Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the RPL9 and LIAS genes in lung tumors.


RPL9 is located on chromosome 4p14 and is approximately 5.5 kb in length
and contains 8 exons. The message for human RPL9 is 712 nucleotides long.
Some of the functions of RPL9 documented this far include the crucial
involvement of the gene product in cell proliferation and protein
biosynthesis. Lipoic acid synthetase (LIAS) is a 1.73 kb gene located at
chromosome 4p14. Alternative splicing occurs at this locus and two
transcript variants encoding distinct isoforms have been identified. The
protein encoded by LIAS gene belongs to the biotin and lipoic acid
synthetases family and localizes in the mitochondrion.The main objective
of this study was to evaluate the expression pattern of RPL9 and LIAS in
lung cancer and to characterise their role in apoptosis and also to
determine if the expression pattern of this genes varies between normal
and diseased state of the tissue.In Situ hybridization, quantitative Real
Time PCR, TUNEL and Bio-informatics have been employed in order to attain
the objectives of this study.In Situ hybridization showed that RPL9
localises in the cytoplasm and it is up-regulated in lung cancer relative
to normal lung. LIAS localises in the cytoplasm and it is also
up-regulated in lung cancer. The expression of RPL9 was relatively higher
than that of LIAS determined by the intensity of localisation.
Quantitative real time PCR confirmed the up-regulation of RPL9 and LIAS
in lung cancer. RPL9 and LIAS were found to be up-regulated 8 and 4 fold
respectively in lung A549 lung adenocarcinoma relative to MRC5 normal
lung fibroblast cell lines. TUNEL showed the highest DNA fragmentation in
adenocarcinoma, followed by squamous cell lung carcinoma then large cell
lung carcinoma which is the same pattern observed in RPL9 and LIAS mRNA
localisation by In Situ hybridization.To further characterise the role of
RPL9 and LIAS in human, Bio-informatics tools were used and the results
revealed that RPL9 is highly conserved through evolution, up-to 100 %
identical to chimpanzee and 98 % to mouse. LIAS was found to be 91 %
identical to rat and 90 % identical to mouse.All these discoveries
coupled with resistance to apoptosis of CHO cell line in which RPL9 and
LIAS were found to be mutated following promoter-trap mutagenesis,
strongly suggests that RPL9 might be playing a role in cell cycle and
apoptosis. RPL9 has been highly conserved through evolution. Manipulation
of this gene can lead to greater biological discoveries in cancer
research and the elevated expression of RPL9 can be used as a molecular
marker for early detection of cancerCitation Format: Zodwa Dlamini,
Zukile Mbita, Lebogang Mphahlele. Characterization of the RPL9 and LIAS
genes in lung tumors. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 1928. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1928

