Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of tamoxifen drug compliance by serum metabolite
profiling in premenopausal breast cancer patients.


Non-adherence to cancer drug therapy is a largely uncontrolled factor
affecting clinical success. Long-term endocrine treatment of
hormone-receptor positive breast cancer by tamoxifen is prone to
premature stop of medication especially in young women due to severe
side-effects commonly including hot flushes, fatigue, joint pain and
nausea. Because non-adherence to prescribed therapy may mask any
prognostic value of biomarkers for determining outcome, it is important
to assess adherence both in prospective and retrospective studies that
investigate pharmacogenetic associations. Currently, the estimation of
compliance rates relies on prescription records and questionnaires that
can be biased. We therefore determined actual rates of tamoxifen
adherence from blood drug levels of the parent drug and its metabolites
in 113 patients. All patients had adjuvant tamoxifen and were study
subjects of the Prospective Study of Outcomes in Sporadic versus
Hereditary Breast Cancer (POSH), a study that explores the effect of
genetic factors on breast cancer prognosis in young women (Eccles et al
BMC Cancer 2007). We used LC-MS/MS analytics to quantify levels of
tamoxifen and its clinically active (antiestrogenic) metabolites
(Z)-endoxifen and (Z)-4-OH tamoxifen, as well as N-desmethyl tamoxifen,
didesmethyl tamoxifen and 15 other metabolites. Among 113 patients, 9
(8%) patients had no quantifiable tamoxifen metabolites and were
considered non-compliant. There was a higher proportion of patients with
breast cancer recurrence or death in non-compliant (7 out of 9, 78%)
compared to compliant patients (54 out of 104, 52%), although this
correlation was not significant. Moreover, a higher proportion of
non-compliant patients were prescribed GnRH agonists (4 out of 9, 44%)
compared to compliant patients (21 out of 104, 20%), although not
significant.This study for the first time used serum metabolite profiling
for the direct assessment of tamoxifen compliance of young women with
breast cancer. We are currently pursuing this in a larger number of cases
to better understand the confounding effects of non-compliance on outcome
of genotype-phenotype associations. This is an important consideration
for tamoxifen pharmacogenetic studies of young patients with a high risk
for non-compliance. The pattern of irregular use and time-to-premature
stop will be further investigated.WS and TM contributed equally

