Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Conditional inactivation of Pten and overexpression of EGFR in
Schwann cells results in early high-grade peripheral nerve sheath tumor
development.


It is hypothesized that many genetic changes are required for the
transformation process of sporadic malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor (MPNST). Currently, Schwann cells and/or their precursor cells are
believed to be the primary pathogenic cell source in peripheral nerve
sheath tumor (PNST) formation and malignant progression. Recently, it has
been shown that phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) and epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) both play important roles in the initiation
of peripheral nerve sheath tumors (PNSTs). In human MPNSTs, PTEN
expression is often reduced, while EGFR expression is often induced. We
tested if these two genes cooperate in the evolution of PNSTs, because
genetically modified mouse models for each gene alone resulted in the
formation of low-grade PNSTs. Transgenic mice were generated carrying
conditional floxed alleles of Pten, EGFR was expressed under the control
of the 2,3-cyclic nucleotide 3 phosphodiesterase (Cnp) promoter and a
desert hedgehog (Dhh) regulatory element driving Cre recombinase
transgenic mice (Dhh-Cre). Transgenic mice with EGFR overexpression and
Pten inactivated have an early postnatal lethality (median survival age
of 26-days) and displayed various peripheral nervous system phenotypes.
These mice had multiple enlarged dorsal root ganglia, with high incidence
of enlarged brachial plexus and trigeminal nerves at various stages of
PNST tumorigenesis. In vitro experiments using immortalized human Schwann
cells demonstrated that loss of PTEN and overexpression of EGFR cooperate
to increase cellular proliferation and anchorage-independent colony
formation. Taken together, our data suggests that reduced PTEN
expression, together with EGFR overexpression, can drive malignant
progression of low-grade to high-grade PNSTs. Importantly, our novel
mouse model recapitulates sporadic human MPNST and will be useful for
testing therapies to prevent or reverse tumor progression.

