Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Up-regulation of vitamin B1 homeostasis genes in breast cancer.


Malignant cells exhibit alterations in metabolic enzymes requiring an
adequate supply of cofactors to support enzymatic activity. In
particular, Vitamin B1 (thiamine) is an important component of cellular
growth and metabolism within all cells, functioning as an essential
enzyme cofactor in key metabolic pathways within in the glycolytic
network. Intracellular availability of thiamine is facilitated by the
activity of thiamine transporters and the conversion of thiamine to the
active coenzyme, thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) by thiamine
pyrophosphokinase (TPK1). Therefore, the objective was to establish if
the cellular determinants regulating thiamine homeostasis differ between
breast cancer and normal breast epithelia. This work will aid in linking
the metabolic phenotype of cancer cells with the adaptive regulation of
thiamine homeostasis. This may provide a molecular basis for dietary
interventions and new therapeutic targets directed towards cancer cell
metabolism.Methods: cDNA arrays of breast cancer and normal breast
tissues were employed to determine expression of SLC19A2, SLC19A3,
SLC25A19 and TPK-1. Western blotting was used to determine whole cell
protein expression. To test the extent of cell surface localization of
the transporters, cell surface proteins were biotinylated and run on
Western Blot. Transport assays were used to quantify thiamine transport
and free thiamine levels in breast cancer cell lines compared to human
mammary epithelial cells (HMEC).Results: SLC19A2, SLC25A19 and TPK-1were
found to be significantly up-regulated in clinical tissues and breast
cancer cell lines 6.48 (P=0.0013), 5.97 (P=0.0003), and 2.33 (P=0.0063)
folds, respectively. Additionally, thiamine transporters THTR1 and THTR2
exhibited different cellular localization and expression depending on the
ER status of the cancer cell. The increase in thiamine homeostasis genes
correlated with an increase in intracellular free thiamine levels but not
with the coenzyme TPP.Conclusions: Overall, these findings demonstrate an
adaptive response by breast cancer cells to bolster an increase in the
cellular availability of thiamine.

