Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AnnexinA2 regulates invasion and metastasis of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma through Semaphorin3d.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA), a devastating disease with a
median survival of less than six months, is characterized by its high
metastatic ability and a lack of effective therapies. The mechanisms
involved in promoting metastasis of PDA have yet to be elucidated. We
recently identified AnnexinA2 (AnxA2) as a PDA-associated antigen. Tyr23
phosphorylated AnxA2 promotes metastasis of PDA cells, while shRNA
knockdown, knockout or therapeutic inhibition of AnxA2 prevents
metastasis to the liver in a mouse model.To identify downstream mediators
of AnxA2 signaling, we evaluated gene expression differences in cell
lines derived from the primary tumors of mice that express AnxA2 (KPC)
and are metastatic or lack AnxA2 expression (KPCA) and are unable to
metastasize. Using microarray analysis, we observed that expression of
the ligand-receptor pair Semaphorin3d (Sema3d) and PlexinD1 (PlxnD1) was
significantly down regulated in the non-metastatic KPCA cells. Sema3d and
PlxnD1 were first identified as axon guidance genes. However, recently,
axon guidance genes, including Sema3d and PlxnD1, were recently found by
the International Cancer Genome Consortium to be among the cellular
pathways that are most frequently altered by genetic mutations and
amplification in human PDA (Biankin 2012). Therefore, we hypothesized
that AnxA2 interacts with Sema3d and PlxnD1 in PDA to induce
metastasis.We confirmed by RT-PCR and immunofluorescence analysis in
multiple independent tumors from KPC and KPCA mice that Sema3d and PlxnD1
expression is down regulated in the absence of AnxA2 expression. AnxA2,
Sema3d and PlxnD1 colocalize at the cell surface during pancreatic tumor
development when AnxA2 is expressed. Interestingly,
co-immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated a direct interaction between
Sema3d and AnxA2 in PDA cells supporting our hypothesis that AnxA2
regulates the secretion of Sema3d from PDA cells to enable its paracrine
interaction with PlxnD1 resulting in invasion of PDA cells.Clinically, we
have found that Sema3d expression correlates with increased
lymphovascular invasion, increased perineural invasion, poor survival and
increased metastatic potential in human PDA patients. Therefore,
understanding the pathways that lead to metastasis of PDA will enable the
development of more effective therapeutics and better clinical outcomes.

