Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying and subtyping circulating tumor cells from breast,
prostate, and pancreatic cancer patients based on distinct morphology.


Background: Isolation of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from peripheral
blood based on size exclusion is rapid and straight-forward using
precision microfilters. We describe the use of CellSieveTM microfilters
to isolate CTCs from the peripheral blood of breast, prostate, and
pancreatic cancer patients. It is accepted that CTCs isolated from
patient samples represent a highly heterogeneous population with varying
degrees of epithelial mesenchymal differentiation. We hypothesized that
the CTCs from three different epithelial malignancies can be identified
and grouped into distinct subtypes by morphological
characterization.Methods: Prostate, breast, and pancreatic patient blood
samples were provided by Northwestern University, Fox Chase Cancer
Center, University of Maryland, and Medical College of Wisconsin and
analyzed by Creatv MicroTech. The CellSieveTM microfilters have 8 micron
diameter pores in a uniform array, with 160,000 pores in a 9 mm diameter
area. 7.5 mL of whole blood was diluted in fixative and drawn through a
microfilter. CTCs collected by this size exclusion technique were
post-fixed, permeabilized, and stained with DAPI, cytokeratin 8, 18 and
19 (FITC), EpCAM (PE), PSMA (Texas Red), and CD45 (Cy5). CTCs were CD45
negative cells identified by their morphology, nuclear profile, and
expression of cytokeratin, PSMA, and EpCAM.Results: Each patient sample
was found to have a number of phenotypic CTC subtypes. Distinct
morphological patterns emerged in the three malignancies. CTCs from
breast cancer patients demonstrated high expression of cytokeratin signal
with web-like cytokeratin filamentation. Prostate cancer CTCs had less
defined filamentation, but intense PSMA and cytokeratin signal and
mottled cytokeratin morphology. Pancreatic CTCs had extremely fine
filamentation, with spindle-like morphology and little or no EpCAM
expression. Within each cancer, CTCs could be grouped into distinct
subtypes. Additional markers, such as vimentin (PE), are used to further
analyze the cells after bleaching the original PE.Conclusions: In
addition to enumeration and identification, the phenotypic analysis of
CTCs provides new information that can be used to characterize disease
status for personalized treatment of cancer patients. We have shown that
CTCs can have multiple distinct phenotypes. These phenotypic morphologies
may implicate definable traits which can be exploited while tracking site
directed treatment of metastatic cancer patients.

