Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomal transfer of microRNA and growth factors by human
Mesenchymal Stem Cells support to breast cancer cells.


Introduction: Recently our laboratory has shown that Serum Deprived
Mesenchymal Stem Cells (SD-MSCs) have the surprising ability to survive
for long periods (more than 60 days) by using autophagy. In addition,
these SD-MSCs aid in tumor survival/growth both by paracrine effects of
the secretome and by miRNAs production that act as post-transcriptional
regulators and affect the regulation of protein-coding. There has been an
explosion of interest in understanding the role of secreted microRNA by
MSCs, presumably through exosomes. Exosomes are 50-90 nm vesicles that
are secreted by various types of cells and made up of a double membrane
of phospholipids that contain proteins, mRNA, and miRNA. It has been
shown that exosomes secreted by cells affect a recipient cell by
modifying its protein translation, thus, inducing a cascade of signaling
events. In this study we characterize the exosomal fraction of
non-apoptotic secretome of SD-MSCs.Materials and Methods: MSCs were
cultured in -MEM without serum for 30 days. The culture supernatant was
centrifuged to remove floating large debris and concentrated 120 times
using an ultrafiltration cellulose membrane (cutoff 1kDa) mounted on a N2
positive pressure system (Amicon). Concentrated supernatant was
centrifuged 1 hour at 100,000g to collect the exosome fraction. miRNA
contained in exosomes was extracted using miRVana kit (Ambion) and
screened for 704 different miRNA using a RT miRNA PCR array
(SABiosciences). Proteins from exosomes were extracted using RIPA buffer.
The trypsin digest of the Rapigest(tm)-resuspended pellet was analyzed
using both nanoLC MALDI-TOF/TOF and nanoRSLC-ESI-LTQ-OrbiTrap MS/MS
analyses.Results: Our results show that at least 110 different miRNAs are
expressed in exosomes from serum deprived MSCs including miR-34a,
miR-199, miR-23 and let-7 series. These play a role in tumor
survival/angiogenesis. Interestingly, we observed an enrichment
expression of passenger miRNA (miRNA* or miRNA-3p/-5p). Proteomics
revealed the presence of at least 281 different proteins from serum
deprived-MSCs exosomes including but not limited to growth factors
(IGF-2, PAI-1), growth-factors binding proteins (IGFBP-2, -3, -5, -7),
transcription factor (AEBP1), integrins (5, 11, 1), Ras family members
(Rab10, Rap1A, Rap1B) and metalloproteinase inhibitors (TIMP1, TIMP2).
The identified proteins map to pathways involved in cell growth and
proliferation, cell death, cell-to-cell signaling and
metabolism.Conclusion: Our study revealed the complexity of exosomes
secreted by serum deprived MSCs. The miRNAs and proteins detected could
act as indirect post-transcriptional regulators (miRNA) or as direct
signaling pathway regulators (growth factors/integrins). This cell to
cell communication through exosomes could reveal a novel mechanism for
paracrine regulation of stromal cells in solid tumors.

