Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting HDAC1 in a novel model of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.


Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) is a type of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
composed of a spectrum of diseases of malignant clonal helper CD4+ T
lymphocytes. Previous studies have shown that IL-15 acts as viability
factor for CTCL cells, inhibiting apoptosis, and may work in association
with other factors to maintain the malignant infiltrate in the epidermis.
IL-15 is highly expressed both at mRNA and protein levels in the skin of
CTCL patients. Using an IL-15 transgenic (tg) mouse model for spontaneous
CTCL that clinically and pathologically mimics the human malignancy, we
described a system for studying lymphomagenesis in CTCL (97th Annual
Meeting of the AACR; 2010. Abstract nr. 2858). Skin lesions in these mice
revealed the presence of characteristic Pautrier's microabscesses and
these mice had poor survival. Cutaneous CD4+ T-cells from these mice were
capable of engrafting into the skin of secondary SCID recipients,
producing histological lesions of similar pathology. Consistent with
human CTCL, we found that these tg mice are predominantly CD62L-
(P=0.0009, N=14) with overexpression of CCR4, CLA, and CD44 (P=0.0001,
N=14). Interestingly, we also observed elevated histone deacetylase-1
(Hdac1) expression in IL-15 tg mice compared to the wild type (WT) cohort
(P=0.0013, N=3). We hypothesized that IL-15 regulates epigenetic changes
in normal CD4+ lymphocytes by modulating Hdac1 and Hdac6. We analyzed
normal human- and WT mouse- CD4+ T-cells and found that IL-15 induces
upregulation of Hdac1 protein and cytoplasmic translocalization of Hdac6.
To elucidate the mechanism controlling Hdac1 induction, we tested whether
IL-15 stimulation leads to autoregulation of Hdac1 in vitro. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) PCR analysis of IL-15 stimulated CD4+ T-cells
revealed that Hdac1 binds to its own promoter as early as 12 hours post
incubation increasing its own transcription. Similar observations were
made in CD4+ T-cells from CTCL patients when compared to normal donor
CD4+ T-cells suggesting that Hdac1 could be upregulated in CD4+ T-cells
as a result of autoregulation from endogenous IL-15. To test
Hdac-inhibitor therapy in IL-15 tg CTCL mice, we performed a randomized,
placebo-controlled trial of an oral HDAC inhibitor invented at The Ohio
State University, AR-42 (Arno Therapeutics Inc., Flemington, NJ).
Interestingly, 100% of mice treated with AR-42 showed clinical
improvement and reduced dermal lymphocytic infiltration after the
treatment when compared to the placebo arm. In summary, our study
provides a murine model of spontaneous CTCL that mimics the human
disease, and also, demonstrate for the first time IL-15 mediated
autoregulation of a histone-modifying enzyme Hdac1 in CD4+ T-cells that
may contribute towards pathogenesis of CTCL. Finally, we show that AR-42
has significant efficacy in this preclinical CTCL model, which has in
part paved the way for its current evaluation in a Phase I human clinical
trial.

