Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An informative clinical applicable serum miRNAs 371-3 and 302/367
test for (germ cell) cancer patients.


Expression of microRNAs (miR) can be unique and specific for malignant
cells, as shown for human germ cell cancers (GCC), i.e., seminomas (SE)
and nonseminomas (NS). GCC are the most frequent malignancy in Caucasian
young males. They show high expression of the embryonic stem cell miR
clusters 371-3 and 302/367, related to their cancer stem cell component.
No recurrent DNA copy number changes of these miR and mutation in DICER
was found in more than 250 primary GCC samples. Current clinically used
serum markers for GCC are the proteins AFP and hCG, which are informative
in a selection of patients (minority with a SE, and majority of those
with a NS: i.p. yolk sac tumor and/or choriocarcinoma). Although the
fore-mentioned miR have been suggested as serum markers for GCC, no
robust protocol is available so far. A novel, sensitive and specific
pipeline for miRNA profiling in body fluids is developed based on a
magnetic anti-probe bead purification step (ABC miRNA purification kit,
Life Technologies). This method shows stable recovery based on multiple
synthetic non-human spike-ins, allowing calibration. Out of a set of 9
potential serum-specific controls, two were identified by Normfinder and
geNorm as most stable (miR-20a and 93), therefore used for normalization.
This TSmiR test was applied to five series of serum samples for
independent learning and validation, including 47 controls (N), 80 GCC
(adult and pediatric) (T), 11 matched pre- and post-orchidectomy samples,
and 12 no-GCC testicular tumors (no-GCC). TSmiR demonstrated a
consistent, significant increase (pExpression of microRNAs (miR) can be
unique and specific for malignant cells, as shown for human germ cell
cancers (GCC), i.e., seminomas (SE) and nonseminomas (NS). GCC are the
most frequent malignancy in Caucasian young males. They show high
expression of the embryonic stem cell miR clusters 371-3 and 302/367,
related to their cancer stem cell component. No recurrent DNA copy number
changes of these miR and mutation in DICER was found in more than 250
primary GCC samples. Current clinically used serum markers for GCC are
the proteins AFP and hCG, which are informative in a selection of
patients (minority with a SE, and majority of those with a NS: i.p. yolk
sac tumor and/or choriocarcinoma). Although the fore-mentioned miR have
been suggested as serum markers for GCC, no robust protocol is available
so far. A novel, sensitive and specific pipeline for miRNA profiling in
body fluids is developed based on a magnetic anti-probe bead purification
step (ABC miRNA purification kit, Life Technologies). This method shows
stable recovery based on multiple synthetic non-human spike-ins, allowing
calibration. Out of a set of 9 potential serum-specific controls, two
were identified by Normfinder and geNorm as most stable (miR-20a and 93),
therefore used for normalization. This TSmiR test was applied to five
series of serum samples for independent learning and validation,
including 47 controls (N), 80 GCC (adult and pediatric) (T), 11 matched
pre- and post-orchidectomy samples, and 12 no-GCC testicular tumors
(no-GCC). TSmiR demonstrated a consistent, significant increase
(p<0.0064) of miR-371-3 and 367 levels in serum of patients with GCC.
Power was demonstrated using mean comparison, Kohonen Self Organizing
Maps, Principal Component Analysis and ROC analysis. Matched pre- and
post-orchidectomy samples demonstrated suitability for follow-up
purposes. TSmiR outperformed the traditional serum markers
(sensitivityall samples 98%, specificityall samples 48%; sensitivityAFP=
3% and 45%; sensitivityhCG= 62% and 66%, in SE and NS, respectively). The
combined serum AFP/hCG and TSmiR test identified all T samples correctly.
In conclusion, a highly reproducible and informative novel serum test for
patients with a germ cell malignancy is developed, suitable to be
prospectively tested for diagnosis and follow-up purposes.

