Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cellular genetics approaches to defining toxicity pathways.


Background: Significant, nonspecific cytotoxic adverse effects that
complicate non-Hodgkin lymphoma treatment vary between patients and are
likely due to complex genetic differences between individuals. Our
ultimate goal is to identify genetic biomarkers that signal adverse
clinical outcomes, maximizing patient safety and minimizing drug cost by
identifying patients most likely to have an advantageous risk/benefit
ratio for a particular therapy. We are particularly interested in the
investigation of the novel anti-lymphoma agents BEZ235, a dual PI3K/mTOR
inhibitor, and selumetinib, a MEK inhibitor. Our study is innovative in
that we are identifying genetic biomarkers using a strategy that can be
employed during preclinical development.Methods: Genome-wide association
analysis requires diversity of both the genotype and phenotype among
individuals in a mapping population. Thus, we are taking a model organism
approach to evaluate pharmacotherapeutic response in a panel of isogenic
mice based on priority strains from the Jackson Laboratory's Mouse
Phenome Diversity Panel. Association mapping in this fixed and inbred
population utilizes existing dense maps of SNP genotype information,
providing precision (greater than 1 to 2 Mb) in localizing quantitative
trait loci using SNPster and EMMA algorithms.We have developed a cellular
genetics screening approach with robust, replicable, multiplexed assays
to accurately describe toxicity response using flow cytometry. Our
population of immune cells was derived from splenocytes isolated from 35
strains of mice using standard procedures. Of note, the splenocytes were
not stimulated to avoid confounding effects, as identification of genes
would be attributed to cellular stimulation rather than associated with
toxicity. Cells at a density of 100,000 cells per well with 100 l media
were incubated with anti-lymphoma compounds on a 10-point logarithmic
dosing scale ranging from 0 to 100 M (37C, 5% CO2). At 4 hours
post-treatment, cells were labeled with antibodies and physiological
indicator dyes and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. Cellular phenotypes
(e.g., viability, mitochondrial membrane potential, and caspase activity)
were collected with the BD Biosciences FACSCanto II flow cytometer and
analyzed with Flow Jo version X. Dose-response curves with response
normalized to the zero dose as a function of log concentration were
subsequently generated using GraphPad Prism 5.Results: Phenotypes have
been quantified using flow cytometry, yielding interstrain variation for
measured endpoints for different immune function cells. The heritability
for viability of T-cells at the 1 M concentration of doxorubicin,
idarubicin, BEZ235, and selumetinib is respectively 86, 83, 56, and
57%.Conclusion: Using this approach, we aim to identify genetic
determinants of cellular response to drugs, including candidate genes and
cellular toxicity pathways for future validation in human studies.

