Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary resveratrol promotes breast cancer progression in
immunocompromised mice.


Resveratrol, a polyphenol from grapes and red wine has been widely
studied due to its beneficial effects against cardiovascular diseases and
cancer. However, our group and others have provided evidence for a dual
cancer promoting or inhibitory role for resveratrol in breast cancer,
dependent on the concentration. Moreover, much of the reported inhibitory
effects of resveratrol are from studies with high non-physiological
concentrations. Herein, we investigated the effects of low (0.5 and 5
mg/kg body weight) and moderate concentrations (50 mg/kg body weight) of
resveratrol on mammary tumor growth, using immunocompromised mice. Our
findings suggest promotion of mammary tumor growth and metastasis by
resveratrol at all concentrations tested in tumors derived from the low
metastatic estrogen receptor (ER)(-), ER(+) MDA-MB-231 and the highly
metastatic ER(-) MDA-MB-435 cancer cell lines. Additionally, the activity
of the migration/invasion regulator Rac, which we have previously shown
to be regulated by resveratrol in vitro, was measured in tumors from
resveratrol treated mice. Our results show a significant induction of
tumoral Rac activity and a trend in increased expression of the Rac
downstream effector PAK1, Akt, and jun kinase (JNK) following resveratrol
treatment. Taken together, our findings implicate low concentrations of
resveratrol in potential promotion of breast cancer. Because of this dual
role of resveratrol on cancer progression, measuring circulating plasma
levels of resveratrol becomes critical and could be used as a prognostic
tool for resveratrol's responsiveness. Since, detection and
quantification of low levels of resveratrol is limited by the sensitivity
of existing methodologies, we developed a rapid UPLC-tandem MS method to
quantify resveratrol from plasma. This method requires minimal sample
preparation and allows the quantification of resveratrol in mouse plasma
at lower levels and shorter retention times than those previously
reported by similar methodologies. This study was supported by DoD/BCRP
W81XWH-08-1-0258 to LCP, DoD/BCRP W81XWH-07-1-0330 to SD, the UCC Pilot
Project Program, the UCC Postdoctoral Program sponsored by the PR
Science, Technology and Research Trust, and the Title V PPOHA grant
number PO31M105050 from U.S. Department of Education to UCC.

