Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A commensal relationship between tumor cell subpopulations
promotes collective invasion.


The invasion of tumor cells out of ductal epithelium is a poorly
understood process that dramatically increases the odds of patient death.
We have defined a new non cell-autonomous control mechanism for
neoplastic invasion that trigger tumors to switch from a benign to a
malignant stage of growth. Using high resolution live-imaging and
functional studies we show that an epigenetically distinct and
autonomously invasive subpopulation of tumor cells induces the invasion
of a large bulk population of autonomously noninvasive tumor cells by
adopting migratory principles observed during sprouting angiogenesis. The
molecular dissection of this cooperative interaction revealed a new
invasion signature of 29 genes that is distinct from traditional
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition markers. Patients expressing this
invasion signature had a worse clinical outcome, which suggests that this
commensal relationship between tumor cell subpopulations contributes to
tumor progression. Functional analysis showed that multiple components of
the invasion signature were specifically required for the cooperative
induction of invasion, but not cell motility, thus revealing new roles
for these genes as non-cell autonomous regulators of invasion. These
results are of broad interest because they are the first demonstration of
a commensal relationship between tumor cell subpopulations during the
induction of invasion. Further, these findings establish a mechanistic
underpinning that obviates the notion that the exclusive role of
heterogeneity in tumors is to act as a source for unique traits that can
be selected for and expanded to improve the cell autonomous fitness of
neoplastic cell populations. Thus, our results support a paradigm shift
towards identifying both the cell autonomous and the non cell-autonomous
regulatory mechanisms of cell biological processes within heterogeneous
tumors to understand neoplastic progression and develop new intervention
modalities.Citation Format: Gray Pearson, Amanda Prechtl, Jill Westcott,
Tuyen Dang, Erin Maine. A commensal relationship between tumor cell
subpopulations promotes collective invasion. [abstract]. In: Proceedings
of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer
Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer
Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 4930. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4930

