Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel auto-antibody test for the detection of pre-neoplastic
lung lesions.


Atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH) and squamous cell dysplasia (SCD)
have been widely reported to be associated with the development of
malignant lesions in the lung. Accurate diagnosis of AAH and SCD could
facilitate earlier clinical intervention and also provide useful
information for assessing lung cancer risk in human populations.
Traditionally, detection of AAH and SCD has been achieved by imaging and
bronchoscopy, but the sensitivity remains unsatisfactory. In this study,
we utilised the ability of the immune system to identify lesion specific
proteins for detection of AAH and SCD. We have successfully used serum
auto-antibody panels as biomarkers for the detection of malignant lung
lesions [Zhong 2006] and thus, a similar approach was utilised here for
the development of a blood-based test for the detection of AAH and
SCD.Following informed consent and Internal Review Board approval, AAH
and SCD tissue was surgically removed from six patients of Chinese
descent (3 AAH and 3 SCD) with corresponding serum samples. Total RNA was
extracted from the tissues and a cDNA library was generated and
incorporated into a T7 bacteriophage vector. To enhance the selection of
tumor-associated proteins, the AAH and SCD pooled phage library was
biopanned using pooled AAH/SCD and normal sera, and candidate phage
clones were subjected for two-color fluorescent protein microarray
construction. Cy3-labelled antibodies were used as a control for the
detection of phage capsid proteins and Cy5-labelled anti-human antibodies
were used to probe for AAH/SCD proteins. A total of 200 AAH related and
200 SCD related phage clones that revealed stronger Cy5:Cy3 ratios from 5
individual AAH and 5 SCD serum reactions were chosen as candidates for
statistical classifier development.Microarray slides were tested with 50
AAH and 50 SCD patient serum samples along with 100 control serum samples
as a training group for statistical classifier development. Nine
AAH-associated phage proteins were identified and used to develop a
classifier with 92.3% sensitivity and 90.2% specificity in distinguishing
AAH samples. Thirteen SCD-associated markers were identified that
generated a classifier with 98.3% sensitivity and 95.6% specificity in
distinguishing SCD samples. The classifiers were further validated in an
independent blinded sample population consisting of 100 AAH, 100 SCD and
200 control serum samples. In this cohort, 82% sensitivity and 70%
specificity was achieved in the detection of AAH samples using a
combination of 9 autoantibody biomarkers. Likewise, 86% sensitivity and
78% specificity was achieved in the detection of SCD samples using a
combination of 13 SCD-associated markers.Both diagnostic values reached
much greater accuracies than any other current biomarkers for AAH or SCD
and hence could be a useful tool to assess lung cancer risk in human
populations.

