Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exposure to high saturated fat acid diet in early life changes the
susceptibility to breast cancer in adulthood.


Nutrition is thought to be involved in 30 to 50% of all breast cancer and
intake of animal fat seems to be related to the increase of this type of
cancer. It has been suggested that breast cancer can originate in early
life, including the in utero and lactation periods. Maternal nutrition
can modify the fetal environment and induce epigenetics modifications
that change the susceptibility of offspring to breast cancer in
adulthood. We hypothesized that exposure to high saturated fatty acid
diet (HFS) in early life can change gene expression through the
remodeling of epigenetic marks and consequently modify the risk of breast
cancer. Sprague-Dawley rats were used in our study, which was composed of
three groups: CO (female rats exposed to control diet [AIN-93G] in utero
and lactation); PG (female rats exposed to HSF in utero) and PL (female
rats exposed to HSF in utero and lactation). The distribution of fatty
acid in the HSF was 37%, 38% and 24% of saturated, monounsaturated and
polyunsaturated, respectively while in the CO diet, the distribution of
those fatty acid was 17%, 27% and 55%, respectively. Female rats were
euthanized on post-natal day (PND) 50 and blood and mammary tissue
collected. Serum samples were assayed for estradiol, progesterone and
leptin levels (radioimmunoassay and immunofluorescence). Mammary glands
were evaluated for the number of terminal End Buds (TEBs), global DNA
methylation (HPLC-DAD) and global histone modification patterns (western
blot). Mammary tumor development induced by oral administration of
dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA) on PND50 was also evaluated. Global DNA
methylation were also determined in mammary tumors. There were no
differences (P>0.05) in maternal caloric intake, offspring birth weight,
serum estradiol levels or number of TEBs among the groups. Serum
progesterone levels showed a tendency to increase (P=0.07) in the PG
group compared to CO group. Compared to others groups, the PL group
showed higher (P0.05) serum leptin levels. The PG group showed higher
levels (P0.05) of global trimethylation of histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9me3)
compared to CO group, but no differences were observed (P>0.05) for
global DNA methylation and global H3K9/H4K16 acetylation and H3K27/H3K4
trimethylation. The PG group showed lower incidence (P0.05) and average
number of tumors compared to CO group and higher latency (P0.05) compared
to PL group. The tumors from PG group presented lower (P0.05) global DNA
methylation compared to others groups. In conclusion, exposure to HSF in
early life influenced the susceptibility of breast cancer in adulthood.
But, differently from what we expected the exposure to this diet in utero
decreased breast cancer risk. If this exposure is continued through the
period of lactation the protective effect is lost. This modification of
breast cancer risk in early life seems to involve epigenetics mechanisms
like post-translational histone modification.

