Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hospicells (MSCs and TAFs relative cells) activate ovarian
carcinoma cells and macrophages to secrete IL-6, IL-8 and VEGF and
polarize macrophages into a TAM phenotype.


Epithelial Ovarian carcinoma (EOC) is the leading cause of death from
gynaecological cancer in the world and is characterized by peritoneal
dissemination, ascite development and a high rate of mortality. Late EOC
is treated by a cytoreductive surgery and chemotherapy but most of
patients experience a recurrence with the apparition of a
chemoresistance. The microenvironment could be implied in this recurrence
and the resistance to chemotherapies.Rafii et al. isolated a new type of
peritoneal cells from ascitic fluid of patients with stage IIIc ovarian
cancer, called Hospicells. These cells share homologies with Mesenchymal
Stem Cells (MSCs) and Tumor-associated Fibroblasts (TAFs).Ovarian cancer
cells (OCCs) xenograft (i.p. or s.c.) associated with Hospicells in Nude
mice leads to a dramatic increase of tumour volume, production of ascitic
fluid and mortality. In order to understand these effects, we studied the
interactions between OCCs and Hospicells.In vitro, Hospicells and OCCs
co-culture leads to the enhancement of the secretion of IL-6, IL-8 and
VEGF (cytokines implied in several tumoral processes) by the OCCs
compared to the culture of each cell line separately. Moreover, the in
vivo co-implantation of Hospicells with OCCs into Nude mice leads to an
increase quantity of these cytokines compare to the implantation of OCCs
alone. These data suggest a specific crosstalk between OCCs and
Hospicells. However, while Hospicells always enhance ovarian cancer
progression in vivo, only some cell lines can be activated by Hospicells
in vitro.We searched for another Hospicells cell partner in vivo and
showed that they activate macrophages to polarize into a pro-tumoral
tumor-associated phenotype (TAM) and to secrete IL-6, IL-8, VEGF, GM-CSF,
IL-1 ( and ), MCP-1, etc To our knowledge, this is the first evidence of
macrophage activation by TAF or MSC-like cells.As ovarian cancer enhanced
progression could be due to interactions between OCCs, macrophages and
Hospicells, we investigated the pathways potentially implied in the
activation of OCCs or macrophages by Hospicells.We already know that
TNF-, IL-1, estrogens, LPA, S1P or NO pathways are not implied in the
activation of OCCs or macrophages by Hospicells but Fas-Ligand, IL-1 or
CD40 Ligand pathways are still under investigation.However, we showed
that the induction of VEGF secretion in OCCs and macrophages by
Hospicells is dependant of the COX-2 pathway. This data strengthens the
importance of the inflammatory microenvironment in the ovarian cancer and
explain a part of the observed effects of Hospicells on the ovarian
cancer progression.Targeting interactions between Hospicells and OCCs and
macrophages has potential to improve ovarian cancer treatment efficiency.

