Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular link that associates high fat diet and prostate tumor
growth.


Prostate Cancer (PCa) is one of the most common invasive tumors in men.
Epidemiological studies indicate that diet and overweight are important
factors implicated in prostate carcinogenesis. Obesity is associated with
PCa aggressiveness, poorer prognosis and increased mortality. Breast
cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) interacts with several
transcriptional regulators to modulate the androgen receptor (AR)
signaling in PCa cell lines. Germline mutations in this gene increase
breast cancer risk and are associated with high grade PCa. Previously, it
had been reported that C-terminal Binding Protein 1 (CtBP1) acts as a
switch to control BRCA1 transcription in response to the metabolic status
of the cells. The release of CtBP1 from BRCA1 promoter through estrogen
induction and high NAD+/NADH ratio (similar to high caloric intake)
increases BRCA1 transcription in breast cancer cells.The aim of this work
was to assess the effect of androgens and/or high fat diet over the
BRCA1/CtBP1 axis and PCa tumor growth.We found that BRCA1 and CtBP1
proteins associate to BRCA1 proximal promoter region in PC3 cells and
suppress BRCA1 transcription. Testosterone stimulation released these
factors from BRCA1 promoter increasing its transcription. To assess
whether this activation is mediated by testosterone or the estrogen,
synthesized from testosterone by the aromatase (CYP19A1), we investigated
this mechanism in the presence of letrozol (LTZ), an aromatase inhibitor.
We found that LTZ abolished BRCA1 induction by testosterone, suggesting
that BRCA1 activation is mediated by estrogen in these cells.Furthermore,
we generated PC3 cell lines transfected with pcDNA3-CtBP1 (PC3-CtBP1) or
shRNA-CtBP1 (PC3-shCtBP1) plasmids, to overexpress or knock down CtBP1
expression, respectively. CtBP1 induction decreased BRCA1 expression in
these cells and this effect was reverted by CtBP1 depletion. In addition,
PC3-CtBP1 cells showed increased clonogenic capacity and proliferation
compared to PC3-shCtBP1 cells.Moreover, we developed an in vivo model to
investigate the effect of high caloric diet on PCa growth after CtBP1
modulated-expression. High fat or control diet fed male nude mice were
inoculated with PC3-CtBP1 and PC3-shCtBP1 stable cells. We found that
CtBP1 depleted cells growing as xenografts in high fat diet fed mice
dramatically decreased prostate tumor growth. Molecular analysis of
tumors by RT-qPCR showed that CtBP1 depletion correlated with high BRCA1
expression. In addition, serum from high fat fed mice significantly
induced PC3-CtBP1 cell proliferation in vitro.These results strongly
suggest that the potential oncogenic role of CtBP1 is dependent on the
caloric diet intake. Hence, BRCA1 regulation by CtBP1 provides an
important molecular link between caloric intake and tumor suppressor
expression.

