Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel targets and monoclonal antibodies for cancer therapy.


Cancer therapeutic targets is an extremely active research field in both
academia and pharmaceutical companies. In our recent research activities
we identified by a high-throughput immunohistochemistry screening of
Tissue microarray (TMA), a panel of 89 novel candidate tumor markers for
prevalent cancers representing breast, lung colon ovary and prostate
carcinomas. The novel marker candidates were found over-expressed in one
or more of the five tumors under analysis, with significant frequency.
Three of them seems to be promising therapeutic targets for monoclonal
antibody therapy, being exposed on the surface of cancer cells. They
include: 1) a lectin binding protein, over-expressed in breast, lung and
ovary cancer; 2) a protein involved in iron homoeostasis and
over-expressed in breast, colon, lung and ovary cancers, 3) a cadherin
homologous protein detected in colon, lung and ovary cancers. Gene
silencing using siRNA technology and/or over-expression experiments using
marker-encoding plasmids significantly alter cell proliferation,
migration, invasiveness and clonal growth in vitro, indicating that
expression of the three proteins confers cell phenotypes relevant for
tumor progression. Highly specific murine monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)
were generated against the three proteins and proved to bind the surface
of cancer cells lines. Of particular interest is a murine mAb targeting
the cadherin-like protein that, upon binding to the cell surface, is
efficiently internalized by cancer cells, suggesting that it is amenable
to the development of antibody-drug conjugates. This mAb did not show any
relevant IHC cross-reactivity in the 35 human tissues requested by FDA to
demonstrate antibody specificity. Furthermore this mAb significantly
inhibited tumor growth in athymic nude mice bearing HCT15 and HT29 colon
cancer xenograft models. Finally, IHC analysis of approximately 300 colon
cancer clinical samples indicates that the antibody stains a large
fraction of colon cancer samples, and gives intense membranous staining
in specific patients group. Overall, data indicate that this antibody
could be developed as a novel tool for a targeted therapy of colo-rectal
cancer, alone or in combination with other treatments

