Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docosahexaenoic acid induces degradation of human papillomavirus
E6 and E7 oncoproteins through activation of the ROS-mediated
ubiquitin-proteasome system in cervical cancer cells.


Sustained expression of high risk human papillomavirus (HR-HPV) E6/E7
oncogenes is essential for the maintenance of cervical cancer. We have
previously reported that docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), an omega-3
polyunsaturated fatty acid, triggers apoptosis in HR-HPV positive
cervical cancer cells. The aim of present study was to investigate
whether and how the DHA-induced apoptosis is associated with modulation
of E6/E7 viral oncoproteins in HR-HPV positive HeLa and SiHa cells. We
found that DHA diminished E6/E7 protein levels in a time-dependent manner
and restored the function of known E6/E7 binding targets, p53 and
retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor suppressors. DHA increased the ubiquitination
and proteasomal degradation of E6/E7 oncoproteins as well as three
different ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) reporter substrates (GFP-CL1,
GFP-ODC and UbG76V-GFP), supporting that DHA degrades E6/E7 viral
proteins via the UPS. Using HeLa cells constitutively expressing
UbG76V-GFP reporter, we confirmed these effects of DHA and further
observed that similar to DHA, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) was also able to
accelerate E6/E7 degradation through promoting the UPS activity. In
addition, reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavengers significantly
prevented the UPS-mediated reduction in E6/E7 viral proteins and
apoptosis caused by DHA and H2O2, suggesting that the augmented UPS
activity and E6/E7 degradation caused by DHA depend on its effect on ROS
generation. Together, our results show that DHA induces degradation of
HPV E6/E7 oncoproteins through activation of the ROS-mediated UPS, and
provide novel insights into the mechanism by which DHA exerts its
inhibitory effect on virus-associated cancer. [This work was supported by
the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by Korea
government (2012-0005767, 2012-0005456 and 2011-0003060)].

