Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomic meta-analysis of colorectal cancer by
elastic-net.


To identify combinatorial sets of known, putative and new cancer drivers
responsible for colorectal cancer (CRC) development and other associated
specific clinical outcomes, we have developed an integrative analysis
method for cancer genome data. This approach is based on the elastic-net
algorithm that we have applied to genomic data from the Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) Project. Our supervised analysis simultaneously assesses the
contribution of i) copy number variation (CNV), ii) gene expression, iii)
miRNA, iv) methylation and v) cancer mutations to clinical features. The
ongoing TCGA project is generating genomic and clinical data sets from
different tumor types including CRC. These detailed catalogues of genetic
changes in cancer genomes will continue to provide us with new insights
about cancer development. However, extracting biologically/clinically
relevant information from TCGA's diverse and large cancer genome data
remains a challenge. In attempt to overcome this challenge, we use
regularized regression method: elastic-net that improves on the least
absolute shrinkage and selection operator (Lasso). To demonstrate the
performance and validity of this approach, we showed that elastic-net
successfully identified i) synthetic genes that have their CNVs perfectly
associated with stages from a simulated data ii) TGFBR2 and other driver
genes that have mutations associated with CRCs that demonstrate
microsatellite instability CRC from TCGA data, and iii) IDH1 that
obtained mutations associated with survival according to glioblastoma
(GBM) data. In the next phase of the study, we identified the top ranked
genes that delineate key clinical features such as TNM stages of CRC. We
have identified a series of candidate genes that may indicate clinical
stages including novel candidates on chromosome 8. Overall, we have
successfully demonstrated that our approach allows for an integrative and
highly robust supervised analysis of TCGA data.

