Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial necrosis pathway drives tumor progression.


Necrosis is a prominent feature of aggressive and invasive cancers.
Previous clinical/epidemiological studies have suggested an association
between the extent of tumor necrosis and poor prognosis and survivorship
for some cancers. Evasion of apoptosis is widely accepted as a hallmark
of cancer. However, whether necrotic cell death plays no role, limits, or
drives carcinogenesis has not been studied in any cancer. Recent work
suggests that necrosis may be an actively regulated form of cell death.
In contrast to apoptosis where permeabilization of the outer
mitochondrial membrane is the defining event, the central event in
necrosis is the opening of a pore in the inner mitochondrial membrane
termed the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP). Cyclophilin
D, a peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerase in the mitochondrial matrix,
encoded by the gene ppif, is critical for opening of the mPTP. Stable
expression of ppif shRNA was used to deplete cyclophilin D in Met-1
cells, a metastatic breast cancer cell line. We first confirmed that
knockdown of ppif in Met-1 cells abrogated necrosis, but not apoptosis.
When these cells were transplanted into the mammary glands of wildtype
FVB mice, tumors resulting from cells that express ppif shRNA were
markedly smaller, with decreased volume and mass, than those derived from
cells expressing control shRNA. Reconstitution of ppif knockdown cells
with wild type cyclophilin D, but not an enzymatically inactive mutant,
rescued tumor volume and mass. As expected, tumors arising from ppif
knockdown cells exhibited less necrosis, while rates of apoptosis were
unchanged. Moreover, rates of BrdU incorporation were significantly
decreased in these tumors. Necrotic cell death is characterized by loss
of plasma membrane integrity resulting in a marked inflammatory response.
Neutrophils and macrophages recruited to tumors often secrete
growth/survival/angiogenic factors that promote tumor growth and
metastasis. Consistent with this model, both macrophage and neutrophil
recruitment were reduced in tumors derived from ppif knockdown cells. In
addition, rates of spontaneous pulmonary metastasis were markedly
decreased in mice harboring tumors derived from ppif knockdown cells
compared with controls. Our data suggest that, in contrast to apoptotic
cell death which limits carcinogenesis, necrotic cell death actually
drives disease progression by altering the tumor microenvironment. These
findings may have therapeutic implications in that they suggest that
inhibition - rather than promotion - of necrotic cell death may provide a
novel treatment paradigm for some cancers.

