Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of microRNAs in early stage lung cancer.


Lung cancer is the most common diagnosed cancer, and a leading cause of
cancer-associated deaths worldwide. It is imperative to understand the
molecular mechanisms underlying early lung cancer development, to
identify better diagnostic and treatment options. We have conducted a
multi-platform genomic screen of sixty paired early stage tumor and
non-tumor adjacent tissues excised from a cohort of lung cancer patients
recruited in our longstanding NCI-MD Case-Control Study. Tissues were
characterized through miRNA and mRNA expression, and methylation
profiling. Our aim is to provide a framework that can be interrogated to
illuminate biological differences associated with racial disparities, to
find diagnostic/prognostic biomarkers of lung cancer, and to define miRNA
transcriptional networks operational in lung cancer. MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
are 20-22 nucleotide-long non-coding RNAs that regulate mRNA
transcription and translation through sequence-specific base pairing.
MiRNAs are transcribed from large pri-miRNAs, as independent transcripts
or within introns of protein-coding genes. It is unclear whether they
possess independent promoter regions. However, several miRNAs are
adjacent to CpG islands (regions rich in CG dinucleotides). CpG island
methylation is a well-described mechanism by which genes with
tumor-suppressive function are silenced in cancer. It has been reported
that some tumor-suppressive miRNAs are epigenetically controlled through
CpG island methylation. Such regulation could have important implications
for progression of early stage lung cancer. Here, tumor and adjacent
non-tumor tissue DNA were analyzed using the Illumina Infinium
HumanMethylation27 BeadChip assays, featuring genome-wide coverage of CpG
sites. This platform covers 110 miRNA promoters, which are annotated by
being close to gene-associated CpGs. We found seven miRNA loci
hypermethylated in tumors. Of these, 4 miRNAs are located within homeobox
gene clusters, miR-196b (HOXA9), miR-615 (HOXC5), miR-10a (HOXB4), and
miR-10b (HOXD4). Two other miRNAs are located adjacent to genes with
significant changes in methylation, miR-638 (DNM2) and miR-639 (GPSN2).
Lastly, methylation of miR-34b/c (BTG4) was consistent with prior
studies. A comparative analysis of methylation at these loci showed a
high concordance between our study and methylation profiling in lung
adenocarcinoma conducted by TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas), with r2: 0.8.
Therefore, methylation at these sites is a generalized finding.
Additionally, we confirmed the methylation of miR-615 in A549 lung cancer
cell line and its demethylation and reactivation by exposure to
5-aza/TSA. Downstream targets of miR-615 are being explored using
available transcriptomic data to gain insight into the functional role of
miRNAs in lung cancer progression. We are also expanding the analysis to
other lung cancer cohorts to evaluate the association of miRNA
methylation with patient survival.

