Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioinformatic approaches for large-scale identification and
relative quantitation of N-glycosylation sites from breast cancer cell
lines.


Introduction:Protein glycosylation and N-glycopeptide site occupancy can
be used as disease indicators differentiating normal and cancer cells.
The analysis of glycoproteins introduces additional computational
challenges to the workflow. In this study, we used the high resolution
and accurate mass features of the Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer
combined with glycopeptide enrichment to analyze glycoprotein changes in
a breast cancer cell model. We employed BYONIC, a bioinformatics search
engine optimized for glycoprotein analysis. We are in the process of
comparing these results with workflows involving MASCOT to identify false
positive rates from the dataset. In addition; we will determine relative
quantitation of the deamidated peptides with Pinpoint.Methods:We compared
the expression of glycoproteins between a benign (MSF10A) and breast
cancer (HCC70) cell line. Glycans of secreted and cell surface
glycoproteins of breast cell lines (MCF10A and HCC70) were oxidized with
periodate and cells lysed with a non-ionic detergent buffer. Lysates were
mixed with hydrazide-modified magnetic beads to capture glycoproteins,
and glycopeptides generated with trypsin and PNGaseF (results in delta
mass of 0.984 for deamidated peptides). Glycopeptides were analyzed by
LC/MS/MS on a Q Exactive in data dependent acquisition mode set to top12
HCD.Preliminary ResultsMascot and Byonic will be used to evaluate the
identification of the deamidated peptides. Currently, using MASCOT on the
two cell lines, we identified 500 glycoproteins, The averaged mascot ion
(e.g., ion scores of 81.0 vs. 69.1 for 2+ ions, and 67.7 vs. 53.3 for 3+
ions) gave identifications within 1% false discovery rate for the
deamidated peptides searched against the 22,763 proteins related to human
taxonomy via Swissprot database search. The bioinformatic approaches for
identifying deamidated peptides will be evaluated with Byonic compared to
the MASCOT results based on the number of identified N-linked
glycopeptides; the false positive rates; speed of analysis;
identification of multiple consensus sites (NX-S/T/Y) on same peptide and
overall dynamic range of the identified deamidated peptides. For other
comparable searches, the Byonic output with the same database search was
considerably faster (10s of seconds versus several minutes for the MASCOT
search). Byonic streamlines PTM searches by applying specific number of
modifications per peptide to avoid combinatorial explosion; increasing
the search efficiency.

