Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid, inexpensive and accurate detection of rare variants by
targeted sequencing.


Next generation sequencing technology is quickly becoming the most rapid
and accurate method of determining mutation profiles of patient's tumor
samples. While whole genome or exome sequencing profiles are the most
comprehensive methods for complete exploration of these tumors, these
protocols typically require large amounts of DNA, are expensive, don't
get deep coverage, and require extensive time for library and sample
preparation. Ion Torrent has developed new methodology for looking at 10s
to 1000s of genomic targets with the Ion AmpliSeq technology. The
recommended input of 10ng of DNA is suitable for work with FFPE or fine
needle biopsy samples, and has been demonstrated on samples with less
than 1ng of DNA. In a 10 hour day this protocol can take isolated DNA
through the library and sample prep as well sequencing with variant
calls, making it an incredibly rapid method for determining sequence
variants within targeted regions. There are currently two commercially
available cancer-specific amplicon panels: the Comprehensive Cancer Panel
(CCP) uses 16,000 primer pairs covering the exons of 409 tumor suppressor
genes and oncogenes frequently cited and mutated in cancers, and the
Cancer Hotspot Panel v2 (CHP2) uses 207 primer pairs in 50 clinically
actionable genes to detect over 2800 mutation hotspots. We recently
measured the sensitivity of SNP detection levels with the CCP and CHP2
panels on a 90:10 (reference:SNP) admixed sample and were able to detect
SNP proportions of 2.0%(pNext generation sequencing technology is quickly
becoming the most rapid and accurate method of determining mutation
profiles of patient's tumor samples. While whole genome or exome
sequencing profiles are the most comprehensive methods for complete
exploration of these tumors, these protocols typically require large
amounts of DNA, are expensive, don't get deep coverage, and require
extensive time for library and sample preparation. Ion Torrent has
developed new methodology for looking at 10s to 1000s of genomic targets
with the Ion AmpliSeq technology. The recommended input of 10ng of DNA is
suitable for work with FFPE or fine needle biopsy samples, and has been
demonstrated on samples with less than 1ng of DNA. In a 10 hour day this
protocol can take isolated DNA through the library and sample prep as
well sequencing with variant calls, making it an incredibly rapid method
for determining sequence variants within targeted regions. There are
currently two commercially available cancer-specific amplicon panels: the
Comprehensive Cancer Panel (CCP) uses 16,000 primer pairs covering the
exons of 409 tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes frequently cited and
mutated in cancers, and the Cancer Hotspot Panel v2 (CHP2) uses 207
primer pairs in 50 clinically actionable genes to detect over 2800
mutation hotspots. We recently measured the sensitivity of SNP detection
levels with the CCP and CHP2 panels on a 90:10 (reference:SNP) admixed
sample and were able to detect SNP proportions of 2.0%(p<0.005) with CHP2
and 2.0% (p2000X for a single sample on a 314 chip and >3000X for 6
barcoded samples on a 318 chip. Comparatively, the average base coverage
of the CCP was >280x and over 95% of the CCP amplicons were covered at
>50X. We ran the CCP in quadruplicate on 318 chips at two separate
facilities and the CHP2 was run barcoded on 318 chips and single samples
on 314 chips also in quadruplicate at two separate facilities and all of
the chips show very equivalent numbers for SNP detection and coverages.
These results demonstrate the consistent nature of targeted sequencing
using a next gen platform. Going from isolated DNA to variant calling in
as little as 10 hrs, this method is extremely fast and efficient which
will be critical in future diagnostic settings.

