Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fractionated whole brain irradiation modulates Homer1a expression
in a brain region specific manner.


About 500,000 new cancer patients will develop brain metastases in 2012.
The primary treatment modality for 250,000 of these patients is partial
or whole brain irradiation. While effective for controlling metastatic
brain tumors, there are significant late effects (> 6 months) following
radiotherapy which include a progressive, irreversible cognitive
impairment. Although the exact mechanism(s) behind this radiation-induced
brain injury are unknown, preclinical studies suggest that radiation
alters neuronal plasticity. Indeed irradiating the rodent brain decreases
long term potentiation, alters N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor expression and ablates
neurogenesis. In this study, we used microarray analysis to show that
Homer1a, a transcriptionally-regulated early response gene, was
transiently upregulated in the hippocampus and downregulated in the
cortex at 48 hours after fractionated (total dose of 40 Gy delivered as 2
Gy/fraction, 2X/week) whole brain irradiation (fWBI) in young adult male
Fischer 344 X Brown Norway rats. Two months after fWBI Homer1a gene
expression was downregulated in both the hippocampus and cortex. Homer1a
binds the consensus sequence on the C-terminus of the group I
metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR); thereby, disrupting the
cross-linking of constitutively expressed forms of Homer1 and activating
mGluR in the absence of glutamate. Radiation did not alter
phosphorylation of mGluR1, total GluR2 or phosphorylation of GluR2/3 in
the hippocampus or cortex at 2 months after fWBI. However, the
radiation-induced changes in Homer1a expression appeared to produce a
significant downregulation in mGluR1 in the hippocampus, and a
significant upregulation in the cortex. Memory/learning paradigms suggest
that trafficking of 2-amino-3-(3-hydroxy-5-methyl-isoxazol-4-yl)propanoic
acid (AMPA) receptors containing mGluR1 from intracellular compartments
to the plasma membrane is an early event during neural plasticity; thus
decreased mGluR1 may result in alterations in hippocampal neural
plasticity following fWBI. These data suggest a novel mechanism for the
development of radiation-induced cognitive impairment. (Supported by
CA122318)

