Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum biomarkers Carcinoembryonic Antigen (CEA) and Human Aspartyl
(Asparaginyl) Beta Hydroxylase (HAAH) compared in normal volunteers,
smokers, and stage I/II lung cancer patients.


Serological biomarkers for detection of cancer are often based upon
measuring the ectopic expression of particular proteins that are
otherwise only expressed during embryonic development. Perhaps the oldest
and best known cancer biomarker in this class is carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA), which despite having some limitations, has been very popular in
its longstanding use. We have compared CEA with HAAH (Human Aspartyl
(Asparaginyl) beta hydroxylase), an emerging biomarker protein that like
CEA has an onco-developmental re-expression pattern in a number of
cancers including lung cancer.One of the limitations of CEA that
precludes its routine utility for early serological screening and
detection of lung cancer is that cigarette smokers, a lung cancer high
risk group, frequently have elevated and variable CEA levels compared to
normal non-smoking individuals. We compared serum CEA by ELISA (using a
commercial kit) with serum HAAH (using Panacea's technology) in 26
individuals each who were either normal, cigarette smokers, or a
population of patients with either stage I or II lung cancer. Both assays
used a double monoclonal antibody sandwich format, and a peroxidase /TMB
detection system with suitable calibration standards . The CEA assay had
a simultaneous format, differing from the HAAH ELISA which had a
sequential homolgous antibody format.The mean CEA level of smokers (2.7
ng/ mL, range 0.84-6.4) was double that of normal (1.3 ng/ mL range 0.77-
2.4) as expected. Several individuals clustered near or exceeded the cut
off of 5ng /mL. More striking was the significant overlap of CEA levels
between smokers and the lung cancer patients (>80 %) (whereas > 53%
overlap between normals and lung cancer). It is even more striking to
observe a 100% overlap between smokers and stage I lung cancer. It's
interesting that a similar pattern of HAAH expression was seen between
normals and smokers (two times higher). However, both of these groups
mostly clustered below a pre-established cutoff of 2 ng/ mL and were
scored negative and non-detectable by our acceptance parameters.
Comparison of HAAH levels between normals/smokers and lung cancer
patients clearly shows a distinction between these groups with 0 %
overlap between normals/smokers and cancer patients.The concept of ELISA
based serological screening for lung cancer is generally very well
received as a cost effective non-invasive potential means for detection.
Our early assessment of HAAH levels in smokers indicates that such
testing performs favorably when compared to CEA testing in the effective
detection of early stage lung cancer. Since cigarette smokers contribute
to an overall 87% association with lung cancer, it's more likely that
these individuals would be selected for voluntary screening and would
therefore benefit from the superior performance of the HAAH ELISA.

