Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic review and meta-analysis of immunohistochemical
diagnostic markers for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.


Background: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has a five year
survival of only 2%. This poor prognosis is partly due to lack of early
diagnosis and effective treatment. Surgery is the only curative option
but is appropriate for only 10-15% of patients; the remainder have
chemotherapy or symptomatic care. Initial diagnosis involves imaging then
endoscopy with cytology: diagnosis is important for guiding patient
management. The cytological specimens require PDAC to be distinguished
from non-neoplastic pancreas. This can be difficult, especially if there
is chronic pancreatitis, and because samples are often small. Many
immunohistochemical (IHC) biomarkers are differentially expressed between
benign and malignant pancreas but none has yet entered routine clinical
practice. This study aims to review the evidence on diagnostic biomarkers
for PDAC in tissues and cells using IHC. To our knowledge, this is the
first meta-analysis on this subject.Material & Methods: The literature
was searched using EMBASE and MEDLINE databases from inception to March
2012. We sought publications which assessed the expression of IHC markers
in human PDAC and non-neoplastic pancreas (normal and/or chronic
pancreatitis). Specimens included both tissue resected at surgery and
cytological samples. We catalogued study characteristics including
specimen type, IHC details and biomarkers assessed and their staining
results including sensitivity and specificity. In the meta-analysis, for
each biomarker, coupled forest plots, bivariate summary estimates and
combined summary receiver operating characteristic curves were generated,
in turn, then compared and ranked according to pooled
sensitivity/specificity.Results: 2066 papers were initially identified.
59 studies reporting 33 biomarkers were selected for systematic review.
From these, 45 studies reporting 16 biomarkers progressed to
meta-analysis. Meta-analysis of IHC biomarkers assessed in resection
specimens showed 11 differentiating PDAC from non-neoplastic pancreas.
The highest ranked biomarkers according to pooled sensitivity/specificity
values were: S100P (100% sensitivity/100% specificity); maspin (92%/97%);
KOC (85%/98%); and MUC4 (82%/93%). Meta-analysis of cytology specimens
showed seven biomarkers differentiating PDAC from non-neoplastic
pancreas. The highest ranked were: KOC (85%/100%); SMAD4 (80%/100%);
S100P (91%/91%); and mesothelin (64%/92%).Conclusion: Thirty-three IHC
biomarkers for PDAC have been compiled from the literature and the
performance of 16 has been quantified and ranked. The highest ranking IHC
markers for PDAC were KOC and S100P, then maspin, mesothelin and MUC4.
Their reported diagnostic accuracies approach those of optimal
conventional cytology. These markers may be worth considering for further
clinical validation and potentially routine use in difficult cases.

