Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GenomeSpace: an environment for frictionless bioinformatics.


Over the past several years, cancer genome characterization initiatives
such as The Cancer Genome Atlas, International Cancer Genome Consortium,
and the Tumor Sequencing Project have produced an explosion of genomic
data. The pace of data production has increased with the adoption of
next-generation sequencing technologies and large-scale data production
efforts to discover the breadth of genomic variation in humans.
Comprehensive analysis of these datasets requires the coordinated use of
Web-based data repositories and applications, desktop analysis tools and
visualizers, and single-purpose algorithms. However, the effort required
to transfer data between tools, convert between data formats, and manage
results often prevents researchers from utilizing the wealth of methods
available to them. Many integrative genomics and translational bench to
bedside discoveries are possible with combinations of existing tools, but
the necessary transitions between them puts them out of the reach of most
researchers. Cloud technologies have produced a new wave of applications
that transfer next-generation sequence data directly from sequencers to a
compute cloud for storage and analysis, but these systems are at an early
stage of maturity and many are tied to commercial sequencing
vendors.GenomeSpace, http://www.genomespace.org, is an environment that
brings together diverse computational tools, enabling scientists without
programming skills to easily combine their capabilities. It aims to offer
a common space to create, manipulate and share an ever-growing range of
genomic analysis tools. GenomeSpace features support for cloud-based data
storage and analysis, multi-tool analytic workflows, automatic conversion
of data formats, and ease of connecting new tools to the environment. A
set of six GenomeSpace-enabled seed tools developed by collaborating
organizations provides a comprehensive platform for the analysis of
cancer data: Cytoscape (UCSD), Galaxy (Penn State University),
GenePattern (Broad Institute), Genomica (Weitzmann Institute),
Integrative Genomics Viewer (Broad Institute), and the UCSC Genome
Browser (UCSC). The extensible format of the system has empowered a wider
range of cancer analyses through the addition of ArrayExpress (European
Bioinformatics Institute), InSilico DB (University of Brussels),
geWorkbench (Columbia University), and Cistrome (Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute).We show how researchers can use GenomeSpace to effortlessly
combine the capabilities of all of these tools in several cancer research
scenarios.

