Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Topical botanical extract for management of chemotherapy-induced
alopecia.


IntroductionChemotherapy-induced alopecia (CIA) is considered the most
visible and emotionally distressing side effect of cancer therapy. But
there are no approved pharmacologic treatments available for CIA and the
main physical treatment with scalp cooling is considered of relative to
poor quality. In the course of CIA, the rapidly growing and dividing cell
populations in anagen phase of hair follicles are damaged by the systemic
chemotoxic agents and undergo premature apoptosis, inducing early onset
of catagen. The intrinsic pathway of apoptosis is essentially
mitochondrial dependent and executed by members of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2.
It has been suggested that early onset of catagen also serves as the
major universal down-stream factor of androgenetic alopecia (AGA).
Pharmacological inhibition of apoptosis pathways has been proposed to
prevent CIA. Considering the complexity of hair growth and cycling in
human and the sensitivity of cancer patients, AGA subjects could
potentially be recruited as CIA mimic for proof of concept study.We
present our study of a GMP-grade botanical extract (hereafter the
Product) on AGA subjects using Bcl-2 as a biomarker. Bcl-2 expression
levels in non-alopecia and AGA subjects were checked and compared. The
number of anagen (A) and telogen (T) hairs before and after the Product
application was recorded by phototrychogram to evaluate the respective
A/T ratio. By increasing intracellular level of Bcl-2, topical
application of the Product may provide with a promising avenue for the
future study to manage CIA.Study DesignHairs in the anagen and telogen
phase were identified and counted using Phototrichogram on 19 AGA male
subjects before and after 1.5 and 3 months topical application of the
Product. The respective A/T ratio of AGA male subjects at day 1, day 44,
and day 86 was calculated.Histomorphometrical Analysis: using scalp
biopsy, Bcl-2+ cells analysis has been performed by determining their
fractional area (%) in the epidermis of 25 male non-alopecia subjects and
15 AGA subjects before and after 3 months topical application of the
Product.ResultsAfter the Product application, the A/T ratio was raised
from 2.96 (day 1) to 4.30 (day 44), and remained at 4.35 all along the
study period (day 86).Average epidermal fraction of Bcl-2+ cells in AGA
subjects before vs after the Product application significantly increased
by 89% (from 1.72 to 3.24; p = 0.001, paired t-test), but remained below
the normal level of Bcl-2 in non-alopecia subjects (4.73). No Adverse
Events were reported.ConclusionThe anti-hair loss Product is a safe Bcl-2
up-regulating agent that can prevent premature apoptosis (early onset of
catagen) in AGA subjects. It may be used as topical management for CIA in
cancer patients receiving chemo- or radiotherapies, in a dosage and a
formulation to be investigated.

