Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mimicking infection for immunotherapy against breast cancer -
fooling the immune system.


Short description: Immunotherapy represents a potential and innovative
means to combat cancer. It essentially harnesses the body's immune system
to fight against cancer. Previous literature suggests that cancer
vaccines designed against a specific tumor antigen have been efficiently
utilized to trigger immune responses against tumor cells. Despite the
preliminary evidence in animal models, low immunogenicity is one of the
major hurdles in the development of vaccines in humans. In order to
surmount this obstacle, several approaches including the use of an ideal
tumor antigen, appropriate delivery techniques, immune boosting
strategies with co-stimulatory molecules are being explored.Purpose: The
purpose of this study was to develop bacteriomimetic nanoparticles to
enhance adaptive cell-mediated immune responses (CD4+ and CD8+ T cell
responses) against tumor antigen as a therapeutic option for cancer
treatment.Materials and Methods: NPs were prepared by modified
solid/oil/water solvent evaporation method using an ultrasonic processor
UP200H system (Hielscher Ultrasonics GmbH, Germany). We used membrane
preparations of the 4T1 mouse mammary cancer cell line as a tumor antigen
and CpG ODN's as a bactriomimetic stimulant. Fourteen days before tumor
challenge BALB/c female mice (6-8 weeks) were pre-immunized with CpG
followed by secondary immunization using respective NPs encapsulated with
the membrane antigen preparation. Subsequently, mice (n=4) were
challenged with 105 tumor cells intravenously (IV). Mice were sacrificed
and tumors were harvested at days 3, 7 and 14 respectively. CD4+ and CD8+
T cell responses were measured in lower respiratory node and spleen using
flow cytometry. In another experimental set, following the same
immunization schedule as mentioned above, mice (n=5) were challenged
subcutaneously (SC) with 105 tumor cells. Primary tumor size was
monitored using vernier caliper and bioluminiscence imaging (Caliper Life
Sciences Inc., MA, USA). Mice were sacrificed on day sixteen after tumor
challenge; spleen cells were used for flow cytometric analysis and
primary tumor tissue was used to evaluate CD4+ and CD8+ T cell via
immunohistochemistry.Results: We found significant reduction in
progression of tumor growth in mice immunized with CpG coated NPs
containing tumor antigen (CpG-NP-Tag). Cytometry analysis demonstrated
increased CD4+ (helper) and CD8+ (cytotoxic) T cell response emphasizing
enhanced immunogenicity against cancer cells. IHC data indicated greater
CD4+ T cell infiltration of the tumor tissue for the animals immunized
with CpG-NP-Tag.Conclusions: Primary tumor size, IHC and flow cytometry
analysis indicate that CpG-NP-Tag NPs were successfully employed to boost
the immune response against tumor cells.

