Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Surface marker screening revealed the marker distinguishes gastric
cancer stem cells in CD44 negative population.


Background: Gastric cancer (GC) is the second leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the world. Reportedly, cancer tissue is
maintained by a small fraction of cancer cells called cancer stem cells
(CSCs). CSCs are considered to initiate therapy resistance, recurrence
and metastasis. Although several reports have shown that GC is maintained
by CSCs, detailed mechanism of gastric CSCs (GCSCs) maintenance is
unclear. It has been shown that high aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)
activity is one of the markers for GCSCs by several groups including us.
To elucidate the molecular mechanism which regulate GCSCs, we performed
screening to identify the novel marker which is able to distinguish GSCSs
with high specificity.Materials and methods: We performed flowcytometric
screening of 8 common CSC markers (CD44, CD133, EpCAM, CD90, CD13, CD117
and ALDH) for 6 GC cell lines (MKN45, AGS, GSU, NUGC3, MKN1 and MKN7).
Fresh surgically removed GC specimens were obtained with informed patient
consent. To obtain xenograft, tissues were dissociated with mechanical
and enzymatic digestion, filtered to remove clumps, and injected
subcutaneously to flank of NOD/SCID mice. Cells were stain with ALDEFLUOR
assay kit for 45 minutes at 37C detection of ALDH activity.Result: Among
8 common CSC makers tested, we decided to focus on ALDH activity because
the cell populations with high ALDH activities (ALDHhigh cells) were
detected in the most of the cell lines and the fresh tumor tested.
ALDHhigh cells showed higher ability of sphere formation, tumorigenicity
in NOD/SCID mice, and chemoresistance. Notch1, a critical regulator in
maintenance of normal gastric stem/progenitor cell, was highly expressed
in ALDHhigh cells. We identified several cell surface markers in the
course of searching for markers selectively overexpressed in ALDHhigh
cells of GC xenograft. By staining GC cells with several markers
including CD44, GCSCs in CD44- fraction became distinguishable.
Expression of the several surface markers was highly increased after
treatment of chemotherapeutic agents. Our data suggest that the cell
populations distinguished by CD44 are heterogenous in terms of
chemoresistance and tumorigenicity.Conlcusion:High ALDH activity is a
marker for GCSCs and analysis of ALDH high cells revealed that fresh
gastric cancer samples contain CD44- gastric cancer stem cells.

