Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 is a key factor for lung cancer stem
cell survival and expansion.


In recent years studies of cancer development and recurrence have been
significantly influenced by the Cancer Stem Cell (CSC) hypothesis.
According to this, cancer is sustained by highly-positioned,
chemoresistant cells with extensive capacity of self renewal, which are
responsible for disease relapse after treatment with debulking agents.
Growth of cancer cells as non-adherent spheroids in non differentiating
conditions is regarded as a useful methodology to enrich for cells
endowed with CSC-like features. We have recently reported that cell
cultures derived from Malignant Pleural Effusions (MPE) of patients
affected by adenocarcinoma of the lung are able to form spheroids in
non-adherent conditions supplemented with selected growth factors, that
these spheroids upregulate markers associated with stemness, can be
serially propagated in vitro through several passages and, finally, give
rise efficiently to tumors, which reproduce the same histopathological
features of the original human tumor when implanted in immunodeficient
mice. By expression profiling we also identified a set of genes whose
expression is significantly upregulated in lung tumor spheroids vs
adherent cultures. One of the most strongly upregulated gene was
Stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD1), the main enzyme responsible for the
conversion of saturated into monounsaturated fatty acids. In the present
study we show both by RNA interference or through the use of a small
molecule inhibitor that SCD1 is required for lung cancer spheroids
propagation both in stable cell lines and in primary tumor cultures. SCD1
inhibition causes a dramatic impairment of survival of cells which
express ALDH and other markers of stemness in vitro. Morphological
examination and image analysis of the tumor spheroids formed in the
presence of SCD1 inhibitors showed a different pattern of growth
characterized by irregular cell aggregates. Electron microscopy revealed
that the treated spheroids displayed several features of cellular damage
and immunofluorescence analysis on optical serial sections showed
apoptotic cells positive for the M30 marker, most of them positive also
for the stemness marker ALDH, thus suggesting that the SCD1 inhibitor is
selectively killing cells with stem like properties. Furthermore,
SCD1-inhibited lung cancer spheroids were strongly impaired in their in
vivo tumorigenicity. These results suggest that SCD1 is a critical target
in lung cancer tumor initiating cells.

