Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockdown of Src expression dissolves resistance to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis in oral cancer cells.


A radical operation for advanced oral cancer results in malfunction of
chewing, swallowing, and pronouncing etc. Nevertheless, the most standard
therapy for oral cancer is a surgical resection because of its good
outcome compared to radiation and chemotherapy. It is expected that
treatment is less-invasive and effective against not only primary lesion
but also metastatic sites or cells with metastatic potential. Because the
acquisition of resistance to anoikis and apoptosis is considered as an
essential event to successfully metastasize, we focused on the apoptotic
signaling pathways mediated by natural death ligands. In this study, we
have used oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell lines with distinct
metastatic potential and attempted to disclose their apoptosis
sensitivity. More than half of the cells died under the low attachment
culture condition in all OSCC cell lines with no relation between their
metastatic potential, while other kind of cancer cell lines showed
anoikis resistance. SAS cells established from human tongue squamous cell
carcinoma showed modest sensitivity to tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), whereas SAS-T5 and SAS-L1 cells, a
clone with high metastatic potential showed robust resistance. Fas ligand
(Anti-Fas/CD95 monoclonal antibody) showed the similar trend of apoptosis
induction as well as TRAIL, but TNF- had no effect in these cells. We
confirmed that the expression levels and the localization of TRAIL
receptors were not correlated with TRAIL sensitivity. One of the
mechanisms underlying the differences in resistance between these cell
lines was an activity of Src kinase. Phosphorylated Src (Tyr 416), the
active form, was upregulated in SAS-T5 and SAS-L1 cells compared to
parental SAS cells. Src inhibitor PP2 suppressed cell proliferation in
response to dependence on Src signaling. Downregulation of Src with siRNA
made metastatic cells dissolve the resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis.
These results suggest that combination therapy with TRAIL plus medicine
inhibiting Src kinase may be a treatment strategy for oral squamous cell
carcinoma.

