Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Negative enrichment of circulating tumor cells using geometrically
activated surface interaction (GASI) chip.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs), existing extremely rare in peripheral
blood (the order of one cell per 1* 106 nucleated cells), have attracted
a lot of attention as they can be exploited to investigate metastasis.
The isolation of intact CTCs is challenging owing to their rarity and
heterogeneous features.A lot of methodologies for CTCs enrichment in
blood were focused using antibodies to epithelial cell adhesion molecule
(EpCAM). However, the recent studies found that the CTCs undergo a
process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) to adapt oneself to
new circumstances which is blood stream and down regulated EpCAM
expression on their surface. It is thought that the many CTCs may escape
detection by conventional detection methods. So, we decided to use the
negative enrichment (i.e. capturing WBCs which are non-target cells and
eluting CTCs which are target cells) for isolation of intact and
heterogeneous CTCs.To capture a large number of WBCs in the channel, we
developed a geometrically activated surface interaction (GASI)-Chip which
is based on the asymmetric herringbone that generate the enhanced mixing
flows increasing the surface interaction between the WBCs and CD45
antibody-conjugated channel surface. Using the optimized experimental
conditions, we isolated 94.67% of MCF-7 cells (breast cancer cell line)
and eliminated 98.94% of Jurkat cells (human T cell lymphoblast like cell
line) at 20 L/min flow rate.Based on these results, we have attempted to
isolate CTCs from patients with several kinds of metastatic cancer
patients under the same conditions. The blood samples (1ml) were
collected from breast, gastric and lung cancer patients, respectively.
After blood samples passed through the GASI-Chip, collected cells were
fixed on a slide glass and stained with DAPI for DNA content, PE
conjugated Cytokeratin for CTC, and FITC conjugated CD45 for WBC.
Following imaging the slide glass, captured images were examined
carefully with predefined criteria (DAPI positive, Cytokeratin positive,
CD45 negative). The number of isolated CTCs varied from 1 to 51 in 1 ml
of blood. Although this device was not intended to process full clinical
blood draws, which typically yield 7.5 mL, quite a number of CTCs can be
detected from only 1ml of blood compared with other approaches based on
the characters of CTCs such as size. Furthermore, the intact and
heterogeneous CTCs can be isolated regardless of EpCAM expression because
our devices do not require any labeling processes (e.g., EpCAM antibody
for CTC).

