Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence that mifepristone, a progesterone receptor antagonist,
can cross the blood brain barrier and provide palliative benefits for
glioblastoma multiforme grade IV.


The prognosis of patients with malignant glioma remains extremely poor
despite surgery and improvement in radio and chemo therapies.
Unfortunately few drugs cross the blood-brain barrier. Therapeutic
treatment with chemotherapy agents, e.g., temozolomide, 1,3 bis
(2-chloroethinyl)-1 nitrosurea carmustine wafers or tipifarnib have not
significantly improved patient survival. Mifepristone has been found to
provide significant palliative benefit to both mice with various types of
malignancies and also humans with a wide variety of advanced cancers no
longer or unresponsive to chemotherapy. The hypothesized mechanism of
action is that tumor cells either directly secrete or cause gamma delta T
cells in the tumor microenvironment to secrete a similar immunomodulatory
protein as in normal pregnancies which inhibits natural killer (NK) cell
cytotoxicity and causes a shift from thymic helper (TH)1 cytokines which
stimulate cellular immune responses to TH2cytokines which evoke a humoral
response. This protein is called the progesterone induced blocking factor
(PIBF). The hypothesis suggests that also similar to pregnancy,
progesterone or a P-like substance secreted by the tumor up-regulates
PIBF response. Mifepristone has been found to down-regulate PIBF
expression from human leukemia cell lines. Whether this is the precise
mechanism of action or not, the progesterone receptor antagonist seems to
inhibit tumor growth and provide extended and better quality of life. The
objective of the present study was to determine if mifepristone may cross
the blood brain barrier and provide a palliative benefit to patients with
stage IV glioblastoma multiforme. A 43 year old male with a large
glioblastoma multiforme grade IV malignant brain tumor arising originally
from the temporal lobe with metastases to the spinal cord was told that
he was no longer a candidate for anymore chemo or radiation therapy. He
was advised that death should occur within 2 months. Indeed 2 months
later death was considered imminent. He slept most of the day and was
unable to converse. He was completely paralyzed from the neck down and
his hands were in a clenched position. After 2 weeks of taking 200mg/day
of mifepristone he became alert and was able to carry out intelligent
conversations. He was now able to open his hand. He remained alert for 3
months, but paralysis had spread making swallowing difficult. He could
not longer ingest the mifepristone. He died 2 weeks later. This case
proves that mifepristone can cross the blood brain barrier and provide
palliative benefits for grade IV glioblastoma multiforme. It is well
tolerated with minimal or no side effects at this dosage. In view of the
paucity of effective therapy for this type of cancer, mifepristone should
be given consideration for treatment earlier than this extremely advanced
stage.

