Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptomic architecture of the airway field cancerization in
early-stage non-small cell lung cancer .


Earlier work has identified in lung cancer a field cancerization (FC)
phenomenon in which tumors and adjacent normal appearing tissues share
specific molecular abnormalities (e.g., loss of heterozygosity) that may
be highly pertinent to cancer pathogenesis. We sought to characterize the
global molecular airway FC adjacent to early-stage non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) in an attempt to unravel profiles that may help to explain
the development of the disease. We performed whole-transcript expression
profiling of a set of resected early-stage NSCLC specimens (n=20
patients) with matched histologically normal airways of varying distance
from the tumor and paired uninvolved normal lung tissue (n=194 samples).
Using linear mixed-effects models, we derived FC profiles signifying
genes concordantly differentially expressed between tumors and airways
compared to normal lung tissues. Gene set enrichment analysis
demonstrated that a subset of the genes (n=299) was significantly and
congruently modulated between large airways of smokers with and without
lung cancer. We then questioned whether the airway FC exhibits site from
tumor-dependent expression patterns.Ordinal regression analysis
identified airway profiles (n=422 genes) that were significantly
progressively expressed by distance from tumors and topologically
organized into canonical cancer-associated pathways, such as eukaryotic
initiation factor, p70S6K kinase, polo-like kinase and mammalian target
of rapamycin signaling (all pEarlier work has identified in lung cancer a
field cancerization (FC) phenomenon in which tumors and adjacent normal
appearing tissues share specific molecular abnormalities (e.g., loss of
heterozygosity) that may be highly pertinent to cancer pathogenesis. We
sought to characterize the global molecular airway FC adjacent to
early-stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in an attempt to unravel
profiles that may help to explain the development of the disease. We
performed whole-transcript expression profiling of a set of resected
early-stage NSCLC specimens (n=20 patients) with matched histologically
normal airways of varying distance from the tumor and paired uninvolved
normal lung tissue (n=194 samples). Using linear mixed-effects models, we
derived FC profiles signifying genes concordantly differentially
expressed between tumors and airways compared to normal lung tissues.
Gene set enrichment analysis demonstrated that a subset of the genes
(n=299) was significantly and congruently modulated between large airways
of smokers with and without lung cancer. We then questioned whether the
airway FC exhibits site from tumor-dependent expression patterns.Ordinal
regression analysis identified airway profiles (n=422 genes) that were
significantly progressively expressed by distance from tumors and
topologically organized into canonical cancer-associated pathways, such
as eukaryotic initiation factor, p70S6K kinase, polo-like kinase and
mammalian target of rapamycin signaling (all p<0.001). In addition, the
site-dependent airway profiles recapitulated NSCLC expression patterns
and were concordantly modulated between tumors and uninvolved normal lung
tissues pinpointing their probable roles in lung cancer pathogenesis.
Quantitative real-time PCR (QRTPCR) analysis confirmed the differential
expression of FC markers selected by both pathways analysis and
statistical criteria. Notably, lysosome associated protein transmembrane
4 beta (LAPTM4B), a putative oncogene with no known role in lung
carcinogenesis, was among the top 5 site-dependent FC markers and was
significantly elevated in NSCLC and immortalized bronchial epithelial
cell lines compared to normal cells. Furthermore, transient or stable
knockdown of LAPTM4B by RNA interference decreasedNSCLC cell growth as
well as anchorage-dependent and -independent colony formation. In
conclusion, our efforts in understanding the adjacent molecularFC in
NSCLC unraveled airway profiles that 1) are, in part, relevant to lung
cancer detection; 2) are modulated by distance from corresponding tumors;
3) recapitulate NSCLC expression patterns and 4) harbor markers engaged
in mediating the lung malignant phenotype. Profiling the adjacent airway
FC in conjunction with tumors, may provide additional insights into the
molecular pathology of NSCLC. Funded in part by Department of Defense
award W81XWH-10-1-1007.

