Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In-vitro studies of MM-121/SAR 256212, an anti-ErbB-3 antibody, in
combination with erlotinib in EGFR-wild-type NSCLC.


MM-121/SAR 256212 is a fully human anti ErbB3/HER3 antibody that blocks
ligand-induced receptor activation. Formation of EGFR/ErbB3 (ErbB1-3)
heterodimers has been implicated as a major driver of tumor growth and
survival in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Although erlotinib
remains the standard-of-care treatment for patients with EGFR-wild-type
NSCLC who have failed platinum combination chemotherapy, clinical benefit
is typically modest. To address this unmet medical need, we investigated
the combination of erlotinib with MM-121 in pre-clinical models of NSCLC.
We initially assembled a panel of 25 EGFR-WT NSCLC cell lines spanning
the most common histological subtypes (adenocarcinoma, squamous and
large-cell carcinoma). Clinical studies show that tumors harboring
activating Ras mutations less commonly respond to ErbB-directed
therapies. To explore the effect of Ras mutations on responsiveness to
MM121, we also selected our cell lines to include a variety of
H-/K-/N-Ras genotypes. Using a carefully optimized in-vitro 3D culture
system, we then measured cell viability in response to MM-121, erlotinib
or a combination of the drugs in the presence or absence of exogenously
added epidermal growth factor (EGF) and/or heregulin-1 (HRG). Our results
indicate that MM-121 inhibits HRG-driven cell proliferation in the
studied cell lines. In the five cell lines exhibiting dual-EGF-HRG-driven
cell proliferation, the combination of MM-121 with erlotinib demonstrated
superior inhibition of cell viability over erlotinib alone.To assess the
ability of MM-121 to inhibit tumor cell growth independent of exogenously
supplied HRG, we established mouse xenografts from three of the cell
lines and treated mice with erlotinib, MM-121, or a combination of the
two. All three in-vivo models showed greatly enhanced inhibition of tumor
cell growth compared to erlotinib alone in a manner consistent with our
in-vitro results.Analyzing our in vitro data we found that mutations in
Ras genes (HRAS, KRAS, NRAS) do not preclude response to MM-121 or
incremental benefit from the combination of MM-121 with erlotinib over
erlotinib alone. Non-adenocarcinoma origin likewise did not preclude
response to MM-121, although a weak trend towards diminished activity in
the ten non-adenocarcinoma NSCLC cell lines was apparent. Merrimack
Pharmaceuticals and Sanofi are co-developing MM-121 and a Phase 1-2 study
of MM-121 in combination with erlotinib is currently enrolling patients
with EGFR-wild-type NSCLC.

