Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exercise alters breast cancer phenotype through distinct
reductions in host-derived proinflammatory growth factor ligands.


It is becoming increasingly recognized that host (systemic) and tumor
cell release of proinflammatory growth factors are critical determinants
of cancer progression and therapeutic response in patients with solid
tumors. Thus, strategies that can attenuate systemic and/or tumor
production of proinflammatory growth factors may offer an effective
approach to improve therapeutic outcomes following a cancer diagnosis.
The present study tests the central hypothesis that exercise modulates
systemic levels of key growth factor ligands that, in turn, inhibit the
activity of critical downstream cell signaling pathways to effectively
inhibit tumor progression. To address this question, we took advantage of
sera collected from a clinical trial examining the efficacy of supervised
exercise training, relative to sedentary control, in patients with early
or advanced solid tumors. Multiplex ELISA analysis showed that exercising
patients (N=23) had significant reductions in circulating concentrations
of interleukin (IL)-4, MIP1- (macrophage inflammatory protein-1),
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-), and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) in comparison with patients
randomized to sedentary control (N=21). Exposure of estrogen receptor
positive (ER+) and Triple-Negative (ER-/PR-/HER2-) distinct human breast
cancer cell lines (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231) to serum from exercised breast
cancer patients led to marked alterations in cellular phenotype as shown
by increases in proliferation, migration, and apoptosis, compared with
exposure to serum from control patients. In vitro add-back experiments
using recombinant growth factors in concentrations consistent with that
observed in the clinical trial, revealed that HGF produced similar
alterations in tumor proliferation and apoptosis as that observed with
serum from exercising patients. Co-culturing of human breast cancer cells
with exercise serum and a neutralizing antibody against HGF, led to
increases in proliferation and decreases in apoptosis in comparison to
exercise serum alone. These results suggest that growth factor ligand
deprivation may play a critical role in mediating the effects of exercise
on tumor cellular phenotype. As such, our findings may provide initial
insight into the potential mechanisms underlying recent observations
showing higher levels of exercise correlate with more favorable disease
outcomes in early breast cancer patients. More generally, this study
indicates the widespread potential of exercise to modulate growth
factor-driven signaling and by extension, tumor progression and possibly
innate or acquired resistance to therapy.

