Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of tumor initiating genes RPL39 and MLF2 that
mediate lung metastasis through nitric oxide signaling and mesenchymal to
epithelial transition.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most aggressive and lethal
form of cancer characterized by lack of estrogen, progesterone and Her2
receptors. It is prevalent in women of African American descent, often
present in younger and premenopausal women. It shows high risk of
recurrence and frequently metastasizes to lungs and brain, resulting in
poor overall prognosis. There is no targeted therapy for TNBC as it does
not respond to hormonal therapy and is intrinsically resistance to
conventional chemotherapy. It is therefore imperative to understand the
mechanism of survival of these cancers and unravel its biological
pathways and modes of progression. We have previously described breast
cancer stem cells (BCSC) to be intrinsically resistant to treatment which
is further confirmed by recent publications by other groups that describe
direct functional evidence for the same. Using genomic assays, we traced
a BCSC gene signature comprising of 477 genes derived from patient
biopsies. On selective shRNA knockdown of these genes we identified RPL39
and MLF2 as the top two candidates that affect BCSC self-renewal.
Selective siRNA knockdown of RPL39 and MLF2 in human cancer xenografts,
showed reduced tumor volume and lung metastases with a concomitant
decrease in BCSC markers. Thus, targeting BCSCs in combination with
chemotherapy should eliminate the heterogeneous populations within a
tumor. Additionally, next generation RNA-seq confirmed mutations in RPL39
and MLF2 in 50% of lung metastases from breast cancer patients. In vitro
and in vivo siRNA knockdown of RPL39 and MLF2 showed decrease in nitric
oxide synthase, suggesting that these genes are driven by nitric oxide
signaling. In conclusion this study reveals novel tumor initiating genes,
RPL39 and MLF2 that target the breast cancer stem cells and also show
impact on lung metastasis. Our findings enhance the understanding of
treatment resistant breast cancer stem cells, the mutations that cause
metastases and also lay foundation for developing new therapies for such
cancers with poor prognosis.

