Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Theranostic profiling of adolescents and young adults (AYA) with
advanced fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma identifies aberrant
activation of the PI3K/AKT/MTOR signaling cascade.


Background: Fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma (FLHCC) is an
extremely rare malignancy predominantly affecting adolescents and young
adults without underlying chronic liver disease. Its molecular profile is
poorly defined. Given limited effective therapeutic options, we
characterized the molecular profiles of patients with advanced FLHCC
treated with novel targeted therapies on phase I clinical trials.Methods:
Of over 3400 pts with advanced malignancies seen in the Phase I clinic,
we identified 12 FLHCC pts (0.4 %). We performed single gene-PCR based
testing for oncogenic mutations in KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, CKIT, EGFR, PIK3CA,
MET, GNAQ, TP53, IHC for PTEN loss, ALK-1, estrogen receptor (ER) and
FISH for her2/neu, cMET amplification and ALK-1 rearrangement on patients
with adequate available tissue in the MD Anderson CLIA-certified lab.
Additionally next-generation sequencing from FFPE sections using a
targeted NGS assay in a CLIA laboratory (Foundation One, MA) was
completed on two patients. Over 2000 exons of 186 cancer-related genes
plus over 30 introns from 14 genes often rearranged in cancer were fully
sequenced for point mutations, insertions/deletions, copy number
alterations (CNAs) and select gene fusions.Results: Abnormal expression
of the tumor suppressor gene PTEN was shown in 2 of 4 (50%) tested pt's
tumors. The first patient's tumor shows overt PTEN loss on IHC while the
second pt's tumor showed very weak cytoplasmic staining for PTEN.
Interruptions of PTEN functions result in loss of negative regulation of
AKT and its downstream components including mTOR. Single gene-based PCR
sequencing for oncogenic mutations and the remainder of the tests using
IHC and FISH were negative. Next generation sequencing of two pts
revealed a missense mutation in FBXW7-E192A in one pt. The second pt's
NGS profile did not reveal any actionable mutations. E192A is a missense
mutation that occurs prior to the F-box domain and the highly conserved
WD40 repeat region, which plays a role in substrate recognition. Mao et
al (Science 2008) have reported that FBXW7 targets mTOR for degradation
and cooperates with PTEN in tumor suppression and tumor cell lines
harboring mutations in FBXW7 demonstrated particular sensitivity to
rapamycin. .Conclusion: With thorough comprehensive molecular profiling,
we can identify potential actionable aberrations in a subset of advanced
FL-HCC patients. Herein we identified activation of the PI3K/AKT/MTOR
pathway by PTEN loss and missense mutation in FBXW7. Further matching
patients to these actionable aberrations is underway, thereby translating
these therapeutic targets to the bedside with the development of novel
targeted therapies.Citation Format: Ishwaria M. Subbiah, Filip Janku,
Aung Naing, Siqing Fu, David S. Hong, Ahmed O. Kaseb, Cynthia Herzog,
Razelle Kurzrock, Robert A. Wolff, Robert A. Wolff, Vivek Subbiah.
Theranostic profiling of adolescents and young adults (AYA) with advanced
fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma identifies aberrant activation of
the PI3K/AKT/MTOR signaling cascade. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 48. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-48

