Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel Btk tyrosine kinase inhibitor, CTN06, as a potential
candidate agent for breast cancer treatment.


Backgrounds: Btk family kinases are non-receptor tyrosine kinases which
are involved in the regulation of diverse cellular processes such as
growth, survival and migration. Btk up-regulation has been shown to
contribute to oncogenesis of myeloid malignacies. However its functions
in solid tumors have not been explored due to its prominent expression in
B cells. In this study, we present the first evidence that Btk
overexpression contributes to breast carcinogenesis.Material and Methods:
CTN06-treated and BTK silenced cells were subjected to an Affimetrix
human Genome U133A 2.0 microarray analysis for a global examination of
Btk's functions in epithelial carcinogenesis. Signaling cascades which
were altered by CTN06 treatment include STAT3, mTOR, S6K and
Wnt/-catenin. In vitro proliferation, migration/invasion assays were
employed to demonstrate CTN06-mediated anti-cancer effects. RNA
interference experiments were performed to show Btk's contribution to
breast carcinogenesis and metastasis. Finally, xenograft mouse model was
used to demonstrate the effects of CTN06 and the down-regulation of Btk
on breast tumorigenesis.Results: Our preliminary data indicates that Btk
is aberrantly expressed in various breast cancer cell lines and tissues
but particularly in cells of invasive phenotype. These findings prompted
us to further explore the role of Btk in breast cancer carcinogenesis.
Using available structural models, our team has developed a collection of
small molecule inhibitors for Btk and shown that one of them, CTN06,
prominently inhibited the growth and migration of different breast cancer
cell lines. Interestingly, CTN06 also appeared to be a potent autophagy
inducer in the highly invasive and triple-negative MDA-MB-231 cells.
Based on these premises and Btk's participation in several signaling
cascades such as Src, PI3K, PLC and PLC, we hypothesize that Btk
overexpression confers a growth and/or survival advantage for breast
cancer cells; Btk inhibitors (CTN06) should effectively suppress breast
cancer development by negatively modulating Btk-related networks and be
evaluated for clinical use. We have obtained promising results not only
in vitro cell line models but also in vivo animal xenograft experiments
to demonstrate its efficacy and safety profile.Conclusions: We
demonstrated for the first time that Btk overexpression is detected in
breast cancer cells particularly in metastatic MDA-MB-231 cells and
Btk-specific inhibitor CTN06 effectively suppressed both tumor growth and
metastasis via negatively modulating the aforementioned signaling
cascades in vitro and in vivo.

