Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Water diffusion decreased in low collagen containing hypoxic
regions of breast cancer xenograft.


Tumors display chaotic vasculature that leads to hypoxia. Hypoxia is
associated with an aggressive phenotype and increased resistance to
radiation and chemotherapy. Hypoxic tumor regions also contain very few
collagen 1 fibers, which is a major component of the tumor extracellular
matrix (ECM) and plays an important role in molecular movement through
the ECM. Here we examined the effects of hypoxia on water diffusion in a
breast cancer xenograft model engineered to fluoresce under hypoxia. We
observed, for the first time, that in hypoxic regions water diffusion and
diffusion anisotropy was lower than in normoxic regions that may be
explained by the few collagen fibers in hypoxic regions.Severe combined
immunodeficient female mice were inoculated in the mammary fat pad with
2x106 MDA-MB-231 cells stably expressing red fluorescent protein (RFP)
under the control of a hypoxia response element. Once tumor volume was
approximately 300-400 mm3 the tumor was excised, fixed and imaged using
high-resolution diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). The apparent diffusion
coefficient (ADC) and fractional anisotropy (FA) maps were calculated.
Following DTI, the tumor was sliced at 1 mm thick sections for optical
imaging. Using a 1x lens to cover the entire tumor section, bright field
and fluorescence optical images were acquired to detect the
RFP-containing hypoxic regions. Multimodality registration was performed
by feature extraction to co-register the optical images to the DTI
images. Statistical dice similarity indices were calculated as a measure
of the registration error. Hypoxic regions were identified from the
optical fluorescence field images and the ADC and FA values were
calculated in the corresponding hypoxic and normoxic regions.ADC and FA
value distributions were identified in the DTI data and red fluorescent
hypoxic regions were identified from the optical images. Co-registration
accuracy confirmed by dice similarity index of 0.88 indicates a good
overlap of optical and DTI images. Overall, hypoxic regions had lower
water diffusion (ADC) and diffusion anisotropy (FA) values than normoxic
regions. We have consistently observed that collagen fibers are
significantly decreased in hypoxic regions, which could explain the lower
ADC and FA values observed in hypoxic regions. In separate studies we
have also observed high ADC in high collagen fiber containing regions in
human breast cancer tissue. Low ADC and FA values observed in low
collagen containing hypoxic regions indicate a functional role of these
fibers in molecular transport. Decreased diffusion of molecules due to
fewer collagen fibers in hypoxic regions may also contribute to poor drug
delivery and tumor recurrence in hypoxic regions. Increased cellularity
is thought to be one reason why lower ADC and FA values are observed in
tumors. An even lower ADC within this backdrop may be due to hypoxic
tumor regions.This work was supported by NIH P50CA103175 P30CA006973

