Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a quantitative colorectal cancer SRM assay for use
in FFPE tumor tissues.


Introduction: Aberrant over-expression of receptor tyrosine kinases,
including the MET, HER, FGFR, and IGFR families along with other critical
downstream oncogenic mediators including KRAS, BRAF, PI3 Kinase and SRC
are known drivers of colorectal cancer (CRC), subdividing the disease
into distinct molecular subsets. Inter-patient tumor heterogeneity
suggests that an expedient, reliable, medium throughput oncogene protein
expression profiling will provide vital information to better personalize
cancer care. Moreover, intra-patient tumor heterogeneity from primary
tumor to metastatic disease is likely to influence biomarker prediction
of response to specific targeted agents. To date, clinical quantification
of protein in formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues is limited
to immunohistochemistry (IHC), which is semi-quantitative at best.
Moreover, IHC of multiple proteins of interest is laborious, time
consuming, wasteful of scarce tissue, and costly. Other protein
quantification methods (ELISA, ECL) would require non-standard tissue
processing for analysis. We present a quantitative mass spectrometric
(MS) assay for CRC utilizing Liquid Tissue - Selected Reaction Monitoring
(SRM), with subsequent multiplex quantification of relevant oncoproteins
in a cohort of CRC paired primary and metastatic tumor tissues.Methods:
Using trypsin digestion mapping of recombinant oncoproteins, we
identified unique peptide sequences, and built quantitative MS assays
which could be multiplexed into a single SRM analysis of 1g of tumor
protein. Assays were preclinically validated on 10 different formalin
fixed (FF) cell lines.We then tested the CRC-plex MS assay with
multiplexed SRM quantification of Met, RON, EGFR, HER2, HER3, IGF1R,
FGFR2, KRAS and cSRC on 42 primary human CRC cancer tissues, with paired
metastases when available obtained from core biopsy or metastatectomy,
using laser capture microdissection of the target material from a single
unstained 10m thick section per sample.Results: Validation of the
CRC-plex SRM assay on cell lines and FFPE tissues revealed very high
concordance when compared to IB and IHC. Multiplex oncogene
quantification of all tissues, to the attomole/microgram level, will be
presented, highlighting inter-patient and intra-patient (from primary to
metastasis) heterogeneity of samples.Conclusions:Taken together, these
data demonstrate a sensitive, accurate, and quantitative assay to measure
relevant actionable oncoproteins in FFPE clinical samples. The CRC-plex
multiplexed oncogene expression of these tumors was feasible and
expedient using limited tissue from clinical samples, and is a novel
clinically applicable approach for tumor characterization for baseline
and/or post-treatment assessment.

