Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting H3K27 Methylation by 3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) in lung
and esophageal cancers.


Polycomb repressor complex-2 (PRC-2) is aberrantly expressed in a variety
of human malignancies including lung and esophageal cancers. PRC-2
contains three main core proteins, enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2), suppressor
of zeste 12 (SUZ12), and embryonic ectoderm development (EED). In the
present study, we sought to examine the effects of PRC-2 expression in
lung and esophageal cancers, and to determine if PRC-2 is a potential
therapeutic target in these malignancies. qRT-PCR analysis demonstrated
significant over-expression of EZH2, SUZ12, and EED in cultured lung and
esophageal cancer cells as well as primary tumors relative to normal or
immortalized aerodigestive tract epithelial cells, or normal lung or
esophageal tissues. Over-expression of individualPRC-2 components
appeared to coincide with tumor histology; for example EZH2 was
particularly over-expressed in small cell lung cancers, whereas EED
appeared to be over-expressed primarily in esophageal cancers. DZNep
mediated dose-dependent depletion of EZH2, EED and SUZ12, with
corresponding decreases in global H3K27Me3 levels in cultured lung and
esophageal cancer cells. Depletion of PRC-2 expression/activity coincided
with growth arrest in these cancer cells. The growth inhibitory effects
of DZNep in lung cancer cells were recapitulated byshRNA-mediated
knock-down of EZH2 in these cells. DZNep induced expression of Dkk-1, a
putative tumor suppressor that we have previously reported to be
repressed by polycomb-mediated mechanisms in lung cancer cells and
cultured normal respiratory epithelia following exposure to cigarette
smoke condensate (CSC). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments
demonstrated that DZNep-mediated activation of Dkk-1 coincided with
decreased levels of H3K27Me3 within the Dkk-1 promoter. qRT-PCR and
immunoblot experiments revealed that exposure of lung cancer cells to
DZNep before or concurrent with CSC abrogated tobacco-mediated repression
of Dkk-1 in vitro. Subsequent experiments demonstrated that daily
intra-peritoneal (IP) injections of CSC significantly decreased Dkk-1
gene expression in subcutaneous A549 and Calu-6 xenografts, and enhanced
growth of these tumors in nude mice. IP administration of DZNep (2.5
mg/kg BID q4 days every 7 days) significantly abrogated the enhancement
effect of cigarette smoke on growth of lung cancer xenografts; this
phenomenon coincided with decreased EZH2 and increased Dkk-1 expression
in these xenografts. Collectively, these findings support development of
DZNep for inhibiting PRC-2 expression in thoracic malignancies.

