Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of microRNAs in colorectal tumors and association
with disease stage.


IntroductionMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, noncoding RNAs that function as
regulators of many critical cellular processes. Increased expression of
specific microRNAs in tumor tissue may be indicative of a patient's
prognosis. The purpose of this study was to assess miRNA upregulation in
fresh frozen colorectal cancer (CRC) tumors compared to paired normal
colorectal tissue in a prospective cohort of CRC patients.MethodsTumor
and normal tissue were collected at the time of surgery from 40 stage
I-IV CRC patients participating in the ColoCare Study in Seattle, WA. The
Qiagen miRNeasy kit was used to isolate miRNAs for analysis. Expression
of candidate miRNAs (e.g., miR-141, miR-31, miR-29a, mir-92a, miR-203)
was measured using Taqman qRT-PCR with miRNA-specific stem loop primers.
For each miRNA, copy number was determined via standard curves and
normalized to miR-16 expression for each sample. Expression in tumor was
compared to expression in paired normal tissue for each participant. In
addition, we profiled two stage III CRC tumor-normal pairs using the
miCURY LNA human panel I qRT-PCR array from Exiqon. Relative expression
from the Exiqon panel was calculated using GenEx software and endogenous
control assays. The Wilcoxon two sample test was used to compare
normalized miRNA upregulation between groups.ResultsExpression of miR-31
was greater than 10-fold higher in tumor compared to normal tissue for 13
of 38 tumor-normal pairs with Taqman data available. Overexpression of
miR-31 in tumor tissue was significantly correlated with stage III-IV CRC
when compared to stage I-II CRC (pIntroductionMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are
small, noncoding RNAs that function as regulators of many critical
cellular processes. Increased expression of specific microRNAs in tumor
tissue may be indicative of a patient's prognosis. The purpose of this
study was to assess miRNA upregulation in fresh frozen colorectal cancer
(CRC) tumors compared to paired normal colorectal tissue in a prospective
cohort of CRC patients.MethodsTumor and normal tissue were collected at
the time of surgery from 40 stage I-IV CRC patients participating in the
ColoCare Study in Seattle, WA. The Qiagen miRNeasy kit was used to
isolate miRNAs for analysis. Expression of candidate miRNAs (e.g.,
miR-141, miR-31, miR-29a, mir-92a, miR-203) was measured using Taqman
qRT-PCR with miRNA-specific stem loop primers. For each miRNA, copy
number was determined via standard curves and normalized to miR-16
expression for each sample. Expression in tumor was compared to
expression in paired normal tissue for each participant. In addition, we
profiled two stage III CRC tumor-normal pairs using the miCURY LNA human
panel I qRT-PCR array from Exiqon. Relative expression from the Exiqon
panel was calculated using GenEx software and endogenous control assays.
The Wilcoxon two sample test was used to compare normalized miRNA
upregulation between groups.ResultsExpression of miR-31 was greater than
10-fold higher in tumor compared to normal tissue for 13 of 38
tumor-normal pairs with Taqman data available. Overexpression of miR-31
in tumor tissue was significantly correlated with stage III-IV CRC when
compared to stage I-II CRC (p<0.01). The Taqman and miCURY platforms both
showed miR-31 upregulation in the two stage III CRC tumors, but the
extent of upregulation varied between platforms.ConclusionIn this study,
upregulation of miR-31 in CRC tumor tissue was associated with more
advanced disease stage in CRC patients. Future studies will investigate
additional miRNAs, and associations with clinicopathological features,
patient outcomes, and circulating miRNA levels.

