Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of p62/IMP2 in breast cancer promotes cell
migration.


Invasion and metastasis are complex processes that are primarily
responsible for most cancer-related deaths throughout the world, and
which involve several different biological processes. The IMPs (IGF2
mRNA-binding Proteins) are a family of oncofoetal proteins that includes
the members IMP1, p62/IMP2, and IMP3. These proteins are expressed during
embryogenesis, and after birth their expression is lost in almost all
tissues. Re-expression of IMPs is however evident in a number of adult
malignancies. Indeed, p62/IMP2 was initially identified as an autoantigen
with serum from a patient with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). p62/IMP2
is therefore a potential biomarker for the early diagnosis of HCC as well
as of other cancers. Nonetheless, its function is largely unknown. To
begin to understand the biology of p62/IMP2, we evaluated its expression
in breast cancer by carrying out immunohistochemical analysis of 118
human sections from normal and malignant breast tissue samples. We
observed a statistically significant (pInvasion and metastasis are
complex processes that are primarily responsible for most cancer-related
deaths throughout the world, and which involve several different
biological processes. The IMPs (IGF2 mRNA-binding Proteins) are a family
of oncofoetal proteins that includes the members IMP1, p62/IMP2, and
IMP3. These proteins are expressed during embryogenesis, and after birth
their expression is lost in almost all tissues. Re-expression of IMPs is
however evident in a number of adult malignancies. Indeed, p62/IMP2 was
initially identified as an autoantigen with serum from a patient with
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). p62/IMP2 is therefore a potential
biomarker for the early diagnosis of HCC as well as of other cancers.
Nonetheless, its function is largely unknown. To begin to understand the
biology of p62/IMP2, we evaluated its expression in breast cancer by
carrying out immunohistochemical analysis of 118 human sections from
normal and malignant breast tissue samples. We observed a statistically
significant (p<0.05) overexpression of p62/IMP2 in human breast tumors
(72/104, 69%), compared with normal human breast tissue (2/14, 14%).
Transfection of human p62/IMP2 cDNA into human MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells (which lack p62/IMP2expression) produced clones with stable
positive and negative p62/IMP2 expression, a result confirmed by both
western blotting and immunofluorescence analysis. Analysis of the
transfected clones, using a wound healing assay, showed that p62/IMP2
overexpression can significantly enhance MDA-MB-231 cell migration. Our
results show that p62/IMP2 is expressed in human breast cancers, and that
its expression can increase cell migration, which suggests is may promote
the invasive behavior of breast cancers.

