Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The HIV protease inhibitor Nelfinavir inhibits medullary thyroid
cancer cell growth.


Background. Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) is associated with RET
mutations and activation of PI3K/AKT and MEK/ERK signaling pathways. Heat
shock protein 90 (HSP90) contributes to functional stabilization of
PI3K/AKT signaling and is required for growth factor inducible activation
of the MEK/ERK pathway. A recent study showed that HSP90 is a molecular
target for HIV protease inhibitor Nelfinavir (NFV). Treatment with NFV is
associated with growth inhibition and induction of apoptosis in breast,
ovarian and prostate cancer cell lines. Objectives. We hypothesized that
NFV-inducible inhibition of HSP90 would lead to down-regulation of
PI3K/AKT and MAPK/ERK signaling pathways and induction of apoptosis in
MTC cells. Methods. MTC-derived cells (TT cells) harboring the RET C634W
mutation were treated with NFV at concentrations from 1M to 10M.
Activation of MAPK/ERK and AKT/ mTOR/p70S6K/pS6 signaling was assessed by
Western blot using specific phospho-antibodies. Apoptosis was determined
by Western Blot with antibody against cleaved caspase 3. Cell growth and
viability were determined by Vi-Cell analyzer and Alamar blue assay.
HSP90 expression was examined in 12 human MTC tumor samples by
immunostaining. HSP90 expression was correlated with pAKT and pERK level.
Results. Treatment with NFV (1M to 10M for 48 hours) did not affect
expression of HSP90 or levels of total AKT and ERK. In contrast, pAKT and
pERK were inhibited in TT cells after treatment with NFV (5M and 10 M).
Since both AKT and ERK pathways contribute to regulation of p70S6K/pS6
activity, we examined activation of this signaling axis. NFV (10M)
decreased the level of p-p70S6K, p-pS6 and down-regulated Cyclin D1.
Growth experiments demonstrated that the number of viable cells decreased
by 30% and 85% after treatment with NFV at concentration 5M and 10M,
respectively. Microscopy showed that exposure to NFV was associated with
cell rounding and nuclear fragmentation, suggesting induction of
apoptosis. Western blot analysis revealed that NFV induced caspase 3
cleavage in TT cells. In addition, treatment with NFV was associated with
induction of H2AX, indicating DNA damage. Immunostaining of human MTC
showed increased expression of HSP 90 in 5/12 of examined MTCs compared
to corresponding normal thyroid tissue. The highest level of cytoplasmic
HSP90 was detected in 3 cases of MTC harboring RET mutation, and
co-localization staining showed that cells with high level of HSP90
expression also exhibited prominent pAKT and pERK. Conclusion. Treatment
of MTC cell with clinically achievable concentrations of NFV results in
down-regulation of AKT and ERK signaling and inhibition of MTC cell
growth. Expression of HSP90 in human tumors suggests that it has a role
in maintenance of anti-apoptotic signaling in MTC cells. Together these
data support the potential utility of NFV for the treatment of patients
with MTC.

