Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase inhibition has potential to suppresse growth
of androgen dependent and independent prostate cancer in vitro and in
vivo.


Histone acetylation plays an important role in chromatin remodeling and
gene expression. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors regulate gene
expressions through the induction of histone acetylation and have been
reported to suppress growth of several malignancies including lymphoma.
In this study, we examined the effects of one example on androgen
dependent and independent prostate cancer growth in vivo and in vitro. In
in vitro study, androgen dependent and independent prostate cancer cell
lines (LNCaP and VCaP) were used. The HDAC inhibitor, OBP-801 (Generously
donated by Dr. Urata, Oncolys Biopharma), significantly suppressed cell
proliferation with induction of G2/M arrest, and decreased expression of
cdc2, androgen receptor (AR) and PSA protein in both cell lines. OBP-801
also significantly induced apoptosis with activation of caspase 3 in
LNCaP. Next, we performed two in vivo experiments. First, we transplanted
an androgen independent rat prostate cancer (PLS-P) into the femurs and
backs of male F344 rats, and OBP-801 was administered intravenously at
doses of 0, 2.5 and 5mg/kg every other day for 2 weeks. OBP-801
significantly reduced the volume of the transplanted tumor, while
inducing cleaved caspase 3 protein expression. OBP-801 also suppressed
bone destruction and induction of osteoclasts in xenografts transplanted
to femurs. Second, we prepared male Transgenic Rat for Adenocarcinoma of
Prostate (TRAP) rats which spontaneously develop androgen dependent rat
prostate cancers, and OBP-801 was given intravenously at doses of 0, 0.5
and 2mg/kg once a week for 8 weeks. As a result, body weight loss was
observed in treated groups, and numbers of carcinoma acini in the lateral
and ventral prostates were significantly decreased compared with the
control group values. In conclusion, the obtained data suggests that
OBP-801 may be a candidate therapeutic or preventing agent for androgen
dependent and independent prostate cancer, although side effects such as
body weight loss may occur. Elucidation of mechanisms of HDAC underlying
these effects is needed.

