Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The CCL28 oncogene in NPC pathogenesis.


CCL28 Gene plays a role as an oncogene in the pathogenesis of
Lymphoepitheliomatous Carcinoma of NasopharynxNasopharyngeal Carcinoma
(NPC) is one of the most common cancers among Chinese living in southern
China, Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan. The molecular mechanisms involved
in the pathogenesis of NPC still are not yet well defined. Although it
was proposed that Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is closely associated with NPC
pathogenesis, but recently many studies have reported that EBV behaves
more likely as a progression factor but not an initiation factor. The
purpose of this research was to find out the genes associated with NPC
pathogenesis. Using cDNA microarray analysis of mRNA expression between
NPC cell lines and normal nasal mucosal epithelial cells, SOX5 gene
expression was found significantly increased in NPC cell lines. In our
previous studies of the function of SOX-5 gene in NPC, we found that
chemokine (CC motif) of ligand 28 (CCL28) was also significantly
increased in NPC cell lines, especially in NPC-TW03 line which is a
lymphoepitheliomatous carcinoma of nasopharynx (LE-NPC). In 50 cases of
Type III NPC biopsy specimens it was found that about 46% of cases
revealed high expression of CCL28 protein in their tumor cells. To
further identify the relationship between SOX5 and CCL28, we found that
SOX5 and CCL28 gene expressions could be reciprocally regulated in NPC
cells and suggested that CCL28 may be a critical factor for the formation
of LE-NPC. To study the role of CCL28 in the molecular pathogenesis of
LE-NPC and its functions, we constructed a stable pBIG2i-CCL28
transfected NPC cell line. We found that tumor cells could be
up-regulated to express CCL28 mRNA and protein remarkably in those
transfectants. This gene could promote tumor cell migration,
proliferation, invasion, and attract lymphocytes especially B cells in
vitro. In addition, EBV-immortalized B cells can also be attracted by
CCL28. On the other hand, EBV could infect the CCL28 transfectants;
furthermore, CCL28 could enhance IgA anti EBV-VCA production from the EBV
infected-B cells. However, in SCID mice bearing CCL28 transfected NPC
xenograft, the tumor growth and metastatic activity were slightly to
moderately increased by this gene, but it has failed to attract mouse
lymphocytic infiltration, probably due to the dissimilarity of CCL28
molecular structure between human and mouse species. Also, cDNA
microarray analysis of CCL28 overexpressed NPC cells showed a group of
oncogenes, such as IFI6 (Interferon L-inducible Protein 6, a survival
protein) up-regulated and some oncosuppressor genes such as GPR68 (a
G-protein-couple receptor 68) (a tumor metastasis suppressor gene)
down-regulated. It is concluded that CCL28 gene may play a role to
promote the formation of LE-NPC and as an oncogene in NPC pathogenesis to
promote LE-NPC migration, proliferation and invasion in addition to its
chemotactic property to attract B cell migration and to enhance IgA anti
EBV-VCA production from the EBV+ B cells.

