Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The identification of AURKB, BUB1B and CDK18 as putative molecular
targets for breast cancer using kinome focused RNAi screens.


The signal transduction events regulated by the kinase family of proteins
control many cellular processes including normal cell proliferation and
survival. The disruption of signaling pathways regulated either directly
or indirectly by protein kinases is frequently observed in cancer cells,
including breast cancer, and thus the development of inhibitors of
specific kinases has become a major focus of drug discovery in oncology.
Functional genomic RNAi screens of the kinome conducted within the
context of a specific tumor type and/or a specific cancer-associated
genetic background have the potential to identify kinases required for
cancer cell survival. A comparison of RNAi screening data that we have
obtained targeting the human kinome in three breast cancer cell lines
with other published RNAi screens led us to perform a detailed analysis
of the phenotypic effects of silencing AURKB, BUB1B, and CDK18 in
multiple breast cancer cell lines with the aim of further characterizing
kinase genes required for the growth of breast tumor cells.The
non-tumorigenic mammary epithelial cell line MCF-10A exhibited minimal
BUB1B protein expression and no detectable expression of AURKB protein,
while all of the breast cancer cell lines studied (a total of eight),
exhibited expression of both of these proteins. This differential
expression was associated with functional differences in silencing of
AURKB or BUB1B resulting in suppression of colony formation in almost all
of the breast cancer cell lines tested, but not in MCF-10A cells.
Silencing of AURKB also induced cell cycle arrest, caspase 3/7-activation
and PARP cleavage in MDA-MB-468 and HCC-38 cells, but not in MCF-10A
cells. These results were phenocopied by an ATP-competitive inhibitor of
aurora kinase with selectivity for aurora B kinase ZM447439. BUB1B
silencing resulted in cell cycle arrest in both MDA-MB-468 and HCC-38
cells, but caspase 3/7-activation and PARP cleavage were only observed in
MDA-MB-468 cells. None of these effects were observed in MCF-10A cells.
Little is known as to the functional role of CDK18, but its silencing
induced cell cycle arrest, caspase 3/7-activation and PARP cleavage in
MDA-MB-468. In contrast we saw minimal phenotypic effects in HCC-38 cells
and MCF-10A cells, even though both of these cell lines express CDK18. To
further elucidate the functional role of CDK18, we performed genome-wide
expression profiling of MDA-MB-468 cells in which CDK18 had been
silenced. Interestingly, one of the transcripts showing the greatest
decrease in expression following silencing of CDK18 was CCNE1 that
encodes cyclin E1. Another cyclin gene, CCND1, also exhibited a decrease
in expression following silencing of CDK18, and we are currently
examining this potential link between CDK18 function and cyclin E1 and
cyclin D1 in more detail.

