Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of intracrine vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
signaling in colorectal cancer cell survival and metastasis.


Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a key regulator of
angiogenesis and vascular function, and it's role in biology are thought
to be well understood. Although the effects of VEGF on angiogenesis, i.e.
on endothelial cells, have been extensively studied, its effects on tumor
cell function remain to be clearly elucidated. Our laboratory has
demonstrated the VEGF receptors are present and active on colorectal
cancer (CRC) cells. Recently we have studied the phenotypic changes in
human CRC cells to determine the role of autocrine/intracrine VEGF
signaling on tumor cell function. Using cell lines with somatic knockout
of the VEGF gene we have been able to show that loss of VEGF expression
led to significantly decreased cell growth and increased spontaneous
apoptosis in CRC cells. Depletion of VEGF also increased the in vitro
sensitivity of cells to the cytotoxic effects of the chemotherapeutic
agent 5-fluorouracil. Importantly, these effects are not mediated in an
autocrine or paracrine fashion, as neutralization of extracellular VEGF
with a monoclonal antibody, or inhibition of kinase activity with small
molecule inhibitors had no effect on CRC cell survival. These studies
support a novel role for VEGF in cell survival as an intracrine factor.
In our attempt to characterize the molecular mechanisms responsible for
the intracrine pro-survival role of VEGF, we have performed gene
microarray analyses on a pair of CRC cells with and without expression of
VEGF. These studies show a clear difference in expression patterns of
genes between cells that produce or lack VEGF, but surprisingly find no
significant changes in gene expression when VEGF function is inhibited by
functional antibodies (Bevacizumab). Our preliminary analyses of the gene
expression profiles indicate that CRC cells lacking VEGF have increased
levels of multiple receptor tyrosine kinases. In other biochemical
assays, we also find that cells lacking VEGF have increased activation of
survival and proliferation pathways compared to normal cells. Based on
our data, we hypothesize that loss of VEGF may induce activation of other
survival pathways that compensate for depletion of VEGF. Our microarray
studies also indicate significant increases in a factor that has been
implicated in increased metastasis in breast and lung cancer. This factor
may be responsible for the increased migration and invasion of CRC cells
lacking VEGF observed in vitro. Future studies will elucidate the exact
role of VEGF in tumor cell survival and metastasis.

