Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of mutant p53 for anti-TGF- therapy in isogenic basal-like
breast cancer models.


Breast cancer remains as one of the most common cancers worldwide
accounting for 450,000 deaths. During cancer progression, transforming
growth factor- (TGF-) signaling in tumor cells is often converted from
tumor suppression to tumor promotion. However, how this oncogenic switch
occurs is not well understood. Tripe-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a
breast cancer subtype, which is frequently associated with p53 mutation
and lacks specific molecular targets for therapeutic intervention. TGF-
signaling has been shown to be oncogenic in TNBC models. Therefore, we
tested the hypothesis that mutation of p53 may cause the oncogenic switch
of TGF- and thus serve as a biomarker for anti-TGF- therapy.In an effort
to create isogenic models resembling the transformation of normal breast
epithelial cells into TNBC, oncogenic H-Ras V12, human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT), and mutant p53 R175H (mP53) or vector control were
sequentially introduced into untransformed human breast epithelial
MCF-10A cells. These generated cell lines were orthotopically introduced
into the mammary fat pads of female nude mice and tumor burden was
monitored. Mice were divided into two groups receiving a TGF- type I
receptor (RI) kinase inhibitor or PBS as control. Harvested lungs were
analyzed for metastasis with GFP fluorescent imaging and quantitative PCR
for tumor cell specific genes.Mice inoculated with the transformed
MCF-10A cells containing mp53 (10A/mp53) displayed greater tumor burden
and lung metastasis incidence than the vector control counterparts.
Systemic treatment with the TGF- inhibitor resulted in a decrease in
metastasis in the mice inoculated with 10A/mp53 representing disruption
of TGF-s oncogenic role. In contrast, inhibition of TGF- signaling in
mice inoculated with 10A/pp290 vector control displayed greater lung
metastasis incidence, likely due to the disruption of TGF- tumor
suppressive effects. Our results indicate that the mp53 may serve as a
biomarker for the oncogenic switch of TGF- pathway and anti-TGF- therapy
for the inhibition of TNBC-induced metastasis.

