Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of bone marrow derived tumor stromal cells in intestinal
tumor response to Thymidylate Synthase Inhibitors inhibitors in the
ApcMin/+ mouse.


Historically, most anti-cancer therapies have been developed to target
cancer cells. For many decades, inhibitors of the enzyme thymidylate
synthase (TS), such as fluoropyrimidines, have been used in the clinical
management of various cancers. However, their clinical utility has been
limited by their toxicity to normal cells and acquired resistance by
tumor cells. More recently, the role of non-neoplastic cells in the tumor
microenvironment on tumor initiation and progression has been firmly
established. These non-neoplastic cells infiltrate the tumor and together
with the extracellular matrix, blood vessels, connective tissue, and
secreted molecules make up the tumor stroma. These cells are thought to
play a role in tumor response to therapy. While therapeutic efficacy is
often measured by its impact on tumor burden, the impact of TS inhibitors
on tumor stromal cells is largely unknown.Bone marrow derived cells
(BMDCs) are a major component of the tumor stroma.The goal of this
project is to determine theirin mediating tumor response to systemic
therapy with TS inhibitors. We hypothesize that in addition to targeting
tumor cells, tumor stromal cells are also direct of TS inhibitors and
thattumor response to therapy may in fact be dictated by stromal
sensitivity to the therapy.To test this hypothesis, we generated chimeric
wherein the chemo-sensitivity of intestinal tumor stromal cells to TS
inhibitors was different from that of the tumor cells. We transplanted
ApcMin/+ mice, a genetic model of intestinal tumorigenesis, with bone
marrow cells that weregenetically modified to express a drug-resistant TS
molecule from E. coli. We found that tumors in these mice were more
resistant to a combined therapy of TS inhibitors as compared to mice
transplanted with non-modified marrow. We identified examine the response
of BMDCs in the tumor stroma that have previously been shown to promote
intestinal tumor development, namely, myeloid derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs), mast cells and T-regulatory (Treg) cells. We found that MDSCs,
but not mast cells or Tregs were specifically sensitive to 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU). Our data suggest that tumor response to 5-FU are at least in part
mediated by MDSCs. Current studies are aimed at examining the response of
other stromal components to 5-FU with the goal of developing strategies
to enhance tumor sensitivity to TS inhibitors.

