Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of androgen receptor (AR) silencing in small cell
prostate carcinoma.


Small cell prostate cancer (SCPC) is an androgen receptor (AR) negative
variant that often emerges in the castration-resistant progression of
typical AR-positive prostate adenocarcinomas. Its presence predicts for
an aggressive clinical course with poor response to hormonal therapies
and a short median survival. Evidence suggests that the emergence of
(SCPC) occurs through cellular transdifferentiation. Therefore, we
hypothesized that loss of AR gene transcription may depend on epigenetic
events. Given the central role of AR in prostate cancer, we reasoned that
identifying the mechanisms involved in its downregulation could improve
our understanding of how the lethal SCPC subtype arises. Here we
investigated the DNA methylation and histone modifications of AR in a
group of six prostate tumor xenografts developed from men with CRPC (two
AR-positive [MDA PCa 170.4 and MDA PCa 180.30] and four AR-negative SCPC
[MDA PCa 144.13, MDA PCa 144.4, MDA PCa 155 and MDA PCa 146.10]) and
three established prostate cancer cell lines (one AR-positive [LNCaP] and
two AR-negative [PC3 and DU145]). We first evaluated the methylation
status of selected CpG sites in the AR promoter-associated CpG island
using bisulfite-sequencing followed by pyrosequencing analysis. Except
for the cancer cell lines PC-3 and DU145, all other cell lines and
xenografts were unmethylated regardless of the AR expression status.
Next, we used chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) to evaluate marking of
the AR promoter and a putative proximal enhancer by active (H3K4me3 and
H3K9ac) and repressive (H3K9me2 and H3K27me3) histone modifications.
Marking of the constitutively expressed genes (ACTB and GAPDH) and a
repressed gene (HBB) served as control for these experiments. As
expected, the only samples with AR marking by H3K4me3 and H3K9ac were the
two AR-positive xenografts and LNCaP. Marking by repressive histone
modifications was more variable: H3K27me3 was a universal finding in
AR-negative samples except for Du-145, and was accompanied by H3K9me2 in
two out of four xenografts. H3K27me3 and H3K9me2 also marked the putative
enhancer region when AR was repressed. Altogether, these data indicate
that promoter DNA methylation of AR is an infrequent finding in prostate
cancer, while polycomb protein-based silencing is nearly universal in
AR-negative variants. Also, it shows that H3K9me2 promotes reinforcement
of silencing. Thus, we propose that reactivation of AR may by achieved in
selected cases by inhibiting H3K27me3 alone, while concomitant inhibition
of both polycomb and SET domain proteins may be necessary for
double-positive H3K27/K9 methylation cases. Given the purported
differentiating and tumor suppressor effects of AR, its reactivation in
SCPC may be of therapeutic benefit.

