Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anthracycline based antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) for the
treatment of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma are effective in cell lines resistant
to auristatin based ADCs.


Anthracyclines are one of the most widely used classes of chemotherapy.
With current success of antibody drug conjugates in the clinic, we were
interested in anthracycline-based antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs).
Anthracyclines currently used in systemic chemotherapy were ineffective
as the ADC drug probably due to low potency of the drug. PNU-159682 was
identified as a metabolic product of nemorubicin that was 700 to 2400
more potent in in vivo cytotoxicity assays than nemorubicin. We were
interested to see if we could develop an effective anthracycline-based
ADC using PNU-159682. For these proof of concept studies we selected the
clinically validated linker
maleimidocaproyl-valine-citrulline-p-aminobenzoyloxycarbonyl (MC-vc-PAB)
used in the approved ADC brentuximab vedotin
[anti-CD30-MC-vc-PAB-monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE)] and attached it to
the primary alcohol of PNU-159682 to make NMS-249. For antibodies we
selected the anti-CD22 and anti-CD79b antibodies that have been shown to
be effective as MC-vc-PAB-MMAE ADCs in phase 1 clinical trials for the
treatment of NHL. In xenograft models of NHL anti-CD22-NMS249 was as
effective or more effective as anti-CD22-MC-vcPAB-MMAE. In particular
WSU-DLCL2, where anti-CD22-MC-vc-PAB-MMAE was least effective, show the
greatest difference between the two ADCs. To further explore if these the
anti-CD22-NMS249 could be used for patients that had progressed on
auristatin-based ADC, we developed two cell lines that were resistant to
anti-CD22-MC-vc-PAB-MMAE by consistently treating xenograft models with
increase amounts of ADC. After removing the resistant tumors and
culturing the cells in vitro the cell lines retained their resistance in
vivo to anti-CD22-MC-vc-PAB-MMAE but were also resistance to
anti-CD79b-MC-vc-PAB-MMAE. This suggests the resistance was not target
related and we found that CD22 expression was maintained in the resistant
cell lines. Anti-CD22-NMS249 maintained its efficacy in the resistant
cell lines. Microarray and FACs showed that the resistant cells lines
were up-regulated in MDR1 (PgP). We found that in vivo, unlike other
anthacyclines, PNU-159682 was not a PgP substrate this may explain the
ability of the anti-CD22-NMS249 to overcome the resistance to
anti-CD22-MC-vc-PAB-MMAE. These studies provide poof of concept for an
anthracycline ADC that could be use in patients that have failed
auristatin-based therapies.

