Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A method for quantifying soluble folate receptor 1 in IMGN853 0401
clinical trial patients.


IMGN853, an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC), consists of a human folate
receptor 1 (FOLR1)-binding monoclonal antibody, M9346A, conjugated to the
maytansinoid, DM4, via the cleavable sulfo-SPDB linker. A phase I
clinical study has been initiated to identify the maximum tolerated dose,
safety, pharmacokinetics (PK), and preliminary efficacy of IMGN853 in
patients with FOLR1-positive tumors, including ovarian cancer, non-small
cell lung cancer, and other epithelial malignancies. The levels of
soluble FOLR1 antigen (sFOLR1) in plasma may vary depending on factors
such as tumor antigen expression level, tumor type, and disease stage,
and may affect the PK of IMGN853and response to treatment. Previously
reported studies describing the detection of sFOLR1 in patient samples
are limited and not quantitative.The aim of this study was to develop a
sandwich ELISA to quantify levels of sFOLR1 present in plasma samples
from cancer patients for use as a potential biomarker of IMGN853 PK
and/or clinical response.A panel of murine anti-FOLR1 antibodies was
generated at ImmunoGen by standard hybridoma technology. Two clones were
chosen for use as capture (FR1-9) and detector (FR1-13) antibodies in the
ELISA due to their high affinity and ability to bind to FOLR1 even in the
presence of IMGN853 or the FOLR1 ligand, folate. The extracellular domain
of FOLR1 fused to murine IgG2a Fc region (FOLR1-Fc) was used as a
reference standard. A sandwich ELISA was developed using FR1-9 antibody
to capture sFOLR1 from patient plasma, and bound sFOLR1 was detected
using biotinylated FR1-13 antibody and streptavidin-HRP with TMB as the
substrate. The ELISA was used to quantify sFOLR1 in ovarian carcinoma
patient plasma using a reference standard curve generated with FOLR1-Fc
antigen.A robust sandwich ELISA was developed to quantify sFOLR1 in
patient plasma. The quantitation range of the assay was determined to be
0.2 to 90 nanomolar. Coated plates stored frozen from 0-14 days and
protein reagents freeze-thawed over two cycles gave repeatable results.
The ELISA was able to detect sFOLR1 in 5 of 10 ovarian cancer patient
plasma samples, where the levels of detectable sFOLR1 ranged from 0.7-31
nM. This ELISA is considered suitable to quantify levels of sFOLR1 in
patients enrolled in the phase 1 trial over the course of IMGN853
treatment, and resulting data will be assessed for correlations with
IMGN853 PK and with clinical response.

