Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of novel high-throughput screening assay system for
exploring EMT inhibitors.


Background: EMT (Epitherial-Mesenchymal transition) is a significant
event in tumor metastasis and malignancy. Cancer cells are stimulated by
EMT-inducible agonists from the surrounding stromal cells, and cause
transformation such as weakening of cell-cell adhesion and the
accompanying acceleration of cell migration and invasion. Inhibition of
EMT is considered to enable controlling of malignant transformation. In
this study, we developed a high-throughput assay system of EMT inhibitor
screen in 3D cell culture.Method: We adopted 3D cell culture method on
NanoCulture Plate (NCP), a scaffold type spheroid culture plate, as a
culture method which can confirm spheroid morphologies. TGF- and its
inhibitor, SB431542, were used as an EMT inducer and as a positive
control for EMT inhibitor, respectively. Expressions of E-cadherin,
N-cadherin, vimentin and zeb-1, represent EMT maker genes, were evaluated
by qRT-PCR. As hypoxia inside the spheroids reflected the spheroid size
and cell-cell adhesion strength, we visualized the intra-spheroid
hypoxia, and used it as an indicator for EMT induction and
inhibition.Result: A549 cell spheroids gradually collapsed, by the
weakening of cell-cell adhesion, and cells migrating out from the
spheroids, by treating with TGF-. This collapse of the spheroids was
inhibited by SB431542 treatment. SB431542 treatment also accompanied
inhibition of E-cadherin down-regulation, and N-cadherin, vimentin and
zeb-1 up-regulation. These results indicate that this method is clearly
reproducing EMT and its inhibition. And we elucidated that intra-spheroid
hypoxicity was closely correlated with spheroid morphology. From this, it
is demonstrated that this method is simple but high-precision
assay.Conclusion: We developed a high-throughput assay system for EMT
inhibitor screen, by evaluating intra-spheroid hypoxicity as an indicator
for alternation of the spheroid morphology. This method is an unique
method which enables to evaluate EMT condition, by monitoring the
collapse of spheroids directly. We are now running a screen for EMT
inhibitor candidate compounds, by using this assay system.

