Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic deregulation of breast cancer is associated with DNA
Repair Capacity.


Introduction 226,870 women are estimated to be diagnosed with breast
cancer in 2012. Search for accurate methods for screening, diagnosis and
treatment follow up, that will be minimally invasive are
ongoing.Hypermethylation of gene promoters occurs frequently in the
pathogenesis of breast cancer, and causes silencing of tumor suppressor
genes. Hypermethylation of Mal, Kif1a and OGDHL in breast cancer cell
lines and tissue samples was previously reported.Aberrant DNA repair
capacity (DRC) has been studied and shown to elevate the risk for breast
cancer.However, information on the association between the epigenetic
promoter hypermethylation and DRC is lacking in the literature.Objective
The aim of this study is to assess the association between breast cancer
and promoter hypermethylation of Mal, Kif1a and OGDHL in serum of breast
cancer patients and controls in association with the DRC.Methods 240
serum samples from breast cancer patients and controls from Puerto Rico
were collected. DNA was extracted and methylation levels were measured
after bisulfite treatment, by QMSP. DRC was assessed by host reactivation
assay of blood samples. The overall risk for breast cancer was calculated
and adjusted for patient characteristics including DRC.Results
Methylation of at least one of the genes was found in 49% of breast
cancer samples compared to 20% of controls. ROC curves for individual
genes showed values of 0.64 for MAL, 0.51 for Kif1a and 0.53 for OGDHL.
In the linear regression unadjusted analysis, mean methylation levels
(what are the values?) of the three genes and odds ratio (OR) were higher
in breast cancer cases compared to controls, with Kif1a and OGDHL values
being statistically significant. These values became non significant
after adjusting for DRC. Hypermethylation of Kif1a, but not MAL or OGDHL
was found to be significantly associated with DRC.Conclusion Correlation
between promoter hypermethylation of the genes Mal, Kif1a and OGDHL and
breast cancer was non significant when adjusted for DRC.A significant
association between hypermethylation of Kif1a and DRC was shown.The
association between promoter hypermethylation and DRC needs to be further
studied.

