Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibiiton of non-hypoxic HIF-1 expression in letrozole-resistant
breast cancer cells reduces their cancer stem cell characteristics.


Although aromatase inhibitors (AIs) have been shown to be highly
effective in treating estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer, a
significant percentage of patients either do not respond to AIs or become
resistant to them. Studies suggest that acquired resistance to AIs (i.e.,
letrozole) involves a switch from dependence on ER signaling to
dependence on growth factor-mediated pathways, such as epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR)/HER2. Recent work in our lab has also linked
hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) and its target gene breast cancer
resistance protein (BCRP, a stem cell marker) to HER2 and AI resistance.
Other studies have associated each of these factors with cancer stem
cells (CSCs),, which have been implicated in drug resistance. Thus, the
purpose of this study is to 1) determine whether HIF-1 expression is
enriched in the CSC subpopulation of letrozole-resistant breast cancer
cells; and 2) determine the effects of inhibiting HIF-1 on CSC
characteristics. The in vitro model used for acquired letrozole resistant
breast cancer is the LTLTCa cell line, which was obtained through
long-term letrozole treatment of MCF-7Ca xenograft tumors. The CSC
subpopulation in LTLTCa cells was isolated by flow cytometry based on
their aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) expression, and the CSC
characteristics studied include mammosphere formation, side population
percentage, and CD44+/CD24+ expression. Inhibition of HIF-1 expression
was accomplished using either commercially available HIF-1 siRNA or
EZN-2968, a specific RNA antagonist against HIF-1 currently in clinical
trials. HIF-1 is the inducible subunit of HIF-1. RT-PCR indicates that
mRNA expression of HIF-1 and stem cell markers, such as BCRP, BMI-1, and
Nanog, were significantly higher (pAlthough aromatase inhibitors (AIs)
have been shown to be highly effective in treating estrogen receptor
positive (ER+) breast cancer, a significant percentage of patients either
do not respond to AIs or become resistant to them. Studies suggest that
acquired resistance to AIs (i.e., letrozole) involves a switch from
dependence on ER signaling to dependence on growth factor-mediated
pathways, such as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)/HER2. Recent
work in our lab has also linked hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) and
its target gene breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP, a stem cell
marker) to HER2 and AI resistance. Other studies have associated each of
these factors with cancer stem cells (CSCs),, which have been implicated
in drug resistance. Thus, the purpose of this study is to 1) determine
whether HIF-1 expression is enriched in the CSC subpopulation of
letrozole-resistant breast cancer cells; and 2) determine the effects of
inhibiting HIF-1 on CSC characteristics. The in vitro model used for
acquired letrozole resistant breast cancer is the LTLTCa cell line, which
was obtained through long-term letrozole treatment of MCF-7Ca xenograft
tumors. The CSC subpopulation in LTLTCa cells was isolated by flow
cytometry based on their aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) expression, and
the CSC characteristics studied include mammosphere formation, side
population percentage, and CD44+/CD24+ expression. Inhibition of HIF-1
expression was accomplished using either commercially available HIF-1
siRNA or EZN-2968, a specific RNA antagonist against HIF-1 currently in
clinical trials. HIF-1 is the inducible subunit of HIF-1. RT-PCR
indicates that mRNA expression of HIF-1 and stem cell markers, such as
BCRP, BMI-1, and Nanog, were significantly higher (p<0.05) in ALDHhigh
(CSC) vs. ALDHlow (non-CSC) cells. HIF-1 siRNA and EZN-2968 decreased
HIF-1 mRNA and protein expression in LTLTCa cells within 48h (0.4 to
0.01-fold vs. negative control siRNA/RNA antagonist). This correlated
with decreases in mRNA expression of stem cell markers BCRP and BMI-1,
and TWIST, an EMT marker and regulator of BMI-1. HIF-1 inhibition also
reduced mammosphere formation by 33% (pAlthough aromatase inhibitors
(AIs) have been shown to be highly effective in treating estrogen
receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer, a significant percentage of
patients either do not respond to AIs or become resistant to them.
Studies suggest that acquired resistance to AIs (i.e., letrozole)
involves a switch from dependence on ER signaling to dependence on growth
factor-mediated pathways, such as epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR)/HER2. Recent work in our lab has also linked hypoxia inducible
factor 1 (HIF-1) and its target gene breast cancer resistance protein
(BCRP, a stem cell marker) to HER2 and AI resistance. Other studies have
associated each of these factors with cancer stem cells (CSCs),, which
have been implicated in drug resistance. Thus, the purpose of this study
is to 1) determine whether HIF-1 expression is enriched in the CSC
subpopulation of letrozole-resistant breast cancer cells; and 2)
determine the effects of inhibiting HIF-1 on CSC characteristics. The in
vitro model used for acquired letrozole resistant breast cancer is the
LTLTCa cell line, which was obtained through long-term letrozole
treatment of MCF-7Ca xenograft tumors. The CSC subpopulation in LTLTCa
cells was isolated by flow cytometry based on their aldehyde
dehydrogenase (ALDH) expression, and the CSC characteristics studied
include mammosphere formation, side population percentage, and
CD44+/CD24+ expression. Inhibition of HIF-1 expression was accomplished
using either commercially available HIF-1 siRNA or EZN-2968, a specific
RNA antagonist against HIF-1 currently in clinical trials. HIF-1 is the
inducible subunit of HIF-1. RT-PCR indicates that mRNA expression of
HIF-1 and stem cell markers, such as BCRP, BMI-1, and Nanog, were
significantly higher (p<0.05) in ALDHhigh (CSC) vs. ALDHlow (non-CSC)
cells. HIF-1 siRNA and EZN-2968 decreased HIF-1 mRNA and protein
expression in LTLTCa cells within 48h (0.4 to 0.01-fold vs. negative
control siRNA/RNA antagonist). This correlated with decreases in mRNA
expression of stem cell markers BCRP and BMI-1, and TWIST, an EMT marker
and regulator of BMI-1. HIF-1 inhibition also reduced mammosphere
formation by 33% (p<0.05). Interestingly, preliminary results indicate
that while EZN-2968 decreased the ratio of CD44+/24+ expression (28% vs.
52% in negative control RNA antagonist) and side population percentage
(8% vs. 16% in negative control RNA antagonist) in LTLTCa cells, the
commercially available HIF-1 siRNA had no effect. These results suggest
that nonhypoxic HIF-1 is involved in regulating cancer stem cell
characteristics in letrozole-resistant breast cancer cells, and that
EZN-2968 should be further explored in the prevention and/or treatment of
AI-resistant breast cancer.EZN-2968 kindly provided by Enzon
Pharmaceuticals.This work is funded by DOD Breast Cancer Research Program
Postdoctoral Award (BC1039031).

