Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An evaluation of the use of genetically modified mouse models in
human cancer risk assessment.


The development of short-term or accelerated cancer bioassays using
genetically modified (GM) animals that exhibit high sensitivity to
chemically induced cancers and that act through mode(s) of action
relevant to humans continues to be an important focus of research.
However, to date only a few GM mouse models such as the Trp53+/, the
Tg.AC and the rasH2 models have effectively been evaluated to substitute
for the two-year rodent cancer bioassays. Whether these models provide an
acceptable replacement for the conventional rodent cancer bioassay for
assessing human cancer risks is the subject of ongoing debate. The
objective of this study was to evaluate the current status of the use of
GM mice for accelerated cancer bioassays in assessing the potential human
health risks associated with exposure to carcinogenic agents. We compared
the published data from the GM bioassays with results obtained using the
National Toxicology Program's conventional 2-year mouse cancer bioassay
presently used in human cancer risk assessment. The results demonstrate a
moderate success for these GM models to distinguish carcinogens from
non-carcinogens. Although the GM models are less efficient in detecting
rodent carcinogens, they are more consistent in identifying
non-carcinogens. Our analysis also shows that there continue to be
concerns about the assay design and protocols used for the GM models,
including issues related to sample size, study duration, genetic
instability, and reproducibility. Additional issues of concern include
specific toxicity pathway-dependent effects, and differences in the
potential carcinogenic mechanisms operating in GM and non-GM animals,
topics that still need to be investigated. In addition, the
dose-responses of the GM models can vary substantially from those seen in
conventional cancer bioassays. Overall, we conclude that the existing GM
mouse models are of value for hazard identification, but are of limited
use for dose-response analysis with currently used study designs. Hence,
until these models are thoroughly validated using more robust study
designs and the dose-response issues adequately addressed, caution should
be exercised when using the current GM models to assess the carcinogenic
risks of chemicals to humans.Disclaimer: The views expressed in this
abstract are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views or policies of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or the
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.

