Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COUP-TF1 is a novel biomarker of therapy response in high-risk
neuroblastoma.


High-risk neuroblastoma (HR NB) is a lethal pediatric solid tumor derived
from sympathetic neuroblasts. Most NBs take up the norepinephrine
analogue 131I-meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) that is used radiologically
to stage disease. Results from a Children's Oncology Group HR NB trial
showed patients with MIBG positive NB at diagnosis had worse overall
survival compared to patients with MIBG negative NB (3 year OS: 65% vs
85%; Parisi 2010) but biologically we do not know why. MIBG (-) NBs are
more undifferentiated pathologically and often fail to secrete the
catecholamines HVA and VMA. We hypothesized that MIBG (-) and MIBG (+) HR
NBs arise at different stages of neuroblast development and thus harbor
different gene expression profiles that affect therapy response. We
interrogated published microarrays (GSE19724, GSE3960) of primary HR NBs
for gene expression changes based on norepinephrine transporter (NET)
expression as NBs take up MIBG through this neural transporter.
Twenty-one genes had > 3-fold significant change in expression based on
NET expression. Genes involved in neural development (ALK, PHOX2B, TLX2,
DBH, DDC) were significantly decreased in NET low NBs, supporting our
hypothesis. NET low NBs also had a >3-fold increase in COUP-TF1, a
transcription factor necessary for retinoic acid (RA) induced
differentiation in some cancers. COUP-TF1s role in NB is unknown.
Microarrays containing prognostic data confirmed HR NBs with medium/high
COUP-TF1 expression had superior patient survival compared to those with
low COUP-TF1, independent of NET (p=.0004,
http://home.ccr.cancer.gov/oncology/oncogenomics). In vitro, NB cell
lines with high COUP-TF1 protein (SMS-SAN) were very sensitive to RA
induced differentiation and shRNA inhibition of COUP-TF1 in SMS-SAN
caused RA resistance. Similarly, overexpression of COUP-TF1 restored RA
sensitivity in RA resistant, low COUP-TF1 expressing IMR5. RA treatment
increased COUP-TF1 expression in NB coincident with RAR induction,
suggesting COUP-TF1 is critical to RA response. shRNA inhibition of
COUP-TF1 (shCOUP) rendered SMS-SAN resistant to doxorubicin, with
SMS-SAN-shCOUP growing in doxorubicin doses that killed > 70% of wild
type SMS-SAN, suggesting COUP-TF1 is necessary for cytotoxic response as
well. We have identified a transcription factor that is associated with
improved patient survival and in vitro studies suggest this is through
mediation of therapy response. COUP-TF1 enhances RA induced
differentiation in NB and we are the first to show COUP-TF1 also mediates
cytotoxic response in cancer. This supports using COUP-TF1 as a biomarker
for therapy response to improve risk stratification and treatment choice
in HR NB. If COUP-TF1 impacts prognosis through chemosensitization and RA
pathway effects, efforts to define the mechanism and therapeutically
enhance COUP-TF1 expression will be critical to reverting therapy
resistance to improve patient survival.

