Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphatidylcholine synthesis as a potential therapeutic target in
multiple myeloma.


A metabolics screen with 8226 cells treated with AICAr showed that de
novo pyrimidine synthesis was inhibited. AICAr -induced apoptosis in 5
different myeloma cell lines. This screen showed a significant decrease
in CDP-choline, an intermediate of the Kennedy pathway involved in de
novo synthesis of phosphatidylcholine (PC). Phosphatidylcholine is the
most predominant phospholipid in mammalian ER membranes. The rate
limiting step in this pathway is the conversion of phosphocholine and CTP
to CDP-choline via the enzyme CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase
(CCT). Although it is likely that the decrease in CDP-choline is a
consequence of pyrimidine starvation, the fact that this pathway showed a
significant decrease within 8 hours of AICAr treatment suggested to us
that this pathway may have a high flux in 8226 cells and that
phosphatidylcholine synthesis may be a relevant target in myeloma
cells.Multiple myeloma (MM) cells may be particularly dependent on this
biosynthetic reaction because of their high consistent level of ER stress
and requirement to continuously replenish ER membranes. Indeed, CCT-null
mice have a defect in differentiation of B lymphocytes to plasma cells
and deficiencies in Ig synthesis. To test whether this pathway remains
critical in survival of malignant MM cells, we exposed MM cell lines to
an inhibitor shown to inhibit CCT activity, HexPC. HexPC induced
apoptosis in all MM cell lines in a concentration- and time-dependent
manner. The addition of lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC), presumably
converted to PC independently of the Kennedy pathway, completely rescued
MM cell apoptosis. Knocking down of CCT with shRNA in myeloma cell lines
also resulted in apoptosis. Apoptosis of MM cells induced by HexPC was
associated with induction of ER stress as shown by enhanced
phosphorylation of IRE1 and eIF-2alpha. This ER stress was also prevented
when LPC was added to HexPC although LPC could not prevent similar ER
stress induced by bortezomib. These results underscore the importance of
this phosphatidylcholine synthesis pathway in MM cells and provide new
targets for future therapy.

