Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative analyses of human estrogen receptor- EF-hand protein
complexes: molecular basis for hormone independent activation.


Estrogen Receptor (ER) belongs to the nuclear receptor super family of
ligand-triggered transcription factors. ER is present in about 70% of
breast cancers and plays a critical role in the biology of breast
carcinoma and improves prognosis. Estrogen binds to ER and mediates a
cascade of cellular signaling events. It has been shown that several
proteins including calcium binding proteins with EF-hand motifs, which
control cellular calcium and calcium mediated signaling pathways,
including calmodulin (CaM) could bind to unliganded ER and activate ER.
CaM has four EF-hand motifs that change conformation upon binding Ca2+
ions. Ca2+-CaM complex binds to the target proteins and initiates various
signaling cascades. Each EF-hand motif contains two alpha helices
connected by a 12-residue loop. Both X-ray and NMR studies show that the
alpha helices of the EF-hand motifs change their position relative to
each other, forming an almost perpendicular conformation. This allows
calmodulin to increase its binding affinity for a number of target
proteins. CaM forms a compact globular conformation by bending its
central helix upon binding its target peptides. S100, a soluble protein
that is recently reported to interact with ER has only two EF-hand
motifs. S100 protein is overexpressed in several cancers and shares a
high degree of sequence homology with calmodulin.Methods: Protein-protein
interactions of CaM, S100 with ER alpha were simulated using HADDOCK and
HEX. Docking results were analyzed in UCSF Chimera and integrated with
data from in vitro proteomics experiments to determine the conformations
of ER bound EF-hand protein complexes. Proteomic experiments consisted of
chemical crosslinking of the corresponding protein complexes followed by
tryptic digestion, analyzing the resulting peptide peaks using FTICR-
Mass Spectrometry.Results/Discussion: Using the fold information and
contact regions obtained from the Mass spectrometry, 3D structures of
ER-EF hand protein complexes were reconstructed. These structures of ER
best represent the conformational state sensed by the specific
interacting partner. ER-S100 complex is distinct from CaM. The lack of
the connective peptidic region between the EF-hand pairs in S100
attributed to less interaction coverage indicative of only inducing a
partial agonist-like conformation. We believe that the ensemble of ER-EF
hand protein complexes generated by our integrated proteomics-assisted
protein interaction profiling will shed light on the lingering issue of
hormone independent activation of ER at the molecular
level.Acknowledgements: This research was supported via funds from the
New York State,National Institutes of Health (5P20MD002725), through the
NCMHD -RIMI program (RVR)

