Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Role of the BP1 homeobox gene in triple negative breast cancer
.


Background: Triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) lack the expression of
ER, PR and HER2 receptors, thus targeted treatments against these
receptors are not effective. We are studying BETA PROTEIN 1, a member of
homeobox gene family, which we cloned and showed is activated in 80% of
invasive breast cancers; its expression correlates with breast cancer
progression and invasion. The BP1 gene is located on 17q21, a region that
is reported to be altered in 30% of breast tumors. Since BP1 mRNA and
protein are highly expressed in ER and PR negative and clinically
aggressive tumors, we hypothesize that BP1 may play a relevant role in
TNBC. Our main objective was to evaluate the gene copy number and
mRNA/protein expression status of BP1 in TNBC, in both clinical cases and
established TNBC cell lines. Methods: We have characterized seven cell
lines (5 TNBC and 2 normal breast cell lines) for the expression of BP1
using qPCR and Western blot analysis. To delineate pathways in TNBC cells
that are dysregulated by BP1 expression, we studied both the seven
parental cell lines and a stably overexpressed BP1 TNBC cell line,
Hs578T-OE. Microarray analysis was performed in all these cell lines and
the data obtained was verified using qPCR and ELISA. Formalin-Fixed,
Paraffin-Embedded tissues of TNBC were analyzed by array-CGH and
confirmed by Taqman copy number (using a BP1-TAM specific probe) and FISH
(using our constructed BP1-BAC probe) assays. Results: All of the
parental TNBC cells had at least 2.8-fold more pBP1 than the normal
breast cell lines suggesting that TNBC tumors have higher levels of pBP1
than non-TNBC tumors. Gene expression microarrays in the TNBC cell lines
revealed up/down regulation of several genes in comparison to the normal
breast cell lines, including the EGFR. Interestingly, the IL-6 and IL-8
genes were significantly upregulated in TNBC cells overexpressing BP1.
ELISA assays confirmed a correlation between elevated levels of IL-6 and
IL-8 production and BP1 in the conditioned media from Hs578T cells
overexpressing BP1 compared with the empty vector. Studies are underway
to establish the mechanism by which these pathways are regulated by BP1.
BP1 increase copy number was observed in 37% (25/67) of the cases by
array-CGH. Confirmation of these changes by FISH and TaqMan copy number
assays revealed increased copy number in 20% (13/66) and 23% (9/38) of
the cases, respectively. Protein expression analysis by IHC is currently
been conducted in these cases to determine if BP1 increase DNA copy
number can be one of the mechanisms that leads to pBP1overexpression.
Conclusions: Both BP1 copy number and protein expression are dysregulated
in TNBC. Microarray analysis in TNBC cell lines have revealed important
cancer related genes and oncogenic pathways that may be upregulate by
BP1, suggesting that BP1 could be a valuable molecular marker and
therapeutic target in this aggressive form of breast cancer.

