Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Studies of early adaptive resistance in mutant-EGFR and EML4-ALK
addicted non-small cell lung cancer in escape against small molecule
inhibitors.


Lung cancer is the second most common malignancy in the United States
with the highest cancer-mortality rate. Molecular targeted therapy in
oncogene addicted non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has gain landmark
proof-of-principle success in clinical utility in recent years. Prime
examples are EGFR targeted therapy against mutated EGFR tumors using
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as erlotinib/gefitinib, and also
ALK targeted therapy against EML4-ALK tumors using ALK inhibitor
crizotinib. Superior response rates and progression free survival
outcomes were observed with the use of targeted therapeutics even in
first line setting. Nonetheless, targeted therapeutics against
mutant-EGFR and EML4-ALK tumors invariably develop an acquired tumor
resistance to the TKIs. Mutational resistant mechanism has been
well-established. Alternative signal pathway activation such as MET/HGF
in both EGFR and ALK TKI resistance, or HER family signaling activation
in EML4-ALK resistance have also been reported. We have recently begun
studies focusing on the non-mutational mechanisms of tumor resistance
under early time window of TKI treatment. Using HCC827 and PC9 cells as
mutant EGFR addiction model, as well as H3122 and H2228 NSCLC cells as
EML4-ALK addicted model, we have uncovered a novel early adaptive TKI
resistance that can be evident as early as 7-14 days under initial TKI
treatment. The early adaptive tumor cells displayed remarkable tumor
resistance against the TKIs with 100-fold higher IC50. In mutant-EGFR
against erlotinib, there was an upregulated mitochondrial
antiapoptotic/prosurvival BCL-2/BCL-xL signaling dependence that is
MET-independent. The early resistant cells were adaptive, highly
reversible and adopted a quiescent state during TKI-induced resistance.
On the other hand, our studies of early TKI resistance in EML4-ALK fusion
cells revealed that while the adaptive resistance to TAE684 was also
reversible, it appears to be not dependent on BCL-2/BCL-xL upregulation.
We found that in both targeted TKI early resistance, the tumor survivor
cells exhibited epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers changes
with decreased E-cadherin expression and increased vimentin expression.
Our studies also provided in vitro and in vivo evidence that these early
adaptive TKI resistant tumor cells can be targetable for prevention or
eradication of tumor resistance emergence, such as utilizing BCL-2/BCL-xL
pathway inhibitors, such as ABT-737, in combination with EGFR TKI in
mutant-EGFR addicted NSCLC. Further preclinical model studies will focus
on investigating the molecular and genomic changes and gene network
regulation in the early adaptive resistant tumor cells, to enable a new
paradigm of novel therapeutic targets discovery to overcome early tumor
resistance emergence and improve long term outcome of targeted therapy in
lung cancer.

