Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 5-Hydroxymethyl-2-deoxyuridine, but not temozolomide, enhances the
selective synthetic lethality in BRCA1 and BRCA2-deficient cells caused
by PARP inhibition.


Inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) has been determined as
an attractive chemotherapeutic treatment for homologous recombination
(HR)-deficient tumors. PARP is involved in repairing DNA single strand
breaks (SSBs) via the base excision repair (BER) pathway; therefore, PARP
inhibitor (PARPi) leads to an accumulation of DNA double strand breaks
(DSBs) at the sites of SSBs during DNA replication. While the cytotoxic
effect of PARPi was demonstrated to be potentiated by addition of
genotoxic alkylating agent temozolomide (TMZ), it is not clear that this
combined treatment further increases selectivity to cause cell death in
HR-deficient cells, such as BRCA-deficient cells, over HR-proficient
cells. TMZ randomly increases SSBs at scattered locations in the genome;
in contrast, incorporation of 5-hydroxymethyl-2-deoxyuridine (5-HmedU) in
DNA has a potential to cause multiple SSBs within a short distance during
BER. We hypothesized that a combination treatment of PARPi and 5-hmedU
could increase selectivity of PARPi-mediated cytotoxicity in HR-deficient
cells more so than the PARPi and TMZ combination. Here we show that in
single chemical treatment experiments, the IC50 of 5-HmedU was eight
times lower in BRCA1-/- and BRCA2-/- mutant cells, but in TMZ treatments
the IC50 was only two times lower compared HR-proficient cells.
Furthermore, the 5-HmedU and PARPi agent Olaparib combination enhanced a
synergistic cell killing effect in BRCA1-/- and BRCA2-/- mutant cells
with higher selectivity than the PARPi and TMZ combination. Advantages of
the 5-HmedU and PARPi combination is as follows: 1] 5-HmedU causes DNA
damage through vast genome incorporation in highly proliferating cells.
Thus, 5-HmedU is more effective at selecting highly proliferating tumor
cells; 2] 5-HmedU single treatment more selectively targeted BRCA1-/- and
BRCA2-/- mutant cells than TMZ. This selectivity could be due to more
efficient DSB formation by 5-HmedU through accumulation of clustered
SSBs; and 3] combination treatment of 5-HmedU and PARPi produces a
synergistic selectivity to kill HR-deficient BRCA1-/- and BRCA2-/- mutant
cells whereas TMZ and PARPi combination does not. A possible mechanism of
the selective cell killing effect by 5-HmedU and PARPi could result from
an accumulation of closely located DSBs with PARP-DNA strand break
complexes in HR-deficient cells.

