Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short-term effect of nose-only cigarette smoke exposure on redox
homeostasis and mitochondrial metabolism in mice.


The components of cigarette smoke have been implicated in the development
of cancer as well as in cardiovascular diseases. We have previously
reported oxidative stress in rat tissues induced by tobacco-specific
toxins nicotine and 4-(N-methyl-N-nitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone
(NNK). Recently, we have also shown increased oxidative stress and
associated inflammatory responses in various tissues after exposure to
cigarette smoke. In this study, we have further investigated the effects
of nose-only cigarette smoke exposure on mitochondrial functions and
glutathione-dependent redox metabolism in tissues of BALB/C mice. Liver,
kidney, heart and lung tissues were analyzed for oxidative stress,
glutathione (GSH) and cytochrome P450 dependent enzyme activities and
mitochondrial functions after exposure to smoke generated by 9
cigarettes/day for 4 days. Control mice were exposed to air only. An
increase in oxidative stress as observed by an increased production of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and altered GSH metabolism was apparent in
all the tissues, but lung and heart appeared to be the main targets
affected. Increased expression and activity of CYP450 1A1 and 1A2 were
also observed in the tissues after exposure to cigarette smoke.
Mitochondrial respiratory functions in the tissues, as observed by
alterations in the activities of Complex I and IV enzymes, was also
observed after exposure to cigarette smoke when compared with air only
exposed mice. SDS-PAGE and Western blot results also indicate that
alterations in the expression of enzyme proteins were in accordance with
the changes in their catalytic functions. These results suggest that even
short term exposure of cigarette smoke have adverse effects on
mitochondrial functions and redox homeostasis in tissues which may
progress to further complications associated with chronic smoking. (The
study is supported by Terry Fox Cancer Research Funds and by the Research
Committee Grants from College of Medicine and Health Sciences)

