Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cdk1 prevents DNA rereplication in G2/M by phosphorylating and
facilitating the removal of Cdc7 from chromatin at the end of S phase.


Cancer is inextricably linked with aneuploidy. Aneuploidy can arise for a
number of reasons, including the deregulation of DNA and centrosome
replication. Mechanisms have evolved that are designed to ensure that DNA
is replicated only once per cell cycle. The initiation of DNA replication
is a key target of these mechanisms, which includes regulating Cdc6, Cdt1
and Cyclin dependent kinases (Cdks). Although the regulatory mechanisms
of Cdc6 and Cdt1 are known, the role of Cdk1 in particular is less clear.
One potential target for Cdk1 regulation is the Dbf4-Cdc7 kinase (DDK),
which acts as a licensing factor for DNA replication. DDK performs an
essential and critical step in initiating DNA replication. As such, it is
a target for novel cancer therapeutic drugs currently in clinical trials.
Even so, the regulatory mechanisms dictating DDK function in human cells
remains poorly understood.A site-directed mutagenesis approach was
undertaken to determine the in vivo function of Cdk-dependent
phosphorylation sites on the primary Cdc7 sequence. Using over-expressed
Cdc7 in human cells (HEK293T), the functional significance of Cdc7
phosphorylation was determined; both the lack of phosphorylation and
constitutive phosphorylation of Cdc7 was analyzed. We found that Cdc7,
the catalytic subunit of the DDK, is a target of Cdk1. Cdc7 is
phosphorylated in G2/M phase by Cdk1. Phosphorylation of Cdc7 removes the
catalytic subunit of DDK from origins of replication and chromatin with
the assistance of the nuclear export factor CRM1, which relocates Cdc7 to
the microtubule cytoskeleton. Finally, the Cdk1-dependent removal of Cdc7
from chromatin prevents the cell from initiating DNA replication,
indicating that Cdc7 is a target of Cdk1-dependent inhibition of DNA
re-replication.We conclude that (1) Cdk1 phosphorylates Cdc7 in vivo. (2)
Cdk1 dependent phosphorylation of Cdc7 regulates chromatin binding and
DNA replication and (3) pCdc7 is associated with the nuclear export
factor CRM1 in G2/M phase, suggesting a mechanism that couples the
down-regulation of Cdc7 function at the end of S phase through nuclear
localization and chromatin association. Taken together, our data provides
key insight into the functional understanding of DDK.

