Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significance of elemental content and distribution profiles in
assessing established cell lines as surrogates for cancer tissues from
two different organs.


Studies have shown that defective metal homeostasis is very essential to
the development of the cancer phenotype in many cancers including lung
and liver carcinomas. Low Zn levels as well as overexpression of
metalothioneins were implicated in the development and progression of
various cancers. Wider elemental profiles that relate cancer and normal
phenotypes with regards to metal homeostasis were not well elucidated in
the literature. To this end, established cell lines are currently used as
accepted models for studying cancer but the level of their representation
of actual cancer tissues was not clear. This study is attempting to
assess the relevance of cell lines currently is use as surrogates for
cancer and establish their relationship to actual normal and cancer
tissues from humans. We hypothesize that elemental content and
distribution profiles in cancer and normal tissue are significantly
different from those possessed by established cell lines. We used
Inductivity Coupled Plasma (ICP-Mass Spectroscopy) for lung and liver
samples obtained from normal and cancer human cadaver tissues (US Biomax)
and cell models of lung and liver carcinomas; the A549 and HepG2 cell
lines (ATCC), to analyze for elements and test the hypothesis. Samples
prepared using standardized digestion procedures were loaded onto the
ICP-MS equipment to test for a profile consisting of 12 elements, namely,
Zn, Cu, Fe, Mg, Mn, Ca, Al, Co, Ba, Cr, Ni and Se. Analysis of data
showed significant variations in elemental content and distribution
profiles between the cell models and actual tissues consistent with the
hypothesis. It is concluded that elemental homeostasis is essential for
normal tissue function and that shifts in their distribution and content
are essential in determining the use of cell models as surrogates for
studying cancer. These results are promising and warrant further studies
to confirm the relevance of cell line models in relation to their use as
screening tools for examining targeted cancer therapeutics.

