Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced activity of pre-activated oxazaphosphorine prodrugs
designed for drug delivery strategy: influence of the length of the
engrafted group.


Oxazaphosphorines are alkylating antineoplasic agents used in the
treatment of cancer and have demonstrated activity against various tumor
types, such as soft tissue sarcomas or lymphomas. Oxazaphosphorines are
non-toxic prodrugs that require cytochrome P450 (CYP) bioactivation. In
the case of Ifosfamide (IFO), the bioactivation produces the 4-OH-IFO,
which after ring opening liberates the active nitrogen mustard displaying
DNA cross-links. Associated toxicities of IFO are due to 1) acrolein, an
urotoxic metabolite concomitantly generated with the nitrogen mustard and
2) chloroacetaldehyde, a neuro and nephrotoxic metabolite obtained by
oxidation of the side chains (Kerbusch et al., 2001).To circumvent these
toxicities, we have designed pre-activated oxazaphosphorines through
electrochemical oxidation and binding of various moieties such as O-alkyl
groups and S-alkyl groups. IFO is activated by oxidation of position 4
with labile moieties leading to pre-activated cytotoxic entities. We
observed physical-chemical characteristics leading to nano-assemblies
depending on the length of the linked moieties, which could bring tissue
specificity for drug delivery purposes. Some of these pre-activated
prodrugs may be constitutive of drug delivery systems, such as
nanoparticules, aiming to address alkylating moieties to their target.We
present here the use of different length moieties, from C1 (methoxy) to
C30 (Squalenoyl, SQ) with intermediate length of C5 (Pentoxy) and C10
(Geranioxy and DimethylOctanoxy). These compounds are pre-activated
formulation of IFO with C4-oxidation allowing to by-pass the CYP
activation with direct release of 4-OH-IFO and then the alkylating
mustard. Some of them, SQ-(O)-IFO, SQ-(S)-IFO and Geranioxy-IFO are able
to self-assembly leading to nanoparticules. The length and nature of the
engrafted moieties allow the study of the parameters that lead the
kinetics of liberation of the activated compound.The nanoparticules have
been fully characterized with a mean diameter of 182 nm for SQ-(O)-IFO
and SQ-(S)-IFO and 130 nm for Geranioxy-IFO. The cytotoxic activity of
SQ-(O)-IFO and SQ-(S)-IFO has been studied in vitro on a panel of 15
human and murine cancer lines (RMS-1, RD, TC71, A673, SK-N-MC, UW 479,
Lan-5, SAOS-2, IGR-OV1, MCF-7(MDR), A549, M109, KB 3.1, B16F10,
MiaPaCa-2). The cytotoxic activity of Pentoxy-IFO, Geranioxy-IFO and
DimethylOctanoxy-IFO has been studied in vitro on a panel of 2 human
cancer lines (A673 and RMS-1). All IFO derivatives present high in vitro
activity while IFO has no activity on these cells. This proves the
pre-activated property of these new compounds and the lack of CYP
activation requirements. Their therapeutic activity is currently studied
in vivo on human Ewing sarcoma TC71 and human Lung cancer A549 xenografts
in mice after i.v. administration. These compounds are now patented.

