Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen modulates cellular and molecular markers of hypoxic tumor
microenvironment in thyroid cancer.


Thyroid proliferative diseases are three to four times more prevalent in
women than in men. Our laboratory has systemically elucidated the role of
estrogen in thyroid cancer as a promoter of increased aggressiveness,
however the role of estrogen within the hypoxic environment of thyroid
cancer is not known. Based on our observation that estrogen promotes
neo-vascularization of thyroid tumors by modulating angiogenic factors,
vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF) and matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs), we hypothesize that tumor hypoxia synergizes with estrogen to
produce an inflammatory microenvironment that helps the progression of
thyroid cancer. We observed that thyroid cancer cells are responsive to
hypoxic conditions and estrogen induces hypoxia inducible factor-1
(HIF-1) nuclear translocation in these cells. Furthermore, estrogen and
hypoxia modulate the HIF-1 signaling in thyroid cancer cells which is
abrogated by the anti-estrogen fulvestrant and the HIF-1 inhibitor YC-1
(3-(5-hydroxymethyl-2-furyl)-1-benzylindazole). Conditioned medium from
estrogen treated thyroid cancer cells lead to enhanced migration and
tubulogenesis of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs), due to
secretion of hypoxia and estrogen responsive proteins by thyroid cancer
cells leading to increased angiogenesis of endothelial cells. This
phenomenon was abrogated by HIF-1 inhibitor. These results demonstrate
for the first time that estrogen signaling pathways mimic the signaling
pathways in the hypoxic environment in thyroid cancer cells, thus
suggesting that estrogen potentially mimics oxygen deprivation at the
molecular level to produce an inflammatory tumor microenvironment thus
fostering the progression of thyroid cancer. We conclude that apart from
the direct activity of estrogen on thyroid cancer phenotype, estrogen
also modulates the tumor microenvironment specifically maintaining
hypoxic conditions which may be essential for thyroid cancer progression
and/or metastases.

