Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential inhibition by microtubule stabilizing agents of
2-(m-azidobenzoyl)Taxol photoaffinity labeling of tubulins from different
eukaryotic sources.


Distinct - and -tubulin isotypes are present in different quantities in
diverse eukaryotic cells. The tritium-labeled photoaffinity Taxol analog,
2-(m-azidobenzoyl)Taxol, was used to photolabel tubulins prepared from
HeLa cells, bovine brain and chicken erythrocytes. A 5-fold molar excess
of unlabeled compound inhibited the photolabeling of tubulin by >90%,
demonstrating the specificity of this photolabeling. Tubulin isotype
content varies from one source to another, particularly for chicken
erythrocytes that contain only one -tubulin and one -tubulin (1 and VI).
2-(m-azidobenzoyl)Taxol photoaffinity labeling of tubulin was carried out
in the presence of six different microtubule stabilizing agents,
including Taxol, epothilone B, discodermolide, ixabepilone, laulimalide
and peloruside A. The inhibitory effects elicited by Taxol, epothilone B,
discodermolide and ixabepilone, at a 5-fold molar excess, on
photolabeling are different for tubulins prepared from different sources.
Taxol had a minimal inhibitory effect on HeLa and bovine brain tubulin,
but a strong inhibitory effect on chicken erythrocyte tubulin.
Discodermolide exhibited opposite effects on photolabeling, compared to
those of Taxol. This is most likely due to the presence of distinct
tubulin isotypes in different sources. However, laulimalide and
peloruside A that are known to bind to a different site than Taxol in
-tubulin, stimulated photolabeling of tubulins from all three sources.
Stathmin (S) plays an important role in the regulation of microtubule
dynamics through sequestering tubulin (T) into a T2S complex. When
stathmin was incubated, in the presence of 1 mM CaCl2, with chicken
erythrocyte tubulin at a tubulin:stathmin ratio of 2:1, followed by
incubation with tritium-labeled 2-(m-azidobenzoyl)Taxol in a buffer
containing EGTA, photolabeling of -tubulin was markedly reduced,
suggesting that stathmin inhibited binding of Taxol to tubulin.
Radiolabeled photoaffinity drug analogs are useful tools for determining
drug binding affinities for the different tubulin isotypes. We are
currently analyzing binding affinities of 2-(m-azidobenzoyl)Taxol to
different bovine brain tubulin isotypes resolved by isoelectrofocusing.

