Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional importance of IL-24 phosphorylation in regulating
molecular signaling pathways associated with cancer cell survival and
metastasis.


Purpose of the Study: Interleukin (IL)-24 is a novel tumor
suppressor/cytokine that has demonstrated potent anti-cancer activities
against human tumors in both, preclinical and clinical studies. However,
the importance of IL-24 phosphorylation for its anti-tumor effects
remains in question. Therefore the present study was designed to identify
the functional importance of IL-24 phosphorylation in mediating its
anti-cancer activities.Experimental Procedure: Human H1299 lung tumor
cell line was stably transfected with a tetracycline-inducible plasmid
vector carrying the IL-24-wild-type (IL-24wt) or -IL-24 with global
knock-down of all five phosphorylation sites (IL-24mt) cDNA. Upon
addition of doxycycline (Dox; 1ug/ml), cells were induced to express wt
or mt IL-24 protein. The functional importance of IL-24 phosphorylation
was determined by assessing the Akt/mTOR signaling pathway and the
consequence of its inhibition on cell viability, cell migration, and
invasion.Results: Expression of IL-24wt but not IL-24mt resulted in
inhibition of cell growth and reduced colony formation on soft-agar. Cell
migration and invasion studies demonstrated that IL-24wt significantly
suppressed the migration rate and invasion of tumor cells across matrigel
compared to cells expressing IL-24mt. Confocal microscopy showed IL-24wt
protein expression as punctate staining and present in the cytoplasm
throughout the cell, whereas IL-24mt protein expression was mainly
localized to the perinuclear space, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and golgi.
Reverse-phase protein array (RPPA) assay revealed differences in
expression levels of Akt and its downstream targets between H1299 cells
expressing IL-24wt and IL-24mt. Validation of RPPA data by Western
blotting demonstrated expression of phosphorylated (p)-AKT and its
downstream targets such as p-GSK-3, p-mTOR, p-FOXO1, p-YAP1, and Cyclin
D1 were markedly reduced with an increased expression of p27 and
p-beta-catenin in H1299 cells expressing IL-24wt compared to H1299 cells
expressing IL-24mt. Critical Akt/mTOR signaling pathways and their
connected molecular transcriptional factors, which are important for
cancer cell survival and metastasis were significantly suppressed in
IL-24wt expressing H1299 cell lines thus reducing tumor survival and
metastasis.Conclusion: Our results demonstrate for the first time,
phosphorylation of IL-24, is functionally important and required for
mediating its anticancer activities via inhibiting the Akt/mTOR pathway.
Additional molecular studies are underway to identify the specific
phosphorylation site (s) required for the IL-24-mediated anticancer
activities.

