Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel resveratrol analog ARSHA shows higher potency for inhibiting
the growth of triple negative breast cancer cells.


Resveratrol (Res) (3, 5,4-trihydroxystilbene) is a well known naturally
occurring polyphenol that exhibits anti-tumor activity. However, its poor
bioavailability and rapid metabolism limits its use as a preferred
anticancer agent. In an attempt to improve the bioavailability and
anticancer potential of Res, we have synthesized five new Res analogs. We
then tested the ability of these analogs to inhibit the proliferation of
5 breast cancer cell lines and 3 non-neoplastic breast epithelial cell
lines and compared their inhibition potential withRes. MTT assay for cell
proliferation was carried out in human breast cancer and non-neoplastic
breast epithelial cell lines. The breast cancer cell lines tested were
MCF-7, T47D, MDA-MB-231,MDA-MB-468 and BT-20. The non-neoplastic breast
cell lines tested were MCF-10A,MCF-10F and HMLE. Of all the analogs
tested, one namely ARSHA showed higher potency for inhibiting the
proliferation of breast cancer cells compared toRes. Furthermore, ARSHA
showed higher potency for inhibiting the growth of triple negative breast
cancer cells (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468 and BT-20) compared to estrogen
receptor positive breast cancer cells MCF-7 and T47D. There was neither
inhibition nor proliferation by ARSHA of non-neoplastic breast epithelial
cell lines tested when compared to vehicle-treated controls.ARSHA induced
Beclin-1 and LC3II which suggest autophagy mediated inhibition of cell
growth. Beclin-1 is known to be suppressed in breast cancers and it's
over expression is reported to inhibit breast cancer. Results from our
studies demonstrate that Res-analog ARSHA is better than Res in
inhibiting specifically breast cancer cell growth and shows higher
potency for inhibiting the growth of triple negative breast cancer cells
by inducing autophagy with an earlier onset for triple negative breast
cancer cells. Therefore, ARSHA may be a better chemotherapeutic agent
than Res against breast cancer and more specifically against triple
negative breast cancer cell growth, a cancer type prevalent in minority
African American population with poor prognosis.

