Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel class I histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, paragazole,
demonstrates antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects in
triple-negative breast cancer models.


Introduction: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a clinically
aggressive breast cancer subtype which lacks estrogen receptor
expression. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have previously been
shown to induce estrogen receptor expression in TNBC models. Paragazole
is a selective class I HDAC inhibitor (HDACs 1, 2, and 3) currently in
preclinical development. In this project, we explored the
antiproliferative and proapoptotic activity of paragazole and
investigated the combination of paragazole and chemotherapy in a panel of
breast cancer cell lines.Methods: Breast cancer cell lines were exposed
to varying sub-micromolar concentrations of paragazole alone and in
combination with carboplatin, paclitaxel, and gemcitabine. Proliferation
was assessed using an SRB assay and analyzed using the Calcusyn program,
whereby synergy was defined as a Combination Index of less than 1. Cell
cycle analysis was performed using flow cytometry and apoptosis was
analyzed using a caspase 3/7 assay. Baseline HDAC expression was measured
by RT-PCR and RNA-Seq was used pre- and post-treatment in a subset of 2
sensitive and 2 resistant cell lines.Results: Exposure to paragazole
resulted in a decrease in cell proliferation at submicromolar
concentrations with more robust antiproliferative activity observed in
the TNBC cell lines compared to the estrogen receptor positive cell
lines. An increase in apoptosis that was maximal at 24-48 hours was
observed with single agent paragazole in a subset of sensitive TNBC cell
lines. The combinations of paragazole with either paclitaxel,
gemcitabine, or carboplatin all resulted in additive or synergistic
growth inhibition. Expression of HDAC 1 was higher in the sensitive TNBC
cell lines than in the resistant lines. Exposure to paragazole led to an
increase in CARM1 mediated estrogen receptor expression.Discussion: These
in vitro results demonstrate that paragazole has antiproliferative and
proapototic activity against TNBC cell lines and may potentiate the
activity of chemotherapy. These data support confirmation of the findings
using in vivo models and the investigation of paragazole in combination
with anti-estrogen agents such as tamoxifen and fulvestrant.

