Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and validation of a microRNA-based diagnostic assay
for the classification of renal cell tumors.


Background:Renal cancers account for more than 3% of adult malignancies
and result in more than 13,000 deaths per year in the US alone. The four
most common types of kidney tumors include the malignant renal cell
carcinomas: clear cell, papillary and chromophobe, as well as the benign
oncocytoma. These histological subtypes vary in their clinical course and
their prognosis, and different clinical strategies have been developed
for their management. The differential diagnosis between the subtypes of
kidney tumors based on morphology alone can be challenging, and is
subjected to inter- and intra-observer variability. Even when utilizing
immunohistochemistry (IHC) markers, the ability to differentiate between
sub-types can be difficult, especially in the setting of uncommon
morphology and biopsy sample with small amounts of tumor tissue. We
present the development and validation of a microRNA-based test for
classifying primary kidney tumors.Methods:181 Formalin Fixed Paraffin
Embedded (FFPE) samples from primary kidney tumors were collected and
reviewed by pathologists from different institutes according to
morphology and available IHC labeling data. High-quality total RNA,
including the well-preserved microRNA fraction, was extracted from the
FFPE samples using a proprietary protocol. Expression levels of hundreds
of microRNAs were profiled using a custom microarray platform. Technical
validation of the array results was performed using qRT-PCR. A diagnostic
assay was developed using a K-nearest neighbor algorithm that searches
for the 5 samples in the training database (181 samples used for assay
development) that are most similar to the tested sample. The result for
the tested sample is defined by a majority vote of the pre-determined
subtypes of these 5 closest neighbors. A validation set of 201
independent samples was classified using the assay and analyzed
blindly.Results:A set of 24 differentially expressed microRNAs were found
to separate the four kidney tumor subtypes and were chosen as classifiers
in the KNN algorithm. Clinical validation was performed using an
independent, blinded sample set. The test was able to produce results for
92% of the validation set of 201 samples with accuracy of
95%.Conclusions: Expression levels of 24 microRNAs measured on a
microarray platform were found to accurately differentiate the four main
types of primary kidney tumors. These findings were the basis for the
development and validation of a standardized diagnostic assay for the
classification of renal cell tumors in FFPE samples from resections or
biopsies. This assay can serve as a reliable diagnostic tool to aid
physicians with the growing unmet need for kidney tumor classification.

