Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mark cancer cells for CTL attack through coating with viral
antigenic peptides.


Selectively coating tumor cells with foreign antigenic peptide may render
coated tumor susceptible to immune recognition and elimination, thereby
bypassing immune tolerance. Here we create a therapeutic chimeric protein
comprised of a tumor-homing module fused to a functional cargo domain
containing foreign antigenic peptide. The tumor-homing module is
comprised of mesothelin-specific single chain variable fragment that
specifically binds to mesothelin, commonly overexpressed in ovarian
tumors. The functional cargo domain is comprised of Fc (IgG2a) protein
and MHC class I-restricted foreign CD8+ T cell epitope flanked by furin
cleavage sites, which can be recognized by furin highly expressed in the
tumor microenvironment. We show that our therapeutic protein specifically
loaded antigenic epitope onto MHC class I of bound tumor cells, rendering
them susceptible to antigen-specific CD8+ T cell-mediated killing for
potent antitumor effects in vitro and in vivo. Our findings have
important implications for bypassing immune tolerance to enhance cancer
immunotherapy.Selectively coating tumor cells with foreign antigenic
peptide may render coated tumor susceptible to immune recognition and
elimination, thereby bypassing immune tolerance. Here we create a
therapeutic chimeric protein comprised of a tumor-homing module fused to
a functional cargo domain containing foreign antigenic peptide. The
tumor-homing module is comprised of mesothelin-specific single chain
variable fragment that specifically binds to mesothelin, commonly
overexpressed in ovarian tumors. The functional cargo domain is comprised
of Fc (IgG2a) protein and MHC class I-restricted foreign CD8+ T cell
epitope flanked by furin cleavage sites, which can be recognized by furin
highly expressed in the tumor microenvironment. We show that our
therapeutic protein specifically loaded antigenic epitope onto MHC class
I of bound tumor cells, rendering them susceptible to antigen-specific
CD8+ T cell-mediated killing for potent antitumor effects in vitro and in
vivo. Our findings have important implications for bypassing immune
tolerance to enhance cancer immunotherapy.

