Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia-mediated autophagy enhances HGF-induced cancer cell
invasion.


The cellular response to hypoxia is a major influence on the
aggressiveness of primary tumors, yet much of how this response mechanism
influences other signaling pathways is unknown. The MET proto-oncogene,
which encodes the tyrosine kinase receptor for hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF), is often overexpressed in cancers and can drive cell
proliferation, invasion, and metastasis. Prior studies demonstrate that
the Met tyrosine-kinase receptor drives cell invasion and metastasis
under hypoxic conditions, and this invasive phenotype is lost if MET
expression is inhibited. Hypoxia also has been shown to sensitize
Met-activated pathways to drive HGF-induced invasion through as yet
undefined a molecular mechanism. The high mortality rate of metastatic
cancer makes it crucial to understand the functional integration of these
two prevalent drivers of metastasis, hypoxia and Met signaling, and to
identify ways to selectively block cancer cell invasiveness. We show that
a chemically generated pseudo-hypoxic condition enhanced HGF-mediated
invasion in the papillary renal cell (PRC) carcinoma cell lines ACHN and
UOK112. Under hypoxic conditions, cells generated high levels of ROS,
which in turn sensitized the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathway to enhance HGF-driven invasion. Furthermore, hypoxic cells
displayed increased autophagy as determined by punctate staining of LC3
II using immunocytochemistry and cleaved LC3 immunoblotting. Inhibition
of autophagy decreased cell invasion and hypoxia-mediated autophagy was
dependent on MAPK pathway activation. These data suggest that hypoxia
promotes the invasiveness of PRC-derived cells by increasing ROS-mediated
autophagy to sensitize the MAPK pathway to HGF stimulation. Identifying
the specific effectors responsible for the integration these signals will
improve our understanding of pro-metastatic invasiveness and potentially
identify novels targets for its selective blockade.

