Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of Autophagy by a novel agent promotes the growth arrest
in breast cancer cells.


Breast cancer is a highly complex disease due to its heterogeneity in
nature; that often impedes the current therapeutic options. Autophagy is
a catabolic process which plays a vital role in both progressions as well
as in the treatment of cancer. In fact, the role of autophagy in cancer
is still unclear. Our lab is focusing on small molecules, which may
induce autophagy that may result in growth arrest in breast cancer cells.
In our preliminary screening studies, we have identified a small
molecule, Nimocinol Acetate (NA) which induces autophagy that resulted in
inhibition of growth of estrogen-positive (MCF-7) and estrogen-negative
(MDA-MB-231) breast cancer cells. Molecular analysis showed the
significant induction of LC-3B and ATG-3 in NA treated cells as compared
to other autophagy-regulators like Atg5, Atg7, Atg12, and beclin-1, which
convey the importance of ATG3 and LC3B markers in induction of autophagy.
The immunofluorescence analysis confirmed the formation of acidic
autophagic vesicles upon NA treatment. To further ascertain the
involvement of lysosomes and autophagosomes, we specifically blocked
ATG-3 and LC-3B expression by siRNA and then subjected to
immunofluorescence assay. The observed results confirmed the contribution
and activation of these two molecules is required for the induction of
autophagy. Interestingly, no significant changes were obseverved either
in the cell cycle regulation or in induction of apoptosis, which revealed
that the activation of autophagy may be responsible for NA mediated
growth inhibition in breast cancer cells. Currently, we are planning to
conduct xenograft studies, which may suggest the in vivo efficacy and
pharmacokinetic potential of NA. The present study concludes that NA
could be a potential agent either alone or in combination with other
chemotherapeutic agents with a novel strategy to combat breast cancer.

