Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SRC-1 promotes tumor angiogenesis through up-regulation of
HIF1-mediated VEGFa expression.


Steroid receptor coactivator 1 (SRC-1) belongs to the p160 coactivator
family which also contains SRC-2 (TIF2) and SRC-3 (AIB1/pCIP/ACTR/RAC3).
These coactivators interact with nuclear receptors and other
transcription factors to up-regulate gene expression. Accumulated
evidence shows that SRC-1 exerts its promotive role in breast cancer
progression and metastasis by up-regulating transcription of multiple
genes important for tumor cell epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT),
migration, invasion and endocrine therapy resistance. However, its role
in tumor angiogenesis has not been examined. In our recent studies using
SRC-1 KO/PyMT and WT/PyMT mammary tumor cell lines established in our
lab, we found that injection of SRC-1 KO/PyMT cells to matrigel plug
formed under the back skin in SCID mice induced less blood vessel
formation compared with that of WT/PyMT tumor cells. Accordingly,
injection of human breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells with stable knockdown
of SRC-1 by shRNA to the matrigel plug also induced less
neovascularization. Meanwhile, VEGFa mRNA level is significantly reduced
in mammary tumors from SRC-1 KO/PyMT transgenic mice. On the contrary, in
SRC-1-overexpressed mammary tumors from MMTV/TVA/PyMT mice, the
expression of VEGFa was dramatically increased. In agreement with these
findings, in vitro studies revealed that VEGFa mRNA levels are much lower
in two of the SRC-1 KO/PyMT tumor cell lines compared with WT/PyMT cell
lines. Knockdown of SRC-1 in WT/PyMT cells and human MDA-MB-231 cells
reduced VEGFa levels, while adenovirus-mediated re-expression of SRC-1 in
SRC-1 KO/PyMT cells significantly potentiated VEGFa expression.
Furthermore, promoter analyze revealed that SRC-1 could interact with
HIF-1 and AP-1 to potentiate the VEGFa promoter activity. We also found
that both SRC-1 and HIF-1 are associated with a VEGFa promoter region by
ChIP assays. These results indicate that SRC-1 can promote breast cancer
progression and metastasis through enhancing tumor angiogenesis.
Targeting SRC-1 may be a feasible strategy for inhibiting breast tumor
angiogenesis and metastasis.Citation Format: Li Qin, Yixiang Xu, Zhen
Feng, Yelin Wu, Yan Xu, Lan Liao, Jianming Xu. SRC-1 promotes tumor
angiogenesis through up-regulation of HIF1-mediated VEGFa expression.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2694.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2694

