Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting c-Met oncogene and the compensatory EGFR/ErbB3 pathways
to eliminate c-Met activated hepatocellular carcinoma.


Background: c-Met, a high-affinity receptor for Hepatocyte Growth Factor
(HGF), plays a critical role in tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients with activated HGF/c-Met signals
have a significantly worse prognosis. Although targeted therapies using
c-Met tyrosine kinase inhibitors are currently in clinical trials for
HCC, monotherapy using growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibition
in other cancers has demonstrated early success but the therapeutic
effect is not durable due to the acquired resistance. Methods: We
utilized the human MHCC97-H c-Met positive cell line to explore the
compensatory survival mechanisms that are acquired after c-Met
inhibition. MHCC97-H cells with stable c-Met knock-down (c-Met KD) were
generated using a c-Met shRNA vector containing puromycin selection
marker, and the scrambled shRNA transfected cells were served as a
control. Gene expression profiling analyses were conducted, and protein
expression assays were utilized to characterize MHCC97-H cells after
blockade of c-Met oncogene. A high-throughput siRNA screen was performed
to find the additional targets. The in vivo tumor growth assays were
performed to evaluate the efficacy of either c-Met inhibition monotherapy
or combined therapy with c-Met and EGFR inhibitors. Results: We have
previously demonstrated that treatment of MHCC97-H cells with a c-Met
inhibitor, PHA665752, results in stasis of tumor growth in vivo. c-Met KD
MHCC97-H cells demonstrate slower growth kinetics, similar to c-Met
inhibitor treated tumors. Using gene expression profiling analyses and
siRNA screening against 873 kinases and phosphatases, we identified EGFR
and ErbB3 as the compensatory survival factors that are up-regulated
after c-Met inhibition, and those factors may represent the potential
targets to further suppress c-Met+ HCC growth. In addition, we found that
PI3K/Akt signal pathway serves as a negative feedback signal responsible
for the ErbB3 up-regulation after c-Met inhibition. Furthermore, in vitro
studies demonstrate that combination therapy with PHA665752 and Gefitinib
(an EGFR inhibitor) significantly reduced cell viability and increased
apoptosis compared with either PHA665752 or Gefitinib treatment alone.
Moreover, we confirmed that combined therapy with c-Met and EGFR
inhibitors resulted in a significant reduction of tumor volume compared
with c-Met inhibition alone. Conclusion: c-Met inhibitor alone is not
sufficient to eliminate c-Met+ HCC tumors. Inhibition of both c-Met and
EGFR oncogenic pathways is necessary to further suppress c-Met+ HCC tumor
growth.

