Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The eSNV-Detect: a computational system to identify expressed
single nucleotide variants from tumor transcriptomes.


MOTIVATION: Transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) is the most economical and
information-rich next generation sequencing technology to study genomic
medicine. Genomic features such as gene expression, transcript
expression, fusion transcripts, long non-coding RNAs and expressed single
nucleotide variants (eSNVs) can be obtained from RNA-seq data. There are
several computational workflows to obtain gene counts, transcript counts
and fusion gene candidates, but not a comprehensive system to identify
expressed SNVs from RNA-sequencing data.METHODS: We have developed a
novel computational system (The eSNV-Detect) with parallel alignment
strategies to identify expressed SNVs accurately from tumor transcriptome
sequencing data. Sequence-based features like reads supporting reference
allele, alternate allele, ratio of alternate reads to total read depth,
base qualities, mapping qualities, forward strand and reverse strand
supporting reads etc. along with a variety of databases such as dbSNP,
1000 genome, 5400 exome, refGene, avsift, ljb_phylop from UCSC were used
to call SNVs from RNA-sequencing data. For the expressed SNVs detected in
tumors, we can also identify the amino acid change and classify the
protein domains using our method.RESULTS: We have applied the eSNV-Detect
method to call novel expressed SNVs in two tumors (one HER2 positive and
one ER positive breast tumor). BWA and Bowtie were used to align the two
breast tumors. Several filtering criteria's were applied to the tumors to
remove any known (germ line) or low confidence SNVs. We randomly selected
83 and 31 eSNVs for the HER2 and ER positive tumors respectively and
performed Sanger sequencing validation in tumor and matched normal
tissues of the tumor. We were able to validate 81 out of 83 eSNVs in the
HER2 tumor sample, and 29 out of 31 eSNVs in the ER positive tumor
sample. Of the eSNVs that we validated 39/81 and 10/31 were localized to
functional protein domains in HER2 and ER positive tumors respectively.
We are also in the process of validating eSNVs detected from RNA-seq with
the tumor and blood exome sequencing data we have for the same patients.

