Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -catenin is activated in arsenic-transformed human
bronchialepithelial cells and promotes angiogenesis .


Arsenic exposure represents a major health concern causing human cancers,
yet the mechanism of arsenic carcinogenesis has not been elucidated. We
and others recently reported that cell malignant transformation by
arsenic is accompanied by epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT).
However, the role of EMT in arsenic carcinogenesis is not well
understood. Although previous studies showed that acute short term
arsenic treatment stimulates angiogenesis, it remains to be determined
whether cells that were malignantly transformed by long term arsenic
exposure have a pro-angiogenic effect. The objective of this study was to
investigate the effect of arsenic-transformed human bronchial epithelial
cells that underwent EMT on angiogenesis and the underlying mechanism. It
was found that the conditioned medium from arsenic-transformed cells
strongly stimulated tube formation by human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVECs). Moreover, enhanced angiogenesis was detected in mouse
xenograft tumor tissues resulting from inoculation of arsenic-transformed
cells. Mechanistic studies revealed that -catenin was activated in
arsenic-transformed cells up-regulating its target gene expression
including angiogenic-stimulating vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF). Stably expressing microRNA-200b in arsenic-transformed cells that
reversed EMT inhibited -catenin activation, decreased VEGF expression and
reduced tube formation by HUVECs. SiRNA knocking down -catenin decreased
VEGF expression. Adding a VEGF neutralizing antibody into the conditioned
medium from arsenic-transformed cells impaired tube formation by HUVECs.
It was further determined that the canonical Wnt signaling was not
increased in arsenic-transformed cells. These findings suggest that EMT
in arsenic-transformed cells promotes angiogenesis through activating
-catenin-VEGF pathway in the absence of elevated-canonical Wnt signaling.

