Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of hedgehog and androgen receptor signaling pathways
produced synergistic suppression of androgen independent prostate cancer
progression.


Introduction: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common cause of
death from cancer and the leading cancer diagnosed in the US men.
Approximately 1 in 6 American men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer
during his lifetime. Estimated new cases and deaths from prostate cancer
in the United States for 2012 include: 241,740 new cases and 28,710
deaths. Initial treatment for metastatic PCa involves androgen ablation
therapy, which causes regression of androgen-dependent tumors. However
they all eventually relapse resulting in recurrent androgen independent
prostate cancer (AIPC).Methods: This study aims at assessing the role of
Hedgehog (Hh) and Androgen receptor (AR) signaling in the development of
AIPC. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis was performed for AIPC cells in vitro
and for AIPC xenograft after castration, to assess the levels of Hh and
AR signaling components. Hh inhibitors, LDE225 (Novartis) and
Cyclopamine, and Androgen receptor inhibitor Pyrvinium pamoate were
tested individually and in combination to assess the suppression of AIPC
progression both in vitro and in vivo. AR-responsive and Gli-responsive
promoter-luciferase assay and MTT assay were used for in vitro studies.
Intraperitoneal administration of drugs and bioluminescence imaging for
monitoring orthotopic tumors in mice were used to study the effect of
drugs on the growth of AIPC in vivo.Results: We demonstrate that androgen
deprivation leads to increase in Hedgehog (Hh) signaling components in
the AIPC cells in vitro and in vivo. AIPC cells also show increased
sensitivity to low concentrations of androgen, suggesting increased
androgen receptor expression. Together, these results suggest that
increased Hh signaling and androgen receptor expression in the absence of
androgen agonist plays an important role in the development and
progression of AIPC. Our results show that inhibiting either Hh or
androgen receptor signaling pathway individually was not effective in
preventing AIPC cell proliferation in vitro as well as in inhibiting
xenograft tumor growth in mice. In contrast, combination of an Hh pathway
inhibitor with an androgen receptor inhibitor synergistically suppressed
the growth of AIPC cells in vitro as assessed by MTT assay and reduced
tumor burden in a mouse xenograft model of AIPC as compared to individual
treatments.Conclusion: Upregulated Hh signaling and AR expression
mediates development and progression of AIPC. Combined inhibition of Hh
and androgen receptor signaling pathways may be a novel effective
therapeutic strategy for the treatment of androgen independent prostate
cancer.

