Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of an intrinsic determinant critical for maspin
subcellular localization and function.


Abstract: Maspin is a novel serine protease inhibitor (serpin) that does
not act as a classical serine protease inhibitor. Our lab demonstrated
that maspin directly inhibits the serine protease-like enzyme, histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), which is a major deacetylase up-regulated in many
types of cancers. To our knowledge, maspin is the only endogenous
polypeptide inhibitor of HDAC1 identified thus far. Interestingly, the
differential regulation of maspin during tumor progression is
characterized by changes in overall expression and subcellular
distribution. In particular, a significant shift in maspin subcellular
localization from the nucleus to the cytosol has been observed at the
transition from benign epithelial cells to precancerous or low grade
carcinoma cells. Accumulated clinical evidence suggests that nuclear
retention of maspin is correlated with better overall patient survival.
We propose that hypothesized that the configuration and conformation of
maspin coded by its primary sequence, i.e. cis elements are the key
determinants for where maspin may be retained in a given molecular
context. We noted that at the C-terminal end of the RCL sequence is an
Aspartate 346 (D346) which is also unique among all maspin homologs and
orthologs. In the current study, using the mutagenesis approach, we aimed
to determine whether D346 acts as the cis element essential for maspin
subcellular localization and function. We showed that in comparison to
the maspinWT, which is distributed in both cytosol and nuclei of cancer
cells, maspinD346E is predominantly localized in the nuclei of cancer
cells. In addition, maspinD346E had an increased affinity towards HDAC1
and it was more effective inhibitor of HDAC1 as compared to the maspinWT.
These findings led to a novel molecular model that explains how maspin
may be disregulated during tumor progression resulting in loss of its
tumor suppressive potential.

