Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Morphine modulates the paracrine interaction between breast tumor
cells and macrophages.


While opioids are highly effective perioperative analgesics, there have
been concerns about their effects on the growth and spread of tumor cells
when used in cancer surgery patients. Using a mouse syngeneic model of
breast cancer, we studied the effect of morphine on breast tumor
dissemination to lungs. Intraperitoneal injection of morphine (10mg/kg)
to BALB/c mice (n=8) every 12h for 3 consecutive days, caused a reduction
in the number of tumor foci in lungs as measured 18 days after
intravenous tumor inoculation. Morphine treatment also caused a reduction
in circulating extracellular matrix (ECM)-degrading matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) measured by gelatin zymography. One of the
major contributors to tumor cell invasiveness is the immune cells
infiltrating the tumors, particularly macrophages. Therefore, we tested
the effect of morphine on the production of gelatinases by murine breast
cancer cells 4T1 and macrophages RAW264.7 alone or cultured together. The
levels of MMP-9 as well as its endogenous inhibitor tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) were shown to be elevated in the conditioned
media of the co-cultures. Interestingly, we found out that although
morphine treatment did not have any significant effect on the level of
gelatinases produced by individual cells, in the co-cultures it caused a
significant decrease in MMP-9 while increasing TIMP-1.We observed the
same effect when breast cancer cells were incubated with the conditioned
media of morphine-treated macrophages, indicating that cell-cell
interaction was not required. Our in vitro data thus suggest that the
anti-tumor effect of morphine observed in our animal studies is at least
in part mediated through modulating the paracrine communication between
tumour cells and tumor associated macrophages in their microenvironment
rather than an effect on tumor cells alone. Randomized prospective
clinical studies are required to determine how opioids, as a part of the
perioperative pain management, could affect breast tumor recurrence and
metastasis in patients.

