Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Orphan nuclear receptor NR4A2 exhibits oncogenic activity in lung
cancer cells.


LKB1 (also known as STK11) is a frequent target for mutations in lung
cancer, however, the role of LKB1 loss in tumorigenesis is undefined.
NR4A2, together with NR4A1, and NR4A3, constitute the nuclear receptor
(NR) subfamily 4A (NR4A), which are orphan NRs lacking identified
ligands. NR4A family has been implicated in cell cycle regulation,
apoptosis, inflammation, metabolism and more recently in carcinogenesis.
However, there are conflicting data for tumorigenesis as NR4A1 and NR4A3
act as tumor suppressors in leukemia mouse models, while NR4A2 appears to
stimulate tumor cell growth in vitro. Our laboratory discovered that the
CRTC1 gene was aberrantly activated in LKB1-null cancer cells,
stimulating the transcription of cAMP/CREB targets including NR4A gene
members.The aim of this study is to examine NR4A2 as a potential oncogene
and therapeutic target under the regulation of CRTC1 in LKB1 wildtype and
null lung cancer cells. We demonstrated here that somatic loss of LKB1 in
tumor cells was associated with underphosphorylation and nuclear
localization of CRTC1, this resulted in upregulated expression and
stronger transcriptional activity of NR4A2 in LKB1 mutant lung cancer
cells and clinical primary lung cancer samples. We confirmed that
forskolin, which can activate adenylate cyclase then catalyze the
transformation of ATP to cAMP, could induce CRTC1 dephosphorylation
resulting in enhanced NR4A2 expression. We identified that activation of
the CRTC gene family induced NR4A2 expression, whereas knockdown of CRTCs
decreased the expression of NR4A2. Furthermore, short hairpin
RNA-mediated down-regulation of NR4A2, results in attenuated lung cancer
cell proliferation and colony formation in vitro and decreased the tumor
sizes in vivo in nude mice.In summary, our data suggested a CRTC-mediated
transcriptional regulatory mechanism for NR4A2 activity, and proposed an
oncogenic role of NR4A2 in LKB1 null lung cancer cell lines.

