Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short-time exposure to high concentrations of sunitinib causes
tumor cell death.


Background: Sunitinib, although initially developed as an antiangiogenic
agent, has been shown to exert direct anti-tumor effects. Previously we
demonstrated that sunitinib inhibits proliferation of various tumor cell
lines in a dose-dependent manner. We here studied whether short exposure
to high peak concentrations of sunitinib would induce tumor cell
death.Methods: 786-O renal cancer cells were incubated with increasing
concentrations of sunitinib (5, 10 and 20 M) for various time intervals
(1 hour, 3, 6, 9, 24, 48, 72 hours). At prespecified time points,
sunitinib was removed and cells were subsequently allowed to grow in
drug-free culture medium. Viability of these cells one week after short
time sunitinib exposure and sensitivity of recovered cells after
repetitive treatment with high sunitinib concentrations were determined
by MTT assays. Flow cytometry with Propidium Iodide staining was employed
to determine apoptosis.Results: Short-time exposure to high
concentrations of sunitinib significantly induced cell death. Exposure to
20 M of sunitinib for 9 hours provoked cell death in a manner identical
to the prolonged exposure of 24, 48 or 72 hours. Flow cytometry confirmed
the significant increase in cell death (60%) after 9-hour treatment with
20 M sunitinib, compared to the untreated control (2%). Tumor cells that
were repetitively treated with high concentrations of sunitinib retain
their sensitivity to the drug identical to its parental cell line.
Analysis of the key signaling pathways involved in sunitinib-induced cell
death is ongoing.Conclusion: We here report that repetitive short-time
exposure to high concentration sunitinib causes cell death without
inducing resistance. Interestingly, single-dose sunitinib up to 300 mg
was previously reported to be well tolerated by patients. Based on these
findings, administration of high dose intermittent sunitinib may result
in cytotoxic antitumor activity irrespective of angiogenesis inhibition.
A phase I trial to test this hypothesis in patients with cancer will
start shortly.

