Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of chemoradiation with cetuximab
HPV-positive head and neck cancer suggests significant radiosensitization.


PURPOSE: Whether cetuximab, a monoclonal antibody to the epidermal growth
factor receptor, should be combined with radiation in patients with human
papillomavirus (HPV) positive locally advanced head and neck cancer (HNC)
is not known. Currently available data are inadequate to address this
important therapeutic question. We sought to examine the ability of
cetuximab to act as a radiosensitizer and to examine the mechanism of
action of this combination in a model system of HPV+ HNC.METHODS: Four
cell lines (UD-SCC2, UM-SCC47, UPCI-SCC90, 93-VU-147T) validated for HPV
expression were used for all assays. Subcutaneous flank xenografts were
performed in Hsd:athymic Nude-Foxn1nu female mice treated with
intraperitoneal cetuximab (0.2mg/mouse) or flank radiation (2
Gy/fraction) delivered twice weekly for 2 weeks. Time to tumor
quadrupling from baseline was assessed by Kaplan-Meier method. Flow
cytometry was used to assess apoptosis by Annexin V staining and cell
cycle distribution by propidium iodide staining.RESULTS: While there was
minimal in vitro radiosensitization after treatment with cetuximab
(similar to that seen in HPV-negative HNC), cetuximab + radiation
resulted in a significant increase in time to tumor quadrupling compared
to cetuximab alone (p=0.001) or radiation alone (pPURPOSE: Whether
cetuximab, a monoclonal antibody to the epidermal growth factor receptor,
should be combined with radiation in patients with human papillomavirus
(HPV) positive locally advanced head and neck cancer (HNC) is not known.
Currently available data are inadequate to address this important
therapeutic question. We sought to examine the ability of cetuximab to
act as a radiosensitizer and to examine the mechanism of action of this
combination in a model system of HPV+ HNC.METHODS: Four cell lines
(UD-SCC2, UM-SCC47, UPCI-SCC90, 93-VU-147T) validated for HPV expression
were used for all assays. Subcutaneous flank xenografts were performed in
Hsd:athymic Nude-Foxn1nu female mice treated with intraperitoneal
cetuximab (0.2mg/mouse) or flank radiation (2 Gy/fraction) delivered
twice weekly for 2 weeks. Time to tumor quadrupling from baseline was
assessed by Kaplan-Meier method. Flow cytometry was used to assess
apoptosis by Annexin V staining and cell cycle distribution by propidium
iodide staining.RESULTS: While there was minimal in vitro
radiosensitization after treatment with cetuximab (similar to that seen
in HPV-negative HNC), cetuximab + radiation resulted in a significant
increase in time to tumor quadrupling compared to cetuximab alone
(p=0.001) or radiation alone (p<0.0001) in HPV+ HNC xenografts. Increased
apoptosis was seen in cetuximab and radiation treated cells. Analysis of
cell cycle distribution 24 hours after drug treatment showed that
cetuximab induced a modest G1 cell cycle arrest when given prior to
radiation, but that 24 hours after combined therapy, a significant G2
arrest was present.CONCLUSIONS: Using HPV+ HNC cell lines, radiation and
cetuximab appear to be beneficial compared to either treatment alone.
This combination, currently undergoing study in randomized clinical trial
is being further evaluated in a direct from patient tumorgraft model of
HPV+ HNC to further understand predictors of response.

