Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of pyrimidine metabolism pathway in 5-azacytidine
resistance.


Background and aim5-azacytidine (AZA) is a DNA demethylating agent that
is clinically used for patients with myelodysplastic syndrome and acute
myeloid leukemia. However, the mechanism of AZA-resistance remains
unclear although many patients become resistant to AZA after short-term
use. To investigate the mechanism of AZA resistance, we established an
AZA-resistant cell line and analyzed its cellular and molecular
biological characteristics.Experimental proceduresTo establish the
AZA-resistant cell line, U937 cells were incubated in a gradually
increasing dose of AZA from 0.1 M to 3 M. Surviving cells were named
R-U937. The profiles of mRNA expression and DNA methylation in U937 and
R-U937 cells were obtained and pathway analysis was performed to
determine differences between U937 and R-U937. Experiments using specific
inhibitors were also performed.ResultsProliferation and drug resistance
of R-U937R-U937 cells showed a lower proliferation rate than their parent
cells, but their viability was not affected by AZA or 2-deoxy-AZA
(DAC).Role of pyrimidine metabolism pathway in AZA resistanceThe pathway
analysis of mRNA expression profiles revealed differences between U937
and R-U937 in terms of the mRNA expression level of 4 genes involved in
the Pyrimidine Metabolism Pathway. The observation was confirmed by
quantitative RT-PCR. R-U937 cells re-acquired sensitivity to AZA when
they were incubated with an inhibitor of CTP synthase. These results
indicated that adaptation in pyrimidine metabolism, particularly the
accelerated synthesis of CTP from UTP, played important roles in the
development of an AZA-resistant phenotype.Role of DNA hypomethylation in
AZA resistanceThe DNA demethylation process induced by AZA involves
inhibition of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) and DNA damage. It is not
clear which process is the major mechanism of the anti-leukemia activity.
To clarify this, we compared the effects of AZA, DAC and RG108, a DNMT
inhibitor with no DNA damaging activity, on viability and DNA damage. AZA
and DAC significantly decreased U937 cell viability, but not RG108. U937
incubated with AZA or DAC showed an increased ratio of p-H2AX-positive
cells, indicating that these agents caused DNA damage. However, the ratio
of p-H2AX-positive cells in U937 incubated with RG108 was equal to that
of cells incubated without the agents. In R-U937, all agents did not
increase the ratio of p-H2AX-positive cells. The DNA methylation profiles
revealed global hypomethylation in R-U937. These results indicated that
DNA damage but not DNMT inhibition played a major role in the
anti-leukemia activity of AZA and DAC.ConclusionThe present results
showed that the development of an AZA-resistant phenotype of R-U937
depended on the adaptation in pyrimidine metabolism and global DNA
hypomethylation. To overcome AZA resistance, pyrimidine metabolism,
particularly CTP synthase, can be a good target.

