Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altered caspase-8 protein expression and activity in
TRAIL-resistant normal human fibroblasts.


TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)-mediated cell death is
currently being utilized in newly developed cancer therapies. The
molecular basis of normal cell resistance to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis,
and thus therapeutic index, remains largely unexplored. We investigated
TRAIL sensitivity in normal fibroblasts (HFF, WI-38, MRC-5) and found
that normal fibroblasts have decreased protein expression of initiator
caspase-8 that is required for complete TRAIL signaling. TRAIL treatment
caused caspase-8 cleavage in TRAIL-sensitive cancer cells. Yet, no
caspase-8 cleavage was observed in normal fibroblasts after TRAIL
treatment. TRAIL treated fibroblasts had modest increase in caspase-8
activity compared to TRAIL-susceptible cancer cells.Previous studies have
found caspase-8 polyubiquitination necessary for caspase-8 aggregation
and complete activation. Additionally, reports show deubiquitination of
caspase-8 limits caspase-8 activity. Therefore, we examined caspase-8
ubiquitination in normal fibroblasts. Caspase-8 ubiquitination, analyzed
by Western blotting, in normal fibroblasts was found to be decreased
compared to TRAIL-sensitive cancer cells. TRAIL sensitivity in normal
fibroblasts after treatment with deubiquitinase inhibitor PR-619 was also
assessed. Normal fibroblasts had markedly decreased cell viability after
co-treatment with TRAIL and PR-619 compared to TRAIL-only treated
fibroblasts. Cancer cell viability after co-treatment with TRAIL and
PR-619 was similar to cancer cells merely treated with TRAIL. Normal
fibroblasts co-treated with TRAIL and PR-619 had increased caspase-8
cleavage, PARP cleavage, and caspase-8 activity. The increased cell death
seen in normal fibroblasts with TRAIL and PR-619 co-treatment was greatly
inhibited when caspase inhibitor ZVAD was added, demonstrating the cell
death with TRAIL and PR-619 was caspase-mediated. Our data suggest that
caspase-8 deubiquitination may be a contributing factor in normal
fibroblast resistance to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis. Our current studies
are focused on investigating the role of deubiquitinase A20, previously
found to deubiquitinate caspase-8, in normal fibroblast caspase-8
deubiquitination.

