Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor derived vacuolar ATPase subunit promotes M2 type
polarization of macrophages.


Tumors and tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) express a unique surface
vacuolar ATPase (V-ATPase) on the plasma membrane. In tumor cells, a 20
kd peptide is cleaved from a2 isoform of V-ATPase and is referred to as
a2NTD; it is associated with in vitro induction of pro-tumorigenic
properties in monocytes and IL- secretion. In this study, we evaluated
the immuno-modulatory properties of a2NTD in inducing murine peritoneal
macrophage polarization and activation of inflammasome components both ex
vivo and in vivo. Peritoneal macrophages from BALB/c mice were stimulated
with recombinant a2NTD and the mRNA and protein expression of M1 (CD11c,
TNF-), M2 (Mannose receptor-1, Arginase-1, IL-10) markers, IL-1 and NLRP3
(inflammasome marker) were analyzed using quantitative real time PCR and
flow cytometry. Further, mice were injected with a2NTD i.p. and
peritoneal cells were analyzed for M1/M2 specific markers. The results of
both in vivo and ex vivo analysis showed an elevated population of M2
subtype in a2NTD-treated mice compared to control (PTumors and tumor
associated macrophages (TAMs) express a unique surface vacuolar ATPase
(V-ATPase) on the plasma membrane. In tumor cells, a 20 kd peptide is
cleaved from a2 isoform of V-ATPase and is referred to as a2NTD; it is
associated with in vitro induction of pro-tumorigenic properties in
monocytes and IL- secretion. In this study, we evaluated the
immuno-modulatory properties of a2NTD in inducing murine peritoneal
macrophage polarization and activation of inflammasome components both ex
vivo and in vivo. Peritoneal macrophages from BALB/c mice were stimulated
with recombinant a2NTD and the mRNA and protein expression of M1 (CD11c,
TNF-), M2 (Mannose receptor-1, Arginase-1, IL-10) markers, IL-1 and NLRP3
(inflammasome marker) were analyzed using quantitative real time PCR and
flow cytometry. Further, mice were injected with a2NTD i.p. and
peritoneal cells were analyzed for M1/M2 specific markers. The results of
both in vivo and ex vivo analysis showed an elevated population of M2
subtype in a2NTD-treated mice compared to control (P<0.05). a2NTD
upregulated the expression of IL-1 and NLRP3 in macrophages. These data
demonstrated that a2NTD modulates macrophage polarization towards the M2
subtype functionally similar to tumor associated macrophages (TAMs).
Since, tumor progression requires sterile inflammation and maturation of
resident macrophages into TAMs; our data provide evidence that the
surface expression of V-ATPase in tumor cells has a role in inducing the
unique inflammatory environment of tumors by modulating macrophage
phenotype and inducing IL-1 production through the action of a2NTD. The
study also provides indication for the involvement of a2NTD in NLRP3
mediated inflammasome activation.

