Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular mechanisms of elesclomol cytotoxicity.


Elesclomol is an anticancer drug that has received both fast track and
orphan drug status from the FDA and is currently undergoing clinical
trials. Elesclomol forms a strong 1:1 complex with Cu2+ and may exert its
anticancer activity through the induction of oxidative stress or its
ability to transport Cu2+ into the cell. The complexes of elesclomol with
redox inactive Pt2+ and Ni2+ were much less cytotoxic than its Cu2+
complex which suggests a role for Cu2+-induced oxidative stress.
Elesclomol and Cu2+-elesclomol inhibited the growth of human
erythroleukemic K562 cells in the low nanomolar concentrations with even
a brief 1.5 hr exposure. The cell growth inhibitory effects of elesclomol
were decreased with an increase in cell density, likely due to Cu2+
depletion of the medium. Consistent with this, the addition of the Cu2+
chelator Trien to the medium decreased cytotoxicity. Cu2+-elesclomol
induced caspase 3/7 in K562 cells, indicating it was apoptosis inducing.
The Cu2+-elesclomol complex inhibited topoisomerase I activity and
induced topoisomerase I-covalent complexes in K562 cells at a relatively
high concentration of 50 M. It did not, however, inhibit or poison
topoisomerase II or produce topoisomerase II-covalent complexes in cells.
Cu2+-elesclomol, but not elesclomol, was able to induce H2AX formation in
K562 cells, indicative of DNA double strand breaks. Ascorbic acid, GSH
and NADH were all able to slowly reduce the Cu2+-elesclomol complex.
However, EPR spin trapping experiments, either in the presence or absence
of added H2O2, showed that the reduced copper complex could not directly
generate damaging hydroxyl radicals. Depletion of GSH in K562 cells by
treatment with BSO sensitized cells to elesclomol and its copper complex,
indicating oxidative stress may be responsible for cytotoxicity. In
conclusion, these results show that elesclomol may inhibit cell growth
through Cu2+-mediated oxidative stress. Support: CIHR, a Canada Research
Chair in Drug Development to B.B.H., and a National Institutes of Health
grant CA090787 to J.C.Y.

