Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3UTR poly(T/U) tract deletions and altered expression of EWSR1 are
a hallmark of mismatch repair-deficient cancers.


Background: Microsatellite instability (MSI), the genome-wide
accumulation of DNA replication errors, is the hallmark lesion of DNA
mismatch repair (MMR) deficient cancers, present in Lynch syndrome
(LS)-related and 10-20% of sporadic colorectal (CRC), gastric and
endometrial cancers. MSI testing is widely used to guide clinical
management but the functional significance of MSI at distinct genic loci
remains largely elusive. Here, we characterize a novel MSI target locus
consisting of a mononucleotide (T/U)16 tract located in the 3untranslated
region (UTR) of the Ewing sarcoma break point region 1 (EWSR1) gene
(EWS16T).Methods: The diagnostic accuracy of EWS16T to identify
MMR-deficient cancers was determined by analyzing 319 cancers (240
colorectal, 72 gastric, 7 endometrial) from two different populations.
The functional consequences of EWS16T contractions were assessed in vitro
(siRNA-mediated poly(A) site selection and pull-down assays) and in vivo
(mRNA and protein expression by qPCR and tissue microarray
analysis).Results: The EWS16T locus discriminates MMR-proficient (n=128)
from deficient (n=191) cancers with perfect diagnostic sensitivity (100%)
and specificity (100%). Biochemical analyses indicate that EWS16T
contractions alter poly(A) site selection by promoting SFPQ-mediated
distal poly(A) site usage in EWSR1 pre-mRNAs and result in decreased mRNA
as well as EWS protein expression. In contrast to their MMR-proficient
counterparts (n=64), MMR-deficient, LS-related CRC (n=94) display altered
subcellular localization of EWS (pBackground: Microsatellite instability
(MSI), the genome-wide accumulation of DNA replication errors, is the
hallmark lesion of DNA mismatch repair (MMR) deficient cancers, present
in Lynch syndrome (LS)-related and 10-20% of sporadic colorectal (CRC),
gastric and endometrial cancers. MSI testing is widely used to guide
clinical management but the functional significance of MSI at distinct
genic loci remains largely elusive. Here, we characterize a novel MSI
target locus consisting of a mononucleotide (T/U)16 tract located in the
3untranslated region (UTR) of the Ewing sarcoma break point region 1
(EWSR1) gene (EWS16T).Methods: The diagnostic accuracy of EWS16T to
identify MMR-deficient cancers was determined by analyzing 319 cancers
(240 colorectal, 72 gastric, 7 endometrial) from two different
populations. The functional consequences of EWS16T contractions were
assessed in vitro (siRNA-mediated poly(A) site selection and pull-down
assays) and in vivo (mRNA and protein expression by qPCR and tissue
microarray analysis).Results: The EWS16T locus discriminates
MMR-proficient (n=128) from deficient (n=191) cancers with perfect
diagnostic sensitivity (100%) and specificity (100%). Biochemical
analyses indicate that EWS16T contractions alter poly(A) site selection
by promoting SFPQ-mediated distal poly(A) site usage in EWSR1 pre-mRNAs
and result in decreased mRNA as well as EWS protein expression. In
contrast to their MMR-proficient counterparts (n=64), MMR-deficient,
LS-related CRC (n=94) display altered subcellular localization of EWS
(p<0.001).Conclusions: The EWS16T locus represents a novel,
quasi-monomorphic MSI target locus to accurately identify both hereditary
and sporadic MMR-deficient cancers. Contractions therein affect multiple
regulatory mechanisms implicating the RNA-/DNA-binding Ewing sarcoma
protein in MSI-associated colorectal tumorigenesis.

