Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inactivation of the tumor suppressor Lgl via PTEN loss promotes
the invasiveness of glioblastoma multiforme.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive and invasive form of
brain tumor. From diagnosis the average survival time is about one year.
While other forms of brain cancer can be successfully removed by surgical
means, the invasive nature of GBM results in frequent relapses at
secondary sites within the brain. PTEN loss is very common in GBM and
leads to aberrant activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway.
Here we show that this event results in the constitutive phosphorylation
and inactivation of the tumor suppressor lethal giant larvae (LGL). In
Drosophila, loss of LGL causes both over-proliferation and increased
invasiveness of epithelial and brain tissue. Studies in yeast and mammals
have also shown a role for Lgl in vesicle trafficking and cell motility.
Its role in the proliferation and invasiveness in human brain cancer has
not been investigated previously. In both cell culture and in vivo
subcutaneous mouse models, expression of a non-phosphorylatable,
constitutively active form of LGL (LGL-3SA) did not significantly affect
the proliferation of human U87MG glioblastoma cells. However, LGL-3SA
expression did lead to a reduction in the invasiveness of U87MG cells in
vitro. This appeared to be mediated in part by effects on matrix
metalloproteinase trafficking, as LGL-3SA prevented the delivery of
matrix metalloproteinase 14 (MMP14) to the leading edge of U87MG cells.
The role of Lgl in primary glioblastoma stem-like cells was also
assessed, as these cells retain their invasive properties in mouse
xenografts and are therefore a more clinically relevant model of
glioblastoma. All primary glioblastoma stem-like cells expressed Lgl.
MMP14 expression was also detected in primary glioblastoma stem-like
cells, and Lgl-3SA impaired its trafficking in these cells as well.
Experiments are underway to assess the affects of Lgl-3SA expression on
the in vivo invasiveness of intracranial xenograft tumours generated
using glioblastoma stem-like cells. Our current in vitro data suggest
that inactivation of Lgl is an essential downstream step mediating the
increased invasiveness of PTEN negative glioblastoma. Inactivation of Lgl
enhances invasiveness by increasing the delivery of MMP-14 to the cell
surface, where it can promote the degradation of extracellular matrix
directly and also indirectly by activation of other matrix
metalloproteinases.

