Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence for large somatic structural events detected as autosomal
genetic mosaicism in GWAS data.


Recent evidence indicates human mosaic abnormalities may be more common
than previously expected. We performed an analysis on blood and buccal
DNA of 30,918 individuals from a collection of 54 cancer-related studies
using a modified mosaic alteration detection algorithm on renormalized
B-allele frequencies and log2 relative probe intensity ratios from
commercially available Illumina SNP microarray chips. 391 autosomal
abnormalities >2Mb in size were detected in 232 (0.75%) individuals. The
distribution includes copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity constituting
192 (49%) events, copy gains 85 (22%) events, and copy losses 102 (26%)
events. There was no difference between blood and buccal sources of DNA.
An overall analysis by age confirmed our earlier finding (p=8.93e-07),
which was also observed in controls (p=0.0086). Similarly, an overall
analysis by sex confirmed mosaic abnormalities are more frequent in males
than females (p=0.0016); and this association was also observed in a
control-only analysis (p=0.0019). Two or more distinct autosomal events
were observed in 43 individuals. Comparable to earlier studies, the most
common events were 4q copy neutral loss of heterozygosity, 9q copy
neutral loss of heterozygosity, 13q14 deletion and 20q deletion. 13q14
deletion was observed in cancer-free controls and individuals with
epithelial cancers. Cancer specific analyses for bladder, endometrium,
stomach, lung (in nonsmoking women from Asia), osteosarcoma, and prostate
cancer revealed no significant association with risk for cancer. These
results replicate the prevalence and age/sex relationships from our
previous findings in an analysis of 57,853 individuals and further
suggest the importance of studying mosaic abnormalities in the general
human population. The findings underscore the importance of thorough
characterization of germline DNA in parallel with somatic
characterization. Our results provide further support for age-related
genomic senescence and could represent the tip of the iceberg for smaller
somatic events.

