Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: N-hydroxylation of 4-aminobiphenyl (ABP) and associated oxidative
stress may influence ABP carcinogenicity in the mouse liver.


Liver cancer is the 3rd most common cause of death from cancer worldwide
due to poor prognosis and lack of treatment options. A prominent sex
difference is observed in human liver cancer such that men have a 3 to 5
fold higher incidence than women even after accounting for known
etiological factors. In a tumor study carried out previously in our
laboratory, two doses of the human carcinogen 4-aminobiphenyl (ABP) given
to mice on postnatal days 8 and 15 resulted in the formation of liver
tumors at 1 year. Moreover, female mice were dramatically protected from
liver tumors compared to males, which parallels the sex difference found
in human liver cancer. Our goal is to elucidate the molecular mechanisms
behind the sex differences in ABP carcinogenesis in mouse liver with the
hope of extrapolating to the human condition.Oxidative stress may play an
important role in human liver carcinogenesis since all major etiological
factors for human liver cancer, including viral hepatitis, alcohol,
obesity and chemical carcinogens have been shown to be associated with
oxidative stress. To determine whether oxidative stress is involved in
ABP-mediated carcinogenesis in the mouse, we first assessed the ability
of ABP to generate oxidative stress in the mouse Hepa1c1c7 hepatoma cell
line. ABP did not produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) or oxidative DNA
damage in Hepa1c1c7 cells. However, N-hydroxy-ABP (HOABP), an in vivo
metabolite of ABP, was a potent inducer of both ROS and oxidative DNA
damage. Furthermore, HOABP-induced oxidative stress was dose-dependent
and could be blocked by co-treatment with the antioxidant
N-acetylcysteine. These results suggest that HOABP may be a potential
source of oxidative stress in mouse liver. We subsequently characterized
the kinetics of ABP N-hydroxylation by mouse liver microsomes, and found
that more than one cytochrome P450 (CYP) appears to be involved in the
reaction. As predicted by the traditional model of ABP bioactivation, the
high affinity ABP N-hydroxylation reaction is mediated by CYP1A2, while
at least one additional low affinity site belonging to an as yet
unidentified CYP is responsible for significant ABP N-hydroxylation at
higher concentrations of ABP that would be expected following the doses
of ABP used in our tumor study. However, no sex difference was found in
either high or low affinity ABP N-hydroxylation activities between liver
microsomes from male and female postnatal (day 15) or adult mice. Future
studies will focus on quantifying both acute and chronic changes in
oxidative stress and antioxidant levels in the mouse liver following
carcinogenic doses of ABP, and correlating such changes to tumor
formation.

