Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGF2 promotes resistance to ABL kinase inhibitors in CML.


Despite the clinical success of imatinib in treating chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML), patients who develop resistance to available ABL
inhibitors remain a clinical challenge. There is compelling evidence to
suggest that the bone marrow microenvironment hinders the efficacy of
kinase inhibitors, and may eventually lead to overt resistance. We
developed a screen of nearly 300 molecules from the microenvironment to
evaluate molecules that protect CML cells from imatinib. This screen
identified Fibroblast Growth Factor 2 (FGF2) as a factor that mediates
kinase inhibitor resistance in the CML cell line K562. Inhibition of FGFR
with the selective inhibitor PD173014 attenuated the protective effects
of FGF2, and siRNA revealed that FGF2 promotes survival through
activation of FGFR3. FGFR3 was found to subsequently activate Ras and the
MAPK pathway to promote K562 survival - despite effective inhibition of
BCR-ABL by imatinib. More impressively, addition of FGF2 to K562 cells in
long-term cultures with imatinib revealed that FGF2 was reproducibly
capable of promoting growth and eventual imatinib-resistance in K562
cells (N=5). In contrast, K562 cells cultured in media alone or with
other myeloid growth factors, did not develop resistance to imatinib.
Sequencing of the kinase domain in resistant cells did not reveal
mutations of the ABL kinase domain as a mechanism of resistance.
Inhibition of both FGFR and BCR-ABL in the FGF2 imatinib-resistant
outgrowths was synergistic in promoting cell death.To evaluate whether
FGF2 may be involved in resistance in CML patients, immunohistochemistry
of bone marrow samples from imatinib, dasatinib and nilotinib resistant
patients revealed increased FGF2 staining compared to normal controls and
CML patients at diagnosis, suggesting that FGF2 levels increase over time
and promote resistance in vivo. Further evidence that FGFR may be
important in kinase resistance is emerging from clinical trials of the
novel ABL inhibitor, ponatinib. Although ponatinib was specifically
developed to bind BCR-ABL with the T315I mutation, it is also a
multi-kinase inhibitor, including inhibition of FGFR in the low nanomolar
range. To wit, ponatinib was able to suppress FGF2 imatinib-resistant
outgrowths in the low nanomolar range whereas imatinib, dasatinib and
nilotinib were ineffective, even at high doses. In clinical trials,
ponatinib has proven effective not only against T315I mutated BCR-ABL,
but also in patients with minor or even no mutations of the ABL kinase
domain (in press). This suggests that stimulation of growth pathways by
the microenvironment, such as FGF2, may be an important mechanism of
resistance in some CML patients. Moreover, our approach provides a method
to predict pathways of resistance in leukemia cell lines and primary
patient samples. This strategy has the potential to define rational
combinations of kinase inhibitors that can circumvent resistance before
it is even clinically apparent.

