Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of cell signaling pathway associated miRNAs in
cancer cells using a systems biological approach.


MicroRNAs(miRNAs) are single-stranded, non-coding RNA molecules and on
average only 22 nucleotides long that regulate gene expression at the
post-transcriptional level. Target predictions of miRNA based on sequence
are limited due to too many candidates resulting in high false positives.
To overcome this limitation functional target prediction approaches have
been investigated with mRNA and miRNA expression data. These approaches
can be used in the computational assessment of functional miRNA-target
association. However, these approaches with miRNA-mRNA association were
not enough to verify real functional targets at protein level, which
could affect on cell signaling pathway. Therefore, in the present study
to compensate this limitation, we developed a novel correlation based
approach (sequence-independence) to predict potential miRNA targets with
genomic and proteomic data, protein, miRNA and mRNA array data, in NCI-60
cells. To establish a prediction model for identifying the association of
miRNA-cell signaling pathways by analyzing genomic and proteomic data, we
performed a correlation based method among miRNA, mRNA and protein
expression profile. Using this approach, we generated the Association
score matrix (ASM) between miRNA and protein probes. Based on ASM, we
finally generated the highly associated miRNAs with cell signaling
pathways called miRNA-pathway association map (miRPM). To validate our
approach, we used miR-500 as an example to investigate the hypothetical
target regulation mechanisms predicted by miRPM. We confirmed in-vitro
that mir-500 highly is associated with ERK/MAPK signaling pathway in
melanoma and breast cancer cells. Furthermore, we found PP1/PP2 might be
a direct target of miR-500 to regulate activating the ERK/MAPK pathway.
In conclusion, we developed a novel expression profile based approach to
systematically predict potential miRNA functional targets which play
critical roles in cell signaling pathways from the NCI-60 genomic and
proteomic data at whole genomic scale. Our approach might be applied to
investigate the unknown regulatory role of miRNAs in signaling pathways
and gene regulatory networks.

