Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacologic inhibition of cytochrome P450 1B1 attenuates the
motility and proliferation of cultured human dysplastic oral leukoplakia
cells.


Oral leukoplakia is a precancerous lesion that may progress to squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck (HNSCC). The long latency period to
invasive cancer provides an opportunity for intervention at the
precancerous stage. The inability of surgical resection to prevent the
recurrence of oral leukoplakia speaks clearly to the need to develop an
efficacious regimen for the chemoprevention of this disease. Tobacco
smoke constituents and ethanol, the major risk factors for oral
leukoplakia and HNSCC, are metabolized by cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) to
form potentially carcinogenic species. Our previous data indicate that
knockdown of CYP1B1 in human oral leukoplakia cells (MSK-Leuk1) by shRNA
decreases cell motility and proliferation, relative to control cells
overexpressing empty vector. Homoeriodictyol (HED), a flavonoid found in
citrus fruits, is a selective inhibitor of CYP1B1 (IC50 0.24 M). As a
next step, we hypothesized that pharmacologic inhibition of CYP1B1 by HED
would attenuate cell motility and proliferation in a manner similar to
genetic knockdown. Because HED is commonly found in our diet, its
toxicity is expected to be low, making it a promising agent for
preventive or therapeutic intervention. The ability of HED to inhibit
CYP1B1 activity in MSK-Leuk1 cells was established by incubating cells
with either vehicle (0.01% ethanol) or HED (5-10 M) for 72 hrs and
quantifying 7-ethoxyresorufin o-deethylation (EROD), a measure of the
activity of CYP1B1 and other enzymes of the CYP1 subfamily. HED decreased
EROD activity in a dose-dependent manner, with 40% inhibition observed at
10 M, as compared to vehicle-treated controls. Western blot analyses
revealed that CYP1B1 levels were unaltered following HED treatment. The
effect of CYP1B1 inhibition on cell motility was examined by exposing
MSK-Leuk1 cells to HED (0-10 M) for 96 hrs followed by a wound-healing
assay, in which the ability of cell monolayers to close a gap was
monitored for 23 hrs. HED inhibited cell motility in a concentration
dependent manner, with maximum inhibition of gap closure reached at 10 M
(6.7 fold relative to vehicle). To assess the effect of CYP1B1 inhibition
on cell growth, MSK-Leuk1 cells were exposed to HED (0-10 M) for 5 days
and proliferation was analyzed (Fluorescent DNA Quantitation kit). A
direct association was observed between HED dose and inhibition of
proliferation, with a 33% decrease observed at 10 M. In summary,
inhibition of CYP1B1 activity by HED resulted in attenuation of the
motility and proliferation of cultured MSK-Leuk1 cells. These data
confirm that CYP1B1 is a promising molecular target for intervention in
HNSCC and provide strong support for the further development of CYP1B1
inhibitors as efficacious agents for the prevention of HNSCC in patients
with oral leukoplakia.(Supported by NCI fellowship 1 F32 CA144199-01).

