Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted BRAF therapy attenuates the promotional activity of
estrogen in thyroid cancer.


Thyroid cancer, which is three to four times more prevalent in women than
men, is the most common endocrine-related cancer in the United States and
its incidence has increased in the past three decades. Among various
genetic lesions identified in thyroid cancer, the BRAF V600E mutation is
found in 50% of papillary thyroid cancers and affords an opportunity for
targeted drug therapy. Our laboratory identified estrogen as a
promotional factor in thyroid cancer, as estrogen enhances proliferation,
migration, and invasion of thyroid cancer cells in vitro. Since the
mitotic activity of estrogen is partially mediated by the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, we hypothesized that a
targeted BRAF V600E inhibitor, PLX4032, would inhibit estrogen-mediated
tumor-promoting activity. Results demonstrate that PLX4032 abrogates
estrogen-induced increases in proliferation and invasion of BRAF
V600E-mutated BCPAP papillary thyroid cancer cells in a dose-dependent
manner. In contrast, this phenomenon was not observed in Nthy-ori 3-1
thyroid cells, which are wild-type immortalized thyroid cells without the
BRAF V600E mutation. Expression of estrogen receptor is not modulated by
PLX4032 treatment, indicating that PLX4032 targets signal transduction
pathways in estrogen-responsive thyroid cells. PLX4032 down-regulates the
expression of key signaling molecules of the BRAF pathway, including
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (p-MEK), extracellular-signal
regulated kinases (p-ERK), and mammalian target of rapamycin (p-mTOR) in
BRAF-mutated BCPAP cells and does not alter the expression of these
signaling molecules in wild-type Nthy-ori 3-1 cells. These results
demonstrate a direct interlinking of a genetic lesion amenable to drug
therapy with the promotional activity of estrogen. These findings will
lead to an evaluation of combinational therapy including anti-estrogens
and PLX4032 in preclinical animal models and a subset of patients
harboring the BRAF V600E mutation. Targeting growth-promoting signal
transduction pathways constitutively activated by genetic lesions will
ultimately aid in overcoming resistance to traditional radioactive iodine
therapy in patients with specific mutations such as BRAF V600E.

