Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and in vivo studies of a novel, functionalized,
completely human serine protease targeting Her2/neu. Activity against
Herceptin- and multi-drug resistant tumor cells .


A number of recombinant fusion constructs and drug conjugates demonstrate
excellent efficacy in preclinical studies but the long-term clinical
applicability of these agents may be limited by tolerability issues and
the emergence of multi-drug resistance. To address these issues, we
employed the human serine protease granzyme B (GrB) as a cytotoxic
effector and the humanized scFv designated 4D5 targeting the Her2/neu
extracellular domain. A human fusion construct designated GrB/4D5/26
containing the fusogenic peptide 26 was constructed. The GrB/4D5/26
fusion construct showed specific and rapid cellular uptake into Her2/neu
positive but not Her2/neu negative cells. We demonstrated efficient,
specific delivery of GrB to the cytosol of Her2/neu positive cells.
Against a panel of Her2/neu-positive tumor cells, IC50 values of the
fusion construct ranged from 10100 nM, compared to that of GrB which was
in the M range. Treatment with GrB/4D5/26 resulted in specific cell
killing accompanied by activation of caspases, PARP cleavage and
cytochrome C release from mitochondria. In contrast to studies from other
groups, the cytotoxic effects of the GrB/4D5/26 fusion construct did not
require the assistance of the endosomolytic reagent chloroquine.
Treatment with GrB/4D5/26 also caused efficient downregulation of the
PI3K/Akt and Ras/ERK signaling pathways. Tumor cell lines highly
resistant to Lapatinib, Herceptin or chemotherapeutic agents were not
cross-resistant to the GrB-based fusion protein. Consecutive intravenous
injections of GrB/4D5/26 into nude mice bearing BT474 M1 tumors resulted
in significant, long-term tumor growth suppression. Twenty-four hours
after i.v. administration, excised tumors displayed an increase in
GrB/4D5/26 concentration and apoptotic nuclei compared to saline
controls. These studies demonstrate the impressive in vitro and in vivo
activity of the the completely human Her2/neu targeted construct and
suggest its further evaluation for clinical use. Research conducted, in
part, by the Clayton Foundation for Research.

