Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibulin-2 suppresses tumor growth and angiogenesis through the
inhibition of Erk1/2 and p65 pathways in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) has distinctive ethnic and geographic
distributions, with the highest incidence in Southern China. Infection
with the human herpesvirus, Epstein-Barr virus, genetic predisposition,
dietary, and environmental factors are high-risk factors for the
development of NPC. Evidence indicates that loss of heterozygosity on
chromosome 3 is one of the early events contributing to the cancerization
of normal nasopharyngeal epithelial cells. By using a chromosome 3 NotI
genomic microarray, Fibulin-2 (FBLN2) mapping to chromosome 3p25.1, was
previously identified as a candidate tumor suppressor. FBLN2, which is an
extracellular matrix (ECM) protein, contains four domains, regions
consisting of cysteine-rich and cysteine-free, anaphylatoxin-like domain,
serial EGF-like repeats, and a fibulin module. FBLN2 is silenced by
promoter hypermethylation in NPC. Re-expression of FBLN2 in NPC cell
lines significantly reduces colony formation, cell proliferation,
migration, invasion, and in vivo tumor formation and angiogenesis. In
this study, the aim is to investigate the molecular mechanisms and
signaling pathways of FBLN2-mediated tumor suppressive and
anti-angiogenesis effects. Full-length FBLN2 was subcloned into inducible
tetracycline-regulated and lentivirus systems. Phosphorylated forms of
the key signaling molecules, Erk1/2 and NFB, were found to be
significantly reduced in FBLN2 stably-expressing NPC cell lines after
phosphorylation target screening using Western blot analysis. FBLN2 also
induces changes in the cytoskeleton arrangement, possibly through the
regulation of Rho GTPases. Thus, the activities of Rho GTPases were
determined by the Rho pull-down assays and immunofluorescence staining
with confocal microscopy. FBLN2 is able to reduce the tumor formation
ability via inhibiting Erk1/2 and NFB pathways and to inhibit the cell
migration and invasion via regulating Rho GTPase activities. FBLN2 is a
secretory protein and is generally silenced in NPC, suggesting the
possibility that it may be useful as a diagnostic marker and/or new
target for therapeutics of NPC. Therefore, these studies provide
strategic new insights into the understanding of the mechanistic role of
FBLN2 in NPC and enhance our understanding of the molecular genetic basis
of NPC tumorigenesis.

