Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of mTOR enhances the activity of HSP90 inhibitors in
part through cessation of heat shock protein synthesis.


Background: Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) is a molecular chaperone
required for the stability of hundreds of client proteins, many of which
promote tumor growth. While HSP90 inactivation abrogates multiple
oncogenic pathways, it subsequently triggers a heat shock response that
may limit its full cytotoxic potential. To overcome this limitation, we
sought to identify a clinically feasible method to block heat shock
protein synthesis induced by the HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib.Results: An
immunoassay was developed to screen a library of >300 late stage or
approved drugs for their ability to block the upregulation of HSP70
subsequent to HSP90 inhibition. A number of effective agents were
identified, with the most prevalent and effective being those that target
PI3K/mTOR signaling. Validating this result, mTOR inhibitors diminished
ganetespib induced HSP70 and HSP90 protein levels in multiple cancer cell
lines. To determine the mechanism of HSP regulation by mTOR inhibitors
the expression of >80 heat shock related genes was analyzed. Inhibitors
of mTOR had no effect on HSP RNA levels but suppressed the upregulation
of HSP genes induced by ganetespib. Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is the
major transcriptional regulator of HSP's. Under conditions of stress or
HSP90 inhibition, HSF1 is released from repressive cytoplasmic chaperone
complexes and translocates into the nucleus to initiate heat shock gene
transcription. Nuclear HSF1 levels increased within 1 h of ganetespib
exposure but were dramatically reduced in the presence of an mTOR
inhibitor. A major function of mTOR is regulating protein synthesis
through activation of the cap-binding protein EIF4E, therefore we
investigated whether inhibition of protein synthesis would affect HSF1
nuclear accumulation. Cycloheximide or an EIF4E inhibitor reduced
ganetespib-mediated HSF1 entry into the nucleus suggesting that
inhibition of mTOR can prevent HSP induction by blocking protein
synthesis. Combinations of ganetespib with mTOR or dual mTOR/PI3K
inhibitors resulted in a significant increase in anticancer activity
compared to monotherapy in multiple in vitro and in vivo cancer
models.Conclusions: Inhibition of mTOR counteracts ganetespib induced
upregulation of HSP's by blocking translocation of HSF1 into the nucleus,
an effect potentially mediated by a decrease in mTOR driven protein
synthesis. Attenuation of heat shock response may contribute to the
synergy observed for ganetespib and PI3K/mTOR inhibitors in preclinical
cancer models. Targeting mTOR signaling thus represents a promising,
clinically feasible approach to maximize the therapeutic potential of
ganetespib.

