Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and functional characterization of a novel
oxidatively modified protein in the cardiac tissue after
doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity.


Doxorubicin (Dox) is an anthracycline drug that is effectively used as a
chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment of a variety of cancers. Its
dose-dependent cardiotoxicity, however, has limited its chemoprotective
properties in clinical practice. One of the primary mechanisms of
Dox-induced cardiotoxicity is the generation of intracellular reactive
oxygen species (ROS) by an iron-catalyzed reaction. We hypothesized that
the consequent protein oxidation under oxidative stress can be monitored
and correlated with cellular outcome of survival or death. First, to
understand how Dox-induced oxidative stress is related to the
cardiotoxicity, we identified specific cardiac proteins that are
oxidatively modified under Dox-induced oxidative stress in a
spontaneously hypertensive rat model of acute toxicity. Next we
characterized the type(s) of modifications and the amino acid residues
within the protein that undergo modification under oxidative stress.
Finally, we investigated the functional consequences of such oxidative
modifications. Based on our findings, we focused on protein carbonylation
as an indicator of severe oxidative damage. We detected a highly
carbonylated protein in the cardiac tissue after Dox-treatment. The
Dox-induced carbonylated protein was identified as a cardiac myosin
binding protein C (MyBPC) using mass spectrometry. To determine the
carbonylated sites and effect of such modification in the protein
structure and function, we expressed MyBPC in E. coli and purified
recombinant MyBPC. Consistent with the in vivo results, recombinant MyBPC
showed an increase in carbonylation under excessive oxidative conditions.
The degree of carbonylation was time- and concentration-dependent.
Excessive carbonylation was associated with the degradation of MyBPC.
Identification of carbonylated sites and the effect of such carbonylation
in the protein functions will help to better understand the Dox-induced
cardiac toxicity. Our findings also indicate the potential for an
oxidative biomarker for monitoring the Dox-induced cardiotoxicity.

