Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic basis of myeloid leukemogenesis in Down syndrome.


BACKGROUNDTransient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM) is known as a clonal
myeloid proliferation affecting 10% of neonatal infants with Down
syndrome (DS). Although spontaneous regression is as a rule in most
cases, about 20-30% of the survived infants develop non-self-limited
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) years after the remission. As for
the molecular pathogenesis of TAM and DS-AMKL, it has been well
established that GATA1 mutations are detected in virtually all TAM cases
as well as DS-AMKL. However, it is still open to question whether a GATA1
mutation and trisomy 21 are sufficient for the development of TAM, what
is the cellular origin of the subsequent AMKL and whether additional gene
mutations are required for the progression to AMKL.METHODSTo answer these
questions, we performed a comprehensive analysis of somatic mutations in
TAM/AMKL cases using whole genome sequencing of three trio samples
sequentially obtained at the initial presentation of TAM, during
remission and at the subsequent relapse phase of AMKL. Whole exome
sequencing was also performed for TAM (N=15) and DS-AMKL (N=14) samples.
The recurrent mutations in the discovery cohort were further screened in
an extended cohort of TAM (N = 41) as well as DS-AMKL (N = 49) and other
AMKL cases (N = 19).RESULTSTAM samples had significantly fewer numbers of
somatic mutations compared to AMKL samples with the mean numbers of
non-silent somatic mutations of 1.7 and 5.7 per sample in whole exome
sequencing in TAM and AMKL cases, respectively (p=0.001). Whole genome
sequencing and subsequent deep sequencing of the individual mutations
revealed more complicated pictures of clonal evolutions leading to AMKL.
Founding clones in TAM evolved into AMKL in two cases and, on the other
hand, the direct ancestor of the AMKL clone in a remaining case could be
back-traced to a more upstream branch-point of the evolution before the
major TAM clone had appeared.While GATA1 was the only recurrent
mutational target in the TAM phase, 8 genes were recurrently mutated in
AMKL samples in whole exome sequencing, including NRAS, TP53 and other
novel gene targets. The recurrent mutations found in the discovery
cohort, in addition to known mutational targets in myeloid malignancies,
were screened in an extended cohort of DS-associated myeloid disorders
(N=90) as well as other AMKL cases, using high-throughput sequencing of
hybrid-selection and/or PCR amplified targets. Secondary mutations other
than GATA1 mutations were found in 6 out of 41 TAM, 38 out of 49 DS-AMKL
and 10 out of 19 other AMKL cases.CONCLUSIONTAM is characterized by a
paucity of somatic mutations and thought to be virtually caused by a
GATA1 mutation in combination with constitutive trisomy 21. We found two
major clonal evolution patterns during DS-AMKL relapse. Secondary genetic
hits other than GATA1 mutations were common in DS-AMKL and mutations
involving genes such as tyrosine kinase and RAS pathway genes play a
major role in clonal evolution into AMKL.

