Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MMP9 reinforces radiation-induced delayed invasion and metastasis
of neuroblastoma through second-signaling positive feedback with NFB via
both ERK and IKK activation.


Tumor recurrences continue to remain high in neuroblastoma (NB), and a
substantial fraction of those develop metastatic disease with only 10%
survival in systemic recurrences. Efficient and improved therapeutic
strategy can be developed through targeted drug delivery approach and by
intervening molecular pathways operating in response to tumor recurrence.
Herein, we investigated the onset and maintenance of metastatic signal
transduction in neuroblastoma (SH-SY-5Y, MC-IXC, SK-PN-DW and IMR-32)
cells that survive after radiotherapy. Gelatin zymography revealed that
exposure to radiation induces significant and consistent increase in MMP2
and MMP9 activity. Further, muting radiation induced NFB with dominant
negative mutant IkB and/or forced expression of NFB (p50/p65 sub-units)
in these cells affirmed the influence of radiation-induced NFB in MMP9
transactivation (QPCR), translation (immunoblotting) and activity
(sequence specific substrate based high sensitive fluorogenic assay).
Interestingly, blocking radiation-induced MMP9 with GM-6001 profoundly
inhibited p65 transactivation and nuclear localization. More importantly,
blocking radiation-induced MMP9 greatly introverted radiation-induced
phosphorylation of IKK in these cells. Furthermore, radiation increased
both transactivation and activity of ERK-1 (active
ERK/phosphor-transferase immunoprecipitation) in neuroblastoma cells.
This pathway was further defined (MMP9 blocking and activation, PMA
studies) to show that radiation-induced functional MMP9 is necessary for
activation of ERK- and NFB-dependent onset of metastasis (tumor invasion
and metastasis transcriptome profiling) in surviving NB cells. Selective
MMP9-dependent ERK regulation was confirmed with futile inhibition of ERK
activity in aprotinin treated cells. Together, these data strongly
suggest that radiation induced NFB-dependent MMP9 reinforces
radiation-induced delayed invasion and metastasis. Further, these results
imply that the MMP9 dependent reinforcement may involve dual signaling
feedback activation of NFB though ERK and IKK phosphorylation.

