Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel genetic abnormality, the amplification
of rictor (rapamycin-insensitive companion of mTOR), in a patient with
non-small cell lung cancer.


Despite recent advances, clinically-relevant oncogenic drivers have not
been identified in about half of lung adenocarcinormas. Here, we report
rictor (rapamycin-insensitive companion of mTOR) amplification as a novel
genetic abnormality in a young patient with non-small cell lung cancer.
This male patient was a never smoker and was diagnosed with lung
adenocarcinorma at the age of 18. He initially presented with refractory
cough and persistent left lung lesions. Pathology was consistent with
lung adenocarcinorma, poorly differentiated. Extensive molecular testing
was negative for common genetic alterations in K-RAS, EGFR, ALK, HER2,
RET, AKT, PIK3CA, BRAF and ROS1. His tumor was subsequently subjected to
next generation DNA sequencing (FoundationOne, Foundation Medicine,
Cambridge, MA) targeting a cohort of more than 180 cancer-related genes.
This analysis identified rictor amplification of at least 6 copies as the
sole DNA abnormality. Immunohistochemistry further documented rictor
overexpression in the patient's lung tumor. The neoplastic lung tissue
exhibited diffuse and strong cytoplasmic staining for rictor, compared to
surrounding non-neoplastic tissues. Furthermore, the tumor tissue showed
diffuse overexpression of phospho-S473 Akt, an essential downstream
target of rictor.Rictor is a key component of mTORC2 complex, where it
modifies actin cytoskeleton organization, cell proliferation and
survival. Activation of rictor signaling has been suggested to play
critical roles in regulating cancer cell migration, invasion and
metastasis in breast, ovarian, and colorectal cancers and gliomas. To our
knowledge, this is the first report of rictor amplification in lung
cancer. Moreover, we found that blockade of the rictor-mTORC2 pathway by
siRNA-mediated rictor knockdown or with pharmacological inhibitors led to
decreased phosphorylation of S473-AKT and growth inhibition in lung
cancer cell lines. Thus, rictor amplification may represent a potential
novel target in lung cancer. We will perform further studies to determine
whether rictor amplification is a unique molecular subtype of lung
cancer. Further, we hope to identify which targeted drugs are active
against tumors with rictor amplification and overexpression.

