Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting the gender disparity of hepatocellular carcinoma: roles
of HBV X protein and androgen receptor.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a leading cancer worldwide and
especially prevalent in Southeast Asia, due to prevalent hepatitis B
virus (HBV) infection. HBV-associated HCC has a male predominance, with a
male-to-female ratio of about 4-5:1. HBV is a partially double-stranded
DNA virus containing four overlapping open reading frames. Among them, X
gene is most frequently integrated into host genome naturally and plays
an important role in hepatocarcinogenesis. In male HBV carriers, the risk
of HCC development is significantly increased in those with higher serum
androgen and androgen receptor (AR) activity. HBV infection may,
therefore, particularly cooperate with male-specific AR signalling to
accelerate hepatocarcinogenesis. In this study, we hypothesized that HBx
cooperated with male-specific AR signalling to enhance
hepatocarcinogenesis, and natural HBx truncated mutants exerted different
effects on this AR signalling. Firstly, we demonstrated that the
expression of androgen receptor was significantly higher in the HCC cells
when compared to the immortalized non-tumorigenic normal liver cell lines
(LO2 and MIHA). Moreover, the HCC cell lines with higher metastatic
potential (MHCC-97L, MHCC-97M and LM3) had a higher AR protein expression
level, suggesting a role of AR in HCC development and progression. In
human HBV-associated HCC tissues, we found that the natural COOH-terminal
truncated HBx was more frequently detectable in HCC tumors from male than
female patients (43% and 11%, respectively). Here, we also showed that
the natural COOH-terminal HBx truncated mutants HBx C3 (1-95 a.a) and HBx
C4 (1-89a.a) physically interacted with AR, indicating the possibility of
HBx C3 and HBx C4 in regulating AR activity and the binding of HBx with
AR at its N-terminal part. Furthermore, we demonstrated that HBx
truncated mutants localized in the nuclear fraction, unlike the
full-length HBx protein which localized in the cytoplasm. The capability
of the nuclear translocation may suggest a role of the HBx truncated
mutants in regulating AR transcriptional activity. In addition, androgen
induced the expression of GADD45, a DNA damage-inducible gene, in HCC
cells. The androgen-induced GADD45 expression was even higher with the
co-expression of full-lengthen HBx protein, demonstrating a synergistic
effect between HBx and AR in inducing DNA damage and genetic instability
in HCC cells. Taken altogether, these findings may provide a linkage
between HBx, AR signaling, genomic instability and HCC carcinogenesis

