Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PAM50 breast cancer subtyping and risk of recurrence in a
population-based cohort.


BACKGROUND The PAM50 gene expression signature for identifying intrinsic
subtypes of breast cancer has been shown to add significant clinical
information beyond standard molecular biomarkers (ER, PR, Her2). Previous
studies with the PAM50 have focused primarily on retrospective clinical
trials in which the drug regimens and enrollment criteria are relatively
homogenous. We assess the prognostic significance of subtyping within the
community setting using therapies appropriate at the time of
diagnosis.METHODS Two prospective studies of breast cancer survivors,
Life After Cancer Epidemiology (LACE) and Pathways, were subtyped by the
PAM50 using quantitative RT-PCR. LACE participants were diagnosed from
1997-2000 with tumors 1 cm; while Pathways enrolled subjects at time of
diagnosis (2006-2008) with tumors 0.5 cm. Both studies included AJCC
stages I-III. LACE participants were enrolled on average 2 years
post-diagnosis, such that early recurrences were excluded. In addition,
women in Pathways were diagnosed after 2006 when Herceptin treatment was
available. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor blocks were centrally
reviewed by a pathologist and 1mm directed punches of invasive cancer
were taken for RNA extraction and expression profiling. A published
algorithm was used for subtyping and provided a continuous gene
expression score for proliferation, ESR1/ER, PGR/PR, and ERBB2/Her2
(Bastien et al, BMC Med Genomics. 2012 Oct 4;5:44). Subtype
classification was correlated with disease-free survival, estimated using
Kaplan-Meier plots and log-rank testing. Multivariable delayed entry Cox
regression analyses determined the prognostic significance of subtypes in
the context of standard clinical indicators of survival.RESULTS The PAM50
subtype distribution for the cohort was Luminal A (52%), Luminal B (20%),
HER2-E (14%), Basal-like (10%), and Normal-like (4%). Approximately 7% of
Luminal tumors (A and B) were called ER negative by immunohistochemistry
(IHC). Luminal A tumors were more likely to be PR positive (82%) compared
to those classified as Luminal B (61%). Only 2% of Luminal B tumors were
low proliferation. The HER2-E subtype contained 66% clinically Her2+
tumors and the Basal-like tumors were 90% triple negative. In univariate
analyses, women with non-Luminal A subtypes were all at higher risk of
recurrence. Controlling for tumor size and positive nodes, those with
Basal-like subtype still had a significantly higher risk of recurrence
(HR=2.34, 95% CI 1.37, 3.98).CONCLUSIONS There are proportionally more
Luminal A patients within the population-based studies compared to
clinical trials that have focused on higher risk patients. The PAM50
subtype remains a significant prognostic indicator of recurrence in the
context of standard therapies used in community practice today.

