Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of AR transcriptional activity and prostate cancer
cellular proliferation by DACH1/Eya1/Six1 pathway.


Prostate cancer progression from androgen responsive to
androgen-depletion therapy resistance is a major cause of treatment
failures. Novel therapies targeting this patient are a major clinical
challenge. We previously reported that the cell fate determination factor
DACH1 inhibits androgen signaling though binding the AR and enhancing
co-repressor recruitment in the context of local chromatin at AR
responsive genes. The repression of AR function of by DACH1 was partly
rescued by the co-activators p300 and SRC. The repression was enhanced by
ectopic expression of HDACs. We had previously shown that DACH1 inhibited
proliferation of androgen-dependent LnCAP cells. To further explore the
significance of DACH1 in human prostate cancer, we established stable
cell lines expressing DACH1 or its DS domain deleted mutant (DS) in
androgen-independent C4-2 cells and AR-negative PC-3 cells by retrovirus
infection. Stable expression of DACH1 inhibited cellular proliferation in
both cell lines, requiring the DS domain. Ectopic expression of DACH1
inhibited colony formation of the androgen-independent 22RV1 cells. DACH1
inhibited migration, invasion and tumor growth of AR-negative PC-3 cells.
Since DACH1, Eya1 and Six1 function together as a network to control
cellular differentiation and organ formation during development, we
examined whether other components of RDGN pathway, could regulate
androgen signaling. In hormone responsive LnCAP cells, ligand stimulation
(DHT, 50nM) induced 17 folds activation of MMTV Luc, co-expression of
Eya1 reduced AR transactivation, and the repression required the EYA
phophatase domain. Expressions of the AR co-repressors, HDAC1, HDAC3 or
SirT1 inhibited the ligand-induced AR activity. Eya1 enhanced
co-repressor function at the PSA and MMTV promoters. Consistent with our
previous publication, DACH1 repressed ligand-induced activity >70%, Eya1
modified DACH1 repression of AR activity. Together, our studies
demonstrated that the RDGN regulates both androgen dependent and
independent prostate cancer cellular proliferation and tumorigenesis.

