Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of epigenomic markers on chromosome 11 that
distinguish between choroid plexus carcinoma (CPC) and papilloma (CPP).


Choroid plexus tumors are rare epithelial brain tumors occurring
predominantly in early childhood.Understanding molecular events leading
to development and progression of these tumors is critical in determining
patient treatment and increased survival.Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) is
a common alteration observed during carcinogenesis. To investigate
somatic genetic abnormalities in different subtypes of choroid plexus
cancers and identify LOH hotspots, we utilized SNP 6.0 arrays
(Affymetrix). Allele specific copy number analysis of 25 CPCs and 31 CPPs
using Chromosome Analysis Suite (Affymetrix) revealed much higher
frequency of LOH events throughout the genome in CPCs (8.4/case) compared
with CPPs (1.2/case). One LOH hotspot, neutral copy loss of
heterozygosity on chromosome 11, was identified in most CPCs but in no
CPPs. Chromosome 11 is known to harbor an imprinted cluster that has been
associated with growth dysregulation and pediatric cancer. Both maternal
(KvDMR1) and paternal (H19DMR) differentially methylated regions overlap
this imprinting cluster. Therefore, we investigated whether the observed
LOH is related to uniparental disomy (UPD). Bisulfite pyrosequencing on a
subset of CPP and CPC were studied for DNA methylation at both H19DMR and
KvDMR1. Our data showed a reverse correlation in the degree of DNA
methylation between the 2 DMRs in CPCs and CPPs. These data correlate
well with the concept of UPD identified through our SNP arrays. Next, we
investigated whether the observed higher expression of insulin like
growth factor (IGF2) in CPP compared to CPC is associated with DNA
methylation aberrations at the imprinted control region (H19 DMR) on
11p15.5. We identified higher DNA methylation at the H19DMR in CPC
compared to CPP. Increased activity of the IGF2 gene has been associated
with many types of cancer. To investigate the mechanism of CPC distinct
IGF2 expression we examined the expression levels of microRNAs (miRNAs).
MicroRNAs are often found to be misregulated in human cancer, and they
can act posttranscriptionally as either potent oncogenes or tumor
suppressor genes. We studied expression of miR-675-3p, miR-483-3p as well
as miR-125-a-3p associated with IGF2/H19 imprinted locus. By quantitative
RT-PCR, both miR-675 and miR-125 were found to be more significantly
upregulated in CPCs than in CPPs whereas miR-483 was expressed at very
low levels in CPCs and in higher levels in CPPs compared with normal
control tissues . Misregulation of miR-483 was positively correlated with
IGF2 levels in both groups. Our data suggest that dysregulation of
epigenetic mechanisms contribute to the molecular events leading to tumor
development and progression in CPC and may eventually facilitate
identification of new diagnostic markers for CPC, as well as new
therapeutic targets for this aggressive, lethal tumor.

