Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of the actin-binding protein Anillin is a prognostic
biomarker for primary ER positive breast cancer.


Identification of novel prognostic and predictive factors is important
for individualizing prognosis and treatment for cancer patients. The
present study aimed at examining the potential prognostic value of
Anillin (ANLN) expression in breast cancer. ANLN, an actin-binding
protein required for cytokinesis, was discovered using the Human Protein
Atlas as being differentially expressed in breast cancer and, thus, a
potential prognostic biomarker. The purpose of the Human Protein Atlas
project (www.proteinatlas.org) is to generate validated antibodies
towards the entire human proteome and to use these antibodies for protein
profiling in normal tissues and cancer cells. The freely available Human
Protein Atlas provides an opportunity to use antibody-based proteomics as
a high-throughput strategy to discover novel cancer biomarkers of
potential clinical relevance. ANLN has been shown to be up-regulated in
several human tumor types including lung, renal and pancreatic tumors.
For the purpose of the current study, tissue microarrays with tumor
samples from three independent breast cancer cohorts were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). SiRNA mediated ANLN knockdown of breast
cancer cell lines followed by western blot or IHC on cytospin was done
for antibody validation. Cell viability assay and cell cycle assay was
used to study the function of ANLN knocked breast cancer cells. The
majority of breast tumors displayed moderate to strong nuclear positivity
in slightly varying fractions, generally below 25%. High nuclear fraction
of ANLN was associated with large tumor size, high histological grade,
high proliferation and estrogen receptor (ER) negativity. Furthermore,
high nuclear expression of ANLN was significantly associated with poor
prognosis for patients with ER positive breast tumors in all three
cohorts. SiRNA mediated ANLN knockdown was found to induce low cell
viability for ER positive breast cancer cells but not for ER negative
breast cancer cells. In addition, cell cycle studies showed that ANLN
knockdown yielded a shift to G2/M phase, in both ER positive and ER
negative breast cancer cells. In conclusion, our results strongly suggest
that ANLN can be used as a prognostic biomarker for ER positive breast
cancer patients.

