Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Withaferin A, a potent and abundant component of Withania
somnifera root extract, reduces myeloid-derived suppressor cell function.


Myeloid cells play a crucial role in growth and metastasis of malignant
tumors. Tumor infiltrating myeloid cells includes myeloid-derived
suppressor cells (MDSC), tumor-associated macrophages (TAMS) and
dendritic cells (DC). These cells infiltrate into tumor and suppress
tumor immunity by their inherent immune suppressive activity which is
enhanced by interactions with each other (cross-talk). Therapeutic
strategies targeting manipulation of these cells are being developed. The
root extract of the plant Withania somnifera (Ashwagandha) (WRE) has been
reported to reduce tumor cell proliferation and angiogenesis. Whether the
anti-tumor effects of WRE are due to direct effects on malignant cells,
or whether WRE also impacts immune suppressive myeloid cells is unknown.
We hypothesize that WRE or its constituents impact tumor infiltrating
myeloid cells and thereby boost anti-tumor immunity. HPLC and mass
spectrometry analysis revealed that Withaferin A (WA) is the most
abundant constituent of Withania somnifera root powder (ChromaDex, Inc.
Irvine, CA). In comparison with the other constituents, WA has the most
potent effect on reducing suppressive functions of myeloid cells. A
prominent effect of MDSC is their production of IL-10 which increases
upon cross-talk with macrophages, thus polarizing immunity to a tumor
promoting type-2 phenotype. WA reduces inherent and cross-talk induced
IL-10 secretion from MDSC in a dose dependent manner. Macrophage
secretion of IL-6 and TNF cytokines that are characteristic of M1-type
macrophages and that also increase MDSC accumulation and function, are
also reduced by WA. Much of the T cell suppressive activity of MDSC is
due to MDSC production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and WA
significantly reduces MDSC production of ROS. Thus adjunctive treatment
with WA has the potential to concomitantly reduce myeloid cell mediated
immune suppression, to polarize immunity towards a tumor-rejecting type I
phenotype, and to facilitate the development of anti-tumor
immunity.Supported by NIH RO1CA115880, RO1CA84232, and American Cancer
Society IRG-97-153-07

