Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of microRNA-29c expression in different subtypes of
breast cancer.


Introduction: The basal-like subtype of breast cancer is associated with
an aggressive phenotype and worse prognosis compared to other subtypes.
Cancers of this subtype often do not express the ER, PR, or HER-2
receptor, and lack targets for molecular therapy. Research to identify
pathways responsible for driving the malignant phenotype in basal-like
breast cancer is critical to help develop more targeted therapies. Our
lab has previously identified miR-29c as a significantly down-regulated
miRNA in basal-like breast tumors and demonstrated an association with
cell invasion and drug sensitivity. However, little is known about the
genetic and regulatory factors contributing to the down-regulation of
miR-29c in the basal-like subtype.Materials and Methods: To characterize
the expression of miR-29c, qRT-PCR was used to measure levels in four
basal-like, four luminal, and five claudin-low breast cancer cell lines.
We used CAGE-tag analysis and ChIP assays to determine transcription
start sites of miR-29c and RNA polymerase II binding sites, respectively.
Flouresecent In-Situ Hybridization (FISH) and qPCR were used to assess
copy number variation (CNV) of the gene. Luciferase assays were used to
measure the promoter activity in the cell lines.Results: MiR-29c has
lower expression in basal-like cell lines and higher expression in
claudin-low cell lines compared to luminal cell lines. To determine if
the changes in expression are driven by the changes in promoter activity,
we first identified the promoter of miR-29c at the region 20kb upstream
of the gene on Chromosome 1q32. Initial results from promoter activity
assays support a trend of promoter activity that correlates with miR-29c
expression in cell lines of the different subtypes. Sequencing of the
promoter region revealed no significant mutations or SNPs to explain the
expression pattern representing the basal, luminal, and claudin-low
subtypes in tumors and cell lines. CNV assays using qPCR suggested lower
copy numbers of miR-29c in basal-like cell lines with a large variation
of copy numbers in tumors. FISH analysis yielded several abnormalities in
the number and structure of 1q32 in cell lines. We are currently
determining the correlation of CNV with expression pattern of mir-29c
seen in the different subtypes as well as identifying a transcriptional
factor contributing to differential expression of miR-29c in breast
cancer subtypes.Conclusions: Our results suggest that miR-29c has lower
expression and promoter activity in basal-like breast cancer, which is
most likely due to regulation of promoter activity rather than mutations
or CNV in the promoter. More work is required to discover the regulatory
factors or epigenetic changes that may be involved in the aberrant
expression of mir-29c in breast cancer.

