Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Active hedgehog (HH) signal transduction in rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS).


RMS is the most common sarcoma of childhood. The majority of embryonal
RMS (ERMS) and a minority of alveolar RMS (ARMS) express HH pathway
components. However, a role for the HH signal transduction pathway is
incompletely defined in RMS. Co-regulation of GLI1 and Patched1 (PTCH1)
in ERMS and fusion-negative ARMS have suggested that the HH pathway is
functionally intact in these subtypes. However, HH pathway activity has
not been directly tested in RMS. Our aim was to demonstrate that some RMS
cells have intact HH signaling pathways and are responsive to HH pathway
activation or inhibition. We demonstrated expression of Indian HH, Desert
HH, PTCH1, SMO and GLI1 by qRT PCR in Rh18 ERMS cells and Rh41 ARMS
cells; Desert HH, PTCH1, SMO, and GLI1 in Rh 30 ARMS cells; and Indian
HH, Desert HH, PTCH1, and SMO in RD ERMS cells. We confirmed high GLI1
protein expression by Western blot in Rh41 and Rh18 cells. Since HH
signaling is believed to occur in primary cilia, we used
immunofluorescence to demonstrate primary cilia in RMS-13 cells. Based on
their differing levels of GLI1 expression (high in Rh41 and Rh18 cells
and low/absent in Rh28 and RD cells), these RMS cell lines provided an
opportunity to up- and down-regulate the HH pathway and measure effects
on gene expression and cell function. Exposure of Rh41 cells to Sonic
HH-containing conditioned media caused a 12-fold increase in PTCH1
expression and exposure of Rh28 cells to Sonic HH peptide increased GLI1
expression 1.5-fold, suggesting intact HH signal transduction in some RMS
cell lines. We down-regulated HH pathway activity with the GLI1 inhibitor
GANT61 and assessed Rh41 and RD cell viability by MTT assays. RMS cell
viability decreased following exposure to increasing concentrations of
GANT61. The reduced cell viability appeared to result at least in part
from down-regulation of the anti-apoptotic GLI1 target gene, BCL2. These
results suggest a role for HH signaling in RMS cell survival.
Understanding the role of HH signaling in RMS biology may contribute to
successful introduction of HH pathway inhibitors into RMS treatment.

