Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dietary flavonoid fisetin negatively regulates NEDD9
expression and inhibits melanoma progression: studies in monolayer and 3D
melanoma skin equivalent cultures.


Melanoma is a leading cause of skin cancer related deaths. The prognosis
of advanced melanoma remains poor in spite of treatment advances,
emphasizing the need to explore additional preventive approaches. One
such approach is through the use of mechanism-based dietary intervention.
Along this line, various flavonoids that are integral components of human
diet are being investigated for their anti-cancer properties. We
previously showed that the dietary flavonoid fisetin disrupted
Wnt/-catenin signaling and inhibited melanoma growth, both in vitro and
in vivo (Syed et al., JID 2011). Neural precursor expressed,
developmentally down-regulated 9 (NEDD9) has recently been identified as
a novel target of Wnt signaling, and implicated in the progression of
several cancers including melanoma. Here, we report that fisetin
treatment of melanoma cells resulted in decreased invasive potential of
cells associated with suppression of NEDD9 signaling. Treatment of
melanoma cells with fisetin inhibited growth and suppressed invasion
across the matrigel, as assessed by cell proliferation and invasion
assays. Immunoblot analysis demonstrated decreased NEDD9 expression
accompanied with loss of Integrin 5 protein expression in fisetin treated
cells. Fisetin inhibited the phosphorylation and activation of Src and
focal adhesion kinase, important mediators of NEDD9-driven cell migration
and invasion. Fisetin treated cells demonstrated a decrease in the
expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers N-cadherin
and Vimentin, with a concomitant increase in E-cadherin. In addition, a
significant decrease in the protein expression of matrix
metalloproteinases -2 and -9 was observed. To establish that decreased
expression of NEDD9 and altered expression of EMT markers correlates with
diminished cell proliferation and invasion, we employed a 3-D melanoma
skin equivalent model, comprising of A375 melanoma cells, cultured with
epidermal keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts. The melanoma constructs
treated with fisetin for 16 days showed significant decrease in
melanocytic lesions as opposed to untreated constructs that showed large
nests of tumor cells and many invading disseminated cells.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed diminished staining of N-cadherin in
fisetin treated sections. In contrast, E-cadherin expression, in the
epidermal compartment of the treated constructs was moderate to strong in
the radially growing melanomas; however the vertically growing melanomas
showed weak E-cadherin expression. These findings indicate that fisetin
is capable of targeting pathways mechanistically linked to melanoma
progression and invasion. We propose that fisetin has the potential to be
developed as an anti-melanoma agent that can be used alone or in
combination with other known agents.

