Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic predictors of response to preoperative chemotherapy in
patients with pediatric osteosarcoma.


Purpose: It is generally accepted that sensitivity of preoperative
chemotherapy, evaluated by a histological analysis using resected tumor
tissue, is the most important prognostic factor for Osteosarcoma (OS).
Methotrexate, doxorubicin, cisplatin (MAP regimen), and ifosfamide (IFO)
are recognized as key drugs for OS, although it is still debatable
whether addition of IFO for all OS patient is beneficial or not. There
have been few analyses documenting molecular markers that predict the
response to each regimen used in the preoperative chemotherapy of OS
patients. The aim of this study is to identify possible genomic markers
for the prediction of sensitivity of preoperative chemotherapy for
pediatric OS patients.Methods: Pre-therapeutic biopsy tumor samples of 22
pediatric conventional OS patients treated in Chiba Cancer Center who had
homogeneous clinicopathological- and therapeutic- background were
analyzed. In our study, all patients were divided into 3 groups according
to the histological response; group A includes 8 patients who
demonstrated a good histological response to MAP regimen, group B
includes 6 patients who were resistant to MAP regimen but showed good
response to IFO regimen, and group C includes 8 patients who did not
respond to neither MAP nor IFO regimen. Genomic DNAs were prepared from
frozen biopsy samples and used for aCGH analysis with Agilent 44k DNA
microarray.Results: Survival analysis revealed that patients in group A
and B exhibited significantly better outcomes than in group C concerning
both overall and event-free survivals. According to the results of
comparative analysis of copy number variation (CNV) patterns in each
group, 2 CNV regions that separated group A from group B and C
(sensitivity 100%, specificity 92.9%) and 6 CNV regions that separated
group C from group A and B (sensitivity 100%, specificity 100%) were
identified. CNV regions specifically identified in Group C contained
several genes previously reported as OS-related genes, such as CDKN2A/B,
PTEN, and CDK4. Based on these CNV profiles, we established a scoring
system that clearly classify the tumors into these 3 groups Re-sequencing
of known cancer-related genes in these OS tumors is also underway to
integrate genomic alterations into the system.Conclusion: Our results
indicated that copy number changes in OS biopsy samples could be good
predictors of response to preoperative chemotherapy. These signatures may
be useful for the future genomics-based personalized chemotherapy for OS
patients.

