Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytochrome CYP3A4 expression may predict metastasis in Ewing's
sarcoma family of tumors.


Background: Ewing's sarcoma family tumor (EFT) is an aggressive
malignancy of bone and soft tissue with high incidence of metastasis and
resistance to chemotherapy in metastatic disease. Cytochrome P450 (CYP)
monooxygenases are a multigene family of enzymes that are involved in
phase I reactions of metabolism of a wide range of endogenous compounds
and xenobiotics, including anticancer drugs. Expression of CYP isoforms
may influence tumor development, progression and resistance to therapy.
Overexpression of CYP3A isoforms was associated with more aggressive
behavior in breast cancer, osteosarcoma and other tumors. The purpose of
this study is to define the expression CYP3A isoforms in EFT and
establish its prognostic significance.Design: Archived EFT cases and
pertinent clinical data were compiled to include patient's age, sex,
tumor location, tumor size, overall survival, disease-free survival and
clinical stage. Two representative histologic sections of the tumors were
selected for tissue microarray construction. Sections were processed for
immunohistochemical labeling with CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and CYP3A7. Liver
sections were used as positive control. The intensity of the staining was
scored as negative, low (weak staining less than the positive control) or
high (equal to or stronger than the positive control). The staining
intensity was correlated with clinical data and the significance of any
associations was statistically analyzed by one tailed and two tailed
t-tests.Results: 36 cases of Ewing sarcoma family of tumors were
selected, 22 were males and 12 females. Age ranged from 12-72 years. 4
cases were excluded from immunohistochemical interpretation due
inadequate viable tissue. CYP3A4 staining was present in 27 (84%) cases
with high expression noted in 6 (19%) of 32 cases. High expression was
significantly associated with distant metastases (pBackground: Ewing's
sarcoma family tumor (EFT) is an aggressive malignancy of bone and soft
tissue with high incidence of metastasis and resistance to chemotherapy
in metastatic disease. Cytochrome P450 (CYP) monooxygenases are a
multigene family of enzymes that are involved in phase I reactions of
metabolism of a wide range of endogenous compounds and xenobiotics,
including anticancer drugs. Expression of CYP isoforms may influence
tumor development, progression and resistance to therapy. Overexpression
of CYP3A isoforms was associated with more aggressive behavior in breast
cancer, osteosarcoma and other tumors. The purpose of this study is to
define the expression CYP3A isoforms in EFT and establish its prognostic
significance.Design: Archived EFT cases and pertinent clinical data were
compiled to include patient's age, sex, tumor location, tumor size,
overall survival, disease-free survival and clinical stage. Two
representative histologic sections of the tumors were selected for tissue
microarray construction. Sections were processed for immunohistochemical
labeling with CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and CYP3A7. Liver sections were used as
positive control. The intensity of the staining was scored as negative,
low (weak staining less than the positive control) or high (equal to or
stronger than the positive control). The staining intensity was
correlated with clinical data and the significance of any associations
was statistically analyzed by one tailed and two tailed t-tests.Results:
36 cases of Ewing sarcoma family of tumors were selected, 22 were males
and 12 females. Age ranged from 12-72 years. 4 cases were excluded from
immunohistochemical interpretation due inadequate viable tissue. CYP3A4
staining was present in 27 (84%) cases with high expression noted in 6
(19%) of 32 cases. High expression was significantly associated with
distant metastases (p< 0.05). There was no association of high CYP3A4
expression with age, sex, tumor size, or location (pelvic or
extrapelvic). CYP3A5 and CYP3A7 were expressed in 5 and 13 cases (15.6%,
40.6%) respectively, and were not associated with age, sex, tumor size,
metastasis or location. None of the studied biomarkers showed any
correlation with overall or disease free survival.Conclusion: CYP3A4,
CYP3A5 and CYP3A7 are variably expressed in EFTs. High CYP3A4 expression
may predict metastasis in EFT. Additional studies with higher number of
cases are needed to further investigate the role of CYP3A4 in the
prognosis of Ewing's sarcoma family tumors.

