Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemopreventive and therapeutic activity of high
anthocyanin-content blueberry against estrogen-mediated breast cancer.


Berries are gaining increasing importance lately for their
chemopreventive and therapeutic potential against several cancers in
pre-clinical studies. In our earlier studies, blueberry-supplemented diet
has shown chemopreventive protection against 17-estradiol-mediated
mammary tumorigenesis. The 5 anthocyanidins in blueberry are presumable
bioactives. In this study, we tested both preventive and therapeutic
activities of high anthocyanin-content blueberry diet in ACI rat model
against 17-estradiol-mediated mammary tumorigenesis. The blueberry used
was a blend of Tifblue and Rubel blueberry (50:50) (U.S. Highbush
Blueberry Council, CA) which has substantially higher amount of
anthocyanins than Berkley/Blue Jay/Bluecrop blueberries used in our
earlier studies. To study the chemopreventive effect, female ACI rats
(5-6-week old) were administered AIN-93M diet or diets supplemented with
blueberry (2.5 and 5%, w/w) 2 weeks prior to 17-estradiol implantation.
To test for the therapeutic activity, when 5% of the animals in the
control group developed palpable tumors, one half of the animals were
provided diet supplemented with 5% blueberry while the other half were
continued on control diet. Animals received diet and water ad libitum and
palpated weekly to determine the effect of berry intervention on tumor
latency and tumor growth. When the tumor incidence reached >90% in
estrogen-treated group on control diet, all the animals were euthanized.
Our data revealed i) the first tumor in control group appeared after 85
days, while this was delayed by 28 and 37 days in groups receiving 5%
blueberry in chemopreventive and therapeutic mode, respectively. The
effect was less pronounced (delay by 7 days) with 2.5% berry; ii) the
tumor incidence was also decreased dose dependently (96% in control
versus 85% and 61% with 2.5% and 5% blueberry in chemopreventive mode,
55% with 5% blueberry in therapeutic mode); iii) a 25% and 51% reduction
in tumor multiplicity with 2.5% and 5% blueberry, respectively (57%
reduction with 5% blueberry in therapeutic mode); and iv) 37% and 45%
reduction in tumor volume with 5% blueberry in chemopreventive and
therapeutic modes, respectively; the effect with 2.5% blueberry was only
modest. These data suggest that the test blueberry is effective in
inhibiting estrogen-mediated mammary tumorigenesis in both
chemopreventive and therapeutic modes. In view of our recent findings of
miRNA signature in estrogen-induced mammary tumors and its favorable
modulation by ellagic acid, we are analyzing modulation of miRNAs in the
current study and its correlation with the tumor inhibition. (Supported
by Highbush Blueberry Council, CA, Agnes Brown Duggan Fund and Helmsley
Foundation).

