Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthetic inhibitors of the cholesterol biosynthetic enzyme
oxidosqualene cyclase block proliferation and survival of breast cancer
cells.


Most human breast cancers are hormone responsive, depending on estrogens
and progestins for tumor cell proliferation. Initially,
hormone-responsive tumors respond to endocrine therapy, however, most
human breast tumors develop resistance to currently used endocrine
therapeutic protocols. It is therefore essential that we identify
additional molecular targets in the signaling pathways that lead to tumor
growth if we are to effectively treat and prevent cancers of the breast.
It is well-established that breast cancer cells have the capacity to
synthesize endogenous cholesterol, the precursor for steroid hormones.
Cholesterol biosynthesis by tumor cells therefore potentially contributes
towards anti-hormone resistance. Most commonly used cholesterol lowering
drugs inhibit HMG CoA-reductase, a key rate-limiting enzyme in the
cholesterol biosynthetic pathway; these inhibitors are however associated
with certain undesirable side effects that limit their use for cancer
therapy. Our goal was to identify alternative targets in the pathway
leading to the production of cholesterol, which might be regulated with
less toxic inhibitors to control the progression of breast disease.
Inhibitors of oxidosqualene cyclase (OSC), an enzyme down-stream of HMG
CoA-reductase, effectively arrested breast cancer cell proliferation.
RO0488071 [4-[6-(Allylmethylamino)hexyloxy]-4-bromo-2-fluorobenzophenone
fumarate]) (RO), and an analogue RO0613479, were particularly effective
in this regard. Administration of both of these OSC inhibitors to ER
positive human breast cancer cells (e.g. BT-474, T47-D, MCF-7) at a
pharmacological dose or at a dose close to the IC50 value for OSC (nM
range) reduced tumor cell viability in vitro. Administration of RO to
animals with human breast cancer cell-derived xenografts prevented
further in vivo progression of the disease, with no apparent toxicity.
Since BT-474 cells are also tamoxifen resistant and rich in Her2/neu, RO
appears to be effective in vivo against even the most aggressive
anti-hormone resistant tumors. Importantly, RO had no effect on the
viability of normal human mammary cells. Our study shows for the first
time that inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis using OSC inhibitors is
a novel and potent means by which to destroy human breast cancer cells,
though further studies are necessary to determine the mechanism of RO
mediated loss of breast cancer cell viability. Supported by a Dept of
Defense Breast Cancer Pgm grant W81XWH-12-1-0191, NIH grant R21 GM088517,
and by a COR grant from the University of Missouri, Columbia.

