Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New approaches to changing an enzyme into a cytotoxic agent: A
novel way to stimulate DNA cleavage by topoisomerase II.


Topoisomerase poisons are important anti-cancer drugs, and include agents
such as etoposide and doxorubicin that target eukaryotic topoisomerase
II. Most topoisomerase II poisons act as interstitial inhibitors. This
mode of inhibition depends on the coordination of the enzyme and DNA
substrate to form a drug binding site. While recent structural studies
have localized topoisomerase II poisons to the drug/DNA interface, our
understanding of the mechanism of enzyme inhibition remains incomplete.
We have combined genetic, biochemical, and structural approaches to
identify regions of topoisomerase II that are important for drug action
and identified sites near the active site tyrosine that contribute to
drug sensitivity. Interestingly, we also identified amino acids near the
C-terminal dimerization domain that also control DNA cleavage. Mutations
in the C-terminal dimerization domain exhibit several unique
characteristics. Importantly, we identified two mutants in the
dimerization domain of yeast Top2 that could not be viably expressed in
yeast mutants defective in double strand break repair. Expression of
these mutants in repair proficient strains led to elevated rates of
homologous recombination, suggesting that these mutant proteins are able
to generate DNA damage even in the absence of topoisomerase II targeting
agents. We purified the mutant proteins and demonstrated that they
possess elevated levels of drug independent DNA cleavage, compared to
wild type proteins. Elevated cleavage was only seen in the presence of
ATP, indicating that the mutant proteins are likely defective in DNA
religation at a specific step in the catalytic cycle, and that the
C-terminal dimerization and DNA religation occurs by a coordinated
process. Finally, we have also shown that homologous mutations in human
topoisomerase II alpha generate effects similar to those described for
the yeast protein. Taken together, these results suggest that it may be
possible to identify potent allosteric inhibitors of topoisomerase II
directed against the C-terminal catalytic domain of the protein. These
hypothetical inhibitors may have unique therapeutic potential, especially
because they represent an approach for isoform specific topoisomerase
poisons.

