Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of transgenic medaka as a stable tumor model for in
vivo screening of anticancer drugs.


The development of anticancer drugs would be facilitated by the
availability of an in vivo screening system based on a multicellular
organism. We intended to construct an animal model which can be stable
and easily detected tumors without autopsy for chemical screening and
assessment. In this study, the medaka which is a small egg-laying
freshwater fish native to East Asia was applied.The medaka has proved
suitable for toxicology and carcinogenesis in the past studies.
Furthermore most of molecular technology is available to the medaka and
the size of the medaka genome (800 Mb) is about half that of the
zebrafish genome. To construct a tumor model using transgenic medaka
fish, a promoter sequence suitable for the tissue specific tumorigenesis
was selected. There are some genes having specific expression in
melanocyte. Melanocyte specific expression of oncogenes may induce
progression to melanoma. Therefore we selected a promoter sequence
encoding Tyrosinase, one of the melanocyte specific genes.The recombinant
plasmids for microinjection are consisting of the medaka tyrosinase
promoter and human oncogenes (cMyc, BRAF mutant V600E and HRAS mutant
G12V). One cell stage embryos were applied for microinjection. We
obtained three stable transgenic individuals derived from one cMyc and
two BRAF mutant (BRAF600E) injected F0, but none from HRAS mutant
(HRAS12V). The transgenic (Tg)-cMyc and the Tg-BRAF600E produced tumor in
internal organs with more than 50 % of all fish, but in eyes or skins
(outer detectable organs) with less than 10 %. The Tg-HRAS12V animals
died before achieving adulthood. We therefore developed a conditional
gene expression system in which HRAS12V is expressed in response to the
induction of Cre recombinase by heat treatment, given that the Cre gene
was placed under the control of a medaka heat shock promoter.One of the
stable transgenic lines developed abnormal pigment cell proliferation in
the eyes and epidermis with 100% penetrance by 6 months
postfertilization. Sorafenib, an inhibitor of RAS signaling, was
administered to the transgenic fish and was found both to reduce the
extent of melanophore proliferation and to improve survival. This
Tg-HRAS12V medaka established here thus represents a promising in vivo
system with which to screen potential anticancer drugs that target RAS
signaling, and this system can readily be adapted for the screening of
agents that target other oncogenes.

