Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of leptin-induced Notch-Wnt crosstalk in
proliferation/survival of triple negative breast cancer cells.


Obese African American and Latina women show the high mortality rate
linked to triple negative breast cancer, TNBC. The disease is commonly
detected at more advance degree and associated with resistance to common
therapeutic treatments. Obesity, characterized by high levels of leptin,
has consistently been associated with many different cancers including
breast cancer. We hypothesize that leptin signaling is instrumental in
the increased proliferation and survival of breast cancer cells, which is
mediated through a crosstalk between the Notch and Wnt signaling
pathways. We further hypothesized that these leptin actions are more
evident in TNBC cells. Objective/Methods: The effects of leptin-Notch-Wnt
crosstalk on the proliferation and survival (MTT-Vybrant assay and
Annexin V-flow cytometry) of breast cancer cells responsive to estrogen
(MCF-7 and T47D) and TNBC (MDA-MB231 and HC1806) were investigated. The
cells were treated with agonists and inhibitors of leptin-Notch-Wnt axis
[i.e., leptin, Wnt1, JAG1/14-mer peptide and leptin peptide receptor
antagonist 2 (LPrA2), g-secretase inhibitor and Wif]. The expression of
Notch and Wnt signaling components (ligands/receptors) and levels of
cyclin D1 and myc were also determined via western blot and real-time
RT-PCR. In a series of experiments the cells were treated with
chemotherapeutic drugs, doxorubicin and cisplatin plus leptin and the
activation of caspase 3, levels of Bcl-2 and, the drug resistance marker
(multidrug resistance-associated protein 1, ABCC1/MRP1) were determined
using as control the etoposide resistant MCF-7/VP cell line. The relative
expression of leptin, Notch and Wnt systems in breast cancer tissue
arrays (n=150; Pantomics) was also investigated. Results: Leptin induced
significant increase of TNBC cell proliferation, cyclin D1, bcl-2, ABCC1
and Notch/Wnt axis. Leptin also decreased the anti-cancer effects of
doxorubicin and cisplatin, which were related to leptin upregulation on
Notch-Wnt crosstalk. HScore analyses of breast cancer tissue arrays
showed significant correlation of the expression of leptin-targeted
proteins (Notch and Wnt) in breast cancer tissues. These results suggest
that leptin can induce the crosstalk between Notch and Wnt and breast
cancer progression. Conclusions: Targeting leptin-Notch-Wnt signaling
axis could be a new strategy to treat and/or prevent breast cancer. The
inhibition of leptin signaling could be a promising new way to target the
most deadly TBNC, especially in obese patients. Acknowledgments: This
work was supported by NIH/NCI 5SC1CA138658-04, Georgia Cancer Coalition
Distinguished Cancer Scholar Award (to RRGP), NIH/2G12RR003034-26 and U54
MSM/TU/UAB Cancer Center Partnership, and NIH/NIGMS R25 GM058268. This
research was also supported, in part, facilities and support services at
Morehouse School of Medicine (NIH 1C06 RR18386).

