Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF-b regulates Par-4 expression through XIAP in ovarian and
endometrial cancers.


The lethality of gynecological malignancies can be explained by their
propensity to develop chemioresistance and metastases. The loss of
apoptotic pathways is one of the major underlying mechanisms by which
tumors become resistant to treatments. This loss can be explained by the
silencing of pro-apoptotic proteins that would normally contrive the cell
into suicide. Par-4 is a tumor suppresor protein that is widely expressed
but only functionally silenced in most endometrial cancer. This protein
presents the unique ability to induce apoptosis selectively in cancer
cells. We have recently demonstrated that Par-4 is a substrate of
caspase-3 and the resulting cleaved fragment retains its
apoptotic-inducing capabilities. We have also evidenced that TGF-, a
known instigator of EMT, regulates the invasiveness of endometrial cancer
cells and Par-4 expression. TGF- has also been shown to increase the
expression of XIAP, an important promoter of cell survival and
invasiveness in endometrial cancer. In this study, we have investigated
the effect of TGF- and XIAP on Par-4 expression in ovarian and
endometrial cancer.We have performed rescue experiment in which MEFs
cells from XIAP KO mice were cultured and transfected with either an
empty plasmid, a wild-type XIAP plasmid or a XIAP mutated RING domain
plasmid. We have then submitted these cells to cisplatin treatment. In
the empty vector transfectants, we have found that the absence of XIAP
results in Par-4 cleavage, increased cleaved caspase-3 and cleaved PARP.
The rescue of XIAP inhibited the apoptotic machinery and Par-4 cleavage
thus resulting in increased chemoresistance. This effect was reversed
using the mutated XIAP plasmid. We have also treated endometrial cancer
cells (HeLa, KLE) with TGF-3 and observed an higher expression of EMT
markers such as Snail, Vimentin and N-Cadherin; Par-4 was also
upregulated by TGF-3. Finally, we have overexpressed ovarian A2780 cancer
cells with Par-4 plasmid, which resulted in the upregulation of Snail and
Vimentin. We confirmed these results using Par-4 siRNA and found that
Snail and Vimentin expression were reduced.Altogether, results of the
present study shed new light in the underlying mechanisms of Par-4
regulation and apoptosis induction. The assembled data also suggests that
TGF- plays a cardinal role in the regulation of Par-4 expression, which
regulates EMT in gynecological cancers.

