Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benign disease prevalence after surgical lung resection varies
geographically in the US Medicare population, implications for lung
cancer screening.


Purpose: The National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) demonstrated that
screening computed tomography (CT) reduces mortality caused by lung
cancer and clinical societies and patient advocacy groups have
recommended screening high risk individuals. Screening CT scan of the
chest reduced lung cancer mortality in this trial but 96% of anomalies
were false positives, 24% of lung surgeries resulted in a benign
diagnosis. The overall mortality rate from procedures was 1.2% in the
trail. The benign disease prevalence after surgical biopsy is not known
at the state level and if these prevalences differ across the United
States, then a nationwide screening regimen may have geographically
varying success. The purpose of this study is to determine the benign
disease point prevalence after surgical lung resection at the state level
using a national dataset.Methods: We examined the point prevalence of
benign disease after lung surgery in a retrospective cohort being
evaluated for known or suspected lung cancer. The MEDPAR Hospital
National Limited Data Set from 2009 was used to identify patients who had
undergone lung surgery by ICD-9CM codes. Patients less than 19 years old
or who had diseases not arising from a lung lesion were excluded.
Malignancy and benign disease were determined by ICD-9CM codes. The
benign diagnosis prevalence was estimated at the state level by dividing
the total number of benign cases by the sum of the benign cases and
malignant cases. Benign disease point prevalence was compared between
states using Pearson chi-square test.Results: There were 25,362 patients
who had a lung operation for known or suspected lung cancer. Among these,
2,312 (9.1%) had a benign diagnosis. Benign diagnosis was more frequent
among women (9.8%) than men (8.5%) after surgery. Crude in hospital
mortality rate for all patients was 2.3%. The mortality rate for patients
with benign disease was 2.1%. Prevalence of benign disease varied
significantly (chi-sq pPurpose: The National Lung Screening Trial (NLST)
demonstrated that screening computed tomography (CT) reduces mortality
caused by lung cancer and clinical societies and patient advocacy groups
have recommended screening high risk individuals. Screening CT scan of
the chest reduced lung cancer mortality in this trial but 96% of
anomalies were false positives, 24% of lung surgeries resulted in a
benign diagnosis. The overall mortality rate from procedures was 1.2% in
the trail. The benign disease prevalence after surgical biopsy is not
known at the state level and if these prevalences differ across the
United States, then a nationwide screening regimen may have
geographically varying success. The purpose of this study is to determine
the benign disease point prevalence after surgical lung resection at the
state level using a national dataset.Methods: We examined the point
prevalence of benign disease after lung surgery in a retrospective cohort
being evaluated for known or suspected lung cancer. The MEDPAR Hospital
National Limited Data Set from 2009 was used to identify patients who had
undergone lung surgery by ICD-9CM codes. Patients less than 19 years old
or who had diseases not arising from a lung lesion were excluded.
Malignancy and benign disease were determined by ICD-9CM codes. The
benign diagnosis prevalence was estimated at the state level by dividing
the total number of benign cases by the sum of the benign cases and
malignant cases. Benign disease point prevalence was compared between
states using Pearson chi-square test.Results: There were 25,362 patients
who had a lung operation for known or suspected lung cancer. Among these,
2,312 (9.1%) had a benign diagnosis. Benign diagnosis was more frequent
among women (9.8%) than men (8.5%) after surgery. Crude in hospital
mortality rate for all patients was 2.3%. The mortality rate for patients
with benign disease was 2.1%. Prevalence of benign disease varied
significantly (chi-sq p<0.001) across states from a low of 1.3% in
Vermont to a high of 25.0% in Hawaii. Median benign disease by state was
8.8% (IQR: 7.8 - 10.9).Conclusion: Benign disease prevalence after lung
surgery varies widely by state and resulted in a mortality rate of 2.1
percent. Cause of observed differences is not known but may be due to
practice variation or locally endemic lung diseases and should be
investigated to determine the impact to a national lung cancer screening
program.

