Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The RNA-binding protein Musashi-1 stabilizes TAC1 mRNA in breast
cancer cells.


Breast cancer (BC) remains a major public health challenge in the United
States. Prognosis for metastatic cancer is poor with nearly all deaths
from BC due to metastatic disease. Upon discovery in bone, the five year
survival rate of BC patients is approximately eight percent. The
tachykinin gene, TAC1, has been implicated in facilitating metastasis of
BC to the bone marrow. The predominant product of TAC1 is the
neuropeptide, substance P (SP). We have previously demonstrated that in
non-malignant cells, TAC1 translation is suppressed by miRNAs.
Stimulation with specific cytokines decreased these miRNA to allow
synthesis of SP. BC cells (BCCs) lack endogenous expression of the
TAC1-specific miRNA, which is consistent with the increased levels of SP
in these cells. Herein the present study investigated the translational
control of TAC1 mRNA in BCCs. Cytoplasmic extracts from BCCs showed an
increase in TAC1 translation and stabilization of its mRNA. These
findings led us to bioinformatic analyses of the secondary structure of
TAC1 mRNA, which predicted candidate interacting sites in Exons 3 and 7.
These predictions were further refined by results from an RNA shift assay
that indicated an RNA-binding protein specifically targeting Exon 7.
Through western blots and proteomic analysis we identified the
RNA-binding protein, Musashi-1 (Msi1), as a putative candidate. Identity
was confirmed by RNA supershift assay utilizing an antibody specific for
Msi1. Gain-of-function and reporter gene assays utilizing the Msi1
expression vector co-transfected with a luciferase reporter gene linked
to the 3UTR of TAC1, including Exon 7, confirmed a stabilizing role for
Msi1 in TAC1 mRNA regulation, concomitant with an increase in substance
P. In summary, we identified Msi1 as a novel binding protein for the
oncogenic TAC1 mRNA. These findings have implications for the
identification of novel targets to treat BC.

