Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MMSET: Can we flip the switch.


Epigenetic regulation of gene expression involves covalent modifications
of histones and DNA in a way that does not alter the underlying DNA
sequence. Recently, misregulation of epigenetic mechanisms has been
linked to a number of diseases, including cancer. These data signify the
importance of understanding normal and aberrant epigenetic regulation and
for development of tools that allow us to modulate various aspects of
epigenetic machinery. One approach to do this is by targeting epigenetic
enzymes with small molecule inhibitors. MMSET (Multiple Myeloma SET
domain), is a histone methyltransferase overexpressed in many cancers,
including a subset of multiple myelomas (MM) harboring the t(4;14)
translocation. Overexpression of MMSET leads to a global increase in
dimethylation of lysine 36 on histone H3 (H3K36me2). The ability of MMSET
to methylate H3 depends on a functional SET (Suppressor of variegation,
Enhancer of zeste and Trithorax) domain, found in most histone
methyltransferases. Methylation of H3K36 by MMSET affects overall
chromatin structure thereby affecting the expression of many genes,
including genes that play a role in cellular proliferation and adhesion.
Conversely, the loss of MMSET in t(4;14)+ cells suppresses cell growth
and induces apoptosis thus supporting the idea that inhibition of MMSET
activity is a viable approach to treatment of this particular type of
myeloma. Currently there are not any known inhibitors of MMSET. Using the
previously identified structure of the SET domain of NSD1, an MMSET
homologue, we performed an in silico screen against a library of
compounds to identify those that may fit in the substrate binding pocket
of MMSET. We tested the in silico hits in a high throughput screen (HTS)
that combines Self-Assembled Monolayers and matrix-assisted laser
Desorption Ionization time-of-flight (SAMDI). This method allows us to
test the ability of the compounds to inhibit MMSET's methylation activity
in a label-free format. From this screen two potential hits have been
identified. These compounds have IC50 values in the micromolar range and
Differential Scanning Fluorimetry (DSF) confirmed the binding of the
small molecule to MMSET. Future in vivo work will determine the potency
and selectivity of these compounds towards MMSET. Identifying an
effective inhibitor of MMSET could make way for new potential
therapeutics in the treatment of t(4;14)+ multiple myeloma, as well as
other cancers that overexpress this protein, and could also prove to be
highly useful in our efforts to understand the various mechanisms of
epigenetic regulation.

