Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kinase library siRNA screen identifies KSR1 as a synergistic
therapeutic target in combination with TIC10.


Apo2L/TRAIL is an endogenous antitumor protein that possesses
efficacy-limiting properties such as short serum half-life, stability,
cost, and limitations in delivery when used as a recombinant protein
therapeutic. TIC10 is a first-in-class small molecule inducer of the
human TRAIL gene that improves these unfavorable drug properties to
ultimately increase the efficacy and utility of TRAIL. TIC10 upregulates
TRAIL gene transcription by activating the pro-apoptotic transcription
factor Foxo3a, which is achieved through dual inhibition of Akt and
MEK/ERK. We conducted a siRNA screen using a kinase library to identify
kinases that affect TIC10 response in cancer cells assayed by cell
viability assays to gain mechanistic insight into the molecular
mechanisms of TIC10 and potentially identify a combinatorial target to
improve the activity of TIC10. Execution and validation of the siRNA
screen revealed 4 kinases (DGKD, SGKL, STK23, KSR) that improved the
therapeutic response to TIC10 upon siRNA-mediated knockdown at 36 hours,
but not 12 hours, post-treatment in HCT116 human colon cancer cells. We
next assayed the effect of knocking down these 4 kinases on cancer cell
cytotoxic response to recombinant human TRAIL. These studies revealed no
effect with kinase knockdowns, suggesting that the mechanisms of
sensitization lie upstream of TIC10-mediated TRAIL production. Network
analysis of the hit kinases and the previously described mechanism of
TIC10 revealed rational overlap of signaling pathways and kinetics. Among
the 4 identified kinases, KSR1 possessed the most direct connection to
the putative mechanism of TIC10 that involves the dual inhibition of Akt
and the MAPK pathway. KSR1 is a MAPK scaffold protein that positively
regulates the MAPK signaling pathway. Based on these observations, we are
testing the hypothesis that inhibiting KSR1 in combination with TIC10
cooperatively inhibits MAPK signaling to increase TRAIL production.
Together, these results suggest that KSR1 is a key player in the
cytotoxic response to TIC10 and that combining TIC10 and an inhibitor of
KSR1 may result in improved therapeutic response.

