Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CUDC-101, a hybrid molecular targeted agent, reverses multiple
mechanisms of drug resistance.


CUDC-101, a hybrid molecular targeted agent, reverses multiple mechanisms
of drug resistanceCUDC-101 is a potent molecular targeted anticancer
agent, rationally designed to simultaneously inhibit HDAC, EGFR and HER2.
It exhibits potent antiproliferative and proapoptotic activities in both
in vitro and in vivo assays and it is currently in Phase 1b clinical
trial.Multidrug resistance (MDR) is a major unresolved obstacle to
successful cancer chemotherapy. It is often associated with increased ABC
transporters-mediated efflux of substrate anticancer drugs out of the
cell. Platinum (Pt)-based anticancer drugs, exemplified by cisplatin and
oxaliplatin, are the mainstay of treatment for most solid cancers.
However, resistance to Pt anticancer drugs develops rapidly upon their
administration, which can be caused by overexpression of MDR transporters
and activated DNA repair mechanisms.We investigated the potentiation
effect of CUDC-101 on the anticancer activity of conventional cytotoxic
drugs in MDR cells with overexpression of various ABC transporters and in
Pt-resistant cancer cells. CUDC-101 was found to increase the
cytotoxicity and accumulation of substrate anticancer drugs in MPR-1
(doxorubicin) and MRP-2 (methotrexate) overexpressing cells, while no
effect was observed in the parental sensitive cells. Mechanistically,
CUDC-101 was found to inhibit MRP-1 and MRP-2 efflux function, probably
by acting as an uncompetitive inhibitor and interfering with their ATPase
activity. In Pt-resistant cancer cells, CUDC-101 appears to circumvent
the resistance through inhibition of both MRP-2 and other DNA
repair-mediated mechanisms. The combinations of CUDC-101 with cisplatin
or oxaliplatin were found to display synergistic cytotoxic effect in
cisplatin- or oxaliplatin-resistant cancer cell lines, respectively. Upon
the concomitant administration of CUDC-101, cellular accumulation of Pt
drugs and formation of DNA-Pt adducts were found to be increased whereas
expression levels of DNA repair genes (e.g. ERCC1) was inhibited in
Pt-resistant cells. The data advocates further development of CUDC-101 as
a novel MDR reversal agent for use in combination cancer chemotherapeutic
regimens.

