Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic characterization of an extensive panel of patient-derived
xenograft tumor models of hepatocellular carcinoma for preclinical
development.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the sixth most common cancer worldwide
and the third leading cause of cancer-related deaths. Half of the total
HCC-related deaths and new cases occurred in China. Different from many
cancers, HCC is intrinsically resistant to conventional chemotherapies,
and many attempts to develop new systemic agents for HCC have failed in
clinic. Lack of clinically relevant and genetically well-defined
preclinical models critically accounts for the failures. In this study,
we established an extensive panel of Chinese HCC patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) models by directly transplanting surgically resected
patient tumor tissues in BALB/c nude or SCID mice. Implantation of 254
patient samples resulted in 70 transplantable PDX models (27.6%) covering
stage I, II, III, and IV tumors. Xenograft tissues could be serially
passaged, cryopreserved, and revived with a success rate of over 94%.
Early passages between p2-p4 of PDX tissues were used in the histological
and molecular characterization. The histology of PDX tissues
recapitulated the features of the original samples and maintained the
heterogeneity of human tumors. Unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis
of gene expression profiles in 7 paired samples assessed by GeneChip
PrimeView Human Gene Expression Array revealed that PDX tumor tissues
retained the global gene-expression patterns of patient samples. Using
next-generation sequencing we performed exome sequencing of 43 of PDX
models. Contaminated murine DNA reads were removed by a proprietary
algorithm to eliminate homology bias. A wide variety of SNPs were
identified and some may represent driver mutations, such as ones on JAK1
and JAK2 genes. Copy number variation analysis by Genome-Wide Human SNP
Array 6.0 in 24 PDX models elucidated amplifications of a number of
genes, including MET, AKT2, AKT3, mTOR, ALDH1A1, ALDH1A2, JUN and NOV. In
vivo efficacy studies exhibited differential responses to
standard-of-care compounds in the models. Collectively, with the current
intense interest in development of targeted therapies, the use of patient
liver cancer tissue-derived models with well genomic characterization
provides an excellent, and perhaps more relevant, platform for
preclinical studies of experimental therapeutics, and for biomarker
discovery and translational research.

