Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of autophagy in melanoma: using cell lines to model
chloroquine sensitivity.


Metastatic melanoma offers an ongoing clinical challenge. According to
the American Cancer Society, the 5-year survival rate in 2012 for stage
IV melanoma is only about 15% even with therapies. To improve outcomes,
it is important to investigate new pathways involved in the regulation of
metastasis as possible targets for prevention or treatment, such as
autophagy. Autophagy (self-eating pathway) destroys a cell's damaged
proteins and organelles through lysosomal degradation and has been shown
to play roles in a wide variety of normal physiological processes
including energy metabolism, nutrient or stress responses, growth
regulation, and aging. The role of dysregulated autophagy in melanoma has
not been well characterized. Preliminary research found cutaneous
malignant melanoma cells display high levels of autophagy suggesting that
this cellular process may provide an active metabolic state for invasive
and metastatic melanoma. Chloroquine (CLQ), a classic antimalarial agent,
is a potent inhibitor of autophagy and has been used safely in human
patients for decades. This study is designed to dissect the role of
autophagy in melanoma using melanoma cell lines (e.g. SK-Mel 19, 103, and
147), and primary melanocytes as controls to determine whether these cell
types respond to CLQ as measured by cell viability . Similar to
pancreatic and prostate cancer cell lines, our preliminary results
indicate that metastatic melanoma cells require autophagy for growth and
show high sensitivity to CLQ at doses as low as 20uM which resulted in
greater than 60% decreases in cell viability. These findings suggest that
metastatic melanoma cell lines rely on lysosomal degradation to a greater
extent than what has been reported for other cell types. In addition,
both N-ras mutation and androgen deprivation mitigate the effects of CLQ
on melanoma cells. Ongoing experiments will confirm the expression of
autophagy related genes, as well as imaging to determine the rate of
autophagy in these cell lines. Finally, we will introduce stripped
hormonal factors including vitamin D and estrogen, to evaluate whether
this addition will progressively restore the original chloroquine
sensitive phenotype. Findings from this work have the potential to be
immediately translatable to patients as CLQ is already approved for
therapeutic use in other human diseases.

