Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The interaction of RUNX1 with CBF-SMMHC during leukemogenesis.


Chromosome 16 inversion is associated with acute myeloid leukemia subtype
M4Eo and produces a fusion gene CBFB-MYH11 that contains part of the core
binding factor (CBF) gene CBFB, and part of the smooth muscle myosin
heavy chain (SMMHC) gene MYH11. This fusion gene encodes a fusion protein
CBF-SMMHC, which is oncogenic and binds to the runt domain (RD) of RUNX1,
another member of the CBF transcription factor family, resulting in
repression of RUNX1 transactivation. We have generated mouse models by
conventional and conditional knock-in of the Cbfb-MYH11 fusion gene and
demonstrated that Cbfb-MYH11 represses Runx1 function in hematopoiesis
and predisposes mice to myeloid leukemia (Castilla et. al., Cell 1996;
Nat Genet, 1999).RUNX1 binding and repression was previously considered a
key step in leukemogenesis by CBF-SMMHC. In order to dissect the
molecular mechanism of RUNX1 and CBF-SMMHC interaction during
leukemogenesis, we generated a knock-in mouse model with deleted high
affinity binding site of Cbfb-MYH11. We found accelerated leukemia
development in these mice (Kamikubo et.al., Cancer cell, 2010) suggesting
that Cbfb-MYH11 play an independent role apart from Runx1 binding and
repression. To test if Runx1 is involved in the leukemia development and
progression, we crossed Cbfb-MYH11 knock-in mice with mice harboring one
of the two mutant alleles of Runx1 - Runx1+/- and Runx1+/Lzd. Runx1+/-
contains a null allele while Runx1+/Lzd contains a knocked-in fusion
between the RD of Runx1 and the LacZ gene, which is partially
dominant-negative in reporter assays. We have determined the rate and
percentage of leukemia development in these mice. We found that the
Cbfb-MYH11 mice that were Runx1+/- had a similar rate of leukemogenesis
when compared with Cbfb-MYH11 mice that were Runx1+/+. However, the
Cbfb-MYH11 mice that were Runx1+/Lzd had significantly delayed
leukemogenesis as compared to Cbfb-MYH11 mice that were Runx1+/+.
Moreover, some of the Cbfb-MYH11; Runx1+/Lzd mice did not develop
leukemia at the end of the one-year observation. We detected a decrease
of BrdU incorporation in the bone marrow cells in mice with the
Runx1+/Lzd allele, suggesting that the delayed leukemia development
resulted, at least in part, from decreased proliferation. These data
demonstrated that Runx1 is likely required for leukemogenesis by
CBF-SMMHC.

