Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidative stress and antioxidant status in high-risk prostate
cancer subjects.


Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer among men in the
United States. Epidemiological, experimental and clinical studies have
implicated chronic inflammation and oxidative stress in the development
and progression of prostate cancer. Diet, environmental carcinogens,
aging, and other inflammatory diseases cause aberration in reactive
oxygen species (ROS) which may play critical roles in the development and
progression of prostate cancer. Chronic inflammation results in lipid
peroxidation and generation of highly reactive products with the
potential to damage DNA. The extent of ROS-induced oxidative damage can
be determined by measuring reductions in levels of endogenous antioxidant
defense enzymes such as glutathione-s-transferase (GST), glutathione
peroxidase (GSH-Px), glutathione reductase (GSH-R), catalase (CAT),
superoxide dismutase (SOD) and non-protein thiols, which participate in
detoxification processes. The aim of this study was to assess the
oxidative status and antioxidant defense mechanisms in 20 men, 54-84
years of age, with increased risk of developing prostate cancer because
of the presence of high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN)
in their prostate biopsies, as compared to 20 healthy men in the same age
range whose prostate biopsies showed no evidence of HGPIN. Total
glutathione levels were measured in red blood cells, and plasma levels of
GSH-Px, GSH-R, CAT, SOD, and PSA were analyzed. Data obtained after
analysis was represented as mean, standard error and box plot. Serum PSA
levels were significantly (pProstate cancer is the most commonly
diagnosed cancer among men in the United States. Epidemiological,
experimental and clinical studies have implicated chronic inflammation
and oxidative stress in the development and progression of prostate
cancer. Diet, environmental carcinogens, aging, and other inflammatory
diseases cause aberration in reactive oxygen species (ROS) which may play
critical roles in the development and progression of prostate cancer.
Chronic inflammation results in lipid peroxidation and generation of
highly reactive products with the potential to damage DNA. The extent of
ROS-induced oxidative damage can be determined by measuring reductions in
levels of endogenous antioxidant defense enzymes such as
glutathione-s-transferase (GST), glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px),
glutathione reductase (GSH-R), catalase (CAT), superoxide dismutase (SOD)
and non-protein thiols, which participate in detoxification processes.
The aim of this study was to assess the oxidative status and antioxidant
defense mechanisms in 20 men, 54-84 years of age, with increased risk of
developing prostate cancer because of the presence of high-grade
prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) in their prostate biopsies,
as compared to 20 healthy men in the same age range whose prostate
biopsies showed no evidence of HGPIN. Total glutathione levels were
measured in red blood cells, and plasma levels of GSH-Px, GSH-R, CAT,
SOD, and PSA were analyzed. Data obtained after analysis was represented
as mean, standard error and box plot. Serum PSA levels were significantly
(p<0.0001) higher in men with HGPIN, whereas glutathione (P=0.002) levels
were higher in men without HGPIN. Levels of 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine
(8-OHdG), an oxidized nucleoside of DNA that is most often detected in
the DNA of white blood cells, were significantly (pProstate cancer is the
most commonly diagnosed cancer among men in the United States.
Epidemiological, experimental and clinical studies have implicated
chronic inflammation and oxidative stress in the development and
progression of prostate cancer. Diet, environmental carcinogens, aging,
and other inflammatory diseases cause aberration in reactive oxygen
species (ROS) which may play critical roles in the development and
progression of prostate cancer. Chronic inflammation results in lipid
peroxidation and generation of highly reactive products with the
potential to damage DNA. The extent of ROS-induced oxidative damage can
be determined by measuring reductions in levels of endogenous antioxidant
defense enzymes such as glutathione-s-transferase (GST), glutathione
peroxidase (GSH-Px), glutathione reductase (GSH-R), catalase (CAT),
superoxide dismutase (SOD) and non-protein thiols, which participate in
detoxification processes. The aim of this study was to assess the
oxidative status and antioxidant defense mechanisms in 20 men, 54-84
years of age, with increased risk of developing prostate cancer because
of the presence of high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN)
in their prostate biopsies, as compared to 20 healthy men in the same age
range whose prostate biopsies showed no evidence of HGPIN. Total
glutathione levels were measured in red blood cells, and plasma levels of
GSH-Px, GSH-R, CAT, SOD, and PSA were analyzed. Data obtained after
analysis was represented as mean, standard error and box plot. Serum PSA
levels were significantly (p<0.0001) higher in men with HGPIN, whereas
glutathione (P=0.002) levels were higher in men without HGPIN. Levels of
8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-OHdG), an oxidized nucleoside of DNA that is
most often detected in the DNA of white blood cells, were significantly
(p<0.00001) increased in men with HGPIN. There was no significant
difference in levels of GSH-R, GSH-Px, lipid peroxide products, CAT, and
SOD in men with or without HGPIN. A significant association in between
CAT and GSH-Px activity [r= -0.33 (P=0.04)]; PSA levels and 8-OHdG [r=
0.57 (P=0.002] and between glutathione and 8-OHdG [r= -0.39 (P=0.038]
were noted between men with HGPIN and healthy controls using Pearson
correlation coefficient. These findings indicate that oxidative stress
induces imbalances in oxidant/antioxidant status. Increased 8-OHdG levels
may lead to oxidative damage and may thereby play an important role in
the development of prostate cancer.

