Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting small domains of p53 to mitochondrial Bcl-XL for cancer
therapy.


The tumor suppressor p53 is involved in transcriptional induction or
repression of various genes resulting in cell cycle arrest, senescence,
DNA repair and apoptosis. While most of these functions can be linked to
its role as a transcription factor in the nucleus, p53 also triggers
apoptosis via the mitochondrial pathway. In response to cellular stress,
p53 translocates to the mitochondria and directly interacts with Bcl-2
protein family members including anti-apoptotic Bcl-XL and Bcl-2 and
pro-apoptotic Bak and Bax. Anti-apoptotic Bcl-XL forms inhibitory
complexes with pro-apoptotic Bak and Bax preventing their
homo-oligomerization. Upon translocation to the mitochondria p53 binds to
Bcl-XL, releases Bak and Bax from the inhibitory complex and enhances
their homo-oligomerization. Bak and Bax homo-tetramer formation disrupts
the mitochondrial outer membrane, releases anti-apoptotic factors such as
cytochrome c and triggers a rapid apoptotic response mediated by caspase
induction. There are conflicting reports suggesting that the MDM2 binding
domain (MBD), the proline-rich domain (PRD) and/or DNA binding domain
(DBD) of p53 are the domains for interacting to Bcl-XL. The purpose of
this work is to determine which subdomain of p53 binds optimally to
Bcl-XL while maintaining the full apoptotic activity of full length p53.
Different domains of p53 (MBD, PRD, DBD) were fused to the mitochondrial
targeting signal from Bcl-XL to ensure Bcl-XL specific targeting. The
designed constructs were tested for apoptotic activity (TUNEL, Annexin-V,
and 7-AAD) in 3 different breast cancer cell lines (T47D, MCF-7,
MDA-MB-231), in a cervical cancer cell line (HeLa), and in human leukemic
cells (K562). Our results indicate that DBD-XL (p53 DBD fused to the
Bcl-XL MTS) shows the same (in T47D and, K562 cells) or higher (in MCF-7,
MDA-MB-231, and HeLa cells) apoptotic activity compared to p53-XL.
Additionally, over-expression of Bcl-XL in T47D cells confirmed that DBD
directly binds and inhibits Bcl-XL. Further, binding affinity of designed
constructs to Bcl-XL will be explored via co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP)
and mammalian two-hybrid assay. Taken together, our data highlights that
DBD can be used instead of full length p53 for achieving apoptosis at the
mitochondria. The benefit of decreasing the overall size of p53 while
maintaining full apoptotic activity allows for better drug delivery
options. Furthermore, DBD-XL-mediated apoptosis of multiple cell lines
including such as breast cancer cells, cervical carcinoma cells, and
leukemia cells highlighting the role of p53 as the ultimate target for
cancer therapy.

