Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Melatonin inhibits aerobic glycolysis (Warburg effect) and fatty
acid metabolic signaling in human leiomyosarcoma.


In the United States alone this year approximately 3,500 people will be
diagnosed with leiomyosarcoma (LMS), a rare, malignant soft tissue cancer
derived from smooth muscle cells, and about 36% will perish from this
disease, despite the current medical interventions of surgery, radio- and
chemotherapy. Epidemiological studies have indicated that the risk of
many types of epithelial cancer including breast, prostate, colorectal,
and endometrial cancer is increased in night-shift workers. These
individuals experience circadian disruption in response to ocular
exposure to light at night, which suppresses the nocturnal circadian
production of melatonin by the pineal gland. In previous studies, we
demonstrated that human LMS perfused with rodent donor blood containing
physiological nocturnal levels of melatonin (1nM) showed a complete
inhibition of LA uptake, 13-HODE release, and marked reduction in tumor
cAMP levels and [3H]thymidine incorporation into tumor DNA. Here we
showed the in vivo effects of a physiological, nocturnal concentration of
melatonin on tumor proliferative activity mediated via aerobic glycolysis
(Warburg effect) and LA metabolic signaling in tissue-isolated LMS
xenografts perfused in situ in nude rats with human donor blood.
Following tumor implantation, LMS xenografts exhibited latency-to-onset
and growth rates that were 22 days and 0.21 0.04 g/day, respectively;
mean tumor weights were 5.1 0.2 g (n = 72). The tissue-isolated human LMS
xenografts in nude rats perfused in situ for 60 min with human donor
blood containing melatonin resulted in a significant reduction in tumor
aerobic glycolysis that included a 30-50% reduction in glucose uptake,
lactate release, O2 uptake and CO2 production. Additionally, melatonin
induced a complete inhibition of LA uptake, 13-HODE release, ERK 1/2,
Akt, GSK3 (Ser9), and NF-kB (p65) phosphorylation, as well as significant
reductions in tumor cAMP levels, DNA content and [3H]thymidine
incorporation into tumor DNA. Addition of the non-selective MT1/MT2
melatonin antagonist S20928 (1 M) completely reversed the inhibitory
effects of melatonin on aerobic glycolysis, LA metabolic signaling and
proliferative activity in LMS xenografts. Moreover, melatonin at
physiological concentrations (1 nM) induced a 30-50% inhibition in cell
proliferation in culture, and suppressed cell invasion by 30% in the
transwell assay. These results demonstrate that in human LMS nocturnal
melatonin levels directly and rapidly inhibit tumor growth activity and
invasion via suppression of the Warburg effect and LA metabolic and other
related signaling mechanisms. An understanding of this novel signaling
pathway for the control of aerobic glycolysis and LA metabolism in human
leiomyosarcoma could lead to new circadian-based approaches for cancer
therapy and/or prevention of rare but highly aggressive
mesenchymally-derived solid tumors.Citation Format: Lulu Mao, Robert T.
Dauchy, Erin M. Dauchy, Melissa A. Wren, Samantha D. Zeringue, Victoria
P. Belancio, David E. Blask, Steven M. Hill. Melatonin inhibits aerobic
glycolysis (Warburg effect) and fatty acid metabolic signaling in human
leiomyosarcoma. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting
of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 5423. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5423

