Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High rates of esthesioneuroblastoma in adenomatous polyposis coli
(apc) mutant zebrafish suggest a new modifier mutation altering tissue
specificity of Wnt/-catenin-dependent hyperproliferation.


The most common mutation in human colon cancer is inactivation of
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), a key inhibitor of the Wnt/-catenin
pathway. If left untreated, all humans carrying germline APC-inactivating
mutations will develop colon cancer by the age of forty. In addition,
truncation of APC is the primary contributor to sporadic colon cancer in
humans. In zebrafish, the same truncated mutation in apc also causes
digestive tract neoplasia. However, the incidence of tumors outside the
intestinal system in the apc mutant zebrafish has not been reported. To
determine if other tumors arise at high frequencies in the apc mutant, we
monitored several cohorts of zebrafish derived from apc(hu147/+)
incrosses on a weekly basis over a one-year period, covering the age of 6
to 18 months post-fertilization. Specimens displaying evidence of tumors
or general signs of declining health were euthanized, photographed,
tail-clipped for genotypic analysis, and then fixed and embedded in
paraffin for histological examination. Analysis of the data showed that
1.2% of the apc(hu147/+) zebrafish had abnormally distended abdomens
(possibly from intestinal neoplasia), and 1.8% of the mutants developed
olfactory neuroblastoma (esthesioneuroblastoma). We have yet to detect a
single wild-type fish with esthesioneuroblastoma in these cohorts.
Overall, the results indicate that our apc(hu147/+) zebrafish exhibit a
remarkably increased incidence of esthesioneuroblastoma compared to
wild-type fish or other tumor-prone mutants. Furthermore, relative to the
latter, our apc(hu147/+) zebrafish begin developing tumors of any type at
an earlier age. Histopathological examination showed these
esthesioneuroblastoma tumors to be highly invasive. No previous reports
indicate that ethesioneuroblastoma is a common tumor type in apc(hu147/+)
zebrafish. Therefore, we propose to have discovered a new modifier
mutation, which leads to hyperproliferation of olfactory neuroepithelium
in response to dysregulation of the Wnt/-catenin pathway. Identification
of this mutant gene is expected to shed light on interactions of
tissue-specific regulators with components of the Wnt/-catenin signaling
pathway to control rates of cell proliferation and differentiation.

