Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tunneling Nanotubes: a new approach to studying intercellular
communication in aggressive solid tumor malignancies.


Background: Intercellular communication is critical to malignant
progression, invasion, and recurrence, yet surprisingly little is known
about the mechanisms of cell-cell communication in the complex
heterogeneous tumor microenvironment. Tunneling nanotubes (TnTs) are
long, non-adherent, actin-based cellular extensions that act as short and
long-range conduits for transport of cellular cargo between connected
cells. We have studied these unique structures in mesothelioma and lung
cancer, and further confirmed that they can form and connect cells
derived from cell lines and also from primary human cells from cancers of
the breast, ovary, cervix, prostate, pancreas, bone (osteosarcoma), and
brain (glioblastoma), indicating that nanotubes are a potential mechanism
of cell communication across cancer types. We have previously
demonstrated that TnTs are present in tumor specimens resected from human
patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma and lung adenocarcinomas,
and that they can mediate transport of mitochondria, proteins, and Golgi
vesicles between connected cells. Time-lapse confocal microscopy
demonstrated that TnTs can form de novo between mesothelioma cells over
several hours. Exosomes - small membrane-derived nanovesicles measuring
30-100 nm in diameter - are also under extensive investigation as
critical signals for communication and cell growth in cancer. We
hypothesized that co-culturing exosomes with mesothelioma cells would
provide a chemotactic stimulus for TnT formation. Cholesterol
accumulation has been proposed to have a direct effect on TnTs;
cholesterol-based microdomains known as lipid rafts have been associated
with exosome signaling as well. In the current study, we also explored
lipid raft expression in the context of TnTs in mesothelioma. Results: We
examined whether addition of exogenous exosomes induced increased
formation of tunneling nanotubes. Mesothelioma cells co-cultured in vitro
with exogenous exosomes formed more TnTs than cells cultured without
exosomes by 48 hours. Average number of nanotubes was higher when
exosomes were co-cultured in acidic conditions as compared to non-acidic
culture conditions, but this was only statistically significant within
the first 24 hours. Electron microscopy revealed that exosomes were
located at the base of and co-localized with TnTs, as well as being
present in the extracellular environment. Mesothelioma cells connected
via nanotubes were enriched with lipid rafts. Conclusions: Our findings
implicate exosomes as potential chemotactic stimuli for tunneling
nanotube formation. Future studies will further examine the role of lipid
rafts in TnT formation and function.

