Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide integrative analysis for the determination of the
consequence of AT-rich interacting domain 2 (ARID2) depletion in
hepatocellular carcinoma.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of
cancer-related death worldwide. We previously reported the genomic
aberrations obtained by the whole genome sequencing of 27 HCCs derived
from Japanese patients (Nature Genetics 44, 760, 2012). The statistical
and functional analyses yielded frequently and recurrently mutated genes
involved in chromatin regulation, including ARID1A, ARID1B, ARID2, MLL
and MLL3. Among the chromatin regulators mutated in HCCs, we here focused
on ARID2, a component of Polybromo-associated BRG1-associated factor
(PBAF) complex, which is one of the SNI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex
involved in ligand-dependent transcriptional activation by nuclear
receptors. Most of the somatic mutations in ARID2 detected in HCCs by our
sequencing studies indicated its loss-of-function, suggesting their role
as a tumor-suppressor. Although its somatic mutation in HCC and other
types of cancer have been recently reported, its detailed function and
role in tumorigenesis is poorly understood. To determine its role in
hepatocarcionogenesis, we first analyzed their activity on cell growth
using HCC cell lines. Knockdown (KD) of ARID2 in ARID2-intact HCC cell
lines, JHH4 and JHH5, promoted cell growth, while overexpression of ARID2
in ARID2-null HuH28 suppressed cell growth compared with controls. These
findings are consistent with its role as a tumor-suppressor in HCC. We
also performed RNA-Seq using the ARID2-KD RNA samples from ARID2-intact
cell lines to predict its down-stream target genes, which might be
affected by ARID2 depletion in HCCs. Pathway analysis of genes up- or
down-regulated by ARID2-KD revealed that a large number of cancer-related
genes showed their expression changes. In addition, some cytokines and
kinases involved in carcinogenesis significantly appeared to be activated
on the basis of down-stream target gene expression profile. These results
indicate that somatic loss-of-function mutations in a component of
chromatin regulator such as ARID2 could lead the genome-wide gene
expression change appeared in HCCs.

