Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of WWOX induces ANGPTL4 and ROS production in breast cells.


Expression of the WW-domain containing oxidoreductase (WWOX) gene is lost
in many human malignancies including breast cancer. It has been suggested
that WWOX is potentially acting as a tumor suppressor in breast cancer.
In order to understand the effects of loss of WWOX expression we used an
shRNA-mediated approach to silence expression of this gene in normal
human breast cells (MCF10F). Microarray analysis identified 671 commonly
deregulated probes between two WWOX-silenced lines generated from shRNAs
targeting two independent regions of the WWOX transcript. We found that
genes involved in cell cycle/proliferation and DNA damage were
significantly enriched in the list of up-regulated genes while genes
involved in oxidation-reduction and wound healing were enriched in the
list of down-regulated genes. ANGPTL4 was found to be one of the most
significantly up-regulated genes in WWOX-silenced cells. ANGPTL4 is known
to be an important player in lipid metabolism and energy balance.
Importantly recent findings have demonstrated ANGPTL4 to also play key
roles in breast cancer progression and metastasis. We validated the
upregulation of ANGPTL4 observed in the microarray at the mRNA level by
qPCR and the protein level by ELISA. We also show that this upregulation
can be reversed by reestablishing WWOX expression in previously silenced
cells suggesting an inverse correlation between WWOX and
ANGPTL4.Supporting these findings, meta-analysis of data from three
independent breast cancer gene expression studies (n= 819 cases)
demonstrated a significant inverse correlation between WWOX and ANGPTL4
expression. WWOXlow/ANGPTL4high tumors were enriched in triple-negative
breast cancer and basal-like tumors.ANGPTL4 signaling is known to
upregulate production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in metastatic
breast cancer cells. Interestingly, we found that silencing WWOX in human
breast cells or MEFs results in a significant increase in NADPH
oxidase-dependent ROS production. Since ROS is a well-known inducer of
DNA damage we hypothesized that WWOX silenced cells could have higher
levels of DNA damage. In tune with this hypothesis, further analysis of
our gene expression data set revealed significant upregulation of
multiple genes involved in DNA repair including BRCA1, RAD51 and FANCA in
WWOX-silenced MCF10 cells. In additional studies, we determined that WWOX
KO MEFs display significantly higher levels of DNA double-strand breaks
when compared with WT counterparts as determined by colabeling with 53BP1
and phospho-H2AX antibodies.In summary, we show that loss of the putative
tumor suppressor WWOX results in increased levels of the breast
metastasis associated gene ANGPTL4 in breast cells and is associated with
increased levels of ROS.

