Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt1 gene expression alters heterogeneous population of prostate
cancer cells; decreased expression pattern observed in
CD133+/CD44+prostate cancer stem cells.


Tumor mass contains a complex and heterogeneous phenotypic population
including a rare group of cancer cells that are capable of serving
cancer- initiating cells or cancer stem cells (CSCs). Established cancer
cell lines contain CSCs, which can be propagated, to form in vitro 3D
tumor spheroids. Spheroids reflect differentiation properties of CSCs in
serum contained medium and more accurately reflect the complex in vitro
microenvironment than simple two-dimensional monolayer. Aberrant
activation of Wnt signaling is strongly implicated in the progression of
cancer and controls CSCs properties. In this study we hypothesize that
when cells maintained as spheroids the structure of CSCs could be show
differentiation between CSCs and non- CSCs counterpart. It is possible to
determine target molecules for CSCs eradication and specify a clue in
therapeutic strategies of cancer. With this aim, CD133+/CD44+
cancer-initiating cells were isolated from DU-145 human prostate cancer
cell line monolayer cultures and propagated as tumor spheroids and
compared with remained heterogeneous cancer cells bulk population. Wnt1,
Fzd1, Adar, Apc, Axin, Btrc, Frat1 gene expression analysis was applied
and protein expression levels of Wnt1, Fzd and Axin were shown by
immunohistochemistry. Results show that Wnt1 expression significantly
higher in non cancer stem cells compared to CSCs. Nevertheless Fzd1,
Adar, Apc, Axin, Btrc, Frat1 gene expressions were higher in CSCs group
than the other population. Increased Wnt1 immunoreactivity was
demonstrated in the non-cancer stem cells. It is possible to assume that
intracellular signaling of Wnt pathway and related molecules in the
nucleus and/or cytoplasm might play an important role independent of Wnt
ligand. This unexpected expression could be important for CSCs behavior
and targeting of this pathway could have therapeutic value in cancer.

