Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput qRT-PCR expression profiling of estrogen receptor
positive breast tumors.


The class I phosphatidylinositol 3 kinases (PI3K) play a major role in
proliferation and survival in a wide variety of human cancers, and
activation of the PI3K pathway is thought to be an important driver in
estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer. A key factor in
successful development of drugs targeting this pathway will be
development in appropriate molecular subsets. Important questions
relevant to PI3K inhibitor development in ER+ breast cancers are whether
these inhibitors will work equally well in luminal A compared to luminal
B tumors, and whether gene expression signatures of pathway activation
may have additional utility in patient stratification beyond PIK3CA
mutation status alone.The goal of this study was to develop a methodology
for high throughput profiling of ER+ breast cancers, in order to enable
molecular subtyping of patients enrolled in clinical studies. To
accomplish this, we developed an analysis platform to measure the
relative expression of 90 breast cancer and PI3K pathway specific genes
in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue. The content for this
panel consists of genes known to be important for epithelial-mesenchymal
biology, proliferation rate, and transcriptional output of the PI3K
pathway. The 96 assay panel (including 6 housekeeping genes) was
developed on the Fluidigm Biomark microfluidics platform and was
extensively validated using well-characterized breast cancer cell lines
and FFPE breast cancer samples of known subtypes based on
immunohistochemistry for HER2, ER, and PR. All assays showed high levels
of inter-and intra-chip reproducibility and were sensitive on standard
curves down to 3ng RNA input.Using this method we were able to separate
breast cancers into distinct molecular subtypes, as well as identify more
proliferative luminal B type tumors. In addition, PIK3CA mutation status,
a potential biomarker, was determined using a highly specific and
sensitive qRT-PCR mutation assay, in order to allow comparison with the
PI3K pathway activation signature. We extended these analyses to a small
cohort of patient samples consisting of matched primary and metastatic
tumor tissues, and report here the correlation of primary and matched
metastatic ER+ breast cancer FFPE tumor samples at both the gene
expression and mutational levels. We found that the majority of matched
pairs were concordant for both mutation status and gene expression,
though a subset did show differences. Future studies will examine the
prognostic significance and clinical relevance of this gene signature.

