Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Berg Interrogative Biology Informatics Suite: data driven
integration of multi-omic technologies using Bayesian AI.


The Berg Interrogative Biology Informatics Suite is an automated
data-processing instrument for generation of actionable hypotheses using
data generated exclusively via the Berg Interrogative Biology approach.
The Berg Interrogative Biology is a platform that systematically
interrogates the biological environment in proprietary in-vitro and
in-vivo biological model systems. The biologically relevant data output
include molecular data from multi-omics technologies such as proteomics,
lipidomics, metabolomics and genomics generated within the context of
Berg Interrogative Biology is subsequently processed by a set of
mathematical algorithms within Informatics Suite. The steps include
filtering of datasets with methods that allows for missing data without
compromising data quality, normalization of data using technology
specific methods, imputation of missing data by rigorous statistical
approaches, and generation of a molecular interactome model by
integrating data across experiments and technologies. Consequently, the
multi-omics data is subjected to analysis using a Bayesian Network
inference approach and a multi-omic cause-and-effect relationships are
inferred for each analyzed condition de novo. In addition to inferring
cross-molecular species interaction networks, in-silico perturbation
experiments may be performed to predict cascades of molecular and
phenotypic responses to a gene or protein knock-down or over-expression
model. Model response is analyzed by statistical techniques and submitted
to a Rich Internet Application (RIA) that allows a dynamic and
interactive meta-analysis of integrated molecular interaction networks.
The Informatics Suite pipeline was applied to multi-omic data set
generated via the use of the Berg Interrogative Biology process in an
in-vitro model of angiogenesis. Comprehensive implementation of the
platform technology with the informatics workflow not only identified new
and physiologically relevant molecular interactions, but also confirmed
previously known canonical interaction pathways described in the
literature. Thus, the Informatics Suite within the Berg Interrogative
Biology platform represents a novel computational component for
integrative analysis of multi-omics molecular data that is fast, accurate
and leads to a rank-ordered number of actionable hypotheses positioning
Berg Interrogative Biology as one of the most innovative and efficient
approaches in drug and biomarker discovery.

