Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Hippo pathway component LATS1 phosphorylates MYPT1 to
counteract PLK1 and regulate G2 DNA damage checkpoint.


Background: LATS1 participates in the Hippo pathway, which is best
characterized in Drosophila melanogaster. Hippo pathway regulates cell
proliferation and cell death to ensure appropriate organ size is
maintained. LATS1 knockout mice develop ovarian tumor and soft tissue
sarcoma, indicating that LATS1 functions as a tumor suppressor. Indeed,
LATS1 expression is reduced in breast cancers due to hypermethylation of
its promoter region, which is well correlated with poor prognosis of the
patients. However in budding yeast, Dbf2 kinase which is the yeast
counterpart of LATS1 phosphorylates and activates Cdc14 phosphatase to
faithfully execute mitotic exit. This signaling pathway is known as
mitotic exit network (MEN). Since there has been reported no phosphatase
substrate of LATS1, we pursued the novel target of LATS1 to elucidate the
significance of MEN in mammals and clarified a novel role of
LATS1.Methods: We screened LATS1 substrates using phosphopeptide
enrichment techniques coupled with high-accuracy mass spectrometry. We
verified that the identified peptides are substrates of LATS1 both in
vitro and in vivo. After determining the phosphorylation sites of the
novel substrate, we analyzed functional significance of this
phosphorylation-mediated signaling pathway.Results: Phosphoproteomic
screening identified myosin phosphatase-targeting subunit1 (MYPT1) as a
new substrate for LATS1. LATS1 directly and preferentially phosphorylated
serine 445 (S445) of MYPT1. An MYPT1 mutant (S445A) failed to
dephosphorylate threonine 210 of polo-like kinase1 (PLK1), thereby
activating PLK1. This suggests that LATS1 promotes MYPT1 to antagonize
PLK1 activity. Consistent with this, LATS1-depleted HeLa cells or
fibroblasts from LATS1 knock-out mice showed increased PLK1 activity. We
also found that DNA damage-induced LATS1 activation caused PLK1
suppression via the phosphorylation of MYPT1 S445. Furthermore, LATS1
knock-down caused impairment of G2 checkpoint arrest after DNA
damage.Conclusions: These results indicate that LATS1 phosphorylates a
phosphatase as does the yeast Dbf2 and demonstrate a novel link between
two mitotic kinases, LATS1 and PLK1. PLK1 is overexpressed in many
cancers and its expression levels often correlate with poor prognosis of
the patients. The oncogenic properties of PLK1, such as inducing genomic
instability by incomplete G2 checkpoint, would be enhanced under the
condition of reduced LATS1 expression. Thus, our data raise the
intriguing possibility that cancer patients with reduced LATS1 expression
in their tumors are potential candidates for treatment with PLK
inhibitors. Our data also suggests that mammalian MEN signaling pathway
plays an important role for the G2 DNA damage checkpoint response other
than mitotic exit.

