Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human antibodies specific for a novel isoform of the macrophage
migration inhibitory factor are potential therapeutics for prostate
cancer.


Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) was found to be upregulated
in many cancers and to act in para- and autocrine loops within the tumor
microenvironment. Thereby, MIF contributes to the modulation of cytokine
patterns and triggers anti-apoptotic and pro-proliferative cell signaling
events. MIF was also described as a pro-angiogenic factor promoting
neoangiogenesis and vascularization. In prostate cancer, MIF mRNA and
protein levels were shown to be increased and to contribute to tumor
development. We have discovered a novel, previously unrecognized
conformational isoform of MIF (designated active MIF) that is produced in
diseases and cannot be detected in healthy subjects. A set of phage
display derived human monoclonal anti-MIF antibodies neutralizing MIF
biological activity in vitro and in vivo specifically recognize active
MIF. In vitro, these antibodies elicited both, a growth inhibitory effect
and a pro-apoptotic response on PC3 and DU145 prostate cancer cells by
interfering with ERK1/2 and Akt/PKB signaling pathways and by promoting
activation of caspase-3. Furthermore, the antibodies inhibited tumor cell
invasion of PC3 cells in a transwell assay in a dose-dependent manner. In
vivo, treatment with human antibodies specific for active MIF
dose-dependently inhibited the growth of the human prostate cancer cell
line PC3 xenografted into MF1 nude mice. New ELISA methods have been
established to allow the detection of active MIF as well as non-active
MIF in plasma samples. In the plasma of PC3 xenografted nude mice, we
observed a reduction of active MIF upon antibody treatment. In addition
we were able to prove the occurrence of active MIF in the plasma of
prostate cancer patients (median 2445 pg/mL, p Macrophage migration
inhibitory factor (MIF) was found to be upregulated in many cancers and
to act in para- and autocrine loops within the tumor microenvironment.
Thereby, MIF contributes to the modulation of cytokine patterns and
triggers anti-apoptotic and pro-proliferative cell signaling events. MIF
was also described as a pro-angiogenic factor promoting neoangiogenesis
and vascularization. In prostate cancer, MIF mRNA and protein levels were
shown to be increased and to contribute to tumor development. We have
discovered a novel, previously unrecognized conformational isoform of MIF
(designated active MIF) that is produced in diseases and cannot be
detected in healthy subjects. A set of phage display derived human
monoclonal anti-MIF antibodies neutralizing MIF biological activity in
vitro and in vivo specifically recognize active MIF. In vitro, these
antibodies elicited both, a growth inhibitory effect and a pro-apoptotic
response on PC3 and DU145 prostate cancer cells by interfering with
ERK1/2 and Akt/PKB signaling pathways and by promoting activation of
caspase-3. Furthermore, the antibodies inhibited tumor cell invasion of
PC3 cells in a transwell assay in a dose-dependent manner. In vivo,
treatment with human antibodies specific for active MIF dose-dependently
inhibited the growth of the human prostate cancer cell line PC3
xenografted into MF1 nude mice. New ELISA methods have been established
to allow the detection of active MIF as well as non-active MIF in plasma
samples. In the plasma of PC3 xenografted nude mice, we observed a
reduction of active MIF upon antibody treatment. In addition we were able
to prove the occurrence of active MIF in the plasma of prostate cancer
patients (median 2445 pg/mL, p < 0.002 versus controls), whereas active
MIF was not detectable in plasma from healthy donors. These studies
demonstrate that active MIF represents a new target in prostate cancer,
as well as a promising marker for disease activity or disease
progression. The data further suggest that our fully human anti-MIF
antibodies have a good potential for clinical use in oncology.

