Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A tumor-suppressive role of the IL-21R/Jak/STAT3 pathway in the
germinal center B cell subtype of diffuse large B cell lymphomas.


Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common type of B cell
malignancy in the adult population. Based on their patterns of gene
expression, DLBCLs can be divided into two major subgroups: the germinal
center (GC) B cell like (GCB-DLBCL) and the activated B cell like
(ABC-DLBCL) cases. Current studies suggest that the cell-of-origin for
both subgroups is a normal GC B cell. The difference lies in the degree
of maturation. While the GCB variant corresponds to the GC centroblasts
that abundantly express BCL6 with no NF-kappaB activation, the ABC
variant phenotypically resembles activated GC centrocytes and plasma cell
precursors that have received activating signals (e.g. IL-21 and CD40L)
from follicular T helper (Tfh) cells and thus contain activated STAT3 and
NF-kappaB due to mutations in a high percentage of cases. Although it is
commonly accepted that pathogenesis of B cell lymphomas such as DLBCL is
intimately linked to impaired B cell differentiation, a direct
examination of this concept has not been made for GCB-DLBCL. In a
previous study, we showed that the IL-21R/Jak/Stat3 signaling pathway
plays a critical role in post-GC plasma cell differentiation, while
concurrent signals transduced through the CD40/NF-kappaB axis potentiate
the activity of Jak/Stat3 through two distinct mechanisms. In the current
study, we report that IL-21-triggered Stat3 activation is often defective
in GCB-DLBCL cell lines. Impaired STAT3 activation results in failure to
commit to the plasma cell fate as evidenced by lack of Blimp-1 induction.
The IL-21 insensitive cell lines either have very low levels of IL-21R or
lack the Jak3 protein. Aberrant expression of the components of the
IL-21R/Jak/STAT3 signaling pathway can also be detected in subsets of
primary GCB-DLBCL samples. Lentivirus mediated reconstitution of IL-21R
and Jak3 in the defective cell lines restored IL-21 responsiveness and
induced a delayed cell death phenotype, indicating that low level
expression of a single signaling molecule is responsible for the IL-21R
signaling defect in a given cell line. We have sequenced the coding
regions of the IL21R, Jak3 and STAT3 genes in 3 cell lines, but did not
find any mutations. Subsequent analyses showed that the IL-21R
abnormality is a transcriptional defect associated with Sp1 expression
changes, while silencing of the Jak3 gene is caused by promoter
methylation. Collectively, our results suggest that in GCB-DLBCL, the
IL-21R/Jak/STAT3 pathway plays a novel, tumor suppressive role, and its
epigenetic inactivation may promote lymphoma development by blocking
terminal B cell differentiation.

