Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serial treatment-transplant xenograft model of
Bevacizumab-resistance reveals temporal induction of markers associated
with disease progression.


INTRODUCTION: Acquired resistance threatens the potential of
anti-angiogenic therapy. Xenograft models of acquired anti-angiogenic
therapy resistance are lacking and often fail to reflect changes human
tumors acquire during prolonged serial treatment with anti-angiogenic
therapy because of the significantly shorter lifespan of tumor-bearing
mice. To create a xenograft model of bevacizumab-resistant GBM allowing
temporal definition of changes during resistance to VEGF blockade, we
created a model whereby serially passaged xenografts were continually
exposed to bevacizumab versus IgG control antibody over 5 generations in
vivo.METHODS: We treated 5 subcutaneous U87 glioma cell line-derived
xenografts with bevacizumab or IgG, explanted the least responsive
xenograft and reimplanted it subcutaneously, then repeated this pattern
of treatment followed by explantation and reimplantation of the least
responsive xenograft for 4 more generations, generating 5 generations of
U87-IgG and U87-BevR xenografts. Western blot assessed temporal
changes.RESULTS: Subcutaneous fifth generation U87-BevR were unresponsive
to bevacizumab versus IgG (P=0.8). Bevacizumab caused U87-IgG to regress
(PINTRODUCTION: Acquired resistance threatens the potential of
anti-angiogenic therapy. Xenograft models of acquired anti-angiogenic
therapy resistance are lacking and often fail to reflect changes human
tumors acquire during prolonged serial treatment with anti-angiogenic
therapy because of the significantly shorter lifespan of tumor-bearing
mice. To create a xenograft model of bevacizumab-resistant GBM allowing
temporal definition of changes during resistance to VEGF blockade, we
created a model whereby serially passaged xenografts were continually
exposed to bevacizumab versus IgG control antibody over 5 generations in
vivo.METHODS: We treated 5 subcutaneous U87 glioma cell line-derived
xenografts with bevacizumab or IgG, explanted the least responsive
xenograft and reimplanted it subcutaneously, then repeated this pattern
of treatment followed by explantation and reimplantation of the least
responsive xenograft for 4 more generations, generating 5 generations of
U87-IgG and U87-BevR xenografts. Western blot assessed temporal
changes.RESULTS: Subcutaneous fifth generation U87-BevR were unresponsive
to bevacizumab versus IgG (P=0.8). Bevacizumab caused U87-IgG to regress
(P<0.05) while U87BevR grew exponentially during bevacizumab treatment
(P=0.6). Intracranial U87-BevR xenografts were bevacizumab unresponsive
(P=0.1), while intracranial U87-IgG xenografts responded to bevacizumab
(P=0.006). Intracranial U87-BevR xenografts also exhibited further
discontinuous invasion, higher percent of invading tumor cells 10 m from
a vessel, and more invasive islands (PINTRODUCTION: Acquired resistance
threatens the potential of anti-angiogenic therapy. Xenograft models of
acquired anti-angiogenic therapy resistance are lacking and often fail to
reflect changes human tumors acquire during prolonged serial treatment
with anti-angiogenic therapy because of the significantly shorter
lifespan of tumor-bearing mice. To create a xenograft model of
bevacizumab-resistant GBM allowing temporal definition of changes during
resistance to VEGF blockade, we created a model whereby serially passaged
xenografts were continually exposed to bevacizumab versus IgG control
antibody over 5 generations in vivo.METHODS: We treated 5 subcutaneous
U87 glioma cell line-derived xenografts with bevacizumab or IgG,
explanted the least responsive xenograft and reimplanted it
subcutaneously, then repeated this pattern of treatment followed by
explantation and reimplantation of the least responsive xenograft for 4
more generations, generating 5 generations of U87-IgG and U87-BevR
xenografts. Western blot assessed temporal changes.RESULTS: Subcutaneous
fifth generation U87-BevR were unresponsive to bevacizumab versus IgG
(P=0.8). Bevacizumab caused U87-IgG to regress (P<0.05) while U87BevR
grew exponentially during bevacizumab treatment (P=0.6). Intracranial
U87-BevR xenografts were bevacizumab unresponsive (P=0.1), while
intracranial U87-IgG xenografts responded to bevacizumab (P=0.006).
Intracranial U87-BevR xenografts also exhibited further discontinuous
invasion, higher percent of invading tumor cells 10 m from a vessel, and
more invasive islands (P<0.05). U87-BevR xenografts expressed 9-fold more
c-Met protein than U87-IgG xenografts after one generation, an effect
sustained through all 5 generations. U87-BevR exhibited 6-fold more
phosphorylated c-Met, a change not occurring until the fifth generation.
U87-BevR exhibited 9-fold more phosphorylated STAT3 and 8-fold more
VEGFR2 than U87-IgG through all 5 generations. U87-BevR exhibited
5-8-fold more alpha5beta1 integrin than U87-IgG cells, a disparity
peaking during the third generation before resolving during generations
4-5.CONCLUSIONS: Our novel model of acquired anti-angiogenic therapy
resistance showed that acquired resistance increases parenchymal and
perivascular invasion with some changes (increased c-Met, VEGFR2, and
phosphorylated STAT3) occurring early and lasting throughout resistance,
while other changes like alpha5beta1 integrin upregulation peaked later
and decreased over time. The ability of this model to replicate prolonged
anti-angiogenic therapy duration seen in patients should generate a
molecular profile of anti-angiogenic therapy resistance, and should
define which resistance-associated changes are driver versus passenger
alterations.

