Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating micro-RNAs can detect adaptive response to therapy and
aggressive subset of prostate cancer.


Circulating markers that inform of the adaptive biology and the clinical
virulence of prostate cancer do not exist. Small cell carcinoma of the
prostate (SCPC) is an aggressive, androgen receptor (AR)-negative,
morphological variant that arises often during the castration-resistant
progression of typical adenocarcinoma. Its presence is associated with a
poor response to hormonal therapies and predicts for a short survival.
Micro-RNAs (miRNAs) regulate a range of processes, including
establishment and maintenance of tissue differentiation, and are
well-preserved in serum. Based on the observation that SCPC are
characterized by a loss of prostate epithelial marker expression (such as
AR and HOXB13) and an increase in the expression of proneural
transcription factors (such as MYCN and ASCL1) we formulated the
hypothesis that the SCPC display a miRNA profile distinct from that of
typical AR-driven prostate carcinomas. We profiled the miR extracted from
the serum samples of 13 men with biopsy-proven SCPC, and of 9 men with
bone-predominant metastatic CRPC. Because SCPC is associated with large
tumor burdens, we selected patients with bone-predominant CRPC that had
abnormally high alkaline phosphatase levels and PSA > 20ng/mL. 322 miR
were detected in at least one of the 22 samples. We identified two miR
that were present in 10 and 11 of 13 (77% and 85%) patients with SCPC and
3 and 1 of 9 (33% and 11%) of men with unselected typical
bone-predominant CRPC. Both of these miRs have been shown to control
multiple genes regulating neuronal differentiation and to induce the
conversion of human fibroblasts into neurons, a mechanism which may be
shared by prostate adenocarcinoma cells in their transdifferentiation to
small cell prostate cancer cells. Moreover, one of them was recently
shown to silence AR expression. Therefore we conclude that two
circulating miRs may serve to monitor adaptive responses and identify
virulent subsets of prostate cancer, thus serving to guide therapy and
selection of patients for clinical trials. Validation of these findings
is ongoing in a larger cohort of patients.

