Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interactions among JNK, p38, Akt and canonical Wnt pathways in
murine mammary adenocarcinoma cells reexpressing Glypican-3 (GPC3).


GPC3 is expressed in normal mammary tissues, but it disappears in tumors.
We have transfected the GPC3 gene into the murine mammary adenocarcinoma
LM3 cells, demonstrating that it acts as a metastasis suppressor. We have
also reported that LM3-GPC3 cells exhibit an inhibition of Akt and
canonical Wnt pathways, while they show an activation of non-canonical
Wnt (JNK) and p38 signaling.The aim of this work was to study the
interactions among GPC3 modulated pathways. For this, subconfluent
LM3-GPC3 cells were treated with SB203589 or SP600125 (p38 and JNK
pharmacological inhibitors, respectively), or with the vehicle. Also, we
introduced by viral infection a constitutively active variant of Akt1 (CA
Akt), or the empty vector, into LM3-GPC3 cells. The effect of the
different treatments on the activity of the other pathways was evaluated
by WB.We demonstrated that in addition to the central role of JNK in the
non-canonical Wnt pathway, it also regulates canonical signaling. We
found that SP600125 induced a 2 to 5-fold increase in the cytoplasmic
-Catenin levels, as well it reduced 2 to 6 times E-Cadherin expression.
Therefore, our results suggest that JNK activation would be required for
the canonical Wnt signaling inhibition induced by GPC3. On the other
side, p38 pathway is considered independent of Wnt signaling. In
association, SB203589 did not modulate either cytoplasmic -Catenin or
E-Cadherin levels, suggesting that p38 activation would not participate
in the canonical Wnt pathway inhibition induced by GPC3. We also observed
that LM3-GPC3 cells expressing CA Akt, showed less E-Cadherin than
controls. So, Akt inhibition would be essential to increase of E-Cadherin
expression induced by GPC3.In relation with the non-canonical Wnt
pathway, we found that SB203589 induced a partial decrease in phospho-JNK
levels. Therefore, p38 would be involved in the non-canonical Wnt
signaling activation induced by GPC3.Inhibitors actions on Akt pathway
were analyzed. We determined that SP600125 had no effect on Akt
activation, suggesting that Akt inhibition induced by GPC3 is independent
of non-canonical Wnt signaling. On the other hand, although without
reaching LM3-vector levels, SB203589 caused a 2-fold increase in
phospho-Akt levels. This indicates that the activation of p38 would be
necessary to induce the inhibition of Akt signaling detected in GPC3
reexpressing cells.In sum, we have dissected some of the functional and
hierarchical interactions between the pathways modulated by GPC3 that may
contribute to the metastasis suppressing activity of this proteoglycan.

