Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biospecimen preferences of African-American cancer survivors for
cancer genetic research.


Background: Research based on large population-based biobanks has
potential to ameliorate health disparities attributed to biological and
genetic differences. Study goals were to identify associations of cancer
survivors sample preferences with sociodemographic characteristics and
familiarity with genetic research and testing.Methods: Information was
analyzed on a convenience sample of 158 adult African-American breast,
colon or prostate cancer survivors who expressed a willingness to provide
a biospecimen for cancer genetic research. Information was collected from
a self-directed instrument that measured: 1) demographics, 2)familiarity
with genetic research and testing, and 3)willingness to provide a variety
of sample types. Descriptive statistics and bivariate chi-square analyses
were utilized.Results: Sample preference variation (N=158) consisted of:
65%, 62% and 18% willing to donate blood, saliva and tissue,
respectively. One third (n= 53) endorsed willingness to provide only one
form of biological sample (blood, saliva, or tissue). Significant
associations were detected between willingness to provide tissue and
individuals Background: Research based on large population-based biobanks
has potential to ameliorate health disparities attributed to biological
and genetic differences. Study goals were to identify associations of
cancer survivors sample preferences with sociodemographic characteristics
and familiarity with genetic research and testing.Methods: Information
was analyzed on a convenience sample of 158 adult African-American
breast, colon or prostate cancer survivors who expressed a willingness to
provide a biospecimen for cancer genetic research. Information was
collected from a self-directed instrument that measured: 1) demographics,
2)familiarity with genetic research and testing, and 3)willingness to
provide a variety of sample types. Descriptive statistics and bivariate
chi-square analyses were utilized.Results: Sample preference variation
(N=158) consisted of: 65%, 62% and 18% willing to donate blood, saliva
and tissue, respectively. One third (n= 53) endorsed willingness to
provide only one form of biological sample (blood, saliva, or tissue).
Significant associations were detected between willingness to provide
tissue and individuals < 50 years of age (p=0.04). Sample preferences
were not otherwise related to age at cancer diagnosis, gender, income,
educational status, or familiarity with genetic testing or genetic
research.Conclusions/Impact: Providing options of acceptable biological
sample types may yield increased donation from minorities. Inadvertently,
this may introduce quality control challenges in obtaining sufficient or
multiple forms of biological samples. Identifying additional predictive
factors for samples preferences may lead to improvements in methods used
to obtain biospecimens from minority populations.Citation Format:
Altovise T. Ewing, Lori AH Erby, Luisel J. Ricks-Santi, Nnenna Kalu,
Denise M. Scott. Biospecimen preferences of African-American cancer
survivors for cancer genetic research. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1355. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1355

