Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of RAD001 on the protein expression pattern and function
of tumor and immune cells.


The crucial role of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway in the pathogenesis of
cancer has led to the development of various therapeutics targeting this
signaling cascade. The serine/threonine kinase mTOR is involved in the
regulation of the different growth properties of both tumor and immune
cells. Furthermore, mTOR forms two macromolecular complexes: (i) the
rapamycin-sensitive mTORC1, which contains RAPTOR and (ii) mTORC2, which
is rapamycin-insensitive and contains RICTOR. Downstream targets of these
complexes like HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha or cyclin D1 are responsible for
the activation of various intracellular processes leading to the
activation of cell proliferation, induction of angiogenesis, and
metastasis. The effects of mTOR inhibitors have been most studied in T
cells, although recently it has been shown that renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) is tightly controlled by mTOR and that mTOR pathway activation
represents an adverse prognostic factor. Thus targeted inhibition of mTOR
represents a promising therapeutic approach for the treatment of RCC
patients. Since it is currently discussed whether the RAD001-mediated
effect on T cells might negatively interfere with its anti-tumoral
activity in RCC we here analyzed the effects of RAD001 on the immune cell
repertoire as well as the growth properties and protein expression
pattern of RCC cells. We could show a decrease in the frequency of T
cells which was associated with an altered expression of chemokines/
chemokine receptors suggesting an altered T cell homing. Furthermore,
RAD001 exerts a dose-dependent growth inhibitory effect in RCC cells.
This was accompanied by distinct expression levels of various proteins in
RCC cells. So far, 11 differentially expressed proteins were identified
by MALDI-TOF analysis, which are involved in cell proliferation and gene
regulation. Currently functional analysis of RAD001-regulated proteins in
T lymphocytes and RCC cells are performed providing better insights into
the consequences of the mTOR inhibition.Citation Format: Franziska
Stehle, Kristin Schulz, Jana Kalich, Corinna Fahldieck, Barbara Seliger.
Effects of RAD001 on the protein expression pattern and function of tumor
and immune cells. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting
of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2172. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2172

