Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PKC412 (Midostaurin) is safe and highly effective in Systemic
Mastocytosis patients: the Bologna experience.


Introduction. Mastocytosis is a myeloid neoplasm characterized by
abnormal accumulation and frequent activation of mast cells (MCs) in
various organs, mostly bone marrow, skin, liver and gastrointestinal
tract. In most adult patients, the systemic form of mastocytosis (SM) is
diagnosed, which includes an indolent (ISM), an aggressive (ASM) and a
leukemic subvariant (MCL). The c-kit mutation D816V is detectable in most
adult patients with SM. Treatment of SM usually focuses on symptom relief
by histamine receptor antagonists and other supportive therapy. However,
in aggressive and leukemic variants, cytoreductive and targeted drugs
must be applied.Methods. From 2008, 18 patients (male/female=7/11)
affected by SM, have been referred to our Institution. The median age was
49 years. All the patients underwent a bone marrow biopsy, with flow
citometry and molecular biology analysis, in order to identify the
presence of D816V mutation of c-Kit gene. Serum tryptase level was
tested, resulting elevated in all cases. Systemic symptoms were
characterized by nausea, diarrhoea, asthenia, weight loss, pruritus and
serotine fever, identifying an aggressive form of the disease in 7/18
patients, due to skeletal involvement, ascitis, liver function
impairment, and bone marrow disfunction. Therefore, since a first line
therapy (mainly represented by IFN) and supportive care with histamine
receptor antagonists werne't followed by a significant benefit, a
personalized use of PKC412 was asked and obtained for 5 out of 7 ASM
patients.Results. From March 2011 5 out of 7 patients with ASM have
received a prolonged period of treatment with PKC412, which was
administered orally, at the dosage of 100 mg twice daily, without rest
periods. The drug was well tolerated. No serious adverse events were
observed. All the patients obtained a quick and prolonged improvement of
clinical symptoms, in terms of weight gain, bowel function and skeletal
pain. At the bone marrow evaluation, the persistence of the D816V c-kit
mutation was observed, despite a significant decrease of mast cell marrow
involvement. In one case we observed, after a first good response, a
disease progression, characterized by the sudden reoccurrence of the same
symptoms detected at diagnosis, confirmed by a relevant expansion of a
pathologic mast cell population in the bone marrow. After a rest period,
the drug was readministered, and a second remission was
obtained.Conclusions. PKC412 is safe and effective in patients with SM,
being able to significantly improve not only the gastrointestinal and
systemic symptoms, but also the haematological profile. The persistence
of the D816V c-kit mutation, despite a morphologic remission, suggests
that many other oncogenic factors may be responsible for the pathogenesis
of the disease.Acknowledgments. Work supported by European LeukemiaNet,
AIRC, AIL, PRIN, University of Bologna and BolognAIL.

