Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the activity of rigosertib, an inhibitor of PI3K and
MAPK pathways, in a preclinical model of colorectal cancer.


Background: Rigosertib is an inhibitor of the PI3K and MAPK kinase
pathways and is currently being evaluated in clinical trials for
pancreatic cancer and hematologic diseases. The PI3K/AKT and MAPK
(RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK) signaling pathways have been identified to play a
central role in the development and progression of CRC by modulating many
different downstream targets that are essential for enhancing cellular
survival and proliferation. Mutations in the PI3K (PIK3CA) and MAPK (RAS)
pathways have been identified and their importance is well-established in
oncogenesis and as drivers of tumor growth. The objective of this study
is to determine the anti-proliferative and anti-tumor effects of
rigosertib in a preclinical model of colorectal cancer (CRC).Experimental
Design: We used colorectal cancer cell lines and a patient-derived
explant model to investigate the growth inhibitory activity of
rigosertib. We treated 25 CRC cell lines with rigosertib for 72 hours and
measured the effect on proliferation by a sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay.
We treated 5 patient-derived CRC explants with rigosertib (250
mg/kg/day-daily) for 28 days to determine anti-tumor activity in vivo. A
tumor growth inhibition inhibition (TGI) 50% was considered
sensitive.Results: Twenty-four CRC cell lines were sensitive to
rigosertib with an IC50 > 1M. The cell lines MIP-101, Lovo, and Caco-2
were the most sensitive reaching an IC50 at 0.0625 M. The Colo678 cell
line was resistant to rigosertib with an IC50 > 1M. There was no
association between mutational status in PIK3CA or RAS and sensitivity to
rigosertib. Zero out of 5 CRC explants showed sensitivity to
rigosertib.Conclusion: Rigosertib is a potent growth inhibitor in vitro
of the majority of CRC cell lines tested with an IC50 Background:
Rigosertib is an inhibitor of the PI3K and MAPK kinase pathways and is
currently being evaluated in clinical trials for pancreatic cancer and
hematologic diseases. The PI3K/AKT and MAPK (RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK) signaling
pathways have been identified to play a central role in the development
and progression of CRC by modulating many different downstream targets
that are essential for enhancing cellular survival and proliferation.
Mutations in the PI3K (PIK3CA) and MAPK (RAS) pathways have been
identified and their importance is well-established in oncogenesis and as
drivers of tumor growth. The objective of this study is to determine the
anti-proliferative and anti-tumor effects of rigosertib in a preclinical
model of colorectal cancer (CRC).Experimental Design: We used colorectal
cancer cell lines and a patient-derived explant model to investigate the
growth inhibitory activity of rigosertib. We treated 25 CRC cell lines
with rigosertib for 72 hours and measured the effect on proliferation by
a sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay. We treated 5 patient-derived CRC explants
with rigosertib (250 mg/kg/day-daily) for 28 days to determine anti-tumor
activity in vivo. A tumor growth inhibition inhibition (TGI) 50% was
considered sensitive.Results: Twenty-four CRC cell lines were sensitive
to rigosertib with an IC50 > 1M. The cell lines MIP-101, Lovo, and Caco-2
were the most sensitive reaching an IC50 at 0.0625 M. The Colo678 cell
line was resistant to rigosertib with an IC50 > 1M. There was no
association between mutational status in PIK3CA or RAS and sensitivity to
rigosertib. Zero out of 5 CRC explants showed sensitivity to
rigosertib.Conclusion: Rigosertib is a potent growth inhibitor in vitro
of the majority of CRC cell lines tested with an IC50 < 1M. Our upcoming
studies will test the inhibitory effects of rigosertib on an additional
15 CRC explants in an attempt to develop biomarkers of sensitivity or
resistance.Acknowledgements: The work was supported by a grant from
Onconova Therapeutics Inc.

