Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibition combined with a novel pan BCL2
family inhibitor abrogates leukemia stem cell survival in a
niche-dependent manner.


Leukemia stem cells (LSC) play a crucial role in initiation, maintenance,
and progression of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Targeted therapy with
a BCR-ABL targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor (e.g. dasatinib) has
improved survival of patients with chronic phase CML. However, like blast
crisis (BC) CML, survival remains only 30% over 5 years, and treatment
frequently fails to eliminate dormant LSC that are hypothesized to drive
CML relapse. Overexpression of BCL2 family genes has been observed in
human BC CML and may fuel LSC survival. Our previous data demonstrated
that pro-survival long isoforms of BCL2 and MCL1 were preferentially
expressed in BC CML LSC compared to normal stem cells. These data showed
that the bone marrow (BM) is enriched for BCL2 and MCL1-expressing LSC
and serves as a reservoir for therapeutic resistance, thereby
underscoring the importance of pan-BCL2 inhibition in the BM. A potent
pan-BCL2 inhibitor, sabutoclax, has been identified that inhibits the
binding of BH3 peptides to Bcl-XL, Bcl-2, Mcl-1 and Bfl1-1 at nanomolar
concentrations.To demonstrate whether sabutoclax or the combination of
sabutoclax and dasatinib could synergize to eradicate LSC in the BM,
humanized BC CML LSC mouse models were established by using 50,000 CD34+
cells selected from primary BC CML patient samples and transplanted into
neonatal RAG2-/-c-/- mice. Mice were screened for peripheral blood (PB)
engraftment of human cells at 6 weeks, randomized, and dosed with (1)
vehicle, (2) sabutoclax (10mg/kg, i.v., twice a week for 2 weeks), (3)
dasatinib (50mg/kg, p.o., daily for 2 weeks), or (4) combination. Mice
were sacrificed one day after last dose; PB, spleen (SP) and BM were
collected for FACS analysis to measure engraftment and cell cycle status
of LSC in different hematopoietic niches. BCL2 and MCL1 expression was
measured in BM and SP by isoform specific qRT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry. Treatment of CML LSC-transplanted mice with
sabutoclax alone led to a significant reduction in LSC burden in the SP,
but only slightly in the BM. Meanwhile, Single agent sabutoclax reduced
the engraftment of quiescent LSC. The effect of sabutoclax synergized
with dasatinib to further reduce LSC burden in the BM to eradicate LSC
that drive therapeutic resistance. Importantly, these treatments spare
normal human stem cells in both BM and SP thereby providing in vivo
evidence of a reasonable therapeutic index. Sabutoclax not only reduced
the expression of BCL2 and MCL1 mRNA long isoform in the BM, but also
significantly reduced the number of human CD34+, BCL2+ and MCL1+ cells in
both BM and SP. These results demonstrate that BM and SP niche BC CML LSC
survival is driven by overexpression of multiple pro-survival BCL2 family
isoforms rendering them susceptible to a novel pan-BCL2 inhibitor,
sabutoclax, at doses that spare normal hematopoietic progenitors.

