Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR3 epigenome switches splice variants in prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the leading cause of cancer and the second
leading cause of cancer death among men in the US, with tumor metastasis
being the main reason behind high rates of mortality and morbidity. How
these tumors escape the molecular signals that prevent epithelial cell
migration from the prostate is being deciphered. A key motility stop
signaling network is via chemokines that bind to the common receptor
CXCR3. CXCR3 is a G protein coupled receptor whose splicing is
differentially regulated in prostate cancer. We have found
over-expression of the CXCR3A splice isoform in prostate cancers and cell
lines whereas normal prostate epithelium expresses by and large only the
CXCR3B isoform, representing a possible switch in the expression between
the CXCR3 splice variants. As these variants link differentially to pro-
and anti-invasion signaling pathways, this may explain the relentless
progression of the prostate carcinoma cells. The switch is present at
both the RNA and protein level which suggests that the altering factor is
at the transcriptional control level. In a series of PCa lines, the CXCR3
gene was scanned for insertions; deletions or substitutions that
introduce a splice silencer; enhancer or a premature stop codon.
Surprisingly, the gene was free from mutations except for a polymorphism
in the intron in one of the cancer cell lines. A mutation is a permanent
change whereas an epigenetic change is a reversible change that confers
the cell with the ability to wield control over the expression of the
isoforms at a given time. This suggests presence of a possible epigenetic
change and explains the absence of mutations. To confirm the
aforementioned, the CXCR3 epigenome was analyzed to find the intronic
region differentially methylated at four different nucleotides while the
upstream putative promoter was not. Strikingly, two of the differentially
methylated sites were flanking splice sites while two of were adjoining
the NK-2 transcription repressor binding site.A bichromatic CXCR3
reporter minigene has been designed to study the cell type specific
expression pattern of the variants and the effect of each differentially
methylated CpG nucleotide on splicing. Upon transfection of the wildtype
minigene, it was found that the cancer cells express both the isoforms
and as expected higher levels of CXCR3A when compared to normal prostate
epithelial cells. The switch of isoforms was observed as: one
subpopulation of cells that express both the isoforms; another that
express solely one of the isoforms: either CXCR3A or CXCR3B. The mutant
with guanines at the differentially methylated sites would validate the
epigenomic link to splicing. The use of this reporter will be presented
to dissect the plasticity of this epigenetic change during dissemination
in experimental models of prostate cancer.

