Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR2 controls breast cancer metastasis and chemoresistance
through PI3K/AKT and COX-2 signalings.


Background: Breast cancer is the chief culprit leading to woman's death.
The major cause is the chemoresistance and distant metastasis before or
after surgery and standard treatment. Recent studies suggest that
chemokines and their receptors may play important roles in breast cancer
metastasis and chemoresistance.Purpose: The chemokine receptor CXCR2 is
associated with tumor development in many cancers. Although IL-8 and
Gro-alpha as the major ligands contribute to breast cancer progression,
the function of their receptor CXCR2 in breast cancer is elusive. In this
study, we investigated the role of CXCR2 in breast cancer metastasis and
chemoresistance.Experimental design:Human breast cancer cell lines
including MCF-7 and SKBR-3 (low metastasis), MDA-MB-231 (medium
metastasis), MDA-MB-231HM (high lung metastasis), MDA-MB-231BO (high bone
metastasis), and MDA-MB-231/Gem (Gemcitabine-resistant) were used to
investigate cell proliferation, migration, invasion, colony formation,
apoptosis, and tumorigenesis by MTT, scratch-wound, transwell, soft agar,
flow cytometery, and animal assays after CXCR2 or its associated proteins
were over expressed or silenced/inhibited. Protein expression in cell
lines and tissues was examined by either Western blot, ELISA,
immunofluorescence, or immunohistochemical staining.Results: CXCR2
expression was higher in chemoresistant breast cancer cell lines,
high-metastatic cell lines and breast cancer tissues than in
chemosensitive cell lines, low-metastatic cell lines, and breast cancer
tissues. Overexpression of CXCR2 promoted cell proliferation, migration,
invasion, cell anti-apoptosis, tumor formation, metastasis, and
chemoresistance, but silencing of CXCR2 inhibited those activities both
in vitro and in vivo. Mechanism studies revealed that CXCR2 suppresses
AKT1 to promote breast cancer metastasis and chemoresistance through
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2; PTGS2) to regulate caveolin-1, MMP2, MMP9,
E-cardherin, and beta-catenin, which can be inversed by knock down of
CXCR2 or COX-2, and over expression of AKT1 and P85alpha. Additionally,
over expression of CXCR2 and COX-2, or silencing of PI3K/AKT1 inhibits
p53 phosphorylation (Serine 15) and E2F1 expression, but activates MDM2,
Bcl-xL and Bcl-2, leading to increased anti-apoptosis. Tissue microarray
analysis from 300 breast cancer patients also indicated that over
expression of CXCR2 is associated with enhanced COX2 expression and
reduced AKT1 expression in metastatic and chemoresistant breast
carcinomas (P Background: Breast cancer is the chief culprit leading to
woman's death. The major cause is the chemoresistance and distant
metastasis before or after surgery and standard treatment. Recent studies
suggest that chemokines and their receptors may play important roles in
breast cancer metastasis and chemoresistance.Purpose: The chemokine
receptor CXCR2 is associated with tumor development in many cancers.
Although IL-8 and Gro-alpha as the major ligands contribute to breast
cancer progression, the function of their receptor CXCR2 in breast cancer
is elusive. In this study, we investigated the role of CXCR2 in breast
cancer metastasis and chemoresistance.Experimental design:Human breast
cancer cell lines including MCF-7 and SKBR-3 (low metastasis), MDA-MB-231
(medium metastasis), MDA-MB-231HM (high lung metastasis), MDA-MB-231BO
(high bone metastasis), and MDA-MB-231/Gem (Gemcitabine-resistant) were
used to investigate cell proliferation, migration, invasion, colony
formation, apoptosis, and tumorigenesis by MTT, scratch-wound, transwell,
soft agar, flow cytometery, and animal assays after CXCR2 or its
associated proteins were over expressed or silenced/inhibited. Protein
expression in cell lines and tissues was examined by either Western blot,
ELISA, immunofluorescence, or immunohistochemical staining.Results: CXCR2
expression was higher in chemoresistant breast cancer cell lines,
high-metastatic cell lines and breast cancer tissues than in
chemosensitive cell lines, low-metastatic cell lines, and breast cancer
tissues. Overexpression of CXCR2 promoted cell proliferation, migration,
invasion, cell anti-apoptosis, tumor formation, metastasis, and
chemoresistance, but silencing of CXCR2 inhibited those activities both
in vitro and in vivo. Mechanism studies revealed that CXCR2 suppresses
AKT1 to promote breast cancer metastasis and chemoresistance through
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2; PTGS2) to regulate caveolin-1, MMP2, MMP9,
E-cardherin, and beta-catenin, which can be inversed by knock down of
CXCR2 or COX-2, and over expression of AKT1 and P85alpha. Additionally,
over expression of CXCR2 and COX-2, or silencing of PI3K/AKT1 inhibits
p53 phosphorylation (Serine 15) and E2F1 expression, but activates MDM2,
Bcl-xL and Bcl-2, leading to increased anti-apoptosis. Tissue microarray
analysis from 300 breast cancer patients also indicated that over
expression of CXCR2 is associated with enhanced COX2 expression and
reduced AKT1 expression in metastatic and chemoresistant breast
carcinomas (P < 0.001), which may be used to predict breast cancer
development.Conclusions: Our results suggest that CXCR2 controls breast
cancer metastasis and chemoresistance through regulating COX-2 and AKT1.
Thus, antagonists of CXCR2 and COX-2 may be used synergistically to treat
breast cancer patients particularly with high metastasis and
chemoresistance.Citation Format: Han Xu, Fengjuan Lin, Ziliang Wang, Jiao
Meng, Huizhen Sun, Zihao Qi, Yan Wang, Zhouluo Ou, Zhimin Shao, Genhong
Di, Gong Yang. CXCR2 controls breast cancer metastasis and
chemoresistance through PI3K/AKT and COX-2 signalings. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 548.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-548

