Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) inhibits apoptosis in ovarian
cancer cell through regulating OCT4 stem cell signal pathway.


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal malignancy of the female reproductive
system with an overall mortality rate of greater than 70%. Our group has
demonstrated that Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) stimulates the
proliferation and invasion of ovarian cancer cells, inhibits apoptosis,
and facilitates neovascularization by increasing expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF). OCT4, a stem cell marker, is
overexpressed in several types of human cancer and can induce resistance
to chemotherapy and inhibition of apoptosis. We have found that FSH
stimulates the expression of OCT4 mRNA and protein in a time- and
dose-dependent manner. Subcellular analysis by immunofluorescent staining
confirmed that FSH stimulation increased OCT4 protein expression in both
the cytoplasm and nucleus of ovarian cancer cells. Re-expression of OCT4
in ovarian cancer cells reversed the inhibition of apoptosis induced by
FSH, whereas siRNA-mediated knockdown of OCT4 resulted in a significantly
rate of apoptosis. Depletion of OCT4 resulted in reduction of p-AKT and
survivin, and also blocked FSH-induced upregulation of p-AKT and
survivin. Moreover, FSH stimulation induced the expansion of CD44+CD117+
cells with a stem cell-like phenotype. Interestingly, re-expression of
OCT4 enhanced the expression of Notch, Sox2, and Nanog, molecules that
play critical roles in cancer stem cell proliferation and
differentiation. FSH upregulated the expression of Notch, Sox2 and Nanog
and these effects were abolished by knocking down OCT4, suggesting that
several cancer stem cell pathways are involved in FSH regulation. We have
also examined OCT4 expression in surgical specimens of ovarian cancer.
Immunohistostaining revealed that OCT4 expression was increased in
ovarian carcinoma compared with benign cystadenomas and borderline
tumors, and OCT4 expression was significantly correlated with
histological grade. Staining for OCT4 was increased in serous
cystadenocarcinoma, when compared with clear cell carcinoma. In summary,
the OCT4 cancer stem cell signaling pathway may mediate FSH-induced
inhibition of apoptosis and could provide a target for treatment of
ovarian cancer.

