Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PIK3CA overexpression induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition
and progression of head and neck squamous cell carcinonoma.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients have a poor
prognosis and invasion and metastasis are the major causes of mortality.
However, the molecular mechanisms of HNSCC invasion and metastasis remain
obscure. The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway regulates a
wide range of cellular processes crucial for tumorigenesis. Amplification
and mutation of PIK3CA, the gene coding for the catalytic subunit of
PI3K, are among the most common genetic alterations in human HNSCC. To
delineate the in vivo roles of PIK3CA during head and neck tumorigenesis,
we developed a PIK3CA genetically engineered mouse model (GEMM), in which
PIK3CA overexpression is specifically induced in the head and neck
epithelia.While overexpression of PIK3CA alone resulted in epithelial
hyperplasia, and carcinoma in situ, it was not sufficient to induce
visible tumor formation. In contrast, when we applied 4NQO, a DNA
adduct-forming agent widely used as a tobacco surrogate together with
PIK3CA overexpression, the PIK3CA-GEMM developed 50% poorly
differentiated HNSCC compared to 10% of those in the control mice. PIK3CA
tumors also had increased numbers of infiltrated leukocytes and
angiogenesis. In addition, either regional lymph node metastases or lung
metastases was observed in 40% of the PIK3CA-GEMM compared to no
metastases in control mice. Characterizations of PIK3CA tumors revealed
that PIK3CA tumors underwent epithelial and mesenchymal transition, and
formed poorly differentiated metastatic tongue SCC in an orthotopical
mouse model. Molecular analysis of the PIK3CA tumors suggests that rather
than AKT, PDK1 facilitates progression of PI3K-driven HNSCC, and enhanced
TGFbeta signaling with increased TGFbeta1 ligand and Smad3 may further
contribute to this process. Lastly, overexpression of PIK3CA is
associated with HNSCC progression and metastasis, and positively
correlated with PDK1 expression but negatively with AKT activation,
further verified the clinical relevance of our GEMM study. In summary,
our results suggest that PIK3CA oncogene drives invasion and metastasis
of HNSCC through PDK1 and TGFbeta signaling, and combined targeting of
these pathways will reduce tumor progression in advanced HNSCC patients
with PIK3CA alterations, which comprise about 40% of all HNSCC patients.

