Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ibrutinib inhibits malignant cell adhesion and migration and
reduces tumor burden in lymph node and bone marrow in a murine model of
mantle cell dissemination and progression.


Introduction:Ibrutnib is a potent and selective Btk inhibitor that
covalently modifiesCys481 in Btk and inhibits B cell antigen receptor
(BCR) signaling. Ibrutinib is currently in a Phase II study in patients
with relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma (MCL). In MCL patients
following 1-2 weeks of ibrutinib treatment, we observed a transient
increase of MCL cells in peripheral blood which was associated with a
rapid reduction of tumor burden in MCL patients suggesting mobilization
of malignant cells from tissues to the periphery (Wanga; Changb). At the
same time, levels of plasma chemokines CCL4, CCL22, CXCL13 were
significantly decreased by 40-60% (pIntroduction:Ibrutnib is a potent and
selective Btk inhibitor that covalently modifiesCys481 in Btk and
inhibits B cell antigen receptor (BCR) signaling. Ibrutinib is currently
in a Phase II study in patients with relapsed or refractory mantle cell
lymphoma (MCL). In MCL patients following 1-2 weeks of ibrutinib
treatment, we observed a transient increase of MCL cells in peripheral
blood which was associated with a rapid reduction of tumor burden in MCL
patients suggesting mobilization of malignant cells from tissues to the
periphery (Wanga; Changb). At the same time, levels of plasma chemokines
CCL4, CCL22, CXCL13 were significantly decreased by 40-60% (p<0.05)
(Changb). As Btk is an essential element in BCR- and chemokine-mediated
adhesion and migration in B lymphocytes, we determined effects of Btk
inhibition by ibrutinib in MCL primary cells co-cultured with stromal
cells, and studied its effects in vivo on MCL homing in immunocompetent
C57Bl/6 mice and lymphadenopathy in a disseminated human xenograft model
of MCL in SCID mice.Results and Conclusions: Ibrutinib inhibited
phosphorylation of Btk, PLC, Erk and JNK in MCL cell lines (Mino, Jeko,
HBL2) and primary MCL cells stimulated by co-culture with stromal cells
or anti-IgM. Furthermore, ibrutinib inhibited BCR- and chemokine (CXCL12,
CXCL13)-induced adhesion and migration of MCL cells lines, and the
migration of MCL underneath bone marrow-derived stromal cells in
co-culture (pseudoemperipoleisis). In addition, ibrutinib significantly
inhibited the production of chemokines CCL3, CCL4, CCL22, TARC and CXCL13
by 50-70% (pIntroduction:Ibrutnib is a potent and selective Btk inhibitor
that covalently modifiesCys481 in Btk and inhibits B cell antigen
receptor (BCR) signaling. Ibrutinib is currently in a Phase II study in
patients with relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma (MCL). In MCL
patients following 1-2 weeks of ibrutinib treatment, we observed a
transient increase of MCL cells in peripheral blood which was associated
with a rapid reduction of tumor burden in MCL patients suggesting
mobilization of malignant cells from tissues to the periphery (Wanga;
Changb). At the same time, levels of plasma chemokines CCL4, CCL22,
CXCL13 were significantly decreased by 40-60% (p<0.05) (Changb). As Btk
is an essential element in BCR- and chemokine-mediated adhesion and
migration in B lymphocytes, we determined effects of Btk inhibition by
ibrutinib in MCL primary cells co-cultured with stromal cells, and
studied its effects in vivo on MCL homing in immunocompetent C57Bl/6 mice
and lymphadenopathy in a disseminated human xenograft model of MCL in
SCID mice.Results and Conclusions: Ibrutinib inhibited phosphorylation of
Btk, PLC, Erk and JNK in MCL cell lines (Mino, Jeko, HBL2) and primary
MCL cells stimulated by co-culture with stromal cells or anti-IgM.
Furthermore, ibrutinib inhibited BCR- and chemokine (CXCL12,
CXCL13)-induced adhesion and migration of MCL cells lines, and the
migration of MCL underneath bone marrow-derived stromal cells in
co-culture (pseudoemperipoleisis). In addition, ibrutinib significantly
inhibited the production of chemokines CCL3, CCL4, CCL22, TARC and CXCL13
by 50-70% (p<0.01) in human MCL co-culture or following BCR activation in
MCL cell lines or primary MCL cells. Gene expression studies of both MCL
cells and patients treated with ibrutinib for either 24 hrs or 8 days
resulted in over 80% inhibition of NF-B, IL-6, CCL3, CCL4 gene
expression. In vivo, ibrutinib treatment at 12 mg/kg inhibited homing of
MCL cells into lymphoid tissues of C57Bl/6 mice by 70%. Ibrutinib at 3
and 12 mg/kg significantly and dose-dependently suppressed tumor burden
in the mandibular/cervical lymph nodes, mesenteric lymph nodes/Peyer
Patches and bone marrow by over 90% in a prevention model of MCL
lymphadenopathy in SCID mice. In a treatment setting of the same model
where tumor injected mice were treated with vehicle for 6 weeks prior to
receiving 12 mg/kg of ibrutinib for 3 weeks, a 90% and 68% reduction of
tumor cells in the lymph nodes and bone marrow, respectively, was
observed. These results collectively demonstrate Btk inhibition mediated
by ibrutinib, suppresses adhesion and migration of malignant MCL cells in
vitro and reduces tumor burden in lymph nodes and bone marrow in
vivo.aWang L et al., ASH 2011.bChang BY et al., ASH 2011.

