Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Additive and multiplicative gene-environment interactions for
colorectal cancer risk.


Background: Genetic and environmental factors influence colorectal cancer
(CRC) risk. Previous studies have provided additional etiologic insight
by examining multiplicative gene-environment interactions for individual
susceptibility loci. However, individual loci confer only modest risks,
which may limit statistical power and clinical significance. A genetic
risk score comprising known CRC loci may provide a more comprehensive
assessment of risk. Further, there is a paucity of data on the role of
additive gene-environment interactions, which may have greater public
health implications than multiplicative interactions. We thus evaluated
both additive and multiplicative interactions between a genetic risk
score and 15 key environmental factors on risk of CRC.Methods: We
conducted an analysis of 10,491 CRC cases and 10,725 controls of European
ancestry in 7 cohort and 6 case-control studies participating in the
Genetics and Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO) or
Colon Cancer Family Registry (CCFR). To provide a global measure of
genetic predisposition, information across multiple risk variants was
combined by calculating a genetic risk score based on 24 polymorphisms
near 21 genetic loci identified in previous genome-wide association
studies. For the genetic score and environmental factors, the reference
category corresponded to that associated with lower CRC risk. We tested
for additive interactions by estimating relative excess risk due to
interactions (RERIs) using logistic regression; for multiplicative
interactions we used an empirical-Bayes approach. Nominal P values 0.05
were considered statistically significant.Results: After adjustment for
age, sex, center, study, principal components, and total energy, as
appropriate, we observed super-additive gene-environment interactions for
CRC risk between the genetic risk score and body mass index (RERI=0.15;
95% CI: 0.00-0.31), ever smoking (RERI=0.14; 95% CI: 0.00-0.28),
pack-years of smoking (RERI=0.23; 95% CI: 0.05-0.41), postmenopausal
hormone therapy use (RERI=0.38; 95% CI: 0.17-0.59), and intake of
processed meat (RERI=0.23; 95% CI: 0.06-0.40). Of the 15 environmental
risk factors, 12 showed RERIs > 0 suggesting an overall trend toward
super-additive interactions for these factors. In addition, we observed
evidence of sub-multiplicative interactions for use of aspirin and
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. There were no other statistically
significant multiplicative interactions.Conclusions: We observed evidence
for super-additive effects of genetic predisposition and environmental
risk factors on risk of CRC. Our findings suggest that certain
environmental risk factors have stronger effects on absolute risk among
individuals with higher genetic risk of CRC. If confirmed in future
studies, these results may have implications for targeted prevention
strategies.

