Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Iron depletion by deferasirox have a synergistic effect on
sorafenib in hepatocellular carcinoma.


Purpose. Sorafenib is a multiple kinase inhibitor approved for advanced
hepatocellular carcinoma(HCC). However, we couldn't get sufficient effect
in clinical use compared to other cancers. Iron metabolism and
relationship with cancer cells have been studied for a long time. Iron
overload is known to associate with an increased risk of HCC, and the
recent study suggests that iron depletion can induce anti-cancer effect
against HCC. We hypothesized that iron depletion enhance the effect of
sorafenib and investigated it.Experimental Design. HepG2 (Human
hepatocellular liver carcinoma cell line) was used in this study. We used
sorafenib and an oral iron chilator, deferasirox (EXJADE TM). The effects
of each agent and combination of both were examined by using cell
viability assay. We examined anti-proliferative mechanism in vitro using
Flow Cytometry and Western blot analysis.Results. We examined the cell
viability of HepG2. Each treatment by sorafenib and deferasirox
suppressed the cancer cell proliferation on dose dependent manner. The
IC50 values of 48hours of sorafenib was 1.45M/L,and that of deferasirox
was 1.37M/L. We examined the possibility of combination therapy. The each
cell viability of sorafenib 1M and deferasirox 10M was 59.4% and 28.1%,
the combination one was 21.8%. The combination index was 0.616 in that
status, which suggested synergistic effect. To evaluate
anti-proliferation mechanism, we performed Flow Cytometry and Western
blot analysis. In Flow Cytometry, S and G2/M phase was significantly
decreased, which suggested to arrest cell cycle. In Western blot
analysis, cyclin D1 was down-regulated.Conclusion. Iron depletion by
deferasirox have anticancer effect by alone and a synergistic effect in
combination with Sorafenib. This result suggested that iron depletion
therapy can be a novel combination chemotherapy for HCC.

