Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel monoclonal antibodies for the analysis and isolation of Lgr5
positive cells.


Cancer stem cells (CSCs), also called tumor initiating cells, have gained
substantial interest in the research field over the past few years. CSCs
have been isolated from multiple tumor entities and were shown to play a
crucial role during tumor growth and metastasis. However, there is still
a major debate about specific cell surface markers capable of identifying
CSCs in most tumor entities. The leucine-rich repeat-containing
G-protein-coupled receptor (LGR) Lgr5 and its close homologues Lgr4 and
Lgr6 associate with Wnt-receptors and act as R-spondin receptors thereby
playing a central role in the modulation of Wnt/-catenin signaling in
normal and neoplastic stem cells (de Lau et al., 2011, Carmon et al.,
2011). Initially described as a highly specific marker for stem cells in
the small intestine, colon, hair follicle, stomach, and during kidney
development (Barker et al., 2007, Jaks et al., 2008, Barker et al., 2010,
Barker et al., 2012), Lgr5 positive cells were also shown to be crucial
during the development and progression of cancer. It was shown that Lgr5
positive crypt stem cells are the cells-of-origin in intestinal cancer
and that CSCs in human colorectal cancer can be identified and isolated
based on Lgr5 expression (Barker et al., 2009, Kemper et al., 2012).
However, the analysis of Lgr5 expressing cells is hampered by the lack of
highly specific monoclonal antibodies. We have developed rabbit
monoclonal antibodies against peptide sequences of Lgr5. After generating
cell lines stably expressing Lgr5, we screened for high affinity
antibodies by flow cytometry. Using stable transfectants for Lgr4 and
Lgr6, we could prove that there is no cross reactivity with its close
homologues. This is of particular importance for Lgr4, as this protein is
also expressed on more differentiated progenitor cells. To allow for
identification, analysis, and isolation of Lgr5 positive cells from solid
tissues, automated and therefore user-independent methods for tissue
dissociation were developed. This resulted in enzyme mixtures which allow
dissociating different tissues without harming the target epitopes. To
detect cells expressing Lgr5 at low levels in flow cytometry based assays
we combined our novel high affinity antibodies with fluorescence
amplification systems. In addition, we generated a new magnetic cell
separation (MACS) protocol that can be used as an easy and fast method to
isolate Lgr5 positive cells from primary human tissue. Taken together, we
have developed highly specific monoclonal antibodies allowing for the
analysis and isolation of Lgr5 positive cells from cell lines and primary
tissues.

