Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual targeting of the AKT/mTOR signaling pathwayinhibits
mesothelioma: Targeted therapies against multiple activated receptor
tyrosine kinases.


Mesothelioma is a notoriously chemotherapy-resistant neoplasm, as is
evident in the dismal overall survival for patients with this
asbestos-associated disease. The receptor tyrosine kinases EGFR and MET
are activated in subsets of mesothelioma, suggesting these kinases might
represent novel therapeutic targets. However, clinical trials have not
shown activity for EGFR inhibitors in mesothelioma. We had previously
demonstrated activation of multiple receptor tyrosine kinases, including
EGFR, MET, and AXL, in individual mesothelioma cell lines, targeting
HSP90 suppressed the multiple activated RTKs in mesothelioma cell lines,
resulting in apo-apoptotic and anti-proliferative effects. Thus, we
hypothesized that a coordinated network of multi-RTK activation
contributes collectively to activate PI3-K/AKT/mTOR and/or RAF/MAPK
signalings for the tumorigenesis of mesothelioma. Herein, we demonstrate
abnormal activation of the PI3-K/AKT/p70S6K and RAF/MEK/MAPK pathways in
mesothelioma, as compared with normal mesothelial cells. Multiple
receptor tyrosine kinases, including EGFR, MET, and AXL, in individual
mesothelioma cell lines, collectively activated survival signaling
intermediate AKT, but not MAPK. The anti-proliferative responses of the
coordinate inhibition of these multi-kinase signaling were comparable
with suppression of PI3-K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Dual targeting AKT/mTOR
signaling has substantially greater effect on mesothelioma proliferation
and survival, compared to inhibition of individual activated kinases and
downstream signaling alone, suggesting that no one activated RTK is the
predominant oncogenic control mechanism in mesothelioma and
PI3-K/AKT/mTOR is a crucial survival pathway. The AKT/mTOR signaling
inhibition by BEZ235 resulting in pro-apoptotic and anti-proliferative
effects in mesothelioma, was associated with the blockage of MDM2-p53
interaction.

