Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of copy number and LOH in germline samples from different
tumor types in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project.


Using data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project and HapMap
consortium, we examined the hypothesis that existing copy number
polymorphisms might predispose individuals to cancer and if different
common CNVs bias toward different cancer types. This analysis was
performed using a subset of the TCGA data, obtained from blood derived
normal samples of cancer patients. All the data was generated using
Affymetrix SNP 6.0 arrays (Affymetrix, Inc.) and processed using Nexus
Copy Number ver. 6.1 (BioDiscovery, Inc.). The project contained 451
Glioblastoma (GBM), 353 Colon cancer, and 245 Skin cancer samples in
addition to 211 HapMap samples which we used as reference since these
individuals were supposed to be healthy. Using Fisher's Exact test, we
compared each different cancer types to the HapMap samples to identify
regions of copy number change with FDR corrected p-value of less than
0.05 and difference in frequency between each population of at least 10%.
Many of the regions found in this process encompass regions identified as
common CNV polymorphisms as reported in the Database of Genomic Variance
(DGV). For example, a polymorphic region on 8p23.1 containing a number of
genes from the Beta defensin family involved in defense response to
bacterium were seen significantly gained in germline samples obtained
from cancer patients as compared to the HapMap samples (11% in HapMap,
42% in Colon Cancer, 28% in GBM, and 32% in Skin cancer). Additionally,
some interesting regions were identified that were not seen as
polymorphic in the general population, did not show up in the HapMap
samples or reported in DGV, but had high prevalence in the blood derived
normal samples from cancer patients. Using gene enrichment analysis on
genes discovered in these regions we identified a number of known cancer
specific pathways that were highly enriched (e.g. KEGG Glioma and
Melanoma pathways being statistically significantly enriched). Looking at
the effected genes in these pathways we identified small focal and
recurrent events that often only spanned a small portion of a gene
covering a few exons. This included genes such as PIK3CA where a focal
gain covering exons 10-14 were observed in none of the HapMap samples but
in 21% of the germline of patients with Colon cancer, 9% of GBM and 14%
of Skin cancer patients. A similar focal and recurrent gain was observed
in KIT covering exons 2-7 with no gains in the HapMap samples and 55% in
Colon, 15% in GBM, and 50% in Skin cancer patients. Similar observations
were also made for other well-known cancer genes such as RAF1 and EGFR
but to a lesser extent. We are in a process of comparing matched
tumor/normal cases to further investigate possible evolution of these
changes from the germline to the surrounding tissue (also available from
the TCGA database) to the primary tumor samples.

