Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERCC1-202 isoform is responsible for all known functions of ERCC1.


Background: ERCC1 is a DNA repair protein whose expression is a
prognostic and predictive biomarker of chemotherapy effect in NSCLC. Four
alternative transcripts of the ERCC1 gene have been described (isoforms
201 to 204). We previously found that only ERCC1-202 isoform is able to
remove cisplatin-DNA adducts and to improve survival after cisplatin
treatment. Little is known however about the role of the other isoforms.
Since the four isoforms are expressed in human samples, we sought to
elucidate the contribution of these different ERCC1-isoforms to ERCC1
described functions within and beyond DNA repair.Methods: We used an
established ERCC1-deficient A549 cells with selective re-expression of
each ERCC1 isoform. We searched for negative dominant functions of the
ERCC1-201, -203, and -204 isoforms using proliferation assay (WST-1) and
clonogenic assay. Respective cellular localizations of the isoforms were
assessed by immunofluorescent (IF) staining and interacting abilities
with previously identified ERCC1 partners was estimated by proximity
ligation assays (Duolink). We finally investigated their influence on the
cellular mitotic process (mitotic spindle shape) by alpha- and
gamma-tubulin IF and video microscopy.Results: IF detection of ERCC1
protein isoforms revealed a nuclear localization of ERCC1-201 and -202
isoforms whereas ERCC1-203 and -204 isoforms were mainly detected in the
cytoplasm. This alternative cellular localization suggests alternative
roles for ERCC1-203 and -204. Only ERCC1-202 formed a stable heterodimer
complex with XPF and other interacting partners (XPA, MSH2, FANCG, SLX4
and TRF2). None of the isoforms decreased cisplatin resistance (IC50)
associated with ERCC1-202 expression. Interstrand Cross-Link repair
(ICL-R) efficiency (mitomycin-C treatment) was also exclusively rescued
with ERCC1-202 re-expression. Further, ERCC1 deficient cells displayed
mitotic aberrations such as chromosome bridges at anaphase that impaired
cytokinesis and generated aneuploidy. Only ERCC1-202 isoform restored
chromosome segregation accuracy.Conclusions: Alternative roles for ERCC1
beyond the canonical NER pathway are currently emerging. Our data suggest
that all currently known functions of ERCC1 are fulfilled by the same
ERCC1 isoform ERCC1-202. Despite their wide expression in human samples,
the identification of alternative roles of other isoforms is still under
investigation. Our A549 clones, with stable ERCC1 deficiency, provide a
promising tool to analyze different functions of ERCC1. Finally, most
antibodies used to test ERCC1 status in patients do not distinguish
between different isoforms, it is important to develop an antibody (or
alternative diagnostic method) able to specifically recognize only the
functional ERCC1-202 isoform. Given that ERCC1-202/XPF interaction
domains can be produced together it would be realistic to use it as an
immunogenic epitope and/or a therapeutic target.

