Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decreased RXR dampened APC-independent proteosomal targeting of
-catenin to cause increased intestinal tumorigenesis after 56-Fe
radiation.


Purpose: Radiation exposure is a risk factor for colorectal cancer (CRC)
and high linear energy transfer radiation (high-LET) radiation such as
56-Fe in outer space is expected to pose greater risk of CRC to space
travelers. Earlier, we have reported increased intestinal tumorigenesis
in heavy ion radiation (HZE) exposed APCMin/+ mice, a well studied model
of CRC, and higher tumor incidence was due to increased stabilization and
activation of -catenin signaling after 56-Fe radiation exposure. However
the molecular mechanism behind -catenin activation is not yet explored.
Levels of -catenin are tightly regulated through its targeting to
proteasomal degradation mediated via adenomatous polyposis coli (APC)
dependent and independent pathways. The APC independent pathway of
-catenin degradation is facilitated via retinoid-X receptor alpha (RXR).
The present study aimed to investigate alterations in RXR mediated
proteasomal pathways in intestinal tumors induced by 56Fe relative to
radiation.Materials and Methods: Six to eight weeks old female APCMin/+
mice (n=6 mice/ group) were irradiated with 5 Gy of gamma and isotoxic
doses of 56Fe (4 Gy, energy: 1 GeV/nucleon; LET: 148 keV/) radiation.
Mice were euthanized between 100 and 110 days after radiation and
intestinal tumor samples were collected. Tumor samples were analyzed to
deliniate the 56-Fe-induced changes in RXR-proteasomal pathways using
activity assays, Western blot and immunohistochemistry (IHC).Results:
Higher proteasomal activity was observed in 56Fe-induced tumors
accompanied with increased expression of proteasomal subunit 20S- and
increased expression/activation of proteosomal activator-200 (PA200)
compared to radiation. However, we found decreased phosphorylation and
consequent reduction in ubiquitination of -catenin, leading to its
increased cellular level in 56Fe relative to gamma radiation-induced
tumors. We also show both by Western blot as well as IHC that exposure to
56-Fe radiation led to decreased RXR expression, a key element in the
APC-independent -catenin degradation pathway.Conclusions: Although 56Fe
radiation led to elevated proteasomal activity via overexpression of
proteasomal subunit and its activator, we observed increased rather than
decreased active -catenin. We propose that increased -catenin activity
and consequent higher frequency of intestinal tumors is due to the
inability of not only the APC-dependent but also the APC-independent
RXR-mediated pathway to facilitate ubiquitination of -catenin and its
subsequent proteasomal degradation. Taken together our study shows for
the first time that 56-Fe radiation exposure modulates -catenin stability
in an APC-independent manner to promote intestinal tumorigenesis.

