Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lifetime ovulatory cycles and risk of ovarian and endometrial
cancers.


Background: Incessant ovulation is a widely accepted hypothesis for
ovarian carcinogenesis. Lifetime ovulatory cycles (LOC) is considered a
composite variable that combines events that suppress ovulation in a
woman's menstrual span. Due to the lack of direct measurements for
incessant ovulation periods, epidemiological studies have used models to
calculate LOC. Although several epidemiologic studies have tested the
hypothesis that high LOC increases the risk of ovarian cancer, there has
been little attention focused on relationships with other gynecological
cancers, such as endometrial cancer.Objectives: (1) Identify existing LOC
algorithms through a systematic literature review. (2) Apply each
algorithm to assess the association between LOC and ovarian and
endometrial cancer risks in a population-based case-control study with
detailed reproductive variables.Methods: We conducted a systematic review
of PubMed to June 2012 using the following search terms: lifetime
ovulatory cycles, ovulatory cycles and cancer," and incessant ovulation.
Algorithms identified were then used to calculate the LOC for
participants in the Polish Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Studies. For
each algorithm (quartiles of LOC among controls), odds ratio (OR) and 95%
confidence intervals were calculated for ovarian and endometrial using
unconditional logistic regression, adjusted for cancer-specific potential
confounders.Results: We identified 17 studies including 18 unique LOC
algorithms based on different combinations of the following variables:
age at menopause, age at menarche, oral contraceptive use duration,
breastfeeding duration, time pregnant, number and outcome of each
pregnancy, average menstrual cycle length, and postpartum or other
periods of amenorrhea. We limited the analysis of the LOC definitions
(n=12) based on the availability of the variables in the Polish Study.
Our analysis was based on 315 ovarian cancer cases/1,951 associated
controls and 540 endometrial cancer cases and 1,895 associated controls,
after exclusions. A core set of variables used to calculate LOC,
including age at menopause/menarche, oral contraceptive use, and duration
of breast feeding yielded similar associations with cancer risk compared
to more complex models. In comparing the highest to the lowest LOC
quartile using the various algorithms, women were at increased risk of
ovarian (OR range 1.90 3.48) and endometrial cancer risk (OR range 2.02
2.95) with the confidence limits overlapping. Conclusions: LOC models
differed in the use of relevant variables and in their complexity,
however increased numbers of LOC were associated with increased risk of
ovarian and endometrial cancers across all algorithms in our study. These
data suggests that LOC algorithms might be formulated based on a core set
of variables that are widely available variables in epidemiological
studies.

