Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased DNA repair capacities and p53/MDM2 pathway aberrations
hallmark neuroblastoma cell lines with the alternative lengthening of
telomeres (ALT) phenotype.


Introduction: Neuroblastoma (NB) is a malignant pediatric tumor of the
sympathetic nervous system. Approximately 10-20% of neuroblastoma tumors
maintain telomere length by activating a telomerase-independent
alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) mechanism, and that these
tumors are associated with high-stage disease, and a poor
prognosis.Methods: mRNA expression of TERT (the catalytic component of
telomerase) and TERC (RNA template), determination of MYCN copy number,
and telomerase activity (TA) was measured by RT-PCR. Telomere content
(TC) and C-Circle (CC) content was assayed by quantitative PCR, p53
function was assessed by quantifying induction of p21 protein by flow
cytometry after irradiation. Expression profiling was carried out with
custom-designed Taq-Man Low Density Arrays (TLDAs) (ABI) that quantified
expression of 61 DNA-repair genes in a panel of 12 NB cell lines, 4 ALT
and 8 telomerase-positive. Of the telomerase-positive lines, 2 were
drug-sensitive, 6 multi-drug resistant. Cell line identities were
confirmed using short tandem repeat (STR) genotyping. Response to
cytotoxic drugs was assessed using the DIMSCAN fluorescence imaging
system. ATRX protein expression was measured with immunoblots.Results:
From a panel of 40 human NB cell lines we identified 4 ALT NB lines,
LA-N-6, SK-N-FI, CHLA-90, and COG-N-291, that had elevated TC > 2-fold
that of TA+ NB cell lines (pIntroduction: Neuroblastoma (NB) is a
malignant pediatric tumor of the sympathetic nervous system.
Approximately 10-20% of neuroblastoma tumors maintain telomere length by
activating a telomerase-independent alternative lengthening of telomeres
(ALT) mechanism, and that these tumors are associated with high-stage
disease, and a poor prognosis.Methods: mRNA expression of TERT (the
catalytic component of telomerase) and TERC (RNA template), determination
of MYCN copy number, and telomerase activity (TA) was measured by RT-PCR.
Telomere content (TC) and C-Circle (CC) content was assayed by
quantitative PCR, p53 function was assessed by quantifying induction of
p21 protein by flow cytometry after irradiation. Expression profiling was
carried out with custom-designed Taq-Man Low Density Arrays (TLDAs) (ABI)
that quantified expression of 61 DNA-repair genes in a panel of 12 NB
cell lines, 4 ALT and 8 telomerase-positive. Of the telomerase-positive
lines, 2 were drug-sensitive, 6 multi-drug resistant. Cell line
identities were confirmed using short tandem repeat (STR) genotyping.
Response to cytotoxic drugs was assessed using the DIMSCAN fluorescence
imaging system. ATRX protein expression was measured with
immunoblots.Results: From a panel of 40 human NB cell lines we identified
4 ALT NB lines, LA-N-6, SK-N-FI, CHLA-90, and COG-N-291, that had
elevated TC > 2-fold that of TA+ NB cell lines (p<.005), two of which
demonstrated telomere repeat C-circles, and all lacked MYCN genomic
amplification. All 4 ALT+ NB cell lines maintain telomere length with
significantly low levels of telomerase activity (pIntroduction:
Neuroblastoma (NB) is a malignant pediatric tumor of the sympathetic
nervous system. Approximately 10-20% of neuroblastoma tumors maintain
telomere length by activating a telomerase-independent alternative
lengthening of telomeres (ALT) mechanism, and that these tumors are
associated with high-stage disease, and a poor prognosis.Methods: mRNA
expression of TERT (the catalytic component of telomerase) and TERC (RNA
template), determination of MYCN copy number, and telomerase activity
(TA) was measured by RT-PCR. Telomere content (TC) and C-Circle (CC)
content was assayed by quantitative PCR, p53 function was assessed by
quantifying induction of p21 protein by flow cytometry after irradiation.
Expression profiling was carried out with custom-designed Taq-Man Low
Density Arrays (TLDAs) (ABI) that quantified expression of 61 DNA-repair
genes in a panel of 12 NB cell lines, 4 ALT and 8 telomerase-positive. Of
the telomerase-positive lines, 2 were drug-sensitive, 6 multi-drug
resistant. Cell line identities were confirmed using short tandem repeat
(STR) genotyping. Response to cytotoxic drugs was assessed using the
DIMSCAN fluorescence imaging system. ATRX protein expression was measured
with immunoblots.Results: From a panel of 40 human NB cell lines we
identified 4 ALT NB lines, LA-N-6, SK-N-FI, CHLA-90, and COG-N-291, that
had elevated TC > 2-fold that of TA+ NB cell lines (p<.005), two of which
demonstrated telomere repeat C-circles, and all lacked MYCN genomic
amplification. All 4 ALT+ NB cell lines maintain telomere length with
significantly low levels of telomerase activity (p<.005) and mRNA
expression of TERT relative to telomerase-positive NB cell lines; 3 of
the 4 ALT lines lacked p53 function and LA-N-6, the sole p53-functional
ALT line carries a homozygous deletion of p14(ARF). ALT lines had a
significant increase (pIntroduction: Neuroblastoma (NB) is a malignant
pediatric tumor of the sympathetic nervous system. Approximately 10-20%
of neuroblastoma tumors maintain telomere length by activating a
telomerase-independent alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT)
mechanism, and that these tumors are associated with high-stage disease,
and a poor prognosis.Methods: mRNA expression of TERT (the catalytic
component of telomerase) and TERC (RNA template), determination of MYCN
copy number, and telomerase activity (TA) was measured by RT-PCR.
Telomere content (TC) and C-Circle (CC) content was assayed by
quantitative PCR, p53 function was assessed by quantifying induction of
p21 protein by flow cytometry after irradiation. Expression profiling was
carried out with custom-designed Taq-Man Low Density Arrays (TLDAs) (ABI)
that quantified expression of 61 DNA-repair genes in a panel of 12 NB
cell lines, 4 ALT and 8 telomerase-positive. Of the telomerase-positive
lines, 2 were drug-sensitive, 6 multi-drug resistant. Cell line
identities were confirmed using short tandem repeat (STR) genotyping.
Response to cytotoxic drugs was assessed using the DIMSCAN fluorescence
imaging system. ATRX protein expression was measured with
immunoblots.Results: From a panel of 40 human NB cell lines we identified
4 ALT NB lines, LA-N-6, SK-N-FI, CHLA-90, and COG-N-291, that had
elevated TC > 2-fold that of TA+ NB cell lines (p<.005), two of which
demonstrated telomere repeat C-circles, and all lacked MYCN genomic
amplification. All 4 ALT+ NB cell lines maintain telomere length with
significantly low levels of telomerase activity (p<.005) and mRNA
expression of TERT relative to telomerase-positive NB cell lines; 3 of
the 4 ALT lines lacked p53 function and LA-N-6, the sole p53-functional
ALT line carries a homozygous deletion of p14(ARF). ALT lines had a
significant increase (p<.05) in the expression of 28 of the 61 DNA-repair
genes analyzed by TLDA relative to telomerase-positive lines (including
those that manifest multidrug resistance); 10 of these genes are involved
in the nucleotide excision repair pathway. All 4 ALT cell lines showed a
high degree of multi-drug resistance, with the mean concentration
cytotoxic to 90% of the ALT cells (IC90) being higher than clinically
achievable plasma levels for melphalan (2-fold), etoposide (4-fold),
topotecan (5-fold), and carboplatin (4-fold). CHLA-90 had undetectable
ATRX protein levels, whereas the other three ALT+ NB cell lines expressed
ATRX.Conclusions: ALT-based telomere maintenance in NB cell lines was
associated with loss of p53 function, increased expression of DNA-repair
genes, and resistance to DNA-damaging chemotherapy. Loss of ATRX
expression is not essential for ALT to develop in NB. Novel,
p53-independent therapies should be considered to treat neuroblastomas
harboring the ALT phenotype.

