Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E2F7 regulates sensitivity to the cytotoxic actions of
anthracyclins in squamous cell carcinoma.


Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the skin and head and neck region is a
common and potentially fatal malignancy. Current chemotherapy treatments
are generally not curative. Therefore, there is considerable need to
develop new and targeted therapies to treat SCC. There is abundant data
to show that E2Fs play an important role in many KC functions such as
differentiation, growth and apoptosis. However, the identification of two
new inhibitory forms of E2F, E2F7 and E2F8 has caused a rethink of our
previous models. In this study, we examined the effects of E2F1, E2F7 and
E2F8 on cytotoxic responses to chemotherapeutic agents.For in vitro
experiments, we generated murine KCs from E2F7 fl/fl or E2F8 fl/fl mice
that were made deficient in E2F7 and E2F8 following infection with Cre
expressing adenoviral constructs. In addition, we had KCs generated from
E2F1 KO mice. Our results showed that E2F8 deficient KCs displayed
unaltered responses to 3 structurally different classes of
chemotherapeutics represented by doxorubicin (anthracycline), cisplatin
(platinum) or etoposide (topoisomerase II inhibitor). Similarly, E2F1 and
E2F7-deficient KCs retained apoptotic responses to etoposide and
cisplatin. In contrast, E2F7-deficient murine KCs were selectively
sensitised to the cytotoxic actions of doxorubicin whilst E2F1-deficiency
protected against doxorubicin. We showed that the sensitivity to
doxorubicin was E2F7 specific since the reintroduction of E2F7 in E2F7
deficient KCs had a clear protective effect against doxorubicin. These
results indicate that E2F7 regulate cytotoxic responses of SCC to
doxorubicin, and doxorubicin toxicity is mediated, in part, by an
E2F1-dependent mechanism. We also looked at the possible mechanism to
drive E2F7-mediated doxorubicin induced cell death. Our results showed
activation of caspase-3 in E2F7 deficient KCs mediates the
doxorubicin-induced reduction in cell viability. Since E2F7 modulates
sensitivity to doxorubicin, we looked at different SCC cells in their
response to cytotoxic action of doxorubicin. The results suggested that
SCC cells vary in their sensitivity to doxorubicin and this correlates
with E2F7/E2F1 protein expression ratio in these SCC cells. The most
sensitive SCC cell lines, KJD, had a very low E2F7/E2F1 ratio whilst the
most insensitive SCC cell line, SCC25, had a very high E2F7/E2F1 ratio.
These data showed that E2F7/E2F1 ratio is disrupted in SCC and this
contributes to the insensitivity to cytotoxic actions of
doxorubicin.Combined, these data indicate the existence of a novel,
non-redundant and isoform-specific activities of E2F7 in KCs that have
implications for our understanding of chemotherapeutic sensitivity in
SCC. Our findings would suggest that if we sensitise SCC to the effects
of anthracyclines, this would have a significant clinical value and add
to therapeutic options available to treat SCC patients where there is a
critical need.

