Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Promoter hypermethylation and silencing of tumor suppressor genes
RASSF1A, WIF1, SLIT2 and ROBO1 in triple negative breast carcinomas.


Triple negative breast cancers represent 10-17% of all breast carcinomas.
They display a high histological grade, a more aggressive clinical
behavior and they lack any specific treatment, thus are associated to a
bad prognosis. As other cancer types, this cancer is caused by sequential
accumulation of mutations and genomic alterations involving tumor
suppressor genes and oncogenes. In this matter, inactivation of tumor
suppressor genes may occur by deletion, promoter hypermethylation or
point mutations. In previous study by array CGH we found several tumor
suppressor candidate genes deleted in a hereditary breast cancer set of
tumors. In addition we studied 4 of these tumor suppressor genes RASSF1A,
WIF1, SLIT2 and ROBO1 in a non triple negative set of breast cancer
tumors, and found a high frequency of promoter methylation, statistically
associated with loss of protein expression for RASSF1A and WIF1. In the
present study we aimed to extend the analysis to triple negative breast
cancer tumors due to their clinical relevance. Methylation analysis
through MS-PCR revealed that RASSF1A promoter was hypermethylated in
52.9% of triple negative tumors, and presents loss of expression in 80.6%
of the tumors. WIF1 promoter was hypermethylated in 89.1% and its protein
expression was downregulated in 63.1% of the tumors. For SLIT2 we found
frequent promoter hypermethylation among tumors (82.6%) showing loss of
expression in 88% of the tumors. MS-PCR analyses were not informative for
ROBO1, but protein expression was reduced in 49% of all tumors. Our
results show that a high percentage of tumors present silencing of
RASSF1A, WIF1, SLIT2 and/or ROBO1, and therefore implying the impairment
of the pathways they represent. This findings support these genes may
have an important role in triple negative breast tumor development.
Fondecyt 1080595.

