Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemoprevention of mammary and prostate cancer by phenethyl
isothiocyanate in vivo is associated with suppression of vimentin protein
expression.


Phenethyl isothiocyanate (PEITC), a constituent of many edible
cruciferous vegetables (eg, watercress), exhibits in vivo preventive
efficacy against cancer in rodents induced by structurally diverse
chemical carcinogens. We have also shown recently that dietary
administration of PEITC (3 mol PEITC/g diet) confers significant
protection against breast and prostate cancer development in MMTV-neu and
TRAMP model, respectively. Prevention of prostate cancer by PEITC
administration in TRAMP mice was associated with induction of E-cadherin
protein expression. Because suppression of E-cadherin protein level
concomitant with induction of mesenchymal markers (eg, vimentin) is a
biochemical hallmark of epithelial-mesenchymal transition, a process
implicated in cancer metastasis, we hypothesized that PEITC treatment was
likely to suppress vimentin protein expression. Contrary to this
prediction, exposure of cultured human breast (MDA-MB-231) and prostate
cancer cells (PC-3 and DU145) to PEITC resulted in a dose-dependent
increase in vimentin protein level, which was observed as early as 6
hours post-treatment and persisted for the duration of the experiment (24
hours). RNA interference of vimentin resulted in a modest augmentation of
PEITC-mediated inhibition of MDA-MB-231 and PC-3 cell migration as well
as cell viability. Furthermore, the PEITC-induced apoptosis was
moderately increased upon siRNA knockdown of vimentin protein level in
MDA-MB-231 and PC-3 cells. To our surprise, PEITC administration caused a
marked decrease in vimentin protein expression in vivo in tumors of
MMTV-neu (breast) and TRAMP mice (prostate). The results of the present
study indicate that cancer chemoprevention by PEITC in vivo is associated
with suppression of vimentin protein expression. The present study was
supported by the grant CA101753-09 awarded by the National Cancer
Institute.

