Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of megakaryocytes in breast cancer metastasis to bone.


Breast cancer cells frequently metastasize to bone. Despite the clinical
ramifications, very little is understood about the fundamental mechanisms
responsible for this phenomenon. While analyzing femur sections from mice
that had been inoculated in the left ventricle of the heart with human
metastatic MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, we saw a several fold increase
in the number of megakaryocytes (MKs) in the bone marrow. We hypothesized
that either MKs aid in the growth of cancer cells in the bone by
preparing a niche for the metastases or that the increase resulted from
the altered microenvironment of the marrow due to the presence of the
cancer. MKs are the pre-cursors to platelets and normally represent a
small portion of all bone marrow cells. However, they can increase
exponentially under stressful conditions such as primary thrombocythemia
and in chronic myelogenous leukemia. Platelets are known to interact with
tumor cells to contribute to hematogenous metastasis and angiogenesis.
Thrombocytosis, high platelet count, is a poor prognostic factor for
breast cancer metastasis; and moreover, many cancer patients die from
thromboembolisms. MKs also play a crucial role in bone metabolism and
skeletal homeostasis.Objectives: to determine (1) if the increase in MKs
precedes the growth of cancer cells in the bone; (2) the role that cancer
cell-osteoblast/stromal interactions play in the increase in
megakaryopoiesis. For aim 1, MK numbers in the femurs of athymic mice
inoculated with MDA-MB-231-luc intracardially (metastasis) were compared
with those inoculated in the mammary gland (no metastasis). Serum was
assayed for key MK maturation factors thrombopoietin (TPO) and
stromal-derived factor-1(SDF-1). There was on average a two-fold increase
in MK numbers in the femurs of mice with metastasic disease. However,
this increase was not found in mice with localized growth but no
metastasis. The increase correlated with the increase in metastatic tumor
burden. There was no increase in platelet count, SDF-1, or TPO even when
MK numbers were high. We concluded that the cancer cells preceded the
increase of MKs in the bone marrow in a xenograft model. A syngeneic
model of Balb/c mice with 4T1.2 cancer cells that metastasize from the
mammary gland and 67NR cells that do not are also being compared. Thus
far we have found that femurs of mice carrying 4t1.2 cells for 30 days
also showed an increase in the numbers of MKs. Finally, Balb/c mice
lacking TPO and thus having low MKs will be tested for metastasis.This
work was supported by the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command
under W81XWH-10-1-0253.

