Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC): A resource for
therapeutic biomarker discovery in cancer cells.


The Genomic of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC; www.cancerRxgene.org)
resource facilitates development of targeted cancer therapies through
pre-clinical identification of therapeutic biomarkers. GDSC is the
largest public resource for information on drug sensitivity in cancer
cells and links these data to extensive genomic information to identify
molecular features that influence anticancer drug response.There is
compelling evidence that alterations in cancer genomes strongly influence
clinical responses to anticancer therapies. There are several examples
where genomic changes are used as molecular biomarkers to stratify
patients most likely to benefit from a treatment (e.g. BRAF in melanoma).
Despite these successes, the majority of cancer drugs have not been
linked to specific molecular features that could be used to direct their
clinical use to maximize patient benefit. We are using pharmacogenomic
profiling in cancer cell lines as a biomarker discovery platform by
systematically linking pharmacological data with genomic information in
cancer cells. The GDSC database contains drug sensitivity data generated
from high-throughput screening performed by the Cancer Genome Project at
the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute and the Center for Molecular
Therapeutics at Massachusetts General Hospital using a collection of
>1,200 cancer cell lines. GDSC release v3 (November 2012) contains drug
sensitivity data for almost 80,000 experiments, describing response to
142 anticancer drugs across over 700 cancer cell lines. To identify
molecular markers of drug response, cell line drug sensitivity data are
integrated with large genomic datasets obtained from COSMIC (Catalogue of
Somatic Mutations in Cancer), including information on somatic mutations
in cancer genes, gene amplification and deletion, tissue type and
transcriptional data. Analysis of GDSC data is through a web portal based
on queries of specific anticancer drugs or cancer genes. Interactive
graphical representations of the data are used throughout with links to
related resources, and all datasets are freely available and
downloadable. The GDSC database will undergo significant expansion in
coming years as drug sensitivity and genomic datasets increase in size
and complexity. GDSC provides a unique public resource incorporating
large drug sensitivity and genomic datasets to facilitate discovery of
new therapeutic biomarkers for cancer therapies.

