Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative analysis of MT1-MMP activity on cell surface: A FRET
assay model.


Introduction: MT1-MMP plays critical roles during tumor malignancy and is
one of the best-validated proteolytic enzyme targets on cancer cells. It
is up-regulated in several tumor types, including breast, cervical, and
ovarian cancer and is significantly associated with adverse outcome. In
spite of the large proteolytic repertoire and of the robust proteolytic
activity of engineered soluble forms of the enzyme, several studies
indicate that soluble MT1-MMP mediated proteolysis is not sufficient per
se for efficient penetration of ECM barriers. Thus, localization of the
enzyme at the cell surface is essential to translate its proteolytic
activity into a modification of cell function. The transmembrane nature
of MT1-MMP allows it to influence extracellular remodeling of the matrix
surrounding tumor cells as well as intracellular signaling events
involved in cell invasion. Like virtually all cell surface proteases,
quantitative assessment of MT1-MMP in its native environment has not been
achieved. A mechanistic examination of MT1-MMP at the cell surface would
unravel the influences of binding partners on activities, and set the
stage for the development of unique, non-active site inhibitors.Methods:
TM MT1-MMP (a deletion mutant lacking the TM domain) was transfected
transiently in COS-1 cells to generate soluble MT1-MMP. Estimation of the
amount of active enzyme was done by TIMP-2 titration. WT-MT1-MMP (Wild
Type) was stably transfected in MCF-7 cells which are deficient in
MT1-MMP. A cell-based FRET assay was developed in a 384-well format using
fluorogenic triple-helical peptide substrates (fTHPs) that are either
suitable for most collagenolytic MMPs or selective for different
collagenolytic MMPs to quantify protease activity. Kinetic parameters
were calculated and activity comparisons were made for soluble MT1-MMP
and several surface-bound MT1-MMP mutants to evaluate the importance of
the cell surface and specific MT1-MMP domains on activity.Results and
Conclusion: Soluble MT1-MMP was expressed, purified, and quantified by
TIMP-2 titration. Kinetic parameters KM, Vmax, and kcat/KM were
determined by calculation of rates of hydrolysis of fTHP-9 in a FRET
assay. A high level of MT1-MMP expression in transfected cells relative
to those mock transfected cells was verified by western blot. Kinetic
parameters determined with WT-MT1-MMP transfected cells as compared to
mock transfected cell suggested that MT1-MMP has affinity for fTHP-9.
kcat/KM for the soluble enzyme was 32800 sec1M1, three times higher as
compared to membrane tethered enzyme. Thus, the catalytic efficiency of
the enzyme is different in the cell surface environment. In this study,
we have developed cell based assays useful for the mechanistic and
quantitative evaluation of substrates and inhibitors of MT1-MMP in its
native environment as well as to rank order potential inhibitors.

