Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A three-dimensional in vitro bioreactor for analysis of the tumor
microenvironment: investigation of interstitial flow and the mechanism of
metastasis.


As recent decades have seen extensive resources dedicated to exploring
tumor metastasis, discoveries have exposed a need for understanding the
intricacies of the tumor microenvironment (TME) in an ex vivo model. Much
of the heterogeneity of the disease stems from the complexity of
interactions between the cells that comprise the TME, placing its
investigation at the heart of developing effective treatment. A number of
findings implicate chemokines and their receptors, expressed early in
cancer progression, in promoting tumor metastasis. These findings
identify several cell types significantly involved in secreting and
responding to chemokines, such as tumor cells, fibroblasts, and
endothelial cells, among others. Chemokine expression depends not only on
the cell types of the TME but also on the conditions in the surrounding
matrix, especially interstitial flow. A strong link has been identified
between interstitial flow and tumor metastasis. This flow, a result of
rapid lymphangiogenesis, correlates with the expression of a number of
chemokines responsible for tumor invasion and metastasis. Current
limitations for studying the human TME have stalled progress since mouse
models cannot fully engage all the relevant human cell types. Thus, the
emergence of complex intercellular relationships within the TME generates
a need for heterotypic three-dimensional in vitro models to cover the
gaps between animal models and human studies. The need for 3D in vitro
models is amplified by the exposed importance of interstitial flow. To
mimic and examine the breast cancer tumor, we have designed a bioreactor,
machined through femtosecond laser-etching technology that allows for
co-culture of the numerous cell types that comprise the TME. The design
incorporates a semicircular chamber connected to a channel 200 m in width
by a thin porous filter of laser-etched glass. The device is coated with
poly-L-lysine and Collagen I to improve cell adhesion. To recreate the
TME, the semicircular chamber is loaded with cancer-associated
fibroblasts and tumor cells (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines) in a ratio
of 3:1 in 3D reconstituted basement membrane with 1.5 mg/mL Collagen I
(rat-tail) and 10% Matrigel. This 3D cell culture is grown for 5 days to
allow spheroid formation. Human microvascular endothelial cells are
cultured to form a confluent monolayer in the channel that is then
perfused with medium, of which a higher quantity is aspirated from the
outlet to generate interstitial flow through the 3D cell culture.
Cancer-associated leukocytes can be infused through the channel to better
mimic the TME. This unique and innovative design will allow in vitro
visualization of cell migration and expression, which can shed light on
the mechanisms of metastasis. Experiments can then be performed to
elucidate the specific relationships linking interstitial flow and
metastasis.

