Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of tumor associated macrophage on drug resistant in
non-small cell lung cancer .


Increased evidence suggests that chronic inflammation is associated with
cancer development, metastasis, invasion and drug resistant. The possible
mechanisms by which inflammation can contribute to carcinogenesis include
lymphocytes infiltration, cytokines and chemokines secretion, tissue
remodeling and angiogenesis, etc. The inflammatory mediators facilitate
the communication between tumor cells and tumor-associated host stromal
tissue, thereby accelerating tumor progression. Tumor-associated
macrophages (TAM) are key regulators of the link between inflammation and
cancer. Previous studies found macrophage in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) specimens by immunohistochemistry staining, and also discovered
interplay of cancer cells and macrophages would induce secretion of
certain cytokines and chemokines. However, the mechanism of cytokines and
chemokines involved with tumor drug resistant in NSCLC is still obscure.
It is also unclear the regulatory mechanisms in change of macrophages
from M1 to M2 phase affected by tumor cells.In this study, we attempt to
investigate the roles of TAM-mediated molecules using different
characteristics of NSCLC cell lines (H2126, CL1-1, H1437, H23, H838,
CL1-5, and H2009) as the study model. We will explore TAM mediators in
NSCLC cell lines to detect and compare the phenotypic characteristics;
then, we may investigate the transcriptional signaling pathways that are
associated with expression of TAM mediators. Finally, we will correlate
the expression of TAM mediators/proteins that are associated with
TAM-mediated regulatory signaling in tumor drug resistant to the outcome
of NSCLC patients. We believe that these proteins may serve as
therapeutic targets for NSCLC patients in the future.In our pilot study,
we analyzed the secretion stimulation of cytokines (MCP-1, IL-6, IL-7,
IL-8, IL-10, and TNF-a) and MMPs (MMP-8, MMP-9, MMP-10 and TIMP-1) from
cancer cells under the effect of macrophages. In the current study, we
will deeply concern that the ambivalent interactions between TAM
phenotypes and biological behavior of cancer cells, because the
paradoxical responses between cancer cells and TAMs in a to and fro way
are potentially evident.Citation Format: Wen-Chien Huang, Yu-Jen Chen.
The role of tumor associated macrophage on drug resistant in non-small
cell lung cancer . [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 5250. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5250

