Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Humanized NOD/Scid/IL2g-/- tumor grafts recapitulate primary
anaplastic large cell lymphoma.


Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) is a subtype of peripheral T-cell
lymphoma that includes two entities ALK+ and ALK- ALCL based on
chromosomal translocations of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK). ALK-
ALCL have very poor clinical outcome with conventional chemotherapy. Lack
of representative cell lines and/or models has compromised the
development of successful therapy.Toward this end, we report the
generation and characterization of a group of novel ALCL tumor grafts. We
implanted subcutaneously (s.c.) tumor tissue fragments, fresh or viable
cryopreserved, from 11 cases of primary systemic ALCL (3 ALK+ and 8 ALK-)
in six- to eight-week old severe immunocombined immunodeficiency NOD
Cg-Prkdcscid/Il2rgtm1wjl/SzJ (NSG) mice. A single leukaemic ALCL sample
was injected i.v. or s.c.Six cases led to successful lymphoma growth
within 6-12 weeks as subcutaneous solid spheroid masses constituted by a
uniform population of large pleomorphic cells CD30-positive. All tumor
grafts were re-implanted in recipient animals, in same cases up to 21
consecutive implants with an analogous time growth rate. Two cases, in
the same way of the original human neoplasia, were early associated with
concomitant enlargement of multiple organs. All tumor graft lines
eventually showed disseminate disease with involvement of distant lymph
nodes and of spleen (with homig in peri-arteriolar spaces), liver
(initially observed within the sinusoidal spaces) and kidney. The
morphological and immunohistochemical (IHC) evaluation (expression of
CD30, cytotoxic proteins and ALK) of the serially propagated ALCL tumor
grafts demonstrated a high concordance between primary and derived animal
tumors which showed highly stable profile along different passages from
the early generation (T1) until the final ones (up to T16). The clonal
relationship with primary and corresponding tumor grafts was confirmed by
gene TCR rearrangement analyses and by ALK FISH studies.In addition we
interrogated the model using gene expression profiling and single
nucleotide polymorphism which established a close relationship among
primary and derived tumors. Massive parallel sequencing on mRNA
transcripts defines the presence of two novel chimeras involving NF1-MAZ
and TRAF1-ALK1, which confirmes the evidence of ALK signaling and
pinpoint a role of RAS in ALK- ALCL.The tumor grafts displayed, also,
therapeutic responses with conventional therapy (CHOP) which reflected
that seen in the donor patients: initial partial responses followed
invariably by clinical relapses. To overcome this refractory we assayed
the sensitivity of two tumorgraft lines, generated from ALK+ ALCL, to a
new selective ALK inhibitor (CEP28122) that led a rapid and stable
response. This study demonstrated the key role of these libraries of
tumor grafts, especially in developing and testing new therapeutic
regimens in refractory ALCL patients.

