Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Trk receptor leads to mesenchymal-epithelial
transition in human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines.


Sorafenib, the first molecular targeted agent for HCC, has been shown to
be clinically effective in global clinical trials. Although overall
survival of HCC patients has been extended by a few months, these results
are not satisfactory. Clinical studies involving other molecular targeted
therapies and combination therapies are ongoing, but no clearly effective
therapy has yet emerged. While we were exploring new targets related to
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is involved in metastasis
and ivasion of advanced cancers, we found the EMT-inducing potential of
the tropo-myosine-related kinase B (TrkB) receptor, whose ligands include
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF).We observed by phase contrast
microscopy that K252a, a Trk inhibitor, induced alterations in cell shape
of several HCC cell lines (HAK-1A, HAK-1B, KYN-2, Huh7, and HLF). The
morphological change was most obvious in HAK-1B cells, which have been
proven to have mesenchymal features: the K252a-treated HAK-1B turned to
polygonal epithelial-like cells. In Western blot analysis, the E-cadherin
expression level was increased in the K252a-treated HAK-1B cells. Similar
findings were demonstrated also in HAK-1A, which is a sister cell line of
HAK-1B. The mechanistic basis for the mesenchymal-epithelial transition
(MET) was down-regulation of E2A, an EMT-regulating transcriptional
factor. Although the down-regulation of E2A was universally found in
other cell lines, such as KYN-2, Huh7, and HLF, their expression levels
of E-cadherin were not apparently increased.Our findings suggest that
inhibition of TrkB signaling may be a new therapeutic approach for
advanced HCC, since the inhibition may give rise to MET in aggressive
tumors. In addition, the present data are impressive insofar as they
imply a relationship between the liver and neurosystem.

