Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MET inhibition using SU11274 impairs cellular activities in
hepatocellular and Cholangiocarcinomas with high levels of MET and low
levels of EGFR expressions.


Introduction: c-MET pathway is often deregulated in human cancer
progression including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and
cholangiocarcinoma (CK). Moreover, high level of HGF, and c-MET have been
correlated with poor prognosis, aggressiveness and metastasis in HCC and
CK (Kaposi-Novak et al., 2006; Miyamoto et al., 2011). We aimed to
characterize the expression pattern of MET in HCC/CK specimens, to
evaluate the effects of MET inhibition on HCC/CK cell properties, and to
identify potential biomarkers of sensitivity and resistance to
SU11274.Methods: SU11274 is a specific inhibitor of overexpressed and
activated MET. MET expression was assessed on human paraffin-embedded
liver section by IHC. Antiproliferative effects of SU11274 and an
EGFR/HER2 inhibitor (lapatinib) were evaluated in human HCC (Sk-Hep1 and
its sunitinib-tolerant counterpart SK-Suni) and CK (Mz-ch-A1, Mz-ch-A2,
and SK-CH) cell lines using MTT assay. mRNA expression and protein levels
were assessed by qRT-PCR and Western blot, respectively. Cell motility
was investigated by wound-healing and matrigel invasion assays.Results:
MET expression level was higher in HCC and CK tumor samples than adjacent
normal liver tissue. Characterization of cell lines showed that
MET-protein and -mRNA expression were detectable in all cell lines,
Mz-ch-A1, Mz-ch-A2 and SK-HEP1 expressing higher MET levels (high-MET)
compared to the other cell lines (low-MET). HGF-induced MET activation
was associated with differential pattern of p-METTyr1234/35, p-GAB1,
p-ERK1/2, and p-AKTser473 between high-MET and low-MET cell lines. We
showed that SU11274 inhibits HGF-induced downstream signaling in all HCC
and CK cell lines at 0.5-2M. However, antiproliferative effects were only
observed in the high-MET cell lines; inhibition rates were 83%, 53% and
48% in Mz-chA-1, Mz-chA-2 and SK-Hep1, respectively. Interestingly,
SU11274 also potently decreased HGF-dependent cell motility (75-90%
inhibition) in high-MET cells but not in low-MET cells. Since cells with
low-MET showed high EGFR expression, we tested the EGFR/HER2 inhibitor
lapatinib on cell proliferation. In contrast to SU11274, lapatinib
inhibited proliferation in low-MET/high-EGFR cells (64% and 60%
inhibition rate in SK-CH and SK-Suni, respectively) but not in
high-MET/low-EGFR cell lines. Complementary results with a
sorafenib-tolerant cell line, SK-sora and two intra-hepatic
cholangiocarcinoma cell lines will be added.Conclusion: In HCC and CK
cells, inhibition of MET-signaling by SU11274 results in decreased cell
proliferation, motility and invasion restricted to high-MET/low-EGFR cell
lines. Thus, high-MET/low EGFR HCC and CK might be the candidate tumor
types to evaluate novel MET inhibitors, whereas low-MET/high-EGFR HCC and
CK may be preferentially tested for EGFR pathway inhibition.

