Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fusion protein capable to initiate two apoptotic pathways in
cancer cells resistant to classical PARA's.


Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL/Apo2L) is
a promising antitumor agent, but its clinical utility in human
malignancies is limited by the resistance mechanism evolved in many
cancers types, including overexpresion of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 like
proteins and lack or disfunction of proapoptotic agents.Bid is well known
proapoptotic factor able to inhibit Bcl-2 proteins after activation by
caspases 8 or 10. Bid may also promote apoptosis by forming selective
voltage dependent anion-channels in mitochondrial membrane through
interaction with Bax protein.AD-O57.4 is a fusion protein consisting of a
short peptide derived from Bid linked to an amino terminus of soluble
TRAIL domain. The separating sequence contains additional motif
recognized by MMPs and uPa proteases that enables cutting-off and
releasing the proapoptotic peptide in tumor environment.Activity of
AD-O57.4 was examined using a MTT assay on NCI panel and primal, patient
derived cancer cell lines. Apoptosis was analyzed by caspase 3 activation
and mitochondrial membrane potential change. The expression of Bid was
determined by Western Blot analysis.Various of tested cell lines were
very sensitive to AD-O57.4 protein with IC50 value between 0.06-173
ng/ml, whereas 5 cell lines showed weak sensitivity or remained
resistant. Cytotoxic activity of TRAIL was significantly lower in
comparison with AD-O57.4 protein. AD-O57.4 induced relatively strong
mitochondrial depolarization both in moderate sensitive cell line
(NCI-H460) and TRAIL-resistant cell line (A549). Analysis of caspase 3
activation and expression of Bid protein showed very fast induction of
apoptosis by AD-O57.4 in comparison to TRAIL protein. Strong antitumor
activity of AD-O57.4 fusion protein was analyzed on the xenograft models
of series of human cancer cell lines regarding TRAIL sensitive human
colorectal carcinoma Colo205, TRAIL resistant, hepatocellular carcinoma
HepG2 and human uterine sarcoma (MES-SA/Dx5) - a multidrug resistant cell
line where it caused almost complete tumor regression and showed much
higher efficacy than TRAIL alone or standard chemotherapeutic agent.We
demonstrated that AD-O57.4 protein has broad in vitro cytotoxic activity
against a panel of cancer cell lines and in vivo antitumor activity on
xenograft model. Sensitization by AD-O57.4 was dependent on short peptide
derived from Bid protein indicating its role for mitochondrial signal
amplification in the proapoptotic TRAIL activity.The use of a peptide
derived from Bid protein causes a significant increase in potency of
TRAIL activity and therefore TRAIL resistant cancer cells can be
sensitized by the fusion peptide which can connect extrinsic and
intrinsic pathways of apoptosis.

