Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo tyrosinase reporter gene imaging with multispectral
photoacoustic technology.


Photoacoustic imaging is a powerful tool for assessing tumor vasculature
and oxygen saturation as well as detecting contrast agents for molecular
imaging. Another exciting possibility is to visualize gene expression by
using a reporter which produces a photoacoustic contrast agent.
Tyrosinase is such a reporter in that its expression results in the
production of melanin, which gives a strong photoacoustic signal. Here we
describe the use of a commercially available photoacoustic (PA) imaging
system (Vevo LAZR, VisualSonics, Toronto) to image inducible gene
expression in subcutaneous xenograft tumors using tyrosinase as a
reporter gene.The photoacoustic imaging system generated light from a
tunable laser (680 - 970 nm) which was delivered through fiber optic
bundles integrated into a linear array transducer (LZ-250, fc = 21 MHz),
mounted to a linear stepper motor for 3D imaging. Animals (n=3) having
MCF-7 xenograft tumors on either flank transfected with (+TYR) or without
(-TYR) doxycycline-regulated tyrosinase were imaged before and one week
after the induction of tyrosinase expression. 3D images of the tumors
were acquired using multiple wavelengths (680, 750, 800, 850, 900 and
950nm) and 2D images were acquired across the entire wavelength range of
the laser to generate absorption curves for blood and melanin. To confirm
the presence of melanin and distinguish it from the endogenous blood
signal, one animal was exsanguinated and the tumor was imaged again.
Approximately 1mm-thick slices of the tumors were taken and photographed
for visual confirmation of the presence of melanin.Comparison of pre- and
post-doxycycline images of +TYR tumors clearly showed enhanced contrast
in the tumor which closely matched the absorption spectrum of melanin.
This signal persisted upon exsanguination. -TYR tumors showed signal
which corresponded with the spectra of oxy and deoxy hemoglobin and
changed little over the course of the experiment. Visual inspection of
the excised sliced tumors revealed pigmentation in the +TYR tumors which
was absent in the -TYR tumors.Here we have shown the ability of the Vevo
LAZR photoacoustic imaging system to visualize inducible reporter gene
expression in vivo. This has implications for assessing genetically
controlled cellular processes and their response to anti-cancer drugs but
also for monitoring gene therapy for cancer treatment non-invasively.

