Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDZdomain binding kinase promotes invasion in prostate cancer
cells through upregulation of matrix metalloproteinases2 and 9.


Members of the protein kinase superfamily of enzymes modulate many of the
facets of the tumor phenotype, such as survival, proliferation, invasion
and metastasis. Genetic, epigenetic or regulatory alterations can result
in aberrant kinase behavior; the targeted inhibition of which has been a
growing focus in anti-cancer drug development. PDZ-domain binding kinase
(PBK) is an under-studied, dual-specificity serine/threonine kinase that
has been shown to play a key role in cell division and regulation of
multiple signaling pathways. It is expressed physiologically in
spermatogenic germ and proliferating neural precursor cells, as well as
aberrantly in a variety of cancer types. However, the role of PBK in
prostate cancer has not been clearly defined. We have found that PBK
expression varies greatly across a panel of human prostate cancer cell
lines. Interestingly, the level of expression of PBK in prostate cancer
cells directly correlates with their invasive ability. Since matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP) -2 and -9 are key invasive effectors in a
variety of cancers, we investigated their protein levels in relation to
that of PBK. Expression of exogenous PBK in low PBK-expressing prostate
cancer cell lines (LNCaP and VCaP) significantly upregulated levels of
both the propeptide and active forms of MMP-2 and MMP-9; conversely,
knockdown of PBK expression in a high PBK-expressing prostate cancer cell
line (PC3M) significantly down-regulated both forms of these two MMPs. To
determine if a change in PBK levels produces a significant phenotypic
effect, we measured the effect of PBK overexpression or knockdown on the
prostate cancer cell lines invasive ability, as measured in a modified
Boyden chamber invasion assay. Overexpression of PBK increased prostate
cancer cell invasion approximately ten fold, while PBK knockdown reduced
PC3M invasive ability more than three fold. Moreover, immunohistochemical
analysis revealed that PBK is present in the majority of human prostate
cancer samples tested but not at all in the benign or normal human
prostate tissue. These data indicate a novel function of PBK where its
presence plays a role in invasion of human prostate cancer cells through
up-regulation of MMP-2 and MMP-9. Therefore, the role of PBK in promoting
cell invasion, combined with its general lack of expression in normal
cells, nominates PBK as a potentially important therapeutic target for
prostate cancer.

