Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delphinidin reduces cell proliferation and induces apoptosis of
non-small cell lung cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.


Lung cancer is a major health problem worldwide and accounts for
approximately 28% of all cancer-related deaths in the USA. Like most
cancers, lung cancer is a conglomeration of diseases of diverse etiology,
broadly divided into small-cell lung cancer (SCLC, comprising 20% of lung
cancers), and non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC, comprising 80% of lung
cancers). Lung cancer has proven difficult to control with conventional
therapeutic and surgical approaches, and the prognosis is poor with an
overall 5-year survival rate of only 15% for NSCLC in the USA. The
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) have emerged as two clinically validated
targets for NSCLC. The development of dietary agents which exhibit
combined EGFR/VEGFR-2 inhibitory activities may be a step forward to
improve antitumor efficacy and to broaden application possibilities. In
our pursuit for the identification of non-toxic dietary ingredients for
prevention and treatment of cancer, we found that delphinidin, an
anthocyanidin, present in pigmented fruits and vegetables, is a potent
inhibitor of both EGFR and VEGFR-2 in NSCLC cells. In the present study,
we determined the effects of delphinidin on cell growth and apoptosis in
vitro and on tumor growth and angiogenesis in vivo in NSCLC cells that
overexpress EGFR/VEGFR-2. Delphinidin (5-60 M) treatment of NSCLC cells
inhibited the (i) activation of PI3K, and (ii) phosphorylation of AKT and
MAPKs. We next determined whether inhibition of EGFR/VEGFR-2 signaling
pathways by delphinidin exhibits a growth inhibitory effect. We observed
that delphinidin treatment of NCI-H441, SK-MES-1 and A549 cells resulted
in a dose-dependent inhibition of cell growth without having any
substantial effects on normal human bronchial epithelial cells as
assessed by MTT assay. Treatment of NCI-H441 and SK-MES-1 cells with
delphindin (5-60 M) resulted in (i) cleavage of PARP protein, (ii)
activation of caspase-3 and -9, (iii) downregulation of anti-apoptotic
proteins (Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and Mcl-1), (iv) upregulation of pro-apoptotic
proteins (Bax and Bak), and (v) decreased expression of PCNA and cyclin
D1. In athymic nude mice implanted with human NSCLC cells (NCI-H441 or
SK-MES-1), delphinidin (1-2 mg, i.p. thrice-weekly) treatment caused a
significant inhibition of tumor growth. There was also a decrease in the
expression of markers for cell proliferation (Ki-67 and PCNA) and
angiogenesis (CD31 and VEGF) as well as an induction of apoptosis in
tumor tissues treated with delphinidin, when compared with tumor tissues
of control mice. Based on these observations, we suggest that
delphinidin, alone or as an adjuvant to current therapies, could be
useful for the management of NSCLCs, especially those that overexpress
EGFR and VEGFR-2.

