Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Up-regulated expression and activation of invadopodia-associated
proteases in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC).


To invade adjacent tissues, cancer cells form special membrane
protrusions with high proteolytic activity, named invadopodia. To better
understand the role of invadopodia-associated proteolytic systems in the
growth of esophageal cancer, we studied the expression of two serine
proteases, FAP-alpha and DPPIV, and three metalloproteinases, MMP-2,
MMP-9 and MT1-MMP, in a primary ESCC. The enzyme profile was evaluated in
relation to the synthesis of cortactin as an important control factor in
invadopodia formation and function. The expression and activity of
proteases and cortactin in cancer tissues paired with non-cancer tissues
were analyzed by RT-PCR, WB and zymography. Tissue samples were obtained
from 24 patients who were undergoing surgical resection for esophageal
carcinoma. All the tumors had been classified as ESCC and diagnosed as T3
or T4, N1-N3, and M0-M1 according to the TNM classification. The
non-cancer tissue samples were taken from the distal area (5-10 cm from
the macroscopic changes) and confirmed in histological examinations to be
R0. We found an average 3-fold increase in DPPIV expression and an
average five-fold higher level of FAP-alpha expression in ESCC over the
control tissues. Up-regulation of DPPIV positively correlates with the
FAP-alpha expression ratio. FAP-alpha transcripts and DPPIV mRNAs were
observed in all the analyzed cancer and non-cancer tissue samples. We
found a much higher level of the active MT1-MMP form in cancers relative
to paired non-cancer tissues. The correlation between the level of
MT1-MMP active form and MMP-2 activity observed in this study shows a
tight connection between the two enzymes. We observed enhanced synthesis
and activation of both MMP-2 and MMP-9 in cancer tissues. The cancer to
normal ratios of the two active gelatinases correlated positively with
the expression levels of both serine proteases. We examined the levels of
CTTN in the cancer and non-cancer tissues of esophagus in order to find
out if CTTN expression is associated with the expression and/or activity
of invadopodia proteases. The increased level of CTTN was identified in
35% of ESCC tissues but the differences between groups were not
statistically significant. No significant correlation was found between
CTTN expression level and any other factors evaluated in our study.In
conclusion, we showed that invadopodia-associated proteases, including
FAP-alpha, DPPIV, MT1-MMP, MMP-2 and MMP-9, are significantly
up-regulated in ESCC and that it might contribute to a more aggressive
esophageal cancer. The presence of FAP-alpha in the cancer-free surgical
margin suggests that alterations in the stromal environment may extend
much father into surrounding tumor tissues than is usually considered.

