Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular docking exploration of potential RET tyrosine kinase
inhibitors at non ATP-binding sites.


RET (REarranged during Transfection) tyrosine kinase receptor is a
transmembrane protein required for the development of
neural-crest-derived cells, the urogenital system, and the central and
peripheral nervous systems, notably the enteric nervous system. The RET
protein has an extracellular domain with a cysteine-rich region and four
cadherin-like domains, a transmembrane domain, and an intracellular
tyrosine kinase domain, required for RET phosphorylation and downstream
signaling. The structure of the RET kinase shares with other tyrosine
kinases many conserved functional motifs and regulatory residues that are
important for the kinase enzyme function. RET activation requires binding
of a glial cell-line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and a co-receptor
of the GDNF family receptors . Germline mutations of RET, leading to
uncontrolled activation, are associated with thyroid cancer, and recently
with colorectal and lung cancers, and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.
RET mutations that result in decreased receptor function have been linked
to developmental defects, such as Hirschsprung disease and kidney
anomalies. The design of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) inhibitors has
traditionally targeted the enzymes highly conserved ATP binding pocket.
This approach resulted in the discovery of potent small molecule
inhibitors, but with relatively low selectivity. To date there are no
RET-specific inhibitors available for therapy, although few small
molecule inhibitors are undergoing clinical evaluations as potential RET
inhibitors. Since there are important critical regions within the RET
molecule (e.g., the substrate binding pocket and activation loop) that
contain unique amino acids and structural features, we used the method of
molecular docking to virtually screen a diverse library of compounds that
potentially target non-ATP binding sites of RET. Known ligands of RET
were used to test the success of docking before the library of compounds
was screened, docking solutions were inspected and ranked, and best
compounds selected for novel structural features and future testing.
Multiple comparisons with other known structures of RTK-ligand complexes
have been performed in order to identify molecular features that would
characterize the discovery of potential RET-specific inhibitors.Citation
Format: Adrian C. Nicolescu, Taranjit S. Gujral, Jordan DS Zelt, Lois M.
Mulligan. Molecular docking exploration of potential RET tyrosine kinase
inhibitors at non ATP-binding sites. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5139. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5139

