Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Surface modification of epirubicin-loaded PLGA nanoparticle with
biotinylated chitosan enhances anti-cancer efficacy in breast cancer
cells.


Nanoparticle (NP) delivery systems in cancer therapies provide better
penetration of therapeutic and diagnostic substances within the body at a
reduced risk in comparison with conventional cancer therapies. This is to
continue our earlier work on the poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA)
NPs with biotinylated chitosan (Bio-CS) modification, the modified PLGA
NPs were further used as an epirubicin (EPB) carrier to enhance cancer
targeting activity and to overcome multidrug resistance (MDR) in
adriamycin-resistance human breast cancer cell line (MCF-7/ADM). In this
study, Bio-CS were synthesized and characterized. The degree of
substitution (DS), as defined as the number of biotin per 100
anhydroglucose units of CS, was determined by 1H-NMR and ICP. EPB-loaded
PLGA NPs were prepared by a solvent evaporation technique (W1/O/W2). The
PLGA NPs surface was modified by Bio-CS via covalent binding. PLGA NPs of
(231.421.0) nm in diameter characterized by laser light scattering
technique, scanning electron microscopy are spherical and its drug
encapsulation efficiency is (84.13.4)%. Zeta potential of unmodified NP
was measured to be negative -(21.212.13) mV. The positive zeta potential
of modified NPs represented the presence of CS on the surface of the
modified NPs. Modified NPs were characterized for surface chemistry by
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Fourier transform infrared
(FT-IR). N region corresponding to the primary amide of CS and S region
corresponding to the biotin meant that PLGA NPs were successfully
surface-modified with Bio-CS. The 31% of surface DS biotin of Bio-CS
modified PLGA NPs were determined and the value was (1.36 0.34)
mol/100mg. In vitro drug release studies showed that Bio-CS modified NPs
had many advantages, such as prolonged drug release property and
decreased burst release, in comparison to the unmodified NPs, and the
modified NPs achieved relatively constant release kinetics. For
cytotoxicity evaluation in vitro, the MCF-7/ADM cells were treated with
free EPB, EPB-loaded PLGA NP and EPB-loaded NP with Bio-CS modification,
respectively, at a same concentration of 150g/mL, for 4, 24, 48 and 72 h.
We found that Bio-CS modified NPs markedly increased EPB anti-cancer
activity, compared to the unmodified NPs. Flowcytometry and confocal
laser scanning microscopy revealed that Bio-CS-modified NPs exhibited
greater extent of cellular uptake than unmodified NP and free EPB at 48h.
Moreover, the uptakes of CS-modified NPs were significantly increased and
cell viabilities were dramatically decreased in the MCF-7/ADM cells,
compared to the free EPB and PLGA NPs. In summary, the NPs by surface
modification with Bio-CS significantly enhanced anti-cancer drug EPB
delivery, increased drug efficacy, and thus this system will have great
potential for cancer chemotherapy.Citation Format: Hongli Chen, Rui Liu,
Wenbin Nan, Yongxue Wang, Yinsong Wang, Wancai Yang, Wancai Yang. Surface
modification of epirubicin-loaded PLGA nanoparticle with biotinylated
chitosan enhances anti-cancer efficacy in breast cancer cells.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5659.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5659

