Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondria-nuclear cross talk regulate cancer properties by
activating oncogenic pathways.


Mitochondria are semiautonomous organelles within cells that play an
important role in cellular energy metabolism, free radical generation,
and apoptosis. Mitochondria contain their own genome (mtDNA), which
encodes a number of proteins critical for energy metabolism, particularly
in oxidative phosphorylation. They are also the major source of
generating reactive oxygen species (ROS). So far, only limited studies
(mostly focused on specific mtDNA mutations) analyzed the significance of
mitochondria in cancer progression. However, it is not clear whether
mitochondrial genomic status or functional defects affect nuclear genome
stability and whether proteins involved in inter-genomic cross talk are
involved in tumorigenesis. Transmitochondrial cybrids (cybrids) are a
great utility for the study of the functional effects of mitochondria in
a defined nuclear background. Cybrids are constructed by fusing
enucleated cells harboring mitochondria of interest with 0 cells
(mtDNA-depleted cells). In our cybrid model, we used 0 cells from
moderately metastatic breast cancer cell line SUM159 as the common
nuclear background. Cybrids were generated using mitochondria from benign
breast epithelium (A1N4 & MCF10A), moderate (SUM159) and highly
metastatic (MDA-MB231) breast cancer cells. Mitochondrial functional
studies suggest that cybrids maintain the mitochondria characteristics of
the mitochondria donor cells with decreased electron transport chain
(ETC) function and increased ROS production in cybrids containing cancer
mitochondria. In vitro tumorigenic studies suggest that even under the
common moderate cancerous nuclear background, mitochondria from benign
cells decreased and metastatic cell increased oncogenic properties.
Metastatic mitochondria increased the expression of metastatic and EMT
marker proteins and decreased the epithelial cell markers. Cybrids with
mitochondria from benign breast cells showed an opposite protein
expression pattern. Interestingly autophosphorylation of tyrosine residue
(Tyr416) which results in Src activation was markedly increased in
cybrids with metastatic mitochondria. Further analysis suggested that Src
kinase phosphorylation depends on the mitochondrial characteristics and
phosphorylated Src located in mitochondria. Treatment with inhibitors of
Src kinases could abolish the oncogenic property of cybrids with
metastatic mitochondria. Our results demonstrated that mitochondria can
initiate cross-talk by regulation of nuclear gene expression or by
post-translational modification of regulatory proteins such that some
cellular properties of the origin of the mitochondria can be carried on
to next generation.

