Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CLEFMA induces apoptosis and downregulates inflammatory markers in
lung cancer model.


Background: Inflammation is a precursor for many cancers. NF-kB plays an
important role in inflammation, is associated with cancerous growth and
has been identified as a potential target for development of anticancer
therapies. Lung cancer is a classic example of inflammation-induced
carcinogenesis where it prevents apoptosis and stimulates production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines. CLEFMA or
4-[3,5-bis(2-chlorobenzylidene-4-oxo-piperidine-1-yl)-4-oxo-2-butenoic
acid] is a new molecule that potently inhibits proliferation of various
cancer cells without affecting normal cells. In this study, we evaluated
the antiproliferative activity of CLEFMA in a mouse xenograft model of
human lung cancer.Methods: Cell viability was determined in human lung
cancer cells H441 and A549 after treatment with CLEFMA. Immunobloting
studies were performed in cell lysates and tissue homogenates for
anti-apoptotic and pro-apoptotic markers. These were further confirmed by
immunohistochemical studies. The ability of CLEFMA in reducing the
metabolic turnover in tumor tissue was examined by positron emission
tomography using F-18-FDG as a biomarker of glucose metabolism.Results:
We found that CLEFMA-induced suppression of lung adenocarcinoma H441 and
A549 cell proliferation was associated with cleavage of caspases 3/9 and
PARP, suggesting apoptotic cell death. In vivo, CLEFMA demonstrated a
dose-dependent suppression of tumor growth associated with reduction of
tumor proliferation marker Ki-67. Non-invasive PET imaging with
F-18-flurodeoxyglucose also showed abrogation of glucose uptake in tumor
tissue. In the tumor tissue homogenates, we found inhibition of
anti-apoptotic markers cIAP1, Bcl-XL, BCL2 and survivin, and upregulation
of pro-apoptotic BID cleavage, BAX and PARP. Further, CLEFMA inhibited
NF-kB at mRNA level and reduced phospho-p65 translocation into the
nucleus. It also reduced the expression of COX-2 in tumor tissue, and
significantly reduced serum pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF- and
IL-6.Conclusions: The findings suggest that CLEFMA inhibits growth of
lung cancer xenografts by activating caspase-dependent apoptotic pathway,
and the tumor suppression is associated with anti-inflammatory and
anti-metastatic effects, perhaps mediated by NF-kB.

