Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carpet bombing with CARs: Influence of dose, timing,
lymphodepletion and costimulatory domain on efficacy of mRNA engineered
anti-CD19 Chimeric Antigen Receptor T cells in preclinical xenograft
models.


T cells engineered to express chimeric antigen receptors (CARs),
consisting of an anti-tumor targeting domain fused to Signal 1 and 2
activation domains, are a promising approach to cell therapy. We compared
T cells engineered to stably express CARs using integrating viral vectors
with T cells transiently expressing CARs via direct transduction with
non-integrating mRNA. In early clinical testing, this CAR design using
lentiviral transduction has been tested in patients with advanced CLL and
relapsed ALL. Dramatic clinical responses have been observed in these
refractory patients, speaking to the power of this approach. Transient
expression has several advantages: i) short-term expression may allow
initial clinical testing while limiting toxicity, and ii) RNA is easier
to manufacture and modify, expediting manufacturing and scaling to GMP of
changing CAR designs, allowing rapid iterative testing of and
improvements to CAR design. To evaluate the in vivo efficacy of mRNA
CAR+T cells compared to permanently modified (lentiviral transduction) T
cells, we used xenograft models of human ALL (Nalm-6 and a primary
patient leukemia, both CD19+) and high-level human T cell engraftment.
NSG mice were injected with ALL at a dose producing 100% BM engraftment
by 5d with 100% mortality by 25d (Nalm-6) or 36d (Primary). T cells were
expanded ex vivo using CD3/CD28 beads and underwent lentiviral gene
transfer or mRNA electroporation. Short-term efficacy of a single dose of
mRNA vs. lentiviral CAR+ T cells was similar, and unlike permanently
modified CAR T cells the costimulatory domain (CD28, 41BB or both) in
mRNA engineered cells had no effect on efficacy in this model. Interval
lymphodepletion with cyclophosphamide (CTX, 60mg/kg1) significantly
improved efficacy with subsequent infusions of RNA CAR T cells. Neither
CTX nor untargeted repeat CAR T cells infusions alone had an effect on
leukemia burden or survival. While lentiviral CAR+ T cells persisted and
were able to demonstrate a memory response on leukemia rechallenge,
median overall survival was not different between repeat mRNA CARs (80d)
and a single dose of lentiviral transduced CARs (77d). Importantly, both
models produced long term (>120 days) survivors, suggesting that repeat
infusion of RNA CAR T cells with interval lymphodepletion may approximate
the efficacy of permanently modified T cells in this liquid tumor model.
In our clinical experience with permanently modified cells, disease
clearance happens over 14-21 days, which correlates with the window of
efficacy of mRNA CARs. This suggests that though they do not persist,
mRNA CARs may have significant potential for clinical efficacy. These
pre-clinical results demonstrate an important advance in T cell
engineering, and are leading directly to clinical trials testing mRNA CAR
CTLs.

