Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined Dynamic 18F-FDG PET Imaging and DCE MRI prediction of
treatment response in an orthotopic model of glioblastoma multiforme.


BACKGROUND: Gliobastomas (GBM) are highly aggressive tumors. When
patients are treated with the standard of care of combined radiation
therapy and temozolomide (TMZ), median survival is less than 15 months.
An earlier prediction of treatment response could allow alternative
salvage therapies to be applied sooner if efficacy is not evident.
Non-invasive medical imaging provides the opportunity to link
imaging-based biomarkers to treatment response. It was hypothesized that
a multimodality imaging protocol (heretofore lacking) could allow more
accurate prediction of treatment response than conventional means.
MATERIALS & METHODS: 1x106 U87MG-luc cells were intracranially injected
into 6-8 week old female Nude mice using a stereotactic surgical
apparatus. Animals were staged for treatment using a T2-weighted MRI
sequence and treatment groups were populated with a tumor volume of
10-20mm3. Treatment was delivered for 5 days as follows 1) Control and 2)
TMZ. DCE MRI images were acquired with a gadolinium (Gd) contrast agent
and dynamic 18F-FDG PET imaging was acquired at baseline and days 7 and
14 post-treatment. Initial AUC (at 30, 60 and 90s) and Ktrans were
determined by fitting the Gd time course data to a generalized 2
compartment kinetic model (Tofts-Kermode approach) and calculated on a
voxel-by-voxel basis. PET data was analyzed with traditional kinetic
modeling (Ki) using Patlak analysis from 12-70 min and for the SUVmean
and SUVmax. Unified metrics that combined Ktrans, Ki and/or SUV were
evaluated for predictive power, as compared to each parameter alone.
RESULTS: Animals treated with TMZ had a significant increase in median
lifespan of 87 days, as compared to controls (59 days; p=0.002).
Comparisons of the influx constant, Ki, showed no significant differences
between control and treated groups, regardless of whether mean or maximum
values were used. Similarly, there were no significant differences
between groups in the SUV mean and SUVmax. DCE MRI data is currently
undergoing analysis. CONCLUSIONS: Control and TMZ-treated groups produced
expected median lifespan results as compared to historical data. Static
and dynamic analysis of 18F-FDG PET data did not demonstrate differences
between treated and untreated groups. It is possible that the time
interval to differentiate the two groups was too proximate to extrapolate
response from the derived parameters or that 18F-FDG is not the optimal
tracer for this type analysis. It is therefore proposed that future
studies utilize later time points in evaluating 18F-FDG-derived
biomarkers and/or evaluate the utility of alternate radiotracers (e.g.
18F-FLT). Additionally, it is expected that combining radiation therapy
with TMZ will produce more measurable differences in these biomarkers at
early time points. A hybrid metric that combines PET and DCE MRI outputs
is under development as an enhanced predictor of response.

