Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prepubertal dietary genistein intake reduces ovarian cancer risk
in BRCA+/- mice.


Genistein, a soy-derived isoflavone, is thought to play a key role in the
cancer-preventive activity of soy consumption. Germline mutations in
BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are known risk factors for both ovarian and breast
cancers. Previously, our lab has discovered that prepubertal dietary
exposure to genistein reduced 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene
(DMBA)-induced mammary incidence (P = 0.029) and aggressiveness of the
tumors (P Genistein, a soy-derived isoflavone, is thought to play a key
role in the cancer-preventive activity of soy consumption. Germline
mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are known risk factors for both
ovarian and breast cancers. Previously, our lab has discovered that
prepubertal dietary exposure to genistein reduced
7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA)-induced mammary incidence (P =
0.029) and aggressiveness of the tumors (P < 0.001) in the WT mice, and
upregulated the expression of BRCA1 in their mammary glands (P = 0.04).
In this study, we investigated whether prepubertal dietary exposure to
genistein reduces ovarian tumors in heterozygous BRCA+/- mice and their
wild type littermates. Mice were fed a control diet AIN93G or 500 ppm
genistein-supplemented diet from postnatal day (PND) 15 to PND 30, and
thereafter mice received the control AIN93G diet. On PND42, control and
genistein mice were primed with medroxyprogesterone acetate and, starting
at PND50, administered 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA) once a week
for four weeks. Ovarian tissues were harvested at 5 months of age.
Histopathology assessment shows that mice developed granulosa cell
tumors. Ovarian tumor incidence in control diet fed wildtype mice was 80%
and in the BRCA+/- mice 100%. The incidence dropped to 33% in the
wildtype and to 50% in the BRCA+/- mice following prepubertal genistein
intake. Thus, the exposure to prepubertal genistein in both BRCA+/- and
WT mice significantly reduced ovarian tumor incidence, compared with
their control diet fed littermates (P=0.001). The mechanisms mediating
the protective effect of prepubertal genistein intake on ovarian cancer
risk are being investigated.

