Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JUNB, survival against chemotherapy.


The long term goal of this research is to determine the early events on
the pathway to chemotherapy resistance in breast cancer. Chemotherapy
plays a critical role in prolonging the disease-free survival of breast
cancer patients. While chemotherapy has increased survival, many progress
to a therapy resistant state with limited treatment options. This study
investigated the novel induction and pro-survival function of JUNB in the
MCF10CA1a human breast cancer cell line. JUNB is a member of the JUN
family of transcription factors which are components of the Activating
Protein-1 (AP-1) transcript factor complex. AP-1 has been associated with
both oncogenic and tumor suppressor functions depending on cell type and
context. MCF10CA1a were derived from MCF-10A immortalized human mammary
epithelial cells transfected with a mutant, constitutively active RAS
construct and serial passaging in immunocompromised mice with selection
for metastases. The presence of constitutive mutant RAS signaling
activates downstream Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) and
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3K) signaling, mimicking aberrant
signal transduction pathways in clinical breast cancer. MCF10CA1a cells
were treated with a lethal dose (300nM) of the chemotherapy agent,
Flavopiridol (FP), a cyclin dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) inhibitor. As a
CDK9 inhibitor, FP is a general inhibitor of RNA Polymerase II (Pol II)
mediated gene transcription. Unexpectedly, both JUNB mRNA and protein
levels increased dramatically in MCF10CA1a cells surviving FP treatment.
The increase in JUNB mRNA levels was not due to increased JUNB mRNA
stability or loss of function of FP because it continued to inhibit the
activation of Pol II. To determine the functional role of JUNB in
response to FP, JUNB levels were reduced (90%) in MCF10A1a cells
nucleofected with JUNB siRNA. JUNB siRNA knockdown reduced the survival
of FP treated MCF10ACA1a cells, consistent with a pro-survival role for
JUNB. The pro-survival role of JUNB was further supported by increased
detection of cleaved caspase3 in JUNB siRNA treated MCF10ACA1a cells in
response to FP. In addition, SKBR3 cells, a HER2 overexpressed human
breast cancer cell line, also exhibited a dramatic (10 fold) increase in
JUNB mRNA levels in response to FP treatment. These results demonstrate
that JUNB gene expression is induced in response to a lethal dose of FP.
This increase suggests that JUNB may play a previously unrecognized
pro-survival role in chemotherapy treated breast cancer cells. In
addition, because JUNB is rapidly (within hours) induced in response to a
lethal dose of FP these results suggest that JUNB induction may be among
the earliest detectable events in resistance of breast cancer cells to
chemotherapeutic agents. Supported by the U.S. Army Breast Cancer
Research Program (JD) and P30 CA16058 (OSUCCC).

