Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism in relation to endometrial
cancer: A prospective study.


BackgroundThyroid hormones may be involved in tumorigenesis and
metastasis in hormone sensitive cancers. Thyroid hormones strongly
influence the menstrual cycle, implantation and fertility, suggesting
that thyroid hormones also could play a role in the development of
endometrial cancer (EC), which is hormone-sensitive. No prospective
studies have examined this association.MethodsWe prospectively evaluated
the association between self-reported physician-diagnosed hypothyroidism
and hyperthyroidism in the Nurses Health Study (NHS) from 1976 - 2010.
Reports of thyroid dysfunction were based on self-report on biennial
follow-up questionnaires, and have shown high validity when compared to
medical records. Incident EC cases were confirmed with medical, pathology
and death records. Multivariate rate ratios (RRs) for endometrial cancer
were calculated, adjusting for major EC risk factors (i.e., body mass
index, smoking, parity, age at last birth, oral contraceptive use, family
history, age at menarche, age at menopause, postmenopausal hormone use,
type 2 diabetes, and height).ResultsDuring 34 years of follow-up in NHS,
we documented 917 cases of incident EC. Compared to those without any
reported thyroid dysfunction, the multivariable RR for hypothyroidism was
0.99 (95% CI, 0.75-1.30) and the null associations were consistent across
categories of time since hypothyroidism diagnosis. The multivariable RR
for hyperthyroidism was 1.38 (95% CI 0.79 - 2.41). An association was
observed with longer time since hyperthyroidism diagnosis (median time
since hyperthyroidism diagnosis was 6 years in NHS); the RR for EC
associated with 6+ years since hyperthyroidism diagnosis was 2.08 (95%
CI, 1.02, 4.23).ConclusionsOverall self-reported hypothyroidism and
hyperthyroidism were not associated with risk of EC; however, longer time
since hyperthyroidism diagnosis may be associated with an increased risk
of EC. Due to the overall small number of cases with hyperthyroidism,
on-going analyses will incorporate results from the Nurses Health Study
II to increase power for these analyses.

