Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic alcohol consumption activates the LiTAF pathway in
melanoma-bearing mice.


We previously reported that chronic alcohol consumption increases
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and compromises melanoma-specific
CD8+ T cells in B16BL6 melanoma-bearing mice; however, the underlying
mechanism has not been elucidated. Activation of LPS-induced TNF- factor
(LiTAF) gene leads to up-regulation in the expression of various
cytokines, chemokines and growth factors such as TNF-, IL-1, and VEGF,
which are inducers of MDSC. Alcohol consumption is associated with the
leakage of LPS into the blood. However, it is not known whether alcohol
consumption modulates the expression of LiTAF. Herein, we examined the
effects of alcohol and subcutaneous inoculation of melanoma in mice on
the expression of LiTAF and its downstream cytokines, chemokines and
growth factors. Female C57BL/6 mice were given 20% (w/v) alcohol for
three to six months followed by subcutaneous inoculation of 2x105 B16BL6
melanoma cells. Two weeks after tumor inoculation, the expression of
LiTAF and related cytokine genes in the spleen were examined by RT-PCR.
Chronic alcohol consumption dramatically up regulated the expression of
LiTAF in the spleen of melanoma-bearing mice; however, expression was
almost undetectable in the spleen of corresponding water-drinking mice.
The expression of IL-1, IL-10, TNF-, CCL5, and VEGF- was also
significantly up regulated by alcohol. These results indicate that
chronic alcohol consumption activates the LiTAF pathway and up regulates
the expression of the downstream cytokines, chemokines and growth
factors. The up regulation of these cytokines could contribute to the
induction of MDSC and inhibition on CD8+ T cells.(Supported by funds
received from the Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF)
Program, from NIH grants R01 AA07193 and K05AA017149, and from funds
provided for medical and biological research by the State of Washington
Initiative Measure No. 171).

