Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-Notch1 antibody (OMP-52M51) impedes tumor growth and cancer
stem cell frequency (CSC) in a chemo-refractory breast cancer xenograft
model with an activating Notch1 mutation and screening for activated
Notch1 across multiple solid tumor types.


The Notch pathway plays a central role in embryonic development, the
regulation of stem and progenitor cells, and is implicated in many human
cancers. Notch1 is also known to be activated by oncogenic mutations in
tumors including T cell leukemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia and
non-small cell lung cancer. Here we report the discovery of similar
mutations in breast cancer. We have developed a primary human xenograft
model from a patient bearing an activating Notch1 mutation and have shown
that blocking Notch signaling in this model with a novel anti-Notch1
antibody, OMP-52M51, impeded tumor growth and reduced cancer stem cell
(CSC) frequency. OMP-52M51 is a humanized antibody that binds with high
affinity and selectivity to human Notch1 and antagonizes Notch
signaling.Additionally, we sought to determine the frequency of Notch
pathway activation across a large panel of human tumors (n>600) by an
immunohistochemistry assay that detects the activated form of Notch1
using a polyclonal antibody that specifically recognizes the Notch1
intracellular domain (ICD). Using this test and a rigorous H-score
cut-off of 30, we found elevated Notch1 in 7-29% of the following
cancers: chemo-resistant breast, gastric, cholangiocarcinoma, esophageal,
hepatacellular carcinoma (HCC), and small cell lung cancer (SCLC).The
class of patients that showed the highest frequency of elevated
Notch1.ICD was chemo-resistant breast cancer (30%). This frequency was
significantly higher than in unselected breast cancer patients,
suggesting that Notch1 signaling plays a significant role in breast
cancer chemoresistance. Interestingly, the human xenograft model which
showed sensitivity to OMP-52M51 was derived from a patient that failed to
respond to pre-operative chemotherapy and developed metastatic disease
following surgery. Thus, chemo-resistant breast cancer as well as the
other tumors with high Notch1.ICD may represent important classes of
patients who could benefit from anti-Notch1 therapy in the clinic.

