Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of inhibition of cancer cell growth and metastasis by
novel small molecule compounds.


The molecular complexity of cancers and therapy-associated side effects
often limit effectiveness of many therapies, and warrant development of
new agents for specific molecular targets while minimizing the off-target
effects. Thus, our goal is to develop novel, safer and effective
anti-cancer therapies on the basis of cell growth and survival inhibiting
functions of an apoptosis regulatory protein, termed CARP-1. CARP-1 was
identified by us as a novel target of select chemotherapy (adriamycin,
etoposide, or Iressa)-dependent human breast cancer cell growth
suppression. By conducting the high-throughput screening of chemical
libraries, we identified a number of novel, small molecule compounds
called CARP-1 Functional Mimetics (CFMs). MTT assay results showed that
CFMs, as well as quinazoline analogues of CFMs, inhibited growth of a
variety of cancer cells, including the drug-resistant breast cancer cell
line MDA-MB 468, without affecting growth of immortalized mammary
epithelial cells. Results of MTT assay indicated also that CFM-4
(1(2-chlorobenzyl)-5-phenyl-3H-spiro[indoline-3,2-[1,3,4]thiadiazol]-2-one)
 was the most potent one. CFMs suppressed cancer cell growth in part by
stimulating CARP-1 levels and promoting cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
RT-PCR assay results revealed that CFM-4 induced the extrinsic pathway of
apoptosis via upregulation of TRAIL receptors, caspase-8 and caspase-3
which can then cleave multiple cellular proteins, leading to cancer cell
death. Cancer-related deaths are often due to spread of cancers to other
organ sites (metastasis) that involves invasion and movement of cancer
cells through the nearby normal tissue and the lymph and blood vessels to
reach other tissues to form secondary tumors. Here we also demonstrate
that CFMs impact biological properties of cancer cells by inhibiting
their movement and invasion through the membranes coated with the
extra-cellular matrix. CFMs also inhibited abilities of cancer cells to
grow as colonies in soft-agar. These proof-of-concept studies suggest
that CFMs could induce cancer cell apoptosis and effectively inhibit
migration and tumor-forming abilities of cancer cells. Thus CFMs or their
analogues have potential as anti-cancer agents to target cancer cell
proliferation, survival, migration, invasion and metastasis, and provide
a strong basis for their development as anti-cancer agents.

