Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and synthesis of membrane type matrix metalloproteinase
(MT-MMP) targeted anti-tumor agents.


Design and synthesis of membrane type matrix metalloproteinase (MT-MMP)
targeted anti-tumor agentsMembrane-type matrix metalloproteinases
(MT-MMPs) are highly active in tumors, but absent or inactive in normal
tissues. MT-MMPs are known to be elevated in the majority of human tumors
and to be central to tumor invasion and angiogenesis. Our objective has
been to design inactive prodrugs that are converted to a potent drug by
selected MMPs within the tumor microenvironment.We report the design and
synthesis of a series of peptide-based conjugates of
azademethylcolchicine (a potent colchicine analogue) designed to be
selectively cleaved by MT-MMPs in the tumor microenvironment.
Azademethylcolchicine was attached to the peptide C-terminus, while the
N-terminus is protected from non-specific cleavage by exopeptidases
through a masking group. A series of N-terminal masking groups, including
unnatural amino acids, substituted aromatic groups, alkyl spacers and
more complex endcaps was employed. Insights have been gained into the
MT-MMP peptide recognition sequence and the relative importance of
individual amino acids with regards MMP-selectivity. The P2 position in
particular has been extensively studied through substitution by both
natural amino acid and unnatural amino acids.We have investigated the
efficiency of hydrolytic cleavage of these conjugates to release the
active agent in both tumor and normal tissues. Results indicate
significant effects of P2 amino acid substitution upon stability and
conversely activation in tumor and normal tissues (liver, kidney, lung,
plasma), with half-lives of hydrolysis ranging from 2-60 min in tumor and
3-300 min in normal tissues.In conclusion, a series of peptide-based
prodrug conjugates of azademethylcolchicine was synthesized. Hydrolytic
activation of these prodrugs in tumor tissue was rapid compared to liver
and other normal tissues. From this screen, ICT-2588, which includes
tyrosine at the P2 position, emerged as the agent with a hydrolytic
cleavage rate most suited for further evaluation as a tumour activated
peptide-based conjugate.

