Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of PRP4 kinase as a potential drug target in cancer.


PRP4 kinase plays a crucial role in regulating pre-mRNA splicing, cell
cycle progression, proliferation, and survival. The aforementioned
functions have been well documented in Schizosaccharomyces pombe,
Caenorhabditis elegans, and human cancer cell lines. For example, it was
demonstrated that PRP4 kinase is essential for growth in fission yeast,
and disruption of C. elegans PRP4 by RNAi resulted in a highly penetrant
early embryonic lethality. In experiments utilizing siRNAs to screen for
kinases essential for pancreatic cancer cell survival, PRP4 knockdown was
demonstrated to increase apoptosis and decrease viability. In a
genome-wide pooled shRNA screen, shRNAs against PRP4 was shown to reduce
the viability of DLD-1, HCT-116, and HCC1954 cancer cell lines.
Similarly, PRP4 kinase was identified as a potential therapeutic target
in a pooled shRNA screen designed to identify genes required for
proliferation and survival of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cell lines.
Moreover, in an effort to reveal potential kinase targets to treat
multidrug resistance ovarian cancer, inhibition of PRP4 activity by
shRNAs was shown to re-sensitize chemo-resistant human ovarian cancer to
paclitaxel treatment. Interestingly, loss of PRP4 kinase was also
demonstrated to enhance paclitaxel activity in breast cancer cells. To
further investigate PRP4 kinase substrate spectrum and explore the
druggability of PRP4 kinase, we utilize quantitative proteomics and
structural biology to help achieve these objectives. In this report, we
provided evidence that the kinase domain of PRP4 is essential for
regulating cell growth and survival. In addition, through a global
proteomics approach, we expanded the interactome and phosphoproteome of
PRP4 kinase in cancer cells and identifed novel substrates of PRP4,
including oncogenic PAK4 kinase. Subsequently, these substrates were
substantiated in orthogonal biochemical and cellular assays. These new
biological findings not only identify suitable biomarkers to monitor PRP4
kinase activity, but also provide interesting avenues for future in-depth
interrogation of PRP4 functions in cancer biology and clinical
development. Finally, we solve the X-ray structure of the PRP4 kinase
domain and identify several features suitable for the rational design of
PRP4 kinase inhibitors. We further provided the co-crystal structure of
PRP4 kinase domain in complex with a small molecule and elucidated the
exploitable mechanisms to synthesize potent and specific PRP4 inhibitors.
Future efforts will be focused on understanding patient stratification
strategy and assessing the utility of PRP4 kinase inhibitors in relevant
pre-clinical models of cancer.

