Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ex vivo chemoresponse assay using patient-derived tumor xenografts
in combination with high content imaging platform as models for oncology
drug development.


Current strategies for developing new anticancer drugs rely heavily on
preclinical testing in cancer cell lines and their derived in vivo cell
line xenograft models. The value of a predictive assay is heavily
dependent on the extent to which it can recapitulate the biology of
disease. It has been reported that heterogeneity of cell populations
within the tumor microenvironment has significant correlation with the
efficacy of any treatment regimen. Cell line models fail to recapitulate
the heterogeneous nature of tumor. The purpose of this study was to
investigate whether the use of patient-derived primary tumor cells (PTC)
could be expanded as xenografts for in vitro chemosensitivity assays to
predict clinical outcomes in anticancer drug testing. We have developed
preclinical cancer models using PTCs grown in 3D cultures that better
mimic in vivo conditions. One of the disadvantages of using patient
derived cells is the limited number of cells available from biopsy
samples. We utilized patient-derived xenografts (PDX) as a strategy to
expand the human tumor cells in mice, while taking efforts to retain the
actual tumor biology of the patient. We used high content imaging to
evaluate colony segmentation, morphological features, proliferative and
apoptotic endpoints to determine efficacy of oncology drug candidates. We
conducted a retrospective study using PTCs from solid tumor indications
including endometrial and lung to evaluate the correlation between
various models and usefulness in predicting the outcome of a specific
drug candidate. Our results indicate that PDX models in combination with
3D PTC models have predictive value and enable secondary interrogation
beyond single agent anti-proliferative activity to better profile the
antitumor activity of targeted agents. Improved preclinical models are
required to advance our understanding of the molecular aberrations that
underpin cancer and are critical for developing and deploying targeted
therapies that will improve patients lives.

