Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ASP3026, a selective ALK inhibitor, shows anti-tumor activity in a
mouse model xenografted with NCI-H2228 intracranially.


EML4-ALK translocation has been validated as a therapeutic target in a
subset of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Crizotinib, an
FDA-approved ALK inhibitor, is effective against several types of human
cancers with ALK abnormalities including EML4-ALK, RANBP2-ALK and ALK
mutations. However, long-term treatment is often limited by the
development of resistant tumors and distant metastases. Multiple brain
metastases are a critical issue because of their poor prognosis despite
the standard radiotherapy. The reason for metastases and development of
tumor in the brain could be attributable to the poor penetration of
crizotinib into central nervous system, as previously reported. ASP3026
is a selective ALK inhibitor which shows antitumor activities in several
crizotinib-refractory models including gate keeper mutants.Here, we
established an intracranial xenograft model by implanting NCI-H2228 cells
directly in the brain of immunocompromised mice. Xenografted cells
develop intracranial tumors which grow in murine brain and eventually
become lethal, resembling the clinical tumors that metastasized in the
brain.To determine the anti-tumor activity against tumors in the brain,
mice were treated with ASP3026 or crizotinib for 2 weeks and held to
observe survival duration. Ten, 30 and 100 mg/kg daily oral
administration of ASP3026 dose dependently inhibited tumor growth in
brain, and tumor regression was achieved in 30 and 100 mg/kg groups
confirmed by MR imaging. These results were supported by the observation
that Ktrans and IAUC (90s) were significantly decreased in 30 and 100
mg/kg groups using dynamic contrast enhanced MR imaging (DCE-MRI).
Furthermore, ASP3026 significantly prolonged the survival of tumor
bearing mice compared to vehicle treatment group. On the other hand,
30mg/kg daily oral administration of crizotinib inhibited the tumor
growth during the treatment period but did not produce significant
survival benefit.Taken together, these results indicate that ASP3026
shows better efficacy than crizotinib and improves overall survival in an
intracranial mouse xenograft model, suggesting that ASP3026 may have
potential to benefit EML4-ALK positive NSCLC patients with brain
metastases.

