Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural variant of osteoprotegerin lacking TRAIL binding for
therapeutic bone remodeling in osteolytic malignancies.


Current treatments for osteolytic cancer pathology include a combination
of radiation and chemotherapy, but toxic side effects are still of major
concern. Studies have shown that osteoclast activity is increased in
patients with osteolytic cancers such as multiple myeloma, breast and
prostate cancer through increased expression of Receptor Activator of
Nuclear Factor Kappa B Ligand (RANKL) leading to RANKL/RANK signaling,
resulting in osteoclast activation and ultimately bone resorption.
Moreover, Osteoprotegerin (OPG), a decoy receptor for RANKL, is
disproportionately expressed in these patients who present with bone
lesions. Thus, the use of OPG as a therapeutic molecule would greatly
decrease osteolytic damage and reduce morbidity. However, despite the
potential of OPG in inhibiting the activation of osteoclast, OPG also
binds to tumor necrosis factor related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)
making tumor cells resistant to apoptosis. TRAIL binds to the Death
Receptor 4 and 5 (DR4, DR5) and initiate cell death of transformed cells
such as MM. The goals of this study was to designed and develop a
therapeutic approach to the treatment of osteolytic bone damage by use of
genetically altered OPG retaining RANKL binding but abolished in TRAIL
binding. Towards uncoupling the events of TRAIL binding of OPG and to
improve its utility for bone remodeling without inducing tumor resistance
to apoptosis, we created a genetic variant of OPG through structural
homology model based on interactive domain identification and by
superimposing structural models of TRAIL, OPG and DR5 to identify regions
of OPG for rational design. The mutant OPG (mut-OPG) was purified and
extensively characterized for its ability for decreasing osteoclast
damage without affecting tumor apoptosis pathway both in vivo and in
vitro indicating its potential for therapy targeting bone lesions in
osteolytic malignancies.

