Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: hRrp15, a ribosome RNA processing protein, has profound function
on nucleoli construction, ribosome biogenesis and cell proliferation.


Nucleolus is the sub-organelle that controls ribosome biogenesis in
cells, and ribosome biogenesis is a highly regulated process that ensures
cell growth (increase in biomass) coordinated with cell proliferation. In
the nucleolus, ribosomal RNA precursor (47S rRNA) is initially
transcribed from rDNA and then subsequently processes into 5.8S, 18S and
28S rRNAs, together with numerous ribosome proteins and nonribosomal
factors, to form 60S and 40S pre-ribosomal particles before they are
exported to the cytoplasm. A large body of evidence demonstrates that
perturbation of rRNA synthesis, process and/or pre-ribosomal factor
function impairs ribosome biogenesis and induces cell cycle arrest. This
is attributed to nucleolar disruption and diffusion of ribosomal
proteins, such as Rpl11 and Rpl5, into the nucleoplasm in which these
ribosomal proteins bind to and inhibit MDM2 function, resulting in p53
induction and activation. In this study, we described the identification
and characterization of a human protein, hRrp15, that has sequence
homology with yeast pre-ribosomal factor, Rrp15p. Previous studies showed
that Rrp15p is a ribosome RNA processing protein required for 60S
pre-ribosomal particle formation and/or maturation in yeast. Using
immunofluorescence and sucrose gradient centrifugation analyses, we
demonstrated that hRrp15 was mainly localized at nucleoli in human cells.
Depletion of hRrp15 expression disrupted nucleolar structure, inducing
diffusion of nucleolar protein, nucleolin, in the nucleus. In contrast to
Rrp15p, hRrp15 mainly associated with 60S pre-ribosomal particle but it
also presented in 40S pre-ribosomal particle. Consistently, inhibition of
hRrp15 expression perturbed nucleolar formation and impaired ribosomal
biogenesis in both 60S and 40S pre-ribosomal subunits. In addition,
depletion of hRrp15 in human non-transformed cells, RPE1, resulted in the
induction of p53 and p21 proteins and cell cycle arrest at G1-G1/S
whereas depletion of hRrp15 in human tumor cells, HeLa and MCF7, caused
DNA damage response with detectable -H2AX and apoptosis. These results
indicated that hRrp15 plays a critical role in regulating formation of
both 60S and 40S pre-ribosomal particles, ribosome biogenesis,
construction of nucleoli, cell growth and cell proliferation in human
cells. Hence, hRrp15 may serve as a potential target for cancer therapy.

