Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of suppressive myeloid populations by tasquinimod.


Purpose: Suppressive myeloid cells such as myeloid derived suppressor
cells (MDSCs) and tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) are a major barrier
of cancer immunotherapy. These populations suppress immune responses,
promote angiogenesis, and facilitate cancer progression and metastasis.
Tasquinimod is an experimental anti-angiogenic agent tested in prostate
cancer. In the current study, we investigated the novel immunomodulatory
effects of tasquinimod. We focused on the modulation of myeloid
populations by tasquinimod since tasquinimod binds to the inflammatory
protein S100A9, which potentially activates MDSCs. Thus, we studied
whether tasquinimod affects the induction/function of MDSCs and TAMs, and
whether this agent can facilitate vaccine therapy in prostate and kidney
cancer models.Experimental Design: The effects of tasquinimod on myeloid
cells were tested in Myc-CaP and TRAMP transplantable prostate cancer
models, and the RENCA orthotopic model of renal cell carcinoma.
Splenocytes, blood cells, and cells from tumor samples were isolated from
tumor bearing mice. The samples were subjected to staining with MDSC
markers (Gr1 and CD11b) and macrophage markers (F4/80 and CD206), and to
flow cytometry analysis. An immunotherapy combining tasquinimod with a
modified survivin peptide vaccine, SurVaxM, was administered in Myc-CaP
and TRAMP models. Tumor growth, MDSCs, and TAMs accumulation and their
function after different treatments were monitored. Tasquinimod's effect
on metastases is currently being tested in a LuCaP 23.1 orthotopic
prostate cancer model.Results: Tasquinimod treatment reduced peripheral
Gr1CD11b+ monocytes, but did not affect the number of peripheral
Gr1+CD11b+ MDSCs. However, tumor infiltrating Gr1+CD11b+ MDSCs
significantly decreased following tasquinimod treatment (60% reduction, p
= 0.03). In addition, Gr1CD11b+ monocytes gained the macrophage marker,
F4/80, in tumors, and tasquinimod reduced the M2 macrophages
(immunosuppressive macrophages) in both peripheral sites and tumors (56%
reduction, p = 0.04). Tasquinimod had a modest effect on the suppressive
function of MDSCs. In the vaccine therapy, tasquinimod, combined with
SurVaxM, improved antitumor immune responses and reduced tumor growth
(48% inhibition, p = 0.03), as compared to vehicle and single treatments
(no inhibition by SurVaxM, 15% inhibition by tasquinimod).Conclusions:
Our study suggests that tasquinimod does not affect the expansion of
Gr1+CD11b+ MDSCs induced by tumor, but interferes with the migration of
MDSCs to tumor sites. Moreover, tasquinimod targets M2 macrophages,
possibly by depleting the monocytic precursor populations such as
Gr1CD11b+ monocytes. By inhibiting MDSCs and TAMs, tasquinimod has an
immunomodulatory potential to target cancer progression and metastasis,
and to improve immunotherapies.

