Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Agents that target the PI3K/mTOR pathway decrease oxygen
consumption, reduce tumor hypoxia and improve radiation response in solid
tumors.


Hypoxia/anoxia is a well-characterized component of the solid tumor
microenvironment and has profound consequences for patient outcome. In
particular, clinical data indicate that patients with certain types of
tumors treated with radiotherapy have a significantly better outcome if
the tumors are less hypoxic. Therefore, we are interested in finding
agents that can improve tumor oxygenation. In this study, we investigated
the effects of two drugs on tumor oxygenation, NVP-BEZ235 (Novartis), a
dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, and nelfinavir, an HIV protease inhibitor that
inhibits PI3K signaling. Treatment of mice bearing SQ20B head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma xenografts with either drug led to a decrease in
tumor hypoxia as measured by binding of the 2-nitroimidazole EF3. In
vitro O2 consumption measurements of cells grown in tissue culture using
a Clark electrode showed that both drugs led to decreased O2 consumption.
This result was confirmed using a XF Extracellular Flux Analyzer
(Seahorse Bioscience). Using this technique, we found that incubation
with NVP-BEZ235 caused a 30- 50% decrease in the oxygen consumption rate
(OCR). O2 consumption was stimulated by addition of the uncoupling agent
CCCP in both controls and NVP-BEZ235-treated cells, which indicates that
they were not killed by NVP-BEZ235 treatment. Similar results were
obtained with nelfinavir. In order to identify whether components of the
PI3K/mTOR pathway could contribute to the decrease in O2 consumption, we
used siRNA directed against either mTOR or the p110alpha subunit of PI3K.
Knockdown of either protein led to a decrease in O2 consumption. Studies
are ongoing to determine whether the mitochondria are a direct target of
NVP-BEZ235 or nelfinavir and if so, which mitochondrial respiratory
complex might be affected. In summary, we show that NVP-BEZ235 and
nelfinavir, both of which inhibit PI3K signaling, decrease O2 consumption
and ameliorate tumor hypoxia. We have found both of these agents to
increase radiation response in vivo in animal models, and nelfinavir is
currently being used in combination with radiotherapy in clinical trials.
These findings offer insight as to how these agents act as radiation
response modifiers.

