Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting of EMP2 reduces breast cancer stem cells.


There is increasing evidence that tumor-initiating cancer stem cells
(CSCs) contribute to tumor metastasis and therapeutic resistance. In
breast cancer, metastatic CSCs are defined as CD44+/CD24- and ALDH+, and
in this study, we define another marker epithelial membrane protein-2
(EMP2) as a novel target for this population of cells. EMP2 is an
oncogene whose expression has been shown to correlate with tumor
progression and survival in a number of human cancers including triple
negative breast, ovarian, and endometrial tumors. In breast cancer, EMP2
is expressed on the majority of invasive tumors examined, and in
particular 70% of triple negative breast tumors showed surface expression
of this marker. Clinical data also revealed higher levels of EMP2 in
metastatic lesions compared to primary tumors.In this study, we show new
evidence that EMP2 is highly expressed in CSCs. New data suggests that
EMP2 upregulates the expression of HIF-1, CD44, and ALDH and directly
contributes to the metastatic potential of the tumor cell. High levels of
EMP2 promote mammosphere formation and increased tumor forming potential.
In tumors created from these cells, high levels of ALDH+ expression were
also observed. In contrast, reduction in EMP2 decreased CD44 expression
and ALDH activity both in vitro and in vivo, with the net consequence of
poorly vascularized and slow growing tumors.We have recently developed a
novel IgG1 monoclonal antibody to EMP2 and have started testing its
therapeutic efficacy. In vitro treatment with EMP2 IgG1 reduced HIF-1,
CD44, and ALDH levels, ultimately leading to caspase mediated apoptosis.
Treatment of breast cancer cells with EMP2 IgG1 reduced tumor load in
both subcutaneous and metastatic models of breast cancer with a
significant improvement in survival. Histological examination of the
tumors revealed significant necrosis and elimination of ALDH+ CSCs. These
results suggest that targeting EMP2 may reduce CSCs and represent an
attractive target for further therapeutic development.

