Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrin 64 stimulates transcription and secretion of EGFR ligands.


Pancreatic carcinoma has the highest death to incidence ratio of all
cancer due to frequent late diagnosis, drug-resistance and high
metastatic potential. The integrin 64 is overexpressed in pancreatic
carcinoma and plays an important role in tumor invasion and metastasis,
in part by altering the transcriptome toward an invasive phenotype. In
this study, we find that these transcriptional changes in pancreatic
carcinomas include upregulation of cancer promoting genes such as ligands
of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), epiregulin (Ereg) and
amphiregulin (Areg). We have found previously that integrin 64 alters
transcription by selectively targeting DNA demethylation or transcription
factors, such as NFAT1 and NFAT5, to gene promoters. Given that Areg and
Ereg are upregulated by over 1000-fold, we hypothesized that integrin 64
may control their expression by targeting their promoters for DNA
demethylation. To test this concept, pancreatic cancer cells with low
expression of integrin 64 were treated with DNA methyltransferase
inhibitor 5-aza-2deoxycytidine (DAC), and mRNA expression measured by
Q-PCR. This treatment resulted in induction of Areg and Ereg expression
indicating that these genes may be controlled by DNA methylation.
Furthermore, suppression of integrin 64 by RNAi, hindered induction by
DAC, thus suggesting that integrin 64 plays a role in ligand expression.
To support these results, pancreatic cancer cells were treated with the
methyl donor S-adenosylmethionine, allowing for global hypermethylation
and silencing of genes controlled by methylation. Our results show that
treatment inhibits Ereg and Areg expression in cells with high expression
of integrin 64, providing evidence for epigenetic regulation by this
integrin. Non-coding RNAs processed by Dicer often play a role in DNA
methylation of specific genes. Accordingly, we used siRNA to target the
microRNA processing enzyme Dicer. Dicer knockdown resulted in decreased
expression of Ereg and Areg, measured by Q-PCR, indicating that small
non-coding RNAs are involved in their regulation. Autocrine EGFR
signaling is also regulated by altered secretion of Ereg and Areg. Using
an ELISA for Areg, we measured secretion associated with variable
expression of integrin 64. We find that integrin 64 stimulated secretion
of Areg into the media, and this secretion is enhanced by HGF signaling.
Consequently, we also provide evidence that integrin 64 promotes
HGF-stimulated chemotaxis, invasion, and invasive growth which is
facilitated by autocrine EGFR signaling. This study demonstrates that
overexpression of integrin 64 in pancreatic cancer promotes a more
aggressive phenotype by activating transcriptional expression and
autocrine secretion of EGFR ligands, Ereg and Areg, that promote an
invasive phenotype.

