Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechano-molecular imaging of the role of COX-2 in cell traction
force.


The cytoplasmic enzyme cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 and its secondary lipid
byproducts are critical determinants of cancer cell invasion and
metastasis. Poorly differentiated MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells
stably expressing COX-2 shRNA exhibit marked attenuation in their ability
to secrete secondary lipid mediator products of the COX reaction, as well
as invade and degrade reconstituted extracellular matrix in vitro.
COX-2-silenced cells inoculated in vivo show significant reduction of
tumor growth and extrapulmonary colonization than their parental
counterpart. Based on compelling evidence for the positive correlation
between cancer invasion and cell traction force, here we interrogated the
mechanistic role for COX-2 in mediating this physical force and imaged
the spatiotemporal distribution of contractile stress arising at the
interface between each adherent cell and its substrate. Over a
physiological range of substrate stiffness, COX-2-silenced MDA-MB-231
cells exhibited a smaller spreading area and a lower cell traction force
than their highly metastatic, parental counterpart. Strikingly, unlike
COX-2-silenced cells, COX-2-high parental MDA-MB-231 cells showed
progressive increases in cell spreading area and traction force with
increasing substrate rigidity. Cell spreading and traction force in
COX-2-silenced cells were restored with an exogenous addition of
COX-2-derived PGE2, however. COX-2-high MDA-MB-231 cells also showed
increases in the expression of mechanosensitive integrin 1, and not 3,
with increasing substrate rigidity. Consistent with these physical
attributes, COX-2-silenced cells expressed a 4.6-fold reduction of the
transcript coding for RhoJ, a member of the family of Rho GTPases, and
displayed a slower remodeling dynamics of the cytoskeleton (CSK). To our
knowledge this is the first report linking the expression of COX-2 with
increased cell traction force and CSK remodeling in a highly metastatic
human breast cancer.

