Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of genetic aberrations in squamous cell carcinoma of the
oral tongue.


Squamous cell carcinoma of the oral tongue (SCCOT) is a common form of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). In the last few decades, a
steady increase in incidence rates of SCCOT has been reported across the
world including India. SCCOT is known to be an age related disease and
tobacco consumption is implicated as the main etiological agent, like
other HNSCC subtypes. Recent reports have indicated an increase in
incidence of SCCOT in the young and in nonsmokers. Among HNSCC, SCCOT
appears to be more aggressive with respect to its clinical and biological
behavior. Molecular genetic studies on SCCOT are scarce and most studies
have been conducted on a small cohort of patients and/or restricted to a
single/few molecular marker(s). We have conducted a multipronged
molecular genetic study of SCCOT and analyzed the status of known
tumorigenesis pathways including TP53, epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), microsatellite instability (MSI), CDKN2A, FHIT and human
papilloma virus (HPV) infection in surgically resected primary tumor
samples and correlated with clinocopathological variables. 67% (67/100)
of SCCOT samples exhibited p53 nuclear stabilization whereas a greater
proportion (87/100; 87%) exhibited elevated EGFR expression, in
accordance with existing literature. Interestingly, p53 nuclear
stabilization was found to be more common in young (31/39; 79.5%) than in
older (35/59; 59.3%) patients (p = 0.0481). As expected, patients with
p53 nuclear stabilization exhibited poorer survival. Further, PCR based
mutation screening of exons 5-8 of TP53 (encoding the DNA binding domain)
revealed mutations in 50% of samples exhibiting nuclear stabilization.
HPV infection was observed in 11/82 (13.4%) tumors while the frequencies
of MSI (12/86; 14%) and loss of heterozygosity (LoH) in CDKN2A (32.6%)
and FHIT (28.4%) loci were significantly higher than previous studies. In
addition, LoH at FHIT locus was significantly associated with p53 nuclear
stabilization (p=0.047). Analysis of genome-wide DNA copy number
alterations (CNA) using array based comparative genomic hybridization
revealed unique copy number alterations validated by quantitative PCR.
Exome sequencing and transcriptome profiling are currently underway to
understand the pathways/genes deregulated in SCCOT, especially in samples
not exhibiting p53 nuclear stabilization.

