Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA mediated regulation of a novel gene, MIEN1, in cancer
metastasis.


Migration and invasion enhancer gene 1(MIEN1), previously known as
C17orf37, C35, ORB3, XTP4, RDX12, and MGC14832, is located in the 17q12
region of the human chromosome. MIEN1 expression is minimal to negligible
in normal cells and tissues compared to its abundant expression in
various cancers, including breast, prostate, oral and gastrointestinal
carcinomas. MIEN1 works as a signaling molecule through the AKT/NF-B
pathway by up-regulating key proteases, matrix metalloproteinase - 9,
urokinase - type plasminogen activator and vascular endothelial growth
factor. We have shown that MIEN1 plays an important role in the migration
and invasion of cancer through increased filopodia formation, hence
promoting metastasis. The overall objective of this study is to identify
the mechanisms that lead to the differential regulation of MIEN1 between
normal and cancer cells. Our hypothesis is that MIEN1 is
post-transcriptionally regulated by specific microRNA(s) that is (are)
down-regulated in cancer, thus explaining its aberrant increased
expression in cancer. MicroRNA expression profiling pattern predict
several microRNAs that can directly bind to 3UTR of MIEN1 mRNA. In silico
analysis followed by northern blotting and real time PCR indicate a novel
microRNA that regulates MIEN1 expression. This was further confirmed by
decrease or increase in RNA and protein levels of MIEN1 as well as its
downstream signaling effectors, upon microRNA mimic or inhibitor
addition, respectively. Direct binding of the microRNA with MIEN1 mRNA
was further confirmed by luciferase reporter assays, while the scratch
wound healing and tumor invasion assays showed the functional
significance of this microRNA on migration and invasion. Since the
importance of MIEN1 as a key signaling molecule in cancer is well
established, understanding the mechanism(s) involved in the regulation of
MIEN1 will aid in designing novel and effective therapeutic strategies to
treat cancer patients.

