Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-specific genomic rearrangements used to quantify disease
burden in plasma from patients with colorectal cancer.


Tumor-specific chromosomal rearrangements have the potential to serve as
highly sensitive biomarkers for tumor detection. Such alterations are not
present in normal cells and should be exquisitely specific. It is well
recognized that some colorectal cancers (CRC) release small amounts of
DNA into plasma. Accordingly, sensitive and specific assays targeting
these tumor-specific rearrangements should enable quantification of
changes in disease burden if applied to serial plasma samples. Here we
report the establishment of efficient procedures for 1) identification of
tumor-specific genomic rearrangements, 2) development of sensitive and
specific assays to these, 3) quantification of these rearrangements in
plasma, and 4) results from applying these procedures to quantify disease
burden in serial plasma samples from CRC patients. The tumor-specific
genomic rearrangements were identified using a combination of next
generation paired-end sequencing of large-insert libraries and SNP array
based DNA copy number analysis. Nested real-time PCR assays targeting the
rearrangements were applied to plasma samples in order to quantify
disease burden. Initially the approach was tested using the CRC cell line
SW620 as a tumor model, and serial dilutions of SW620 DNA and normal
human plasma DNA as models of patient plasma. Multiple cell line specific
rearrangements were identified and nested real-time PCR analysis of these
in the serial dilutions revealed an excellent linearity, recovery across
three log scales. Also the sensitivity was very good. As little as 6.4 pg
cell line DNA could be detected in a background 20 ng of normal plasma
DNA, corresponding to DNA from 1-2 tumor cells circulating in 2 ml
plasma. We are currently in the process of analyzing 25 CRC patients from
which we have more than three years of follow-up and serial plasma
samples collected every third month, starting the day before surgery and
until month 36. The results from these analyses will be presented. In
conclusion: We have shown that the combination of large insert paired end
sequencing and copy number analysis readily identifies multiple
tumor-specific rearrangements that can be targeted by sensitive and
specific nested real-time PCR assays to quantify disease burden in plasma
samples.

