Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of fluorescent imaging to monitor drug responses in mouse
models of tumorigenesis.


As our understanding of the complexities of cancer biology has increased,
the ability to exploit unique features of tumour cells with molecularly
targeted therapies has become a reality. However, intrinsic and acquired
resistance to these agents means their full potential is not being
reached, and despite unprecedented volumes of new molecules in clinical
trials, the number of highly efficacious drugs approved by the regulatory
authorities remains disappointingly low. The frequent emergence of
resistance mechanisms, necessitates better preclinical platforms to be
able to prospectively identify and optimise relevant combination
strategies.Fluorescence imaging is a potentially powerful modality for
preclinical drug development, and the production of fluorescent cell
death imaging agents would be a valuable tool. A novel in house reporter
construct identifying cells undergoing caspase mediated cell death,
namely apoptosis, has been generated (pCasFSwitch). Validation of
pCasFSwitch in stably transfected squamous carcinoma cells revealed a
consistent kinetic profile of caspase activity upon staurosporine
treatment. Specificity studies using caspase inhibitors demonstrated that
the construct was specific for cleavage by caspases, and was not cleaved
by other members of the cysteine protease family. With activity
confirmed, pCasFSwitch will be utilized to explore drug efficacy in a
mouse model of breast carcinogenesis, driven by overexpression of the
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) oncogene coupled with /
without the loss of the phosphatase and tensin (PTEN) tumour suppressor.
Multifocal tumours arose in mice from both lines and displayed a
histopathology consistent with a HER2 type neoplasm. Disruption of PTEN
rapidly accelerated tumour onset (from 138 to 82 days) and tumour growth
(with the time from tumour onset to maximum tumour size reduced from 38
to 21 days), significantly reducing overall survival (from 165 to 102
days).Tumours arising in both mouse genotypes have been utilized to
generate cell lines, which have been stably transfected with pCasFSwitch.
Growth of these cells is currently being established in vivo, with a view
to examining tumours by intravital imaging. Since PTEN loss is associated
with resistance to the HER2 targeted therapy Herceptin, these cell lines
will be used to identify drugs that are suitable for combination with
HER2 directed therapies and which promote tumour cell apoptosis.
Utilizing this model, combination sequencing will be further optimized in
vivo through the use of temporal reporter imaging. Collectively, this
integration of mouse tumour models and imaging represents an advanced
preclinical strategy for examining therapeutic response.

