Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel negative regulation principle between DAPK and STAT3 in
inflammation-associated carcinogenesis.


It has been shown that the TNF-IL-6-STAT3 pathway plays a crucial role in
promoting ulcerative colitis associated carcinoma (UCC). As inflammation
compromises gut homeostasis and is associated with cancer progression, it
is important to understand the role of key signalling molecules that are
involved in the activation of the inflammatory cascade. Interestingly, we
found that intestinal epithelial cells (IEC) of UCC in comparison to
ulcerative colitis (UC) show high expression level of the
anti-inflammatory Death associated protein kinase (DAPK) but only low
levels of pSTAT3. Accordingly, epithelial DAPK expression was enhanced in
STAT3IEC-KO mice. To unravel a possible regulatory mechanism we used an
in vitro model of TNF-treated IEC. We identified a new function of DAPK
in suppressing TNF-induced STAT3 activation as DAPK si knockdown and
treatment with a DAPK inhibitor potentiated STAT3 activation and IL-6
secretion. DAPK attenuated STAT3 activity directly by physical
interaction shown in a 3D structural model. This model suggests that DAPK
induced conformational changes in the STAT3 dimer masked its nuclear
localization signal. Vice versa, pharmacologic inactivation of STAT3 led
to an increase in DAPK mRNA and protein levels. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation data showed that STAT3 restricted DAPK expression by
promoter binding, thereby reinforcing its own activation by inducing
IL-6. This novel negative regulation principle was confirmed in an
AOM-DSS-colon carcinogenesis mouse model. It might balance TNF-induced
inflammation and seems to play an important role in the
inflammation-associated transformation process. DAPK as a negative
regulator of STAT3 emerges as therapeutic option in the treatment of UC
and UCC.Citation Format: Saritha Chakilam, Muktheswar Gandesiri, Tilman
Rau, Clemens Neufert, Abbas Agaimy, Vijayalakshmi Mahadevan, Jelena
Ivanovska, Ralph Wirtz, Natalya Benderska, Jan Schulze-Lhrmann, Nadine
Wittkopf, Ajithavalli Chellappan, Petra Ruemmele, Michael Vieth, Margret
Rave-Frnk, Hans Christiansen, Arndt Hartmann, Raja Atreya, Christoph
Becker, Pablo Steinberg, Regine Schneider-Stock. A novel negative
regulation principle between DAPK and STAT3 in inflammation-associated
carcinogenesis. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting
of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2861. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2861

