Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: USP22 modulates AR activity to critically regulate prostate cancer
progression.


Recently, the deubiquitylase Ubiquitin-specific protease 22 (USP22) was
identified as a member of the 11 gene death-from-cancer signature, which
can predict poor response to therapy and/or propensity toward metastasis
of multiple tumor types, including breast and prostate. However, the
mechanism for how USP22 impacts cancer is currently unknown. Our new data
implicate a specific role for USP22 in hormone-dependent cancers,
especially prostate cancer (PCa) where USP22 expression is elevated in
primary and metastatic PCa. USP22 has an established role in regulating
oncogenic c-Myc activity as it is recruited by c-Myc for transcriptional
activation through deubiquitylation of histones, and is necessary for
c-Myc-mediated cell transformation. Similarly, our data in PCa cells
demonstrates that USP22 controls c-Myc activity but does not affect
expression levels.Additional data has also identified USP22 as a critical
effector of androgen receptor (AR) levels and output. This is of great
clinical relevance since PCa is intricately dependent on AR signaling for
disease initiation and progression to castrate resistant disease (CRPC).
First, USP22 overexpression in hormone-dependent and CRPC cell lines
increased AR protein expression and activity, but did not perturb
transcript. Second, in the absence of ligand, USP22 upregulation resulted
in enhanced AR recruitment to target genes, as determined by chromatin
immunoprecipitation, which corresponded with significant enhancement of
cell proliferation and BrdU incorporation. Third, USP22 depletion
resulted in attenuated AR activity and caused a significant reduction in
AR protein levels that could be attributed to protein stability.
Importantly, in the CRPC setting, USP22 depletion dramatically inhibited
in vivo tumor growth while expression correlated with decreased time for
tumor regression.In sum, the data suggest that USP22 upregulation is
sufficient for aberrant c-Myc activity, altered AR expression and
activity, and establishment of a CRPC phenotype. We propose that
modulation of UPS22 expression and/or activity may present a novel
platform to achieve combinatorial suppression of AR and c-Myc function,
and therefore could be potentially developed as a novel approach for
treatment of PCa.

