Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel Mcl-1 inhibitors using integrated
screening approach: combining high throughput and virtual screening.


Myeloid cell leukemia-1 (Mcl-1) is a potent anti-apoptotic protein, a
member of the prosurvival Bcl-2 family, and its role is emerging as a
critical survival factor in a broad range of human cancers. Mcl-1
represents a very attractive molecular target for development of a new
class of cancer therapy and there is still need for developing BH3
mimetics that can efficiently and selectively target Mcl-1 protein. We
employed integrated screening approach through combining high throughput
and virtual screening, to identify novel chemical classes as Mcl-1
inhibitors. For this purpose we developed a dual-readout HTS assay that
combines two assay technologies, FP and FRET, into one system using the
Mcl-1 and labeled Noxa BH3 derived peptide and optimized in a 1,536-well
ultra-HTS format. This assay was used for screening a library of 102,255
compounds. As two assay platforms were utilized for the same target
simultaneously, hit information was enriched identifying 1214 compounds.
To further improve the output and the quality of the identified
inhibitors, as well as to incorporate the structure-based knowledge of
the interactions between Mcl-1 and number of BH3 peptides, we have
integrated in silico target-based screening for selection of the most
promising hits for further validation. The complex structure between
Mcl-1 and Noxa BH3 peptide (PDB ID: 2NLA) was used for the induced fit
docking of 1214 hits. Followed by the scoring and ranking of the
identified hits, 62 compounds were selected for further evaluation in a
series of complementary biochemical, biophysical and functional assays.
Several in vitro binding assays with different platform, FP, SPR, and
(HSQC) NMR spectroscopy, were used to determine the binding affinity of
the compounds. The binding data revealed that we have identified
inhibitors with different selectivity profiles against five members of
the Bcl-2 family: Mcl-1, Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, Bcl-w and A1. 15N HSQC spectra
conclusively showed that newly identified compounds interact with the BH3
domain in Mcl-1 protein and affect many residues in the BH3 binding
groove. Using pull down assay it was demonstrated that the identified
compounds were able in a dose dependent manner to disrupt interactions
between endogenous Mcl-1 protein and biotin labeled Noxa BH3 peptide.
Functional studies showed that compounds can antagonize Mcl-1 function
and induce cytochrome c and Smac release from the isolated mitochondria.
By using murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), wild type and deficient in
both Bax and Bak (double knock out), it was further demonstrated that the
cytotoxic activity and induction of apoptosis, depend on Bax and/or Bak,
suggesting that the compounds function as BH3 mimetics. Collectively,
these findings provide several different chemical classes for further
chemical modifications and optimization toward developing a new class of
anticancer drugs as Mcl-1 inhibitors.

