Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of global DNA methylation in uterine tissue from
different species of monkeys and humans exposed to tamoxifen.


Tamoxifen (TAM) is a selective estrogen receptor modulator used worldwide
for adjuvant therapy and chemoprevention of breast cancer. However, women
receiving TAM therapy have an increased risk of endometrial and
myometrial cancer, which may be due to genotoxicity and/or estrogen
receptor-related mechanisms. It is now accepted that cancer can be both a
genetic and an epigenetic disease, with these components participating at
all stages of cancer development. DNA methylation at the 5-position of
cytosine silences gene expression. Aberrant global DNA 5-methylcytosine
(5-mC) levels may produce critical changes in the expression of genes
that regulate cell growth and invasiveness. In order to study the effect
of TAM exposure on uterine 5-mC levels, we examined uterine tissues taken
from aging Erythrocebus patas (patas) and Macaca fascicularis (macaque)
monkeys given oral TAM dosing for 3-4 months. In addition, we evaluated
endometrial and myometrial samples from breast cancer survivors, who
typically receive adjuvant TAM therapy for 5 years. The percentage of
5-mC in DNA was determined by an ELISA that employed a highly-specific
5-mC antibody. Of 5 female patas, 2 were unexposed and 3 were given oral
dosing with 1.7 mg TAM/kg bw/day for 3 months. Of 12 female macaques, 6
were unexposed and 6 were given 1.3 mg TAM/kg bw/day for 4 months. Also,
uterine tissue was taken at surgery or autopsy from normal-appearing
areas and malignant-appearing areas, from women who received 20 mg
TAM/day (n=9) and unexposed women (n=6). The patas monkeys given TAM had
significantly increased levels of uterine 5-mC compared to the controls
(2.90.13% vs. 1.90.26%, mean SE, respectively, p=0.03). However, the
macaques showed no significant differences in uterine 5-mC between
unexposed and TAM-exposed animals (0.93%0.1 vs. 1.07%0.05, mean SE,
respectively). In human patients, TAM treatment did not alter the global
5-mC levels in either normal-appearing or malignant-appearing
endometrium. However, global 5-mC levels in normal-appearing endometrium
from the combined TAM-treated and untreated women (n=6) were
significantly lower than those found in malignant-appearing uterine
tissue from the combined TAM-treated and untreated (n=9) group (0.33%0.01
vs. 0.70%0.09, mean SE, respectively, p=0.006). Therefore, changes in
uterine global DNA 5-mC are not altered consistently within primate
species as a result of long-term TAM exposure, suggesting that 5-mC
alterations are not major contributors to TAM-induced endometrial cancer.
Continuing studies will evaluate 5-mC levels in the promoter regions of
specific genes that are modulated in expression level during TAM therapy.

