Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of nuclear beta catenin, following chibby enforced
expression, activates endoplasmic reticulum stress in cells expressing
the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene of chronic myeloid leukemia.


CML is a myeloproliferative disease originated from a pluripotent
hematopoietic cell, the bona fide leukemic stem cell (LSC), where
reciprocal translocation t(9;22) generates the BCR-ABL rearranged gene.
This single genetic lesion drives the clonal expansion of leukemic
hematopoiesis through the constitutively activated tyrosine kinase (TK)
of its protein. The majority of CML patients undergoes complete
hematologic remission in response to TK inhibitor Imatinib (IM). However,
BCR-ABL+ LSC are neither dependent on BCR-ABL TK for proliferation and
survival nor killed by IM and second generation inhibitors, providing a
putative source of drug-resistance. catenin is a central component of
BCR-ABL+ LSC self-renewal. Moreover, it may have a role in the stemness
recovery of committed granulocyte/macrophage progenitors at the outcome
of blast crisis. Consequently, beta catenin subcellular distribution is a
central component of signaling activity and its nuclear-cytoplasmatic
shuttling is tightly regulated by multiple carrier protein, including
14-3-3.Chibby (CBY) is a protein that directly interacts with beta
catenin and competes with TCF/LEF factors for beta catenin binding,
repressing its transcriptional activity. Moreover, Chibby cooperates with
14-3-3 to regulate beta catenin subcellular distribution and signaling
activity. We have recently found a significant CBY reduction associated
with BCR-ABL TK with a consequent increment of active beta catenin. This
findings suggested a CBY putative role in the proliferative advantage of
CML hematopoiesis and addressed our further investigation towards the CBY
impact on proliferation and survival of BCR-ABL+ cells. To this purpose
we stably transduced the BCR-ABL+ K562 cell line with a construct
containing C22orf2.The cytoplasmatic accumulation of beta catenin
triggered the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated stress pathway known
as the unfolded protein response (UPR). The UPR is primarily a survival
response which activates a series of complementary adaptive mechanisms to
resolve the dysregulation of protein folding. However, under prolonged
and irreversible ER stress conditions UPR triggers apoptosis through
caspase activation and modulation of ER Ca2+ signaling. The ER stress
elicited by beta catenin cytoplasmatic accumulation in consequence of CBY
overexpression doomed K562 cells to apoptotic death induced by a
significant increase of CHOP, which amplifies the pro-apoptotic signal by
transcriptional activation of BIM and the release of PKR-like eIF2 kinase
(PERK) and inositol-requiring enzyme (IRE1), all mediators of ER
stress.Our results suggest that enforced CBY expression significantly
reduced K562 proliferation through events encompassing the beta catenin
prominent relocation to the cytoplasm and its transcriptional silencing.

