Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genotypic agreement between histological specimen and preoperative
cytology in small lung adenocarcinoma.


Background. Histological subtype and genotype is critical for making
treatment decisions and improving patient outcomes in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Approximately 70% of lung cancers are diagnosed in
advanced stages where small biopsies and cytological specimens are the
only source of material for both diagnosis and genotyping. Patients with
specific gene alterations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) or
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) likely receive more benefit from EGFR
TKI or ALK TKI therapy, respectively. Although, genotyping agreement from
cytological and histological samples is critical, more investigational
studies need to be explored to assess the concordance of genotype.
Purpose. We performed a comparing investigation on concordance rate for
pathological diagnosis and EGFR gene mutation status between surgical
specimen and preoperative cytological specimen in small lung cancer.
Additionally we reviewed immunohistochemical (IHC) staining with two
different ALK specific antibodies. Materials and Methods. 55 patients who
had surgically resected small (3cm) lung adenocarcinoma with known
preoperative bronchial brushing cytology were examined retrospectively.
IHC staining was conducted by mutation-specific antibodies using
E746-A750 deletion and L858R for EGFR or 5A4 and D5F3 for ALK. DNA
analysis was performed by PNA-RNA PCR clamp assay. Results. 1) Diagnostic
concordance rate between cytological and histological specimen was 90.9%.
Disagreement cases were included one case of squamous cell carcinoma, two
cases of small cell carcinoma, one case of melanoma and one case of
mucoepidermoid carcinoma by cytology. 2) In IHC positive for
mutation-specific EGFR antibodies, the sensitivity was 83% in E746-A750
and 100% in L858R, respectively. In EGFR IHC positive cases, well to
moderate differentiation were dominant. 3) In ALK IHC, one case was
observed stronger cytoplasmic staining in D5F3 than 5A4. Furthermore, the
cribriform pattern was observed in H&E staining. Distinctive cytological
feature was not observed. Conclusion. Our results showed that high
genotype concordance rates of histology and cytology agreement in small
lung adenocarcinoma.

