Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitor of Differentiation/DNA binding (ID) proteins modulate
the stem-like features of NSCLC cells by regulating the expression of
Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog.


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 85% of total lung cancer
cases and demonstrates a strong association with tobacco use. The overall
survival rate for NSCLC patients diagnosed in the late stages of cancer
is very low, demonstrating the need for novel therapeutic strategies to
combat this disease. While the genetic changes contributing to lung
cancer in smokers and non-smokers are fairly well characterized, the
downstream signaling events involved in tumorigenesis are not fully
understood. Our laboratory had identified the transcriptional regulator,
ID1 (inhibitor of differentiation/DNA binding 1), as a common mediator of
oncogenesis in NSCLC, irrespective of the smoking history. NSCLC tumors
are heterogeneous and are either refractory to the available treatments
or develop resistance to therapy. Cancer stem cells (CSC) hypothesis has
emerged as an explanation for tumor initiation, drug resistance and
metastasis. CSCs have been shown to have tumor initiating
properties.Given that the ID gene family (ID1- ID4) is known to be
expressed in the embryonic progenitor cells and have been have been
suggested to promote self renewal capacity of embryonic stem cells, and
since ID proteins are known to promote the genesis of NSCLC, we examined
whether these proteins contribute to the stemness of NSCLC CSCs.
Side-population (SP) cells with CSC properties were isolated from four
different NSCLC lines using flow cytometric sorting based on Hoechst
33342 exclusion. The mRNA and protein expression of the ID1-4 genes was
assessed in the sorted SP cells from these cell lines and compared to the
main population (MP) cells. Among the four ID proteins, ID3 expression
was found to be comparatively higher in the SP cells compared to MP cells
from all the cell lines; there was a difference in the levels of other
family members as well. Depletion of ID3 expression by siRNAs led to a
decrease in SP frequency; further, this led to a reduced expression of
embryonic stem cell transcription factors Sox2, Oct4 and Nanog
expression. Similar results were obtained when ID1 was depleted as well.
Interestingly, depletion of ID1 or ID3 significantly impaired the ability
of SP cells to self-renew, as measured by sphere formation assays.
Further analysis suggests that the transcriptional co-repressor ZBP89
might be involved in the ID-mediated repression of the ES cell
transcription factors. Our findings suggest that Id proteins might play a
role in the maintenance of stem like properties in NSCLC CSCs and this is
facilitated by the regulation of ES cell transcription factors in a
ZBP89-dependent manner. Our ongoing studies are aimed at elucidating the
potential correlation of gene expression levels of ID family members with
the survival of NSCLC patients, using microarray datasets.

