Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cdca7l is a sex-specific modifier of astrocytoma and glioblastoma.


Astrocytoma and glioblastoma-multiforme (GBM) are the most common primary
brain tumors and are currently incurable. Both astrocytoma and GBM show
male-predominance, with a male-to-female ratio of 1.3:1, respectively.
Previously, our lab has demonstrated that astrocytoma/GBM-tumorigenesis
in the Nf1-/+;Trp53-/+cis (NPcis) mouse model shows gender-bias in
certain genetic contexts. Using linkage-analysis in the NPcis mouse, we
have identified a male-specific genetic modifier locus on distal
chromosome 12, named Arlm1 for Astrocytoma-resistance-locus-in-males1. To
identify candidate genes for the Arlm1 modifier of glioma risk, we used
combinational bioinformatics approaches and cross-species comparisons,
identifying Cell-division-cycle-associated-7-like (CDCA7L) as a strong
candidate for a male-specific astrocytoma susceptibility gene among 503
candidate genes. To investigate the role of CDCA7L in astrocytoma/GBM, we
analyzed CDCA7L in both human and mouse astrocytoma cell lines in both
genders. CDCA7L expression was upregulated in astrocytoma cells compared
to normal brain with male-predominance. shRNA-mediated CDCA7L-silencing
in male-derived astrocytoma cells led to decrease of both cell growth and
viability in both human and mouse. Further mechanistic study revealed
that CDCA7L-depletion in male-derived astrocytoma cells was connected
with the induction of Caspase3-activation and reduction of
CyclinD1-expression, suggesting the oncogenic role of CDCA7L in
astrocytoma/GBM. On the other hand, CDCA7L-overexpression in
female-derived astrocytoma cells showed less degree of cell proliferation
and viability increases. Strikingly, CDCA7L-depletion in human
female-derived astrocytoma cell line, U87MG caused increase of both cell
growth and viability. These data highlight the sex-specificity of CDCA7L
in astrocytoma/GBM tumorigenesis and provide evidence for the first
modifier of male-specific susceptibility to brain tumors.

