Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The oxidation state of DJ-1 determines the cell fate during
oxidative stress triggered by Fenretinide (4-HPR): autophagy or apoptosis.


Increasing oxidative stress caused by many anti-cancer drugs is commonly
accompanied with a switch from autophagy, a cyto-protective response, to
apoptosis in cancer cells. However, the underlying mechanism of this
process is still poorly understood. To address this we chose fenretinide
(4-HPR) as the candidate drug since the major anti-cancer mechanism of
this drug is reactive oxygen species (ROS) induction. We have shown
previously and herein that 4-HPR-driven ROS induce the
autophagy-apoptosis transition in a threshold manner in vitro and vivo.
During this process, ASK1-regulated JNK1 or p38 signaling is response for
4-HPR-induced autophagy or apoptosis, respectively. Given ASK1 play a
pivotal role in the selective activation of individual signaling, we
further characterize the potential regulating unit of ASK1 by
immunoprecipitation following LC/MS/MS analysis. Of note, DJ-1, a crucial
antioxidant protein, is identified from a total of 7 fragments. We show
that DJ-1 interacts with ASK-1 under moderate oxidative stress, but
segregate from ASK-1 under lethal level of oxidative stress, suggesting
DJ-1 may be a potent key regulator of autophagy-apoptosis transition.
Interestingly, various oxidation statuses and the stability of homo-dimer
formation of DJ-1 are highly related to different levels of intracellular
oxidative stress. Moreover, we apply two kinds of artificial DJ-1 mutants
at position C106 or E18 and further confirm that DJ-1 served as an
oxidative sensor to determine the switch between autophagy and apoptosis
triggered by 4-HPR. Hence, different oxidation state of DJ-1 modulates
ASK-1-JNK1/p38 signaling activation to dictate the cellular response to
oxidative stress: to autophagy or apoptosis.Citation Format: Ji Cao,
Meidan Ying, Nan Xie, Jun Zhang, Xiaowen Liu, Qiaojun He, Bo Yang. The
oxidation state of DJ-1 determines the cell fate during oxidative stress
triggered by Fenretinide (4-HPR): autophagy or apoptosis. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2915.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2915

