Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apoptotic effect of thymus extract plus Lactobacillus kefiri P-IF
on human myeloid leukemia (HL60/AR) cancer cells.


Apoptosis involves a cascade of biochemical events that is tightly
regulated. Induction of apoptosis in tumor cells is a promising approach
to curing cancer. Therefore, new and safe treatment methods that maximize
cancer cells apoptosis are therefore highly sought after. In this study,
we examined the effect of gross thymus extract (GTE) combined with freeze
dried, heat-killed Lactobacillus kefiri P-IF in the induction of
apoptosis in human multidrug-resistant (MDR) myeloid leukemia (HL60/AR)
cells in vitro and evaluated the mechanism underlying its effect. L.
kefiri P-IF is a specific strain of lactic acid bacteria that has a
unique DNA sequence and PET scans show a 99.6% homology with regular
kefiris. To identify any synergistic effect of these two products, tumor
cells were cultured for three days with 1) GTE at a concentration of 1.25
mg/ml or 2) L.kefiri P-IF at a concentration of 1.25 mg/ml or 3) a
combination of both products at the same concentrations. The apoptotic
response was assessed by propidium iodide assay and expression of Bcl2,
anti-apoptotic protein, was determined by flow cytometry. Results showed
that GTE and L.kefiri P-IF induced apoptosis in HL60/AR cells; GTE caused
37% apoptosis while L.kefiri P-IF caused 17% apoptosis, as compared to 7%
for control cancer cells without treatment. When cancer cells were
cultured in the presence of both GTE and L.kefiri P-IF, 60% apoptosis of
cancer cells was detected. This data was confirmed by giemsa stained
cytospin preparation. The synergistic apoptotic effect was associated
with decreased expression of Bcl2. MFC: 74, 68, 61 and 50 for control
untreated cells, GTE, L.kefiri P-IF and GTE + kefiri P-IF respectively.
Atomic Force Microscopy studies were performed and showed clear signs of
apoptotic cancer cells including membrane blebbing. These results
demonstrate that GTE + L.kefiri P-IF induces apoptosis on cancer cells
that exceed the effect of either agent alone, and this agent may
represent a new class of adjuvants for the treatment of leukemia. GTE
(Thymax) was provided by the YS Nature Company, Tokyo, Japan; L.kefiri
P-IF was provided by Paitos Co., Ltd. Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.Citation
Format: Mamdooh H. Ghoneum, Mark Henary, Yoshikazu Seto. Apoptotic effect
of thymus extract plus Lactobacillus kefiri P-IF on human myeloid
leukemia (HL60/AR) cancer cells. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 3294. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3294

