Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapamycin can overcome ABT-737 resistance in patient-derived SCLC
xenograft models.


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive form of lung cancer with
one of the highest case fatality rates among cancers. Standard therapy
for SCLC has not changed in nearly 30 years and despite high initial
response rates, treatment-refractory recurrence is nearly universal.
Overexpression of the anti-apoptotic protein, Bcl-2, is observed in the
majority of SCLC cases and is associated with therapy resistance. We have
previously shown that the small molecule BH3 mimetic, ABT-737, is
cytotoxic against Bcl-2 expressing SCLC cell lines in vitro and causes
dramatic tumor regressions in SCLC cell line-based xenografts in vivo
(Hann et al., Can Res 2008). We have also assessed the activity of
ABT-737 in patient-derived (PD) SCLC xenografts; a model we believe
better reflects patient tumor biology (Daniel et al., Can Res 2009). In
PD SCLC xenografts that express high levels of Bcl-2, we found that
treatment with ABT-737 caused tumor growth inhibition (TGI) but without
any regressions. Our results in PD xenografts mirrored the activity seen
clinically with ABT-263, an orally bioavailable form of ABT-737. In early
phase trials, ABT-263 had limited single-agent activity in patients with
recurrent SCLC (Rudin et al., Clin Can Res 2012).To identify factors that
contribute to ABT-737 resistance we compared the gene expression profiles
of PD SCLC xenografts after treatment with ABT-737 to treatment-nave
tumors. We then used the Connectivity Map database to identify compounds
that could potentially overcome ABT-737 resistance by inducing gene
expression changes inverse to those observed in ABT-737 resistant
xenografts. The top candidates from our query included inhibitors of the
PI3K/mTOR axis. mTOR plays a key role in the hypoxic response through
positive regulation of HIF1 and its downstream targets; this pathway was
one of the most enriched gene expression profiles in our ABT-737
resistant xenografts.We assessed the combination of ABT-737 and the mTOR
inhibitor, rapamycin, in two PD SCLC xenografts. We found that
combination treatment was well-tolerated and resulted in rapid tumor
regression in mice. This response was durable; after treatment
discontinuation, the combination-treated tumors remained too small to
measure for over 30 days. In contrast, treatment with either ABT-737 or
rapamycin alone caused TGI but no tumor regressions. Furthermore,
combination treatment of animals that had previously received either
single agent also resulted in tumor regression, suggesting that
resistance to combination therapy did not develop after exposure to
either single agent in the acute setting. Correlative studies of the mTOR
and HIF1 pathways on our models and efficacy studies in additional PD
SCLC xenografts are currently underway. As the safety of ABT-263 has been
determined in early phase clinical trials and several FDA-approved mTOR
inhibitors are currently available, this treatment paradigm may have
clinical applicability.

