Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromatin regulatory nuclear proteins and nuclear architecture in
cell lines derived from curable and incurable metastatic human cancers.


Introduction and Objective: Historically an impressive response to
chemotherapy for metastatic testicular cancer is in stark contrast to the
dismal results with metastatic pancreatic cancers. Based on our
hypothesis that nuclear chromatin structure plays a key role in
determining the aggressiveness and the curability of cancer, and the
chromatin regulatory proteins alter nuclear structure and hence may be
differentially expressed between curable and incurable cancers, we have
studied several of these proteins in Tera-1 & Tera-2 (from metastatic
testicular carcinoma) and in PANC-1 & CAPAN-1 (from metastatic pancreatic
cancer) cell lines.- The nuclear protein targets are SATB1 (special
AT-rich sequence-binding protein-1), HP1 (Heterochromatin Protein 1),
NUMA (nuclear mitotic apparatus protein), Transcriptional repressor CTCF
(11-zinc finger protein), Lamin A/C, Lamin B, and High-mobility group
AT-hook 1 (HMGA1).Methods: The cell lines were grown in 4-well chamber
slides coated with poly- L-lysine (BD, USA) using specific media. After
fixing the cells with acetone: methanol (1:1), immunocytochemistry was
done using specific commercial antibodies, biotinylated secondary
antibody, Avidin/Biotinylated Complex system and Vector red dye. Some
proteins were not done in Tera-1 cell lines since we had some problems in
culturing them. Nuclear morphometry was quantified using Feulgen stained
nuclei captured by the AutoCyte Pathology Workstation which calculated -
features of shape, size, DNA content and texture.Results: The nuclear
chromatin protein expressions of CTCF, HP1, HMGA1 and NuMA were
determined as moderate (2+) to strong (3-4+) in pancreatic cell lines,
but were weak (1+) to no expression in testicular cancer cell lines. For
Lamin A/C, though no significant difference between the cell lines
occurred, in the testicular cells the expression was confined to nucleus
whereas in pancreatic cells staining was both nuclear and cytoplasmic.
The expression of Lamin B did not differ between cell lines and no
expression of SAT B1 was found in the cell lines. The nuclear morphometry
features showed significant difference in DNA content and size & shape
factors between pancreatic and testicular cell lines.Conclusions: Our
preliminary results indicate that the differential expression of nuclear
chromatin regulatory proteins may play an important role in
responsiveness to treatment and might offer new targets for study.
Further, measurement of nuclear structure support alterations in nuclear
shape and DNA content commensurate with these nuclear protein
studies.Funding: National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of
Health through awards funded under Grant number 1U54CA143803-03.

