Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endothelin-induced multifunctional complex regulates -arrestin-1
nuclear activity to promote EMT in chemoresistant ovarian cancer cells.


Chemotherapy is the preferred therapeutic approach for advanced
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC), but a successful long-term treatment is
prevented by the development of drug resistance. In EOC cells, there are
ample evidences supporting the role of the endothelin-1 (ET-1)/ ET A
receptor (ETAR) signaling in invasive and drug-resistant cells. Moreover,
in these cells ET-1/ETAR pathway promotes the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), a phenotype that is closely linked with the development
of drug resistance and metastasis. To decipher ETAR signaling complexity
in EMT and chemoresistance, we explored the role of -arrestin-1 (-arr1),
a protein that mediates signals in response to receptor recruitment, as
nuclear scaffold to control gene transcription in chemoresistant EOC
cells. To this end we used cisplatin-sensitive EOC cell lines (A2780 and
2008) and their resistant variants. In chemoresistant cells, -arr1 and
ETAR were ovexpressed. In response to ETAR activation by ET-1, -arr1
increases its nuclear translocation, and its interaction with
transcription factors critically involved in EMT, such as -catenin,
Snail, and HIF-1, and forms nuclear complexes capable to localize these
transcription factors on the promoter regions of their target genes, such
as ET-1, Axin2, matrix-metalloproteinase-2, and Cyclin D1. Moreover,
-arr1, by promoting the dissociation of transcriptional repressors, such
as HDAC1, and the recruitment of transcriptional activator, such as p300
acetyltransferase, controls epigenetic modifications and gene
transcription. These effects are abrogated by -arr1 silencing or by
expression of a mutant -arr1 incapable of nuclear distribution,
confirming that nuclear -arr1 forms functional complex capable of
regulating epigenetic changes in ET-1-driven invasive behaviour. At
functional level, -arr1 silencing or expression of mutant -arr1, as well
as ET-1 receptor blockade resulted in reduced cell invasion, and EMT
determinant expression, as well as metastasis inhibition in sensitive and
resistant EOC xenografts, providing evidence that blockade of
ETAR/-arr1-driven EMT can overcome chemoresistance and inhibit tumor
progression. In human EOC tissues, -arr1-dependent nuclear complexes are
selectively enriched at target gene promoters, correlating with tumor
grade, confirming a direct in vivo -arr1 association at specific set of
genes involved in EOC progression. Collectively, our findings provide
insights into how -arr1-mediated epigenetic mechanism driven by ETAR
controls EMT transcriptional responses and chemoresistance. Supported by
AIRC.

