Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective modulation of CHOP/GADD153 in prostate cancer cells by
alpha-mangostin promotes cell death.


Background: It is well-established that during endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress cells utilize several cell signal pathways collectively named
unfolded protein reaction (UPR) to re-establish homeostasis and promote
cell survival. The upregulation of UPR proteins to an extent is thought
to be a growth advantage for cancer cells. However, chronic ER stress or
prolonged UPR will lead to apoptosis. Alpha-mangostin, a xanthone from
mangosteen fruit, has been reported to effectively induce prostate cancer
cell apoptosis in vitro and suppress xenograft tumor growth. Thus, we
investigated the alteration of ER stress-related proteins in mangosteen
fruit extract (MFE)- or -Mangostin-treated prostate cancer cells as well
as its correlation with apoptosis.Methods: Two human prostate cancer cell
lines, 22Rv1 and LNCaP, and a prostate epithelial cell line were treated
with MFE or -mangostin. Flow cytometry, MTT and BrdU were used to
evaluate cell apoptosis, viability and proliferation. Western blot and
fluorescent microscopy were used to detect proteins involved in apoptosis
or ER stress. We also evaluated the anti-cancer activity of MFE and
-mangostin in nude mice inoculated with 22Rv1 cells. In addition,
pharmacokinetics data of -mangostin was collected on wild type C57BL6
mice for toxicity concern.Results: MFE increased apoptosis, decreased
viability and inhibited proliferation in prostate cancer cell lines. Both
MFE and -mangostin significantly upregulated the expression of ER stress
proteins, such as PERK, CHOP and IRE1. Both MFE and -mangostin also
effectively suppressed tumor growth in a xenograft tumor model without
affecting body weight. Interestingly, CHOP knockdown enhanced apoptosis
in -mangostin-treated prostate cancer cells; both MFE and -mangostin
decreased PERK expression and did not induce ER stress in prostate
epithelial cells (PrECs) from prostate cancer patients.Conclusions: Both
MFE and -mangostin selectively promote ER stress in prostate cancer cells
and inhibit prostate cancer cell growth in a xenograft mouse model
without observable toxicity, suggesting further research is needed to
evaluate its potential as an anti-cancer agent.

