Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ErbB2/HER2-specific natural killer cells for adoptive
immunotherapy of glioblastoma.


In addition to primary natural killer (NK) cells, continuously growing
cytotoxic cell lines such as NK-92 are being considered for adoptive
cancer immunotherapy. High cytotoxicity of NK-92 has been shown against
malignant cells of hematologic origin in preclinical studies, and general
safety of infusion of NK-92 cells has been established in phase I
clinical trials. To enhance their therapeutic utility, we genetically
modified NK-92 cells to express chimeric antigen receptors (CAR) specific
for different tumor-associated surface antigens including ErbB2 (HER2).
Such CAR were composed of a tumor-specific scFv antibody fragment fused
via hinge and transmembrane domains to intracellular signaling proteins
such as CD3 zeta chain or a composite CD28-CD3 zeta fusion
molecule.Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and severe
intracranial malignant tumor in humans. Despite aggressive therapy,
recurrence of GBM is very frequent, and the median survival of GBM
patients is only 12 to 15 months. Since enhanced ErbB2 expression was
found in up to 80% of GBM cases, adoptive ErbB2-targeted immunotherapy
may represent a more efficient alternative to standard therapy. For
development towards clinical applications, here we generated a lentiviral
second generation CAR construct (5.28.z) specific for the ErbB2 antigen,
and established GMP-compliant protocols for transduction and expansion of
NK-92 cells. An ErbB2-specific single cell clone (NK-92/5.28.z) was
isolated, which showed high and selective cytotoxicity towards different
established ErbB2-expressing glioblastoma cells and tumor cells of
various other origins in vitro, as well as specific tumor homing in
murine in vivo models. Treatment with NK-92/5.28.z cells also resulted in
marked inhibition of the growth of subcutaneous glioblastoma xenografts
in NOD/SCID c KO mice. Ongoing work now focuses on evaluating the
feasibility and efficacy of intracranial application of NK-92/5.28.z
cells in orthotopic xenograft models of ErbB2-positive glioblastoma cells
as a basis for further development of these cells as an adoptive
immunotherapy for glioblastoma patients.

