Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthetic lethal siRNA screening to identify novel combinational
therapies with Topotecan in neuroblastoma.


Despite advances in multimodal treatment, the outcome of neuroblastoma
(NB) is still often fatal for children with advanced-stage disease. The
topoisomerase-1 inhibitor topotecan is currently a mainstay for both
up-front and salvage regimens for NB patients. In order to improve
efficacy of single agent therapy, we used high throughput loss of
function siRNA screens to identify genes whose inhibition sensitizes cell
lines to topotecan treatment. The translation of these silenced-gene-drug
interactions into potent synergistic drug-drug combinations for cancer
therapy is the ultimate goal.We screened with the QIAgen human druggable
genome kit containing 13910 siRNAs targeting 6878 genes in four NB cell
lines, two MYCN-amplified (IMR5 and IMR32) and two non-amplified (SKNAS
and NBEB) lines. To reduce the false positive rate mainly due to
off-target binding of the seed region of siRNAs (2nd -8th base) to
multiple gene transcripts, we performed common seed analysis to eliminate
siRNA exhibiting this effect. We then ranked the siRNAs by their activity
applying the Redundant siRNA activity (RSA) algorithm and identified 150
genes whose silencing caused a significant decrease in cell survival in
combination with topotecan in any of the four cell lines. This list was
further filtered to contain only curated drug targets for potential drug
combination therapies.Furthermore, Haystack analysis allowed us to
predict target genes based on the siRNA off-target effects in our
screens. Using this method, 39 additional transcripts whose 3-UTR regions
contain off-target binding sites for the seeds of multiple, active siRNAs
were identified. Additionally, we picked transcription factors predicted
by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) to regulate our target genes. These
hits were verified with three additional siRNAs per gene. In 12-point
drug dosage response screens, we evaluated 634 siRNAs targeting 213 genes
for significant decrease of the IC50 concentration of topotecan. As
expected, the prime target genes for therapeutical intervention are
within the DNA double-strand breakage repair pathway. In addition, we
also identified other biologically interesting targets ranking high on
the list. Based on this hit list, we are now selecting the appropriate
drugs targeting a particular gene or an affiliated pathway to test them
for synergy with topotecan in the four cell lines. Furthermore,
expression profiles are generated for the cell lines in the presence of a
low and a high topotecan concentration to examine the biology behind the
killing mechanism of the drug. A good correlation of an up-regulated
expression with a strong sensitizing effect in the siRNA screens will
further validate the significance of our target genes.

