Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spontaneous formation of sarcomas in Usp18 knockout mice.


Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS) and leimyosarcoma are two of
the most common adult soft tissue sarcomas. Their etiology is unknown
hence the need for new models to elucidate the biology of these diseases.
We report here a spontaneously occurring mouse model of sarcoma in Usp18
knockout mice. Usp18 is the deconjugase for isgylation. Isgylation is the
ubiquitin-like protein modification in which ISG15 is conjugated to
proteins. Usp18 removes ISG15 from the target proteins, thus reversing
the functional consequences of ISG15 conjugation. Usp18 knockout mice on
a C57Bl6 background developed neurological abnormalities and exhibited
100% mortality within 5 months. These mice were also hypersensitive to
Type I IFN stimulation, which was attributed to an increased JAK-STAT
signaling. We now report that Usp18 knockout mice in a FVB background
developed subcutaneous tumors in the neck and trunk regions from ages
ranging from 6 months to 16 months. Tumor formation to date shows a
penetrance of 77%. Immunohistochemical analysis characterized the tumors
as either UPSs or leimyosarcomas. About 30% of these tumors displayed
stabilization of p53, a common event also seen in human sarcomas. We
derived two cell lines (KHC-1, KHC-2) from the sarcomas of separate mice,
and analyzed the levels of STAT family proteins in these cell lines.
Stat3 was noted to be constitutively activated in these sarcoma cell
lines. Persistent activation of Stat3 is seen in diverse human
malignancies such as breast and head and neck cancers. To determine if
restoring Usp18 activity reverses tumorigenicity in these cells, human
USP18 was introduced retrovirally. Cells re-expressing USP18 versus empty
vector showed a substantial decrease in anchorage independent growth in
soft agar and also had reduced levels of activated Stat3 (pStat3).
Furthermore, treatment of the parental cell lines with a Stat3 inhibitor,
JSI-124, led to decreased cell growth, apoptosis and reduced levels of
pStat3. In summary, Usp18 knockout mice spontaneously develop sarcomas,
whose tumorigenicity can be partially reversed by reintroduction of
Usp18. Thus, this new and tractable model should prove useful to
elucidate the activity of Stat3 targeting and other agents to treat
sarcomas.

