Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Equipotent antagonism, transient immune activation and excellent
antitumor efficacy with a peptide inhibitor of PD-1 immune check point
pathway.


Pioneering success of anti-CTLA4 antibody (Ipilimumab) and the impressive
clinical data on agents that target PD-1 or its ligands have opened novel
avenues in the area for caner immunotherapy. However, along with
impressive clinical activity, immune-related toxicities have also been
observed in significant (25-30% with anti-CTLA4 and up to 15% with
anti-PD1) patient population. Sustained inhibition of PD-1 signaling as a
result of a very long half-life (>15-20 days) and >70% target occupation
for months are likely contributing to severe adverse effects observed in
clinical trials with antibodies targeting PD-1 signaling. In the present
study, we sought to characterize in detail a novel peptide antagonist of
the PD1 signaling providing desired anti-tumor efficacy with shorter
exposure and thus transient immune activation for effective management of
severe adverse effects.Design of peptide to disrupt PD-1 signalling
pathway was carried out by selecting individual fragments from PD-1
ectodomain reported to participate in binding. Sequences critical for
ligand-receptor interaction were identified and combined in a non-linear
fashion. The strategy resulted in a novel peptide, AUR-012 (29-mer),
which displayed equipotent antagonism in disruption of PD1-PDL1/2
interaction and highly effective in restoration of proliferation and
effector functions of mouse splenocytes and monkey and human PBMCs using
species specific ligands. In preclinical models of melanoma, breast,
kidney and colon cancers, AUR-012 showed superior showed superior
efficacy compared to therapeutic agents currently used in the clinic in
inhibition of both primary tumour growth and metastasis. Additionally,
AUR-012 showed additive anti-tumor activity in a pre-established tumor
models when combined with tumor vaccination or a chemotherapeutic agent
such as cyclophosphamide known to induce immunological cell death.
Anti-tumoral activity was correlated with increased drug distribution
within the tumor while promoting intratumoral recruitment of CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells. Furthermore, AUR -012 was well tolerated in 14 days
repeated dose toxicity studies at 100x efficacious doses.The above
findings demonstrating equipotent activity antagonism of both PD-L1 and
PD-L2 signaling coupled with impressive efficacy in preclinical models
support further development of AUR-012 for clinical use.

