Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down-regulation of HOXC6 in serous ovarian cancer.


Objective: The Homeobox (HOX) family of genes consists of 39 genes
encoding transcription factors important to morphogenesis and cell
differentiation. Usually inactive in normal differentiated tissues,
dysregulation of HOX genes has been reported in several malignancies. HOX
genes have been linked to genes important in malignant transformation
including vascular endothelial growth factor, Ras, interleukin-8, and
fibroblast growth factor. We have previously reported up-regulation of
HOXA2, HOXA7 and HOXB7 in ovarian cancer. Little is known about HOXC6
gene expression in ovarian cancer. In this study we evaluated HOXC6
expression in normal and malignant human ovarian tissue to characterize
expression of HOXC6 in serous ovarian cancer.Methods: Microarray analysis
of mRNA from LCM captured cells from human ovarian tissues was performed
on 11 samples of normal, and malignant ovarian tissues. These samples
were analyzed using the Affymetrix Human EXON 1.0 ST microarray to
distinguish the differential pattern of mRNA expression between malignant
and normal samples. Real-time reverse transcription PCR was utilized to
confirm down-regulation of HOXC6 genes as determined by microarray
analysis. HOXC6 protein in tissue was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry.Results: Microarray analysis demonstrated
significant down-regulation of the HOXC6 gene in malignant serous ovarian
tumor samples compared to normal ovarian epithelial cells of control
samples. RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry confirmed HOXC6 down-regulation
in malignant samples. A 115-fold difference in malignant and normal
primary tissue samples and cell lines was seen in the RT-PCR analysis. By
immunohistochemistry nuclear staining of HOXC6 protein was seen in the
nuclei of normal ovarian surface epithelial tissues but significantly
reduced or absent in malignant ovarian samples.Conclusion: HOXC6 is
significantly differentially expressed comparing normal ovarian tissue
and serous malignant ovarian tissue based on both tissue mRNA and protein
analysis. This finding of HOXC6 down-regulation in ovarian cancer is
unique and opposite of the up-regulation of other HOX genes previously
reported. Down-regulation of HOXC6 in serous ovarian cancer may be an
important finding relative to oncogenic pathways and biomarker
development. This suggests dysregulation of HOXC6 genes may be an early
event in malignant transformation and additional studies to validate the
role of the HOXC6 gene in ovarian cancer are warranted.

