Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogene signatures and oncogene interaction networks in SUM
breast cancer cell lines.


During the course of tumorigenesis, cancer cells acquire a large number
of genetic and epigenetic alterations. A subset of these alterations
result in the generation of driver oncogenes that play critical roles in
initiating and maintaining the transformed phenotype. Identification and
therapeutic targeting of driver oncogenes has revolutionized cancer
treatment however, responses to therapies that target a single oncogene
are rarely durable. We hypothesize that most solid tumors are
simultaneously driven by multiple driver oncogenes that together form an
oncogene network and that durable therapies will need to target multiple
oncogenes. Identifying multiple driver oncogenes among the large number
of mutated/amplified genes that are present in most solid tumors is a
nontrivial task that will require novel approaches. In this work we have
combined RNAi-based dropout screens with copy number, expression and
exome mutation analysis to identify the full complement of driver
oncogenes that function in a panel of breast cancer cell lines. Our
initial analysis has focused on four cell lines that each contain a known
activated receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) driver oncogene (SUM-52/FGFR2,
SUM-185/FGFR3, SUM-190/HER2, and SUM-225/HER2). Using the SUM-52 cell
line data as an example, we identified 956 copy number amplified genes
and RNAi-based screening showed that 13 are amplified/over expressed and
are necessary for growth/survival of this cell line. Similarly, of the
615 mutated genes in this cell line, 23 scored in the screen. Three
specific gene mutations were previously identified in other cancer types.
Together these genes comprise a first draft of the complete oncogene
signature for this cell line. This oncogene signature contains the known
driver oncogene, FGFR2, as well as a novel oncogene, MYST3, that is of
particular interest because it is found to be focally amplified in 5
different cancer subtypes in the TCGA database. Additionally, one of the
mutated genes, RASGRF3 is of particular interest due to the presence of
this mutation in the COSMIC database and its role is ras/MAPK signaling.
In an effort to identify oncogenes that cooperate with activated RTKs, we
performed time-series expression analysis following treatment of cells
with RTK inhibitors. In the SUM-52 cell line we identified a suite of
genes that are regulated by FGFR2 in these cells and some of these genes
are themselves amplified and necessary for growth/survival. Amplified
genes regulated by an upstream driver oncogene represent candidate
cooperating oncogenes that function as part of an FGFR2 driver oncogene
network in these cells. Similar results have been obtained in additional
cell lines from our panel including SUM-190 and SUM-225. Future work will
focus on validation of oncogene signatures and identification of
oncogenes that can be targeted to elicit a synthetic lethal response in
the presence of specific, activated driver oncogenes.

