Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulating AKT induced epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) for
prevention and treatment of colon cancer.


Activation of serine threonine kinase-AKT transduces signals that
regulate multiple biological processes including cellular proliferation,
survival, apoptosis, gene expression, angiogenesis, migration and EMT in
many cancer types. Recent studies have shown oncogenic activation of AKT
has emerged as a central feature of EMT, endowing the cancer cells with
migratory and invasive capability. In our results over expression of AKT
in HCT-116 (AKT/HCT-116) (express low levels of pAKT as compared to the
other colon cancer cell lines) showed significantly higher cell
proliferation and aggressive phenotype with increase in migration and
invasion when compared to the vector transfected control cells
(pCMV/HCT-116). Further in vivo studies revealed highly aggressive,
angiogenic with large tumor volume in AKT/HCT-116 xenografts compared to
the control tumors. Down-regulating constitutively active Akt (by a PI3
kinase inhibitor, such as wortmannin or LY 294002) reverses both cell
survival and resistance to chemotherapeutic agents, however, these
inhibitors causes severe toxicity in animal models. Hence, it is exigent
to identify novel molecules, to inhibit Akt signaling, which could be
developed as a new therapeutics, as well as preventive agents for colon
cancer.Our small molecules screening studies revealed, Withaferin-A (WA)
as a potent molecule which significantly inhibited AKT activity that
resulted in inhibition of cell proliferation in AKT over expressing
HCT-116 cells. At molecular level inhibition of AKT resulted in
suppression of its downstream pro-survival signaling such as NFB and
BCL-2 in AKT/HCT-116 cells and pCMV/HCT-6 cells. Oral treatment of WA
significantly suppressed AKT-induced tumor growth, invasion and migration
in cell culture and xenograft models. These results correlated well at
molecular level with significant inhibition of the important EMT markers
i.e. snail, slug, -catenin, MMP-2 and MMP-9. Immunohistochemistry of
tumor tissues showed WA treatment resulted in increase in E-cadherin
expression with concomitant decrease in the expression and nuclear
localization of -catenin in AKT overexpressing tumors. Decreased levels
of pAKT, NFkB, Snail, Slug, vimentin expression were seen in WA treated
both pCMV/HCT-116 and AKT/HCT-116 tumors. Interestingly, significant
inhibition of micro-vessel formation and length of vessels were evident
in WA-treated tumors which correlated with low expression of angiogenic
markers like Factor VIII and RETIC. In conclusion, the present study
underscores the crucial role of AKT activation in inducing cell
proliferation, angiogenesis and EMT in colon cancer cells and WA could be
a potent compound for the chemoprevention and/or chemotherapy of colon
cancer.

