Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caveolin is related to progression of malignant transformation in
patients with breast tumors.


Aim: Caveolin seems to be an important factor in tumorigenesis and
progression. It has a dual role in both tumor suppression and
progression. The proponents of tumor suppression suggest that caveolin is
the major protein of the cavea in the cells and these regions accumulate
the growth stimulatory signals from certain growth factors such as
epidermal growth factor family. Locus of caveolin gene on chromosome 7 is
closely related to other tumor suppressor genes. Proponents of the
oncogenic role state that caveolin is highly expressed in cancer tissues
such as prostate, lung, and renal cell carcinoma when compared to normal
counterparts. This type of expression in breast cancers has been ill
defined in previous studies. We designed a detailed study in order to
evaluate the expression of caveolin in breast cancers and investigation
of its possible use as target of specific cancer therapy. The initial
phase of the study consists of evaluation of caveolin in patients with
benign and malignant breast disease with respect to normal controls. Here
we present our preliminary results of the first phase of the
study.Materials and methods: Breast tissue from 202 benign breast tumors,
98 breast cancers and 20 normal controls (obtained from reduction
mammoplasties with informed consent) in our center. Caveolin was
evaluated by immunohistochemistry.Results: Caveolin distribution was
higher in malignant tissues when compared to control tissues and benign
tumors. Furthermore caveolin antigen distribution was enhanced with more
aggressive tumor behavior. We observed enhanced caveolin expression
especially in myoepithelial cells. The benign tumors expressed higher
caveolin when compared to normal controls. In both benign and malignant
breast tumors the caveolin expression increased with stromal content of
the tumor.Conclusion: Tumor microenvironment influences the tumor tissue
interms of proliferation and metastasis. Caveolin seems to be expressed
in the stromal component of the tumor and seems to have increased
expression with aggressive nature of the tumor. Results of this
preliminary study suggests that caveolin plays a determinative role in
tumorigenesis in breast cancer and furthermore correlates with the
aggressiveness of the tumor. Caveolin may exert its oncogenic effects by
promoting epithelial to mesenchymal transition. Therefore targeting
caveolin may be logical strategy in breast cancer treatment.

