Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ras GTPase activating like protein (IQGAP1) in human acute
myelogenous leukemia.


Background and Significance: Prognosis of acute myelogenous leukemia in
patients over the age of 60 is poor. Recent recognition that the process
of transformation utilizes a limited number of common pathways as
decsribed by Hanahan and Weinberg provided the impetus to validating and
extending previously published observation that immunization with normal
human white blood cells (WBC) whose surface charge had been modified in
vitro elicited an antibody response that cross-reacted against a broad
range of leukemias (MB Sahasrabudhe Nature 1971).Specific Aim: Isolation
and molecular characterization of a shared antigenic moiety from human
leukemia cells.Methods: Peripheral blood was collected from healthy
volunteers in ACD tubes. Red blood cells were removed by dextran
sedimentation and hypotonic shock lysis. The WBCs were incubated with
fluorodinitrobenzene (FDNB) at 104 molecules per cell for 12-15 minutes
at room temperature. Three rabbits were immunized with FDNB-treated
cells. A control rabbit was immunized with sham-treated cells. Immune
sera were collected and complement was inactivated. The sera were
absorbed against untreated WBCs from normal healthy donors. Absorbed
immune sera were tested against leukemia cells lines (agglutination and
flowcytometry) and clinical leukemia samples by Western blotting after
SDS-PAGE. Antigens from whole cell lysates and membrane prep were
immunoprecipitated using IgG adsorbed on protein A/G agarose beads.
Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis of the
immunoprecipitated was performed.Results: Sera from experimental rabbits
immunized with modified WBCs agglutinated leukemia cell lines (titers
1:256 to 512) whereas serum from the rabbit immunized with untreated WBCs
did not. Sera from experimental rabbits also showed greater intensity of
staining of leukemia cell lines by flowcytometry. Western blots of whole
cell lysates and membrane preps from clinical acute myelogenous leukemia
samples and normal bone marrow were probed with pre-immune serum and
immune sera from the control rabbit as well as one of the experimental
rabbits. Several bands recognized by the serum from experimental rabbits,
immunized with FDNB-treated WBCs, but not by serum from control rabbit,
immunized with sham-treated WBCs. LC-MS of the immunoprecipitated
material revealed IQGAP1 and major vault transporter proteins as being
differentially recognized.Conclusion and Future Directions: Immunization
of rabbits with normal peripheral blood WBCs that had been incubated with
nanogram quantities of FDNB elicited an antibody response that identified
IQGAP1 and major vault transporter proteins as shared feature in human
acute myelogenous leukemias. Investigation of the role of IQGAP1, a
critical regulator of multiple cellular functions, in human acute
myelogenous leukemia will be undertaken.

