Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway activation drives expression of the immune
inhibitory ligand PD-L1 in NSCLC.


Despite the development of targeted drug therapies, lung cancer remains
the leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Targeting immune
checkpoints altered in cancer, such as the T cell inhibitory receptors
programmed death 1 (PD-1) or CTLA4, represent promising new approaches to
lung cancer treatment. Here we investigated the relationship of
activation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway and expression of the
immune suppressive ligand, PD-L1, in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
NSCLC cell lines with mutations in KRas, EGFR, BRaf, ALK or RET had high
levels of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway activation as well as increased
expression of PD-L1. Cell lines that lacked these mutations had low
PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway activation and less PD-L1 expression. In murine
cell lines derived from tobacco carcinogen (NNK)-induced lung tumors,
high levels of active Akt correlated with high PD-L1 expression. Agonists
of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway activation such as EGF or the carcinogen
NNK, as well as knockdown of PTEN or induction of Kras induced PD-L1
expression. Conversely, treatment of high PD-L1 expressing NSCLC cell
lines with inhibitors of PI3K (LY294002), AKT (triciribine) or mTOR
(rapamycin) decreased PD-L1 expression. These inhibitors decreased PD-L1
protein levels, but did not alter PD-L1 mRNA. Rapamycin-mediated PD-L1
loss was partially blocked by pre-treatment with a lysosomal, but not a
proteosomal inhibitor. In vivo, increased expression of PD-L1 and
activation of mTOR was an early event after exposure to NNK and was
blocked by rapamycin. To test the efficacy of blocking PD-1 while
reducing the expression of PD-L1 in tumor tissue, rapamycin and a murine
anti-PD-1 receptor antibody were administered to A/J mice bearing
syngeneic lung tumor xenografts. The combination decreased the tumor
growth rate to a greater degree than either agent alone and decreased
mTOR pathway signaling, PD-L1 expression, and increased cleaved caspase
3. Tumor associated activated CD8+ T cells were also increased in the
tumors. These data support a relationship between activation of
PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling, PD-L1 expression and the development of an
immune resistant phenotype in lung cancer. Combination regimens using
PI3K/Akt/mTOR inhibitors may enhance the efficacy of immune therapies
targeting PD-1.

