Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigations to evaluate the role of Twist1 during tumor
promotion and epithelial carcinogenesis.


Recent studies have identified the involvement of receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) and their downstream signaling pathways, including MAPK,
PI3K/Akt/mTOR, and Stat3, as key regulatory factors of epidermal
proliferative capacity during skin carcinogenesis. Through development
and study of transgenic mice with overexpression of a constitutively
active form of Stat3 (Stat3C) in the basal cell layer, previous studies
in the laboratory discovered that constitutive Stat3 activation
accelerates tumor progression in the two-stage skin carcinogenesis model,
which utilizes the tumor initiator 7,12-dimethylbenz[]anthracene (DMBA)
and tumor promoter 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Twist1, a
well-known inducer of EMT, has been shown to be regulated by Stat3 in a
number of systems. Western blot analysis of epidermal protein lysates
from Stat3C transgenic mice indicated a two-fold induction of Twist1
expression as compared to wild type mice. In addition, immunofluorescence
staining analysis of tumors from wild type mice [papillomas and squamous
cell carcinomas (SCCs)] and Stat3C mice (SCCs) showed nuclear
co-localization of Twist1 and Stat3. In the present study, we
investigated the activation and subsequent downstream signaling of Twist1
during TPA-induced epidermal hyperproliferation. Western blot analysis of
epidermal lysates from mice treated topically with multiple applications
of TPA showed an initial decrease (4-6 h) followed by a subsequent
rebound of Twist1 protein at 18 hours post TPA treatment. This initial
decrease and then rebound coincided with that of the cell cycle
regulatory proteins cyclin D1, cyclin E1, E2F-1, and c-myc.
Interestingly, basal levels of Twist1 were reduced in epidermis specific
Stat3 deficient mice. Furthermore, Stat3 deficient mice treated with TPA
failed to show a rebound in expression of Twist1 in the epidermis.
Immunofluorescence experiments of TPA treated epidermis revealed that
nuclear localization of Twist1 was restricted to the proliferative
compartment. Collectively, these results, combined with other data to be
presented, suggest that Stat3 regulates basal levels of Twist1. This
protein is localized in the nucleus of cells found primarily in the
proliferative compartment of hyperplastic epidermis and skin tumors. The
current results further suggest that Twist1 may play a role in cell cycle
progression in keratinocytes during tumor promotion. Research supported
by CA76520.

