Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: POLD3 is required for DNA damage response to endogenous and
exogenous DNA damage in human cells.


Methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) induces mutations in a nonlinear
(hockey-stick-shaped) dose-response curve in DT40 cells, about 55% of
which are located at A:T sites with a high frequency of A to T mutations.
We hypothesized that these transversion mutations are due to base
excision repair (BER) intermediates, such as abasic sites and single
strand breaks derived from N3-methyladenine. One candidate polymerase to
bypass abasic sites is polymerase delta (POLD). POLD is responsible for
the lagging strand during DNA replication. POLD is referred to as a high
fidelity DNA polymerase because of its ability to discriminate
deoxynucleotides and its 3->5 exo-nuclease activity. One of the POLD
subunits, POLD3, is important to recruit PCNA binding to the POLD core
enzyme and is implied to have critical roles for translesion DNA
synthesis. In yeast, cells deficient in POLD3 homologous gene POL32 are
sensitive to DNA damaging agents and resistant to mutations caused by
mutagens, such as MMS and UV. Here we generated POLD3 knock-down (KD)
cells via lentivirus based shRNA in three different human cell lines. All
POLD3 KD cells grow slower than the control cells, suggesting POLD3
function tolerates endogenous DNA lesions. Furthermore, we found that
POLD3 KD cells were sensitive to various genotoxic agents including MMS
and potassium chromate. To further investigate the role of POLD3 in the
DNA damage response, we introduced a series of deletion mutations of
POLD3 in POLD3 deficient cells. We found that both the POLD2 binding
domain and the middle linker domain are critical for the activity of
POLD3 while the C-terminal PCNA binding domain is dispensable. While
there is little homology between human POLD3 and yeast POL32, function of
these two proteins appears to be quite similar in structure biology
analysis. Our results also suggest that POLD3 plays important roles to
bypass DNA lesions caused by endogenous and various exogenous genotoxic
agents.

