Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The gep protooncogene G12 mediates LPA-stimulated activation of
CREB in ovarian cancer cells.


Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), plays a critical role in the pathophysiology
of ovarian cancers. Our previous studies have shown that LPA stimulates
the proliferation of ovarian cancer cells through GNA12, the gep
protooncogene G12. The present study is focused on identifying the
G12-dependent mechanism through which LPA stimulates the proliferation of
ovarian cancer cells. Using ovarian cancer cells in which the expression
of G12 is silenced, we demonstrate here that G12-dependent mitogenic
signaling by LPA involves the atypical activation of the transcription
factor, cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB). Protein/DNA array
analyses using LPA-stimulated Hey8 cells in which the expression of G12
was silenced indicated the potent but G12-dependent activation of CREB by
LPA. After validating the array data with immunoblot analysis using
antibodies specific to Ser133-phosphorylated active form of CREB, we
demonstrate that the expression of the constitutively activated mutant of
G12 stimulate the activation of CREB even in the absence of LPA whereas
silencing of G12 abrogates such LPA-stimulated activation in multiple
ovarian cancer cell lines. Furthermore, our results indicate that the
robust activation of CREB by LPA is an early event, which can be
monitored upon LPA stimulation from 3 minutes onwards. In addition, we
establish that LPA/G12-dependent activation of CREB involves an atypical
cAMP-independent mechanism involving Ras and ERK. More significantly, our
findings indicate that the expression of the dominant negative mutant of
CREB (S133A) leads to a reduction in LPA-stimulated increase in Cyclin A
levels along with an attenuation of LPA-stimulated proliferation of these
cells. Thus, these studies unravel a novel G12-dependent mechanism
involving CREB through which LPA stimulates the proliferation of ovarian
cancer cells.

