Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Grb10, a negative regulator of insulin signaling, is a tumor
suppressor in prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is manageable in its initial stages and when
localized, but as it progresses it metastasizes and also becomes
resistant to conventional chemotherapies. Identifying mechanisms that are
related to the rapid progression of the disease could result in
development of appropriate intervention strategies. We analyzed protein
and mRNA expression of Grb10 (also known as insulin receptor-binding
protein) in various PCa cell lines and found a significant decrease when
compared to normal prostate epithelial cells. We also analyzed the
expression pattern of Grb10 in a human PCa tissue array and found
significant loss of Grb10 mRNA in more than 90% of the samples. Based on
Gleason Score, the loss of Grb10 mRNA correlated with the stage and grade
of the disease. These initial observations led us to hypothesize that
Grb10 may act as a tumor suppressor whose expression is lost during the
progression of human PCa. Using immuno-histochemical analysis of human
PCa tissue samples we found loss of Grb10 protein with increasing tumor
grade. We next analyzed various components of insulin signaling, based on
the evidence that Grb10 expression is negatively correlated with insulin
signaling. We observed significant increase at both mRNA and protein
levels of IR, IGF-1R, IRS-1 and IRS-2 in PCa cells and tissues that
directly correlated with loss of Grb10. Recently, Grb10 expression was
shown to be negatively correlated with PTEN levels in different cancer
types including PCa. We determined the expression pattern of Grb10 mRNA
in prostate tissue samples from 15-weeks old PTEN wild type (WT) and PTEN
knockout (KO) mice and observed that Grb10 levels were significantly
down-regulated in PTEN-KO mice suggesting that loss of PTEN results in
loss of Grb10. Further analysis suggested increased insulin signaling in
PTEN-KO mice compared to PTEN-WT mice confirming negative regulation of
Grb10 with insulin signaling. To further understand the role of Grb10 in
PCa, we overexpressed Grb10 in human PCa DU145 (PTEN-mutated) cells.
Overexpression of Grb10 resulted in decrease in colony formation,
migration and invasion that was associated with down-regulation of
insulin signaling. In summary, our findings suggest that Grb10 is a
negative regulator of insulin signaling whose expression is lost in PCa
in humans and correlates well with disease progression and
aggressiveness. We conclude that Grb10 is a tumor suppressor in human PCa
whose loss promotes rapid progression of the disease. Identification of
this novel role of Grb10 could open up new strategies for the management
of human PCa.

