Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plectin modulates invasion and metastasis in prostate cancer.


Introduction:Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most prevalent cancer among men
and the third most common cause of cancer related-deaths. Distant
metastasis represents the major lethal cause of prostate cancer. The most
critical clinical challenge in the management of the patients is
identifying those individuals at risk of developing metastatic disease.
Our long term objective is to identify the molecules and characterize the
mechanisms that are involved in PCa metastasis. The identification of
biomarkers for predicting the susceptibility of men to develop metastasis
and understanding the mechanisms of metastasis will potentially better
discriminate the more aggressive metastatic forms of the disease and
provide better treatment and clinical management opportunities.Methods:We
have analyzed protein expression in two syngeneic prostate cancer cells
lines with different metastatic potentials (PC3-N2, lowly metastatic;
PC3-ML2, highly metastatic) using high throughput quantitative mass
spectrometry. Validations of the most significantly differentially
expressed proteins were done by western blot, qRT-PCR and
characterization of the target proteins was carried out by performing
siRNA knockdowns, proliferation assays and invasion assays, flow
cytometry western blot and Immunofluorescence assays.Results: We
identified 130 proteins that were differentially expressed between PC3-N2
and PC3-ML2 cell lines. Out of these, 68 proteins were found to be
significantly up-regulated while 62 are significantly down-regulated in
PC3-ML2 cells compared with PC3-N2 cells. Plectin was the most
significantly upregulated protein in the proteomics experiments and this
was validated by Western blot, confocal microscopy and
immunohistochemistry. SiRNA knockdown of plectin suppresses the invasive
and migratory capacity of the highly metastatic PC3-ML2 cells and results
in the modulation of various signal transduction pathways. To our
knowledge, this study is the first to demonstrate that up-regulation of
plectin positively correlates with the invasion and metastasis of
androgen-independent PCa cells.Conclusions: We have identified several
proteins including plectin that are differentially expressed in prostate
cancer cell lines with different metastatic potentials. Furthermore,
these results suggest that plectin plays a role in the progression and
metastasis of PCa. Plectin regulates protein kinase activation, as well
as receptor signaling cascades, and recently plectin was identified as a
putative biomarker in pancreatic cancer. These findings are currently
being validated using disease stratified tissue microarrays to determine
the expression patterns in PCa patients. Further studies are focusing on
uncovering the mechanisms responsible for progression and metastasis of
PCa that are modulated by plectin. These could assist in the development
of novel diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for the disease.

