Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the nuclear transport protein CRM1 induces human
breast cancer cell death by regulating survivin degradation.


Survivin is a member of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) family
based on its N-terminal baculovirus IAP repeat (BIR) domain. The protein
is largely undetectable in differentiated tissues, but is highly
expressed in most human tumors. Its cytoplasmic expression in these
tumors correlates with reduced tumor cell death, increased resistance to
cancer therapy, and decreased patient survival. Survivin is actively
exported into the cytoplasm exclusively by the chromosomal region
maintenance 1 (CRM1/Exportin1) protein, one of seven known nuclear export
proteins. CRM1 binds to the canonical nuclear export signal (NES) domain
within the survivin protein. Inhibition of CRM1-mediated nuclear export
has been suggested as a novel cancer therapeutic strategy that restores
the tumor suppressor function of multiple nuclear proteins. Here, we
investigated the anti-tumor mechanisms of two novel, drug-like CRM1
inhibitors, KPT-185 and KPT-276, in estrogen-receptor positive and triple
negative breast cancer cell lines. Tumor and control cells were treated
with varying doses of the KPT compounds over time. Cell proliferation and
apoptosis were measured using standard assays. Survivin localization and
expression in the presence and absence of the KPT drugs was assessed by
immunofluorescence microscopy and cell fractionation. Breast cancer cell
lines were engineered to express higher or lower levels of Survivin to
determine the contribution of Survivin inhibition to the anti-tumor
effects of the CRM1 inhibitors. Results showed that the KPT compounds
have potent anti-proliferative properties and that they induce time- and
dose-dependent apoptosis. KPT-185 and KPT-276 initially enhanced nuclear
Survivin expression but produced a decrease in total cellular Survivin
levels at later time points. Survivin protein degraded at a faster rate
following KPT treatment, which was blocked by treatment with proteasome
inhibitors. Knockdown of Survivin increased KPT-mediated cell apoptosis
while exogenous expression of Survivin rescued cells from KPT-mediated
apoptosis. In summary, our data demonstrate that inhibition of nuclear
export by CRM1 inhibition suppresses breast tumor cell growth and
enhances tumor cell death, in part through specific targeting of the
Survivin-CRM1 complex.

