Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and functional validation of novel
genetically-linked breast cancer targets through pooled gain-of-function
screening.


Breast cancer is one of the most common cancer types, with greater than
450,000 deaths reported per year worldwide. Through genome wide
sequencing efforts, multiple genetic alterations have been identified,
including mutations and amplifications in genes such as v-erb-b2
erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog 2 (ERBB2), GATA binding
protein 3 (GATA3), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase alpha catalytic subunit
(PIK3CA) as well as novel genomic rearrangements such as the recently
identified MAGI3-AKT3 fusion. Now that breast cancer can be characterized
to an unprecedented level, one of the key challenges remaining is to
identify and distinguish critical driver events responsible for tumor
progression, from neutral passenger lesions. In order to achieve this, we
utilized high resolution aCGH analysis of 50 purified breast cancer
samples (made up of Her2+, estrogen receptor positive (ER+) and triple
negative tumors with variable responses to SOC regimens), in combination
with a Gain-of-Function transformation screen to identify and validate
novel breast targets. 158 genomic regions were found to be recurrently
amplified, consisting of 759 genes in total. The top 32 focally amplified
genes, along with 12 cancer-relevant mutant alleles were prioritized and
a library generated utilizing the pTRIPZ-tetracycline regulated inducible
lentiviral vector system. These 44 genes were subsequently combined into
16 different target pools (5-13 targets per pool, co-expressing genes
that were co-amplified in the same clinical specimen) and evaluated for
their ability to transform immortalized breast epithelial MCF10A cells
(both wild-type and p53 -/- cells). Through this screening approach,
p21-activated kinase 1 (PAK1) was identified, whose kinase activity was
required to robustly transform MCF10A cells through regulating multiple
signalling pathways including MAPK. Several other putative oncogenes were
also identified and will be presented here, including the
glycosyltransferse asparagine-linked glycosylation 8 (ALG8).
Interestingly, PAK1 and ALG8 are co-amplified in both breast (8%) and
ovarian cancers (11%). Our target validation studies have suggested that
ALG8 can support PAK1-induced transformation, as dramatic suppression of
soft-agar colony growth was seen in co-amplified breast cancer cell lines
upon combined siRNA treatment to both targets. Thus, this combined high
resolution aCGH profiling and functional screening approach has enabled
the successful identification of novel oncogenic targets in breast cancer.

