Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutations of aromatic amino residue to polar residue in NBDs alter
the transport properties of ABCC10.


ABCC10 is an efflux pump that confers multidrug resistance to cells by
extruding a variety of natural and nucleosides analogues using energy
from ATP hydrolysis. The objective of this project is to understand the
detailed relationship between ATP hydrolysis and drug transport for
ABCC10 and how ABCC10s ATPase activity is regulated. For this study, we
mutated aromatic residues to polar residues in the Nucleotide Binding
Domains (NBDs) of ABCC10 to determine how these residues are involved in
the transport of ABCC10 substrates. Prior, structural analyses of several
bacterial ABC-transporters indicated that aromatic amino acid residues in
NBDs are needed for ATP binding and ATP hydrolysis. In these studies,
substitution of these aromatic residues completely abolished
ATP-dependent transport. Prior work on ABCC1 has shown that substitutions
such as W (tryptophan) to C (cytidine) or Y (tyrosine) to C (cytidine)
decreased ABCC1s affinity for ATP, and ATP-dependent LTC4 transport
activities. Analogous substitutions of W (tryptophan) residues to polar
residues in the NBD2 of ABCC2 eliminated estradiol glucuronide and
leukotriene C4 transport. Based on these data, we hypothesize that
mutating aromatic to polar residues in the NBDs of ABCC10 will modulate
the biochemical and cellular transport activities of this efflux pump.At
present we have generated mutant-ABCC10 constructs by site-directed
mutagenesis. Specifically, we mutated the aromatic Tyr747 (NBD1), Trp607
(NBD1) and Tyr1255 (NBD2) residues to polar cysteine residues. We then
examined all ABCC10-mutant, wild-type ABCC10 and empty-vector constructs
using immunofluorescence, ATPase assays, sensitivity and transport
assays. We observed that the mutant ABCC10 proteins localized
predominantly to the membranes. Further, ABCC10-mutant cells, except for
the W607C mutant clone, showed less sensitivity than empty
vector-transfected cells. Using accumulation assays we also demonstrated
that substitutions of aromatic to polar residues, such as W607C and
Y1255C, decreased the ability of ABCC10 to transport, docetaxel and
Ara-C, however transport was not completely abolished. Using our ABCC10
mutants we found that aromatic to polar residue substitutions eliminated
the stimulatory effects of docetaxel and Ara-C on ATPase activity of
ABCC10.Taken together, these results demonstrate that these aromatic
residues are involved in the ATP binding process and mutations of these
residues cause of reduction in ABCC10 transport of docetaxel and Ara-C
from cells.

