Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AMG 161, a fully human monoclonal antibody to human RANKL,
inhibits tumor-induced osteoclastogenesis and reduces skeletal tumor
burden in mice that express chimeric (murine / human) RANKL.


Tumor cells can induce RANKL expression in the bone stroma, causing
activation of osteoclasts which consequently mediate bone breakdown and
subsequent tumor proliferation. RANKL is an essential mediator of
osteoclast function and survival. RANKL inhibition by OPG-Fc can prevent
tumor-induced osteolysis, decrease skeletal tumor burden, and increase
survival in preclinical models. Denosumab is an anti-huRANKL antibody
approved for the prevention of skeletal-related events due to bone
metastases from solid tumors. Selective anti-huRANKL antibodies do not
bind murine RANKL, therefore efficacy cannot be tested in typical mouse
models. We developed a breast cancer bone metastasis model in mice in
which exon 5 from murine RANKL was replaced with its human ortholog
(mu/huRANKL). We tested the effect of AMG 161, an antibody which binds
huRANKL and chimeric mu/huRANKL, on tumor burden and associated
osteoclasts. After intra-cardiac injection of MCF-7Luc breast carcinoma
cells, hind limb metastases formed and tumor burden was tracked by
bioluminescence imaging (BLI). AMG 161 (0.3 or 3.0 mg/kg, 2x/week),
OPG-Fc (3.0 mg/kg, 2x/week) or vehicle were administered beginning 10
days post tumor injection to treat established bone metastases until
study termination at day 31. AMG 161 resulted in a dose-dependent
decrease in skeletal tumor burden (3.0 mg/kg: 84% decrease vs. control
p=0.0052) similar to that observed with OPG-Fc (85% decrease vs. control,
p=0.0038). Histological analysis at the end of the study showed
reductions in skeletal tumor burden consistent with the BLI. AMG 161
treatment resulted in a significant decrease in tumor-associated
osteoclasts (TRAP staining) and inhibition of osteolytic lesions (X-ray).
The inhibition of tumor burden by the anti-RANKL antibody was indirect
via osteoclast inhibition since MCF-7Luc cells do not express RANK, and
RANKL inhibition does not affect subcutaneous growth of MCF-7Luc cells.
These data support the efficacy of anti-RANKL antibody treatment to
inhibit tumor-induced osteoclastogenesis and to block the growth of bone
metastases.

