Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CLIC4 regulates carcinogenesis in a TGF- context-dependent manner.


CLIC4 is a 28kD, ubiquitously expressed, redox-regulated, multifunctional
protein. It is dimorphic and can transition between membrane bound or
soluble forms in the cytoplasm. Cytoplasmic CLIC4 translocates to the
nucleus in multiple cell types under conditions of metabolic stress and
nuclear CLIC4 causes growth arrest, terminal differentiation and
apoptosis. In vivo, CLIC4 is nuclear in quiescent epithelial cells with
little stromal expression. In contrast, nuclear CLIC4 is lost from tumor
epithelium and is highly upregulated in tumor stroma. We show that CLIC4
expression is reduced in chemically induced mouse skin papillomas, mouse
and human squamous carcinomas and squamous cancer cell lines. The extent
of reduction in CLIC4 coincides with progression of squamous tumors from
benign to malignant. Adenoviral targeting of CLIC4 to the nucleus of
tumor cells in orthografts of oncogenic ras transformed keratinocytes
inhibits tumor growth, while elevation of CLIC4 in transgenic epidermis
reduces de novo chemically induced skin tumor formation. In parallel,
overexpression of exogenous CLIC4 in squamous tumor orthografts
suppresses tumor growth. These results identify CLIC4 as a tumor
suppressor. We show that CLIC4 is an integral intermediate in TGF-
signaling, that overexpressing CLIC4 in tumor cell lines restores TGF-
mediated growth inhibition, and tumor cells in vivo overexpressing CLIC4
have enhanced TGF- signaling. We have also analyzed the substantial
upregulation of CLIC4 in tumor stroma. Reconstituting orthografts of
mammary or squamous tumors with stromal cells overexpressing CLIC4
enhances tumor growth.Correspondingly, tumor growth is significantly
inhibited in orthografts of tumor cells to hosts that lack stromal CLIC4.
CLIC4 expression is increased in stromal cells by conditioned medium from
tumor cells in a TGF- dependent manner. In stromal cells genetically
deleted of CLIC4, the conversion of fibroblasts to cancer associated
myofibroblasts by TGF- through p38 activation is prevented. CLIC4 is
essential for preventing the de-activation of p38 by its phosphatase
PPM1a. Stromal cells that overexpress CLIC4 enhance tumor cell invasion
and EMT in vitro. Thus CLIC4, like TGF-, has context dependent dual
influence on tumor cell growth and progression. CLIC4 is an attractive
therapeutic target both in cancer stages where TGF- signal augmentation
or inhibition is required due to responses in separate tissue
compartments. Targeting CLIC4 would also be a more specific approach in
therapy that would mitigate some of the severe side effects of global
targeting of the multifunctional TGF- pathway.

