Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of ERO1L gene is poor prognostic factor for gastric
cancer.


Gastric cancer is the second cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide.
Even though within same stage, gastric cancer patients present diverse
clinical manifestations and prognosis. Molecular markers will be
important in predicting patients outcomes and tailoring personalized
treatments according to individual biology. In this study, we analyzed
the gene expression profile of human gastric cancer (published on CCR) to
identify potential biomarkers. We found that TXN family genes and ERO1L
were significantly overexpressed and related to prognosis. We evaluated
ERO1L significantly overexpressed in gastric cancer and ERO1L was very
highly expressed in hypoxic condition. The other study has identified
ERO1L as included in the small group of eight genes predicting poor
survival of patients with pulmonary adenocarcinoma. To investigate the
function of ERO1L gene in gastric cancer cell line (AGS, MKN1 and
NCI-N87), we tested the effect of shRNA inhibition of ERO1L on gastric
cancer cells. To determine the biologic role of ERO1L in regulating
cancer cell proliferation, stable transfection of shRNA for ERO1L in
gastric cancer cells. Our results showed that shERO1L decrease cell
proliferation. Furthermore, Knock down expression by shERO1L have effects
on regulating gastric cancer cell apoptosis. Next, we tested whether or
not the ERO1L gene is involved in progression to metastatic disease in
gastric cancer,especially in late tumorigenesis, including migration and
invasion. As a results, Knock down expression for ERO1L significantly
decreased the migration and invasiveness of gastric cancer cells. In
conclusion, our findings show that a prognostic molecular signature that
can predict the poor progression of gastric cancer tumors. Furthermore,
unequal distribution of expression patterns reflecting activation of
ERO1L with different survival rates supports a personalized target
therapy in gastric cancer with biomarker gene signature driven patient
selection. While further work is needed to elucidate the biological
contributions of these markers in. in vivo, the results presented here
provide a basis for future investigations of the functional and clinical
effect of new target genes in gastric cancer.

