Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of selected miRNA and miRNA processing genes in oral
precancer and cancer tissues.


Introduction: Oral leukoplakia is a premalignant lesion that long has
been considered to confer increased risk for the development of Oral
Cancer which is highly prevalent in India. Oral lichen planus (OLP) on
the other hand is a chronic inflammatory disease whose malignant
potential is debatable. Since not all oral precancerous lesions progress
to oral cancer, molecular markers like miRNA expression could be used to
diagnose and predict progression of disease that cannot be detected
histopathologically.Objective: Study of intra- and inter-variation in the
expression of a few microRNAs (26a1, 423, 34b, 29a, 193a, 137 and 205)
and microRNA processing (XPO5, GEMIN3 and RAN) genes in the three disease
types, namely, oral cancer, leukoplakia and lichen planus.Methodology:
Total RNA was extracted from paired disease and normal tissues from 15
oral cancer, 19 leukoplakia and 19 OLP patients. Expression of microRNAs
and microRNA processing genes were studied using TaqMan assay. Subsequent
statistical analyses were performed for interpretation of expression
data.Results: Expression of mir 26a-1 and mir 137 genes was dysregulated
>2 folds in 70% of the cancer samples while expression of remaining
microRNAs and mir-processing genes were deregulated in a few samples. In
leukoplakia, expression of mir-26a-1 was dysregulated >2 folds in 50% of
the samples while dysregulation in expression of the remaining miRNAs was
observed in 1/3rd of the patients. In OLP, there was an interesting trend
of unidirectional up or down regulation in the expression of mir26a-1,
mir29a, mir-34b and mir-137 genes. We also observed that the average
expression of miRNA genes differed among the three patient
groups.Conclusion: Deregulation in microRNA expression could not be
correlated with individual's tobacco habits. Variation in expression of
microRNA as well as miRNA processing genes was observed within
individuals of the same patient group (i.e. cancer or leukoplakia or
lichen planus) and between any two patients groups. There was correlation
in expression of microRNAs which probably explains the unidirectional
increase or decrease of miR expression in OLP. Finally, the mean
expression level in the three types of disease tissues differed
significantly. But expression of more miRNA genes in more samples would
be necessary for molecular markers.

