Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel NPM-BAX pathway regulates death evasion and drug
sensitivity in human hepatoma cells.


Death evasion is crucial for both carcinogenesis and resistance to
anticancer therapies. Recently we identified nucleophosmin (NPM) as a key
factor counteracting death stimuli in human hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) cells. Here we report the identification of a novel
NPM-BCL2-associated X protein (BAX) pathway orchestrating death evasion
in human HCC cells. Silencing of NPM expression significantly sensitized
HCC cells, particularly those bearing inactivated p53 (Huh7, Hep3B, and
Mahlavu), to UV irradiation, mitomycin C, doxorubicin, cisplatin,
sorafenib, and lapatinib. This sensitizing effect was not further changed
as p53 expression had been simultaneously silenced. Following cell
stress, NPM and BAX were induced and exported out of nucleoli and
nucleus, respectively. BAX was translocated to cytoplasm in cells with
relatively high NPM level, or accumulated in the mitochondria in cells
with relatively low NPM level and undergoing apoptosis. Subcellular
fractionation revealed that silencing of NPM expression greatly enhanced
mitochondrial translocation and oligomerization of BAX in Huh7 and
Mahlavu cells. In situ proximity ligation assays and reciprocal
co-immunoprecipitation evidenced direct interaction between NPM and BAX
in the cytoplasm. Silencing of BAX expression abolished the sensitization
effect exerted by silencing of NPM in HCC cells. Clinically, upregulation
of NPM was significantly associated with advanced tumor stage and poor
prognosis. Conclusion: Via directly blockading BAX mitochondrial
translocation and activation, NPM helps human HCC cells evade death
induction independently of p53-mediated cell death. Silencing of NPM
significantly sensitized HCC cells to anticancer therapies. NPM is a
potential co-target in combination with other therapies for HCC
particularly harboring inactivated p53. Our findings are of clinical
significance, since NPM upregualtion and p53 mutations are usually found
in advanced human cancers, including HCC.

