Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and in vivo synthetic lethal screens to identify novel
targets in the context of PTEN deficiency.


Functional genomic screens have been employed by many groups to identify
novel targets for cancer therapeutics. However, translation of these data
sets into new drug discovery programs has proved challenging, in part due
to difficulties in obtaining strong on-target knockdown, coupled with
misleading off-target effects. Most commercially available pooled shRNA
screening libraries provide 5-6 shRNAs per gene, with little knowledge of
knock-down efficiency. In an effort to overcome these issues, we designed
a custom shRNA library targeting 580 human genes, including key nodes in
signal transduction pathways and genes of interest for oncology drug
development. This pathway-centric design allows us to determine critical
pathways for cancer cell growth in addition to individual gene
phenotypes. For each gene, we have total of 11 shRNAs, a subset of which
have been previously shown high efficiency knock-down. In particular, we
emphasized genes where tool or lead compounds were available for rapid
follow-up. Both in size and scope, this library was designed to quickly
identify important signaling pathways that are essential on their own or
when perturbed in the presence of small molecule drugs in our
pipeline.With this focused library, we performed functional genomic shRNA
screens in PTEN mutant or null lines across cancer types in vitro,
including four cell lines that are PTEN deficient (UACC62, MDA-MB-468,
U87-MG and PC3), and one cell line, (HCT-116) that is PTEN wild type.
Meanwhile, we performed in vivo screens with PC3 cells. To identify hits
from our screens, we used an internally developed algorithm, c-FOLD, to
calculate p-value and fold changes for each shRNA. As confirmation that
our library and methods can identify essential genes in a context
specific manner, we observe BRAF as the top essential gene hit in the
cell line which contains an activated BRAF allele, UACC62, but not in
other lines tested. We then examined the concordance of hits in our in
vitro and in vivo experiments with PC3 cells. In general, individual
shRNAs were highly correlated between in vitro and in vivo assays, but a
subset is specific to one setting, and may present particularly
interesting targets.To discover synthetic lethal partners to PTEN
deficiency, we required that a gene is essential in all four PTEN
deficient lines in vitro, as well as in PC3 in vivo, but not essential in
HCT-116. Among the top hits are multiple shRNAs against ENTPD5, an ER
enzyme hydrolyzing UDP to UMP. In addition, using our pathway approach,
we identified components in JNK pathways as synthetic lethal partners to
PTEN deficiency. The results obtained from these studies established a
strong platform for in vivo and in vitro identification of novel targets
and novel combination partners. These approaches can also be integrated
with other Omics data, such as mutation and expression, to ultimately
find promising targets to develop novel cancer therapeutics.

