Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High calcium reduces multiple or advanced colorectal adenoma risk
by nearly 90% among those with variant alleles in two critical genes in
calcium reabsorption.


Despite the rapidly increasing use of colonoscopy, colorectal cancer
still remains the 2nd most common cause of cancer death in the United
States. Most of these colorectal cancers arise from adenomas. High
calcium consumption has been linked to reduced risks of colorectal
adenoma and cancer. However, results from a large clinical trial
conducted in the general population were not consistent from those
conducted among colorectal adenoma patients. Adenoma patients have a
lower intake of calcium than general population. Furthermore, previous
studies indicate there is substantial inter-individual variation in the
ability to (re)absorb calcium, which is mostly attributed to genetic
variation. Thus, we hypothesized that some of the inconsistency in
previous studies was due to interactions between calcium and genetic
polymorphisms involved in calcium homeostasis. In an NIH R01 project, we
conducted a two- phase study to evaluate whether polymorphisms in KCNJ1
and 13 other genes modified the associations between calcium intake and
risk of colorectal adenoma. Included in the study were 1818 cases and
3992 controls identified from the Tennessee Colorectal Polyp Study
(TCPS), a colonoscopy-based case control study conducted in Nashville,
TN. We identified in Phase 1 and replicated in Phase 2 that two
polymorphisms in two genes (i.e. one SNP in each gene) significantly
modified the associations between calcium intake and colorectal adenoma
risk. One gene is potassium inwardly-rectifying channel, subfamily J,
member 1 (KCNJ1), which etiologically leads to hereditary familial
diseases with impairments in reabsorption for calcium. The p for
interaction with the SNP in the KCNJ1 gene remained statistically
significant after Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons (all
SNPs in 14 genes). In the combined analysis of these two genes, we found
52% of the study population carry at least one variant allele in one of
two genes while 13% of the population carry variant alleles in both
genes. We found among those with zero variant alleles in two genes, the
highest tertile of calcium intake was not associated with adenoma risk
with an OR (95% CI) of 1.06(0.65-1.72). Highest calcium intake tertile
was significantly associated with a 39% reduced adenoma risk among those
who carry variant allele in one gene (p for trend, 0.046), and with a 69%
reduced risk among those with alleles in both genes (p for trend, 0.039).
The corresponding reduction in risk with advanced or multiple adenomas
increased to 89% (95%CI: 41%-98%) among those with variant alleles in
both genes (p for interaction, 5.5105). In summary, high intake of
calcium may only protect against colorectal carcinogenesis among those
who carry variant alleles in two genes, particularly for those who carry
variant alleles in both genes.

