Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNA expression profile of Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell
neoplasm.


Background:Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) is a rare
neoplasm currently included among acute myeloid leukemias in the WHO
classification. BPDCN is an orphan tumor characterized by an unknown
biology with clinical aggressive course and dismal prognosis.Only few
studies explored its genetics, documenting a complex karyotype and
sporadic genetic alterations. Unfortunately, data were based on a limited
number of patients and lacked functional elucidation. Conversely, studies
on the transcriptome only compared BPDCN with other leukemias, failing to
identify pathogenetic events.In this study we aimed to assess whether
miRNA deregulation contribute to BPDCN pathogenesis and clinical
behaviour.Methods:We studied by miRNA profiling (NanoString Technologies)
30 BPDCN samples, 9 normal plasmacytoid dendritic cell (pDCs) samples and
the CAL-1 tumor cell line. In addition, 25 independent BPDCN cases were
studied by qRT-PCR and IHC as validation. To investigate the functional
consequences of miRNA deregulation, we also performed a global gene
expression profile (GEP) analysis on the same cases by using the Illumina
Whole Genome DASL Assay. We applied ANOVA and Student t-test to find
genes and miRNAs differentially expressed between BPDCNs and normal pDCs.
The selected miRNAs were further filtered based on their predicted impact
on the GEP using Linear Discriminant Analysis, Spearman correlation and
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis. Finally, the functional effects of selected
miRNAs were assessed ex vivo on CAL-1 cell line.Results:We found that,
according to the unsupervised analysis of miRNAs, BPDCN patients have a
molecular signature well distinct from their normal counterpart.The
following supervised analysis identified a set of 114 miRNAs
significantly deregulated whose aberrant expression might have a relevant
impact on cancer-related cellular pathways.Therefore, after validating
their expression in an independent set of cases, we integrated the miRNA
and mRNA expression profiles on the same patients, in order to assess the
functional impact of deregulated miRNAs on gene expression
profile.Pathway analysis of the predicted miRNA target genes, revealed
that most of them were involved in the same gene ontology category:
miRNAs synergic action appeared to strongly affect the biological process
of programmed cell death.We thus focused on miRNA-mRNA anti-correlations
affecting the apoptotic pathway: we transfected specific mimics and
inhibitors into CAL-1 cell line; we evaluated their functional impact by
gene expression profile and, finally, we confirmed their relation with
specific targets by Luciferase assay.In conclusion, for the first time we
investigated the miRNA profile of BPDCN, defining previously uncovered
molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of the disease.
Specifically, we found a subset of miRNAs significantly deregulated and
highly affecting the apoptotic pathway.

