Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of patient-derived xenografts
of head and neck tumors.


Background-Aims: The introduction of first targeted therapy with
Cetuximab has improved survival of head and neck cancer. However there is
still a large population with intrinsic resistance. To evaluate the
mechanisms and find alternative treatments we started establishing a
large panel of patient derived xenografts from head and neck squamous
cell carcinomas displaying the heterogeneity of this disease, as cell
lines and thereof established xenografts have only a limited value for
preclinical drug evaluation and biomarker analysis due to clonal
selection and cellular dedifferentiation. Using these models we evaluate
new treatment options, identify predictive biomarkers and test the
sensitivity of experimental drugs and treatment approaches.Methods:
Specimen from head and neck tumor samples were transplanted
subcutaneously to immunodeficient mice within 24 hours. In case of
engraftment groups of 5-6 mice were treated after 3rd passage with 5-FU,
MTX, Cetuximab, Carboplatin, Docetaxel and Everolimus. Treatment was
applied for 3 weeks. Response to treatment was evaluated by comparing
growth inhibition of treated tumors in relation to a control group.
Patient tumors and xenografts were evaluated for HPV status by
immunohistochemical staining of p16INK4A and detection of HPV-16 E6 and
E7 viral DNA by PCR. Primary tumor and the derived xenografts are
screened for common oncogenic mutations using the Illumina TruSeq
Amplicon - Cancer Panel and for genetic expression profiles by Affymetrix
analysisResults: In total, 70 tumor samples were transplanted resulting
in 26 stably growing patient derived xenografts and 21 remain presently
ongoing. So far only 23 xenotransplanted tumors did not grow. This
results in an engraftment rate of >60%. Tumors remained histologically
similar through several passages. Engraftment was not related to growth
fraction of the primary tumor, ranging from 10 to 90% evaluated by Ki67
staining. In a few cases we were able to establish xenografts from
primary tumors and synchronous metastases. These showed high similarity
concerning growth rate and drug sensitivity. Response to treatment varied
considerably. Significant growth inhibition in relation to the control
group was observed in 8 of 11 (72%) treated tumors for Everolimus, in
4/11 (36%) for 5-FU, 3/11 (27%) for MTX, in 3/11 (27%) for Carboplatin,
in 3/11 (27%) for Cetuximab and in 6/11 (54%) for Docetaxel. Out of the
established xenografts four primary tumors were classified as HPV
positive but only one of them remained positive after several passages in
mice.Conclusion: Our newly established head and neck cancer panel
provides an excellent tool for preclinical drug and biomarker research.
Together with the molecular genetic characterization, these patient
derived xenografts can be used for modeling the systemic biology of the
tumor and can help to develop new rational hypotheses for further
clinical trials.

