Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of hyaluronan-CD44 interaction in breast cancer.


The tumor microenvironment is crucial for cancer cell survival and
spreading. The glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan (HA) is accumulated in 50% of
malignant breast cancer tumors and its accumulation correlates with poor
survival of breast cancer patients. HA is synthesized at the cell surface
by HA synthase enzymes (HAS1-3) and is extruded to the extracellular
space where HA molecules can be attached to the cell surface via
interactions with its receptors or HAS proteins. HA can also interact
with its binding proteins and be incorporated into surrounding ECM.
However, the origin and exact functions of HA in breast cancer are still
unclear. The aim of this study was to explore the role of HA in the tumor
microenvironment of breast cancer, especially in the interaction of tumor
and stromal cells in vitro and in vivo. First, interaction of breast
cancer cells and stromal cells were studied in mono- and co-cultures.
Human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and breast
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) synthesized high amounts of HA,
while this was the case for The tumor microenvironment is crucial for
cancer cell survival and spreading. The glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan (HA)
is accumulated in 50% of malignant breast cancer tumors and its
accumulation correlates with poor survival of breast cancer patients. HA
is synthesized at the cell surface by HA synthase enzymes (HAS1-3) and is
extruded to the extracellular space where HA molecules can be attached to
the cell surface via interactions with its receptors or HAS proteins. HA
can also interact with its binding proteins and be incorporated into
surrounding ECM. However, the origin and exact functions of HA in breast
cancer are still unclear. The aim of this study was to explore the role
of HA in the tumor microenvironment of breast cancer, especially in the
interaction of tumor and stromal cells in vitro and in vivo. First,
interaction of breast cancer cells and stromal cells were studied in
mono- and co-cultures. Human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) and breast cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) synthesized high
amounts of HA, while this was the case for <5% MDA-MB-468 breast cancer
cells. In co-culture with MSCs or CAFSs, MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-231 cells
formed distinct pericellular HA coats. Similar HA coats were observed
after addition of exogenous FITC-labeled high molecular weight HA (1,2
MDa) to MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-231 cell cultures. Interestingly, binding
of FITC-labeled HA was not efficiently blocked by unlabeled HA below 500
kDa. In co-cultures, the high molecular weight HA coats around MDA-MB-468
and MDA-MB-231 cells were prevented by antibody blockade of the HA
receptor CD44, indicating that formation of HA coats is CD44-mediated.
Knockdown of CD44 by shRNA also inhibited the formation of HA coats when
FITC-HA was added to the cultures or when breast cancer cells were
co-cultured with MSCs. MSCs also increased proliferation and migration of
MDA-MB-468 (parental/Luc) cells, analyzed by luciferin and Transwell
migration assays, respectively. MDA-MB-468 cell proliferation was
slightly inhibited by removal of HA with pegylated human recombinant
hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20), and migration towards exogenous HA could be
inhibited by CD44 knockdown. Importance of HA coats around breast cancer
cells was also studied in vivo using MDA-MB-468 cells over-expressing
HAS3 which forms 4.7-fold larger HA coats than parental MDA-MB-468 cells.
MDA-MB-468 HAS3 cells exhibited much enhanced in vivo growth compared to
MDA-MB-468 cells, and tumor growth of MDA-MB-468 HAS3 xenografts was
inhibited up to 85% by PEGPH20. The results suggest that HA in tumor
microenvironment, produced by tumor or stromal cells, provides growth
benefit for breast cancer cells via promoting their proliferation and
migration. Both phenomena seem to be mediated by CD44, which highlights
the importance of HA-CD44 interaction in the growth of breast cancer.

