Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomic analysis of urine from patients undergoing total body
irradiation.


Development of biomarkers for the responses to radiation has relevance to
assessment of patient course and outcome after radiation therapy, as well
as to other radiologic events including accidental and terrorist. The
purpose of this study was to extend the biomarker discovery to humans, as
previous studies have focused on mice. Urine was collected from patients
undergoing total body irradiation (TBI) at Memorial Sloan Kettering prior
to bone marrow transplantation at 4-6h post irradiation (a single dose of
125cGy) and 24h (three fractions of 125cGy each). Patient diagnoses
include leukemias (ALL, AML, and CML), non-hodgkins lymphoma,
myelodysplastic syndrome, aplastic anemia, and essential
thrombocytopenia. Global metabolomic profiling was obtained through
analysis with Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) coupled to
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (TOFMS) (Waters). Peak alignment and
deconvolution of the chromatographic data were conducted with MarkerLynx
software (Waters, MA). Prior to further analysis, each sample was
normalized to its respective creatinine. Ions with non-zero abundance
values in at least 75% of samples in both groups were analyzed for
statistical significance via the nonparametric Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
for equality of probability distributions on the log-transformed dataset.
Statistical significance for ions with non-zero abundance values in at
least 75% of samples in only one group were analyzed categorically for
presence (i.e. non-zero abundance) via the Fisher's exact test. Biomarker
candidates were verified by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) by
comparison to pure chemicals and quantification of the markers was
conducted with the triple quadrupole mass spectrometer XEVO TQ MS
(Waters). Validated and quantified biomarkers include
L-Octanoylcarnitine, Hypoxanthine, Trimethyl-L-Lysine, Acetyl-carnitine,
Decanoylcarnitine, Pantothenic acid, Hippuric acid, Uric acid, and
Xanthine, and thus contribute to the development of a human metabolomic
signature following exposure to radiation, and can now be integrated with
features including underlying disease status, gender, age, and outcome.

