Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin is effective in killing gemcitabine resistant pancreatic
cancer cells: Studies of the cell cycle, and apoptosis.


BackgroundGemcitabine resistance is a major challenge in pancreatic
cancer where the drug is considered a gold standard treatment. Although
many studies have attempted to address mechanisms of gemcitabine
resistance, these are not yet clear. The complete elimination of these
resistant cells will be a major breakthrough in treatment. In many
cancers, curcumin is of interest due to its inherently low toxicity to
patients even at high doses: The drug can inhibit pancreatic cancer cell
growth, and also acts in synergy with gemcitabine reducing viability of
several established cancer cell lines. Identifying curcumins efficacy
after transition from gemcitabine sensitive to resistant disease is
therefore a key question for progress toward treatment. We have created a
novel cell line from a parental MIA-PaCa-2 pancreatic adenocarcinoma
which is 286 times more resistant to gemcitabine exposure than the parent
line. Here we investigated the cell cycling properties of this cell line
and its ability to be killed by curcumin.MethodsThe gemcitabine resistant
MIA-PaCa-2 cell line was created by continuous gemcitabine dosing which
increased its EC50 for the drug to 286-fold greater than that of the
parent line. The extent of resistance was confirmed by MTT for viability
and BrdU ELISA for proliferation. The sensitive and resistant Mia-PaCa-2
cells were then incubated in the absence, or presence of varying doses of
curcumin (0.01-150M). Cells were analysed with respect to their cell
cycling profiles by staining initially with EdU over a time course,
followed by 7-AAD DNA staining of permeabilised cells with subsequent
flow cytometric analysis. Early apoptotic, late apoptotic and necrotic
fractions of these cells were determined by staining with annexin-V and
propidium iodide.Results:Curcumin inhibited growth of both gemcitabine
sensitive and resistant cell lines to a similar extent (IC50s =13.7 M and
16.6 M for sensitive and resistant lines respectively). Whereas
gemcitabine was incapable of causing apoptosis in the resistant strain,
curcumin induced similar levels of apoptosis in both lines at doses
between 1 and 56M. With respect to the cell cycle, gemcitabine caused
complete S-phase arrest in the sensitive strain and had no effect on the
resistant strain, whereas curcumin caused G2/M phase arrest (no increase
in G1 and 100% loss of second cycle S-phase) in both cell
lines.ConclusionsCurcumin is effective as a chemotherapeutic drug against
gemcitabine resistant cells due to its ability to inhibit the cell cycle
at the G2/M boundary after gemcitabine fails to activate the restriction
point. The ability of curcumin to avoid cross resistance after
gemcitabine is rendered ineffective should be studied as this could
provide mechanisms for the creation of new drugs or highlight the
possibilities of curcumin analogues as a second-line therapeutic for the
placation of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

