Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNA networks mediate the tumor suppressive function of FOXO
proteins.


FOXO transcription factors, as regulators of a variety of cellular
functions, including promotion of apoptotic cell death, are negatively
regulated by various oncogenic signaling cascades and have emerged as
bona fide tumor suppressors. Indeed, studies by others and us have shown
that the suppression of FOXO function is critical in promoting evasion of
apoptosis and is a significant occurrence in several hematological
malignancies. Consequently, FOXO proteins signify an important
therapeutic target in hematopoietic malignancies as well as other types
of cancer, where repression of FOXO plays a key role in malignancy. Since
transcription factors are not yet easily druggable," it is vital to
identify mediators of FOXO function that can be readily targeted. It is
now apparent that aberrant miRNA expression plays a major role in cell
and tissue-specific manner in the pathogenesis of various types of
cancers including hematological malignancies. Both miRNA loss of function
and miRNA overexpression have been shown to target key cellular proteins
and contribute to cancer pathogenesis. Conversely, miRNA genes themselves
have been shown to be direct targets of transcription factors that are
known as important tumor suppressors or oncogenic proteins. Through a
systematic screening approach, we have identified members of three miRNA
clusters that are dependent on FOXO transcription factors for expression.
We have observed that the level of these miRNAs is dependent on BCR-ABL
status of hematopoeitc cells and they their levels are changed in
specimens from Leukemia patients. Our studies indicates a mechanism of
action for FOXO tumor suppressors whereby members of two miRNA families
are direct transcriptional targets of FOXO3. Moreover, these miRNAs
target and reduce the expression of two key oncogenic factors, the
serine/threonine kinase mTOR, and proto-onocogene c-myc, to keep cell
growth at bay and prevent tumorigenesis. Our investigations have
unraveled the miRNA arm of the FOXO tumor suppression network.Citation
Format: Monica Nadler, Robin Zabolian, Kenneth Ndebele, thierry bertomeu,
Octavian Bucur, Bodvael Pennarun, Roya Khosravi-Far. miRNA networks
mediate the tumor suppressive function of FOXO proteins. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3058.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3058

