Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole exome and RNA sequencing reveals genetic alterations in DNA
damage and homologous recombination pathways in triple negative breast
cancer.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), is characterized by a lack of
expression of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and
human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2). TNBC comprises about 15 of all
breast cancer diagnoses, but 25% of deaths. TNBC has a more aggressive
clinical course and long-term disease-free survival is poor. As is well
known, tumors that develop in women who carry deleterious germline BRCA
mutations typically have tumors characteristic of the basal-like TNBC
phenotype associated with defects in double stand break repair and
homologous recombination. These observations have led to the development
of therapeutic strategies aimed at these mechanisms, such as PARP
inhibitors, which are in mature stages of drug development for the
treatment of a subset of patients diagnosed with mTNBC. Iniparib,
although not believed to be a true PARP inhibitor, is believed to act
through a similar mechanism of action.We have completed a study of whole
genome and transcriptome sequencing of 14 patients with metastatic triple
negative breast cancer (mTNBC). One patient who was sequenced had a
complete response to a combination including gemcitabine, carboplatin,
and iniparib prior to sequencing. Sequencing analysis revealed a
collection of somatic mutations and alterations in genes associated with
DNA repair and homologous recombination, including DCLRE1C, MEI1, TP53,
DDB1, RIF1, ZBTB40, BRIP1, and BRCA2. Furthermore, RNA-seq expression
analysis demonstrated significant underexpression of BRCA1. Thus, these
alterations may serve as markers that can be predictive of responders
from non-responders of treatment regimens including iniparib or possibly
PARP inhibitors.To begin to identify a genomic profile indicative of PARP
response, tumors and blood of four additional mTNBC patient samples were
collected and subjected to whole exome and RNA sequencing. We have also
obtained the mutational data of TNBC tumors sequenced by the Cancer
Genome Atlas. The genetic profiles of these tumors will be compared to
the previously sequence mTNBC sample that responded to iniparib to
determine the frequency of these specific events in mTNBC. Through this
work we hope to identify a genetic profile that can serve as a possible
predictor of response to iniparib or true PARP inhibitors.

