Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glioma stem cells promote brain endothelial cell motility: a new
mechanism for the direct interaction of glioma stem cells with
endothelial cells.


Angiogenesis, the development of a neovasculature, is a key histologic
feature of malignant glioma. It occurs through multiple mechanisms,
including sprouting and migration of existing endothelial cells (ECs),
and is driven by signals in the microenvironment. Glioma stem cells (GSC)
inhabit a region near ECs (perivascular niche). Here we examined the
hypothesis that GSCs interact directly with ECs and promote EC motility.
In 4 of 5 glioblastoma biopsies we found that 40% of GSCs were localized
within 25 m of ECs, based on double-labeling for Sox2 and vWf. We then
examined the effect of GSCs on EC motility when plated on a 2D laminin
substrate, and found a significant increase in EC motility in the
presence of GSCs as well as a direct interaction. In a 3D assay, EC
migration was enhanced by GSC-conditioned media, but the physical
presence and interaction between ECs and GSCs further increased EC
migration through a laminin-coated, 3-m pore filter, as compared to
GSC-conditioned media. Integrin v3 and L1CAM have been reported to be
upregulated on ECs and GSCs, respectively, in GBM tumors, and integrin v3
can bind the RGD-peptide in L1CAM. We examined the effect of blocking or
downregulating integrin v3 or L1CAM on EC interaction with GSCs. In a
cell-cell binding assay, blocking or downregulating the integrin 3
subunit significantly inhibited EC-GSC direct contact, as did an RGD
peptide and an antibody to L1CAM. Furthermore, downregulation of integrin
3 on ECs significantly reduced EC migration in the presence of GSCs in
the transwell migration assay and reduced EC association with GSCs in
mouse brain slices in organotypic culture, analyzed by 2-Photon-LSM.
These data suggest GSCs promote angiogenesis in part by promoting EC
motility, and that the EC-GSC direct interaction mediated by integrin v3
on ECs and L1CAM on GSCs also stimulates EC motility.

