Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of fine needle aspirate biopsy (FNAB) in evaluating drug
responses in tumor models: Better data with less animal use? .


It is now accepted that the coordinated application of pharmacokinetics
(PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD) provides a rational, efficient and
informative approach to preclinical and clinical drug development. In
clinical studies, core or aspirate biopsies are used normally for PK/PD
evaluation. In contrast in the majority of preclinical studies whole
tumor samples are collected for PK/PD studies requiring killing of
animals at each time point and hence the use of large numbers of animals
for such studies. For example to perform a single dose PK/PD experiment
in this manner typically uses 20 animals (4 animals at each of 5 time
points). In the present study we evaluated the use of FNAB for performing
PK/PD studies in tumor bearing mice and rats. The technique involved
collecting biopsies from tumors using a fine needle (21 or 25 G) and
applying a negative pressure through use of a syringe attached to a
Camego gun. The use of a fine needle allowed sampling of serial biopsies
from mid-size (400 mm3) tumors. The biopsies contained enough tissue for
analysis of biomarkers using one of several techniques (IHC, in situ
hybridization, immunoassays or by RTPCR). Depending on the technique used
for biomarker analysis compound levels could also be determined in the
same biopsies using LC-MS/MS. PK evaluation in small blood samples (20 L)
collected from the tail vein at the same time as the biopsies also
allowed determination of PK/PD relationship. Sampling of serial biopsies
from mid-sized tumors using FNA allowed determination PK/PD using just 4
animals instead of the 20 typically used when whole tumors were collected
for such studies. The data obtained using the two techniques were
comparable for a number of different targets (e.g. PI3K and MEK
inhibitors) in different tumor types. Potentially the use of FNAB instead
of whole tumor sampling could increase the quality of the data since
tissue from the same tumor is analyzed at different time points. Studies
using a number of different tumors also showed that several biopsies can
be collected through the course of an efficacy study (starting at about
200 mm3) without influencing the growth of tumors thus enabling
longitudinal analysis of biomarkers/changes in tumors during such studies
and potentially providing better PK/PD and efficacy relationship.In
conclusion, use of FNAB technique to determine PK/PD responses can reduce
animal use by up to 80% compared to a previous method. In addition the
technique opens up the possibilities of more readily determining changes
which are transient and performing longitudinal studies to evaluate
changes leading to development of drug resistance or tumor heterogeneity
without using large numbers of animals.

