Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro tumorigenicity and stemness characterization of the U87MG
glioblastoma cell line: Monolayer cultures, neurospheres, and CD133+ and
CD133- sorted fractions.


The cancer stem cells (CSC) hypothesis is nowadays the most widely
accepted theory regarding tumor formation and self-renewal capacity. It
states that one of the different tumorigenic phenotypes inside a tumor
mass is capable of generating new tumors if transplanted onto a host and
it is able to self-generate and regenerate the rest of the tumor cells.
The necessity to find pharmacological compounds or biological agents
capable of eliminating CSC makes the search for methods of recognition
and isolation of these cells a matter of great urgency.Our working
hypothesis is that the selection of cancer cells with the CD133 marker
and their subsequent isolation and characterization will allow us to
assess the capacity of the different CD133 subpopulations as CSC. The aim
of the study was to separate CD133+ and CD133- cell subpopulations from
the U87MG glioblastoma cell line by magnetic activated cell sorting
(MACS), and to analyze the tumorigenic and stem cell differences among
four sets of cells: the cell line grown in serum (monolayer group), the
neurospheres of the same cell line, and the CD133+ and CD133- sorted cell
fractions from the neurospheres.Our results showed that the neurospheres
and the CD133+ cells overexpressed stem cell marker genes like SOX2,
Nestin, Musashi1 and CD133, and formed more colonies in soft agar than
the cell groups with less CD133 expression (monolayer and CD133- group).
On the other hand the CD133- and the monolayer groups had similar
expression levels of CD133, while the CD133- cells expressed higher
levels of Nestin, SOX2 and Musashi1 than the monolayer cells. Besides,
cell migration assessed by the scratching test showed that the CD133- and
the monolayer cells migrated more than the neurospheres and the CD133+
cells. Moreover, the CD133- cells had a higher proliferation rate than
the CD133+ cells and the neurospheres, being all these three groups
cultured in the medium for neurospheres.In conclusion, we might point to
the presence of CSC in the CD133- group, as previously suggested by
others. Then, CD133+ cells are not necessarily equivalent to CSC. Maybe
CD133+ cells present a higher probability of including CSC than CD133-
do. Therefore, further functional and genetic analyses must be performed
to reach an optimal isolation of CSC.

