Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of a novel androgen-regulated
long non-coding RNA in prostate cancer.


Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have recently been associated with the
development and progression of a variety of cancers, including prostate
cancer. However, to date very few prostate cancer lncRNAs have been
characterized by functional studies as bona fide oncogenes and tumor
suppressors. Previously, transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) of prostate
tumors and benign adjacency tissues revealed a set of putative lncRNAs
termed Prostate Cancer Associated Transcripts (PCATs) with significantly
altered expression levels in cancer. Intriguingly, a subset of these
PCATs were strikingly upregulated in treatment-resistant metastatic
prostate cancer samples, suggesting that they may play a role in the
development of castrate resistant disease. To explore this possibility we
stimulated prostate cancer cell lines with synthetic androgen and
monitored the responsiveness of several PCATs. We found that PCAT29, a
six-exon nuclear transcript located in a gene desert on chromosome 15,
was suppressed by androgen in a time-dependent fashion. Furthermore,
androgen receptor (AR) ChIP-Seq data revealed a strong binding site
upstream of the PCAT29 promoter suggesting that PCAT29 may be a direct
androgen receptor target. Supporting this notion, physical castration of
a mouse Xenograft model led to profound upregulation of PCAT29 suggesting
that AR signaling suppresses its transcription. Knockdown of PCAT29 using
two independent shRNA leads to significant increase in the proliferation
of LNCaP cells. Consistently, overexpression of PCAT29 in DU145 cells
suppresses proliferation. Finally, we show that in prostate cancer
patients, high PCAT29 expression correlates with better overall survival.
Taken together our study suggests that PCAT29 may have a tumor suppressor
like function in prostate cancer. Ongoing studies are focused on
understanding the potential mechanism of PCAT29 function and its
relationship with androgen signaling.

