Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer tissue-derived spheroid, CTOS, for evaluation of drug
response from individual patient tumor samples.


Primary culture of cancer cells can be an excellent platform for
investigating the biology of cancer and predicting chemosensitivity for
individual patients, yet has been hampered by technical difficulties. We
established a method of primary culture for human colorectal cancer:
cancer tissue-originated spheroid (CTOS) method. The principle of the
method is to maintain cell-cell contact throughout preparation and
culture; never dissociating the samples into single cells. The clusters
of cancer cells turn out to spheroids, CTOSs, within a short period.
CTOSs of colorectal cancer consisted of highly purified cancer cells, and
they were prepared with high efficiency. We applied the CTOS method to
non-small cell lung cancer and urothelial cancer.For non-small cell lung
cancer, we used 125 surgical specimens and 18 pleural effusions. The
success rate of CTOS preparation from surgical specimens was 80.0%. CTOSs
were subjected to sensitivity assay and pathway activation assay for the
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) erlotinib. The sensitivity differed
among individual patient CTOSs. The EGFR mutation status and expression
levels corresponded with erlotinib sensitivity, confirming previous
clinical findings. Next, we examined urothelial cancer. The success rate
of CTOS preparation from the non muscle-invasive urothelial cancer was
90.7%, whereas that from the muscle-invasive urothelial cancer was 68.2%.
Total development rate was 84.2%.Using these CTOSs, we investigated the
effects of growth factors on the growth of CTOS in vitro. Among the
growth factors examined, including EGF, IGF-1, basic FGF, and activin A,
we found that heregulin (HRG)/neuregulin1, a ligand of HER3, potently
induced CTOS growth in both lung and urothelial cancers. HRG promoted the
growth of primary CTOSs in 10 out of 13 (71.4%) cases of lung cancer, and
in 2 out of 4 (50%) cases of urothelial cancer. Along with the growth,
HRG most potently stimulated the phosphorylation of AKT. In lung cancer
CTOSs, a neutralizing antibody against HER3 inhibited the growth and the
phosphorylation of HER3 and AKT.In all three tumor types examined, CTOSs
formed xenograft tumors in immunodeficient mice, and the tumors retained
the features of the parental tumors. As CTOS can be cryopreserved, we are
accumulating stocks of CTOSs derived from patient samples as well as the
CTOSs from xenograft tumors. CTOS experiments can be shuttled between in
vitro and in vivo.Thus, the CTOS method enables us to obtain primary
colorectal, lung, and urothelial tumor cells of high viability and
purity. CTOS could be a new platform for studying lung cancer biology,
and be useful to select patients for molecular targeting drugs.

