Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epidemiology of tobacco use among a sample of Hispanic/Latino men
attending an STI clinic.


Background: Tobacco products are a major cause of death and disease
worldwide. Although a substantial decrease in tobacco use has been
documented in Puerto Rico (PR), tobacco-related disparities among
vulnerable and underserved populations still needs to be addressed. It
has been demonstrated that behavioral risk practices, such as unprotected
sex, multiple sex partners, alcohol and drug use, are associated with
tobacco use.Objective: To describe the epidemiological profile of tobacco
use and correlates associated with lifetime and current tobacco
consumption in a sample of Hispanic/Latino men attending a Sexually
Transmitted Infection (STI) clinic in San Juan, PR.Methods: A
cross-sectional study consisting of 206 men 16 years was conducted.
Survey included demographic characteristics and behavioral assessment of
high-risk practices such as tobacco, alcohol, and drug-related risks, as
well as sexual practices and self-reported STIs. Frequency distributions
and descriptive statistics were used to characterize the study sample.
Bivariate analysis (chi-square test) was used to determine the relation
between demographic, behavioral and clinical assessments with lifetime
and current (last 12 months) tobacco use. Variables that achieved
statistical significance in the bivariate analysis (pBackground: Tobacco
products are a major cause of death and disease worldwide. Although a
substantial decrease in tobacco use has been documented in Puerto Rico
(PR), tobacco-related disparities among vulnerable and underserved
populations still needs to be addressed. It has been demonstrated that
behavioral risk practices, such as unprotected sex, multiple sex
partners, alcohol and drug use, are associated with tobacco
use.Objective: To describe the epidemiological profile of tobacco use and
correlates associated with lifetime and current tobacco consumption in a
sample of Hispanic/Latino men attending a Sexually Transmitted Infection
(STI) clinic in San Juan, PR.Methods: A cross-sectional study consisting
of 206 men 16 years was conducted. Survey included demographic
characteristics and behavioral assessment of high-risk practices such as
tobacco, alcohol, and drug-related risks, as well as sexual practices and
self-reported STIs. Frequency distributions and descriptive statistics
were used to characterize the study sample. Bivariate analysis
(chi-square test) was used to determine the relation between demographic,
behavioral and clinical assessments with lifetime and current (last 12
months) tobacco use. Variables that achieved statistical significance in
the bivariate analysis (p<0.05) were assessed in age-adjusted logistic
regression models.Results: The mean age of the study participants was
38.0 14.2 years. The vast majority (73.5%) of the participants reported
having smoked tobacco, in which more than half of them (65.8%) were
current smokers. The mean amount of cigarettes consumed in the last 12
months was 7.5 9.2. Bivariate analyses showed that lifetime and current
drug use was associated with lifetime and current tobacco use
(pBackground: Tobacco products are a major cause of death and disease
worldwide. Although a substantial decrease in tobacco use has been
documented in Puerto Rico (PR), tobacco-related disparities among
vulnerable and underserved populations still needs to be addressed. It
has been demonstrated that behavioral risk practices, such as unprotected
sex, multiple sex partners, alcohol and drug use, are associated with
tobacco use.Objective: To describe the epidemiological profile of tobacco
use and correlates associated with lifetime and current tobacco
consumption in a sample of Hispanic/Latino men attending a Sexually
Transmitted Infection (STI) clinic in San Juan, PR.Methods: A
cross-sectional study consisting of 206 men 16 years was conducted.
Survey included demographic characteristics and behavioral assessment of
high-risk practices such as tobacco, alcohol, and drug-related risks, as
well as sexual practices and self-reported STIs. Frequency distributions
and descriptive statistics were used to characterize the study sample.
Bivariate analysis (chi-square test) was used to determine the relation
between demographic, behavioral and clinical assessments with lifetime
and current (last 12 months) tobacco use. Variables that achieved
statistical significance in the bivariate analysis (p<0.05) were assessed
in age-adjusted logistic regression models.Results: The mean age of the
study participants was 38.0 14.2 years. The vast majority (73.5%) of the
participants reported having smoked tobacco, in which more than half of
them (65.8%) were current smokers. The mean amount of cigarettes consumed
in the last 12 months was 7.5 9.2. Bivariate analyses showed that
lifetime and current drug use was associated with lifetime and current
tobacco use (p<0.05), and self-reported HIV status was marginally
associated with current tobacco use (p=0.05). After age-adjusted logistic
regression, lifetime drug users were up to 9 times more likely to have
used tobacco in their lifetime as compared to non-drug users (OR=9.3; 95%
CI=4.5-19.4). A significant association between current drug use and
lifetime tobacco use was also observed in this sample (OR=16.7; 95%
CI=4.8-57.9). On the other hand, men who reported ever used drugs, have
more than a two-fold increase odds of current tobacco use as compared to
non-drug users (OR=2.9; 95% CI=1.1-8.0).Conclusions: Lifetime and current
smoking prevalence is high among this population of men attending this
STI clinic, particularly among drug users. Due to the strong addictive
component of nicotine, it is important to develop tobacco cessation
interventions as an essential part of regular STI clinics protocols.
Thus, tobacco cessation programs could be effective in STI clinic
settings in order to promote cancer prevention and control, and other
health related behaviors.

