Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systemic administration of fiber redesigned infectivity-selective
oncolytic adenovirus for pancreatic cancer.


Adenovirus (Ad) has frequently been used as a backbone of oncolytic viral
agents, while lack of selectivity to cancer cells at the stage of
infection has greatly hampered in vivo efficacy. Unlike loco-regional
therapy, systemic application of cancer gene therapy mandates different
level of selectivity of gene delivery. The controlled distribution and
selective transduction of the vector would overcome the obstacles for
systemic delivery and enable efficient systemic treatment of cancer.We
have recently developed transductionally-targeted Ads by high-throughput
screening of high-diversity (109-level) Ad-library. Mesothelin (MSLN) is
highly over-expressed in pancreatic cancers. Ad with redesigned AB-loop
targeting MSLN, AdML-VTIN, was successfully isolated from the high
throughput screening of Ad library by infectivity for MSLN-expressing 293
cells (293-MSLN).The in vitro binding of AdML-VTIN corresponded to the
level of MSLN-expression and the suppression of MSLN with siRNA or
antibody significantly reduced the binding to MSLN-expressing cells,
which indicates that mesothelin is a receptor moiety for the isolated
targeting ligand. The binding ability of this virus in Panc-1
(MSLN-positive) was higher than that of Ad with 5/3 modified fiber which
is known to exhibit highest infectivity in pancreatic cancer cells. The
in vivo antitumor effect was compared in Panc-1 and MiaPaCa-2
(MSLN-negative) subcutaneous xenografts. The injection of the
MSLN-retargeted oncolytic Ad showed significant antitumor effect against
Panc-1 tumors, and about half of the tumor disappeared. Contrarily, the
same virus showed no antitumor effect in MiaPaCa-2. Viral DNA
quantitation also supported the selective viral replication in
Panc-1.Upon systemic administration in the nude mice with Panc-1
subcutaneous xenografts, the sequestration of AdML-VTIN to the liver was
significantly lower than that of wild-type Ad5, and the copy number of
this retargeted virus was significantly (1000 fold) higher in the tumor.
These data indicates the systemic delivery of this vector is efficient
for MSLN-expression pancreatic cancer xenografts.In this study, our
MSLN-targeted Ad vector exhibited significant infectivity to
MSLN-positive pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Moreover,
this virus showed significantly reduced liver sequestration as well as
dramatically augmented delivery to the tumors upon systemic
administration. This new genetically modified Ad transductionally
retargeted to pancreatic cancer may embody a next generation targeting
for this devastating disease in clinical settings.Citation Format:
Yoshiaki Miura, Joohee Han, Julia Davydova, Masato Yamamoto. Systemic
administration of fiber redesigned infectivity-selective oncolytic
adenovirus for pancreatic cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3308. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3308

