Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved progression-free survival (PFS) in patients with short
tumor telomere length: Subgroup analysis from a randomized phase II study
of the telomerase inhibitor imetelstat as maintenance therapy for
advanced NSCLC .


Tumor regrowth after chemotherapy may be driven by growth of tumor stem
cells. Telomerase, required for indefinite replication, is upregulated
both in putative stem cells and bulk tumor cells. Imetelstat, a lipidated
13-mer oligonucleotide, is a potent and specific inhibitor of telomerase.
A randomized phase II study was conducted to assess whether imetelstat,
given as maintenance therapy, prolongs PFS in advanced NSCLC: results for
the primary and secondary endpoints are reported separately.NSCLC cell
lines and other tumor cells with short telomeres appear to be more
sensitive to imetelstat in vitro than those with long telomeres. A
planned exploratory analysis to determine PFS as a function of tumor
telomere length (TL) was performed. Tumor TL was assessed in archival
tumor specimens from pts by quantitative PCR (qPCR).TL data were
available for 57 of the 116 pts accrued in the clinical trial. PFS was
evaluated in patients grouped into the shortest 1/2, shortest 1/3 and
shortest 1/4 of TL. In 19 pts with the shortest 1/3 TL measured by qPCR,
imetelstat maintenance increased PFS with a HR in favor of the imetelstat
arm of 0.32 (95% CI 0.1 to 1.0), p=0.042 (un-stratified log rank). Median
PFS was 4.0 months for the imetelstat-treated short TL sub-group and 1.5
months for the control short TL sub-group. In the 38 pts with the longest
2/3 TL HR was 0.83 (95% CI 0.36 to 1.9). Results in the group with the
shortest 1/4 of TL were similar to the shortest 1/3 TL group, and in the
shortest 1/2 group, results were consistent but attenuated, indicating
that a smaller subset may contain patients with the most potential to
benefit. In the control arm, short TL was associated with shorter median
PFS (1.48 months) compared to patients with long TL (2.7 months),
suggesting that short TL has a negative prognostic value.These findings
suggest that imetelstat given as maintenance therapy prolongs PFS in pts
with advanced NSCLC whose tumors have short telomeres as measured by
qPCR. The data are consistent with the hypothesis that clinical benefit
from telomerase inhibition is greater in patients with tumors possessing
short telomeres. Prospective confirmation of these results in solid
tumors and hematologic neoplasms is planned.

