Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hydroxychoroquine (HCQ) modulates autophagy in melanoma:
preliminary results of a phase 0 trial in patients with resectable
melanoma.


Autophagy enables tumors to survive metabolic stress by recycling
intracellular components to sustain metabolism. This suggests that
inhibiting autophagy with drugs such as HCQ, a lysosomotropic agent that
blocks the final step of autophagy when autophagosomes fuse with
lysosomes, may promote tumor cell death. In melanoma cell lines and
animal models, HCQ administration resulted in inhibition of flux through
the autophagy pathway as measured by visualization of increased numbers
of autophagic vesicles (AVs) and processing of the autophagosome marker
LC3 from LC3-I to LC3-II. We hypothesized that administration of HCQ can
modulate autophagy in human melanoma tumors that can be detected by
increased autophagic vesicle (AV) formation and by increased LC3-II/I
ratio. Methods: To test this hypothesis, we conducted a phase 0 trial in
patients with resectable stage III or IV melanoma. Patients who consented
underwent pretreatment tumor biopsies, were treated with either 200 or
400 mg bid of HCQ for 14 days, and then underwent surgery. Paired tumor
samples were processed for electron microscopy (EM) and scored by
counting AVs per high powered field in multiple fields. Changes in the
LC3II/I ratio were examined by Western blot. Quantitation of HCQ in blood
was performed using HPLC-fluorescence method in whole blood, plasma and
ultrafiltrates. Changes in AV formation on EM, LC3 II/I ratio, and
pharmacokinetic (PK) data from the paired observations were to be
correlated. Otherwise, the statistics utilized were descriptive. Results:
12 of 14 patients enrolled had tumor sufficient for evaluation. 8
patients were enrolled at 200 mg bid and 4 at 400 mg bid. No significant
toxicities were observed. Autophagy modulation was observed in 4 of the
12 tumors as evidenced by increased LC3II/I ratio on Western blot.
Observed changes in AV formation correlated with pre-post changes in
LC3II/I ratio (correlation r = 0.42, p = 0.20) in this small sample size.
HCQ concentrations (ssmin) showed dose proportional increases in blood,
plasma and ultrafiltrate. No correlations were evident between changes on
EM and HCQ concentration in plasma, whole blood, or plasma
ultrafiltrates. Analyses for common driver mutations in melanoma are
ongoing. Conclusions: Treatment with HCQ for 14 days resulted in
increased LC3II/I ratio indicative of autophagy modulation in 1/3 of
tumors from patients with resectable stage III or IV melanoma. The
correlation between pre-post changes in AV formation and LC3II/I ratio
suggests that LC3II/I ratio may be a useful measurement of autophagy in
human tumors, as in the laboratory. The degree of modulation after 14
days of therapy did not appear to be dose or exposure dependent, although
HCQ levels had likely not reached steady state at 14 days. Enrollment
continues at 600 mg bid to assess if higher doses produce saturable PK,
increased AV formation, and stronger correlations among them.

