Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imatinib-induced modulation of gastrointestinal and hepatic
membrane transporters in mice.


Drug-induced changes in the expression or activity of ADME genes may
critically affect the pharmacokinetics (PK) and the efficacy of
chemotherapy as well as the incidence and severity of unwanted side
effects. Drug uptake and efflux transporters are likely to be involved in
the intestinal absorption, distribution and hepatic excretion of
imatinib, an oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor approved for the treatment of
CML and GIST. Previously, we demonstrated that imatinib is a substrate
drug of both ABCB1 and ABCG2. Furthermore, we showed that prolonged
imatinib exposure in Caco-2 cell cultures leads to increased expression
of these drug efflux transporters. Evidently, some GIST patients
chronically treated with imatinib show a time-dependent decrease in
imatinib plasma levels. Altered transporter activity in the intestine
and/or liver affecting the PK of imatinib may (partially) account for the
observed PK resistance. We hypothesized that acquired PK resistance by
decreased absorption and/or increased clearance of imatinib may be
attributable to induction of intestinal and hepatic transport proteins.
So, we investigated in mice whether imatinib-induced modulation of drug
transporters occurs over time upon prolonged daily use of imatinib. To
mimic the clinical situation we chronically treated C57/Bl6 mice, either
with imatinib or with a solute control (H2O) for 4, 8 or 12 weeks.
Imatinib (100 mg/kg once daily) was administered to the mice via oral
gavage (300 l / mice). We collected all organs involved in the absorption
and elimination of imatinib including the liver and the complete GI-tract
(esophagus, stomach, small and large intestine and caecum) and
subsequently isolated total RNA and protein from these tissues. We
performed mRNA and miRNA profiling using mouse genome 430 PM (Affymetrix)
and LNA-modified oligonucleotide arrays (Exiqon), respectively, and
examined the expression of >80 transporter genes using the RT2 Profiler
PCR array system (SABiosciences). Prolonged imatinib treatment resulted
in the modulation of various intestinal and hepatic drug transporters and
clearly changed the mRNA and miRNA profiles of ADME-involved organs.
Apart from the imatinib-associated transporters Abcb1a/b, Abcg2, Slc22a1
and Slco1b2, indicating proof of concept, our search identified various
other potential imatinib transporter which are currently tested in uptake
experiments using transporter-transfected HEK293 cells. In summary, we
showed that continuous exposure of mice to daily dosages of imatinib
markedly affects the expression of drug transporters and changes the mRNA
and miRNA expression profiles in organs involved in uptake, distribution
and elimination of imatinib. These imatinib-induced changes may
critically affect the PK, efficacy and adverse events of imatinib
chemotherapy.

