Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of nestin using siRNA as a novel therapeutic option for
pancreatic cancer.


Introduction: Nestin is a member of the class VI intermediate filaments
and it was first described as a central nervous system (CNS)
progenitor/stem cell marker. Nestin is highly expressed in various
cancers and was recently reported as a tumor stem cell marker for
glioblastoma and melanoma. Previously,we have reported that 30% of
pancreatic cancer cases expressed nestin in cancer cells, and its
expression correlated with nerve invasion and the presence of cancer
cells in the tumor resection margins (Kawamoto, et al. Hum Pathol 2009).
Knockdown of nestin exhibited a sheet-like appearance with tight
cell-cell adhesion, increased expression of filamentous actin and
E-cadherin, and attenuated migration and invasion (Matsuda, et al. Cancer
Biol Ther 2011). These findings suggest that nestin is a novel
therapeutic target for pancreatic cancer. In this study, we examined the
effects of siRNA targeting nestin on pancreatic cancer cell growth
migration, and invasion in vitro and in vivo. Methods: Two types of siRNA
targeting nestin, which binds to different sites of nestin mRNA, were
prepared and transfected to PANC-1 and PK-45H cells. Cell growth,
migration, invasion and sphere formation abilities of these cells were
analyzed in vitro. We also determined the synergistic effects of
gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer cells under treatment with siRNA
targeting nestin. For an in vivo study, we constructed
luciferase-gene-transfected pancreatic cancer cells and orthotopically
implanted the cells into the pancreas of NOD/Shi-scid/IL-2Rnull (NOG)
mice. We injected siRNA into the tail vein of NOG mice once per week with
Invivofectamine.Every week, luciferin was injected into the peritoneal
cavity of NOG mice and images of primary and metastases were taken using
IVIS. After 6 weeks, animals were sacrificed, and the primary and
metastatic tumors were macro and microscopically examined. Results: siRNA
targeting nestin inhibited the growth, migration, invasion and
sphere-forming ability of both PANC-1 and PK-45H cells. Treatment with
gemcitabine, in addition to the treatment with siRNA targeting nestin in
pancreatic cancer cells, decreased cell viability as compared with only
gemcitabine, siRNA targeting nestin or control siRNA- treated pancreatic
cancer cells. In the orthotopic implantation model, siRNA targeting
nestin significantly decreased primary tumor formation in the pancreas,
as compared with negative control siRNA groups. Furthermore, nestin siRNA
markedly suppressed the formation of metastatic nodules in the liver and
lungs. Conclusion: In pancreatic cancer cells, siRNA targeting nestin
inhibited cell growth, migration, invasion and sphere formation in vitro,
and primary tumor growth and metastatic tumor formation in vivo.
Furthermore, siRNA targeting nestin had synergistic effects with
gemcitabine. Inhibition of nestin using siRNA may be a novel therapeutic
optiont for pancreatic cancer treatment.

