Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new mathematical model for describing metastatic spreading:
Validation in tumor-bearing mice, confrontation with clinical data and in
silico simulations to optimize treatment modalities.


Occult metastatic disease is a major concern in clinical oncology because
optimal therapy can not been undertaken in a timely manner. Developing
mathematical tools for describing and anticipating early metastatic
stages would help clinicians to choose the most adequate therapeutic
strategy, even if no metastasis is yet detectable at bedside. We have
developed a mathematical model that provides a Metastatic Index (MI). We
used a phenomenological approach based on a structured transport equation
with non local boundary condition for the colony size distribution of
metastases. The velocity of this transport was related to a Gompertz
law's growth. The colonization rate of the tumors reflects not only the
metastatic diffusion but also some fractal dimension of the blood vessels
infiltrating the tumors. This model is mostly based upon few parameters
and can integrate the impact of surgery or chemotherapies on tumor growth
and spreading. Model structure and parameters were first adjusted by
fitting the predictions with observed data from several experiments
performed in mice bearing the MDA-231LUC+ breast orthotopic xenograft.
Three-dimmensional bioluminescence monitoring was carried out so as to
detect early metastases as small as 105 cells. A pre-validation step was
carried out to check the ability of bioluminescence imaging to
discriminate small metastatic sites from artifactual signals. Various
molecular markers (A-cadherine, alcohol dehydrogenase, metaloproteases)
were studied from tumor biopsies to refine some of the model parameters.
Data were finally compared using Monolix software and Visual Predictive
Check confirmed the ability of the model to predict accuratelly both
tumor growth-rate and invasiveness. Additionally, we compared the in
silico predictions of the model with clinical data from 2648 breast
cancer patients (a.k.a. the Koscielny cohort) with a follow-up of
metastatic reccurence depending on the initial tumor size measured upon
surgery. Results showed that the model's predictions matched the clinical
observations (r2=0.98), thus suggesting that our MI could be a useful
tool indeed to forecast metastatic spreading in patients with cancer.
Finally, in silico simulations were performed to study the impact of
surgery or treatment with cytotoxics alone or combined with
antiangiogenics. Marked variations in efficacy were observed depending on
the treatment modalities. The resulting simulations suggest therefore
that our mathematical model could be used as well to determine in silico
the best scheduling and dosing of cancer chemotherapy, especially when
anti-angiogenic and cytotoxic drugs are associated.

