Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MLH1 silencing is caused by hypoxia through epigenetic regulation..


Transcriptional silencing of the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) gene, MLH1, is
one of the main causes of microsatellite instability in sporadic cancers
of the colon and other sites. We and others have shown that hypoxia, a
key microenvironmental stress in solid tumors, causes reduced expression
of MLH1via transient transcriptional repression mediated by both
HIF-dependent and independent pathways. Here, we further investigated
whether hypoxia-induced down-regulation of MLH1 is associated with
epigenetic modifications that may mark the locus for long-term silencing.
We find that hypoxia drives epigenetic repression of the MLH1 promoter
with decreased H3K4 methylation as a key repressive modification. We find
that this is mediated by the H3K4 demethylases, LSD1 (lysine-specific
histone demethylase 1) and PLU-1/JARID1B. In RKO cells containing a
reporter construct consisting of the MLH1 promoter driving selectable
thymidine kinase (TK) and blasticidin resistance (BlastR) genes,
long-term silencing of the MLH1 promoter was produced by exposure of the
cells to hypoxia as compared to minimal silencing under normoxia.
Importantly, knockdown of LSD1 blocked the hypoxia-induced MLH1 promoter
silencing in this reporter system.In RKO cells, the endogenous MLH1
promoter is constitutively silenced by DNA hypermethylation at CpG sites.
MLH1 re-expression can be induced by 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC), a
DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, accompanied by increased levels of H3K9
acetylation and H3K4 methylation at it promoter. But the promoter rapidly
becomes re-silenced after removal of 5-Aza-dC. However, we find that
knockdown of LSD1 or its corepressor, CoRest, blocks MLH1 resilencing in
the RKO cells. Consistently, ChIP analyses revealed that the control RKO
cells (with a GFP knockdown vector) showed return of both H3K9
acetylation and H3K4 methylation back to pre-treatment levels coupled
with MLH1 re-silencing upon removal of 5-Aza-dC, but intriguingly, high
levels of H3K9 acetylation and H3K4 methylation were also observed at
MLH1 promoters in RKO LSD1sh cells. Analysis of DNA methylation revealed
that MLH1 promoter methylation levels were reduced by 5-Aza-dC treatment,
as expected. However, after removal of 5-Aza-dC, promoter methylation
levels returned back to the pre-treatment levels only in the control RKO
cells. In the RKO cells with shRNA mediated knock down of either LSD1 or
CoRest, the promoter re-methylation process was blocked. Collectively,
the results demonstrate that the LSD1/CoRest repressive complex is
essential for the MLH1 silencing and that hypoxia is a critical driving
force for stable transcriptional silencing of MLH1 through a concerted
pattern of chromatin and DNA modifications, thereby promoting genetic
instability and tumor progression.

