Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Strigolactones: a novel class of plant hormones inhibit cancer
cell and cancer stem-like cell growth and survival.


Strigolactones (SLs) are a novel class of plant hormones produced in
roots and regulate new above ground shoot branching, by inhibiting
self-renewal of undifferentiated meristem cells. Here we show that
Strigolactone analogues are able to inhibit proliferation and induce
apoptosis of several different types of cancer cells including breast,
prostate, lung, colon and osteosarcoma cells but not non-cancer lines.
Given the therapeutic problem of cancer recurrence which is hypothesized
to be due to drug resistant cancer stem cells, we also tested the ability
of Strigolactone analogues to inhibit cancer stem cell growth. We show
that Strigolactones are potent inhibitors of self-renewal and survival of
breast cancer cell lines grown as cancer stem cell enriched mammospheres
and even a short exposure leads to irreversible effects on mammosphere
dissociation and cell death. Cell cycle analysis showed that all five
strigolactone analogues induced G2/M arrest, coupled with increased
percentages of cells in the sub-G1 fraction. AnnexinV staining confirmed
that Strigolactone treatment induced apoptosis. Strigolactone treatment
was hallmarked by increased expression of genes involved in stress
signaling, as well as apoptosis, metabolic function and cellular
adhesion. Immunoblot analysis of strigolactone treated cells also
revealed increased phosphorylation of the stress activated MAPKs: p38 and
JNK1/2 and decreased phospho-ERK1/2 and phospho-AKT. In summary,
Strigolactones are promising candidates for anticancer therapy by their
ability to induce cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in cell lines derived
from a wide array of different cancers.Citation Format: Ronit I. Yarden,
Claire B. Pollock. Strigolactones: a novel class of plant hormones
inhibit cancer cell and cancer stem-like cell growth and survival.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5575.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5575

