Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CBF regulates cell senescence and autophagy through sphingolipid
metabolism.


Core Binding Factor (CBF) is a heterodimeric transcription factor
comprised of one of three RUNX DNA binding proteins (Runx1, Runx2, or
Runx3) and a non-DNA binding component termed CBF. CBF is a dedicated and
required component of CBF. CBF is commonly altered by chromosomal
translocations leading to acute myeloid and lymphocytic leukemias. More
recently, altered CBF activity was associated with the malignant
phenotype of various solid tumors. Recent studies placed RUNX factors in
direct transcriptional control of several sphingolipid pathway enzymes as
well as autophagy in murine fibroblast and myofibrils. However, CBF
regulation of sphingolipid metabolism in cancer cells has not been
investigated.Purpose: To study CBF function in solid tumors. Hypothesis:
Previous work in the laboratory lead to a hypothesis that suggested a
requirement for CBF in the malignant phenotype of prostate and ovarian
cancers. Method and Results: To determine if CBF contributed to the
malignant phenotype of cancer cells, we used lentiviral delivery of
CBF-specific shRNA to decrease CBF expression. Cells knocked down for CBF
expression exhibited a growth defect that was not associated with large
perturbances in the cell cycle or with increased apoptosis. Since both
sphingolipid metabolism and autophagy are central to survival pathways,
these processes were examined in the CBF knockdown cell lines. Prostate
(PPC1 and PC-3) and ovarian (SKOV-3) cancer cell lines that were infected
with the CBF-specific shRNA but not those cells infected with a
non-target-shRNA displayed a significant increase in autophagic markers,
including LC3B-II, suggesting that autophagy was upregulated in CBF
knocked-down cells. Treatment of CBF knockdown cells with the autophagy
inhibitors chloroquine and 3-methyladenosine modestly increased cell
survival, suggesting that cell death was associated with increased
autophagy. Real time PCR analysis revealed that Ugcg, an enzyme critical
for sphingolipid metabolism, was decreased in SKOV-3 cells after CBF
knockdown. These data lead to a hypothesis that loss of CBF increases
cell death and autophagy by, in part, perturbing sphinglolipid metabolism
and, thus, increasing ceramide pools. Since sphingolipid metabolism is
linked to senescence the process was examined using senescence-associated
B-galactosidase activity, which was found to be increased in CBF
knockdown cells. Treatment of cells knocked down for CBF with Fumonsin B1
(FB1), which decreases ceramide production, improved cell survival and
decreased autophagy. Further, direct lipodomic analysis of the CBF
knockdown cells identified significant increases in the levels of
ceramide. Conclusion: Together, these data suggest that CBF regulates
senescence and autophagy via control of the sphingolipid pathway. These
studies further suggest that CBF is a putative therapeutic target in
prostate and ovarian cancers.

