Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular imaging of early inflammatory response during
hyperplasia and/or colitis in response to bacterial infection.


Inflammatory diseases such as ulcerative colitis recruit myeloid cells
and result in inflammatory responses such as generation of reactive
oxygen species (ROS). Development of non-invasive luminescence imaging
approaches is needed to evaluate these inflammatory responses. We
developed methodologies to show that vibration induced gut inflammation
can be determined using luminescence imaging approach in a non-invasive
fashion (Papineni and Vizard, World Molecular Imaging Congress2012).
Citrobacter rodentium (CR) is a natural bacterial pathogen that infects
the distal colon of mice and induces transmissible murine colonic
hyperplasia (TMCH). Here we determined the early inflammatory response
(ROS activity) to intestinal infection by CR in a longitudinal study. We
further assessed the effects of allelic variation on murine chromosome 11
(B6.CAST. 11) on the inflammatory response. The ROS activity was
monitored in real-time in vivo using L-012
(8-amino-5-chloro-7-phenylpyridol [3,4-d]pyridazine-1,4(2H,3H) dione), a
chemiluminescence reporter, using planar multimodal imaging system. 0.1
ml of 1 mg/ml L-012 probe was injected (i.p.) in control and the
experimental mice that were subjected to CR infection. Necrosis was
imaged (post-infection day-19) using a fluorescent probe containing a bis
(zinc2+dipicolylamine, Zn-DPA) motif which binds with high affinity to
apoptotic, necrotic, and bacterial surfaces. Significant difference in
the basal gut ROS activity was found in mice with allelic variation on
chromosome 11 compared to the wild type littermates. Robust elevation in
ROS activity was observed in both the wild type and B6.CAST.11mice that
were infected with CR (post infection 9, 12, 19 days). The variation in
the levels of ROS activity however was very distinct between the wild
type and B6.CAST.11 mice indicating the contribution of molecular
determinants at the chromosome 11. The potential advantages in these
real-time ROS monitoring methodologies by in vivo imaging, in
understanding mechanisms of infection, inflammation, and development of
better intervention strategies will be elaborated.

