Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of the LMO1 oncogene in neuroblastoma pathogenesis.


Neuroblastoma, an embryonic tumor of the peripheral sympathetic nervous
system (PSNS), accounts for 10% of all childhood cancer deaths. We
recently developed a robust zebrafish model of neuroblastoma and
demonstrated that activated ALK synergizes with MYCN by inhibiting a
developmentally-timed apoptotic response that is otherwise induced by
MYCN (Zhu et.al. Cancer Cell, 2012). We have now used this model to
provide evidence in support of the results of a neuroblastoma genome-wide
association study (GWAS) showing that common variation within the LIM
domain-only 1 (LMO1) gene locus is highly associated with the development
of advanced neuroblastoma and may function as an oncogene in established
disease (Wang K et.al. Nature, 2011). We are collaborating because our
zebrafish system provides a robust in vivo tumor model to investigate the
underlying mechanisms through which LMO1 overexpression contributes to
malignant transformation. Here we developed transgenic lines in which
LMO1 is overexpressed in the PSNS under control of the
dopamine-beta-hydroxylase (dh) promoter. We observed that overexpression
of LMO1 in three individual transgenic lines synergized with MYCN to
accelerate the onset of neuroblastoma in the interrenal gland (IRG), the
zebrafish analogue of the adrenal medulla. Tumors began to appear at 13
weeks in transgenic fish overexpressing MYCN alone and this latency was
shortened dramatically to 5 weeks (p=0.02) and the penetrance was
increased more than three-fold in the transgenic fish coexpressing both
MYCN and LMO1. In addition, we found that coexpression of LMO1 with
activated ALK induced neuroblastoma, which is the first time in our model
system that neuroblastoma has been induced without MYCN overexpression.
Thus, the zebrafish model system appears to be robust for functional
genomics analysis to provide in vivo evidence and investigate mechanisms
and pathways underlying new associations emerging from GWAS, tumor genome
resequencing and other genome-wide technologies that are currently under
intense investigation in human cancers.

