Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of OvCa1 in human malignancies.


Immunohistochemistry biomarkers are currently being developed to target
specific proteins found in cancer cells, which could contribute to a
better understanding of specific types of cancers and provide information
to develop better treatments for cancer patients. The biomarker and
putative tumor suppressor, OvCa1, has a function that is not well
characterized. Due to a lack of staining reagents, we developed
monoclonal antibodies of OvCa1 to examine multiple human malignancies.
The goal of this project was to gain a better understanding of OvCa1 and
its role in cancer. Primary cancers with different histological grades as
well as metastatic lesions were examined with the monoclonal antibodies.
Ovarian cancer tissue samples from the Indiana University Simon Cancer
Center Tissue Bank were used for this study. The samples were fixed in
neutral buffered formalin and processed into paraffin blocks. The tissues
were cut using a microtome and placed on slides. Staining of the OvCa1
antibody was completed using immunohistochemistry (IHC) techniques.
Thirty-one samples were evaluated including low grade tumors, medium
grade tumors, high grade tumors, and metastatic ovarian carcinomas. All
cases revealed a range of staining intensity with the OvCa1 antibody. The
results indicated that OvCa1 for the high grade, stage 3/4, ovarian
carcinomas had the highest staining intensity. Medium grade tumors had
less OvCa1 expression. The metastatic tumors had less staining than any
of the other three grades. Immunostaining was observed primarily in the
cytoplasm and nucleus of the tumor cells. In addition, we evaluated
approximately 20 tumors from various different organs. These included
prostate, breast, spleen, lung, colon, stomach, and kidney tumors, which
were positive for immunostaining with the OvCa1 antibody. In summary, the
results indicated that all histological grades expressed the biomarker,
OvCa1, and the staining intensity was highest in the high grade, stage
3/4, tumors. Our preliminary studies demonstrated a further need to
delineate OvCa1 as a potential biomarker, which could be used for early
detection and diagnosis of ovarian cancer.

