Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Addition of antiangiogenic agents enhances nab-paclitaxel
antitumor activity in experimental pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by early tissue
invasion and metastasis, complex desmoplastic stromal response, and high
resistance to systemic therapies. Nanoparticle albumin-bound (nab)
paclitaxel (NPT) has the potential for pharmacodynamic advantages over
conventional taxanes and has shown efficacy as mono- and combination
therapeutic agent in several malignancies including pancreatic, lung and
ovarian cancer. We evaluated the combination treatment benefits of
nab-paclitaxel with the antiangiogenic agents bevacizumab (Bev) and
sunitinib (Su) in experimental pancreatic cancer.In vitro cell
proliferation and protein expression were measured by WST-1 assay and
immunoblotting. Tumor growth and animal survival studies were performed
in murine xenografts. Intratumoral proliferation and apoptosis were
evaluated via Ki67 and TUNEL staining.Nab-paclitaxel displayed higher in
vitro antiproliferative activity as a single agent in pancreatic cancer
compared with gemcitabine or the polysorbate-based taxane docetaxel. In
AsPC-1 PDAC cells, nab-paclitaxel IC50 was reduced more than 6-fold by an
IC25 dose of sunitinib (500 nM) but not by bevacizumab (10 g/ml). In
endothelial cells HUVEC, nab-paclitaxel IC50 (82 nM) was decreased to 41
nM by bevacizumab (10 g/ml) and to 63 nM by sunitinib (100 nM). In
fibroblast WI-38 cells, nab-paclitaxel IC50 (7.2 M) was decreased to 7.8
nM by the IC25 dose of sunitinib (2.5 M), but no significant decrease was
observed by bevacizumab (50 g/ml) addition. Nab-paclitaxel increased
stathmin phosphorylation and decreased tubulin expression in vitro. In a
subcutaneous murine xenograft model, net tumor growth inhibition in NPT,
Bev, Su, Bev+Su, NPT+Bev, NPT+Su and NPT+Bev+Su was 72, 44, 61, 89, 67,
93 and 86 percent. Effects of therapy on intratumoral proliferation and
apoptosis corresponded with tumor growth inhibition data. In tumor tissue
lysates, nab-paclitaxel caused an increase in stathmin phosphorylation
but no change in tubulin expression. In an intraperitoneal murine
xenograft model, compared to controls (median survival: 19 days), animal
survival increased after nab-paclitaxel (32 days, p=0.0008) but not after
antiangiogenic therapy with Bev (21 days), Su (24 days) or Bev+Su (22
days; for all: p=NS). Animal survival was further increased by the
combination treatment of nab-paclitaxel with bevacizumab and sunitinib,
with a median survival of 38, 37 and 49 days in NPT+Bev (p=0.03 vs. NPT),
NPT+Su (p=0.174 vs. NPT) and NPT+Bev+Su (p=0.001 vs. NPT) groups,
respectively.Nab-paclitaxel has strong antitumor activity as a single
agent in this model of experimental pancreatic cancer. Nab-paclitaxel
effects were further enhanced by addition of the antiangiogenic agents
bevacizumab and sunitinib. These findings strongly support the potential
of nab-paclitaxel based combination strategies for clinical PDAC therapy.

