Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The INHERIT EGFR study: Investigating hereditary risk from T790M.


Background: The EGFR T790M mutation, commonly associated with acquired
resistance to EGFR kinase inhibitors, has also been described rarely as a
germline mutation in association with familial lung cancer. In
collaboration with the Addario Lung Cancer Medical Institute
(www.ALCMI.net), we initiated a prospective trial to identify patients
and families carrying germline EGFR mutations in order to characterize
their lung cancer risk.Preliminary data: In a prior study (GR Oxnard et
al, JTO, 2012), it was identified that patients with lung cancers found
to harbor EGFR T790M at diagnosis have a 50% chance of carrying an
underlying germline T790M mutation. This suggests that by focusing on
patients already identified to carry T790M in their cancer, it is
possible to enrich for a germline mutation that may be otherwise too rare
to study prospectively.Subject eligibility: The following groups are
eligible: (1) Patients with a cancer (lung or other) harboring an EGFR
T790M mutation on tumor genotyping; lung cancers that acquired EGFR T790M
only following treatment with an EGFR kinase inhibitor are ineligible.
(2) First-degree relatives of patients found to carry a germline EGFR
mutation. (3) Patients who already are known to carry a germline EGFR
mutation on prior testing. Subjects are referred to cohort 1 based upon
genotyping results from academic centers, oncology practices, or
partnering commercial laboratories (e.g. Response Genetics, Los Angeles,
CA).Trial design: Subjects may present at a participating cancer center
or may participate remotely through a study website
(www.Dana-Farber.org/T790Mstudy). Eligible patients submit a saliva
and/or blood specimen for central testing in a CLIA lab. After
counseling, patients carrying germline EGFR mutations have the option of
inviting first-degree relatives to participate. Genetic counseling is
coordinated at the participating center or offered over the phone. Chest
CT scans are collected from germline carriers and analyzed centrally to
study nodule prevalence and characteristics. Patients are then clinically
followed for 2 years.Funding: Supported by grants from the Conquer Cancer
Foundation of ASCO and the Bonnie J. Addario Lung Cancer Foundation.

