Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Repurposing clinical kinase inhibitors to enhance chemosensitivity
by overriding checkpoints.


Many conventional chemotherapies act as DNA damaging agents. Chemotherapy
activates cell cycle checkpoint signaling to prevent cells from entering
mitosis with either damaged or unreplicated DNA. Based on the
observations that interference with the checkpoint mechanism (checkpoint
override) results in cell death via mitotic catastrophe, the development
of checkpoint inhibitors is actively being pursued as an anti-cancer
therapy. In a cell-based screen of clinically relevant kinase inhibitors
we identified three compounds that display checkpoint override
properties: isomer of bosutinib, a recently FDA-approved Abl and Src
inhibitor; BEZ235, a PI3K/mTOR inhibitor; and dovitinib, a multi-receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Most interestingly, all compounds display
off-target activity towards DNA damage checkpoint kinases including Chk1,
ATR and Wee1. We determined these kinase inhibitors potently sensitized a
panel of pancreatic cancer cell lines to S-phase acting (Gemcitabine,
cisplatin) or G2-phase arresting (doxorubicin) DNA-damaging agents. Using
a combination of live-cell videomicroscopy and immunofluorescence, we
demonstrated that the inhibitors forced drug-treated cells to override
the DNA damage induced checkpoint activation and aberrantly enter
mitosis. The aberrant mitoses had characteristic chromatin fragmentation
and that kinetochores and centromeres appeared to be detached from the
chromatin mass, in a manner reminiscent of mitosis with unreplicated
genomes (MUGs). As a result, cells died either in mitosis or due to
mitotic catastrophe. The efficacy of pulsatile (24h and 48h after
chemotherapy) administration of these previously unsuspected checkpoint
inhibitors was further validated in tumor explants and cells isolated
directly from a pancreatic cancer patient who is currently undergoing
treatment. Tellingly, xenograft studies showed that gemcitabine and
bosutinib isomer had significant activity as single agents but the
combination significantly prevented tumor growth, even after drug
removal. Our findings suggest that kinase inhibitors targeting cell cycle
checkpoints, albeit in an off-target manner, may be fast-tracked into the
clinic to enhance the efficacy of standard chemotherapies.

