Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of radiosensitizing effects of KSP inhibition in cancer
cells.


Background: Several chemotherapeutic agents act as radiosensitizers,
priming the cancer cells to the effects of ionizing radiation and
resulting in increased tumor kill with radiotherapy. The combination of
radiosensitizing chemotherapeutics and localized external beam radiation
therapy is based on the scientific rationale derived from both
preclinical and clinical observations of synergism between radiotherapy
and chemotherapy. Recently, many kinesin spindle protein (KSP) inhibitors
have undergone preclinical and clinical investigation as anticancer
agents. The mitotic kinesin is an essential mitotic enzyme with no role
outside of mitosis. KSP is essential for separation of spindle poles
during mitosis; therefore its inhibition causes mitotic arrest and
subsequent cell death. Amongst the various KSP inhibitors, SB-743921 is a
highly potent second generation KSP inhibitor that has shown activity in
a broad spectrum of tumor models and is now being investigated in
clinical trials. We sought to investigate the radiosensitizing properties
of SB-743921 in various cell lines in order to investigate its potential
as a radiosensitizer for enhancing treatment efficacy in multiple
cancers.Materials & Methods: We first assessed the inhibitory activity of
SB-743921 in multiple cell models (hepatocellular carcinoma, colorectal
cancer, breast cancer, pancreatic cancer). The half-maximal inhibitory
concentrations (IC50) were determined by carrying out cell viability
assays in each of these cell lines. Cancer cells were exposed to various
concentrations of SB-743921 in growth medium for 72 hrs before cell
viability was determined by colorimetric estimation of metabolic activity
using XTT assay. Further, we evaluated the radiosensitizing effect of
SB-743921 on hepatocellular carcinoma and colorectal cancer cells by
performing clonogenic assays. Cells were first treated with SB-743921 for
24 hours at their respective IC50 values, followed by irradiation with
2-8 Gy doses. Post-treatment, the cells were plated at clonal density and
incubated in growth medium for 10-14 days. Cells were fixed and stained,
and colonies with 50 cells or more were counted.Results: The IC50 values
of 4 cancer cell lines were between 0.5-2.5 nM. The results from the
clonogenic assays indicate radiosensitization effect in the
heptatocellular carcinoma cell line, whereas in the colorectal cancer
cell line, radiosensitization was not observed.Conclusion and Future
studies: From our results, it can be concluded that KSP inhibition with
SB-743921 radiosensitizes some types of cancer, but not all. More cancer
cell lines are currently being evaluated to demonstrate a relationship
between cancer type and the radiosensitization effect by KSP inhibition.
In future, in vivo chemoradiation experiments in mice will be performed
in multiple cancer models to further assess the radiosensitization effect
by KSP inhibition.

