Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential regulation of E2A (TCF3) by androgens in prostate
cancer cells.


Introduction: E2A (TCF3) is a multifunctional basic helix loop helix
(bHLH) transcription factor. E2A promotes cell differentiation, acts as a
negative regulator of cell proliferation in normal cells and cancer cell
lines and is required for normal B-cell development. Previous studies
from our laboratory has shown that E2A expression is highly increased in
prostate cancer as compared to normal prostate and that it acts as a
tumor promoter in prostate cancer. Given the diverse biological pathways
regulated/ influenced by E2A little is known about its regulation in
prostate cancer.Experimental design: E2A expression in androgen sensitive
LNCaP and insensitive C81 prostate cancer cell lines was determined by
western blot after treatments with androgen receptor (AR) agonist R1881
and antagonist casodex. Putative Androgen Response Elements (ARE) were
identified in the first intronic region of the E2A gene using some of the
online bioinformatics tools and confirmed by Chromatin
Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with AR antibody and Luciferase reporter
assays on the above mentioned cell lines after treatments with R1881 and
casodex.Results: E2A expression was found to increase with the increasing
aggrasiveness of prostate cancer cell lines as compared to normal
prostate epithelial cell line RWPE1. When androgen responsive cell line
LNCaP was treated with R1881 there was an increased expression of E2A
which decreased upon treatment with antiandrogen casodex whereas the E2A
expression remained unaltered upon similar treatments in androgen
insensitive cell line C81. The first intronic region of the E2A gene was
predicted to contain two putative ARE sites. ChIP after treatment of
LNCaP and C81 cells with R1881 and casodex showed that the intronic
region was bound by AR in LNCaP cells only in the presence of R1881,
whereas C81 cells showed a pulldown with AR in presence as well as
absence of R1881. Similar results were observed in luciferase reporter
assays indicating that E2A is transactivated by AR in LNCaP cell lines
whereas it is independent of androgens in C81 cell line. Furthermore,
Luciferase reporter assays also confirmed that only one of the two
predicted putative AREs was functionally active and responsible for the
androgen mediated regulation of E2A.Conclusion: Our results indicate that
E2A is differentially regulated in Prostate cancer cell lines. The
increased expression of E2A and its role as a tumor promoter in prostate
cancer cell lines may be contributed to its loss of androgen dependence
as is evident in its progression from androgen dependent LNCaP to
independent C81 cells.Acknowledgements: This study was supported by
NIH/NCI RO1 CA128914 and NIH/NCRR/RCMI G12RR03062.

