Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new approach to study intracellular pathways of metastasis in
living tumor cells.


Although genes associated with metastasis have been identified, the core
intracellular events of the process remain obscure. Recently, it has been
shown that cytoskeletal reorganisations, indicated by changes in the
tensional force generated by the actin-myosin interaction in the cell,
are critical for the development of invasive phenotypes. These changes
are mediated in part by the microenvironment through mechanotransduction
(6,7). Moreover, reduced cytoskeletal stiffness and increased mutability
can distinguish metastatic cells from non[[Unsupported Character -
Codename ­]]invasive cancer cells and from normal cells. This suggests
that many cancer cells are distinguished by altered physical properties
and that biomechanical measurements of isolated cells may have
significant diagnostic and prognostic value (2-4, 8). Thus, we
hypothesize that by using isogenic cancer cell lines of differing
metastatic potential transfected with fluorescently labelled motility
reporter constructs, we will be able to elucidate altered
mechanotransduction signalling as an important component in tumour
formation and progression, which can then be studied mechanistically.We
have recently demonstrated novel cytoskeleton dependent
mechanotransduction pathways in heart (5) and skeletal muscle (1) cells
in which stretch-dependent signal transduction activates the local
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) to trigger Ca2+ signaling
events. These discoveries were made possible by combining new
mechano-optical techniques. We intend to apply this approach to further
investigate abnormal kinase-mediated sensing of mechanical cues that may
result in the development of fundamental abnormalities in the cancer
microvasculature. We present preliminary data from different cancer lines
that suggest manipulating kinase-mediated tension, using different
inhibitors (ROCK inhibitor Y27632, MAPK inhibitor U0126), alone or
jointly with one another can reprogram the tumour cells so that they
normalize their reorientation response to cyclic strain and their ability
to form networks (9).

