Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYC maintains the self-renewal of cancer stem cells through the
regulation of the glutathione redox system.


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a rare population of self-renewing cells
that can persist even after extensive therapeutic intervention. The
molecular mechanism of CSC self-renewal is not yet clear. Here we show
that MYC is causally involved in CSC self-renewal through the regulation
of glutathione (GSH) redox system. In a MYC-driven conditional transgenic
mouse model of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), we identified
Sca-1+ CSCs. We found that these CSCs express the glutathione (GSH) redox
system related genes including glutamate cysteine ligase (GCL) and
Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Kinase 1 (PDK1) but low levels of expression of
the mitochondrial redox enzyme, Superoxide Dismutase 2 (SOD2). Even a
brief period of MYC inactivation in the Sca1+ CSCs led to their apoptosis
associated with the downregulation of GCL and PDK1, but the upregulation
of SOD2, in turn resulting in ROS-generation and mitochondrial damage.
Moreover, suppression of SOD2 by siRNA silencing or the use of the
peroxide scavenger, ascorbic acid, prevented MYC inactivation from
inducing apoptosis in the Sca-1+ CSCs. Finally, in human CSCs, including
primary human Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML), and human colon cancers, we
confirmed that MYC expression was required for high GCL, PDK1 and low
SOD2. Even the brief inactivation of MYC in human CSCs resulted in the
loss of their self-renewal, as well as the global chance in redox state
by decrease in GCL, PDK1 and increase in SOD2. We conclude that high
levels of continued MYC expression are essential for CSC self-renewal
through regulation of redox state.Citation Format: Bikul Das, Rika
Tsuchida, Reza Bayat-Mokhtari, Jason R. Gotlib, Renee Reijo-Pera, Herman
Yeger, Felsher W. Dean. MYC maintains the self-renewal of cancer stem
cells through the regulation of the glutathione redox system. [abstract].
In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association
for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA):
AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 267.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-267

