Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-invasive measurement of prostate-specific membrane antigen
(PSMA) expression with radiolabeled J591 imaging: a promising biomarker
for PSMA-based radioimmunotherapy.


Background:PSMA is nearly universally expressed by prostate cancer and is
upregulated with castration-resistance. Recently, non-invasive
measurement of PSMA expression has been demonstrated to be a novel
biomarker of androgen receptor activity in animal models. J591 is a
monoclonal antibody which selectively and efficiently binds the external
domain of PSMA with no direct effect on PSA expression or secretion. Four
therapeutic phase I and II trials of radiolabeled (RL)-J591 using
(177Lu-J591 and 90Y-J591) have been performed in men with metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). In addition to therapeutic
infusion with RL-J591, planar gamma camera imaging was
performed.Methods:Following IRB approval, a combined analysis of 4
prospective studies of RL-J591 for metastatic CRPC was performed. RL-J591
images were semi-quantitatively scored using 2 methods by 2 independent
radiologists blinded to outcome. A 5-point visual score (VS) of 0 - 4+
was assigned. In addition, a semi-quantitative Tissue Targeting Index
(TTI) was calculated for the most prominent lesions in each subject using
the ratio of lesion count density (corrected for background) to whole
body count density, with maximum and mean scores recorded. PSMA
expression as measured by imaging was correlated with efficacy measures
in long-term follow up of all studies.Results:130 patients (pts) with
metastatic CRPC received RL- J591 with semi-quantitative imaging. 86.2%
had bone metastases, 51.5% lymph node, 16.9% lung, 9.2% liver. 87.7% had
accurate targeting of known sites of disease by planar imaging. Only 8.0%
of pts with no evidence of PSMA expression via J591 imaging (VS=0)
experienced treatment response versus 40.6% of those with the highest
strongest expression as measured by VS (p=0.01). In addition to PSA
declines, for the subset of 17 pts with baseline and follow up
circulating tumor cell (CTC) counts, those with higher VS tended to have
more CTC decreases (p=0.12). Those with the lowest level of PSMA
expression as measured by TTI tended to have fewer PSA declines (p=0.12).
PSA response was associated with superior overall survival compared to
those without >30% PSA decline (p=0.02).Conclusions:Non-invasive
measurement of PSMA expression may be semi-quantitatively measured with
planar gamma-camera imaging following infusion with RL-J591. Level of
PSMA expression is associated with response to radiolabeled anti-PSMA
radioimmunotherapy. Improvements in quantitative molecular imaging
techniques such as PSMA PET/CT with 89Zr-J591 may prove to be a valuable
predictive biomarker for PSMA-based therapeutics.

