Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo and in vitro stem cell models suggest a role for LGR5 in
regulating intestinal epithelial lineage specification.


The stem cell marker Leucine Rich Repeat Containing G-protein Coupled
Receptor 5 (LGR5) is frequently upregulated in human colon cancer.
Numerous observations implicate LGR5 in stem cell maintenance during
intestinal development, tissue homeostasis and cancer, however the
precise role of LGR5 in these processes is still unclear. To explore the
role of LGR5, we generated mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) in which one
or both alleles of Lgr5 were deleted and replaced with either
-galactosidase or green fluorescent protein (gfp) reporter genes, or the
human LGR5 gene. These cell lines were used in three complimentary
systems to differentiate and/or isolate cell lineages. The first system
was an in vivo model in which subcutaneous xenografts of murine ESCs grew
and formed tumors (teratomas) containing cellular structures from all
three germ cell layers. Immunostaining showed that a subset of
E-cadherin-positive epithelial cells also expressed Lgr5 reporter genes.
Teratomas derived from Lgr5 null ESCs showed an increase in
E-cadherin-positive epithelial structures, and gene expression profiling
of Lgr5 null teratomas showed an upregulation of epithelial genes
including Cdh1, Epcam, Cldn7, Krt5, and Krt14 compared with control
teratomas. In contrast, ESCs constitutively overexpressing a secreted
form of LGR5 ectodomain formed teratomas with fewer epithelial structures
and reduced expression of epithelial genes compared to control teratomas.
The second system used in vitro differentiation of ESCs towards an
intestinal epithelial lineage, followed by 3D culturing, to derive
intestinal organoids. Lgr5+/+ (WT), Lgr5lacZ/+ (Het), or Lgr5lacZ/gfp
(Null) ESCs are being examined for their ability to adopt an intestinal
fate and form organoids in vitro. A third system used ex vivo culture of
murine intestinal crypts isolated from humanized LGR5 heterozygous mice
to form intestinal organoids. In summary, the morphological and gene
expression changes observed in teratomas implicate a role of LGR5 in
regulating epithelial tissue homeostasis. The ability to grow and
manipulate organoid cultures ex vivo/in vitro will allow us to use
various soluble reagents and detailed microscopy to further assess the
role of the Lgr5 pathway in intestinal cell lineage specification as well
as tumorigenesis.

