Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective inhibitors of Mcl-1 with potent activity against
multiple myeloma patient cells and animal xenografts.


To date most of the studies targeting apoptotic machinery have focused on
inhibiting Bcl2 and BclXL proteins that have shown limited clinical
utility. This could be in part due to the over-expression of Myeloid
Leukemia-1 (Mcl-1) that carries similar anti-apoptotic functions. Our
recent evaluations of Multiple Myeloma (MM) patient derived samples have
shown consistent over-expression of Mcl-1 suggesting that it is an
attractive therapeutic target. We have discovered a novel druggable site
in Mcl-1 protein. Using structure based drug design we have developed
small molecule inhibitors (SMIs) of Mcl-1 that bind with high affinity to
the BH-3 hydrophobic groove of the protein thereby displacing different
pro-apoptotic partners such as Bax, Bak, Bok and Bid with activity
against MM cells (IC50 5 M) and anti-tumor activity in animal xenografts.
The lead SMI (UMI-77) inhibits growth and induces apoptosis in MM cells.
Molecular analysis of MM cells reveals activation of pro-apoptotic
factors post UMI-77 treatment. Co-immunoprecipitation studies show that
UMI-77 disrupts the Mcl-1-Bax and Mcl-1-Bak interactions. The drug
synergizes with standard proteasome inhibitor Velcade (5 nM) and
Carfilosimib (1 nM). In patient derived MM cells (n=45), UMI-77 inhibits
growth and induces apoptosis that is concurrent with induction of Bax,
Bak and enhancement in cleaved fractions of caspases 3 and 9. At similar
concentrations UMI-77 does not affect normal peripheral lymphocytes.
UMI-77 is well tolerated by animals at MTD (60 mg/kg i.v.). In a mice
lymphoma model, oral administration of UMI-77 significantly reduced tumor
growth and histological examination of tumors revealed suppression of
Mcl-1 protein expression along with enhancement of pro-apoptotic markers.
Our novel Mcl-1 inhibitors provide a new therapeutic option for cancers
for MM that overexpress Mcl-1 that have failed standard therapies.

