Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paired analysis of matched colon normal and tumor using whole
exome sequencing.


Background: Whole Exome sequencing (WES) is a tool that is
revolutionizing screening for pathogeni single nucleotide variations
(SNV) in complex disorders such as cancers. Using matched normal-tumor
pairs, it is possible to identify exome-wide germline and somatic variant
alterations that may have an effect on disease progression or response to
different interventions. The existing analysis pipelines are under
continuous enhancements. In analyzing matched pairs, there is a critical
assumption that the sequenced data are matched, without any quality
check. Identification of germline and rare somatic variants depend on the
normal sample being the qualified matched pair. Our aim was to determine
if Identity By State (IBS), a genetics concept on measuring relatedness
between individuals (matched tumor-normal pairs) can assess somatic
landscape between individual using WES data. Materials and Methods:
Genomic DNA was extracted from 8 normal-tumor pair tissues from African
Americans (males n=3, females n=5) with colorectal cancer (CRC). WES was
performed for identification of SNV according to manufacturer
recommendations (Illumina HiScan SQ). The low quality reads were
discarded and the clean reads were aligned against the human reference
genome (HG19) and base quality calibration was completed using SAMTools,
and GATK for variant calling and annotation. Pairs with no shared allele,
one shared allele, and two shared allele assigned as IBS 0, IBS 1, and
IBS 2 respectfully. Alleles in the dataset were coded using A and B and
pairwise IBS was computed between all samples. Display of the IBS
landscape was done using GenomeRelator. Results: The frequency of IBS
from WGS data sets showed that most of the changes were IBS-1 which were
heterozygous variants; i.e. AA/BB>AB (somatic) or AB>AA/BB (LOH).
Frequency of LOH varied from 4.36% to 73.61%. Homozygous variant (i.e.
IBS-0, AA>BB) on the other hand was not common, from 0.00% to 4.17%.
Distribution of IBS across genome for matched pairs reveals that most of
the IBS were IBS-2, indicating that both alleles between matched normal
and tumor were similar. Frequency of IBS-1 and IBS-0 varied amongst the
samples. Sample CC1053 had the most allele changes in chr1-22, and Xq,
and sample CC1054 showed the second highest allele changes in
chr1,3,4,6,8,9,10,11,13, 16, 17,19,20 and 22. Conclusion: Our results
showed that the SNV difference between normal-tumor matched pair is
relatively small consistent with the assumption of low mutation rate in
cancer. IBS approach provides the tumor contents as well as assurance in
the selection of samples for sequencing using SNP data. In our samples
88% similarly was found, as shown in IBS landscape across the
chromosomes. We concluded that our matched pair samples are appropriately
selected and are suitable for analysis of mutation across the samples.

