Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming cetuximab resistance in HNSCC: the role of AURKB and
DUSP6.


Introduction: As the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is expressed
in up to 90% of all HNSCC tumors and initiates important signaling
pathways in carcinogenesis, cetuximab, an EGFR targeting agent, is a
promising therapeutic agent. However, many tumors remain non-responsive.
Therefore, unraveling the underlying mechanism of resistance is of major
importance.Previously, we performed gene expression studies of cetuximab
sensitive (LICR-HN2 and SC263) and cetuximab resistant (LICR-HN1 and
Cal27) cell lines. These results indicated an upregulation of Aurora
kinase B (AURKB) in LICR-HN1 cells and a downregulation of dual
specificity phosphatase 6 (DUSP6) in Cal27 cells.Methods: Growth
inhibitory experiments for barasertib, an AURKB targeting agent, and
apigenin, a MAPK inhibitor, were performed as single-agent (barasertib:
0-25nM and apigenin: 0-40M), and in combination with 15nM cetuximab for
168h using simultaneous and sequential treatment schedules. Induction of
apoptotic cell death was investigated in LICR-HN1 cells using the Annexin
V-FITC apoptosis detection kit for all treatment schedules.
Immunohistochemical staining for AURKB was performed on formalin fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissues from 52 newly diagnosed HNSCC patient samples,
using an automated IHC staining platform and will be correlated with
clinicopathological parameters. The phosphorylation status of ERK was
investigated using the NanoPro technology and the methylation status of
DUSP6 will be analyzed using the Pyrosequencing method.Results: The
mitosis-targeting drug barasertib induced cytotoxicity in the cetuximab
resistant HNSCC cell lines, Cal27 and LICR-HN1, with IC50 values of 13.15
0.60nM and 17.6 1.38nM, respectively. In combination therapy with
cetuximab, no additional benefit over barasertib as single agent was
observed. However, preliminary results showed that pretreatment of
LICR-HN1 cells with 15nM cetuximab followed by barasertib (10 or 20nM)
resulted in less viable cells compared to cetuximab or barasertib
treatment alone. AURKB expression was present in HNSCC patients, with
intensities ranging from 0 - 100%.Apigenin induced cytotoxicity in the
two cetuximab resistant cell lines, Cal27 and LICR-HN1, with IC50 values
of 22.29 0.60M and 30.66 0.97M respectively. Preliminary results showed
that the combination of cetuximab with apigenin had a synergistic effect
in the Cal27 cell line. Furthermore, increased phosphorylation of ERK was
present in the cetuximab-resistant cell lines compared to the
cetuximab-sensitive cell lines.Conclusion: These results seem to confirm
that overexpression of AURKB and/or downregulation of DUSP6 are involved
in mechanisms of cetuximab resistance in HNSCC cell lines and inhibition
of these pathways might, therefore, be a new strategy for anticancer
therapy.

