Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Target and drug discovery for recalcitrant, rare and neglected
cancers.


Efforts are underway to improve the treatment of recalcitrant, rare and
neglected cancers through the discovery of potential therapeutic targets,
the identification of possible therapeutic combinations, and the
identification of genomic vulnerabilities, using state-of-the-art drug
discovery, molecular characterization, and mechanism-of-action
techniques. Our current focus is on sarcoma and small cell lung cancer.
Sarcoma comprises approximately 1% of cancers inclusive of 50 subtypes
and occurs in patients of all ages with a frequency spread evenly over
the human age range. Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) constitutes
approximately 15% of lung cancers, is extremely aggressive, has a high
mortality rate and frequently recurs after conventional cytotoxic
chemotherapy. We have established comprehensive panels of human sarcoma
and small cell lung cancer cell lines (approximately 80 per tumor type).
Cell lines are being screened for response to all of the FDA approved
anticancer agents and to a library of investigational agents with a goal
of identifying existing agents that may be suitable for novel clinical
trials, plus identifying potential points of vulnerability for drug
discovery. Analysis of selected somatic mutations showed that ATM is
frequently mutated in both soft tissue and bone sarcoma. In addition,
gene expression profiles were measured in sarcoma cell lines using
Affymetrix Exon 1.0 ST arrays in an effort to facilitate identification
of splice variants and fusion genes. The gene-level data from the Exon
ST1 array compares well with published U133plus 2 expression profiles.
Principal components analysis of genes in 48 sarcoma lines indicates that
expression varies primarily by disease subtype. For instance, Ewing's
Sarcoma overexpressed genes including PRKCB, NPY5R and NPY1R, ITM2A plus
adrenergic receptors B1, B3 and A1D, while ACTC1, IGF2 and CHRNA1 were
dysregulated in rhabdomyosarcoma. Predicted associations between gene and
miRNA expression included CSF1 with miR-128, thioredoxin reductase with
miR-324-5p, MDM4 with miR-152, and PODXL with miR-199a-5p, suggesting
potential regulatory relationships that might be exploited as cancer
targets. In these lines, exome expression was found to be altered more
than 10% in 232 genes, including known splice variant genes such as
KLK11, UBE2C and sarcoma related fusion genes EWSR1 and ETV. Calculated
fusion scores based on EWSR1-FLI1 expression profiles successfully
segregated Ewing's sarcoma from all other sarcoma cell lines. Association
analysis between gene and microRNA expression and sensitivity to specific
anticancer agents is ongoing. Our mission is to improve the treatment of
these neglected cancers by providing a comprehensive public database of
molecular signatures and sensitivities that can be leveraged by the
scientific community at large. Funded by NCI Contract no.
HHSN261200800001E.

