Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Legumain protease substrate modified TAT-liposome cargo: an
efficient tool for targeting malignant diseases.


Tumor targeting specificity and efficacy of the internalization of
macro-biomolecular drugs have emerged as two major obstacles hampering
the application of liposome-based delivery system against tumor.
Trans-activating transcriptional activator (TAT) is a member of the
cell-penetrating peptides which enhance the penetration of various
macro-biomolecular cargos. In this study, we developed a modified
TAT-Liposome cargo in which the activation of TAT peptide was blocked by
Legumain protease substrate Ala-Ala-Asn-(AAN). Firstly, we confirmed the
extremely high level of Legumain expression in a variety of solid tumors,
as well as its specific effect on recognition and digestion of AAN. Then
we conjugated AAN with the TAT peptide and constructed the modified
liposome (AAN-TAT-Lipo) cargo. Flow-cytometry assay showed the
internalization of AAN-TAT-Lipo was significantly higher than that of
AAN-Lipo in 4T1 cells which expressed active Legumain. In vivo, the
concentration of Dox encapsulated in AAN-TAT-Lipo was significantly
higher in the tumor sites and lower in normal tissues compared with
Free-Dox, AAN-Lipo-Dox and TAT-Lipo-Dox groups after administration in
mouse model of orthotopic breast cancer. Luciferase assay showed that the
AAN-TAT-Lipo-Dox dramatically inhibited tumor growth compared with other
groups. TUNEL staining demonstrated that the apoptotic cells in tumor
sites were significantly increased in the group of AAN-TAT-Lipo-Dox,
compared with other groups. Whereas, the apoptotic cells in the heart,
liver, spleen and kidney were decreased in the group of AAN-TAT-Lipo-Dox.
Taken together, the modified TAT-lipo cargo via blocking TAT peptide
activation with a Legumain specific substrate, AAN, is proven effective
for improving the efficacy of internalization, and reducing the systemic
toxicity of the tumor targeting delivery system as well.

