Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of potent androgen receptor antagonists for treating
CRPC and AR+ breast cancer.


Androgen Receptor (AR) antagonists have been used in clinic to treat
prostate cancer. One example is bicalutamide (Casodex), which is used
along with castration to treat advanced prostate cancer. Unfortunately,
the patients developed resistance to bicalutamide (alone or in
combination therapy) after only 0.5-2 years of treatment, resulting in
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Elevated AR expression in
tumor cells correlates with a change in the functional activity of
bicalutamide from antagonist to agonist, suggesting that prostate tumors
may adapt to survive on any residual agonism. MDV3100, a more potent AR
antagonist (5x vs bicalutamide) without residual agonism, has
demonstrated excellent efficacy in CRPC patients and has been approved by
FDA for treating CRPC in clinic. Recently, AR antagonists demonstrated
anti-tumor activities in preclinical AR+ breast cancer models.
Approximately 75% of invasive breast cancers were founded to be
AR+.Although MDV3100 is generally well-tolerated, there is a need to
eliminate the clinically observed CNS adverse side effects (1% incidences
of seizure). Suzhou Kintor launched a research effort looking for more
potent full AR antagonists with reduced CNS drug distribution.Lead series
was rapidly generated by computer-aided drug design. Designed molecules
based on clinically proven thiohydantoin core were docked into AR LBD
binding site and filtered with criteria of binding and ability to induce
antagonism conformation. Initial optimization mainly focused on improving
AR antagonism potency. Additional substitutions were introduced in the
left hand side to increase binding affinity to AR whereas more extended
fragment was used in the AR helix 12 region to prevent AR to adopt
agonism conformation hence ensure full antagonism (which may help
overcome resistance arise from residual AR agonism). Further optimization
for ADME properties with focus to reduce CNS drug exposure led to
discovery of several candidate compounds, after overcoming the challenge
of increase polarity while maintaining/improving AR antagonism potency.
GT0918 and GT0903 emerged as two of top candidates for further
preclinical clinical development. Both compounds have excellent affinity
with AR (4-10x tighter than MDV3100), as well as potent AR antagonism
(2-5x more potent than MDV3100). They also demonstrated good anti-tumor
efficacy in both hormone sensitive and CRPC animal models. In addition,
both candidate compounds demonstrated anti-proliferation effects in AR
positive breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-453). With higher
polar surface area (PSA), GT0918 demonstrated low CNS drug distribution
and no seizure was observed in animal toxicity studies (up to 1g/kg,
rat/dog). With improved ADME profile (better solubility and predicted to
have less drug accumulation in patients), GT0918 is being developed for
Phase I trial start.

