Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A tissue microarray-based study of the basal cell in canine
prostatic hyperplastic, pre-neoplastic and neoplastic lesions.


It has been stated that dog is the best natural model to study
carcinogenesis in comparison with men. In addition, the loss of the basal
cell layer integrity is one of the main characteristics in human
pre-neoplastic and neoplastic prostatic lesions. In human normal
prostate, the basal cells selectively express p63 in their nuclei,
demonstrating basal cell layer integrity. However, in both primary and
metastatic prostate carcinomas, has been described absence of p63
immunoexpression. This study aimed to evaluate the involvement of basal
cells (p63 and 34E12) and proliferative index (ki-67) in prostatic
pre-neoplastic and neoplastic lesions from dogs. A tissue microarray
(TMA) was constructed using 66 canine prostatic paraffin-embedded
lesions, selecting appropriate and representative areas of normal tissue
(n=7), benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH, n= 18), prostatic inflammatory
atrophy (PIA, n=22) and prostatic carcinoma (PCa, n=19).
Immunohistochemistry was performed using peroxidase method and DAB. The
immunohistochemical staining was assessed by scores according the
distribution of positive cells for p63 and 34E12 (score 1: 75%) and for
Ki67, positive nuclei were counted in each lesion. Chi-square or Fisher
exact test was used to determine the association between the categorical
variables and student t test to compare proliferative index among
lesions. Concerning the p63 protein, we found higher number of cases with
more than 75% of positive basal cells in CaP (p=0.002) and PIA (p=
0.0042) when compared to normal tissue and BPH. CaP and PIA showed 34E12
protein expression when compared to normal prostatic tissue and BPH (p=
0.032, p=0.0064). There was no statistically significant difference in
the comparison between PIA and BPH. Ki67 showed higher proliferative
index in PCa (p= 0.0028) and PIA (p= 0.01) compared to normal tissue and
BPH. Higher p63 and 34E12 immunohistochemical staining as well as higher
proliferative index in these cells were observed in canine pre-neoplastic
lesion (PIA) and prostate carcinoma indicate the involvement of basal
cells in these lesions in dogs, different from humans. These results do
not support the dog as the best natural model to the study of all types
of prostatic carcinomas in men.Financial support: Fapesp

