Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyunsaturated omega-3 fatty acids and their metabolites
preferentially inhibit cell proliferation and motility in triple negative
over luminal breast cancer cells.


The role of diet as a preventive measure in breast cancer remains
controversial. Current literature suggests that the risk of developing
breast cancer may decrease or increase with the intake of omega-3 (n-3)
and omega-6 (n-6) fatty acids, respectively. Omega 3 polyunsaturated
fatty acids (PUFAs) exert an anticancer effect by affecting multiple
cellular mechanisms leading to inhibition of proliferation and induction
of apoptosis. It is well known that breast cancer comprises distinct
molecular subtypes which differ in their responsiveness to therapeutic
and preventive agents. In these experiments, we tested the hypothesis
that n-3FA may preferentially affect triple negative breast cancer cells
for which no targeted intervention is presently available. The in vitro
effects of n-3 PUFA Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and its metabolites,
4-OH-DHA and 4-OXO-DHA, were tested on proliferation and motility of
seven triple negative human basal breast cell lines at different stages
of transformation (MCF-10F, trMCF, bsMCF, caMCF, MDA-MB-231, Hs-578T, and
BT-549), and three luminal breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, T-47D, and
SK-BR-3). Cell proliferation was measured with the tetrazolium MTT
(3-(4,5-dimethylthiazolyl-2)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay and
cell migration was assessed using the wound healing assay via time lapse
microscopy with MetaMorph 7.7.7.8. All assays were performed in
quadruplicate. Statistical significance was assessed using Student's
t-test (pThe role of diet as a preventive measure in breast cancer
remains controversial. Current literature suggests that the risk of
developing breast cancer may decrease or increase with the intake of
omega-3 (n-3) and omega-6 (n-6) fatty acids, respectively. Omega 3
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) exert an anticancer effect by
affecting multiple cellular mechanisms leading to inhibition of
proliferation and induction of apoptosis. It is well known that breast
cancer comprises distinct molecular subtypes which differ in their
responsiveness to therapeutic and preventive agents. In these
experiments, we tested the hypothesis that n-3FA may preferentially
affect triple negative breast cancer cells for which no targeted
intervention is presently available. The in vitro effects of n-3 PUFA
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and its metabolites, 4-OH-DHA and 4-OXO-DHA,
were tested on proliferation and motility of seven triple negative human
basal breast cell lines at different stages of transformation (MCF-10F,
trMCF, bsMCF, caMCF, MDA-MB-231, Hs-578T, and BT-549), and three luminal
breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, T-47D, and SK-BR-3). Cell proliferation
was measured with the tetrazolium MTT
(3-(4,5-dimethylthiazolyl-2)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay and
cell migration was assessed using the wound healing assay via time lapse
microscopy with MetaMorph 7.7.7.8. All assays were performed in
quadruplicate. Statistical significance was assessed using Student's
t-test (p<0.05). DHA and its metabolites significantly inhibited cell
proliferation (20-90% reduction) of both basal and luminal breast cancer
cell lines. The inhibitory effect was more pronounced on triple negative
basal breast cancer cell lines as compared to luminal breast cancer cell
lines. DHA did not produce an inhibitory effect on cell migration.
However, the metabolites of DHA significantly reduced (20-60% reduction)
cell migration on the bsMCF cell line. Our data provide novel information
regarding the preferential antitumor effect of DHA and its metabolites on
basal type breast cancer. (This project was supported by the Komen
Foundation (KG081632).

