Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of the vitamin D catabolizing enzyme CYP24A1 is
caused by gene amplification and results in highly proliferative
colorectal tumors.


Vitamin D insufficiency increases risk of colorectal cancer. Vitamin D is
produced photochemically in the skin, thus, low sunlight exposure results
in vitamin D insufficiency. Vitamin D is further processed in the liver
to its storage form calcidiol (25-OH vitamin D3). Calcidiol can be
activated by 1-hydroxylation to the secosteroid hormone calcitriol
(1,25-OH vitamin D3). Although systemic levels of bioactive calcitriol
are regulated by the kidneys, almost every tissue can synthesize and
degrade calcitriol. Tissue calcitriol acts in an autocrine/paracrine
manner and controls proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation.In
colorectal cancer, the calcidiol and calcitriol-degrading enzyme CYP24A1
is substantially overexpressed both on mRNA and protein level. High
CYP24A1 levels markedly reduce the half-life of vitamin D metabolites,
likely reducing the anti-tumorigenic effects of calcitriol in the tumor.
The causes and consequences of this overexpression are not fully
understood.Here, we investigated gene amplification of the CYP24A1 locus
(20q13.2) as a possible cause of CYP24A1 overexpression and increased
proliferation as a consequence thereof. Quantitative real time PCR assays
showed that approximately 60% of colorectal tumors carry CYP24A1 gene
amplification (n=127). This gene amplification correlated with increased
mRNA expression (=0.38, pVitamin D insufficiency increases risk of
colorectal cancer. Vitamin D is produced photochemically in the skin,
thus, low sunlight exposure results in vitamin D insufficiency. Vitamin D
is further processed in the liver to its storage form calcidiol (25-OH
vitamin D3). Calcidiol can be activated by 1-hydroxylation to the
secosteroid hormone calcitriol (1,25-OH vitamin D3). Although systemic
levels of bioactive calcitriol are regulated by the kidneys, almost every
tissue can synthesize and degrade calcitriol. Tissue calcitriol acts in
an autocrine/paracrine manner and controls proliferation, apoptosis, and
differentiation.In colorectal cancer, the calcidiol and
calcitriol-degrading enzyme CYP24A1 is substantially overexpressed both
on mRNA and protein level. High CYP24A1 levels markedly reduce the
half-life of vitamin D metabolites, likely reducing the anti-tumorigenic
effects of calcitriol in the tumor. The causes and consequences of this
overexpression are not fully understood.Here, we investigated gene
amplification of the CYP24A1 locus (20q13.2) as a possible cause of
CYP24A1 overexpression and increased proliferation as a consequence
thereof. Quantitative real time PCR assays showed that approximately 60%
of colorectal tumors carry CYP24A1 gene amplification (n=127). This gene
amplification correlated with increased mRNA expression (=0.38, p<0.001).
Aberrantly high CYP24A1 expression may reduce the anti-proliferative
actions of calcitriol and lead to increased proliferation. In our
colorectal cancer cohort, CYP24A1 mRNA expression correlated with
expression of several proliferation markers (e.g. CDC6 =0.60, pVitamin D
insufficiency increases risk of colorectal cancer. Vitamin D is produced
photochemically in the skin, thus, low sunlight exposure results in
vitamin D insufficiency. Vitamin D is further processed in the liver to
its storage form calcidiol (25-OH vitamin D3). Calcidiol can be activated
by 1-hydroxylation to the secosteroid hormone calcitriol (1,25-OH vitamin
D3). Although systemic levels of bioactive calcitriol are regulated by
the kidneys, almost every tissue can synthesize and degrade calcitriol.
Tissue calcitriol acts in an autocrine/paracrine manner and controls
proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation.In colorectal cancer, the
calcidiol and calcitriol-degrading enzyme CYP24A1 is substantially
overexpressed both on mRNA and protein level. High CYP24A1 levels
markedly reduce the half-life of vitamin D metabolites, likely reducing
the anti-tumorigenic effects of calcitriol in the tumor. The causes and
consequences of this overexpression are not fully understood.Here, we
investigated gene amplification of the CYP24A1 locus (20q13.2) as a
possible cause of CYP24A1 overexpression and increased proliferation as a
consequence thereof. Quantitative real time PCR assays showed that
approximately 60% of colorectal tumors carry CYP24A1 gene amplification
(n=127). This gene amplification correlated with increased mRNA
expression (=0.38, p<0.001). Aberrantly high CYP24A1 expression may
reduce the anti-proliferative actions of calcitriol and lead to increased
proliferation. In our colorectal cancer cohort, CYP24A1 mRNA expression
correlated with expression of several proliferation markers (e.g. CDC6
=0.60, p<0.001).In conclusion, our data suggest that CYP24A1 gene
amplification results in increased mRNA expression in colorectal tumors.
Further, high CYP24A1 expression correlates with increased proliferation,
possibly caused by an inhibition of the anti-proliferative effects of
calcitriol. Tumor specific inhibition of CYP24A1 may provide a future
strategy to restore local vitamin D levels and its anti-tumorigenic
activities.

