Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Doxorubicin eliminates tumor-induced myeloid-derived suppressor
cells and enhances T-helper lymphocyte-based immunotherapy in a murine
breast cancer model.


Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) represent a heterogeneous
population of cells equipped with the ability to inhibit T
lymphocyte-mediated immune responses. A significant increase in the
number of MDSC has been reported in the blood, secondary lymphoid organs
and tumor beds in tumor-bearing animals and in patients with many types
of cancers. MDSC frequency correlates with the disease stage and
prognosis. These cells impair CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL)-mediated
anti-tumor immunity by different overlapping mechanisms such as reactive
oxygen species or immunosuppressive cytokine production. Importantly,
MDSC elimination or inactivation substantially enhances the efficiency of
immunotherapy. Multiple studies have lent support to the concept that
some anti-neoplastic molecules, besides their conventional direct
cytotoxic influence on cancer cells, may also exhibit immunostimulatory
effects, thereby promoting anti-tumor immunity. We present results
demonstrating that doxorubicin, utilized in multiple chemotherapeutic
regimens and known to trigger an immunogenic type of cancer cell death,
dramatically reduces the number of tumor-induced MDSC in the murine
mammary tumor model 4T1. Elimination of these suppressive cells occurs by
an apoptotic process. In addition, residual MDSC isolated from
doxorubicin-treated animals are significantly impaired in their
immunosuppressive function. Of particular interest, the number of
apoptotic CD4+ or CD8+ T lymphocytes is not augmented in mice
administered with doxorubicin compared to untreated animals. We further
demonstrate that doxorubicin-mediated elimination of MDSC is associated
with enhanced T and NK cell activation, proliferation and expression of
Perforin and Granzyme B. Lastly, we evaluated a chemoimmunotherapeutic
strategy associating doxorubicin with T helper-1 or T helper-17
lymphocytes generated and activated in vitro. Our results indicate that
this combination regimen hinders tumor development as evidenced by
reduced number of 4T1 metastatic nodules in the lungs of treated animals.
This therapeutic effect is associated with an increased cytotoxic
activity of CD8+ T lymphocytes in the spleen of the treated mice. These
observations thus highlight a new application of doxorubicin as a MDSC
depleting agent and further advocate for the implementation of this drug
in cancer immunotherapy approaches.

