Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cyclooxygenase-2 regulates anandamide-induced endoplasmic
reticulum stress in tumorigenic keratinocytes.


Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) is the most common cancer in the United
States. NMSC and other epithelial tumors overexpress cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2), differentiating them from normal epithelial cells. COX-2
metabolizes arachidonic acid to prostaglandins of the E-, F-, D-, and
J-series. While E-series prostaglandins promote tumor cell proliferation,
J-series prostaglandins induce apoptosis by various mechanisms including
the induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. In response to
excessive ER stress, sensors such as PKR-like ER kinase (PERK) and
activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) are activated and initiate the
apoptotic cascade by increasing the expression of C/EBP homologous
protein (CHOP 10). Anandamide (AEA) is an endogenous cannabinoid
neurotransmitter which induces apoptotic cell death in a variety of tumor
cell types. AEA is metabolized by COX-2 to ethanolamide conjugates of E-,
F-, and D-series prostaglandins. Data from our previous study showed that
J-series prostaglandins are also metabolic products of AEA however, the
identity of the specific J-series prostaglandins produced was unknown. In
the current study, we identify the J-series prostaglandins produced by
AEA and test the hypothesis that these ethanolamide conjugates of
J-series prostaglandins (PGJ2-EA) initiate AEA-induced ER stress in NMSC
cells.To determine if AEA induces ER stress in NMSC cells we examined the
phosphorylation of PERK and eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha (eIF2),
the induction of CHOP 10 expression and the nuclear translocation of ATF
6 by Western blot or immunocytochemical analysis. Our data show that AEA
increased PERK and eIF2 phosphorylation, CHOP 10 expression and ATF 6
nuclear localization. To determine whether COX-2 and J-series
prostaglandins are necessary for AEA-induced ER stress, non-tumorigenic
HaCaT keratinocytes, which express low basal levels of COX-2, were
transfected with a plasmid containing human COX-2 cDNA or an empty vector
and the cells treated with AEA or drug vehicle. We observed that
AEA-induced phosphorylation of PERK and eIF2 occurred only in the
presence of COX-2. To identify the specific J-series PGs synthesized from
AEA in NMSC cells, JWF2 keratinocytes were treated with AEA, the PGs
extracted from the culture media of treated cells, and the samples
analyzed using LC/MS. Our data show that ethanolamide conjugates of
15-deoxy 12, 14PGJ2, 12PGJ2, and PGJ2 are metabolic products of AEA.These
findings suggest that COX-2 mediates the induction of ER stress by AEA.
Therefore, the initiation of ER stress may be responsible for the
pro-apoptotic activity of AEA in tumor cells. As such, AEA or chemical
derivatives of AEA could be ideal topical agents for the eradication of
non-melanoma skin tumors that overexpress COX-2.

