Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Morphological assessment of tumor-associated vessels: Automated
image processing of whole tumor sections in invasive breast cancer.


Clinical benefit of anti-angiogenic therapies in different cancers is a
result of normalizing the tumor vasculature by these agents. However,
tumor vascular imaging modalities in human cancers are in their early
evaluating phases. Photoacoustic mammography (PAM) is a newly introduced
technique which can image the hemoglobin distribution and oxygenation
state inside breast tissue with high spatial resolution. We have
previously presented the oxygenation data of our first study in breast
cancers by PAM in European Congress of Radiology (ECR) 2011. Here we
report the morphological assessment of tumor-associated vessels in 81
histological sections of 20 invasive breast carcinomas.The histological
slides were scanned with the magnification of 200 after CD31
immunohistochemical staining. For automated CD31 analysis, 105 jpeg files
were extracted from each virtual slide and were changed to binary images
with Image Pro-Plus 7.0 software. The optimal hue, saturation and
intensity (HSI) of stained structures was selected for each virtual
slide. Each binary file was divided into 16 squares of 0.84mm x 0.84 mm
size. Total number, area and length of stained structures were calculated
in each square.Patients age ranged from 36 to 84 years.19 cases were
invasive ductal carcinomas and 1 case was invasive lobular carcinoma.
Nine cases were luminal A, 9 cases luminal B and 2 cases were HER-2
subtype. For Ki67 scoring ndex,5 cases had Clinical benefit of
anti-angiogenic therapies in different cancers is a result of normalizing
the tumor vasculature by these agents. However, tumor vascular imaging
modalities in human cancers are in their early evaluating phases.
Photoacoustic mammography (PAM) is a newly introduced technique which can
image the hemoglobin distribution and oxygenation state inside breast
tissue with high spatial resolution. We have previously presented the
oxygenation data of our first study in breast cancers by PAM in European
Congress of Radiology (ECR) 2011. Here we report the morphological
assessment of tumor-associated vessels in 81 histological sections of 20
invasive breast carcinomas.The histological slides were scanned with the
magnification of 200 after CD31 immunohistochemical staining. For
automated CD31 analysis, 105 jpeg files were extracted from each virtual
slide and were changed to binary images with Image Pro-Plus 7.0 software.
The optimal hue, saturation and intensity (HSI) of stained structures was
selected for each virtual slide. Each binary file was divided into 16
squares of 0.84mm x 0.84 mm size. Total number, area and length of
stained structures were calculated in each square.Patients age ranged
from 36 to 84 years.19 cases were invasive ductal carcinomas and 1 case
was invasive lobular carcinoma. Nine cases were luminal A, 9 cases
luminal B and 2 cases were HER-2 subtype. For Ki67 scoring ndex,5 cases
had <5%, 9 cases between 5-20% and 6 cases had more than 20%.There was a
wide heterogeneity among total of 2.95 x10 6 analyzed tumor-associated
vessels in 81 histological sections.
shows the characteristics and distribution pattern.Additional analysis of
shape and pericyte coverage in these vessels is on its way. In
conjunction with oxygenation data obtained by PAM,this can be used as a
tumor vessel normalization assessment tool which can be used as a
biomarker in anti-angiogenic treatments in breast cancers.

