Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Periostin signaling regulates breast cancer stem cells.


Recent evidence suggests that the molecular heterogeneity inherent to
breast cancer, which underlies metastasis, resistance to treatment and
disease recurrence, can be driven by a distinct subpopulation of tumor
cells referred to as cancer stem cells (CSCs). However, the extracellular
cues and intracellular pathways that CSCs rely on remain unclear. Working
with a breast cancer progression model system we found the invasive
breast cancer cell line to exhibit numerous stem-like characteristics.
Gene expression profiling, along with a careful review of the literature,
identified a secreted extracellular matrix molecule, periostin (POSTN),
which we hypothesized to be required for the maintenance of a cancer stem
cell state. POSTN expression was increased in numerous basal-like breast
cancer cell lines that contain an expanded CSC population, as well as in
cells grown as mammospheres and in the CD44+/CD24- fraction of tumor
cells. Furthermore, CSC-like lines displayed increased surface levels of
the alpha-v beta-3 integrin heterodimer, a known receptor for POSTN,
suggesting that hyperactivation of a POSTN signaling axis could
potentially regulate the CSC state. Using stable cell lines expressing an
shRNA directed at POSTN we have found that POSTN is required for
efficient mammosphere formation and for the maintenance of an
ALDH-positive CSC population. In line with this, we found these cells had
impaired Erk and Wnt signaling and expressed less IL-6 and IL-8, known
regulators of CSCs. Furthermore, high POSTN expression correlates with a
worse clinical prognosis in basal-like breast cancer patients. Therefore,
we suggest that POSTN signaling through integrin receptors may enrich for
highly tumorigenic breast CSCs in a subset of basal-like tumors, leading
to aggressive and recurrent malignancies. More broadly, our results imply
that a supportive tumor niche can be established and maintained by cancer
cells, and raises the possibility of targeting components of this
extracellular environment to eradicate breast CSCs.

