Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of Snail is associated with lymph node metastasis
and poor prognosis in patients with gastric cancer.


Background: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a significant
role in tumor progression and invasion. Snail is a known regulator of EMT
in various malignant tumors. This study investigated the role of Snail in
gastric cancer.Methods: We examined the effects of silenced or
overexpressed Snail using lenti-viral constructs in gastric cancer cells.
Immunohistochemical analysis of tissue microarrays from 314 patients with
gastric adenocarcinoma (GC) was used to determine Snail's
clinicopathological and prognostic significance. Differential gene
expression in 45 GC specimens with Snail overexpression was investigated
using cDNA microarray analysis.Results: Silencing of Snail by shRNA
decreased invasion and migration in GC cell lines. Conversely, Snail
overexpression increased invasion and migration of gastric cancer cells,
in line with increased VEGF and MMP11. Snail overexpression (75% positive
nuclear staining) was also significantly associated with tumor
progression (P Background: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays
a significant role in tumor progression and invasion. Snail is a known
regulator of EMT in various malignant tumors. This study investigated the
role of Snail in gastric cancer.Methods: We examined the effects of
silenced or overexpressed Snail using lenti-viral constructs in gastric
cancer cells. Immunohistochemical analysis of tissue microarrays from 314
patients with gastric adenocarcinoma (GC) was used to determine Snail's
clinicopathological and prognostic significance. Differential gene
expression in 45 GC specimens with Snail overexpression was investigated
using cDNA microarray analysis.Results: Silencing of Snail by shRNA
decreased invasion and migration in GC cell lines. Conversely, Snail
overexpression increased invasion and migration of gastric cancer cells,
in line with increased VEGF and MMP11. Snail overexpression (75% positive
nuclear staining) was also significantly associated with tumor
progression (P < 0.001), lymph node metastases (P = 0.002),
lymphovascular invasion (P = 0.002), and perineural invasion (P = 0.002)
in the 314 GC patients, and with shorter survival (P = 0.023). cDNA
microarray analysis revealed 213 differentially expressed genes in GC
tissues with Snail overexpression, including genes related to metastasis
and invasion.Conclusion: Snail significantly affects
invasiveness/migratory ability of GCs, and may also be used as a
predictive biomarker for prognosis or aggressiveness of GCs.

