Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the tyrosine kinase receptor Axl blocks cell
invasion and promotes apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells.


Pancreatic cancer is virtually a uniformly lethal disease and a better
understanding of the molecular basis of this malignancy is needed to
discover new ways to prevent or treat this deadly disease. A central
feature of malignant cells is their ability to disseminate from the
primary tumor and establish local and distant metastases. In most cases,
cancer patients with localized disease have significantly better
prognosis than those with metastatic tumors and the majority of cancer
mortality is associated with metastatic disease rather than the primary
tumor. The receptor tyrosine kinase Axl is overexpressed in over 50% of
pancreatic cancers and expression of Axl in these cancers is highly
associated with a poor prognostic outcome for patients. Axl is a TAM
family receptor tyrosine kinase involved in multiple aspects of
tumorigenesis. Increased expression of Axl is associated with increased
oncogenic transformation, cell survival, proliferation, migration,
angiogenesis, and cellular adhesion. The known ligand for Axl is the
Growth Arrest Specific Gene-6 (Gas6) protein and it's binding to Axl
leads to Axl autophosphorylation and activation of downstream signaling
pathways including MAPK and PI3K/Akt pathways. We discovered and
developed a small molecule Axl kinase inhibitor, HCI-2084, and explored
it for the effectiveness of targeting the Axl kinase in cell-based models
of pancreatic cancer. HCI-2084 is a
2-((2,5-substitutedpyrimidin-4-yl)amino)-N,N-dimethyl benzene sulfonamide
that has low nanomolar (IC50 = 12 nM) activity against the Axl kinase in
a biochemical assays. In further biochemical evaluation, HCI-2084 was
shown to inhibit the entire TAM family of kinases (IC50 Axl = 12 nM; IC50
Mer = 60 nM; Tyro3 = 71% inhibition at 200 nM). HCI-2084 inhibits a small
number of additional kinases when screened in a kinase panel of over 500
kinases and has demonstrated an ADMET profile suggesting it may be a
potential clinical candidate. In cell proliferation assays, HCI-2084
significantly inhibited pancreatic cancer cell growth at concentrations
as low as 30 nM. In pharmacodynamic assays, HCI-2084 dramatically
inhibited Akt signaling (pAKT S473) downstream of GAS6 stimulation in
pancreatic cancer cell lines. Consistent with the known function of Axl,
HCI-2084 inhibited Gas6-induced migration and invasion of pancreatic
cancer cells in vitro and potently induces apoptosis. Mechanistically,
HCI-2084 decreases the expression of genes involved in
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) and induces cells to take on more
epithelial phenotypes. HCI-2084 also significantly inhibited the growth
of pancreatic cancer cell lines grown in xenograft tumor mouse model and
taken together, these results suggest Axl is a potential therapeutic
target in pancreatic cancer and that HCI-2084 is a potential agent treat
this disease.

