Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deletion of bone morphogenetic protein receptor 1A impairs mammary
gland development and tumor formation.


Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMPs) are secreted cytokines/growth factors
belonging to the Transforming Growth Factor (TGF) superfamily. BMP
ligands have recently been shown to be overexpressed in human breast
cancers. Normal breast and cancers display active BMP signaling as
indicated by phosphorylated Smads 1, 5 and 8. BMP signaling is a known
morphogen, responsible for differentiation of many cell types. This led
us to hypothesize that BMP signaling may be required for development of
the mammary gland and tumors. We first utilized the mammary epithelial
specific Cre recombinase driven by the MMTV promoter to remove
conditionally floxed BMPR1a alleles. We found that mice lacking BMPR1a
(cKO) had significant reduction in epithelial branching morphogenesis
within the mammary gland. We further analyzed BMPR1a loss in lactating
mice using WAP promoter driven Cre, which demonstrated a loss of milk
production. We next combined the MMTV.PyVmT oncogene with mice lacking
BMPR1a and found this deletion resulted in delayed tumor onset and
extended survival significantly (p-value Bone Morphogenetic Proteins
(BMPs) are secreted cytokines/growth factors belonging to the
Transforming Growth Factor (TGF) superfamily. BMP ligands have recently
been shown to be overexpressed in human breast cancers. Normal breast and
cancers display active BMP signaling as indicated by phosphorylated Smads
1, 5 and 8. BMP signaling is a known morphogen, responsible for
differentiation of many cell types. This led us to hypothesize that BMP
signaling may be required for development of the mammary gland and
tumors. We first utilized the mammary epithelial specific Cre recombinase
driven by the MMTV promoter to remove conditionally floxed BMPR1a
alleles. We found that mice lacking BMPR1a (cKO) had significant
reduction in epithelial branching morphogenesis within the mammary gland.
We further analyzed BMPR1a loss in lactating mice using WAP promoter
driven Cre, which demonstrated a loss of milk production. We next
combined the MMTV.PyVmT oncogene with mice lacking BMPR1a and found this
deletion resulted in delayed tumor onset and extended survival
significantly (p-value <.001). Furthering these studies, we investigated
the morphology of BMPR1a deleted tumors and found a striking loss of
luminal characteristics combined with a stromal desmoplasia.
Immunofluorescence staining revealed that cKO tumors co-expressed
cytokeratins and mesenchymal cell markers such as Vimentin. This
indicated that epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT) like changes were
occurring upon BMPR1a deletion. We performed a DNA microarray on these
tumors and found unique changes, which supported a loss of mammary gland
differentiation and resulted in EMT-like activation. We next examined
human breast tumor cell lines that previously reported the molecular
signature response to BMP stimulation and compared them to primary human
mammary epithelial cells (HMEC). Comparing signatures, we found that BMP4
stimulation induced unique genes in HMECs compared to tumor cells.
Interestingly, transcriptional targets that were absent from tumors and
found in normal HMECs included differentiation related genes. These
results suggest that BMP signaling is critically deregulated in tumors.
In conclusion, we found that loss of the BMP pathway restricts mammary
gland development and impairs tumor formation and progression.

