Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reprogramming tumor associated macrophages toward an anti-tumor
phenotype by targeting the NF-B pathway using novel targeted
nanotherapeutics.


Tumor associated macrophages (TAMs) can modify the tumor microenvironment
to create an inflammatory, pro-tumor niche. Activation of the NF-B
pathway has been implicated in creating a pro-tumor phenotype in TAMs.
Manipulation of TAM phenotype is a new approach to engage anticancer
immunity, but has been limited by a lack of methods capable of
therapeutic delivery to TAMs in vivo. We have successfully utilized
mannosylated polymer nanoparticles capable of disrupting the endosomal
compartment to deliver siRNA for RNAi of NF-B proteins into bone marrow
derived macrophages (BMDMs) derived from transgenic mice with a
GFP/Luciferase reporter of NF-B activity (NGL). In in vitro studies, the
nanoparticles are comparable to commercial transfection agents using both
gene and protein level readouts for knockdown. The transfection protocol
utilizing these novel vehicles has been optimized with respect to
transfection time, siRNA dose, and siRNA:polymer ratio with the intent to
inform in vivo experiments. The presence of serum does not significantly
affect transfection efficiency in vitro, presumably due to an almost
neutral particle surface charge. Preliminary in vivo studies have
revealed no significant particle toxicity. Delivering siRNA specific to
the p52/p100 protein in the alternative pathway achieves knockdown of
total NF-B activity by approximately 80% in NGL BMDMs stimulated by TNF-.
By targeting proteins in the classical pathway, we have decreased total
NF-B activity by approximately 50% in the same model. While inhibition of
NF-B activity may be desirable in some contexts, we recently reported
that induced activation of NF-B in macrophages can result in anti-tumor
activity. We have delivered a liposomal formulation of muramyl tripeptide
(Mifamurtide), a synthetic derivative of a bacterial cell wall peptide
and an activator of macrophages, to NGL BMDMs. Mifamurtide delivery
increases both NF-B activity, and the production of reactive oxygen
species, indicating a preliminary mechanistic explanation for the
therapeutic potential of NF-B activation. Mifamurtide is used clinically
in the European Union to treat osteosarcoma, potentially providing an
avenue for rapid clinical translation of NF-B modulating therapy for
other tumor types. However, Mifamurtide has the potential to activate
multiple pathways simultaneously. A more elegant approach would be to
target knockdown of an NF-B inhibitor to macrophages to mediate pathway
specific activation. In preliminary studies we have demonstrated the
ability to increase total NF-B activity by treating NGL macrophages with
nanoparticles carrying siRNA against the IB inhibitor of NF-B. Our data
provides evidence that delivering siRNA specifically to macrophages to
modulate their functions using nanoparticles has potential as a
therapeutic approach to cancer treatment.

