Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) antagonist attenuates cell
motility of human endometrial cancer by down-regulating Twist and
N-Cadherin expression.


Introduction :More than 25% of patients diagnosed with endometrial
carcinoma have an invasive primary cancer accompanied by metastases. GHRH
is secreted by the hypothalamus and stimulates the synthesis and
secretion of GH from the pituitary. The expression of GHRH and its
receptors has been demonstrated in peripheral tissues. In recent years,
many antagonistic analogs of GHRH were developed. GHRH antagonists have
effects on tumor cells, but the underlying molecular mechanism is not
well known. Although Twist and N-Cadherin play important roles in cancer
cell motility, it is not established whether Twist and N-Cadherin are
required for GHRH antagonists-attenuated cell motility on endometrial
cancer cells. In the present study, we examined the action of GHRH
antagonist-attenuated cell motility and the mechanisms of the action in
endometrial cancer.Methods and Materials :Endometrial cancer cell line
Ishikawa and ECC-1 were derived from an endometrial adenocarcinoma. GHRH
antagonist MIA-602 was synthesized by solid phase methods. Cell motility
was estimated by invasion and migration assay. Immunoblot analysis and
RT-PCR were performed to investigate the expression of GHRH receptor,
GHRH, and the effects of GHRH antagonist in Twist and N-Cadherin. Human
GHRH receptor siRNA was used to knock down the expression of GHRH
receptor for elucidating the mechanisms of GHRH antagonist action.Results
:The GHRH receptor was expressed in human endometrial cancer cells. The
GHRH antagonist attenuated cell motility in a dose-dependent manner. GHRH
antagonist-attenuated cell motility was restored in cells pretreated with
GHRH receptor siRNA. GHRH antagonist suppressed Twist and N-Cadherin
signaling. Knockdown of GHRH receptor with siRNA recovered the expression
of Twist and N-Cadherin signaling.ConclusionsThese results demonstrate
that the GHRH antagonist suppressed the cell motility of human
endometrial cancer through the GHRH receptor and the down-regulation of
Twist and N-Cadherin. Our findings represent a new concept regarding the
mechanisms of GHRH antagonist-suppressed cell motility in human
endometrial cancer, suggesting the possibility of GHRH antagonist as a
potential therapeutic intervention for the treatment of human endometrial
cancer.Citation Format: Hsien-Ming Wu, Andrew V. Schally, Peter C.K.
Leung. Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) antagonist attenuates cell
motility of human endometrial cancer by down-regulating Twist and
N-Cadherin expression. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 4769. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4769

