Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor suppressor C/EBPdelta promotes hypoxia-induced EMT and
expression of stem cell markers through inhibition of FBXW7: Implications
for mammary tumor metastasis.


The transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (C/EBP)
exhibits tumor-suppressor like-qualities such as downregulation of cyclin
D1, and promotion of growth arrest and apoptosis. However, using a mouse
model of mammary tumorigenesis (MMTV-Neu), we had found that C/EBP has
dual functions. C/EBP suppresses primary tumor incidence while also
augmenting metastatic progression. The pro-metastatic function of C/EBP
can be correlated with a role in hypoxia adaptation and expression of
pro-inflammatory genes and macrophage activation. C/EBP exerts both of
these functions through inhibition of FBXW7, a component of SCF E3
ubiquitin ligase complex, which targets substrates such as c-myc and
Notch for degradation (Balamurugan et al, 2010; Balamurugan et al., under
revision). Hypoxia is believed to promote tumor progression in part by
inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which contributes to
the generation of stem-like cancer cells (CSCs). In the present study, we
found that hypoxia-induced EMT and expression of CSCs markers were
compromised in Cebpd null primary tumor cells and in human breast tumor
cells when C/EBP expression was silenced. On the other hand, silencing of
the C/EBP-repressed gene FBXW7 was sufficient to induce a
mesenchymal-like phenotype. Loss of FBXW7 has been shown to promote
acquisition of stemness. In line with this notion, we found that
overexpression of FBXW7 in the breast tumor cell line MDA-MB-468 reduced
expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (Aldh1), C/EBP and the active form
of NOTCH (NICD). Together, these data suggest that C/EBP augments -
whereas its target FBXW7 prevents - EMT and breast cancer stem cell
development, which may be an additional mechanism by which C/EBP promotes
metastatic progression. Our current investigations are aimed at
understanding how the different functions of C/EBP are integrated
depending on cellular environment and context that results in its tumor
promoting function despite its tumor suppressor role.

