Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histology-directed lipid MALDI MS profiling can distinguish
prostate cancer from normal epithelium.


Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS)
is demonstrated to be useful for profiling of common solid tumors. In
this approach, mass spectra are obtained from discrete locations on 10
m-thick cryosection tissue, guided by H&E-stained top slide. To determine
if a lipid signature obtained from tissue samples could be found to
assist with diagnosis, frozen surgical samples collected from 7 prostate
cancer patients and 9 adjacent normal tissue samples were analyzed using
matrix (DHB/CHCA)-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass
spectrometry (MS). When leave-one-out cross validation was performed
using support vector machine, permutation p value for the cross-validated
misclassification rate was statistically significant (p=0.04), suggesting
that lipid profiles are clearly different between prostate cancer and
adjacent normal tissue samples. One of the most striking difference
between prostate cancer and normal tissue is the phosphatidylcholine (PC)
32:1 (m/z 798.6) overexpression (p=0.007, tumor/normal=2.4). In order to
identify molecular mechanisms of PC 32:1 overexpression in prostate
cancers, we performed immunohistochemical analyses for metabolic enzymes
responsible for phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis. Prostate cancers
overexpress choline kinases and phosphate cytidylyltransferases, known
oncogenes which generate phosphatidylcholines, compared with adjacent
normal tissue samples. Thus, lipid MALDI MS analysis captures a global
alteration in lipid profile of prostate cancer tissue, potentially
distinguishing cancerous epithelium from normal epithelium. To our
knowledge, this study is the first comprehensive lipid profiling study in
prostate cancer. This histology-directed MALDI MS approach enables rapid
and sensitive identification of discriminatory lipids in cancerous
epithelium of prostate cancers, even those with infiltrative growth.We
are in the process of a large sample set (Supported by Korean Ministry of
Education, Science, and Technology Grant 2012K001506).Citation Format:
Seungho Choi, Jun Won Park, Weon Seo Park, Hark Kyun Kim, Kang Hyun Lee.
Histology-directed lipid MALDI MS profiling can distinguish prostate
cancer from normal epithelium. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2506. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2506

