Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sample specific outlier kinase expression identified by RNA-Seq
provide targets for precision therapy.


Protein kinases represent a most effective class of therapeutic targets
in cancer cells, and potent inhibitors of oncogenic kinases including
ABL, AKT, ALK, AURKs, BRAF, CDKs, EGFR, ERBB2, FGFRs, KIT, MAPKs, MET,
PIK3CA, PLKs, RET, SRC, S6Ks, and VEGFR are in clinical use, trials, or
development. Presence of activating mutations, gene fusions or copy
number amplification of many of these kinases predict responsiveness to
specific inhibitors, for example, imatinib for BCR-ABL-positive chronic
myeloid leukemia, trastuzumab and lapatinib for ERBB2-amplified breast
cancers, gefitinib for lung cancers with kinase domain mutations in EGFR,
and crizotinib for lung cancers with ALK gene fusions. However, tumors
with defined kinase aberrations represent a very small proportion of all
cancers, and we hypothesize that potentially most, if not all, cancers
are dependent on specific kinases, and that Outlier Expression of
specific kinases in individual samples may be indicative of selection
during clonal evolution, and thus may represent a therapeutic avenue. To
explore this hypothesis, we analyzed RNA-sequencing data from a
compendium of 482 cancer and benign samples belonging to 25 different
tissue types to define sample-specific kinome expression profiles.
Comparing the expression of kinases within a sample and across sample
sets, we identified distinct outlier kinases in individual samples,
defined as genes showing the highest statistically significant levels of
absolute and differential expression. Frequently observed outlier kinases
included known therapeutic targets like ERBB2 and FGFR4 in breast cancer,
distinct from MET, AKT2, and PLK2 in pancreatic cancer. Outlier kinases
imparted sample-specific dependencies in various cell lines as assessed
by siRNA knockdown or pharmacologic inhibition in vitro and in vivo.
Outlier expression of polo-like kinases (PLKs) observed in a subset of
KRAS-dependent pancreatic cancer cell lines conferred increased
sensitivity to the PLK inhibitor BI 6727. Together, our results suggest
that outlier kinases represent effective personalized therapeutic targets
that are readily identifiable through RNA-sequencing of tumors. Next, to
help translate these observations into treatment options, we are
attempting to establish 3D tumoroid cultures from tumor samples that can
be used to optimize combinations of therapeutics including outlier kinase
inhibitors.

