Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Onco Vasculomics(tm): A 3-d tumor vasculature assessment
methodology for quantifying mechanism and efficacy of discovery-stage
anti-cancer compounds.


Conventional methods for evaluating tumor vasculature, such as
microvessel density, do not capture critical 3-dimensional properties
such as their spatial distribution, tortuosity, and distribution of
different vessel sizes on a population basis. Such parameters are
critical for understanding the biological effects of agents targeting
tumor vasculature by different mechanisms. To address this critical unmet
need, we developed a novel system platform which enables high-resolution
3-D, structural microvascular-pattern analysis and biomarker mining in
support of preclinical and translational oncology discovery space. The
OncoVasculomics platform captures, reconstructs, and then automatically
and quantitatively analyzes microvascular structures and patterns
indicative of response to targeted drug therapy.Methods: The effect of
two different anti-angiogenic therapeutic agents, bevacizumab and
sunitinib, were assessed using OncoVasculomicsTM platform in Colo205
human colorectal cancer xenograft model. Animals bearing 200 mm3 sized
tumors were treated for 7 days either with the appropriate vehicle,
bevacizumab at 5 mg/kg (i.p. daily) or sunitinib at 30 mg/kg (p.o.
daily). Mice were then systemically perfused with Mercox, the tissue was
macerated and the resulting vascular tumor cast was imaged using a
microCT. 3-dimensional tumor vascular tree was derived using proprietary
segmentation and reconstruction software. OncoVasculomicsTM vascular
mining software was then used to derive various vascular morphology
parameters.Results: Mean tumor sizes did not significantly differ between
the Bevacizumab, sutent or vehicle treatment groups at the end of the
experiment. Whole tumor 3D micro vessel density (MVD) was similar between
the treatment groups: vehicle (bevacizumab) 2.7+/-0.6 % of total tumor
volume, bevacizumab 2.2+/-0.4%, vehicle (sunitinib) 2.9+/-0.3% and
sunitinib 2.5+/-0.3%. Bevacizumab and sunitinib treatments resulted in
20% and 16% decrease in total tumor MVD, respectively. Bevacizumab
treatment resulted in 8.2 % cold spot or low vascular density region
generation. In contrast, sunitinib was 5-fold more efficient in
generating cold spots at a rate of 37% (sunitinib vs. vehicle tumors).
Bevacizumab's anti-vascular activity targeted vessels of 28 um in
diameter and larger. However, the majority of sunitinib's activity had
effect on vessels 21-35 um in diameter.This study demonstrates that a
comprehensive 3d OncoVasculomic analysis may provide important
mechanistic and efficacy insights into the vascular effects of different
classes of drugs targeting tumor vasculature.

