Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipoprotein lipase binds to the surface of cancer cells and
facilitates uptake of lipoproteins.


We examined the hypothesis that some cancer cells have surface-bound
lipoprotein lipase (LPL), and we postulate that this membrane-bound LPL
facilitates the acquisition of fatty acids (FA) from circulating
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. This deployment of the enzyme links the
growth of tumors to dietary fat.Background: Recent studies have explored
the association of dietary fat and obesity with increased incidence and
aggressiveness of certain cancers. Tumor cells require FA for synthesis
of membranes and thus for growth. Cells can acquire lipids through de
novo synthesis from glucose and glutamine using fatty acid synthase
(FASN) or by acquisition of pre-formed FA using LPL. LPL is a secreted
enzyme synthesized by some cancer cell lines and all tumors examined to
date (n = 181). It facilitates the uptake of very low density
lipoproteins (VLDLs) by extracellular hydrolysis of triglyceride-rich
particles such as VLDLs in the circulation or lipoprotein endocytosis
followed by intracellular hydrolysis. In previous work, we demonstrated a
heparin-releasable pool of LPL, consistent with tumor cell
surface-associated LPL binding to a heparan sulfate proteoglycan
(HSPG).Methods: We used immunocytochemistry and flow cytometry to
demonstrate LPL on the surface of HeLa, BT474 and DU4475 breast cancer,
and LiSa-2 liposarcoma cells. Confocal microscopy with
fluorophore-labeled VLDLs enabled us to follow the endocytosis of
VLDLs.Results: We have demonstrated that cancer cells can acquire
lipoprotein particles (VLDLs) from their environment by endocytosis, and
that this is mediated by cell-surface LPL bound to a specific HSPG motif.
Major findings include:1) Cell surface LPL is detectable by
immunocytochemistry and flow cytometry.2) The binding of LPL to the cell
surface is abrogated by heparin.3) LPL binding is likewise disrupted by
NS4F5, a novel antibody to the specific proteoglycan motif which binds
LPL to the surface of vascular endothelial cells.4) Cancer cells
endocytose VLDL particles, and this is abrogated by heparin or NS4F5.5)
VLDL particles accelerate the growth of LPL-expressing cancer
cells.Conclusions: This work demonstrates of the use of endocytosis for
the acquisition of diet-derived FA by cancer cells, and that this is
mediated by cell-surface LPL bound to a specific HSPG motif. Thus
endocytosis is a new mechanistic link between dietary lipoproteins and
tumor cell growth. Further, these findings suggest that abrogation of LPL
binding to the cell surface presents an opportunity for non-cytotoxic,
therapeutic intervention.This work was supported by a grant from the
Sarcoma Foundation of America (NBK) and a Prouty grant from Norris Cotton
Cancer Center (WBK) and NIH Grant RO1CA126618 (WBK).

