Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The influence of gemcitabine and its metabolites on cancer cell
metabolism.


The nucleoside analogue gemcitabine is marketed for patients with locally
advanced or metastatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas as single agent and
first-line treatment. In addition, it is widely used for the treatment of
various carcinomas and approved by the FDA for several combination
treatments. However, many patients develop gemcitabine-resistant tumor
cells. This phenomenon is of special concern in pancreatic cancers, as
these tumors are known to harbor more than 60 different mutations. In
addition, gemcitabine is rapidly metabolized upon entry into the cells,
leading to the development of drug metabolites (mono-, di-,
tri-phosphates, deaminated and subsequently phosphorylated metabolites,
etc.) with minimal differences in molecular mass and partly hydrophilic
properties. As a result, quantitative analysis - a prerequisite for
understanding the metabolism and the mechanism of action - is extremely
difficult. This poses enormous challenges for overcoming gemcitabine
resistance and for the development of novel active pharmaceutical
ingredients addressing other, additional targets in pancreatic and other
cancers. Therefore, pharmaceutical companies need more accurate data on
how is gemcitabine metabolized, whether various subpopulations of
patients react differently to the drug and on which biomarkers associated
with drug sensitivity and/or resistances exist.Here, we report a new
LC-MS/MS method development at Metanomics Health that allows for the
first time to accurately assess and quantify the entire range of
gemcitabine metabolites. The new method works in high-throughput mode
analyzing samples from full blood as well as various cells and tissue in
respect to their response to gemcitabine and its derivatives. The
analytical platform also includes about 90 key energy metabolites from
glycolysis and TCA pathways, nucleobases, amino acids, co-enzymes, etc.
This comprehensive analysis covering the key metabolites involved in
cancer metabolism can be performed from a single sample in one run and in
high-throughput mode.The detection and in-depth analysis of gemcitabine
and its metabolites therefore provides an invaluable basis for a better
understanding of gemcitabine's self-potentiation mechanisms, its
mechanisms of action, as well as mechanisms that lead to the inactivation
of gemcitabine or to gemcitabine-mediated activation of treatment
resistance. Subsequently, this might support the development of new
combination therapies. To determine remaining gemcitabine activity in
patients in the long run, metabolite profiling seems a sagacious next
step. This approach may support the decision for the appropriate timing
of the next treatment dose, which likely contributes to saving costs,
reducing side-effects and even slowing down the process of gemcitabine
resistance development.

