Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GRM1 over-expression in melanoma cells promotes microvesicle
formation which functions in stimulating angiogenesis.


Our group has reported that metabotropic glutamate receptor 1 (GRM1) as
an oncogene and a potential therapeutic target for melanoma. More than
60% of human melanoma expresses GRM1, while normal melanocytes do not. In
a Phase-0 trial of riluzole (an oral inhibitor of GRM1) in patients with
advanced melanoma we showed suppression of the PI3K/AKT and MAPK pathways
in melanoma specimens in 34% of the patients.Our group found that
enhanced expression of GRM1 in a subclone of a melanoma cell line
(UACC903) that normally expresses low levels of GRM1 stimulated
angiogenesis via activation of the AKT-mTOR-HIF1-IL8, VEGF signaling
pathway. Increasing GRM1 expression promoted membrane blebbing (a
phenomenon that appears to lead to microvesicle formation) and riluzole
treatment inhibited this effect. Suppression of GRM1 expression using an
inducible siRNA construct inhibits the blebbing phenomena and
microvesicle formation. Therefore, we hypothesize that GRM1 expression
promotes microvesicle formation that may be involved in stimulating
angiogenesis and tumor progression. Through electron-microscope and flow
cytometry analysis, we have confirmed that increased GRM1 expression
enhanced microvesicle secretion into the medium in cell culture and that
knocking down GRM1 expression significantly reduced the quantity of
microvesicle secretion. Furthermore, intra-tumor injection of collected
microvesicles into two different melanoma xenograft tumors (UACC903 and
C8161) demonstrated that the microvesicles formed from high GRM1
expressing cells promoted tumor growth and angiogenesis. We also showed
that microvesicles from high GRM1 expressing cells increased endothelial
cell proliferation exhibited measured using a BrdU incorporation
assay.Our preliminary data demonstrate that GRM1 expression promotes
microvesicle formation and that these microvesicles are associated with
angiogenesis. Research on the molecular events associated with the
phenomenon is ongoing.

