Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Different change of LEF1/TCFs family members in colorectal
carcinogenesis.


Wnt/-catenin pathway is activated in many cancers, especially colorectal
carcinoma (CRC). LEF1/TCFs family, which includes LEF1, TCF7(TCF1),
TCF7L1(TCF3) and TCF7L2(TCF4), are required for -catenin-induced
transcription of target genes which are widely involved in the
carcinogenesis. The aims of our study were to investigate the change of
the members of LEF1/TCFs family in chronic inflammation associated
colorectal carcinogenesis and the possible roles in carcinogenesis.
Chronic inflammation-associated CRC was induced with the AOM-DSS mouse
model. Gene expression array experiment was performed with the colonic
tissue samples which were collected at different time points during the
carcinogenesis. Data analysis strongly indicated that Wnt/-catenin
pathway was activated in chronic inflammation-related colorectal
carcinogenesis. However, the members of LEF1/TCFs family showed different
changes. The mRNA levels of LEF1 and TCF1 increased while the mRNA levels
of TCF3 and TCF4 decreased with the formation of CRC, which were
confirmed with real-time PCR. Although some of Wnt target genes were
significantly up-regulated, such as MMP7 and Axin2, some were
down-regulated, such as Nrcam. Most importantly, the members of LEF1/TCFs
family showed the same expression profile in the human samples from
normal colon, low grade adenoma, high grade adenoma and CRC. But the mRNA
levels of the members were not correlated with the grade of CRC.
Moreover, almost all of the target genes up-regulated in AOM-DSS model
also increased in human CRC. Finally, prognosis analysis showed that
up-regulation of LEF1, TCF1 and corresponding target genes were
correlated with higher survival rate (p=0.0068). TCF3, TCF4 and the
target genes down-regulated in AOM-DSS model were correlated with
disease-free survival rate (p=0.03). Taken together, the members of
LEF1/TCFs family changed differently in CRC independent of the status of
inflammation. Members of LEF1/TCFs family combined with target genes may
be potential prognostic biomarkers for CRC.

