Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The search for the stem cells of human and canine osteosarcoma:
evaluation of stemness markers and sarcosphere formation.


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary bone tumor of both humans
and dogs. The high recurrence rate, resistance to chemotherapy and
radiotherapy indicate that novel approaches to treatment are needed. In
various cancers, a small population of cells with capacity for
self-renewal, tumor growth and metastasis have been identified and
designated cancer stem cells, CSCs. Identification and effective
targeting of CSCs are necessary for successful treatment of these
cancers. The heterogeneous cell types of OS suggest the involvement of
CSCs in OS. In some studies, the ability to form spheres in semi-solid
media has been proposed as a characteristic of CSCs and in others, the
expression of the general stemness markers such as OCT4 has been proposed
as a major phenotype of the CSCs. In this study, we evaluated the
sarcosphere forming fraction of two cell lines, D17 and SAOS2, a canine
and a human OS cell line, respectively. Both D17 and SAOS2 cells were
transfected with an OCT4-YFP (yellow florescent protein) reporter
construct. The YFP positive and negative cell fractions were isolated
from both cell lines and evaluated for sarcosphere forming ability. In
addition, expression of OCT4 and other stemness markers, NANOG and SOX2
were evaluated. All cells were characterized for their tumorigenic
potential in vitro, including invasion through Matrigel, as well as for
their ability to form sarcospheres. Our data show that OCT4 positive
cells were more invasive than negative subsets in both D17 and SAOS2 cell
lines. In addition, while both subsets were able to form spheres, OCT4
positive cells formed larger spheres than negative cells. These findings
further highlight the heterogeneity of the osteosarcoma tumor cells, and
suggest that neither sarcosphere formation nor OCT4 expression are
sufficient to define the CSCs in either canine and human OS. Further
studies incorporating other markers are ongoing to identify and
characterize the CSCs in OS.

