Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cocaine enhances HIV-1 integration by modulating the epigenetic
signatures of CD4+ T cells.


Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV-1) has claimed the lives of over 25
million people. Illicit drug use serves as a co-factor for HIV/AIDS.
Cocaine, a commonly used drug among HIV-1 positive individuals, serves as
a cofactor for HIV-1 infection and progression to acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Previous studies suggest that cocaine
increases HIV-1 replication in cell cultures, peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and animal models. However, the mechanism by
which cocaine enhances HIV-1 replication in CD4+ T cells remains largely
unknown. During HIV-1 replication, the viral genome is reverse
transcribed into a double stranded DNA (dsDNA) by HIV-1 reverse
transcriptase (RT). This viral dsDNA is transported into the nucleus in
the form of a pre-integration complex (PICs) that contains the viral
integrase (IN) and other viral and cellular proteins. Integration is a
critical step in the HIV-1 life cycle. The main objective of this study
is to examine the effects of cocaine on HIV-1 integration by its
modulation of epigenetic signatures of CD4+ T cells. However, there are
no studies on cocaine-induced integration in CD4+ T cells which serves as
the main targets for HIV-1 replication in vivo. A correlation between DNA
methylation and HIV-1 integration is yet to be demonstrated biochemically
and mechanistic information is limited. Experimental strategy for in
vitro study involves the production of infectious HIV-1 NL4.3 virus,
isolation of HIV-1 PICs from SupT1 lymphoma infected cells and carrying
out integration assay. Our preliminary data demonstrates cocaine and DNA
demethylating agent (5-aza-2-deoxycytidine) both enhance HIV-1
integration. The isolated PICs are active in integrating viral DNA into
target DNA and integration was more efficient in unmethylated DNA than
methylated DNA. To confirm integration activity, we performed
quantitative nested PCR analysis using primers specific to the target and
viral DNA. We propose that results from this project will help us better
understand the role of cocaine in HIV-integration by modulating the
epigenetic signatures of CD4+ T cells. Furthermore, understanding the
molecular details of HIV-1 integration will aid in the discovery of novel
targets that can synergize with integrase inhibitors as part of an
approach to cure HIV/AIDS.*Amma Addai is supported by T32 grant
#2T32H007735-17 fromNIH/NHLBI to Dr. S. E. Adunyah

