Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing of JAM-A inhibits cell growth through cell cycle arrest
in endometrial cancer.


Endometrial cancer is one of the most common malignancies of the female
genital tract. The identification of proteins for prognostic assessment
and therapeutic targets in this disease is of significant clinical
importance. We have previously reported a novel proteomic method for
discovering potential therapeutic targets in endometrial cancer. We used
a biotinylation-based approach for cell-surface protein enrichment
combined with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation
(iTRAQ) technology using nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry analysis to identify specifically overexpressed proteins in
endometrial cancer cells compared with normal endometrial cells. We
identified a total of 272 proteins, including 11 plasma membrane
proteins, whose expression was increased more than twofold in at least
four of seven endometrial cancer cell lines compared with a normal
endometrial cell line. In addition to the identification of previously
reported tumor antigens such as NCAML1, we also identified JAM-A as a
novel tumor antigen in endometrial cancer by this methodology. JAM-A is a
member of the immunoglobulin superfamily found at intercellular junctions
of endothelial cells and epithelial cells. Some investigators have
studied the role of JAM-A in carcinogenesis. However, the role of JAM-A
in tumor growth and dissemination is still a debated issue. In this
study, our goal is to investigate the role of JAM-A in tumor growth as
well as the potential value in cancer therapeutic target.To confirm the
altered expression of JAM-A in endometrial cancer, we performed flow
cytometry and western blotting analysis using one immortalized normal
endometrial cells (EM-E6/E7/TERT) and nine endometrial cancer cell lines
(HEC-1, HEC-1A, HEC-6, HEC-88nu, HEC-108, HEC-116, SNG-II, and SNG-M).
Protein expression of JAM-A was not detected in normal endometrial cells.
In contrast, a considerably higher level of JAM-A expression was detected
in all the nine endometrial cancer cell lines. Furthermore, to test the
functional significance of JAM-A in endometrial cancer cell
proliferation, the effect of JAM-A siRNA treatment was evaluated using
WST-8 assay. Compared with non-target siRNA control, siRNA targeting
JAM-A dramatically inhibits endometrial cancer cell proliferation. Flow
cytometry with propidium iodide-staining revealed that JAM-A siRNA
treatment induces cell cycle arrest in endometrial cancer cells. Taken
together, our findings suggest that JAM-A may play a regulatory role in
proliferation of endometrial cancer cells. Further studies are underway
to identify the signal transduction pathway involved in JAM-A siRNA
induced growth inhibition.

