Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mTOR inhibition is required for conversion of invariant NKT cells
into immunosuppressive regulatory cells.


Invariant Natural Killer T (iNKT) cells recognize glycolipid antigens
presented by the CD1d antigen-presenting molecule. They have been shown
to play an important role in various types of immune responses, including
antitumor immune responses. Upon activation with -galactosylceramide
(-GalCer) iNKT cells can produce different kinds of cytokines, like IFN-,
resulting in activation of other T cell subsets. However, production of
IL-2 by iNKT cells has been shown to contribute to the expansion of
immunosuppressive regulatory T cells (Tregs). Although Tregs are
critically dependent on the X-chromosome encoded FoxP3 gene, it is also
known that FoxP3 is expressed in conventional T cells upon activation.
Recently it was reported that freshly isolated iNKT cells can express
FoxP3 upon stimulation with TGF- and acquire suppressive capacities in
the presence of rapamycin. In addition, IL-10 has been reported to
stimulate iNKT cells resulting in CD25 upregulation and proliferation.In
order to assess whether it is possible to induce FoxP3 expression and
suppressive capacities in iNKT cell lines, iNKT cell lines were cultured
with IL-10, TGF- and/ or rapamycin. Phenotypic analysis was performed and
upregulation of FoxP3 was seen in all conditions cultured with IL-10 and
rapamycin while, in contrast to a previous report, TGF- was found to
inhibit iNKT cell FoxP3 expression. To investigate whether these FoxP3+
iNKT cells acquired suppressive abilities, they were co-cultured with
CFSE labeled responder cells. These assays showed that while IL10
resulted in a moderate increase in FoxP3 expressing iNKT cells, only iNKT
cultured in the presence of rapamycin were able to suppress responder
cells. Therefore, while IL-10 can enhance FoxP3 expression in
proliferating iNKT cells, rapamycin is required and responsible for the
induction of suppressive function of iNKT cells. As recent evidence
indicates that FoxP3 is differentially localized in subcellular
compartments in suppressive T cells versus activated T cells, we are
currently performing FoxP3 localization experiments to identify different
localization patterns in suppressive vs. non-suppressive FoxP3+ iNKT
cells.With these experiments we show that rapamycin is required for the
induction of suppressive capacities in iNKT cells. Further studies are
required to evaluate the clinical relevance of this modulating effect of
mTOR inhibitors on iNKT cells in the field of transplantation medicine
and anticancer therapies in renal cell carcinoma, breast cancer, and
pancreatic neuroendocrine carcinomas.

