Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of TGF-2 levels in breast milk with breast biopsy
diagnosis.


Background: TGF- isoforms play a dual role in breast carcinogenesis,
acting at early stages as tumor-suppressors and later as tumor-promoters.
TGF- isoforms are expressed in breast tissues and secreted in milk,
suggesting that analysis of levels in milk might have value for
understanding the effect of pregnancy and lactation on breast
carcinogenesis. Data suggest that TGF-2 levels in milk are higher than
TGF-1, show heterogeneity among women, and may vary with psychosocial
stress, maternal immunity, and length of nursing. We assessed whether
TGF-2 levels in milk from each breast were correlated with a history of
prior breast biopsy (biopsied vs. not biopsied) and biopsy
diagnosis.Methods: Fresh breast milk donated by lactating women who had
either undergone or were scheduled for a breast biopsy was shipped on ice
to a central laboratory. Breast cancer risk factors were obtained via
questionnaire and biopsy diagnoses were extracted from pathology reports.
Milk was processed to create cellular-enriched and cellular-depleted
fractions and frozen at -20[]C prior to testing. TGF-2 levels in milk
were analyzed using the Quantikine Human TGF-2 Immunoassay (R&D Systems
DB250) and quantified using the Coomassie Plus (Bradford) Assay (Thermo
Scientific) kits in bilateral samples donated by182 women, including
duplicate samples from 1 woman (n= 366). We compared log transformed
TGF-2 (pg/ml) and TGF-2/total protein ratio (pg/g) levels for biopsied
and non-biopsied breasts using t-tests and ordinary least squares
regressions adjusted for confounders and clustering of observations by
woman.Results: TGF-2 levels ranged 0 - 68,070 pg/ml and total protein
levels ranged 1,558- 36,198 g/ml. The levels of TGF-2 in the biopsied and
non-biopsied breasts were correlated (r2 = 0.64), albeit not
statistically significant. Controlling for mother's attained age, age at
first birth, age of baby (surrogate for length of nursing), number of
live births, time since breast biopsy, and race, did not alter the
finding for TGF-2 or the TGF-2/total protein ratio. But, mean levels of
TGF-2 proteins were highest in milk among women with cancer (9971 pg/ml,
n=16), followed by proliferative lesions with atypia (8842 pg/ml; n=4)
biopsy diagnoses. TGF-2 levels were lower among women with
non-proliferative biopsy diagnoses (4131 pg/ml; n=292) as compared with
those who had proliferative lesions with atypia or cancer (PBackground:
TGF- isoforms play a dual role in breast carcinogenesis, acting at early
stages as tumor-suppressors and later as tumor-promoters. TGF- isoforms
are expressed in breast tissues and secreted in milk, suggesting that
analysis of levels in milk might have value for understanding the effect
of pregnancy and lactation on breast carcinogenesis. Data suggest that
TGF-2 levels in milk are higher than TGF-1, show heterogeneity among
women, and may vary with psychosocial stress, maternal immunity, and
length of nursing. We assessed whether TGF-2 levels in milk from each
breast were correlated with a history of prior breast biopsy (biopsied
vs. not biopsied) and biopsy diagnosis.Methods: Fresh breast milk donated
by lactating women who had either undergone or were scheduled for a
breast biopsy was shipped on ice to a central laboratory. Breast cancer
risk factors were obtained via questionnaire and biopsy diagnoses were
extracted from pathology reports. Milk was processed to create
cellular-enriched and cellular-depleted fractions and frozen at -20[]C
prior to testing. TGF-2 levels in milk were analyzed using the Quantikine
Human TGF-2 Immunoassay (R&D Systems DB250) and quantified using the
Coomassie Plus (Bradford) Assay (Thermo Scientific) kits in bilateral
samples donated by182 women, including duplicate samples from 1 woman (n=
366). We compared log transformed TGF-2 (pg/ml) and TGF-2/total protein
ratio (pg/g) levels for biopsied and non-biopsied breasts using t-tests
and ordinary least squares regressions adjusted for confounders and
clustering of observations by woman.Results: TGF-2 levels ranged 0 -
68,070 pg/ml and total protein levels ranged 1,558- 36,198 g/ml. The
levels of TGF-2 in the biopsied and non-biopsied breasts were correlated
(r2 = 0.64), albeit not statistically significant. Controlling for
mother's attained age, age at first birth, age of baby (surrogate for
length of nursing), number of live births, time since breast biopsy, and
race, did not alter the finding for TGF-2 or the TGF-2/total protein
ratio. But, mean levels of TGF-2 proteins were highest in milk among
women with cancer (9971 pg/ml, n=16), followed by proliferative lesions
with atypia (8842 pg/ml; n=4) biopsy diagnoses. TGF-2 levels were lower
among women with non-proliferative biopsy diagnoses (4131 pg/ml; n=292)
as compared with those who had proliferative lesions with atypia or
cancer (P<0.005). TGF- 2 levels were non-significantly lower (4307 pg/ml;
n=52) among women with proliferative lesions without atypia than among
those with proliferative lesions with atypia or cancer.Conclusion: More
severe pathologic diagnoses were associated with higher mean TGF-2 levels
in breast milk, although levels of biopsied and non-biopsied breasts were
correlated. These data suggest that higher TGF-2 levels in milk are
linked to higher breast cancer risk for a woman, but do not specifically
indicate which breast is at risk.

