Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo fluorescence labeling of gastrointestinal stromal tumor
(GIST) .


Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), the most common sarcoma,
metastasizes hematogenously and peritoneally. Tumor-free margins and
complete cytoreduction of metastatic disease are critical for decreasing
recurrence. Since most GISTs overexpress KIT (c-KIT, CD117), we
hypothesized that fluorescently labeled anti-KIT antibodies can improve
detection of GIST. KIT K641E+/ transgenic mice that spontaneously develop
cecal GIST, and wild-type C57BL/6 mice were used in this study. Wistar
rat anti-mouse monoclonal c-KIT antibody was labeled with the AlexaFluor
488. The conjugated anti-KIT-Alexa 488 antibody (50-100 g) was delivered
via tail vein at 24 hours prior to standard staging laparoscopy. A
pediatric laparoscopic grasper was inserted in the left lower quadrant
for bowel mobilization in order to visualize the cecum. All 4 quadrants
of the peritoneal cavity were examined systematically under both
fluorescence and bright light. Post laparoscopy, mice were sacrificed and
their abdomens exposed for Olympus OV-100 imaging. All tumors were
resected and confirmed by H&E. We divided the mice into 4 groups. KIT
K641E+/ mice received anti-KIT antibody (N=4) or control antibody (N=3).
Wild-type mice received the same antibodies (N=3 per group). Fluorescence
laparoscopy demonstrated a high tumor signal-to-background noise ratio.
Upon whole body imaging used to detect gross tumors, there were 2 false
positive and 0 false negative results, leading to an accuracy of 92%. The
sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values were:
100%, 87%, 85%, and 100%, respectively. This method has several
translatable applications: 1) identification of peritoneal metastases; 2)
following disease response; 3) non-radioactive imaging; 4) endoscopic
differentiation of gastric GISTs from leiomyomas or schwannomas; 5)
laparoscopic staging; and 6) assessment of margin status.

