Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capture and enumeration of mesenchymal CTCs on the OnQChip
platform.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are cancer cells that disseminate from the
primary tumor and enter the blood. While cells in the primary tumor are
generally epithelial in nature, as they become migratory and invasive,
changes such as loss of epithelial markers (ie: EpCAM and cytokeratin
(CK)) and a switch to a mesenchymal phenotype (EMT) often occur. CTC
platforms must be flexible in capturing and identifying cells, and not
limited to the use of only epithelial markers. Dual modal capture on the
OnQChip provides this flexibility, allowing for CTC isolation based on
size and independent of surface marker expression in addition to specific
antibody mediated capture targeting markers such as EpCAM. For cell lines
ranging in EpCAM expression, the OnQChip captures 90% or greater of mid
to high EpCAM expressing cells, and 79% or greater of very low EpCAM
expressing cells. Due to the OnQChip's gradient design, distinct capture
patterns related to EpCAM levels are observed, allowing for capture
location to be informative about EpCAM expression. When Hs578T cells, a
mesenchymal model with very little EpCAM and CK, are prestained around
79% of spiked cells are enumerated on the OnQChip, but when the same
cells are not prestained and only CK staining is used, 0-2% of spiked
cells are counted. When two new mesenchymal staining markers are
incorporated alongside CK, 60-80% of spiked Hs578T cells are now
enumerated, translating to a 75-100% staining efficiency of captured
cells. Although very few cells are visualized with CK alone, pooling CK
staining with mesenchymal staining shows increased staining intensity
compared to mesenchymal staining alone, highlighting benefits of a
multi-marker staining panel for visualizing cells with low expression of
several different markers, likely the case for subpopulations of cells at
different stages of the EMT. On a population of 44 prostate cancer
samples, an increase of 28.5, 8.2, 12.7, and 7.6 in the mean number of
total, intact, irregular, and fragmented CTCs, respectively, was observed
with staining for CK plus the mesenchymal markers as compared to CK
staining alone. Specifically, 70.5%, 18.2%, 50%, and 38.6% of patients
showed an increase of 5 or more, and 40.9%, 9.1%, 31.8%, and 25% showed
an increase of 10 or more, total, intact, irregular, and fragmented CTCs,
respectively, when mesenchymal staining was included. Additionally, a few
case studies from this population for which serial draws during treatment
were obtained indicate changes in the ratio of CTCs enumerated with
staining for CK plus mesenchymal markers compared to CK only, suggesting
the ratio of mesenchymal to epithelial like CTCs may reflect a clinical
outcome. Our data suggests that the OnQChip's ability to capture CTCs
based on size independent of surface marker expression and inclusion of
two new stains, allow for capture and enumeration of mesenchymal CTCs
that would be missed by platforms incorporating only epithelial markers
such as EpCAM and CK.Citation Format: Keith D. Merdek, Kam Sprott,
Chunsheng Jiang, Michael Stocum, Glenn Bubley, Walter Carney. Capture and
enumeration of mesenchymal CTCs on the OnQChip platform. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5108.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5108

