Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Less tumor engraftment after anti-VEGF therapy in pediatric low
grade astrocytoma.


Introduction. Low grade astrocytomas are the most frequent brain tumors
in children. Although children can benefit from treatments including
neurosurgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy, still children die due to
tumor progression. Furthermore, morbidity can be serious. So new
therapeutic strategies are warranted for these patients. Previously, we
showed that angiogenesis is a characteristic of pediatric low grade
astrocytoma (Sie et al, NAN 2010). Therefore, vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), the most critical angiogenic factor, may be a potential
therapeutic target. The present study aimed to analyze the effect of VEGF
inhibition in vitro and in vivo in pediatric low grade
astrocytoma.Materials and methods. Three different pediatric low grade
astrocytoma cell lines were used: Res-186 (WHO grade I astrocytoma),
Res-259 and UW-467 (WHO grade II astrocytoma). Effects in vitro of the
anti-VEGF monoclonal antibodies, bevacizumab (0 - 50 ug/ml, Avastin, anti
human VEGF) and B20-4.1.1 (0 - 200 ug/ml, anti human and mouse VEGF) were
studied using a WST-1 cell viability assay and a cell proliferation assay
with BRDU. Res-259 cells were orthotopically implanted in NOD-scid
IL2Rgnull mice. After 6 weeks of treatment intraperitoneal twice weekly
with bevacizumab (15 mg/kg), B20-4.1.1 (5 mg/kg) or phosphate buffered
saline as control group, mice were euthanized and tumor engraftment was
studied in brain slides using Aperio's imagescope viewer.Results. In
vitro cell growth was not changed as measured by WST-1 and BRDU
incorporation. In vivo results showed less tumor engraftment in
bevacizumab (n = 10) and B20-4.1.1 (n = 9) treated mice compared with the
control group (n = 10) (resp. 70%, 44%, 100%). In the bevacizumab and
B20-4.1.1 treated mice tumor mass was lower as compared with controls
(resp. P = 0.062, P = 0.001).Conclusion(s). This study showed less tumor
engraftment after anti-VEGF therapy in a newly developed pediatric low
grade astrocytoma mouse model. In these tumors anti-VEGF seems to work
especially on tumor microenvironment. Suggesting that anti-VEGF could
have a potential role in the therapeutic strategy for children with low
grade astrocytoma, thoughtfulness on possible tumor escape mechanisms
that may arise will be crucial.[W.F.A. den Dunnen and E.S.J.M. de Bont
shared senior authorship.]

