Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Procoagulant receptor tissue factor provokes the escape from brain
tumor dormancy.


Occult persistence of transformed cells is known to precede the onset of
clinically apparent malignancies, accompany disease remission and
micrometastasis. While the mechanisms governing this dormant state remain
poorly understood, tissue injury and wound healing responses have often
been implicated in its cessation, but the surrounding circumstances
remain largely obscure. Notably, the activation of hemostasis represents
the first response to the exogenous and endogenous tissue injury, and is
linked to inflammation, angiogenesis and growth promoting
microenvironment. Tissue factor (TF) acts as the main trigger of the
coagulation cascade in this setting, and is known to be overexpressed in
cancer cells, including in high grade brain tumors such as glioblastoma
(GBM). Here we report that in a model of GBM, the TF-mediated activation
of the coagulation system may act as the sufficient initial trigger in
the cessation of tumor dormancy, and the onset of inflammation and
angiogenesis. We also document that while TF may play a role in the
subsequent tumor progression, its expression by cancer and host cells may
no longer be absolutely required in established tumors.Thus, we observed
that indolent human glioma cells (U373) remain viable, but dormant for
over 250 days post subcutaneous and orthotopic inoculation, with no
evidence of tumor growth, as detected by bioluminescent monitoring. The
enforced expression of TF is sufficient to trigger tumor formation by
these cells, albeit after long latency (30-90 days). During this latent
phase TF-expressing glioma cells, but not their TF-negative counterparts,
are able to recruit rich stroma, containing CD11b+ myeloid cells and
CD105+ blood vessels. These cells also evolve to become rapidly
tumorigenic and gain a dramatic change to their transcriptome. Similar
aggressiveness can also be induced in U373 cells by the expression of the
oncogenic epidermal growth factor receptor variant (EGFRvIII), which also
provokes upregulation of TF and onset of the procoagulant phenotype
(U373vIII cells). Targeting TF in U373vIII tumors, as well as their
implantation into TF-hypomorphic recipients (low-TF mice) delays, but
does not abrogate experimental GBM progression. We generated spontaneous
GBM tumors by intracranial injection of the oncogenic cDNA (SV40, N-ras),
which becomes expressed in brain astrocytes under the control of the
Sleeping Beauty (SB) transposase. Disruption of the TF gene in the
astrocytic lineage of such mice (Cre/nestinTF-/-) resulted in a partial
tumor growth inhibition.We postulate that activation of the coagulation
system (via TF) may play a role in disruption of the dormant behavior of
brain tumor cells and can serve as targets in prevention of disease
onset. However, targeting TF alone is only partially effective as a
measure to control the growth of established astrocytic tumors.
Acknowledgments: We thank Dr. John Ohlfest for providing us with the SB
transposon system.

