Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of amphiregulin-mediated EGFR signaling suppresses
tumorigenicity in breast cancer cells.


Approximately half of all basal type breast cancers show evidence of
autocrine activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) by
amphiregulin (AREG). In addition, AREG expression is associated with
aggressive and chemoresistant forms of breast cancer. Studies in our
laboratory show that when AREG is the activating ligand, EGFR accumulates
at the cell surface, resulting in altered receptor trafficking and
downstream signaling. To investigate the effect of AREG-mediated
activation of EGFR on the phenotype of AREG-expressing cancers, AREG
expression was knocked-down in SUM149 cells, a highly tumorigenic and
metastatic cell line isolated from a basal subtype inflammatory breast
cancer, which expresses high levels of AREG and overexpresses EGFR.
Microarray analysis of AREG knockdown cells revealed a number of relevant
pathways affected by AREG-EGFR signaling. These pathways include Notch
signaling, MAPK activation, IL-1 signaling and multiple components of the
Wnt signaling pathway. In particular, knockdown of AREG or inhibition of
EGFR signaling in AREG stimulated cells resulted in the upregulation of
DKK-1, an antagonist of canonical Wnt signaling, and the expression of
several WNT target genes. Flow cytometric analysis of these cells
demonstrated that AREG knockdown resulted in a significant reduction in
CD44+ cells while simultaneously increasing the non-stem cell fraction of
CD44-/CD24+ cells. Because CD44hi/CD24lo is characteristic of
undifferentiated cells that have the potential to initiate tumor
formation, the tumorigenicity of these cells was investigated by
transplanting parental and AREG knock-down SUM149 cells into the mammary
fat pads of NOD-SCID mice. The tumorigenic activity of the AREG
knock-down derivatives was significantly reduced compared to the parental
SUM149 cells. In particular, the AREG knockdown clone that expressed the
lowest level of AREG expression and the highest level of DKK-1 expression
failed to form tumors in NOD-SCID mice. To investigate the link between
AREG-mediated activation of EGFR, receptor trafficking, and downstream
signaling pathways that are responsible for changes in expression of WNT
pathway genes, we are investigating differences in EGFR phosphorylation
and downstream signaling stimulated by AREG versus EGF. In conjunction
with our previous findings that AREG-mediated EGFR signaling results in
activation of NF- and the upregulation of IL1/, our current results
suggest a link between these pathways, WNT signaling, and tumorigenicity
in SUM-149 cells.

