Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin D reduces lung cancer progression the
N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea model of mouse lung squamous cell
carcinoma.


Vitamin D, an essential mediator of calcium homeostasis, acts through the
vitamin D receptor to promote cellular differentiation and inhibit
proliferation. Epidemiologic studies indicate that low serum levels of
25(OH)D3 are associated with increased risk and poor prognosis of lung
cancer. Pre-clinical studies in mice show that dietary vitamin D and
calcium deficiency promote carcinogenesis in mouse models of cancer.
These data suggest that vitamin D may have a role as a chemopreventive
agent. To investigate the role of vitamin D in lung cancer, a
carcinogen-induced model of lung squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) was
employed. N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) was applied topically
each week to the back of SWR/J mice. Following 15 weeks of NTCU
treatment, mice on a standard diet begin to develop flat atypia, which
progresses through dysplasia to invasive lung SCC by 35 to 40 weeks.We
investigated the effects of vitamin D on cancer progression using
different levels of dietary vitamin D3 and injections of the most active
metabolite 1,25(OH)2D3 (calcitriol) in the NTCU model (80 mM/week). After
24 weeks of NTCU, mice on a deficient diet had more advanced disease than
those on a sufficient diet. However, that study demonstrated that the 80
mM/week of NTCU was too toxic and resulted in premature death. A second
vitamin D intervention study has now been completed using a less toxic
dose of 40 mM/week of NTCU. In this study mice were randomized to 6
treatment groups (Table 1). Disease burden, as measured by histology
(Table 1), was similar to that seen with higher dose NCTU. This study
supports our earlier findings that vitamin D deficient mice develop
disease at a more rapid rate when compared to mice that are sufficient.
This also suggests that calcitriol administration may reduce the
progression of lung SCC in mice that are vitamin D deficient. Further
studies are on going to elucidate the mechanism by which vitamin D acts
to slow the progression of lung SCC in this model.
Serum 25(OH)D3 levels & incidence of high-grade dysplasia and lung SCC.

