Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cells enhance invasion of cancer cells via
CCL-5-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition.


Background: Growing evidences have demonstrated that the tumor
microenvironment comprises a variety of stromal cells that play a crucial
role in tumor progression and metastasis. Among them, cancer stem cells
(CSCs) were a subset of the bulk tumor responsible for tumor development
and metastasis. However, whether CSCs in cancer microenvironment could
influence the characteristics of cancer cells has not been addressed. The
present study is aimed to investigate the contribution of CSCs in ovarian
cancer cell metastasis and signaling pathway that mediate CSCs effects.
Material and methods: Ovarian CSCs were obtained from A2780 and SKOV3
cell lines by serum-free culture selection. Transwell and wound-healing
assay were used to determine the ability of invasion and migration of
cancer cells with or without CSCs in the lower wells. We next examined
EMT markers at both protein and mRNA levels by real-time PCR, Western
blotting and immunouorescence analysis in the ovarian cancer cells before
and after co-cultured with CSCs, or treated with rhCCL5; or blocking with
control IgG, anti-CCL5, CCR1, CCR3, CCR5 antibody and NF-kappa B
inhibitor. ELISA, Immunouorescence and Western blotting were used to
determine whether NF-B activation was involved in CCL5-mediated EMT of
cancer cells by CSCs. We further conducted an immunohistochemical
staining of CCL5, CCR1, CCR3 and CCR5 in benign ovarian tissues, primary
or invasive ovarian carcinoma tissues. Results: We found that co-culture
of A2780 and SKOV3 cells with CSCs significantly promoted the migration
and invasion of cancer cells in a cell number-dependent manner.
Furthermore, in A2780 and SKOV3 cells, co-cultured with CSCs induced an
EMT phenotype from cabblestone-like to spindle-like morphology,
accompanied by down-regulated epithelial markers (E-cadherin) and
up-regulated mesenchymal markers (Snail, vimentin, N-cadherin). We
further found that addition of anti-CCL5 or its receptors (CCR1, CCR3,
CCR5) antibody to the co-culture system of CSCs with A2780 or SKOV3 cells
showed an inhibition of the invasion and migration, and EMT promoted by
CSCs. Furthermore, treatment of A2780 and SKOV3 cells with recombinant
CCL5 for 24 hours enhanced the invasion of cancer cells, and induced EMT
in a dose-dependent manner. We also found that the expression of CCL5 and
its receptors in invasive ovarian carcinoma were much stronger compared
to primary ovarian carcinoma. Interestingly, we found the activity of
NF-kappa B also increased in A2780 and SKOV3 cells when co-cultured with
CSCs or treatment with rhCCL5; Moreover, NF-kappa B inhibitor
significantly decreased the migration and invasion of cancer cells
exerted by CSCs. Conclusions: Our results suggest that CCL5 derived from
CSCs plays a critical role in promoting ovarian cancer progression by
induction of EMT via the activation of NF-kappa B.Citation Format: Bo
Zhu, Haixia Long. Cancer stem cells enhance invasion of cancer cells via
CCL-5-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2807.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2807

