Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Personalizing cancer therapy using dynamic BH3 profiling.


Personalizing cancer therapy using dynamic BH3 profiling.J. Montero, A.
Letai.Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA.Background: There are many targeted therapies that lack
effective predictive biomarkers. Many of these agents kill via the
mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis. Apoptosis can be considered as a
threshold, and we have designed a tool, BH3 profiling, that can measure
mitochondrial priming for death, essentially the proximity of a cell to
the this threshold of apoptosis. When effective death signaling is
initiated by a targeted therapy, dynamic BH3 profiling can be used to
measure the increase in mitochondrial priming caused by the agent within
hours, without the requirement for prolonged ex vivo culture. This means
that death signaling induced by any number of distinct agents can be
simultaneously compared on a single cell line or primary tumor
sample.Hypothesis : Early apoptotic signaling detected via dynamic BH3
profiling can predict later cytotoxic cellular response.Results: Our
first test was whether dynamic BH3 profiling performed following only 16
hours of drug exposure could predict cytotoxicity at a much later (72-96
hours) time point. We initiated our studies on a diverse panel of cancer
cell lines treated with a wide range of kinase inhibitors. These cell
lines included: PC9 (NSCLC), K562 (CML), MCF7 (Breast Cancer), LP1
(Multiple Myeloma), DHL6 (Diffuse Large B cell lymphoma) and Sk5 mel
(Melanoma) using nine different treatments (primary targets): gefitinib
(EGFR inh), imatinib (BCR-ABL inh), lapatinib (HER2 inh), PD173074 (FGFR
inh), TAE-684 (ALK inh), MK-2206 (Akt inh), PLX-4032 (BRaf V600E inh),
AZD6244 (MEK inh) and BEZ235 (PI3K/mTOR inh). We observed a significant
correlation between the increase in priming and cell death, demonstrating
the predicting capacity of dynamic BH3 profiling in different cancer
cells.We also tested the predictive ability of dynamic BH3 profiling in
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). We tested samples from stable phase
CML patients of known clinical outcome who were either sensitive
(underwent at least complete cytogenetic response) or refractory to
clinical imatinib treatment. We found that the induction of mitochondrial
priming caused by short term (16 hr) ex vivo exposure to imatinib
predicted clinical response.Conclusions: Our cell line and clinical
experiments demonstrate the potential for dynamic BH3 profiling to be
used as a powerful real time predictive tool across many cancers and many
agents, including combinations of agents. This tool could be used to
identify niche populations sensitive to an individual agent.
Alternatively, it could be used to recognize the best agent from a list
of possible therapies for an individual tumor and improve cancer therapy.

