Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Presence of non-canonical tumorigenesis pathways in early-onset
sporadic rectal cancer.


Chromosomal instability (CIN) caused by -Catenin dependent aberrant
activation of canonical Wnt signaling or Microsatellite instability (MSI)
triggered by inactivation of mismatch repair (MMR) pathway, are the two
major genetic instability pathways that drive classical age-related
sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC). Activation of canonical Wnt signaling
and MSI are primary tumor initiating events in about 80% and 15% of
late-onset CRC cases, respectively. Canonical Wnt signaling is also
reported as a secondary event in tumors primarily driven by MSI. These
inferences are based on seminal studies that included a
disproportionately greater number of colon tumors (as compared to rectal
tumors). Recent genome-wide studies have suggested colon and rectal
cancer to be a single entity, though several other studies appear to
indicate otherwise. Exclusive studies on rectal cancer (RC), especially
the early-onset sporadic subtype, have been fewer. Despite a recent trend
of increased worldwide incidence, early-onset sporadic rectal cancer
(EOSRC) is not well understood. We profiled canonical Wnt, KRAS and p53
(components of the classical colorectal carcinoma progression model) and
MSI status in a panel of 298 colorectal cancer samples. 41% of EOSRC
samples did not harbor Wnt or MSI pathways; the high proportion of a
double negative entity was neither identified in late-onset RC samples
nor in colon cancer samples. KRAS mutation frequency was also
significantly lower in EOSRC (24%). Since CIN is a hallmark of canonical
Wnt activation driven CRC, we profiled genome-wide DNA copy number
alterations (CNAs) in microsatellite stable EOSRC samples and
surprisingly identified extensive chromosomal aberrations in both Wnt
active and Wnt inactive subtypes suggesting the interesting possibility
of presence of CIN in the absence of canonical Wnt activation. Several
CNAs were detected exclusively in Wnt inactive samples (being absent in
Wnt active samples) and were validated by quantitative PCR. As expected,
a few CNAs, such as an amplification detected at 17q12 (ERBB2/GRB7), were
present in both subtypes. Genome-wide transcript profiling performed in
parallel revealed the elevated expression of genes located within the
amplifications, validated by quantitative reverse transcription PCR
(Q-RT-PCR). More importantly, aberrant activation of non-canonical
signaling pathways was identified in a subset of the double negative
EOSRC samples, based on unsupervised (hierarchical clustering) and
supervised (significance analysis of microarrays and gene set enrichment
analysis) analyses of the transcriptome data. Elevation of non-canonical
pathway gene transcripts was confirmed by Q-RT-PCR. Our study has
therefore revealed presence of unique tumorigenesis pathways in EOSRC
samples distinct from canonical pathways that drive late-onset CRC.

