Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Electric-field assisted delivery of gemcitabine for the treatment
of pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer death in the
world, with an incidence rate approximately equivalent to the death rate.
The very poor prognosis for pancreatic cancer can be attributed to late
diagnosis and the ineffectiveness of drug delivery to the primary tumor.
Poor tissue perfusion plays a substantial role in preventing adequate
drug exposure to primary pancreatic tumors. The systemic administration
of gemcitabine, the current standard-of-care chemotherapy for pancreatic
cancer, has shown limited efficacy for the treatment of pancreatic
cancer, with only 5 to 10% of patients demonstrating an objective
radiographic response at the primary tumor site. Furthermore, the
toxicity associated with systemic chemotherapy has been found to reduce
the quality of life of the patient and in extreme cases can be fatal. In
an attempt to address the lack of effectiveness of systemically
administered chemotherapy and associated toxicity, we have developed
modalities for the localized delivery of chemotherapies to pancreatic
tumors. These devices rely upon an applied electric potential difference
between electrodes to drive chemotherapy into the tumor. This use of an
electric potential for local delivery of chemotherapies offers the
capability of overcoming considerable flow and pressure gradients.
Significant work using an applied electric potential difference for drug
transport has been performed in transdermal drug delivery. In the area of
oncology, electric field-assisted delivery techniques have been proposed
for skin and ocular cancers and have been clinically translated to the
treatment of bladder cancers in the electromotive delivery of mitomycin
C. This technique, combined with novel device approaches, is particularly
well suited for the local treatment of the primary pancreatic tumor.
Herein, we report the development of electric field-assisted delivery
devices and the testing of these devices in a patient-derived orthotopic
xenograft mouse model of pancreatic adenocarcinoma and a healthy canine
animal model. The results show that our devices provide a significant
increase in the local delivery of gemcitabine while limiting systemic
toxicity.

