Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of human adaptive immunity by the tumor metabolite
5-deoxy-5-methylthioadenosine.


An immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment is considered one of the main
problems in the treatment of different malignancies with immunotherapies
like adoptive T cell transfer. Metabolites like lactate - which is
produced by tumor cells even in the presence of sufficient oxygen
("Warburg-effect") - contribute to this setting. Another metabolic
alteration found in many malignancies is a high level of
5-deoxy-5methylthioadenosine (MTA), due to a reduction of the
catabolizing enzyme methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP). In case of
malignant melanoma, MTAP-deficiency has been demonstrated to result in a
higher invasive potential as well as in a worse response of melanoma
cells to an interferon- therapy. Additionally, studies showed an
anti-inflammatory activity on macrophages and lymphocytes, emphasizing a
tumor-promoting effect of MTA.We hypothesized that MTA has a direct
suppressive effect on the induction of adaptive immunity. Indeed,
polyclonally stimulated CD8+ and CD4+ T cells showed a strongly
diminished proliferation in the presence of MTA (50M). MTA pre-treated T
cells remain in the G0 Phase of the cell cycle. Furthermore, in a
co-culture-system of antigenic peptide-pulsed DCs with autologous CD8+ T
cells, addition of 25M MTA led to an inhibition of proliferation,
activation and consequently to lower antigen-specificity. A potential
toxic effect of MTA on resting T cells could be excluded as apoptosis was
not observed until day seven of culture. In contrast, antigen-stimulated,
activated CD8+ T cells that were incubated in co-culture with DCs in
presence of 25M MTA showed high apoptosis levels and decreasing cell
numbers.Since MTA has been described as a protein methylation inhibitor,
we conducted western blot analyses of polyclonally stimulated CD8+ T
cells and found that presence of MTA lead to decreased protein
methylation in CD8+ T cells. To prove the hypothesis that MTA exerts the
effects on T cells by protein methylation inhibition, we compared MTA to
another known inhibitor of protein methylation (adenosine-2,3-dialdehyde,
AdOx) and found that AdOx as well inhibited antigen-specificity,
proliferation and activation of T cells at comparable concentrations.In
addition to direct effects of MTA on T cells, monocytes cultured in the
presence of higher doses MTA (150M) differentiated to DCs that showed a
smaller phenotype as well as impaired expression of co-stimulatory and
maturation markers when compared to DCs generated without MTA. MTA-DCs
were still capable of activating T cells and inducing antigen-specificity
in co-cultures, however, cytokine secretion of MTA-DCs stimulated CD8+ T
cell was strongly impaired.In summary we provide in vitro evidence of a
potential new immune evasion mechanism via secretion of MTA from tumor
cells as well as an interesting new mechanism of non-toxic suppression of
T cells via interfering with protein methylation.

