Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy is required for prostate cancer progression.


Autophagy (also referred to as macroautophagy) is a self-catabolic
process that maintains intracellular homeostasis and prolongs cell
survival by the autophagosomic-lysosomal degradation of cytoplasmic
contents during metabolic stress or nutrient starvation. Inactivation of
PTEN tumor suppressor function is a common characteristic of human
prostate cancer that leads to the upregulation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR
signaling pathway, and has emerged as promising candidate for targeted
therapies. mTOR is one of the upstream regulators of autophagy,
therefore, inhibiting the PI3K/Akt/mTOR axis putatively stimulates
autophagy. However, the role of autophagy in cancer is complex, acting
both as a tumor suppressor and promoter, and its role in prostate
tumorigenesis remains to be defined. Here we demonstrate that prostate
cancer is dependent on autophagy for its growth and progression through
the use genetically modified mouse models of prostate cancer.We had
previously reported a conditional knockout mouse model in which
homozygous deletion of PTEN lead to the stage-specific development of
invasive adenocarcinoma. Characterization of tumors from the mice showed
that although autophagy was suppressed early in tumor development, tumors
eventually restored autophagic function despite increased PI3K/Akt/mTOR
signaling. To determine the effect of defective autophagy on prostate
cancer progression, we generated prostate-specific conditional double
knockout mice harboring both inactivated PTEN and ATG7, a key regulator
for the formation of autophagosomes. Prostate-specific inactivation of
ATG7 function alone did not result in changes to the development or
function of the prostate gland. Prostate-specific inactivation of both
PTEN and ATG7 led to the early development of prostate adenocarcinoma
similar to homozygous PTEN-mutant mice. However, prostate tumors failed
to progress and showed regression. Our data suggests that impaired
autophagy can be induced independent of mTOR and defective autophagy
contributes to suppress tumor progression. Thus, our findings support the
role of autophagy as a therapeutic target for advance prostate cancer.

