Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR regulates Mcl-1 dependence in chemoresistant and acquired
ABT-737-resistant high-risk neuroblastoma (HR NB).


Patients with HR NB initially respond to treatment yet > 60% die of
chemoresistant disease due to inhibited apoptosis. We have shown that HR
NBs depend on anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 or Mcl-1 to sequester the pro-death
protein Bim for survival. Mice carrying Bcl-2 dependent NB xenografts
were cured with the Bcl-2/Bcl-xL antagonist ABT-737 plus cytotoxics, but
Mcl-1 dependent NBs were resistant, as ABT-737 does not target Mcl-1. We
also showed a Bcl-2 dependent NB cell line (SMS-SAN) selected in vitro to
resist high dose ABT-737 (SAN-ABTR) altered Bim binding from Bcl-2 to
Mcl-1, despite persistent Bcl-2 expression. SAN-ABTR is also resistant to
common cytotoxic drugs compared to SMS-SAN, likely through acquired Mcl-1
dependence. As no current molecules inhibit Mcl-1 directly, we
hypothesized that targeting pathways that regulate Mcl-1 expression will
restore chemotherapy and Bcl-2 antagonist sensitivity in HR NB. Real time
cell sensing (xCELLigence) showed that SAN-ABTR at steady state had a > 2
log increase in proliferation compared to SMS-SAN. Tyrosine kinases (TK)
enhance NB proliferation and regulate Mcl-1 in adult cancers, but how
they regulate Bcl-2 proteins in NB is unknown. Using phospho-protein
microarrays, we found that EGFR and its downstream effectors, AKT, ERK
1/2, and CREB were phosphorylated in SAN-ABTR but not in SMS-SAN.
Co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) showed that inhibition of EGFR by shRNA in
SAN-ABTR reverted Bim from Mcl-1 back to Bcl-2 sequestration, despite
persistent Mcl-1 expression and restored sensitivity to ABT-737 in vitro.
EGFR inhibition also re-sensitized SAN-ABTR to cytotoxic agents.
Immunoblots of a panel of 12 NB cell lines characterized for Bcl-2
dependence patterns showed EGFR to be highly expressed in Mcl-1 dependent
NBs but not in Bcl-2 dependent NBs. We inhibited EGFR by shRNA in Mcl-1
dependent SKNBE(2) and again Bim moved from Mcl-1 sequestration over to
Bcl-2, suggesting a role for EGFR in de novo Mcl-1 dependence. Inhibition
of ERK 1/2 (using UO126) resulted in enhanced sensitivity to ABT-737 in
Mcl-1 dependent, EGFR expressing NLF cells, suggesting EGFR is regulating
Mcl-1:Bim binding through ERK. Work is ongoing to evaluate
post-translational modifications causing EGFR mediated Bim:Mcl-1 binding
in NB. This data supports a role for EGFR in both pre-existing
chemoresistance and emergent targeted therapy resistance in HR NB through
modulation of Bcl-2 family interactions. Earlier studies suggest that
EGFR inhibitors alone have little utility in NB treatment. Here, we
demonstrate that Bcl-2 sequesters Bim upon EGFR inhibitor displacement of
Bim from Mcl-1. Therefore, EGFR inhibitors will be more effective if the
Bcl-2 survival bias is subverted using Bcl-2 antagonists. The novel
targeted combination of EGFR and Bcl-2 blockade has the potential to
impact the survival of patients with HR NB as well as other EGFR
overexpressing and Mcl-1 dependent cancers.

