Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ADAM proteases shed UL-16-binding protein 2 in human lung cancer
cell lines.


NKG2D is an activating receptor that is expressed in immune effector
cells, and the ligands for which are expressed in transformed cells.
NKG2D-NKG2D ligand system might play an essential role in the tumor
immunity of host cells. We have previously reported that a member of
NKG2D ligand family, UL-16-binding protein 2 (ULBP2), is predominantly
expressed on the surface of lung cancer cells, and is shed and
solubilized into the sera of the lung cancer patients. In addition, we
showed that the soluble form of ULBP2 (sULBP2) aggravates the
cytotoxicity of host immune effector cells. Therefore, shedding of ULBP2
from the surface of cancer cells might be a critical component of the
immune escape mechanisms employed in lung cancer. In this study, we
investigated the mechanism of ULBP2 shedding from the cell surfaces in
human lung cancer cell lines. First, we compared the amount of ULBP2
expression on the surface of normal cells and that in the culture medium
of various lung cancer cell lines. We observed a significant correlation
among non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines (r=0.835, PNKG2D is
an activating receptor that is expressed in immune effector cells, and
the ligands for which are expressed in transformed cells. NKG2D-NKG2D
ligand system might play an essential role in the tumor immunity of host
cells. We have previously reported that a member of NKG2D ligand family,
UL-16-binding protein 2 (ULBP2), is predominantly expressed on the
surface of lung cancer cells, and is shed and solubilized into the sera
of the lung cancer patients. In addition, we showed that the soluble form
of ULBP2 (sULBP2) aggravates the cytotoxicity of host immune effector
cells. Therefore, shedding of ULBP2 from the surface of cancer cells
might be a critical component of the immune escape mechanisms employed in
lung cancer. In this study, we investigated the mechanism of ULBP2
shedding from the cell surfaces in human lung cancer cell lines. First,
we compared the amount of ULBP2 expression on the surface of normal cells
and that in the culture medium of various lung cancer cell lines. We
observed a significant correlation among non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cell lines (r=0.835, P<0.01), but not small-cell lung cancer
(SCLC) cell lines (r=-0.154). These observations suggest that the ULBP2
shed in the culture medium is proportional to the level of its cell
surface expression by NSCLC cell lines, but this does not apply in case
of SCLC cell lines. Next, we examined the expression levels and
activation status of A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase (ADAM) families
in the cell lines as candidates that execute the shedding of ULBP2
proteases. We found that ADAM17 was abundantly expressed and activated in
NSCLC cell lines, but not in SCLC cell lines. Finally, we directly
confirmed the shedding of ULBP2 by the enzyme ADAM metallopeptidase
domain 17 (ADAM17) by using gene silencing and overexpression of ADAM17
in NSCLC and SCLC cell lines, respectively. Our data indicated that the
expression of ADAM17 is a crucial determining factor in the heterogeneous
shedding of ULBP2, which is observed in the lung cancer cell lines. ULBP2
shedding, and the resultant sULBP2 formation, is one of the determining
factors of host tumor cell immunity; hence, developing a form of
intervention to act on the shedding step by using ADAM protease
inhibitors would be a promising and novel immunomodulatory therapy.

