Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Signaling through the progesterone receptor in the tumor
microenvironment regulates hormonal sensitivity in endometrial carcinoma.


Progesterone, an agonist for the progesterone receptor (PR), can be an
efficacious and well tolerated oral treatment for subsets of women with
endometrial cancer. Clinically, progesterone is under-utilized as
reliable predictors of response are not available. Although progesterone
has been used for decades in treatment of endometrial neoplasia, its
mechanism and site of action remain unknown. Our study aims to determine
how and through which tumor cell types does progesterone exert its
anti-tumor effects.To address these questions we first established an in
vivo endometrial cancer model based on the two most common genetic
mutations seen in human endometrial carcinoma: cell autonomous loss of
PTEN with or without activation of Kras. Importantly in this model we can
genetically manipulate the tumor epithelium and stroma independently.
Mouse endometrial tumors generated in this system closely resemble human
disease. The progesterone hormone with or with out estrogen was
administered to tumor bearing mice. When both hormones were
co-administered to mice bearing PTEN null endometrial tumors complete
resolution of the cancer was achieved. Abundant expression of PR was
detected in the tumor stroma throughout this therapeutic time-course.
When progesterone was administered without estrogen, PTEN-null tumors
persisted and stromal expression of PR diminished. Conditional
stromal-specific deletion of PR in PTEN-null tumors was sufficient to
convert these hormone sensitive cancers to a progesterone resistant tumor
despite estrogen and progesterone co-administration. These results
suggest that stromal expression of PR is necessary for anti-tumor effects
of progesterone and dual hormone administration is critical for achieving
a therapeutic response. Cell-autonomous activation of K-ras is commonly
detected in the context of PTEN loss and this genetic combination in our
model resulted in a hormone refractory endometrial cancer. A significant
reduction in stromal PR expression was found in the PTEN-null/Kras
hormone refractory tumors compared to PTEN-null sensitive cancers. Loss
of stromal PR in all cases was coupled with diminished phosphorylation of
estrogen receptor at serine 118.We demonstrate that anti-tumor effects of
progesterone are exerted through stromal PR signaling. The loss of PR
expression in the tumor microenvironment confers progesterone resistance;
therefore pharmacologic restoration of stromal PR should be investigated
as a therapeutic intervention in hormone refractory tumors. Regulation of
PR in the tumor stroma may be modulated by estrogen signaling. Defining
mechanisms of resistance and sensitivity to hormonal therapy will
facilitate individualization and wider application of hormonal therapy in
patients suffering from endometrial cancer.

