Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of IL-6 in ER+ breast cancer and potential use for
Siltuximab, an anti-IL-6 antibody, in ER+ breast cancer treatment.


Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is an important growth factor for estrogen
receptor-alpha (ER) positive breast cancer. High IL-6 serum levels are
associated with poor prognosis in ER+ breast cancer patients, and IL-6
related polymorphisms that lead to elevated IL-6 expression are
associated with decreased overall survival (PMID 17261184, 12771987).
Preclinical data suggest that in contrast to ER negative breast cancer
cell lines, ER positive cell lines rarely produce autocrine IL-6, and are
therefore dependent on paracrine IL6 produced by the microenvironment.
Furthermore, when ER positive cell lines are exposed to paracrine IL-6,
phosphorylation of STAT3-Y705, increased growth rates and more aggressive
tumor phenotypes are observed (PMID 17586727, 18974155, 19581928). We
utilized 3D co-cultures and heterotypic xenograft models to investigate
the ability of siltuximab, an anti-IL-6 antibody in clinical development,
to attenuate paracrine IL-6 effects across a panel of 8 ER positive
breast cancer cell lines and heterotypic xenograft models. From a panel
of 8 ER postive breast cancer lines, 75% responded to recombinant human
IL-6 (hIL-6) protein by phosphorylation of STAT3 (Ty705), but not AKT,
MEK1/2, or ERK1/2. Siltuximab treatment blunted pSTAT3 induction in all
IL-6 responsive ER positive breast cancer lines but failed to reduce
pSTAT3 phosphorylation in three ER negative cell lines that produced
autocrine IL-6. The 3D tumor growth assay demonstrated accelerated growth
rates for ER positive breast cancer lines in the presence of IL-6 or
human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC), which returned to baseline with
siltuximab treatment. In addition, when hIL-6 was supplemented in vivo,
the ER positive tumor cell line, MCF-7 engrafted without the need for
estrogen supplementation and tumor growthblunted with siltuximab
treatment. When tumors were allowed to establish before treatment,
siltuximab was able to induce tumor regressions in all treated animals
(10/10). Tumor regression was associated with decreased mitotic counts in
tumors. In addition to these experiments, we investigated STAT3
activation in a panel of primary patient-derived ER positive breast
cancer samples. 43% of samples demonstrated activated STAT3 as determined
by Y705 phosphorylation. These same ER positive breast cancer patients
displayed an activated IL-6 network as assessed by an a priori 32-gene
IL-6 network gene expression profile signature and was also associated
with increased IL-6 serum levels. This activated IL-6 gene signature was
also associated with ER positive tumors and increased metastasis as
assessed by positive node status in four independent breast cancer data
sets. Taken together, these data suggest a key role for IL-6 in estrogen
independent ER positive breast cancer progression.

