Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estimating the fraction of a tumor that is killed by a drug.


We analysed mathematically the progress of thousands of patients enrolled
in clinical trials with diagnoses of prostate, renal cell, breast, and
thyroid carcinomas and multiple myeloma, treated with cytotoxic and
targeted drugs, tumor quantity being measured radiologically or by serum
markers (see, e.g., Stein et al Clin Cancer Res. 2011,17, 907-17, for
prostate cancer). Treatment often results in reduction of tumor quantity,
with subsequent regrowth. In some regression does not occur; in others
regrowth is not recorded. All these outcomes are described by a simple
mathematical formula (see Eq. (1) below) that describes progress of
treatment, yielding the rate of tumor decay, d, and rate of regrowth, g.
When regrowth is not seen, g is indistinguishable from zero, as is d if
tumor quantity fails to decrease. Parameter g is a surrogate measure of
overall survival. Median g values can be used to compare the arms of a
clinical trial.In a minority of cases, increase in tumor quantity is
delayed for an extended period of time before regrowth occurs, and the
simple formula must be modified to include an additional parameter, , the
fraction of tumor killed by the drug, see Eq. (2). In a trial of 750
multiple myeloma (MM) patients treated with liposomal doxorubicin plus
bortezomib (PLD + B) or bortezomib (B) alone, 114 cases were better
fitted by Eq. (2) than by Eq. (1). For these, the median value of was
0.99, meaning that 99% of the tumor was destroyed by drug, only 1% being
left to regrow. Were this 1% of tumor to regrow at rate 0.0131 per day
(the median for these 114 patients) it would return to the initial tumor
quantity, expanding 100-fold, in ln(100)/0.0131 days or 11.5 months. The
OS for these patients who died before the study closed was 12.7 (8.9 to
16) months, close to the predicted. If is less than 0.85, and g is larger
than 0.02 per day, the predictions of Eqs. 1 and 2 are similar. Slight
scatter in the data will not allow a distinction to be made between the
models, nor a definitive value of estimated. Nevertheless, aggregating
data from numerous patients enables to be estimated for such a data set.
Aggregating the data for the 388 MM patients for whom g and/or d but not
could be established, was 0.84 for the PLD + B arm and 0.79 for B. To
regrow to the initial tumor quantity requires 2.7 doublings for the PLD +
B arm and 2.2 for B, a difference that would result in only a trivial
increase in OS. However, the difference between the computed tumor growth
rates, 0.0019 and 0.0037 for the PLD + B arm and B respectively, would be
expected to lead to a noticeable increase in OS were treatment to
continue beyond conventional endpoints.Measuring the fraction of tumor
killed by a drug, and the rate of growth recovery, can give insight into
drug/tumor interactions and guide development of new therapies.Equation
1: f(t) = exp (-d t) + exp (g t) -1, exp is the base of the natural
logarithms, and f(t) the tumor measurement at time t, normalized to the
tumor measurement at day 0;Equation 2: f(t) = exp (-d t) + (1-) exp (g t)]

