Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ouabain, a cardiac glycoside, inhibits the Fanconi Anemia-BRCA
pathway activated by DNA crosslinking agents.


Most cancer therapies, including conventional chemotherapy and
radiotherapy, are based on DNA damage-induced tumor cell death. In tumor
cells, cellular DNA repair machinery can decrease anticancer drug
efficacy and induce drug resistance. The DNA repair pathway has been an
emerging target for development of anticancer drugs. DNA
intercrosslinking, one of the most severe forms of DNA damage which are
caused by anticancer drugs, such as cisplatin and mitomycin C (MMC),
could activate the Fanconi anemia (FA)-BRCA DNA repair pathway.
Inhibition of the FA-BRCA pathway can enhance the cytotoxic effects of
anticancer drugs which induce DNA crosslinking and can reduce anticancer
drug resistance. To find FA-BRCA pathway inhibitory small molecules, we
established a cell-based high-content screening method for detecting the
FA-BRCA pathway by measuring ubiquitinated FANCD2 foci on DNA lesions
after immunofluorescence staining and then we applied our method to
chemical screening. Using commercial LOPAC1280 chemical library
screening, ouabain was identified as a competent FA-BRCA pathway
inhibitory molecule. Ouabain, a member of the cardiac glycoside family
and an endogenous mammalian hormone, binds to and inhibits the plasma
membrane protein Na+/K+-ATPase and has been used for the treatment of
heart disease for many years. We observed that ouabain, as well as its
cardiac glycoside family membersdigitoxin and digoxinreduced
monoubiquitination of FANCD2, inhibited ubiquitinated FANCD2 foci
formation on DNA lesions and abrogated cell cycle arrest induced by MMC
treatment. These inhibitory activities of the FA-BRCA pathway were
independent of the cellular Ca++ ion increase or the drug
uptake-inhibition effect which is known to be a function of ouabain.
Furthermore, we found that ouabain potentiated cytotoxic effects of MMC
in tumor cells. Taken together, we identified an additional role of
ouabain as a FA-BRCA pathway inhibitor which has chemosensitization
activity. The results of this study suggest that ouabain may serve as a
chemosensitizer to anticancer drugs which induce DNA crosslinking.

