Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor microenvironment of inflammatory breast cancer is critical
for mammosphere branching and proliferation.


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is an angioinvasive form of breast
cancer associated with a high incidence of early nodal and systemic
metastasis. In contrast to the recent decrease in breast cancer incidence
in the United States, the annual incidence of IBC continues to increase
with a concomitant increase in mortality. The hallmark symptoms of IBC
are redness, swelling, skin thickening and an orange peel pitted texture
of the skin which are caused by the buildup of fluid (lymph) in the skin
of the breast. This fluid buildup occurs because cancer cells have
blocked lymph vessels in the skin, preventing the normal flow of lymph
through the tissue. In addition to the cancer stem cells and the
intrinsic signals regulating them, the tumor microenvironment (TME) also
plays a major role. Inflammatory TME has been described as a major axis
of evil in IBC, therefore its thorough understanding will be critical in
finding possible underlying mechanisms, their potential crosstalk with
oncogenic signaling pathways, and more importantly finding new targets to
control IBC. Our long term goal is to understand IBC biology, to evaluate
its unique TME, and to use that information to improve diagnosis,
management, and survival rate in IBC patients. These cells rely on their
TME which can drive a latent tumor to grow into a highly metastatic
tumor. Inflammatory TME can suppress antitumor immunity, aggravate
pro-inflammatory pro-tumorigenic factors and eventually overcome the
beneficial effects of the anti-cancer drugs. When we compared the
secretions from the cell lines of the IBC cell lines (SUM149PT;
SUM1315MO2) with those obtained from the primary human mammary epithelial
cells (HMEC), the secretions were found to be enriched with
Osteoprotegerin (OPG), GRO, GRO-, MIF, MIP-1. To gain a complete
understanding of the role of one of the most abundant secreted protein
OPG in IBC tumorigenesis, we used, in vitro cultivation system called
mammospheres, which contain progenitor cells able to clonally reproduce
functional complex structures in vitro resembling the in vivo mammary
tree is generated. Therefore, we aim to evaluate the role of OPG on
mammosphere characteristics (size, viable cells in the spheres) which
will be a valuable strategy to find new targets for IBC treatment. Our
work highlights the potential autocrine and paracrine effects of OPG in
IBC tumor cell survival, angiogenesis, cancer stem cell population,
mammosphere branching and metastases adding to the severity of disease.
Along with high levels of OPG, we also observed high levels of PGE2 which
has pleiotrophic effects on cell proliferation, motility, invasion and
angiogenesis. PGE2 and OPG together modulate the tumor microenvironment
axis of the IBC - making it highly metastatic and invasive and thus
contributing to the severity of the disease.

