Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of the relationship between experimentally induced rodent
forestomach hyperplasia and tumorigenesis.


Hyperplasia is an increase in cell number resulting from physiological
processes such as irritation, or pathological processes like
carcinogenesis. The difficulty in differentiating reactive versus
preneoplastic (or dedicated) hyperplasia has been the subject of debate
in the literature, especially in regard to prediction of human health
risks following chronic chemical exposure. Squamous hyperplasia and
neoplasia are frequently detected in the rodent forestomach (FS)
following chronic oral administration of chemicals evaluated in rodent
cancer bioassays. Molecular level mechanistic details related to FS
hyperplasia progression are not available for a wide range of chemicals,
despite the increasing need for this level of mechanistic understanding
to support evaluations for human health risk. In order to facilitate
further discussion on the use of rodent FS lesions in the estimation of
cancer and noncancer reference values, a comparison of chemical
hyperplasia versus tumor induction was performed. FS lesion
classification and incidence data were obtained from rat and mouse gavage
bioassays on over 50 chemicals from National Toxicology Program (NTP)
2-year bioassays that reported dose-related increases in FS hyperplastic
or neoplastic lesions in one or more rodent sex/strain combinations
tested. Chemical effects were tabulated and sorted by strain, sex,
genotoxicity assay results and irritation effects, and the relationship
between FS hyperplasia and FS tumor (e.g., squamous cell papilloma or
carcinoma) induction was analyzed using grouped animal data. When
considering chemicals with positive results in genotoxicity assays, FS
tumors positively correlated with FS hyperplasia incidence in both rats
and mice. Increased incidence of FS hyperplasia was not correlated with
FS tumors in animals exposed to chemicals that were negative for
genotoxicity and irritation. The potential results of this analysis may
be useful in the evaluation of chemicals with limited chronic bioassay
data by informing predictions of long-term tumor formation based on
chemical properties observable during short-term animal or in vitro
studies (e.g., genotoxicity, irritation).The views expressed in this
abstract are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the
views or policies of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

