Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High accuracy of microRNAs expression in the detection of lymph
node metastasis in patients with oral squamous cell carcinomas.


The presence of metastatic disease in cervical lymph nodes of oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) patients is one of the most important
determinants in therapy choice and prognosis. Thus, the correct staging
of regional lymph node metastases is critical to the success of
loco-regional control of the disease, response to treatment and thus
influences the overall survival of these patients. Routine clinical
staging is not always efficient as it might miss occult metastasis and
the post-surgical pathologic evaluation of resected lymph nodes through
H&E is not sensitive in detecting small metastatic deposits. Thus, there
is an urgent need for diagnostic markers and techniques for a rapid and
accurate detection of metastatic cells in cervical lymph nodes to guide
clinicians in the choice of the most appropriate therapy for these
patients.MicroRNAs are promising candidates for diagnostic markers since:
(1) they play a role in many pathways involved in tumor metastasis; (2)
they are reported to have tumor and tissue-specific expression; (3) their
expression is evaluated using the sensitive and rapid qRT-PCR technique;
(4) they are suitable to be evaluated in paraffin embedded tissue. Thus,
we report here the evaluation of microRNAs as markers in detecting
metastatic cells in lymph nodes from OSCC patients.An initial screening
using PCR-array compared the expression of 664 microRNAs between
metastatic and non-metastatic lymph nodes from 6 OSCC patients and after
several inclusion and exclusion criteria, 25 microRNAs were selected as
differentially expressed. Four microRNAs were selected for further
validation using qRT-PCR in lymph nodes from 48 patients (23
non-metastatic, 18 with macrometastasis, 5 with micrometastasis and 2
with isolated tumor cells). All microRNAs showed 100% specificity. Two
microRNAs had high levels of sensitivity (76% and 88%), but were not
successful in detecting small metastatic deposits (28.6% and 57.1%). On
the other hand, the other two markers were sensitive enough to detect all
metastatic samples showing accuracy level, negative and positive
predictive values of 100%, as well as AUC values of 1.0.These results
show the feasibility of microRNAs as diagnostic markers of cervical
metastasis in OSCC patients that can potentially be evaluated using
several approaches at different time-points such as pre-treatment
diagnostic using fine-needle aspiration biopsies, intraoperative sentinel
node biopsy and after surgery as an auxiliary tool to pathology
examination, immensely helping in the choice of management of these
patients from initial treatment to adjuvant therapy.

