Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rsu1 regulates MCF10A mammary epithelial cell migration and acini
formation by binding to the IPP complex but it promotes spreading and Map
kinase activation independent of IPP.


Tumor cell motility is dependent upon integrin activation, focal adhesion
(FA) formation and dissolution, and cytoskeleton reorganization. The IPP
complex [integrin linked kinase (ILK), PINCH1, Parvin] regulates FA
formation via binding of ILK to B-integrin. ILK serves as an adaptor by
binding PINCH1 and Parvin thus linking FAs and actin. Rsu1 binds to
PINCH1 and also regulates stress kinase signaling. The IPP complex is
elevated in fibrotic disease and many common tumors contributing to
changes in adhesion and migration. However, the Rsu1 locus is deleted in
subsets of gliomas and liver carcinomas and Rsu1 expression is altered by
alternative splicing in other advanced tumors. To identify the functional
contribution of Rsu1 to the IPP complex regulation of adhesion,
migration, and survival, Rsu1 and PINCH1 were independently depleted from
MCF10A mammary epithelial cells. siRNA-mediated depletion of either Rsu1
or PINCH1 altered the localization but the not the expression of FA
proteins, inhibited adhesion, and blocked migration. Both Rsu1- and
PINCH1-depleted cells exhibited disorganized actin stress fibers and
constitutive phosphorylation of actin regulatory proteins. Reduction of
either Rsu1 or PINCH1 blocked acini formation in 3D culture. However,
only Rsu1 depletion blocked the phosphorylation of p38 Map kinase.
Depletion of Rsu1 caused significant reduction in PINCH1, but PINCH1
depletion resulted in only a modest reduction in Rsu1 implying a function
for Rsu1 in regulating the IPP complex through PINCH1 stabilization.
Expression of wt-Rsu1 in Rsu1-depleted cells restored all Rsu1 functions.
In contrast, reconstitution of Rsu1-depleted cells with an Rsu1 mutant
that is non-binding for PINCH1 failed to induce FA formation or cell
migration, suggesting that binding of Rsu1 to PINCH1 is required for Rsu1
regulation of adhesion and migration. Unexpectedly, this non-binding
mutant restored both the level of PINCH1 and cell spreading as well as
p38 MAP kinase phosphorylation. These data indicate that Rsu1 regulates
the stability of PINCH1 by a mechanism other than direct binding and that
Rsu1-PINCH1 association is not required to promote cell spreading. Rather
it is required to promote formation of FAs and the turnover of FAs
necessary for migration. These findings differentiate the critical
functions that Rsu1, PINCH1 and IPP complex contribute to cell adhesion
and migration and explain how, even when disassociated, members of this
complex contribute to tumor cell migration.Supported by W81XWH-10-1-0224,
Predoctoral fellowship from the CDMRP Breast Cancer Research Program.

