Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ablation of N1-S1 hepatocellular carcinoma in rat livers with
nanosecond pulsed electric fields and induction of protective immunity.


Nanosecond pulsed electric fields (nsPEFs) could be used to ablate local
tumor masses through minimally invasive or open surgery delivery, but
further pre-clinical studies are needed. NsPEFs not only induces
permanent permeabilization of cells, but also impacts intracellular
organelles and result in apoptosis and other forms of cell death in vitro
and in vivo. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third most common
cancer cause of mortality worldwide. A diagnosis of HCC carries a guarded
prognosis, especially when metastasis is documented. Presently, reliable,
curative treatments without recurrence for very early, early, and
intermediate HCC stages are still in urgent need of attention. In these
studies, we specifically test the efficacy of nsPEFs in an orthotopic HCC
rat tumor model. Orthotropic insertion of stably transfected (mcherry
and/or luciferase) N1-S1 cells in Sprague Dawley rat livers was used as a
model for treating HCC. Cells were treated with pulses with 100 ns
duration and electric field strengths of 50 kV/cm. Different pulse
numbers were applied. Recent results suggest that treatments of 300 or
500 pulses were more effective when separated by a 6 minute interval than
when applied as a continuous, uninterrupted single treatment. However
over time and treatment of more than 20 animals, 1000 nanosecond pulses
treatment consistently showed successful ablation by effectively inducing
tumor cell death. A single treatment of 1000 nsPEFs successfully induces
cell apoptosis by activating caspase-9, caspase-3, but not caspase-8 in
some cells, indicating induction of intrinsic apoptosis mechanisms as
well as caspase-independent cell death, like that observed in vitro with
human Jurkat cells. More importantly, rats successfully treated with 1000
pulses showed protective responses to a second N1-S1 intra-hepatic
challenge injection of N1-S1 cells, suggesting a host immune response,
which is under exploration. As an ideal potential therapy for HCC, nsPEFs
treatment did not show any damaging impact on liver blood flow. These
studies demonstrate for the first time, successful intra-hepatic
treatment of HCC with a potential induction of immunogenic cell death and
a host immune response after nsPEF ablation.

