Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of humanized NOG mice within the pre-clinical development of
new human specific therapies.


Immune cells within the tumor microenvironment are now well recognized as
to be targets of interest for cancer treatment. However there are no
available pre-clinical models that will accurately support the
pre-clinical development of such therapeutic approaches. Humanized NOG
(NOD/shi-scid/IL-2Rnull) mice, bearing human immune cells with or without
human target tumor cells, are relevant models to test various therapeutic
strategies (e.g. antibody dependent cell cytotoxicity, Treg targeting
antibodies, TLR agonists, vaccines, adoptive T cells transfer, ) in
various pathologies (e.g. oncology, autoimmune disease, inflammation,
transplantation, ). Humanization of NOG mice was already characterized
and validated using freshly collected human PBMCs or hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs) in both newborn and adult NOG mice.The complete
characterization of the reconstituted NOG mice was done in peripheral
blood as well as central lymphoid organs such as bone marrow, spleen and
thymus, using FACS analysis. Moreover, the human immune reconstitution
and function in NOG mice was also evidenced with human cytokine and
immunoglobulin quantification in mouse plasma samples. The injection of
mature human PBMC in adult NOG mice leads to the consistent development
of a xenogeneic graft-versus-host disease (GvHD), which mimics human GvHD
(modification of CD4/CD8 ratio, expression of T cells activation markers
and cytokine production).Growth characteristics of human tumors models on
humanized mice will be presented either as subcutaneous or as
disseminated intravenous model. Randomization parameters were selected
regarding both tumor and immune cell sides. Required readouts to
understand immune cell modulation (Cell phenotyping and functionality)
and related antitumor efficacy will be described. Finally, such models,
i.e. humanized NOG mice bearing or not human tumor cells in the context
of evaluation of new therapies will be detailed in various pathologies.

