Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MET is a potential therapeutic target and a candidate for
combination therapy with EGFR inhibition in triple-negative/basal-like
breast cancer.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)/basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) are
known as poor outcome subtypes with deficiency of targeted molecular
therapy. Previous studies showed that MET may play a critical role in the
development of TNBC and may be a rational therapeutic target. In order to
evaluate MET as a potential therapeutic target for TNBC, we investigated
genomic aberration and expression status of MET and evaluated efficacy of
MET inhibitor, PHA-665752 in TNBC cell lines. MET protein expression was
relatively high in TNBC cell lines. The depletion of MET using small
interfering RNA (siRNA) led decreased cell proliferation and migration.
PHA-665752 treatment resulted in decreased cell viability, and most of
these cell lines were found to be moderately sensitive in their response
to PHA-665752. The most resistant cell line, MDA-MB-468, showed
exclusively high expression of EGFR, and then EGFR depletion using siRNA
induced increased sensitivity to PHA-665752. In our cohort, BLBC was the
subtype showing the highest relationship with MET expression among 5
subtypes (77/134, 57.5%, PTriple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)/basal-like
breast cancer (BLBC) are known as poor outcome subtypes with deficiency
of targeted molecular therapy. Previous studies showed that MET may play
a critical role in the development of TNBC and may be a rational
therapeutic target. In order to evaluate MET as a potential therapeutic
target for TNBC, we investigated genomic aberration and expression status
of MET and evaluated efficacy of MET inhibitor, PHA-665752 in TNBC cell
lines. MET protein expression was relatively high in TNBC cell lines. The
depletion of MET using small interfering RNA (siRNA) led decreased cell
proliferation and migration. PHA-665752 treatment resulted in decreased
cell viability, and most of these cell lines were found to be moderately
sensitive in their response to PHA-665752. The most resistant cell line,
MDA-MB-468, showed exclusively high expression of EGFR, and then EGFR
depletion using siRNA induced increased sensitivity to PHA-665752. In our
cohort, BLBC was the subtype showing the highest relationship with MET
expression among 5 subtypes (77/134, 57.5%, P<0.001). MET expression had
a poorer OS (P=0.001) and DFS (P=0.010). Interestingly, TNBC patients
with co-expression of MET and EGFR worsen the DFS significantly compared
with EGFR expression only. Our findings highly suggest that MET can be a
potential therapeutic target in TNBC, and the combined inhibition of MET
and EGFR may benefit for the treatment of BLBC patients.

