Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mapping C-terminal transactivation domains of nuclear HER family
receptor tyrosine kinases.


The HER family of receptor tyrosine kinases consist of four receptors,
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR/ErbB1/HER1), HER2 (ErbB2), HER3
(ErbB3), and HER4 (ErbB4). Collectively, this family of receptors plays a
critical role in initiating proliferation and survival signals in several
human cancers. It is well established that the HER family receptors rely
on two distinct compartments of signaling: 1) Classical membrane bound
signaling and 2) nuclear signaling. In the nucleus, HER family receptors
can serve as co-transcription factors, mediated by their C-terminal
domains, to promote transcription of several genes essential for cell
proliferation and cell cycle regulation, including regulation of the gene
cyclin D1. However, the domains within the C-terminus of EGFR, HER2 and
HER3 that confer this transcriptional potential (transactivation domains)
have yet to be defined.In the current study we aimed to minimally map the
regions of the C-terminal domains of EGFR, HER2 and HER3 that function as
transactivation domains. We first demonstrate that EGFR, HER2, and HER3
are nuclear localized in their full-length forms in various breast and
lung cancer cell lines. Next, we fused various intracellular cytoplasmic
domain regions of each receptor to the DNA binding domain of the yeast
transcription factor Gal4, and measured the ability for each construct to
transactivate Gal4 UAS-luciferase activity. This analysis demonstrated
that the C-terminal region distal to the tyrosine kinase domain (CTD) of
all HER family receptors have strong transactivation potential, with HER2
exhibiting the highest transactivation potential. Further deletion
mapping analysis of each receptor's CTD identified two regions
(bipartite) of approximately 25-40 amino acids in length that harbored
the majority of the receptors transactivation potential. To understand
how the identified bipartite C-terminal regions of each HER family
receptor influenced their transcriptional functions we deleted these
regions from each full-length receptor and performed cyclin D1
promoter-luciferase assays. While wild type EGFR, HER2, and HER3
overexpression was capable of transactivating cyclin D1-luciferase,
bipartite deleted receptors were severely hindered in their ability to
regulate the cyclin D1 promoter. Collectively, the findings presented
herein suggest that the EGFR, HER2 and HER3 contain a bipartite
C-terminal transactivation domain that may be responsible for their
ability to function as co-transcription factors.

