Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of novel VEGFR2 and Raf-1 kinase inhibitorsuppressing
MAPK signaling pathway in K-Ras mutant cancer cell-lines.


Introduction: Signal transduction in the Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK (MAPK) pathway
plays a key role in cell survival, growth and proliferation. The pathway
is controlled by extracellular signals through receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTK) and is activated by oncogenic mutations in many types of cancer.
The B-Raf mutants are found in various cancers, such as melanoma,
colorectal, ovarian, and prostate cancer. The Ras mutants are also found
in various carcinomas including colon cancer, pancreatic cancer,
non-small-cell lung cancer, and liver cancer. The mutated K-Ras gene
sends continuous signals to the colorectal cancer cells, telling them to
grow independent of the way ERBITUX blocks the EGFR growth signals.
Especially, over 90% of detected mutations in B-Raf are a V600E which
leads to constitutive kinase activity 500-fold greater than B-Raf wild
type and correlates with increased malignancy. Vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) and its receptors have been implicated in the
angiogenesis that is essential for growth and metastasis of solid tumors.
Since formation of solid tumors are angiogenesis dependent, several
strategies have been developed to inhibit VEGF signal transduction as
part of anticancer therapy. The first VEGFR2 and Raf-1 inhibitor to enter
clinical development was the multikinase inhibitor SORAFENIB, which is
now approved for the treatment of patients with advanced renal cell
carcinoma. More potent dual inhibitors against VEGFR2 and Raf-1 may be
beneficial for patients suffering from various tumors. In this study,
some of rational-designed compounds were synthesized and carried out the
in vitro and in vivo studies to find more efficient VEGFR2 and Raf-1
inhibitors.Methods: About two hundreds of compounds were designed and
synthesized. in vitro assays and in vivo studies were performed to
characterize the potential of VEGFR2 and Raf-1 inhibitors for solid
tumors.Results: Compound UI-162 showed strong kinase inhibition against
VEGFR2 (12 nM), B-Raf V600E mutant (0.2 nM), B-Raf wildtype (2.0 nM) and
Raf-1(0.6 nM). The compound showed good inhibitory effect in against
malignant cells expressing K-Ras or B-Raf V600E mutant type of cell-line
(SK-MEL-2 GI50: 133 nM / HCT-116 GI50: 229 nM / MDA-MB231 GI50: 278 nM /
A375P GI50: 51 nM / HT29 GI50: 40 nM / COLO 205 GI50: 12 nM,
respectively). In mechanism studies, the phosphorylation of MEK and ERK
were suppressed by the UI-162 compound in HCT-116 cell-line. In addition,
paradoxical effects were not detected compared with VEMURAFENIB. The
compound had also a good anti-proliferative activity against HUVEC and
showed a good oral bioavailability.Conclusions: The results of in vitro
and in vivo studies suggests that dual inhibition of VEGFR2 and Raf-1 may
provide strong antitumor efficacy and that UI-162 is a promising
candidate for the treatment of various human cancers harboring the K-Ras
and B-Raf V600E mutation.

