Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomic profiling reveals significant differences between the
ductal fluid from cancerous compared to unaffected breasts.


Introduction: There is significant need to develop new methods to improve
breast cancer (BC) screening and early detection. Metabolomic analysis of
breast ductal fluid is an exciting opportunity for improving the
detection of BC at an early stage. We hypothesize that differences
between metabolomic profiles of tumor cells compared to normal cells can
be used to develop an assay for early detection of BC. Breast ductal
fluid can be obtained in a non-invasive way from the breast via nipple
aspiration or ductal lavage.Approach: Metabolomic profiles were evaluated
in ductal lavage fluid samples obtained from 54 patients with breast
tumors (DCIS and Invasive Breast Cancer). The samples were collected in
the operating room from patients with unilateral disease and confirmed
diagnosis, prior to their surgery. For each patient, two samples were
obtained: one from the affected breast and the other from the
contralateral normal breast (control). Each patient served as her own
control. Metabolite extraction was performed using a sequential solvent
extraction protocol. Metabolomic analysis was performed using UPLC-TOF MS
analysis and the data were acquired in duplicate (two technical
replicates) for each sample. We used the XCMS package (Scripps Center for
Metabolomics, La Jolla, CA) for peak detection, peak matching, and
correction of retention time shift. This is followed by ion annotation to
identify derivative ions originating from the same compound in the forms
of adduct, isotopes, and in-source fragments. We performed statistical
analysis to identify ions with significant difference between the tumor
and normal samples. To correct for multiple testing, we used q-values
based on Storey's pFDR method. Significant ions with q-value 1.5 was
selected. Putative identifications of the selected ions were obtained
through mass-based search against four databases: the Human Metabolite
DataBase (HMDB), Metlin, Madison Metabolomics Consortium Database (MMCD),
and LIPID MAPS.Results: We analyzed the differences between normal and
tumor samples excluding the subjects who received preoperative treatment
(n=8). Based on statistical significance and FC, we selected 39 ions.
Verification of putative IDs for these metabolites is
underway.Conclusion: Our metabolomics analysis of the breast ductal fluid
reveals significant differences between cancerous and normal breasts.
These differences may be used to develop an assay that may improve early
detection of BC.Supported by a Grant from the Avon Foundation for Women

