Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic contrast-enhanced ultrasound monitoring of tumor perfusion
in a murine pancreatic tumor model to assess the effect of
(ziv)-aflibercept and sorafenib, two anti-angiogenic drugs.


Background: anti-angiogenic drug combinations provide a promising new
therapeutic approach. Noninvasive monitoring techniques would help to
choose drug based on patient response. The effects on tumor perfusion by
combining Ziv-aflibercept (VEGF-Trap is being developed as a part of a
collaboration between Sanofi and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc.) and
Sorafenib (NexavarTM, Bayer Schering Pharma) was tested. Methods:
pancreatic adenocarcinomas were induced by subcutaneous injection of 100
l containing 1 x 106 MIA PaCa2 cells in the left flank of 50 female, 2-4
week-old, nude mice (Naval Medical Research Institute [NMRI] Elevage
Janvier, Le Genest-St-Isle, France). Dynamic contrast-enhanced ultrasound
(DCE-US) was performed using an Aplio 50 ultrasound imaging system with a
12-MHz probe (PLT 1202 S, TOSHIBA, Tokyo, Japan). DCE-US data sequences
were acquired after intravenous injection of a 100 l bolus of Luminity
contrast agent. Data were acquired from each mouse on days 15, 16 and 24
after tumor cell injection. Treatment was started on day 15 just after
DCE-US baseline scan. Fifty mice were included in this study: 15 controls
received placebo, 11 mice were treated with sorafenib (60 mg/kg/day by
gavage), 12 mice were treated with ziv-aflibercept (40 mg/kg2 twice a
week by injection) and 12 mice were treated with the combination of the
two anti-angiogenic drugs. Image sequences were recorded in raw data
format and extracted with TOSHIBA software (CHIQ) allowing calculation of
the linear time-intensity curve in regions of interest within the tumor.
Using in-house software, the time-intensity bolus curve was fit to a
lognormal model from which the Area Under the Curve (AUC) was calculated
to assess microvascular perfusion in the tumor. Statistical analysis was
performed using Wilcoxon Signed-Rank tests. Results: the AUC decreased
significantly from day 15 to day 16 for the group receiving
ziv-aflibercept (p=0,020) and for the group receiving the combination of
ziv-aflibercept and sorafenib (p=0,005), while no significant differences
were found for the placebo or sorafenib monotherapy groups. From day 15
to day 24, the AUC obtained from the fit to the bolus curve decreased
significantly for the group receiving the combination of ziv-aflibercept
and sorafenib (p=0,031), while no significant differences were found for
the three other groups. Conclusions: the DCE-US functional evaluation
used in this study demonstrated that the association of the combination
of ziv-aflibercept and sorafenib and ziv-aflibercept alone reduced
functional perfusion in the tumor 24 hours after therapy onset. The long
term (9 days) perfusion reduction was maintained for combined therapy but
was not significant for placebo, ziv-aflibercept or sorafenib
mono-therapy.

