Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acute depletion of DNA methyltransferases reveals unique and
overlapping target sites in cancer.


DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) are responsible for establishing (DNMT3A,
DNMT3B, DNMT3L) and maintaining (DNMT1) DNA methylation to regulate gene
transcription and promote overall genome stability. Global changes in DNA
methylation, such as hypomethylation of repetitive sequences and
hypermethylation of tumor supressor gene promoters, are commonly observed
in various types of cancer; however, the DNMTs contribution to this
aberrant methylation remains largely unknown. In this study, we aim to
identify unique and overlapping target sites for each of the DNMTs in
order to better understand aberrant DNA methylation in cancer that will
ultimately permit development of new therapeutic strategies. We utilize
siRNA-mediated knockdown technology to acutely deplete the mRNA for each
of the DNMTs in both individual and combinatorial fashion in NCCIT
embryonal carcinoma cells. Subsequently, DNA methylation is observed
genome-wide in each DNA sample using two different methodologies: (1)
Methyl-CpG Binding Domain (MBD)-seq, which identifies regions of the
genome that are enriched for DNA methylation, and (2) Illumina Infinium
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (450K array) allowing for specific CpG site
methylation status determination. Aligned MBD-seq sequences for
individual DNMT knockdowns are analyzed by read coverage nomalization
within 100Kbp windows and using various peak-calling algorithms (e.g.
MACS, BALM). For the 450K array, DNA samples for both individual and
combination knockdowns undergo bisulfite conversion and array processing;
-values for each CpG site are derived from the array signal intensities
using GenomeStudio and R/Bioconductor (minfi). Genome-wide DNA
methylation analysis reveals that DNMT1 depletion, both individual and in
combination with knockdown of other DNMTs, results in global
demethylation among all genomic features. Interestingly, a small
population of genes exhibit hypermethylation in gene-promoter CpG islands
for DNMT1 (individual only) depletion. In contrast, de novo
methyltransferase depletion (individual and combination) shows more
specific demethylation effects. In particular, hypomethylation events
resulting from DNMT3B depletion (individual and combination (not 3B+3L))
occur within gene bodies and largely outside of CpG islands and flanking
regions (shores, shelves). Additionally, a number of hypermethylation
events occurring within the 3UTR region of genes are observed in de novo
methyltransferase depleted samples. We anticipate further analysis will
reveal unique and overlapping target sites for each of the DNMTs that
will lay the ground-work necessary to characterize and understand DNMT
recruitment both in normal and cancerous tissues.

