Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Classification of HCC patient derived xenograft (PDX) models by
transcriptome and microRNome profiling, and their resemblance to patients.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a disease of diverse types.
Transcriptome analysis recently classified HCC into three major
categories with distinct clinical parameters as well as cellular
differentiation1. They are S1 (stem-like group with activation of the WNT
pathway and TGF-), S2 (activation of MYC and AKT), and S3 (hepatocyte
differentiation). Patient derived xenografts (PDXs) have been suggested
to be predictive experimental models (Patient avatars) because they have
not been in vitro manipulated, and have the original patients
histopathological and genetic profiles2,3. In order to assess the
resemblance of these avatar to patients, we performed transcriptome
profiling on a collection of HCC-PDXs using the same algorithm1.
Twenty-two HCC-PDX models were classified into 3 groups, among which S1
and S2 are more closely related. Using the 572 genes generated from the
algorithm, the same classifications were obtained by hierarchical
clustering and principal component analysis (PCA), except for two
outliers. The results demonstrate that our cohort of HCC-PDXs can be
divided into the same three subclasses as those from patient samples1.In
addition, Luk et al., recently classified HCC using expression levels of
microRNA cluster at 14q32.2 locus, in which a stem-like HCC phenotype was
associated with high expression4. We thus also used this criterion to
classify our collection of HCC PDXs. The two resulting categories,
14q32.2-hi and 14q32.2-lo, can be compared to the S1, S2, S3 subclasses
determined by mRNA profiling described above, in which S1 belongs to
14q32.2-lo and S2/3 belong to 14q32.2-hi (except LI1025, LI1078).The
serum -fetoprotein (AFP) and tumor AFP-mRNA levels were found to be
strongly and positively correlated, and also associated with S21 and
14q32.2-hi4, consistent with previous reports1. Six stem-like markers
were found not to be associated with S11, nor with 14q32.2-hi4, thus
different from the report by Luk et al4. Activation of c-MET was found
exclusively in S1 models, consistent with one of previous observations5,
but not the other4. When all these models were treated with Sorafenib, a
multi-kinase inhibitor, there seemed to be no correlation in the tumor
responses between the subclasses. In summary, the data provided insights
into the classifications of HCC by mRNA expression1 and 14q32.2 microRNA
expression4, partially consistent with existing reports1,2. The results
also show distinctive characteristics of our HCC-PDXs that merit further
studies.

