Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NG2 upregulation and its defective asymmetric distribution in
pediatric brainstem glioma and diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma.


Introduction:Pediatric brainstem glioma (BSG) is one of the most
difficult cancers to treat accounting for 10-20% of all pediatric central
nervous system (CNS) tumors. BSGs may occur throughout the brainstem and
are categorized into two main groups: diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas
(DIPGs) and focal brainstem gliomas. DIPGs represent about 80% of BSG and
have a peak onset of six to nine years of age. DIPGs invade throughout
the pons and may spread to other portions of brainstem. To better
understand the pathophysiology of the disease, a genetically engineered
(PDGF-expressing) BSG mouse and a xenograft model have been
established.Results:We recently reported proteome profiling of DIPG CSF
and formalin fixed specimens. To expand our molecular studies of the
disease, we generated complete protein profiles of specimens obtained
from BSG mouse tumor and aged-matched healthy controls. Neuroglia 2
(NG2), also known as chondroitine sulfate proteoglycan 4 (CSPG4) was
selected for further analysis based on its exclusive expression in BSG
specimens. Although NG2 has been previously implicated in adult gliomas,
its role in pediatric gliomas has not been investigated and currently
there are no publications on the role of NG2 in DIPGs. Recently, NG2
expression has been shown to play a significant role in neoplastic
transformation of glioma precursor cells. Gliomas are thought to
originate from cells including astrocytes, stem cells, and glioma
progenitor cells. Glial progenitor cells are specifically important since
several groups have reported detection of oligodendrocyte markers
including NG2, PDGFR, and Olig-2 in gliomas.Our preliminary data shows
high expression of NG2 in murine model of brainstem glioma as well as 80%
of pediatric DIPG specimens tested. We show that shRNA-mediated knockdown
of NG2 reduces cellular migration in vitro. NG2 expression is defective
(symmetric) in dividing cells in vitro and in vivo. The defective NG2
expression is consistent with a recent observation in adult high grade
gliomas. Injection of NG2 expressing neurospheres (NS) into brainstems of
2 day old mice (P2) results in highly aggressive brainstem tumors
resulting in death within 3-7 weeks post-injection. Therefore the NS
injected mouse model of brainstem glioma provides a solid model for
testing therapeutics and evaluating interventions. Furthermore, we show
selective delivery of liposomal nanoparticles to brainstem of our robust
BSG mouse model. We also show that nanoparticle-mediated delivery of
doxorubicin will induce apoptosis in tumor and not the adjacent normal
region.Conclusion:We introduce a robust murine model of brainstem glioma
that is developed using NG2 expressing cells. High expression of NG2 in a
subset of DIPGs and its defective expression may provide novel approaches
for treating DIPGs and BSGs.

