Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of carcinogenic effect of multiwall carbon nanotubes on
the rat lung at 2 and 52 weeks after pulmonary instillation.


Multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) have recently been shown to contain
fibers similar to asbestos in length and diameter. When these fibers are
inhaled, MWCNT can induce pulmonary toxicity including inflammation,
granuloma, fibrosis, and hyperplasia. Also, a characteristic shared with
asbestos fibers has led to concern that environmental or occupational
exposure to MWCNT might cause asbestos-like pulmonary diseases including
carcinoma. To examine MWCNT's pulmonary toxicity, we used the
intrapulmonary spraying (IPS) technique. Also, to examine the effects
depending on its length of MWCNT, using a 25 m-sieve it was separated
into three fractions; the remaining (R), flow through (FT), and whole
(W). Male F344 rats were treated with 0.5 mL of 250 mg/mL suspensions of
each fraction of MWCNT eight times over a 14-day period by intrapulmonary
spraying. Six hours after the last IPS, the rats were sacrificed and
complete autopsy was done (short-term exp). Mean length of MWCNT was 2.6
m (FT) and 4.2 m (W). Length of the R fraction could not be measured
because of its tangled up status. At 52 weeks after the start of the
experiment, the remaining rats were sacrificed and complete autopsy was
also done using a 25 m-sieve. In the short-term exp, MWCNT were found
mainly in focal granulomatous lesions in the alveoli and in alveolar
macrophages. MWCNT were also seen in the mediastinal lymph nodes.
Inflammatory cell infiltration and granuloma formation were seen in each
fraction treatment group. Mean area of inflammatory cell infiltration was
significantly increased in the FT fraction treatment group as compared to
the other two fractions treatment groups and control group. In the
long-term exp, MWCNT were detected in focal granulomatous/fibrous lesions
in the alveoli and in alveolar macrophages. In the lung tissue of each
fraction treatment group, mean area of granulomatous/fibrous lesions
increased compared to the control group. In the lung tissue of the
short-term exp, the levels of mRNA/protein expression of Csf3, IL6,
Cxcl2, and Ccl4, which were highly expressed in a microarray analysis in
primary cultured macrophages, were enhanced in each fraction treatment
group compared to the control group. In the long-term exp, the levels of
mRNA expression of Csf3 and IL6 were markedly low. mRNA expression of
Cxcl2 and Ccl4 were almost same level as the control. IPS of MWCNT did
not cause tumors in alveolar epithelial tissues. These results indicate
that MWCNT cause inflammatory toxic effects on the rat lung at 2 and 52
weeks after instillation. The initial hypothesis of a carcinogenic
activity of instilled MWCNT could not be verified in a 52-week bioassay
system.

