Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The unknown piece of the pie: Molecular markers in triple-negative
lung cancer.


Lung cancer is the main cause of cancer mortality worldwide.
Approximately 80% of lung cancer cases are non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) in type and >50% of NSCLC are adenocarcinoma in histopathology. A
shifting paradigm in the field of pulmonary oncology is the
identification of molecular markers that are therapeutic targets and/or
provide prognostic information. The recent recognition of the role
biomarkers such as EGFR, KRAS, and ALK play in NSCLC adenocarcinoma
patients demonstrates this trend. Although these three highly
characterized molecular markers make up one-quarter to two-thirds of
NSCLC adenocarcinoma patients, the remaining population, termed
Triple-Negative Lung Cancer (TNLC), has yet to be fully defined. The
complete absence of therapeutic targets for triple-negative lung cancer
patients undeniably supports the need to identify up-regulated and
mutated genes that better define this poor prognostic cohort. Recent
genome-wide expression profiles subdivided TNLC patients into a poor
prognostic group based on the overexpression of the DEP domain containing
1 gene (DEPDC1) (Okayama et al., 2011). We hypothesized that
overexpression of DEPDC1 correlates with a specific sub-population of
adenocarcinoma patients. Our initial studies indicate that DEPDC1 is
constitutively expressed in both normal lung as well as lung cancer
specimens. DEPDC1 transcripts are present as two variants (V1 and V2),
with constitutive expression of the V1 variant in normal lung. We
hypothesized that expression of the V2 transcript could be unique to
NSCLC adenocarcinomas. Screening of FFPE NSCLC adenocarcinoma specimens
using a proprietary qPCR approach demonstrated the presence of the DEPDC1
V2 variant but at levels that were not sufficient to serve as a sole
biomarker. We therefore investigated whether the ratio of DEPDC1 V2
expression relative to V1 could serve as a biomarker in TNLC. Our
preliminary data suggest that the ratio of V2 to V1 expression of DEPDC1
does in fact segregate TNLC into specific sub-populations. These studies
have exciting diagnostic as well as therapeutic implications as Phase
I/II studies using novel peptide vaccines derived against DEPDC1 have
proven tolerable and efficacious for patients with bladder cancer and
could potentially be extended to target these newly identified TNLC
sub-populations.

