Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) mediates metastases of
breast cancer stem cells.


Background: Recent studies on various cancer types suggest that the mere
acquisition of cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) phenotype is not sufficient
to confer metastatic potential. Epithelial-Mesenchymal transition (EMT)
has been implicated in enhancing cancer metastatic dissemination, and
generating CSCs, which may be a key determinant in imparting metastatic
potential to CSCs. Our goal is to determine the metastasis potential of
the CSCs generated from EMT and to explore critical molecules involved in
the metastatic cascade process.Experimental design and methods: The
metastatic ability of the EMT-generated-CSCs (HMLE-Ras-Snail) and the
control cell line (HMLE-Ras-vector) were compared by the migration,
invasion and chemotaxis assays in vitro, as well as experimental and
spontaneous metastases mice models in vivo. A microarray gene profiling
analysis was performed to explore signaling molecules involved in the
EMT-CSCs-metastasis. Functional assays were used to verify the identified
molecule in vitro and in vivo.Results: HMLE-Ras-Snail cells showed
significant high migration, invasive behaviors, especially under the
different organ protein as chemo-attractants (lung, brain and liver).
Experimental lung and brain metastasis mice study showed a significant
enhancement of tumor extravasation and outgrowth of HMLE-Ras-Snail cells
compared with the control cells. Spontaneous metastases mice studies
showed that 7 out of 9 mice developed lung metastasis, and 2 out of 9
with brain metastasis for the HMLE-Ras-Snail model, while none of the
HMLE-Ras-vector cell-injected mice were detected with metastases.
Two-photon live animal imaging also showed enhanced single cell adhesion
and movement in the lung or brain micro-vessels in the HMLE-Ras-Snail
cell-injected mice. The differential gene expression analyses and western
blot indicated that the CTGF is up-regulated in the EMT-generated-CSCs.
Knockdown of CTGF in the HMLE-Ras-Snail cells not only enhanced the
expression of epithelial marker and decreased the mesenchymal marker, but
also decreased the in vitro proliferation, migration, invasion,
mammosphere formation and in vivo lung metastases.Conclusions: CTGF may
play an important role in breast cancer metastasis, with enhancing cell
motility, invasiveness and also give cell self-renewal stem cell-like
characteristic to facilitate EMT-CSCs-Metastasis.Citation Format: Jing
Zhong, Xiaoping Zhu, Hong Zhao, Stephen Tc Wong, Stephen Tc Wong.
Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) mediates metastases of breast
cancer stem cells. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 4924. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4924

