Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular alterations in mammary stem cells in response to
pregnancy or short-term estradiol treatment leads to the reduced risk of
breast cancer.


Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women worldwide. Early
pregnancy is the only known natural phenomenon that reduces the risk of
breast cancer. Rodents like rats and mice that undergo a full term
pregnancy also have a greatly reduced susceptibility to chemical
carcinogen induced mammary carcinogenesis compared to nulliparous rats
and mice. Earlier we have demonstrated that short-term treatment with
pregnancy levels of estradiol is highly effective in conferring
protection against mammary carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis is a multistep
process which includes initiation, promotion and progression. In the
current study our objective was to determine the molecular mechanisms
underlying the protective effect conferred by parity and short-term
treatment with pregnancy levels of estradiol against mammary
carcinogenesis. We mainly focused on the differences in mammary stem
cells between virgin, parous and short-term estradiol treated groups.
Virgin Lewis rats were implanted with Alzet mini pumps releasing 1
microgram of estradiol/day at 7 weeks of age. The Alzet pumps were
removed 3 weeks later. Rats were mated between 6-7 weeks of age. The pups
and mother were weaned after three weeks of lactation. Six weeks after
weaning or withdrawal of hormone treatment (16 weeks of age), the rats
were treated with 50 mg/kg of N-methyl-N-nitorosurea (MNU). Rats from all
the three groups were euthanized at different timepoints. Mammary gland
was surgically removed and mammary stem cells were sorted using flow
cytometry. Cells that were positive for aldehyde dehydrogenase, CD44 and
low or negative for CD24 were sorted and used for molecular analysis.
Using stem cell signaling PCR arrays we have attempted to identify
differences in gene expression among mammary stem cells obtained from the
three groups of animals. We observed clear differences in expression of
fibroblast growth factor receptos (FGFRs), notch, smads, and
transcription factors between virgin mammary stem cells in comparison to
parous and short-term estratiol treated mammary stem cells. These
findings are currently being validated using quantitative RTPCR and
immunoblotting. The results obtained will be presented. The current data
indicates that there are molecular differences in the mammary stem cells
between animals that are susceptible to mammary carcinogenesis compared
to animals that are protected against mammary carcinogenesis.

