Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishing validated pediatric cancer cell lines and direct
xenografts from post-mortem samples.


Background: Cell lines and direct xenografts (XGs) provide important
laboratory models for cancer research. The COG Cell Line & Xenograft
Repository (www.COGcell.org) establishes, characterizes, banks, and
distributes cell lines and XGs from a wide-range of pediatric cancers. We
explored the use of post-mortem (PM) samples, in particular
readily-obtainable blood samples with circulating tumor cells, to
initiate cell lines in vitro and direct-to-mouse XGs.Methods: Tumor was
minced and blood, bone marrow (BM), or pleural fluid mononuclear cells
were separated by a ficoll gradient. Cells were cultured in IMDM + 20%
FBS + 4mM L-Glutamine + ITS at 37C in 20% O2 / 5% CO2. A subset of
samples was also cultured in BM level hypoxia (5% O2) and/or tumor level
hypoxia (2% O2). Another subset of samples was cultured in a serum-free
formulation (Neurobasal-A) in addition to the standard IMDM formulation;
15 samples were also injected directly into NOD/SCID, nu/nu, or NSG mice.
Neuroblastoma (NB) origin was confirmed by expression (RT-PCR) of
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), Ewings Family of Tumors (EFT) line origin by
detection of the EWS-FLI1 translocation, and lymphoma by B-cell markers
via flow cytometry. All lines were validated for identity by 16 loci
short tandem repeat (STR) analysis (compared to original patient sample)
and all tumor lines were tested for the lack of the Epstein-Barr Virus
(EBV) genome by PCR.Results: We received 33 PM samples (brain tumor = 1,
EFT = 1, lymphoma = 3, NB = 26, RMS = 2) and established 24 continuous
cell lines: 1 brain tumor, 1 EFT, 3 lymphoma, 17 NB, and 2 RMS; 4/9 from
tumor, 15/18 from blood, 4/5 from BM, 1/1 from pleural fluid. Ten direct
XGs were established (9 with matching cell lines): 3 lymphoma and 7
neuroblastoma; 8/9 from blood, 1/1 from BM, and 2/3 from tumor). The
overall take rate for PM cell lines was 76%. Tumor was the least
successful at 44% while PM blood samples were the most successful with an
89% take rate. Cell lines were also established for all 15 samples
cultured in hypoxia and 5 of 6 in serum-free media. All cell lines and
XGs were validated to original patient tissue or blood using STR
analysis. All NB lines expressed TH and the EFT line has a EWS/FLI1
translocation. Blood or marrow mononuclear cells matching 9 cell lines
and xenografts were transformed with EBV to generate lymphoblastoid cell
lines as a source of germ line DNA.Conclusions: PM samples enable
establishing cell lines and xenografts from heavily-treated patients with
progressive disease. These PM cell lines and XGs should manifest
therapeutic resistance and thus closely reflect the tumor biology of
subjects enrolled in early-phase trials. Physicians, patients, and
parents should be made aware of the value of obtaining PM samples for
research. These cell lines and XGs from PM samples will provide a
renewable resource for cancer genomic, biological, and preclinical
therapeutic studies of therapy-refractory pediatric cancers.

