Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exome sequencing and SNP array analysis of HLRCC syndromic uterine
leiomyomas.


Uterine leiomyomas (fibroids) affect approximately 70% of women by the
age of 50 years and thus are the most frequent tumors of the female
reproductive tract. Fibroids are benign tumors originating from the
smooth muscle cells of the uterus. They may cause various symptoms
including abdominal pain, abnormal bleeding, and pregnancy complication,
and they are the most common cause for hysterectomy. Our recent study
identified somatic mutations in mediator complex subunit 12 (MED12) in as
many as 70% of sporadic fibroids. Traditionally, fibroids have been
considered rather stable, although some recurrent cytogenetic
rearrangements affecting mainly chromosomes 7q, 12q15, and 6p21 have been
reported. Hereditary Leiomyomatosis and Renal Cell Cancer (HLRCC, OMIM
150800) is an autosomal dominant cancer syndrome which predisposes to
cutaneous and uterine leiomyomas, and renal cell cancer. Syndrome is
caused by heterozygous germline mutations in the tumor suppressor gene
fumarate hydratase (FH) at 1q42.1. The gene encodes fumarase, which
catalyzes the hydratation of fumarate to L-malate in mitochondrial
tricarboxylic acid cycle. Cutaneous and uterine leiomyomas are the most
prevalent lesions with the syndrome and present typically at the age of
25 to 30 years. The aim of this study was to systematically characterize
the genomic profile of FH deficient fibroids. For this, we analyzed
altogether 10 fibroids and their corresponding myometrial samples from
two Finnish HLRCC-family members and one sporadic leiomyoma sample with
two somatic changes in FH by exome sequencing and SNP array analyses. To
identify somatic variants, exome data from the tumors was filtered
against the data from the respective myometrial samples as well as 93
Finnish individuals from the 1000 Genomes Project, 62 in-house controls,
and all known variants in the dbSNP database. Altogether only 18
validated somatic mutations were observed in the exome data. All the
variants were unique; they were observed only in one sample and the
respective genes did not harbor additional changes in other tumors. No
variations in genes commonly mutated in malignant tumors e.g. TP53, Rb or
PTEN were observed. Neither were MED12 mutations, suggesting that
mutations in MED12 and biallelic FH inactivation are mutually exclusive.
In the SNP array analysis most of the tumors were found to carry large
(>5 Mb) aberrations. The only recurrent change was the deletions at the
FH locus. Deletions at 7q, which are frequently observed in sporadic
uterine leiomyomas, were not present in these FH deficient tumors. To
summarize, exome sequencing and SNP array analyses of 11 FH deficient
tumors did not reveal any recurrent somatic variations in addition to the
changes at the site of FH at 1q42. Loss of FH function damages the
tricarboxylic acid cycle and causes a severe metabolic stress for the
cells. This may be sufficient to induce formation of these benign lesions
of the uterus.

