Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of bladder cancer-associated gene methylation using
next-gen bisulfite sequencing.


DNA methylation profiling of bladder cancer specific gene promoters has
been shown to be a sensitive and specific diagnostic tool for early- and
late-stage bladder cancer. We have recently shown that a urine-based
assay that combines DNA and protein biomarkers can accurately triage
patients undergoing evaluation for bladder cancer. As part of this assay,
hypermethylation of Twist1 and Nid2 is performed by conventional
methylation-specific PCR (cMSP). To increase throughput and lower cost,
we have now developed an approach to determine the methylation at
single-base resolution of CpG sites using next generation bisulfite
sequencing. In addition to Twist1 and Nid2, methylation of the Vimentin
promoter, which has been shown to be associated with epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) in bladder cancer, was also evaluated using
this technique. To determine the sensitivity of this approach,
amplification was performed on control bisulfite converted genomic DNA
that was either enzymatically methylated or chemically unmethylated at
CpG sites using non-methylation specific PCR. Twist1, Nid2 and Vimentin
PCR products were subsequently used as template for emulsion PCR and
sequenced using the Ion Torrent PGM. Methylation status was determined by
aligning sequencing reads to unmethylated reference sequences. In this
assay, 0.4% methylated DNA could be reliably detected in 10 ng of
bisulfite converted DNA, more than doubling the sensitivity of the
current assay as well as potentially generating a single-base resolution
mapping of additional CpG sites not yet quantified for Twist1, Nid2 and
Vimentin. The clinical performance of the Next-Gen bisulfite sequencing
assays for Twist1, Nid2 and Vimentin is currently being tested using
urine samples from patients with bladder cancer as well as from age
matched individuals who present with hematuria but who are found to be
cancer-free. The technique we have developed could be used to detect
other hypermethylated genes in a variety of bodily fluids where percent
methylation may be much lower than in tumor tissue samples.

