Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dovitinib has anti-tumor activity in gastrointestinal stromal
tumor (GIST) cell lines.


Background: Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common
gastrointestinal tract sarcoma, with 5000-6000 cases per year diagnosed
in the United States. Most GISTs carry activating mutations in KIT ( 75%
of cases) or PDGFR alpha (10%-15%). Imatinib, a KIT/PDGFR inhibitor, is
the frontline treatment for GIST, although secondary mutations commonly
lead to acquired resistance. Dovitinib inhibits several kinase targets
important in the development and maintenance of GISTs, including KIT,
PDGFR, VEGFR, and FGFR. This study was designed to evaluate the
single-agent activities of imatinib and dovitinib in a panel of GIST cell
lines and an imatinib-sensitive mouse model.Methods: In vitro sensitivity
was examined in both imatinib-sensitive (GIST-T1 and GIST882) and
-insensitive (GIST430 and GIST48) cell lines. KIT phosphorylation was
measured by Western blot and sandwich ELISA. Imatinib and dovitinib
monotherapy were evaluated for tumor growth inhibition and delay in a
nu/nu mouse xenograft model using GIST-T1 xenografts. Dovitinib was
administered by mouth at either 60 mg/kg daily for 14 days or 30 mg/kg
daily for 21 days. Imatinib was given at 100 mg/kg by mouth twice daily.
Following treatment, dosing was terminated, and tumors were allowed to
regrow off treatment. Kaplan-Meier analysis was used to determine tumor
growth delay, reported as median time to reach endpoint (tumor volume
1000 mm3).Results: Imatinib and dovitinib inhibit KIT phosphorylation in
GIST-T1,GIST882, GIST430 and GIST48 cells, although imatinib appeared to
be more potent. Dovitinib and imatinib both potently inhibited the
proliferation, GI50 10-100 nM, of imatinib-sensitive GIST-T1 and GIST882
cell lines; GI50 was > 500 nM in imatinib-insensitive GIST48 and GIST430
cell lines. In vivo, imatinib and dovitinib were well tolerated for 14-
and 21-day treatment cycles. In the 14-day treatment model, imatinib and
dovitinib led to 52% and 59% tumor regression, respectively, and median
time to regrowth was 69 days for both agents compared with 31 days for
vehicle. In the 21-day treatment model, imatinib and dovitinib led to 66%
and 36% tumor regression, respectively, and median time to regrowth was
81 and 69 days, respectively, compared with 27 days for
vehicle.Conclusions: Dovitinib inhibits KIT signaling and has similar
growth-inhibition activity to imatinib in imatinib-sensitive GIST cell
lines. In xenograft models, both imatinib and dovitinib are well
tolerated, induce tumor regression, and delay tumor regrowth. The
additional kinase inhibitory activities of dovitinib offer the
possibility for enhanced or differentiated activity to imatinib in
certain settings. Experiments are ongoing to explore this possibility.
These data suggest that dovitinib may have therapeutic benefit in GIST,
with efficacy resulting from a combination of the inhibition of KIT and
other kinases.

