Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Studies on antitumor effects of bithionol on ovarian cancer cells.


Introduction: Drug Repurposing promises to be a successful concept for
the treatment of many diseases. We focused on Bithionol (BT), a
clinically approved antiparasitic drug for use as a therapeutic agent
against ovarian cancer. BT has been shown to inhibit solid tumor growth
in several preclinical cancer models by targeting autotaxin (ATX).
Methods: In the present study, we determined the anti-tumor effect of BT
and its mechanism of action against a panel of ovarian cancer cell lines.
First, we studied the cytotoxic effect of BT against a panel of ovarian
cancer cell lines (A2780 & A2780-CDDP OVACAR-3, SKOV-3, IGROV-1, and
IGROV-1CDDP). We identified the type of cell death i.e. apoptotic vs.
necrosis, and examined markers of apoptosis and necrosis. Mechanism(s) of
action were studied in terms of reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation,
autotoxin (ATX) inhibition and MAPK signaling. In addition, we studied
the sensitizing effect of BT on cisplatin cytotoxicity. Results: Our
results have shown that BT causes dose dependent cytotoxicity against all
the cell lines tested with IC50 values ranging from 20M - 60M. The order
of ranking in terms of sensitivity to BT is A2780 > SKOV-3 > OVACAR-3>,
IGROV-1. Cisplatin resistant variants of A2780 and IGROV-1 have shown
almost similar IC50 values to their sensitive variant. Apoptotic cell
death was observed at low concentration and early time points whereas
necrosis was observed at high concentrations and later time points.
Apoptotic cell death was shown by expression of caspases 3,7, increased
homogenous caspases 3/7 activity, loss of mitochondrial potential, cPARP
expression, DNA condensation, up-regulation of p38 and down regulation of
XIAP. At higher concentrations, BT caused down-regulation of caspases3/7
activity and increased LDH activity indicative of necrosis. Sensitization
studies with BT showed that pre-treatment of ovarian cancer cell lines
with BT for 24 hrs enhanced cisplatin cytotoxicity by 20 - 80%.
Interestingly, cisplatin resistant variants of A2780 and IGROV-1 were
more sensitive to cisplatin upon BT pre-treatment as compared to their
sensitive variants. The order of ranking in terms of enhanced sensitivity
to cisplatin upon BT pre-treatment was A2780-CDDP > A2780 > OVCAR-3 >
IGROV-1CDDP > IGROV-1 >SJOV-3. BT treatment resulted in increased ROS
generation. Treatment with antioxidant ascorbic acid resulted in partial
restoration of cell viability. In addition, dose and time dependent
inhibition of ATX was observed. Conclusions: Our results demonstrate the
cytotoxic effect of BT on various ovarian cancer cells and the mechanism
of actions appears to be partly via ROS generation and inhibition of ATX.
Pre-treatment with BT resulted in enhanced cytotoxicity to cisplatin
especially in cisplatin resistant variants. In view of these results, BT
can be an effective adjunct agent along with cisplatin for ovarian cancer
treatment.

