Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of Src family kinase inhibitors in non-metastatic clear
cell renal cancer.


Approximately 8000 new cases of renal cancer are diagnosed each year,
with an estimated five year survival rate of 50%. Treatment options are
limited, however a potential target is a family of non-receptor tyrosine
kinases, called Src family kinases (SFKs). SFKs have a role in multiple
oncogenic processes and are associated with promoting metastases in solid
tumours; however, research in renal cancer is limited. Previously, we
reported that all eight SFKs were expressed in human renal clear cell
carcinoma. Lyn, Blk, Lck, Fyn and Yes showed a significant increase in
expression between stages T1 and T2 and a subsequent decrease between T2
and T3, suggesting SFKs increased to promote invasion and migration for
metastatic spread.The aim of the current proposal is therefore to
investigate if SFKs could be a therapeutic target for renal cancer.The
prototypical SFK, Src was investigated for association with clinical
outcome measures. High membrane Src expression was associated with
improved disease specific survival (p=0.097). However, low expression of
phosphorylated cytoplasmic FAK at Y861 a Src specific site, was
associated with poor disease specific survival (p=0.001). This suggests
that poor prognosis associated with FAK is due to a family member other
than Src as all SFKs can phosphorylate this residue. The effect of SFKs
inhibition on migration, apoptosis and proliferation in a non-metastatic
renal cancer cell line, 786O was examined. Western blot analysis
demonstrated that treatment of 786O with the SFK inhibitor, dasatinib,
did not affect total levels of Src, but a dose dependent reduction in SFK
activation was observed, as shown via Y416 phosphorylation and FAK
phosphorylation at Y861. Cells also exhibited a dose dependent reduction
in migration accompanied by an increase in apoptosis when treated with
dasatinib for 48 hours. However, no effect on proliferation was observed.
Treatment with Src siRNA to remove Src from the cells did not
significantly influence the effects observed in response to dasatinib
suggesting dasatinib acts via another SFK family member.Our data shows
that activation measured via phosphorylation of the downstream marker FAK
at Y861 was associated with poor prognosis and removing Src from 786O
cells did not effect the actions of the Src inhibitor, dasatinib. This
combined with our previous observation of SFKs expression increasing from
stage T1 to T2 and decreasing from T2 to T3 lead us to conclude that SFKs
are important for tumour cells migrating to the outer edge of the organ
ready for metastasis then dissipate as the metastasis occurs and that
this may be promoted by a SFK family member other than Src. However the
specific family member responsible for these actions and the actions of
dasatinib is still to be established.

