Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast tumor kinase (Brk/PTK6) mediates hypoxia/HIF-1-associated
breast cancer progression.


Triple negative (basal type) breast cancers are more aggressive and
difficult to treat relative to HER2/ER/PR positive (luminal type) breast
cancers; these tumors frequently express abundant Met receptors and
contain high constitutive levels of hypoxia inducible factor alpha
(HIF-1), a principal mediator of cellular stress that predicts cancer
relapse and increased risk of metastasis. Breast tumor kinase (Brk/PTK6;
Sik in mice) is a soluble tyrosine kinase that is not found in normal
breast tissue, but is aberrantly expressed in up to 86% of all breast
cancers. We recently showed that Brk is a critical downstream effector of
Met signaling and required for HGF-induced cell migration. Herein, we
show that Brk and HIF-1 are co-expressed in human triple negative cell
lines and tumors. Brk mRNA and protein levels are strongly upregulated
during conditions that induce cellular stress in vitro, including low
glucose, H2O2, and hypoxia. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
revealed that Brk is a direct early transcriptional target of HIF-1; HIF
knockdown demonstrated that Brk expression is dependent upon both HIF-1
and HIF-2. Notably, Brk expression rescued the growth of MDA-MB-231
xenografts knocked-down for both HIF1 and HIF2 in vivo. Finally, we
crossed WAP-Brk (FVB) transgenic mice into the MMTV-METmut model (FVB
mice engineered to express MMTV-driven constitutively active mutant Met
receptors); the addition of the human wt Brk transgene decreased survival
in this model. Notably, mouse mammary tumors that arose in MMTV-METmut
mice expressed abundant Sik, the mouse homolog of Brk; high Sik
expression conferred markedly decreased latency to tumor formation
independently of the presence of the Brk transgene. These results
identify HIF-1 as a novel regulator of Brk mRNA expression and suggest
that Brk is a key mediator of HIF-1-induced breast cancer progression.
Targeting Brk expression or activity (downstream of the HGF/Met receptor
signaling pathway) may provide an effective means to block the
progression of deadly triple-negative breast cancers.

