Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tamoxifen amplifies antitumor impact of nanoformulated ceramide-
pan efficacy in a myriad of tumor cell types.


Although ceramide has potent tumor suppressor properties, its use in
cancer therapeutics has been limited; this is mainly due to rapid
metabolism of ceramide by cancer cells, the inability to attain
therapeutic levels when ceramide-generating agents are employed, and the
inherent insolubility of ceramide as a therapeutic. Our approach
circumvents these disadvantages and provides advantages over existing
methodologies. For example, rather than promoting intracellular ceramide
generation by application of exogenous drugs that activate de novo and
sphingomyelinase pathways, we have chosen to administer ceramide
exogenously in the form of short-chain C6-ceramide nanoliposomes; this
overcomes solubility issues and improves uptake. In addition,
nanoliposomes are efficient platforms for delivering other hydrophobic
chemotherapeutics. The antiestrogen tamoxifen was selected for our
studies because of its unusual off-target actions, which include
inhibition of ceramide metabolism at glycosylation and hydrolysis.
Blocking these junctures increases C6-ceramide intracellular residence
time and diminishes production of sphingosine 1-phosphate, a mitogenic
lipid derived via the action of ceramidase and sphingosine kinase. Hence,
C6-ceramide and tamoxifen make up a versatile drug duo. Using in vitro
models of human colon and breast cancer, acute mylogenous leukemia (AML),
and melanoma, we show that simultaneous administration of nanoliposomal
C6-ceramide and tamoxifen potently and synergistically decreased cell
viability, compared to the single agents. The mix induced
caspase-dependent apoptosis, cell cycle arrest at G1 and G2, upregulation
of JNK, p38, and p53, and downregulation of Akt and survivin. In triple
negative, hormone-insensitive breast cancer cells, C6-ceramide-tamoxifen
induced cell cycle arrest, caspase-dependent apoptosis, and lysosomal and
mitochondrial membrane permeability. Evaluation of single agents showed
that tamoxifen elicited lysosomal membrane permeability and inhibited
acid ceramidase. We have obtained similar results in in vitro models of
human melanoma and AML. In an in vivo retroviral transduced murine AML
model, the combination lowered leukemia burden in spleen and marrow. The
combination also perpetuated synergistic increases in long-chain
ceramides, likely compounding the overall ceramide effect. Of interest
regarding in vivo utility, the major metabolites of tamoxifen,
N-desmethyltamoxifen and 4-hydroxytamoxifen, were effective in
combination with C6-ceramide. Our findings show that tamoxifen magnifies
the antiproliferative effects of C6-ceramide via aggregate mechanisms.
This proficient, ceramide-based nanoliposomal drug regimen may have
potential as an effective anticancer therapeutic.Supported by NIGMS
77391; ABC's, Los Angeles; Fashion Footwear Association of New York
Charitable Foundation.

