Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transient mechanical stimulation can enhance cancer cell invasion.


Formation of secondary tumors by metastasis is a leading cause of death
in cancer patients. During metastasis cells separate from the primary
tumor, invade the stroma, travel through blood and lymph and colonize
tissues distant from the primary mass. Several biochemical factors have
been identified which are able to drive this metastatic cascade. However
information of the role of mechanical factors in cancer metastasis has
primarily focused on the effect of compliance, overshadowing other
mechanical factors that might facilitate the metastatic progression. For
example, contractile cells produce short term stress on extracellular
matrix fibers during extensive remodeling of the stroma, such variable
and transient force would easily propagate through the fibers providing
communication between cells. To simulate this type of stress, we
developed an in vitro invasion assay where cancer cells are subjected to
tugging or pulling forces, similar in randomness and magnitudes to those
produced by contractile cells in the tumor microenvironment, without
interference of any secreted factors that could be provided by the
stromal cells. We discovered a significant difference in the extent of
invasion by cancer cells that were mechanically stimulated in this manner
verses non- stimulated cell culture environments. This response requires
the presence of fibronectin in the extracellular matrix. The objective of
our current study is to understand the mechanotransduction pathway
leading to enhanced invasion. We speculated that in response to
mechanical forces in the stroma, tumor cells will show an altered
expression of genes involved in mechanosensing. We performed expression
profiling of several genes related to cell migration, adhesion and tumor
metastasis by real-time PCR analysis. Given a 24 hour assay period, six
genes were confirmed to be differentially expressed between mechanically
stimulated and non-stimulated conditions. Of particular interest was the
down-regulation of a fibronectin specific integrin subunit in response to
the mechanical stimulation that enhanced invasion. Over-expression of
this gene resulted in a significant decrease in enhanced invasion,
supporting its role in sensing the mechanical stimulus. We speculate that
mechanical stimulation during cancer cell invasion results in integrin
cross-talk leading to the downregulation of specific integrins, while
enriching others within the invadopodia.

