Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The extracellular form of NAMPT contributes to creating a
proinflammatory environment in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.


Malignant cells are characterized by a higher NAD turnover rate than
normal cells, making this biosynthetic pathway an attractive target for
cancer treatment. Increasing evidence indicate that NAD plays important
roles not only in energy metabolism, but also in calcium homeostasis and
inflammation. Here we investigated the biologic significance of a
rate-limiting enzyme of the NAD synthesis pathway, nicotinamide
phosphoribosyl transferase (NAMPT), focusing our attention on the
extracellular form (eNAMPT), which exerts cytokine/adipokine-like actions
in different tumor models as well as in acute and chronic
inflammatory-metabolic diseases. The role of eNAMPT and its mechanisms of
action have been addressed in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), an
indolent lymphoproliferative disorder, strongly dependent on a growth
supportive environment and on nucleotide/nucleoside metabolism. The aim
of this work is to test whether eNAMPT plays a role in shaping the
leukemic environment, by generating proinflammatory conditions that favor
tumor expansion.Results indicated that: i) B-CLL lymphocytes expressed
higher levels of NAMPT mRNA compared to normal B lymphocytes obtained
from age- and sex-matched donors; ii) plasma levels of eNAMPT were also
significantly higher in CLL patients (n=80) compared to controls (n=20);
and iii) activation of purified CLL cells was followed by eNAMPT
secretion, indicating that it is the leukemic component that actively
releases eNAMPT. Then we addressed the question whether this cytokine may
play an active role in the leukemic microenvironment. Treatment of PBMCs,
but not B purified CLL lymphocytes, for 5 days with recombinant NAMPT
resulted in an increased numbers of adherent cells (CD11b+), displaying
intracellular vacuoles and granules, consistent with macrophage
differentiation, and in significant induction and secretion of
proinflammatory cytokines. Furthermore, long-term exposure to eNAMPT
enhanced the formation and the phagocytosis ability of nurse-like cells
(NCLs), a CD68+ myeloid population and an essential component of the CLL
microenvironment. Moreover, treatment of NLCs with eNAMPT triggered rapid
phosphorylation of Erk1/2, STAT3 and nuclear translocation of the NF-kB
component p65. Lastly, preliminary data indicated that NAMPT enzymatic
activity is not required for its extracellular functions, as highlighted
by the inability of i) nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN), a product of
the NAMPT activity, to induce STAT3 phosphorylation and cytokines
secretion, as well as ii) NAMPT inhibitor FK866 to block eNAMPT-dependent
STAT3 activation.Taken together, these data support the hypothesis that
eNAMPT, secreted by CLL cells, contributes to the formation of a
proinflammatory environment, driving recruitment and differentiation of
myeloid populations, that provides anti-apoptotic and pro-survival
signals to leukemic cells.

