Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ion AmpliSeq Panel for the DNA sequencing of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes
on Ion Torrent PGM.


The development of massive parallel sequencing (MPS) has revolutionized
the field of genomics and created new avenues for basic research. The
introduction of the benchtop sequencers enables the development of
methodologies for genetic screening that are faster, more comprehensive
and more cost-effective than conventional Sanger sequencing. In this
study we describe a collaborative effort for the validation of a strategy
for the screening of the breast cancer susceptibility genes- BRCA1 and
BRCA2, making use of the most recent advances on Ion AmpliSeq multiplex
PCR technology combined with Ion PGM System.Strict criteria were set to
the design of the amplification primers: 1) 100% coverage of all coding
exons and exon-intron boundaries; 2) amplicons covering exons must be
overlapping; 3) primers must not overlap; 4) no SNPs in the last five
nucleotides of primer; and 5) maximum of three non-validated SNPs per
primer. Constitutional genomic DNA of 50 BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutated cases are
used. The cases are divided in two groups. The first 20 cases are used to
test and optimize the methodology and are selected based on the presence
of mutations in or within close proximity to homopolymer regions. The
additional 30 cases are used for an independent and blind evaluation and
power estimation of the new methodology. All samples are studied using
both gold standard Sanger sequencing and Ion PGM System. For
data-analysis various software packages are evaluated.In the first 19
cases all SNPs and mutations, identified by Sanger sequencing were
detected with our Ion AmpliSeq based approach. The disease-causing
mutations identified included missense, nonsense and indel mutations. The
number false positive results were always less than five per sample and
reproducible. This work demonstrates the potential for mutational
screening of BRCA1 and BRCA2 using the Ion AmpliSeq technology combined
with the Ion Torrent PGM.

