Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vangl2 and Prickle1 expression, interaction and regulation of
Wnt/PCP signaling in medulloblastoma and neuroblastoma.


Background /Aims: Wnt are a family of intercellular signaling factors
that regulates a wide range of functions during embryonic development
including cell proliferation, cell fate determination, differentiation,
cell polarity and cell migration. They bind to Frizzled receptors and
thereafter proceed via Dishevelled to several intracellular pathways
known as the canonical and non-canonical signaling pathways. Activation
of the canonical pathway results in an accumulation of cytoplasmic
beta-catenin levels. Increased Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is associated
with many forms of cancer, including the embryonic neural childhood
tumors medulloblastoma and neuroblastoma. The non-canonical Wnt signaling
pathways can inhibit the canonical signaling pathway, although the
mechanism is still unclear. In this study, we investigate the roles of
Prickle1 and Van Gogh-Like 2 (Vangl2), two planar cell polarity (PCP)
genes in regulation of the cytoskeleton, Wnt/beta-catenin activity and
tumorigenicity in neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma.Methods: mRNA and
protein expression of human Prickle1, Vangl2 and beta-catenin were
examined in neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma cell lines. siRNA and cDNA
transfection were performed together with co-immunoprecipitation and
immunocytochemistry.Results and conclusions: We show that Prickle1 and
Vangl2 are expressed in neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma cell lines at
different levels. Decreased Prickle1 expression correlates with increased
levels of Wnt/beta-catenin in both medullo- and neuroblastoma cell lines,
demonstrating a downregulation of PCP components and a possible
activation of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. Immunoprecipitation
demonstrated that Prickle1 is present in complex with Vangl2. However,
the exact mode of interaction between Prickle1 and Vangl2 remains to be
eluciated. Microarray analysis revealed that low expressions of Prickle1
or Vangl2 are both associated significantly worse clinical outcome in
neuroblastoma. Additionally, siRNA experiments revealed that knockdown of
Prickle1 and Vangl2 increased cell proliferation of neuroblastoma cells.
Taken together this indicate that the non-canonical Wnt pathway may be an
interesting therapeutic target in embryanol neural childhood tumors.

