Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA-seq identifies a TGF- signature that predicts response to
preoperative bevacizumab in breast cancer.


Background: Gene expression profiles from tumor biopsies taken during
preoperative therapy may identify markers associated with therapy
benefit. We have previously shown that changes in TGF- pathway activity
following one dose of bevacizumab (B) are associated with pathologic
complete response (pCR) (SABCS, 2012). Here we evaluated the ability of
this signature to predict pCR following brief exposure to trastuzumab (T)
or nab-paclitaxel (N).Methods: We sequenced transcriptomes of core biopsy
RNA from 50 breast tumor pairs obtained from neoadjuvant clinical trials
BrUOG 211A/211B. Patients were given one dose of B (n=15) or N (n=17) or
T (n=18), followed by combination biologic/chemotherapy (HER2- with
B/carboplatin/N; HER2+ with T/carboplatin/N). Paired-end sequencing
(74bp) was performed using amplified total RNA from biopsies obtained
pre/post 10 day exposure to run-in monotherapy. Transcript abundance and
differential expression were estimated assuming Poisson-distributed
read-counts. Significance-adjusted log2 fold change (sa-log2FC) of gene
expression was calculated by diminishing statistically insignificant (p >
0.05) log2FC values by 100. sa-log2FC values of the TGF- activity
signature genes were used to cluster patients and the clusters were
tested for enrichment of pCR cases. Prioritization of the genes in the
TGF- activity signature was performed with a shrunken centroid classifier
using 3-fold cross-validation to identify an appropriate shrinkage
threshold.Results: PCA and RNA-seq based PAM50 subtyping showed baseline
and post-brief exposure samples clustering together across all patients.
We identified significantly differentially expressed genes upon brief
exposure to therapy associated with pCR in the B arm. Pathway analysis
revealed TGF- signaling, Cell Cycle, DNA Replication and Steroid
Biosynthesis pathways to be enriched (p0.05) after multiple testing
correction. Following the lead on TGF- signaling, we derived a 107-gene
TGF- activity signature by combining a published TGF- activity signature
(Padua et al, 2008) with the pCR-associated KEGG TGF- signaling pathway
genes in our study. This signature showed a strong separation of pCR
cases (p=0.004) by clustering. We further refined this using a shrunken
centroid classifier to identify a 61-gene signature of TGF- activity
whose down-regulation is predictive of pCR in the B arm. Evaluation of
the TGF- signature in the T and N arms showed no association with
pCR.Conclusions: TGF- pathway genes whose activity is altered by brief
exposure to bevacizumab are associated with pCR; a similar pattern was
not observed following exposure to trastuzumab or nab-paclitaxel. This
signature may provide an early indication of potential benefit from
preoperative treatment with bevacizumab and combination chemotherapy. We
are currently in the process of validating these results using a custom
RT-PCR panel.

