Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: K14-GFP-miR-31 transgenic mice confer high susceptibility to
squamous cell tumorigenesis on oral tongue and esophagus.


Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) occurring on head and neck region and
esophagus causes tremendous cancer mortality around the world. Effects
from tobacco and/or alcoholic carcinogens and other factors are highly
associated with the prevalence of these malignancies. MiRNAs are small
non-coding RNAs mediating the RNA interference on targeted mRNAs. They
play important roles in the pathogenesis of malignancies. miR-31 is among
the most eminently up-regulated miRNAs in SCC occurring in head and neck
region and esophagus. To elucidate the molecular pathogenesis of SCC, we
established miR-31 transgenic mouse lines, in which miR-31 is under the
control of K14 promoter and co-expressed with GFP. GFP and miR-31 were
detected in basal and suprabasal squamous cells of skin, oral cavity and
esophagus in these transgenic mice. The transgenic mice exhibited higher
potential for tumor induction than wild type mice on oral tongue and
esophagus by 4-nitroquinoline 1-oxide (4NQO) treatment. The precancerous
lesions on oral tongues and esophagus in transgenic mice were also in
more advanced stages in contrast to counterparts of wild type mice.
Homozygous transgenic mice had the worst prognosis than the others. 4NQO
induction also up-regulated miR-31 expression in tumors of wild type
mice. The tumors induced in transgenic mice expressed more abundant
miR-31 and VEGF, and less abundance of factor inhibiting HIF (FIH) than
tumors in wild type mice. Base excision repair genes were validated as
targets of miR-31 in human SCC cell lines, and the expression of these
target genes were also decreased in the squamous epithelium of transgenic
mice. This study identifies the high sensitivity of K14-GFP-miR-31
transgenic mice for chemical carcinogen-induced squamous cell
tumorigenesis, and this could be associated with the down-regulation of
tumor suppressor genes and the impairment of repair activity to
counteract carcinogenic stimuli in squamous cells.

