Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diagnostic serum biomarkers for canine hemangiosarcoma: a
potential model of human angiosarcoma.


People suffering from uncommon diseases often do not benefit from the
advances in medical research due to lack of research. One such disease is
angiosarcoma, a highly aggressive cancer originating from blood vessels
with risk factors including toxic exposure, radiotherapy and lymphedema.
Angiosarcoma in dogs (commonly called hemangiosarcoma) is a very similar
disease with much higher prevalence, comprising up to 7% of all canine
malignancies. For both species, an accurate diagnostic method is needed
for more favorable outcome.We developed a biomarker discovery pipeline
consisting of a high-throughput biomarker discovery platform and a
database for data mining and statistical analysis for candidate
identification. The platform screens for differential glycosylation of
serum glycoproteins as potential biomarkers utilizing 20 individual
lectins followed by direct coupling to tandem mass spectrometry. The
database facilitates the identification of differential glycosylation and
produces a ranked list of potential biomarker candidates. Using this
pipeline, sera from 10 dogs with hemangiosarcoma with 10 age and
sex-matched control sera were processed and analyzed.Candidates from the
database were ranked based on its ability to classify normal and cancer.
The ranked list of candidates for this screen composed of glycoproteins
involved in cell migration, tumor immune response, and glycoproteins
reported to be altered in human and canine angiosarcoma and other cancer
types. Some examples will be shown to illustrate the change in specific
glycosylation structures associated with cancer as measured by binding to
specific lectin(s) while binding to other lectins are not changed. These
glycosylation-specific changes are potentially more specific diagnostic
biomarkers than circulating proteins alone.We are currently validating
the identified candidates and pursuing the development of clinical tests
to improve diagnosis and clinical outcomes of angiosarcoma for both dogs
and humans.

