Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathway analysis of chemoresistance in ovarian cancer cell lines.


Introduction: Ovarian Cancer is the most deadly female reproductive
cancer and fifth most common cause of death from cancer among women.
Limited characterization of the chemoresistant population demonstrates
the need for improved therapy for ovarian cancer. Pathway analysis of
microarray data of paired chemosensitive and chemoresistant ovarian
cancer cell lines may help to elucidate important contributors to
chemoresistance, and paired analyses can eliminate the significant
heterogeneity among patient samples. Significant genes may serve as
potential targets for novel drug therapies. Some genes likely contribute
to resistance of multiple chemotherapies and represent common pathways of
resistance.Methods: Microarray data of three pairs of chemosensitive and
chemoresistant ovarian cancer cell lines were analyzed using GeneSpring
Single Experiment Analysis of 517 pathways. These pairs include SKOV3ip1
and SKOV3TRip2 (taxane-resistant), HeyA8 and HeyA8MDR (multi-drug
resistant), and A2780cp20 and A780cp55 (increasing cisplatin resistance).
Significant genes within significant pathways were compared between types
of drug resistance.Results: Between SKOV3ip1 and SKOV3TRip2, 8 pathways
were significantly (pIntroduction: Ovarian Cancer is the most deadly
female reproductive cancer and fifth most common cause of death from
cancer among women. Limited characterization of the chemoresistant
population demonstrates the need for improved therapy for ovarian cancer.
Pathway analysis of microarray data of paired chemosensitive and
chemoresistant ovarian cancer cell lines may help to elucidate important
contributors to chemoresistance, and paired analyses can eliminate the
significant heterogeneity among patient samples. Significant genes may
serve as potential targets for novel drug therapies. Some genes likely
contribute to resistance of multiple chemotherapies and represent common
pathways of resistance.Methods: Microarray data of three pairs of
chemosensitive and chemoresistant ovarian cancer cell lines were analyzed
using GeneSpring Single Experiment Analysis of 517 pathways. These pairs
include SKOV3ip1 and SKOV3TRip2 (taxane-resistant), HeyA8 and HeyA8MDR
(multi-drug resistant), and A2780cp20 and A780cp55 (increasing cisplatin
resistance). Significant genes within significant pathways were compared
between types of drug resistance.Results: Between SKOV3ip1 and
SKOV3TRip2, 8 pathways were significantly (p<0.001) modulated, dominated
by the selenium pathway and folate/B12 metabolism. Between HeyA8 and
HeyA8MDR, 9 pathways were significantly modified, led by DNA regulation
and cell cycle progression. These differences between the SKOV3 model
were interesting, given that both chemoresistant lines were developed in
the same way. In A2780cp20 and A2780cp55, 7 pathways were significantly
affected, highlighted by members of the Electron Transport Chain and
controls on oxidative phosphorylation and autophagy. Validation of
individual genes as important to chemoresistance will follow from this
analysis.Conclusions: Multiple pathways are implicated in
chemoresistance, even when selected by the same chemotherapeutic agent.
Pathways contributing to metabolism, DNA repair, cell cycle control, and
stress responses dominated. The high variability in pathway
overexpression highlights the importance of patient-specific approaches
to overcoming chemoresistance in ovarian cancer.

