Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo evaluation of IGF2 RNA interference in a mouse xenograft
model of paclitaxel-resistant human ovarian cancer.


Introduction. We previously showed that paclitaxel-resistance of human
ovarian carcinoma cell lines was reverted by knockdown of IGF2 with RNA
interference. The aim of this study was to determine if our
paclitaxel-resistant cell line HEY-T30 was resistant to paclitaxel
treatment in vivo and if this resistance could be reverted by IGF2
knockdown through short hairpin RNA. Methods. Paclitaxel-resistant
HEY-T30 cells, derived in our laboratory from HEY ovarian carcinoma
cells, were transfected with a plasmid containing shRNA to target IGF2
(shIGF2-p) or a nontargeting shRNA (shScrambled). Stably transfected
clones were evaluated by reverse transcription real-time PCR for IGF2
mRNA expression and by sulforhodamine cytotoxicity assay for paclitaxel
sensitivity. For in vivo experiments, HEY, HEY-T30, shIGF2-p or
shScrambled cells were suspended in OptiMem and one million cells/animal
injected subcutaneously into 4-week-old female nude mice. Tumors were
allowed to grow to a mean volume of 125 mm3, prior to treatment
initiation with paclitaxel (20 mg/kg administered intraperitoneally every
3 days x 5 doses) or vehicle (5% dextrose in water; D5W). Animals were
weighed and tumors were measured with digital calipers three times per
week. Effect of treatment was calculated as effect=1-(T/C) at the
indicated time point, where T is the mean tumor volume of the paclitaxel
treatment group and C is the mean tumor volume of the vehicle control
group. Significance was calculated with a 2-way repeated measures ANOVA
with a Bonferroni multiple comparisons post-test. Results. IGF2 mRNA
levels of shIGF2-p cells were comparable to HEY, whereas shScrambled was
similar to HEY-T30. The IC50s (concentration of 50% inhibition of
proliferation) for paclitaxel in vitro were HEY: 2.3 nM; HEY-T30: 164.0
nM; shIGF2-p: 13.89 nM; shScrambled: 140.0 nM. HEY xenografts responded
well to paclitaxel treatment, showing a significant growth retardation
compared to the D5W group beginning at 9 days after treatment initiation
(p=0.0005), with an effect of treatment of 83.2% at day 19. In contrast,
HEY-T30 xenografts showed no significant difference in tumor volume
between the paclitaxel-treated and the D5W group at any time point,
confirming its resistance to paclitaxel (the effect of treatment was
5.5%). shScrambled xenografts were similarly resistant to paclitaxel as
HEY-T30 xenografts. shIGF2-p xenografts responded well to paclitaxel
treatment, showing a difference in tumor volume from day 15 onward (day
15, p=0.0457; day 19, p=0.0006) with an effect of treatment of 64.1%
after 22 days. Discussion. HEY-T30 xenografts are resistant to paclitaxel
treatment, whereas HEY xenografts respond well. IGF2 knockdown by shRNA
restores paclitaxel sensitivity to the HEY-T30 xenografts. These in vivo
results confirm our prior observations in cell lines and suggest a novel
target for the treatment of paclitaxel-resistant disease.

