Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BLID is a novel drug-inducible apoptotic molecule: Implications in
chemosensitization of breast cancer.


The triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive form of breast
cancer frequently seen in African American women and BRCA1 mutation
carriers. Although breast cancer risk increases with age, a high
proportion of early onset breast cancers (women 40 years old or younger)
are TNBC. The TNBC tumors often relapse with distant metastases following
standard chemotherapy. Advances in the molecular targets and mechanisms
of chemosensitivity may lead to a targeted systemic therapy, and
significantly and safely improve the outcome of chemotherapy in a subset
of metastatic TNBC. To this end, we have demonstrated that BLID, BH-3
Like motif containing Inducer of cell Death, is a strong prognostic
factor in invasive breast cancer. Frequent lack of BLID in breast cancer
has been associated with TNBC, African American ethnicity and younger
women (median 40 years) (all P values The triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC) is an aggressive form of breast cancer frequently seen in African
American women and BRCA1 mutation carriers. Although breast cancer risk
increases with age, a high proportion of early onset breast cancers
(women 40 years old or younger) are TNBC. The TNBC tumors often relapse
with distant metastases following standard chemotherapy. Advances in the
molecular targets and mechanisms of chemosensitivity may lead to a
targeted systemic therapy, and significantly and safely improve the
outcome of chemotherapy in a subset of metastatic TNBC. To this end, we
have demonstrated that BLID, BH-3 Like motif containing Inducer of cell
Death, is a strong prognostic factor in invasive breast cancer. Frequent
lack of BLID in breast cancer has been associated with TNBC, African
American ethnicity and younger women (median 40 years) (all P values
<0.005). Significant correlations exist between BLID negative breast
cancer and declines in overall survival, local relapse-free survival and
distant metastasis-free survival (all P The triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC) is an aggressive form of breast cancer frequently seen in African
American women and BRCA1 mutation carriers. Although breast cancer risk
increases with age, a high proportion of early onset breast cancers
(women 40 years old or younger) are TNBC. The TNBC tumors often relapse
with distant metastases following standard chemotherapy. Advances in the
molecular targets and mechanisms of chemosensitivity may lead to a
targeted systemic therapy, and significantly and safely improve the
outcome of chemotherapy in a subset of metastatic TNBC. To this end, we
have demonstrated that BLID, BH-3 Like motif containing Inducer of cell
Death, is a strong prognostic factor in invasive breast cancer. Frequent
lack of BLID in breast cancer has been associated with TNBC, African
American ethnicity and younger women (median 40 years) (all P values
<0.005). Significant correlations exist between BLID negative breast
cancer and declines in overall survival, local relapse-free survival and
distant metastasis-free survival (all P < 0.03). In a pilot study, the
odds of allelic loss of BLID for patients aged 40 years and younger are
3.7 times the odds of loss for patients aged 41-55 years (95% CI,
1.1-13). Despite the fact that members of the Forkhead boxO (FOXO)
subfamily of transcriptional regulators have been linked with breast
pathogenesis and prognosis, their mechanisms of action in breast cancer
are largely unknown. Several FOX proteins are negatively regulated via
phosphorylation by AKT, and drug-resistance of breast cancer cells has
been correlated with a dysfunctional FOXO3a/AKT axis. Our dose response
and time course studies suggest that BLID expression is induced by
several chemotherapeutic drugs including doxorubicin (DXR),
5-fluorouracil and cisplatin in hormone-responsive breast cancer cells.
In ChIP-PCR and ChIP-qPCR assays, DXR treatment of breast cancer cells
resulted in increased binding of FOXO3a, a well known proapoptotic
transcription factor, to the BLID gene promoter in a drug-dependent
manner. Exogenous expression of BLID cDNA nanocomplex led to significant
increase in chemosensitivity in ER-ve and PR-ve (SKBr3) and TNBC cells
(MDA-MB231). Consistent with a potential role of BLID in
chemosensitivity, BLID knockdown resulted in reversal of DXR-induced
cytotoxicity in breast cancer cells. Furthermore, siRNA silencing of
FOXO3a was found to be associated with decrease in BLID expression and
reversal of drug-induced cytotoxicity. Collectively, it appears that
certain chemotherapeutic drugs induce BLID expression via activation of
specific FOXO proteins and a functional FOXO/BLID signaling pathway may
be an important determinant of breast cancer response to chemotherapy.

