Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogene addiction switch from NOTCH to PI3K/AKT requires
simultaneous targeting of NOTCH and PI3K pathway inhibition in
glioblastoma.


Notch signaling pathway regulates normal stem cells in the brain and
glioma stem cells (GSCs) with high Notch activity. However, blocking the
proteolytic activation of NOTCH with -secretase inhibitors (GSIs) fails
to alter the growth of some GSCs as GSIs seem to be active in only a
fraction of GSCs lines with constitutive NOTCH activity and limiting the
efficacy of this strategy. Linking the molecular aberrations of cancer to
drug responses could guide treatment choice and identification of new
therapeutic applications. Here we report loss of PTEN as a critical event
leading to resistance to NOTCH inhibition, which causes the transfer of
oncogene addiction from the NOTCH to the phosphoinositol-3 kinase
(PI3K)/AKT pathway. This novel observation suggests the need to
simultaneous inhibition of both pathways as a means to improve
therapeutic efficacy in human GBMs.We investigated the effects of Notch
pathway inhibition in GSC using GSI. Drug cytotoxicity test on 16 GSCs
show differential growth response to GSI stratifying GSCs into two
groups: responders (6 cell lines) vs non-responders (10 cell lines).
Active Notch signaling seems to be important features for the GSC as
Notch inhibition only affected GSCs defined as having increased
endogenous Notch activity. However in the responder group GSCs with the
PTEN mutation seems to be less sensitive to GSI treatment. Here we show
that NOTCH regulates the expression of PTEN and the activity of the
PI3K/AKT signaling pathway in GSCs since treatment with GSI attenuated
Notch intracellular domain (NICD), Hes-1, Hes-3, and Hes-5 and increases
PTEN expression. NOTCH regulates PTEN expression via Hes-1 as knockdown
of either Notch or Hes1 led to increase expression of PTEN. In contrast,
PTEN knockdown decreases the response of GSCs to GSI in PTEN wild type
GSCs. Our data shows that PTEN is an important mediator of GSI induced
attenuation of cell growth suggesting that there might be a regulatory
circuit-linking Notch signaling with PTEN/PI3K/Akt pathway, providing the
basis for the design of new therapeutic strategies and suggests the need
to simultaneously inhibit both pathways as a means to improve therapeutic
efficacy in human GBMs. Our preliminary data reveal the synergistic
attenuation of cell growth using combination of GSI and PI3K inhibitors
in PTEN mutant GSCs. Our results warrant further studies to test the
efficacy of combined PI3K/AKT- and NOTCH-directed therapies in human
cancer.

