Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing MCT4 inhibits GBM growth, HIF response, and
CD133-positive fraction in a lactate-independent fashion.


Glioblastomas (GBM) contain a hypoxic core surrounded by proliferative
cells. Our group and others have shown that GBM stem cells favor a
hypoxic microenvironment, and it is believed that many reside in the
tumor core. Conventional therapies target the tumor bulk, but may spare
stem cells in the hypoxic niche. To patch this therapeutic loophole, we
sought to target the GBM stem cell microenvironment by identifying genes
that are important for survival in hypoxia. We identified monocarboxylate
transporter 4 (MCT4) as one of the most upregulated genes in our GBM
neurosphere lines in response to hypoxia. Clinically, GBM patients with a
two-fold or more upregulation of MCT4 have a significantly shorter
survival (p = 0.036) than patients with intermediate expression.
Consistent with this data, MCT4 upregulation correlated with the
aggressive mesenchymal subset of GBM (pGlioblastomas (GBM) contain a
hypoxic core surrounded by proliferative cells. Our group and others have
shown that GBM stem cells favor a hypoxic microenvironment, and it is
believed that many reside in the tumor core. Conventional therapies
target the tumor bulk, but may spare stem cells in the hypoxic niche. To
patch this therapeutic loophole, we sought to target the GBM stem cell
microenvironment by identifying genes that are important for survival in
hypoxia. We identified monocarboxylate transporter 4 (MCT4) as one of the
most upregulated genes in our GBM neurosphere lines in response to
hypoxia. Clinically, GBM patients with a two-fold or more upregulation of
MCT4 have a significantly shorter survival (p = 0.036) than patients with
intermediate expression. Consistent with this data, MCT4 upregulation
correlated with the aggressive mesenchymal subset of GBM (p<0.0001).
Using immunohistochemical analysis, we also found that MCT4 protein
levels are increased in high-grade as compared to lower grade
astrocytomas (pGlioblastomas (GBM) contain a hypoxic core surrounded by
proliferative cells. Our group and others have shown that GBM stem cells
favor a hypoxic microenvironment, and it is believed that many reside in
the tumor core. Conventional therapies target the tumor bulk, but may
spare stem cells in the hypoxic niche. To patch this therapeutic
loophole, we sought to target the GBM stem cell microenvironment by
identifying genes that are important for survival in hypoxia. We
identified monocarboxylate transporter 4 (MCT4) as one of the most
upregulated genes in our GBM neurosphere lines in response to hypoxia.
Clinically, GBM patients with a two-fold or more upregulation of MCT4
have a significantly shorter survival (p = 0.036) than patients with
intermediate expression. Consistent with this data, MCT4 upregulation
correlated with the aggressive mesenchymal subset of GBM (p<0.0001).
Using immunohistochemical analysis, we also found that MCT4 protein
levels are increased in high-grade as compared to lower grade
astrocytomas (p<0.0001), confirming the clinical importance of MCT4. To
test the requirement for MCT4 under hypoxia in vitro, we silenced MCT4 in
neurospheres using lentiviruses encoding short hairpin RNA (shRNA)
specific for MCT4. Cell growth was inhibited in hypoxia by 60% in
HSR-GBM1 and 70% in JHH-GBM10 in these neurosphere lines following MCT4
knockdown. Interestingly, while MCT4 was expressed at lower levels in
normoxia, silencing it in 21% oxygen also significantly inhibited growth.
CD133-positive stem-like cells expressed a significantly higher amount of
MCT4 compared to CD133-negative cells, and decreased proliferation in
vitro following MCT4 silencing was associated with reduced CD133-positive
stem-like cells and increased apoptosis. This suggests that MCT4 is
critical for the survival of CD133-positive stem-like cells under
hypoxia, and its inhibition targets the stem cell pool in the hypoxic
niche in tumors. Importantly, MCT4 silencing also slowed GBM intracranial
xenograft growth in vivo (p=0.009). Interestingly, while multiple earlier
studies had identified and characterized MCT4 as a lactate exporter, we
found that both extracellular and intracellular lactate levels did not
change following MCT4 silencing. Instead, MCT4 inhibition led to
downregulation of the HIF (Hypoxia-Inducible Factor) response, reducing
HIF target gene expression and pointing to a potential novel
lactate-independent function of MCT4 and a unique mechanism for growth
inhibition in malignant gliomas.

