Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a multiplexed RT-PCR-coupled liquid bead array
assay for the molecular characterization of CTCs.


Introduction. The presence of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in patients
bloodstream is responsible for hematogenous metastases and as a liquid
biopsy these cells should be considered as a useful tool for the
detection and the characterization of micrometastasis. Molecular
characterization of CTCs is really helpful for diagnostic and therapeutic
purposes. We recently developed a liquid bead array hybridization assay
for studying the expression of 6 genes in CTCs in breast cancer (Markou
et al, Clin Chem 2011). The aim of the present study was to expand the
potential of this assay by adding more genes of clinical interest in the
genes panel.Materials and Methods. We designed and evaluated a
multiplexed PCR-coupled liquid bead array for studying simultaneously the
expression of 14 genes. We firstly designed in silico primers and capture
probes for: a) breast cancer stem cell markers: ALDH1, CD24, CD44, b) EMT
markers: SNAIL, TWIST-1 and VIM, c) breast cancer markers: ERBB2,
mammaglobin A, MAGEA3, PTEN, d) epithelial markers: CK-19, e)
housekeeping genes: PBGD, HPRT1, and PDCD4 as a gene related with
apoptosis. The assay is based on the following steps: total RNA
isolation, cDNA synthesis, multiplex PCR for 14 genes, biotinylation of
multiplex PCR products, hybridization of the biotinylated multiplex PCR
products to xMAP microspheres, addition of streptavidin-phycoerythrin and
measurement in the Luminex 100 analyzer. Every single step was optimized
in terms of analytical specificity, repeatability and reproducibility
using the breast cancer cell lines MCF-7, MDA-MB-231 and SK-BR-3. To
evaluate the performance of this assay we used cancer cell lines
originated from the following tissues: a. human colon (COLO-205), b.
human cervix (HeLa) and c. human mammary gland (T-47D).Results. The total
duration of the assay, including hands on work, is approximately 6h. The
assay is highly specific for each gene in complex multiplexed formats.
Intra-assay CVs (n=3) ranged from 0.2% to 15.3% and inter-assay CVs (n=3)
ranged from 1.0% to 18.9%. The developed assay was successfully applied
for studying gene expression in COLO-205, HeLa, MCF-7, MDA-MB-231,
SK-BR-3 and T-47D cancer cell lines.Conclusions. The previously developed
liquid bead array has been successfully expanded including 8 additional
gene targets of clinical interest. The developed assay could be applied
for the molecular characterization of CTCs, since the expression of 14
genes can be measured simultaneously and reliably, thereby saving
precious sample and reducing the costs and time of analysis. The
developed assay will be further extended to include additional gene
targets.

