Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted delivery to tumor cells by using tunable nano-delivery
system with chlorotoxin.


The aim of this research is to develop the Tunable Nano-Delivery System
(TNDS) for specific targeting of the tumor cells using Chlorotoxin (CTX).
We present preliminary findings for the TNDS localized drug delivery
system comprising of non-ionic surfactant vesicles (niosomes) with CTX
embedded in a biodegradable and temperature sensitive chitosan network.
The system demonstrates a new approach in the treatment of cancers,
through the controlled and targeted delivery to tumor cells (the release
time and dosage can be accurately controlled) while sparing normal cells.
CTX is a scorpion-derived peptide that binds specifically to
neuroectodermal tumors, e.g., glioma, but not to normal tissues.
Previously, we have shown that there is a specific interaction between
chitosan and Mucin1 (MUC1) receptors over expressed in epithelial ovarian
carcinoma resulting in higher chitosan accumulation on the cancer cell
surface than on normal ovarian epithelial cells.The current research
addresses the incorporation of CTX embedded in Chitosan network to
enhance specific targeting, which already benefits from the intrinsic
interaction of MUC1 with Chitosan. Our current studies incorporating CTX
in chitsoan resulting in TNDS-CTX complex are preformed in cell-free
system. First, the release rates and release kinetics of TNDS-CTX are
being measured in cell-free system using High Performance Liquid
Chromatography (HPLC) and Attenuated Total Reflectance- Fourier Transform
Infra-Red (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy. Results are being compared to our
established TNDS delivery system to better determine CTX specific
chemical binding sites along with the sites already determined to be
specific for MUC1. Next, we will be testing TNDS-CTX in vitro in glioma,
epithelial ovarian carcinoma, and normal ovarian epithelial and astrocyte
cells. The level of fluorescence of normal cells and tumor cells exposed
to the TNDS-CTX-fluorescently labeled are evaluated in in vitro by
confocal microscopy. The studies in cell-free system showed that the
release rates could be finely controlled depending on the specific design
of the TNDS-CTX e.g., ratio of niosomes to chitosan and amount of
crosslinker for the chitosan network.We are currently evaluating TNDS-CTX
containing benchmark chemotherapeutics such as Paclitaxel, and it is
expected that the presence of CTX will enhance cellular uptake of
chemotherapeutics when compared to the noisome-chitosan delivery system
without CTX. Based on our preliminary data, it is anticipated that CTX
will perform as a targeting ligand improving the TNDS-CTX's anti-tumor
efficacy owing to enhanced tumor targeting and its tunable and localized
delivery.

