Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDK4/FLT3 dual inhibitors as potential therapeutics for acute
myeloid leukemia.


CDK4 is a cyclin D dependent kinase that promotes cell cycle progression
in a broad range of tumor types by phosphorylating the tumor suppressor
retinoblastoma protein (Rb) and releasing transcription factor E2F.
Critical involvement of the cyclin D-CDK4-Rb pathway in carcinogenesis is
strongly supported by a large amount of genetic evidence. In addition,
promoter methylation with consequent silencing of expression of the CDK4
inhibitor, p15, has been reported in 44-60% of acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) patients. It is also well established that constitutive activation
of the tyrosine kinase FLT3 via mutation contributes to the development
of AML, with 30% of AML carrying such activating mutations. FLT3 tyrosine
kinase inhibitors used as single agents reduce peripheral blood and bone
marrow blasts in only a minority of AML patients, and the effect tends to
be transient. This may be due to insufficient FLT3 inhibition, the
selection of drug-resistant clones, or the independence of the cell on
FLT3 signaling for proliferation and survival. In preclinical models, a
synergistic effect of CDK4 inhibition and FLT3 inhibition resulting in
increased apoptosis of AML cell lines was reported (Wang et al., Blood,
2007). From a HTS hit through SAR optimization led to AM-5992, a potent
and orally bioavailable dual inhibitor of CDK4 and FLT3 including all
FLT3 mutants reported to date. AM-5992 inhibits the proliferation of a
panel of human tumor cell lines including MDA-MB-435(Rb+), colo-205(Rb+),
U937(FLT3WT) and induced cell death in MOLM13(FLT3ITD), MV4-11(FLT3ITD),
and even in MOLM13(FLT3ITD, D835Y) which exhibits resistance to a number
of FLT3 inhibitors currently under clinical development. In mouse models
of leukemia using cells with the FLT3ITD mutation, AM-5992 treatment at
150 mpk qd on days 6-16 after leukemia cell injection significantly
reduced the leukemia burden and prolonged survival 11 days over that of
vehicle controls. Collectively, these data support the hypothesis that
simultaneously inhibition of CDK4 and FLT3 may improve the durability of
clinical response in AML; and consequently that this hypothesis should be
tested in the clinic.

