Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pediatric Preclinical Testing Program (PPTP) stage 1 evaluation of
the antimicrotubule agents cabazitaxel and docetaxel.


Introduction: Cabazitaxel (C) is a novel taxane active in preclinical
models of both chemotherapy-sensitive and -resistant human tumors.
Cabazitaxel is active in patients with advanced prostate cancer who have
progressed following docetaxel (D) treatment. We compared the antitumor
activity of cabazitaxel with that of docetaxel (both provided by Sanofi)
against in vitro and in vivo models of pediatric cancers.Methods: Both
agents were evaluated against the 23 cell lines of the PPTP in vitro
panel using 96 hour exposure at concentrations from 0.01 nM to 0.1 M.
They were tested against the PPTP solid tumor xenografts (SCID mice)
using a dose of 7.5 or 10.0 mg/kg administered by the IV route every 4
days X 3.Results: In vitro the median relative IC50 (rIC50) for
cabazitaxel was 0.47 nM and for docetaxel was 0.88 nM. Cabazitaxel and
docetaxel rIC50 and Ymin% values were significantly correlated with each
other. Cabazitaxel rIC50 values were significantly correlated with cell
line ABCB1 expression, but showed a weaker relationship compared to that
for docetaxel. In vivo, there was a trend for greater weight loss and
greater toxicity for cabazitaxel-treated versus docetaxel-treated
animals. A direct comparison of the EFS distributions for cabazitaxel and
docetaxel showed that 5 xenografts had significantly longer EFS for
cabazitaxel compared to docetaxel, while docetaxel was more effective for
no models for this measure. 5 of 10 xenografts showed maintained complete
responses (MCRs) to cabazitaxel, with MCRs observed across multiple
histologies. Only 1 of 10 docetaxel-treated models showed an MCR. In vivo
results are summarized in the Table using standard PPTP objective
response criteria.
Conclusions: Cabazitaxel was more potent in vitro than docetaxel against
the PPTP cell lines and showed greater in vivo activity than docetaxel,
although with somewhat greater toxicity. (Supported by award NO1-CM-42216
from the NCI).

