Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of microtentacles in the metastatic potential of breast
tumor stem cells.


Breast cancer is the 2nd leading cause of cancer-related death among
women; however, the majority of deaths arise as complications from
metastasis, rather than the primary tumor. The cancer stem cell (CSC)
hypothesis provides an explanation for the limited success of current
therapies for metastatic breast cancer. CSCs are defined as a
subpopulation of tumor-initiating cells with the stem cell-like
characteristics of self-renewal and multipotency. CSCs have been shown to
enter circulation and reach distal tissues, where they may remain
cell-cycle arrested, and therefore resistant to conventional
chemotherapeutics. Recent work in our lab has shown that circulating
tumor cells use dynamic tubulin-based microtentacles (McTNs) to reattach
to distant tissues, a critical step in metastasis. McTNs are novel
cellular structures formed by epithelial cells when detached from the
extracellular matrix and are increased in more metastatic breast cancer
cell lines. Given the proposed metastatic efficiency of CSCs, we examined
McTN incidence and function in mammary stem cells and breast cancer stem
cells. Flow cytometry for the CSC markers CD44 and CD24 showed that
breast tumor cell lines with increased CSC characteristics display higher
McTN frequencies. Given this correlation, CD44 and CD24
immunofluorescence was used to separate human mammary epithelial (HMLE)
cells into CSC and non-CSC subpopulations with flow cytometry. Stem-like
HMLE cells (CD44hi/CD24lo) have increased McTN levels compared to non-CSC
cells (CD44lo/CD24hi) from the same HMLE cell line. The CSC subpopulation
also demonstrated increased cytoskeletal modifications that promote McTN
formation, such as elevated vimentin expression and an increase in both
the amount and the bundling of stabilized, detyrosinated tubulin.
Vimentin and detyrosinated tubulin localize to McTNs in suspended
stem-like HMLEs. The increased McTNs in stem-like HMLEs promote faster
initial reattachment of suspended cells that is inhibited by the
tubulin-directed drug, Colchicine, confirming a functional role for McTNs
in stem cell reattachment. Moreover, live cell confocal microscopy
demonstrates that McTNs participate in the structure of breast stem cell
mammopsheres, extending between adjacent cells along cell-cell junctions.
McTNs can be reduced by the breast CSC targeting agent Curcumin. These
studies show that McTNs contribute to the metastatic potential of breast
CSCs as well as the ability of mammary stem cells to form multicellular
mammospheres. We anticipate that this work will clarify the molecular
mechanisms underlying tubulin alterations in breast cancer stem cells and
identify how these tubulin modifications may be targeted more
specifically to reduce McTNs and the metastatic reattachment efficiency
of breast cancer CSCs.

