Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of the PARP inhibitor veliparib (ABT-888)
in combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy in acute myeloid leukemia.


Genomic instability and impaired DNA repair are features of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). DNA damaging agents such as cyclophosphamide and
anthracyclines exert their antileukemic activity by generating widespread
genomic damage, coupled with inefficient DNA repair, and ultimately
apoptosis. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) enzymes are important in
recognizing and catalyzing DNA repair, particularly in cells with
impaired double stranded DNA (ds-DNA) repair. Veliparib (ABT-888) is a
potent, orally bioavailable small molecule inhibitor of PARP-1 and
PARP-2. We hypothesized that the ABT-888 would exploit DNA repair defects
in AML cell lines and enhance cytotoxicity when combined with
cyclophosphamide and idarubicin.Leukemic cell lines were exposed to
escalating doses of ABT-888 (50 - 5000 nM) alone and in combination with
idarubicin hydrochloride (ida)(1 - 30 nM), or
4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide (4-HC)(1 - 6 micromolar) at various time
points (24, 48 & 72 hrs) and sequences. Cell viability was measured by
XTT cell proliferation assay and trypan blue exclusion. Apoptosis was
measured by Annexin V flow cytometry. Cell cycle analysis was measured
via propium iodide flow cytometry. Measurement PAR polymerization was
performed with a standard ELISA assay.ABT-888 potently inhibited PAR
polymerization (Genomic instability and impaired DNA repair are features
of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). DNA damaging agents such as
cyclophosphamide and anthracyclines exert their antileukemic activity by
generating widespread genomic damage, coupled with inefficient DNA
repair, and ultimately apoptosis. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)
enzymes are important in recognizing and catalyzing DNA repair,
particularly in cells with impaired double stranded DNA (ds-DNA) repair.
Veliparib (ABT-888) is a potent, orally bioavailable small molecule
inhibitor of PARP-1 and PARP-2. We hypothesized that the ABT-888 would
exploit DNA repair defects in AML cell lines and enhance cytotoxicity
when combined with cyclophosphamide and idarubicin.Leukemic cell lines
were exposed to escalating doses of ABT-888 (50 - 5000 nM) alone and in
combination with idarubicin hydrochloride (ida)(1 - 30 nM), or
4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide (4-HC)(1 - 6 micromolar) at various time
points (24, 48 & 72 hrs) and sequences. Cell viability was measured by
XTT cell proliferation assay and trypan blue exclusion. Apoptosis was
measured by Annexin V flow cytometry. Cell cycle analysis was measured
via propium iodide flow cytometry. Measurement PAR polymerization was
performed with a standard ELISA assay.ABT-888 potently inhibited PAR
polymerization (<10% of control) in HL60 cells at achievable serum
concentration (200 nM) at 24, 48, & 72 hrs, both alone and in combination
with chemotherapy. Single-agent ABT-888 had modest activity in inhibiting
HL60 viability and inducing apoptosis, with an IC50 in the high
micromolar range. Exposure of HL60 cell lines to increasing doses of ida
or 4-HC led to dose dependent decrease in viability, increased apoptosis,
and cell cycle perturbation. Simultaneous treatment with increasing doses
of ABT-888 (40-500 nM) did not significantly increase cytotoxicity or
apoptosis and had no effect on cell cycle beyond chemotherapy alone.
Additional leukemia cell lines tested (OCI-AML3, K562, NB4) yielded
similar results. The sequence of administration was then investigated.
When ABT-888 (200 nM) was introduced prior to the cytotoxic drug, there
appeared to be antagonism, with reduced cytotoxicity at each dose level
for the combination, compared to chemotherapy alone. When the ABT-888
followed the cytotoxic drug, results were similar to simultaneous
administration.The interaction between PARP inhibitors and cytotoxic
chemotherapy in AML cell lines appears to be schedule dependent. Further
studies to define the optimal schedule, drug combination, and susceptible
cell types, including those with defective ds-DNA repair are needed.

