Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AMPK alpha 2 promotes tumor cell survival in models of breast
cancer dormancy.


Breast cancer can recur after standard of care treatment, even after many
years. As a result, there is a need to identify new ways to treat
metastatic recurrence, and to understand the mechanisms behind long-term
cancer cell dormancy. AMP-dependent kinase (AMPK) has been implicated in
tumor cell survival pathways and is under investigation as a potential
target for breast cancer treatment. A defining characteristic of dormant
tumor cells has been shown to be a reduction in mitogenic ERK1/2
signaling with a concomitant activation of stress-induced p38MAPK
signaling. This study aimed to investigate the role of AMPK2 in
establishing and/or maintaining a dormant state. Two estrogen-dependent
human breast cancer cell lines that express different levels of AMPK2
were used. MCF-7 cells, with little to no AMPK2 expression, were
transfected to express GFP control or AMPK2, while ZR-75-1 cells, with
high AMPK2 expression, were transduced with lentiviral shAMPK2 or shGFP
control particles. Stable cell lines were plated into mammospheres and
were exposed to stress conditions such as hypoxia, depletion of essential
growth factors, or low glucose. These mammospheres were evaluated by
direct cell count, size, and immunofluoresence. In addition, single cell
suspensions were mixed with matrigel and injected into athymic nude mice
containing slow-release estradiol cholesterol pellets. Estradiol pellets
were removed one week after implantation, and re-introduced six weeks
later. Matrigel plugs and tumors were harvested and analyzed for cell
survival by histological analysis, as well as immunofluorescent analysis
of the tumor cells for ERK/p38 activation, epithelial cadherin,
differentiation proteins, and autophagy markers. In order to investigate
the survival of MCF-7 cells with and without AMPK2, the amount of cells
remaining after prolonged estrogen deprivation was evaluated. There were
twice as many viable AMPK2 expressing cells as GFP cells. Re-exposure of
these animals to estradiol resulted in a rapid expansion of the remaining
GFP and AMPK2 tumor cells. Notably, AMPK2 tumors maintained a significant
growth advantage and were double the size of the GFP control tumors at
harvest. Evaluation of the p38MAPK pathway by immunoblot revealed that
those cells expressing increased amounts of AMPK2 exhibited high levels
of phospho-p38MAPK. Furthermore, those cells that expressed AMPK2 also
expressed increased amounts of LC3-II and autophagosome formation,
standard autophagy markers. In conclusion, AMPK promotes breast cancer
cell survival under stress in models of tumor dormancy potentially
through promotion of the p38MAPK pathway with concomitant reduction in
MAPK signaling, and/or autophagy pathways. This study suggests that AMPK2
contributes to breast cancer recurrence by promotion of tumor cell
dormancy and may be a novel therapeutic target.

