Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypercholesterolemia induces angiogenesis and causes accelerated
growth of breast tumors in vivo.


Background: While many risk factors for breast cancer (BC) such as family
history and age have been firmly established, evidence suggests that
dietary factors may also play a role in BC. Studies have linked intake of
saturated fat as well as metabolic syndrome to an increased prevalence of
BC. A common feature shared by metabolic syndrome and a typical American
diet is a high level of circulating cholesterol, however a number of
epidemiological reports investigating the relationship between high
cholesterol levels, cholesterol lowering drugs and BC are conflicting. To
determine the relationship between dietary cholesterol and BC in vivo, we
modeled this complex condition in a well controlled animal model that
utilized an innovative isocaloric diet. We hypothesized that
hypercholesterolemia promotes BC progression while hypocholesterolemia
has the opposite effect and retards BC progression.Methods: Female SCID
mice were fed a low fat/no cholesterol (LFNC) diet for 2 weeks and then
randomized to 4 diet groups with calorie set at 21.2 Kcal/day. These
isocaloric diets consisted of a LFNC diet with or without ezetimibe (a
drug that specifically blocks cholesterol uptake in the gut, thereby
lowering serum cholesterol) and a high fat/high cholesterol (HFHC) diet
with and without ezetimibe. Significant differences in serum cholesterol
level between groups were achieved and maintained throughout the study.
Mice were then implanted orthotopically with MDA-MB-231 BC cells into the
4th mammary fat pad and tumor growth was monitored every 3 days until
sacrifice when tumors were harvested.Results: No differences in tumor
take were observed (>95% for all groups). Tumors from animals fed the
HFHC diet exhibited the fastest progression. While significant
differences in serum cholesterol were observed between the diet groups,
no differences were observed in the intratumoral cholesterol levels. To
determine the underlying mechanism of cholesterol-induced tumor
progression, we assessed tumor proliferation, apoptosis and angiogenesis.
Ki67 analyses of tumor proliferation demonstrated a significantly greater
percentage of proliferating cells in tumor from mice fed the HFHC diet
(48%) compared to animals on the HFHC diet with ezetimibe or the LFNC
diet with and without ezetimibe (32%, 33% and 30% respectively). Tumors
from hypercholesterolemic animals displayed significantly less apoptosis,
as determined by percentage of TUNEL positive cells (39%), compared to
the other diet groups (49%, 52% and 58%). Finally, when tumor
angiogenesis was evaluated by CD31 staining and microvessel density was
quantified, tumors from HFHC mice had vessel areas that were 70% greater,
on average, compared to tumors from the other groups.Conclusion: These
results demonstrate that hypercholesterolemia induces angiogenesis and
accelerates breast tumor growth in vivo.Supported by the Breast Cancer
Research Foundation and NIH P01 CA045548

