Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of peroxidasin in human prostate cancer.


Peroxidasin is a peroxidase associated with kidney disease and its
function is not totally known. Peroxidasin was identified first in the
common fruit fly, or Drosophilia, where its function has not been
identified, but is expressed in different stages of development. When
peroxidasin was identified in the human system, it was found in colon
cancer cell lines as the product of a p-53 response gene. It was
originally called melanoma gene 50 because it was speculated to be a
potent-melanoma associated antigen. In previous studies, we have found
using real-time PCR array, that peroxidasin is up regulated 300-fold in
ARCaP prostate cancer cell line overexpressing Snail transcription
factor. Snail is the transcriptional factor that is involved in
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition, or EMT, which is associated with
increased migration and metastasis. Snail down-regulates cell-cell
association genes like E-cadherin and up-regulates mesenchymal genes like
vimentin. We hypothesized that the enzyme, peroxidasin, will be one of
the causes for increased cellular migration and increased tumor
progression in aggressive prostate cancer. By using Western Blot,
immunofluorescence and immunohistochemical analyses, peroxidasin presence
was examined in normal prostate epithelial tissue, prostate cancer
patient tissue, non-metastatic and metastatic prostate cancer cell lines.
We also utilized LNCaP and ARCaP prostate cancer cell lines that were
modified to over-express Snail to better ascertain the regulation of
peroxidasin by Snail in these cell lines. So far, we have found that
peroxidasin is increased in prostate cancer patient tissue as compared to
normal epithelial tissue. Peroxidasin is also expressed at varying levels
in prostate cancer cell lines. LNCaP and ARCaP Snail-transfected cells
also expressed more peroxidasin as compared to empty vector Neo control
cells. Migration, invasion, and adhesion assays will be performed to
examine the role of peroxidasin in these biological pathways. Based on
the results, future studies will focus on the migration of prostate
cancer cells towards nerve cells and if peroxidasin presence is
significant to this process. Overall, we have shown that peroxidasin is
highly expressed in prostate cancer and its expression is mediated by
Snail transcription factor.Supported by grants P20MD002285-01 &
G12RR003062-22.

