Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 (MRN) complex: A critical mediator of
chemoresistance and cancer stem cell progression in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma.


While platinum-based agents like cisplatin (DDP) are the mainstay of
chemotherapeutic options for several tumor types, including ovarian,
lung, and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, resistance to these
agents can significantly contribute to treatment failure and increase the
need for higher toxic doses. Tumors are heterogeneous in nature, with
their growth sustained by a small subpopulation of highly malignant
cells, termed cancer stem cells (CSCs). These cells comprise the top of
the tumor cell hierarchy, are remarkably chemoresistant, and are
associated with tumor recurrence.Enhanced repair of DNA double stand
breaks (DSBs) may compensate for DDP induced damage and contribute to
chemoresistance in tumor cells. The Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 (MRN) complex is a
key player in DNA DSB repair, telomere maintenance, and cell cycle
checkpoint control, and has been associated with DDP resistance. The
present study investigates the role of MRN in the development of a
CSC-mediated chemoresistant phenotype and its associated molecular
signature.Human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines,
a mouse model with human HNSCC, and tissue from HNSCC patients previously
treated with DDP monotherapy were used in the study. In order to
demonstrate the role of MRN on DDP resistance, two cell lines with
significantly different sensitivity to DDP were chosen. In vitro and in
vivo studies were performed to evaluate whether the chemoresistant cell
line experienced increased CSC levels after DDP treatment, and whether
enhanced MRN complex mediated DNA repair could explain this differential
response. In addition, we assessed whether disrupting the MRN complex
could lead to downregulation of these disparate effects on MRN and DNA
repair, in both the CSCs and the rest of the tumor cells, conferring
increased sensitivity to DDP. We evaluated both MRN expression and CSC
levels, and how they correlated with apoptosis levels in patient tissue
resected three days after a three day course of induction DDP
monotherapy. Our study demonstrates that CSC levels and MRN expression
strongly correlate with chemoresistance in vitro, in vivo, and in human.
Importantly, disruption of MRN leads to increased sensitivity of HNSCC
cells to DDP treatment.In conclusion, we propose to elucidate a novel
mechanism responsible for CSC mediated chemoresistance, which relies on
enhanced DNA DSB repair via upregulation of the MRN complex. Our findings
emphasize that disrupting this complex leads to increased sensitivity of
HNSCC cells to DDP, potentially reducing the need for high, toxic doses
of DDP used clinically and improving treatment outcomes.

