Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced cell proliferation and induced autophagy in PC-3 prostate
cancer cells by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin exposure.


Introduction: Prostate cancer (PC) is the most commonly diagnosed cancer
in males in the Western world and the third leading cause of cancer in
men. The environmental contaminant 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) shows a wide range of severe adverse effects in animal models,
including immunotoxicity, developmental and reproductive toxicity,
teratogenicity, and carcinogenicity. The exposure to TCDD early in
development may increase susceptibility to PC and the exposure to TCDD in
aged rats can cause greater epithelial proliferation, accompanied by
morphological alterations manifested as lobe-specific prostatic
hyperplasia. The administration of TCDD to a variety of cultured cells
may alter their ability to proliferate and die. Autophagy is an
evolutionarily conserved cellular pathway playing a critical role in
cellular homeostasis. Defects of autophagy are involved in the
pathogenesis of different diseases, including cancer. One of the
well-known autophagy markers is the microtubule associated light chain
protein 3 (LC3). We have previously demonstrated that exposure of
Madin-Darby Bovine Kidney cells to TCDD increased cell proliferation and
autophagy. The aim of this study is to evaluate the biological effects of
TCDD exposure on a highly metastatic prostate cancer cell line
(PC-3).Methods: PC3 cells were exposed to different concentrations of
TCDD (D1=0.1 pg/ml, D2=1 pg/ml and D3=100 pg/ml) and cell viability was
assessed by Trypan Blue exclusion after 24, 48, and 72 hours of exposure.
Autophagy was evaluated using the following: (a) detection of acidic
vesicular organelles (AVOs) by acridine orange staining; (b)
immunoflurescence analysis (IF) of LC3; (c) LC3 gene expression by
real-time PCR; and (d) study of autophagic flux by chloroquine (CQ)
autophagy inhibitor (10M).Results: When compared with their relative
controls, only D3 exposure at 24, 48, and 72 hours caused the following:
(1) statistically significant increase of cell proliferation (CP) (CP24h
=20.3%, CP48h =54.5% and CP72h =52.4%); (2) detection of AVOs; (3) LC3 IF
positivity; and (4) LC3 over expression (expression ratio24h =1.4,
expression ratio48h =6.2 and expression ratio72h =11.4). When PC-3 cells
were D3 exposed and treated with CQ at 24, 48, and 72 hours, LC3
expression ratios compared with controls (dioxin treatment) decreased
(CQ24h =-12.8, CQ48h =-28.1 and CQ72h =-2.8).Conclusions: While increased
incidence of PC in men exposed to TCDD is known, the molecular mechanisms
of carcinogenesis of this compound have not been fully investigated. Our
preliminary study demonstrated that treatment of PC-3 with TCDD results
in enhanced cell proliferation and activation of autophagy, potentiating
the transformed phenotype of these cancer cells. Comparison of the normal
primary prostate epithelial cells with PC-3 will further clarify the
oncogenic mechanisms of TCDD in PC.

