Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel gene-pathway regulating of microRNA mediates resistance to
trastuzumab forgastric cancer.


Background: Recently, the efficacy of trastuzumab is indicated in
patients with unresectable or recurrent HER2 positive gastric cancer from
the results of ToGA trial, and trastuzumab administration was to be done
in patients with gastric cancer. However, resistance to trastuzumab has
become a problem in breast cancer. MicroRNAs (miRs) are involved in
regulating multiple cellular pathways, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, and chemotherapy resistance, and thus may function as
oncogenes or tumor suppressing genes. The aim of current study is to
clarify the miR-gene pathway regulating resistance to trastuzumab.
Method: Using 6 gastric cancer cell lines, we examined the following
items in vitro. 1. We examined the status of HER2 protein expression by
western blotting. 2. We focused on miR-21 and its target gene PTEN and
evaluated the expression of miR-21 and PTEN in HER2 positive gastric
cancer cell lines by real time PCR and western blotting. 3. We examined
the expression of PTEN and downstream gene to clary the target gene of
miR-21 by over or down regulation of miR-21. 4. We investigated whether
miR-21-PTEN pathway can affect the resistance of trastuzumab. Result:
1.We confirmed the status of HER2 in gastric cell lines. 2. The
endogenous expression of PTEN and miR-21 showed inverse correlation in
each cell lines. 3. The suppression of miR-21 increased PTEN expression
with downregulation of P-Akt, persisting HER2 expression. 4.
Overexpression of miR-21 can induce the resistance of trastuzumab, and
suppression of miR-21 can restore the sensitivity of trastuzumab.
Conclusion: Our current study revealed that miR-21-PTEN pathway can
regulate the sensitivity of trastuzumab in HER2-positive gastric cancer
cell lines. These findings suggest that this pathway can be crucial clue
to the mechanism of resistance to trastuzumab in gastric cancer. To
elucidate the mechanism of resistance to trastuzumab can lead to the
development of individualized treatment.

