Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular classification of glioblastoma multiforme using
isoform-level gene expression signatures.


Glioblastomamultiforme (GBM) is one of the most deadly cancers in adult
and even with aggressive therapy prognosis is poor with a median survival
of about 15 months. Recent large scale genomic studies have shed light on
the molecular mechanisms of cancer and shown the existence of distinct
molecular sub-groups of GBM whose identification is the key to develop
specific therapeutic regimen for each GBM group. Since transcriptome
studies, by us and others, have discovered that majority of genes produce
multiple protein isoforms, which could be involved in multiple functional
pathways, we hypothesized that the isoform-level expression profiling
will generate better classification to identify themolecular sub-groups
of GBM. To test this hypothesis, we performed isoform-level analysis of
the exon array expression data for GBM patient samples from the TCGA data
portal, and discovered that isoform-level analysis identifies 2.5 fold
more differentially expressed transcript variants than differentially
expressed genes captured by gene-level analysis, indicating that
isoform-level expression profiling is more sensitive in identifying
molecular changes among GBM patients. Next, we applied consensus
non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) clustering method, based on
isoform-level expression ofmost variable isoforms and effectively grouped
the GBM samples into 4 sub-groups with significant (p=0.0103) survival
differences between the groups. In contrast, though clustering based on
gene-level expression produced four homogenous groups there was no
significant survival difference among the sub-groups. Based on the
prognostic value of the molecular sub-groups, our goal was to build a
classifier that can assign each GBM patient a molecular sub-group.We
compared the prediction accuracy of a gene based vs an isoform based
classifier to identify sub-group and found that isoform based classifier
is a better predictor (85%vs90%). Using the Random forest feature
selection we have build a classifier based on the expression of 147
isoforms that is 91% accurate and have developed a high-throughput
RT-qPCR assay to measure the expression of these discriminatory isoforms.
We have successfully validated the classifier to identify the molecular
sub-group in an independent cohort of GBM patient samples from the Human
Brain Tumor Tissue bank at University of Pennsylvania.Our study has led
to the development of a classification assay for GBM patient
sub-grouping, which can be useful in developing targeted drug therapy for
each sub-group, and suggests that isoform based expression analysis can
lead to better molecular classification of cancer, a requirement for the
quest of personalized therapy.Citation Format: Sharmistha Pal, Yingtao
Bi, Lukasz Macyszyn, Louise C. Showe, Donald M. O'Rourke, Ramana V.
Davuluri. Molecular classification of glioblastoma multiforme using
isoform-level gene expression signatures. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of
the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5597. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5597

