Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E-cadherin regulates cell adherence and -catenin/TCF signaling in
multiple myeloma.


Multiple myeloma (MM) is a malignancy of terminally differentiated clonal
plasma cells displaying significant molecular heterogeneity. Alterations
in cadherin function have been implicated in tumorgenesis. We have
previously demonstrated that the majority (80%) of MM express N-cadherin
that mediates interactions between MM cells and the bone morrow
microenvironment. In this study we determine the role of E-cadherin,
another member of the classical cadherin family, in adhesion and
regulation of the -catenin pathway in MM.Cell lysates were prepared from
24 MM cell lines and from CD138+ cells selected from the BM of eight
patients with MM. Six (25%) cell lines expressed high levels of
E-cadherin protein as determined by western blotting. Of the 8 patients,
5 expressed E-cadherin: One patient showed a high band intensity. This
patient did not express N-cadherin. Four patients showed band of
intermediate (2 patients) of low (two patients) intensities. PC from
these patients also expressed N-cadherin, as did the PC from the 3
patients that did not express E-cadherin. To determine whether E-cadherin
mediates MM cell adherence, a cell aggregation assay was performed using
the GFP-tagged MM cell line Sach1, which highly expresses E-cadherin
protein but no N-cadherin. Cultured in normal growth medium, Sach1 cells
aggregated to form clusters. Addition of an E-cadherin neutralizing
antibody to these cultures significantly attenuated aggregation of Sach1
cells. Using immunohistochemistry, E-cadherin protein was clearly
observed between myeloma cells in aggregation clusters. Cluster formation
was significantly diminished in calcium-free medium, indicating that that
like N-cadherin, E-cadherin mediated adhesion is calcium dependent. Next
we determined the role of E-cadherin in regulation of the -catenin/TCF
signaling pathway. Complexes of E-cadherin/-catenin measured by
immunoprecipitation were observed in 6 of the cell lines that expressed
E-cadherin. Furthermore, high levels of endogenous TCF activity, as
determined by luciferase reporter assay, were observed in the 6 MM cells
lines. Moreover, overexpression of E-cadherin by transfecting plasmids
containing E-cadherin cDNA into three MM cell lines significantly
increased nuclear -catenin concentrations and significantly augmented TCF
activity, compared with cells transfected with empty vectors. Taken
together, these data suggest that similar to N-cadherin, E-cadherin plays
a pivotal role in regulating homotypic adhesion between myeloma cells.
E-cadherin also up-regulates -catenin/TCF signaling pathways in MM.
Studies are currently underway to determine the mechanism by which
E-cadherin enhances -catenin/TCF pathway in myeloma.

