Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNAi- and U1 small nuclear interference (U1i)-mediated gene
knockdown reveals the functional relevance of Pim-1 kinase in colon
carcinoma and glioblastoma.


Pim-1 is a constitutively active serine/threonine kinase overexpressed in
various tumors. Its role as proto-oncogene is based on several Pim-1
target proteins involved in pivotal cellular processes, and Pim-1
overexpression has been linked to poor prognosis.RNAi-based knockdown
approaches were used to inhibit Pim-1 in colon carcinoma cells. We
demonstrate anti-proliferative, pro-apoptotic and overall antitumor
effects of Pim-1 inhibition. The analysis of the molecular effects of
Pim-1 inhibition reveals a complex regulatory network, with therapeutic
Pim-1 repression leading to major changes in oncogenic signal
transduction with regard to p21Cip1/WAF1, STAT3, JNK, c-Myc and survivin,
and in the levels of apoptosis-related proteins Puma, Bax and Bcl-xL.
Furthermore, Pim-1 knockdown sensitizes tumor cells towards 5-FU
treatment, thereby antagonizing a 5-FU-triggered Pim-1 upregulation. This
effect is mediated through decreased miR-15b levels, and our studies
identify miR-15b and miR-33a to regulate Pim-1.There is first evidence of
Pim-1 overexpression also in glioblastoma, but the functional relevance
is so far unknown. U1 small nuclear interference (U1i) has recently been
described as novel gene silencing mechanism. It employs short
oligonucleotides, so-called U1 adaptors, for specific gene knockdown. We
generated Pim-1 specific U1 adaptors and demonstrate their ability to
induce Pim-1 knockdown in GBM cells. U1 adaptor transfection leads to
anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects.To explore therapeutic in
vivo applications, we complexed siRNAs or U1 adaptors with a low
molecular weight polyethylenimine (PEI) that mediates protection and
cellular internalization. Treatment of tumor xenograft-bearing mice with
PEI/siRNA or PEI/adaptor nanoparticles exhibits antitumor effects based
on the knockdown of Pim-1, thus offering novel therapeutic
strategies.Conclusions: We demonstrate that Pim-1 plays a pivotal role in
several tumor-relevant signalling pathways, and establish the functional
relevance of Pim-1 in colon carcinoma and in glioblastoma. Our results
also substantiate the RNAi-mediated Pim-1 knockdown based on polymeric
PEI/siRNA nanoparticles as a promising therapeutic approach, and we show
that U1i represents an alternative to RNAi for the therapeutic knockdown
of pathologically upregulated genes.

