Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide analysis of the molecular crosstalk between mitogenic
and proinflammatory signaling in breast cancer.


The interplay between mitogenic (e.g., estradiol) and proinflammatory
(e.g., TNF) signaling pathways play key roles in determining the
phenotypes and clinical outcomes of breast cancers. Both pathways promote
dramatic changes in the transcriptomes of breast cancer cells, as well as
downstream cellular effects, but the interplay between these two pathways
at the transcriptional level has not yet been analyzed in a comprehensive
way across the genome. We have used global nuclear run-on coupled with
deep sequencing (GRO-seq), a genomic method that maps the location and
orientation of all actively engaged RNA polymerases, to characterize the
immediate transcriptional responses of MCF-7 breast cancer cells treated
for short durations (40 min.) with either estradiol (E2), TNF, or both.
In addition, we have integrated these data with chromatin
immunoprecipitation coupled with deep sequencing (ChIP-seq) for both
estrogen receptor alpha (ER), which mediates E2 signaling, and the p65
subunit of the NF-B transcription factor, which mediates TNF signaling.
Our results indicate extensive transcriptional interplay between these
two signaling pathways, which is observed for a number of classical
mitogenic and proinflammatory protein-coding genes. In addition, GRO-seq
has allowed us to capture the transcriptional crosstalk at genomic
locations encoding for long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), a poorly
characterized class of RNAs which have been shown to play important roles
in cancer outcomes. The synergistic and antagonistic interplay between E2
and TNF also manifests itself at the level of ER and p65 binding, which
relocalize to new binding sites that are not occupied by either treatment
alone. Taken together, our results identify rapid, signal-dependent
transcriptional changes that occur during proliferative signaling versus
inflammatory signaling and show that these effects are more extensive
than previously anticipated. Uncovering the transcriptional landscape of
these two important pathways outside of the protein coding regions of the
genome may lead to new ways of diagnosing and treating breast cancer.

