Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The chromatin structure regulates selective glucocorticoid
receptor recruitment to the genome in intact tissue.


The dissection of regulatory pathways in physiological and
pathophysiological states and during pharmacological intervention
necessitates the application of biochemical and genomic approaches in
intact target tissues. The hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis is a
highly conserved neuroendocrine pathway that results in the synthesis of
glucocorticoid hormones from the adrenal gland to control reactions to
stress and inflammatory processes. Exploiting a mouse model in which
animals have been adrenalectomized to remove endogenous glucocorticoids,
we monitor changes of the chromatin landscape in liver, following a
single glucocorticoid injection, using ChIP-seq and DNase-seq
methodologies.We observe that GR exclusively occupies accessible
chromatin, demonstrating that accessible chromatin can be highly
predictive of transcription factor occupancy in tissue. Importantly,
changes in RNA polymerase II recruitment to GR regulated genes are
associated with proximal regions of induced and repressed chromatin
accessibility. Underscoring the highly tissue-specific GR-dependent
transcriptional response, GR binding sites in other cell types are
occluded in liver through highly positioned nucleosomes and inaccessible
chromatin. Remarkably, we demonstrate that sixty two percent of GR
binding sites in liver are associated with C/EBPbeta occupancy. At the
majority of these sites chromatin is pre-programmed, suggesting a priming
function of C/EBPbeta in GR recruitment. However, at a subset of GR
binding sites C/EBPbeta loading is assisted by GR recruitment in
conjunction with de novo chromatin remodeling.Disruption of C/EBPbeta
binding to chromatin using a dominant negative C/EBP targeted to the
liver results in an attenuation of pre-programmed chromatin
accessibility, GR recruitment and GR induced chromatin remodeling only at
sites occupied by GR and C/EBP. Our results demonstrate a highly
cooperative mechanism by which C/EBP regulates selective GR binding to
the genome in liver tissue and provides a mechanism for phenotypic
similarities described for GR and C/EBP mouse models. We suggest that the
selective targeting of GR in other tissues is likely mediated by the
combined action of cell-specific priming proteins and chromatin
remodelers.

