Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinational treatment with MUC1 vaccine and Indomethacin reduces
breast tumor burden via a COX-independent pathway.


Introduction: While much advancement has been made in breast cancer
treatment, metastatic breast cancer remains an incurable disease. The
glycoprotein MUC1 is over-expressed and underglycosylated in over 90% of
human breast tumors and 100% of metastatic lesions, and thus was ranked
the second most targetable tumor antigen (TA) by NCI. Vaccines against
TAs have several benefits, including the chance to eliminate metastatic
lesions that express the TA. To this end, we have proposed vaccinating
with peptides from the MUC1 protein core, which is only visible to the
immune system on the tumor-associated form of the protein. We have
previously shown that vaccination does elicit a MUC1-specific immune
response that can only be functional if the immunosuppressive tumor
microenvironment is blocked to allow efficient tumor cell killing. We
investigated the effectiveness of MUC1 vaccination in combination with
drugs known to inhibit immunosuppression. Methods: Mice that are
transgenic for human MUC1 were orthotopically injected with syngenic
breast cancer cells expressing human MUC1. Mice were vaccinated after
palpable tumor formation three times in 10 day intervals. Previous work
has shown that blocking the cyclooxygenase pathway (COX) resulted in an
inhibition of immunosuppression. Thus we treated daily with following
drugs in combination with the MUC1-vaccine therapy: Indomethacine (COX1/2
inhibitor), Celecoxib (COX2 inhibitor), 1-methyl tryptophan (IDO
inhibitor), and AH6809 (EP2 receptor antagonist). Tumor volume was
monitored every day by caliper measurements. Immune activation was
measured via an IFN- ELISPOT assay using T cells from tumor-draining
lymph nodes as responders and dendritic cells pulsed with the vaccinating
peptides as simulators. Results: MUC1 vaccine therapy alone causes a
slight reduction in tumor burden, although not significant, but does
induce IFN- production from T cells, indicating immune cell activation.
Only the combinational therapy of Vaccine + Indomethacin results in a
significant reduction in tumor size. All drugs cause significantly higher
levels of IFN- production from T cells compared to vaccine alone but no
reduction in tumor burden. The combinational treatments of Vaccine +
Indomethacine and Vaccine + Celecoxib reduce intra-tumoral PGE2 levels
compared to vaccine alone. In a repeat experiment, we found that vaccine
alone and indomethacin alone caused a slight reduction in tumor burden,
but tumor burden was only significantly reduced when the therapy was
given in combination. Conclusion: In this model, MUC1 vaccine efficacy
can be enhanced when given in combination with Indomethacin. Since
Indomethacin but not Celecoxib reduced tumor burden when given in
combination with the MUC1 vaccine, we suggest that Indomethacin enhanced
vaccine efficacy via a COX-independent pathway. Future experiments will
explore this mechanism.

