Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential autophagy activation in KRAS and EGFR mutant lung
adenocarcinomas.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in western countries,
and adenocarcinomas (LADs) are the most frequent histological subtype.
The aberrant activation of the kinases promotes plethora of tumorigenic
processes, mainly through PI3K and MAPK oncogenic pathways leading to
oncogene addiction. The activation of PI3K pathway deregulates mTOR, a
master kinase for cell growth and autophagy. Autophagy can be pro- or
anti- tumorigenic, however its roles in protecting tumors exposed to
metabolic stress under chemotherapy are considered as a survival
mechanism for the tumors leading to acquired resistance. Consequently,
the inhibition of autophagy is an attractive therapy to prevent the
emergence of acquired resistance. Activating mutations in EGFR and KRAS
are mutually exclusive and are the most frequent oncogene activation in
LAD. There are considerable differences in the control of signalling
pathways including PI3K-mTOR axis. Therefore, it is hypothesized that the
susceptibility to autophagy differs depending on EGFR or KRAS mutational
status. To test the hypothesis, we applied nutrient-starvation
conditions, the most well-known inducer of autophagy, to a panel of LAD
cell lines bearing known EGFR or KRAS mutations. As a positive control,
cells were treated with rapamycin, which also induced autophagy
inhibiting MTOR activity. Autophagy activation was analyzed by: i)
Western blot of LC3-II and p62/SQSTM1 protein levels, that measures
autophagy flux and autophagic protein degradation, respectively; and ii)
autophagolysosome detection and lysosomal activity by fluorescent
microscopy. Our data suggest that KRAS-mutant LAD cell lines are able to
activate autophagy, whereas EGFR-mutant are not, under starvation stress.
Furthermore, we found a potential interaction between mutant EGFR and
Beclin 1 (BECN1, a protein required for the initiation of the
autophagosome) at the cell membrane proximity, using
co-immunolocalization by confocal microscopy and immunoprecipitation
followed by Western blot. Together, these data provide a compelling
rationale to investigate anti-autophagy therapy in mutant KRAS LADs and
warrant further investigation in the regulation of autophagy via a novel
link between Beclin1 and mutant EGFR.

