Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell phenotypic heterogeneity as a prognostic factor in
glioblastoma.


Background Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is a highly aggressive and
heterogeneous disease in which survival of patients is measured only in
months. Pathologic features associated with patient outcome are still
incompletely understood. Until recently, phenotypic features of single
cells have not been investigated due to technological limitations.
However, with the advent of high-content slide scanning coupled with
cognitive and scriptable algorithms, researchers are now positioned to
identify and quantify single cell features that may provide unique
insight on tumor behavior. In this project we sought to identify
variations in cellular phenotypes which correlate with time of post
diagnostic survival in patients with GBM.Methods A total of 157 GBM
patients were selected for study on the basis of short (SS) (median K-M
survival = 6 months; N=81) or long (LS) (median K-M survival = 33 months,
N=76) survival times. Median age was 56 years and all patients underwent
current standard of care therapy for GBM (surgery, radiation and
temozolomide). Among the 157 cases, 11 were excluded due to poor sample
quality (final n=146). For each case, the diagnostic H&E slide was
digitally scanned using the ScanScope XT (Aperio, Vista, CA, USA) with a
200x/0.8NA objective lens. Definiens TissueStudio v3.0 (Munich, Germany)
was used to identify viable tumor regions. Individual cells were
segmented in areas of viable tumor and twenty separate features extracted
from each tumor cell (subcellular compartmentalization, nucleus to
cytoplasm area ratio, nuclear size and shape, etc). In total, the 20
features were extracted in thousands of single cells for each GBM case.
Output was evaluated by Matlab (The MathWorks, Inc,, Natick, MA) using a
heatmap approach by first normalizing the scales of each feature to a
range of 0-1, and assigning a color from green (0) to red (1) (5 classes)
for each cell or compartment (x) and each feature (y).Results This study
was completed in a series of three stages including training followed by
two replication sets. In the training set (N=50), four of the evaluated
features associated with the size and shape of the cancer cell nuclei
(i.e. width [m], circularity, ellipticity and hematoxylin intensity),
were found to distinguish the SS group (15/25) from the LS group (6/25)
based on supervised classification. A similar pattern was observed in
replication set 1 (15/24 and 8/28, respectively) and replication set 2
(15/23 and 8/21, respectively). Overall, 66% of cases were correctly
classified with respect to survival time on the basis of these cellular
features (p=0.0001).Conclusions Quantitative image analysis may be useful
in the identification of novel prognostic features in GBM with potential
for gaining new biological insights on the behavior of these tumors.

