Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting TSP1 and inhibiting angiogenesis in UV-induced skin
cancer by apigenin.


Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) is a major health problem in the United
States, with over two million new cases diagnosed yearly. Among many
genetic and environmental factors contributed to NMSC, ultraviolet B
(UVB) radiation is the major carcinogen. As with all solid tumors,
angiogenesis is a necessary prerequisite for the progression and
metastasis of NMSC. Thrombospondin-1 (TSP1) is the first endogenous
inhibitor of angiogenesis to be identified, and its expression is
markedly downregulated in epidermis following UVB irradiation and
throughout distinct steps of skin carcinogenesis. Apigenin (4, 5,
7-trihydroxyflavone), a nonmutagenic plant flavonoid, inhibits UV-induced
NMSC in mice. However, the molecular mechanisms of apigenin's
chemopreventive function remain elusive. For the first time, we found
that apigenin restores normal TSP1 levels in UVB-irradiated skin
keratinocytes in vitro and in vivo. The regulation of TSP1 expression in
UVB/apigenin-treated keratinocytes occurs post-transcriptionally and is
mediated by RNA-binding protein Human antigen R (HuR). Importantly, HuR
has recently been demonstrated to play an important role in translation
of TSP1 mRNA, and we showed that apigenin promotes cytoplasmic
localization of HuR, where polyribosomal translation of TSP1 occurs. In
addition, knockdown of HuR by siRNA abrogates the ability of apigenin to
maintain normal TSP1 levels in UVB-irradiated keratinocytes. Furthermore,
apigenin inhibits microvascular density (MVD) in superficial dermis that
occurs in response to UVB irradiation. Taken together, our results
demonstrate that apigenin promotes TSP1 expression in UVB-irradiated
epidermis via HuR leading to inhibition of angiogenesis. Identifying TSP1
as a key target of apigenin and demonstrating its important role in
chemoprevention by apigenin will provide a compelling rationale to use
apigenin for maintaining the expression of protective TSP1 in the skin as
a novel strategy for NMSC prevention and treatment.

