Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt signaling and telomerase activation in hepatoblastoma.


Purpose: The abnormal Wnt/-catenin signaling plays a key role in
hepatoblastoma (HBL) development. In HBL, CTNNB1 coding -catenin protein
with mutated or deleted at hot-spot regions involving exon 3 stimulates
this pathway. Previously we reported that the levels of telomerase
reverse transcriptase (TERT) mRNA and telomerase activities were
correlated with outcomes of the patients with HBL. In this study, we
examined the correlation between Wnt/-catenin signaling and telomerase
activation in HBL. And, we investigated the location of -catenin and TERT
in HBL and the expression levels of the Wnt signal genes downstream of
-catenin.Methods: Tumors derived from 212 HBL cases treated with the
JPLT-2 protocol were analyzed for oncogenic mutations (missense mutations
and interstitial deletions in the third exon) of the CTNNB1 gene encoding
-catenin and mutations of Wnt signal genes including APC, AXIN1, and 2.
Moreover, these tumors were analyzed for the expression levels of TERT
(telomerase reverse transcriptase) and the Wnt signal genes downstream of
-catenin (MYC, cyclin D1 and MMP7) using Real time RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry.Results: Oncogenic mutations of CTNNB1 were detected
in 163 cases (76.4%) and more than 80% showed abnormalities of Wnt signal
genes. The expression levels of TERT were significantly higher in 49
cases without mutation (P Purpose: The abnormal Wnt/-catenin signaling
plays a key role in hepatoblastoma (HBL) development. In HBL, CTNNB1
coding -catenin protein with mutated or deleted at hot-spot regions
involving exon 3 stimulates this pathway. Previously we reported that the
levels of telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) mRNA and telomerase
activities were correlated with outcomes of the patients with HBL. In
this study, we examined the correlation between Wnt/-catenin signaling
and telomerase activation in HBL. And, we investigated the location of
-catenin and TERT in HBL and the expression levels of the Wnt signal
genes downstream of -catenin.Methods: Tumors derived from 212 HBL cases
treated with the JPLT-2 protocol were analyzed for oncogenic mutations
(missense mutations and interstitial deletions in the third exon) of the
CTNNB1 gene encoding -catenin and mutations of Wnt signal genes including
APC, AXIN1, and 2. Moreover, these tumors were analyzed for the
expression levels of TERT (telomerase reverse transcriptase) and the Wnt
signal genes downstream of -catenin (MYC, cyclin D1 and MMP7) using Real
time RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry.Results: Oncogenic mutations of
CTNNB1 were detected in 163 cases (76.4%) and more than 80% showed
abnormalities of Wnt signal genes. The expression levels of TERT were
significantly higher in 49 cases without mutation (P < 0.05).
Interestingly, Wnt/-catenin target genes including MYC, cyclin D1 and
MMP7 were significantly activated in the tumors with telomerase
activation (P = 0.01). -catenin staining distinguished the CTNNB1 mutated
tumors from others but cyclin D1 and MMP-7 did not. In advanced HBLs,
double stain analysis of TERT and -catenin showed that both were located
in the same site in nucleus, suggesting that both proteins were
co-localized in nucleus in hepatoblastoma.Conclusions: Wnt/-catenin
signaling in the HBLs without CNNB1 mutations was activated by telomerase
activation. The clinical courses in HBLs with mutated Wnt signal gens and
high TERT expression seemed to be unfavorable due to highly activated
Wnt/-catenin signaling. This correlated pathway might become molecular
targets for advanced hepatoblastoma.

