Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I study of histone deacetylase inhibitor belinostat in
combination with warfarin in patients with solid tumors or hematological
malignancies.


Background: The family of Histone Deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes serves as
important epigenetic regulators of gene expression through modulation of
acetylation on important histone and non-histone proteins. Aberrant
acetylation of histones can alter gene expression believed to be
important in the tumorigenic process. Belinostat, a potent inhibitor of
HDAC proteins has demonstrated anti tumor activity in animal models and
in humans. The purpose of this study was to examine the pharmacokinetic
and pharmacodynamic properties of warfarin in combination with belinostat
and to evaluate the safety profile of belinostat with concomitant
warfarin.Methods: Eligible patients enrolled on the study received 5 mg
PO warfarin 14 days prior to administration of belinostat. Belinostat was
administered as an iv infusion, 1000mg/m2 over 30 minutes for 5
consecutive days every 21 days. On day 3, cycle 1 of belinostat
treatment, a second dose of 5mg PO warfarin was administered 2 hours
prior to belinostat. Pharmacokinetic blood samples were obtained during
cycle 1 of the study to measure warfarin and belinostat metabolism.
Toxicities were monitored regularly throughout treatment and response was
monitored according to standard of care guidelines.Results: 18 patients,
with solid tumors or hematologic malignancies, treated with belinostat
and warfarin were included in this analysis. Median age was 55 years
(31-77). 11 (61%) patients were male and 7(39%) patients were female. The
most common Grade 1 or 2, toxicities observed during the study were
anemia (78%), fatigue (72%) and nausea (61%). The most frequent Grade 3
or 4 toxicities were nausea (11%) and hyperuricemia (11%). No Grade 3 or
4 thrombocytopenia or neutropenia were reported. No treatment related
Grade 5 toxicities were reported. During cycle 1 no patient experienced
treatment delays or discontinued study as result of treatment related
toxicity.Conclusion: Belinostat was generally well tolerated in patients
with solid tumors or hematologic malignancies with the major toxicity
being anemia, fatigue or nausea. Pharmacokinetic results will be
presented at the conference.

