Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence for a dynamic interaction between bone marrow and the
cutaneous epithelium during skin carcinogenesis by exposure to solar
ultraviolet radiation.


Non-melanoma skin cancer induced by solar ultraviolet radiation (UV) is
the most common of epithelial cancers and occurs more frequently in the
human population than any other type of malignancy. Therefore,
determining its etiology is a significant problem. The objective of this
investigation was to determine whether there might be an interaction
between epidermal keratinocytes and bone marrow during carcinogenesis
induced by solar UV. First, we determined that bone marrow cells were
recruited to the cutaneous epithelium where a subpopulation assumed
epithelial characteristics during chronic exposure of mice to solar UV
radiation. Second, we documented the presence of keratins in blood and
bone marrow prior to and during exposure of mice to solar UV radiation by
quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction, fluorescence activated
cell sorting of freshly harvested cells, and by immunofluorescence
microscopy of bone marrow smears. We observed low, but reproducible
levels of keratins 8, 14 and 15 in both blood and bone marrow of
un-irradiated mice, with a relatively higher expression of keratin 8 in
blood, and a relatively higher expression of keratins 14 and 15 in bone
marrow. Third, during chronic exposure to solar UV, we detected a dose
dependent increase in the percentage of cells expressing keratin 14 in
bone marrow: increasing from approximately 1% in un-irradiated control
bone marrow, to approximately 10% after 10 weeks of irradiation, with
greater increases at later time points. Surprisingly, this increase in
keratin expression in bone marrow began many weeks prior to development
of benign or malignant cutaneous neoplasms. Fourth, because these results
could suggest a possible egress of keratinocytes from the cutaneous
epithelium and homing to the bone marrow, we performed in vitro
keratinocyte migration assays with bone marrow as bait. We observed a
significant and reproducible migration of epidermal keratinocytes towards
bone marrow over controls such as 3T3 cells, fetal bovine serum, or other
keratinocyte cultures. We conclude from these studies that there is a
dynamic interaction between the cells of the cutaneous epithelium and the
bone marrow. The cells and the mechanisms involved in this interaction
are currently under investigation.

