Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The side effects of sorafenib in treating hepatocellular carcinoma.


Sorafenib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor of VEGFR and B-Raf, is a standard
treatment for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, there are
several clinical observations showing discontinuous sorafenib treatment
associated with more metastasis or rapid relapse. We tested effect of
sorafenib on tumor growth and metastasis in different dosing and
schedules in liver cancer allograft or xenograft models. The results
showed a lower dose sorafenib treatment will induce more intrahepatic or
lung metastasis while the primary tumor growth is still inhibited in HCC
with a higher expression of HTATIP2 but not in HCC with a lower
expression of HTATIP2. Further studies showed sorafenib decreased HTATIP2
expression only in HCC with a higher expression of HTATIP2. The clinical
data also supported the patients with lower HTATIP2 expression in tumor
benefit from sorafenib treatment while patients with a higher HTATIP2
expression in tumor did not. We also observed the effect of sorafenib on
host (mouse) immunity after we found pre-treatment by sorafenib before
implantation of tumor resulted in more lung metastasis. We found
interleukin 12 (IL12) was significantly inhibited by sorafenib, which is
responsible for more lung metastasis. In conclusion, our study showed the
side effect of sorafenib may promote tumor progression if sorafenib
treatment is stopped or not given in a full dose. These findings may help
to improve the efficacy of sorafenib by overcoming its side
effects.Citation Format: Hui-Chuan Sun, Wei Zhang, Xiao-Dong Zhu, Lu Lu,
Qiang-Bo Zhang, Zhao-You Tang. The side effects of sorafenib in treating
hepatocellular carcinoma. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 5086. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5086

