Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of the guanylate-binding-protein 1 (GBP-1) in immunoediting
of colorectal carcinoma.


The human guanylate-binding protein 1 (GBP-1) is among the proteins the
most highly induced by IFN- in every cell type investigated as yet. In
vivo, GBP-1 expression is associated with the presence of inflammation
and has been observed in autoimmune diseases, inflammatory bowel diseases
(IBD) and cancer. In colorectal carcinoma (CRC), we previously reported
that the expression of GBP-1 in the cells of the desmoplastic stroma
correlates with the presence of an IFN--dominated Th1 microenvironment
and with an increased cancer-related 5-year survival. Moreover, GBP-1
expression in the blood vessels of CRC tissue was associated with a
reduced angiogenesis. However, the expression and the role of GBP-1 in
the tumor cells of CRC remained unknown.In the present study, the
analysis of GBP-1 expression in a series of 185 CRCs by
immunohistochemistry confirmed that GBP-1 is expressed in stroma cells of
CRCs and revealed a significantly less frequent expression in tumor
cells, which was contradictory with the broad inducibility of GBP-1.
Furthermore, three of six CRC cell lines treated with IFN- were unable to
express GBP-1 indicating a reduced inducibility in colorectal tumor
cells. On the contrary, non-transformed colon epithelial cells strongly
expressed GBP-1 in vitro in presence of IFN- and in vivo in IBD.
Reconstitution of GBP-1 expression in a negative CRC cell line inhibited
cell proliferation, migration, invasion and anchorage-independent growth.
Using RNA interference, we showed that GBP-1 mediates the
anti-proliferative, anti-migratory, anti-invasive and anti-clonogenic
effects of IFN- in CRC cells. In addition, GBP-1 was able to inhibit
tumor growth in vivo. Altogether these results suggested that GBP-1 acts
directly as a tumor suppressor in CRC by mediating the effects of IFN-.
In addition, the loss of GBP-1 expression in tumor cells indicated that
tumor evasion from the IFN--dominated Th1 immune response might have
occured. This was confirmed by showing, first, that the absence of GBP-1
inducibility in CRC cell lines correlates with resistance to the
anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects of IFN- and, second, that
the resistant cell lines exhibit defects in the IFN- signaling pathway.

