Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The regulation of anoikis by carcinoma-associated fibroblasts in
breast cancer cells.


The tumor microenvironment is now appreciated to be an active participant
in driving the oncogenic behavior of cancer cells. In particular,
evidence is mounting that carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in the
microenvironment are a critical player in the promotion of tumor
progression and metastasis. However, the precise mechanisms utilized by
CAFs to enhance malignancy are only beginning to be understood. Given the
importance of CAFs in promoting tumor progression and the fact that
cancer cells lack normal extracellular matrix (ECM) attachment after
breaking through the basement membrane, we hypothesized that CAFs may be
actively involved in the inhibition of anoikis (ECM-detachment-induced
cell death). To investigate this question, we utilized NIH-3T3 mouse
fibroblasts lacking the caveolin-1 gene (KO 3T3s), a cell line that has
previously been demonstrated to share many similarities to human CAFs.
Interestingly, the addition of media conditioned by KO 3T3s led to robust
anoikis inhibition in detached MCF-10A cells, suggesting that factors
secreted by CAFs can block anoikis. We validated these findings by
demonstrating that factors secreted from patient-derived human CAFs can
inhibit anoikis to a similar degree. Moreover, the ability of
CAF-conditioned media to block anoikis was not limited to MCF-10A cells
as we obtained similar results in other non-tumorigenic cell lines and in
breast cancer cell lines. To examine if the observed differences in
anoikis induction caused by secreted factors from CAFs manifest in a more
physiologically relevant context, we employed a 3-dimensional (3D) cell
culture model of mammary acinus development. MCF-10A acini exposed to
secreted factors from CAFs were more prone to have filled lumen
suggesting that factors secreted by CAFs can promote the survival of
ECM-detached cells in the luminal space.In addition, when investigating
the mechanism by which CAFs block anoikis, we discovered that the release
of mitochondrial cytochrome c into the cytosol was robustly inhibited by
CAF-conditioned media in MCF-10A cells. Surprisingly, this inhibition was
independent of signaling through PI(3)K or MAPK and did not involve
alterations in Bim protein levels. However, we discovered that the
degradation of Mcl-1 was strongly inhibited by CAF-conditioned media
suggesting that Mcl-1 was not properly targeted to the proteasome.
Furthermore, using mass spectrometric analyses, we have identified
proteins of the IGFBP family that are differentially secreted by CAFs in
a fashion that regulates anoikis induction. In aggregate, these data
identify a novel mechanism by which CAFs contribute to tumorigenesis (the
inhibition of anoikis) and suggest that targeting factors secreted from
CAFs could be a novel therapeutic approach to eliminate ECM-detached
cells through the selective induction of anoikis.

