Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of LMTK3 in breast cancer cell growth and invasion.


AbstractTitle: The role of LMTK3 in breast cancer cell growth and
invasionBackground: We have identified Lemur tyrosine kinase-3 (LMTK3) as
a novel regulator of estrogen receptor (ER) that is associated with
disease free and overall survival and predicted response to endocrine
therapies in breast cancer. In addition, inhibition of LMTK3 in tamoxifen
(tam)-sensitive and tam-resistant xenograft mouse models led to tumor
volume reduction. Moreover, a genome microarray analysis revealed various
genes modulated by LMTK3 implicated in different canonical pathways.
Herein we present evidence that further elucidates the mechanism of LMTK3
involvement in breast cancer growth and invasion.Methods: Stable
over-expressed and depleted LMTK3 breast cancer cell lines were generated
to study the effects of LMTK3 on proliferation and invasion. Various
molecular and cellular biology techniques (including RT-PCR,
immunofluorescence, immunoprecipitation and invasion assays) were carried
out to elucidate the participation of LMTK3 in various signalling
pathways. Stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)
was undertaken to identify and analyse novel LMTK3-regulated
proteins.Results: Transwell and collagen 1 invasion assays results
demonstrated that over-expression of LMTK3 in non-invasive MCF7 cells
promote invasion while conversely knockdown of LMTK3 in MDA-MB-231 cells
significantly inhibited invasion. Moreover, stable LMTK3 over-expressing
cells form larger and looser acini structures compared to parental cells
in 3D matrigel overlay assays. Wound healing assays demonstrated an
increased motility of cells that over-express LMTK3 compared to LMTK3
knock-out cell lines. Cell adhesion assays revealed preferential binding
of LMTK3 over-expressing cell lines to different ECM ligands. RT-qPCR
analysis indicated up-regulation of an invasive gene signature (including
MMPs, vimentin, and others) associated with LMTK3 over-expression. SILAC
analysis identified various novel LMTK3-regulated proteins and
phospho-proteins. In addition, modulation of LMTK3 affected the
expression of specific members of the integrin family, as well as
proteins involved in the focal adhesion complex. Co-immunoprecipitation
and immunofluorescence experiments further helped us identify interacting
partners of LMTK3 pertaining to the pathways conferring the observed
pro-invasive phenotypic results. Finally, the involvement of LMTK3 in
promoting tumorigenicity was confirmed in an in vivo xenograft mouse
model.Conclusion: We show that LMTK3 is important for mediating breast
cancer cell growth and invasion and propose a model of the mechanism of
LMTK3 action in these processes. These data position LMTK3 in the map of
well-known oncogenic signaling cascades.

