Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Periostin expression is altered by TGF and hypoxia during breast
cancer progression.


The extracellular matrix (ECM) contributes to the generation of normal
breast tissue, and variations in the composition of the ECM have been
shown to directly influence the formation and organization of acinus-like
and duct-like structures. Specific ECM proteins are also important in the
progression of several human cancers, and in particular upregulation of
the ECM protein periostin has been linked to poor outcomes in breast
cancer. Here we investigated the expression of periostin in biopsy
specimens collected from breast cancer patients, as well as determined
the differential effects of TGF and hypoxia on the expression of
periostin mRNA and protein in human breast cancer cells.
Immunohistological analyses of the breast cancer biopsy specimens
indicate that breast cancer tissues expressed different levels of
periostin regardless of the stage of the disease and that the expression
of periostin tended to decrease as breast cancer progressed. Multiple
splice variants of periostin mRNA were expressed by breast cancer cells
as determined by RT-PCR. Furthermore, treatments with either TGF or
hypoxia led to significantly different expression of periostin mRNA
isoforms and of total level of periostin protein (pThe extracellular
matrix (ECM) contributes to the generation of normal breast tissue, and
variations in the composition of the ECM have been shown to directly
influence the formation and organization of acinus-like and duct-like
structures. Specific ECM proteins are also important in the progression
of several human cancers, and in particular upregulation of the ECM
protein periostin has been linked to poor outcomes in breast cancer. Here
we investigated the expression of periostin in biopsy specimens collected
from breast cancer patients, as well as determined the differential
effects of TGF and hypoxia on the expression of periostin mRNA and
protein in human breast cancer cells. Immunohistological analyses of the
breast cancer biopsy specimens indicate that breast cancer tissues
expressed different levels of periostin regardless of the stage of the
disease and that the expression of periostin tended to decrease as breast
cancer progressed. Multiple splice variants of periostin mRNA were
expressed by breast cancer cells as determined by RT-PCR. Furthermore,
treatments with either TGF or hypoxia led to significantly different
expression of periostin mRNA isoforms and of total level of periostin
protein (p<0.05) by breast tumor cells. These observations support the
role of periostin in breast cancer progression and suggest a role for
specific periostin isoforms in response to changes in the
microenvironment including tissue hypoxia and TGF paracrine signaling
from mesenchymal and immune cells.[This works is supported by grants from
the Department of Defense Era of Hope research program (BC044778) and the
National Science Foundation EFRI program (CBE0736007)]

