Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glial cell derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)-RET signaling as a
target in aromatase inhibitor resistant ER-positive breast cancers.


The majority of breast cancers are estrogen receptor (ER)-positive and
depend on estrogen for growth and survival. Blockade of estrogen
biosynthesis by aromatase inhibitors (AIs) is the first-line endocrine
therapy for post-menopausal women with ER-positive breast cancers.
Despite providing substantial improvements in patient outcome, resistance
to such therapy remains a major clinical challenge. We previously showed
that GDNF-RET signaling plays an important role in ER-positive breast
tumors and in the response to tamoxifen treatment. Resistance to this
therapy is often associated with estrogen-independent activation of ER
mediated by cell surface growth factor receptors, such as RET. Here, a
multidisciplinary strategy was used to address the impact of GDNF-RET
signaling in the response to AI treatment. First, using 2D and 3D in
vitro approaches we show that GDNF-mediated RET signaling is enhanced in
a model of AI resistance. Further, GDNF-RET signaling promotes the
survival of AI-resistant cells and increases resistance in AI-sensitive
cells, effects that are selectively reverted by a potent RET kinase
inhibitor.Second, we generated a proliferation-independent GDNF-response
gene set, identified from gene expression profiling in ER-positive breast
cancer cells, and demonstrated this to be an independent prognostic
marker of poor patient outcome and, importantly, to be predictive of poor
response to AI treatment and development of resistance. Finally, the
relevance of these findings was validated by demonstrating increased RET
protein expression levels in an independent cohort of AI resistant
patient samples. Together these preclinical and clinical models identify
GDNF-RET signaling as a key determinant of response and resistance to AIs
in ER-positive breast cancers. As a consequence, RET inhibition may be of
use in the clinical setting either in combination with an AI to prevent
and delay the onset of resistance, or to prolong the efficacy of the AI
in the recurrent and/or metastatic setting.

