Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure of the anti-MET antibody, onartuzumab (MetMAb) with MET
demonstrates the primary mechanism of action is inhibition of hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF) -chain binding.


Binding of proteolytically activated HGF to the receptor tyrosine kinase
MET causes receptor oligomerization and initiation of cell signaling that
leads to cell proliferation, scattering, migration, invasion and
branching morphogenesis, collectively described as invasive growth.
HGF/MET signaling has been implicated in the oncogenic process of
multiple cancers. Onartuzumab is a ligand blocking anti-MET monovalent
antibody that has shown early promise in clinical studies in combination
with the epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor erlotinib. As a
second- or third-line treatment for advanced or metastatic non-small-cell
lung cancer, the combination of onartuzumab and erlotinib significantly
prolonged progression-free and overall survival versus erlotinib plus
placebo in a phase II trial. We investigated the molecular mechanism by
which onartuzumab inhibits HGF binding to MET. Biochemical binding
studies with individual fragments of HGF showed that onartuzumab blocks
the high affinity binding of the HGF -chain to MET, as well as the
smaller NK1 fragment, but not the binding of the HGF -chain. We resolved
a 2.8 crystal structure of a ternary complex comprising onartuzumab Fab,
MET Sema-PSI and HGF -chain to elucidate in detail the binding site for
onartuzumab on MET. The structure revealed that HGF -chain and
onartuzumab Fab bind simultaneously to adjacent sites on the same side of
the 7-bladed -propeller of the Sema domain. These structural data,
together with the finding that onartuzumab and HGF -chain binding for MET
are mutually exclusive, allow us to suggest a likely binding site for the
HGF -chain on MET. Furthermore, these data support the necessity for
onartuzumab to be engineered as a monovalent antibody, since a bivalent
antibody would act as a potent HGF mimetic, consistent with the
derivation of onartuzumab from an agonistic antibody. In addition, the
structural data identify key interaction residues for onartuzumab on MET
that explain why onartuzumab only binds to human MET and not to murine
MET, despite having 87% sequence homology between the species. We were
able to show that mutation of key binding residues in human MET to the
murine residues resulted in ablation of onartuzumab binding. Taken
together, these data explain how onartuzumab inhibits HGF-dependent MET
signaling by blocking a unique site in the MET Sema domain in a 1:1
stoichiometry that occludes binding of the high affinity HGF -chain,
thereby acting as a pure antagonist on the MET receptor.[Xiaolei Ma is
now affiliated with Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, 4560
Horton Street, Emeryville, CA 94608.]

