Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein Tyrosine Kinase 6 promotes peripheral adhesion complex
formation, cell migration, and the epithelial mesenchymal transition in
prostate cancer.


Protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6) is an intracellular tyrosine kinase that
is evolutionarily related to Src kinases. In the normal prostate, total
and active PTK6 is localized within the nucleus, but nuclear localization
is lost in prostate tumors. While the majority of total PTK6 is localized
within the cytoplasm of PC3 cells, a human prostate cancer cell line, the
active pool of PTK6 that is phosphorylated on tyrosine residue 342 is
membrane associated. Ectopic expression of membrane targeted PTK6 leads
to enhanced activation of PTK6 at the membrane and formation of
peripheral adhesion complexes and increased migration of PC3 cells.
Ectopic expression of PTK6 in SYF cells, a nontransformed mouse embryonic
fibroblast cell line lacking Src, Yes, and Fyn kinases leads to cell
transformation and tumor growth in vivo. Ectopic expression of active
membrane-targeted PTK6 in PC3 cells promotes the epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT). PTK6 regulates the EMT through AKT, as knockdown of AKT
or inhibition of AKT activity by knockdown of p130CAS partially rescues
the phenotype. PC3 cells expressing active membrane targeted PTK6 exhibit
increased migration in vitro and form more metastases in a xenograft
mouse model, while knockdown of PTK6 promotes an epithelial phenotype and
impairs tumorigenesis in vivo. In prostates of Probasin-Cre, Pten
flox/flox mice, striking activation of endogenous mouse PTK6 is observed
at the membrane in Pten-null prostates, and this is accompanied by
deregulated expression of E-cadherin and vimentin. We found a reverse
correlation between PTK6 and E-cadherin expression in normal and
metastatic human prostate cancer samples, and show PTK6 is activated at
the membrane in some high-grade prostate tumors. Our studies reveal novel
functions for PTK6 in prostate cancer, and define it as a potential
therapeutic target.

