Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A reporter mouse model reveals that human CYP19A1 (aromatase) gene
expression is induced in breast cancer xenograft stroma and surrounding
mammary gland by the cancer cells in vivo.


Aromatase enzyme coded by the CYP19A1 gene catalyzes the final step of
estrogen biosynthesis and is of major significance in endocrine
regulation of breast cancer (BCa). Human CYP19A1 gene expression is
regulated through the utilization of various non-translated tissue
selective first exons, each controlled by unique sets of e.g. hormones
and cytokines. Extragonadal expression pattern and regulation of human
CYP19A1 gene is significantly different from that of rodents, which has
been a major obstacle in studies focusing on regulation of aromatase gene
expression in vivo. To study the tissue-selective regulation of human
CYP19A1 gene in vivo, we have generated a transgenic reporter mouse
model, hARO-Luc mouse, with a construct composing of a 100-kbp-long
5-regulatory region of the human CYP19A1 gene attached to a luciferase
(Luc) reporter gene. The aim of this study was to investigate human
CYP19A1 gene expression in human BCa xenografts, to determine how the BCa
cells regulate CYP19A1 gene expression in tumor associated stroma in
vivo. In vitro, BCa cells have been shown to induce CYP19A1 gene
expression in human breast derived fibroblasts. Furthermore, in order to
study the regulation of the human CYP19A1 gene expression in hARO-Luc
derived undifferentiated fibroblasts, mesenchymal stromal cells were
isolated from bone marrow of female reporter mice. In these cells, human
CYP19A1 gene expression was induced by dexamethasone TNF, and PGE2 that
are among factors known to drive aromatase gene expression in human
mammary fibroblasts through promoters I.4 and I.3/PII. In order to
investigate human CYP19A1 expression in BCa xenografts and tumor
surrounding mammary gland, the hARO-Luc reporter mice were cross-bred
with athymic nude mice. Estrogen-responsive MCF-7 or T47D cells or
non-estrogen-responsive MDA-MB-231 cells were injected into
inguino-abdominal mammary fat pads of athymic female hARO-Luc mice, and
mice that received MCF-7 or T47D cells were also implanted s.c. with
estradiol releasing pellet to induce the estrogen-dependent tumor growth.
The reporter gene activity was measured from tissue homogenates. MCF-7
and T47D tumors had 5-10 -fold higher Luc activity as compared with the
intact mammary gland, indicating a strong up-regulation of the reporter
gene in host derived tumor stroma. In contrast, in MDA-MB-231 tumor
bearing mice the reporter activity in tumors was only slightly higher as
compared with the intact mammary gland. Furthermore, reporter gene
activity in mammary gland surrounding MDA-MB-231 tumors was 2-fold higher
than in the tumor itself. In conclusion, the data indicate that human BCa
cells up-regulate expression of human aromatase gene in the tumor
associated stroma in vivo.

