Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimizing a modular synthetic approach for producing SH7139, a
new drug candidate for treating B-cell lymphomas.


The scale-up of synthetic methods for producing small molecule
therapeutics can often prove to be problematic and expensive. Synthetic
mechanisms can be inefficient and purification methods used to select
specific isomers or remove reactants or other contaminants can often be
difficult to scale. The modular approach we developed for creating small
molecule targeting agents called SHALs (Selective High Affinity Ligands)
as therapeutics and diagnostics for B-cell lymphoma circumvents many of
these problems by using off the shelf components as recognition elements
that collectively contribute to the molecules high affinity and
selectivity and miniPEG and common amino acids to build up the scaffold
using solid phase chemistry. Here we present the results of our efforts
to scale up the synthesis of the first of these promising new drug
candidates, SH7139, to provide the compounds needed for pre-IND animal
testing and a pet dog lymphoma clinical trial. Working with AmbioPharm
Inc,, a CRO with extensive expertise in the GMP synthesis of peptide
pharmaceuticals, we recently completed small pilot production scale
syntheses of SH7139 and several closely related analogs. The simple solid
phase peptide-based chemistry used to synthesize the compounds coupled
with preparative HPLC adapted well to scale-up and resulted in the
production of highly purified compounds identical in structure (as
determined by mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy) to the bench scale syntheses we performed in house.
However, one unexpected and notable difference between the scaled-up
synthetic products and their bench-scale synthesis counterparts was their
solubility. SH7139 and two of its analogs, which are essentially
insoluble in water and PBS when synthesized in house, were observed to be
highly soluble (>100mg/ml) when synthesized using the scale-up protocol.
While the reason for this is still under investigation, microscopic
analyses of the dried product suggest the solubility difference may
relate to the lyophilization step used to produce the dried product. The
majority of the insoluble SH7139 we produce in bench-scale syntheses is
amorphous in form, while the soluble SH7139 produced by AmbioPharm
appears to be in a semi-crystalline or glass-like state. This research
was supported, in part, by NIH/NCI SBIR grant 1R43CA159843-01 to Rod
Balhorn.

