Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy is a survival mechanism in mediating resistance to
androgen receptor signaling inhibitors in castrate resistant prostate
cancer cells.


Introduction and Objective: Macro-autophagy is associated with drug
resistance in various cancers and can function as an adaptive response to
maintain cell survival under metabolic stresses, including androgen
deprivation. Our hypothesis was: 1) autophagy is a cellular mechanism
that confers resistance to the androgen receptor signaling inhibitor
(ARSI), enzalutamide (MDV-3100) therapy and 2) blocking autophagy
circumvents this survival mechanism to improve therapeutic
response.Materials and methods: To determine if autophagy was activated,
we examined expression levels of LC3-I/II using Western Blotting in
prostate cancer (CaP) cell lines, LNCaP, C4-2B, and CWR22 stably
over-expressing LC3-GFP. Flow cytometry and fluorescence microscopy were
used to quantify and visualize autophagy and to analyze cell cycle
progression and apoptosis. Clonogenic assays were employed to evaluate
cell survival. Enzalutamide (ENZA) and biclutamide were used as androgen
receptor inhibitors. SiRNA to AMPK was transfected with Lipofectamine
2000.Results: Androgen deprivation or treatment with androgen receptor
signaling inhibitors, ENZA or biclutamide induced autophagy in
androgen-dependent and in castration resistant CaP (CRPC) cell lines. The
autophagic cascade triggered by AR blockage, correlated with the
increased LC3-II/I ratio and ATG-5 expression. Autophagy was observed in
a subpopulation of C4-2B cells that developed insensitivity to ENZA after
sustained exposure in culture. Using flow cytometry and clonogenic assays
we showed that inhibiting autophagy with clomipramine or
hydroxychloroquine increased apoptosis and significantly impaired cell
viability. This autophagic process was mediated by AMPK activation and
the suppression of mTOR through Raptor phosphorylation (Serine 792).
Finally, si-RNA targeting AMPK significantly inhibited autophagy and
promoted cell-death in CaP cells acutely or chronically exposed to ENZA
or androgen deprived culturing condition, suggesting that autophagy is an
important survival mechanism in CRPC cells.Conclusion: These novel data
support autophagy as an important mechanism of resistance to the androgen
receptor signaling inhibitor in CRPC. Antiandrogen mediated autophagy is
dependent on the activation of AMPK pathway and the suppression of mTOR
pathway. Blocking autophagy pharmacologically or genetically
significantly impairs prostate cancer cell survival, implying the
therapeutics potential of autophagy inhibitors in the antiandrogen
resistance setting.

