Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling Ewing's sarcoma and tolerance of EWS-FLI1 with neural
crest stem cells.


Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is a highly malignant bone and soft tissue tumor
that primarily affects children and young adults. These tumors are
characterized by chromosomal translocations, most commonly
t(11;22)(q24;q12), which generates the EWS-FLI1 fusion oncogene. Despite
its oncogenic potential, the fusion protein induces cell cycle arrest or
apoptosis in most non-transformed cells unless mutations in tumor
suppressors such as p16 are also present. However, only a minority of
patients (25%) have such mutations at diagnosis, suggesting other
mechanisms for cellular tolerance must be present in the cell of origin.
Currently, the cell of origin of these tumors is controversial, with data
supporting both a mesenchymal and/or neural crest origin. To assess the
potential to model ES using mouse neural crest stem cells (NCSCs) and
elucidate the mechanism(s) of EWS-FLI1 tolerance, primary fetal and adult
mouse NCSCs were transduced with a V5-tagged EWS-FLI1 2a eGFP construct.
Both wild-type fetal and postnatal NCSCs tolerated EWS-FLI1 expression,
with 40-60% of the stem cell-derived neurospheres positive for GFP. There
was no difference in neurosphere forming ability between cells infected
with EWS-FLI1 or an empty vector, suggesting EWS-FLI1 expression was not
toxic to these cells. EWS-FLI1 expression was maintained as the stem
cells self-renewed, with GFP-positive primary neurospheres giving rise to
GFP-positive secondary and tertiary neurospheres but there was no
difference in the frequency of GFP-positive and -negative secondary
neurospheres. EWS-FLI1 expression was confirmed by quantitative PCR and
the V5 tag was localized to the nucleus by immunocytochemistry,
consistent with transcription factor function. EWS-FLI1-mediated gene
expression analysis is currently ongoing. Interestingly, the tolerance of
EWS-FLI1 was dramatically reduced in Bmi-1 deficient NCSCs. Bmi-1 is
known to function cooperatively with multiple other oncogenes to mediate
transformation but its role in tolerance has not been studied. In the
absence of Bmi-1 only 8% of the fetal neurospheres were positive for GFP,
a large decrease compared to 40% of the wild-type neurospheres. Taken
together, these data are consistent with a neural crest origin for ES and
demonstrate a critical role for Bmi-1-mediated tolerance to EWS-FLI1.
Work is ongoing to determine whether EWS-FLI1 can transform these cells
and to assess the full utility of this novel system to model ES and
genetically assess important regulators of EWS-FLI1 function.

