Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spheroid culture of colorectal cancer cells from patient tumor
tissue preserves important cellular characteristics of the parental tumor.


At the time of diagnosis more than 65% of patients with colorectal cancer
have advanced disease and require chemotherapeutic treatment. However,
colorectal tumors demonstrate pronounced heterogeneity, leading to
significant individual variation in sensitivity to standard
chemotherapeutic drugs. Tools for assessing chemosensitivity and
tailoring therapeutic regimens to the individual patient are therefore
urgently needed. A promising approach is to isolate viable cancer cells
from patient tissue and to test the chemosensitivity of the individual
tumor in vitro.The aim of the current study was to establish primary
colorectal cancer cell cultures from patient tissue and investigate if
the cultured cells retain important characteristics of the original
tumor. Small cell clusters were isolated from colorectal tumor tissue and
allowed to form cell spheroids in suspension culture. The cell type
composition of patient spheroids was characterized by immunostaining with
cell type specific antibodies. Spheroid size was monitored over time and
growth curves established for each patient. The distribution of
proliferating and apoptotic cells in the spheroids was assessed by
staining for specific markers. The 3D culture system was verified as a
tumor model by comparing the results obtained for the spheroids to
paraffin-embedded sections of the original tumors.Successful spheroid
culture was obtained from more than 80% of tissue samples. Immunostaining
confirmed that the primary cultures were composed of colorectal cancer
cells, without significant contaminations by other cell types. Growth
could be observed as an increase in spheroid size. The dominating cell
populations of the original tumor could generally be identified in the
derived spheroids as well. In summary, spheroid cultures of colorectal
cancer cells can be established from tumor tissue of individual patients
with a high success rate and the formed spheroids retain important
cellular characteristics of the original tumor. Culture of colorectal
cancer cells as spheroids represents a promising method for establishing
primary cultures for chemotherapeutic screening of the individual patient.

