Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer chemopreventive potential of grape seeds and skin in mice
inoculated with Ehrlich ascites carcinoma cells.


Chemoprevention by dietary constituents holds great promise to control
cancer. Grape seeds(GSE) and skin (GSK) contain large amounts of
phytochemicals such as flavonoids, phenolic acids, and anthocyanidins,
which play an important role as chemopreventive and anticancer agents.
This study was undertaken to investigate the chemopreventive effects of
GSE and GSK efficacies and associated mechanisms on tumor growth in mice.
GSE & GSK were separated from the pulp of grape Vitis vinifera, dried and
ground to powder. Equal amounts of GSE & GSK were mixed uniformly with
the standard diet powder at concentrations of 10% (w/w). The supplemented
diet was started two weeks before tumor cells inoculation and continued
until the end of the experiment. Female Swiss albino mice were inoculated
subcutaneously with 2.5x106Ehrlich ascites carcinoma (EAC) cells. Tumor
growth was monitored for 30 days.Cell cycle progression was measured and
the apoptotic effect of GSE and GSK on tumor cells were evaluated by flow
cytometric analysis, histopathology and transmission electron microscopy
examination. GSE & GSK intake prevented tumor development in 47% of the
animals.Tumor volume and tumor weight measured at the termination of the
experiment were reduced by 93.9 %& 86.3 %, pChemoprevention by dietary
constituents holds great promise to control cancer. Grape seeds(GSE) and
skin (GSK) contain large amounts of phytochemicals such as flavonoids,
phenolic acids, and anthocyanidins, which play an important role as
chemopreventive and anticancer agents. This study was undertaken to
investigate the chemopreventive effects of GSE and GSK efficacies and
associated mechanisms on tumor growth in mice. GSE & GSK were separated
from the pulp of grape Vitis vinifera, dried and ground to powder. Equal
amounts of GSE & GSK were mixed uniformly with the standard diet powder
at concentrations of 10% (w/w). The supplemented diet was started two
weeks before tumor cells inoculation and continued until the end of the
experiment. Female Swiss albino mice were inoculated subcutaneously with
2.5x106Ehrlich ascites carcinoma (EAC) cells. Tumor growth was monitored
for 30 days.Cell cycle progression was measured and the apoptotic effect
of GSE and GSK on tumor cells were evaluated by flow cytometric analysis,
histopathology and transmission electron microscopy examination. GSE &
GSK intake prevented tumor development in 47% of the animals.Tumor volume
and tumor weight measured at the termination of the experiment were
reduced by 93.9 %& 86.3 %, p< 0.001) respectively as compared to the
untreated tumor- bearing mice. GSE& GSK induced a marked increase in the
percentage of apoptotic tumor cells as determined by flow cytometric
analysis and confirmed by histopathological and electron microscopy
examination. These changes were associated with significantG1-phase cell
cycle arrest, decrease in the expression of Bcl-2, increase of the
expression of p53 and induced caspase-3 activation in the tumor cells.
Our data demonstrated that grape seeds& skin intake resulted in profound
cell growth inhibition by a mechanism involved G1-phase cell cycle
arrest, and apoptosis. Therefore, dietary grape seeds and grape skin
possess cancer chemopreventive potential and provide support for their
use in human cancer chemoprevention.

