Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the Notch and mTOR pathways in diffuse intrinsic pontine
glioma.


Diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) is a universally fatal pediatric
brain tumor which is known to have frequent alteration of mTOR signaling.
Analysis of DIPG tissue obtained through the Mid-Atlantic DIPG Consortium
(MADC) also shows high level activation of Notch pathway effectors HES4
and HES5. We have established JHH DIPG1, a human DIPG xenograft and
neurosphere cell line from a rapid autopsy specimen obtained through the
MADC. Notch 1 and 3 and Notch downstream effectors, Hes1, Hes5 and Hey1,
are highly expressed in JHH DIPG1 and a second DIPG line, SU DIPG1. These
DIPG cell lines also express high level phospho-S6 and phospho-AKT 473,
indicating activation of TORC1 and TORC2. Notch and mTOR pathway
signaling is equal to or exceeding that observed in glioblastoma
neurosphere cell lines. Notch targeting using a gamma-secretase inhibitor
leads to a dose-dependent reduction in cell proliferation of up to 30%
(p=0.05) as well as inhibition of phospho-AKT 473, suggesting that
inhibition of the NOTCH pathway targets TORC2 complexes. BrdU
incorporation also showed that treatment of DIPG cell lines with a TORC1
inhibitor also has up to a 60% attenuation of cell proliferation
(pDiffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) is a universally fatal
pediatric brain tumor which is known to have frequent alteration of mTOR
signaling. Analysis of DIPG tissue obtained through the Mid-Atlantic DIPG
Consortium (MADC) also shows high level activation of Notch pathway
effectors HES4 and HES5. We have established JHH DIPG1, a human DIPG
xenograft and neurosphere cell line from a rapid autopsy specimen
obtained through the MADC. Notch 1 and 3 and Notch downstream effectors,
Hes1, Hes5 and Hey1, are highly expressed in JHH DIPG1 and a second DIPG
line, SU DIPG1. These DIPG cell lines also express high level phospho-S6
and phospho-AKT 473, indicating activation of TORC1 and TORC2. Notch and
mTOR pathway signaling is equal to or exceeding that observed in
glioblastoma neurosphere cell lines. Notch targeting using a
gamma-secretase inhibitor leads to a dose-dependent reduction in cell
proliferation of up to 30% (p=0.05) as well as inhibition of phospho-AKT
473, suggesting that inhibition of the NOTCH pathway targets TORC2
complexes. BrdU incorporation also showed that treatment of DIPG cell
lines with a TORC1 inhibitor also has up to a 60% attenuation of cell
proliferation (p<0.005) in treated DIPG cells compared to non-treated
cells and a dose-dependent reduction in phospho-S6, with concomitant
upregulation of phospho-AKT 473 indicating TORC2 activation. Dual TORC1
and TORC2 inhibition by combining a rapalog and a gamma-secretase
inhibitor may prove to be synergistic in DIPG. Simultaneous treatment
with a rapalog and gamma-secretase inhibition suppresses TORC1 and TORC2,
as measured by western blot. We are currently investigating the possible
mechanism of action of these drugs in DIPG. Our laboratory is
investigating additional metabolic inhibitors that can be used with TORC1
and TORC2 inhibitors to further improve treatment options for DIPG. We
are currently exploring the role of the Notch and mTOR pathways in DIPG
in pre-clinical studies in mice, with the goal of moving targeted
inhibitors into clinical trials for these currently highly lethal tumors.

