Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mTOR inhibitor MLN0128 Has antitumor efficacy in cell lines with
intrinsic and acquired rapamycin resistance in vitro and in vivo.


Introduction: The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway plays a
central role in cancer biology. mTOR forms two multiprotein complexes,
mTOR complex 1 and 2 (mTORC1 and mTORC2). Rapamycin and analogues are
allosteric mTOR inhibitors that predominantly inhibit mTORC1. Rapamycin
analogues have been FDA approved for several cancer types and are in
clinical trials for treatment of many others. MLN0128 is a mTOR kinase
inhibitor, that inhibit s both mTORC1 and mTORC2. We hypothesized that
MLN0128 may have antitumor efficacy in cancer cell lines with intrinsic
or acquired rapamycin-resistance.Methods: Twenty immortalized human
cancer cell lines representing various cancer types and a range of
rapamycin sensitivity were treated with Rapamycin, MLN0128 or vehicle.
Sulforhodamine B assay was used to determine rapamycin and MLN0128 half
maximal inhibitory concentrations (IC50), which were later confirmed with
colony formation assay (CFA). Acquired resistance models were created in
BT-474 and MCF-7 cell lines through culturing in progressively increasing
doses of rapamycin until sustained growth at supratherapeutic (10uM)
doses was achieved. Western blotting was used to characterize PI3K/mTOR
signaling pathway expression. Flow cytometry and cell sorting (FACS) was
used to detect and quantify apoptosis of Annexin-V-FLUOS stained cancer
cell lines. Xenograft models of nu/nu mice were treated with MLN0128 and
rapamycin or everolimus for 28 days.Results: Cell lines that were
intrinsically rapamycin sensitive as well as those that were
intrinsically rapamycin resistant were sensitive to MLN0128. MLN0128
induced cell cycle arrest; Induction of apoptosis or autophagy with
MLN0128 was not detected with western blotting and annexin labeling in
most cell lines tested. MLN0128 demonstrated greater inhibition of mTORC1
signaling, especially with a decrease in p4E-BP1 across all cell lines.
In addition, MLN0128 demonstrated inhibition of mTORC2, with decline in
pAKT473 and pAKT450. However a feedback-dependent phosphorylation of AKT
S308 was observed. In cell lines with acquired rapamycin resistance,
treatment with MLN0128 produced a significantly higher growth inhibition
compared to rapamycin. Thus far, we have demonstrated that MLN0128
treatment resulted in increased tumor growth inhibition compared to
rapamycin in xenograft models of BT474 cells with acquired rapamycin
resistance.Conclusion: Cancer cell lines with intrinsic as well as
acquired resistance to rapamycin are responsive to mTOR kinase inhibitor
MLN0128. Further investigations are needed to study the efficacy of
MLN0128 in clinical trials and to evaluate its potential as a treatment
option in cases of resistance to rapalogs.

