Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of curcumin in combination with 6-shogaol and
epicatechin for the chemoprevention of prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed malignancy in American
men and second leading cause of cancer related death. Despite much recent
progress, prostate cancer continues to represent a major cause of
cancer-related mortality and morbidity in men. Various epidemiological
data suggested the inverse relationship between the consumption of fruits
and vegetables and the incidence of various cancers. Recently there has
been increased interest in the use of phytochemicals for the prevention
of cancer. In order to identify effective chemopreventive strategies for
prostate cancer, we are evaluating the effectiveness of the combinations
of promising dietary phytochemicals including curcumin (CURC) from
turmeric with epicatechin (EC) from green tea and 6-shogaol (6-SHO) from
ginger in human and mouse prostate cancer models. In the present study,
we first measured the growth inhibitory effect and found that the
combinations of both CURC+6-SHO and CURC+EC produced significantly higher
inhibition of growth of human prostate cancer cells (LNCaP, DU145, PC-3)
and cultured mouse prostate cells from Hi-Myc mice (HMVP-2 cells)
compared to the individual compounds alone. Next, we measured the
apoptosis inducing activity and found that both combinations induced
apoptosis and cleavage of PARP more strongly than the individual
compounds alone. To clearly understand the molecular mechanism of
increased growth inhibition and apoptosis, we performed Western blot
analyses and found that CURC+6-SHO inhibited activation of both
constitutive and IL-6 induced Stat3 activation. Several Stat3 target
molecules such as cyclinD1 and survivin levels are also decreased. The
combinations also showed stronger inhibition of NF-B and mTORC1 signaling
pathways. Quantitative real-time PCR data showed that combinations of
CURC+6-SHO further modulated the expression of cell cycle and apoptosis
regulatory genes as well as certain chemokines and cytokines. We have
recently established an allograft mouse model of prostate cancer by
injecting the HMVP-2 cells into FVB mice. This model gives rise to
palpable tumors within 10-14 days post injection. Since the combinations
of CURC+6-SHO and CURC+EC appeared most effective from cell culture
experiments, we are currently testing these combinations for their
efficacy against HMVP-2 cells grown as allograft tumors in FVB/N mice.
Taken together, our current findings suggest that combinations of CURC
with 6-shogaol and EC showed greater activity than individual compounds
alone in cultured cells. Ongoing in vivo studies to be presented will
provide a better understanding of the efficacy and mechanisms of action
for these combinations in chemoprevention of prostate cancer. A. Saha is
supported by CPRIT training grant RP101501

