Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plexin B1 trafficking in prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer is a leading form of cancer in men with 324,000 cases
diagnosed/year in the European Union. Plexin B1 is a cell-membrane
receptor for semaphorins; its ligand is semaphorin 4D. Plexin receptors
are involved in axon guidance, angiogenesis, immunity as well as cancer
biology. We have identified a high frequency of somatic missense
mutations in the plexin B1 gene and overexpression of the protein in
prostate cancer. The mutations found in prostate cancer are functionally
significant, altering signalling pathways downstream of plexinB1 and
affecting cell phenotype. These results suggest that plexin B1 has an
important role in prostate cancer progression. Previous studies have
documented the unexpected localization of cell membrane receptors such as
EGFR and ErbB2, in the nucleus and their role as transcription factors.
Preliminary immunohistochemistry results in the laboratory indicated the
presence of plexin B1 protein in the nucleus in tumour cells, suggesting
that plexins may have a role in the nucleus. The aim of this study was to
determine if plexin B1 is translocated to the nucleus in prostate cancer
cells and what is the nuclear localization signal recognized for the
trafficking of the protein.The different techniques were used;
Immunofluorescence was performed on cell lines with antibodies specific
to the intracellular domain of plexin B1. Colocalization studies were
carried out using the Volocity Software. A cell fractionation assay was
performed and cell lysates analysed by immunoblotting. A construct of the
cytoplasmic domain of plexin B1 fused with GFP was generated and its
subcellular localization in transfected cells analysed by confocal
microscopy. The plexin B1/GFP construct is currently mutated on the
putative NLS signal using site-directed mutagenesis. The subcellular
localization of the plexin B1 mutants will be observed by confocal
microscopy.Immunofluorescence of prostate cancer cell lines showed the
presence of the intracellular domain of plexin B1 receptor in the
nucleus, suggesting a translocation of the protein to the nucleus. Plexin
B1 was found to co-localize with DAPI staining. Further
immunofluorescence studies showed that the presence of plexin B1 in the
nucleus is dependent on semaphorin 4D binding in a time-dependent manner.
The translocation occurs 15min after ligand binding and decreases after
40min of ligand binding. A cell fractionation assay followed by
immunoblotting confirmed the preliminary immunofluorescence data. To
assess the nuclear trafficking with a functional assay, a GFP tag was
attached to the intracellular domain of plexin B1 and its translocation
to the nucleus was observed in transfected cells.In conclusion, the
translocation of plexin B1 to the nucleus suggests an interesting novel
role for this receptor in the nucleus. Plexin B1 could act as a
transcription co-factor and may have an impact on carcinogenesis.

