Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new alphaV/beta3 integrin selective carrier for nanodrug
delivery to tumors based on isoDGR-tagged albumin.


Albumin is emerging as a versatile drug carrier in a number of
applications in cancer therapy and diagnosis. Basically, albumin can be
exploited to enhance the tumor uptake of peptides and low
molecular-weight compounds, owing its tendency to accumulate in tumors,
and for the preparation of nanoparticles that encapsulate anti-cancer
drugs or diagnostic agents.We have addressed the hypothesis that coupling
albumin with a peptide containing the isoAsp-Gly-Arg (isoDGR) sequence, a
tumor-vasculature targeting motif discovered by our group, might enhance
its tumor-homing properties. IsoDGR is a mimetic of Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD), an
integrin-recognition motif. Accordingly, isoDGR can recognize
RGD-dependent integrins with different affinity and selectivity depending
on isoDGR conformation and molecular scaffold. To have at hand isoDGR
peptides that can be easily coupled to albumin we designed various
head-to-tail-cyclized exapeptides containing free thiol groups, to enable
chemical coupling to proteins, and analyzed their integrin binding
properties before and after coupling to albumin. We have identified a
peptide (c(CGisoDGRG)) that, after coupling to human serum albumin, has a
very good selectivity for alphaV/beta3 and alphaV/beta5, two integrins
overexpressed in the tumor vasculature. In vitro and in vivo studies
showed that isoDGR-tagged albumin binds to endothelial cells, inhibits
their adhesion properties, homes in on tumor vessels and inhibits tumor
growth, with no evidence of toxicity. IsoDGR-tagged albumin was exploited
as a carrier for the preparation of a new nano-gold systems capable of
delivering tumor necrosis factor (TNF), a well known vascular damaging
agent, to tumor vessels. In vivo studies, performed with mice bearing
WEHI-fibrosarcomas, showed that intravenous administration of gold
nanoparticles loaded with isoDGR-tagged albumin and TNF (equivalent 5 pg
of bioactive TNF/mouse) could induce stronger anti-tumor effects than
nanoparticles loaded with albumin and TNF. These findings support the
concept that isoDGR-tagged albumin is superior to albumin as a vector
system for targeted delivery of nanomedicines to tumor vessels. Because
of its good selectivity for tumor vessels and its inherent anticancer
activity isoDGR-tagged albumin might be exploited as a novel and
versatile material for the preparation of a wide range of tumor
vasculature-selective drugs and nanoparticles for cancer therapy and
diagnosis.

