Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted re-sequencing of neuroblastoma tumors reveals chromosomal
rearrangements that involve the Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) gene.


Neuroblastoma (NBL) is a cancer of early childhood arising from the
developing sympathetic nervous system. NBL tumors display a broad
clinical and biological heterogeneity, ranging from highly aggressive
tumors with fatal outcome to tumors with spontaneous regression.
Recurrent mutations are mainly only observed in Anaplastic Lymphoma
Kinase (ALK), which is involved in the pathogenesis of both familiar and
sporadic NBL. ALK encodes a tyrosine kinase receptor with importance in
neuronal development and was initially characterized in anaplastic large
cell lymphoma from a translocation leading to the NPM-ALK fusion protein.
Subsequent studies show that additional ALK chimeras have been generated
with different fusion partners in various cancers. To date no
ALK-containing rearrangement has been reported in primary NBL tumors
although one study has describeda NBL cell line with an ALK intragenic
deletion leading to constitutive ALK kinase activity. This led us to
screen for and further investigate possible ALK containing translocations
in our NBL material.Genomic profiling of 350 NBL samples though SNP
microarrays indicated ALK-rearrangement in four primary tumors and two
cell lines (IMR32 and CLB-BAR) which were further analyzed through
targeted re-sequencing of the common MYCN amplicon region (Chr2;14-18Mb)
and the entire ALK gene. Briefly, detection of rearrangements was
performed through solution-based enrichment followed pair-end sequencing
of 400-500bp libraries.Junction sites were identified by manual sequence
viewing on IGV and validated through PCR followed by Sanger
sequencing.With this strategy we were able to determine translocation
sites for all but one sample. In one tumor ALK was found to be
translocated to GAB2 (chr11q14) causing loss of the first exon of
respective gene. However,ALK and GAB2 were placed head-to-head with
respect to transcription direction and this novel translocation is
therefore unlikely to cause a chimeric protein. Another tumor showed
translocation between ALK intron 4 and chr 4 subtelomeric region without
known genes. Two NBL cell lines and one tumor had both MYCN and ALK
amplification and sequencing revealed high level complexity of respective
amplicon with multiple rearrangements. IMR32 show involvement of at least
six different 2p-regions including MYCN and ALK exon 3-4. CLB-BAR has
also multiple rearrangements including an ALK intragenic translocation
causing loss of exon 4-11, ultimately resulting in an ALK protein with
truncated extracellular domain.Here we show that ALK translocation sites
could be deduced from targeted re-sequencing without previous knowledge
about fusion partner. However, no translocations resulting in chimeric
protein were detected. We were also able to detect MYCN amplicon
junctions, which are highly unique for each patient and could be used for
detection of minimal residual disease.

