Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymerase epsilon (POLE) mutations and mutator phenotypes in
colorectal and endometrial tumors.


Colorectal rectal and endometrial cancers are divided into microsatellite
instable (MSI) and microsatellite stable (MSS) types. MSS tumors have
chromosome instability with mutation rates of 1-10/Mb. MSI patients have
a better prognosis than MSS patients and are treated less aggressively.
These tumors exhibit microsatellite instability (MSI), and the CpG island
methylator phenotype (CIMP), an increased mutation rate (10-100/Mb,
hypermutated). Here we demonstrate a novel class of tumor in these two
diseases exhibiting an ultramutator phenotype with mutation rates
exceeding 100/ Mb, MSS and chromosome stable. The ultra-high mutation
rates appear to be caused by recurrent mutations in the exonuclease
domain of DNA polymerase epsilon (POLE).Matched tumor and normal whole
exomes for 512 colorectal and 248 endometrial cancers (TCGA data control
center) were evaluated for mutation frequency and MSI status. Among the
colorectal tumors, 70/512(14%) were hyper mutated, endometroid tumors had
65/248(26%) hypermutated tumors. Within the hypermutated tumors, we
identified tumors with extremely high mutation rates (100 mutations/Mb)
termed ultramutated. 14 (3%) colorectal and 17 (7%) endometrial were
ultramutated. 100% of the colorectal and endometrial ultramutated contain
an exonuclease domain mutation in POLE with three recurrently mutated
positions: P286R/H/S and V411L and S459F, these mutations are found
exclusively in ultramutated samples. The functional relevance of these
mutations has been demonstrated by previous mutational analysis of the
exonuclease domain in bacteria phage (T4) yeast,and mice. Disruption of
residues in the active site leads to high error rates, a mutator
phenotype and tumor formation. The defined exonuclease active site aligns
closely with the recurrent mutation found in the ultramutated tumors.The
ultramuted tumors have a distinct mutation spectrum, occur in context and
exhibit strand biases. POLE exonuclease domain mutation tumors have high
rates of C to A and T to G mutations with low rates of C to G and T to A.
Changes of C to A occur predominately in context of 3 and 5 flanking T
bases. This mutation spectrum and context of flanking bases suggests
replicative strand bias. We found that mutations on the leading strand,
exhibited a preference for C to A over G to T (60:40). Suggesting
transcription-coupled repair (TCR) plays a role in ultramutation.Our
results demonstrate that ultra mutated tumors are driven by recurrent
mutations in the exonuclease domain of DNA polymerase epsilon. The
distinct mutation spectrum, strand bias and mutation context all suggest
TCR is involved in ultramutated tumors. We describe a previously unknown
role of POLE in colorectal tumors as well as identification of a
previously undescribed hot spot for cancer mutations.

