Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A metabolomics approach to identify differences between
P-glycoprotein (ABCB1) expressing drug resistant and sensitive cancer
cells.


P-glycoprotein (P-gp) is an ABC transporter whose expression in various
human cancers including hepatocellular, lung and colon carcinomas often
correlates with resistance to chemotherapeutics. Its activity not only
affects the pharmacokinetics of therapeutic agents but also protects
cells against xenobiotics and causes drug resistance in cancer cells.
Although it is known that P-gp transports a wide variety of chemically
dissimilar compounds, its function in the normal cellular milieu is
poorly understood. This is primarily due to insufficient knowledge
concerning what substrates it transports in vivo and how its expression
is regulated. Identification of P-gp's physiological substrates and the
pathways that regulate its function would help to reveal unknown roles of
this transporter that may lead to new ways to overcome therapeutic drug
resistance. This information would also be of great significance in
predicting the pharmacokinetic and toxicological properties of novel drug
candidates. In this study, we used a global metabolite profiling approach
to identify and characterize P-gp expression-associated changes in the
metabolic fingerprint of cells. P-gp was functionally expressed using a
modified baculovirus based (BacMam) expression system to identify the
metabolomic changes induced due to expression of Pgp in HeLa cells. A
functionally dead mutant P-gp (E556Q/E1201Q) and a non-specific green
fluorescent protein (BacMam-GFP) were expressed as negative controls for
P-gp activity and viral transduction, respectively. Relative changes in
chemical concentrations of small molecule metabolites including amino
acids, carbohydrates, lipids, cofactors and nucleosides produced in
response to expression of functional P-gp were evaluated to determine
their effect on biochemical pathways. P-gp-positive cells had lower
levels of glucose, acetyl-coA, citrate, malate and fumarate, which are
components of the TCA cycle. Six structurally unidentified compounds were
also significantly lower in P-gp-expressing cells. An overall lower
metabolic state in virally transduced P-gp-expressing cells was observed.
The difference in the metabolic state of the P-gp-expressing cells is
currently being validated by transport- or mass spectrometry- based
assays. The data presented here thus provide a global view of cellular
networks and processes initiated when a drug-sensitive cell becomes
drug-resistant due to expression of P-gp and bring to light new
information about the physiological and pharmacological relevance of P-gp
and other ABC drug transporters.

