Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intragenic ATM hypermethylation as a mediator of increased breast
cancer risk associated with high serum folate.


Background: Cancer cells display epigenetic as well as genetic
abnormalities, however, little is known about the possible contribution
of epigenetic variability to cancer risk prior to disease. We have
previously reported a breast cancer risk marker at the ATM gene,
ATMmvp2a, at which hypermethylation, detectable in blood prior to disease
onset, is associated with increased breast cancer risk (OR=1.89).
However, we do not yet understand the mechanism of increased risk, nor
potential causes of increased hypermethylation at this locus. In the
current study, we investigated environmental effects on ATM methylation
as a mechanism of increased breast cancer risk. We hypothesised that
methylation at this ATM locus may be dependent on the one-carbon
metabolism pathway, which provides methyl groups from dietary
micronutrients including folate, and on interaction with the MTHFR gene
T677C polymorphism previously implicated in this pathway.Methods: ATM
methylation was measured by bisulphite pyrosequencing of blood DNA
samples (n=71) from the EPIC study, for which 28 serum metabolite levels
and environmental factors were known. We also measured ATM methylation in
a second set of control individuals (n=288) for which dietary measures
were available from questionnaire data. The MTHFR T677C polymorphism was
genotyped in all individuals by Pyrosequencing.Results: Linear regression
revealed that ATM hypermethylation was associated with serum folate
levels (p=0.006, n=71), but not with dietary folate levels inferred from
questionnaire data (p=0.626, n=288). ATM methylation was on average 7%
higher in the highest serum folate quintile compared with quintiles 1-4,
and was within the range associated with breast cancer risk. While MTHFR
genotype was associated with serum folate levels, hypermethylation of ATM
was independent of MTHFR status. We found an intriguing association
between folate and ATM methylation with fasting status, where dietary
folate was associated with fasting (3.98e-07, n=288), and ATM methylation
appeared lower in individuals who had fasted (p= 1.852e-06,
n=288).Conclusions: We conclude that the previously reported increased
risk of breast cancer with over-supplementation of folate may be
partially mediated via hypermethylation of ATM and other loci. Validation
of these finding in larger studies is required, adjusting for MTHFR SNP
status, fasting, and other potential modifiers, including age and alcohol
consumption. Functional analysis is warranted to determine the biological
significance of ATM hypermethylation, and to explain the apparent paradox
of association of DNA methylation with both transient environmental
factors and long-term cancer risk.

