Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phylogenetic models of tumor progression from fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) data on many single cells of a solid tumor.


Purpose: Characterizing the common pathways through which tumors progress
is critical to understanding the molecular basis of cancer and developing
effective treatments. Algorithms for phylogenetics, i.e., evolutionary
tree building, can be used to infer progression pathways of single tumors
when there is widespread intra-tumor heterogeneity from cell to cell. We
describe computational methods to compute likely evolutionary histories
from single-cell copy number data and apply the methods to single-cell
gene copy number data derived from paired primary and metastatic samples
of cervical cancers.Materials and methods: The inputs to our methods are
lists of cell types for each patient sample, where a cell type is an
array of copy numbers of gene probes measured by FISH. In the cervical
cancer data set, copy numbers of four genes (LAMP3, PROX1, PRKAA1 and
CCND1) were measured on up to 250 cells each of paired primary and
metastatic samples from 16 patients. An example of a cell type is (4, 1,
3, 2). Our algorithms derive maximum parsimony phylogenetic trees
explaining how all observed cell types might have evolved from a common
diploid ancestor (2,2,2,2), seeking to explain the observed cells with as
few copy number changes as possible across the tree. Due to the
computational difficulty, we apply a heuristic algorithm to infer an
approximately optimal tree by identifying likely unobserved ancestral
cell states through a variant of the median joining method and then find
the most parsimonious tree connecting these states. Our software also
includes a method of computing consensus trees that facilitate the
comparison of the tree models for each primary/metastasis sample
pair.Results and Conclusion: Our methods allow us to build models of
evolution of single tumors at the cellular level that provide insights
into possible progression pathways and varying selective pressures in
primary and metastatic sites. Analysis of tree geometry shows significant
variability in evolutionary patterns between primary and metastatic sites
consistent with more specific selective pressures in the metastases.
Analysis of specific patterns of gene gain or loss in each environment
shows a complicated portrait of tumor evolution with substantial
variability from patient to patient.

