Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of protein kinase C delta induces apoptosis through
JNK-H2AX pathway in melanoma.


Metastatic melanoma is the major cause of skin cancer death, and the
annual incidence of melanoma continues to increase. Despite the
impressively high rates of response to BRAF inhibitors in patients with
melanomas harboring BRAF mutations, most of these patients eventually
relapse after developing resistance to the drug, due in part to secondary
mutations in NRAS. Although NRAS mutation is the second most common
genetic mutation in melanoma patients (after BRAF mutation), there is
currently no treatment option that targets NRAS-mutated melanomas. New
targeted therapies are urgently needed. Our previous reports have
demonstrated the sensitivity of pancreatic cancer cell lines carrying
oncogenic KRAS mutations to apoptosis initiated by inhibition of protein
kinase C delta (PKCd), suggesting that PKCd inhibitors might be effective
in melanomas with primary or acquired NRAS mutations. PKCd is not
required for normal mammalian development, making it a potential
tumor-specific target. In this study, we investigated the effect of PKCd
inhibition, and the efficacy of a new PKCd inhibitor BJE6-106 (B106), in
melanoma. Inhibition of PKCd by B106 (at nano-molar concentrations), or
by siRNA, inhibited the growth of multiple melanoma cell lines carrying
NRAS mutations, and induced apoptosis mediated by terminal caspase
activation. Analysis of the molecular mechanisms involved in this NRAS
signaling-targeted approach demonstrated activation of the JNK pathway
after PKCd inhibition, leading to the activation (phosphorylation) of
H2AX, a histone H2A variant. Activation of H2AX was attenuated when
JNK1/2 levels were repressed, indicating that H2AX activation is mediated
by the JNK pathway in response to PKCd inhibition. Although the
phosphorylation of H2AX has in the past been primarily known for its role
in repair of DNA double strand breakage, more recent studies have
proposed an active role for phospho-H2AX in the induction of apoptosis.
Consistent with these reports, knockdown of H2AX prior to inhibition of
PKCd mitigated the induction of caspase-dependent apoptosis in NRAS
mutant melanoma cell lines. To explore the potential activity of new PKCd
inhibitors in inhibitor-resistant BRAF-mutant tumors, we derived melanoma
cell lines harboring BRAF mutations that evolved resistance to a BRAF
inhibitor PLX4032 (vemurafenib). B106 effectively induced cytotoxicity in
these cells, suggesting the potential clinical application of targeting
PKCd in patients who have relapsed following treatment with PLX4032.
Taken together, our present study suggests that inhibition of PKCd causes
caspase-dependent apoptosis in melanomas with NRAS mutations and in
PLX4032-resistant BRAF mutant melanomas. This apoptosis is mediated via
activation of the JNK-H2AX pathway, which involves a novel role for
phospho-H2AX in the execution of apoptosis.

