Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Definition of biosimilars: Energy Resolved Oxonium Ion Monitoring
(Erexim) technology grasps detailed N-glycan microheterogeneity on
therapeutic antibodies.


The patent expiry of innovative antibody drugs has provoked a great deal
of concern over generic drugs. Reduction of medical costs by generics is
undoubtedly beneficial to all countries, however, major issues about
bioequivalence and immunogenicity remain incompletely addressed. The
first draft guidance on the evaluation of biosimilarity was published by
FDA in Feb 2012, in which emphasis was placed on the importance of
evaluating minor structural differences that can significantly affect the
potency and safety of biopharmaceuticals, with specific reference to
glycosylation patterns on antibody drugs. We propose here a new method
for validating the microheterogeneity of N-glycans on therapeutic
antibodies. The continuous collision energy scanning of
oligosaccharide-derived fragment ions (oxonium ions) illustrated both
comprehensive structural information of glycans on glycopeptides and
their quantitative abundance ratio simultaneously in a single analysis of
a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer. We showed that oxonium ion m/z 138
could be a specific reporter ion for sensitive quantification of
glycopeptides, regardless of glycan structures. Indeed the quantitation
limit of glycopeptide was 30 attomole and, importantly, even very rare
structural isomers were quantifiable, which existed only 0.1% of all
glycoforms. We named this technology Energy Resolved Oxonium Ion
Monitoring (Erexim) and utilized for the evaluation of lot-to-lot
glycoform variations of monoclonal therapeutic antibodies trastuzumab and
bevacizumab. The quantitative profiles of 4 lots (n = 4 each) revealed
that N-glycans on both drugs showed gradually shortened tendency with
time. Surprisingly some abundant glycoforms on both antibody drugs
exhibited 10% changes between two continuous lots. We further applied
Erexim technology to in-depth analysis of cetuximab glycosylation
pattern, previously known to induce severe anaphylaxis. Our method
successfully provided a comprehensive structural view of Fab- and
Fc-glycans simultaneously in 30 minutes analysis, which uncovered lots of
critical non-human type antigens only on the Fab region of cetuximab,
such as Gal(1-3)Gal or Neu5Gc structures. Hence in the process of future
biosimilar approval, the Erexim technology we demonstrated herein has
potential to define how similar it is.Citation Format: Koji Ueda,
Atsuhiko Toyama, Taka-Aki Sato, Yusuke Nakamura, Hidewaki Nakagawa.
Definition of biosimilars: Energy Resolved Oxonium Ion Monitoring
(Erexim) technology grasps detailed N-glycan microheterogeneity on
therapeutic antibodies. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 3214. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3214

