Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gallium maltolate inhibits brain tumor volume and blood volume in
xenograft model.


Purpose: There are limited treatment options for glioblastomas (GBM).
Tumor cells have a high requirement for iron; the latter is taken up by
cells through transferrin receptor-mediated endocytosis of
transferrin-iron. These receptors are highly expressed on GBM cells,
which makes them an attractive target for transferrin receptor-directed
therapies. Gallium is a group IIIa metal that can function as an iron
mimetic by avidly binding to transferrin and incorporating into cells
through the transferrin receptor. No studies have been performed to
determine the efficacy of gallium-based therapies in brain tumors.
Consequently, the goal of this study was to evaluate gallium maltolate in
the treatment of a U87 xenograft brain tumor model. Methods: Athymc rats
bearing U87 human grade IV astrocytoma cells were studied. Gallium
maltolate (50 mg/kg/day, n=5) or saline (n=3) was given intravenously.
via an alzet mini pump in the jugular vein. Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) was performed on days 8 and 18 on a Bruker 9.4 T scanner. Enhancing
tumor volumes were determined from the post-contrast T1w images, in all
slices showing enhancing tumor. The spin and gradient echo relaxation
rate changes were then determined giving estimates of microvascular and
total blood volume. ((CBVmicroR2=R2MION-R*pre-MION CBVTotal R2* =
R2*MION-R2*pre-MION). Results: Gallium maltolate inhibited tumor growth
(377132%), as measured by enhancing tumor volume, compared to saline
controls (863481%). Treatment shows decrease of CBV micro and CBVTotal
compared to the controls. The ratio of R2* /R2, which is a measure of
mean vessel diameter, increased in saline treated controls but remained
unchanged for the gallium maltolate treated rats. To our knowledge this
is the first study performed that uses physiologic MRI measurements to
investigate the effects of gallium maltolate on brain tumor xenografts.
The differences shown are not statistically significant a result likely
due to the small sample sizes, which is being remedied by ongoing
additional studies. For the imaging studies included here tissue markers
of proliferation (Ki67), hypoxia (HIF1) transferrin receptors, and
vascular density (vWF) are being analyzed to provide additional
information regarding mechanism of action. In general these results
demonstrate, for the first time, that the novel gallium maltolate
treatment holds promise for the treatment of malignant brain tumors.

