Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue-specific regulation of alternative splicing by breast
cancer associated genetic variants identified in recent GWAS.


Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified more than
30 novel loci associated with breast cancer. However, the biological
functions of these genetic variants have not been characterized yet.
Alternative splicing is one mechanism through which genetic variants may
act on gene expression. We hypothesize that the associated genetic
variants influence tissue-specific regulation of alternative splicing
leading to misregulation of specific isoforms involved in breast
tumorigenesis. We performed an integrated analysis of genomic variation
and transcriptome sequencing to elucidate alternatively spliced isoform
expression quantitative trait loci (asQTL) and to identify breast cancer
susceptibility genes whose isoform-specific expression were influenced by
the candidate genetic variants. The current study utilized a unique
source of paired blood and normal breast tissue from 20 healthy women
free of diagnosed breast cancer. We genotyped 42 SNPs that were
associated with breast cancer in previous GWAS reports, and assessed
expression of approximately 35,000 known splicing variants in more than
24,000 gene transcripts in normal breast tissue using RNA sequencing
data. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to assess the
differences of isoform-specific expression across genotypes. After
account of age, race and batch effects, we found 384 unique genes whose
isoform-specific expressions in normal breast tissue were correlated with
the 42 breast cancer candidate SNPs (Bonferroni corrected p 90%) were
associated with the candidate SNPs in trans, i.e. isoform-specific
expression were influenced by SNPs on a different chromosome. In
addition, 27 out of the 384 identified genes also showed differential
isoform-specific expression in breast tumor vs. normal tissue in our
separate analyses. We have identified known cancer genes including SOD1,
NPM1, FAU, GABARAP, and SMAD5, as well as novel putative breast cancer
genes including PCBP2, SAP18, ATPF7IP, and N4BP2L2. An ingenuity pathway
analysis of the 27 genes suggested three functional networks. Network 1,
related to Cell Death and Survival, Cell Cycle, and Gene Expression,"
includes genes EIF4A1, GABARAP, HARS, HNRNPC and USP33; network 2,
related to Organ Morphology, ReproductiveSystem Development of Function,
and Embryonic Development," included genes ATF7IP, NPM1, RAB2A, SMAD5,
and SOD1; network 3, related to Cancer, Neurological Disease, Cell Death
and Survival," includes gene FAM45A. Our results identify known and novel
putative breast cancer susceptibility genes whose isoform-specific
expression were influenced by breast cancer candidate SNPs from previous
GWAS, showing the impact of germline variants on the regulation of
alternative splicing in transcriptome.

