Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined targeting c-Src and c-Met pathways to impair prostate
cancer cell growth and invasion.


Overexpression of tyrosine kinases c-Src and c-Met has been shown to be
highly associated with prostate cancer progression and poor clinical
outcomes, therefore small molecule Src or Met inhibitors are being
extensively evaluated in clinical trials for advanced prostate cancer.
However clinical data suggest that single treatment with any of these
inhibitors only yield limited effects in patients. One possibility is
that redundant signaling pathways in tumor cells exist that allows tumor
cell uninterrupted upon blockade of purely one pathway. We hypothesize
that c-Src and c-Met are two compensatory pathways that may cooperate to
promote prostate cancer progression, hence here we studied treatment
effects of combining inhibitors targeting c-Src (dasatinib, saracatinib)
and c-Met (ASLAN002, also named BMS-777607) on multiple functional
behaviors associated with tumor growth and metastasis in c-Src and c-Met
expressing prostate cancer cells (PC-3, DU145). Combination of Src
inhibitors and ASLAN002 was found to inhibit cell proliferation and
colony formation more strongly than either single agent, as assessed by
MTT and clonogenicity, respectively. In a wound-healing assay, compared
to either treatment alone, the combinatorial treatment exhibited greater
suppression on cell motility induced by hepatocyte growth factor, the
only known ligand of c-Met. Similarly, using a Matrigel-based Transwell
assay, Src inhibitors plus ASLAN002 resulted in significant reduction of
cell invasion in the presence or absence of HGF. Western blot analysis
demonstrated that co-targeting Met and Src kinases lead to not only
inhibition on c-Met and c-Src autophosphorylation but also greater
blockade of multiple downstream kinases such as focal adhesion kinase
(FAK), Akt and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK). These data
indicate that combined application of small molecule Src and Met
inhibitors cause significant impairment on various phenotypes associated
with prostate cancer progression in vitro including proliferation,
survival, migration and invasion, suggesting that this combination
intervention modality may serve as a potential anti-metastatic strategy
that could be further tested in metastatic prostate cancer models in vivo.

