Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NT113, a potent and selective pan-ErbB inhibitor, is efficacious
in vivo and has high brain penetrance.


Background: The ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases EGFR (ErbB1),
Her2 (ErbB2) and ErbB4 (Her4) function to transduce signals across the
cell membrane in a wide variety of epithelial cells. ErbB dimerization
results in the phosphorylation of intracellular tyrosine residues,
activating diverse signaling pathways. These downstream pathways
culminate in a variety of cellular responses, including cell growth,
proliferation, differentiation and migration. In addition, interactions
between ErbB receptors provide a mechanism for signal differentiation and
amplification. Dysregulation of ErbB mediated signaling confers a growth
advantage, and can result in cellular transformation and/or increased
tumor metastatic potential. ErbB family members have been well validated
cancer targets. Both antibodies and small molecule kinase inhibitors
targeting individual ErbB receptors or both ErbB1/ErbB2 together have
been approved for the treatment of human cancers. In addition, some ErbB
targeting agents are in late stages of clinical testing.A large fraction
of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM, the most common and malignant primary
brain tumor) harbors EGFRvIII activating mutation, and may represent an
especially appropriate subgroup of this cancer for treatment with ErbB
inhibitors.Results: NT113 is a potent and selective pan-ErbB family
kinase inhibitor. It also inhibits known mutant EGFRs resistant to first
generation EGFR inhibitors, including the T790M gate keeper mutant. NT113
inhibited proliferation of ErbB kinase driven cell lines, and GBM cell
lines harboring EGFRvIII mutations.NT113 showed excellent oral PK in
mouse and rat. rat, iv CL = 6.3 L/h/Kg, oral t1/2 = 15 h, F = 70%; mouse
iv CL = 1.4 L/h/Kg, oral t1/2 = 16h, F = 100%. Importantly, NT113 showed
significant brain exposure in rat oral PK studies, with brain/plasma
ratio > 4 at 2, 4 and 24 hr time points, while afatinib brain level was
not detectable at all 3 time points. If these PK results are maintained
in human patients, it may lead to significant clinical activity. Longer
half life would allow the drug to better permeate into tumor, while the
brain penetrance is favorable for insuring the clinical activity of NT113
for CNS cancer, as well as for brain metastasis of NSCLC and breast
cancers.In vivo, NT113 displayed excellent activities in NT87 gastric
cancer xenograft models, and in NCI-H1975 (T790M gate keeper mutation)
NSCLC xenograft models. In an intracrania GBM xenograft model with
EGFRvIII mutation, NT113 completely suppressed the growth of tumor, and
significantly prolonged the life span of the mice after two weeks of oral
dosing.Conclusion: NT113 appears to be a promising best-in-class agent
for treating cancers whose growth is driven by both wild type and mutant
ErbB. It is currently undergoing IND enabling studies.

