Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gamma-H2AX level in peripheral blood lymphocytes as a risk
predictor for bladder cancer.


Introduction: Identification of susceptibility to double-strand breaks
(DSB) may provide valuable information about genomic instability and
cancer risk. The formation of gamma-H2AX foci is a highly sensitive
marker for DNA DSBs induction. We assessed whether levels of gamma-H2AX
in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) obtained after stimulation by
ionizing radiation (IR) are associated with bladder cancer risk in a
bladder cancer case-control study.Material and Methods: Patients and
controls were enrolled from an ongoing bladder cancer case-control study.
Epidemiologic data were collected during an in-person interview using a
structured questionnaire. Baseline and IR induced H2AX-phosphorylation
was assessed in PBL from 174 newly diagnosed, previously untreated
bladder cancer patients and from 174 age, sex and ethnicity matched,
healthy control subjects by a novel, image-based, high-throughput
phenotypic assay. The ratio of gamma-H2AX level of IR-treated cells to
that of non-treated cells (baseline) derived from the same blood sample
was used as the parameter to assess the sensitivity to the mutagen.
Logistic regression analysis was used to estimate odds ratios associated
with gamma-H2AX. We also compared the discriminatory ability of a model
with only demographic variables and a model including gamma-H2AX
ratio.Results: The mean gamma-H2AX ratios were significantly higher for
cases than for controls (1.430.14 vs. 1.350.12; p=1.44E-08). This trend
was irrespective of age, sex or smoking status. The risk estimates of
bladder cancer for induced DNA DSBs showed a significant trend for
increased risk at the highest tertiles for the whole cohort (OR=3.09;
95%CI 1.76-5.40; p=8.15E-05 for the second tertile and OR=3.78; 95%CI
2.26-6.33; p=4.18E-07 for the third tertile) as well as for each
category. Discrimination ability of the epidemiological model was
moderate, with an area under curve (AUC) of 0.64. However, the AUC
increased significantly to 0.74 when gamma-H2AX ratio was
incorporated.Conclusions: Our findings suggest that a higher
susceptibility to induction of DSBs as measured by the gamma-H2AX assay
is significantly associated with an increased risk for bladder cancer.
This might help to identify individuals at high risk for this cancer,
adding new perspectives to established epidemiological and genetic risk
factors. Further research of the role of gamma-H2AX in biological
processes of bladder cancer is warranted.

