Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of the in vitro differentiation ability of hybrid
cell clones derived from spontaneous cell fusion events between murine
breast cancer cells and murine mesenchymal stem cells.


We have previously shown that murine breast cancer cell lines are capable
of acquiring malignant attributes through cell fusion with stem cell
lines in vitro. Hybrid cell clones emerged from spontaneous fusion events
in a co-culture model showed an increased resistance against
chemotherapeutic substances together with a higher proliferation rate and
genetic alterations compared to their parental cell lines. Since solid
tumors, including breast cancer, have pronounced heterogeneity of cell
populations, cell fusion between cancer cells and tumor infiltrating
immune cells as well as stem cells is one mechanism how tumor cells could
acquire new properties.With relation to the importance of cell fusion in
tumor heterogeneity and progression the objective of this study was to
characterize and investigate if hybrid cell clones arised from
spontaneous fusion events between hygromycin resistant murine 67NR-Hyg
mammary carcinoma cells and puromycin resistant murine bone marrow
derived stem cells (BMDCs) from Tg(GFPU)5Nagy/J mice to maintain their
ability to differentiate into the neural and osteogenic lineage. Dual
hygromycin/puromycin resistant mBMDC/67NRHyg cells originated by cell
fusion were confirmed by a dual drug selection procedure and PCR analysis
to examine an overlap of parental markers. BMDCs are generally defined as
self-renewable, multipotent progenitor cells with the ability to
differentiate into several mesenchymal lineages. Differentiation was
performed by cultivating the cell clones and parental cell lines under
appropriate conditions to an established neural and osteogenic
differentiation protocol, respectively.Our results revealed through
molecular and biochemical analyses that hybrid cell clones and parental
cell lines were positive for neuronal as well as osteogenic markers.
Differentiation of hybrid cell clones into the osteogenic lineage was
associated with expression of osteocalcin, bone sialoprotein II and
collagen type I alpha 1 and increasing alkaline phosphatase activity,
while differentiation into neuronal lineage was concomitant with
expression of neurofilament M, GAD67 and class III beta-tubulin. In
conclusion, our data show that hybrid cell clones are able to
differentiate into specialized cells from both osteogenic and neuronal
lineages. These stem cell properties indicate that cell clones derived
from cell fusion events maintain abilities of the parental cell lines.

