Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transient up-regulation of Myc in B-cell lymphomas enhances
p53-independent apoptotic responses to chemotherapy.


The c-MYC oncogene deregulation is a common trait in human cancers, with
programmed cell death (or apoptosis) among Myc-regulated events. Myc is
well-known to induce apoptosis in a p53-dependent manner, via the MycARF
MDM2 p53 pathway. We had previously shown that this pathway couldbe
exploited to increase sensitivity to anti-cancer drugs. Specifically,
small increases in Myc levels obtained by inhibiting Myc-targeting
microRNA-34a resulted in enhanced apoptotic response of B-cells to
bortezomib (Sotillo et al, Oncogene 2010). Because many Myc-driven tumors
are defective for p53 activity, we sought to determine whether transient
up-regulation of Myc also increases cell death in response to
chemotherapeutic drugs in a p53-deficient background. For this purpose,
we used B-lymphoma cells isolated from bone marrows of p53ER knock-in
mice and subsequently transduced with a Myc-expressing retrovirus
(Amaravadi et al, J Clin Inv 2007, Yu et al, Blood 2007). This inducible
system allowed us to distinguish between p53-dependent (cells treated
with tamoxifen) and independent (no tamoxifen added) cell death.
Additionally, instead of modulating Myc levels through miRNA inhibitors,
which currently have limited clinical utility, we increased Myc stability
with a small molecule inhibitor of GSK3, which promotes proteosomal
degradation of Myc. We observed that the activation of p53 via the
addition of tamoxifen is sufficient to induce robust apoptosis, with
neither modulation of Myc levels nor additional treatment with
doxorubicin being necessary. On the other hand, in the absence of active
p53 doxorubicin was needed to kill Myc/p53ER cells, but cell killing was
rather inefficient. Remarkably, pharmacological stabilization of Myc
strongly enhanced p53-independent doxorubicin-induced apoptosis. This
enhancement was accompanied by selective activation of pro-apoptotic
genes BIM, BAX and BAK, but not PUMA or NOXA, suggesting that the
response was indeed p53-independent. To validate this effect in a more
relevant setting, we inhibited GSK3 in various Burkitt's lymphoma cell
lines and achieved consistent up-regulation of Myc. Most importantly,
even in p53mut Ramos cells, Myc stabilization resulted in sharply
increased responses to doxorubicin. Our results suggest that transient
up-regulation of Myc could be a viable adjuvant therapy even for tumors
with p53 loss or MDM2 amplification.

