Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel approach to select cancer initiating cells by targeting
unique sialilated glycosphingolipids and CD20 in patients with metastatic
melanomas.


Background and objectives: There is growing evidence that a minor subset
of melanoma cells drive melanoma progression and is responsible for the
metastatic potentials. Thus, identification and elimination of these
cancer initiating stem cells and understanding their mechanisms is
paramount. With a novel approach, we attempted to identify tumor
biomarkers specific for cancer initiating cells. A comprehensive
immunological study of liver and lympnode metastatic tissues compared to
the primary tumors was performed. Patients and Methods: Samples were
excised from surgically removed cancerous tissues, lymphnode metastases
and peripheral blood of patients with malignant melanomas (Ethical
Permission No: ETT TUKEB 16462- 02/2010) (n= 118) and processed in
cellular immunological and molecular genetic assays. Immunohistochemistry
was performed on core biopsies of liver metastases (n=31) and tissue
microarrays of primary and metastatic tumors (n: 32) with antibodies
against various novel tumorassociated antigens and B cell markers. Fresh
cell cultures of lymphnodes and cancerous tissues were immunofluorescence
FACS sorted and analysed for characteristics relevant to cancer
initiating cells. Results: Immunohistochemistry of paraffin-embedded and
fresh frozen tissue sections identified a characteristic colocalisation
of unique GD3 sialilated glycosphingolipids and CD20 positivity in
primary melanomas and metastatic tissues. The double positive minor cell
population (0.1% - 0,8 %) could be selected by immunofluorescence FACS in
most of the cases with lymphnode metastases. They showed characteristic
growth pattern and longterm tough cancerous outgowth potential, and were
positive for CD133, Nestin, ABCB5, CD20 aswell as for the newly
identified strong GD3 ganglioside (90% positivity). Further
characterisation at gene expression and protein levels revealed unique
characteristics of these minor cell populations. Conclusion: Our results
provide novel markers to select stem cell like cancer initiating cells in
malignant melanomas. This novel approach opens a door for specific
detection and targeted elimination of cancer stem cells in patients with
metastatic melanomas and provides basic material for antibody engineered
specific, fully human immunoconjugates for diagnostics and therapy.
Acknowledgements: The financial support of Harry J Lloyd Charitable Trust
and the devoted work of the Oncodermatological, Surgical and Pathological
Departments in the National Institute of Oncology are acknowledged.

