Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase 11 is an epigenetic regulator of CD8+ T-cell
effector function and memory formation.


Cytotoxic T-cells play a vital role in immune mediated tumor responses.
Indeed, adoptive transfer of CD8+ T-cells can result in regression of
tumor in refractory, progressive metastatic melanoma in a minority of
patients (Chapuis, Thompson et al. 2012). In adoptive transfer
recipients, clinical response correlates with the persistence of T-cells.
Central memory CD8+ T-cells (Tcm) are a population of long-lived T-cells
with an enhanced replicative capacity. Resultantly, adoptive transfers of
Tcm populations confer a superior anti-melanoma response in mouse models
(Klebanoff, Gattinoni et al. 2005). To improve upon the efficacy of
T-cell adoptive immunotherapy a more extensive understanding of the
mechanisms regulating the formation of central memory cells as well as
the effector function and proliferative capacity of CD8+ T-cells is
needed. Here we report that the newest discovered histone deacetylase
(HDAC), HDAC11, is a negative regulator of Eomes, a transcription factor
controlling memory formation and effector phenotype in CD8+ T-cells
(Pearce, Mullen et al. 2003; Intlekofer, Takemoto et al. 2005). T-cells
from HDAC11 knockout (HDAC11KO) mice demonstrate a robust proliferative
capacity upon stimulation when compared to wild-type CD8+ T-cells.
Additionally, these cells favor a more robust inflammatory phenotype,
producing significantly higher levels of INF-, IL-2 and TNF. Analysis of
the thymus, spleen and lymph nodes from HDAC11KO mice demonstrates no
gross differences in overall percentages or numbers of CD4+ or CD8+
T-cells, nor double positive or double negative thymocytes. However,
further examination reveals a significantly increased percentage of Tcm
cells in the CD8+ compartment. To further understand these phenotypic
differences, we investigated the expression and acetylation of the
transcription factor Eomes message. Significantly higher levels of Eomes,
both at the basal state and post stimulation, are expressed in HDAC11KO
CD8+ T-cells. Additionally, increased levels of acetylated histone 3 at
the Eomes promoter, a marker for transcriptional activation, are seen.
Finally, in vivo, adoptive transfer of HDAC11KO T-cells results in
significantly decreased tumor progression in mice with established
melanoma tumors. These results demonstrate HDAC11 as a negative regulator
of Eomes expression and, resultantly, a negative regulator of central
memory formation and effector function in CD8+ T-cells. Therefore, HDAC11
represents a novel therapeutic target for augmenting the efficacy of
T-cell adoptive immunotherapy.

