Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of breast tissue biomarkers by high dose omega-3 fatty
acid supplementation in women at high risk for development of breast
cancer.


Background. Previously, we had observed that women at high risk for
development of breast cancer were more likely to exhibit cytologic
hyperplasia with atypia in specimens acquired by random periareolar fine
needle aspiration (RPFNA) if they had low intake and/or low plasma, red
blood cell, or breast tissue levels of omega-3 relative to omega-6 fatty
acids. We evaluated the effect of high dose omega-3 supplementation on
breast tissue markers in two parallel pilot studies, one of
pre-menopausal and one of post-menopausal women. Methods. 36
pre-menopausal and 35 post-menopausal women at high risk for breast
cancer had breast tissue harvested by RPFNA before and after a 6-month
intervention with 4 g daily of omega-3-acid ehyl esters [1.86 g
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 1.5 g docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)].
Premenopausal women were aspirated in the follicular phase of the
menstrual cycle. Specimens were evaluated for tissue risk biomarkers
including cytomorphology, proliferation (Ki-67). Fatty acid composition
was determined in plasma, red blood cells, and breast RPFNA specimens.
Additional blood and frozen breast tissue was reserved for assessment of
hormones, adipokines, cytokines and gene expression. Results. To date,
only two of the 71 subjects have discontinued the study early, while 50
subjects have completed study and are evaluable for modulation of tissue
biomarkers. Grade 2 or greater gastrointestinal side effects have been
reported by only seven subjects. Favorable modulation was observed for
cytologic evidence of atypia (70% to 44%; p=0.012), Masood score (medians
of 15 to 14; p=0.001), number of epithelial cells recovered (p=0.002),
and Ki-67 expression (p=0.059 if all subjects are included even if they
did not exhibit Ki-67 staining at baseline, medians of 1.7% to 0.8%; or
p=0.001 for 27 women with baseline Ki-67 >1.5%, medians of 3.2% to 1.4%).
Modulation was more prevalent (and was statistically significant for all
variables) in pre-menopausal women than in post-menopausal women. Fatty
acid assessment, adipokine and cytokine assays are batched to minimize
variability and all results are not yet available. Preliminary results
indicate that the ratio of omega-3:omega-6 fatty acids increased in
erythrocytes and plasma by two-fold after 6 months of the high dose
omega-3 fatty acid intervention. Conclusion. High dose supplementation
with omega-3 fatty acids is well-tolerated in healthy women at high risk
for development of breast cancer and was associated with favorable
modulation of the tissue risk biomarkers of cytologic atypia and
proliferation. This strategy will be explored further as a promising
intervention that may reduce risk for development of breast cancer.
Supported in part by funding from the Breast Cancer Research Foundation
and the Kansas Bioscience Authority. Study agent was provided by
GlaxoSmithKline.

