Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiRNA expression profile of tumor microenvironment in murine liver
metastatic model.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most recurrent cancer type and one
of the most lethal diseases around the worldwide. The lethality of the
CRC is due to the metastasis and the principal target is the liver.
Although the main responsible of the metastasis is the cancer cell we can
not obviate the crucial role of the host organ and how the cells of the
host organ support the progression of the disease. The crosstalk of the
tumor microenvironment with the tumor has been deeply studied from the
cellular point of view but the regulatory pathways of these processes
still remain unknown. The epigenetic regulation has been postulated as
one important process implicated in the regulation of cellular changes.
The microRNA (miRNA) expression is one of the variants of the epigenetic
regulation. In this work we study the deregulation of the miRNA
expression in the metastasized liver respect to healthy condition using a
murine in vivo liver metastasis model.We inoculated CT26 murine colon
carcinoma cell intrasplenically in BALB/c mice and after 15 days we
sacrificed the animals to obtain four liver cell types (hepatocytes,
liver sinusoidal endothelial cells, Kupffer cells and hepatic stellate
cells). Then we isolated the total RNA and performed gene expression and
miRNA expression microarrays (Agilent) comparing the tumor received cells
with control cells (PBS injected animal's cells). The gene expression
microarray helps us finding the biological and cellular sense of the
deregulated miRNAs and could be an important data source to elucidate the
therapeutic option of each deregulated miRNAs. An in vivo approach is a
more realistic model that can show more elements implicated in the
crosstalk of the different liver cell types. This fact show us several
results in the different cell types with expected and unexpected new
miRNA deregulations. For instance downregulation of miR-16 and miR-15b
and upregulation of miR-138 has been found in hepatic stellate cells with
important role in activation proliferation and apoptosis of this cell
type and we also observed deregulation of miR-135 in liver sinusoidal
cells. These are some of the examples of a large amount of miRNA
identified. Nowadays we are checking the role of each deregulated miRNA
in the cellular processes to verify their implication in the metastatic
progression and postulate them as therapeutic targets.

