Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Connectivity-map analyses identify FDA-approved drugs targeting
breast cancer stem cells.


Recently developed genomics-based tools are allowing repositioning of
established drugs as cancer treatments. This approach has not been
employed extensively to identify drugs that may target cancer stem cells
(CSCs) of solid tumors. CD44+/CD24- cancer cells are the first described
CSCs for breast cancer, which are enriched in mesenchymal stem-like (MSL)
and mesenchymal-like (ML) subtypes of triple negative (TNBCs) and in
anti-estrogen resistant breast cancers. We subjected gene expression
array datasets containing list of genes differentially expressed in
CD44+/CD24- CSCs compared to non-CSCs as well as in cells enriched for
other markers of CSCs including CD271 and GD3S (six datasets in total) to
connectivity map (CMAP) to identify drugs that may reverse gene
expression patterns unique to CSCs. All trans retinoic acid (ATRA) was
negatively connected with gene expression in CD44+/CD24-, CD271+, and
GD3S+ CSCs as well as in ML and MSL subtypes of TNBCs. Independently,
ATRA was found to modulate the expression of several genes in the
recently described CSC-enriched Yes-Associated Protein (YAP) signature.
ATRA-inducible genes of the YAP signature were associated with good
prognosis, whereas ATRA-repressible genes were associated with poor
prognosis, depending on the subtype of breast cancer. ATRA reduced
mammosphere forming ability of breast cancer cells including acquired
anti-estrogen resistant cells, which correlated with ATRA-mediated
reduction of the critical stemness-associated gene SOX2 and induction of
SOX21, which functions as a differentiation factor depending on the cell
type. CD44+/CD24- breast cancer cell line with K-ras mutation was
resistant to ATRA, which was reversed by MAP kinase inhibitors. From
these results, we propose ATRA as a potential therapy for specific
subtypes of breast cancers enriched for CSCs. A biomarker-driven patient
selection may help to identify patients who may benefit from ATRA therapy.

