Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the synergistic action of histone deacetylase
inhibitor and cisplatin in lung squamous cell carcinoma.


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) constitutes 85-90% of all lung cancer
cases with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) being one of the major subtypes
of NSCLC (35%). Although the risk of developing lung SCC remains
steadfast in recent years, it prevails as a major public health concern
worldwide due to its low 5-year overall survival rate. Platinum-based
chemotherapies are currently the standard of care NSCLC, however,
resistance to platinum compounds pose to be a major obstacle in achieving
long term therapeutic effects. Currently, the understanding on resistance
in lung SCC is severely limited. While many targeted therapies have been
recently approved for adenocarcinoma of the lung, only a limited few have
been applied on lung SCC due to a paucity of identifiable driver
mutations. Hence, elucidation of specific pathways responsible for
platinum resistance may reveal novel chemotherapeutic targets aimed at
circumventing resistance to platinum in lung SCC. From a panel of lung
SCC cell lines, we categorized them into cisplatin-resistant and
-sensitive groups as study models based on cell viability assays. Gene
expression profiles in these models after cisplatin treatment revealed
that genes involved in MAPK signalling pathway and phosphatidylinositol
signalling system were down-regulated in the cisplatin-sensitive group.
Further investigation utilizing phosphoprotein antibody arrays revealed
changes to levels of phosphorylated signalling proteins, with
phosphorylated Akt, Erk1/2, p38, GSK3 and RSK levels abrogated upon
cisplatin treatment in a sensitive cell line. In contrast, elevated
levels of phosphorylated Erk1/2 were observed in a resistant cell line,
suggesting the involvement of Erk in cisplatin resistance. Inhibitors of
histone deacetylase (HDAC) have been shown to induce differentiation,
cell growth arrest, and apoptosis in NSCLC cells. Recent reports have
demonstrated that HDAC inhibitors could re-sensitize tumours to
chemotherapy, but the mechanism(s) for these observations remains
unknown. Here, we observed that cisplatin-resistant SCC lines were more
responsive towards PXD101, a pan-HDAC inhibitor. Interestingly, we
observed that PXD101 selectively dephosphorylated Erk1/2 and GSK3/, but
had no activity on phosphorylated Akt. Moreover, several SCC lines grown
under anchorage-independent growth condition demonstrated that treatment
with HDAC inhibitor could suppress the malignant growth of transformed
cells in combination with cisplatin. Taken together, these results
illustrate the synergistic effects of HDAC inhibitor in
cisplatin-resistant lung SCC tumours. Our preliminary findings also
convey that Erk1/2 could be a potential target for the treatment of lung
SCC tumours with intrinsic resistance to cisplatin.

