Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early growth response 1 is required for radiation-induced
apoptosis in normal tissues.


Although radiation therapy is a mainstay of cancer treatments, it can
have deleterious effects on normal tissues, leading to poor quality of
life for cancer survivors. Radiation can cause depletion of stem cells in
normal tissues that can result in late sequelae, including poor learning,
cognitive disorders, intestinal malabsorption, infertility, and skin
injuries. Our laboratory has shown that low doses of radiation can induce
apoptosis selectively in undifferentiated normal stem cells compared to
adjacent differentiated cells in multiple niches including the brain and
intestine. To elucidate the molecular basis underlying stem cell
sensitivity to radiation, we performed discovery research to detect
genomic differences between stem cells and differentiated cells. Among
the candidates, the Early growth response 1 (Egr1) gene was expressed at
high levels in stem cells, but not in isogenic differentiated cells. Egr1
is a zinc-finger transcription factor that is rapidly induced in response
to radiation and activates the transcription of pro-apoptotic genes.
Since cancer survivors can suffer from cognitive difficulties and
intestinal malabsorption, we investigated the role of Egr1 in neuronal
and intestinal cell death following irradiation. Knockdown of Egr1 using
shRNA increased clonogenic survival in irradiated HT-22 hippocampal
neuronal cells and IEC-6 intestinal epithelial cells. This increased
radioprotection was largely due to reduced apoptosis in Egr1 knockdown
cells. Additionally, suppression of Egr1 promoter binding by mithramycin
A and chromomycin A3 also conferred radioprotection to HT-22 and IEC-6
cells. Mouse models further supported Egr1s role in radiation-induced
apoptosis. Egr1 null mice had significantly fewer apoptotic cells in the
hippocampus and small intestinal crypts following irradiation, as
compared to their wild-type littermates. Finally, we examined mechanisms
by which Egr1 regulates radiation-induced apoptosis. Irradiation of HT-22
and IEC-6 cells led to a G2/M cell cycle arrest, which was abrogated by
the knockdown of Egr1. Also, knockdown of Egr1 by shRNA and inhibition of
Egr1 promoter binding both attenuated radiation induction of the
pro-apoptotic factors p53, Bim, and Bax, and upregulated the
anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2. Thus, this study establishes a crucial role
for Egr1 in the radiation-induced apoptosis of hippocampal and intestinal
tissues. Egr1 could be a potential molecular target to minimize the
normal tissue complications associated with radiation therapy.

