Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SHetA2 decreases mitoses and growth, and alters pathology of
MNU-induced rat mammary tumors.


Background: SHetA2 (NSC721689) is a non-toxic chemoprevention drug that
has completed pre-clinical testing by the NCI-RAID and RAPID programs and
will be evaluated in a Phase 0 clinical trial under development. Previous
studies found that SHetA2 reversed the cancerous phenotype and prevented
carcinogenesis in organotypic cultures of human ovarian cancer and
endometrial cells. The objective of this project was to evaluate the
effects of oral SHetA2 on histologic features of tumors induced by the
nitrosomethylurea (MNU) carcinogen in Sprague-Dawley rats.Methods: SHetA2
was administered to 3 treatment groups of 15 animals each in a Teklad
diet formulated to contain doses of 0 (control), 25 (low dose) and 50
(high dose) mg/kg/day. Five days after initiation of treatment, each rat
was injected with 11.25 mg of MNU into the peritoneum and the animals
were continued on their respective diets. The first palpable tumors were
noted 48 days after MNU injection. Tumors volumes were measured weekly.
Four animals in the control group were euthanized early on days 58, 63,
78 and 82, one animal in the low dose group was euthanized on day 78 and
one animal in the high dose group was euthanized on day 74 due to the
excessive sizes of their tumors. The remaining animals were euthanized on
day 85 and the tumors were collected for histologic evaluation. H&E
stained slides of the tumors were reviewed for histologic features in a
blinded manner. A linear mixed model was used to compare the growth rate
of tumor volumes. The fixed effects included treatment group and days. An
unstructured covariance matrix was used in the model. The numbers of
mitoses in the tumors of the different treatment groups were compared
using a linear mixed model.Results: Tumor growth rate was significantly
lower in the high dose group in comparison to the control group (p=.004)
and the low dose (p=.003). No significant difference (p=.716) in growth
rate was observed between low dose and control groups. The number of
mitoses counted in the tumors was significantly smaller in the high dose
than in the control group (p=.004), but no significant difference was
observed between low dose and control groups (p=.945). The histology of
the tumors included fibrocystic disease, intraductal papillomatosis,
adenoid cystic carcinoma, papillary carcinoma, papillary and adenoid
cystic carcinoma and carcinoma. When compared per animal, there were no
significant differences in the histologies between the treatment groups,
however when each tumor was considered an individual data point, there
was a statistical trend that both doses of SHetA2 decreased the
percentage of papillary carcinoma and increased the percentages of
adenoid cystic carcinoma, (high dose vs control: p=.058; low dose vs
control: p=.058).Conclusion: SHetA2 administered in the diet reduced cell
proliferation, growth and aggressiveness of the pathologic diagnosis of
mammary tumors in MNU-treated rats.

