Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progressive expression of n-cadherin and epidermal growth factor
receptor in colorectal adenocarcinoma.


Purpose: N-cadherin (NCAD) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
have been found to be inducers of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
that are known to play a role in invasion and metastasis of cancer. Over
expression of NCAD and EGFR are associated with increased tumor
invasiveness. However, their progressive expression in colorectal cancer
(CRC) has not been studied. Therefore, in the present study, we
investigated expression status of NCAD and EGFR in paired lesions of CRC.
Experimental Design: We examined the expression of NCAD and EGFR in
paired lesions of human CRC (hCRC) and human mice CRC (hmCRC) xenograft
by immunofluorescence (IF). Images were acquired using the Olympus
FluoView FV1000 (OFVFV1000) Confocal Microscope. The average FITC
fluorescence intensity (aFFI) was measured by OFVFV1000 software. Western
blot analysis was performed to validate results obtained from IF
method.Results: Differential expression pattern of NCAD was observed in
paired normal, primary and metastatic lesions of hCRC and hmCRC xenograft
tissues. For NCAD, it was mainly localized in cytoplasm (diffused),
nucleus (moderate levels), and membrane or cell junctions of CRC. For
EGFR, normal colon tissue or primary CRC showing membranous EGFR-low
positive staining. In contrast corresponding liver metastasis showing
membranous EGFR-high positive staining. The NCAD and EGFR expressions
were correlated with metastasis phenotype of hCRC. The expressions of
NCAD ((aFFI; 812 vs. 261) and EGFR (aFFI 421 vs.131) were each found to
be 3 times higher in liver metastasis of hCRC as compared to primary
tumor. It has been observed that the expression of NCAD was substantially
increased in metastatic lesion of hmCRC xenograft as compared to primary
lesion of hmCRC xenograft.Conclusion: This study revealed that
upregulation of NCAD and EGFR expressions is a mechanism by which CRC
lesions acquire a more aggressive phenotype and, thereby, progress to a
more advanced stage of CRC. Furthermore, our findings are likely to have
implications in the design of clinical trials targeting the NCAD and EGFR
proteins in CRC.

