Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel aurora plus Bruton's tyrosine kinase-targeted therapies for
aggressive B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.


Exploring synthetic lethality in the context of signaling pathways with
novel targeted agents may yield effective combination therapies for
aggressive B-NHL. Auroras are a family of mitotic oncogenic
serine/threonine kinases intimately involved in high fidelity regulation
of cell division. We previously demonstrated that aberrant Aurora (A and
B) expression portends a poor survival in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL)
patients. Aberrant aurora expression leads to genetic instability,
polyploidy, and resistance to microtubule targeted agents (MTAs). We
demonstrated that combination of an Aurora inhibitor MLN8237 (alisertib)
or AT9283 with MTAs (e.g. taxol or vincas) leads to a mechanistic
decoupling of the mitotic spindle manifesting as a synergistic apoptotic
response in cell culture and in mouse xenograft models of aggressive
B-NHL. Gene expression profiling of harvested mouse xenograft tumors at
the end of treatment (3 weeks) with an aurora inhibitor + MTA showed
over-expression of several markers of resistance of which BTK (Bruton's
tyrosine kinase) was the most prominent. BTK plays a role in uncontrolled
activation and proliferation of malignant B-cells via the chronic active
B-cell receptor pathway in aggressive B-NHL. We hypothesized that
targeting proliferation [BTK] and replication [Aurora] would be a novel
therapeutic strategy in aggressive B-NHL.We demonstrate that both aurora
(A and B) and BTK are highly over-expressed in B-NHL cell lines
(Granta-519, SUDHL4, SUDHL10, OCI-Ly-10, TMD8, U-2932) and harvested
mouse xenograft tumour treated with an Aurora inhibitor + vincristine and
in patient samples. IC50 values for AT9283 is 5-10nM, and CNX652 is
0.07-5M. The combination index (CI) indicated significant synergism for
AT9283 plus CNX-652 or vice versa. Combination therapy showed increased
apoptosis (flow cytometry, PARP-cleavage) in a dose-dependent manner.
Both AT9283 and AVL-292 (CNX-652 is a structural analog with similar in
vitro and in vivo properties to AVL-292) are in early phase clinical
trials in hematologic malignancies. We utilized clinically relevant doses
to evaluate the efficacy of single agent and combination therapy of
AT9283 and CNX652 in mouse xenograft models (Granta-519) of MCL. The
first mouse model evaluated single agent dose-response and target
modulation by Western blotting (pHisH3, pBTK) in tumors harvested at the
end of 3 weeks of treatment (CNX-652 daily oral for 3 weeks or AT9283
daily IV for 3 weeks, n=12 mice per cohort). The second study evaluated
the combination of AT9283 and CNX-652 for endpoints of response, overall
survival and target modulation. Gene expression and protein analysis of
harvested tumors at the end of treatment (3 weeks) have been interrogated
to ascertain the mechanistic role of Aurora plus BTK inhibition. The
combination of AT9283 + CNX652 represents a novel therapeutic strategy
for aggressive B-NHL [Funded by the Hope Foundation].

