Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early tumor detection and characterization of a novel mouse model
of Shh-driven medulloblastoma using contrast-enhanced micro-MRI.


Introduction: An important translational application of preclinical
models is the ability to draw insights into the etiology and molecular
pathways altered in cancers. This is especially true for brain tumors
since the early stages of disease are rarely detectable in patients and
advanced-stage tumors may not accurately reflect the mutations
responsible for tumor initiation. Therefore, there is a critical need for
sensitive imaging protocols that allow the study of the early stages of
tumor formation. In this study we optimized an in vivo high-resolution
contrast-enhanced MRI protocol for the early detection and
characterization of a novel mouse model of medulloblastoma (MB), the most
common pediatric brain tumor which originates in the cerebellum
(Cb).Method: The Patched (Ptc1) mutant mouse is one of the most studied
models of MB. In our study we generated a new variant of this model
(referred as Ptc1-CKO) by breeding Ptf1acre/+ mice with mice homozygous
for a floxed allele of the Ptc1 gene (Ptc1fl/fl). Using this approach,
Ptc1 was deleted in less than 1,000 embryonic Ptf1a-expressing granule
cell progenitors (GCPs) compared to the extensive mutation of many GCPs
seen in many models. Based on our results, tumors in Ptc1-CKO mice likely
initiate from a single mutated GCP, and thus better models the clonal
origin of sporadic human MBs. Thus, the Ptc1-CKO mouse is an ideal
platform to study the early stages of MB tumorigenesis. For in vivo
imaging, we used manganese-enhanced MRI (MEMRI) to obtain images 24h
after intraperitoneal (IP) injection of a manganese chloride (MnCl2)
solution using a 7T micro-MRI system. We acquired three-dimensional (3D)
images with a 15-minute and 2-hour protocol for screening and
high-resolution images, respectively. Image analysis was performed using
AMIRA software. After imaging, tumors were extracted for histological and
molecular analysis.Results: The contrast obtained with our MEMRI protocol
showed detailed cerebellar morphology and allowed detection of MBs in
Ptc1-CKO mice at different stages. Our in vivo MRI protocol was sensitive
enough to detect pre-neoplastic lesions as early as 2 weeks postnatal age
(N=22) and was validated with histology (N=12). Furthermore, in vivo
longitudinal micro-MRI allowed the noninvasive monitoring of individual
pre-neoplastic lesions and showed that individual lesions have different
tumorigenic potential. Volumetric studies were performed to analyze tumor
morphology and growth rates (N=25), and the advanced phenotypes were
correlated with immunohistochemistry. In addition, 3D MRI images were
used to guide the dissection of tumor tissue for microarray expression
analysis (N=6). Our results show that Shh-driven MBs in Ptc1-CKO mice
display at least two distinct imaging and molecular phenotypes, contrary
to previous reports that all Shh-driven tumors converge to a common
molecular endpoint.

