Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Incorporation of flanking probes reduces truncation losses for
fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of recurrent genomic
deletions in tumor sections.


Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a robust technique when used
with appropriate interpretative guidelines, and the assay can yield
consistent results that provide diagnostically and prognostically useful
information to help guide patient therapy. The establishment of quality
control standards in clinical laboratories using routine FISH analysis of
formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) sections in different tumor types
for fusion and break-apart strategies and gene amplifications have been
developed for both analysis and reporting, but at the present time there
are no comprehensive guidelines for the analysis of genomic deletions
using FFPE sections. The use of FISH on archival FFPE samples is
technically demanding and becomes more challenging when applied to
paraffin-embedded tissue microarrays. The evaluation of FISH signals in
interphase nuclei of FFPE sections is affected by truncation and
overlapping of the nuclei due to varying cell density, tissue
architecture differences and histological forms. In this study we report
a generalizable four-color deletion FISH approach to assist
interpretation problems arising when evaluating FISH signals. The
guidelines will help address interpretative dilemmas associated with
overlapping and truncated nuclei in FFPE prostate cancer sections. The
four-color FISH approach was developed using the PTEN tumor suppressor
gene deletion model in prostate cancer. The PTEN assay was based on a
robust bioinformatics analysis of 311 published human genome array
datasets and comprises a centromeric chromosome enumeration probe, a
specific PTEN gene probe, and control flanking probes either side of the
target probe. The sensitivity and specificity parameters of the
four-color PTEN probe set were further characterized using a large number
of well-characterized tumors and stringent scoring criteria. The
incorporation of flanking control probes allowed the analysts to
determine if the chromosomal region was subject to truncation loss. A
minimum threshold for apparent deletion frequency was set to address the
heterogeneous and homogeneous nature of tumor histology. In addition the
approach facilitated analysis of genotypic heterogeneity and varying
clonality within different foci of tumor in the prostate. Overall the
approach provided robust and highly reproducible results that minimized
inter- and intra-assay variability. The four-color FISH deletion assay
reduced the frequency of misinterpretation and improved both the quality
and throughput of FISH analyses using clinical samples. Moreover the use
of established controls and conservative cut-offs for assigning deletions
will facilitate more coherent approach to developing reporting standards
for deletion assays as more tumor suppressor genes of clinical importance
are discovered by next generation sequencing methods.

