Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Aurora A kinase-dependent phosphorylation of cortactin
in invadopodia formation.


Aurora A kinase (AURKA) is a serine/threonine kinase known for its
critical role in regulation of cell cycle progression. Overexpression and
activation of AURKA is implicated in development of multiple types of
human cancer. AURKA upregulation is considered as independent prognostic
marker for breast cancer patients and associated with poor survival
outcome. Recent work by our laboratory and others suggests a new role for
AURKA in promotion of tumor cells migration and invasion through
regulation of actin dynamics. However, the specific manner in which AURKA
regulates actin-based machinery of migrating cancer cells is unknown. In
our current work we show that phosphorylation of cortactin (CTTN) by
AURKA directly regulates actin dynamics in breast cancer cells. CTTN is
known to be regulated by oncogenic Src kinase. This phosphorylation is
pivotal for formation of free barbed ends and further actin
polymerization. Dynamic polymerization/depolimerization is required for
invasion of cancer cells. Thus inhibition of Src-dependant
phosphorylation of CTTN is critical for invadopodia maturation. In our
current work we identify the phosphorylation site on CTTN targeted by
AURKA and show that phosphorylation of CTTN by AURKA could potentially
inhibit further phosphorylation of CTTN by Src leading to stabilization
of invadopodia. Inhibition of AURKA activity or depletion of AURKA in
cancer cells led to decrease in invasion and invadopodia maturation. In
addition, we showed that adaptor protein NEDD9 which is known to bind
both AURKA and Src also binds to CTTN and therefore potentially can
mediate Src-CTTN-AURKA complex formation that regulates the sequential
phosphorylation events necessary for invadopodia genesis. It is our
expectation that AURKA-phosphorylated CTTN will inhibit Src-driven
tyrosine-phosphorylation of CTTN, regulating a mechanistic switch between
complementary actin polymerization and actin stabilization programs.

