Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arginine deprivation therapy using ADI-PEG20 as a novel
therapeutic modality in the treatment of bladder cancer.


Background: Argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS1) catalyzes the rate
limiting step in the biosynthesis of arginine. ASS1-deficient tumors are
therefore candidates for arginine deprivation therapy, utilizing
ADI-PEG20 as it degrades circulating arginine. We therefore evaluated 187
patients with bladder cancer, who underwent radical cystectomy between
1988 and 2008 at our institution for ASS1 expression. ASS1 was evaluated
as a predictor of disease outcome, while in-vitro studies were conducted
to assess the therapeutic efficacy of ADI-PEG20 in representative cell
lines.Design: ASS-1 expression was assessed by immunostaining and
stratified based on moderate to strong expression (2+, 3+) versus absent
to weak expression (0 or 1+). Both univariate and multivariate
statistical analysis of ASS1 expression, along with various clinical
parameters, was carried out to determine the effect on overall (OS) and
progression-free (PFS) survival. In addition, multiple bladder cancer
cell-lines were screened for ASS1 expression and utilized as an in-vitro
model. Downstream signaling changes in these cells, in response to
arginine deprivation, were assessed by quantitative PCRs and
immunoblotting and this was correlated with changes in cell viability,
proliferation and cell death. The latter was assessed by a combination of
clonogenic and MTT assays in addition to propidium iodide (PI) staining
alone or PI /Annexin V double staining followed by flow
cytometry.Results: 63% had conventional urothelial carcinoma (UCa), while
the rest had rarer variants such as squamous cell carcinoma (SCC: 18%),
the micropapillary variant (9%), adenocarcinoma (5%) and small cell
carcinomas (4%). Micropapillary variants (71%) and adenocarcinomas (90%)
tended to show moderate to strong ASS1 expression, while UCa (42%) and
small cell carcinomas (38%) demonstrated intermediate ASS1 expression
(2+, 3+). In contrast, patients with SCC tended to have weak ASS1
expression (91%, 0 or 1+). In univariate analysis, increased ASS1
expression was associated with poorer OS (p.10 in all cases for OS) and
PFS (p=.03 for PFS (2+, 3+ vs 0, 1+)). In multivariate analysis, ASS1
expression (3+ vs 0, 1+ or 2+), p=.04, along with positive nodes
(p=.0005), surgical margins (p=.007), and higher pT-stage (p=.02) were
all seen to be independent predictors of poorer OS. In-vitro studies with
UCa derived J82 cells (that were found to be ASS1 deficient) following
ADI-PEG20 treatment revealed an activation of GCN2, a kinase known to be
activated by amino acid deprivation. Downstream changes included
induction of the pro-apoptotic gene CHOP. This was correlated with a
reduction in cell viability (IC50=0.24ug/ml) that was attributed to
increased apoptosis.Conclusion: High ASS1 expression is an independent
predictor of poor OS and PFS in bladder cancer. Furthermore, ADI-PEG20
represents a promising new therapy for ASS1-deficient bladder cancers.

