Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-targeted, engineered IL-2 variant (IL-2v)-based
immunocytokines for the immunotherapy of cancer.


IL-2 therapy can lead to durable responses in cancer patients, but is
associated with significant toxicity. None of the described IL-2-based
immunocytokines has progressed beyond Phase II trials due to various
constraints in their design: 1) pM affinity for IL-2R on immune cells and
pulmonary vascular endothelium compromising tumor targeting due to the
fusion of two wildtype IL-2 moieties to the antibody, together with FcR
binding on the same cells; 2) Rapid systemic clearance and short
half-life due to high affinity IL-2R binding; 3) Preferential activation
of Tregs over immune effectors by wt IL-2. Here, we describe a novel
monomeric tumor-targeted immunocytokine where a single, engineered IL-2
variant (IL-2v) with abolished IL-2R (CD25) binding is fused to the
C-terminus of an antibody with a heterodimeric Fc-part. FcR and C1q
binding is completely abolished by a novel Fc mutation. For targeting,
human(-ized) high affinity antibodies against CEA (GA504, CEA-IL2v) or
FAP (GA501, FAP-IL2v) were selected. CEA- and FAP-IL2v were recombinantly
produced and induction of P-STAT5, proliferation, activation induced cell
death (AICD), activation markers and cytokines were determined on
effector cells. Safety, pharmacokinetics (PK), tumor targeting,
pharmacodynamics and anti-tumor efficacy were analyzed in SCID and
immunocompetent C57Bl/6 mice. FAP- and CEA-IL-2v completely lack binding
to CD25, but retain IL-R binding. They do not bind to CD25 or
preferentially activate Tregs, and induce lower degree of AICD. However,
IL-2R bioactivity is retained and they activate NK, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells
as shown by induction of activation markers and proliferation. In
particular, CEA- and FAP-IL2v expand and activate NK cells and skew the
CD4:CD8 ratio towards CD8+ T cells in vivo. In C57Bl/6 mice, CEA- and
FAP-IL2v demonstrate improved safety despite of higher exposure and
circulatory half-life than the corresponding wt IL-2 immunocytokine.
MicroSPECT/CT imaging revealed FAP-mediated tumor targeting of FAP-IL2v
with low normal tissue uptake with FAP-IL2v tumor targeting being similar
to the parental FAP antibody with low accumulation in lymphoid tissues
and clearly superior to an FAP-targeted wt IL-2 immunocytokine that shows
preferential spleen targeting. Studies in tumor-bearing mice showed dose
dependent anti-tumor efficacy of CEA- and FAP-IL2v in established
xenograft and syngeneic mouse models. Thus, CEA- and FAP-IL2v demonstrate
superior safety, PK and tumor targeting, while lacking preferential
induction of Tregs due to abolished CD25 and FcR binding, monovalency and
high-affinity tumor-targeting as compared to classical immunocytokines.
They retain capacity to activate NK and Teffector cells through IL2R; in
particular once targeted to the tumor microenvironment. These data
support their investigation for the immunotherapy of CEA/FAP-positive
tumors.

