Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cannabis smoking and lung cancer risk: pooled analysis in the
International Lung Cancer Consortium.


BackgroundLung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer death
worldwide, with tobacco smoking established as the main risk factor.
Cannabis smoke contains similar carcinogens as tobacco smoke including
the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons; animal studies and human case
series and histopathologic studies have suggested its potential
carcinogenic effect in lungs. However, epidemiologic evidence is limited
and conflicting. The present study aimed to examine the role of cannabis
smoking in lung cancer risk using a pooled analysis in the International
Lung Cancer Consortium (ILCCO).MethodsCannabis smoking and putative lung
cancer risk factor data on 2131 lung cancer cases and 3075 controls were
harmonized and pooled from six case-control studies in US, Canada, UK and
New Zealand within the ILCCO. To standardize the definition and to
distinguish occasional/non-users from habitual users, cumulative
consumption of 1 joint-year (1 joint-equivalent per day for 1 year) or
more was used to define habitual vs. non-users. The association between
cannabis smoking (habitual vs. non-users, joint-equivalent per day,
duration, and total joint-years) and the risk of lung cancer was assessed
by odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) obtained from
unconditional logistic regression in each study, while adjusting for age,
sex, sociodemographic factors and tobacco packyears. Pooled risk
estimates were calculated using random effect models. To minimize
confounding by tobacco smoking, we also conducted analyses restricted to
367 case and 1400 control never tobacco smokers.ResultsThe summary OR
from the six studies for habitual vs. non-users was 1.15 (95% CI:
0.73-1.82, p for heterogeneity: 0.05). Compared to non-users, the summary
OR was 1.28 (95%CI: 0.62-2.63) for individuals who smoked cannabis for 20
years or more and 1.53 (95%CI: 0.57-4.09) for those with 10 joint-years
or more cumulative consumption. A lack of significant association between
cannabis smoking and lung cancer was also observed in the never tobacco
smokers: compared to non-users, the OR was 0.99 (95% CI: 0.49-2.00) for
habitual users and 2.13 (95%CI: 0.67-6.78) for those who used 20 years or
more.ConclusionOur pooled results showed no significant association
between the intensity, duration, or cumulative consumption of cannabis
smoke and the risk of lung cancer overall or in never smokers. Cannabis
use is under international control and its legal status varies, so
reporting bias is of concern. However, since the reported prevalence in
our data is comparable to nation-specific survey results and not
differential between cases and controls, it is unlikely to fully explain
the lack of significant association. Our results cannot preclude the
possibility that cannabis may exhibit an association with lung cancer
risk at extremely high dosage. We will also present data after applying
restricted cubic splines to explore non-linear relationships.

