Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomic and molecular insights into pancreatic cancer-induced
cachexia.


Pancreatic cancer is an aggressive and lethal neoplasm that induces
cachexia and is typically detected at an advanced stage. Better
understanding of the disease, early detection, and new therapeutic
targets are urgently needed. Here we have investigated the metabolism of
multiple pancreatic tumors, and their effect on mouse body weight. To
understand the interactions between the tumor and normal tissue, we are
developing a cell-based optical biosensor using genetically engineered
myoblasts to detect the early onset of cachexia-inducing signals in
muscle tissue. We have also characterized the expression of choline
kinase (Chk), which is known to be overexpressed in aggressive cancer,
and cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2), a critically important inflammation
mediator that significantly influences cancer angiogenesis, invasion, and
metastasis. Human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell lines Pa02C and Pa04C
(Jones et al, Science 2008), as well as Panc1, and BxPC3 (obtained from
ATCC), were inoculated subcutaneously in male SCID mice. Mouse bodyweight
was followed for approximately 6 weeks. Tumors (500 mm3) were excised and
freeze-clamped for immunoblot and high-resolution 1H MRS analyses. A loss
of body weight was observed after inoculation of Pa04C and Panc1 cells
but not BxPc3 and Pa02C cells. Panc1 tumors exhibited high expression
levels of COX-2 and the highest levels of Chk. However, Pa04C tumors
showed low levels of those two proteins. 1H MRS analysis revealed that
Panc1 tumors contained the highest level of total choline, mainly due to
a high level of phosphocholine, correlating with the high level of Chk.
Panc1 tumors were also characterized by a high level of lactate. Pa04C
tumors presented with the second highest levels of total choline and
lactate. To determine the effect of pancreatic cancer cells on muscle, we
transiently co-transfected primary human myoblasts with constitutive EF-1
driven eGFP expression and with either a control vector, triple-tandem
repeat of a NFB cis-element lacking a minimal promoter (mp) sequence, or
with the same tandem repeat fused to a minimal promoter sequence
(3xNFB-mp) driving tdTomato expression. The transfected myoblasts were
differentiated into myotubes and then treated for 24 h with conditioned
medium from pancreatic tumor cells. We observed that the 3xNFB-mp
promoter was inducible in the presence of conditioned medium obtained
from both Panc1 and Pa04C cells. No red fluorescence was induced in
undifferentiated myoblasts or in confluent myoblasts. The acquisition of
in vivo 1H MRSI is ongoing, and should further improve the
characterization of those pancreatic cell lines, and the correlation
between the metabolites measured in vivo and weight loss. Our data
identify increased total choline and lactate as potential imaging
biomarkers to detect pancreatic cancer, and Chk and COX-2 as potential
therapeutic targets of this devastating disease.This work was supported
by NIH P50CA103175.

