Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomic study reveals smokers characteristic profile.


Given recent FDA legislation to mandate cigarette performance standards
and evaluate health claims for modified tobacco products, and separately
the fact that most persons with lung cancer are former smokers,
biomarkers of lung cancer risk are needed. Yet, today there are only a
few biomarkers of exposure and none that are validated for lung cancer
risk. This study identified putative biomarkers of exposure and harm
through metabolomics, a powerful method to identify numerous metabolites
and profiles. It utilized a previously conducted epidemiological study of
well-characterized smokers. Using UPLC-QTOF-MS, we analyzed global
metabolomic profiles of 160 smokers plasma totaling 613 repeated samples,
and evaluated whether gender, race, number of cigarettes per day,
nicotine metabolism, and type of cigarette is associated with smokers
global metabolome. These subjects completed an extensive interview and
smoked two cigarettes in a smoking laboratory. Blood and CO measurements
were collected before and after each cigarette. Using subset analysis for
the effect of gender on smokers metabolome, we were able to identify
putative metabolites that are mostly steroid hormones or cholesterol
derivatives, signifying the importance of sex-specific differences in
metabolism. There was also significant discrimination in the metabolome
of heavy and light smokers, of African-American and Caucasian smokers,
and of menthol and non-menthol cigarette smokers. We also performed a
paired analysis on menthol versus non-menthol smokers matched by race,
gender, metabolizer status, and smoking status. Our result showed not
only a significant discrimination between metabolomes of these two
cigarette types, but also discriminated a cigarette brand with the lowest
nicotine yield from the one with the highest yield. Putative metabolites
were identified including several related to carcinogenesis and the
inhibition of actin cytoskeleton activation. Further validation is needed
to identify and characterize those metabolites.In summary, we have shown
that the potential biomarkers identified in this study are strongly
related to other well established lung cancer risk factors including
gender, race, and tobacco exposure variables, and therefore may be useful
in cohort studies of persons at high risk for lung cancer.

