Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down-regulation of Wnt inhibitory factor 1 is an early event in
oropharyngeal cancer associated with tobacco-use.


Background: Tobacco use is the primary risk factor for head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), the sixth most common malignancy
worldwide. Aberrant activation of the Wnt pathway is a key event in
tumorigenesis, but the precise mechanisms leading to up-regulation of Wnt
signaling in HNSCC have not been defined. Wnt inhibitory factor 1 (WIF1)
is significantly down-regulated in many tumors but its expression status
in oropharyngeal HNSCC is unknown.Aims: To characterize WIF1 expression
in oropharyngeal normal and tumor samples and delineate the mechanisms
leading to alterations in WIF1 expression.Methods: Paraffin-embedded
tissue samples from fifty patients with HNSCC identified from the
annotated tumor registry at the University of Oklahoma were obtained.
Additionally, fifty paraffin-embedded tissues were obtained from smoker
and non-smoker individuals undergoing tonsillectomy at the University of
Oklahoma for non-cancerous diagnosis. Histological diagnoses were
reviewed and samples from non-cancer individuals were matched for age and
sex. Smoking habits were registered in pack-years. WIF1 protein
expression was determined by immunohistochemistry. Genomic DNA isolated
from normal and tumor samples were treated with bisulfite, and
methylation-specific PCR and bisulfite sequence analysis were
performed.Results: WIF1 expression was very high in normal tonsil
epithelium obtained from non-smokers. However, WIF1 expression was
reduced in smokers compared to non-smokers (p=0.01). WIF1 expression was
frequently and significantly reduced in tumors compared to normal
adjacent epithelium (pBackground: Tobacco use is the primary risk factor
for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), the sixth most common
malignancy worldwide. Aberrant activation of the Wnt pathway is a key
event in tumorigenesis, but the precise mechanisms leading to
up-regulation of Wnt signaling in HNSCC have not been defined. Wnt
inhibitory factor 1 (WIF1) is significantly down-regulated in many tumors
but its expression status in oropharyngeal HNSCC is unknown.Aims: To
characterize WIF1 expression in oropharyngeal normal and tumor samples
and delineate the mechanisms leading to alterations in WIF1
expression.Methods: Paraffin-embedded tissue samples from fifty patients
with HNSCC identified from the annotated tumor registry at the University
of Oklahoma were obtained. Additionally, fifty paraffin-embedded tissues
were obtained from smoker and non-smoker individuals undergoing
tonsillectomy at the University of Oklahoma for non-cancerous diagnosis.
Histological diagnoses were reviewed and samples from non-cancer
individuals were matched for age and sex. Smoking habits were registered
in pack-years. WIF1 protein expression was determined by
immunohistochemistry. Genomic DNA isolated from normal and tumor samples
were treated with bisulfite, and methylation-specific PCR and bisulfite
sequence analysis were performed.Results: WIF1 expression was very high
in normal tonsil epithelium obtained from non-smokers. However, WIF1
expression was reduced in smokers compared to non-smokers (p=0.01). WIF1
expression was frequently and significantly reduced in tumors compared to
normal adjacent epithelium (p<0.001). Methylation-specific PCR and
bisulfite sequence analysis revealed that WIF1 promoter methylation is
common in oropharyngeal HNSCC and occurs in some normal epithelium
samples obtained from smokers.Conclusions: WIF1 promoter hypermethylation
is frequent in oropharyngeal cancer and contributes to WIF1
down-regulation. Importantly, by studying samples obtained from
non-cancer patients, we show clearly and for the first time that WIF1
promoter methylation is an early event associated with tobacco-use. Taken
together, this study establishes an important role for WIF1 in
oropharyngeal HNSCC and suggests that WIF1 promoter methylation in normal
epithelium is a biomarker of risk for tobacco-associated cancer.Grant
support: This work was supported by the Oklahoma Center for the
Advancement of Science & Technology. LQ holds a Presbyterian Health
Foundation Endowed Chair in Otorhinolaryngology.

