Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoproteomic analysis of extracellular receptor kinase-1/2
post-translational activation in microdissected human hyperplastic
aberrant crypt foci.


Oncogenic activation resulting in hyperproliferative lesions within the
colonic mucosa has been identified in putative precancerous lesions,
aberrant crypt foci (ACF). KRAS (codons 12 and 13) and BRAFV600E mutation
status was determined in 172 ACF identified in colorectum of screening
subjects by in situ high-definition, magnifying chromoendoscopy. Lesions
were stratified according to histology: serrated hyperplastic versus
distended (non-serrated) hyperplastic. Due to their limiting size,
however, it was not technically feasible to examine downstream signaling
consequences of these oncogenic mutations. We have combined
ultraviolet-infrared (UV/IR) micro-dissection with an ultra-sensitive
nanofluidic proteomic immunoassay (NIA) to enable accurate quantification
of post-translational modifications to mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) in total protein lysates isolated from hyperproliferative crypts
and adjacent normal mucosa. Using this approach, levels of singly and
dually (activated) phosphorylated isoforms of extracellular receptor
kinase(ERK)-1 and -2 were quantified in samples containing as little as
16-ng of total protein recovered from Oncogenic activation resulting in
hyperproliferative lesions within the colonic mucosa has been identified
in putative precancerous lesions, aberrant crypt foci (ACF). KRAS (codons
12 and 13) and BRAFV600E mutation status was determined in 172 ACF
identified in colorectum of screening subjects by in situ
high-definition, magnifying chromoendoscopy. Lesions were stratified
according to histology: serrated hyperplastic versus distended
(non-serrated) hyperplastic. Due to their limiting size, however, it was
not technically feasible to examine downstream signaling consequences of
these oncogenic mutations. We have combined ultraviolet-infrared (UV/IR)
micro-dissection with an ultra-sensitive nanofluidic proteomic
immunoassay (NIA) to enable accurate quantification of post-translational
modifications to mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) in total protein
lysates isolated from hyperproliferative crypts and adjacent normal
mucosa. Using this approach, levels of singly and dually (activated)
phosphorylated isoforms of extracellular receptor kinase(ERK)-1 and -2
were quantified in samples containing as little as 16-ng of total protein
recovered from <200 colon epithelial cells. ERK activation is responsible
for the observed hyperplasia found in these early lesions, but its
activation state is not directly dependent on KRAS and/or BRAF mutation
status. This study describes the novel use of a sensitive nanofluidic
platform to measure oncogene-driven proteomic changes in diminutive
lesions procured at the time of endoscopy and highlights the advantage of
this approach over classical immunohistochemistry-based analyses.

