Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Experimental metastasis by the prostate adenocarcinoma-derived
cell line PC3M is driven by partial activation of the human Met pathway.


Interspecies cross-reactivity is an important consideration when
interpreting the results of tissue xenograft studies. For many paracrine
signaling pathways, murine growth factors may not activate their
orthologous human receptors in tumor xenografts, thereby failing to
recapitulate a potentially relevant human condition in the mouse model.
Unrecognized or poorly defined species-specific differences of this type
can seriously hinder basic research progress as well as the development
of therapeutic or diagnostic agents. For example, the contributions of
both tumor- and stromal-cell derived vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF)-A to the vascularization of human tumor xenografts in
immunodeficient mice prevented the direct comparison of anti-VEGF
antibodies with different abilities to block host VEGF, and led to the
production of mice expressing humanized VEGF with biological activity
comparable to both human and mouse VEGF-A.Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)
and its receptor, Met, are also highly sought targets in cancer drug and
diagnostic development. HGF/Met signaling drives tumor cell growth and
motility, tumor invasiveness and metastasis. However, the failure of
murine HGF to stimulate the growth of human tumor xenografts has
restricted preclinical drug studies to a handful of human tumor cell
lines that possess autocrine pathway activation or other more rare Met
activation mechanisms, and ultimately forced the costly development of
human HGF transgenic and knock-in mice so that preclinical studies could
begin to encompass the known breadth of the pathway's involvement across
human cancers.We report here that despite the failure of murine HGF to
drive human tumor xenograft growth, mouse HGF potently stimulates human
Met autophosphorylation, increased cell motility and matrix invasion, but
not proliferation. As a result, the growth of xenografted PC3M human
prostate adenocarcinoma cells as primary tumors in mice was not inhibited
by a selective HGF antagonist, but spontaneous tumor metastasis was
completely blocked. These results improve our understanding of the
cross-reactivity between human and murine HGF/Met signaling pathways and
suggest that the preclinical evaluation of agents for their ability to
block HGF-driven tumor metastasis may incorporate cell lines expressing
human Met but not HGF, i.e. a wide variety of human carcinoma-derived
cell lines, without the need for using mice engineered to express human
HGF.

