Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Markers of inflammation and risk of prostate cancer: Results from
a 20-year follow-up study.


Introduction: Evidence from clinical, histopathological and
epidemiological studies suggest that inflammation plays a role in
prostate carcinogenesis. However, studies investigating these
associations using biomarkers of inflammation such as C-reactive protein
(CRP) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) have reported conflicting results. A
meta-analysis of six studies reported no associations between CRP and
risk of prostate cancer while an inverse association was reported for
IL-6, although the analysis was limited to only three studies. Because of
the conflicting findings from previous studies, we investigated the
associations of four markers of inflammation (CRP, fibrinogen albumin and
leucocyte) and risk of prostate cancer.Methods: We investigated these
associations in a prospective cohort study involving 2,627 middle-aged
men from Eastern Finland who had baseline examination and blood draw
between March 1984 and December 1989. During a follow-up period lasting
twenty years, with virtually no losses to follow-up, 203 men developed
prostate cancer. They were identified through linkage with the
nationwide, population-based Finnish Cancer Registry, using the unique
personal identification number available to all residents of Finland.
Associations between the markers and risk of prostate cancer were
examined using Cox proportional hazards model, adjusting for known and
potential confounders (age, examination year, socioeconomic status,
alcohol consumption, energy intake, cardiorespiratory fitness, body mass
index and pack-years of smoking).Results: Elevated pre-diagnostic serum
albumin and leucocyte count, but not serum CRP and fibrinogen
concentrations were associated with statistically significantly increased
risk of prostate cancer. In multivariate adjusted analyses, the relative
risks (RRs, 95%CI) of prostate cancer among men in the highest quartiles
of albumin and leucocyte concentrations compared to men in the lowest
quartiles were 1.39 (95%CI 1.10-1.91, p-trend=0.04) and 1.60 (95%CI
1.10-2.29, p-trend=0.01), respectively. The relative risks of prostate
cancer among men in the highest quartiles of CRP and fibrinogen
concentrations compared to those in the lowest quartiles were 1.08 (95%CI
0.74-1.60, p-trend=0.56) and 1.25 (95%CI 0.87-1.81, p-trend=0.14),
respectively.Conclusions: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
prospective study to observe positive associations between pre-diagnostic
serum albumin concentrations, leucocyte count and the risk of prostate
cancer. Similar to previous epidemiological studies, we observed no
significant positive associations between CRP concentrations and the risk
of prostate cancer. The results from our study suggest that markers of
inflammation may have differential associations with prostate cancer risk.

