Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An alternative splicing study approach to discriminate between
NSCLC subtypes.


Alternative splicing of pre-mRNA, a key post-transcriptional mechanism
allowing for the production of distinct proteins from a single gene,
affects over 90% of human genes. Splicing plays a major role in gene
regulation in normal tissues as well as in disease. In cancer,
alternative splicing permits the generation of protein isoforms having
different biological activities. Thus, splicing alterations participate
in the diversity and phenotypic plasticity of tumor cells. The
identification of such molecular changes represent promising avenues for
cancer diagnosis and therapy.Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer
mortality. Over 80% of lung cancers are non-small cell lung carcinomas
(NSCLC). Adenocarcinoamas (AC) and Squamous Cell Carcinomas (SCC) are the
two most common subtypes of NSCLC and account for more than 60% of lung
cancer cases. Despite being categorized together in NSCLC due to similar
microscopic appearance of their tumour cells and similar treatment
options in the clinic, AC and SCC are heterogeneous in many clinical
aspects, these include distinct oncogenic mutations and divergent
therapeutic responses, thus heightening the emphasis on accurate NSCLC
subtyping.Here, we describe two approaches to seek transcriptome changes
that discriminate between SCC and AC subtypes. To do so, we profiled SCC
and AC biopsies together with their adjacent normal tissues on Exonhit's
Genome Wide SpliceArray, a new generation of microarray that extends
transcriptomic profiling to the monitoring of alternative splicing,
thereby increasing the discriminatory power of the analyses. Through this
discovery platform, disease status, progression, and drug response can be
monitored.First, we developed transcriptomic signatures using
combinations of exon body, exon-intron junction, evidenced and discovery
probes and performed principal component analyses at various q values and
fold change thresholds. Using a t-test on the first principal component,
we compared their respective efficacy to discriminate between SCC and AC
subtypes. The data that will be discussed highlight the importance of
discovery and junction probes in the signatures.Second, an epitope
identification approach was conducted. We focused on splicing events that
generate potential novel amino acid sequences. Events up-regulated were
selected based on combination of statistical analysis of probe sets
deregulations, protein knowledge and pathway analyses. The events were
used to identify novel cell surface epitopes which may be suitable for
antibody development.These findings should be validated with larger
sample numbers but indicate that alternative RNA splicing offers a
currently underexploited source of biological information for cancer
research. Platforms dedicated to splicing can be useful to allow
identification of biomarkers and novel targets, as well as guidance in
the selection and follow-up of patients for therapy.

