Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microtentacle stabilization during TGF-induced EMT as a new
therapeutic target to reduce circulating tumor cell metastasis.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have been identified as a predictive
factor of patient outcome and disease progression in breast cancer. Solid
tumor metastasis involves detachment of epithelial cells into the
lymphatics or vasculature, and the subsequent reattachment in distant
tissues to establish new tumors at metastatic sites. Our lab has
identified tubulin-based protrusions, termed microtentacles (McTNs),
which facilitate tumor cell re-attachment and can penetrate endothelial
layers to promote the retention of CTCs in distant tissues. In the
current study, we examine the role of the physiological cytokine, TGF, in
the cytoskeletal changes that promote McTN formation. McTNs are induced
during the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) that accompanies
tumor progression, and previous studies have shown that TGF can promote
an EMT in a pathologic setting, despite its normal role as an
anti-proliferative factor. When we treated MCF10A nontumorigenic mammary
epithelial cells and MCF-7 breast tumor cells with TGF, immunoblotting
demonstrated changes in protein expression consistent with an EMT, such
as increased vimentin and N-Cadherin and decreased E-Cadherin expression.
Alongside these typical EMT-induced protein expression changes, levels of
detyrosinated -tubulin (Glu-tubulin) also increased, which is a marker of
stabilized microtubules that also promotes McTN formation. Furthermore,
immunofluorescence demonstrated that Glu-tubulin was highly diffuse in
untreated cells, but became organized into distinct cytoplasmic filaments
upon treatment of cells with TGF. Detached MCF10A and MCF-7 cells also
showed increased McTNs following exposure to TGF. Real-time measurement
of cell reattachment by electrical impedance demonstrated that the
increased McTNs associated with TGF treatment resulted in more efficient
and faster cell reattachment.These results emphasize that the
post-translational alterations in microtubules promoted by TGF can
promote increased McTNs and that therapies targeting the molecular
mechanisms underlying these TGF-induced cytoskeletal changes could
provide new targets aimed at reducing CTC reattachment and metastasis.

