Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Flavopiridol-mediated multiple modulatory effects synergistically
increase sensitivity to TRAIL-induced cell death in human leukemia cells.


Previously, we described the antileukemic synergistic interactions
between the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor flavopiridol (F) and TRAIL
in multiple cell lines representing a broad spectrum of human leukemia.
With the introduction of new hybrid regimens for flavopiridol-based
therapies and advances in the clinical development of TRAIL/TRAIL
agonists, a renewed interest in this therapeutic concept has emerged. In
an attempt to identify key mechanistic signaling networks, human U937
leukemia cells were treated simultaneously with F (SelleckChem, Houston
TX) and TRAIL (Alexis, Enzo, Farmingdale, NY) and analyzed for signaling
events associated to cell death induction. We found a dramatic F-mediated
shift from cytoprotective NF-kB, AKT and ERK pathways to pro-cell death
ceramide and JNK signals. Functional studies using both pharmacological
inhibitors and genetically modified cells revealed the functional
relevance of these signals. Furthermore, F-mediated transcriptional
modifications played key roles in determining and regulating the
cross-talk between anti- and pro-cell death pathways. Co-exposure to F
resulted in transcriptional down-regulation of genes involved in the
regulation of pro-apoptotic JNK including XIAP, Gadd45 and phosphatases
DUSP1, -10 and -11. In addition, F induced a significant reduction of
multiple anti-apoptotic genes/proteins directly implicated in the
pro-apoptotic cascades including (Mcl-1, XIAP, Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, c-Flip,
cIAP2/3), and cell cycle modulators (cyclin D1, -E1/E2, CDKs 1,7,9,13,17,
p15, p57, p21). However, although in many cases similar changes were
observed in F- and TRAIL/F-treated cells, additional factors may have to
exist that lead to the potent synergistic interactions observed with the
drug combination. In fact, by using clonogenic assays (long term
effects), we observed that while TRAIL or F-treated cells were able to
recover after treatment, that was not the case in TRAIL/F-exposed cells
(% clonogenic survival: T= 82, F=47, TF= 1.4). Time-course analysis by
flow cytometry of cell surface localized TRAIL Death Receptors DR4 and
DR5 showed that in the presence of F, either alone or in combination with
TRAIL, the membrane levels of both receptors were significantly increased
during the first 2-6h of treatment. Together, these findings indicate
that combined exposure of human acute leukemia cells to TRAIL/FP results
in an early mobilization of TRAIL death receptors (DR4, DR5) to the cell
surface, effect that is temporally associated with activation of
anti-apoptotic ERK, AKT and NF-kB signals; however, activation of
DR4/5-mediated apoptotic pathway is later potentiated by a shift toward
pro-cell death JNK/ceramide signals that, in association to F-mediated
transcriptional effects, results in a dramatic increase in the
sensitivity to TRAIL in otherwise TRAIL-resistant human leukemia cells.

