Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mapping matrix mechanics in 3D to study the role of stiffness in
breast tumor progression.


IntroductionEvidence suggests that the Extra Cellular Matrix (ECM)
stiffness may be a driving factor in tumor progression and may sensitize
epithelial cells towards the invasive phenotype. In fact, high
mammographic density is linked to a higher risk of tumor. In vitro,
stiffness in naturally derived ECMs is commonly increased via changing
concentration or cross-linking. Either process will change ligand
density, porosity, architecture, and diffusivity. Therefore, it is
difficult to determine whether the resulting tumor phenotype is due to
stiffness changes or other factors. ECM stiffness is conventionally
measured via parallel plate rheology or AFM. But, while one only provides
an average ensemble of the entire sample, the other lacks the axial
resolution required to measure deep within the gels.We use our stiffness
gradient device (SGD) to tune stiffness independent of concentration or
crosslinking. In the SGD, the ECM is polymerized around a post, which is
rotated to induce strain, and a stiffness gradient is established.
Stiffness can be tuned from 100 - 1000 Pa within one dish, the range of
normal and malignant breast tissue. We have combined SGD with active
microrheology (AMR) to investigate the role of ECM stiffness in
sensitizing epithelial cells towards an invasive phenotype. AMR allows
deep measurements within the sample to map ECM stiffness in 3D and around
cells. We can correlate these maps with the function and signaling of
mechanoreceptors such as integrins.Materials and MethodsCells were
cultured inside hydrogels (Collagen or Matrigel) containing 2 um silica
beads to be used as probes for AMR. AMR was conducted to calculate the
complex shear modulus (G*). G* is a measure of material stiffness (G) and
loss (G).MCF10A.ErbB2 cells (courtesy of the Muthuswamy lab) were
cultured inside 3D hydrogels within the SGD. These cells can be driven
towards malignancy with the addition of a synthetic dimerizer that
activates the ErbB2/Her2 pathway. The cells were allowed to reach their
growth arrested acini phase, at which time the appropriate matrices were
stiffened. After an additional 2 weeks, dimerizer was added to the
culture. Non-linear imaging in regions of high stiffness and low
stiffness reveals acini morphology and molecular distributions.Results
and DiscussionIn dimerizer-free culture, we observed an organized tubule
network connecting acini, which lost their growth control only in
stiffened regions. In the non-stiffened regions we saw growth arrested
hollow acini. With the addition of dimerizer, in soft regions we
observed, consistent with published results, thin disorganized tubules.
Interestingly, in the stiffened region, we saw a partial rescue of the
organized morphology suggesting that stiffness may play an orthogonal
role to Her2 signaling. Further observations suggested that a stiff ECM
sensitizes mammary epithelial cells to the actions of the Her2 pathway.

