Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of gene expression and copy number variation in breast
tumors using both sequencing and hybridization-based platforms.


Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies provide rapid genomic
analyses of single nucleotide variants, RNA expression and DNA copy
number. Application of these technologies to material isolated from
formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue and even degraded frozen
material could provide powerful replication samples but remains
challenging. We tested the nanoString platform to validate deep sequence
analysis of gene expression and DNA copy number in degraded and FFPE
material. Firstly, RNA from the Universal Human Reference RNA and a
breast cancer cell line (MDA-MB-436) was artificially degraded to
different degrees (RIN 1.2-6.8). We used the nanoString platform to
simultaneously measure RNA expression across 226 genes in each degraded
sample and the corresponding undegraded RNA. Secondly we isolated RNA and
DNA from matched fresh frozen and FFPE tissues from nine breast cancer
patients (3 HER2+/ER+/PR+, 2 HER2+/ER-/PR-, 2 HER2+/ER+/PR-, 2
HER2-/ER+/PR+) using the nanoString platform to compare expression and
copy number across 226 and 86 genes respectively. Finally, we correlated
expression and copy number data generated by nanoString with Illumina
transcriptome and whole genome sequencing (WGS). NanoString log2
expression fold-change between all artificially degraded samples and
their undegraded counterpart showed extremely high correlation (r2>0.91).
NanoString DNA copy number between matched fresh-frozen and FFPE showed a
high degree of correlation (r2=0.71). All gene amplifications with copy
number 5 in DNA from fresh-frozen material (N=9) were successfully
identified in DNA from FFPE material. We also observed good correlation
of gene expression between whole transcriptome sequencing and the
nanoString platform (r2 0.59 - 0.72) in FFPE and artificially degraded
material and for DNA copy number between WGS and nanoString in DNA
isolated from cancer cell lines (r2=0.96). The nanoString platform
provides reliable data from highly degraded and FFPE material and
correlates with sequence analysis of both expression and copy number from
NGS platforms demonstrating potential for large-scale replication studies
in FFPE material.

