Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantification of mitochondria in MCF-10A, MDA-MB-231, and SUM149
cells to understand potential defects in oxidative phosphorylation in
cancer.


Cancer cells are known to exhibit altered metabolism. The Warburg effect,
whereby cancer cells preferentially use glycolysis instead of oxidative
phosphorylation to produce ATP, plays an important role in the
tumorigenic capacity of breast cancer. Previously, we found that SUM149
(inflammatory breast cancer) and MDA-MB-231 (invasive breast cancer)
cells have decreased oxidative phosphorylation. Since mitochondria are
the powerhouses of oxidative phosphorylation, examining their
concentrations, phenotypes, and the distribution of their key enzymes can
provide crucial information. These data can be used to further clarify
whether the observed metabolic discrepancies stem from abundance
differences or from other sources, such as defective enzymes and/or
intermediate participation in alternate metabolic pathways. The purpose
of our research was to elucidate if differential mitochondria
concentrations accounted for the observed marked decrease in oxidative
phosphorylation in cancer cells. Specifically, we focused on quantifying
the number of mitochondria in two aggressive cancer cell lines,
MDA-MB-231 and SUM149, and a normal-like breast cell line, MCF-10A.In
order to measure the number of mitochondria in the cancerous and
noncancerous cells, a commercially available antibody conjugated to green
fluorescent protein (GFP) and directed against the E1-alpha subunit of
pyruvate dehydrogenase was used in each cell line. The resulting cells
were imaged under high-resolution confocal microscopy and their relative
fluorescence assessed. The average intensity of GFP in each cell was
calculated and used as an indicator for the amount of mitochondria in
each cell line. Additionally, these results were compared to transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) images of each of these cell lines to validate
the immunofluorescent quantifications.Our results showed that there is no
significant difference among the number of mitochondria in MDA-MB-231,
SUM149, and MCF-10A cells. Additionally, the distribution of mitochondria
among all three cell lines was relatively uniform, with a slightly
greater abundance of mitochondria around the nuclei. These findings are
surprising given that the published research on the Warburg effect, as
well as our own prior observations on these three specific cell lines,
suggested that cancer cells may have different numbers of mitochondria,
although the previous work did not offer definitive proof of this
interpretation. Therefore, these results contradict that hypothesis, and
direct further studies to identify qualitative functional defects within
mitochondria such as mutated or silenced mitochondrial genes, and to
explore alternate pathways that breast cancer cells use to derive energy.
Our investigation highlights the importance of taking a multi-facetted
approach to studying cancer cell metabolism.

