Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genistein-induced reduction of Wnt/beta-catenin pathway activity
in colorectal cancer cell lines correlates with inhibition of
proliferation and colony growth in soft agar .


Introduction. The majority of colorectal cancers (CRC) have
mutationally-driven constitutive activation of the Wnt pathway. Despite
this, tumor cells remain responsive to Wnt signals arising at the cell
membrane through the interaction of extracellular Wnt ligands and cell
surface frizzled receptors; the strength of the Wnt signal can be
modified by Wnt pathway inhibitors (sFRP) in the tumor microenvironment.
Genistein, a natural product from soy, is known to remove epigenetic
blockage of sFRP promoters and decrease nuclear beta-catenin expression,
a marker for Wnt pathway activation. In this study we have examined the
effect of genistein on Wnt throughput in CRC cell lines and on
proliferation in tissue culture and growth in soft agar.Methods. Human
CRC cell lines HT29, DLD1 and RKO were transfected with Wnt/beta-catenin
reporter plasmids and treated with different concentrations of genistein.
Pathway activity was measured using a super TOP-flash luminescence
reporter construct. Proliferation was estimated with an MTT assay. A soft
agar assay was utilized to define non-adherent colony formation.Results.
Genistein reduced proliferation of HT29 and DLD1 at 50uM, with an
inhibitory P50 at 100uM. RKO cells were inhibited at lower
concentrations. Inhibition of soft agar colony growth occurred at similar
concentrations. Wnt/beta-catenin activity was significantly inhibited at
75uM for HT29 (p=0.025) and at 50uM for DLD1. The reduction in
proliferation and colony growth correlated with reduced Wnt signaling,
with the latter most strongly correlated (R2=0.81 vs. 0.47 for the
former). Cells growing independently of anchorage were more sensitive to
genistein treatment than those attached to the plastic : colony counts
decreased for RKO 8-fold at 50 uM while proliferation on plastic
decreased less than 4x; colony counts decreased for HT29 7-fold for at
100 uM while proliferation on plastic decreased less than 2x.Conclusions.
Genistein reduces Wnt/beta-catenin activity in CRC cell lines; this
reduction correlates with cell proliferation in vitro and with soft agar
colony growth. Cells growing in an anchorage-independent fashion appear
more sensitive to genistein treatment. Further investigation into the
mechanisms of this effect in CRC is ongoing. These data suggest that
genistein may be a useful adjunctive therapy for patients with CRC.

