Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-related communication and decision making between patients
and their spousal caregivers.


Aims: Patients with cancer and their spousal caregivers face dynamic
communication and difficult decision making needs throughout the cancer
trajectory. This literature review aims to delineate the current pattern
of cancer-related communication (or non-communication) and decision
making between patients and their spousal caregivers; and to discuss the
support needs of couples on communication and decision making across the
cancer trajectory.Methods: A systematic search was conducted to identity
the articles on cancer-related communication and decision making of
couples coping with cancer. The search for relevant literature included
studies published in English from January 2000 to October 2012. Studies
were located using several strategies, including an electronic search, a
manual search for the bibliography of related studies, and an author
search. The PICO (Population/problem, Intervention/exposure, Comparison,
and Outcome) format was applied to guide the identification of the key
terms for literature search. The databases searched included MEDLINE,
CINAHL, SCI Expanded, Scopus, and PsychINFO. Articles were extracted
according to predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria. The PRISMA flow
diagram was used to outline the literature search and selection
process.Results: Findings revealed that open and effective communication
between couple's coping with cancer facilitated the overall process of
decision making, which also led to improved stressful mood, marital
relationship, and quality of life of both partners. However, the results
also showed that most patients and their spousal caregivers lacked
effective communication, which related to both cancer patients and
spousal caregivers psycho-sociological distress, created tension in their
marital relationship and impaired their quality of life. Patients and
their spousal caregivers had vast differences in opinion regarding
decision making in treatment and care needs, including medical
information on diagnosis, treatment, remission, end of life care, and
caregivers needs in different cancer stage.Conclusions: These findings
underline the importance of open communication between patients and their
spousal caregivers in the study of couples coping with cancer. It is
recognized that effective communication within couples may have positive
effects on couple's intimacy, decision making, and to improve both the
patients and caregiving outcomes. Lack of communication may relate to
negative effects on their health care outcomes. Further research is
needed to explore interventions that facilitate couples communication and
address both the patient's and their spouse's needs on decision making
throughout the cancer trajectory.Key words: Cancer; Spousal caregivers;
Communication; Decision making

