Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New alternatives to photodynamic therapy based on light-enabled
drug delivery.


Conventional photodynamic therapy (PDT) aims to achieve tumor drug
targeting by selectively killing cells upon illumination. PDT serves as a
non-invasive treatment option for many types of non-metastatic,
light-accessible cancers such as those involving the head and neck, lung,
bladder, prostate, or esophagus. The various types of PDT all use the
same basic strategy for killing cells; photosensitizing molecules are
taken up by cancer cells, and, upon illumination, singlet oxygen is
generated in the vicinity of the photosensitizer, killing the cell. A new
alternative to PDT is photochemical internalization, in which singlet
oxygen generated by a photosensitizer disrupts endosomes containing a
toxin, releasing it into the cytoplasm and killing the cell. A drawback
to both of these approaches is that moderate levels of oxygen are
required, yet tumors are often hypoxic environments. Moreover, during PDT
treatment, oxygen levels drop even further as the singlet oxygen is
consumed; this can compromise treatment effectiveness. We have sought to
address these challenges by developing new strategies for light-based
treatment of cancer that are oxygen independent. In the first approach,
which we call photocaged permeability, we have attached the anticancer
drug doxorubicin to a cell impermeable small molecule via a
light-cleavable linker. We show using flow cytometry and confocal
microscopy that this conjugate is cell impermeable in the dark, yet upon
illumination, doxorubicin is released and enters the cells. The IC50 for
our conjugate in JH-EsoAd1 cells using non-cytotoxic doses of light is
1.6 M, identical to that of doxorubicin alone. No cytotoxicity is
observed at doses 30-fold higher in the dark. In a second approach, we
have attached doxorubicin to folate receptor and PSMA ligands via a light
cleavable linker in order to enable dual cancer cell targeting with both
light and ligand specificity. The ability of the resulting conjugates to
selectively kill cells expressing the requisite receptors with light will
be described.

