Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduction of tumor growth and metastasis by a humanized IgG4
monoclonal antibody to SEMA4D (VX15/2503).


Semaphorin 4D (SEMA4D; CD100) has been implicated in several key
mechanisms of tumor progression, including transactivation of several
oncogenes, metastasis, tumor invasion, and neovascularization. Expression
of SEMA4D and its receptor plexin-B1 (PLXNB1) correlates with invasive
disease in humans. SEMA4D is over-expressed in a wide array of tumor
types and is also produced by inflammatory cells recruited to the tumor
microenvironment. SEMA4D binding to PLXNB1 on endothelial cells activates
RhoA and AKT signaling pathways, which promotes formation of new blood
vessels and tumor growth in vivo. In addition to its effects on
endothelial cells, the interaction of PLXNB1 with MET and ERBB2 can lead
to SEMA4D-mediated transactivation of these membrane receptor kinases
with a direct effect on tumor cell migration and invasive growth. It is
well known that tumor growth and metastasis involve a complex process of
cross talk amongst the tumor cells, stroma and immune infiltrate, as well
as the endothelial cells and vasculature. Our understanding of the role
of SEMA4D in this process is evolving.We selected a humanized IgG4
antibody, VX15/2503, that blocks SEMA4D interaction with the high
affinity receptor PLXNB1 and a lower affinity receptor, CD72, expressed
on immune cells. The antibody binds with between 1-5 nM affinity to rat,
mouse, primate, and human recombinant SEMA4D. Affinity to native
cell-associated SEMA4D on primary human T cells was, however, determined
to be 0.5 nM. We demonstrate that antibody-mediated SEMA4D neutralization
delays tumor growth in several primary and metastatic in vivo models.
Inhibition of SEMA4D regulates angiogenesis and vascular permeability in
these models. Additionally, tumor growth delay results from modulation of
the tumor microenvironment, such as infiltrating immune cells. We also
demonstrate direct effects of SEMA4D/PLXNB1 interaction acting as a
guidance signal for tumors, as previously described for axons, whereby
tumor migration is affected 80%. Antibody blockade restores these
functional activities. Moreover, using a genetic fingerprinting approach,
we identified a unique gene signature that is related to changes in
PLXNB1 expression and sensitivity to existing targeted therapies. This
signature sheds light on combination therapies with anti-SEMA4D
antibodies that may produce additive anti-tumor effects. In summary,
blockade of SEMA4D reduces tumor growth through effects on tumor
microenvironment, angiogenesis and vascular permeability, as well as
direct effects on tumor. Therefore, antibody neutralization of SEMA4D
represents a new therapeutic strategy for cancer treatment. The humanized
antibody, VX15/2503, has successfully completed IND-enabling toxicology
testing and a Phase I trial is currently being conducted in adult
patients with advanced solid tumors.Citation Format: Elizabeth E. Evans,
Alan S. Jonason, Mark Paris, Terrence L. Fisher, Sebold Torno, Holm
Bussler, Jessica Decker, Maria Scrivens, He Huang, Laurie A. Winter,
Tracy Pandina, Leslie Balch, Michael A. Doherty, Renee Kirk, Alan Howell,
Jennifer Seils, Christine Reilly, Maurice Zauderer, John E. Leonard,
Ernest S. Smith. Reduction of tumor growth and metastasis by a humanized
IgG4 monoclonal antibody to SEMA4D (VX15/2503). [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1245.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1245

