Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual regulation of cell death by Akt kinase inhibitor Mk-2206 in
colorectal cancer.


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second highest cause of cancer
related deaths in the United States. Dissemination of CRC cells to
distant organs (liver and lungs) often leads to treatment failure. Thus,
the identification of novel strategies for the treatment of metastases is
a pressing need in this type of cancer. Several reports have suggested
the development of inappropriate cell survival signaling for various
steps in the metastatic process and have noted the particular importance
of aberrant cell survival to successful colonization at metastatic sites.
We have earlier reported that Akt inactivation is associated with
survivin and XIAP downregulation and increased cell death. Given the
widespread role of Akt in cell survival and association of survivin and
XIAP with CRC progression and metastasis, as well as other types of
cancer, we hypothesize that Akt phosphorylation may be key to the
aberrant survival mechanism permitting metastatic growth at distal organ
sites. Thus, inactivation of Akt activity might be an important
therapeutic target in CRC metastasis.Methods: Mk-2206 is a potent
allosteric kinase inhibitor of Akt (provided by Merck). It inhibits the
translocation of Akt to plasma membrane to prevent its phosphorylation
and activation. IGF1R dependent CRC cell lines were treated with MK-2206
to study its anti-tumor effects in vitro and in vivo.Results: Mk-2206
promotes anti-tumor activity in the IGF1R dependent CRC cell lines and
increases cell death both in vitro and in vivo. Mk-2206 inhibits Akt
phosphorylation at S473 and T308 leading to decreased protein expression
of XIAP and Survivin. Interestingly, Mk-2206 treatment upregulated
apoptosis inducing factor (AIF) and its translocation from mitochondria
to the nucleus and a concomitant inactivation of phospho-Ezrin at Y354
and T567.Ezrin is a cytoskeleton organizing protein implicated in the
metastatic process of several other types of cancer in addition to CRC.
RNAi studies were performed to confirm the role of AIF and Ezrin in
Mk-2206 mediated cell death. We are currently analyzing the
anti-metastatic effects of MK-2206 in an orthotopic mouse model of human
CRC cells.Conclusion: In this work we have demonstrated the effectiveness
of Mk-2206 as a pharmacological agent for targeting CRC cells. We have
identified dual mechanisms by which Mk-2206-mediated Akt inactivation
promotes cell death.The first mechanism involved caspase-independent AIF
mediated DNA fragmentation; while the second involved caspase-dependent
Akt-Ezrin-XIAP mediated cell death.Citation Format: Ekta Agarwal,
Anathbandhu Chaudhuri, Michael G. Brattain, Sanjib Chowdhury. Dual
regulation of cell death by Akt kinase inhibitor Mk-2206 in colorectal
cancer. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 594.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-594

