Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: N-terminal domain of Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase I (Tdp1) is
critical for its cellular function.


Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase I (Tdp1) is a highly conserved eukaryotic
DNA repair enzyme that catalyzes the resolution of 3 and 5 phospho-DNA
adducts. Tdp1 has been implicated in the repair of DNA topoisomerase I
(Top1)-DNA covalent complexes reversibly stabilized by camptothecins
(CPTs) such as the FDA approved CPT derivatives topotecan and irinotecan.
Tdp1 contains two HKD-motifs that provide two catalytic histidines that
function as a nucleophile and an acid-base residue. A mutation of the
acid-base His to Arg (H493R) in human Tdp1 is associated with the rare
recessive ataxia SCAN1. hTdp1H493R and the analogous yeast mutant
(Tdp1H432R) enhances cell sensitivity to CPT. In addition, the toxicity
induced by this mutant is caused by the formation of a more stable
Tdp1-DNA covalent intermediate, a rare characteristic for a DNA repair
enzyme. However, this His to Arg substitution induces a minor toxic
phenotype compared to other substitutions, such as the His432 to Asn
substitution, which induces a Top1 dependent cellular lethality. A band
depletion assay suggests that in vivo/cell Tdp1His432Asn remains in
complex with Top1 on the DNA, which was not observed in a biochemical in
vitro assay.Biochemical studies revealed that Tdp1 catalysis is
independent of the N-terminal domain. Among Tdp1 proteins, the N-terminal
domain is poorly conserved in sequence and size (80aa for yeast and 140aa
for human Tdp1).We investigated the role of the N-terminal domain for
Tdp1 activity in the cell. The N-terminal truncated proteins showed
similar cellular distribution as the full-length proteins. Interestingly,
the N-terminal truncated proteins did not display the toxicity that was
observed with the full-length Tdp1 mutant proteins. This suggests that
the N-terminal domain is a critical determinate of Tdp1 cellular
function.Preliminary results from our human cell line model shows similar
results implying that the function of the N-terminal domain is conserved
among Tdp1 proteins although it is poorly conserved. Further studies are
necessary to ensure that these constructs are properly distributed.
Moreover, the N-terminal domain of hTdp1 is post-translational modified,
while our preliminary results suggest that this domain is important for
protein-protein interaction and Tdp1 recruitment to its substrates.
Understanding Tdp1 substrate and protein-interactions are important in
the development of Tdp1 as therapeutic target.This work is in part
supported by the ADDA.

