Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling modulation in solar UV-induced skin
carcinogenesis.


Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) are the most
common types of cancers. Since most BCC and SCC develop on sun-exposed
areas of the body, chronic sun exposure is considered the main etiologic
factor of these tumors. In vitro and in vivo studies have identified
PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway as a solar light-activated pathway.
However, little work has been done on studying the expression profiles of
this pathway in humans. In the study herein, we evaluate the modulation
of solar light-activated PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway in normal human
skin and solar simulated light (SSL)-irradiated human skin to determine
the expression profiles of upstream and downstream phosphorylated
proteins Akt (Ser473), mTOR (Ser2448), S6 ribosomal protein (Ser235/236),
and 4E-BP1 (Thr37/46). The study population consisted of individuals 18
years or older in general good health with skin types II-III. SSL
irradiation at 2, 2.5, and 3 times minimal erythema dose (MED) were
applied to unexposed skin. Punch biopsies were taken at baseline, 5
minutes, 1 h, 5 h, and 24 h post-irradiation and immediately fixed in 10%
formalin. Tissues were evaluated by immunohistochemistry for the
expression of phosphorylated proteins. Proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA) and cleaved caspase 3 (Asp175) were evaluated as markers for
keratinocyte proliferation and apoptosis, respectively. Induction of
phosphorylated Akt was seen at 5 hours with a 2-fold increase in
expression when compared to baseline. Expression of phosphorylated mTOR
gradually increased with a peak at 24 hours (3-fold). Significant
induction of phosphorylated S6 ribosomal protein was seen at 1 h
(3-fold), 5 h (7-fold), and 24 h (10-fold) post SSL irradiation.
Induction of phosphorylated 4E-BP1 was limited to the 24 h time point
with an increase of 2-fold when compared to baseline. Our data
corroborate in vitro and in vivo studies finding, which allow for better
understanding of the expression profile patterns of phosphorylated
proteins in the PI-3 kinase/Akt/mTOR pathway during exposure of
physiological relevant solar-simulated light. Identification of key
proteins in this pathway could lead to the use of these proteins as
biomarkers and/or specific targets for the prevention and control of skin
tumors.

