Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docosahexaenoic acid attenuates glycolytic metabolism and the
Warburg phenotype by targeting hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha in breast
cancer.


Dietary factors have been estimated to account for approximately 30-40
percent of cancer incidence and research has shown that high fat diets
rich in n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) are associated with lower
cancer occurrences, including breast cancer. The glycolytic switch, known
as the Warburg Effect, is observed in many malignant models, which
results in a unique metabolic shift in energy metabolism where tumor
cells increase anaerobic glycolysis even in the presence of normal oxygen
levels. In our laboratory, we have shown that the n-3 PUFA,
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA; C22:6), significantly decreases total cellular
ATP and the transcriptional activity and protein levels of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1), a major contributor to the
Warburg phenotype. In this project, we set out to determine if DHA is
responsible for attenuating the Warburg Effect through a HIF-1-dependent
mechanism. Alterations in glucose uptake and usage upon supplementation
with DHA were examined in vitro in the breast cancer BT-474, MDA-MB-231,
and non-transformed MCF-10A cell lines. Total glucose transporter 1 (GLUT
1) protein levels were determined in each cell line. No change was seen
upon DHA supplementation in the MDA-MB-231 cell line, which may be due to
overexpression of GLUT 1. However, GLUT 1 protein levels were
significantly down in response to DHA treatment in the BT-474 cell line.
We also observed significant decreases in glucose consumption through
glycolysis and lactate production in the BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines
upon DHA supplementation. However, no change was seen in the
non-transformed cell line MCF-10A, suggesting that DHA is having
anti-glucose-metabolism effects specifically on cancer cells, but not on
non-transformed cells. Moreover, HIF-1 small interfering RNA (siRNA)
experiments showed a similar trend in GLUT 1 expression and glycolytic
capacity in the BT-474 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines, suggesting that DHA is
exerting some of its anti-cancer effects through HIF-1. Based on these
findings, changes in glucose transporter expression and glucose usage
likely contribute to the impaired growth and survival of malignant cell
lines supplemented with DHA. Currently, therapies are being developed to
target the Warburg Effect in the treatment of cancer and DHA could likely
enhance such therapies.

