Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of a PARP inhibitor in mice representing
genetically different subtypes of pancreatic cancers.


The incredibly short survival of patients diagnosed with pancreatic
cancer underscores one of the greatest failures of the medical community:
our inability to identify effective treatments for pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. Most new compounds in clinical trials fail because of
highly toxic side effects in normal tissues and limited efficacy in tumor
response. An ideal drug would kill only tumor cells and spare the normal
cells. In this regard, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors have
demonstrated a promising therapeutic potential, particularly in patients
with BRCA-deficient tumors. BRCA-deficient cells have an impaired
homology-directed repair (HDR) pathway, a mechanism critical for
resolving DNA double strand breaks (DSBs). When PARP1 is inhibited, DNA
single strand breaks are not repaired and they mature to double strand
breaks, which are very toxic for the cell. Hence, inhibition of PARP1 is
selectively toxic to cells with an impaired HDR pathway, such as
BRCA-deficient tumor cells, but not to normal cells. Because up to 10% of
pancreatic cancer patients carry mutations in either BRCA2 or other
proteins involved in the HDR pathway, PARP inhibitors may also prove
effective in this setting. However, a number of subtleties remain that
call this conclusion into question, including poor drug delivery, loss of
heterozygosity, and BRCA-independent alteration of the HDR pathway.We
designed a preclinical study to evaluate the efficacy of MK-4827, a
potent PARP inhibitor, in three different genetically engineered mouse
models representing different pancreatic cancer patient populations. The
KPC mice carry mutations in genes that are frequently mutated in
pancreatic cancer patients and develop tumors that fully recapitulate the
biology of human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. These mice will
represent the broad population of patients with spontaneous pancreatic
tumors. A second model with heterozygous mutations in BRCA2 (KPCB2+/-)
will represent patients with hereditary BRCA2 mutations. A third model
with homozygous conditional deletion of BRCA2 (KPCB2f/f) will represent
spontaneous tumors that have completely lost HDR functions. We show that
BRCA2-deficient KPC tumor cells strongly respond to treatment with
MK-4827 in vitro and in vivo. MK-4827 efficiently inhibited PARP
activity, increased double strand break formation and induced M-phase
cell cycle arrest in tumors of KPCB2f/f mice. In the future, we will use
pre- and post-treatment tumor biopsies to determine the molecular
mechanisms of response to PARP inhibition. The ultimate goal of this
study is to identify genetic determinants of PARP sensitivity and
validate our results in a clinical setting. Identification of a biomarker
would be an extremely valuable clinical tool to classify pancreatic
cancer patients that could respond to the treatment with PARP inhibitors,
a tool that is currently not available.

