Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated transcriptome and methylome sequencing of Xp11
translocation renal cell carcinomas reveal uncoupling of DNA methylation
and transcriptional profiles.


Background: Xp11 translocation renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is a rare
subtype of RCC characterized by the fusion of TFE3 gene to multiple
partners. Despite its genetic homogeneity, there is considerable
heterogeneity in the clinical course of this disease, probably due to
epigenetic events that follow the initial translocation.Material and
methods: We performed whole-transcriptome next-gen paired end sequencing
of 7 Xp11 RCC samples, 10 clear-cell RCC and 19 papillary RCC. In
addition, we performed genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation of 9 Xp11
samples by Digital Restriction Enzyme analysis of Methylation (DREAM),
based on next-generation sequencing.Results: Using a robust
bioinformatics pipelines, we confirmed 6 previously known TFE3
translocation partners, and discovered a novel partner involving the
splicing gene LUC7L3 that we validated by RT-PCR. Unsupervised clustering
of gene expression profiling revealed genetic homogeneity of Xp11 cases
that clustered together, independently from clear-cell and papillary RCC
subgroups. Ingenuity analysis confirmed MITF activation. Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) showed mTOR pathway activation. In contrast
with genetic homogeneity of gene expression, unsupervised clustering
analysis of CpG sites located within CpG islands (CGI) revealed: (1) a
CpG islands methylator phenotype (CIMP+) subgroup related to patients
with metastatic disease (n=3), and (2) a CIMP negative (CIMP-) subgroup
related to patients with local disease (n=6). Integrative analysis showed
that genes with differentially methylated levels between CIMP+ and CIMP-
tumors (SD: +/-20%) and which were down-regulated in CIMP+ subtype as
compared to normal kidney, were also down-regulated in CIMP- subgroup .
Of note, FZD10 and CCDC8 were found to gain promoter methylation in three
cases of Xp11 RCC, but their baseline expression was already low in
normal kidney. In contrast, small gain of promoter DNA methylation in
cancer samples was associated with gene silencing of putative tumor
suppressor genes. Interestingly, GSEA for gene body methylation
identified enrichment of MAPK signaling pathway in CIMP+ versus CIMP-
cases. Exome-sequencing of 2 out of 3 cases with CIMP+ phenotype
identified non-synonymous IDH1 (p.V71I) mutation present in COSMIC
database for one case and a frameshift mutation of the chromatin
remodeling enzyme INO80D in the second case.Conclusion: Our data reveal
uncoupling of DNA methylation and gene expression profiling in Xp11 RCC.
Patients with metastatic disease showed higher methylation level, with
CIMP+ phenotype possibly related to IDH1 mutation in one case. These
results suggest that additional epigenetic alterations following the
initial Xp11 translocation may explain the aggressive biology of some
Xp11 RCCs.

