Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic characterization of prostate cancer cell lines.


Purpose: The tumor microenvironment has a major impact on tumor growth
and progression; the composition and characteristics of the tumor
microenvironment is influenced by the metabolism of both tumor and
stromal cells. In preparation to determining the effects of cell
metabolism on the anti-tumor T cell immune response, we studied the
metabolism of two murine prostate cell lines (RM1 and Myc-Cap) under
different conditions. The long-term goal of our study is to assess what
features of an abnormal tumor microenvironment negatively impact T cell
tumor targeting and the activation of T cells in orthotopic prostate
cancer models.Methods: The metabolic profiles of the more aggressive
rapidly growing RM1 and more moderate growing Myc-Cap cells were
determined. A Seahorse XF96 Extracellular Flux Analyzer, which provides
real-time measurements of the extracellular acidification rate (ECAR),
was used to measure of glycolysis and lactate production, and the oxygen
consumption rate (OCR), a measure of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS).
The effects of 24-hour glucose and glutamine deprivation were
studied.Results: Myc-Cap cells utilized significantly less glucose,
produced much less acid (lactate) and had a low proliferation rate
compared to RM1 cells. RM1 cells exhibit a higher rate of glycolysis and
showed higher glycolytic capacity, whereas OCR (a measure of
mitochondrial respiration) was lower in RM1 compared to Myc-Cap cells.
The expression of glycolytic enzymes was comparable in both cell lines;
RM1 cells demonstrated higher LDHA and lower expression of mitochondrial
enzymes, as measured by Western blot.For RM1, glucose withdrawal from the
media resulted in reduced LDHA expression, a 77% decrease in lactate
production (measured by ECAR), and a 50% decrease in OCR. Glutamine
withdrawal resulted in a 35% decrease in ECAR, and an 82% decrease in
OCR. Myc-Cap cells were slightly less affected by glucose withdrawal
(slight change in LDHA expression, a 69% decrease in ECAR, and a 40%
decrease in OCR), whereas glutamine withdrawal had a more profound effect
on ECAR (75% decrease) and a similar effect on OCR (83% decrease).
Glutamine withdrawal reduced the proliferation rate of both cell lines
significantly more than glucose withdrawal.Conclusions: Our data
demonstrate a major difference in acid production (lactate) between the
two cell lines (RM1>Myc-Cap). RM1 cells are more glucose dependent,
whereas Myc-Cap is more glutamine dependent. Understanding the metabolic
differences between tumors and the impact of metabolism on the tumor
microenvironment will provide specific targets that could enhance T cell
therapy through a modification of the tumor microenvironment.

