Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gi proteins are a differential mediator of activation of RTK
signaling in normal and breast cancer cells.


In classic view, inhibitory heterotrimeric G protein alpha subunits 1, 2,
and 3 (Gi1, Gi2 and Gi3) couple to Gi protein-coupled receptors (GiPCR)
and then transduce signals from GiPCRs to downstream pathways in hormone
and chemo-attractant signaling. Recent genetic evidence demonstrates that
Gi proteins are crucial to embryo development and growth as well as
tumorigenesis. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the
implication of Gi proteins in this physiological and pathological process
is largely unknown.Here we report that Gi proteins differentially
regulate receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs)-mediated activation of growth
factor signaling. Gi1 and Gi3 double deficient (Gi1/3 DKO) mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), in which Gi2 expression is also lower than
that in wild type cells, exhibited a clear defect in ERK1/2 activation by
EGF, HB-EGF, insulin and IGF-I, but not aFGF, bFGF or high dose of serum
(FBS). Further, Gi1/3 DKO MEFs were largely defective in Akt-mTORC1
activation by aFGF, bFGF, EGF, HB-EGF, serum, but not IGF-1 and insulin.
The defect in Akt or ERK1/2 activation in Gi deficient MEFs was rescued
upon reintroduction of Gi1 and Gi3 proteins. Interestingly, Gi deficiency
impaired activation of Akt-mTROC1 and ERK1/2 by PDGF at a low, but not a
high dose. Using a RNA interference strategy, we showed that knockdown of
Gi proteins in either wt MEFs or triple negative breast cancer cells
(MDA-MB231-D3H2-LN) led to a defect in Akt-mTROC1 and ERK1/2 activation,
which is similar to that in Gi deficient cells in response to EGF, bFGF
or IGF-1.Additional experimental analysis revealed that Gi proteins
formed a complex with RTKs, Gab1, FRS2 and Shp2 in breast cancer cells in
response to EGF, bFGF, or IGF-1. Gi1/3 DKO MEFs showed a defect in EGF-
and IGF-1-induced interaction of Gab1 with SHP2, which is required for
ERK1/2 activation by EGF and IGF-1, and a defect in bFGF-induced
interaction of Grb2 with Gab1, which is required for Akt-mTORC1
activation by aFGF and bFGF. Finally, knockdown of Gi proteins impaired
in vitro growth and invasion of breast cancer cells in response to bFGF,
EGF, and IGF-1.Thus, Gi proteins are a differential mediator of RTK
signaling in normal and breast cancer cells.

