Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of a second opinion for sex cord stromal tumors through
expression and molecular analysis of FOXL2: a study of the GINECO group
and TMRO network.


Background: Ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors (SCSTs) represent about 7% of
ovarian tumors. Since the exact diagnosis of these rare malignancies is
difficult to establish and could modify the appropriate therapeutic
strategy, the GINECO group (Group of National Investigators for Ovarian
Cancer Studies) developed the National Rare Ovarian tumor Observatory in
2002 which proposes a systematic pathological second opinion for all
cases of rare ovarian tumor diagnosed in France. We investigated whether
a systematic second opinion in one of the expert centers (Lyon, France),
using evaluation of FOXL2 mutation and FOXL2 level of expression for all
samples of suspected SCSTs cases, could improve diagnosis and
classification of sex cord-stromal tumors.Methods: Immunostaining for
FOXL2 and new molecular markers is being developed in this pathology. The
aim of this study was to evaluate the benefit of a systematic second
opinion and the use of a new algorithm that rationalizes the use of these
new tools, to allow more accurate diagnosis and classification of SCSTs.
Data were collected in a recent database dedicated to rare ovarian cancer
Observatory for rare malignant tumors of the ovary. Seventy-two patients
from the database were included. All tumor samples were referred to
referent center for morphological and IHC review. Search for FOXL2C134W
mutation and immunostaining of FOXL2 were performed.Results: FOXL2
mutation was present in 44 out of 47 adult granulosa cell tumors (A-GCTs)
(94%), in 2 out of 8 thecomas (25%) and in 1 out of 10 sertoli leydig
tumors (10%). These results confirm FOXL2 mutation as a specific marker
for A-GCTs. Immuno-expression of FOXL2 was present in 44 out of 45 SCSTs
(97.8%). After a second opinion, using morphological and classical
immunohistochemistry markers only, 15% of the initial diagnoses were
modified. With the use of our algorithm, initial diagnosis was changed in
22%.Conclusion: New tools like the search of a FOXL2 mutation are
fundamental to obtain an optimal diagnosis and classification of these
tumors. The use of an algorithm could be generalized to homogenize
practice and rationalize the use of these markers. We hope this algorithm
can also adjust and standardize the therapeutic strategy.

