Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and characterization of a new antiangiogenic peptide
targeting tumor vessels.


Vascular targeting is a promising approach for the treatment of
angiogenesis-dependent diseases particularly for tumor treatment.
Targeted drug-delivery to tumor vasculature preferentially localizes the
drug at the tumor site, thus increasing efficacy and decreasing systemic
side effects. In tumor neovasculature activated endothelial cells have
been shown to express molecules characteristic of angiogenic vessels and
virtually not expressed in normal vessels. Notably, tumor-associated
endothelial cells express an isoform of aminopeptidase N (CD13) that
binds to the cyclic peptide Cys-Asn-Gly-Arg-Cys (named NGR). Such
vascular addresses allow the selective targeting of systemically
administrated therapies to tumors, including chemotherapeutic agents and
cytokines. In particular, the NGR-TNF conjugate has been shown to induce
potent antitumor effects and is currently tested in phase II-III clinical
trials. In this context, we developed and characterized a new tumor
targeting peptide with a pathway of specificity comparable to that of
NGR, but with a higher stability and affinity for the tumor vessels. In
particular, we synthesized peptides containing the Cys-Arg-Gly-Asn-Cys
cyclic motif made of D-aminoacids (i.e. crGnc, named rGn). The rGn
peptide can be considered a partial retro-inverso of the NGR peptide,
since a real retro-inverso petpide requires cyclization through the
backbone, whereas in this case cyclization was obtained via the formation
of the disulphide bond between the N and the C- terminal cysteins. The
main advantage of retro-inverso peptides is their high metabolic
stability, because the peptide bonds generated by D-aminoacids are stable
to enzymatic cleavage. To characterize the biological activity and
functions of the new peptide, we studied the rGn/CD13 interactions in
vitro and in vivo on both tumour blood vessels and normal tissues, using
quantum dots (Qd), whole-mount histology, and fluorescence/confocal
microscopy. rGn-Qd showed the same recognition pattern of NGR-Qd on
primary cell cultures of endothelial origin. Consistently, in vivo
administered rGn-Qd and NGR-Qd bind to tumor blood vessels of several
murine tumours. Of note, the binding of either rGn-Qd or NGR-Qd to CD13
is efficiently competed by an excess of either NGR or rGn peptide,
respectively, both in in vitro and in vivo models. In particular, the rGn
peptide showed a significantly higher affinity than NGR for its target
cells in vitro. Moreover, silencing CD13 with specific shRNA prevented
not only anti-CD13 MoAb binding, but also rGn-Qd binding. Finally,
stressed experimental conditions that allowed deamidation of NGR to
isoDGR, do not affect rGn structural integrity. In conclusion, the rGn
peptide binds to CD13 expressed by angiogenic vessels with higher
affinity and stability than NGR. Coupling rGn to cytotoxic/cytostatic
molecules could lead to the generation of new potent antitumor compounds.

