Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule biological screens and global analytical approaches
reveal the complexity of cancer cell signaling networks and the challenge
of personalized medicine.


BRAF is mutationally activated in 50% of melanomas with a variety of data
indicating its role as a driver of malignancy. However, while patients
with BRAF mutations respond to vemurafenib, most responses are not long
lasting. Moreover, the 25% of melanomas harboring an NRAS activating
mutation are resistant de novo to BRAF inhibitors. In order to identify
effective drug combinations that increase the effectiveness of BRAF
inhibition, we used combinatorial small molecule biological screens and
global analytical approaches to identify compensatory and redundant
pathways. We screened a drug library for combinations with BRAF or MEK
inhibitors that cause synergistic cytotoxicity in melanoma cell lines.
Although BRAF mutational status predicted sensitivity to inhibitors of
BRAF, each BRAF mutant line differed in the combination of drugs that
induced synergistic cytotoxicity. One robust and clinically relevant pair
identified was the BRAF inhibitor PLX4720 and the EGFR/HER2 inhibitor
lapatinib. This drug combination was synergistic in half of the BRAF
mutant cell lines tested, including a line that was completely resistant
to PLX4720. The combination was also effective in the two NRAS mutant
lines tested. Xenograft experiments testing the combination of PLX4720
and lapatinib revealed a significant reduction in tumor volume compared
to either single agent alone in both PLX4720 sensitive and resistant BRAF
mutant tumors, providing preclinical data supporting the efficacy of this
drug combination. Synergy of the PLX4720-lapatinib combination did not
correlate with EGFR/HER2 expression, activity state, or mutational
status. This further indicates that sensitivity of melanoma to drug
combinations is not determined by the targeted oncogenic drivers, but by
the existence of unique secondary, compensatory survival responses. We
hypothesize that mutationally activated BRAF is wired into the
constitutive signaling network differently in each of these cells,
presumably a consequence of the diverse secondary mutations that
characterize melanomas. Consistent with this, whole exome-sequencing data
revealed a diversity of somatic variation among the synergistic and
non-synergistic melanomas, while gene expression analysis demonstrated
both distinct, line-specific basal transcriptional profiles and the lack
of common gene expression signatures in melanomas synergistically
inhibited by treatment with PLX4720-lapatinib. Collectively, these data
point out the extraordinary robustness of cancer cell signaling networks
and the challenges of individualizing therapies. This study has uncovered
novel functional drug combinations and suggests that the underlying
signaling networks that control responses to targeted agents can vary
substantially depending on unexplored components of the cell genotype and
cell signaling network.

