Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of KIT and FcR1 receptor mutations in
Mast Cell Leukemia using Single Cell Network Profiling (SCNP).


Background: A recent report described an imatinib/dasatinib (Imat/Dasat)
resistant MCL patient (pt) with mutations in KIT (V654A) and FcR1 (L188F)
receptors [Spector et al, Leukemia 2011]. The pt did not respond to
cytarabine-based induction therapy combined with Dasat or to
post-induction Imat. The functional consequence of the receptor mutations
on downstream signaling networks, and sensitivity to alternative
therapeutics, was unknown. SCNP is a flow cytometry-based assay that
quantitatively and simultaneously measures, in single cells,
extracellular surface markers and activation of intracellular signaling
proteins in response to modulation. SCNP was applied to interrogate
downstream signaling networks and network sensitivity to targeted
therapeutics by examining:1) Basal and modulated signaling using stem
cell factor (SCF) or -IgE2) Effect on basal and modulated signaling of:a)
KIT inhibitors Imat, Dasat, and Nilotinibb) PI3K inhibitor GDC-0941c) SYK
inhibitor fostamatinib R406Methods: Cryopreserved MCL BMMCs and healthy
donor BMMCs were processed alongside fresh healthy donor basophils (FHDB)
as controls. BMMCs were modulated with SCF for 5 and 15 min +/-KIT or
PI3K inhib. MCL BMMCs and FHDB were modulated with -IgE for 5min +/-
fostamatinib. Signaling in the KIT and FcR1 pathways was quantified
through measurement of p-AKT/ p-ERK/ p-S6 and p-ERK/ p-PLC2 / p-SYK
levels, respectively, in the MCL population: CD45+, CD34+, CD33+, and
CD117+.Results: As previous reported, the V654A KIT mutation did not
result in constitutive activation of the PI3K or MAPK pathways in MCL
blasts, but was associated with dysfunctional SCF modulated signaling.
Specifically, SCNP identified SCF induced p-AKT levels at 5min, higher
(2X) compared to CD34+/CD117+ FHDB, and sustained to 15min with no
simultaneous induction of p-ERK or p-S6. Consistent with the clinically
observed Imat/Dasat resistance of the MCL case, in vitro AKT induction
was unaffected by the presence of KIT inhibitors but sensitive to the
PI3K inhib GDC-0941. KIT inhibitors and GDC-0941 blocked SCF induced
signaling in the healthy BMMC control. Despite robust p-ERK induction in
the FHDB control after -IgE modulation of the FcR1 receptor and
inhibition by fostamatinib treatment, no basal or -IgE modulated FcR1
receptor signaling was detected in MCL BMMC cells.Conclusions: SCNP
functionally characterizes signaling and drug resistance profiles in MCL
BMMCs and can potentially inform on therapeutic selection. Despite robust
p-ERK induction in the FHDB control after -IgE modulation of the FcR1
receptor and inhibition by fostamatinib treatment, no basal or -IgE
modulated FcR1 receptor signaling was detected in the cryopreserved MCL
BMMCs. Further studies will elucidate whether the lack of detected signal
could be related to the freeze/thaw process and/or to cell-type specific
differences.

