Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GRK6 deficiency promotes tumor aggressiveness and metastasis in a
murine model of human lung cancer .


G protein coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) phosphorylate the activated
form of G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) followed by the association
of -arrestin (arr) with the phosphorylated receptor, desensitization and
down-regulation. We have recently shown that the chemokine receptor,
CXCR2, couples to GRK6 to regulate cellular responses including
chemotaxis, angiogenesis and wound healing. In this study, we sought to
investigate the role of GRK6 in CXCR2-mediated tumorigenesis using a
murine model of human lung cancer. Mice deficient in GRK6 (GRK6/)
exhibited a significant increase in Lewis lung cancer (LLC) growth and
metastasis relative to control littermates (GRK6+/+). GRK6 deletion had
no effect on the expression of pro-angiogenic chemokine or vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), but up-regulated matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9 release, tumor-infiltrating PMNs and
microvessel density. Treatment of the mice with a CXCR2 inhibitor
(SB225002) or a murine anti-CXCR2 antibody blocked the effect of GRK6
deletion. Surprisingly, a GRK6//arr2/ double knockout animal model
exhibited faster tumor growth relative to GRK6/ or arr2/ animals.
Exposure of GRK6//arr2/ mice to the anti-CXCR2 antibody totally inhibited
tumor growth. This suggest that the effects of arr2 and GRK6 knockdown in
CXCR2-mediated tumor development are additive. Altogether, the results
indicate that CXCR2 couples to GRK6 to regulate angiogenesis, tumor
progression and metastasis. Deletion of GRK6 increases the activity of
the host CXCR2, resulting in greater PMN infiltration and MMP release in
the tumor microenvironment thereby promoting angiogenesis and metastasis.
Since GRK6//arr2/ mice showed greater tumor growth relative to GRK6/ or
arr2/ mice, the data also suggest that CXCR2 couples to a different
mechanism to mediate tumor progression and metastasis.

