Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT signaling is totally deregulated in malignant pleural
mesothelioma: What are the reasons.


Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is an aggressive tumor caused by
former asbestos exposure with a mean overall survival of 12 months from
diagnosis. The knowledge about predictive factors of outcome is poor and
MPM is resistant to conventional therapy. The long latency period in MPM
pathogenesis as well as the absence of early symptoms is responsible for
the late diagnosis of this disease.From our recent study and published
data we know that the regular rapid progressive type of MPM uses several
signaling pathways regulating cell growth and survival. Asbestos causes
genetic modifications, most notably the upregulation of cell survival and
growth signaling pathways as well as the expression of other proteins
that favor the resistance of MPM to apoptosis and chemotherapy. In order
to develop more effective therapy than the currently used chemotherapy,
novel targets have to be identified in MPM.The JAK/STAT signaling pathway
is the principal signaling mechanism for lots of cytokines or growth
factors in mammalians. JAK activation induces a variety of biological
responses like cell proliferation, differentiation, cell migration, and
apoptosis.Our investigations demonstrate that the STAT signaling pathway
is totally deregulated: STAT1 is upregulated, whereas STAT3 is
downregulated. SOCS1 and SOCS3 - which represent a negative feedback loop
and which are regulators of STAT1 and STAT3 - are totally missing in MPM.
Investigations in six mesothelioma cell lines showed that STAT1 is highly
expressed and that SOCS1 is missing whereas the expression of pSTAT1
(Tyr701) can be stimulated and therefore be increased by Interferon-gamma
treatment. The expression levels of other components of the STAT
signaling pathway in these cell lines are currently under
investigation.It is known that protein expression is controlled by
noncoding RNAs, e.g. microRNAs (miRNA) and we investigated the possible
impact of miRNAs on the STAT signaling pathway in MPM. We identified
miR-30d* as a regulator of phosphorylated STAT1 (Ser727). Furthermore we
found that miR-19b, miR-30b, miR-30c and miR-222 are upregulated which
are predicted to target SOCS1 and SOCS3 - this could be an explanation
for the missing expression of these proteins. MiR-21 is extremely
upregulated in MPM, a miRNA that is associated with a wide variety of
human tumors and which targets STAT3.Understanding the role of STATs in
MPM could be the first step into the development of a targeted therapy
for these tumors.

