Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma retinol, but not 25-OH vitamin D or vitamin E, is
associated with increased survival in colorectal cancer patients.


OBJECTIVE: To determine the association of lipid-soluble vitamin status
with survival in colorectal cancer patients.METHODS: Using stored patient
plasma samples from a multiethnic population-based case-control study of
colorectal cancer, we determined associations of post-treatment blood
levels of retinol, 25 OH-vitamin D, and Vitamin E with survival. Patients
(n = 455) were followed (mean of 8 years) after phlebotomy, during which
time 20% died of colorectal cancer and 24% from other causes. Hazard
ratios (HR) were estimated by Cox proportional hazards regression with
adjustment for stage and age at diagnosis, ethnicity, sex, and smoking
status.RESULTS: A strong inverse association with all-cause mortality was
observed for plasma retinol (Ptrend OBJECTIVE: To determine the
association of lipid-soluble vitamin status with survival in colorectal
cancer patients.METHODS: Using stored patient plasma samples from a
multiethnic population-based case-control study of colorectal cancer, we
determined associations of post-treatment blood levels of retinol, 25
OH-vitamin D, and Vitamin E with survival. Patients (n = 455) were
followed (mean of 8 years) after phlebotomy, during which time 20% died
of colorectal cancer and 24% from other causes. Hazard ratios (HR) were
estimated by Cox proportional hazards regression with adjustment for
stage and age at diagnosis, ethnicity, sex, and smoking status.RESULTS: A
strong inverse association with all-cause mortality was observed for
plasma retinol (Ptrend <0.0001), with similar significant trends observed
for both colorectal cancer-specific deaths and other causes of death (P
for heterogeneity = 0.43). The inverse association between retinol and
all cause mortality was consistently observed for both sexes, subjects of
Caucasian and Japanese ancestry, and for both rectal cancer and colon
cancer. Overall no significant associations were observed for plasma
25-OH vitamin D or vitamin E with survival.CONCLUSIONS: Results are
consistent with a direct relationship between low vitamin A status and
poor survival among colorectal cancer patients. The absence of a
significant association for 25-OH vitamin D levels with survival may be
related to the generally higher circulating levels of 25-OH vitamin D in
residents of Hawaii where the study was conducted, and results may differ
in northern climates and in darker pigmented patients. If verified
through larger prospective studies, future complementary intervention
trials involving the assessment of vitamin A status and supplementation
of individuals with inadequate levels may be warranted.

