Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Complex effects of dietary apigenin on prevention of
MPA-accelerated DMBA-induced mammary tumors in Sprague-Dawley rats.


Epidemiological and laboratory studies support the use of the
plant-derived flavonoid apigenin as a potential nutraceutical for
preventing a number of different cancers. However the effect of dietary
apigenin on prevention of progestin-accelerated breast tumors has
hitherto not been explored. Medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) is the most
commonly used synthetic progestin administered to post-menopausal women
for hormone replacement therapy. MPA accelerates the development of
breast cancers by reducing tumor latency and increasing tumor incidence
and multiplicity in a DMBA-induced breast cancer model, and causes
progression of human cancer cells in xenografts (Clin Can Res, 2006,
12:4062; Cancer Res, 2007, 67: 9929). Previously we showed that
intraperitoneally administered apigenin effectively treated and prevented
the progression of MPA-accelerated breast cancer in both the
DMBA-induced, and xenograft mammary cancer models (Cancer Prev Res, 2011,
4: 1316; Horm Canc, 2012, 3: 160). In the present study we used the DMBA
model to examine the chemopreventive effect of dietary apigenin against
MPA-accelerated tumors. Based on reports in the literature, we examined
the effects of feeding 3 different dietary levels of apigenin (0.02%,
0.1% and 0.5% wt/wt) in a phytoestrogen-free diet following treatment
with DMBA, and prior to implantation of MPA pellets which accelerate
tumor development. The MPA-dependent tumor incidence was lower in the
0.1% dietary apigenin treatment group. Surprisingly, the same dietary
level significantly increased tumor multiplicity in those animals that
developed tumors. A five-fold increase (0.5%) or reduction (0.02%) in
dietary apigenin failed to reduce MPA-dependent tumor incidence and the
higher dose (0.5%) substantially increased tumor multiplicity compared
with MPA alone. Tumor incidence and multiplicity were unaffected in
apigenin-fed animals that were treated with DMBA but supplemented with
placebo pellets. There were no morphological or histological differences
between tumors from animals fed apigenin-supplemented diets and those
given a control diet, either in the presence or absence of MPA.These
findings show that apigenin, given in a diet devoid of phytochemicals,
exacerbated the effects of MPA on tumor development and multiplicity in a
chemically-induced breast cancer model. Consequently, until further
research clarifies the effect of dietary apigenin on
progestin-accelerated tumors, caution should be exercised when
considering the flavonoid as a dietary supplement for preventing
hormone-dependent breast cancer. Supported by a COR award from University
of Missouri, and research funds from RADIL.

