Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressive microRNA-218 regulates oncogenes of focal
adhesion pathways in renal cell carcinoma.


INTRODUCTION&OBJECTIVES: Our recent microRNA (miRNA) expression signature
of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) revealed downregulation of miR-218 in RCC,
suggesting that it might be a tumor suppressor. The aim of this study is
to investigate the functional significance of miR-218 and to
identifymiR-218-mediated cancer pathways in RCC.METHODS: We evaluated
miR-218 expression in 33 RCC clinical specimens and adjacent normal
kidney tissues by stem-loop RT-PCR. We performed gain-of-function studies
(cell migration and cell invasion assays) by using miR-218 transfectants
(TFs). Oligo-microarray analyses of the miR-218 TFs and the RCC specimens
were carried out to identify molecular targets of miR-218. According to
GENECODIS software, we focused on the focal adhesionpathway, in which
caveolin-2 (CAV2) was a candidate target gene. A luciferase reporter
assay was performed to determine miR-218binding sites with CAV2 3UTR.
Loss-of-function assays using si-CAV2 were performed to investigate the
functional significance of CAV2. The expression of CAV2 mRNA and protein
was evaluated by qRT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, to
investigate signaling pathways regulated by CAV2, we performed gene
expression analysis of si-CAV2TFs.RESULTS: The expression of miR-218 was
significantly reduced in the RCC specimens. Significant inhibitions of
cell migration and invasion were observed in the miR-218 TFs. Gene
expression analysis showed that 615 genes were downregulated in the
miR-218 TFs. The GENECODIS software revealed that miR-218 appeared to
regulate 25 pathways (PINTRODUCTION&OBJECTIVES: Our recent microRNA
(miRNA) expression signature of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) revealed
downregulation of miR-218 in RCC, suggesting that it might be a tumor
suppressor. The aim of this study is to investigate the functional
significance of miR-218 and to identifymiR-218-mediated cancer pathways
in RCC.METHODS: We evaluated miR-218 expression in 33 RCC clinical
specimens and adjacent normal kidney tissues by stem-loop RT-PCR. We
performed gain-of-function studies (cell migration and cell invasion
assays) by using miR-218 transfectants (TFs). Oligo-microarray analyses
of the miR-218 TFs and the RCC specimens were carried out to identify
molecular targets of miR-218. According to GENECODIS software, we focused
on the focal adhesionpathway, in which caveolin-2 (CAV2) was a candidate
target gene. A luciferase reporter assay was performed to determine
miR-218binding sites with CAV2 3UTR. Loss-of-function assays using
si-CAV2 were performed to investigate the functional significance of
CAV2. The expression of CAV2 mRNA and protein was evaluated by qRT-PCR
and immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, to investigate signaling pathways
regulated by CAV2, we performed gene expression analysis of
si-CAV2TFs.RESULTS: The expression of miR-218 was significantly reduced
in the RCC specimens. Significant inhibitions of cell migration and
invasion were observed in the miR-218 TFs. Gene expression analysis
showed that 615 genes were downregulated in the miR-218 TFs. The
GENECODIS software revealed that miR-218 appeared to regulate 25 pathways
(P<0.0001). In these pathways, we focused on ten genes in focal adhesion
and seven genes in tight junction. CAV2 was the most upregulated gene
among the genes related to these pathways by using available data sets
(GSE36895 and GSE22541) in gene expression omnibus (GEO). Luciferase
reporter assay showed that CAV2 was directly regulated by miR-218.
Silencing study of CAV2 demonstrated significant inhibition of cell
migration and invasion. The mRNA and protein expression of CAV2 were
significantly up-regulated in RCC specimens. Gene expression analysis of
si-CAV2 TFs revealed that CAV2 might control 15 pathways including tight
junction pathway, containing pro-metastatic genes such as claudin-1, AKT3
and R-Ras2.CONCLUSION: Tumor suppressive miR-218contributes to inhibition
of cell migration and invasion through regulating focal adhesion pathway,
especially CAV2 in RCC. This is the first report that CAV2 contributes to
metastatic processes in RCC.

