Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased risk of prevalent high risk human papillomavirus
infection in Lactobacillus iners rich microbiota in Nigerian women.


The microbiota plays an important role in prevention of colonization of
the vagina by pathogenic organisms such as HIV, Herpes simplex virus and
N. gonorrhea. Given the role of persistent high risk HPV (hrHPV)
infection of the cervix as a necessary but not sufficient cause of
cervical, we hypothesized that in addition to other risk factors,
specific community types of vaginal microbiota may be cofactors in the
etiology of cervical cancer and pre-cancer (CIN2+).We enrolled HIV+ and
HIV- women who presented to our cervical cancer screening program at the
National Hospital, Abuja and the University of Abuja Teaching Hospital,
Abuja, Nigeria between April and August 2012 into this study. Using a
nurse administered questionnaire, we collected information on
demographics and risk factors of cervical cancer. Without cleaning the
introitus, we collected mid-vaginal samples and cervical exfoliated cells
from all participants.We characterized the vaginal microbiota from the
mid-vaginal sample by using barcoded universal primers 515F and 806R for
the amplification of the V3 - V5 hypervariable regions of 16s rRNA gene
and sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq Instrument. The processed gene
sequences were classified using the RDP Nave Bayesian Classifier and the
vaginal microbiota were clustered into community state types (CST)
according to community composition. We used Roche Linear Array HPV
Genotyping Test to characterize the prevalent HPV according to
manufacturer's instruction. We analyzed association between community
class types of vaginal microbiota and hrHPV infection using Fisher's
exact tests.We enrolled 278 women, 40% (111) of whom were HIV negative,
54% (151) HIV positive and 6% (16) with HIV status unknown. The
prevalence of hrHPV types among the HIV- women was 10.6%, and 35.6% among
the HIV+ women. hrHPV infection was commoner among HIV positive compared
to HIV negative participants (OR 4.67, 95%CI 2.32 - 9.88, pThe microbiota
plays an important role in prevention of colonization of the vagina by
pathogenic organisms such as HIV, Herpes simplex virus and N. gonorrhea.
Given the role of persistent high risk HPV (hrHPV) infection of the
cervix as a necessary but not sufficient cause of cervical, we
hypothesized that in addition to other risk factors, specific community
types of vaginal microbiota may be cofactors in the etiology of cervical
cancer and pre-cancer (CIN2+).We enrolled HIV+ and HIV- women who
presented to our cervical cancer screening program at the National
Hospital, Abuja and the University of Abuja Teaching Hospital, Abuja,
Nigeria between April and August 2012 into this study. Using a nurse
administered questionnaire, we collected information on demographics and
risk factors of cervical cancer. Without cleaning the introitus, we
collected mid-vaginal samples and cervical exfoliated cells from all
participants.We characterized the vaginal microbiota from the mid-vaginal
sample by using barcoded universal primers 515F and 806R for the
amplification of the V3 - V5 hypervariable regions of 16s rRNA gene and
sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq Instrument. The processed gene sequences
were classified using the RDP Nave Bayesian Classifier and the vaginal
microbiota were clustered into community state types (CST) according to
community composition. We used Roche Linear Array HPV Genotyping Test to
characterize the prevalent HPV according to manufacturer's instruction.
We analyzed association between community class types of vaginal
microbiota and hrHPV infection using Fisher's exact tests.We enrolled 278
women, 40% (111) of whom were HIV negative, 54% (151) HIV positive and 6%
(16) with HIV status unknown. The prevalence of hrHPV types among the
HIV- women was 10.6%, and 35.6% among the HIV+ women. hrHPV infection was
commoner among HIV positive compared to HIV negative participants (OR
4.67, 95%CI 2.32 - 9.88, p<0.0001). The commonest clusters of vaginal
microbiota CSTs that we identified in our sample were - Lactobacillus
iners rich CST III and CST IV which lacked significant numbers of
Lactobacillus. Amongst the HIV negative enrollees, participants with CST
III were more likely to test positive for prevalent hrHPV than
participants with CST IV (OR 3.6, 95% CI: 0.88 - 16.96, p = 0.05).
Amongst the HIV positive participants, the presence of CST III was
commoner among women with prevalent hrHPV but this was not statistically
significant (OR 1.14, 95% CI 0.55 - 2.40, p=0.73)Our results suggest that
L.iners rich microbiota may be associated with increased risk of
prevalent hrHPV infection in Nigerian women. Further research is needed
to confirm this preliminary result and to evaluate the relationship of
vaginal microbiota with persistent hrHPV infection.This work was
supported by the UM-Capacity Development for Research in AIDS Associated
Malignancy Grant (NIH/NCI 1D43CA153792-01)

