Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: URI and PP1 constitute a negative feedback loop regulating MAPK
signaling in BRAF-V600E mutated cancer cells.


Malignant transformation of cells involves acquisition of so-called
hallmarks of cancer. Such hallmark capabilities are brought about by
functional activation of oncogenes and inactivation of tumor suppressor
genes. Much has been learned about the actions of individual such cancer
genes, however, how an entire set of acquired mutations shapes cancer
phenotypes in a context-dependent manner remains elusive in many cases.
It has for example increasingly become clear that feedback mechanisms
control activated signaling pathways and might thus mitigate oncogenic
signaling. Therefore, functional inactivation of such feedback loops
might represent an additional event in carcinogenesis. Along this line we
have recently shown that URI (unconventional prefoldin RPB5-interactor)
can act as a negative regulatory subunit for the protein phosphatase 1
(PP1) and form a negative feedback loop regulating mTOR-S6K1-BAD
apoptotic signaling at mitochondria.Since the URI-PP1 interaction in this
context is regulated by URI-phosphorylation at S371, we performed a mass
spectrometric search for other phospho-sites regulating URI-PP1-complex
formation. We identified a potential MAPK-target site in URI's
PP1-interaction domain, which is phosphorylated by extracellular
signal-related kinase (ERK) in vitro. In in vitro kinase / in vitro
binding assays, we demonstrate that this phosphorylation event provokes
URI-PP1 complex disruption. Moreover, PP1 can dephosphorylate MEK in
vitro. These observations lead to the intriguing conclusion that URI and
PP1 form a negative feedback on MEK-ERK-signaling. Indeed, in
co-immunoprecipitation assays, introducing the BRAF-V600E-mutation (but
not KRAS-G13D) into HEK293T cells promotes complex disruption, which can
be rescued by co-treatment with the BRAF-V600E-specific inhibitor
PLX4720. To address the question of whether this feedback loop is
important in vivo, we analyzed a set of colorectal cancers by TMA
(n=357). We identified low PP1 expression in 28% of all CRC, however, in
the BRAF-V600E-mutated subgroup, PP1 expression was significantly more
frequently low (50%) and it correlated with worse overall survival in
this subgroup only. This observation is also mirrored by cell culture
experiments in the CRC cell line RKO: Downregulation of PP1 by RNAi
increases colony formation in long term proliferation assays,
particularly under low serum conditions, and this is rescued by
re-introducing rat PP1 in cells.In summary, we have identified a novel
negative feedback loop tuning signaling output of the BRAF-V600E-MEK-ERK
pathway. Deregulating this feedback by reducing PP1 levels might provide
a subgroup of BRAF-V600E-mutated cancer cells with a further
proliferative advantage by de-repressing MEK-ERK-signaling.

