Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo fluorescence lifetime imaging differentiates the bound
versus unbound status of a cell surface receptor targeted ligand.


In vivo fluorescence lifetime imaging allows for the isolation of
probe-specific fluorescence lifetime from surrounding tissue
auto-fluorescence. Fluorescence lifetime is not affected by agent
concentration or depth, or image acquisition parameters. However,
fluorescence lifetime can be affected by the in vivo tissue
microenvironment, e.g. pH or hypoxia. In this work, fluorescence lifetime
is used to characterize the presence and fate of a high-affinity peptidyl
delta opioid receptor (OR) ligand conjugated to the near-infrared
fluorescent IRDye800CW (Li-Cor).HCT116 colorectal cancer cells engineered
to over-express the OR and parental non-expressing HCT116 cells were
bilaterally xenografted subcutaneously into the flanks of athymic nude
mice. At a series of time-points following tail vein injection of the
ligand, in vivo fluorescence images images were acquired using the Optix
MX3 scanner (Advanced Research Technologies).For 24 h, the ligand
fluoresence lifetime was significantly different (pIn vivo fluorescence
lifetime imaging allows for the isolation of probe-specific fluorescence
lifetime from surrounding tissue auto-fluorescence. Fluorescence lifetime
is not affected by agent concentration or depth, or image acquisition
parameters. However, fluorescence lifetime can be affected by the in vivo
tissue microenvironment, e.g. pH or hypoxia. In this work, fluorescence
lifetime is used to characterize the presence and fate of a high-affinity
peptidyl delta opioid receptor (OR) ligand conjugated to the
near-infrared fluorescent IRDye800CW (Li-Cor).HCT116 colorectal cancer
cells engineered to over-express the OR and parental non-expressing
HCT116 cells were bilaterally xenografted subcutaneously into the flanks
of athymic nude mice. At a series of time-points following tail vein
injection of the ligand, in vivo fluorescence images images were acquired
using the Optix MX3 scanner (Advanced Research Technologies).For 24 h,
the ligand fluoresence lifetime was significantly different (p<0.05) in
the OR positive tumors relative to the negative tumors. At 48 hours, the
fluorescence lifetime in the negative tumor decreased and was no longer
different. We hypothesize that the early difference in fluorescence
lifetime is attributed to the bound state of the ligand on receptor
positive tumors relative to the unbound state in negative tumors. Over
time, unbound ligand clears from the negative tumor leaving only a low
concentration of ligand retained by non-specific interactions.In vitro
studies demonstrated that the fluoresecence lifetime of this ligand is
not altered within the biological pH range. However, the tumor
microenvironment is complex and multiple factors may be influencing the
observed differences. Future plans include studies of 3D cell cultures
using varied microenvironmental conditions and studies on OR endogenous
cell lines.

