Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy inhibition as an effective strategy for sensitizing
triple-negative breast cancer cells to chemotherapy.


Introduction: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), defined by a lack of
expression of the estrogen, progesterone and HER-2 receptors, remains a
major clinical challenge due to higher recurrence rates and poorer
prognosis compared to other subtypes of breast cancer. Tumors that
initially respond to chemotherapy - the core treatment option for the
patients with an advanced disease - eventually develop resistance. New
therapeutic options are urgently required for TNBC. Autophagy, a
lysosome-mediated degradation and recycling process, has been shown to
function as an adaptive survival response during chemotherapy. Previous
studies in other cancer subtypes have indicated that autophagy inhibition
can restore chemotherapeutic sensitivity and enhance treatment
response.Objective: Generate proof-of-principle evidence for autophagy
inhibition as an effective treatment strategy for TNBC.Experimental
Design: We are employing in vitro models using TNBC lines MDA-MB-231 and
SUM159PT, as well as their derivative lines (R8 and R75, respectively)
resistant to Epirubicin (EPI) and other anthracyclines. In vivo xenograft
mouse models of MDA-MB-231 and R8 are being used to evaluate the effects
of combinatorial therapy with EPI and autophagy inhibitor
hydroxychloroquine (HCQ).Methods: We assessed levels of autophagy in TNBC
cell lines treated with EPI, developed EPI- resistant sub-lines, and
compared basal autophagy levels in parental and resistant lines, using
autophagy flux (degradative completion of autophagy) assays. We evaluated
the effects of chemotherapy alone and in combination with autophagy
inhibitors (HCQ or siRNAs targeting autophagy-related (Atg) proteins) on
both parent and resistant sub-lines by assessing their viability. For in
vivo studies, MDA-MB-231 cells were injected subcutaneously in Rag2M
mice. After tumor formation, mice were treated with EPI, HCQ or their
combination, and treatment efficacy was evaluated by tumor volume
measurements. Autophagy levels in tumors were also assessed.Results: TNBC
cells demonstrated increased autophagy in response to EPI treatment in
vitro and in vivo. EPI- resistant lines showed at least 1.5 fold
increased basal autophagy levels compared to their parental lines
suggesting a possible adaptive role for autophagy in development of
chemoresistance. Knock-down of Atg proteins by siRNA dramatically reduced
the viability of EPI-resistant sub-lines, which indicates dependence of
drug-resistant cells on autophagy for survival. Resistance of
MDA-MB-231-R8 cells to EPI was reverted by autophagy inhibition in vitro.
Combination of EPI with HCQ in vivo showed an enhanced tumor response to
treatment compared to monotherapy with EPI. Additional in vivo studies
are in progress.Conclusion: Our preliminary results suggest that
autophagy inhibition may be an effective strategy for the treatment of
chemo-refractory TNBC cells.

