Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UV damage-induced histone H3 lysine 56 deacetylation regulates
nucleotide excision repair and checkpoint signaling.


Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is the major pathway in cells for the
removal of bulky photoproducts and ensuring integrity of the genome. NER
constitutes lesion recognition, excision of damaged DNA, synthesis of a
DNA fragment, and ligation of the repair patch. Nonetheless, DNA within
the cells is compacted into chromatin and lesion recognition requires
chromatin to be remodeled to permit access of repair and checkpoint
machinery to the damage site. Consequent to repair of the lesions,
chromatin structure is restored to its original state so that cells
resume cell cycle progression. Although several reports have demonstrated
the role of chromatin remodelers, histone modifications and histone
chaperones in DNA damage response (DDR), knowledge of how these
epigenetic mechanisms control the DDR is largely in its infancy. We and
others have recently observed that histone H3 is deacetylated on lysine
56 immediately in response to UV-induced DNA damage. Acetylation is
promptly restored upon completion of repair and is necessary for recovery
from DNA damage induced cell cycle arrest. However, the function of H3K56
deacetylation in the DDR remains to be determined. We found that
UV-induced deacetylation of H3K56 is abrogated in the presence of TSA and
sodium butyrate, both of which inhibit class I histone deacetylases
(HDACs). Knockdown of either HDAC1 or HDAC2 alone did not affect
UV-induced deacetylation of H3K56. However, simultaneous knockdown of
both HDAC1 and 2 resulted in retention of H3K56 acetylation after UV
irradiation. Consistently, both HDAC1 and HDAC2 localized to sites of UV
damage. These observations are consistent with that reported by Miller
et. al., indicating that HDAC1 and HDAC2 are responsible for the
deacetylation of H3K56 in response to DNA damage. Since the deacetylation
of H3K56 is one of the most immediate responses to UV-irradiation, we
assumed it to play a crucial role in NER. Accordingly, we observed that
CPD removal was affected in H1299 cells with histone H3K56Q mutation that
mimics constitutive acetylation. Furthermore, we found that localization
of the checkpoint kinase ATM to UV damage sites was affected in these
cells. Consequently, ATM-mediated H2AX phosphorylation was also found to
be defective in the mutant cells. Based on our observations, we speculate
that HDAC1 and 2 mediated H3K56 deacetylation regulates NER and
checkpoint signaling cascade in response to UV damage.This work was
supported by PHS grants ES2388, ES12991 and CA93413 and Pelotonia
postdoctoral fellowship to AB.

