Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Killing and IFN--dependent G1 cell cycle arrest are the mechanisms
of regulation of tumor growth by cytotoxic T lymphocytes.


Adoptive transfer of CTLs leads to tumor regression in animal models and
human clinical settings. To understand global effector mechanisms of CTL
therapy, we performed microarray gene expression analysis for murine CTL
therapy model using pmel-1 TCR transgenic T cells and B16 melanoma
cells.Tumor-specific CTLs were prepared from nave pmel-1 splenocytes
stimulated in vitro with hgp100 peptide-pulsed DCs for 3 days. B16 tumor
cells (1106) were implanted subcutaneously in C57BL/6 mice. Nine days
later (day 0), 1107 CTLs were intravenously injected into tumor bearing
mice. Tumors grew progressively in control mice. In contrast, tumor
growth was suppressed in mice receiving CTLs by adoptive transfer from
day 3 through day 7. In CTL-treated mice, CD8+CD90.1+CTLs were detected
in the tumor as early as day 1 after CTL transfer, peaked on day 3-5 and
gradually decreased by day 7. Intracellular IFN- staining demonstrated
that tumor-infiltrating CTLs produced IFN-. The diffuse infiltration of
CTLs into the tumor was accompanied by the spotty apoptotic or necrotic
area of the tumor.Tumors were harvested and mRNAs of the tumors were
subjected to genome-wide gene expression analysis. Besides up-regulation
of genes that are related to antigen presentation, MHC class I pathway,
cytotoxic effector molecules, etc., positively regulated cell cycle genes
were down-regulated at days 3 and 5 after CTL therapy. To analyze cell
cycle of tumor cells, fucci (fluorescence ubiquitination-based cell cycle
indicator) was transduced into B16 melanoma cells (B16-fucci), which emit
red fluorescence in G1-phase and green fluorescence in S-/G2-/M-phases,
respectively. In the same setting of CTL therapy using B16-fucci, tumors
were harvested on day 3 and cell cycle was analyzed by calculating
Green/Red (G/R) ratio in fluorescence microscopic image as well as flow
cytometry. G1 cell cycle arrest was observed in CTL transfer group (G/R
ratio: 0.140.06, n=3) but not in control untreated group (G/R ratio:
0.400.01, n=3) (p=0.014). Infiltrated CTLs and IFN- mRNA in the tumor
peaked at days 3-5 after CTL therapy. G1 arrest and tumor growth
inhibition was abrogated by administration of IFN- neutralizing antibody.
Furthermore, they were also abrogated when B16-fucci expressing IFN-
receptor that lacks intracellular component (B16-fucciIC) was used in
this CTL therapy. These results indicated that IFN- by tumor specific
CTLs were responsible for the G1 cell cycle arrest of B16 melanoma
cells.Importantly, more tumor cells in cell cycle arrest than those
undergo apoptosis were accompanied with the infiltration of CTLs into the
tumor. Though infiltrated CTLs are much less in number compared to tumor
cells, CTLs can regulate tumor growth dominantly by exerting cytostatic
effect on tumor cells (G1 cell cycle arrest) rather than cytocidal effect
(killing them one by one).

