Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endocrine resistant luminal breast cancer xenografts are powerful
models for the analysis of sensitivity to endocrine and everolimus
treatments .


Background. Activation of the PI3K pathway is associated with resistance
to endocrine treatments (ET) in luminal breast cancer (LBC). Everolimus,
an mTOR inhibitor, has been approved in combination with exemestane in
endocrine resistant breast tumors. However, no definite signature of ET
resistance or predictive factors of sensitivity to everolimus (EVE)
treatment have been evidenced so far. In order to further decipher these
molecular patterns, we used patient derived LBC xenografts (LBC-PDX)
treated with various ET and EVE based combinations.Methods. 3 LBC-PDX
(named HBCx-3, HBCx-21 and HBCx-34) were treated with ET during several
months to establish hormono-resistant (HR) xenografts. Both parental and
HR models were treated by tamoxifen, estrogen deprivation, fulvestrant,
EVE alone, and EVE combined with all three ET modalities. Tissue Micro
Arrays from control and treated tumor samples were generated for IHC
analyses. RT-PCR analyses were conducted on genes related to
proliferation, ER, PI3K, IGF-1R and angiogenesis pathways.Results. In
primary PDX, ET showed a poor level of sensitivity for HBCx-3 and a high
and sustained efficacy of ER targeting and/or ER deprivation for HBCx-21
and HBCx-34 tumors. In vivo resistance to ET was confirmed in all HR
variants with tumor growth rates faster than parental xenografts. ER
expression was conserved in HR tumors, but expression of the
ER-responsive genes PS2, PR and MYB was strongly decreased, indicating
impaired ER transcriptional activity. Acquired resistance to tamoxifen
and ovariectomy was also associated to a strong decrease of IGF-1R
signaling in HBCx-21, and was related to higher P-AKT expression,
although P-pS6 was highly expressed in both sensitive and resistant
tumors. Furthermore, in vivo experiments showed that EVE alone was highly
efficient in all models independently of P-AKT expression/PTEN loss. EVE
combined with fulvestrant yielded the most complete and durable tumor
growth inhibition. In HBCx-3, proliferation and pS6 levels were markedly
decreased only by the EVE-fulvestrant combination. In HBCx-21 and HBCx-34
HR models, EVE-based treatments decreased proliferation, expression of
angiogenesis markers, as well as P-pS6 expression with no variation in
(P-)AKT nor (P-)mTOR levels. A high IGF-1R protein expression was found
only in the HBCx-34 TAM-R tumor, which was strongly decreased in the
fulvestrant-treated tumors.Conclusions. LBC-PDX with confirmed HR status
have been established and may serve as models to study alternate
therapies. Of note, in the HBCx-21 and -34 models, activation of the PI3K
pathway is poorly correlated with baseline sensitivity to ET, suggesting
other pathways of resistance. EVE alone is highly efficient in all
settings, and combination with fulvestrant is promising at the in vivo
and molecular levels. Proteomic, genomic and gene expression studies are
ongoing.

