Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monoclonal antibodies derived in neuN mice following successful T
cell therapy of spontaneous breast tumors are specific for tumor
progenitor cells.


There is considerable interest in developing approaches to specifically
target tumor progenitor cells. Our previous results demonstrated that
adoptive transfer of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells primed with a breast cancer
progenitor vaccine inhibited the progression of spontaneous primary
tumors in neuN mice. Interestingly, post-treatment serum but not
pre-treatment serum was reactive with surface molecules on the vaccine
cells. This indicates that the transferred T cells resulted in uptake of
tumor antigens and stimulation of host B cells. To characterize the
antigenic targets, we generated hybridomas from spleen cells derived from
treated mice. Three candidate clones which were strongly reactive with a
neu-negative variant tumor line were subjected to two rounds of limiting
dilution cloning. The mAb prepared from hybridoma #1 (IgG1) and hybridoma
#2 (IgG2b) were each reactive against two independent tumor lines derived
from spontaneous breast tumors in neuN mice (C2D1 and MMC5) when these
cells were maintained in serum-free culture medium as tumorspheres. There
was no reactivity against the same tumor cell lines when cultured as
adherent monolayers in serum-containing medium nor was there reactivity
against 3T3 adherent or tumorsphere cultures. Our previous analysis of
tumorsphere cultures of C2D1 and MMC5 indicated that they express a panel
of markers associated with tumor progenitor cells and have markedly
enhanced per-cell tumorigenicity. Two of these antibodies have been
purified by protein G or Protein A columns and retain binding to
C2D1-tumorsphere cells, but not to C2D1 adherent cells. Importantly,
these two antibodies can also bind to cultured 4T1-tumorsphere cells, an
additional breast cancer cell line arising initially in BALB/c mice.
These studies will allow us to identity corresponding antigens and
determine expression on a broader array of spontaneous breast carcinomas
in neuN mice. The epitopes recognized by these mAbs, which are expressed
on progenitor cells from multiple tumor lines, might have importance as
an immunotherapy target.

