Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide aberration analysis of rare cancer cell populations
derived from formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue.


Introduction. The majority of clinically described patient material
worldwide is available as formalin fixed parafin embedded (FFPE) tissue
blocks. Despite being a cheap and convenient way of archiving tissue
suitable for review under the microscope, FFPE blocks are difficult to
interrogate with modern molecular biology methods due to changes
occurring during the process of fixation, embedding and aging. Genetic
analysis of tumours with limited malignant cell count, like classical
Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) or T-cell/histiocyte-rich B cell lymphoma
(TCHRBCL) is impeded by a bulk mass of non-malignant tumour infiltrating
cells. Laser capture microdissection is currently a method of choise for
rare tumor cell isolation, however it induce serious damage for gDNA,
therefore additional techniques for enrichment are needed to enable
meaningful genome-wide aberration analysis of tumors with low cancer cell
content.Methods. For extraction of nuclei from FFPE blocks of cHL and
TCHRBCL cases enzymatic digestion and mechanical force were utilized.
Pure populations of cancer cell nuclei were isolated by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) based on cancer type-specific
nuclear markers Pax-5, Mum-1, Bcl-6, Ki-67. Array comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH) was utilized for genome-wide aberration
analysis.Results. We have optimized a set of methods to successfully
isolate intact, high quality nuclei from FFPE tissue blocks. Nuclei
retain their antigenicity and, therefore, are suitable for labelling with
frourophore-conjugarted antibodies, which enables flow-sorting based not
only on physical parameters and DNA content, but also on positivity for
highly specific nuclear markers. Tumour nuclei populations from cHL and
TCHRBCL of 70-90% in purity were isolated. DNA extracted from as little
as 500 flow-sorted nuclei was sufficient to generate high-resolution and
reproducible aCGH data.Conclusions. Our proposed methodology allows the
use of tissues in FFPE blocks more widely. Efficient isolation of
malignant cells from the tumour mass was achieved. In the cases where
starting material is scarce and very low number of target nuclei can be
isolated, DNA extraction with improved recovery together with
commercially available whole genome amplification methods enable
genome-wide aberration analysis.

