Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing a first in class of drug to inhibit protein arginine
methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) enzyme dysregulation in glioblastoma
multiforme.


Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is associated with a dismal prognosis
despite intensive multimodal therapy, highlighting the need for novel
therapeutic approaches. Chromatin remodeling complexes and associated
co-repressors such as histone deacetylases (HDAC), DNA methyltransferases
(DNMT) and protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) are involved in
silencing tumor suppressor and regulatory gene expression and may
contribute to glial cell transformation. PRMT5 silences the transcription
of key regulatory genes by symmetric di-methylation (S2Me) of arginine
(R) residues on histone proteins (H4R3 and H3R8) and works more
efficiently when associated with other co-repressor enzymes. We have
previously identified PRMT5 over-expression in GBM cell lines, primary
GBM tumors, and GBM that spontaneously develop in a pre-clinical mouse
model. The degree of PRMT5 over-expression inversely correlated with
survival of GBM patients (r=-0.57, p=0.0001) and correlated with
proliferation of GBM cell lines (r=0.81, pGlioblastoma Multiforme (GBM)
is associated with a dismal prognosis despite intensive multimodal
therapy, highlighting the need for novel therapeutic approaches.
Chromatin remodeling complexes and associated co-repressors such as
histone deacetylases (HDAC), DNA methyltransferases (DNMT) and protein
arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) are involved in silencing tumor
suppressor and regulatory gene expression and may contribute to glial
cell transformation. PRMT5 silences the transcription of key regulatory
genes by symmetric di-methylation (S2Me) of arginine (R) residues on
histone proteins (H4R3 and H3R8) and works more efficiently when
associated with other co-repressor enzymes. We have previously identified
PRMT5 over-expression in GBM cell lines, primary GBM tumors, and GBM that
spontaneously develop in a pre-clinical mouse model. The degree of PRMT5
over-expression inversely correlated with survival of GBM patients
(r=-0.57, p=0.0001) and correlated with proliferation of GBM cell lines
(r=0.81, p<0.0001), PRMT5 works concertedly with HDAC2, methyl-CpG
binding domain protein 2 (MBD2) and DNMT3a to silence genes with
anti-cancer and immune modulatory activities. PRMT5 silending in GBM cell
lines leads to growth arrest, apoptosis and loss of HDAC2, DNMT3a and
PRMT5 co-repressor complex recruitment at chemokine gene promoters. These
findings provide evidence that PRMT5 is a central repressive element
required for maintenance of target gene silencing. Thus, we explored
methods to inhibit PRMT5 activity as a novel experimental therapeutic
strategy for GBM. A rational design of small molecule compounds to
inhibit PRMT5 activity led us to construct an in silico model of the
human PRMT5 catalytic domain based on available homologous crystal
structures. We screened a library of 10,000 compounds and eight small
molecules were identified based on binding energy in the PRMT5 catalytic
site. Enzyme inhibition assays showed that a lead compound (BLL1) was
capable of selectively inhibiting PRMT5 and not PRMT1 or PRMT7 activity
(pGlioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is associated with a dismal prognosis
despite intensive multimodal therapy, highlighting the need for novel
therapeutic approaches. Chromatin remodeling complexes and associated
co-repressors such as histone deacetylases (HDAC), DNA methyltransferases
(DNMT) and protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) are involved in
silencing tumor suppressor and regulatory gene expression and may
contribute to glial cell transformation. PRMT5 silences the transcription
of key regulatory genes by symmetric di-methylation (S2Me) of arginine
(R) residues on histone proteins (H4R3 and H3R8) and works more
efficiently when associated with other co-repressor enzymes. We have
previously identified PRMT5 over-expression in GBM cell lines, primary
GBM tumors, and GBM that spontaneously develop in a pre-clinical mouse
model. The degree of PRMT5 over-expression inversely correlated with
survival of GBM patients (r=-0.57, p=0.0001) and correlated with
proliferation of GBM cell lines (r=0.81, p<0.0001), PRMT5 works
concertedly with HDAC2, methyl-CpG binding domain protein 2 (MBD2) and
DNMT3a to silence genes with anti-cancer and immune modulatory
activities. PRMT5 silending in GBM cell lines leads to growth arrest,
apoptosis and loss of HDAC2, DNMT3a and PRMT5 co-repressor complex
recruitment at chemokine gene promoters. These findings provide evidence
that PRMT5 is a central repressive element required for maintenance of
target gene silencing. Thus, we explored methods to inhibit PRMT5
activity as a novel experimental therapeutic strategy for GBM. A rational
design of small molecule compounds to inhibit PRMT5 activity led us to
construct an in silico model of the human PRMT5 catalytic domain based on
available homologous crystal structures. We screened a library of 10,000
compounds and eight small molecules were identified based on binding
energy in the PRMT5 catalytic site. Enzyme inhibition assays showed that
a lead compound (BLL1) was capable of selectively inhibiting PRMT5 and
not PRMT1 or PRMT7 activity (p<0.0001). BLL1 interfered with maintenance
of S2Me-H4R3 and S2Me-H3R8 in GBM cell lines by western blot and confocal
microscopy. Dose titration experiments with BLL1 showed a dose-dependent
response of inhibition of cellular proliferation in GBM cell lines.
Combination treatment of GBM cells with subtoxic doses of BLL1,
hypomethylating agent 5-azacitidine, and HDAC inhibitor TSA showed
synergistic induction of cell death, loss of the epigenetic mark
S2Me-H4R3, and de-repression of the immune modulating chemokine CXCL10.
Preclinical in vivo studies have shown favorable toxicity and
pharmacokinetic profiles for BLL1. We have successfully developed a first
in class drug to selectively target dysregulated PRMT5 enzymatic activity
in GBM. We are currently developing drugs with improved selectivity and
potency.

