Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intermittent hypoxia selects for increased carcinogenicity in
breast epithelial cells.


The hypoxic regions of solid tumors are hotbeds of drug resistance and
selection. Tumors with highly hypoxic regions correlate with poor
prognosis and increased aggressiveness. The exact molecular mechanisms of
selection have not been elucidated. Recent studies have demonstrated that
reoxygenation causes widespread DNA damage. Additionally, hypoxia
suppresses the DNA damage machinery. Because cells within a solid tumor
do not receive a consistent amount of oxygen, cycles of acute hypoxia and
reoxygenation occur, a phenomenon termed intermittent hypoxia (IH). We
predict that this may lead to widespread unrepaired DNA damage that
consistently selects for populations adapted to survive within harsh
tumor microenvironmental conditions.We tested three breast cell lines -
one aggressive carcinoma (MB 231), one DCIS line, and one non-transformed
epithelial cell line (MCF10A) - for DNA damage and transformation after
multiple cycles of IH. Cells were incubated under 0.2% hypoxia for 16
hours and reoxygenated for 8, for multiple cycles. Multiple clones of
each cell line selected under IH conditions were then isolated. MCF10A
IH-selected clones exhibit increased resistance to etoposide relative to
unselected clones. Two of these clones were selected for additional
phenotyping, and exhibited constituitive carbonic anhydrase 9 expression,
as measured by qRT-PCR. Resistance to methotrexate, docetaxel, and
hypoxia induced cell death was also observed, but growth-factor
independent proliferation was not detected. Additionally, genomic
analyses have revealed loss of the tp53 and e-cadherin loci after
intermittent hypoxia. Consistent with this, we detect loss of p53 and
e-cadherin mRNA levels and anchorage independent growth. These data
increase our understanding of why hypoxia creates more aggressive cancers
and poorer prognoses, and how de novo drug resistance arises.

