Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PELP1 localization as a biomarker for early mammary carcinogenesis
and response to tamoxifen chemoprevention.


Progress in breast cancer prevention is currently limited by our lack of
biological markers to identify which highrisk women will progress to
develop breast cancer and which women will respond to chemoprevention
therapies, such as tamoxifen (Tam). While Tam has proven to be effective
for breast cancer chemoprevention, Tam therapy only reduces the risk of
developing breast cancer by approximately 50%. Therefore, identification
of biomarkers is essential to determine which women will benefit from Tam
chemoprevention.We have been studying the role of PELP1 in early mammary
carcinogenesis and response to Tam chemoprevention. PELP1 subcellular
localization is primarily nuclear in normal mammary epithelium, but it
has been shown to be localized to the cytoplasm of Progress in breast
cancer prevention is currently limited by our lack of biological markers
to identify which highrisk women will progress to develop breast cancer
and which women will respond to chemoprevention therapies, such as
tamoxifen (Tam). While Tam has proven to be effective for breast cancer
chemoprevention, Tam therapy only reduces the risk of developing breast
cancer by approximately 50%. Therefore, identification of biomarkers is
essential to determine which women will benefit from Tam
chemoprevention.We have been studying the role of PELP1 in early mammary
carcinogenesis and response to Tam chemoprevention. PELP1 subcellular
localization is primarily nuclear in normal mammary epithelium, but it
has been shown to be localized to the cytoplasm of <50% of PELP1 positive
breast tumors. Targeting PELP1 to the cytoplasm leads to activation of
non-genomic signaling to ERK1/2 and AKT and promotes Tam-resistance
breast cancer cells. Additionally, it has been shown that transgenic mice
expressing cytoplasmic PELP1 develop mammary gland hyperplasia. We have
developed human mammary epithelial cell (HMEC) lines that express either
vector control, wild-type PELP1 or a mutant of PELP1 in which the nuclear
localization sequence has been mutated and the protein is predominately
cytoplasmic (PELP1-cyto). Data generated using these cells lines
indicates that PELP1-cyto, but not wild-type PELP1, promotes
Tam-resistance. Our data also suggest that Tam treatment results in
non-apoptotic death of HMECs. We found that Tam treatment induces the
expression of LC3, an autophagy marker, and that Tam-induced LC3
expression is blocked in HMECs expressing PELP1-cyto. Together these data
suggest that Tam-induced autophagy may be the mechanism of death in the
HMEC cell lines and that cytoplasmic PELP1 may inhibit autophagic
death.The objective of our current research is to determine if
cytoplasmic PELP1 expression promotes expression of a novel gene
signature that predicts response to Tam chemoprevention. We are currently
testing models of early mammary carcinogenesis (pre-stasis, post-stasis,
and immortal) for their response to Tam in the presence and absence of
cytoplasmic PELP1. Microarray analysis will be performed on RNA from cell
line that represents the earliest point in mammary carcinogenesis in
which we see an effect of PELP1 expression. We expect that these studies
will provide us with gene signatures that can predict cytoplasmic PELP1
expression and Tam resistance in early mammary carcinogenesis. Gene
signatures will then be validated using existing gene array databases.
These studies have the potential to lead to additional targets for
chemoprevention and benefit women who are resistant to Tam
chemoprevention.

