Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of the pro-invasive properties of neuroblastoma-stem
cells by membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase.


Neuroblastoma (NB) is an aggressive childhood cancer that represents the
leading cause of cancer deaths in children. Despite aggressive therapy,
more than half of the children with advanced NB usually die because of
uncontrolled metastatic disease. In order to develop new therapeutic
strategies to limit NB's metastatic potential, it is crucial to identify
key molecular targets governing the invasive process. The study of Cancer
stem cells (CSCs) may be of interest in this regard because after
chemotherapy, CSCs persist in tumors and cause relapse and metastasis. We
had recently demonstrated that CD133 allowed to detect CSCs in NB.
Membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) is important in the
metastatic process and its expression was correlated with unfavourable
outcome in NBs. Our preliminary data had indicated that MT1-MMP was
highly expressed in CD133high NB.The purpose of this study is to
characterize the interaction between CD133 and MT1-MMP in NB and
determinate the role of MT1-MMP in pro-invasive properties of CSCs. We
constructed paraffin-embedded blocks of tissue microarrays (TMA) from 235
patients. In vitro experiments were performed on four established NB cell
lines (SK-N-DZ, SK-N-FI and SK-N-SH and SJNB-10). We performed
immunohistochemical studies on paraffin-embedded TMA sections with two
antibodies (CD133, MT1-MMP). To verify correlation of expression of
MT1-MMP and CD133, we realized western blot and immunofluorescence (IF)
of both proteins in non treated versus treated NB cell lines. CD133high
NB cells were isolated by flow cytometry. CD133high and CD133low NB cells
were grown within a 3D collagen matrix and the cell migration assay was
tested in collagen-coated transwells. All experiments were performed with
or without an anti-MT1-MMP neutralizing antibody or GM6001, a
broad-spectrum MMP inhibitor.To assess the interaction between CD133 and
MT1-MMP, lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation (IP) using an
anti-CD133 antibody, followed by immunodetection with an anti-MT1-MMP
antibody. Finally, we determined which domain of MT1-MMP is involved in
its interaction with CD133. Different dominant negative mutants of
MT1-MMP (catalytically inactive E240A, cytoplasmic domain-deleted C20 and
non-phosphorylatable Y573F) were transfected into NB cells followed by an
IP.There is a correlation between MT1-MMP and CD133 expressions in tumors
of patients and in cell lines. Cells selected after chemotherapy express
both CD133 and MT1-MMP. CD133high cells presented higher migration and
invasion properties than CD133low which were MT1-MMP dependent. IF and IP
showed a colocalization and interaction between CD133 and MT1-MMP. The
cytoplasmic domain of MT1-MMP seems to be responsible for the interaction
with CD133.These results contribute to a better understanding CSCs
properties in NB and may be of great interest to improve new therapeutic
strategies.

