Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of pesticide involvement in breast cancer.


There is considerable evidence linking cumulative and sustained exposure
to estrogens as a key promoter of breast tumor proliferation. Chemicals
with estrogenic activity can bind to the estrogen receptor (ER) to affect
downstream signaling of estrogen-responsive genes. Organochlorines are a
class of chemical pesticides that can act as xenoestrogens to disrupt
normal endocrine function. Mitochondria play a significant role in
maintenance of energy regulation and cellular detoxification and
mitochondrial DNA is sensitive to levels of estrogen. Some members of the
Estrogen Related Receptor (ERR) family are known to interact with hypoxia
inducible factors to modulate mitochondrial response through the mTOR
pathway which is pivotal to cell homeostasis and cellular detoxification.
This study investigates the link between two organochlorine pesticides,
Methoxychlor and Toxaphene, and the cellular effects by examining the
hypothesis that exposure induces differential molecular pathways. Two
breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7 (ER+) and MDA-MB-231 (ER-), and a normal
breast epithelial cell line MCF-10A are used as a model to evaluate the
response to Methoxychlor and Toxaphene treatment. Cytotoxicity studies
established different sensitivities of the two breast cancer cell lines
to pesticides. MCF-7 was more sensitive to both pesticides, which
supports the premise that organochlorines may be acting as endocrine
disruptors. Furthermore, pesticide-resistant clones of MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 were established and compared to their sensitive counterparts.
RNA was collected from cells treated in a hypoxic environment, cells
treated with a high dose pesticide, and cells that had a co-treatment of
hypoxia and pesticide for evaluation of ERR, hypoxic factor expression,
and markers of mTOR pathway. Flow cytometry, RT-PCR and immunoblotting
demonstrated that treatment affected mitosis and mitochondrial function
and we found that ERR and hypoxic factor expression changed in a similar
manner suggesting a common mechanism by pesticide treatment or hypoxic
conditions. These results provide a basis for understanding specific
pesticide-induced molecular mechanisms and their possible relationship to
ER+ and ER- mammary epithelial biology.

