Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the GRB7 interactome in triple-negative breast cancer.


Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) lack expression of Estrogen
Receptor, Progesterone Receptor, and HER2 and, as such, are
non-responsive to currently available targeted therapies. Thus, more
insight is needed into the molecular mechanisms underlying this disease
in order to identify new therapeutic targets. GRB7 is an SH2-domain
containing adaptor protein, which couples upstream activated receptor
tyrosine kinases to downstream signaling intermediates. Most of the
interest in GRB7 has been as a result of its co-amplification with the
HER2 oncogene in HER2-overexpressing breast tumors, in which GRB7/HER2
co-overexpression is associated with a particularly poor prognosis.
However, our recent large study of 764 patients, which included 246 TNBC
cases, revealed that high levels of GRB7 in TNBC patients was the
strongest positive predictor of tumor recurrence in this population.
Additional recent studies in our lab have shown that GRB7 inhibition
reduces cell motility and invasion and promotes apoptosis in TNBC cell
lines and so suggest that GRB7 may be an important therapeutic target in
this disease.Due to the lack of available non-peptide drugs specifically
targeting GRB7, our aim is to identify the signaling pathways that GRB7
couples in TNBC, which may be more easily targetable in breast tumors.
For this purpose, we are analyzing the GRB7-binding partners and the
signaling pathways mediated by GRB7 in TNBC cell lines. We have
established triple-negative MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-436, HCC1806,
HCC1937, Hs578T and BT549 cells stably overexpressing FLAG-GRB7 protein.
So far, we have observed that GRB7 overexpression leads to increased
AKT/mTOR, MAPK/ERK and SAPK/JNK pathways activation, which might explain
the enhanced survival and invasion related to GRB7 activity in TNBC cell
lines.We determined the GRB7-interacting partners in MDA-MB-231 cells by
co-IP and LC-MS/MS. These GRB7 immunoprecipitates include proteins
regulating microtubule dynamics like MAP1B, MAP4, Spectrin, RRBP1, LRPPRC
and CKAP5. We also detected the previously described interaction with
STAU1, and found other proteins that might be also related to stress
granules and mRNA translation control like SERBP1 and IGF2BP1. Some of
the interacting proteins we have found have previously been related to
breast cancer like the splicing factor kinase SRPK1, the transcription
factor chaperone THOC4, CKAP5 and the adaptor protein 14-3-3. Other
interactors are involved in DNA replication like DNA topoisomerase 1 and
XRCC6. We are currently evaluating the roles of these proteins in
triple-negative breast cancer cell lines.This study is funded, in part,
by a postdoctoral fellowship from Fundacion Alfonso Martin Escudero to VC.

