Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome wide hydroxymethylation tested using the HELP-GT assay
shows redistribution in cancer.


Background: 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC) is a recently discovered
epigenetic modification that is altered in cancers. Genome wide assays
for 5-hmC determination are needed as many of the techniques commonly
used to assay 5-methylcytosine (5-mC), including conventional
methyl-sensitive restriction digest and bisulfite sequencing, are
incapable of distinguishing between 5-mC and 5-hmC.Results: Glycosylation
of 5-hmC residues by beta-Glucosyl Transferase (-GT) can make CCGG
residues insensitive to digestion by MspI. We used this premise to modify
the HELP-tagging assay to identify both 5-mC and 5-hmC loci in the
genome. The HELP tagging assay uses massive parallel sequencing to
analyze the cytosine methylation status of 2.1 million CpGs in the
genome. Libraries were generated from genomic DNA digested with HpaII,
MspI and -GT +MspI. Comparison of HpaII and MspI digested samples led to
determination of 5-mC loci, while comparison of -GT +MspI with MspI
digested samples identified 5-hmC residues. This modified HELP-GT assay
allowed multiplexing of 8 libraries per sequencing lane to generate an
average of 6-10 million HpaII/MspI reads per sample with an average depth
of coverage between 6-11x for each CCGG site. A custom bioinformatics
pipeline was created to identify 5-hmC sites that were validated at
global level by LS-MS and at the locus specific level by qRT-PCR of 5-hmC
pulldown DNA. Hydroxymethylation at both promoter and intragenic
locations correlated positively with gene expression. This assay was then
used to analyze 5-hmC profiles of two pancreatic cancer cell lines (Pa03C
and Pa04C) that were compared with pancreatic control cells (HPNE).
Analysis of pancreatic cancer samples revealed striking redistribution of
5-hmC sites in cancer cells with significantly increased 5-hmC at
Promoters, Gene bodies and Transcription factor binding sites. 5-hmC was
also increased at many oncogenic promoters such as GATA6 in pancreatic
cancer and correlated with its overexpression. 5-hmC profiles were also
able to distinguish between cancer and control cells with greater
discrimination (unsupervised hierarchical clustering) when compared to
5-mC patterns.Conclusions: The HELP-GT assay allows a high resolution,
simultaneous determination of 5-hmC and 5-mC loci from small amounts of
DNA with the utilisation of modest sequencing resources. This assay is
able to provide single base pair resolution analysis of over 1 million
sites in the human genome with the use of 1g of genomic DNA.
Redistribution of 5-hmC seen in cancer highlights the importance of
examining this modification in conjugation with conventional methylome
analysis.

