Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of stroma-derived matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in a
model of gastric cancer.


Gastric cancer is the second commonest cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. Within these tumors, it is increasingly recognised that
signaling between myofibroblasts, an important stromal cell type, and
cancer cells results in proliferation, invasion and metastasis. However,
little is known of the range of proteins secreted by stromal cells ie
their secretome, or the contribution of proteases in shaping the
extracellular milieu ie the cancer degradome.Using SILAC labeling and
combined fractional diagonal chromatography (COFRADIC) we identified and
quantified differential abundance and appearance of neo-N-termini (ie
cleavage products) in the secretomes of gastric cancer-associated
myofibroblasts (CAMs) compared with myofibroblasts from adjacent tissue
(ATMs). There was decreased abundance of many proteins in CAM secretomes,
but a small sub-set exhibited increased abundance including matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP) -1 and -3. Cancer-restricted proteolytic
cleavages included cleavage in the prodomains of MMP-1, -2 and -3
consistent with activation. Western blot, enzyme activity and cancer cell
migration assays verified significantly increased abundance of active
MMP-1, -2 and -3 in CAM media.To establish the in vivo relevance of these
findings we utilized a model in which primary gastric CAMs stimulate
growth of MKN45 gastric cancer cells in xenografts in nude mice. MMP
activity was imaged by fluorescence molecular tomography (FMT) employing
MMPSense750 FAST, which produces a fluorescent signal following MMP
cleavage. CAMs enhanced xenograft growth by 6-fold (mean SEM, 29.621.1 vs
196.832.2 mm3 n=12, p=0.004). Using an experimental design that achieved
similar volumes for tumors containing MKN45 cells alone and those
containing MKN45+CAM, FMT assessment of tumor-related MMP activity in
vivo indicated a two-fold increase in CAM-MKN45 xenografts compared with
MKN45 cells alone (0.90.4 vs 1.80.8 fmol/mm3).Stromal cell secretomes
therefore contribute to the remodelling of the cancer cell
microenvironment by activation of MMPs with consequences for cell
migration and tumor growth. This system has potential for in vivo
screening of anti-cancer therapies directed at the inhibition of
stroma-stimulated tumor growth.

