Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel IKK inhibitor, IMD-0354, inhibits ovarian cancer
dissemination by inhibiting VEGF production from cancer cells - the
potential for a novel anti-angiogenic therapy.


Purpose: The prolongation of disease-free survival in patients with
advanced ovarian cancer by the anti-VEGF (vascular endothelial growth
factor) monoclonal antibody (bevacizumab) has been shown in several large
clinical trials, demonstrating that an anti-angiogenic therapy is one of
promising treatment options. However, the effect of bevacizumab on the
overall survival of patients is very limited and it is too expensive to
use for every patient in the world. Therefore, the development of a novel
anti-angiogenic drug composed of low-molecular-weight compounds would be
a powerful armament for the treatment of ovarian cancer. Since it is
known that NF-B signaling promotes VEGF expression, we determined to
identify the potential of a novel IKK inhibitor, IMD-0354, as an
anti-angiogenic drug for ovarian cancer treatment in vitro and in
vivo.Methods: A novel IKK inhibitor, IMD0354, was a generous gift from
IMMD inc. (Tokyo, Japan). The activation of IKK in various ovarian cancer
cell lines was examined by Western Blotting. The effect of IMD-0354 on
ovarian cancer cell lines was analyzed via cell cycle analysis, in vitro
cell proliferation or invasion assay. The inhibitory effect of IMD-0354
against VEGF production from cancer cells was examined by luciferase
activity assay and in vitro tube formation assay. Using a xenograft
model, the inhibitory effect of IMD-0354 against peritoneal dissemination
of ovarian cancer cells was analyzed.Results: The higher dose treatment
of IMD-0354 ( 1 M) caused the G1 arrest of ovarian cancer cells and
subsequently inhibited the cell growths. In contrast, the lower doses of
IMD-0354 ( 100 nM) treatment decreased the expression of VEGF mRNA
transcript levels as well as VEGF promoter activities in a
concentration-dependent manner without impairing cell viabilities. In
SKOV-3ip1 ovarian cancer xenografts, i.p. treatment with IMD-0354 (30
mg/kg daily) significantly reduced tumor burden and the number of
peritoneal implants. Immunohistochemical analysis of inoculated tumors
with anti-CD-31 antibody revealed a marked inhibition of blood vessel
formation by the treatment of IMD-0354.Conclusion: In most ovarian cancer
cells, IKK is constitutively phosphorylated, suggesting NF-B signaling
could be a potential molecular target. A novel IKK inhibitor, IMD-0354,
strongly suppressed VEGF production from ovarian cancer cells and finally
inhibited the cell growth. Accordingly, in an ovarian cancer xenograft
model, the treatment of IMD-0354 significantly inhibited peritoneal
dissemination with a marked reduction of with blood vessel formation.
IMD-0354 is a stable low molecular weight drug and has already
administered safely to humans in other clinical trials. Anti-angiogenic
therapy using this drug has the potential to be an alternative option to
cure of ovarian cancer patients in the future.

