Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benefits of adding an exercise intervention to conventional
immunosuppression in chronic graft versus host disease: insights from a
murine model.


Purpose.- Graft-versus-host-disease (GVHD) is a major complication of
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT), and it is
associated with high morbimortality and decreased patients physical
capacity. We determined the effects of an exercise training program
performed after allo-HSCT on survival, clinical evolution and physical
capacity, using a murine model of chronic GVHD treated with cyclosporine
A.Methods.- BALB/C female mice (aged 8 weeks) were randomly assigned to
an exercise (n=11) or control group (n=12). Allo-HSCT was performed with
donor bone marrow cells and splenocytes from B10.D2 female mice. Mice of
the exercise group performed a moderate-intensity treadmill running
program, and both groups received Cyclosporine A (15 mg/kg/day) during
11wks after transplant. We analyzed survival and total clinical severity
score (which is the sum of five individual scores). We measured mice
basal heart rate as an indicator of physical fitness status before and
after allo-HSCT. We collected blood and serum samples for immune cell
reconstitution at days +21 and +82, and for cytokine analysis (IL2, IL4,
IL6, IL10, IL17a, IFN and TNF) at days -10 and +82. On sacrifice day, we
removed target tissues (liver, intestine, skin) and spleen, for analyzing
the GVHD damage and the immune cell reconstitution respectively, and
skeletal muscles evaluating the muscle adaptations.Results.- Exercise
training resulted in an increased survival (p=0.011) and lesser
deterioration of physical capacity after 11 weeks (p=0.03 for the
between-group comparison) in the exercise group. Regarding disease
clinical course/severity, the exercise intervention induced a significant
group x interaction effect for total severity score (p=0.002), reflecting
a better disease evolution in the exercise group. We found a beneficial
effect in three individual scores: weight (a reliable indicator of the
severity of the disease, p=0.02), spontaneous activity (p=0.001) and
posture (p=0.002). Exercise training reduced blood IL4 and TNF (p=0.025
and p=0.031, respectively) while increasing circulating B220 (p=0.008)
and CD4 lymphocytes (p=0.043). We found no between-group difference in
citrate synthase activity (p=0.322), and a trend towards higher muscle
anabolism (as determined by the ratio of phospho-p70 S6 kinase / p70 S6
kinase) in the exercise compared with the control group
(p=0.083).Conclusion.- A moderate-intensity exercise program mimicking
the widely accepted public health recommendations for physical activity
in humans ( 30min/day) was well tolerated and had significant positive
effects on clinical and biological indicators of chronic GVHD, and
resulted in better survival.

