Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Arg-1+iNOS+ tumor-associated macrophages and nitric
oxide on tumor microenviroment after high-dose irradiation.


Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are a major non-cancer component in
solid tumors and actively participate in remodeling tumor
microenvironment after a variety of treatment; however their functions in
irradiated tumors are not fully clarified. Our previous studies showed
that high-dose irradiation to TRAMP-C1 tumor (a mouse prostate cancer
cell line) decreased micro-vascular density (MVD) and induced CD68+ TAMs
aggregation at avascular hypoxia region. These findings drive us to
examine if these aggregated CD68+ TAMs promote regrowth of irradiated
tumors. The TRAMP-C1 tumor cells were i.m. injection into shank muscle
and irradiated with single-dose 25Gy at size of 4mm diameter. Sutent, a
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, was i.p. injected (20mg/kg per day) to some
mice and served as a model for hypoxia induced by anti-angiogenesis
treatment. Tumors treated with Sutent alone also had decreased MVD and
large amount of avascular hypoxia, but the aggregation of CD68+ TAMs in
avascular hypoxia region was only observed in irradiated tumors, not in
sutent-treated tumors; this finding suggests this aggregation of CD68+
TAMs in hypoxic region is not a universal finding and could be specific
for irradiated tumor microenvironment. The phenotype of TAMs in regions
with and without aggregation was studied and the differences existed.
Arg-1+iNOS TAMs were the dominant phenotype outside the avascular hypoxia
regions and randomly distributed, but presence and accumulation of
Arg-1+iNOS+ TAMs in avascular hypoxia regions was detected. The NOS
inhibitor, L-NAME (500mg/L in drinking water), was therefore used to
block the effects of nitric oxide produced from specific Arg-1+iNOS+ TAMs
accumulated in avascular hypoxia region. The blockade of nitric oxide
delayed tumor regrowth in irradiated but not in control tumors.
Aggregation of TAMs and presence of Arg-1+ iNOS+ TAMs in avascular
hypoxia regions were totally vanished in tumors treated with NOS
inhibitor. In addition, the MVD was further decreased and percentages of
avascular hypoxia regions were increased in the irradiated tumor treated
with NOS inhibitor. These findings suggested that Arg-1+iNOS+TAMs
accumulated in avascular hypoxia regions promote tumor regrowth after
irradiation, and nitric oxide blockage is a potential strategy to improve
the effects of radiotherapy. (This work is supported by grants
101-2314-B-182A-129-MY3 from National Science Council, Taiwan,
CMRPG390943 from Chang Gung Memorial Hospital)

