Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lysophosphatidic acid receptor-3 pathways are involved in
up-regulation of cell migration and invasion activity of human sarcoma
cells.


Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) acts through G-protein coupled transmembrane
receptors, and at least 6 types of LPA receptors (LPARs) have been
identified. They regulate many different cellular responses, such as
proliferation, survival, differentiation, migration, cytoskeletal changes
and calcium influx through these pathways, and may act as a positive or
negative regulator of cancer cell behaviors in a receptor specific manner
which depends on cell types. Gene expression profiles analyzed in rat
sarcoma model showed highly metastatic osteosarcoma cells expressing
abundant LPA receptor-3 (LPAR3) compared to mesenchymal stem cells and
non-metastatic MFH cells. In the current study, we generated
LPAR3-knockdown cells from human fibrosarcoma HT1080 and osteosarcoma HOS
cells by transfection with shRNA plasmids and investigated the
involvement of LPA3 pathway for cell migration and invasion abilities.
Both sarcoma cells expressed through LPAR1 to 5 except for LPAR1 in
osteosarcoma HOS. Firstly, we tested the effects of chemical inhibitors
of downstream effector of G-proteins, and results suggested that
downstream of Gi and Gq protein inhibition suppressed cell motility in
both sarcoma cells, while downstream of G12/13 inhibition did not. Then,
we generated LPAR3 knockdown cells by transfection of shRNA for LPAR3,
which resulted in effective knockdown of the LPAR3 expression in those
cells. Expression of autotaxin, a mediator for LPA production, was
suppressed in HT1080 but not in HOS by shRNA, indicating the difference
of LPA production loop between those cells. LPAR3 knockdown did not
affect cellular growth rates in both sarcoma cells. Moreover, LPA
treatments stimulated cell proliferation in a dose dependent manner even
in LPAR-3 knockdown cells, suggesting that LPA signaling on cell
proliferation could be regulated by other LPAR pathways rather than LPAR3
in these cells. On the contrary, LPAR3-knockdown cells showed
significantly lower cell motility than control cells both in cell
motility assay and in scrape assay. Invasion assay with the
Matrigel-coated filter also showed significantly lower invasion
activities in LPAR3-knockdown HT1080 cells, which originally showed
strong invasive capacity. While, there were no differences observed in
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) -2 and 9 activities on gelatin zymography,
suggesting that the control of invasiveness through LPAR3 signaling
pathways was independently regulated from MMPs. These results suggest
that a part of the abilities for cell migration and invasion in human
sarcoma cells were possibly regulated through the downstream of LPAR3, Gi
and Gq protein signaling pathways, and those pathways could be the
candidates for molecular targeted therapy against sarcomas. Further
elucidation of detailed mechanisms underlying in these complex pathways
will be required for future therapeutic approach.

