Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Obatoclax (GX15-070) and photodynami therapy, in vitro
induction of apoptosis in breast cancer cells.


Breast cancer is the most common malignancy in women. Approximately
one-third of women with breast cancer develop metastases and ultimately
die of the disease. Breast epithelial cell homeostasis requires the
balance of cell proliferation with a type of cell death called apoptosis.
Changes in regulation of apoptosis may result in an increase in cell
numbers. Apoptosis contributes to cell death in tumors treated with
various anticancer agents. Chemo, surgery, radiation and hormone therapy
are the conventional therapies, however some patients that initially
respond to the therapy suffer recurrent disease or become resistant to
the treatment. Chemoresistance often accompanies the progression of
breast cancers from a hormone-dependent, non metastatic,
antiestrogen-sensitive phenotype to a hormone independent, invasive,
metastatic, antiestrogen resistan phenotype. For that reason it is
important to identify novel therapies for breast cancer, recently
photodynamic therapy (PDT) has been used to treat chest wall breast
cancer recurrence. It induced cell death, manly through apoptosis, by
oxidative stress. PDT was approved by United States FDA for the treatment
of esophageal and lung cancer and actinic keratosis. The mechanism of
action relies on a bimodal protocol in which visible light activates
tumor cell-associated photosensitizer to produce reactive oxygen species.
Mitochondrial damage has been suggested as an early event in PDT-mediated
apoptosis, which could result in the release of apoptotic factors which
activate the downstream targets in the apoptotic pathway. It has been
suggested the protective role of the Bcl-2 family members in breast
cancer tumors (Mcl 1 and Bcl-2). Obatoclax is a small molecule that
mimics the BH3 domain of the BH3 only family members, inhibiting the
effect of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 members. General purpose was to evaluate
the pro-apoptotic effect of obatoclax in combination with photodynamic
therapy (PDT) in vitro in breast cancer cells (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231).
Cell lines of breast cancer were cultured in the presence of delta
amino-levulinic acid for 24 h. They were then irradiated to 30 or 60
J/cm2 in the presence or absence of obatoclax. Cell viability was
measured using the colorimetric kit nonradioactive "XTT" (Roche, USA).
Total extracts were obtained at the conditions described above to
evaluate the expression of proteins by Western Blot. We evaluated the
induction of apoptosis by TUNEL.The viability of the cells treated with
obatoclax or PDT alone was dose dependent. PDT-obatoclax combination
treatments showed reduction of viability. Treatment with obatoclax showed
variation in the expression of some proteins. Both treatments in breast
cancer cells induced apoptosis.

