Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of molecular networks that drive astrocytoma initiation
and progression.


High grade astrocytomas, anaplastic astrocytoma and glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) remain incurable in spite of advanced aggressive
treatments including surgery, radiation and chemotherapy. To study
pathways and mechanisms involved in the development of high grade
astrocytomas, we used mouse models wherein key molecular pathways
perturbed in human GBMs were inactivated or induced via Cre-driven adult
astrocyte-specific system. Inhibition of Rb pathway via expression of
T121, a N-terminal fragment of SV40 large T antigen (T: TgGZT121,
GFAP-CreERTM) initiated diffuse grade II astrocytoma formation by 2
months after tamoxifen treatment which in some cases developed to grade
III pathology 1.5 year after induction. Activation of KRas pathway (TR:
TgGZT121, Kras+/lsl-G12D, GFAP-CreERTM) facilitated progression to grade
III anaplastic astrocytoma tumor masses 4-5 months post induction which
in a few cases developed to grade IV glioblastoma with some features of
human disease. Additional PTEN loss or haploinsufficiency (TRPhet:
TgGZT121, Kras+/lsl-G12D, PTEN+/fl, GFAP-CreERTM; TRPnull: TgGZT121,
Kras+/lsl-G12D, PTENfl/fl, GFAP-CreERTM) led to rapid development of
glioblastoma with characteristic features of angiogenesis and necrosis
observed in human disease. Transcriptome analyses of GBM in our mouse
models showed concordance with highly aggressive mesenchymal and
proneural subclasses.To identify disease-specific gene networks involved
in astrocytoma initiation and progression, we analyzed more than 300
brain samples from tamoxifen-induced T, TR, TRPhet and TRPnull mice and
corresponding controls at different time points after induction for gene
and miRNA expression by microarray and Nanostring technology. The genes
that were induced early and gradually increased in expression with tumor
grade belonged to several key molecular networks: DNA replication and
repair, cell division and chromosome transmission fidelity, cell cycle
progression, metabolism, and pathways important for embryonic stem cell
biology. Pathways significantly induced at later stages of disease
(grades III-IV) included Notch and Wnt signaling, inflammatory response
genes, p53 signaling, and RNA processing. Significantly downregulated
pathways were related to neuronal development and function. We have
confirmed expression of several candidate genes in mouse tumor samples
and cell lines derived from low and high grade tumors. Currently we are
investigating potential role of the selected candidates in astrocytoma
development by in vitro and in vivo functional analysis. In summary, we
utilized mouse models to determine global molecular changes during
astrocytoma initiation and progression to high grade. These studies are
important for understanding the mechanisms of the disease and may
facilitate the development of new therapies.

