Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Np63 promotes neuroblastoma by regulating tumor angiogenesis.


Background: The tumor suppressor gene p63 and its family members p53/p73
have been described as critical determinants of tumorigenesis. Np63, a
splice variant of p63 lacking the N-terminal transactivation domain, is
thought to antagonize the transcriptional regulation of the p53, p63 and
p73 target genes and blocks their tumor suppressor activity.
Overexpression of Np63 has been observed in a number of adult human
cancers, suggesting a role of this isoform in tumor formation. While some
studies have proposed that Np63 might simply inhibit p53 function within
cells, leading to malignant transformation, we found that this model is
challenged by the lack of consistent correlation between p53 mutation and
Np63 expression suggesting that Np63 might possess a gain of
function.Methods: Since expression of Np63 isoforms in primary tumors has
been shown to correlate with poor prognosis, we attempted to analyze
their relationships with tumor angiogenesis. To test whether
overexpression of oncogenic Np63 in HEK-293T cells can stimulate tube
formation in endothelial cells using HUVEC tube formation assay. Further,
we performed gene affymetrix as well as protein micro array analysis in
primary cells compared to cells overexpressed Np63 isoforms. In addition,
we used siRNA techniques to verify any potential role of Np63 isoforms in
tumor angiogenesis in vitro as well as in vivo experiments.Results: We
found that overexpression of the oncogenic isoform of p53 family member
Np63 in HEK-293T cells resulted in stimulation of tubular structures in
HUVEC cells. As 293T cells lack functional p53, these results strongly
suggest a gain of function for Np63. In addition, we found that Np63 is
overexpressed in neuroblastoma and Np63 overexpression results in
increasing secretion of the inflammatory cytokines interleukin-6 (IL-6)
and -8 (IL-8) leading to elevated phosphorylation of STAT-3. Our further
analysis showed that elevated phosphorylation of STAT-3 induced
stabilization of HIF-1 protein resulting in VEGF secretion.Conclusions:
We found that Np63 is overexpressed in neuroblastoma and resulted in
elevated secretion of the inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and -8 leading to
increased STAT3 activation. Our further studies showed that elevated Np63
induced stabilization of HIF-1 protein resulting in VEGF secretion in a
p53 independent manner. Importantly, we show in vitro and in vivo
experiments that depletion of Np63 isoform by specific siRNAs
significantly reduced angiogenic potential of Neuroblastoma. In summary,
our study revealed the underlying molecular mechanism how Np63, as a
master transcription factor, modulates tumor angiogenesis in
Neuroblastoma.

