Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JQ-1, a novel c-Myc inhibitor, suppressed cell proliferation and
metabolism through the downregulation of lactate dehydrogenase A in
ovarian cancer cells.


Introduction: Amplification and overexpression of c-Myc is very common in
human cancers, including ovarian cancer. Heightened aerobic glycolysis
(the Warburg effect) is a key metabolic hallmark of cancer and is thought
to be under the control of c-Myc. JQ-1 is a selective small-molecure BET
bromodomain inhibitor, and BET inhibition by JQ-1 leads to the
downregulation of MYC transcription. Thus, JQ-1 functions as a novel
c-Myc inhibitor and has been found to potently suppress tumor growth in
hematologic malignancies. Thus, we aim to assess the impact of JQ-1 on
the proliferation of human ovarian cancer cell lines and further explore
its effects on cellular metabolism, especially the aerobic glycolysis
pathway and its key enzymelactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA).Methods: Three
human ovarian cancer cell lines (HEY and SKOV3) were used in this study.
Cell proliferation was assessed by MTT assay after exposure to JQ-1
(generously provided by the laboratory of Dr. James E. Bradner). Cell
cycle progression was evaluated by Cellometer. Apoptosis was assessed by
Annexin V-FITC assay. Expression of c-Myc, p21, phosphorylated-LDHA and
pan-LDHA were detected by Western blot analysis. Cellular glucose uptake,
ATP production, reactive oxygen species (ROS), LDHA activity and lactate
production were determined by ELISA assay using the corresponding
commercial kits. Mitochondrial membrane potential changes were measured
by JC-1 staining via Cellometer.Results: JQ-1 suppressed cellular
proliferation (IC50 = 360 nM for HEY, p = 0.00001; IC50 = 3500 nM for
SKOV3, p = 0.0007) via G1 cell cycle arrest in the ovarian cancer cell
lines, but only caused moderate apoptosis. Western blot analysis
demonstrated that JQ-1 increased p21 expression and decreased expression
of c-Myc and phosphorylation of LDHA. In parallel, treatment with JQ-1
decreased LDHA activity, glucose uptake, mitochondrial membrane
potential, lactate and ATP production and increased ROS levels in the
ovarian cancer cell lines.Conclusions: We find that targeting c-Myc by
JQ-1 significantly suppresses proliferation through G1 arrest in ovarian
cancer cell lines. In addition, JQ-1 had multiple influences on cancer
metabolism, particularly in the aerobic glycolysis pathway. JQ-1 reduced
both the expression and activity of LDHA, inhibited lactate production
and decreased the energy supply of the ovarian cancer cells. This
evidence suggests that JQ-1 may be a promising targeted therapy for
ovarian cancer through its effects on both cell proliferation and
metabolism.

