Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of alternative compounds by drug screening of HER2
positive breast cancer cell lines.


About 15% of the diagnosed breast cancers have an amplicon in the
17q12-21 region leading to over-expression of the human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2 (HER2). HER2 activates two main downstream pathways,
the PI3K/Akt and the MAPK pathways, that are involved in survival, cell
growth and proliferation. HER2 positive (HER2+) breast cancers are
treated with trastuzumab or lapatinib, which inhibit HER2 by different
molecular mechanisms. However, many patients develop resistance or do not
respond to the treatment. Therefore, identification of alternative
compounds that could replace the current treatment strategies in the
patients who have developed resistance is vital.Thirteen HER2+ breast
cancer cell lines were screened with 22 compounds targeting the EGFR
family pathways, or other key players in the HER2+ breast cancers. The
compounds were printed in seven concentrations in two replicates and all
screens were performed twice. Cell viability was used as an endpoint. In
addition, gene expression profiles, copy number changes and PIK3CA
mutation status, as well as PTEN protein expression levels were analyzed
for the same cell lines.Thirteen compounds induced more than 50% growth
inhibition with the highest concentration for two or more cell lines and
were selected for further analyses. All EGFR-family targeting inhibitors
were more effective in the trastuzumab-responsive than in the
non-responsive cell lines. In addition, several other drugs also
inhibited cell growth more efficiently than trastuzumab.The cell lines
were divided into three groups based on their response to trastuzumab:
responsive, intermediate, and non-responsive. Similarly, three response
groups were seen for lapatinib, but they did, however, not have a
complete overlap with the trastuzumab response groups. These groups were
used to find drugs that are effective in the resistant cell lines.
Interestingly, two mTOR inhibitors, everolimus and temsirolimus, were
most effective in trastuzumab-resistant cell lines. In addition, two
trastuzumab-resistant cell lines were more sensitive to an Akt inhibitor
than the rest of the cell lines. These findings will be further validated
by comparing gene expression and mutation statuses of these cell lines to
others.In conclusion, compound screening revealed several inhibitors that
efficiently decreased cell viability in HER2+ cell lines. Interestingly,
Akt and mTOR inhibitors decreased cell growth in cell lines that did not
respond to the inhibitors currently used in the clinic. To understand the
molecular mechanisms of the drug actions, further studies at the genomic
levels are needed.

