Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S-Glutathionylation of buccal mucosal cell proteins as biomarkers
of oxidative stress.


Many anticancer drugs produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) that directly
or indirectly lead to toxicities. As a conduit to drug development we
have identified S-glutathionylated (post-translational addition of
glutathione to susceptible cysteine residues) serine proteinase
inhibitors (serpin's A1 and A3) as plausible biomarkers for drug exposure
in both rodent and human blood. Commercial mouthwashes often contain
redox-altering agents such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and/or ethanol.
Oxidative damage in buccal mucosa cells is associated with etiology of
oral cancers and we hypothesized that these cells may also serve to
provide a surrogate tissue source for biomarker analysis to measure
S-glutathionylated proteins. Using an approved clinical protocol for
exfoliated buccal cell samples, we have identified a number of
S-glutathionylated proteins, including actin, in samples from volunteers
following standard treatments with a commercial mouthwash containing H2O2
(1.5%). Their identities are similar to those discovered using in vitro
experiments with the human buccal cell line TR146. Our current data show
a time and dose-dependent increase in S-glutathionylation of buccal cell
sample profiles in normal volunteers following four days of exposure
dosing to H2O2 containing mouthwash. Increases in protein
S-glutathionylation occurred immediately following exposure and remained
for 30min following treatments. Higher levels of S-glutathionylation were
maintained with each subsequent daily exposure. These increased levels of
S-glutathionylation preceded the transcriptional activation of ROS
sensitive genes, incuding ATF3. The identification of biomarkers that
evaluate the effects of oxidative stress in the oral cavity may define
at-risk populations for oral cancer and may be useful as direct
biomarkers for the impact of drugs on general redox status.

