Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a new assay system for predicting the degree of
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity and the clinical outcome in
patients receiving trastuzumab.


Trastuzumab is widely used in the treatment of HER2-positive breast
cancer. Despite its promising usefulness in the clinical setting, large
differences in the clinical outcomes among patients remain a key issue
among patients treated with trastuzumab. The purpose of this study was to
investigate the inter-individual differences in the occurrence of
trastuzumab-mediated antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity
(ADCC), one of the significant mechanisms underlying the antitumor
activity of trastuzumab, and develop a new system to predict the clinical
effectiveness of trastuzumab.We used the peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) of three healthy volunteers (HVs) to examine the degree of
ADCC by the calcein assay. The ADCC activities of the cells from the
three HVs differed from each other. Then, it was confirmed by other
independent experiments that the inter-individual differences among the
three subjects were consistent and reproducible, regardless of the assay
method and type of target cells used. The consistency and reproducibility
of the inter-individual differences were also confirmed by using PBMCs of
an additional 8 HVs in three independent experiments. To identify
molecular markers that might be correlated with ADCC activity, we adopted
an ex vivo gene expression analysis (Mitsuhashi, Clin Chem 53:148-149,
2007) in which changes in the mRNA expression can be measured
quantitatively. Using this technology, we examined the changes in the
expression of 14 candidate genes of leukocytes in 8 HVs triggered by ex
vivo exposure to heat-aggregated IgG for 4 hr. We found that the increase
(expressed as fold increase (FI)) in the expressions of TNFSF15, IL6 and
CXCL3 were significantly correlated with the ADCC activity (R2= 0.58, R2
= 0.72, R2 = 0.76, respectively). Next, we conducted a prospective
evaluation in 18 patients who were receiving trastuzumab-based
neoadjuvant chemotherapy, to determine whether the FIs in the expressions
of these 14 genes were associated with a pathological complete response
(pCR). Patients who achieved a pCR showed higher FIs in the expressions
of CXCL1, CXCL3, TNFS2 and TNFSF15 than those who did not show a pCR (p =
0.004, p = 0.015, p = 0.0495, and p = 0.014, respectively).This is the
first report of demonstration of the consistent stability of
inter-individual differences in trastuzumab-mediated ADCC activity in
vitro, and of a promising new assay system for predicting the degree of
ADCC and pCR in patients receiving trastuzumab-based neoadjuvant
chemotherapy.

