Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimal drug concentration screening and evaluation in cancer stem
cells & 3D tumor stem cell cultures drug response assays in association
with clinical efficacy for pancreatic cancer stem cell.


Three-dimensional (3D) culture of cancer cell lines has long been
advocated as a better model of the malignant phenotype that is most
closely related to tumorigenicity in vivo. Moreover, new drug development
requires simple in vitro models that resemble the in vivo situation more
in order to select active drugs against solid tumors and to decrease the
use of experimental animals. The induction of chemotherapy or concomitant
chemoradiotherapy has been used to increasingly to improve survival, and
organ preservation. This approach encounters significant morbidity and
mortality. Therefore reliable chemosensitivity assays are needed to
accurately predict the response to chemotherapy and guide the selection
and treatment of cancer patients. The purpose of this study is to examine
and evaluate optimum drug candidates in vitro chemosensitivity on patient
tumor tissues directly in culture and on their Cancer stem cell cultures.
The tumor samples obtained after surgery or biopsy, were placed
immediately in Celprogen Tumor Transportation Media and shipped at 4-8 OC
for processing. Tissues were washed with 1X PBS solution and aseptically
cut into 0.5mm sections and cultured in 6 well tissue culture plates with
an insert pre-coated with ECM. All cancer cell types remain viable and
maintain their native architecture for at least 14 days and incorporated
DNA measured by adding EdU(5-ethynyl-2-deoxyuridine) to the culture. The
efficacy of various therapeutic agents targeting major pathways
(wnt,Notch,PI3K,MAPK,STAT) and chemotherapy agents were tested using DNA
uptake and TUNNEL assay anti-cancer agents was calculated according to
the inhibition index. The same compounds were tested for utilizing the
patient's Pancreatic Cancer Stem Cell Cultures established with
Celprogen's Media and ECM. Expression of PDX-1, SHH, CD24, CD44, CD133,
EpCAM, CBX7, OCT4, SNAIL, SLUG, TWIST, Ki-67, E-cadherin, -catenin and
vimentin were quantified by qPCR or immunocytochemistry per cell culture.
The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is linked to induction of a
stem-cell like phenotype. We cultured the cells in low oxygen since Tumor
hypoxia induces EMT, which induces invasion and metastasis, and is linked
to cancer stem cells (CSCs). Among the 600 compounds tested Gemcitabine,
Taxol, Fluorouracil, Leucovorin, Irinotecan, and Oxaliptin were not
effective against Pancreatic Cancer Stem cell (CSC) but were effective on
tumor cells (differentiated CSCs). We were able to show 6 compounds that
were effective against Pancreatic CSC targeting selected pathways.

