Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytototoxicity and mode of action of extract from of two lichens,
Tuckermannopsis ciliaria (Ach.) Gyelnik and Xanthoparmelia chlorochroa
(Tuck.) Hale against Burkitt's Lymphoma (Raji) cells and the Human colon
cancer (HT-29) cell line.


Natural products from various plants, microorganisms, fungi etc. have
provided considerable value to the pharmaceutical industry over the past
half century. But there still remains a vast potential reservoir of
possible useful therapeutics, yet to be identifed. Among them, lichens
(symbiotic associations between a fungus and an alga and/or a
cyanobacterium), which produce more than a 1000 secondary chemicals. The
United States is home to a diverse assemblage of lichen species. Lichens
play many biological roles; however, their full potential as a source of
anticancer drugs has been largely unexplored. To examine the possible
anticancer role of several lichen species, we assessed the cytotoxic
activity of 17 species collected from various parts of the US. Secondary
compounds of these lichens were extracted with acetone and screened
against Burkitt's Lymphoma cells (Raji) and the human colon cancer cell
line (HT-29). Based on the cytotoxcity of these lichen extracts we
selected two species Tuckermannopsis ciliaris and Xanthoparmelia
chlorochroa for further testing. IC50 values for these two species showed
particular promise - 28.8 and 28.6 g/ml for Raji cells and 60 and 40 g/ml
for HT-29 cells respectively. The viability and cell growth of both cell
lines was significantly reduced by the extracts from these two lichens
but these extracts did not affect the viability and growth of normal
lymphocytes. We performed morphological detection of apoptosis using
Acridine orange and Propidium Iodide. Extracts from both lichens were
found to induce apoptosis in both cancer cell lines when treated with the
concentrations equivalent to the IC50. Cell proliferation of Raji and
HT-29 cells, as measured by 3H-thymidine incorporation, was significantly
reduced in treated cells (P Natural products from various plants,
microorganisms, fungi etc. have provided considerable value to the
pharmaceutical industry over the past half century. But there still
remains a vast potential reservoir of possible useful therapeutics, yet
to be identifed. Among them, lichens (symbiotic associations between a
fungus and an alga and/or a cyanobacterium), which produce more than a
1000 secondary chemicals. The United States is home to a diverse
assemblage of lichen species. Lichens play many biological roles;
however, their full potential as a source of anticancer drugs has been
largely unexplored. To examine the possible anticancer role of several
lichen species, we assessed the cytotoxic activity of 17 species
collected from various parts of the US. Secondary compounds of these
lichens were extracted with acetone and screened against Burkitt's
Lymphoma cells (Raji) and the human colon cancer cell line (HT-29). Based
on the cytotoxcity of these lichen extracts we selected two species
Tuckermannopsis ciliaris and Xanthoparmelia chlorochroa for further
testing. IC50 values for these two species showed particular promise -
28.8 and 28.6 g/ml for Raji cells and 60 and 40 g/ml for HT-29 cells
respectively. The viability and cell growth of both cell lines was
significantly reduced by the extracts from these two lichens but these
extracts did not affect the viability and growth of normal lymphocytes.
We performed morphological detection of apoptosis using Acridine orange
and Propidium Iodide. Extracts from both lichens were found to induce
apoptosis in both cancer cell lines when treated with the concentrations
equivalent to the IC50. Cell proliferation of Raji and HT-29 cells, as
measured by 3H-thymidine incorporation, was significantly reduced in
treated cells (P <0.05) over 24 hours as compared with controls. To
further investigate apoptosis we measured DNA fragmentation using gel
electrophoresis. Within 24 hours of treatment, there was partial DNA
degradation. Using flow cytometry, it was discovered that extracts from
both lichens arrested cell-cycle progression in S phase. Using RT-PCR, it
was found that the p53 gene was up-regulated in the treated cells during
G1 phase while the DNA repair enzyme Thymidine kinase 1 (TK1) was down
regulated.In conclusion, extracts from T. ciliaris and X. chlorochroa
were both cytotoxic and induced apoptosis in cancer cells but not in
normal cells. Hence extracts from these two lichens could hold potential
as a non-toxic anticancer therapy. However, more research is required to
further elucidate the molecular mechanisms behind these preliminary
findings.

