Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kidney injury molecule-1: a novel therapeutic target in renal cell
carcinoma.


Background. Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is characterized by lack of early
warning signs, diverse clinical manifestations, absence of a reliable
diagnostic and predictive biomarker, and resistance to targeted therapy.
Thus, novel approaches for diagnosis, management and treatment of RCC are
urgently needed. Kidney Injury Molecule-1 (KIM-1) is not expressed in
normal kidney tissues but markedly up-regulated in dedifferentiated
proximal tubular epithelial cells following renal injury. We demonstrated
that KIM-1 is expressed ubiquitoulsy by both primary and metastatic
lesions of clear cell and papillary renal cell carcinoma, while barely
detectable in other subtypes of RCC. Additionally, the ectodomain of
KIM-1 is cleaved by matrix metalloproteinases and sheds into the
surrounding milieu.Methods. KIM-1 was stably transfected in immortalized
renal tubular epithelial cells (LLC-PK1, gain-of-function) and KIM-1 was
downmodulated in RCC cell lines (loss-of-function) using a siRNA
lentiviral approach. KIM-1 function was assessed using these two
systems.Results. Stable expression of KIM-1 in non-malignant renal
epithelial cells increased cell proliferation, migration and invasion
potential, induced anchorage independent growth, and increased the
secretion of tumor promoting and angiogenic factors including VEGF, Ang2,
TGF beta and IL-6 (PK1-KIM-1); while depletion of KIM-1 in RCC cells led
to G1 cell cycle arrest phase and senescence. Recently, we and others
have demonstrated that KIM-1 is a phosphatildyl serine receptor and the
expression of KIM-1 converts a normal epithelial cell into a semi
professional phagocyte and facilitates the removal of apoptotic and
necrotic cells by recognizing phosphotidyl serine (PS) on their cell
surface. Our data suggests that during this process, tumor epithelial
cells undergo reprogramming and secrete and activate cytokines involved
in cell survival and angiogenesis programs.Conclusions. The present study
shows that KIM-1-expression promotes tumorigenesis primarily by two
distinct mechanisms: i) by directly conferring oncogenic properties to
renal epithelial cells; ii) by resulting in production of a variety of
chemokines and cytokines that support tumor progression and angiogenesis.
We believe that our findings can significantly contribute to the
development of novel therapeutic apporaches and in the advancement of
management strategies in RCC and help reduce associated mortality and
morbidity.Citation Format: Venkata Sabbisetti, Rupal Bhatt, Swetha
Ramadesikan, Joseph Bonventre. Kidney injury molecule-1: a novel
therapeutic target in renal cell carcinoma. [abstract]. In: Proceedings
of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer
Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer
Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5195. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5195

