Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of T-cell protein tyrosine phosphatase (TC-PTP) in
UVB-induced epidermal cell proliferation and survival.


Ultraviolet (UV) radiation is the primary cause of human skin cancer.
Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) is one of the
key regulators of epidermal cell survival and proliferation during the
development of UV-induced skin cancer. We have previously shown that
T-cell protein tyrosine phosphatase (TC-PTP) contributes to the rapid
dephosphorylation /deactivation of Stat3 in response to UVB irradiation
in keratinocytes. In the current work, we investigated the functional
role of TC-PTP in keratinocyte survival and proliferation following UVB
exposure. Knockdown of TC-PTP in mouse keratinocytes using siRNA
significantly reduced apoptosis following UVB irradiation in comparison
with control keratinocytes as evidenced by the decreased levels of
activated caspase-3 and PARP cleavage. This reduction corresponded with
an increased level of phososphorylated Stat3 in TC-PTP-deficient
keratinocytes. Knockdown of TC-PTP in keratinocytes also significantly
increased cell proliferation following UVB irradiation compared with
control keratinocytes. Similar with these results, overexpression of
TC-PTP in keratinocytes significantly increased apoptosis and decreased
cell proliferation in response to UVB irradiation compared with control
keratinocytes, which corresponded with a decreased level of
phosphorylated Stat3. Further studies using TC-PTP-deficient keratinocyte
cell lines showed that cell viability was increased in TC-PTP-deficient
cells following UVB irradiation. Treatment of TC-PTP-deficient
keratinocytes with specific Stat3 inhibitor, STA21 significantly reduced
cell viability, upon UVB exposure in comparison with untreated
TC-PTP-deficient keratinocytes, which suggests that the effect of TC-PTP
on cell viability is mediated by Stat3 dephosphorylation. Combined, our
results indicated that TC-PTP plays an important role in the regulation
of keratinocyte proliferation and survival after UVB exposure via
modulation of Stat3 signaling. Furthermore, these results suggest that
TC-PTP may be a novel potential target for the prevention of UVB-induced
skin cancer.

