Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High EGFR gene copy number predicts poor outcome in
triple-negative breast cancer.


INTRODUCTION: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is frequently
expressed in triple-negative breast cancer and is emerging as a new
therapeutic target. However, the rate of EGFR gene copy number alteration
and mutation has been reported to be quite variable and their prognostic
significance is poorly defined in triple-negative breast cancer.METHOD:
We examined EGFR protein expression, gene copy number alteration and
mutation in 150 cases of tripe-negative breast cancer and correlated
their findings with clinical outcome of the patients. EGFR protein
expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry using whole tissue
sections and EGFR copy number alteration was assessed by dual-color
fluorescence in situ hybridization using tissue microarrays. EGFR
mutation analysis was performed by polymerase chain reaction of exon 18
to 21 of EGFR gene and direct sequencing of PCR products.RESULT: EGFR
protein was expressed in 117 of 150 cases (78.0%). High EGFR gene copy
number was found in 33.3% of the cases (amplification in 2.0% and high
polysomy in 31.3%). Five EGFR mutations were detected in 4 of 150 cases
(2.7%) with G719A in exon 18 (n=1), V786M in exon 20 (n=1) and L858R in
exon 21 (n=3). One case had two mutations (G719A and L858R). High EGFR
copy number, but not EGFR mutation, was correlated with EGFR protein
over-expression. In survival analyses, high EGFR copy number gain was
found to be a poor prognostic factor for relapse-free survival (p=0.046),
especially for metastasis-free survival (p=0.016).CONCLUSION: EGFR
mutation is found to be a rare event in triple-negative breast cancer.
However, high EGFR copy number is relatively frequent and is associated
with poor clinical outcome in triple-negative breast cancer, suggesting
that evaluation of EGFR gene copy number is beneficial for the prediction
of outcome in patients with triple-negative breast cancer and selection
of the patients for anti-EGFR targeted therapy.

