Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemoresistance is induced by butyrate in colon cancer cells.


Purpose.Butyric acid is a short chain fatty acid produced naturally by
fermentation of dietary fiber in the colonic mucosa. It is known to play
an important role in preventing the initiation and the progression of
colon cancer by suppressing the proliferation of cancer cells. However,
some colon cancer still develops and progresses to a more malignant and
chemoresistant one despite of the presence of butyric acid. The present
study was undertaken to investigate a possibility of butyrate-involved
mechanism by which the colon cancer cells acquire resistance to
chemotherapeutic drugs.Methods.Human HCT116 colon cancer cells were
exposed to progressively increasing concentrations of butyrate for three
months to establish a colon cancer cell line with acquired resistance to
butyrate. After obtaining butyrate-resistant cells, the sensitivity
against multiple chemotherapeutic drugs were compared between parental
and butyrate-resistant cells. The expression of proteins related to
chemotherapeutic response was also compared by immunoblotting
analysis.Results.Butyrate-resistant HCT116 cancer cell lines could be
established by culturing cells in the presence of butyrate up to 0.8 mM
concentration. The concentrations inhibiting the cell growth by 50%
(IC50) of butyrate was 0.62 and 4.56 mM in parental and
butyrate-resistant HCT116 cells. Butyrate-resistant HCT116 cells were
also resistant to widely used chemotherapeutic drugs: the IC50 after
paclitaxel, doxorubicin or 5-FU treatment were 2.10-, 3.98- and 1.6-fold
higher in butyrateresistant cells compared with parental cells. The
expression of multidrug resistance-related proteins that function as drug
efflux pumps such as P-glycoprotein and the multidrug
resistance-associated protein 1 were not changed at protein level. Among
the apoptosis-involved proteins, the expression of anti-apoptotic BcL-2
protein was increased while that of proapoptotic BAD protein was reduced
in butyrate-resistant cells, suggesting that the above chemoresistance
was associated with cellular resistance to apoptosis.Conclusion.Our data
herein suggests that the colon cancer cell grown in the presence of
butyric acid may acquire resistance to apoptotic cell death and thus lead
to resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs.

