Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduced expression of CYLD is an independent prognostic factor in
breast cancer and confers treatment resistance and migratory activity in
vitro.


Background: CYLD was originally identified as a tumor suppressor that is
mutated in familial cylindromatosis. CYLD has deubiquitinase activity and
can negatively regulate NF-B pathways. Recent study has revealed that
CYLD plays important roles in tumor progression as well as immune
response and osteoclastogenesis. CYLD loss of function has been
associated with several tumors. Despite the broad relevance of CYLD to
various tumors, its clinical and biological significances in breast
cancer are still largely unknown.Materials and Methods: We assessed CYLD
expression in 171 primary breast cancer tissues by immunohistochemistry
and examined the correlations with CYLD expression and
clinicopathological factors as well as patients prognosis. In addition,
we investigated effects of CYLD knockdown by using siRNA on malignant
state in breast cancer cell lines.Results: Our immunohistochemical
analysis revealed a significant correlation between loss of CYLD
expression and poor patients disease free survival (log-rank, p = 0.004),
particularly in luminal and triple negative breast cancer patients.
Multivariate analysis revealed that loss of CYLD expression was an
independent poor prognosis factor (Hazard ratio 2.95, 95% CI 1.20 - 7.98,
p = 0.02) in addition to hormone receptor expression status. Loss of CYLD
expression correlated with high nuclear grade but not hormone and HER2
status.Consistent with our clinical data, repression of CYLD increased
CD44 high/ CD24 low cancer stem-like cell population with acquisition of
resistance to apoptosis induced by conventional therapy in MDA-MB-231
cells. Moreover, CYLD knockdown promoted migration through downregulation
of Maspin which is a potent suppressor of breast cancer
metastasis.Conclusions: CYLD expression was an independent prognostic
factor in primary breast cancer. Reduced CYLD function may promote breast
cancer progression and treatment resistance.

