Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and in vivo evaluation of dasatinib and imatinib on
physiological parameters of pulmonary arterial hypertension .


Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), defined by increase in mean
pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP), results from occlusion or
vasoconstriction of the pulmonary veins and can lead to progressive right
ventricular failure. The tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) imatinib,
indicated for chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is being investigated as
a potential treatment for PAH, due to its anti-vasoproliferative
properties. However, the TKI dasatinib also used for CML is associated
with PAH in a small percentage of heavily pre-treated patients although
partial or complete reversibility is seen after discontinuation of
treatment. Despite the different kinase profiles, studies in rat models
of PAH have shown that both TKIs are equally efficacious in reversing
functional and structural PAH-related changes. Therefore, nonclinical in
vivo (SD rat) and in vitro (human pulmonary artery endothelial
cells/smooth muscle cells [hPAEC/hPASM) studies evaluating direct effects
of the two TKIs were conducted to understand the potential mechanistic
differences for the apparently different clinical effect.The in vivo
study explored direct effects of vehicle (80 mM citric acid; control),
clinically relevant doses of imatinib and dasatinib (30 or 8 mg/kg/day,
oral) and monocrotaline (single i.p. dose, 70 mg/kg; positive control) on
PAH-related pulmonary changes in rats (1-month treatment). Monocrotaline
reduced nitric oxide (NO; vasodilation) and increased endothelin-1 (ET-1;
vasoconstriction) levels in plasma, induced structural changes
(perivascular inflammation, EC injury and SMC proliferation) in PA and
lungs, and increased (2-5 control) systolic and diastolic PAP and right
ventricular pressure. In contrast, both imatinib and dasatinib increased
NO in plasma (2.5), did not any induce PAH-related structural changes (PA
or lungs) and did not alter hemodynamic function compared to controls.
The in vitro hPAEC/PASM co-culture model demonstrated that imatinib and
dasatinib at clinically relevant (Cmax) concentrations increased NO and
decreased ET-1 protein and mRNA.Our results demonstrate that dasatinib,
as imatinib, does not have the potential to directly induce PAH-related
changes in vivo or in vitro. In addition, both molecules induce
biochemical changes in vivo and in vitro consistent with a protective
effect on PAP.Citation Format: Mausumee Guha, James Hennan, Julia Li,
Damir Simic, Jochen Woiche, Bethany Baumgart, Thomas Sanderson, Michael
Graziano, Roderick Bunch. In vitro and in vivo evaluation of dasatinib
and imatinib on physiological parameters of pulmonary arterial
hypertension . [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of
the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington,
DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr
2426. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2426

