Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Statin induced apoptosis in human melanoma cells is prevented by
inhibition of caspase 2 and translational activity.


Background: Statins may trigger apoptosis in tumour cells in vitro and,
particularly, melanoma cells are susceptible to statin induced apoptosis.
Lipophilic statins (e.g. Atorvastatin, Simvastatin) induce strong caspase
3 activation after 48h of treatment, whereas hydrophilic statins (e.g.
Pravastatin, Rosuvastatin) do not trigger caspase activation. Recently,
we demonstrated the presence of an autocrine amplification loop which
increases apoptosis by a caspase 8 dependent pathway after treatment with
lipophilic statins (Minichsdorfer and Hohenegger, Br J Ph 2009). It is
known that activation of caspase 2 may prime melanoma cells for death
receptor induced apoptosis, however, although an association between
caspase 2 activation and RhoB upregulation was shown, the significance of
this interaction is still not clear.Methods: We investigated the activity
of caspase 2, 3 and 8 in A375 and 518A2 human metastatic melanoma cells
after statin treatment in the presence and absence of a caspase 2
inhibitor (Z-VDVAD-FMK) or cycloheximide by cleavage of specific
fluorescent caspase substrates. Upregulation of RhoB after statin
treatment as well as the influence of the co-treatment with the
isoprenoids farnesylpyrophosphate (FPP) or geranylgeranylpyrophosphate
(GGPP) was studied by Western blot.Results: Exposure of these cells to
simvastatin led to increased caspase 2 activation which is abrogated by
co-application of the caspase 2 inhibitor Z-VDVAD-FMK. Moreover,
treatment with Z-VDVAD-FMK also prevented caspase 8 and caspase 3
activation. We could show that production of an autocrine factor needs an
intact translation machinery. Inhibition of translation by
co-administration of cycloheximide prevented apoptotic morphological
changes as well as caspase 3 and caspase 8 activation in A375 and 518A2
cells. Since caspase 2 may interact with RhoB, we also investigated the
effect of statin treatment on RhoB expression and observed an
upregulation of RhoB which was inhibited by the addition of cycloheximide
in both cell lines. However, isoprenoids were not able to reverse RhoB
upregulation or PARP cleavage in 518A2 cells.Conclusion: Overall, our
data provide evidence for an important role of caspase 2 in statin
induced apoptosis of 2 human metastatic melanoma cell lines. These
findings may help to understand the function of caspase 2 in the
induction of apoptosis. Moreover, we observed upregulation of RhoB
following statin treatment in these cell lines. However, additional
experiments are necessary to fully understand the role of RhoB in statin
induced apoptosis.

