Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation, culture and immunophenotyping of live patient-derived
circulating tumor cells.


Metastasis is responsible for the majority of cancer-related deaths. A
limiting step in metastasis is access to circulation, thus circulating
tumor cells (CTCs) should be present in all patients with metastatic
tumors. Tissue biopsy is the standard for diagnosis of carcinoma of
unknown primary (CUP) and other metastatic carcinomas but there is a need
for improved methodology. Circulating tumor cells not only enable
real-time monitoring of cancer progression and response to therapy but
may be utilized to provide personalized treatment for patients by
evaluating the patients own CTCs in culture with therapeutics prior to
systemic administration. Our overall objective is to utilize CTCs to
provide insight into systemic cancer progression and approaches to
therapy, including a CTC blood test as a tool for diagnosis, prognosis
and therapy. We hypothesize that isolation, culture and real-time,
single-cell immunophenotype profiling of CTC populations will inform
diagnosis of tissue of origin, reveal prognostic markers such as
stem-like properties, predict tumor aggressiveness and enable evaluation
of potential therapies. We have been developing a post-Veridex CTC
analysis method using multiplexed Q-dot conjugated antibodies for
detection of multiple markers in each single cell within a CTC population
to aid in CUP diagnosis. In parallel, we are developing a flexible micro
spring array (FMSA) size-based CTC enrichment protocol and other
approaches for capturing, culturing and immunophenotyping live CTCs. We
have demonstrated that as few as 20 cancer cells spiked into blood may be
captured with the FMSA device and grown into the millions of cells
necessary for evaluating potential therapies. Due to the challenges of
growing patient-derived tumor cells in culture, minimal progress has been
made in this area. Cells captured from a patient with adenocarcinoma of
unknown primary that have proliferated in culture on an FMSA device are
being be evaluated for CK8,18 expression to identify putative CTCs.
Utilizing an alternate approach, we have successfully captured and
cultured CK8,18 positive and CD45 negative putative CTCs from the blood
of a colorectal cancer patient. In addition to developing our approach
for diagnosis of tissue of origin, we will utilize the FMSA device and
other approaches for isolating live CTCs to study the biological
properties of these cells in the context of metastatic spread. Successful
application of our protocol to CTCs in patient samples is expected to
provide a noninvasive, relatively quick and inexpensive blood test that
can be both diagnostic and prognostic, and provide a platform for
personalized therapeutic strategies. Circulating tumor cells may provide
insight into the mechanism of systemic cancer progression, the
characteristics of metastatic founder cells and changes within these
cells as cancer progresses, thereby impacting the efficacy and evaluation
of cancer therapy.

