Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Honokiol affects stem cell viability in part through suppression
of Hippo signaling pathway.


Background: Despite therapeutic advances, colon cancer remains the second
leading cause of death in the United States. Cancer stem cells are
implicated in resistance to radiation and chemotherapy. Honokiol is a
biphenolic compound that has been used in the traditional Chinese
Medicine for treating various ailments. The current study is designed to
determine whether honokiol affected colon cancer stem cells and to
identify a mechanism.Method: Colon cancer cell lines HCT116 and SW480 and
normal colon epithelial cells were used in the study. Cell growth was
measured by hexoseaminidase and clonogenicity assays. Apoptosis was
determined by measuring caspase 3/7 activities. Colosphere formation
assay and FACS sorting were used for stem cells. For in vivo effects,
HCT116 xenografts were developed in the flanks of nude mice.
Immunohistochemistry was performed for CD31, stem cell markers and Hippo
signaling proteins.Results: Honokiol induced a significant dose-dependent
inhibition of proliferation and colony formation of the two colon cancer
cell lines, but not that of the normal cells. Honokiol treatment also
induced the colon cancer cells to undergo apoptosis. To demonstrate
honokiol effects on stem cells, we performed colosphere assays. Honokiol
significantly reduced the number and size of colospheres, suggesting
effects on stem cells. In addition, colon cancer stem cell marker
proteins DCLK1, LGR5, CD44 and SOX-9 were also decreased. Further proof
was obtained by flow cytometry analyses, where honokiol reduced the
number of DCLK1+ cells. We next determined whether signaling pathways are
affected, for this, we tested the effect of honokiol on Hippo signaling
pathway, which is an active pathway in intestinal stem cells. Honokiol
significantly decreased the phosphorylation of Hippo pathway proteins
Mst1/2, Lats1/2 and YAP1. Furthermore, honokiol inhibited the expression
of YAP interacting proteins TEAD1, TEAD2, and TEAD4. On the other hand,
ectopic expression of the TEAD1 partially rescued the cells from
honokiol-mediated growth suppression. To determine the effect of honokiol
on tumor growth in vivo, nude mice harboring HCT116 tumor xenografts in
their flanks were administered the compound intraperitoneally every day
for 21 days. Honokiol treatment significantly inhibited tumor xenograft
growth, with notably lower tumor volume and weight. Microvessel density,
based on CD31 staining was also significantly lower in the tumors
following honokiol treatment when compared to controls. Western blot and
immunohistochemistry analyses demonstrated significant inhibition in the
expression of stem marker and Hippo signaling proteins in the
honokiol-treated xenograft tissues.Conclusion: Together, these data
suggest that honokiol is a potent inhibitor of colon cancer that targets
stem cells by inhibiting Hippo signaling pathway.

