Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Examining the role of the mechanical microenvironment in
pancreatic cancer: microrheology studies in 3D tumor models.


A growing body of literature points to the importance of the mechanical
microenvironment, including rheology (rigidity, viscoelastic properties)
of the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM), as a regulator tumor
growth behavior. This is particularly provocative for tumors of the
pancreas, which are noted for profound desomplasia characterized by
exceptionally dense, collagen-rich, hypovascular, fibrous stroma. While
this property of pancreatic tumor stroma has been implicated in drug
resistance, and even explored as a therapeutic target (stromal
depletion), key questions about the role of the mechanical
microenvironment remain unanswered. For example, it is unclear the extent
to which this extreme matrix rigidity is driven by the tumorigenic
program or what its role is in contributing to the notorious
treatment-resistance of these tumors, beyond serving as a physical
barrier to drug penetration. In this study we leverage in vitro 3D
pancreatic tumor-fibroblast co-culture models combined with particle
tracking microrheolgy as a tool to longitudinally probe the mechanical
properties of the surrounding ECM during growth and in response to
exogenous stimuli. Cultures are prepared by embedding pancreatic cancer
cells (PANC-1, AsPC-1 or Capan-1) along with normal human fibroblasts
(MRC-5) and (biologically-inert) fluorescent tracer probes in a collagen
matrix. The Brownian motion of tracer probes obtained by high-speed
digital video microscopy and subsequent offline particle tracking
analysis, is used as a reporter of spatio-temporal changes in the
viscoelastic properties of ECM. This, combined with our previously
introduced high-content quantitative imaging approach for assessment of
growth and treatment response in 3D tumor models comprises a platform for
mapping of interdependent changes in the matrix mechanics and tumor
growth behavior. In this study we correlate changes in matrix stiffness
under normal growth, with and without stromal fibroblasts present as
signaling partners and TGF- stimulation. We further explore local
mechanical effects by comparing groupings of trajectories of probes
proximal and distant from tumor nodules. In ongoing studies we are
examining the impact of traditional chemotherapeutics and photodynamic
therapy (PDT) on modulation of the mechanical microenvironment and
conversely, the impact of ECM rigidity on treatment sensitivity.

