Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ZEB1 maintains self-renewal, invasion and chemoresistance of
glioblastoma stem cells.


Despite intense efforts in basic research and clinical medicine,
glioblastoma remains one of the most lethal types of cancer. In
particular, tumor recurrence after surgical resection, targeted
radiation, and aggressive chemotherapy remains an insurmountable
obstacle. Recurrence has been attributed to residual cancer cells that
re-initiate tumor growth after primary clinical intervention.
Hierarchical attribution of this capacity for tumor (re-)initiation to a
specific cellular subpopulation is one of the hallmarks of the cancer
stem cell hypothesis. In cancers outside the CNS, a considerable overlap
between cancer stem cell phenotypes and Epithelial-Mesenchymal-Transition
(EMT) has been found. EMT is frequently associated with distant spreading
and the generation of secondary tumors. Tumor cells undergoing EMT have a
higher propensity for invasion and therapy resistance, as well as greater
stemness potential. Transcription factors regulating EMT, including ZEB1
(zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1), have been found to regulate
typical stem cell-associated genes. We therefore tested whether the
EMT-associated transcription factor ZEB1 may coordinate mechanisms of
invasion, therapy resistance and recurrence in glioblastoma.ZEB1 is
preferentially expressed at the tumor invasion front, and its knockdown
results in a dramatic reduction of tumorigenicity, invasion and increased
sensitivity to the chemotherapeutic agent Temozolomide (Temodar, TMZ). We
found that ZEB1 indirectly controls expression of the
chemoresistance-mediating enzyme MGMT (O-6-Methylguanine DNA
Methyltransferase), as well as cell-cell adhesion and stemness pathways,
thus linking chemoresistance and invasion in brain cancer stem
cells.Moreover, ZEB1 expression in glioblastoma patients is predictive of
shorter survival and poor TMZ response. These results indicate that
invasive glioblastoma cells are particularly sheltered from current
therapeutic approaches, rendering them likely candidates for tumor
recurrence. This offers a potential novel model for GBM recurrence, and a
potential therapeutic target.

