Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated germline analysis platform for comprehensive
clinical cancer genomics.


Background: In order to apply massively parallel sequencing for use in
clinical oncology, we have created algorithms to identify clinically
actionable somatic alterations within an individual patient's tumor
exome. To fully implement comprehensive clinical sequencing for cancer
patients, a parallel platform for analyzing germline genetic variants is
necessary to identify 1) clinically relevant cancer risk, non-cancer
disease risk, and pharmacogenomics variants, and 2) germline variants
related to clinically relevant somatic alterations.Methods: Databases
consisting of genes known to undergo germline alterations that may inform
disease risk or pharmacogenomic variation were created by review of
publically available resources (e.g. Cancer Gene Census) and augmented
with literature review and expert opinion. Whole exome sequencing of
normal DNA from prospectively acquired individual patient germline
samples was performed using established Broad Institute pipelines for
hybrid capture and variant calling. Population frequencies of all
non-synonymous variants represented in our clinical germline databases
were assessed with Exome Variant Server data, and all variants were
cross-referenced with published lists of possibly pathogenic germline
variants (e.g. HGMD). Variants with a population frequency of less than
1% that were also present in our clinical germline databases were
assigned for high priority review. Integration of germline alterations
with somatic data was implemented by computationally searching for
germline non-synonymous variants in somatically altered clinically
actionable cancer genes or pathways of such genes. All findings were
incorporated into a novel web-based decision support system to maximize
interpretation access for clinical genetic specialists who determined
final classification of the variants.Results: Application of the germline
analysis platform to whole exome sequencing data from twelve
prospectively acquired clinical patient samples identified a median of 7
[range: 4-10] high priority germline variants warranting subsequent
review from among thousands of variants per patient. Integrative analysis
of one patient with EGFR mutant lung adenocarcinoma revealed a
non-synonymous germline variant in EGFR at another site warranting
further exploration.Conclusions: Our germline analysis platform
facilitates prospective clinical interpretation of germline genomic
variants by prioritizing and representing alterations of potential
clinical significance. The platform also integrates germline variants
with clinically actionable somatic alterations for enhanced understanding
of potential disease drivers at the individual patient level.
Implementation of clinical cancer sequencing with germline analyses may
directly impact patient care and deepen our understanding of the role of
germline variants in cancer epidemiology.

