Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of IRE1-XBP1 pathway is a promising therapeutic
application in acute myeloid leukemia.


Background:Survival of cancer cells rely on the unfolded protein response
(UPR) to resist stress triggered by the accumulation of misfolded
proteins within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). IRE1-XBP1 pathway, one of
the most important branches of the UPR, is activated in different types
of cancer. Upon IRE1 activation, the spliced form of XBP1 (XBP1s) is
generated to activate the transcription of many pro-survival genes to
prevent cellular death and relive cellular stress. Blockade of the
IRE1-XBP1 pathway can thereby be considered as a potential anti-cancer
strategy.Results & Clinical relevance:Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the
most common acute leukemia in adults. Here, we first examined the
formation of the XBP1s in leukemia cell lines and AML samples from
patients. Interestingly, spliced XBP1 was detectable in 85 % (22 of 26)
of leukemia cell lines and 66 % (19 of 29) of AML samples from patients.
Compared with normal mononuclear cells from normal individuals, XBP1s was
significantly elevated in AML samples from patients (p=0.0043, n=28) as
measured by QRT-PCR. 2-hydroxy-1-naphthaldehyde (HNA) is a novel
small-molecule inhibitor of the IRE1-XBP1 pathway, which specifically
prevents the splicing of XBP1.HNA blocked both the basal and inducible
(tunicamycin treatment) XBP1s in NB-4 and HL60 AML cells, as well as
leukemic blasts from AML patients. Furthermore, HNA was able to decrease
cellular viability of both AML cell lines (mean IC50=31M, n=8) and AML
samples from patients (mean IC50=35M, n=18). In contrast, HNA had very
low toxicity against normal human marrow mononuclear cells (mean IC50=123
M, n=4). Importantly, HNA caused a significant inhibition (mean IC50=6 M,
n=6) of clonogenic growth in soft agar of AML cells from patients with
different leukemic subtypes. The inhibitory effect trigged by HNA was at
least in part mediated through the induction of important regulatory
genes for apoptosis, G0/G1 cell cycle arrest and downstream targets of
XBP1, namely p53, PARP, p21cip1, p58IPK, CHOP and DNAJB9. Additionally,
the combination of HNA with either arsenic trioxide (As2O3) or bortezomib
exhibited a synergistic anti-proliferative effect against several human
AML cell lines (NB-4 and U-937). Taken together, our results strongly
suggest that inhibition of the IRE1-XBP1 axis is an exciting therapeutic
approach for the treatment of AML.

