Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intervention of chronically-induced human breast cell
carcinogenesis.


The purpose of our study was to investigate the ability of dipyridamole
(DPM)
[2,6-bis(diethanolamino)-4,8-dipiperidinopyrimido-(5,4-d)-pyrimidine] to
intervene in breast cell carcinogenesis induced by chronic exposure to
environmental carcinogens. More than 85% of breast cancers are sporadic
and attributable to long-term exposure to environmental carcinogens
through a multistep and multiyear disease process. Therefore, it is
urgent to identify preventive agents effective in intervention of
cellular carcinogenesis. DPM, an antioxidant and a synthetic inhibitor of
phosphodiesterase, is approved by the Food and Drug Administration to
inhibit platelet aggregation and vasoconstriction. DPM is also able to
enhance the cytotoxicity of anticancer agents, such as cisplatin,
adriamycin, and 5-fluorouracil, in various cell types. However, its
ability to block breast cell carcinogenesis has not been determined.
Using our chronically-induced breast cell carcinogenesis model as a
target system, we found that DPM, at a non-cytotoxic
physiologically-achievable dose of 10 nmol/L, effectively blocked breast
cell carcinogenesis induced by chronic exposure to three unrelated
carcinogens: 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5- b]pyridine (PhIP),
benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P), and
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK). The ability of DPM
to block H-Ras upregulation, thus blocking ERK pathway activation,
reactive oxygen species (ROS) elevation, and DNA damage in each exposure,
may account for its mechanisms in intervention of carcinogenesis induced
by chronic exposures to PhIP. Likewise, DPM's ability to block ROS
elevation and DNA damage may account for its mechanisms in intervention
of carcinogenesis chronically induced by NNK and B[a]P, as well. Our
study revealed, for the first time, the novel ability of DPM to block
breast cell carcinogenesis induced by three unrelated carcinogens. DPM
should be seriously considered as a chemopreventive agent in development
of strategies for reducing the risk of sporadic breast cancer associated
with long-term exposure to environmental carcinogens.

