Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High dietary vitamin D prevents dysplastic lesions in an AOM/DSS
model of colorectal cancer.


Diet and lifestyle have an important impact on the etiology of colorectal
cancer (CRC), one of the leading causes of cancer morbidity and mortality
in Western countries. Epidemiological studies suggest that vitamin D
might have chemopreventive effects.In this study we investigated the
effect of increasing dietary vitamin D3 intake on chemically induced
colorectal tumor development in mice.We fed female C57BL/6J mice with a
diet containing five different vitamin D3 concentrations ranging from 100
to 5000 IU/kg diet and studied the impact of dietary vitamin D3 on the
development of chemically induced colonic dysplasia, a precursor of CRC.
To induce dysplasia, we injected mice once with 10 mg/kg azoxymethane
(AOM) intraperitoneally, followed by three cycles of dextran sodium
sulfate salt (DSS) in the drinking water. Dietary vitamin D3
concentration correlated positively with 25(OH)D3 serum levels (Spearman
Correlation Coefficient (SCC) 0.752, pDiet and lifestyle have an
important impact on the etiology of colorectal cancer (CRC), one of the
leading causes of cancer morbidity and mortality in Western countries.
Epidemiological studies suggest that vitamin D might have chemopreventive
effects.In this study we investigated the effect of increasing dietary
vitamin D3 intake on chemically induced colorectal tumor development in
mice.We fed female C57BL/6J mice with a diet containing five different
vitamin D3 concentrations ranging from 100 to 5000 IU/kg diet and studied
the impact of dietary vitamin D3 on the development of chemically induced
colonic dysplasia, a precursor of CRC. To induce dysplasia, we injected
mice once with 10 mg/kg azoxymethane (AOM) intraperitoneally, followed by
three cycles of dextran sodium sulfate salt (DSS) in the drinking water.
Dietary vitamin D3 concentration correlated positively with 25(OH)D3
serum levels (Spearman Correlation Coefficient (SCC) 0.752, p<0.001).
Both dietary vitamin D3 concentration and serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D3
levels correlated inversely with the dysplasia score (SCC -0.579,
p=0.002; SCC -0.618, p=0.001). Dysplastic regions expressed less vitamin
D receptor while the proliferation marker Ki67 was significantly higher
expressed in regions with high grade dysplasia compared with the
respective normal mucosa of the same colon.Our data show that high
dietary vitamin D3 concentrations reduce the development of chemically
induced precursors of colorectal cancer in mice.

