Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis and biological evaluation of a novel cancer treatment
based on folic acid receptor-targeted, -cyclodextrin-based drug complexes.


Drug targeting is a very active area of research and nano-scaled drug
delivery systems hold tremendous potential for improving the therapeutic
efficacy of neoplasms while the side effects are reduced. The folate
receptor (FR) is highly over-expressed (>90%) on primary and metastatic
human cancers of the ovary, lung, breast, colon, endometrium, kidney, and
brain. Cyclodextrin (CDs) are widely used as functional macrocyclic host
molecules in supramolecular chemistry due to their low cost, water
solubility, and biocompatible properties, along with their substantial
ability to entrap drug molecules within their internal cavity. In this
study, a novel CD-based nanoparticle drug delivery system has been
assembled and investigated for the treatment of FR-positive [FR(+)]
cancer. Water-soluble folic acid (FA)-conjugated CD carriers (FACDs) were
successfully synthesized and the structures were characterized by 1D/2D
NMR (g-COSY, HMBC, and HMQC), UV spectroscopy, FTIR, HR-MALDI-TOF-MS, and
HPLC. Drug complexes of cytotoxic adamatane (Ada) and doxorubicin (Dox)
with FA-conjugated -CD were readily obtained by mixed solvent
precipitation. The host-guest association constant, Ka, was 1,639 M1 as
determined by induced circular dichroism and the hydrophilicity of the
FACDs was greatly enhanced compared to unmodified CD. The interaction of
Ada-Dox with CDs resulted in -CD with an inner-cavity diameter of 7.0 .
The adamantyl group of Ada-Dox also had a diameter of 7 , and it has been
confirmed that the strongest binding occurred between adamantine and -CD,
consistent with the near-perfect match between the cavity and guest
diameter. The conjugation of Dox with FA greatly improved its
cytotoxicity in comparison with the prodrug Ada-Dox and non-targeting
drug complex, N-FACD-Ada-Dox, specifically to FR (+) JAR cells. Sustained
in vitro drug release was seen and delivery of Dox into FR (+) cancer
cells via endocytosis was observed by confocal microscopy. Drug uptake of
the targeted nanoparticles was eightfold greater than that of
non-targeting drug complexes in FR(+) cancer cells. Normal fibroblast
cells exposed to the FA-targeted Dox complexes had lower levels of
reactive oxygen species (ROS), with increased activity of both
glutathione (GSH) and glutathione peroxidase (GPx), indicating a reduced
potential for Dox cardiotoxicity. In conclusion, we have reported the
successful synthesis and purification of novel water soluble, folic
acid-conjugated -cyclodextrin-based targeting drug supramolecules with
adamantine-doxorubicin as the therapeutic cargo. The FR-targeted drug
complex possesses high drug association and sustained drug release
properties with good biocompatibility and physiological stability.

