Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of EGFR activity reduces AML cell survival via
inhibition of downstream Akt and Erk signaling pathways.


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor erlotinib, has been
shown to induce complete remission of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in two
patients with concurrent lung cancer, suggesting a prominent role for
EGFR in AML. However, EGFR expression analysis in AML is poorly defined
and the role of EGFR in AML is still unclear.In this study, we determined
the EGFR protein expression in different human AML cell lines and studied
the impact of EGFR inhibition by canertinib on the AML cell survival,
proliferation, apoptosis and their downstream signaling routes. Using
flowcytometry, we have shown that total EGFR as well as the
phosphorylated residue Tyr1068 is expressed in five out of the eight AML
cell lines (range of 4.9-46.6% for total and phosphorylated EGFR). EGFR
phosphorylation was found to be induced by EGF stimulation, which could
be prevented by canertinib treatment, showing functional activity and
specificity of the EGFR phosphorylation site. Canertinib was shown to
decrease the AML cell survival sufficiently (at a median IC50 of 6.2 M,
range: 0.9 - 15.2 M canertinib in n=8 AML cell lines) as measured by
WST-1 assays. The lower cell survival was the net result of lower numbers
of mitotic phospho-histone H3 positive cells and an increase in the
number of Annexin V positive cells. Immunoblot analysis revealed that
canertinib treatment (5uM) reduced the phosphorylation of Akt and Erk
intracellular proteins downstream of the EGFR signaling pathway in AML
cells. Long-term canertinib treatment (5uM) showed that downstream
targets were re-activated after 24 hours, which suggest kinomic
reprogramming by alternative escape mechanisms compensating for the loss
of EGFR activity. These findings suggest encouraging possibilities for
targeting EGFR as a therapeutic strategy in AML. Future studies are
necessary to determine the exact mechanism through which EGFR activity
might contribute to AML progression, relapses as well as to interact with
possible escape mechanisms of AML cells.

