Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation techniques for PCA-based gene expression signatures.


Background: Many gene expression signatures exist for measuring the
biological state of a profiled tumor. One way to derive a gene-signature
of a biological event is to perturb cell lines to mimic the event. The
signature is applied to tumor data to predict the magnitude of the
biological effect in tumors. Examples include pathway activation,
metastasis scores, and chemo-resistance. Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) summarizes a gene signature into a score, however many published
gene signatures capture proliferation, rather than the intended process,
as the first PCA component (PC) when applied to tumor datasets Venet et
al. (Venet, 2011, PLoS Comput. Biol.). Determining why this happens and
how this effect can be detected is an important for utilizing these
signatures.Aim: To develop a set of tools to determine if a derived gene
signature works as intended and is robustly represented when applied to a
tumor dataset.Results: Differences observed between a cell line
experiment and tumor data set is a problem of calibration transfer. The
signature is derived on data with controlled variation and then applied
to data often exhibiting much larger variation. PCA is a powerful tool
for summarizing a gene signature into a score, but there are several
pitfalls, particularly when the variation is larger than expected. We
have developed a visual tool for evaluating the application of a
signature, PCA characteristics are measured against thousands of random
gene signatures to determine the significance of the findings. Four key
concepts are measured using this tool. Coherence: Elements of a signature
should be correlated beyond chance; if a common mechanism is measured,
there should be coherence to the gene signature. This is the amount of
variance explained in the first PC. Uniqueness: The general direction of
the data can drive most of the observed signal. A gene signature
possessing a unique direction (relative to the entire dataset) provides
confidence that it is measuring a true effect. Robustness: If a signature
is designed to measure a single biological effect, then this signal
should be sufficiently strong and distinct compared to other signals
within the signature. This is measured by calculating the ratio between
the explained variance of the first and second PCA components.
Transferability. The derived PCA gene signature score should describe the
same biology in the tumor data set as it does in the cell line data. This
can be verified by comparing the cell-line based PCA model with the
tumor-based PCA model. If the sign and relative importance (loadings) of
individual genes are similar between the two PCA models, this is an
indication that the calibration transfer was successful.Conclusions: We
have developed a technique for validating PCA-based gene signatures work
as intended when applied to tumor data. Application of this technique can
identify instances in which signature scores do not represent the desired
biological effect.

