Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of a murine model of Neurofibromatosis Type 2 that
accurately recapitulates the spontaneous development of vestibular and
spinal schwannomas found in NF2 patients.


Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is a genetic disease resulting from
germline loss of the NF2 tumor suppressor gene. The hallmark of NF2 is
hearing and vestibular loss of function in young adults caused by the
development of vestibular schwannomas, which occur bilaterally in nearly
all patients and are associated with homozygous loss of NF2. Individuals
affected with NF2 also acquire schwannomas of other cranial, spinal and
peripheral nerves. Importantly, non-familial schwannomas, the most common
tumor of the peripheral nervous system, are also caused by bi-allelic
loss of NF2 gene function. A major limitation in the identification of
genetic and pharmacologic targets for schwannomas has been the lack of a
robust preclinical model that accurately recapitulates human NF2 disease.
In order to develop a more robust model, we intercrossed a mouse
expressing Cre Recombinase under the control of the 3.9PeriCre promoter
with an Nf2 conditional knockout mouse previously generated by Dr. Marco
Giovannini to conditionally ablate Nf2 in neural crest-derived cell
populations. Histological analysis of the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) and
proximal spinal nerves of 3.9PeriCre+;Nf2flox/flox mice revealed that
intercrossed mice spontaneously develop tumors between 8 and 10 months at
every single spinal level. Microscopic analysis implicated these tumors
as schwannomas, as they display a dense pattern of cellularity consistent
with the established criteria of GEM schwannoma, including S1001
positivity. Quantitation of the DRG volume indicated that 3.9PeriCre+
mice have a statistically significant increase when compared to
3.9PeriCre- littermates. FDG-PET studies corroborated this finding, as
comparative studies showed an increase in the metabolic activity of
paraspinal tumors found in 3.9PeriCre+ mice. Auditory Brainstem Response
testing has revealed that 3.9PeriCre+ mice acquire an age-dependent
increase in hearing threshold by 8 months when compared to age-matched
3.9PeriCre- controls. Histological analysis of Cranial Nerve VIII
confirmed that the hearing loss was directly associated with the
development of vestibular schwannomas. To test for concomitant vestibular
loss of function, three different behavioral studies (contact righting,
trunk curl, and swim) were performed to isolate and test the integrity of
the vestibular sense in 3.9PeriCre;Nf2flox/flox mice. These studies
indicated that 3.9PeriCre+ mice develop vestibular deficits, as all three
studies identified highly significant differences between the two
genotypes. Collectively, these genetically engineered mice acquire a
physiologic phenotype that closely recapitulates important features of
human NF2 disease and provides opportunities for testing putative
therapeutic targets using genetic intercrosses or novel small molecule
inhibitors.

