Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AGR2 is a potential marker for metastatic human oral squamous cell
carcinoma.


Purpose: The mortality of oral cancer, which is a common subtype of human
and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC), is increasing in Taiwan,
Southeast Asia, and eastern countries during the last twenty years.
Averagely, the 5-year survival rate of distant metastasis of oral
carcinoma is less than 30-40%. Prevention of cancer metastasis to distant
organs is one of practical approaches that may reduce the mortality of
patients. This study aims to identify novel metastatic tumor markers for
oral cancer.Experimental Design and Results: A high metastatic
sub-population, HSC-3-5 cells, was divided from human oral cancer HSC-3
by Transwell invasion assay. Our results indicated that HSC-3-5 cells
exhibited higher metastatic capacities due to re-arrangement cytoskeleton
and subsequently epithelial mesenchymal transition transformation in
vitro. In addition, metastatic and tumorigenetic capacities of HSC-3-5
cells were characterized by spontaneous and experimental metastasis
experiments in vivo. The microarray-based gene expression profiles of
HSC-3/HSC-3-5 cells and their corresponded xenografts (orthotropic and
heterotopic) were then performed. Anterior gradient 2 (AGR2), a
pro-oncogenic signaling intermediate in various human cancers, was the
most significantly up-regulated gene in HSC-3-5 cells compared with
HSC-3. Furthermore, overexpression of AGR2 protein was verified in cells,
xenograft animal models, and clinical patient tissues, and it encompassed
positive relation with OSCC metastasis.Conclusions: A high metastatic
sub-population HSC-3-5 cell line derived from human oral cancer HSC-3
cells was divided. HSC-3-5 cells represented higher capacities not only
in metastasis but also in tumorigenesis. According to microarray gene
profiles and immunohistochemistry analysis, the expression of identified
potential biomarker, AGR2, showed positive relationship with tumor
metastasis during oral carcinogenesis.

