Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MAb-PAM4 can differentiate between pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma and chronic pancreatitis.


Background: Due to the asymptomatic nature of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) in its early stages of growth, and its relatively
low incidence, screening methods have not received high attention.
However, with recent studies providing the ability to identify specific
patient groups at high risk for PDAC, a rationale exists for longitudinal
surveillance as a means to improve early detection specifically in these
high-risk settings. Individuals with a family history of PDAC, those
patients with long-standing chronic pancreatitis (CP), patients with
new-onset diabetes who meet certain other conditions, or those with FAMMM
syndrome, etc., could be evaluated on a long-term basis for the detection
of early malignant changes by use of a MAb-PAM4-based immunoassay
procedure.Methods: We have developed and validated (in over 600 patient
specimens) an enzyme immunoassay (EIA) based upon use of MAb-PAM4 for
quantitation of antigen in the serum of patients diagnosed with
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. In addition, the antibody has been used
for immunohistochemical evaluation of malignant, benign, and normal
pancreatic tissues.Results: 71% of patients with confirmed early-stage
disease and 91% with advanced disease were positive by EIA for
circulating PAM4-antigen. Overall specificity was 81% with respect to
benign pancreatic disease. Of 126 patients diagnosed with benign
conditions of the pancreas, 24 (19%) were positive for the PAM4-antigen,
with the majority of these cases being diagnosed with chronic
pancreatitis [18 of 80 positive (23%)], all of whom had surgical
resection performed for severity and/or duration of disease activity. ROC
curve analyses of PAM4 assays revealed a statistically significant
difference between the PDAC and CP groups (PBackground: Due to the
asymptomatic nature of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) in its
early stages of growth, and its relatively low incidence, screening
methods have not received high attention. However, with recent studies
providing the ability to identify specific patient groups at high risk
for PDAC, a rationale exists for longitudinal surveillance as a means to
improve early detection specifically in these high-risk settings.
Individuals with a family history of PDAC, those patients with
long-standing chronic pancreatitis (CP), patients with new-onset diabetes
who meet certain other conditions, or those with FAMMM syndrome, etc.,
could be evaluated on a long-term basis for the detection of early
malignant changes by use of a MAb-PAM4-based immunoassay
procedure.Methods: We have developed and validated (in over 600 patient
specimens) an enzyme immunoassay (EIA) based upon use of MAb-PAM4 for
quantitation of antigen in the serum of patients diagnosed with
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. In addition, the antibody has been used
for immunohistochemical evaluation of malignant, benign, and normal
pancreatic tissues.Results: 71% of patients with confirmed early-stage
disease and 91% with advanced disease were positive by EIA for
circulating PAM4-antigen. Overall specificity was 81% with respect to
benign pancreatic disease. Of 126 patients diagnosed with benign
conditions of the pancreas, 24 (19%) were positive for the PAM4-antigen,
with the majority of these cases being diagnosed with chronic
pancreatitis [18 of 80 positive (23%)], all of whom had surgical
resection performed for severity and/or duration of disease activity. ROC
curve analyses of PAM4 assays revealed a statistically significant
difference between the PDAC and CP groups (P<0.0001), with an area under
the curve of 0.84 0.02 (95% CI: 0.79-0.89). The positive likelihood ratio
for differentiating PDAC from benign conditions of the pancreas was 4.00,
which was significant (PBackground: Due to the asymptomatic nature of
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) in its early stages of growth,
and its relatively low incidence, screening methods have not received
high attention. However, with recent studies providing the ability to
identify specific patient groups at high risk for PDAC, a rationale
exists for longitudinal surveillance as a means to improve early
detection specifically in these high-risk settings. Individuals with a
family history of PDAC, those patients with long-standing chronic
pancreatitis (CP), patients with new-onset diabetes who meet certain
other conditions, or those with FAMMM syndrome, etc., could be evaluated
on a long-term basis for the detection of early malignant changes by use
of a MAb-PAM4-based immunoassay procedure.Methods: We have developed and
validated (in over 600 patient specimens) an enzyme immunoassay (EIA)
based upon use of MAb-PAM4 for quantitation of antigen in the serum of
patients diagnosed with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. In addition,
the antibody has been used for immunohistochemical evaluation of
malignant, benign, and normal pancreatic tissues.Results: 71% of patients
with confirmed early-stage disease and 91% with advanced disease were
positive by EIA for circulating PAM4-antigen. Overall specificity was 81%
with respect to benign pancreatic disease. Of 126 patients diagnosed with
benign conditions of the pancreas, 24 (19%) were positive for the
PAM4-antigen, with the majority of these cases being diagnosed with
chronic pancreatitis [18 of 80 positive (23%)], all of whom had surgical
resection performed for severity and/or duration of disease activity. ROC
curve analyses of PAM4 assays revealed a statistically significant
difference between the PDAC and CP groups (P<0.0001), with an area under
the curve of 0.84 0.02 (95% CI: 0.79-0.89). The positive likelihood ratio
for differentiating PDAC from benign conditions of the pancreas was 4.00,
which was significant (P<0.001). It is very important to emphasize that
the true specificity of this assay is likely underestimated.
Immunohistochemistry data have shown the PAM4-biomarker is absent from
normal pancreas and benign, non-neoplastic lesions of the pancreas. In
over 50 surgical specimens of CP, the PAM4-biomarker was identified only
within PanIN lesions that are associated with long-term CP, and not by
the inflamed tissue.Conclusions: Our results suggest that PAM4-positive
CP patients (and likely other PAM4-positive patients diagnosed with
benign conditions of the pancreas) may very likely have pancreatic
neoplasia (invasive and/or precursor lesions), and therefore should be
followed closely. Indeed, such studies might reveal new cutoff values or
kinetic changes that would support early surgical intervention.
(Supported in part by NIH grant CA096924.)

