Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA sequencing based prognostic indexes show a high degree of
correlation with historic array based gene expression measurements in
multiple myeloma.


The Multiple Myeloma Research Foundation (MMRF) and the Multiple Myeloma
Research Consortium (MMRC) have pioneered efforts towards understanding
the genomic underpinnings of multiple myeloma. The MMRC centers have
submitted over 1900 tumor samples to the MMRC tissue bank, from which
>400 have been used in the Multiple Myeloma Genomics Initiative (MMGI),
which is a multi-institutional comprehensive study to unveil the complete
genomic blueprint of myeloma with public data access. In the initial
phase 238 myeloma tumors were analyzed for somatic copy number
alterations using array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH)
and array-based gene expression profiling (GEP). The large majority of
this reference collection was also analyzed by array-based methylation
profiling. We have also performed whole genome or exome sequencing on
>200 normal/tumor pairs. These studies led to several key discoveries
including global hypomethylation, homozygous deletion of UTX, novel
mutations in FAM46C (13%) and DIS3/RRP44 (11%), and potentially
therapeutically actionable BRAF mutations (4%).To improve our
understanding of the transcriptional activities in myeloma, we have
performed RNA-sequencing on 84 myeloma patient samples and 65 human
myeloma cell lines for which whole genome or exome sequencing data is
also available. RNA-seq has a number of advantages over GEP including
improved dynamic range and the detection of exon and isoform levels,
allele specific expression, and fusion transcripts. There are a number of
robust gene expression classifications and indexes with prognostic value
for myeloma samples tested by GEP. Within the cohort of 84 patient
samples there are 42 samples with matched GEP data. Using this subgroup
we tested if the current GEP methods could be directly moved to RNA-seq
data by matching the current probesets to genes. We then compared the
results across the patient set for each index or classification. For
classifications we determined that the TC classification could be
directly transitioned to RNA-seq data with 100% concordance. For the
indexes we showed a strong correlation for the proliferation index
(R2=0.971) and the NFKB index (R2=0.961) but only a moderate correlation
for the 70-gene index (R2=0.761). The decreased correlation in the
70-gene index is clearly due to the large number of probesets used, which
are associated with genes that are clearly not expressed by RNA-seq.
Integration of the DNA and RNA sequencing data showed that 42% of the
mutations detected in the DNA are expressed. Interestingly we observed
the progressive loss of wildtype FAM46C alleles, which are often
heterozygously mutated and expressed in patients but is exclusively
homozogous in cell lines. Additional integrated analysis will improve out
understanding of myelomagenesis and might lead to new and improved
classification and prognostic models.

