Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation of a high affinity, specific human monoclonal antibody
that binds to FGFR-2 IIIc.


Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor-2 (FGFR-2) expression and activation
have been increasingly implicated in a number of human cancers, including
prostate, ovarian, breast, gastric, bladder, pancreatic, endometrial and
lung malignancies. Mechanisms include stimulation of angiogenesis, direct
stimulation of tumor growth and promotion of tumor metastasis. Similar to
other FGFRs, FGFR-2 binds a subset of FGF ligands with high affinity and
consists of an extracellular region comprised of two or three
immunoglobulin-like (Ig) domains, a single transmembrane region and an
intracellular kinase domain. Variable splicing in the second half of the
third Ig-like domain generates two isoforms, IIIb or IIIc, with different
ligand binding specificity and expression patterns. An isoform switch
from epithelial cell-expressed FGFR-2IIIb to mesenchymal cell-expressed
FGFR2-IIIc has been shown to associate with an epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT), which increases cell migration and invasion and
facilitates metastasis of epithelial carcinomas, such as prostate and
bladder cancer. Several groups are developing antibodies to block FGFR-2
as therapeutics. Small molecule drugs that block FGFR-2 signaling are
currently being evaluated in clinical trials. Recently, there have been
reports of FGFR-2 IIIb-specific antibodies. In the same studies,
monoclonal antibodies that bind both isoforms IIIb and IIIc were
described, but, to date, no detailed studies describing the isolation of
an FGFR-2 IIIc-specific antibody have been reported. The high degree of
sequence conservation between the IIIb and IIIc exons is presumably the
major reason why this has been technically challenging. In this study, we
report the isolation of a high affinity, human monoclonal antibody,
ATTO-1, and a murine mAb, 5H11, that bind to human and mouse FGFR-2 IIIc,
but not FGFR2-IIIb, respectively. ATTO-1 binds to established mesenchymal
tumor cell lines, such as AT3 and BT459 (FGFR-2 IIIc+), but not to MCF-7
or DT (FGFR-2 IIIb+). These antibodies may be valuable research tools for
studying and developing novel therapies for blocking tumor invasion and
metastasis.

