Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Murine prostate tumors recruit endogenous, thymic-derived
regulatory T cells which are redistributed following castration.


Studies in a variety of solid tumors have shown a correlation between
high frequencies of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) and poor patient
prognosis. Thus, due to their central role in regulating immune
responses, the modulation of Tregs has been the focus of many emerging
cancer immunotherapies. While promising, the catastrophic autoimmunity
associated with widespread Treg ablation has significantly limited such
approaches. Thus, strategies must be developed which specifically target
unique aspects of the life-cycle and function of tumor-associated Tregs
(taTregs). In order to identify such novel targets, it will be essential
to elucidate the fundamental biology behind the development, specificity
and function of taTregs in the tumor environment. To better understand
endogenous taTreg responses, we analyzed the T Cell Receptor (TCR)
repertoire within autochthonous prostate tumors of TRAMP mice. Using this
approach, we identified a TCR specificity that was recurrently expressed
by a significant proportion of Tregs within the tumor, and was
exclusively found in the Treg subset. We then generated transgenic mice
expressing this TCR, coined MJ23," in order to facilitate the study of
the antigenic specificity, developmental origins and effects of
castration on the anatomical distribution of an endogenous taTreg
population. We first determined that MJ23 T cells show poor induced Treg
development in the periphery, develop into natural Tregs in the thymus,
and become enriched in the prostate-draining lymph nodes of both
tumor-free and tumor-bearing mice, suggesting reactivity to a prostate
self antigen. These results support a model in which tumors enrich for
thymic-derived Tregs specific for antigens found within the tissue of
cancer origin, rather than promoting the differentiation or induction of
Foxp3neg CD4+ T cells reactive to tumor neoantigens. Next, to determine
the impact of castration (a first line treatment given for locally
advanced prostate cancer) on the prostate taTreg population MJ23, one of
three treatments was administered: castration, sham castration or
castration followed by testosterone restoration. Using this approach, we
discovered that castration led to a dramatic increase in thymic
cellularity, a selective expansion of thymic MJ23 Treg frequency, and the
anatomical redistribution of MJ23 Tregs. Thus, MJ23 Tregs are impacted by
the loss of testosterone following castration, leading to systemic
redistribution away from the prostate draining lymph nodes. In future
studies it will be critical to determine if the effects observed are due
to the loss of self antigens or if Tregs themselves are androgen
sensitive. Additionally, utilizing this model we will focus on
elucidating the in situ function, antigen specificity, and cognate
antigen presenting cells within prostate tumors.

