Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of sulindac and/or atorvastatin on colorectal adenomas in
the Apc+/Min-FCCC mouse model varies depending on the presence or absence
of adenomas at the time of drug initiation.


While treatment with sulindac plus atorvastatin has been shown to be more
efficacious than either agent alone in inhibiting chemically-induced
colorectal tumors, the effectiveness of this same drug combination
against sporadic colorectal cancer has not been evaluated. The goal of
this study was to assess the chemopreventive activity of sulindac plus
atorvastatin, in combination, in a unique strain of Apc+/Min-FCCC mice
that spontaneously develops colorectal adenomas at a high multiplicity
and incidence. Male Apc+/Min-FCCC mice (6-8 weeks of age) were subjected
to colonoscopic examinations at baseline (prior to treatment) and
randomized to receive either control chow or chow supplemented with
sulindac (300 ppm), atorvastatin (100 ppm) or sulindac plus atorvastatin
for 100 days. All drugs were well tolerated, with no significant change
in body weight observed among the treatment groups. At the time of
euthanasia, gross small intestinal (SI) and colonic tumors were
identified and the height, width and length of the colonic tumors was
measured using calipers. Only the colon was submitted for
histopathological evaluation. The multiplicity of gross SI tumors was
decreased in animals administered sulindac (54%) or sulindac plus
atorvastatin (41%), as compared to those receiving either control diet or
atorvastatin alone (P 0.00024). Based on the results of the colonoscopic
evaluation, mice were categorized as being tumor-free or tumor-bearing at
baseline. Treatment with atorvastatin, alone or in combination, lead to a
2.4-3.6-fold increase in the percentage of mice that were tumor-free both
at baseline and at the time of euthanasia: control 12.5%; sulindac 9.1%;
atorvastatin 44.4% and sulindac plus atorvastatin 30%. Interestingly,
atorvastatin completely inhibited the formation of microadenomas in mice
that were tumor-free at baseline (P = 0.002). In mice that were
tumor-bearing at baseline, only the sulindac plus atorvastatin
combination therapy reduced the multiplicity of colon adenomas
significantly as compared to that of controls (Mean SEM, 3.7 0.7 and 6.4
1.2, respectively) (P = 0.049). The effect of drug exposure on tumor
volume was evaluated at the time of euthanasia. Colon tumor volume was
reduced 2-fold in mice treated with sulindac as compared to that of mice
administered control diet or diet supplemented with atorvastatin or
sulindac plus atorvastatin in combination (P While treatment with
sulindac plus atorvastatin has been shown to be more efficacious than
either agent alone in inhibiting chemically-induced colorectal tumors,
the effectiveness of this same drug combination against sporadic
colorectal cancer has not been evaluated. The goal of this study was to
assess the chemopreventive activity of sulindac plus atorvastatin, in
combination, in a unique strain of Apc+/Min-FCCC mice that spontaneously
develops colorectal adenomas at a high multiplicity and incidence. Male
Apc+/Min-FCCC mice (6-8 weeks of age) were subjected to colonoscopic
examinations at baseline (prior to treatment) and randomized to receive
either control chow or chow supplemented with sulindac (300 ppm),
atorvastatin (100 ppm) or sulindac plus atorvastatin for 100 days. All
drugs were well tolerated, with no significant change in body weight
observed among the treatment groups. At the time of euthanasia, gross
small intestinal (SI) and colonic tumors were identified and the height,
width and length of the colonic tumors was measured using calipers. Only
the colon was submitted for histopathological evaluation. The
multiplicity of gross SI tumors was decreased in animals administered
sulindac (54%) or sulindac plus atorvastatin (41%), as compared to those
receiving either control diet or atorvastatin alone (P 0.00024). Based on
the results of the colonoscopic evaluation, mice were categorized as
being tumor-free or tumor-bearing at baseline. Treatment with
atorvastatin, alone or in combination, lead to a 2.4-3.6-fold increase in
the percentage of mice that were tumor-free both at baseline and at the
time of euthanasia: control 12.5%; sulindac 9.1%; atorvastatin 44.4% and
sulindac plus atorvastatin 30%. Interestingly, atorvastatin completely
inhibited the formation of microadenomas in mice that were tumor-free at
baseline (P = 0.002). In mice that were tumor-bearing at baseline, only
the sulindac plus atorvastatin combination therapy reduced the
multiplicity of colon adenomas significantly as compared to that of
controls (Mean SEM, 3.7 0.7 and 6.4 1.2, respectively) (P = 0.049). The
effect of drug exposure on tumor volume was evaluated at the time of
euthanasia. Colon tumor volume was reduced 2-fold in mice treated with
sulindac as compared to that of mice administered control diet or diet
supplemented with atorvastatin or sulindac plus atorvastatin in
combination (P < 0.03). These data suggest that the chemopreventive
activity of sulindac and/or atorvastatin against colorectal adenomas is
dictated in part by the status of the animal (tumor-free or
tumor-bearing) at the time treatment is initiated. Additional
experimentation is required to establish the patient subgroup and drug
schedule that will yield optimal therapeutic activity in a clinical
setting. (Supported by NIH R21CA129467)

