Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The pre-clinical in vitro and in vivo activity of AZD6738: A
potent and selective inhibitor of ATR kinase.


AZD6738 is a potent and selective orally bioavailable kinase inhibitor of
ataxia telangiectasia and rad3 related (ATR). Here we report the
pre-clinical in vitro and in vivo and biological profile of AZD6738. ATR
is a serine/threonine protein kinase involved in DNA damage response
signalling caused by DNA replication associated stress. Activation of ATR
at stalled replication forks leads to suppression of replication fork
origin firing, promotes repair and S/G2-cell cycle checkpoints to prevent
premature mitosis and maintain genomic integrity. Failure to resolve
damage leads to genomic instability and if sufficiently high, cell death.
Stalled replication forks may collapse leading to formation of DNA double
stranded breaks and activation of the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)
kinase. ATM works in conjunction with ATR to efficiently resolve
replication associated DNA damage creating a co-dependency with loss of
one leading to a greater reliance on the other to maintain genomic
stability. ATM is frequently inactivated across B-cell malignancies, head
and neck, breast and lung cancers through chromosomal deletion, promoter
hypermethylation or mutation. ATM-deficient tumours are hypothesised to
be more reliant on ATR for survival and specific inhibition of ATR may
lead enhanced anti-tumour activity while minimizing normal tissue
toxicity. AZD6738 demonstrates this preclinical profile.AZD6738 inhibits
the phosphorylation of direct downstream substrate CHK1 while increasing
the phosphorylation of ATM-dependent substrate CHK2 and DNA damage marker
H2AX. This is associated with impaired S-phase cell cycle progression
with prolonged inhibition causing cell death, indicative of replication
fork stalling, collapse and irreversible damage. AZD6738 is active as a
single agent across cancer cell line panels but shows enhanced
sensitivity in cell lines with ATM-pathway defects. AZD6738 when used in
combination with DNA damaging inducing agents gemcitabine, cisplatin or
ionising radiation (IR) shows enhanced synergistic cell killing activity.
In vivo, AZD6738 monotherapy treatment leads to significant anti-tumour
activity in ATM-deficient but not ATM-proficient xenograft models at
equivalent, tolerated doses. When AZD6738 is used in combination with
carboplatin or IR anti-tumour growth inhibitory activity or regression is
observed. AZD6738 in vivo activity is also associated with a persistent
increased H2AX staining in tumour tissue but only a transient increase in
normal bone marrow or gut tissue suggesting a favourable therapeutic
index can be achieved. Early pre-clinical safety studies support these
findings with target related bone marrow suppression, neutropenia and GI
tract impact only at high-doses. These data merit further investigation
of AZD6738 as a monotherapy or in combination with chemo or radiotherapy.

