Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ETV1 directs androgen metabolism and confers aggressive prostate
cancer in engineered mice and patients.


A central challenge in prostate cancer is identification of those men
with prostate cancer whose disease will eventually progress to the lethal
castration-resistant stage. Understanding molecular events leading to
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), and identifying new disease
markers are critical for the development of improved therapies for such
patients. Chromosomal rearrangements involving ETS transcription factors,
such as ERG and ETV1, occur frequently in prostate cancer (PCa). It is
widely presumed that ectopically expressed ETV1 (mainly due to gene
fusions) plays a similar role in prostate tumorigenesis to that of ERG.
However, we found that high levels of ETV1 expression are often
associated with more advanced PCa in patient cohorts tested, whereas ERG
overexpression is mainly associated with localized PCa and with elevated
androgen receptor (AR) signaling. These data suggest that ETV1 and ERG
may play different roles in prostate tumorigenesis. To address this
question, we have generated Tmprss2-ERG (T-ERG) and Tmprss2-ETV1 (T-ETV1)
knockin mouse models, targeting the two most prevalent ETS family members
involved in fusions in PCa. Although, male mice carrying ERG or ETV1
targeted to the endogenous Tmprss2 locus alone are normal, either factor
cooperated with Pten-loss, leading to localized cancer. Interestingly,
only ETV1 supported development of advanced adenocarcinoma under
Pten-loss background. To learn the molecular insights underlying this
difference, we then focused mechanistic studies on the identification of
chromosomal targets directly bound by ERG and ETV1. We showed that ERG
and ETV1 control a common transcriptional network but largely in an
opposing fashion. In particular, while ERG negatively regulates the AR
transcriptional program, ETV1 cooperates with AR signaling by favoring
its activation. Then, we performed microarray gene expression profiling
for mouse prostate epithelial cells carrying T-ETV1 knockin allele alone.
Strikingly, by gene set enrichment analysis, we found in T-ETV1 prostate
cells (compared to controls), most top enriched gene sets from the KEGG
pathway database are related to steroid and cholesterol biosynthesis.
Consistent with this, when we castrated T-ETV1 knockin males, we found a
significant portion of ETV1 expressing prostate cells (tracked by GFP
expression) could survive castration long-term. Moreover, we found that
ETV1 expression, but not that of ERG, promotes autonomous testosterone
production. These data suggest that ETV1 may reprogram metabolism toward
steroid synthesis, which may promote progression to castration-resistant
state. Lastly, patient data confirmed association of ETV1 expression and
androgen metabolism. Thus, the distinct biology of ETV1-associated
prostate cancer suggests that this disease class may require new
therapies directed to the underlying programs controlled by ETV1.

