Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of eukaryotic elongation factor-2 kinase mediates
Rottlerin induced effects in apoptosis and cell proliferation inhibition
in human pancreatic cancer cells.


Pancreatic cancer (PaCa) is one of the most aggressive cancers and
currently incurable with less than 2% five-years survival rate. Among the
ever-increasing list of naturally occurring anticancer agents, a Kmala
Tree-derived anticancer compound, Rottlerin (ROT), a PKC-delta inhibitor,
appears to have anti-proliferative activity due to its effects on several
pathways and cell machineries involved in cell survival, apoptosis,
autophagy and invasion. Recent studies suggest that ROT is not a specific
PKC delta inhibitor and mediates its effects through other mechanisms. We
have previously reported that inhibition of eukaryotic elongation
factor-2 kinase (eEF-2K), one of the major kinases appears to be
activated in rapidly proliferating malignant cells, leads to
down-regulation of signaling pathways affecting growth, survival and
chemotherapeutic resistance (Tekedereli et al, 2012). Thus, we
hypothesized that ROT targets eEF-2K, and inhibition of eEF-2K signaling
is responsible of mediating its effects in PaCa cells. We found that ROT
treatment (4-10 M) inhibits the expression of eEF-2K that was associated
with apoptosis induction in PaCa cells in a dose and time-dependent
manner as detected by Western blot analysis. We also found that ROT
treatment inhibits PaCa cell proliferation and mitochondrial activity and
modulates G1/S phase progression in these cells. Treating PaCa cells with
ROT markedly induced expression of active caspase-9, caspase-3 and
cleaved PARP. To demonstrate a direct link between eEF-2K inhibition and
ROT-induced effects, we knocked-down eEF-2K by a specific siRNA. Such
knockdown was associated with inhibition of cell growth, resulted in
modulation of caspase-related events with induction of similar degree of
apoptosis, increased the percentage of Annexin V positive apoptotic cells
and resulted in induction of cellular shrinkage and blebbing. Moreover,
we found that eEF-2K down-regulation is involved in ROT-induced
stimulation of extrinsic apoptotic pathway in PaCa cells with concomitant
induction of TNF related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) receptor DR4
and caspase-8 cleavage. In addition, our findings suggest that eEF-2K
contributes to the regulation of G1/S phase progression, as in vitro
down-modulation eEF-2K resulted in an increase in the expression of
p27Kip1 cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (CDKI). Collectively, the
results of our study demonstrate, for the first time, that
down-regulation of eEF-2K contributes to rottlerin-induced effects
including, growth inhibition and apoptosis in PaCa cells and clearly
demonstrate novel mechanisms of ROT-induced potent antitumor effects.
These findings show that the multi-targeted kinase inhibitor, ROT,
represents a promising novel agent for PaCa treatment and eEF-2K could
represent an attractive target for the future anticancer agents.

