Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA expression profiles classify renal cell carcinoma
subtypes.


Introduction. Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) accounts for nearly 4% of all
malignancies worldwide. According to the WHO classification of tumors of
the urinary system, RCC is a collection of different subtypes rather than
one entity. Besides the conventional clear cell RCC (ccRCC), the
papillary RCC (pRCC), with an incidence of 10%-15%, is the second most
common entity among renal malignancies. By histological characteristics,
pRCCs can further be sub-divided into two distinct subtypes. Hereby,
pRCCs type 2 are correlated with a worse clinical outcome. To date,
little is known about the molecular characteristics within the pRCC
subtypes.Material and Methods. We used commercial miRNA microarrays
(GeneChip miRNA arrays, Affymetrix) to perform whole miRNome profiling in
a set of seven cases of ccRCC and pRCC subtypes 1 and 2 each. The
expression of a selected subset of miRNAs was validated by quantitative
PCR. The best discriminating miRNAs of this initial set were used to
establish a classification model for tissue samples. This core set of
miRNAs was analyzed in a second, independent patient cohort of 69 tissue
samples. Using the pre-defined classification rules, the samples of the
independent patient cohort were classified in a double-blind fashion
solely by their miRNA expression.Results. Microarray results showed, that
every RCC entity and subtype displayed a characteristic pattern of miRNA
expression. Ten miRNAs were selected based on their ability to
discriminate between tumor and normal tissue or between different
subtypes of RCC. Binary logistic regression identified a core set of only
five miRNAs that was able to fully classify any given sample with an
overall accuracy of 88%. This classification scheme was applied to an
independent patient cohort. Here, the five discriminating miRNAs (miRNAs
miR-145, -200c, -210, -502-3p, and let-7c) were able to classify the
samples with an overall accuracy of 64%. A pathway analysis indicated
that target genes of deregulated miRNAs are members of the family of
multidrug-resistance proteins (MRPs) or components of the Jak-STAT
signaling pathway.Conclusions. Every entity or subtype of RCC displays a
characteristic and unique pattern of miRNA expression. Characteristic
miRNAs can be used to distinguish not only between tumor and normal
tissue samples but also between different tumor entities with high
accuracy. Target genes of these characteristic miRNAs might contribute to
the tumor biologic and clinical behavior of RCC entities and subtypes.

