Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy-regulation of STAT3 phosphorylation determines subtype
differences in autophagy addiction and breast cancer cell survival.


Autophagy is a long-lived protein and organelle degradation pathway in
which cytoplasmic material is engulfed in a double membrane structure
known as the autophagosome and later delivered to the lysosome for its
degradation. Macroautophagy (referred herein as autophagy) has been
extensively studied in recent years, increasing our understanding of the
major constituents of the autophagic pathway. Most importantly, defects
in the autophagic pathway have been involved in diverse diseases
including cancer. In this regard, some cancers, like pancreatic cancer
and some Ras transformed tumors, are thought to be autophagy addicted
since they require a functional autophagic pathway for survival. Although
breast cancer has been considered to be an autophagy-independent type of
cancer, most studies have not considered the high heterogeneity of this
disease. Here, we found that different subtypes of breast cancer vary in
their dependence on autophagy with cell lines from two particular
subtypes, basal-like and claudin-low displaying particular sensitivity to
autophagy inhibition by Atg gene knockdown or chloroquine treatment when
compared to luminal and non-transformed cell lines.STAT3 constitutive
activation and dependence for survival is known to be important for
triple negative breast cancers which are mostly comprised by the
basal-like and claudin-low subtypes. We found a strong correlation
between STAT3 constitutive activity and autophagy-dependence for survival
in a panel of breast cancer cell lines. Importantly, autophagy inhibition
by Atg gene knockdown or chloroquine treatment significantly
decreasedSTAT3 phosphorylation in the autophagy-dependent cell lines.
Moreover, treatment with Stattic, a STAT3 inhibitor, showed a similar
effect on cell death than chloroquine treatment or Atg gene knockdown,
suggesting targeting of the same pathway. Finally, a constitutively
active form of STAT3 decreased cell death induced by inhibition of the
autophagic pathway in autophagy-addicted cell lines.Our results suggest
that autophagy addiction in breast cancer is caused by autophagy
regulation of STAT3 activation and that autophagy inhibition might be a
potential therapeutic strategy for hard-to-treat triple negative breast
cancers by blocking STAT3 activation. Currently these types of breast
cancer lack effective and targeted treatment strategies and have the
worst prognosis among breast cancers. Moreover, screening of STAT3
activation in tumors could serve as a selection strategy for treatment
with autophagy inhibitors like chloroquine.Funding: NIH
grants#R01CA150925 and RO1CA111421.

