Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted sequencing of 5p15 locus defined by non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) GWAS using next-generation sequencing.


Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified genetic
loci associated with lung cancer risk. Direct sequencing is regarded as
the ultimate approach for moving beyond genetic mapping to identify
causal mutations and define disease candidate genes. We conducted a pilot
next-generation sequencing (NGS) of all exons of TERT and CLPTM1L genes
within the 5p15 locus from our NSCLC GWAS, replicating previous studies.
We performed an amplicon capture-NGS on 138 samples, including 82 NSCLC
cases and 56 controls. These results were highly consistent across
samples, with the majority covering 85-95% of bases at 100-fold and with
only 5 samples failing to achieve 100-fold coverage for at least 80% of
bases. We identified 11 SNPs in TERT and 5 SNPs in CLPTM1L. Using our
SKAT/SKAT-O method, we found that both genes were associated with NSCLC
(TERT, p=0.006; and CLPTM1L, p=0.04). When the SNPs of the two genes were
combined, we saw a greater joint effect (p=0.001). In a subgroup analysis
focusing on functional SNPs, including 7 and 4 nonsynonymous SNPs in TERT
and CLPTM1L, respectively, we found a stronger association with TERT
(p=0.0005), as well as an increased joint effect (p=0.0001). Moreover,
none of the sequenced subjects had functional SNPs in both TERT and
CLPTM1L genes. Furthermore, most nonsynonymous variations seemed
clustered either in the cases or in the controls. Bioinformatic
annotation of these nonsynonymous SNPs revealed that those clustered in
the controls had only benign effects on the encoded protein, whereas
those overrepresented in the NSCLC cases had possible damage to the
encoded protein. Using Sanger dideoxy-terminator sequencing at an
independent core facility and Taqman genotyping, all of the 11 functional
SNPs identified by amplicon capture-NGS were confirmed. In summary, the
results seem to support the hypotheses that aggregated functional
variations, but not the neutral ones, contribute to the risks of NSCLC
development. However, the initial finding is not conclusive, as this
pilot project was limited by a small sample set and structural variations
were not examined.

