Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell-cell fusion in vivo transfers genes for human malignancy,
metastasis, and the donor tumors organoid phenotype to stromal hamster
cells.


Cell-cell fusion in vitro has been a method for investigating
oncogenesis, gene mapping, and gene regulation. Whether such mechanisms
occur in vivo requires similar studies with in-vivo cell fusion,
particularly whether genes for malignancy, metastasis, and organoid
features can be transmitted horizontally to adjacent stromal cells. We
describe our experiences with the transplantation of a human glioblastoma
multiforme and two Hodgkin lymphomas from patient specimens directly to
the hamster cheek pouch, resulting in highly malignant tumors that
metastasize in their rodent hosts within the initial transplantation
passage and subsequently over passage for many years. The resulting
glioblastoma cell line, GB-749, showed heterosynkaryon formation between
the tumor and hamster host cells by karyology and FISH, and the retention
of 7 human genes, VIM, CD74, CXCR4, TP53, PLAGL2, GFAP, and EGFR, by PCR,
of which 3 showed protein translation in vivo by immunohistochemistry;
namely, CD74, CXCR4, and PLAGL2. These 3 genes have been implicated with
malignancy or, particularly, glioblastoma.In the second example of two
Hodgkin lymphomas grafted to hamsters, FISH again demonstrated stable
human-hamster heterosynkaryons, while PCR showed the retention of 7 human
genes in the GW-532 and GW-584 cell lines propagated for 5-6 years
in-vivo (VIM, CD74, CXCR4, CD19, CD20, CD71, and CD79b). Thus, the
glioblastoma and Hodgkin tumor hybrids retained different genes after
cell-cell fusion with hamster cells, but VIM, CD74, and CXCR4 were
common, surprisingly, to all three tumor hybrid lines. The hybrid
transplants also retained the morphological appearance of their original
donor tumors, thus retaining their organoid genes providing the tumor's
morphological phenotype. In the glioblastoma, GB-749, these included
PLAGL2, GFAP, and EGFR, while in the Hodgkin lymphoma lines, GW-532 and
GW-584, the B-cell-lineage genes, CD19, CD20, CD79b, were retained. We
believe these are the first examples of in-vivo cell-cell fusion between
human tumor and rodent host cells showing stable heterosynkaryon
formation and propagation over many years, and with the retention of
select human genes implicated in the malignant phenoytype, metastasis,
and organoid gene signatures. Thus, at least in this model, human cancer
cells can transmit malignant and organoid genes to stromal cells in their
microenvironment, perhaps representing a basic mechanism for the tumor
heterogeneity observed clinically. Whether such fusion events occur
during the progression of cancers in patients remains to be determined.

