Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterisation of cellular transport and accumulation of six
clinically approved tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in colon cancer
cells.


TKIs are a loosely characterised family of small molecules which inhibit
the ATP driven phosphorylation of signalling proteins that normally
activate transduction cascades. Aberrations in signal cascades have been
linked to the development of tumours and their survival pathways; TKIs
are targeted at these pathways. However, promising preclinical studies on
structurally different TKIs often did not translate into clinical success
due to cellular resistance, cascade mutations and poor bioavailability.
TKIs tend to be alkali in nature with a correspondingly high pKa (5-8)
while absorption properties have been linked to both ABC and Organic
Cation Transporters (OCT). Previously we demonstrated in a gut epithelium
model that absorption of TKIs is relatively poor, while a correspondingly
high negative flow was observed. In this study we aimed to characterize
tumour cell uptake and accumulation of TKIs using specific transporter
inhibitors. We used a sensitive and specific LC-MS-MS method to
characterize the role of the transport inhibitors Ko143 (BCRP inhibitor),
amantadine (Am;hOCT1&2), cimetidine (Ci;hOCT1&2&3), desipramine
(Ds;hOCT1&2&3), -estradiol (Be; hOCT1&3) and verapamil (Ve;
hOCT1&P-gp).Uptake of TKIs at 4C and 37C in CaCo2 and WiDr colon cancer
cells showed large differences; uptake of Gefitinib (G - 10M), Erlotinib
(E - 10 M) & Dasatinib (D - 1M) was partially active since after 2hr
uptake at 4C was lower compared to 37C. Uptake of Sunitinib (Su - 10M),
Sorafenib (So - 10 M) and Crizotinib (Cr - 10 M) was predominantly
passive since values were comparable at 4C and 37C. Absolute accumulation
over 24hr (37C) was very different with E and D reaching 20-150 ng/mg
protein, while G was 20 fold higher. Su, So and Cr accumulation were even
higher reaching 2 to 12 g/mg protein. This pattern matched accumulation
of some TKIs observed in the clinical setting. Accumulation for Su and Cr
showed a similar pattern suggesting that Cr accumulated in lysosomes
similar to Su. Bafilomycin, a lysosomal inhibitor, decreased total
accumulation of Su 14.1-fold, and that of Cr 2.4-fold indicating
lysosomal accumulation. The hOCT inhibitor Ds consistently (25-55%)
decreased accumulation of G, So Su and Cr; Ci, Be and Am had little
effect on cellular accumulation for all TKIs tested. Ve, De and Ci
increased accumulation of E, and Ve that of D, suggesting inhibition of
efflux via P-gp, MRP or BCRP. Ko143 increased accumulation for G, E, So
and Su in WiDr but only for Su in CaCo2 cells indicating a differential
role for BCRP depending on TKI and tumour type. In conclusion, several
transporters appear to be involved to differing degrees for each
molecule, indicating TKIs pharmacokinetics should be investigated on an
individual basis.

