Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of applications for acoustic membrane microparticle
assay technology for translational medicine.


The detection and study of proteins and their interactions utilizing
small samples of cells or tissues is an ongoing problem in cancer
research. Recent advances in the early detection of many cancers have
resulted in smaller sized tumors for biopsy and evaluation. This has
created a need for sensitive and robust assays for pathway related
proteins. One mission for the Antibody and Protein Purification Unit
(APPU) of the National Cancer Institute has been to evaluate emerging
technologies and create new applications for these technologies. Using
Acoustic Membrane MicroParticle (AMMP) assays on the ViBE Workstation
(Bioscale, Lexington, MA) for solution phase immunoassays, the APPU has
developed several applications which support the great utility and
breadth of use for this technology in translational research. AMMP assays
employ a homogenous, sandwich assay format with paired antibodies, one
coupled to a magnetic bead and the second tagged for capture on the
sensor, and the analyte forming a complex which interacts with a
vibrating membrane sensor. The assay measures the concentration of the
analyte by a resonant frequency shift of the membrane caused by the
protein interaction without matrix interference or signal scatter seen in
optical techniques. A highly sensitive assay for Prolactin showed no
serum interference, which is a common problem in optical immunoassays for
circulating peptide hormones. An assay for the important marker C-Met
required less than 125 nanograms of cell lysate protein for detection and
quantitation. An AMMP assay was further able to quantitate C-Met on the
surface of Hep2 cells using an antibody capture method. In an application
for detection and quantitation of a member of the MAPK kinase family, an
ultrasensitive assay for the detection of MEK1 was developed as well as a
highly specific solution phase assay for pMEK1 (S218/S222) as shown by
cognate phosphopeptide inhibition. And finally in an application which we
believe to be truly unique, a solution heterodimer assay for the
ERK1/MEK1 interaction was shown to be susceptible to inhibitor treatment.
In conclusion, the AMMP technology was able to perform a wide range of
applications required by translational research studies. The assays
showed superior lower limit of detection and were reproducible, only
requiring nanogram quantities of lysate proteins. The ability to measure
protein/protein interactions in solution phase is especially useful for
drug development and evaluation of drug effects in targeted therapies.

