Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilization of KLF-4 as a pharmacodynamic biomarker for in vivo
anticancer activity of a novel small molecule drug LOR-253.


LOR-253 is a potent and selective growth inhibitor of several cancer
types, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), colon cancer and
leukemia. LOR-253 stimulates Krppel Like Factor-4 (KLF-4), a tumor
suppressor factor which is characteristically deficient in a variety of
cancers, and so represents a new approach to cancer therapy. The current
Phase I dose-escalation study is being conducted at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York and MD Anderson Cancer Center
in Houston. In the present preclinical study, the changes in KLF-4
expression levels were evaluated in vivo to examine the utility of KLF-4
as a pharmacodynamic biomarker, aiming at linking the antitumor effects
of LOR-253 to the induction of KLF-4. In the human H226 NSCLC xenograft
mouse model, LOR-253 demonstrated dose-dependent antitumor activity when
administered at 1, 5, and 15 mg/kg and mediated significant tumor growth
inhibition of about 55% at the highest dose given by intravenous bolus
injection (p=0.05). Tumors were harvested 24h after the last dose
following the treatments at 1, 5, and 15 mg/kg and KLF-4 mRNA and protein
levels were analyzed by real-time RT-PCR and Western blot, respectively.
A dose-dependent induction of KLF-4 mRNA and protein levels was observed.
Pharmacodynamic studies to characterize the effect of LOR-253 on
intratumoral KLF-4 were also conducted in the H226 NSCLC xenograft mouse
model to determine the optimal time point for tumor biopsy sampling,
following the treatment schedule in the ongoing Phase 1 clinical trial (2
days dosing, 12 day break, 2 days of dosing, 12 day break (1 cycle)).
Tumor samples were taken 24h after the second, fourth and eighth dose of
LOR-253 and analyzed for KLF-4 expression. It was determined that tumor
sampling after the second and eighth doses was optimal at demonstrating
increased intratumoral KLF-4 levels. Furthermore, antitumor efficacy of
LOR-253 was also evaluated in nude rats bearing established human H226
NSCLC tumors when LOR-253 was infused intravenously following the current
Phase I clinical dosing schedule. A significant efficacy was observed at
the end of the first cycle of treatment, demonstrating 44% decrease in
mean tumor volume when compared with the control treatment (p=0.025).
Inhibition of tumor growth was paralleled by the induction of KLF-4 in
isolated tumors when analyzed by real-time RT-PCR and Western blot. Taken
together, the in vivo data obtained in both mouse and rat models provide
strong preclinical support for utilizing KLF-4 as a potential
pharmacodynamic biomarker for LOR-253 treatment in clinic.

