Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An in vitro synergism between Ganoderma lucidum and Bacillus
Calmette Gurin on premalignant transitional cell carcinoma.


Introduction: The major challenge for superficial transitional cell
carcinoma (TCC) of the urinary bladder is recurrence. In the past three
decades, Bacillus Calmette Gurin (BCG) has been used as an effective
adjuvant therapy through the eradication of residual adverse cells
following the surgical ablation of TCC tumors. Despite BCG has recently
suspended for manufacture and shortage in supply, it provides moderate
efficacy by reducing 30-40% of the recurrence cases but has high side
effects toll of allergic cystitis. A medicinal mushroom - Ganoderma
lucidum (GL) is known for its un-disputed scientific evidences which
supporting the therapeutic roles on different cancers including TCC. In
our previous reports, the triterpene-enriched ethanol extract of GL (GLe)
was found to have similar immunological activities with BCG, in addition
to apoptosis and telomerase inhibition. Therefore, BCG and GLe synergism
was investigated. Brief Methodologies: The drug-drug interactions between
BCG and GLe were assessed in an established carcinogen-sensitive human
uroepithelial cell (HUC-PC) line, using two treatment schedules, i.e.
co-treatment and pre-treatment with GLe. Outcome measures were cytoxicity
and cytokines secretion using automated Vi-CELL cell viability analyzer
(Beckman Coulter, USA) and FlowCytomix method (Bender MedSystems,
Austria) with flow cytometry, respectively. Treated cells and culture
media were harvested for measurements at 24 hours and 5 days upon the
completion of the treatment schedules. Results and Discussion: In
comparison with BCG, GLe was shown to exhibit immediate cytotoxic effects
on the HUC-PC cells following incubation, whereas both drugs were
individually active in stimulating the production of interleukin (IL)-6,
IL-8 and monocyte chemotactic protin-1 (MCP-1). In both treatment
schedules, complete cytostasis by maintaining the baseline cell seeding
numbers was demonstrated in 24 hours, and cell eradication processes were
progressively executed in the next 5 days in dose-dependent manners. By
isobologram analysis, the interaction between BCG and GLe on cytotoxicity
was shown to be synergistic. However, the pre-treatment of GLe has also
resulted in suppression of all cytokines without influencing its
cytotoxic effect. Conclusion: The results suggested that pre-treatment of
GLe before BCG incubation could be effective to enhance the efficacy in
adverse cells eradication, and potentially useful for counteracting the
inflammation-associated side effects.

