Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific detection tool for mesenchymal and epithelial-mesenchymal
transformed circulating tumor cells.


Circulating tumor cells (CTC) released from primary tumor tissues into
bloodstream or lymphatic vessels are emerging as novel tools in the
detection and prognosis of several types of metastatic cancers. At
present, CTC markers are limited to epithelial cancers and there are no
specific markers available to detect mesenchymal and
epithelial-mesenchymal transformed (EMT) CTCs. EMT cells are
characterized by increased motility and invasiveness and are known to
escape detection technologies that use EpCAM and cytokeratins as CTC
markers. Here we report a novel antibody, 84-1 for detection of
mesenchymal and EMT CTC. Antibodies were raised in mice after injecting
metastatic cancer cells and clones were selected that were positive only
for CTC and negative for PBMCs and normal cells. 84-1 was the only
antibody that was unique in its ability to detect CTCs from mesenchymal
tumors and EMT CTC from epithelial tumors. Studies for characterization
of the epitope for 84-1 antibody are ongoing. We then analyzed the
sensitivity and specificity of the antibody by utilizing spiking assay
and were able to specifically detect and isolate as low as one cell from
1 ml of blood. In a pilot analysis, we were able to detect CTCs from
patients with colon cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, osteosarcoma, and
leukemia with very high specificity, while CTCs were not observed in
healthy subjects. CTCs were characterized based on the size of the
nucleus and for 84-1 positivity and CD45 negativity using fluorescence
microscopy. The CTCs from cancer patients were isolated and cultured for
mutational analysis. CTCs were also detectable in the blood of mice with
tumors of both epithelial (colon) and non-epithelial (osteosarcoma)
origin and were isolated and cultured in vitro, which formed colonies of
cells that were used for further analysis to confirm the identity of
CTCs. Furthermore, we also evaluated CTCs in mutant p53 mice that
developed spontaneous tumors of both mesenchymal and epithelial origin.
Collectively, our observations provide a novel technology to selectively
detect and isolate both mesenchymal and EMT CTC. Detection and molecular
characterization of CTCs is one of the fastest growing areas of
translational cancer research. Utilizing our antibody, we can enumerate
and isolate rare CTCs that will aid in the early detection of tumors,
metastasis, and relapse and will contribute to the development of
specific targeted therapies, an ultimate goal of personalized medicine.

