Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of PHLPP1 as a novel metastasis suppressor in
melanoma .


Metastatic dissemination is the cause of nearly all melanoma-related
deaths. Despite an improving understanding of genetic lesions present in
human melanomas, how these alternations relate to the metastatic process
is not well understood. Previously, we found that activation of the
PI3K/Akt pathway is a driving force in metastatic melanomas. Here we
identify PHLPP1 as a novel metastasis suppressor in melanoma. PHLPP1 was
recently identified as a Ser/Thr-specific phosphatase, belonging to
pleckstrin homology (PH) domain leucine-rich repeat protein phosphatase
family. The two isoforms of this family, PHLPP1 and PHLPP2 control kinase
signaling in the AKT family by catalyzing the dephosphorylation of the
hydrophobic phosphorylation motif. PHLPP1 can specifically
dephosphorylate AKT2 and AKT3, whereas PHLPP2 dephosphorylates AKT1 and
AKT3. To study the role of PHLPPs in metastatic melanoma, we first
examined the expression of PHLPPs in 30 melanoma metastases, 30 primary
melanomas, and 9 normal skin tissues using tissue microarray analysis. We
found that PHLPP1 was significantly downregulated or lost in metastatic
melanoma samples, but not PHLPP2. Moreover, analysis of various human
melanoma cell lines (12 highly metastatic, 14 poorly metastatic melanoma
cell lines and 1 normal melanoctye cell line) demonstrated that PHLPP1
expression correlated with metastatic behavior, supporting the notion
that PHLPP1 is involved in the metastatic regulation of melanoma. To
confirm a functional role for PHLPP1 in metastasis, we forced the
expression of PHLPP1 and PHLPP2 in B16 and A375sm melanoma cell lines.
Overexpression of PHLPP1 dramatically inhibited metastasis in both cell
lines. Unexpectedly, the PHLPP2 isoform had little influence on
metastatic ability in both cell lines in vivo, despite the fact that both
PHLPP1 and PHLPP2 were able to inhibit in vitro cell proliferation,
motility, migration as well as colony formation in soft agar. Notably,
introduction of PH mutant forms of PHLPP1 still blunted the metastatic
potential of both cell lines, whereas a phosphatase-deficient C-terminal
mutant did not affect metastasis. Interestingly, transfected AKT2 active
form could rescue PHLPP1-mediaed inhibition of metastasis. Our data
demonstrate at the first time that PHLPP1 plays a critical role in
inhibiting metastasis through its phosphatase activity, and suggest that
PHLPP1 could be a diagnostic marker and therapeutic target for metastatic
melanoma.

