Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of intracellular ara-C/ara-CTP following treatment with
the new anti-leukemic drug elacytarabine using a bioluminescent bacterial
biosensor.


Cytarabine (ara-C) is an analogue of deoxycytidine with an established
role in treating AML. Cytarabine depends on the human equilibrative
nucleoside transporter-1 (hENT-1) for cellular entry (1). Loss of hENT-1
function in vitro has been shown to result in ara-C resistance (2), and
reduced hENT-1 expression and activity has been associated with adverse
therapeutic outcomes in patients treated with cytarabine (3). The
lipophilic ara-C-5 elaidic acid ester of cytarabine (elacytarabine) has
shown nucleoside transport independent uptake and long retention of the
active nucleotide ara-CTP in a leukemic cell line (4) and may have the
ability to overcome resistance due to insufficient transport in the
clinical setting. (1). The whole cell bioluminescent biosensor,
Escherichia coli HA1 was engineered to produce a measurable
bioluminescent output in response to the nucleoside analogue ara-C (5).
This was achieved through reduced expression of cytidine deaminase and
the insertion of the human deoxycytidine kinase gene and the full lux
operon from the Photorhabdus luminescens. The bacterial biosensor is able
to monitor both ara-C and ara-CTP.The aim of this study was to evaluate
the feasibility of using the Escherichia coli HA1 biosensor to measure
intracellular ara-C and ara-CTP following ex vivo exposure of human cells
to elacytarabine and cytarabine.CCRF-CEM cells or blast cells from
patients were treated with ara-C or elacytarabine for up to 4 hours in
the presence or absence of the hENT inhibitor dipyridamole (DPM). Cells
were washed, lysed and the lysate incubated with E. coli HA1 and
monitored on a plate reader luminometer. A cell viability assay was also
performed to confirm biosensor results.E. coli HA1 produced a measurable
response to lysate from CCRF-CEM cells treated with either ara-C or
elacytarabine. In the case of ara-C, this response was reduced when cells
were incubated with DPM. No such reduction was observed for
elacytarabine. When used to treat blast cells derived from leukemic
patients, elacytarabine treatment produced a stronger signal from E. coli
HA1 than an equivalent concentration of ara-C. Furthermore, the efficacy
of elacytarabine was not susceptible to hENT inhibition in patient
samples, whereas the efficacy of ara-C was. The findings of this project
suggest that the E. coli HA1 biosensor is compatible with elacytarabine
and that elacytarabine is able to bypass the effect of hENT inhibition on
CCRF-CEM cells and patient derived blast cells.1. Burke & Giles. Expert
Opin Inv Drug. 2011; 20(12):1707-15.2. Cai et al. Cancer Res. 2008;
68(7):2349-57.3. Galmarini et al. Leukemia Res. 2002;26(7):621-9.4. Adema
et al. Invest New Drug. 2012; 30(5):1908-16.5. Alloush et al. Clin Chem.
2010; 56(12):1862-70.

