Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro platforms representing tumor complexity for target
validation and drug discovery.


PREDECT is one of the major Innovative Medicines Initiatives (IMI) of the
European Union with 21 laboratories collaborating in a Public-Private
partnership, aiming to create more appropriate in vitro platforms for
target validation and drug discovery. Genomic and proteomic data on
cancers from patient material provides hypotheses regarding potential
novel drug targets. Laboratory platforms to validate whether target
modulation would provide a clinical benefit are usually highly
reductionist, often using long-established cell lines growing in 2
dimensions in vitro. These models do not reflect the complexity of a
tumour in situ, where biochemical pathways are wired with connections to
the complex tumour environment provided by stromal, immune and
endothelial cells. PREDECT has the goal of comparing the pathological and
molecular profiles of novel in vitro platforms with those of human
tumours. In a stepwise manner, material from in situ tumours will be
"deconstructed," for example through tissue slices, 3-D heterogenously
complex models (with stroma etc), simple 3D models, complex 2D models to
simple 2D models and the profiles of each platform compared with an in
situ tumour, both in the resting state and when perturbed by drugs or RNA
interference. "Reconstruction" of tumor complexity will also be attempted
and profiled. Proteomics of models of breast, prostate and lung cancer
will be compared in a Work Package based on a centralised TMA platform,
immunohistochemistry and a Web-based microscopy. A systems approach will
interrogate the fidelity of in vitro platforms to represent the
complexity and heterogeneity of human tumors. Because clinical material
presents both logistic and quality problems for ongoing and intense
studies of target validation, PREDECT aims to use material from
genetically engineered mouse models, and some "advanced" xenografts,
whose pathology and molecular profiles closely match cohorts of human
tumours. PREDECT hopes to provide more appropriate platforms both for
target validation and subsequent preclinical studies which will replace a
current cascade of tests which are poorly predictive of clinical activity.

