Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC1 increases epidermal growth factor receptor levels and
signaling in endometrial cancer cell lines.


Endometrial cancer is the most common gynecological cancer, affecting
over 600,000 women in the United States. Furthermore, increased incidence
of endometrial cancer is observed among obese and premenopausal women.
Currently, the standard of care is hysterectomy with the addition of
radiation and chemotherapy for late stage cancers. Novel therapies are
required to avoid surgical complications associated with obese patients
and to preserve the fertility of young patients. MUC1 is a large, heavily
glycosylated transmembrane protein that functions to lubricate mucosal
surfaces, protect cells from external insult and modulates the embryo
implantation process. Recent evidence suggests that the C-terminus of
MUC1 is involved in intracellular signaling through interaction with
several cancer-associated proteins. One of these proteins is the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a receptor tyrosine kinase that
influences cellular proliferation, migration and apoptosis. Elevated MUC1
levels are associated with increased levels and signaling of EGFR in
breast cancer; however, this phenomenon has not been described in the
context of endometrial cancer and the mechanisms involved are not well
understood in any context. To this end, human endometrial cancer cell
lines were subjected to siRNA knockdown of MUC1 followed by qRT-PCR,
western blotting, EGFR promoter-driven luciferase assays, proliferation
and migration assays. These assays demonstrate a correlation of MUC1
levels with EGFR mRNA levels, protein levels, signaling, gene expression
and cellular proliferation and migration. These results demonstrate that
MUC1 control of EGFR levels and signaling also occurs in endometrial
cancer-derived cell lines. Future experiments will elucidate the
mechanisms by which MUC1 promotes EGFR gene expression and signaling in
endometrial cancer. These insights may provide novel MUC1-based targets
for endometrial cancer therapies which when used in conjunction with
current non-surgical treatments may provide a therapeutic strategy that
avoids surgical complications and preserves fertility. (Work supported by
NIH grants RO1 HD 29963 and NCI 2P5098258-06 as well as Rice University
funds to DDC).

