Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of variant claudin 1 transcripts in human breast
tumors.


Claudin 1 is a tight junction protein which contributes to the
transepithelial barrier that controls the transport of ions and small
molecules in epithelial cells. Claudin 1 is also important for the
organization of epithelial cell polarity and thus is crucial in
maintaining the differentiated state of epithelial cells. An increasing
number of studies have shown that the deregulated expression of the
junctional proteins is directly or indirectly involved in cancer
progression, including breast cancer. However, although claudin 1 forms
the backbone of the tight junction, the role of claudin 1 in breast
cancer is not known. Studies from our laboratory and others suggest that
it may be that of a tumor suppressor, as it is often down regulated or
absent in human invasive breast cancer. In the present study we explored
mechanisms that may be involved in the down regulation of claudin 1 in
human breast cancer.Using claudin 1 primers, RT-PCR analysis of several
human breast cancer tissue samples resulted in the identification of a
number of cDNAs, ranging in size from 217bp-615bp. Sequencing of these
cDNAs revealed that they were products of variant claudin 1 transcripts,
exhibiting various deletions primarily involving exon 1. Further
inspection of these sequences showed that the RNA from which they were
derived could not be translated into full length claudin 1 protein
because of existing frame shifts and premature stop codons which may
partially explain the loss of the protein in these tumors. Using genomic
DNA derived from the tumors, we sequenced the claudin 1 exon coding
regions in order to ascertain whether deletions or mutations could
explain the aberrant transcripts. We identified several single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), however, the SNPs did not appear to be directly
linked to these alternate splice variants. Additionally, methylation
specific PCR assay of exon 1 of the claudin 1 gene suggests distinct
methylation patterns within the breast tumors. This data, in conjunction
with supporting evidence obtained from the Cancer Genome Atlas study,
suggests that methylation is involved in the regulation of claudin 1
expression in human breast cancer.In this study, we have identified for
the first time variant claudin 1 transcripts in human breast cancer.
These studies provide novel insights and reveal two possible mechanisms
that may explain the down regulation of claudin 1during breast cancer
progression. Since the breakdown of cell-cell interactions and the
deregulated expression of the junctional proteins, are believed to be key
steps in invasion and metastasis, understanding the molecular and genetic
changes within tight junction molecules such as claudin 1 during breast
tumorigenesis will be critical for facilitating more effective patient
management.

