Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of patient primary colorectal tumor xenograft models
for test of anticancer agents.


BACKGROUND Human xenograft tumor models established by transplantation of
human tumor cell lines into immunodifficient mice have been routinely
used for preclinical test of anticancer agents. But tumor cell lines have
a relatively low transplantability, which resulted in a limited number of
tumor models available for selection right models to test novel
anticancer agents. Recently, we have developed a large number of patients
primary colorectal tumor xenograft models by transplanting human fresh
colorectal tumor tissues into nude mice, which have been employed for
preclinical test of standard care of drugs and novel anticancer agents
for their chemosensitivity screening. METHODS The fresh colorectal tumor
samples were collected from local hospitals. The tumor fragments of 2-3
mm were subcutaneously implanted in the flanks of nude mice by trocar
needle. Sixteen tumor fragments were grafted into four mice from one
patient tumor tissue (passage 0). The standard care of drugs as controls
included 5-FU, irinotecan, oxaliplatin, Erbitux, and Avastin. The
histopathology and gene sequencing of the established primary tumor
models were analyzed and compared with patients original tumors. RESULTS
A total of 180 patients colorectal tumor samples were implanted into nude
mice; and 93 patient tumor derived models have been established with a
tumor taking rates of 52% for the first passage. The tumor taking rates
were higher in the later passages ranged from approximately 80-100%. The
therapeutic efficacy of the test drugs was consistent with their clinical
findings. The patients primary colorectal tumor xenografts from 5
passages retained a similarity in architecture, histopathological
morphology, and genomic mutation status to the patients original tumors.
CONCLUSIONS The patient primary tumor model system can provide a larger
number of models for selection of right models to test novel agents in
preclinical setting based on their anticancer mechanism. The primary
tumor models retain a similarity in histology and genomic mutation status
to their counterpart patients original tumors and may predict more
relevant clinical response and higher correlation with clinical findings
than use of traditional xenograft models established from long-term
cultured cancer cell lines. Especially, they have advantages for test of
target-oriented therapeutics in new drugs development programs.

