Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VEGF-A and Cox-2 gene polymorphisms and susceptibility to
colorectal cancer in Brazilian population.


Background: Brazilian population displays very high levels of genomic
diversity due to the multi-ethnicity, which have important
clinical/genomic implications. The vascular endothelial growth factor-A
(VEGF-A) and Cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) polymorphisms have been implicated
in colorectal cancer (CRC) risk, however, the results on the association
between polymorphisms and cancer risk are conflicting. VEGF and Cox-2
polymorphisms might modify the levels of mRNA and protein expression and
may have a considerable influence on disease phenotype. Aim: We carried
out a case-control study to evaluate whether polymorphisms of VEGF-A and
Cox-2 genes modulate the risk of developing CRC. We also aimed to
investigate possible interactions between these genetic variations and
environmental factors in CRC. Methods: We evaluated VEGF-A and Cox-2
genotypes obtained from a series of 230 CRC patients and 194 controls
from the Hospital-based Brazilian population. DNA was isolated from
leukocyte using extraction and purification kit PureLink, followed by
amplification by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Real-time analysis was
used for genotyping of polymorphisms of VEGF-A and Cox-2, through the
TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assay. There was no difference between the cases
and controls regarding gender, age, ethnicity, and no individual or
familial history of cancer was found in control cases. Results: We
determined frequencies of four VEGF-A biallelic polymorphisms (-2578C>A,
-460T>C, -634G>C, +936C>T), with twelve genotypes; and three Cox-2
polymorphisms (-1195A>G, -765G>C, 8437T>C,) with nine genotypes. The
genotypes frequencies were similar in both case and control groups, and
there was, therefore, no association between these genotypes and CRC
risk. A high frequency of the wild genotype Cox-2 -765GG and 8437TT and
polymorphic genotype Cox-2 -1195GG and VEGF-A -634CC was found in an
Asiatic (mostly Japanese) population. Moreover, VEGF-A -2578C>A, and
-460T>C were associated to familial history of cancer in the cases
series. Tobacco consumption was marginally associated to Cox-2 -1195A>G
genotype. Conclusion: VEGF-A and Cox-2 gene polymorphisms are not
associated with an increased risk of CRC in a Brazilian population. We
could demonstrate the genotype differences among ethnicity, and the
association of these polymorphisms with some risk-factors for CRC.

