Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progesterone-induced immunosuppression thwarts immunosurveillance
to tumors and promotes lung metastasis in a breast cancer model.


Exposure to sexual hormones is one of the strongest risk factors for
breast cancer. Increased risk is entwined with a greater number of
reproductive cycles and the use of progestin-containing hormone
replacement therapy. In addition, the importance of progesterone in
dampening immune response was illustrated in several models of infection
and pregnancy. Based on the tolerogenic properties of progesterone (Pg)
and its promoting role in breast cancer, in this work we investigated
whether progesterone may thwart immunosurveillance and promote tumor
metastasis by fostering an immunosuppressive microenvironment in breast
cancer. Exogenously added Pg: (108M) or its synthetic analogue
medroxiprogesterone acetate (MPA: 108M) induced the expression of the
immunosuppressive protein galectin-1 (Gal1) in the hormone-dependent
human breast cancer cell lines T47D and MCF-7 and in the mouse mammary
adenocarcinoma C4HD. This effect was abrogated by pre-treatment with
RU486 (107M) indicating that the progesterone receptor (PR) was involved.
Interestingly, in vitro MPA treatment of human PBMC or mouse splenocytes
controlled the expansion of regulatory T cells (Tregs) (CD4+CD25+Foxp3+)
and skewed the balance toward a Th2-type cytokine profile. Furthermore,
differentiation from naive T-cells to Tregs cells was enhanced in the
presence of MPA, IL-2 and suboptimal concentrations of TGF-. In addition,
in vivo treatment with MPA (15mg 30-day release depot) of C4HD
tumor-bearing mice increased both the expression of Gal1 and the
frequency of Treg cells in tumor-draining lymph nodes and the tumor
microenvironment. While the increase in Treg cell frequency was
associated with an effect on Treg cell SMAD4 expression that potentiates
TGF- signalling, homing of Treg cells to tumor sites was supported
through the induction of tumor-derived CCL22. Finally, we used a PR
negative breast tumor model (4T1) to evaluate the effect of MPA on the
tumor microenvironment and the consequences of this effect on tumor
progression. In vivo treatment with MPA promoted lung metastasis by
inducing an invasive phenotype in breast cancer cells. Co-culture of Treg
cells differentiated in vivo in the presence of MPA with 4T1 cells
promoted its invasive activity and modulate several genes associated with
EMT, including SNAIL. In summary, these results demonstrate that
progesterone hierarchically fosters an immunosuppressive tumor
microenvironment that promotes metastasis by co-ordinately regulating
Gal1 expression, stimulating the TGF- pathway and augmenting the
frequency of Treg cells. Our findings provide new insights into the role
of progesterone in breast cancer as a crucial promoter of tumor-immune
escape.

