Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Micro-RNA signature differences in lung cancer patients with ALK
translocation, EGFR mutations and KRAS mutations.


Background: Oncogenic driving mutations identify lung adenocarcinoma with
different prognosis and sensitivity to targeted therapies. miRNAs are a
new class of non-coding RNA involved in gene expression regulation and
recent studies have suggested that miRNAs could be useful for stratifying
lung cancer subtypes. How miRNAs are dysregulated in lung cancer patients
with ALK translocation, EGFR or KRAS mutation is unknown. Aim of the
present study is to identify miRNA signature differences according to the
presence of specific oncogenic driver and correlation between miRNAs
deregulation and drug response.Materials and methods: The study was
conducted in a cohort of 70 lung cancer patients including 68 primary
cancer tissue (17 ALK positive tumors, 11 ALK negative EGFR positive
tumors, 15 ALK negative KRAS positive tumors, 24 ALK negative EGFR and
KRAS negative tumors defined as wild-type) with matched normal lung
tissue (N=18) and 2 metastatic tissue. RNA was isolated from
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue (FFPE), using the Recover ALL kit
(Ambion). Data were processed according to manufacture guidelines. We
used Limma to test for differential expression analysis of data. The
miRNAs expression between tissues for all RT-qPCR was analyzed using the
parametric t-test (unpaired, 2-tailed for validation).Results: miRNA
expression profile, cluster distinctly ALK+ patients from ALK- and normal
lung tissue. Furthermore we found specific miRNAs subsets, within the
ALK- group, able to sub-stratify KRAS versus EGFR careers and cluster
sharply wild-type versus EGFR and wild-type versus KRAS as well. miRNAs
belonging to the miR-515 family seems to be the most deregulated in the
ALK+ vs ALK- comparison. Although their expression is stably high in
normal tissues and ALK+ class they are highly downregulated in KRAS
mutated versus EGFR mutated and versus ALK-/KRAS wild type/EGFR wild type
(p-value Background: Oncogenic driving mutations identify lung
adenocarcinoma with different prognosis and sensitivity to targeted
therapies. miRNAs are a new class of non-coding RNA involved in gene
expression regulation and recent studies have suggested that miRNAs could
be useful for stratifying lung cancer subtypes. How miRNAs are
dysregulated in lung cancer patients with ALK translocation, EGFR or KRAS
mutation is unknown. Aim of the present study is to identify miRNA
signature differences according to the presence of specific oncogenic
driver and correlation between miRNAs deregulation and drug
response.Materials and methods: The study was conducted in a cohort of 70
lung cancer patients including 68 primary cancer tissue (17 ALK positive
tumors, 11 ALK negative EGFR positive tumors, 15 ALK negative KRAS
positive tumors, 24 ALK negative EGFR and KRAS negative tumors defined as
wild-type) with matched normal lung tissue (N=18) and 2 metastatic
tissue. RNA was isolated from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue
(FFPE), using the Recover ALL kit (Ambion). Data were processed according
to manufacture guidelines. We used Limma to test for differential
expression analysis of data. The miRNAs expression between tissues for
all RT-qPCR was analyzed using the parametric t-test (unpaired, 2-tailed
for validation).Results: miRNA expression profile, cluster distinctly
ALK+ patients from ALK- and normal lung tissue. Furthermore we found
specific miRNAs subsets, within the ALK- group, able to sub-stratify KRAS
versus EGFR careers and cluster sharply wild-type versus EGFR and
wild-type versus KRAS as well. miRNAs belonging to the miR-515 family
seems to be the most deregulated in the ALK+ vs ALK- comparison. Although
their expression is stably high in normal tissues and ALK+ class they are
highly downregulated in KRAS mutated versus EGFR mutated and versus
ALK-/KRAS wild type/EGFR wild type (p-value <0.001 for all
comparisons).Conclusions: miRNAs profile significantly differs in lung
cancer patients with ALK translocation, EGFR mutations and KRAS
mutations. Molecular analysis of the pathways involving the miR-515
family is ongoing in order to correlate their expression levels with
patients outcome. Since miRNAs can induce resistance or sensitize to
chemotherapies, in vitro modulation of miR-515 family expression level
together with drugs test are ongoing in order to find better targeted
therapies for ALK+ and ALK- patients.Citation Format: Pierluigi
Gasparini, Lorenza Landi, Stefania Carasi, Carmelo Tibaldi, Luciano
Cascione, Greta Al, Armida D'Incecco, Gabriele Minuti, Antonio Chella,
Gabriella Fontanini, Federico Cappuzzo, Carlo M. Croce. Micro-RNA
signature differences in lung cancer patients with ALK translocation,
EGFR mutations and KRAS mutations. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3061. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3061

