Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of MGMT-binding proteins involved in the negative
regulation of angiogenesis and invasion.


Background: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most frequent and most
aggressive form of primary malignant brain tumors in adults. The dismal
prognosis of GBM patients stems from the highly angiogenic and invasive
behavior of GBM tumor cells. O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase
(MGMT), a DNA repair protein ubiquitously expressed in normal tissues has
been extensively characterized for its role in resistance to alkylating
agents used in GBM treatment. We reported for the first time an inverse
relationship between expression of MGMT and the angiogenic and invasive
profile of GBM cell lines. The mechanisms by which MGMT affects
angiogenesis and invasion are unknown. We hypothesized that interactions
of MGMT with binding proteins (BPs) may account for additional functions
beyond its known role as a DNA repair protein.Methods: As a first
screening to identify MGMT-BPs with a functional relevance for invasion
and angiogenesis, we performed affinity purification of MGMT-BPs
following overexpression of FLAG-tagged MGMT and mass spectrometry
analysis using 293T-Flag/MGMT and control Flag-tagged empty vector
(293T-Flag/EV). Lysates were subjected to affinity purification using an
anti-Flag monoclonal antibody covalently attached to agarose resin. The
affinity bound FLAG fusion proteins were eluted and separated on
SDS-PAGE. Coomassie Blue staining enabled the identification of 6 bands
including Flag-MGMT in 293T-Flag/MGMT but not the Flag/EV control. The
bands were excised from the gel, subjected to trypsin digestion and
identified by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. The
resultant MS/MS spectra were searched against a proteome database for
peptide matching and protein identification. Proteins were identified
with high confidence using Scaffold software.Results: Our analysis
provided evidence for binding of MGMT to 120 BPs. Using gene ontology
(GO) database to search for functional categories, we identified proteins
involved in DNA repair, ubiquitin pathway, DNA replication and
transcription, RNA metabolism and processing, cell cycle and division,
response to stress and cell death. Importantly, we identified proteins
involved in cell motility and/or angiogenesis, cytoskeletal-related
proteins (15 proteins), small GTPases family and their regulators (10
proteins, such as Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2) and two
proteins involved in angiogenesis (Endoribonuclease Dicer and
Ribonuclease inhibitor). We also used T98G a human GBM cell line with
constitutive expression of MGMT to perform immunoprecipitation of
endogenous MGMT (anti-MGMT antibody or the IgG1 isotype control). Mass
spectrometry and proteomic analysis of MGMT-BPs in T98G is
underway.Conclusion: Our data provide new structural aspects of MGMT and
shed light into the multifaceted role of MGMT, which may lead to the
identification of novel therapeutic targets in GBM.

