Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of Met-dependent tumorigenesis in models of triple
negative breast cancer.


Human breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease encompassing multiple
subtypes. The basal-like and claudin-low subtypes, collectively known as
triple negative (TN) breast cancer, are predominantly negative for the
expression of therapeutic targets (Her2 and estrogen receptors) and have
poor prognosis. In human breast cancer, elevated levels of MET are
correlated with TN subtypes and poor outcome, but the reasons for this
are relatively unknown. The Met receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) is a cell
surface protein that is activated in response to the Hepatocyte Growth
Factor (HGF). Upon stimulation, Met signaling pathways initiate a program
of cell survival, migration, and invasive growth. To investigate the role
of Met in tumourigenesis, we generated transgenic mice with mammary
specific expression of an oncogenic variant of Met (MMTV-Metmut). These
mice develop tumours with features of TN breast cancer.Tumour-initiating
cells (TICs) have emerged as a key concept in prevailing models of tumour
development. In breast and other solid tumours, where the bulk of the
tumour mass consists of differentiated non-tumourigenic cells, TICs
constitute a cell fraction of less differentiated tumourigenic cells, and
have been shown to be highly resistant to radiation and chemotherapy.
TICs are thus a key therapeutic target, yet little is known about TICs in
TN breast cancer. Using tumoursphere assays, we have established the
presence of TICs in tumours derived from MMTV-Metmut transgenic mice.
MMTV-Metmut TICs have constitutively active Met. Interestingly, treatment
with a small molecule inhibitor targeting Met can diminish both
tumoursphere formation and proliferation. Thus, in TN breast cancers,
elevated levels of Met signaling may promote TIC tumourigenicity. Here,
mechanisms of Met-dependent TIC propagation and tumourigenicity will be
addressed and supporting data presented.The molecular events that lead to
human basal-like and claudin-low breast cancers are poorly understood.
Validating a role for Met in TICs could identify key pathways involved in
the pathogenesis of TN breast cancer, providing information for new
therapeutic targets.

