Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relationship between tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), tumor
delivery, and efficacy of PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) and
non-liposomal doxorubicin (NL-doxo) in genetically engineered mouse
models (GEMMs) of breast cancer (BC).


Introduction: Solid tumors consist of both malignant cells and
non-malignant stromal cells. Stromal cells typically include vascular,
mesenchymal, and pro-inflammatory cells. Macrophages are the most
abundant pro-inflammatory cell type in solid tumors and are termed TAMs.
TAMs are derived from monocytes (mononuclear phagocyte system, MPS) and
are associated with tumor progression, angiogenesis, and metastasis. The
MPS are responsible for the clearance and distribution of nanoparticle
(NP) anticaner agents such as PLD. However, the role of MPS in the tumor
delivery of NP have not been evaluated. In this study, we evaluated the
relationship between TAM-related tumor microenvironment factors, tumor
delivery, and efficacy of PLD and NL-doxo in GEMMs of BC.Methods:
Basal-like (C3(1)T-antigen) and claudin-low (T11/TP53-/-) GEMMs of human
BC subtypes were evaluated. PLD or NL-doxo was administered at 6 mg/kg IV
x 1 via a tail vein. For each GEMM, mice (n=3) were sacrificed prior to
dose, and from 5 min to 96 h post dose. Plasma encapsulated and released
doxo and sum total doxo conc in tumor was measured by HPLC. Area under
the plasma and tumor conc versus time curves (AUC) were calculated. TAM
infiltration was visualized and measured via immunohistochemistry (IHC)
for F4/80. Endothelial cells in tumors were detected by CD31 IHC. Density
of TAMs and endothelial cells in tumors were measured by the Aperio
analysis algorithms. In efficacy study, PLD or NL-doxo at 6 mg/kg was
administered every week for 6 weeks (n=20 per model). Tumor growth and
overall survival were monitored.Results: Mean SD of plasma AUC of PLD
encapsulated doxo in T11 and C3tag were1,449 57 and 1,610 111 (gh/ml),
respectively. Mean SD of tumor sum total AUC of PLD in T11 and C3tag were
210 26 and 480 71 (gh/ml), respectively. Mean SD of tumor AUC of NL-doxo
in T11 and C3tag were 61 12 and 57 10 (gh/ml), respectively. Mean SD
baseline % positive cells of TAM in T11 and C3tag were 113 45 and 110 50,
respectively. Mean SD baseline microvessel density in T11 and C3tag were
8.8 2.5 and 6.1 1.8 (number of vessels x105 per unit area), respectively.
C3tag demonstrated greater antitumor response to PLD compared to
T11.Conclusions: There was a substantial difference in tumor exposure of
PLD, but not NL-doxo, in the two GEMMs. These findings suggest that TM
factors in BC may affect the delivery of NP agents, but not small
molecules (SM). However, the similar TAM and microvessel baseline density
in GEMMs suggest alternative tumor factors specifically affecting the
delivery of NP agents. Further studies are warranted to elucidate the
mechanisms underlying the delivery of NP agents in these and other tumors
which may explain different tumor phenotypes and therapeutic outcomes
related to treatment with NP and SM agents.

