Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coupling of hydroxyethyl starch to anticancer drugs for the
improvement of tolerability and efficacy.


Background: Standard-of-care anti-cancer drugs exhibit anti-tumor
activity but typically display dose limiting toxicities in patients. Poor
solubility in water, a short half-life, and a narrow therapeutic window
further limit their applicability. The aim of the current studies was to
investigate whether coupling of hydroxyethyl starch (HES) to selected
anti-cancer drugs with different cleavable linkers improves their
efficacy and safety in human tumor xenograft models in mice.Materials and
methods: Female NMRI nu/nu mice bearing subcutaneous xenografts of the
human large cell lung cancer LXFL 529 were treated twice weekly i.v. for
two to four weeks with either the vehicle only, etoposide, temsirolimus
or their HES-conjugates. Dosing started at group median tumor volumes of
200-250 mm3. In another model, 5x106 tumor cells from the human breast
carcinoma MT-3 cell line were inoculated s.c. followed by i.v. injection
of vehicle, docetaxel, or HES-docetaxel conjugates starting on day 7 at
palpable tumor size. Docetaxel was administered on 5 consecutive days [5
mg/kg]; the HES-docetaxel conjugates were given only once on day 7 [75
mg/kg]. Moreover, 1x107 cells of the human colon carcinoma HT-29 cell
line were implanted s.c. to develop palpable tumors within 8 days. On day
8, the mice received a single i.v. dose of vehicle, irinotecan, or either
HES-irinotecan or HES-SN38 conjugates.Tumor volume, body weight, and
mortality were monitored during an observation period of up to 90
days.Results: The conjugates were well soluble in saline in contrast to
the originator drugs. HES-temsirolimus exerted a higher anti-tumor
activity, and HES-etoposide caused a substantially delayed progression of
the large cell lung cancer xenograft LXFL 529 after the end of dosing in
comparison to the respective originator drug. In the experiment with the
breast carcinoma xenograft model, the HES-docetaxel conjugates were
better tolerated than docetaxel, allowing the administration of higher
doses. HES-docetaxel conjugates exerted a stronger anti-tumor activity
compared to the originator drug.In the human colon carcinoma xenograft
model, HES-SN38 at the same, or even at a lower dose level compared to
irinotecan, caused a substantially stronger tumor growth inhibition
dependent on the stability of the linker. Moreover, HES-irinotecan
reduced tumor growth to a significantly greater degree than the
irinotecan originator.Conclusion: We showed for the first time that the
conjugation of HES to drugs is useful to improve their water solubility,
making irritating excipients required to dissolve hydrophobic drugs,
dispensable. In addition, the coupling of HES to anti-cancer drugs can
improve their efficacy and tolerability in tumor xenograft models in
mice. The extended release kinetics of HES-drug conjugates may improve
the pharmacokinetic profile by reducing exposure peaks, which are
typically related to unwanted drug effects.

