Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Robo1, a new target, by Wnt and androgen receptor signaling in
castration resistant prostate cancer.


Androgen receptor (AR) and -catenin/TCF-4 signaling both play a critical
role during prostate cancer progression to castration-resistance and
cross-talk with each other. Therefore, identifying novel down-stream
targets that are co-regulated by AR and -catenin/TCF-4 signaling is
important for understanding the development of castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC). Robo1, a transmembrane receptor of Slit, is known
for its roles in neurogenesis and angiogenesis. Previous studies have
shown that Robo/Slits are aberrantly expressing in different cancers. We
have shown that Robo1 is over-expressed in androgen-insensitive prostate
cancer cell lines (C4-2B, PC3, 22RV1) compared to androgen-sensitive
lines (LNCaP and LAPC-4), and absent in normal prostate epithelial cells.
Androgen deprivation resulted in enhanced expression of Robo1 and
addition of synthetic androgen R1881decreased Robo1 expression in LNCaP
cells. In addition, Wnt 3A and 5A conditioned medium stimulation
increased Robo1 mRNA expression in LNCaP cells. Inhibition of Wnt
signaling by overexpression of secreted Wnt antagonists Wnt-inhibitory
factor-1 (WIF-1) and Frzb/sFRP3 in two CRPC cell lines, decreased the
expression of Robo1. Using GenBank and MatInspector software, we have
identified potential binding sites for TCF-4 in the 5 flanking promoter
region of the ROBO1 gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
real-time PCR analysis revealed that TCF-4 binds to the ROBO1 promoter at
two predicted sites, and that WIF-1 and Frzb/sFRP3 expression inhibited
its promoter binding. Overexpression of WIF-1 and Frzb/sFRP3 also
inhibited the promoter activity of Robo1. Knock-down of Robo1 by
short-hairpin RNA in PC3 cells resulted in dramatic morphological changes
with increased cell aggregation and adhesion. Taken together, our results
indicate that Robo1 is a co-target of Wnt and AR signaling. Further
studies are in progress to define the functional role of Robo1 in CRPC.

