Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of ERK, AKT and MEK isoform phosphorylations between
primary and corresponding metastatic colorectal carcinoma lesions using
the NanoPro1000 technology.


Proteomic analysis of cellular signaling networks has strongly gained in
importance in the field of cancer research and treatment. In particular,
there is a focus on the activation status of growth factor receptor
related signaling cascades represented by phosphoproteins, as key
mediators of cellular signaling. For example, the inhibition of the
EGF-receptor pathway has been widely integrated into clinical practice
for different tumor entities, e.g. non small lung cancer and colorectal
cancer. Although, predictive genetic markers of response to targeted
therapy such as KRAS testing are already in use, heterogeneity in
responses to treatment has been clinically observed. In order to
understand this heterogeneity on the proteome level, the activation
status of cell signaling proteins has to be analyzed. The in-depth
analysis of isoform phosphorylation can potentially reveal significant
biological differences in activation patterns and might result in
predictive signatures.In this study, we differentially analyzed basal
isoform phosphorylations of selected key proteins of two EGF-receptor
downstream pathways, in four primary colorectal tumors and their
corresponding metastases using the NanoPro1000 technology. Patient's
biospecimen were collected according to standard operating procedures,
ensuring a high quality of tissues characterized by ischemia times below
10 minutes, comprehensive clinical data and corresponding sets of body
fluids. The detailed characterization of isoform phosphorylations was
conducted using the recently introduced NanoPro1000 technology. This
assay provides the separation of phospho protein isoforms by
high-resolution isoelectric focusing (IEF) combined with a specific,
antibody based detection. In addition to these data, the mutation status
of selected, clinical relevant genes (KRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA) was
determined in primary and metastatic tumor samples using Sanger
sequencing. Among the analyzed primary tumors, there were two KRAS
mutants, one BRAF mutant and one wild type tumor. Identical results were
found in the matched metastasis.NanoPro1000 analysis revealed that
isoform phosphorylation of ERK1/2, AKT and MEK1/2 differed among
patients, as well as primary tumors and metastases. For example, ERK1
showed a tendency to be higher mono- and dual-phosphorylated in the
primary tumors, whereas mono-phosphorylated ERK2 was elevated in
metastases. However, a correlation to the mutation status was not
found.These differences may explain the heterogeneity of individual
responses to target anticancer treatment among patients, independent of
their mutation status. Therefore, the NanoPro1000 technology can
potentially be useful to identify predictive biomarker for the
development of resistance to anti-EGF-receptor treatment and further
improve personalized medicine.

