Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput four color detection and analysis of circulating
epithelial cells in early and late breast cancer.


The Maintrac technique (RBClysis,fluorometric detection and analysis on
Olympus ScanR) detects more circulating epithelial cells (CEC) then other
enrichment- based methods. In our ongoing early breast cancer study
(n=177), we found >125 CEC/ml in 35% of patients. In advanced breast
cancer 60% of patients had cell counts>125 cells/ml . In controls (n=98)
we found 125-250 cells/ml in 2%. Extended evaluation of a non cancer
control group showed >125 cells/ml in 90% of patients with liver
affections such as nonalcoholic fatty liver disease(NAFLD) . Using a
three colour- based technique living and dead (DAPI) EPCAM + cells
coexpressing vimentin and in parallell EPCAM+ cells coexpressing Vimentin
and CD44 were measured. We saw a very inhomogeneous EPCAM+ population
with different expression patterns,which made analysis very tedious.
Moreover, there was no detectable difference between the CEC in early and
late breast cancer and in liver affections, in both situations CEC had
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)- and stem cell characteristics.
We aimed to perform a more comprehensive analysis of these CEC by
introducing a fourth color.We modified the basic procedure of the
Maintrac technique in order too allow analysis and detection of CEC on
the AMNIS FlowSight. Cells are aspirated from 96 well microplates
allowing four color detection and automated analysis with AMNIS IDEAS
software. Total plate run is completed within 9 hours. Beside the
fastness new items like detection of tumor microemboli (TME) and EPCAM-
independent analysis of cells with a stem cell phenotype (CD44high,CD24
low) or metabolic markers (HIF-1,carboanhydrase 9) is possible. We
currently use DAPI, EPCAMAF660, vimentin -PE and CD45-FITC as basic
combination . A second run uses CD24-PE, CD45-FITC, CD44-PacBlue and
EPCAM- AF660 . Double measurement of the EPCAM+CD45neg population as
basic population for comparison is achieved . Comprehensive analysis of
more defined circulating stem cells (CSC) is thus possible.This approach
will clarify the differences between liver- and tumor-derived CEC thus
avoiding false positive CTC counts in early breast cancer . Our
preliminary results show detectable differences between patients with
advanced cancer and NAFLD concerning highly defined CEC with with
"stemness" expression (CD44high, CD24low, EPCAM+, CD45neg). Our focus is
on a cell type with very high "dotted " expression of CD44, EPCAM and
vimentin, seen already with three colour analysis. We are currently
introducing other markers like ALDH1 and beta-catenin for better
definition of CSC. Furthermore, detection of Her2 or other targets like
PD-1 or phosphatidylserine are possible on this defined CEC. We will
present extended data with the four color approach for CEC analysis in
early and late breast cancer at the conference.

