Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin promotes tumorigenesis in animal models of cancer
prevention.


Metformin is a bi-guanidine employed in treating Type II diabetes.
Epidemiologic studies have suggested that diabetics receiving metformin
vs thialidizones or insulin have a lower incidence of cancer. In
addition, metformin decreases levels of AMPK and IGF1; encouraging its
use in both cancer prevention and therapy settings. Most preclinical
studies with metformin have employed cell culture or xenografts. We
examined its efficacy in multiple in situ animal cancer models. The
preventive effect of Metformin administered by gavage or in the diet, at
roughly the human equivalent dose (HED), was determined in four standard
animal models: (1) methylnitrosourea (MNU)-induced ER+ mammary cancers;
(2) MMTV-Neu ER mammary cancers; (3) hydroxybutyl(butyl)nitrosamine
(OH-BBN) induced urinary bladder cancers; and (4) Min mouse model of
intestinal tumorigenesis. In the MNU model, Metformin (150 or 50 mg/Kg
BW/day) was ineffective as a preventive dose; decreasing neither tumor
multiplicity nor latency. Furthermore, both doses increased final tumor
weights in treated rats. PK studies at the higher dose of Metformin (150
mg/kg BW/day) showed serum levels slightly higher than humans taking 1.5
g per day. In the MMTV-Neu model, dietary metformin (1200 PPM in diet)
decreased the latency of tumor development as well as slightly, but
insignificantly, increasing the final tumor multiplicity. Metformin (1200
ppm in diet) in the Min mouse model marginally increased the multiplicity
of intestinal adenomas. In contrast, the NSAID naproxen (400 ppm in diet)
examined simultaneously in the min mouse strongly inhibited adenoma
development. Metformin (150 mg/Kg BW/day) in the OH-BBN induced model of
urinary bladder cancer failed to significantly reduce bladder cancers
despite relatively high levels of Metformin in the urine. In the MNU
model, when rats were placed on a high fat diet to induce a pre-diabetic
state, we observed roughly a 20% decrease in tumor multiplicity in the
metformin treated rats (P> 0.10). In contrast, tamoxifen and Targretin
(an RXR agonist) that were used as positive controls were highly
effective in rats on a high fat diet. Metformin didn't decrease
tumorigenesis in these standard models, but actually increased tumor
formation (incidence, multiplicity, weight) in three of the four models
at their HED. These results should particularly discourage any large
phase clinical trials in individuals without insulin resistance. The
final study certainly raises the question whether the agent might be
effective in animals that are diabetic or show insulin resistance

