Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Indication switching of the FDA-approved anticancer tyrosine
kinase inhibitors to treat metabolic diseases.


Drug switching is a unique way to identify and extend new indications for
approved drugs in drug discovery & development. Tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) are used in biologically targeted cancer therapy and so
far 12 TKIs have been approved by FDA. We hypothesize that these TKIs act
on other molecular targets in addition to tyrosine kinases and may manage
metabolic diseases given that there is a complex network of kinases that
work together to regulate a number of important cellular processes.
Employing a comprehensive docking method with our established
chemical-protein interactome (CPI) and 11 FDA-approved TKIs, we have
discovered301 PDB-deposited proteins corresponding to 353 ligand binding
pockets among a total of 1,780 PDB-deposited human protein entries.
Notably, sorafenib, dasatinib and crizotinib had a CPI binding score
(ZZ_score) of -1.2903, -1.0278 and -1.5384 against histone deacetylase
7A, respectively. In addition, those TKIs achieved high ZZ scores against
B-Raf, PPAR and VDR, suggesting a high binding affinity of sorafenib,
dasatinib and crizotinib with these proteins. Our preliminary studies
have showed that the acetylated-lysine in -tublin and oncogenic Akt and
Raf-signaling was inhibited significantly in human multiple melanoma
cells by these TKIs. Interestingly, dasatinib increased VDRE and HDLR
luciferase reporter activity in the human lung adenocarcinoma A-549
cells, and dasatinib and crizotinib induced autophage by activated LC3 in
vitro. Furthermore, the erlotinib and sorafenib decreased glucose levels
in Wistar STZ-D rats. These TKIs are predicted to act on a series of
therapeutics targets associated with metabolic diseases (such as PPAR and
Sirt1). Collectively, FDA-approved TKIs may be switched to become a magic
bullet concurrently targeting tyrosine kinase, HDAC, PPAR, VDR and B-Raf,
shedding a light for future anti-metabolic disorder and anticancer drug
discovery & development. Further validation of additional hot targets
besides tyrosine kinase such as HDAC, B-Raf, PPAR, Sirt1, Akt and VDR,
and in vivo evaluation of anti-metabolic disorder by TKIs are undergoing
at our laboratory. These findings suggest that drug switching may
represent a new and effective approach to expanding the application of
existing drugs.

