Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Switching of CD44 and hMena mRNA splice variants between the
intramucosal lesion and invasive front of early stage human colorectal
carcinoma (pT1), and their relationship to the expression of cancer stem
cell markers and clinicopathological features.


Background:Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) is a key process
involved in both tumor metastasis and cancer stem cell development.
Recent studies have indicated that regulation at the level of alternative
splicing constitutes a critical mechanism that controls EMT and cancer
progression (Warzecha CC et al. Mol Cell 33:591,2009). The aim of this
study was to clarify the mRNA expression statuses of CD44 and hMena
splice variants and colon cancer stemness markers in pT1 stage colorectal
carcinoma (CRC).Materials and methods:The mRNA expression of CD44 and
hMena splice variants as well as colorectal cancer stemness markers, such
as ALDH1, CD133 and CD26, were analyzed in 58 tumors of early CRC
featuring submucosal invasion (pT1). The samples were obtained from
endoscopically resected specimens between 2006 and 2010 at the Asahi
General Hospital. The mRNAs were extracted from the mucosal lesion and
invasive front of each CRC specimen using laser-captured microdissection
then analyzed by semi-quantitative real-time PCR. The correlations
between expression of these mRNAs and clinicopathological factors were
also investigated. This study was approved by institutional review
boards.Results:Significantly higher CD44s mRNA levels were predominantly
expressed in the samples from invasive fronts when compared with those
measured from intramucosal lesion, while CD44v mRNA levels were
significantly higher in the samples from intramucosal lesions than of
those from invasive fronts (P=0.0004 and 0.001, respectively). The
hMena+11a mRNA levels in the mucosal lesions were higher than those
measured from the invasive front (p=0.006). The mRNA levels of hMenaINV,
in contrast, showed the reversed expression pattern. Thus, cell-type
specific expression of epithelial and mesenchmal isoforms of hMena is
achieved through tight regulation of mutually exclusive exons hMena+11a
and MenaINV, respectively. The mRNA levels of ALDH1, CD133 and CD26 were
low and did not differ between samples from the intramucosal area and
invasive front. However, ALDH1 transcript levels increased at the area of
subserosal invasion of advanced CRCs. Notably, higher expression levels
of hMenaINV mRNAs in samples extracted from invasive fronts were
associated with tumor budding grade (P=0.008).Discussion:Our study
indicates that the expression of CD44s and MenaINV may reflect the EMT
better than the cancer stem cell markers during the initial submucosal
invasion of CRC. In summary, the expression of CD44 and hMena splice
variants could be potentially useful biomarkers for evaluating the
malignant potential of CRC.

