Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential roles of microglia and macrophages for glioma
progression.


Glioblastomas belong to the tumors with the worst prognosis. One reason
for the short survival time after diagnosis is the invasiveness of these
tumors, which makes a total resection impossible, and hinders effective
local therapies. So far, the exact role of the resident microglia and
blood macrophages in the process of tumor cell invasion remains unclear.
We investigated the role of these immune cells using CX3CR1 transgenic
BL/6 mice. In heterozygous CX3CR1-GFP mice, the function of microglia or
macrophages is not impaired but both cell types can be tracked over time
by stable GFP expression; homozygous mice have both GFP-labeled microglia
and macrophages, but lack a functional CX3CR1 chemokine receptor. Both
mice strains received a chronic cranial window with subsequent
stereotactic Gl261 glioma cell injection into the brain three weeks
later. The invasion dynamics of the stably dsRed-transduced tumor cells
was monitored using intravital two photon microscopy. In homozygous
animals, tumor cells migrated faster than in heterozygous mice (4,6 m/h
vs. 3 m/h, pGlioblastomas belong to the tumors with the worst prognosis.
One reason for the short survival time after diagnosis is the
invasiveness of these tumors, which makes a total resection impossible,
and hinders effective local therapies. So far, the exact role of the
resident microglia and blood macrophages in the process of tumor cell
invasion remains unclear. We investigated the role of these immune cells
using CX3CR1 transgenic BL/6 mice. In heterozygous CX3CR1-GFP mice, the
function of microglia or macrophages is not impaired but both cell types
can be tracked over time by stable GFP expression; homozygous mice have
both GFP-labeled microglia and macrophages, but lack a functional CX3CR1
chemokine receptor. Both mice strains received a chronic cranial window
with subsequent stereotactic Gl261 glioma cell injection into the brain
three weeks later. The invasion dynamics of the stably dsRed-transduced
tumor cells was monitored using intravital two photon microscopy. In
homozygous animals, tumor cells migrated faster than in heterozygous mice
(4,6 m/h vs. 3 m/h, p<0.001). Both groups showed a perivascular tumor
cell invasion pattern. Moreover, single microglia or macrophage cells
showed intracellular RFP-positive fragments as a sign of glioma cell
phagocytosis; this was observed only in heterozygous animals and not in
homozygous animals lacking a functional CX3CR1 receptor. To decipher the
role of resident microglia vs. macrophages in glioma invasion, blood
macrophages were depleted in heterozygous CX3CR1 mice by intravenous
injection of clodronate liposomes. In those mice tumor cell invasion was
dramatically reduced. Pre-existing brain resident microglia was not
affected by clodronate treatment. All in all, these results implicate a
CX3CR1-dependent proinvasive role for blood-borne macrophages in glioma
cell invasion in the live mouse brain, whereas residential microglia
seems to exert anti-glioma effects. This microglia - macrophage dichotomy
has implications for therapies aiming at inhibition of glioma invasion,
via CX3CR1 targeting and beyond.

