Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein kinase C substrate screens reveal enrichment for mRNA
binding proteins and identify SERBP1 as a novel PKC substrate and signal
transduction hub protein.


PKC is implicated in carcinogenesis and tumor progression, potentially
via its influence on protein translation. Relatively few PKC substrates
have been identified, however, limiting our understanding of these
processes. Here, we use high throughput kinase screens and gene ontology
(GO) annotation enrichment analysis to identify putative PKC substrates
and potentially related biological themes. Protein microarrays spotted
with 4085 Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins and 2754 human proteins were
probed with a PKC catalytic domain in the presence of 33 ATP, lipid
activators and divalent calcium. Three concentrations of the kinase
spanning a 50-fold concentration range were compared to protein kinase A-
and kinase-free control reactions. 117 yeast proteins and 112 human
proteins yielded PKC phosphorylation Z scores greater than 3.0, including
the known PKC substrates Annexin 2 and CPI-17/PPP1R14a. 53 human proteins
and 41 yeast proteins that were dose-proportionally phosphorylated by PKC
were considered high confidence PKC substrates. Over 90% of these are
known polyanion binding proteins (PABP) suggesting that protein charge
distribution may influence PKC-substrate interactions. PKC phosphorylated
WD repeat proteins, DEAD box helicases, Eukaryotic Initiation Factors,
La-related proteins, and Casein Kinase 2 family paralogs on both arrays.
GO analysis of all human high confidence hits showed greater than six
fold enrichment in the terms RNA binding and ribonucleoprotein complex
(Benjamini P-value PKC is implicated in carcinogenesis and tumor
progression, potentially via its influence on protein translation.
Relatively few PKC substrates have been identified, however, limiting our
understanding of these processes. Here, we use high throughput kinase
screens and gene ontology (GO) annotation enrichment analysis to identify
putative PKC substrates and potentially related biological themes.
Protein microarrays spotted with 4085 Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins
and 2754 human proteins were probed with a PKC catalytic domain in the
presence of 33 ATP, lipid activators and divalent calcium. Three
concentrations of the kinase spanning a 50-fold concentration range were
compared to protein kinase A- and kinase-free control reactions. 117
yeast proteins and 112 human proteins yielded PKC phosphorylation Z
scores greater than 3.0, including the known PKC substrates Annexin 2 and
CPI-17/PPP1R14a. 53 human proteins and 41 yeast proteins that were
dose-proportionally phosphorylated by PKC were considered high confidence
PKC substrates. Over 90% of these are known polyanion binding proteins
(PABP) suggesting that protein charge distribution may influence
PKC-substrate interactions. PKC phosphorylated WD repeat proteins, DEAD
box helicases, Eukaryotic Initiation Factors, La-related proteins, and
Casein Kinase 2 family paralogs on both arrays. GO analysis of all human
high confidence hits showed greater than six fold enrichment in the terms
RNA binding and ribonucleoprotein complex (Benjamini P-value <0.0008 and
0.0006, respectively). One high confidence hit, the PAI-1 mRNA binding
protein SERBP1, is structurally related to the signaling hub protein and
PKC substrate Ki1/57. A modulator of PAI-1 mRNA stability, SERBP1 is a
highly connected hub protein that has been linked to tumor status and
cancer progression. Here, site-directed mutagenesis and phospho-specific
antibodies were used to show that recombinant PKC uniquely phosphorylates
SERBP1 serine 74 in a highly conserved amino terminal motif distinct from
the PKC motif in Ki1/57. SERBP1 phosphorylation was also demonstrated in
leukemia cells and peripheral blood cells treated with phorbol esters, a
reaction that was blocked in a dose-dependent manner by isoform-selective
PKC inhibitors. These findings suggest that mRNA binding proteins and
other PABP represent a new class of PKC substrates, and that some of the
known effects of PKC on protein translation may arise through direct
interactions with mRNA binding proteins.

