Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gynostemma pentaphyllum saponins alter the gut microflora
composition and convert dysbiosis to eubiosis state in xenograft nude
mice.


Increasing evidence has shown that the gut microflora may have a crucial
role in many diseases, including cancers. In our previous studies, we
have demonstrated that treatment with total saponins of Gynostemma
pentaphyllum (GpS) exerts anti-cancer effects in cellular and animal
models. Our study showed that an unnatural shift in the microflora
composition was observed in nude mice with xenografted tumors induced by
GFP/Ras cells. To investigate the potential association between the
anti-cancer effect of GpS and the gut microflora, we first investigated
whether GpS treatment would affect the microflora composition.
Enterobacterial Repetitive Intergenic Consensus sequence-based PCR
(ERIC-PCR) was used to analyze the bacterial genomic DNA from the fecal
samples of the experimental mice. ERIC-PCR analysis revealed that gut
microbiota communities were able to restore back to the non-tumor state
(day 0)) after treatment with GpS for 10 days. In addition, we found that
GpS treatment can increase the levels of certain beneficial bacteria,
including Bifidobacterium spp. and Lactobacillus spp. Furthermore, we
defined the detailed changes in the gut microbiome by pyrosequencing of
the 16S rRNA gene sequences. We found that Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes ratio
showed an increased trend upon GpS treatment in xenograft nude mice.
Furthermore, GpS altered certain species of bacteria, including the
Clostridium cocleatum and Bacteroides acidifaciens, which have
well-documented beneficial effects. In conclusion, this study has
demonstrated GpS can potentially regulate and balance the gut microbial
ecosystem by increasing symbionts. However, further investigation is
required on whether this alteration of the gut microflora is the cause or
consequence of the drug action. [This study was partially supported by
FRG2/11-12/102 to WLWHsiao]

