Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel CXCR4-mediated mechanism of docetaxel resistance in
prostate cancer cells.


Docetaxel (DTX), a semi-synthetic analog of paclitaxel, has emerged as
the standard of care for chemotherapy of hormone-resistant prostate
cancer. DTX confers its anti-neoplastic activity by inhibiting
microtubule depolymerization, which leads to G2/M cell cycle arrest and
subsequent apoptosis. However, most patients treated with DTX ultimately
develop resistance to the drug and succumb to the disease. Therefore,
understanding the mechanisms underlying DTX resistance is a priority area
in prostate cancer research. Increasingly, it is being suggested that
cancer cells may use common pathways for disease
aggressiveness/metastatic spread and chemotherapeutic resistance.
Therefore, we investigated the role of CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling, which is
known to promote invasion and metastasis, in DTX-resistance of prostate
cancer cells. Our data demonstrated that CXCL12 treatment rescued the
prostate cancer cells from DTX-induced cytotoxicity and G2/M mitotic
arrest. Furthermore, the cytoprotective effect of CXCL12 was abolished
upon pretreatment of prostate cancer cells with AMD3100 (a small molecule
antagonist of CXCR4) or siRNA-mediated silencing of CXCR4, thus
confirming the role of CXCR4 in DTX-resistance. Immunofluorescence
analyses revealed enhanced polymerization of microtubules in DTX-treated
prostate cancer cells. In accordance with this, immunoblot analyses
demonstrated increased levels of detyrosinated (glu-) and acetylated
(ace-) tubulins, specific markers of the polymerized tubulin, in prostate
cancer cells treated with DTX. Co-treatment of CXCL12 abrogated
DTX-induced stabilization of microtubules in the prostate cancer cells,
an effect that was diminished when the cells were pre-treated with
AMD3100. Altogether, these initial findings demonstrate the role of
CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling axis in DTX-resistance of prostate cancer cells
and thus could be an attractive target for therapeutic enhancement of DTX.

