Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Redundancy of growth factor utilization and complex molecular
analyses in human primary tumors highlights potential resistance
mechanisms for targeted agents.


Redundancy in growth factor (GF) pathway utilization in human tumors has
been hypothesized to be a primary resistance mechanism to targeted
therapeutics. Little evidence has been reported in primary tumors to
demonstrate functional differences between tumors to GF receptor
activation. Data is presented that demonstrates variable response between
EGF, HGF, and IGF-1 stimulation of primary tumors that is not attributed
solely to receptor expression. Growth factor receptor expression (EGFR,
MET, and IGF-1R) and function was investigated in viable, non-apoptotic
disaggregated primary tumors by flow cytometry (n= 199) from multiple
tumor types including breast, NSC lung, colorectal, and ovarian cancer.
Analyses were performed under conditions shown to preserve receptor
expression and function in positive cell line controls. Cell surface GF
receptor expression was evaluated by flow cytometry. Evidence of GF
receptor function was investigated by analysis of intracellular signaling
pathways using phospho-specific antibodies following ex vivo GF
stimulation (EGF- 100ng/ mL, HGF - 500ng/mL, IGF1 - 200ng/mL; 5 minutes).
Combination of receptor expression and pathway utilization revealed
approximately 38 unique combinations defining the 199 tumors analyzed.
Receptor expression was highly variable and analysis of intracellular
signaling pathways demonstrated functional differences and redundancy in
pathway utilization following stimulation with EGF, HGF, or IGF-1 (see
Table). The presence of GF receptor alone did not account for the
differences to GF stimulation observed suggesting alternative
contributing factors to these biological differences. Using this robust
and sensitive platform we provide evidence for growth factor pathway
redundancy in primary tumors. Additional analyses of mutations and
targeted mRNA analyses were explored to identify signatures that
correlate with response to GF stimulation.
Redundancy in growth factor response in tumors.

