Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p21-activated kinase-1 in the prevention of inflammation-driven
colon cancer.


Chronic gut inflammation in inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) predisposes
to the development of colorectal cancer, causing increased mortality. Use
of mesalamine in the treatment and remittance of ulcerative colitis (UC)
modulates the risk of neoplastic progression. We have previously reported
(Khare V, et al. Biochem Pharm 2012) that p-21 activated kinase-1 (PAK1)
mediates mesalamine activity by orchestrating MAPK signaling; Wnt-
catenin pathway and cell adhesion; all implicated in the colon
carcinogenesis. Since mesalamine has primarily an anti-inflammatory
function, we evaluated the role of PAK1, its target, in IBD and in
colitis-associated cancer (CAC). PAK1 expression was scored by
immunohistochemistry in human samples from IBD, CAC and normal mucosa.
Compared to normal mucosa and Crohn's disease, a higher PAK1 expression
was detected in UC which further increased in CAC. PAK1 expression was
also elevated in the inflamed mucosa and carcinomas in IL-10/ mouse model
of colitis. The efficacy of mesalamine in reducing inflammation and tumor
incidence in these mice has been previously reported (Brown JB et al,
Gastroenetrology 2010). The consequence of PAK1 overexpression was
further investigated in vitro. Normal diploid colon epithelial cells
(HCEC-1CT) showed higher proliferation (46 3.1% increase) upon
overexpression of wildtype (wt) PAK1 while dominant negative (dn) PAK1
overexpression reduced proliferation (25% 2.5 decrease) compared to
control. Apoptosis (Annexin V staining) was reduced in HCEC-1CT
overexpressing wtPAK1 (1.2% 0.40) compared to dnPAK1 (11.6% 0.3) and
control (16% 0.83). Mesalamine treatment (20mM) was effective in
counteracting the effect of PAK1 overexpression by reducing cell
proliferation and inducing apoptosis. Treatment of cells with specific
inhibitors (PD98059/LY294002/Rapamycin) of signaling pathways
(MEK/PI3K/mTOR) demonstrated that mesalamine regulated PAK1 expression by
the MEK, PI3K and mTOR signaling pathways. Our data indicate that (1)
PAK1 is upregulated in UC and in CAC, (2) PAK1 may be utilized as a
predictive marker for the development of CAC, and (3) PAK1 is a viable
target for chemoprevention in the setting of colitis. Mesalamine
counteracts PAK1 expression and its effect on cell proliferation and
apoptosis. In the longterm management of UC mesalamine may protect from
CAC through inhibition of PAK1.

