Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The contribution of bone marrow cells to carcinogenesis in the
chronic inflammatory lung conditions.


The role of inflammation in lung carcinogenesis is suggested by the
independent association between chronic obstructive lung disease, a
systemic inflammatory process, and lung cancer risk. To investigate that
chronic inflammation in the lung potentiates tobacco smoke-induced lung
carcinogenesis, we utilized two murine models of chronic lung
inflammation: a model of sustained intranasal exposure to
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and a transgenic model of inducible
interleukin-1 overexpression in the lung. In preliminary experiments,
nicotine-derived nitrosamine (NNK) tobacco carcinogen induced tumor
multiplicity is significantly increased in stress markers in the lung
tumors with chronic inflammation.To determine the role of bone
marrow-derived stem cells (BMDCs) in mediating the oxidative stress
response in this model of chronic lung inflammation, we performed lineage
tracing experiments. BMDCs are capable of self-renewal and recruited to
the end organs where they differentiate into various terminal cells. In
inflammation-associated gastric cancer, BMDCs contribute to the tumor
microenvironment both by direct proliferation of epithelial cells and by
differentiation into -SMA positive cancer-associated fibroblasts. We
hypothesize that BMDCs are recruited to inflammatory sites and contribute
to the process of lung carcinogenesis through differentiation. We
performed bone marrow transplantation from male GFP tagged donors to
female chronic lung inflammation models. We investigated the localization
and quantification of BMDCs contributions to subsequent lung tumors by
immunohistochemistry of GFP and FISH for the Y chromosome. Additionally,
we examined the differentiation of BMDCs in the tumor and associated
microenvironment.This study has the potential to identify novel pathways
of lung carcinogenesis in cigarette carcinogen-induced lung cancers
arising in the setting of chronic inflammation.

