Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and anti-angiogenic effects of small molecule
inhibitors of TEM8.


Tumor endothelial marker 8 (TEM8) is a gene upregulated on colonic tumor
endothelium compared to quiescent normal endothelium. Inhibition of TEM8
using antibodies potently inhibits the growth of a variety of tumor types
in mice. This inhibition of tumor growth is accompanied by a reduction in
microvessel density within the tumors. Thus, TEM8 appears to represent a
tumor specific endothelial marker that has a functional role in tumor
angiogenesis. TEM8 is also a receptor for anthrax toxin. In the current
study, we used chemical libraries to identify small molecule inhibitors
of TEM8 that may have efficacy as inhibitors of tumor angiogenesis and
anthrax toxin.We conducted a fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) based screen of over 270,000 small molecules in order to identify
molecules that inhibit the interaction of TEM8 with its well-known ligand
anthrax protective antigen (PA). We describe here the identification and
anti-angiogenic effects of small molecules that bind to TEM8.From the
initial screen 280 molecules inhibited TEM8/PA interaction by greater
than 50%. A secondary screen involved the elucidation of IC50 values for
these 280 compounds as inhibitors of the TEM8/PA interaction. Twelve
compounds had measurable IC50s in the micromolar range. The
anti-angiogenic effects of these compounds were studied in vitro. Of the
12 compounds tested in a human microvascular endothelial cell (HMVEC)
proliferation assay, 3 compounds significantly inhibited endothelial cell
proliferation after 24 hours (P Tumor endothelial marker 8 (TEM8) is a
gene upregulated on colonic tumor endothelium compared to quiescent
normal endothelium. Inhibition of TEM8 using antibodies potently inhibits
the growth of a variety of tumor types in mice. This inhibition of tumor
growth is accompanied by a reduction in microvessel density within the
tumors. Thus, TEM8 appears to represent a tumor specific endothelial
marker that has a functional role in tumor angiogenesis. TEM8 is also a
receptor for anthrax toxin. In the current study, we used chemical
libraries to identify small molecule inhibitors of TEM8 that may have
efficacy as inhibitors of tumor angiogenesis and anthrax toxin.We
conducted a fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) based screen of
over 270,000 small molecules in order to identify molecules that inhibit
the interaction of TEM8 with its well-known ligand anthrax protective
antigen (PA). We describe here the identification and anti-angiogenic
effects of small molecules that bind to TEM8.From the initial screen 280
molecules inhibited TEM8/PA interaction by greater than 50%. A secondary
screen involved the elucidation of IC50 values for these 280 compounds as
inhibitors of the TEM8/PA interaction. Twelve compounds had measurable
IC50s in the micromolar range. The anti-angiogenic effects of these
compounds were studied in vitro. Of the 12 compounds tested in a human
microvascular endothelial cell (HMVEC) proliferation assay, 3 compounds
significantly inhibited endothelial cell proliferation after 24 hours (P
<0.05), and 5 compounds significantly inhibited proliferation at 72 hours
(P Tumor endothelial marker 8 (TEM8) is a gene upregulated on colonic
tumor endothelium compared to quiescent normal endothelium. Inhibition of
TEM8 using antibodies potently inhibits the growth of a variety of tumor
types in mice. This inhibition of tumor growth is accompanied by a
reduction in microvessel density within the tumors. Thus, TEM8 appears to
represent a tumor specific endothelial marker that has a functional role
in tumor angiogenesis. TEM8 is also a receptor for anthrax toxin. In the
current study, we used chemical libraries to identify small molecule
inhibitors of TEM8 that may have efficacy as inhibitors of tumor
angiogenesis and anthrax toxin.We conducted a fluorescence resonance
energy transfer (FRET) based screen of over 270,000 small molecules in
order to identify molecules that inhibit the interaction of TEM8 with its
well-known ligand anthrax protective antigen (PA). We describe here the
identification and anti-angiogenic effects of small molecules that bind
to TEM8.From the initial screen 280 molecules inhibited TEM8/PA
interaction by greater than 50%. A secondary screen involved the
elucidation of IC50 values for these 280 compounds as inhibitors of the
TEM8/PA interaction. Twelve compounds had measurable IC50s in the
micromolar range. The anti-angiogenic effects of these compounds were
studied in vitro. Of the 12 compounds tested in a human microvascular
endothelial cell (HMVEC) proliferation assay, 3 compounds significantly
inhibited endothelial cell proliferation after 24 hours (P <0.05), and 5
compounds significantly inhibited proliferation at 72 hours (P <0.05).
None of the compounds exhibited measurable cytotoxicity. One of the five
compounds tested for effects on HMVEC migration, significantly inhibited
migration on a fibronectin coated-surface by 78% (PTumor endothelial
marker 8 (TEM8) is a gene upregulated on colonic tumor endothelium
compared to quiescent normal endothelium. Inhibition of TEM8 using
antibodies potently inhibits the growth of a variety of tumor types in
mice. This inhibition of tumor growth is accompanied by a reduction in
microvessel density within the tumors. Thus, TEM8 appears to represent a
tumor specific endothelial marker that has a functional role in tumor
angiogenesis. TEM8 is also a receptor for anthrax toxin. In the current
study, we used chemical libraries to identify small molecule inhibitors
of TEM8 that may have efficacy as inhibitors of tumor angiogenesis and
anthrax toxin.We conducted a fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) based screen of over 270,000 small molecules in order to identify
molecules that inhibit the interaction of TEM8 with its well-known ligand
anthrax protective antigen (PA). We describe here the identification and
anti-angiogenic effects of small molecules that bind to TEM8.From the
initial screen 280 molecules inhibited TEM8/PA interaction by greater
than 50%. A secondary screen involved the elucidation of IC50 values for
these 280 compounds as inhibitors of the TEM8/PA interaction. Twelve
compounds had measurable IC50s in the micromolar range. The
anti-angiogenic effects of these compounds were studied in vitro. Of the
12 compounds tested in a human microvascular endothelial cell (HMVEC)
proliferation assay, 3 compounds significantly inhibited endothelial cell
proliferation after 24 hours (P <0.05), and 5 compounds significantly
inhibited proliferation at 72 hours (P <0.05). None of the compounds
exhibited measurable cytotoxicity. One of the five compounds tested for
effects on HMVEC migration, significantly inhibited migration on a
fibronectin coated-surface by 78% (P<0.01).We have identified a number of
small molecule inhibitors of TEM8, some of which display anti-angiogenic
effects in vitro. Should these inhibitors also display potent
anti-angiogenic effects in vivo, they may serve as lead compounds for the
future development of TEM8 therapeutic small molecules. Future studies
will focus on determining the effects of these molecules on tumor growth
and angiogenesis in mouse models.

