Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathway oriented phospho-proteomics analysis with reverse phase
protein array (RPPA) technology in cell growth and cancer therapy.


A number of molecularly targeted drugs have been successfully launched as
anti-cancer agents, and intensive efforts are underway to discover new
targets and their modifiers. Nevertheless, many compounds selected by
enzyme screening methodology demonstrated unexpected effects in intact
cells or animal models. Since recent efforts from signaling pathway
analysis have revealed that complexity of signaling networks, homeostatic
controls and off-target effects can lead to unexpected cellular/in vivo
consequences, profiling the effects of drug candidates on a wide range of
intracellular signaling pathways is becoming an attractive strategy.Many
proteomics approaches, especially in the area of phospho-proteomics, have
been developed, and their applications are rapidly growing for the
purpose of cellular signal profiling. Among these approaches, reverse
phase protein array (RPPA) is one of the most powerful technologies
because of its high sensitivity and reliability. We have developed a
signal transduction oriented RPPA system that focuses on phospho-protein
profiles in samples. Thus far, our system utilizes approximately 180
phospho-protein specific antibodies and can profile the phosphorylation
status of more than 100 Gene Ontology processes covering more than 10
components in each process. Our current studies on modification of
cellular signals induced by tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in several
cancer cell types are elucidating novel mechanisms for TKI actions. For
example, our studies on Erlotinib and Gefitinib treated cells have
resulted in very similar profiles as EGF-stimulated cancer cells.
However, several differences in the signaling profiles between them may
suggest differences of efficacy and toxicity.Independently, we have
developed a nearly comprehensive in vitro kinase inhibitor profiling
system, and we already have complete inhibition profiles for nine kinase
inhibitors such as Erlotinib or Gefitinib. This allows us to combine in
vitro profiling results with pathway intervention profiles to build a
database integrating kinase-inhibition-potencies and
cellular-signaling-profiles. Our aim is to expand this database to obtain
new information to guide strategies for effective targeting in drug
discovery. In this presentation, we present the novel targeting discovery
strategy based on this database analysis.

