Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGFRI inhibition results in reduced collagen expression in
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by a robust
stromal component termed the desmoplastic reaction. Transforming growth
factor (TGF) has been implicated in the activation of the
cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF) that leads to pancreatic desmoplasia
and the increased deposition of extracellular matrix proteins.
Desmoplasia and its effects are thought to contribute to poor drug
efficacy in PDAC treatment. We therefore hypothesized that TGF receptor
(TGFR) inhibition may serve to improve the activity of chemotherapeutics
in PDAC by reducing the effects of desmoplasia. Using the TGFRI
inhibitors, LY2157299 and SB431542, we assessed the effects of TGFR
inhibition on cell proliferation and collagen production in both mono-
and co-cultured pancreatic tumor cells and CAFs. We found that although
the TGFRI inhibitors had moderate effect on the proliferation of PDAC
cells and co-cultured CAF cells, they significantly inhibited collagen 1
expression in the co-culture of MIA PaCa-2 and SU86.86 cells with CAFs
(2.3 and 6.0-fold at the mRNA level, respectively). Similar qualitative
reductions were also observed in immunofluorescence microscopy and
immunoblots probing for collagen 1 protein levels. We also sought to
determine if TGFR inhibition would result in a reduction in collagen
expression in the more biologically relevant in vivo model for PDAC, the
LSL-KrasG12D/+;LSL-Trp53R172H/+;Pdx-1-Cre (KPC) mouse. KPC mice were
treated orally, b.i.d., with 75mg/kg LY2157299 and by i.p., with
gemcitabine (q3dx4) at 80mg/kg. Tumors in KPC mice treated with the
combination of LY2157299 and gemcitabine showed a marked reduction in
overall stromal content when compared to vehicle-treated mice. Our
results suggest that TGFR inhibition may be an effective means of
ameliorating the effects of desmoplasia in PDAC, which may in turn
improve the efficacy of current PDAC treatment regimens.

