Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AMPK as a target to overcome hypoxia-induced treatment resistance
in tumors.


Purpose: AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) responds to ATP depletion
and orchestrates cell-adaptive responses to energy-restricted conditions
like low glucose or hypoxia. AMPK activation stimulates energy producing
pathways and inhibits ATP-consuming biosynthesis and controls
post-irradiation metabolism. Pharmacological stimulation of AMPK to mimic
energetic stress slows tumor growth, possible by inhibition of
proliferation.However, since AMPK is critically involved in cell survival
during energy restrictions (a tumor hallmark), inhibition of AMPK may
effectively kill treatment resistant hypoxic tumor cells. In this study
we investigate the antitumor effect of AMPK targeting using the AMPK
inhibitor Compound C (CC).Methods: Since hypoxia-induced changes in
energy-metabolism (e.g., Pasteur effect) is much more pronounced in cells
inherently dependent on oxidative phosphorylation than in the typical
glycolytic tumor energetic phenotype, cell lines representing both
phenotypes were included. Cell viability, proliferation and energy
metabolism (glucose consumption/lactate synthesis) was assessed during
acute (3h) or chronic (48h) energy-replete (5 mM glucose and 21% O2) or
energy-deplete (2 mM glucose and 0% O2) conditions in the absence or
presence of CC. Furthermore, CC treated and untreated mice bearing SCCVII
tumors were administered with pimonidazole (hypoxia marker) and FDG
(glucose analogue) followed by tissue section analysis of the
microregional distribution of hypoxia and glucose consumption.Results:
Long-term CC treatment reduced cell viability/proliferation and
suppressed glucose consumption and lactate synthesis both under energy
replete and deplete conditions, but the relative effects were more
pronounced during energy restriction, suggesting that treatment may show
specificity towards cells in the hostile tumor microenvironment. Also
acute changes in energy metabolism 3h following transition to
energy-replete conditions were observed during CC treatment. In
accordance, the hypoxia-elicited stimulation of glucose use (the Pasteur
effect) was fully suppressed in CC-treated cells, resulting in much more
dramatic effects on glycolytic flux in SiHa cells (atypical
non-glycolytic phenotype) than in FaDuDD cells (typical glycolytic
phenotype). Currently, we are investigating if CC treatment affects the
tumor microenvironment in tumor-bearing mice and whether CC treatment
sensitize tumors to irradiation.Conclusions: CC fully suppressed the
hypoxia-elicited Pasteur effect which may be responsible for cell death.
Metabolic effects were much more pronounced in inherently non-glycolytic
than in glycolytic tumor cells. In vivo testing of the
efficacy/specificity of CC treatment in tumor bearing mice is ongoing.

