Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aurora kinases: potential therapeutic targets in K-Ras-induced
lung cancer.


K-Ras-induced lung cancer is a very common disease, for which there are
currently no effective therapies. Intense efforts are underway to
identify K-Ras targets that play a crucial role in oncogenesis. We have
previously shown that K-Ras-induced lung tumorigenesis is potentiated by
the transcription factor NF-B; and others have shown that Aurora kinases,
not only play a significant role in tumorigenesis, but also can activate
NF-B. Therefore, we hypothesized that Aurora A and/or Aurora B are
important K-Ras targets in lung cancer. In order to test this hypothesis,
we first determined whether oncogenic K-Ras induces Aurora kinase
expression. For that purpose, we used three different cell-based models:
(1) an immortalized primary lung epithelial cell line and its isogenic
K-Ras-transformed counterpart, (2) H1703 lung cancer cell line engineered
to express oncogenic K-Ras inducibly, and (3) K-Ras positive lung cancer
cell lines H358 and A549 stably expressing inducible shRNAs targeting
K-Ras. In all cases, K-Ras expression positively correlated with Aurora A
and Aurora B expression. In order to validate Aurora A an B as
therapeutically relevant K-Ras targets in lung cancer, we used genetic
and/or pharmacological approaches in the abovementioned cells to
inactivate Aurora A or B. Inducible shRNA-mediated knockdown of Aurora A
or B, as well as treatment with a dual Aurora A and B inhibitor (AI II),
decreased growth, viability and migration of K-Ras positive H358 and A549
cell lines. Interestingly, in our primary isogenic model and in our H1703
K-Ras-inducible cell line, AI II reduced viability and induced apoptosis
in an oncogenic K-Ras-dependent manner. This suggests that Aurora kinase
inhibition therapy can specifically target K-Ras transformed cells. In
conclusion, our results support our hypothesis that Aurora kinases are
important K-Ras targets in lung cancer and suggest Aurora kinase
inhibition as a novel approach for K-Ras-induced lung cancer therapy.

