Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA mismatch repair protein MLH1 induces apoptosis in human
prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer is one of the most common malignancies in men and ranks
the second most common cause of cancer-related deaths. Mismatch repair
(MMR) enzymes act as proofreading complexes that maintain the genomic
integrity and MMR-deficient cells show an increased mutation rate. MMR is
essential to the survival of the cell and health of the individual.
Recent studies have shown that MMR influence the regulation of tumor
development in various cancers, such as colon, ovarian, and others, but
their impact on prostate cancer growth has not been investigated thus
far. One important gene in the MMR complex is MutL homolog 1 (MLH1). The
aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of MLH1 on growth
properties of prostate cancer. MLH1 levels were characterized in patients
with prostate cancer. Immunohistochemical analysis was done on tissue
microarrays (TMAs) by using a monoclonal antibody for MLH1. TMAs
consisted of cores sampled from the center of donor tissue blocks from 36
prostate cancer cases of various Gleason's grades. Staining intensity was
measured to estimate the expression level of MLH1 proteins in each core
and compared. As MLH1 levels differed between grades of cancer, we then
evaluated the functional effects of MLH1 on prostate cancer cells.
Expression of MLH1 was initially measured in normal and cancerous
prostate cell lines by real-time PCR and western blotting. Cancerous
cells displaying the lowest levels of MLH1 as compared to normal cells
was then transfected with MLH1 to determine gene effects on cell
proliferation by utilizing the MTS assay, and apoptosis by flow
cytometry. Immunohistochemical analysis showed patients with high
Gleason's score to have reduced expression of MLH1 compared to those with
low grade prostate cancer. To determine the role of MLH1 on prostate
cancer cell growth, gene transfection studies were then performed. Of the
various prostate cell lines, DU145 cells had dramatically reduced
expression levels of MLH1 as measured by real-time PCR with no protein
detected by western blotting, whereas levels were high in normal prostate
cell lines. Interestingly, over-expressing the MLH1 gene in DU145 cells
decreased cell proliferation and increased apoptosis compared to vector
control. These results demonstrate MLH1 to protect against prostate
cancer progression and to have a functional role by affecting apoptosis
of prostate cancer cells.

