Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A docking domain directed inhibitor targeting ERK regulated F-site
substrates.


Extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) are ubiquitously
expressed in almost all tissues and cell types. Accordingly, ERK1/2
regulate a diversity of cellular processes by phosphorylating more than
150 substrate proteins. With its constitutive activation being frequently
implicated in human malignancies, ERK has been an appealing target in
anti-cancer drug development. However, currently available ERK1/2
inhibitors are ATP-competitive. Since these ERK inhibitors block all ERK
functions, the potential for side effects in normal tissues and cells may
limit their potential of being developed into therapeutic agents. To
overcome this limitation, we used a combination of computational and
experimental methods to develop small molecular weight inhibitors that
target ERK-substrate docking domains. Here we report the identification,
characterization and optimization of a compound with a thienyl
benzenesulfonate scaffold that specifically inhibits substrates
containing an F-site or DEF (docking site for ERK, FXF) motif. Our X-ray
crystallography data showed that this compound bound to a pocket in the
vicinity of the F-site docking domain on ERK. Biological analysis further
demonstrated that this compound and its analogs could preferentially
inhibit phosphorylation and function of F-site-containing ERK substrates,
and that these compounds preferentially inhibited growth of melanoma
cells harboring a V600E B-Raf mutant. Additionally, this compound was
shown to inhibit the phosphorylation of specific PKC isoforms via an ERK
dependent mechanism. These findings represent the first identification
and validation of chemicals that selectively inhibit ERK substrates and
signaling events through ATP-independent mechanisms. These compounds have
potential utility for elucidating the complex biological roles of ERK1/2
and development into novel anti-cancer agents.

