Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The IGF1 receptor/insulin receptor dual kinase inhibitor
BMS-754807 targets the cancer stem cell population in addition to its
synergism with Lapatinib in colorectal cancer.


Colon cancer is the second leading cause of cancer mortalities each year.
Current treatment options include drugs that target the epidermal growth
factor (EGF) pathway. However, the use of these drugs is limited to
individuals that are wild type for KRAS. New therapies are needed for
patients who develop resistance to EGF-based therapies, as well as for
the 40% of patients whose tumors have mutated KRAS. Our approach has been
to target pathways that regulate cancer cell metabolism. The insulin and
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF1) pathways regulate glucose metabolism,
cell growth, cell motility and anti-apoptotic pathways. In colon cancer,
IGF1 and insulin enhance tumor growth, promote metastasis and increase
the cancer stem cell (CSC) population. In order to target the insulin and
IGF-1 pathways simultaneously, we utilized the small molecule, dual
kinase inhibitor BMS-754807 which inhibits the Insulin receptor (IR) and
IGF1 receptor (IGF1R) with equal potency. We previously reported that the
drug effectively reduced cell viability in a panel of eight colon cancer
cell lines. In combination when combined with Lapatinib, an EGFR/HER2
small molecule dual kinase inhibitor, the drug showed synergistic effects
on viability in a subset of cell lines. In order to determine the
mechanism of the observed synergy, we examined whether EGFR and IGF1R
were interacting directly as has been observed in breast cancer.
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments in colorectal cancer cells, did not
demonstrate an interaction between the EGFR and IGF1R. Examination of the
signaling pathways in our panel of cell lines has determined that the
regulation of ERK appears to be a critical determinant in sensitivity to
the combination therapy. In both of the sensitive lines, AKT was strongly
activated by IGF1, while ERK was strongly activated by EGF, but less
substantially by IGF1. However in the cell lines that were insensitive to
the BMS-754807/Lapatinib combination, substantial activation of ERK was
observed in the absence of either EGF or IGF1. Therefore constitutive ERK
activation in the absence of EGF signaling may be the determinant for
sensitivity to the combined therapy. Finally, we examined the efficacy of
BMS-754807 in the targeting colon cancer stem cells. In our panel of
eight cell lines, BMS-754807 strongly inhibited colonsphere formation
from the CSC population in three cell lines, and showed moderate
inhibition in four of the five remaining lines. Of interest is the fact
that the cells that were most sensitive to BMS-754807 in sphere formation
were the most resistant in viability assays, and did not synergize with
Lapatinib. These results are encouraging as we continue to develop
strategies that specifically target the cancer stem cell, and indicate
that BMS-754807 has multiple potential mechanisms of action in colon
cancer.

