Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prometastatic variants of mouse gastric cancer cells demonstrated
the resistance to cytotoxic chemotherapy.


We have established a primary cultured cell line from glandular stomach
of a genetically-engineered mouse that spontaneously developed
adenocarcinomas in stomach and intestine using cre-mediated deletion of
floxed tumor suppressor alleles in epithelial tissue of gastrointestinal
tract. To derive prometastatic variant, high-Epcam+ subpopulation was
obtained using FACS from this cell line. These cells were injected
subcutaneously into severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice, and
allowed to grow until the mouse showed evidence of lung metastases. The
metastatic foci were re-implanted subcutaneously into a new SCID mouse.
When the mouse showed lung metastases, prometastatic variant was cultured
from the metastatic foci. Compared with parental cells, prometastatic
variant cells showed enhanced tumorigenicity, as measured by a decreased
latent period and higher take rate, and faster invivo growth as well as
higher metastatic potential. Moreover, these cells readily grew
orthotopically in syngeneic mice by 100% take rates. This cell line was
also successfully used for testing novel immunotherapeutic agents.
Importantly,this cell demonstrated increased invitro IC50 for cytotoxic
chemotherapeutic agent including 5-FU, as compared with parental cells.
Thus,stem-like characteristics enriched in prometastatic variants of
mouse gastric cancer cells may induce the resistance to cytotoxic
chemotherapy, supporting the cancer stem cell hypothesis for drug
resistance in GI cancers. (supported by the Proteogenomic Research
Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the
Korean Ministry of Education, Science and Technology; and by Korean
National Cancer Center Grant 121005).Citation Format: Jun Won Park, Heung
Tae Kim, Jeffrey E. Green, Hark Kyun Kim, Seok Hun Jang. Prometastatic
variants of mouse gastric cancer cells demonstrated the resistance to
cytotoxic chemotherapy. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10;
Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2724. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2724

