Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-derived circulatory exosomal miRNAs as biomarkers of
recurrent lung tumors.


More people in the U.S. (157,300 per year) die of lung cancers than of
prostate cancer, breast cancer and colon cancer combined. Eighty five
percent of NSCLC patients die within 5 years. Even after resection of an
early stage NSCLC, many patients die of relapse. Despite 2 decades of
cisplatin-based chemotherapy for NSCLC, the survival benefit remains
modest. Poor outcomes and relapse indicate need for new screening and
early biomarkers for detection of recurrent lung tumors. In this study,
first, we determined the frequency of lung tumor recurrence in female
athymic nude mice (4-5 wk-old; n=25) using H1299 cells (1.5 x 106 cells).
When tumors reached 300-400 mm3, the tumors were completely excised under
anesthesia from 18/25 mice; the primary tumors in the remaining animals
(n=7) were allowed to grow. We recorded the appearance of first tumor
recurrence, 1 week after the surgery and the incidence rate of recurrent
tumors was 60% (11/18). Average recurrent tumor volume at the end of the
study was 431 236 mm3. Second, we determined the circulating miRNA
profiles by analyzing exosomal miRNAs in serum from control and H1299
lung tumor-bearing mice. Exosomes, nano-vesicles that carry load of
miRNAs and mRNAs, were isolated from 1ml serum by pooling blood from five
mice, using ExoQuick reagent (System Biosciences). Exosomes were
visualized and their sizes measured by NanoSight (Wiltshire) and
confirmed by transmission electron microscopy. Total RNA was isolated
from exosomes with Trizol and was analyzed by qPCR using cancer-pathway
finder miRNA array, containing 84 miRNAs (Qiagen). Our data showed i) the
presence of circulatory exosomes with particle size 34-97 nm, ii)
circulatory exosomal miRNAs iii) differences >2-fold in the up- and
downregulated miRNAs in the H1299 primary tumors and recurrent tumors
versus normal human bronchial epithelial cells, and serum exosomes from
tumor-bearing versus control mice, iv) similarity of all 25 miRNAs
expressed in the recurrent tumors with 25/34 miRNAs in primary tumors,
suggesting that recurrent tumors originated from microscopic primary
tumors, and v) similarity of 10 miRNAs expressed in serum exosomes with
those expressed in primary tumors (e.g., miR-132 and let-7c), suggesting
that serum exosomal miRNAs originated from the lung tumors and suggest
their biomarker significance. Further, we performed immunoaffinity
enrichment of tumor-specific exosomes with anti-EpCAM magnetic beads
using serum from control and lung tumor-bearing mice. Western blot
analysis revealed that the enriched exosomes were positive for the tumor
marker EpCAM, and was significantly higher in exosomes from tumor-bearing
vs. control nude mice. Thus, our initial observations suggest that the
miRNAs carried by the tumor-derived exosomes can be a true representation
of tumor-profile and a more stringent validation of miRNAs as circulatory
biomarkers. (Supported by Agnes Brown Duggan Endowment and Helmsley
Endowment).

