Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of Anti-CD47 therapy for pediatric brain tumors.


Introduction: Extensive molecular characterization of Brain tumors done
in recent years has proven valuable for tumor classification, risk
stratification and outcome prediction for current treatment modalities.
However the current standard of care has not improved the prognosis and
carries an increased risk of cognitive impairments for children with
brain tumors. A characteristic feature of tumor progression and
recurrence is its ability to evade the immune system. Our hypothesis is
that by modulating the innate immune system we can enhance the ability of
macrophages to eat and kill brain cancer cells. Recent data suggests that
the interaction between the cell surface antigen CD47 and its binding
partner SIRP is a mechanism by which non-solid and solid tumors can evade
the innate immune system. To see if anti-CD47 therapy is a potential
therapy in malignant pediatric brain tumors we first looked at CD47
expression in freshly isolated patient and postmortem samples from 4
different tumor types; Diffused Intrinsic Pontine Glioma,
Medulloblastoma, Ependymoma and ATRTs. We tested the hypothesis that
blocking CD47- SIRP interaction induced phagocytosis in an in-vitro
phagocytosis assay. We next established orthotopic xenografts models in
immune compromised mice and treated them with anti-CD47 humanized
antibody, which is currently being developed for clinical trials in
hematopoietic and non-CNS malignancies.Result: CD47 expression was
upregulated in all tumor types and was present in >90% of the cells in
high grade tumors. Increased CD47 expression was observed in CD15+ and
CD133+ putative cancer stem cell population. Blocking the CD47- SIRP
interaction increases tumor phagocytosis by macrophages in-vitro.
Systemic treatment with anti-CD47 antibody significantly reduced tumor
burden in an orthotopic xenograft setting.Conclusion: Anti-CD47 therapy
is a viable and effective treatment modality for pediatric high grade
brain tumors.

