Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations between changes in circulating inflammatory
biomarkers and reduced BMI achieved in SMART and PREFER behavioral weight
loss interventions.


OBJECTIVEObesity, increasingly recognized to be associated with low-grade
systemic inflammation, is a global pandemic that has been linked to
several forms of malignancies, including breast, colon, and endometrial
cancer (EC). The goal of this study was to explore longitudinal
inflammatory biomarker changes in overweight and obese participants of
the SMART and PREFER behavioral weight loss trials, focusing on
participants who were most successful in reducing body mass index (BMI)
by the 12th month of the intervention. We hypothesized that overweight
and obese individuals undergoing intentional weight loss would experience
changes in the levels of proinflammatory cytokines and several other
biomarkers associated with the development of EC and other
malignancies.METHODSParticipants were selected on the basis of weight
loss over a period of 12 months in two major behavioral weight loss
trials SMART and PREFER conducted at the University of Pittsburgh. Serum
samples were obtained at baseline, 6 and 12 months from 68 participants
(baseline mean body mass index (BMI) was 33.62 4.1 kg/m2). Twenty-six
bead based xMAP immunoassays were used for this study, including
cytokines, chemokines, and hormones. These biomarkers were chosen on the
basis of their link to inflammation and cancer development in previous
research. Repeated measures mixed models were used to evaluate the
association between changes in biomarkers and BMI from baseline with and
without adjustment for covariates, including age, gender, and
race.RESULTSParticipants lost an average of 16.83 kg from baseline to 12
months, with the largest change occurring in the first 6 months of the
intervention. Both repeated measures ANOVA models (with and without
covariates) demonstrated that among 26 biomarkers, changes in
adiponectin, CRP, C-Peptide, IGFBP-1, insulin, leptin, PAI-1 (total),
resistin, sE-selectin were significantly associated with BMI
change.CONCLUSIONSThis study contributes to an emerging literature
beginning to explore biological mechanisms that may contribute to health
benefits of even moderate weight loss. Results also emphasize the
importance of further studies of biomarkers that showed significant
changes after weight loss to determine the molecular pathways involved.

