Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of circulating serum Amphiregulin levels in patients
with breast cancer.


Amphiregulin (AREG), a ligand for Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
(EGFR), has been implicated as an effector of ER signaling in mammary
gland development and as a candidate ER effector in human breast cancers.
Analysis of 13 luminal subtype breast cancer cell lines and human breast
tumors showed a strong correlation between ER status and high AREG
levels. A pilot study using healthy and breast cancer women's serum
showed that circulating AREG levels were higher in the ER positive
patients as compared to healthy individuals. Therefore we hypothesized
that Amphiregulin is a potential biomarker and/or therapeutic target for
ER positive breast cancers.To test our hypothesis, we are currently
evaluating AREG as a potential serum biomarker of breast cancer
progression and as an indicator of response to treatment by analyzing a
cohort of breast cancer patients (n=225) stratified by stage of disease
and subtypes (hormone receptor status). In this study, we want to
determine if tumor-derived AREG is released into the systemic circulation
and whether it may be a useful serum biomarker for the presence of breast
cancer and for response to therapy. In the first phase, serum
Amphiregulin was measured by an ELISA assay to establish the reference
range in 125 healthy females. Fifty-five percent of the healthy women had
no detectable circulating AREG (n=69), and only ten women had levels
exceeding 500 pg/mL. Serum AREG levels did not vary significantly during
the menstrual cycle. We determined that the 95th and 90th percentile was
>1575 pg/ml and >471 pg/ml, respectively, to use as a comparison against
the AREG levels of the breast cancer patients. We are analyzing serum
AREG levels in breast cancer patient serum samples of three different
cohorts: women with no evidence of disease after more than 1 year
post-surgery (Cohort 1), women with locally advanced or stage IV with
disease progression (Cohort 2) and women with operable disease that will
have surgery and subsequent chemotherapy and/or endocrine therapy (Cohort
3). Each cohort was further stratified by hormone receptor status. In
addition to determining the baseline AREG levels, for Cohort 3, AREG
levels will be measured post-surgery and at different timepoints during
treatment. Interim analysis of the different cohorts showed a
significance difference (pAmphiregulin (AREG), a ligand for Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR), has been implicated as an effector of ER
signaling in mammary gland development and as a candidate ER effector in
human breast cancers. Analysis of 13 luminal subtype breast cancer cell
lines and human breast tumors showed a strong correlation between ER
status and high AREG levels. A pilot study using healthy and breast
cancer women's serum showed that circulating AREG levels were higher in
the ER positive patients as compared to healthy individuals. Therefore we
hypothesized that Amphiregulin is a potential biomarker and/or
therapeutic target for ER positive breast cancers.To test our hypothesis,
we are currently evaluating AREG as a potential serum biomarker of breast
cancer progression and as an indicator of response to treatment by
analyzing a cohort of breast cancer patients (n=225) stratified by stage
of disease and subtypes (hormone receptor status). In this study, we want
to determine if tumor-derived AREG is released into the systemic
circulation and whether it may be a useful serum biomarker for the
presence of breast cancer and for response to therapy. In the first
phase, serum Amphiregulin was measured by an ELISA assay to establish the
reference range in 125 healthy females. Fifty-five percent of the healthy
women had no detectable circulating AREG (n=69), and only ten women had
levels exceeding 500 pg/mL. Serum AREG levels did not vary significantly
during the menstrual cycle. We determined that the 95th and 90th
percentile was >1575 pg/ml and >471 pg/ml, respectively, to use as a
comparison against the AREG levels of the breast cancer patients. We are
analyzing serum AREG levels in breast cancer patient serum samples of
three different cohorts: women with no evidence of disease after more
than 1 year post-surgery (Cohort 1), women with locally advanced or stage
IV with disease progression (Cohort 2) and women with operable disease
that will have surgery and subsequent chemotherapy and/or endocrine
therapy (Cohort 3). Each cohort was further stratified by hormone
receptor status. In addition to determining the baseline AREG levels, for
Cohort 3, AREG levels will be measured post-surgery and at different
timepoints during treatment. Interim analysis of the different cohorts
showed a significance difference (p<0.05) between healthy individuals and
patients with ER+ breast tumors when comparing detectable versus
undetectable AREG levels (threshold of detection: 20 pg/ml).
Interestingly, longitudinal sampling of one patient with very high levels
(18,300 pg/ml at diagnosis) showed a 37% decline following tumor
resection and a 60% decline after 9 months of endocrine therapy.In
summary, determining the potential role of AREG as predictive biomarker
for therapy and/or as therapeutic target by the completion of this
clinical study, will contribute to the quest for better predictive
biomarkers in breast cancer and better management of the disease.

