Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel inhibitors of the interferon-inducible, dsRNA-activated
kinase PKR for myelodysplastic syndrome.


In hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells, the interferon-inducible,
dsRNA-activated protein kinase, PKR, is a central mediator for the
anti-proliferative effects of a wide variety of hematopoietic,
inflammatory or cytotoxic stresses such as deprivation of IL-3, IL-5 or
GM-CSF from hematopoietic factor-dependent cells. Once activated, PKR
inhibits protein synthesis by phosphorylation of eIF2alpha, inhibits
mitochondrial function by activating PP2A-dependent Bcl2
dephosphorylation, and activates signaling pathways such as NF-kappaB,
p53 and STAT1 to regulate proliferation and apoptosis in response to
cellular stress. Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a heterogeneous
group of clonal hematologic malignancies characterized by peripheral
cytopenias, a hypercellular marrow with ineffective hematopoiesis and
risk of transformation to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Significantly,
PKR is highly activated in myeloid progenitor cells from MDS patients and
inhibition of PKR activity or siRNA-knockdown partially reverses the
suppressive effects of IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha on hematopoietic colony
formation using normal or MDS-derived CD34+ cells. Thus, increased PKR
activity in hematopoietic stem cells may cooperate with driver/founder
mutations to promote bone marrow failure and apoptosis characteristic of
MDS, and inhibitors of PKR may be therapeutically useful to delay the
onset and/or reduce the severity of MDS and its evolution to AML. Since
there is only one commercially available pharmacologic PKR inhibitor that
targets ATP binding and has been reported to have off target effects, we
performed studies to identify novel small molecule compounds that
specifically inhibit PKR-substrate association. Using the crystal
structure of the PKR kinase domain-eIF2alpha complex, we employed a
molecular docking strategy to screen in silico the NIH Developmental
Therapeutic Program's repository of over 300,000 small molecules for
compounds that interact with and inhibit PKR. The top 195 scoring small
molecule compounds identified were obtained and validated in vitro using
a LanthaScreen PKR kinase assay and 32P PKR assay. In addition, we
screened the NIH/DTP Diversity and Challenge Compound Sets for inhibitors
of PKR (2047 compounds total). Using these methods, we have identified 27
novel PKR inhibitors with an IC50 In hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells,
the interferon-inducible, dsRNA-activated protein kinase, PKR, is a
central mediator for the anti-proliferative effects of a wide variety of
hematopoietic, inflammatory or cytotoxic stresses such as deprivation of
IL-3, IL-5 or GM-CSF from hematopoietic factor-dependent cells. Once
activated, PKR inhibits protein synthesis by phosphorylation of
eIF2alpha, inhibits mitochondrial function by activating PP2A-dependent
Bcl2 dephosphorylation, and activates signaling pathways such as
NF-kappaB, p53 and STAT1 to regulate proliferation and apoptosis in
response to cellular stress. Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a
heterogeneous group of clonal hematologic malignancies characterized by
peripheral cytopenias, a hypercellular marrow with ineffective
hematopoiesis and risk of transformation to acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Significantly, PKR is highly activated in myeloid progenitor cells from
MDS patients and inhibition of PKR activity or siRNA-knockdown partially
reverses the suppressive effects of IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha on
hematopoietic colony formation using normal or MDS-derived CD34+ cells.
Thus, increased PKR activity in hematopoietic stem cells may cooperate
with driver/founder mutations to promote bone marrow failure and
apoptosis characteristic of MDS, and inhibitors of PKR may be
therapeutically useful to delay the onset and/or reduce the severity of
MDS and its evolution to AML. Since there is only one commercially
available pharmacologic PKR inhibitor that targets ATP binding and has
been reported to have off target effects, we performed studies to
identify novel small molecule compounds that specifically inhibit
PKR-substrate association. Using the crystal structure of the PKR kinase
domain-eIF2alpha complex, we employed a molecular docking strategy to
screen in silico the NIH Developmental Therapeutic Program's repository
of over 300,000 small molecules for compounds that interact with and
inhibit PKR. The top 195 scoring small molecule compounds identified were
obtained and validated in vitro using a LanthaScreen PKR kinase assay and
32P PKR assay. In addition, we screened the NIH/DTP Diversity and
Challenge Compound Sets for inhibitors of PKR (2047 compounds total).
Using these methods, we have identified 27 novel PKR inhibitors with an
IC50 < 100 M. Significantly, five are competitive inhibitors for
eIF2alpha binding to PKR while the remaining inhibit ATP binding. These
results identify a novel class of PKR inhibitors that specifically
disrupt association of PKR with its substrate, eIF2alpha, and lay the
groundwork for future studies that test whether these PKR inhibitors may
be therapeutically useful to delay the onset of cytopenias and bone
marrow failure associated with MDS and MDS evolution to AML.

