Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the mitotic checkpoint with inhibition of MPS1 kinase
enhances radiosensitivity of glioblastoma cancer cells.


During the cell cycle, genomic stability requires accurate chromosome
segregation. Errors in this process can cause aneuploidy and lead to
tumorigenesis. To ensure faithful chromosome segregation, cells develop a
mechanism called the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC). Cancer cells are
addicted to the components of SAC machinery for a faithful entry of the
cell into anaphase. Thus, targeting the molecular mechanisms required for
the growth of aneuploid cells may be a more cancer cell specific
therapeutic approach applicable to broader tumor histologies. Previously,
using a siRNA based RNAi screen we identified MPS1 kinase, (also known as
TTK) as an important kinase for GBM cell survival. MPS1 is an essential
SAC enzyme aberrantly overexpressed in a wide range of tumors and
necessary for tumor cell proliferation.We observed inhibition of GBM cell
growth when MPS1 was downregulated by number of MPS1 specific siRNAs.
This was further validated using a selective and orally bioavailable MPS1
inhibitor NMS-P715 in various in-vitro cell assays. The inhibition of
cell death was induced partly by apoptosis; however, the major mechanism
was mitotic catastrophe. Cells treated with NMS-P715 showed an increase
in cells in G2-M phase of cell cycle compared to control cells followed
by mitotic catastrophe. Moreover, inhibition of MPS1 resulted in
radiosensitization of GBM cells. We observed decrease in DNA damage
repair and significant retention of H2AX foci after combination of
radiation (RT) with NMS-P715 compared to individual treatments. Next,
radiation in combination with NMS-P715 inhibited cell survival ability of
GBM cells in a colony formation assay. Further, NMS-P715 could inhibit
GBM tumor growth in an orthotopic brain tumor model. Finally, in order to
determine MPS1 associated molecular pathways, we compared gene expression
profile in MPS1 knockdown cells compared to the control by microarray
analysis. Ingenuity pathway and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis were used to
investigate the biological relevance of the MPS1 modulated genes. We
identified genes important in cell assembly, cell organization, DNA
repair and cell death pathways. Thus, inhibiting MPS1 kinase in
combination with radiation could represent a promising new approach to
GBM therapy.

