Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Miniaturized PBPK model improves pharmacodynamic characterization
and physiological interpretability for compounds with profound hysteresis
in tumor.


Background:Significant hysteresis between plasma concentration and target
inhibition at the effect site (e.g., tumor) is a frequent observation,
commonly described mathematically by connecting the central (i.e.,
plasma) compartment to an effect compartment by a link which causes the
concentration in the latter to be delayed relative to the plasma. The
result is a direct response between effect-compartment concentration and
target inhibition. A significant drawback is that the effect compartment
cannot be observed (making it impossible to validate) and has no
physiological interpretation (rendering communication with other
disciplines difficult). We develop a novel approach that is more
physiologically meaningful, provides more-precise model parameter
estimates, and gives insight into the physico-chemical factors limiting
distribution into the tumor.Method:We orally administered single doses of
several compounds (including Crizotinib, AZD3463, and others) targeting
ALK to mice bearing tumors derived from the DEL and H3122 non-small-cell
lung cancer line, at several dose levels. At 6, 24, and 48 hours
post-dose, we measured the plasma and tumor concentrations of each
compound and associated target inhibition (phosphorylated ALK, pALK) in
the tumor. pALK inhibition shows a direct response not to plasma, but to
tumor concentration, indicating that the delay is distributional in
nature. We constructed a miniature physiologically-based pharmacokinetic
(mPBPK) model consisting of a central compartment and a tumor of fixed
physiological volume. pALK inhibition was modeled as a direct Emax
response to tumor concentration. For each compound, we simultaneously
fitted the mPBPK model to the nave-pooled plasma and tumor
concentrations, as well as pALK, using all available dose levels. Beyond
the standard PK and PD parameters (Emax, E0, IC50) we also fitted the
tumor partition constant Kp, and tumor blood flow rate Qt. For
comparison, we fitted a standard effect-compartment (link) model to the
plasma concentrations and pALK levels to the same data.Results:For each
compound, we computed unbound EC50 for both effect-compartment and mPBPK
models. We found that while the point estimates largely agree, the mPBPK
model delivers more-precise estimates (typically 50% lower CV%). We
attribute this to its use of additional data (tumor concentration) to
constrain the model, which more than compensates for the additional
parameters in the mPBPK model. We find that there is broad consistency in
estimates of tumor flow rate Qt across the compounds studied, indicating
that distribution from plasma to site of action is limited by blood flow,
rather than by permeability. Additionally, we found that the greater
physiological interpretability of the mPBPK model enhances
cross-functional communication within project teams.

