Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RRP1B, a hereditary metastasis modifier, mediates transcription
and splicing to regulate mRNA expression.


RRP1B (ribosomal RNA processing 1 homolog B) was first identified as a
metastasis susceptibility gene in breast cancer by its association with
the altered expression of extracellular matrix genes, which are common
factors in metastasis predictive gene expression signatures. A
non-synonymous polymorphism in RRP1B (1421C>T; 436P>L) is associated with
metastasis-free survival in multiple breast cancer cohorts, representing
over 2,000 patients. These data collectively demonstrate the clinical
importance of RRP1B in tumor progression in breast cancer. Yet, the
mechanism through which RRP1B alters the expression of
survival-associated genes is unknown. Previous studies have shown that
many RRP1B binding candidates are involved in alternative splicing, a
method of gene expression regulation that is increasingly recognized to
be involved in cancer progression and metastasis. One such target is
SRSF1 (SF2/ASF), an essential splicing regulator that also functions as
an oncogene. Since RRP1B regulates transcriptional activity, we
hypothesized that RRP1B also regulates the expression of alternative mRNA
isoforms through its interaction with SRSF1. Interaction between RRP1B
and SRSF1 was verified by co-immunoprecipitation and
co-immunofluorescence. Earlier studies demonstrated that transcription
and mRNA splicing are co-dependent in which each process affects the
other through either physical interaction or kinetic regulation. Given
that RRP1B interacts with both chromatin-associated factors and splicing
regulators, we examined whether RRP1B acts as a mediator between the two
sets of machinery. Treatment of cells with transcriptional inhibitors
significantly increased the interaction between RRP1B and SRSF1,
demonstrating that the association of these two proteins is
transcriptionally modulated. In addition, immunoprecipitation assays
showed that RRP1B interacts with RNA polymerase II. To assess the role of
RRP1B in the regulation of alternative isoforms, we generated
RNA-sequencing data from control and Rrp1b-knockdown cells. Knockdown of
Rrp1b induced a significant change in isoform expression in over 600
genes compared to control cell lines. This was verified by qRT-PCR using
isoform-specific primers. Pathway enrichment analyses identified genes
involved in cell cycle and checkpoint regulation to be those most
affected by Rrp1b knockdown. Also, knockdown of Rrp1b increased in vitro
cell invasiveness and in vivo metastasis, confirming the role of RRP1B as
a metastasis suppressor. Based on these findings, we propose that RRP1B
regulates metastatic progression by altering the transcriptome through
its interaction with transcriptional machinery as well as splicing
regulators such as SRSF1. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
study to show that a metastasis susceptibility gene is directly involved
in regulating alternative isoform expression.

