Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SMAD3 upregulation is a novel biomarker of poor prognosis and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic cancer has one of the worst survival rates among all cancers.
Features like epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) are often seen in
pancreatic tumors and correlate with poor prognosis. The purpose of this
study was to identify factors involved in EMT in pancreatic cancer that
may serve as prognostic indicators. Gene-expression profiling identified
overexpression of SMAD3 in pancreatic cancer with high-grade solitary
cell infiltration, one of the EMT-like features. SMAD3 expression was
then evaluated through immunohistochemical analysis using clinical
specimens. SMAD3 was accumulated in the nuclei of tumor cells (positive
rate ranging from 0% to 75%), but was not detected in most of the
epithelial cells in the pancreatic duct. Upregulated SMAD3 (15% positive
in nuclei of tumor cells) correlated with malignant characteristics, such
as higher tumor grade (P = 0.001) and lymph node metastasis (P Pancreatic
cancer has one of the worst survival rates among all cancers. Features
like epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) are often seen in pancreatic
tumors and correlate with poor prognosis. The purpose of this study was
to identify factors involved in EMT in pancreatic cancer that may serve
as prognostic indicators. Gene-expression profiling identified
overexpression of SMAD3 in pancreatic cancer with high-grade solitary
cell infiltration, one of the EMT-like features. SMAD3 expression was
then evaluated through immunohistochemical analysis using clinical
specimens. SMAD3 was accumulated in the nuclei of tumor cells (positive
rate ranging from 0% to 75%), but was not detected in most of the
epithelial cells in the pancreatic duct. Upregulated SMAD3 (15% positive
in nuclei of tumor cells) correlated with malignant characteristics, such
as higher tumor grade (P = 0.001) and lymph node metastasis (P <0.001),
as well as with EMT-like features, such as reduced E-cadherin (P = 0.013)
and elevated vimentin (P = 0.032). SMAD3 knockdown in pancreatic cancer
cells resulted in increased E-cadherin expression, decreased vimentin
expression and decreased cell motility. The suppressed EMT-like features
by SMAD3 knockdown were observed even in SMAD4-inactivated pancreatic
cancer cells, suggesting that SMAD3 is involved in EMT induction,
regardless of SMAD4 status. In clinical cases, SMAD3 upregulation and
EMT-like features correlated with shorter survival time. Moreover, SMAD3
and E-cadherin were identified as independent prognostic factors by
multivariate analysis, and the group of patients with both upregulated
SMAD3 and reduced E-cadherin had the least favorable prognosis compared
with other groups. Taken together, SMAD3 seems to play an important role
in malignant progression of pancreatic cancer, and may provide a
potential biomarker for poor prognosis of pancreatic cancer.

