Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-expression modules as hallmarks of breast cancer survival and
response.


Background: Co-expression modules in cancer are cohesive groups of genes
with highly correlated expression patterns, presumably regulating
phenotypes important in carcinogenesis, metastasis, or response to
treatment. With the growing database of gene expression data, it is now
possible to deduce co-expression modules active in breast cancer
subpopulations.Methods: We assembled 74 breast-cancer related gene
expression datasets containing 5,500 samples altogether. Per dataset, we
identified genes with bimodal expression analyzed using mixture-model
clustering to ultimately find gene groups that are consistently
co-regulated across multiple datasets. Functional and pathway enrichment
of modules was assessed using DAVID and g:profiler software tools.
Associations between module expression and patient outcome, chemotherapy
response, clinical variables, epithelial vs. stromal expression,
intrinsic subtype and other published signatures were assessed using
standard statistical methods.Results: Our meta-analysis identified 11
modules ranging in size from 5-200 genes. As expected, there were modules
representing estrogen signaling, cell proliferation, and ERBB2 signaling
that correlate with intrinsic subtype and receptor status. In addition,
we found modules associated with immune signaling, development, histone
modification, and the ECM. The immune modules were highly correlated to
previously published Tcell/Bcell, STAT1, and IFN immune signatures. In
multivariate analysis, the combination of a downregulated Tcell/Bcell
immune module and an upregulated proliferation module associated with
recurrence, suggesting that cancers with a high proliferation rate in the
absence of an activated immune system are prone to recur. This
association was especially strong in TN and basal cancers. Comparing
modules associated with response to chemotherapy to those associated with
the prognosis of untreated patients, the most common pattern was that of
a module associating with good prognosis or a good response to
chemotherapy (but not both). For instance, high expression of the
estrogen module associates with a good prognosis but a poor response to
chemotherapy, whereas upregulation of the proliferation module associates
with a poor prognosis but a good response to chemotherapy. Another
pattern we observed, of a biomarker that associates with good prognosis
without chemotherapy and a good response to chemotherapy, was found in
the T/B cell immune modules.Conclusion: Co-expression modules provide a
high-level functional view of breast cancer that complements the cancer
hallmarks. These results suggest that in some high-immune patients, the
same host processes contributing to an excellent response to chemotherapy
might preclude its necessity, and support a treatment strategy boosting
anti-tumoral immunity in low-immunity patients with highly proliferating
tumors.

