Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of v integrin in melanoma cell migration and invasion.


Melanoma, the most aggressive form of skin cancer, has a high incidence
of forming metastases with a poor prognosis and median survival of less
than 12 months. Tumor metastasis depends on cell interaction with
vascular endothelial cells and the extracellular matrix (ECM) regulated
by adhesion molecules such as integrin transmembrane receptors. Integrin
v (vitronectin receptor) has been implicated in the metastatic cascade of
many cancers, and blocking v integrin with intetumumab (fully humanized
monoclonal antibody) decreases the formation of breast cancer brain
metastases and inhibited human melanoma tumor growth in a rat xenograft
model. The purpose of this study is to test the hypothesis that v
integrins are crucial for the cell migration and invasion characteristics
of melanoma cells that are involved in metastasis. Human A2058 melanoma
cells pretreated with hexadimethrine bromide were transduced with
lentiviral clones of anti-v integrin shRNAs. Stable cell lines were
selected with puromycin showing 75% knockdown (A2058-75KD) or 40%
knockdown (A2058-40KD) of the v-integrin protein as determined with
western blotting. Using the Cell Titer-Glo luminescence cell viability
assay, we determined that the A2058-75KD cells have a 60% decreased rate
of proliferation compared to control cells, and grow as large cell
aggregates in suspension unlike adherent monolayer of control cells. The
A2058-75KD cells demonstrate an ECM-dependent growth pattern. In a
3-dimensional matrix of Matrigel, the cell clumps dissociate and grow as
infiltrating single cells, however, after harvesting from the Matrigel,
cells revert back to non-adherent suspension clumps under 2-dimensional
culture conditions. In comparison, the A2058-40KD cells with 40% v
integrin knockdown showed no difference in the rate of proliferation
compared to control cells and also grow as adherent monolayer under
standard culture conditions. A transwell invasion assay was performed to
assess migration through a barrier of Matrigel (2mg/ml) ECM for 72h using
10% fetal bovine serum media as the chemoattractant. A2058-40KD cells
showed 50% decreased invasion compared to control cells. Using an ibidi
2-dimensional cell migration assay, we found that A2058-40KD cells showed
markedly reduced migration at 6 days after plating, which was
significantly reduced compared to control A2058 cells. Blocking v
integrin with intetumumab decreased the migration of the control A2058
cells. Further experiments are underway to investigate the effect of v
integrin knockdown on cell adhesion under dynamic fluid flow conditions
and the specific integrins involved in v-mediated effects in melanoma. We
conclude that v integrins play a crucial role in the invasiveness of
metastatic melanoma cells.

