Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling of EMT/MET transitions in breast cancer stem cells.


Background: Recent studies suggest that breast cancer stem-like cells
(BCSCs) exist in two freely interconvertible states: an EMT- and an
MET-like state, and that conversion between these two states is regulated
by both intracellular and microenvironmental signaling (Liu et al. 2012,
Korkaya et al. 2012). Using a mathematical model, we quantify rates of
transition between the EMT and MET-like states. We further explore BCSC
behavior in response to alterations in microenvironmental signaling and
examine key regulators of BCSC population dynamics.Methods: We employ a
continuous-time Markov chain model to quantify rates of transition
between the EMT and MET-like state for BCSCs. Our data-based modeling
approach employs parameter estimates derived from mouse xenograft
experiments from the Wicha laboratory (Liu et al. 2012) to estimate the
equilibrium EMT- and MET-like state distributions. We expand our model to
simulate BCSC population counts and EMT and MET state transitions in
response to alterations in the complex regulatory network involving IL-6,
HER2, miRNA, NF-B, and TGF- signaling.Results: We estimate the rate of
BCSC transition from an EMT- to MET-like state to be 0.08 per cell per
day, and the rate of transition from an MET- to EMT-like state to be
0.013 per cell per day. Simulation studies examining the effects of
abrogating microenvironmental signals individually and in combinations
revealed that slowing both self-renewal rate and the rate of transition
from an MET- to EMT-like state is essential to eradicating the total BCSC
population. The fastest decline in the BCSC population was observed when
IL-6 is inhibited and the activation of NF-B via HER2 signaling and IL-6
feedback was blocked.Conclusions: Rates of transition between EMT- and
MET-like states are estimated to occur frequently and these events are
much more likely than dedifferentiation. Predictions from our
mathematical model match experimental data (Korkaya et al. 2012) showing
the efficacy of combined HER2 and IL-6 blockade in reducing the BCSC
population.

