Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific destruction of iron oxide labeled cancer cells by
variable gradient magnetic field.


Minimally invasive cancer therapy with nanostructures such as
hyperthermia treatment with superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO)
nanoparticles that has been recently demonstrated, represents novel
highly important strategy for cancer management. In this study we have
demonstrated that oscillating gradients of magnetic field induce
significant non-thermal damage to cells labeled with magnetic SPIO
nanoparticles. Iron oxide labeling was achieved either by specific cell
surface labeling with biotinylated trastuzumab antibody followed by
streptavidin-conjugated SPIO nanoparticles (MiltenyiBiotec) at 4 C to
prevent internalization, or by internalization of BNF-starch
nanoparticles (Micromod Partikeltechnologie) using standard cell
transfection reagents. Both protocols resulted in an efficient cell
labeling with SPIO confirmed by Prussian blue staining. The novel
treatment procedure, called GIFT (gradient-induced Fe therapy), was
implemented on a small animal Bruker Biospec 9.4T MRI scanner equipped
with G060 gradient system. SPIO nanoparticles can also serve as MRI
contrast agent thus enabling image-guided delivery of therapy. Cell
samples or mice were positioned in the center of the gradient system of
the magnet, and cycling gradients with the amplitude of Gmax = 93.5 G/cm
were applied for variable periods of time. The sample temperature was
stabilized by a home-built temperature controlled chamber. The treatment
resulted in an efficient destruction of both surface labeled and SPIO
loaded human breast cancer HER2/neu positive BT-474 cells. We also
obtained preliminary results for in vivo GIFT therapy with human breast
cancer MDA-MB-231/luc models expressing firefly luciferase. Cancer cells
prelabeled with BNF nanoparticles were inoculated orthotopically and GIFT
and T2 MR imaging were initiated starting from 48h after the tumor
inoculation. The tumor viability following the treatment was
longitudinally evaluated by bioluminescence imaging (BLI) and by
histological endpoints. GIFT therapy resulted in significant reduction of
BLI intensities from SPIO prelabeled tumors, whereas no effect was
observed for unlabeled tumors or when no gradients were applied. We
hypothesize that variable gradients induce structural damage to
iron-oxide labeled cells in the presence of strong polarizing magnetic
field and that the potential mechanism may include mechanical destruction
of cell membranes and/or organelles by magnetically polarized
nanoparticles or their aggregates and is not related to hyperthermia
induced by the radiofrequency. GIFT can be implemented on a standard MRI
system that makes the technology applicable for clinical use.

