Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fiber-induced DNA damage response in human lung epithelial cells.


Asbestos, a group of naturally occurring mineral fibers, is a significant
lung carcinogen. Exposure to asbestos fibers induces the formation of
reactive oxygen species in cells and, subsequently, DNA double-strand
breaks (DSBs), the most serious form of DNA damage related to
transformation of cells. As a part of the DNA damage response, H2AX
histone variant molecules are phosphorylated at ser139, producing H2AX
foci at the site of DSBs, and these serve as a docking site for DNA
repair molecule complexes. Thereby, H2AX foci are considered a sensitive
marker for DSBs. DNA damage response has not thoroughly been investigated
in particle carcinogenesis. Here, we studied fiber-induced DSB formation
in two human lung epithelial cell lines, the cancer cell line A549 and
the transformed cell line BEAS-2B to provide further knowledge on DNA
damage associated with fiber exposure as a risk factor for lung cancer.A
sub-lethal asbestos fiber concentration of 2 g /cm2 was determined, by
cell viability tests, as suitable for working with the A549 and BEAS-2B
cells. Then, we studied the kinetics of fiber induced DSB formation in
terms of H2AX phosphorylation. Foci of H2AX can be detected using
specific antibody in immunocytochemistry assays. A549 and BEAS-2B cells
were exposed to asbestos fibers for 4, 24 and 48 h, and H2AX foci were
counted. Concurrent non-exposed control cultures were settled at each
time point. At 4 h, the control group displayed remarkable endogenous DSB
formation, possibly due to replication stress. In exposed cultures, the
formation of H2AX foci peaked at 24 h. We also explored whether it is
possible, by using H2AX antibody in a chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by next generation sequencing, to find out the distribution of
DSBs at 24 h in the fiber-exposed A549 cells. The sequences involved in
H2AX foci were genome-widely distributed. To conclude, the kinetics of
fiber-induced H2AX foci formation in the A549 and BEAS-2B cells was
partly interfered by endogenously formed DSBs. This study revealed
sequences that may be implicated within H2AX foci for further elucidation
on their contribution to lung tumor progression in particle
carcinogenesis.

