Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implementing an automated clinical next generation sequencing
analysis pipeline - assuring accurate and robust results.


Introduction: There is unmet clinical need for automated data processing
of deep sequencing in heterogeneous sample populations in molecular
oncology specimens. We have developed clinical assays using Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) for deep sequencing in both solid tumor and
hematological indications. We have targeted five genes (ASXL1, RUNX1,
EZH2, ETV6, and TP53) involved in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and
three genes (BRAF, c-KIT, NRAS) in late stage melanoma. We designed and
implemented a data processing pipeline that integrates novel and
commercial analysis software to provide automated rules-based filtering
and annotation of variants.Methods: We used a targeted resequencing
approach with the Fluidigm Access Array system for library creation and
molecular barcoding for sample multiplexing. Samples were processed in
duplicate to filter out potential false positives. Libraries were
sequenced using the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM) (Life
Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) and the Illumina MiSeq (Illumina Inc., San
Diego, CA) systems. Raw data in FastQ format was preprocessed using
Windows batch commands and Perl programs that were integrated with
NextGENe (SoftGenetics, State College, PA) analysis software for quality
trimming, alignment and variant calling against NCBI curated references.
Variant calls were compared between duplicate samples and annotated using
a separate Perl program that queried databases containing known germline
and somatic variants.Results: Quality control was implemented by trimming
all downstream reads that contained specified Q-scores (Phred, Q16 or
above) as well as requiring a minimum coverage depth of 500X per exon.
Only variant calls confirmed at greater than 5% in both duplicate samples
and with a balanced ratio of forward and reverse reads were considered
reportable in a clinical setting. Variants appearing in only one of the
duplicates were consistent with systematic errors. Variant calls were
annotated with existing database information or were saved in a database
of novel mutations by the annotation pipeline. The pipeline removes all
systematic errors in known cell line samples by filtering
metrics.Conclusions: We have developed a robust and automated pipeline
for NGS data analysis in the clinical lab that is independent of
sequencing platform. The implementation of an automated processing
pipeline increases the efficiency and consistency of analysis. Hands-on
time for data analysis has been decreased from 30 minutes per sample to
less than 5 minutes per sample. Carrying duplicates through the entire
multiplexing and sequencing process also helps reduce test based
false-positive errors (e.g. PCR errors) while robust analytical metrics
remove other sources of error (e.g. strand bias). We have found an
average of 6-10 false positive calls in both sample types, all of which
were filtered out by the pipeline presented here.

