Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-Jun as a target in pancreatic cancer.


Prognosis for pancreatic cancer is especially poor, with a 5% survival
rate. Current FDA-approved therapeutics gemcitabine and erlotinib extend
patient survival by a mere two months. As the disease is asymptomatic,
patients are generally diagnosed at later stages of the disease.
Consequentially, only 15-20% of patients present with resectable tumors.
Further, aggressive metastasis often occurs after surgical intervention,
resulting in the death of 75% of patients within five years. These
statistics indicate an unmet need for more effective therapeutic
strategies to combat pancreatic cancer.c-Jun is a component of the AP-1
early response transcription factor. It is expressed in 87% of primary
pancreatic cancer lesions and in several pancreatic cancer cell lines.
c-Jun overexpression has been linked to metastasis in numerous cancer
models and previous work in our laboratory has demonstrated the efficacy
of a DNAzyme against c-Jun for the suppression of tumor growth and
angiogenesis in in vivo models of basal and squamous cell carcinoma. We
sought to explore the role of c-Jun in pancreatic cancer and the
therapeutic potential of gene silencing of endogenous c-Jun.We confirmed
serum-inducible c-Jun expression at the mRNA level using qRT-PCR in two
in vitro models of pancreatic adenocarcinoma, PANC-1 and MIA PaCa-2. This
is consistent with Western blot data, which confirm expression of both
c-Jun as well as its phosphorylated form (p-c-Jun) at the protein level.
Optimal uptake of a FITC-labeled siRNA into these cell lines was achieved
using DOTAP/DOPE transfection reagent. We subsequently demonstrated that
the effective blockade of c-Jun and p-c-Jun could be achieved with siRNA
targeting human endogenous c-Jun. At the functional level, while blockade
of c-Jun had no apparent effect on cell proliferation, PANC-1 and MIA
PaCa-2 cell migration and invasion were markedly reduced. This was
demonstrated using transwell assays. Interestingly, this effect was
enhanced in cells that were also treated with gemcitabine. Further, we
showed that MMP-1 expression was inhibited in MIA PaCa-2 cells treated
with siRNA targeting c-Jun. We have also identified Cystatin F, MDM2,
MET, MMP-13 and NF2 as potential downstream targets of c-Jun using a
human tumor metastasis PCR array.This in vitro data confirms the
expression and activation of c-Jun in pancreatic cancer cells, and
demonstrate a functional role for c-Jun in pancreatic cancer cell
migration and invasion, which underpin metastasis. We are in the process
of validating these results in vivo employing shRNA to generate a stable
knockdown of c-Jun in pancreatic cancer cells (MIA PaCa-2).

