Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New findings of kinase switch in gastrointestinal stromal tumor
under imatinib using phosphoproteomic analysis.


Despite the initial effectiveness of imatinib for gastrointestinal
stromal tumors (GISTs), patients must continue lifelong imatinib therapy,
and may eventually relapse owing to acquired drug resistance. Pathology
reveals the persistence of viable cells during imatinib therapy, even in
the disappearance region upon radiological examination. These cells are
thought to cause acquired drug resistance and relapse. To uncover the
mechanisms underlying these clinical issues, we used GIST-T1 cells to
investigate the phosphoproteomic alterations induced by imatinib
treatment. Because some tyrosine kinases might be activated after
imatinib exposure, it is important to reveal the increased
phosphorylation of proteins on a proteomic scale, and elucidate
drug-resistant proteins. Proteins extracted from imatinib-treated or
untreated GIST-T1 cells were digested with trypsin. The resulting
tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides were purified using an
immunoaffinity-enriched and iTRAQ-labeled reagent, and analyzed using
mass spectroscopy. Using this phosphoproteomic approach, we identified
171 tyrosine phosphorylation sites spanning 134 proteins. We also
detected increased tyrosine phosphorylation of Fyn (Y420) and focal
adhesion kinase (FAK) (Y576). Increased phosphorylation was also
confirmed by Western blot analysis, and knockdown of Fyn or FAK increased
cells sensitivity to imatinib. Furthermore, the anti-proliferative effect
of imatinib significantly enhanced imatinib-resistant GIST-T1 cells,
which exhibited constitutive phosphorylation of FAK when treated with a
FAK-selective kinase inhibitor. Moreover, FYN was proved to be a signal
of FAK of upper reaches.These results indicate that an iTRAQ-based
quantitative phospho-tyrosine-focused phosphoproteomic approach is a
powerful method for screening phosphoproteins associated with drug
resistance. Fyn or FAK might be potential therapeutic targets to overcome
acquired resistance to imatinib in GISTs.

