Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular markers promoting metastases to the brain via EMT:
Genes, proteins, and functional analysis.


Brain metastasis is the most common cause of mortality and morbidity of
many cancers and occurs in more than 40% of patients. The metastatic
cascade entails an orderly sequence of steps enabling tumor cells to
migrate from the primary tumor and colonize at secondary locations. The
underlying mechanisms of metastatic dissemination to the brain remain to
be defined. However, In order to achieve this metastatic potential a
cancer cell may go through a cellular reprogramming process, namely
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and its counterpart
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET), by acquiring multiple genetic
alterations and a stem cell like phenotype. We hypothesized that EMT
would play a crucial role in brain metastasis. In order to achieve our
goal we studied the expression of markers of EMT, MET, and stem cells in
metastatic brain tumor samples. Microarray analysis of metastatic tumors
was also done using a plate form of 17,000 genes. Furthermore, functional
analysis establishing the metastatic phenotype of cancer cells towards a
cerebral environment was also demonstrated using metastatic cell lines.
Our results demonstrated that the expressions of EMT markers (Snail,
TWIST, pSTAT3, NFkB), as well as the mesenchymal marker Vimentin, were
present in metastatic tumor samples. The stem cell marker CD44 was also
highly expressed. Gene expression analysis established the high presence
of transcriptional factors associated with differentiation and
reprogramming. Lastly, Immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated the
presence of the mesenchymal marker Vimentin in brain tumor specimens.
Tumor cells grown in astrocytic media displayed an increased cell
proliferation, as well as enhanced S-phase cell cycle entry using an EDU
incorporation technique. Migration of primary tumor cells was
significantly enhanced in astrocytic media as evidenced by scratch wound
migration. Furthermore, the tumor cells have a greater affinity for
astrocytic media as demonstrated by chemotatic migratory tests. Moreover,
co-culture analysis of primary tumor cells with astrocytic cells shows
amicable mutual growth with Immunofluorescence demonstrating cell-to-cell
interaction via E-Cadherin. In conclusion results of this study suggests
that reprogramming via EMT/MET plays a crucial step in brain metastasis,
and that the cerebral milieu provides a suitable microenvironment for
metastatic cells to grow and disseminate.

