Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cool-1-mediated inhibition of c-Cbl as a therapuetic target, which
modulates multiple critical properties of glioblastomas.


Glioblastomas (GBMs), the most malignant glial tumors, differ from normal
glial progenitor cells in many ways, but little is known about the
molecular circuitry underlying these differences.We have discovered a
novel means by which GBMs become chemo-resistant, based on inhibition of
the redox/Fyn/c-Cbl pathway by overexpression of Cool-1(Beta-Pix). The
protein c-Cbl, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, is responsible for the
ubiquitination and degradation of multiple receptor tyrosine kinases
critical for cell division and cell survival. In normal glial progenitor
cells of the CNS, exposure to chemotherapy oxidizes cells, leading to
sequential activation of Fyn and c-Cbl. However in GBM cells, exposure to
BCNU or other chemical pro-oxidants does not lead to c-Cbl activation.
Further studies demonstrated that these agents do cause Fyn activation,
suggesting that GBMs inhibit c-Cbl phosphorylation leading to decreased
degradation of EGFR, accounting for increased EGFR signaling. We next
discovered that the decrease in c-Cbl activation via the redox/Fyn/c-Cbl
pathway was due to c-Cbl sequestration by Cool-1, which is overexpressed
in GBM cells and samples of tumors. We found that oxidant-associated
c-Cbl activation can be restored by shRNA-mediated inhibition of Cool-1
expression, leading to restoration of normal c-Cbl-mediated degradation
of RTKs (including EGFR). We further found that restoration of Cool-1
activity modulated multiple other hallmarks of GBM, including changes in
migration, cell cycle parameters, and altering the cancer stem cell
phenotype of our cells. In contrast, Cool-1/c-Cbl complexes were not
found in normal brain or normal glial progenitors and Cool-1 knockdown
did not reduce progenitor cell division. The translation of these
findings into an in vivo intracranial xenograft model of GBM showed that
Cool-1 is essential for tumorigenesis and decreasing Cool-1 levels leads
to decreased tumor take, decreased tumor growth, and increased
survival.In sum, the ability of Cool-1/c-Cbl interactions to modulate a
variety of tumor cell properties suggests that these interactions offer
an attractive target for modulating GBM growth, particularly due to the
absence of Cool-1/c-Cbl complexes in normal brain tissue and to the lack
of effects of Cool-1 knockdown on division of normal glial progenitor
cells. The activation of c-Cbl activity through pharmacological agents is
a potentially viable strategy for the specific eradication of GBM cells.

