Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BMP 7 regulates dormancy and recurrence of prostate cancer stem
cell in bone via P38/NDRG1/P21 signaling axis.


Bone is the most common metastatic site of prostate cancer, which affects
approximately 70% of patients with advanced disease. Although patients
with localized lesions can be cured by radical prostatectomy or
radiotherapy, more than 90% of cancer deaths are attributed to metastatic
disease. Growth of the tumor cells in the bone is generally slow and they
often become dormant until an appropriate microenvironment is established
for their recurrence. However, how these metastatic tumor cells become
dormant and how they recur at the target organs is virtually unknown. To
address this critical question, we have studied an interaction of
prostate cancer cells (PC3mm) and bone stromal cells (HS5).The
conditioned medium of HS5 induced growth arrest and senescence to
prostate cancer cells. Our results of Western blot, qRT-PCR and reporter
assay showed that this effect was mediated by induction of p38 MAP
kinase, the tumor metastasis suppressor gene, N-myc downstream regulated
gene 1 (NDRG1) and cell cycle inhibitors. We also found that this
secretory factor is bone morphogenetic protein 7 (BMP7) and that BMP7
indeed induced NDRG1 and p21 through activation of p38. Importantly, BMP7
was able to induce senescence to PC3mm cell; however, the tumor cells
regained their growth ability upon withdrawal of BMP7, suggesting that
BMP7-induced senescence is reversible. Notably, our results of the
existing database analysis indicate that the expression level of BMPR2,
one of the BMP7 receptors, showed inverse correlation with bone
metastasis and recurrence of prostate cancer. Furthermore, BMP7
significantly suppressed sphere forming ability of the cancer stem-like
cells isolated from PC3mm and induced senescence followed by activation
of NDRG1 and p21, and this effect was reversed by withdrawal of BMP7. To
determine whether BMP7 secreted from bone stromal cells induces growth
arrest of cancer stem-like cells in vivo, we co-injected the cancer
stem-like cells with bone stromal cells which had either scrambled shRNA
(control) or shRNA for BMP7 into the tibia of nude mice. We found that
the control HS5 suppressed the growth of cancer stem-like cells, while
HS5 with knocked-down BMP7 failed to inhibit cancer growth in the bone.
Furthermore, direct injection of BMP7 after inoculation of cancer
stem-like cells into mouse tibiae significantly suppressed the tumor
growth. More importantly, we found that withdrawal of BMP7 treatment led
the tumor to regrow in the bone, suggesting again that BMP7 plays a
critical role in determining the fate of cancer stem-like cells for
dormancy and recurrence in bone metastasis of prostate cancer. Our
results revealed a novel mechanism of the BMP7-NDRG1axis which plays a
critical role in the regulation of dormancy and recurrence of prostate
tumor cells in bone metastasis.

