Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ten degrees of separation: novel genes affecting outcome in
ovarian cancer.


Objective: To identify genomic predictors of overall survival of women
with high grade serous ovarian cancer based on best separation overall
survival Kaplan-Meier curvesMethods: Comprehensive data analysis of the
TCGA dataset of high grade serous epithelial ovarian cancer was carried
out with a training (n= 375) and validation (n= 188) data sets. The
R-code was written specifically to identify all genes with high
expression that gave the greatest predictive potential for patient
survival. The top ten cases with lowest sums of the log rank test
p-values obtained for training and validation sets were chosen to be
included with Kaplan-Meier survival curves for analysis.Results: The ten
genes with high expression that had the smallest p-values in their
respective order were: SLC6A1, LIPK, EHBP1, SUSD5, PEX3, SLC22A3,
RABGEF1, PPM2C, KIAA1219, and GALNT10. The range of p-value sum ranged
from 1.77E-3 to 2.09E-3. The lowest p-value was for SLC6A1, which encodes
for GABA Transporter-1 that removes GABA from extracellular to
intracellular space. Interestingly, four of the 10 genes predictive for
poor outcome are directly involved in cell metabolism: LIPK, PPM2C, PEX3,
and GALNT10. The median OS of the high gene expression group ranged from
38 to 48 months. The median OS of the low gene expression group ranged
from 55-70 months. The median OS difference of high gene vs. low gene
expression groups ranged from 15-25 months. EHBP1 gene, involved in
endocytic trafficking of transferrin into endosomes and GLUT4 into
adipocytes, had the greatest difference in median OS between high and low
expressions at 25 months (p= 2.16E-3). Finally, low expression of PPM2C
compared to its high expression was significantly associated with > 5
year survival (10.1% vs. 1.1%, p=0.001) and no recurrence in both
training and validation sets (12.5% vs. 2.2%, p=0.04). PPM2C encodes for
pyruvate dehydrogenase-phosphatase 1 that catalyzes reactivation of the
alpha subunit of the E1 component of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.
Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex in the active form transforms pyruvate
from glycolysis to acetyl-CoA in the mitochondria. To evaluate whether
similar findings are noted in other cancers, we also examined the TCGA
data for breast, lung, colon cancer, and glioblastoma. PPM2C is amplified
by 7% in invasive breast cancer, and leads to an overall worse survival
(68.9 months vs. 129.5 months, p = 0.037).Conclusion: Genes involved in
cell metabolism, neurotransmitter functioning, and endocytic trafficking
are highly predictive of outcome in high grade serous ovarian cancer.
High PPM2C expression and gene amplification leads to worsening overall
survival in ovarian and invasive breast cancer, respectively. These
pathways likely reflect novel and important therapeutic targets.

