Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of pro-angiogenic and pro-inflammatory cytokines in
tumor cells: Implication of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions .


Increasing data suggest a contribution of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transitions in specific steps of the metastatic cascade, particularly in
tumor invasion and intravasation, and in the release of circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) in the blood stream. The completion of these steps largely
relies on interactions disseminating tumor cells establish with host
cells. Because cytokines are particularly implicated in tumor-host
cross-talks, we have examined whether EMT programs could be involved in
the regulation of pro-inflammatory and pro-angiogenic cytokines which
could favor angiogenesis, intravasation and CTC release.To investigate
EMT implication in cytokine regulation, we used two cell lines,
MDA-MB-468 (a mammary adenocarcinoma cell line) and A549 (a lung
carcinoma cell line). These cell lines were shown to undergo EMT-changes
following EGF and TGF- treatment respectively, characterized by an
upregulation of vimentin, snail and slug, and a downregulation of
E-cadherin. A cytokine array on cell supernatant showed that EMT
induction in these cell lines is associated with the upregulation of a
consistant panel of cytokines. We then confirmed that interleukin-8
(IL-8), interleukin-6 (IL-6) and Granulocyte Monocyte-Colony Stimulating
Factor (GM-CSF) are upregulated during EMT in the two carcinoma cell
lines by RT-qPCR and ELISA. Emphasizing a functional role of such
regulations, conditioned medium from EMT-induced MDA-468 cells was shown
to stimulate HUVEC cell migration in a boyden chamber assay.In order to
investigate whether slug and snail EMT transcription factors are involved
in the regulation of IL-8, IL-6 and GM-CSF, we used both siRNA and cDNA
transfection approaches. Combined repression of snail and slug inhibited
the EMT-associated upregulation of IL-8, IL-6 and GM-CSF, suggesting that
snail and slug are necessary for this process. Ectopic expression of each
transcription factor was not sufficient to induce cytokines expression.
However, ectopic expression of a proteasome degradation-resistant mutant
of snail was sufficient to induce expression of IL-6, IL-8 and GM-CSF,
suggesting that the stabilization of snail is necessary to regulate the
expression of these cytokines.We thus here demonstrate that EMT is
associated with an overexpression of specific pro-angiogenic and
pro-inflammatory cytokines. We further emphasize a role of snail and slug
transcription factors in this regulatory process. These data suggest that
EMT programs could directly contribute to the stimulation of angiogenesis
and inflammatory cell recruitment in the tumor microenvironment. The
impact of such regulations on angiogenesis and the metastatic spread is
currently under investigation.

