Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Berry feeding changes gut microbiota and immune function in
association with adenoma formation in the Min mouse.


In the gut, the interaction between the tumor tissue and its
microenvironment including the microbiota and immune cells may play a
significant role in the carcinogenic process. Here we studied whether the
anti-carcinogenic effects of berry diets were mediated by changes in the
gut microbiota and immune cells. Male and female Min mice were fed
modified high-fat AIN93-G diets containing 10% (w/w) freeze-dried
bilberry or cloudberry for 10 weeks. The control diet was similar but
without any berries. Mucosal B and T lymphocytes were analysed using
immunohistochemical staining. The microbial profile was determined
carrying out PCR-DGGE analysis using bacterial genomic DNA extracted from
caecal contents.Microbial PCR-DGGE profiles contained 10-19 amplicons,
indicating that the microbiota in the mouse cecum contents is diverse.
According to their PCR-DGGE patterns, samples of control and
cloudberry-fed mice could be divided to well-defined subgroups both
visually and using Molecular Analyst software. Instead, visual grouping
of the samples of bilberry-fed mice was impossible and the samples were
only grouped using the software. In the control mice, amplicons a-d were
present in all samples but on the basis of their intensity, amplicons b-d
represented the dominant species. In the cloudberry mice, amplicons a, c,
d, e and f existed in all samples but some of them lacked a pronounced
amplicon b. In the bilberry mice, the amplicons a-e existed in all
samples. In addition, bilberry samples contained amplicon g that seemed
to be more prevalent and intense than in the samples of the other two
groups. The amplicon g was sequenced and found to belong to the
Clostridiales order of the Clostridia class in the Firmicutes phylum and
to represent an uncultured bacterium clone abc21b07.x1:
AY667976.Cloudberry feeding resulted in a smaller density of mucosal CD3+
T lymphocytes (p=0.149) and a significantly smaller ratio of
intraepithelial to total CD3+ T lymphocytes (p=0.034) when compared to
the control group. Furthermore, there was a significant positive
correlation (p=0.012) between the ratio of intraepithelial to total CD3+
T lymphocytes and adenoma burden in the small intestine of Min mice.
Interestingly, no difference in the density of any lymphocytes was found
between the bilberry and the control group. Berry feeding did not affect
the density of B lymphocytes in the intestinal mucosa.Here we show that
berry feeding changes the microbiota and the distribution of immune cells
in the intestine of Min mice and these changes are associated with
adenoma formation.

