Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of an in vivo generated subpopulation of human
LnCaP prostate cancer cells as an improved testosterone-dependent in vivo
mouse xenograft model for compound testing.


Prostate cancer is one of the most frequently diagnosed cancer entities
in men. It can be estimated that in 80% of all men reaching the age of 80
years prostate tumors are present. Since a depletion of testosterone in
prostate cancer therapies is often performed, androgen-dependent and
-independent prostate carcinoma cell lines have been widely used to
establish mouse in vivo xenograft models in order to identify novel drugs
helping to eliminate prostate tumors.A commercially available LnCaP cell
line was shown to be androgen-dependent since addition of synthetic
androgens to androgen-free culture medium was able to restore proper cell
proliferation in cell culture. However, when implanted in SCID mice in
order to establish a xenograft model, the take rate turned out to be very
low and tumor growth was highly heterogeneously. Therefore, we resected
and recultivated one of the few well-growing tumors and reimplanted the
arising subpopulation subcutaneously in mice. After performing two rounds
of this subpopulationing procedure we could generate a new cell line,
LnCaP-Z2, which was able to form tumors in mice with a take rate of
nearly 100%, but still shows heterogenous tumor growth similar to other
subcutaneously implanted prostate cancer cells (e.g. PC-3).In order to
demonstrate an androgen dependency of our new LnCaP subpopulation model
in vivo we used castrated mice and implanted them subcutaneously with two
different prostate cancer cell lines in the absence or presence of also
subcutaneously inoculated testosterone pellets. Whereas no influence of
testosterone was detectable on the growth behavior of subcutaneous PC-3
xenograft tumors, the development of the LnCaP-Z2 xenografts was strictly
dependent on testosterone release.Finally, treatment of Bicalutamide, a
typical member of the class of anti-androgens, which is frequently used
in the treatment of prostate cancer, led to significant inhibition of
tumor growth using our improved subpopulation LnCaP-Z2 in vivo model.
Thus, we could demonstrate the model's potency as a
testosterone-dependent in vivo tool suitable for screening and
development of novel anti-prostate cancer drugs.

