Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PSMA-targeted theranostic nanoplex combining TRAIL gene cDNA and
prodrug enzyme delivery for prostate cancer treatment.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of death from cancer in
men in the U.S, and there is a compelling need for the development of
effective treatments for metastatic PCa. Theranostic approaches that
combine detection with treatment hold significant promise for
cancer-cell-specific treatments especially with molecular reagents such
as cDNA or siRNA that can increase or decrease the expression of genes of
interest. We have reported on a prostrate specific membrane antigen
(PSMA)-based platform to deliver a prodrug enzyme and small interfering
RNA (siRNA) to downregulate gene expression for theranostic imaging of
metastatic PCa[1]. Here we expanded this platform for gene delivery and
expression of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL) cDNA. PSMA, which is highly expressed by castration-resistant
PCa, was used for PCa-specific delivery and localization of the nanoplex
that delivered TRAIL cDNA and a prodrug enzyme, bacterial cytosine
deaminase (bCD). TRAIL has been reported to specifically kill malignant
cells but to be relatively nontoxic to normal cells. The GFP-TRAIL cDNA
used expresses a GFP-TRAIL fusion protein that can be detected with
optical imaging to evaluate cDNA expression. The prodrug enzyme bCD
converts the non-toxic prodrug 5-fluorocytosine (5-FC) to the active
cytotoxic drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) that can be monitored by 19F MRS.
Our prototype nanoplex was synthesized by conjugating: (i) a low
molecular weight urea-based PSMA targeting moiety
(2-(3-[1-carboxy-5-[7-(2,5-dioxo-pyrrolidin-1-yloxycarbonyl)-heptanoylamino
]-pentyl]-ureido)-pentanedioic acid, (ii) the prodrug-activating enzyme
bCD that converts nontoxic 5-FC to cytotoxic 5-FU, (iii) the
near-infrared fluorescent probe Cy5.5 labeled linker poly-L-lysine (PLL),
and (iv) the GFP-TRAIL pDNA delivery vector: PEI (polyethyleneimine)-PEG
(polythethyeneglycol) co-grafted-polymer. Imaging studies with PSMA
targeted nanoplexes were performed with PC-3 human prostate cancer cells
genetically engineered to overexpress PSMA (PC3-PIP); non-PSMA expressing
PC-3 cells (PC3-Flu) were used as controls. Cell imaging studies
indicated higher expression of GFP-TRAIL fusion protein in PC3-PIP cells.
In vivo images obtained from PIP and Flu tumors demonstrated increased
accumulation of the nanoplex in PIP tumors. In ex vivo imaging studies,
increased uptake of the nanoplex as detected by Cy5.5 fluorescence, and
higher expression of GFP in PIP compared to Flu tumors was observed. 19F
MRS indicated the prodrug enzyme bCD efficiently converted the prodrug
5-FC to 5-FU at 24 h. Tumor growth studies showed increased inhibition of
PIP tumor growth. Collectively, these data demonstrate the ability to
express a gene of interest using a theranostic nanoplex specifically
targeting cancer cells.

