Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Creating clinical target validation groups via quality assured
transfer of robust clinical pharmacodynamic (PD) assays from the NCI:
clinical implementation of a HIF1 immunoassay in tumor biopsies.


Robust pharmacodynamic (PD) assay results are valuable for informing
go/nogo decisions about preclinical and clinical development of new
agents and for identifying optimal combinations of targeted agents. The
NCI's Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis (DCTD) develops and
validates PD assays to obtain accurate information about target
engagement in first-in-human clinical trials. The Pharmacodynamic Assay
Development and Implementation Section (PADIS) and National Clinical
Target Validation Laboratory (NCTVL) were established at SAIC-Frederick
to develop and validate PD assays by validating analytical performance,
demonstrating fitness-forpurpose for the clinical protocol, and
finalizing companion standard operating procedures (SOPs) for specimen
handling and processing. Proven clinical assays are transferred from the
NCI to requesting sites in academia and industry through laboratorybased
certification and training, centralized access to current SOPs,
assistance with assay transfer, and participation in the assay's Quality
Assurance Plan. One such validated assay is the HIF1 Immunoassay, which
is currently in clinical evaluation at NCTVL. Procedures to clinically
implement HIF1 analysis in tumor biopsies from patients treated with
angiogenesis inhibitors required consideration of many factors including
the low abundance and oxygen sensitivity of the analyte. A customized
extraction process for HIF1 was developed and optimized using mouse
xenograft biopsies. Use of a customized extraction buffer containing
2-hydroxyglutarate, which was degassed to minimize dissolved oxygen, was
shown to improve analyte recovery. Optimized extraction procedures also
include use of an automated ceramic bead homogenizer to improve both the
efficiency and reproducibility of extraction of HIF1 over sonication. The
immunoassay procedure uses lyophilized reagents from a commercially
available kit and a modified procedure together with quality control
specimens that serve to qualify the performance of each run. Finally,
pre-defined data analyses and quality control evaluation criteria are
used to perform a semi-automated process to analyze data and evaluate
acceptability of performance for both the assay run and individual
clinical specimens. In total, five SOPs have been developed to define
procedures from collection and freezing of the needle biopsies in the
radiology suite to data analyses and reporting. Together, these defined
procedures are being used to perform PD analyses as key parts of two
clinical trial evaluations at the NCI and will be launched to the
community once clinical utility is demonstrated. Funded by NCI Contract
No HHSN261200800001E.

