Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequency of homologous recombination repair defects across breast
cancer subtypes.


Introduction: Defects in homologous recombination (HR) repair have
potential therapeutic relevance, and current clinical studies are focused
on examining the efficacy of agents that exploit HR deficiency in triple
negative breast cancer. A homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) score
based on whole genome tumor LOH profiles has been developed that is
highly correlated with defects in BRCA1/2, and other HR pathway genes, in
ovarian cancer(1), and which predicts response to platinum-based
neoadjuvant therapy in triple negative breast cancer(2). This study
examines the frequency of BRCA1/2 defects and elevated HRD score across
breast cancer subtypes as defined by IHC hormone receptor status.Methods:
A targeted custom hybridization panel was developed targeting BRCA1,
BRCA2, and 50,000 selected SNPs across the entire human genome. This
panel, in combination with sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq, was used to
analyze approximately 50 randomly ascertained tumors from each of 4
breast cancer subtypes (triple negative, ER+/Her2-, ER-/Her2+, ER+/Her2+)
for BRCA1/2 somatic and germline mutations, and SNP allele frequencies.
HRD scores were calculated using LOH profiles reconstructed from the SNP
analysis. A BRCA1 promoter methylation assay was also performed on all
samples.Results: BRCA1/2 somatic and germline mutations were detected in
all breast cancer subtypes. BRCA1/2 mutations were observed most
frequently in triple negative and ER+/Her2+ tumors. BRCA1 promoter
methylation was confined almost exclusively to triple negative tumors.
Association between elevated HRD score and BRCA defects was observed
regardless of tumor type, and BRCA1/2 intact tumors with elevated HRD
scores were observed in all breast cancer subtypes.Conclusions: Elevated
HRD score is significantly associated with BRCA1/2 defects in breast
cancer. BRCA1/2 defects and elevated HRD scores were observed in all
subtypes of breast cancer, suggesting the presence of HR defects in genes
other than BRCA1/2 are present in all breast cancer subtypes. HRD score
could potentially be used to facilitate the expansion of platinum or PARP
inhibitor therapy beyond triple negative breast cancer into other
subtypes.

