Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression signature for classification of non-small cell lung
cancer.


Background: Approximately 85-90% of lung cancers are non-small cell lung
cancers (NSCLCs) consisting of adenocarcinoma (ADC) and squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) and several rare types including undifferentiated large
cell carcinomas. Most NSCLCs are diagnosed from small biopsies or
cytology materials and, even with the use of immunostains, some cannot be
classified further and are referred to as NSCLC - not otherwise specified
(NSCLC-NOS). For several clinically relevant reasons and for selection of
therapy the correct identification of NSCLC typing is important.Specific
Aim: To develop a highly specific and sensitive RNA expression signature
as an adjunct test for routine pathological classification.Methods: A
microarray dataset of 263 resected NSCLC cases (183 ADC, 80 SCC) obtained
from MD Anderson Cancer Center and profiled on the Illumina WG-6 V3
platform was used as the learning set. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA;
http://cancergenome.nih.gov/) microarray dataset (105 ADC, 205 SCC),
which were profiled on an RNAseq platform, was used as the validation
set. Histologic typing on the TCGA specimens was performed by light
microscopy according to the WHO classification. Materials for
immunostaining were not always available.Results: We developed a 44-gene
signature which contained many of the genes encoding proteins routinely
used in immunostains for NSCLC typing, including TP63, TTF1, SOX2, and
several high molecular weight keratins. For testing, a nearest neighbor
approach with Pearson metric was used, which yielded two scores (Pearson
correlations, ranging from -1 to +1) for ADC and SCC histologies. Scores
above 0.4 were considered positive for the respective tumor type, while
values below 0.4 were considered to be null (equivalent to
poorly/undifferentiated histology). The learning set had 7% discrepancies
for the major tumor type and 1% was scored as null. Initial validation of
the TCGA data indicated a relatively high percentage of discrepancies
(10% of ADC, 12% of SCC). After discussions with TCGA reference
pathologists Drs. Travis and Rekhtman and further evaluation by them a
revised pathological classification was generated, which included 25
NSCLC-NOS diagnoses. The discrepancies were reduced to 9 % and 4 % for
ADC and SCC respectively. The NSCLC-NOS cases were classified as ADC, SCC
or null types.Future plans: We are utilizing the expression signature to
develop and validate a quantitative nuclease protection assay (qNPA by
High Throughput Genomics) that can be applied to small biopsies and
5-micron sections of archival paraffin embedded formalin fixed material
in a 96 well format.Summary and significance: The development and
application of a sensitive and specific molecular signature for the
classification of NSCLC provides an important adjunct test for routine
pathological diagnosis, especially for application to small specimens
(which constitute about 70% of current diagnostic lung cancer samples).

