Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High grade serous ovarian cancer cells spontaneously self-organize
in vitro into multicellular irregular aggregates and highly organized
spheroids.


Ovarian cancer (OvCa) has the worst prognosis among gynecologic cancers
because it is typically detected at an advanced stage. Accumulation of
fluid inside the peritoneal cavity, and multicellular clusters featured
within ascites are common manifestations of the disease. Patients undergo
aggressive cytoreductive surgery followed by platinum-taxane therapy; yet
in most cases, patients will relapse and die due to tumor progression.
OvCa recurs as it presents, with growths within the peritoneal cavity,
accumulation of ascites, but with a chemotherapy-resistant phenotype.
Thus, understanding the dynamics of peritoneal metastases is of clear
significance. This work provides evidences that OvCa cells derived from
serous, treatment-resistant relapsed disease spontaneously develop
multicellular anchorage-independent OvCa aggregates in vitro. The human
serous ovarian adenocarcinoma PEO6 cells, while growing as adherent
monolayer, spontaneously self-assemble into multicellular foci that float
away off the adherent component of the culture. The floating phenotype is
comprised of irregular cellular clusters and more organized spheroids
with blastocyst-like morphology. Within each multicellular structure
cells gather differently as evidenced by the distribution pattern of the
cell junction adhesion molecule E-cadherin. Both types of non-adherent
multicellular aggregates have live cells with no morphological features
of apoptosis indicating their resistance to anoikis. Anchorage
independent OvCa spheroids have the capacity to recreate the entire
culture phenotype when placed in a new dish; the spheroids adhere upon
transference and develop foci that grow upright irregular aggregates and
more organized spheroids, ultimately leading to the generation of new
non-adherent components. The floating PEO6 structures include clusters of
cells expressing the cancer initiating antigen CD133 supporting their
plasticity to perpetuate the anchorage-independent component of the
culture. In summary, this study led to the characterization of an in
vitro model of recurrent, treatment-resistant serous OvCa cells with
intrinsic ability to gather in two types of clusters that survive in an
anchorage-independent manner-a hallmark of transformation and critical
factor in metastasis. The spontaneous in vitro development of OvCa
multicellular irregular aggregates and spheroids at recurrence may
represent a preclinical model to study the biology of selection and
adaptation of disease malignancy and ways to interrupt its progression.

