Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prototype device for quality control of cancer specimens.


Objective: Molecular degradation in cancer specimens may lead to
misinterpretation of patients biological information. We have recently
shown that utilization of the quantitative ratio between Tissue
Degradation Indicators (TDIs) intact form and their breakdown form(s)
accurately reveals the stage of degradation in cancer specimens. We here
propose to develop an enzymatic device built on one of the TDIs - alpha
II spectrin (SPTAN1) - to monitor the degradation of cancer specimens,
starting at the time of surgical resection. The device will allow
specimen-users to assess the degradation stage of individual specimens
prior to laboratory analyses. Approach: Proteolytic enzyme screening was
conducted to identify the enzyme responsible for degradation-induced
SPTAN1 breakdown. An in vitro enzymatic reaction was set up using the
identified enzyme to catalyze overexpressed SPTAN1. The cleavage speed
was monitored under various ambient temperatures at assigned time points.
Correlation was studied between in vitro SPTAN1 breakdown and respective
ambient conditions. A Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET)-based
SPTAN1 peptide containing the proteolytic site was synthesized to replace
the overexpressed SPTAN1 in above reaction. The enzymatic device was
attached to experimental specimens and underwent assigned ambient
exposures. SPTAN1 cleavage was measured by spectrophotometry. Correlation
was studied among the SPTAN1 breakdown-induced fluorescence, the ambient
impact, and the intrinsic TDI status. Further, FRET- SPTAN1 was injected
into specimens in situ and the breakdown-induced fluorescent changes
(catalyzed by local enzymes) were examined by fluorescence microscopy.
Results: Calpain I was identified to be responsible for
degradation-induced spectrin proteolysis. The in vitro enzymatic reaction
can accurately reveal (following certain mathematic algorithm) the
ambient temperature alteration and the exposure length via displaying a
dynamic ratio between the breakdown and the intact SPTAN1. The
introduction of FRET technology greatly facilitates the detection of
spectrin breakdown reflected by breakdown-induced fluorescent signals.
The FRET-device can properly reveal the ambient impact and the
corresponding degradation inside the attached specimens. Local
proteolytic enzymes in specimens are able to catalyze injected FRET-
SPTAN1 and thereby the in situ approach imitates the in vitro enzymatic
reaction and detects the ambient impact in specimens microenvironment.
Conclusions: The prototype device yields a potentially transformative
platform dedicated to specimen quality control. This foundational device
may be attractive for commercialization and widely used throughout the
basic and clinical cancer research communities. This effort also
addresses critical, yet unmet needs for developing a universal standard
for specimen degradation measurement.

