Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Netrin-1 promotes the invasiveness and survival of human
glioblastoma cells.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most severe human brain cancer,
which has no efficient treatment. The main reason for the lethality of
GBM is its resistance to all current therapies and highly invasive.
According to microarray data on Oncomine database netrin-1 is upregulated
in glioblastoma tumors. Netrin-1 is a secreted laminin related
extracellular matrix protein. Its main function is to regulate the axon
guidance during embryogenesis. Recently it has been observed to act as a
survival factor for different forms of cancer such as aggressive
neuroblastoma, metastatic breast cancer and non small cell lung cancer.
It also promotes tumorigenesis of colorectal cancer.Based on these
observations we explored the possibility whether netrin-1 plays a role in
human GBM. We analyzed the effects of netrin-1 expression on human GBM
cells. According to Matrigel invasion assays overexpression of netrin-1
increased the invasiveness whereas partial knock-down of netrin-1 by
shRNAs reduced the invasiveness of human GBM cells. On the other hand,
complete knock-down of netrin-1 led to apoptotic death of those cells. To
further analyze netrin-1 signaling in human GBM we performed a mass
spectrometry screen to identify binding partners of netrin-1. We
identified Notch as a novel receptor for netrin-1. In addition, we
observed that netrin-1 overexpression increased and knockdown decreased
Notch activation. The role of Notch signaling regarding the
aggressiveness of various cancers has been controversial. Our results
confirm that increased Notch signaling increases glioblastoma cell
invasiveness, and that netrin-1 increases Notch signaling. Further, we
identified here a recombinant netrin-1 fragment that inhibits Notch
signaling by blocking the Notch signaling complex to the cell
surface.Current studies provide new mechanistic information on the
tumorigenesis of GBM. Activation of Notch signaling pathway has been
linked to the initiation of EMT which is essential for cancer cell
invasion. Our results suggest that netrin-1 regulates GBM invasion by
activating Notch signaling. The inhibition of netrin-1 signaling may
prove out to be a treatment option for human glioblastoma.

