Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastatic analysis of clonal epithelial and mesenchymal-like
murine mammary tumor cells.


Tumor metastasis is the most common cause of cancer mortality, and yet it
is among the most poorly understood processes in tumor progression. While
carcinomas are composed primarily of epithelial cells, tumors contain a
continuum of cells with epithelial and mesenchymal-like properties. This
tumor cell heterogeneity is attributed to differentiation plasticity,
which is characterized by epithelial to mesenchymal (EMT) or mesenchymal
to epithelial transitions (MET). It has been proposed that tumor cells
undergo EMT in order to disseminate from the primary tumor and MET in
order to seed at secondary sites. The invasive mesenchymal carcinoma cell
phenotype is thought to be a state required for tumor dissemination, but
to date, pathologists have not found conclusive evidence of mesenchymal
cells in human metastatic tumor samples. An alternative theory suggests
that both mesenchymal and epithelial cells are required for metastasis to
occur. According to this theory, detachment from the primary tumor and
invasion by mesenchymal cells facilitates the movement of epithelial
tumor cells that are able to seed at distant sites. We hypothesize that
the presence of mesenchymal-like mammary tumor cells facilitate the
metastasis of epithelial tumor cells and that only epithelial cells are
able to seed at distant sites. To test this hypothesis, we cloned
epithelial and mesenchymal-like primary cell lines from spontaneous
mammary tumors produced in FVB MMTV/Neu mice. Epithelial cells have been
stably transfected to express firefly luciferase and GFP, and we are in
the process of cloning mesenchymal-like cells expressing Renilla
luciferase and mCherry. We have preliminary data that shows that when
clonal epithelial cells are administered into the mammary fat pad of FVB
MMTV/Neu mice, tumors grow, but do not form metastatic lesions. In
contrast, when stably transfected clonal epithelial cells are
administered with non-transfected clonal mesenchymal-like tumor cells,
luciferase+ metastatic lesions in the spleen, liver and lung are detected
biophotonically, and GFP + cells are detected in the spleen and liver.
These data indicate that epithelial cells are present (but does not rule
out the presence of mesenchymal cells) at the metastatic site. Whether
epithelial cells undergo EMT, and how metastasis is facilitated by the
presence of mesenchymal cells remains to be determined.

