Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An antibody-drug conjugate targeting tissue factor with broad
anti-tumor efficacy in xenograft models with heterogeneous tissue factor
expression.


Tissue factor (TF) is aberrantly expressed in a wide variety of solid
tumors, and expression has been associated with poor prognosis. In normal
physiology, TF is the main initiator of the coagulation cascade, which
starts when circulating factor VII(a) (FVII(a)) binds membrane bound TF.
The TF:FVIIa complex proteolytically activates FX to generate FXa,
eventually resulting in clot formation. In addition, the TF:FVIIa complex
activates PAR-2 intracellular signaling, thereby stimulating the
production of pro-angiogenic factors, cytokines and adhesion molecules.We
developed an antibodydrug conjugate (ADC) composed of a human TF-specific
IgG1 antibody (TF-011), a proteasecleavable valine-citrulline (vc) linker
and the microtubule disrupting agent monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE).
Unconjugated TF-011 efficiently inhibited TF:FVIIa induced ERK
phosphorylation and IL-8 production, but showed only minor inhibition of
FXa generation or clot formation. Unconjugated TF-011 efficiently killed
TF-positive tumor cells by antibody dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity
(ADCC) in vitro, and showed some anti-tumor efficacy in vivo in a
prophylactic setting. Upon target binding, TF-011 was rapidly
internalized and colocalization with LAMP-1 was observed already after 1
hour. This suggests efficient lysosomal targeting, a prerequisite for
intracellular release of MMAE and subsequent tumor cell killing by an
ADC. Indeed, TF-011-vcMMAE efficiently induced tumor cell killing in
vitro, which was dependent on and correlated with TF cell surface
expression. In addition, TF-011-vcMMAE demonstrated potent anti-tumor
efficacy in xenograft models for pancreatic and epidermoid cancer in
vivo. Therapeutic treatment at doses as low as 0,3 mg/kg inhibited tumor
growth, whereas tumor regression was observed at doses of 1 mg/kg or
higher. Importantly, TF-011-vcMMAE also induced tumor cell killing in
human biopsyderived xenograft models, which are thought to represent the
genetic and histological heterogeneity of human tumors.
Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed that the heterogeneity of TF
expression in human tumors was reflected in human biopsyderived
xenografts. TF-011-vcMMAE induced efficient tumor regression in xenograft
models for bladder, lung, pancreatic, prostate, ovarian and cervical
cancer, with the percentage of TF positive cells ranging from 25-50% to
75-100%. In two tumor models that showed TF expression in less than 25%
of tumor cells, TF-011-vcMMAE showed inhibition of tumor growth.In
summary, TF-011-vcMMAE is a promising new ADC that showed potent
anti-tumor activity in vivo in a wide variety of models, including models
that represent the heterogeneous TF expression that is observed in human
tumors. The ADC potently kills tumor cells by disrupting microtubules,
while preserving the effector functions of the unconjugated antibody.

