Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Are circulating testosterone and PSA levels associated in a
nationally representative sample of men without a diagnosis of prostate
cancer.


Background: PSA-based prostate cancer screening is controversial, in
part, because of imperfect specificity, especially for aggressive
disease. PSA production by prostate luminal epithelial cells is under
androgenic regulation. However, the association between circulating
androgen and PSA levels is unclear in general populations. Knowledge of
this association may enhance clinical decision-making for an elevated
screening serum PSA.Methods: Included were 378 men, 40-85 years who
participated in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey in
2001-04, who did not have a prior prostate cancer diagnosis, and who had
not had a recent biopsy, exam, or infection of the prostate. Serum levels
of PSA (Hybritech), testosterone, androstanediol glucuronide (AAG),
estradiol, and sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG; carries testosterone
and estradiol in circulation) (immunoassay) were previously measured.
Free testosterone was estimated by mass action. We calculated geometric
mean PSA levels and 95% confidence intervals by hormone quintiles. We
applied sampling weights, and adjusted for age and race/ethnicity, and
also for BMI, waist circumference, smoking, diabetes, and mutually for
the hormones. We stratified by age, race/ethnicity, and adiposity. We
estimated the OR of a mildly elevated PSA (2.5 ng/mL) per hormone
quintile by logistic regression.Results: Geometric mean PSA level
increased across testosterone quintiles after age and race/ethnicity
adjustment (Q1: 0.80, Q5: 1.14 ng/mL; p-trend=0.001) and after further
multivariable adjustment (Q1: 0.80, Q5: 1.15 ng/mL; p-trend=0.022). The
same patterns were observed for free testosterone and AAG. SHBG was not
associated with PSA after age and race/ethnicity adjustment
(p-trend=0.85), but was strongly inversely associated after multivariable
adjustment (Q1: 1.30, Q5: 0.81 nmol/L; p-trend=0.007). Estradiol and PSA
levels were not associated. While PSA levels differed by age, by
race/ethnicity, and by adiposity, the same sized increasing association
for testosterone and PSA was seen within strata of age, of
race/ethnicity, and of adiposity. The OR of PSA 2.5 ng/mL per
testosterone quintile was 1.52 (95% CI 1.16-1.98) after age and
race/ethnicity adjustment, and 1.74 (95% CI 1.13-2.68) after
multivariable adjustment; SHBG explained the OR shift. The
multivariable-adjusted OR of PSA 2.5 ng/mL per SHBG quintile was 0.60
(95% CI 0.37-1.00).Conclusions: In this nationally representative sample,
men with higher testosterone had higher PSA, even after taking into
account other hormones and modifiable factors. Men with higher SHBG had
lower PSA, but only after multivariable adjustment. This information on
testosterone and SHBG may be incorporated into algorithms for determining
next steps following an elevated screening PSA.Funding: MD Cigarette
Restitution Fund; NIH Intramural Research Program

