Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cisplatin resistance is associated with autophagy in SPARC
expressing medulloblastoma cells.


Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor in children and
is associated with a poor outcome. Our previous studies indicate that
SPARC expression suppressed medulloblastoma tumor growth in vitro and in
vivo. We were interested in gaining further insight into the potential of
SPARC expression as a novel approach to sensitize medulloblastoma to
chemotherapeutic agents. In this study, we demonstrate that SPARC:
expression resulted in enhanced resistance of cancer cells to cisplatin,
a commonly used chemotherapeutic drug in the treatment of
medulloblastoma. We also demonstrate that autophagy was involved in SPARC
expression mediated resistance to cisplatin. We further demonstrated that
suppression of autophagy by autophagy inhibitors, 3-methyladenosine (3MA)
and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting Atg5 in SPARC expressed
cells enhanced the sensitivity of medulloblastoma cells to cisplatin
compared to cells treated with cisplatin alone. Moreover, sensitization
to cisplatin by inhibition of autophagy is SPARC expressed cells was
accompanied by induction of apoptosis indicating that suppression of
autophagy indeed renders tumor cells more sensitive to cisplatin. Further
we show overexpression of High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1 in SPARC
expressed cells rendered medulloblastoma cells resistant to cell death;
whereas depletion of HMGB1 using RNA interference suppressed autophagy
and increased the sensitivity of medulloblastoma cells to cisplatin as
assessed by microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3)
lipidation, redistribution of LC3 into cytoplasmic puncta, and
accumulation of autophagosomes and autolysosomes. Further our data
suggest a role for HMGB1 in the regulation of autophagy through the
MEK-ERK pathway in SPARC over expressed cells. The results of our study
revealed a new mechanism for enhancing cisplatin sensitivity in SPARC
expressed cells. These findings have important clinical implications for
the design of experimental treatment protocols for
medulloblastoma.Citation Format: Padmavathi Pannuru, Ranadheer Dontula,
Herbert Engelhard, Howard Ozer, Sajani S. Lakka. Cisplatin resistance is
associated with autophagy in SPARC expressing medulloblastoma cells.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1654.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1654

