Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo NCL-targeting affects breast cancer aggressiveness through
miRNA regulation.


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are noncoding single-stranded RNA molecules of 22
nucleotides in length. They have a critical role in regulating gene
expression by targeting messenger RNAs (mRNAs) in a sequence-specific
manner. Active mature miRNAs are produced from primary miRNA transcripts
(pri-miRNAs) through sequential cleavages by the microprocessor complex,
which includes DROSHA, DGCR8, and DICER proteins. Several miRNAs are
specifically up-regulated in various types of tumors, and a wide range of
studies have demonstrated how their down-regulation could potentially
affect tumorigenesis, metastasis formation and drug resistance. However,
most of these studies have indicated the possibility of modulating miRNA
expression at the transcriptional level, while only a few focused on
post-transcriptional control. Nucleolin (NCL) is a highly conserved
multifunctional protein involved in ribosomal RNA (rRNA) biogenesis and
in the stabilization of different mRNAs, in the nucleus and in the
cytoplasm of normal and cancer cells. NCL was also found on the surface
of different types of cancer cells, but not on their normal counterparts,
shuttling between the inner and the outer part of the cell membrane.
These observations suggested that NCL might be considered a cancer cell
specific receptor, able to mediate tumor-selective uptake of specific
ligands such as RNA and DNA G-rich aptamers. Here we show that NCL binds
the terminal loop and promotes the maturation of a specific set of
miRNAs, including miR-21, miR-103, miR-221 and miR-222, whose
over-expression is causally associated with greater aggressiveness and
resistance to anti-neoplastic therapies of several kind of tumors, such
as breast cancer. Accordingly, a direct correlation between the
expression levels of NCL and NCL-dependent miRNAs in human breast cancer
samples was also observed. Conversely, NCL impairment down-regulated
NCL-dependent miRNAs and up-regulates their target in vitro, affecting
cancer cell proliferation, migration and anti-neoplastic drug resistance.
Finally, we used AS1411, the first NCL-targeting G-rich aptamer that has
reached phase II clinical trials for cancer therapy, to inhibit NCL
activity in orthotopc xenograft models of breast cancer. Our in vivo data
demonstrate that AS1411 down-regulates NCL-dependent miRNAs, hindering
breast cancer metastasis. These findings provide insights into the
molecular function of NCL in miRNA biology, as well as one of the first
realistic strategies for miRNA regulation in cancer therapy.

