Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cadherin-11 function is required for full neoplastic
transformation of mouse fibroblasts by v-Src.


The signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (Stat3) is an
important signal transducer with a role in cancer etiology. Following
activation of a number of growth factor or cytokine receptors or
expression of oncogenes such as vSrc, Stat3 is phosphorylated at tyr705,
dimerizes and migrates to the nucleus where it activates transcription
from a number of genes involved in cell division and survival. We
recently discovered a novel pathway of activation of Stat3: Engagement of
cadherin-11 (cad11), a cell to cell adhesion protein, known to be
involved in metastasis, induces a dramatic increase in the levels of the
Rac and Cdc42 small GTPases, and this leads to Stat3 activation. Stat3 in
turn, downregulates the p53 antioncogene and upregulates anti-apoptotic
genes, thus offering a potent survival signal.A large number of oncogenes
such as vSrc activate the E2F transcription factor family, which induce
the expression of genes involved in cell division. However, at the same
time E2F is a potent apoptosis inducer, hence the high demand of
transformed cells for anti-apoptotic signals. Since cad11 activates
Stat3, a potent survival factor, we examined the effect of downregulation
of cad11 upon transformation of mouse Balb/c3T3 fibroblasts by vSrc.
Forced expression of high levels of activated Src caused a dramatic
reduction in cad11 levels. However, intermediate Src levels, which are
physiologically relevant, did allow cad11 expression, albeit at lower
levels. Cad11 knockdown in these cells through shRNA expression with a
retroviral vector caused a dramatic reduction in Stat3 activity and
induced apoptosis. That is, the residual amounts of cad11 present are
sufficient to activate Stat3 and prevent apoptosis induced by the Src/E2F
axis. Taken together, these findings indicate that cad11, despite its
presumed structural role, and in addition to its known role in promoting
metastasis, is actually also necessary for full neoplastic transformation
by the Src oncogene.

