Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing breast cancer subtype-specific responses to
macrophages.


Breast cancer is a multi-faceted disease giving rise to five distinct
subtypes. Emerging data show that each of these subtypes has distinct
interactions with the surrounding stroma and immune cell populations
present in the microenvironment. We hypothesized that macrophages have
distinct interactions with breast cancer in a subtype-dependent manner.
Using a coculture system, we evaluated changes in THP-1 differentiation,
morphology and gene expression during the monocyte-to-macrophage
transition in response to cell lines representing the basal-like
(HCC1937, MDA-MB-468, SUM149), luminal (MCF-7, T47D, ZR-75-1), epidermal
growth factor receptor/HER2-enriched (BT474, SKBR3) and claudin-low
(Hs578T, MDA-MB-231, SUM159) breast cancer subtypes. Macrophage
polarization phenotypes were validated by immunofluorescence staining for
M1 (CD163) and M2 (CD36) macrophage markers in normal tissue sections
adjacent to representative breast tumors. We further investigated
differences in genomic and cytokine expression profiles, proliferation,
and chemosensitivity (to Doxorubicin) of the breast cancer cell lines in
response to THP-1 coculturing. Greatest levels of THP-1 differentiation
was induced in basal-like cocultures (mean differentiation 79%, compared
to differentiation Breast cancer is a multi-faceted disease giving rise
to five distinct subtypes. Emerging data show that each of these subtypes
has distinct interactions with the surrounding stroma and immune cell
populations present in the microenvironment. We hypothesized that
macrophages have distinct interactions with breast cancer in a
subtype-dependent manner. Using a coculture system, we evaluated changes
in THP-1 differentiation, morphology and gene expression during the
monocyte-to-macrophage transition in response to cell lines representing
the basal-like (HCC1937, MDA-MB-468, SUM149), luminal (MCF-7, T47D,
ZR-75-1), epidermal growth factor receptor/HER2-enriched (BT474, SKBR3)
and claudin-low (Hs578T, MDA-MB-231, SUM159) breast cancer subtypes.
Macrophage polarization phenotypes were validated by immunofluorescence
staining for M1 (CD163) and M2 (CD36) macrophage markers in normal tissue
sections adjacent to representative breast tumors. We further
investigated differences in genomic and cytokine expression profiles,
proliferation, and chemosensitivity (to Doxorubicin) of the breast cancer
cell lines in response to THP-1 coculturing. Greatest levels of THP-1
differentiation was induced in basal-like cocultures (mean
differentiation 79%, compared to differentiation <42% for all other cell
lines). Additionally, all basal-like breast cancers strongly induced
macrophage polarization to a mixed M1 and M2 phenotype, however, one cell
line from both the claudin-low (SUM159) and HER2-enriched (SKBR3)
subtypes also elicited this response. The impact on THP-1 differentiation
was clearly visualized by morphological changes after 48 hours of
coculturing with these cell lines. Similar macrophage polarization
phenotypes were predominantly observed in the triple negative breast
cancer, normal-adjacent human tissues. Basal-like breast cancers
underwent equally dramatic gene expression changes in response to
macrophages compared to luminal cell lines, and demonstrated a more
highly differential milieu of secreted cytokines. Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis (IPA) revealed significant upregulation of DNA damage and repair
pathways in the basal-like subtype under coculture conditions.
Interestingly, luminal breast cancer cell lines exhibited increased
proliferation as a result of macrophage interaction, while the growth of
all basal-like lines was diminished in the presence of THP-1 macrophages.
Consistent with alterations in DNA damage response, basal-like breast
cancers (SUM149) displayed reduced chemosensitivity after coculturing.
These results define subtype-specific interactions between breast cancers
and macrophages, and suggest a possible mechanism by which macrophages
may promote chemoresistance in more aggressive basal-like breast cancers.

