Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of homeoprotein six1 activates non-canonical
TGF-beta signaling to induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human
papillomavirus type 16-immortalized human keratinocytes.


Inappropriate expression of embryonic genes, particularly homeodomain
transcription factors, contributes to tumorigenesis and tumor
progression. The overexpression of Six1, a member of the Six family of
homeodomain transcription factors, has been found in various human
cancers, and is associated with increased tumor progression and
metastasis. Previous studies in our laboratory discovered that the
expression of Six1 mRNA and protein increased during in vitro progression
of human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16)-immortalized human keratinocytes
(HKc/HPV16) toward a differentiation-resistant (HKc/DR) phenotype.
However, the precise mechanisms of how Six1 promotes tumor onset at early
and late stages of HPV16-mediated transformation remain unknown. In this
study, we found that HKc/HPV16 and HKc/DR overexpressing Six1 exhibited a
more mesenchymal phenotype compared to vector controls, as characterized
by a fibroblastic morphology, and increased migration and invasion. We
utilized Whole Human Genome Microarrays (4x44K from Agilent Technologies)
to explore the gene expression changes associated with Six1
overexpression in HKc/HPV16 and HKc/DR. We found that overexpression of
Six1 down-regulated epithelial-related genes (ex., E-cadherin and
occludin) and up-regulated mesenchymal-related genes (ex., N-cadherin,
vimentin, and snail), which strongly suggests that Six1 overexpression
induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Gene expression changes
determined by microarray analysis were confirmed by real time PCR and
western blotting. Increased expression of TGF-beta receptors in response
to overexpression of Six1 in HKc/DR did not lead to increased
Smad-dependent signaling but did activate the Mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) pathway, suggesting that MAPK non-Smad TGF- signaling may
be involved in Six1-mediated EMT. In conclusion, our study demonstrates
that Six1 overexpression induces EMT, possibly by activation of the MAPK
non-canonical (non-Smad) TGF- pathway, during HPV16-mediated
transformation of human keratinocytes.

