Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: YM155 inhibits survivin-mediated survival, migration, and tumor
growth in neuroblastoma.


Background: Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid tumor in
children, with poor prognosis in children diagnosed after 12-15 months of
age. Even with current multimodal therapies, the 5-year event-free
survival is below 50%, necessitating the development of new, targeted
therapies. Survivin is a developmentally regulated gene that is highly
up-regulated in many cancers. In neuroblastoma, survivin is up-regulated
by PI3Kinase-AKT signaling and its expression correlates with poor
prognosis. Survivin is a member of the Inhibitor of Apoptosis family of
proteins and is involved in cell survival through caspase dependent and
independent pathways. Knockdown of survivin in melanoma cells reduces
cell migration in vitro and its expression correlates with metastasis in
Ewing's Sarcoma and Schwann cell tumors. YM155 is a transcriptional
suppressor of survivin and has shown efficacy in several cancer model
systems both in vivo and in vitro and is currently under clinical
investigation for adult cancers. In this study, we investigate the
effects of YM155 on neuroblastoma cell apoptosis and migration in vitro
and on tumor growth in vivo.Methods: Four neuroblastoma cell lines were
treated with YM155 and subject to cell viability and migration assays.
Gene expression was investigated by microarray and signaling by Western
Blotting. In vivo, effects on tumor volume were determined by xenograft
implant of neuroblastoma cell lines followed by YM155 treatment and
measurement by calipers.Results: Treatment with YM155 caused a
dose-dependent decrease in survivin expression and reduced cell viability
in neuroblastoma cell lines; however IC50 values vary by cell line. Cells
treated with YM155 near the respective IC50 showed increased cleavage of
Caspase 3 and PARP indicating apoptosis. Gene and protein expression
changes include reduced CXCR4 and Mcl-1. Low levels of YM155 reduced cell
migration by 30-50%; cytotoxicity was not observed at the lower
concentrations. Treatment with YM155 reduced tumor growth in vivo by
25-70% and depended on cell line.Conclusions: YM155 inhibits survivin
expression, reduces cell viability, induces apoptosis, and migration in
vitro, and reduces tumor volume in vivo. Further investigation is
warranted in characterization of YM155 as a possible therapeutic agent
for neuroblastoma.

