Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of AMPKalpha isoforms in bladder tumorigenesis.


Bladder cancer is the fifth most diagnosed cancer and currently is one of
the most expensive cancers to treat due to lifelong surveillance. Bladder
cancer is marked by two distinct pathways that result in either
noninvasive low grade or invasive high grade cancer. Although low and
high grade bladder cancers are defined by driver mutations, similarities
such as mTORC1 pathway activation exist. Along these lines rapamycin
treatment, an mTORC1 inhibitor, has been shown to suppress tumorigenesis
in a mouse model of bladder cancer. These data suggest that mTORC1
activation may be an early tumorigenic event in the bladder.In order to
elucidate the mechanism by which the mTORC1 signaling is increased, AMPK
(AMP-activated protein kinase), a critical negative regulator of the
pathway, was further investigated. AMPK governs a cell's response to
metabolic stressors by suppressing anabolic pathways and inhibiting cell
growth. Furthermore, it has been observed that AMPK activation is
diminished in primary breast cancer. In order to determine whether AMPK
activation and/or levels are altered in bladder cancer, a pilot cohort of
human samples was obtained and the expression of both AMPKa catalytic
isoforms was assessed. Both AMPKa1 and AMPKa2 were significantly
suppressed in bladder cancer. AMPKa isoform levels in adjacent non-tumor
bladder epithelium and bladder cancer were evaluated in matched patient
samples and this revealed cancer-specific AMPKa suppression does indeed
exist. Additionally, AMPKa1 protein levels were partially suppressed in
low grade cancer and further suppressed in high grade cancer. In
contrast, AMPKa2 levels were uniformly suppressed in both high and low
grade of cancer. Interestingly, it was observed that AMPKa1 is localized
predominantly to the cytoplasm while AMPKa2 was present in cytoplasmic
and nuclear compartments. This data suggests that the AMPKa isoforms may
have distinct roles in the bladder.To test whether loss of AMPKa2
function promoted bladder tumorigenesis, wild-type and AMPKa2-/- mice
received 0.05% BBN [n-butyl-n-(4 hydroxybutyl)] nitrosamine, a rodent
bladder carcinogen, in drinking water over the course of 20 weeks.
Significant tumors were observed at 20 weeks in both wild-type and
AMPKa2-/- mice and bladder weights were significantly higher in AMPKa2-/-
mice correlating with larger bladder tumor mass. Additionally, there was
a significant increase in the amount of proliferating tumor cells as
assessed by Ki67 in the AMPKa2-/- mice. This study suggests that AMPKa
isoforms are suppressed in bladder cancer and that AMPKa may play a
critical role in bladder cancer progression by loss of expression and
tumor suppressive function.

