Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase-2 (IRAK2) is a critical
mediator of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress.


Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress occurs when unfolded proteins
accumulate in the lumen of the organelle, triggering signal transduction
events that contribute either to cellular adaptation and recovery or
alternatively to cellular dysfunction and death. ER stress has been
implicated in numerous diseases, including cancer where harsh tumor
microenvironments induce ER stress and create pressure for evolution of
malignant clones that have acquired mechanisms for successful adaptation
to stressful environments. To identify novel modulators of ER stress, we
undertook a siRNA library screen of the kinome, revealing Interleukin-1
Receptor-Associated Kinase-2 (IRAK2) as a contributor to unfolded protein
response (UPR) signaling and ER stress-induced cell death. Knocking down
expression of IRAK2 (but not IRAK1) in cultured mammalian cells
suppresses ER stress-induced expression of the pro-apoptotic
transcription factor CHOP and activation of stress kinases. Similarly,
RNAi-mediated silencing of the IRAK family member Tube (but not Pelle)
suppresses activation of stress kinase signaling induced by ER stress in
Drosophila cells. The action of IRAK2 maps to the IRE1 pathway, rather
than the PERK or ATF6 components of the UPR. Interestingly, ER stress
also induces IRAK2 gene expression in an IRE1/XBP1-dependent manner,
suggesting a mutually supporting amplification loop involving IRAK2 and
IRE1. In vivo, ER stress induces Irak2 expression in mice. Moreover,
Irak2 gene knockout mice display defects in ER stress-induced CHOP
expression and IRE1 pathway signaling. These findings demonstrate an
unexpected linkage of the innate immunity machinery to UPR signaling,
revealing IRAK2 as a novel amplifier of the IRE1 pathway involved in ER
stress signaling. Future analysis of the role of IRAK2 in animal models
of cancer will aid in assessing whether IRAK2 provides a novel targets
for potential cancer therapeutics development.(Supported by NIH grant
AG-15393).Citation Format: Ravanan Palaniyandi, Samir Benosman, Ying-Chen
Hou, Ricardo G. Correa, Minjia Yu, Muhammet Fatih Gulen, Xiaoxia Li,
James Thomas, Yasuko Matsuzawa, Shu-Ichi Matsuzawa, John C. Reed.
Interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase-2 (IRAK2) is a critical mediator
of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2928. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2928

