Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid validation of a novel kinase target using a large scale
genomic database and matched patient derived tumor models.


Target discovery and validation in oncology has largely relied on
molecular and functional studies performed in cell lines. Recent advances
in genomics have now afforded large databases based on well-characterized
tumor tissue, which has enabled direct investigation of patient tumors
for novel targets. Following these discoveries, it is routine to perform
functional studies in cell line-based systems; however, it is often
difficult to find relevant cell line model and if identified, they can be
confounded with artifacts created from decades of culture. The result can
be a target validation process which takes considerable time and does not
readily translate to clinical relevance.We report here the creation and
use of a target validation platform based on a large-scale genomic
database matched to patient-derived tumor models. The platform relies on
Molecular Response's proprietary bank of more than 144,000 patient
derived tumors, of which nearly 400 tumors have been genomically
characterized and databased for target discovery studies. The database is
growing, but currently features the following cancer indications: colon
carcinoma, NSCLC, melanoma, ovarian carcinoma, prostate and non-hodgkins
lymphoma. Upon discovery of a novel target, tumors of interest are
immediately implanted into mice to perform functional studies in direct
patient derived modelseither in vivo or using mouse-passaged cells for
broader ex vivo studies.Through use of this platform, we have identified
a novel kinase target for potential therapeutic development. We
investigated prevalence of target overexpression across 7 cancer
indications, and identified melanoma as a clinical indication of high
interest. We examined growth characteristics from patient tumors
featuring high kinase gene expression vs. low expression to help
characterize the role of this target in oncology disease progression.
Finally, we performed functional knockdown studies in patient derived
models to further validate this novel kinase as a druggable target of
pharmaceutical interest. Studies are ongoing to develop small molecule
and antibody-based therapeutics that will serve as drug candidates for
further development.

