Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol's Metabolomic biomarkers of efficacy: the missing link
to chemoprevention.


Chemoprevention has received considerable attention over the last decade.
The notion of using bioactive food components to reduce the risk of
developing, or the recurrence of cancer has long been recognized.
Resveratrol (a naturally occurring polyphenolic compound) has been
studied extensively with considerable evidence demonstrating its efficacy
as an anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer agent, with the most evidence for
its role in colon cancer prevention. However, Resveratrol intervention
studies in clinical trials still remains controversial, due to the lack
of biomarkers of efficacy. Utilizing Metabolomic analysis we have
identified biomarkers of efficacy in a pre-clinical model of
inflammation-induced colorectal carcinogenesis.Metabolomics is the
process of identifying metabolites present in biological specimens. Our
study has demonstrated the chemopreventative activity of Resveratrol in
mice treated with the chemical carcinogen azoxymethane (AOM) and then
exposed to colonic irritant dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) to induce
inflammation-associated colon carcinogenesis. We found a diet enriched in
Resveratrol resulted in a reduction in tumor incidence in AOM/DSS treated
mice by 29 percent. Furthermore, we identified several biomarkers that
are indicative of Resveratrol chemopreventive activities. Prior studies
have shown Resveratrol's role in inhibiting several key enzymes important
during the carcinogenesis process. We have correlated such findings with
Metabolomic biomarkers. We found a significant reduction in Arachidonic
acid, the limiting reagent of pro-inflammatory enzyme COX-2, and a
reduction in spermidine a product of Ornithine decarboxylase, an enzyme
that promotes proliferation. More intriguingly, we found biomarkers
representing changes in bile acids by Resveratrol, which highlight
chemopreventative activities that were not previously described. We found
that Resveratrol treatment causes a reduction in tumorigenic secondary
bile acids, deoxycholic acid and lithocholic acid, which are metabolic
byproducts of intestinal bacteria. These data suggested that dietary
supplementation with Resveratrol results in a healthy microbiome.These
pre-clinical studies should easily be translated into clinical studies
designed to ascertain chemopreventive efficacy for bioactive compounds
like Resveratrol, all with the objective to identify patients that will
benefit from an intervention.

