Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying biomarkers of estrogen response in models of serous
ovarian cancer.


Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer death among women in
the United States. Despite advances in treatment for other cancers,
ovarian cancer patient prognosis has not improved significantly since the
advent of platinum-based chemotherapy. It is a highly heterogeneous
disease with at least four distinct histological subtypes: serous,
mucinous, endometrioid, and clear cell. However, no subtype- or
biomarker-specific therapies are approved for ovarian cancer. Identifying
targeted therapies is crucial to improving clinical outcomes. Specific
therapies will likely vary based on tumor histology and
biomarkers.Expression of estrogen receptor alpha (ER) is a well
established biomarker of response to endocrine therapies in breast
cancer. Despite the success of anti-estrogen therapies in treating breast
cancer, little attention has been given to their potential in ovarian
cancer. However, epidemiologic studies show that approximately 70% of
epithelial ovarian tumors express ER, particularly serous and
endometrioid subtypes, and that estrogen plays a role in ovarian cancer
etiology. Further, clinical data suggest that a subset of ovarian cancer
patients can be successfully treated with endocrine therapy. We
hypothesize that some ovarian tumors require estrogen for growth and that
predictive biomarkers will identify patients who will benefit from
endocrine therapy.Using cell line models, we examined the response of
ovarian cancer cells to estrogen (E2) and anti-estrogens with regard to
gene expression and cell proliferation. E2 induces expression of
canonical ER target genes (e.g. GREB1) in these cells, suggesting that
they are estrogen-responsive. We observe that 4-hydroxytamoxifen and
fulvestrant inhibit growth of ovarian cancer cells including the
chemo-resistant line PEO4. Gene expression microarray studies identified
additional E2-regulated genes in ovarian cancer cells that may be
utilized as biomarkers of ER activity. We are expanding our studies to in
vivo models (human primary tumor xenografts) to evaluate the role of E2
in driving tumor progression and determine the efficacy of anti-estrogens
in treating serous ovarian cancer.There is a critical need for targeted
therapies in ovarian cancer. Our studies will determine if endocrine
responsiveness correlates with gene expression of specific biomarkers,
which may lead to the identification of predictive clinical markers of
response to endocrine therapy.

