Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving the anti-AML efficacy of liposomal ceramide by targeting
sphingolipid metabolism.


Novel approaches to enhancing the delivery, uptake, and therapeutic
effect of sphingolipids are of interest for the treatment of neoplasms.
We attempt to promote cellular ceramide accumulation in murine and human
models of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) by modifying ceramide
metabolism with either the sphingosine kinase1 inhibitor safingol
(Lip-Saf), or the acid ceramidase inhibitor LCL204, preventing ceramide
glycosylation by inhibition of p-glycoprotein (P-GP) activity with
tamoxifen (Lip-Tam), and supplementing cells with exogenous C6 ceramide
(Lip-C6) via liposomal delivery. Ceramide is widely recognized as an
apoptotic signal and blocking its catabolism to sphingosisne-1-phosphate
has been shown to induce autophagy. Safingol and LCL204 both modify
ceramide catabolism. Supplementation of tamoxifen has been shown to
promote apoptosis via ceramide accumulation by inhibiting the activity of
P-GP at the Golgi membrane, which can participate in ceramide
glycosylation. C1498, HL-60, HL-60/VCR, and KG-1 leukemia cell line
viability was quantified following treatment with Lip-C6, Lip-Saf, or a
2:1 combination to measure synergy. Likewise, cell line viability was
evaluated using Lip-Tam and Lip-C6, independently and in a 1:1
combination to study synergy. C1498 viability was also quantified with
increasing concentrations of LCL204. CalcuSyn software was used to
analyze dose-response and synergistic therapeutic efficacy.
Colony-forming capacity was assessed using a poor-prognosis AML patient
sample treated with Lip-C6, Lip-Saf, or the combination of both.
Autophagy and apoptosis were further evaluated using flow cytometry with
primary AML samples and leukemia cell lines. A reduction in IC50 of the
drugs used in combination was noted in several cell lines. Dramatic IC50
shifts were observed in KG-1, HL-60, and the vincristine-resistant
HL-60/VCR cell lines after exposure to a combination of Lip-C6 and
Lip-Saf in a 2:1 ratio. Flow cytometry confirmed Lip-Saf enhances
autophagy, whereas Lip-C6 exerts an effect primarily through apoptosis in
C1498 and primary AML samples. Therefore, the observed cell death
synergism is likely due to induction of both autophagy and apoptosis.
Additionally, it was shown that the anti-AML efficacy of Lip-Tam was
dramatically enhanced in combination with Lip-C6, demonstrating that
inhibition of ceramide glycosylation is also a valid combinatorial
therapeutic approach. Lastly, inhibition of acid ceramidase via LCL204
demonstrated efficacy as a cytotoxic agent both in vitro and in vivo
using C1498 cells alone or engrafted into C57BL/6J mice. These studies
verify inhibition of ceramide metabolism as an effective strategy to
enhance the therapeutic efficacy of ceramide in the treatment of AML.

