Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of steroid sulfotransferase (SULT) in human prostate cancer:
Potential implications for SULT as a biomarker and therapeutic target.


Purpose: Reactivated androgen receptor, fueled by elevated tumor tissue
5-dihydrotestosterone (DHT), plays a key role in the reemergence of
prostate cancer. Primary prostate cancer almost always regresses in
response to androgen deprivation therapy. The disease, however, recurs
and progresses to therapy resistance and death in 30% patients.
New-generation drugs that inhibit androgen receptor (MDV3100) or enzymes
involved in androgen biosynthesis (Zytiga, TAK-700, Dutasteride) extend
survival of post-chemotherapy patients for a limited period following
which therapy resistance emerges hence the challenge to develop alternate
means for reducing intra-tumor androgen signaling.Design and Results:
3-sulfation of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), mediated by the
prostate-expressed sulfotransferase SULT2B1b (hereon SULT), is likely to
reduce intra-prostate androgen levels since sulfated DHEA cannot be
converted to androstenedione and thus to testosterone and DHT. We tested
whether enzyme-catalyzed sulfation of DHEA, the obligate precursor
steroid for androgen synthesis, is targetable to inhibit prostate cancer.
Results show that SULT silencing increased prostate cancer cell
proliferation. Clinical prostate cancer specimens showed markedly reduced
SULT expression, revealed by immunohistochemistry, western blotting and
mRNA quantification. 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D3 (D3) and sterols enhanced
SULT expression due to induction of the SULT2B-encoding gene by
D3-activated vitamin D receptor (VDR) and sterol-activated liver X
receptor (LXR).Conclusion: Tumor SULT levels may be a marker for
predicting prostate cancer recurrence and progression. We also anticipate
that enhancement of SULT activity in tumors by activating VDR and LXR
through combined therapeutic intervention with D3 and sterols would limit
the tumor androgen pool and inhibit recurrent, therapy-resistant prostate
cancer.

