Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma folate and colorectal cancer risk in the Shanghai Men's
Health Study.


Previous epidemiological studies that investigated the association of
circulating folate concentration with colorectal cancer risk have
generated mixed results. We prospectively evaluated the association of
plasma folate concentration with colorectal cancer risk in a case-control
study nested within the Shanghai Men's Health Study, a population-based
cohort study of 61,483 Chinese men aged 40-74 years at enrollment in the
years between 2002 and 2006. Included in the analysis are 289 cases who
were diagnosed with incident colorectal cancer through November 2010 and
578 controls who were individually matched to cases on baseline
characteristics at the time of plasma sample collection (i.e., age, date,
time of day, recent use of antibiotics, time since last meal, and
collection of urine sample). Folate concentration in plasma samples was
measured by microbiological assay and categorized into tertiles based on
the distribution among controls. Conditional logistic regression was used
to assess the association between plasma folate and colorectal cancer
risk, while adjusting for smoking status, body mass index, multivitamin
supplement use, and plasma C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration. Joint
associations of plasma folate (tertiles) and CRP, smoking status, alcohol
consumption, or time from blood collection to diagnosis with colorectal
cancer risk were investigated. The median plasma folate concentrations
among cases and controls were 6.87 and 6.81 ng/mL, respectively. A
borderline significantly increased risk of colorectal cancer was observed
for the middle tertile [odds ratio (OR) = 1.47 and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) = 1.00-2.14], but not in the highest (OR = 1.28 and 95% CI
= 0.85-1.93), compared with the lowest tertile of plasma folate. This
association reached statistical significance for cases diagnosed within 4
years after blood collection (OR = 1.87 and 95% CI = 1.12-3.11). In joint
association analysis of folate and CRP level, colorectal cancer risk was
significantly elevated (OR = 2.03 and 95% CI = 1.13-3.66) in subjects
with the highest tertile of folate and high CRP comparing to those with
the lowest tertile of folate and low CRP. These results suggest that in
our study population where folate fortification of the food supply and
supplement use are uncommon, plasma folate may have a non-linear
association with colorectal cancer risk; moderate level of plasma folate
(the range: 5.59 to 8.50 ng/mL) may be related to increased colorectal
cancer risk, particularly among individuals who are likely to have
precancerous changes. Further investigations are needed to elucidate our
findings.

