Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coordinate methylation of the alkaline phosphatase gene family in
colon cancer. Implications for understanding the manifestation of the CpG
island methylator phenotype (CIMP). .


The HDAC-inhibitor sodium-butyrate, promotes differentiation of colon
cancer cells as evidenced by induction of alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
enzyme activity. Screening of a panel of 34 colon cancer cell lines
identified cell lines responsive (44%) and refractory (56%) to
butyrate-induced differentiation. Refractory cell lines were
significantly enriched for those harbouring the CpG island methylator
phenotype (CIMP) (P=0.016). The ALP gene family comprises 4 members -
ALPi, ALPL, ALPP and ALPPL2 - each of which was induced by butyrate in
responsive cell lines, demonstrating co-ordinate regulation of this gene
family in response to HDACi treatment. Deletion analyses of the ALPi
promoter identified a KLF/Sp1 cis element essential for
butyrate-induction of ALPi promoter activity. Remarkably, we observed
that a CpG dinucleotide within this site was preferentially methylated in
refractory cell lines. Furthermore, the majority of cell lines with
methylation of this site in the ALPi promoter also harboured methylation
of similar sites within the ALPL and ALPP promoters, indicating
coordinate methylation of this gene family in refractory cell lines.
Frequent methylation and reduced expression of ALPi and ALPL were also
observed in primary human colon cancers. Targeted inactivation of the DNA
methyltransferases Dnmt1 and Dnmt3b (HCT116-DKO) and co-treatment with
decitabine restored butyrate-inducibility of ALP in the methylated HCT116
cell line. However, butyrate-induction of an exogenous ALPi
promoter-reporter paralleled induction of endogenous ALPi mRNA across the
cell lines, suggesting ALPi promoter methylation may not be the primary
determinant of ALP inducibility. We therefore explored whether the
differential induction of the ALP gene family in colon cancer cells was
due to selective induction of a common transcriptional regulator. To
address this, responsive and refractory cell lines were treated with
butyrate for 72h and transcription factors selectively induced in
responsive cell lines identified by microarray. By focussing on factors
which bind KLF/Sp1 regulatory elements, we identified KLF5 as selectively
induced in responsive cell lines. KLF5 was also preferentially induced by
butyrate in HCT116 DKO cells. Importantly, knockdown of KLF5 markedly
attenuated butyrate-induction of ALP mRNA expression and enzyme activity.
These findings demonstrate that the ALP gene family is co-ordinately
inducible by butyrate in select colon cancer cell lines, in a
KLF5-dependent manner. Cells lines refractory to butyrate-induction of
the ALP gene family were enriched for CIMP high lines, and displayed
coordinate promoter methylation. We propose that the coordinate
methylation of this gene family in CIMP high colon cancers is likely
linked to their coordinate regulation.

