Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Visfatin promotes malignant breast cancer behavior through
activation of STAT3.


Background. Obesity-associated adipocyte dysfunction and adipocytokine
imbalance has become a major focus in breast cancer research. In this
study, the role of circulating visfatin, a recently discovered
adipocytokine, in breast cancer was explored.Methods. Serum visfatin was
analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and correlated with
clinicopathological characteristics and survival, while the expression of
phosphorylated and activated STAT3 in breast cancer tissue was analyzed
by immunohistochemistry. The biologic activity of visfatin as well as the
underlying mechanisms was analyzed by using XTT cell proliferation assay,
flow cytometry and immunoblotting analysis in human breast cancer
cells.Results. Serum visfatin was substantially elevated in breast cancer
patients. It was positively associated with tumor stage and lymph node
metastasis, but negatively associated with estrogen receptor (ER) and
progesterone receptor (PR) status. Breast cancer patients with high serum
visfatin, especially in combination with ER and PR status, had a poor
patient survival. On the other hand, patients with high serum visfatin
had a lower incidence of disease recurrence and a better patient survival
after adjuvant hormone therapy. Serum visfatin was positively associated
with STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation in breast cancer tissues. In
agreement with the clinical observation, visfatin treatment in breast
cancer cells activated JAK1 and SRC as well as their downstream molecule
STAT3, followed by an enhanced G1/S progression and cell
proliferation.Conclusion. Serum visfatin, through activation of STAT3,
leads to a malignant cancer behavior and poor survival in breast cancer
patients.Key words: visfatin, adipocytokine, breast cancer, STAT3Citation
Format: Shyng-Shiou F. Yuan, Yun-Ju Chen, Yi-Chen Lee, Ming-Feng Hou.
Visfatin promotes malignant breast cancer behavior through activation of
STAT3. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1933.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1933

