Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of redox/Fyn/c-Cbl pathway function by Cdc42 controls
tumor initiation capacity and tamoxifen sensitivity in basal-like breast
cancer cells.


Two of the substantial challenges in cancer research are to identify
means overcoming resistance of malignant cells to existing therapies and
to eliminate the unique small population within bulk tumors, named tumor
initiating cells or cancer stem cells which have been proposed to
regenerate resistant relapsed tumors. In this study, we offer a novel
therapeutic target relevant to both of these goals on basal-like
(triple-negative) breast cancer (BLBC) cells, one of the most challenging
cancers to treat with current regimens.Our findings emerged from
examining the puzzling differences in regulation of activation of the E3
ubiqutin ligase c-Cbl in normal cells and in cancer cells by low microM
concentrations of tamoxifen (TMX). In normal progenitor cells, TMX causes
oxidation and sequential activation of Fyn kinase and the c-Cbl ubiquitin
ligase. Activation of c-Cbl via this redox/Fyn/c-Cbl (RFC) pathway leads
to accelerated degradation of receptor tyrosine kinases that are critical
in cell survival and division (such as the epidermal growth factor
(EGFR)). In BLBC cells, in contrast, TMX does not activate c-Cbl despite
making the cells more oxidized and causing activation of Fyn. Moreover,
BLBC cells exposed to TMX show no reduction in levels of EGFR.We found
that TMX-induced activation of c-Cbl in BLBC cells was inhibited due to
expression of Cdc42. Cdc42 sequestered c-Cbl, prevented its activation
and prevented EGFR from being degraded. Restoration of c-Cbl function, by
inhibiting activation of Cdc42, reduced EGFR levels in these cells. More
critically, restoring c-Cbl function sensitized these cells to TMX both
in vitro and in vivo through estrogen receptor-independent mechanisms.
Analysis of tumor growth and formation in vivo showed that reducing the
levels of Cdc42 reduced the size of tumors, increased sensitivity to TMX
and decreased tumor forming capacity of these cells.The results provide a
novel defense mechanism that BLBC cells utilize to prevent EGFR
degradation, which may have high relevance to treatment of these tumors.
Of particular importance is the ability of cdc42 to confer TMX
sensitivity on these otherwise resistant tumor cells. Moreover, as use of
low microM levels of TMX has been attempted for over a dozen different
kinds of cancers, at least some of which express increased levels of
Cdc42, this strategy may be relevant to the treatment of multiple
different cancers.

