Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Function and regulation of peroxiredoxin proteins in
doxorubicin-treated MCF-7 breast cancer cells.


The Peroxiredoxin (Prdx) family of genes encodes thiol-specific
antioxidant proteins that protect cells from oxidative stress. Mammalian
cells express six different Prdx proteins, and these proteins play a role
in cell signaling, proliferation and apoptosis. Recent studies have shown
that Prdx levels are elevated in many cancers, suggesting that Prdx
upregulation may be an advantageous adaptation to the cancerous state. In
the present study we investigated the expression and function of
different Prdx proteins in untreated and doxorubicin-treated MCF-7 breast
cancer cells, as well as noncancerous MCF-10A cells. We used real-time
PCR and western blotting to examine Prdx expression in both cell lines,
and also measured Prdx protein expression in doxorubicin-treated MCF-7
cells. In addition, we suppressed Prdx expression using transiently
transfected siRNA and measured cell proliferation and apoptosis. Our
results show that MCF-7 cells are significantly more resistant to cell
death induced by the chemotherapy agent doxorubicin. We also found that
five of the six Prdxs are overexpressed in MCF-7 cells at the mRNA and
protein levels, and that serum deprivation reduced Prdx expression.
Treatment of MCF-7 cells with doxorubicin altered expression of specific
Prdxs, demonstrating a specific effect on these antioxidants. Transient
transfection of MCF-7 cells with Prdx6 siRNA resulted in a marked
reduction in Prdx6 suppression, with no change in other Prdx proteins.
Suppression of Prdx6 in these cells led to reduced cell proliferation and
increased susceptibility to doxorubicin-induced death. Similar studies
are currently underway for the other Prdx proteins. Together, these
findings suggest that Prdx overexpression in MCF-7 cells may be
cytoprotective and that Prdxs may contribute to doxorubicin-resistance in
these and other breast cancer cells.

