Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bitter melon extracts enhance the activity of chemotherapeutic
agents through the modulation of multiple drug resistance.


Purpose: Bitter melon (BM) is a tropical and subtropical vine, widely
grown in Asia, Africa, and the Caribbean for its edible fruit. The fruit
is recommended in ancient Indian and Chinese medicine for
prevention/treatment of diabetes. Recent publications have demonstrated
that BM extracts inhibit the growth of breast and prostate cancers. Our
previous studies also suggest that it can be used as a
preventive/therapeutic agent in colon cancers. Phytochemical usage and
dietary supplementation can often lead to improved efficacy of
conventional therapies but they may also lead to drug-drug interactions.
Thus, we studied the effects of bitter melon on the anticancer activity
as well as bioavailability of doxorubicin (DOX) in colon cancer cells
(SW480 and HT29)Methods: Cell proliferation studies using DOX were
carried out in colon cancer cells either pretreated or co-treated with BM
extract. To identify the effects of BM on active permeation of DOX drug
uptake and efflux studies were carried out in colon cancer cells. PCR and
western blots were performed to determine the changes in major efflux
protein levels involved in limiting the uptake of DOX in cancer cells.
Further, luciferase based activity assays for PXR, a xenobiotic sensing
nuclear receptor were performed to identify the mechanism with which BM
altered the efflux transporter expression.Results: BM was found to
enhance the effect of DOX as well as sensitize the cells towards DOX upon
pretreatment. Combinatorial index was calculated to identify synergism
between the therapeutics. This effect may be result of altered drug
permeation into the cells as both drug uptake and efflux were found to
reduce in the presence of BM pre- and co- treatment. The reduced efflux
and uptake maybe due to inhibition as well as alteration in expression of
expression of Multidrug resistance genes (P-glycoprotein, MRP-2 and BCRP)
as was observed with PCR and western blots. The BM extracts were seen to
effect PXR activation as well as expression in colon cancer cells which
might be responsible for the altered efflux protein expression. Since
AMPK pathway is the main target of BM we also studied the effect of other
AMPK activators to see whether there is a correlation between AMPK
pathway and efflux. Our results were interesting in showing potential
correlation between AMPK pathway and drug efflux.Conclusion: Taken
together these results suggest that BM can enhance the bioavailability
and efficacy of conventional chemotherapy. This can lead to reduction in
minimum effective doses of chemotherapeutics thereby reducing
toxicity/side effects.

