Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIF is necessary, but not sufficient for the hypoxia response.


Hypoxia is a common characteristic of many solid tumors. Hypoxia
inducible factor HIF1 and HIF2 have been shown to drive malignant
progression by activating genes involved in angiogenesis, proliferation,
anaerobic metabolism, and other processes that enable tumor cells to
survive or to escape their O2-deficient microenvironments. While the
major players in the hypoxia-mediated HIF protein stability and the
functions of HIF1/ARNT and HIF2c/ARNT proteins in activating
hypoxia-inducible genes are well established, the role of other
transcription factors and how HIF regulates its target genes in the
hypoxic transcriptional response are much less understood. We report here
that the Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription-3 (STAT3) and
the basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine-zip transcription factor, upstream
stimulatory factor-2 (USF2) are required for the hypoxic transcriptional
response, specifically for hypoxic activation of HIF1 and HIF2 target
genes respectively. Mechanistically, STAT3 (or USF2) activates HIF1 (or
HIF2) target genes by binding to HIF1 (or HIF2) target gene promoters,
interacting with HIF1 (or HIF2) protein and recruiting co-activators CBP
and p300 to form enhanceosome complexes that contain HIF, USF2, CBP, p300
and RNA Pol II on HIF target gene promoters. Interestingly, we found that
HIF1/ARNT and HIF2/ARNT activate their target genes by recruiting
Brm/Brg-1 SWI/SNF complexes to remodel HIF target gene promoter and thus
increase HIF target gene activation. These studies established additional
players in hypoxic transcriptional response post HIF protein
stabilization by hypoxia. In addition, our studies also showed that
co-activators USF2/STAT3 and HIF cooperatively promote the hypoxia
response by recurring histone acetylases and chromatin remolding
complexes respectively. Uncovering the role of STAT3 and USF2 in the
hypoxia response established the foundation to specifically inhibit HIF1
or HIF2 activity for solid tumor treatment.Citation Format: Cheng-Jun Hu,
Matthew Pawlus, Johnny Sena, Liyi Wang. HIF is necessary, but not
sufficient for the hypoxia response. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 2929. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2929

