Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Six1 homeoprotein downregulates p53, via a novel, MDM2
independent mechanism.


The p53 tumor suppressor is a critical regulator of genomic stability.
P53 is known as the guardian of the genome because it plays a crucial
role in inducing apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in response to DNA
damage. P53 is mutated in approximately 50% of all human tumors and is
downregulated in a large majority of the remainder. An important
regulator of p53 is the E3 ubiquitin ligase, MDM2, which acts to
ubiquitinate p53 and target it for degradation through the proteasome.
There is currently a large effort in the field directed toward developing
targeted therapies that inhibit MDM2s ability to interact with p53, thus
allowing p53 to be stabilized. One such drug that is already undergoing
clinical trials is Nutlin-3a. Our preliminary data demonstrate that the
homeobox containing transcription factor, Six1, decreases the p53
response to DNA damage in a proteasome independent manner, suggesting
that it may downregulate the p53 response even in the presence of
Nutlins. Six1, is an important developmental regulator as it increases
cell migration, invasion, and proliferation, however, it is not expressed
in most normal adult tissues. It is, however, re-expressed in cancerous
cells, including human breast lesions. As we are currently developing
drugs to target Six1, it is essential to understand mechanistically how
Six1 downregulates p53 and whether or not inhibition of Six1 may
re-sensitize cells to Nutlin therapies.Here we show that Six1
downregulates p53, not on the mRNA level, but on the protein level, and
that this downregulation leads to a decrease in p53 function. We have
shown that Six1 can target p53 in a variety of different cell culture
systems, including both breast and colon cancer cell lines, as well as
normal breast and embryonic kidney cell lines. We have begun to examine
the mechanism by which Six1 downregulates p53, and have shown that it is
able to target p53 independent of MDM2, as siRNA knock down of MDM2 is
not able to rescue p53 levels in the presence of Six1. Furthermore, Six1
does not affect the half life of p53, and congruently Six1 is able to
downregulte p53 even in the presence of a proteosome inhibitor. Together,
these results suggest that MDM2s ability to target p53 for proteasomal
degradation is dispensable for the ability of Six1 to decrease p53
levels. Furthermore, our preliminary data suggests that Six1 regulates
p53 in a post-transcriptional mechanism, potentially through the use of
the p53 3UTR region. Six1 overexpressing lines are more resistant to
Nutlin therapies in-vitro, demonstrating a significant increase in
viability in the presence of Nutlins when compared to control cell lines.
Thus, high levels of Six1 may correlate with decreased response to
Nutlins clinically, and targeting of Six1 may be a novel approach to
re-sensitize tumors expressing high levels of Six1 to Nutlin therapy.

