Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The aging suppressor hormone Klotho inhibits ovarian cancer cell
proliferation by down-regulation of the estrogen receptor.


Klotho is a 1012 amino acid (aa) long transmembranal protein, which can
be cleaved, shed and act as a circulating hormone. Klotho contains two
regions named KL1 and KL2, each about 500aa long. Klotho deficient mice
present a syndrome of early aging, while overexpression of klotho extends
lifespan. Klotho is an essential co-factor for the activity of FGF23 and
thus serves as a major regulator of phosphate homeostasis. Klotho is also
a potent inhibitor of the insulin growth factor (IGF)-1 pathway. We have
identified klotho as a tumor suppressor in breast and pancreatic cancer.
Recently, klotho activity as a tumor suppressor was observed also in
melanoma and in cervix, lung, colon and gastric cancers. As klotho is
expressed in the normal ovary, we undertook to study the expression and
activity of klotho in ovarian cancer.We first analyzed klotho expression,
using quantitative RT-PCR and Western blotting, in 18 ovarian cancer cell
lines and noted high levels of klotho mRNA and protein in only three
lines. We next used immunohistochemistry analysis to study klotho
expression in a tissue array containing 277 primary and recurrent
ovarian, fallopian and primary peritoneal cancers, along with 22 normal
and benign tumor samples. While high klotho expression was noted in all
normal samples, reduced expression was noted in 30% of the tumors.
Reduced expression was not associated with histology, tumor location or
stage. Overexpression of either full length klotho or KL1 reduced clonal
growth of OvCa432, SKOV3 and ES2 ovarian cancer cell lines by 80%, 60%,
and 0%, respectively.Klotho inhibits the IGF-1 pathway in pancreatic and
breast cancer cells. As the IGF-1 pathway plays an important role in
ovarian cancer development, we studied the effect of klotho on this
pathway in ovarian cancer cell lines. Klotho inhibited IGF-1-mediated AKT
activation, and to a lesser degree ERK1/2 phosphorylation, in SKOV3 and
OvCa432 cells. Interestingly, ES2 cells did not respond to IGF-1.Estrogen
receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) have a significant role in
ovarian cancer development. ER is expressed in a majority of ovarian
cancers, while PR is less abundant, and its expression is a marker for
better prognosis. We found that klotho reduces ER expression and activity
in SKOV3 and OvCa432. Interestingly, klotho elevated PR-A isoform
expression in these cell lines.In conclusion, unlike in breast and
pancreas cancer, where klotho was identified as a potent tumor suppressor
in most cancer subtypes, and the IGF-1 pathway was inhibited in a wide
array of cell lines, in the ovary, klotho plays a role in a smaller
subset of tumors. The characteristics of this group have not been
identified yet. However, it appears that ER inhibition and PR-A
up-regulation may play a role in mediating klotho activities in this
subset.

