Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sequence-specific repair of etheno-adenine at mutation hotspots in
p53.


Vinyl chloride monomer (VCM) is a colorless gas used in the plastic
industry for manufacturing polyvinyl chloride. VCM is mutagenic and
carcinogenic, being associated with the development of liver
angiosarcoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, and cholangiocarcinoma in humans.
The metabolites of VCM chloroethylene oxide and chloroacetaldehyde react
with all four bases in DNA by alkylation to form exocyclic etheno
adducts. An adenine adduct, 1, N6-etheno adenine (A), is specifically
recognized and excised by N-methylpurine DNA glycosylase (MPG) leaving an
abasic (AP) site that is subsequently recognized and cleaved by
apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease (APE1), forming a nick in the DNA
during Base Excision Repair (BER). Unrepaired A results in A to T
transversions, and these mutations are specifically found at hotspot
codons in the p53 gene in liver angiosarcoma patients: codons 179, 249,
and 255. We hypothesized that A at these codons is excised less
efficiently than at non-mutation hotspot codons due to differences in
sequence context. We modified an existing real time PCR-based method to
monitor BER in vivo, which utilizes a phagemid construct (M13mp18)
containing a single A placed in the p53 sequence. The phagemid is
transfected into mammalian cells and retrieved at various time points
post-transfection. The retrieved phagemid is treated with MPG and APE1 to
convert any unrepaired A to nicked DNA. The products are then analyzed by
real time PCR utilizing primers that flank the damage site. Nicked DNA
will be less amplifiable than intact DNA, which will indicate the amount
of repair that occurred in the cell. We transfected HepG2 cells with
phagemid constructs containing a single A at the mutation hotspot codons
179, 249, and 255, as well as the non-mutagenic codon 246. We observed
that 50% of eA placed at a non-mutagenic codon in the p53 gene (codon
246) is repaired in less than 5 hours post-transfection, while 50% of A
placed at the hotspot codons (codons 179, 249, or 255) is repaired in
more than 16 hours. The in vivo results were confirmed in vitro utilizing
purified MPG and oligonucleotide substrates containing A in the sequence
context of the non-hotspot and hotspot codons. We observed a 2.5 fold
decrease in product formation by MPG when A is placed at codon 249
compared to codon 246. We observed a 1.5 fold decrease in product
formation by MPG when A is placed at codon 179 or 255 compared to codon
246. These results indicate that sequence context affects the excision
activity of MPG which suggests a potential mechanism for the presence of
mutation hotspots in p53 (supported by RO1 CA92306 grant from NCI/NIH).

