Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor splice variants in mouse prostate cancer cell
lines: altered distribution in lines derived from castration-resistant
tumors relative to those primary tumors.


Prostate cancer is sensitive to androgen deprivation at the primary
androgen-dependent growth stage (ADCa). However, it invariably acquires
resistance to androgen withdrawal leading to the recurrence of the
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Androgen receptor (AR)
activity that is necessary for the normal prostate development remains
active through both phases of the disease. Even at castrate levels of
androgen AR remains functional, possibly through several non-mutually
exclusive mechanisms including expression of constitutively active AR
variants (ARVs). The full-length of AR (ARFL) is a 110 KDa nuclear
hormone receptor composed of an N-terminal domain (NTD, exon1),
DNA-binding domain (DBD, exon 2 and 3), a hinge region (exon 4), and the
C-terminal ligand binding domain (LBD, exon 4-8). To date up to 15
different ARVs lacking LBD have been identified in human prostate cancer
cell lines or specimens. It is thought that the altered biological
properties of these ARVs may be, in part, correlated to the development
of castration resistance. ARVs remain understudied in mouse prostate
cancer cell lines; detection of only two ARVs was reported in a mouse
cell line. A better definition of ARVs in distinct phases of this cancer
in an appropriate mouse model should be valuable for insights into the
role of ARVs in therapy and disease progression.To this end, by using
cell lines established from the conditional Pten deletion mouse model of
prostate adenocarcinoma, we detected low molecular weight AR protein
species (50 kDa - 80 kDa) besides the presence of the 110 kDa
full-length. We performed 3RACE and subsequent Sanger sequencing on cell
lines derived from both ADCa (E-series) and CRPC stages (cE-series) and
identified three different ARVs which we named as mARV-abc. Structurally,
mARVa is analogous to the previously reported mAR-V4 and the human
ARV567es which only lacks LBD domain retaining exon 1-4 followed by the
inclusion of a cryptic exon 4 from intron 4 at the 3-terminal sequence.
More interestingly, we identified two novel ARV isoforms (mARV-b and -c)
which merely contains the NTD encoded by exon 1 before the addition of
specific sequences from different positions of intron 1. Although these
mARVs occur in all the murine cell lines tested, their proportion appears
to vary with respect to the stage of the disease from which the cell
lines originated. In cE-series established from a CRPC tumor, novel ARVb
and ARVc are more abundant than that in E-series from an ADCa tumor; in
parallel, ARVa displays an opposite expression profile. These new
findings together with the results of ongoing experiments, including the
single cell expression analysis and on their biological activities of the
splice variants will be discussed.

