Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic simvastatin and metformin chemotherapy for metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer.


Docetaxel (Dtx), first-line chemotherapy of metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), provides a modest increase
in overall survival, yet results in frequent occurrence of severe side
effects and leads to Dtx-resistant disease. Identification of a more
effective alternate chemotherapy with fewer side effects would greatly
benefit patient quality of life. Metabolic alterations occur in
metastatic CRPC cells that may promote survival.
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-Coenzyme A reductase (HMG-CoAR) is
over-expressed and dysregulated, leading to elevated cellular cholesterol
levels. In addition, adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) activity is significantly decreased by Ser-485/491
phosphorylation, in part due to constitutively-active Akt. Simvastatin
(SIM), used to treat hypercholesterolemia (HC), is a potent inhibitor of
HMG-CoAR; metformin (MET) is an indirect activator of AMPK prescribed for
Type II Diabetes (T2D). T2D and HC are associated with increased risk of
advanced prostate cancer (PCa); whereas, SIM or MET treatment is
associated with reduced risk of advanced PCa and recurrence following
radical prostatectomy or androgen deprivation therapy. Moreover, SIM and
MET are significantly less toxic than Dtx. SIM and MET have potential to
act synergistically by i) inhibition of HMG-CoAR, ii) activation of AMPK,
further inhibiting HMG-CoAR activity by Ser-872 phosphorylation, and iii)
inhibition of Akt activity, which is directly upstream of AMPK.
Therefore, we hypothesized that combination SIM and MET act
synergistically to inhibit metastatic CRPC cell survival. Using C4-2B3
and C4-2B4 cell lines, in vitro models of osseous metastatic CRPC, we
determined that (1:500) combination SIM and MET at
pharmacologically-relevant concentrations (500nM-4M and 250M-2mM,
respectively) displays strong synergy per Chou-Talalay calculation and
significantly reduces C4-2B3 and B4 viability, without adversely
affecting viability of PrEC normal prostate epithelial cells; combination
SIM and MET was also shown to significantly inhibit metastatic CRPC cell
migration, invasion, and proliferation. Compared to SIM and MET alone,
combination treatment led to earlier and more pronounced G1-phase cell
cycle arrest in both C4-2B3 and B4. Combination SIM and MET also
synergistically increased phospho-Thr-172 and activity of AMPK, and
increased phospho-Ser-872 and decreased activity of HMG-CoAR in C4-2B3
and B4 cells in a time-dependent manner. Used individually, SIM and MET
show limited promise as CRPC chemotherapeutic agents; however, in
combination, they demonstrate more significant, synergistic effects, and
may be an effective first-line chemotherapeutic alternative to Dtx for
metastatic CRPC.

