Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilizing optical imaging technologies to screen candidate ADC
antibodies.


Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) represent a promising new therapeutic
option to treat cancer where powerful cytotoxic compounds are conjugated
to antibodies targeting a tumor-associated antigen. Molecular imaging
allows relatively quick, non-invasive assessment of biological and
biochemical processes in living subjects and when applied to research and
development of ADC therapeutics, it has the potential to expedite the
drug development process. The current study aims to evaluate optical
imaging as a tool to aid in the selection of antibody candidates by using
imaging data to predict in vivo efficacy of ADC therapeutics. In this
study, candidate antibodies with engineered cysteines for site-specific
conjugation of payloads were successfully labeled with the near-infrared
fluorescent dye, alexa fluor 750, to achieve a degree of labeling of 2
dyes per antibody. Mice bearing target-positive tumors were treated with
the dye-labeled antibodies, and were imaged at 1, 2, and 6 days
post-injection using a fluorescence molecular tomography (FMT) in vivo
imaging system. The tumor and major organs were subjected to ex vivo
optical imaging and confirmatory immunofluorescence staining. Differences
were observed in the tumor uptake, biodistribution profiles, and
penetration of the four candidate antibodies. Concurrently, in vivo
efficacy studies are being conducted with ADCs comprised of these lead
antibodies, and the imaging data, along with the binding affinity and
internalization rate of each antibody, will be compared to the
pharmacology data to determine if a predictive correlation exists. Once
established, correlations between the imaging data and efficacy results
would justify the use of molecular imaging to screen large panels of
antibodies to aid in the lead selection for ADCs, thus enabling
significant time and cost reduction for the development of ADC
therapeutics.

