Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational status of the p53 tumor suppressor gene is associated
with expression of GSTP1 allelic variants in human GBM..


The tumor suppressor and transcription factor, p53, regulates the
transcription of a large number of genes that control key cellular
functional, such as, cell cycle arrest, DNA repair, senescence and
apoptosis, and its mutational inactivation of p53 has been implicated in
tumor development and progression. Mutation in p53 is a common genetic
abnormality in GBM and other cancers and several studies have associated
wild type p53 with high tumor drug resistance. Our laboratory previously
reported that the polymorphic human GSTP1 gene is a transcriptional
target of and is activated by p53 via a canonical p53 binding motif
located in intron 4 of the GSTP1 gene. The ability of the p53 wild type
to transcriptionally activate the GSTP1 gene, thus, defines a novel
mechanism of protecting the genome and enhancement tumor drug resistance.
The ability of the different GSTP1 alleles to protect against the
toxicity of anticancer agents plays an important factor in this
GSTP1-mediated tumor drug resistance. In a previous study, we showed that
p53 mutations in GBM spanned the entire p53 gene, with the majority of
the mutations in the DNA binding domain and that GSTP1 expression
correlated, in most cases with wild type p53. In the present study, we
examined the relationship between p53-dependent GSTP1 gene activation
genetic polymorphism and expression in human GBM. We sequenced the p53
gene in 52 primary human GBMs, genotyped these tumors for their GSTP1
allelic status and determined the expression of the GSTP1 gene
transcripts by quantitative PCR. The results showed the GSTP1*A allele to
most highly (40%) expressed in the tumors and of these 27% harbored
wild-type p53. In contrast, GSTP1*C allele was not only the least
prevalent allele but also had the least association with wild-type p53.
GSTP1*B, as well as, heterozygous GSTP1 alleles were intermediate in
their association with p53 mutational status of the tumors. The level of
expression of the individual genes also correlated with the presence of
wild-type p53 in inversely with mutant p53. These results demonstrate a
significant impact of p53 mutational status, not only in mediating the
level of GSTP1 gene expression but also that it is related to the
specific allelic form of GSTP1 that is expressed. This suggest that p53
mutational status and both GSTP1 expression and allele polymorphism may
interact together to mediate glioma drug resistance.

