Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FOXM1 target genes associated with cell cycle regulation predict
breast cancer metastatic outcome.


FOXM1 is a key transcription factor regulating both cell proliferation
and DNA damage checkpoint responses; and previous studies have
demonstrated that higher breast cancer FOXM1 expression is associated
with worse patient survival. Despite its functional and prognostic
significance, the FOXM1 cistrome remains largely uncharacterized. Thus,
in this study we utilized chromatin immune-precipitation sequencing
(CHIPseq, GenPathway) and paired-end RNA-sequencing (RNAseq, UCSC) to
comprehensively characterize the direct FOXM1 target genes associated
with transcriptomic differences between actively proliferating and
non-proliferating (confluent) ER+ MCF-7 cells. CHIPseq analysis
identified 2.5K peaks with differential FOXM1 binding (MACS, p FOXM1 is a
key transcription factor regulating both cell proliferation and DNA
damage checkpoint responses; and previous studies have demonstrated that
higher breast cancer FOXM1 expression is associated with worse patient
survival. Despite its functional and prognostic significance, the FOXM1
cistrome remains largely uncharacterized. Thus, in this study we utilized
chromatin immune-precipitation sequencing (CHIPseq, GenPathway) and
paired-end RNA-sequencing (RNAseq, UCSC) to comprehensively characterize
the direct FOXM1 target genes associated with transcriptomic differences
between actively proliferating and non-proliferating (confluent) ER+
MCF-7 cells. CHIPseq analysis identified 2.5K peaks with differential
FOXM1 binding (MACS, p < 107). Peaks located within 5kb (-4.5kb to
+0.5kb) of a transcription start site were assigned to genes, yielding
429 differentially bound genes. 5.1K genes were found to be
differentially expressed (DESeq, BH-FDR corrected p 1.5). Of these, 145
were differentially bound by FOXM1 and referred to as direct target
genes. These direct targets were enriched in 43 functional categories (GO
biological processes, KEGG, Reactome or BioCarta pathways;
Benjamini-corrected EASE score 1.5). Of these, 145 were differentially
bound by FOXM1 and referred to as direct target genes. These direct
targets were enriched in 43 functional categories (GO biological
processes, KEGG, Reactome or BioCarta pathways; Benjamini-corrected EASE
score < 0.05) predominantly related to cell cycle and chromatin assembly.
The remaining 4.9K differentially expressed proliferation associated
genes with unaltered FOXM1 DNA binding, referred to as indirect targets
and including FOXM1 itself, were enriched in a far more diverse group of
46 functional categories including processes related to cell cycle, DNA
repair and DNA damage response. The average expression levels of FOXM1
direct and indirect target genes were computed in a pooled set of 683
node-negative adjuvant chemotherapy-nave breast cancers from four public
sources (GSE2034, GSE5327, GSE7390, NKI-295) annotated for distant
metastasis-free survival (DMFS). Higher average expression of FOXM1
direct and indirect target genes were associated with worse DMFS (log
rank p value 1.5). Of these, 145 were differentially bound by FOXM1 and
referred to as direct target genes. These direct targets were enriched in
43 functional categories (GO biological processes, KEGG, Reactome or
BioCarta pathways; Benjamini-corrected EASE score < 0.05) predominantly
related to cell cycle and chromatin assembly. The remaining 4.9K
differentially expressed proliferation associated genes with unaltered
FOXM1 DNA binding, referred to as indirect targets and including FOXM1
itself, were enriched in a far more diverse group of 46 functional
categories including processes related to cell cycle, DNA repair and DNA
damage response. The average expression levels of FOXM1 direct and
indirect target genes were computed in a pooled set of 683 node-negative
adjuvant chemotherapy-nave breast cancers from four public sources
(GSE2034, GSE5327, GSE7390, NKI-295) annotated for distant
metastasis-free survival (DMFS). Higher average expression of FOXM1
direct and indirect target genes were associated with worse DMFS (log
rank p value < 0.00001 for cohorts dichotomized at median average
expression). When the dichotomized cohorts were further stratified by ER
status, significant DMFS associations were only observed within the ER+,
but not the ER-, subsets. However, in the latter subset there was a trend
for worse prognosis associated with high expression of FOXM1 direct
targets (HR = 1.6, log rank p=0.08), but not with FOXM1 indirect gene
targets (HR=1.0, log rank p = 0.88). Altogether, these findings
demonstrate that following induction of breast cancer cell proliferation,
FOXM1 direct target genes are primarily associated with cell cycle
regulation and appear to be better biomarkers of breast cancer metastatic
outcome than proliferation associated indirect gene targets not
associated with FOXM1 binding changes.

