Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of MUT-MAP, a high-throughput multi-analyte mutation
panel for cancer biomarkers discovery.


Molecular profiling plays an increasingly vital role in determining
treatment options in oncology. These include expression profiling,
mutation detection as well as copy number variation analysis (CNV). Hence
there is an increasing need for a robust and high-throughput technology
to detect oncogenic hotspot mutations - and copy number variation (CNV)
in various kinds of cancer. Although there are commercial assays or kits
available to detect genetic aberrations in a given oncogene, there is a
need to simultaneously detect these hotspots in more than a few of these
genes using very little DNA. Recent technological advances such as
next-generation sequencing (NGS) platforms are the powerful tools to
unravel the complex biological and genetic mechanisms in different human
diseases. However, there are several challenges facing NGS platforms,
such as high cost, and DNA input requirement, and difficult data analysis
pipeline which require much longer data turnaround time that is not
feasible in the clinical setting.We have developed a high-throughput
microfluidic panel for detecting 120 somatic mutations across 11 genes of
therapeutic interest using TaqMan or allele-specific PCR (AS-PCR)
technologies. The 11-gene mutation panel is designed to detect hotspot
mutations that have higher oncogenic potential. Additionally, we can
detect (CNV) changes in a total of 18 genes. This mutation panel only
requires as little as 2 ng of high quality (fresh frozen) or 100 ng of
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) genomic DNA. A pre-amplification
of 38 amplicons is carried out to enrich DNA carrying the targeted
mutations, using custom-designed primer sets followed by detection of the
mutations using TaqMan/AS-PCR assays carried out on a Biomark
microfluidics system. Mutation, CNV calls including an automated data
analysis process have been implemented to run 88 samples per day. We will
present data showing validation of this platform using plasmids and
archival samples, including correlation between amplified and unamplified
samples on alternate mutation detection platforms that will demonstrate
sensitivity and selectivity. The platform is being routinely used in our
labs to analyze tissues from patients enrolled in clinical trials.

