Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulatory roles of conserved phosphorylation sites in the
activation loop of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1.


The catalytic domains of most eukaryotic protein kinases are highly
conserved in their primary structures. Phosphorylation of the activation
loop, a variable region between kinase catalytic subdomains VII and VIII,
is a common mechanism for regulating protein phosphotransferase activity.
Our investigation of the distribution and evolutionary conservation of
phosphorylation sites in 492 typical human protein kinase catalytic
domains revealed that about 75% of the 303 known activating phosphosites
are located within the activation loop.Extracellular signal-regulated
kinase 1 (ERK1) belongs to the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
family, which is one of the most intensively studied protein kinase
families and serves as a paradigm for regulation of protein kinases in
signaling modules. ERK1 homologues play fundamental roles in regulation
of cell growth and proliferation from yeast to humans. In addition to the
well-documented TEY activating site in the activation loop of ERK1 and
its closest relative ERK2, three flanking phosphosites have been
confirmed (T198, T207 and Y210 from ERK1) by high throughput mass
spectrometry. We noticed that T207 and Y210 correspond to conserved
phosphosites (T/S-XX-Y) located just prior to the subdomain VIII APE
motif in many other protein-serine/threonine kinases including CDKs,
CAMKs, PKB/Akts and PKCs, which may implicate a common regulatory role
for of these phosphosites in a wide range of kinases.To investigate the
roles of these three flanking phosphosites, we mutated T198, T207 and
Y210 of ERK1 individually and in combinations. In vitro kinase assays
with myelin basic protein (MBP) using purified mutants indicated the
functional importance of T207 and Y210, but not T198 in regulating ERK1
catalytic activity. By single substitution of the T207 to alanine, the
activity of ERK1 towards MBP decreased dramatically without affecting the
phosphorylation on TEY motif by MEK1. An additional mutation at Y210
caused the loss of most ERK1 phosphotransferase activity. However,
neither of the T207E nor Y210E mutants had the ability to mimic the
phosphorylation state and produce the full activation of ERK1. In
addition, Y210 could be important for ERK1 to be recognized by MEK1,
since the substitution of this residue blocked most of the
phosphorylation on TEY sites by this MAPK kinase. Preliminary data also
indicated the possibility of autophosphorylation on T207 and Y210, which
probably happens after the phosphorylation of the TEY sites by MEK1. The
phosphorylation of the flanking sites may help to stabilize the active
state of the kinase.Our findings contribute to an improved understanding
of MAPK activation and regulation. Hyper-phosphorylation within the
kinase activation loop may serve as a general mechanism for protein
kinases to achieve full stimulation by autophosphorylation following the
initial activation by other upstream kinases.

