Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Checkpoint Kinase 2 in the regulation of androgen
receptor signaling and prostate cancer cell growth during progression to
castration resistance.


As the second leading cause of cancer deaths in men, prostate cancer is a
persistent, significant challenge for clinicians and researchers. Almost
all patients with disseminated prostate cancer initially respond to
androgen deprivation therapy. However, virtually every patient will
relapse due to the growth of castration-resistant cancer cells and
develop metastatic and lethal disease. Even with the recent development
of new androgen ablation treatments such as Abiraterone and Enzalutamide,
castration-resistant prostate cancer is still incurable. We hypothesize
that compensatory signaling mechanisms that limit the effectiveness of
androgen ablation can be overcome with therapeutic strategies targeting
kinase cascades. In order to identify signaling pathways that regulate AR
activity and prostate cancer cell growth we screened a panel of shRNAs
targeting the human kinome in LNCaP prostate cancer cells grown in the
presence and absence of androgen. We discovered that knockdown of
Checkpoint Kinase 2 (CHK2) dramatically increased LNCaP prostate cancer
cell proliferation. This observation is clinically relevant since CHK2
inactivating mutations arise in over 10% of prostate cancer patients and
CHK2 expression decreases as prostate cancer progresses to a
castration-resistant disease. Consistent with these clinical
observations, CHK2 knockdown did not affect cell growth in the castration
resistant C4-2 cell line, suggesting that the selection of the castration
resistant C4-2 line from LNCaP involved the same effector as observed in
clinical specimens. Consistent with this, CHK2 expression is lower in
C4-2 cells compared to LNCaP. We determined that CHK2 knockdown increases
androgen receptor (AR) transcriptional activity on both androgen
activated and androgen repressed genes, providing evidence that CHK2
affects prostate cancer cell proliferation, at least in part, through the
AR. These data suggest that CHK2 is a negative regulator of androgen
sensitivity and prostate cancer cell growth and that CHK2 is lost during
the progression to castration resistance. We are examining the role of
CHK2 in regulating androgen-AR signaling, growth, and survival of
prostate cancer cells; specifically we are identifying the crucial
intracellular proteins that mediate CHK2 signaling and growth regulation
of prostate cancer cells. Since CHK2 signaling is activated by DNA
damage, such as that triggered by radiation therapy and brachytherapy,
understanding how CHK2 signaling regulates the AR will provide critical
insights into how we can combine current therapies with androgen blockade
for greater clinical effectiveness.

