Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation increases permeability and retention of PEG-conjugates
in solid tumors.


Poly-ethylene glycol (PEG), a hydrophobic polymer used to improve the
circulation and biocompatibility of biomolecules, accumulates in solid
tumors in a size-dependent manner that has been attributed to the
enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect. Irradiation of cancer
disrupts cancer microvasculature, resulting in enhanced EPR effect. In
the present study, we found that radiation increases the retention of PEG
in solid tumors. The accumulation of PEG in solid tumors was observed
with in vivo imaging. Nude mice were prepared with heterotopic unilateral
murine and human glioma (GL261, U87) and lung carcinoma (LLC, A549)
tumors. A near-infrared (NIR) dye conjugated to PEG was then administered
by IV to the mice which were imaged by NIR for seven days. There was
increased retention of PEG-dye in tumors that had been irradiated. To
further elucidate the mechanism of this increased retention, a similar in
vivo imaging experiment was conducted in bilateral heterotopic tumor
models (GL261, U87, LLC, A549) for seven days. The irradiated tumors
demonstrated increased accumulation of PEG-dye, suggesting that the
response to irradiation influenced the accumulation of PEG-dye. To
observe the distribution of PEG-dye in the solid tumors, after the in
vivo imaging was complete, the tumors were harvested and then sectioned
for microscopy and histological staining. PEG-dye was observed in both
the necrotic and non-necrotic regions of the tumor. The cancer
microvasculature environment differs depending on where the tumor is
located; to determine if the increased uptake was limited to only the
hind limb, in vivo imaging was conducted in nude mice bearing orthotopic
brain (GL261) and lung (LLC) tumors. PEG-dye was also observed to
accumulate in these irradiated tumor models. Radiation induced EPR led to
cancer specific delivery of PEG conjugates. Collectively, our data
suggest that irradiation increases the retention of PEG-dye in solid
tumors. This effect appears in more than one tumor type suggesting that
the mechanism may arise from an increase in EPR following irradiation of
cancer. If so, the concurrent administration of radiation therapy with
polymer-conjugated therapeutic complexes may improve targeted drug
delivery to cancer.

