Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thailanstatins: New pre-mRNA splicing inhibitors and potent
antiproliferative agents discovered from Burkholderia Thailandensis
MSMB43.


Natural products have been traditionally sought from actinomycetes,
filamentous fungi and medicinal plants. Gram-negative bacterial species,
such as Burkholderia, Chromobacterium, Lysobacter, Pseudomonas and
Xenorhabdus, however, have recently captured attention as new sources of
diverse bioactive natural products. Mining the genome sequence of B.
thailandensis MSMB43 revealed a cryptic biosynthetic gene cluster highly
resembling that of FR901,464, a prototype pre-mRNA splicing inhibitor
produced by Pseudomonas sp. No. 2663. Transcriptioal analysis identified
a cultivation condition in which a representive gene of the cryptic gene
cluster is adequately expressed. Consequently, three new compounds,
thailanstatins A, B and C, were isolated from the fermentation broth of
B. thailandensis MSMB43 through natural product chemistry. Thailanstatins
belong to the FR901,464-family of microbial products biosynthesized by a
hybrid polyketide synthease-nonribosomal peptide synthetase pathway. They
have an oveall structural similarity with FR901,464, but feature an extra
acetic acid unit which endows the compouds with a significantly higher
stability than FR901,464 under physiologically relevant conditions. In
vitro assays showed that thailanstatins inhibit pre-mRNA splicing as
potently as FR901,464, with half-maximal inhibitory concentrations in the
single to sub M range, causing pre-mRNA to accumulate and preventing the
production of mRNA and splicing intermediates. In vitro cell culture
assays indicated that thailanstatins also possess potent
antiproliferative activities in representative human cancer cell lines,
with half-maximal growth inhibitory concentrations in the single nM range
(Table 1). This work provides new chemical entities for research and
development, and validates the Burkholderia species as an exciting new
source of bioactive natural products. Antiproliferative activities of
compounds in human cancer cell lines (GI50 in nM).

