Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of dasatinib and potential escape mechanisms in diffuse
intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) models.


BackgroundDiffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) have a dismal prognosis
and their biology is not yet well explored. Using an integrated molecular
profiling approach we revealed PDGFRA gene amplification and mutations in
the extracellular domain as a characteristic of the oligodendroglial
subgroup in newly diagnosed pediatric DIPG. Therefore we explored the
therapeutic potential of dasatinib, an inhibitor of the PDGFR, Src, and
Ephrin tyrosine-kinases in newly developed DIPG models.Materials and
MethodsA unique panel of 12 DIPG cell lines has been established from
fresh tumor material biopsies in newly diagnosed children with DIPG with
a 100% success rate. Four were oligoastrocytomas Grade 2 and 3, five
astrocytomas Grade 2, 1 GBM and 2 non further specified; two had a gain
of the PDGFRA gene. Effects of dasatinib on proliferation, invasion and
cytotoxicity in vitro were determined at concentrations of 0.001-1 M
using the Live-cell imaging assay of the IncuCyte system. Cell growth and
cell invasion were monitored by confluence algorithm, and cytotoxicity
was determined by loss of membrane integrity generating nuclear staining
by a fluorescent live-cell imaging reagent. Tyrosine-kinase receptors
(RTK) and downstream signaling expression was assessed by phospho-RTK
array and Western blot analysis.ResultsAnti-proliferative effects of
dasatinib were observed in all 6 cell lines tested with IC50s between
0.02-0.07 M. This compared favorably with the sensitive adult glioma T98G
cell line and the pediatric supratentorial glioma SF188 cell line (0.15 M
and 0.3 M, respectively). Significant dose-dependent cytotoxic effects
were observed in two DIPG cell lines (NEM145 and NEM 168) and
anti-invasive effects were seen in all cells at 0.1 M.The two most
sensitive cell lines exhibited PDGFRA activation and their primary tumors
had a gain of PDGFRA. While Src was activated in all cell lines, we
noticed that the less sensitive cell lines had MET
overexpression.ConclusionPrimary DIPG cell lines are highly sensitive in
vitro to dasatinib suggesting its exploration is children with DIPG.
Sensitivity may be linked not exclusively to PDGFRA activation but also
to Src activation. The role of MET activation in escape mechanisms is
currently explored.

