Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of mitogen-activated protein kinases which are
required for the growth of triple-negative breast cancers.


Background: Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed malignancy
(besides non-melanoma skin cancer) and is the second leading cause for
cancer-related death among US women. Most breast cancers overexpress the
estrogen receptor (ER) or, to a lesser extent, the HER2 receptor and thus
are responsive to hormonal therapies. However nearly a quarter of
patients do not express ER, HER2, or progesterone receptor
(triple-negative breast cancer) and are clinically managed as a single
disease with nonspecific chemotherapies. Novel targeted therapies are
urgently needed to treat these aggressive cancers. Recent large-scale
studies integrating multiple dimensions of genomic data have revealed
that alterations to the MAP kinase pathways are critical for the
development and progression of triple-negative cancers (TNBCs). In
particular, mutations in MAP3K genes have been associated with
receptor-negative tumors. In this study, we hypothesized that TNBCs
depend on unique MAP3K proteins distinct from those required by non-TNBCs
to transduce growth signals.Methods: We performed an unbiased screen of
the MAP3K family to identify genes critical for growth and tumorigenicity
in six TNBC and six ER-positive cell lines. Pools of siRNA were deposited
into optical microplates and cell lines were liposomally
reverse-transfected. Depending on the growth rate, cells were stained
with DAPI at 4 or 6 days post-transfection and nuclei were detected by
high-throughput microscopy. To test for inhibition of
anchorage-independent growth, cells were transfected with siRNA and the
next day seeded in soft agar in 6-well dishes. Colonies were counted by
machine at 1-3 weeks and compared to control siRNA-treated cells. For
death assays, siRNA-treated cells were grown for 2 days and collected for
western blot detection of annexin V and cleaved caspase 3.Results: We
determined that MAP3K3 (MEKK3) and TAO2 (MAP3K17) are essential for
anchorage-dependent growth of TNBC cells, but are not required for the
proliferation of ER-positive cell lines. Among the TNBC cells, there were
variable responses to knockdown of these kinases. While the growth of
MDA-MB-231, HCC70, and HCC1937 cells were greatly inhibited after MAP3K3
knockdown, the growth of HCC1937 cells was unaffected by MAP3K3 knockdown
but was instead suppressed by TAO2 inhibition. Knockdown of MAP3K3 and
TAO2 also resulted in a dramatic reduction of anchorage-independent
colony formation in these TNBC cells but not in ER-positive lines. We
demonstrated that this reduction in growth is due to suppression of
proliferation, and not by induction of apoptosis via annexin V apoptotic
assay and detection of cleaved caspases.Conclusion: These data suggest
that TNBCs evolve a dependence on specific MAP kinase pathways, and that
targeting MAP3K3 and TAO2 may be an effective strategy to treat the
subset of TNBCs that rely on these molecules to potentiate growth.

