Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel genes involved in clear cell
carcinogenesis of the ovary using retrovirus-based cDNA expression
library.


[Objectives] Clear cell carcinoma is an important chemotherapy-resistant
subtype in epithelial ovarian carcinomas, and associated with poor
prognosis of the patients. Understanding of molecular carcinogenesis of
this tumor is mandatory to develop effective treatments, however, gene
abnormalities of clear cell carcinoma have not been fully understood.
Recently, novel oncogenic genes or genetic alterations in various
malignancies were identified using the full-length cDNA expression
library on a retroviral vector and subsequent functional screening, such
as the EML4-ALK fusion gene in lung cancer. To identify the genes
responsible for clear cell carcinogenesis, we performed a functional
screening using a constructed retroviral expression library of the human
ovarian clear cell carcinoma cell.[Methods] 1) cDNA library in
pDON-AI/Neo retroviral plasmid was constructed from mRNA extracted from
clear cell carcinoma RMG-1 cells. NIH3T3 cells were seeded and
transfected with the retroviral supernatant. Transformed foci were
identified and the genomic DNA from transformed foci was extracted for
sequencing. 2) The mRNA and protein levels of candidate genes were
examined using real time RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry in 62 cases of
ovarian carcinoma tissues. 3) The PCR-direct sequencing was performed in
24 cases of clear carcinoma cell samples. 4) Transforming activity of
isolated genes was evaluated using NIH3T3 cells.[Results] 1) Among 20
genes isolated from the transformed cells, we focused on two genes,
Sec61B (protein translocation regulator in ER) and C1ORF38 (Toll-like
receptor modulator). In addition, mutations in DVL1 (Wnt signal
modulator) were found in C-terminal region. 2). The mRNA levels of three
candidate genes and the protein expression of Sec61B andC1ORF38 were two
to three-fold increased (p[Objectives] Clear cell carcinoma is an
important chemotherapy-resistant subtype in epithelial ovarian
carcinomas, and associated with poor prognosis of the patients.
Understanding of molecular carcinogenesis of this tumor is mandatory to
develop effective treatments, however, gene abnormalities of clear cell
carcinoma have not been fully understood. Recently, novel oncogenic genes
or genetic alterations in various malignancies were identified using the
full-length cDNA expression library on a retroviral vector and subsequent
functional screening, such as the EML4-ALK fusion gene in lung cancer. To
identify the genes responsible for clear cell carcinogenesis, we
performed a functional screening using a constructed retroviral
expression library of the human ovarian clear cell carcinoma
cell.[Methods] 1) cDNA library in pDON-AI/Neo retroviral plasmid was
constructed from mRNA extracted from clear cell carcinoma RMG-1 cells.
NIH3T3 cells were seeded and transfected with the retroviral supernatant.
Transformed foci were identified and the genomic DNA from transformed
foci was extracted for sequencing. 2) The mRNA and protein levels of
candidate genes were examined using real time RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry in 62 cases of ovarian carcinoma tissues. 3) The
PCR-direct sequencing was performed in 24 cases of clear carcinoma cell
samples. 4) Transforming activity of isolated genes was evaluated using
NIH3T3 cells.[Results] 1) Among 20 genes isolated from the transformed
cells, we focused on two genes, Sec61B (protein translocation regulator
in ER) and C1ORF38 (Toll-like receptor modulator). In addition, mutations
in DVL1 (Wnt signal modulator) were found in C-terminal region. 2). The
mRNA levels of three candidate genes and the protein expression of Sec61B
andC1ORF38 were two to three-fold increased (p<.005) in clear cell
carcinoma compared with other histological subtypes including serous,
mucinous endometrioid carcinomas. 3) Only one case had the point mutation
in DVL1 gene in clear cell carcinoma samples. 4) Forced expression of
Sec61B or C1ORF38 using pMEI/Neo vector resulted in plaque formation of
NIH3T3 cells.[Conclusions] We identified C1ORF38 and Sec61B as possible
functional genes in ovarian clear cell carcinogenesis using
retrovirus-based cDNA expression library. C1ORF38 and Sec61B were
over-expressed in ovarian clear cell carcinoma compared with other
histological subtypes. Further study is warranted to characterize the
functions of these genes in clear cell carcinoma.

