Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ZNF24 may modulate microvascular endothelial cell invasion by
regulating MMP2 transcription.


ZNF24 is a C2H2 zinc finger transcription factor that regulates
angiogenesis by repressing the transcription of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF). It has also been implicated in the control of cell
proliferation and differentiation in the central nervous system and in
hepatocellular carcinoma. In the current study, we have focused on the
role of ZNF24 in modulating endothelial cell motility. We have found that
silencing of ZNF24 in human microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC) leads
to significantly decreased cell migration and invasion. Consistently, the
protein level and proteolytic activity of matrix metalloproteinase-2
(MMP2), but not those of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9), are
significantly downregulated when ZNF24 is silenced in these cells. We
have also determined the effect of ZNF24 silencing on the mRNA levels of
endogenous inhibitors of MMPs, the tissue inhibitors of
metalloproteinases (TIMPs). While TIMP1 and TIMP4 levels are moderately
upregulated by ZNF24 silencing, the level of TIMP2, a major regulator of
MMP2 proteolytic activity, and that of TIMP3, are significantly
decreased. However, ZNF24 siRNA induces only a moderate decrease in the
protein level of TIMP2, suggesting that TIMP2 does not play an important
role in the regulation of MMP9 activity by ZNF24. Another major regulator
of MMP2 proteolytic activity, membrane-type-1 matrix metalloproteinase
(MT1-MMP), also does not exhibit significant changes when ZNF24 is
silenced, suggesting that MMP2 is regulated by ZNF24 at the
transcriptional level. Indeed, the mRNA level of MMP2 is significantly
downregulated when cells are transfected with ZNF24 siRNA, indicating
that ZNF24 positively regulates the transcription of MMP2. When compared
to normal endothelial cells, tumor endothelial cells exhibit higher
levels of endogenous ZNF24, suggesting that ZNF24 may function to
increase cell invasion in these cells via upregulation of MMP2. Our
current studies are focused on determining whether MMP2 is a direct
downstream target of ZNF24 as well as on its role(s) in modulating
endothelial cell motility in vivo. (Supported by NIH P01 CA045548, the
Breast Cancer Research Foundation and the Advanced Medical Research
Foundation)

