Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia induces accumulation of lysosomal proteins within
mitochondria.


Mitochondrial quality control (MQC) plays a critical role in maintaining
a healthy status of mitochondria, preventing aging, cancer, and a variety
of degenerative diseases. However, the mechanism largely remains unclear.
Recently, we discovered a novel MQC mechanism regulated by Mieap, a
p53-inducible protein, in which Mieap induces intramitochondrial
lysosome-like organella that plays a critical role in the elimination of
oxidized mitochondrial proteins (designated MALM for Mieap-induced
accumulation of lysosome-like organelles within mitochondria) in response
to mitochondrial damage (1-4). Here, we report a physiological role of
the MALM function. Hypoxia dramatically induced accumulation of lysosomal
proteins within mitochondria without the destruction of mitochondrial
structure in both human normal mammary epithelial cells (HMEC4s) and
mouse embryonic fibroblasts cells (MEFs). In response to the hypoxic
stress, the MALM was inducible in ATG5-KO, ATG7-KO, and PINK1-KO MEFs,
but not in p53-KO and Mieap-KO MEFs, suggesting that the phenomenon is
completely different from canonical autophagy. In the MALM-deficient
cells, hypoxia caused an increase of mitochondrial reactive oxygen
species (ROS) generation and accumulation of oxidized proteins within the
mitochondria. Surprisingly, the MALM-deficient cells in the hypoxic
condition revealed enhanced activities of cell migration and invasion.
This phenotype was totally cancelled by a ROS scavenger reagent, Ebselen.
These results suggest that the MALM is a universal and fundamental
function in the cell (at least from mouse to human), which plays a
critical role in MQC under hypoxia. Alteration of the MALM function in
cancer cells could facilitate cancer invasion and metastasis via
mitochondrial ROS generated by unhealthy mitochondria.1. Miyamoto Y et
al. PLoS ONE 6: e16054, 20112. Kitamura N et al. PLoS ONE 6: e16060,
20113. Nakamura Y et al. PLoS ONE 7: e30767, 20124. Miyamoto T et al. Sci
Rep 2: 379, 2012

