Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of AR activation status on the DNA damage response.


Recent evidence implicates the androgen receptor (AR) as a critical
modulator of the DNA damage response in prostate cancer. Treatment for
locally advanced disease depends on combined radiation therapy and
ablation of AR function, and clinical evidence strongly supports the
contention that active AR reduces the response to radiotherapy. Moreover,
it was reported in vitro that AR activation can induce DNA damage at
sites of active transcription, thus providing additional evidence for
crosstalk between the DNA damage response and AR pathways. Despite these
observations, the underpinning mechanism by which AR alters the response
to DNA damage remains unknown.Several lines of evidence will be discussed
which illuminate a role for AR in the response to DNA damage. First,
investigation in a battery of hormone-therapy sensitive prostate cancer
cells (in which AR activity remains dependent on ligand binding) and in
castrate resistant tumor cells (reflecting advanced disease wherein AR
activity is enhanced) showed that androgen depletion enhances the
response to ionizing radiation. Restoration of dihydrotestosterone
reduced the response to radiation, thus demonstrating that ligand-induced
AR activity promotes a resistance to radiation. Second, the mechanism by
which AR promotes radioresistance was addressed. Preliminary findings
indicate that in the presence of DNA damage, AR dramatically alters the
rate of DNA damage repair independent of significant effects on cell
cycle. Moreover, these studies uncovered an unexpected role for
androgen-activated AR to alter expression and subsequent activity of
genes critical for the DNA damage response, possibly through differential
recruitment of AR to loci of key players in the response to damage.
Finally, a series radioresistant prostate cancer model systems were
developed, wherein the impact of AR on acquired radioresistance is under
investigation; early studies in these models indicate that altered AR
output is associated with acquired radioresistance. Combined, the studies
to be presented reveal novel functions of androgen and AR in controlling
the molecular and cellular response to DNA damage, and provide the basis
for future studies directed at targeting DNA-damage specific AR activity
in the course of human disease.

