Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related transcription factor
ZEB suppresses Claudin expression in breast cancer cells.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is classified as a heterogeneous
group, because TNBCs are defined as breast cancer negative for the
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor, and human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2 (HER2). We show that TNBC cell lines can be divided
into those which express the repressor of transcription Zinc finger E-box
binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) and the tight junction protein claudin-1. ZEB1
has been identified as a key transcription factor eliciting
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer progression. We found
that knockdowns of ZEB1 in TNBC cells induce an epithelial-like
morphology and induce the mRNA expression of claudin-1.> The claudin
family is the principal constituent of tight junctions in epithelial
cells. We also found that ZEB1 binds to a claudin-1 promoter sequence by
DNA-mediated pull-down assay. Furthermore, in breast cancer specimens, we
observed a reciprocal expression of ZEB1 and claudin-1. These findings
suggest that ZEB1 represses claudin-1 expressions in TNBCs. We then
analyzed the association of clinical outcomes with ZEB1 and claudin-1
expressions by using a publicly available gene expression database of
breast cancer patients. The overall survival rates in the category which
tested positive for ZEB1 and claudin-1 is poor. To further characterize
the effects of ZEB1-positive breast cancer cells on this phenotype of
cancer, we investigated tumor formations following the co-inoculation of
ZEB1-expressing MDA-MB-231 cells and claudin-1-expressing HCC1937 cells
into nude mice. Although HCC1937 cells alone didn't form tumors in our
orthotopic xenograft models, tumor formations were observed when the
cells were mixed with MDA-MB-231 cells. These data suggest that the
ZEB1-expressing breast cancer cells do promote tumorigenicity of
claudin-1-positive cancer cells. We hypothesized that the heterogeneity
on gene expressions within the tumor tissue is associated with malignancy
and therapeutic resistance of breast cancers.

