Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGF9 overexpression promotes tumorigenic potential of non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells, and is associated with poor prognosis in
NSCLC patients.


Background. Fibroblast growth factor 9 (FGF9) is a member of the FGF
family, which modulates cell proliferation, differentiation and motility.
Recent studies show that activation of FGF signals including FGF9 is
associated with pathogenesis of several cancers. In lung cancer, some
reports showed that FGF9 indirectly promoted the growth of lung
adenocarcinoma and the intensity of FGF9 staining was positively
correlated with the status of disease and the degree of lymph node
metastasis in lung adenocarcinoma patients. However, the direct effect of
FGF9 on the development and growth of lung cancer has not been
clear.Purpose. The purpose of this study is to clarify the role of FGF9
in NSCLC.Method. First, we have performed in vitro analysis to clarify
the role of FGF9 in NSCLC. FGF9 was introduced by retroviral infection to
make stable cell lines. The cell lines which express no or low FGF9 were
selected for the study, namely A549, PC9 and H1975. Overexpression of
FGF9 in these cells was confirmed at mRNA and protein levels. Tumorigenic
potential was evaluated by soft agar colony formation assay. The effect
on proliferation of NSCLC cells was evaluated by MTS proliferation
assay.Next, patients survival analysis was also performed to evaluate the
effect of FGF9 on the prognosis of NSCLC patients. NSCLC specimens were
obtained from 91 patients who underwent surgical resection at Department
of Thoracic Surgery, Keio University Hospital from 2001 through 2006 with
written informed consent. We have performed cDNA microarray gene
expression analysis. Patient survival data was evaluated by genes
expression profile.Results. Of the cells studied, A549 with FGF9
overexpression (A549-FGF9) cells significantly increased the anchorage
independent colony formation ability compared with A549-empty cells. The
numbers of the colonies were significantly higher in A549-FGF9, and the
size of the colonies was bigger compared with A549-empty. For patient
study, we found 10 out of 91 (11.0%) NSCLC patients overexpressed FGF9.
We found FGF9 overexpression was associated with significantly worse
prognosis (p=0.001). While none of other FGFs and FGFRs was associated
with the prognosis of the patients. Three-year survival rate of FGF9-high
patient group and FGF9-low patient group were 40% and 88% respectively.
The rate of relapse was significantly higher in FGF9-high patients
compared with FGF9-low patients, 60% vs 36.2% (p=0.016).Conclusion. Our
in vitro and clinical data indicate that FGF-9 may promote tumorigenic
potential, and can be a prognostic indicator in NSCLC patients.

