Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BAY-ACC001, a novel ACC inhibitor, regulates fatty acids synthesis
and lipid survival signaling with promising in vitro and in vivo
activities in multiple preclinical tumor models.


Unlike normal cells, tumors undergo intensified de novo biogenesis of
fatty acids (FAs) irrespective of the available circulating lipids.
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 (ACC) controls the rate limiting step in FA
synthesis. ACC1 is up-regulated in a variety of human tumors and strongly
associated with poorer prognosis in some tumor indications. Although
targeting lipogenesis for cancer treatment appeared having strong
rationale, drug discovery in this field has not been fully explored due
to the lack of powerful tools for both evaluation and understanding the
mode of action. Here we report the identification and the functional
characterization of a highly selective ACC inhibitor BAY-ACC001, a
ketoenol derivative using various pharmacological and lipidomic
approaches to address the mechanism of ACC inhibition in cancer cells and
its efficacy in preclinical tumor models. BAY-ACC001 inhibits human ACC1
and ACC1 with biochemical IC50s of 278 nM and 2590 nM measured by ACC1-
or ACC2- mediated generation of ADP, respectively. In a cellular
mechanistic assay using MCF7 tumor cells, BAY-ACC001 potently inhibited
malonyl-CoA synthesis with an IC50 of 62 nM. Profiling BAY-ACC001 in a
panel of 100 tumor cell lines revealed strong anti-proliferative activity
in a sub-set of tumor cell lines with IC50s at low 3-digit nanomolar. Of
note, in contrast to the potent activity in tumor cell lines, e.g.
apoptosis induction in MCF7 breast tumor cells, ACC inhibitor showed only
weak anti-proliferative effect and could not induce apoptosis in a set of
non-transformed mammary epithelial cells. To elucidate the anti-tumor
MoA, the levels of lipid components (400 lipid molecules) in MCF7 cells
were analyzed using lipidomic technology. Interestingly, ACC inhibition
did not lead to a simple depletion of lipid in cells, evident from a
significant increase in tumor apoptosis-related lipid signaling molecules
ceramides. These results suggested a bi-direction linkage between FA
synthesis and the regulation of tumor cell survival. Single
administration of BAY-ACC001 orally at 10 mg/kg (the maximum tolerable
dose is 30 mg/kg, BID) in mice strongly reduced malonyl CoA levels in
tumors. Treatment of BAY-ACC001 as single agent was efficacious in
multiple tumor models, including MCF7 (breast), PC3 (prostate), HCT116
(colon) and MDA-MB-435 (melanoma) xenograft models; partial tumor
remissions observed in MCF7 model. Furthermore, combination with
Tamoxifen was synergistic in the MCF7 tumor model in vitro and in vivo.
In conclusion, the prevalence of the exacerbated de novo FA synthesis
observed in primary and metastatic tumors, the ACC-mediated novel
survival signal transduction discovered in this study, and robust in
vitro and in vivo anti-tumor activity of BAY-ACC001 provide a strong
rationale for developing novel therapeutics targeting ACC for cancer
treatment.

