Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a novel cell type in human renal proximal
tubules with connection to renal cell carcinoma development.


The proximal tubular segments of the kidney are extremely energy
demanding, rendering this epithelium exceptionally sensitive to ischemic
insults. Acute renal injury is a potentially life threatening condition,
where the tubular cells detach and die. However, the tubules of injured
kidneys have a substantial regenerative ability, and epithelial
continuity, can with proper supportive care be restored. The cellular
source of regeneration has been debated and until now the proximal
tubules has been considered a completely homogenous cellular
epithelium.Using an assay based on aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity
followed by FACS, we have recently discovered a cell with progenitor cell
characteristics scattered within the proximal tubules of the kidney.
These novel proximal tubule rare cells (PTRCs) expressed stem cell
markers CD133 and CD24, as well as intermediate filaments not normally
seen in PTs. The gene expression profile of these cells shows a striking
resemblance to that of papillary renal cell carcinoma (pRCC) and the gene
signatures are also associated with a worse prognosis in clear cell renal
carcinoma. Additionally, cells positive for PTRC-markers were seen in
regenerating tubules after acute kidney injury. We have characterized
these cells further at an ultra structural level, using electron
microscopy. The cells were small, flask shaped and had a more densely
packed chromatin pattern and drastically fewer mitochondria than the
surrounding proximal tubular cells, indicating a different metabolic
state. We suggest that these cells, in contrast to the surrounding highly
oxygen dependent proximal tubular cells, constitute renal reserve cell
pool capable of surviving ischemic renal injury with a capacity to
spearhead subsequent tubular repopulation. We suggest that the increased
probability for survival of these cells is due to their low mitochondrial
content, structural robustness and anti-apoptotic signaling. Also, due to
the considerable transcriptional similarities between pRCC, renal
adenomas and the PTRCs we hypothesize that pRCC may arise through
multistep oncogenic transformation of PTRCs.

