Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of 15-Hydroxyprostaglandin Dehydrogenase in
Helicobacter pylori-infected rt gastric mucosa cells and its restoration
by curcumin.


Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) have been known to cause gastritis and
promote gastric cancer development. H.pylori infection causes
overproduction of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which has been implicated in
inflammation and carcinogenesis. The intracellular level of PGE2 is
regulated not only by its biosynthesis, but also by degradation.
15-Hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (15-PGDH) is the key enzyme that
catalyzes the first step of PGE2 degradation.In the present study, we
have observed that H. pylori suppressed the expression of 15-PGDH in rat
gastric mucosa (RGM)-1 cells. By using deletion constructs of 15-PGDH
promoter, we found that the Ets-binding site is the most essential
determinant of 15-PGDH expression in RGM-1 cells. H. pylori infection
suppressed the phosphorylation of Elk-1, a major transcription factor of
the Ets family. Notably, curcumin, a yellow coloring agent present in the
rhizome of Curcuma longa Linn (Zingiberaceae) with anti-inflammatory
activity, induced expression of 15-PGDH in RGM-1 cells. We have found
that activator protein-1 (AP-1) is the most critical transcription factor
responsible for curcumin-induced upregulation of 15-PGDH expression.
Curcumin enhanced the expression of c-Jun and c-Fos, which are functional
subunits of AP-1, in the nuclear fraction of RGM-1 cells. Knockdown of
c-jun abrogated curcumin-induced expression of 15-PGDH. Curcumin induced
phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2) and
c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK1/2), but did not affect the
phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) in RGM-1
cells. Pharmacologic inhibition of each of above kinases abolished the
curcumin-induced expression of c-Jun and 15-PGDH in RGM-1 cells. In
another study, tetrahydrocurcumin which lacks the ,-unsaturated carbonyl
group failed to upregulate the expression 15-PGDH, suggesting that the
electrophilic carbonyl moiety of curcumin plays a critical role in its
induction of 15-PGDH expression in RGM-1 cells. Moreover, oral
administration of curcumin increased the expression of 15-PGDH in the
total protein lysate and enhanced the expression of c-Jun, c-Fos and CREB
in the nuclear fraction of the mouse stomach. Curcumin again induced
phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and JNK1/2, but did not affect that of p38 MAPK
in the mouse stomach in vivo. Taken together, our study suggests that
down-regulation of 15-PGDH expression induced by H. pylori infection may
contribute, at least in part, to development of gastritis and gastric
cancer, and upregulation of 15-PGDH expression by curcumin can account
for the chemopreventive effect of this phytochemical on
inflammation-associated gastric carcinogenesis.

