Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of histone demethylase GASC1 in promoting prostate cancer
progression.


Prostate cancer affects 1 in 6 American men, and is the second leading
cause of cancer-related deaths in males. The defiance of
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) to currently available
treatments represents the most challenging aspect of this disease.
Although resistant to androgen deprivation treatment, most CRPCs continue
to express the androgen receptor (AR) and remain dependent on AR
signaling for growth and proliferation. Previously, we cloned a novel
gene, GASC1 (gene amplified in squamous cell carcinoma 1), from 9p24
amplified cancer cells. Recently, the GASC1 protein has been identified
as a key histone demethylase that controls chromatin-mediated regulation
of gene expression. Importantly, the GASC1 protein interacts with the AR
and serves as a co-activator of AR-induced transcription in prostate
cells. In this study, we demonstrated that various aggressive tumors,
including CRPCs, have upregulated GASC1. We used an shRNA approach to
determine whether GASC1 knockdown would affect the proliferation and
transformation of CRPC cell lines. We found that knocking down GASC1
inhibits growth and colony formation of CRPC cells (C4-2B and CWR22Rv1)
in vitro. Previously, it was reported that the GASC1 protein interacts
with the AR and functions as a co-activator of AR-induced transcription
in LNCaP cells. The GASC1 protein contains N-terminal Jumonji catalytic
domains and C-terminal Tudor and PHD domains; however, which domains are
responsible for the association of GASC1 with the AR have not yet been
identified. To address this question, we generated stable LNCaP cell
lines expressing V5-tagged N-terminal Jumonji catalytic domains and
C-Terminal PHD/Tudor domains, and performed Co-IP analyses. We found that
the C-terminal region is essential for GASC1 association with the AR in
prostate cancer cells. To explore the contribution of GASC1 to endogenous
AR-regulated gene expression in AR-positive CRPC cells, we performed
quantitative RT-PCR assays to measure the expression of both classical AR
target genes (including PSA/KLK3, KLK2, FKBP5, and NDRG1) and
CRPC-specific genes (including UBE2C, CDK1, CDC20, and CCNA2) in C4-2B
cells with or without GASC1 knockdown. We found that knocking down GASC1
significantly reduced transcript levels of a set of classical and
CRPC-specific AR target genes in either the presence or absence of the AR
ligand. Our data demonstrates that GASC1 is a target of substantial
relevance to aggressive prostate cancers, including CRPCs. As such,
targeting GASC1 is a promising strategy to control CRPC or prevent its
emergence.

