Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3K pathway dependencies in endometrioid endometrial cancer.


Background: Endometrioid endometrial cancers (EECs) frequently harbor
coexisting mutations in PI3K pathway genes, including PTEN, PIK3CA,
PIK3R1, and KRAS. We sought to determine the genetic determinants of PI3K
pathway inhibitor response in EEC cells, and whether PTEN-mutant EEC
cells rely on p110 signaling for survival. Methods: Twenty-four human EEC
cell lines were characterized for their mutation profile using the
Sequenom OncoCarta Panel v1.0 and Sanger sequencing for PTEN, PIK3CA, and
PIK3R1 transcripts, and their protein and phospho-protein expression
levels of PI3K and MAPK signaling pathway components. The cell line panel
was treated with pan-class I PI3K, p110 and p110 isoform-specific,
allosteric mTOR, mTOR kinase, dual PI3K/mTOR, MEK and RAF inhibitors, and
the correlations between protein expression, gene mutations, and
sensitivity to targeted therapeutics determined. RNA interference was
employed to assess effects of KRAS silencing on EEC cells. Results: The
prevalence of PI3K pathway mutations in the EEC cell line panel studied
mirrored that reported for primary EECs. PI3K pathway activation as
determined by levels of AKTSer473 phosphorylation was significantly
associated with PTEN but not PIK3CA or KRAS mutation status. EEC cell
lines harboring PIK3CA and PTEN mutations were selectively sensitive to
the pan-class I PI3K inhibitor GDC-0941 and allosteric mTOR inhibitor
Temsirolimus, respectively. Subsets of EEC cells with concurrent PIK3CA
and/or PTEN and KRAS mutations were sensitive to PI3K pathway inhibition.
Only 2/6 KRAS-mutant EEC cell lines showed response to MEK inhibition,
and KRAS siRNA silencing did not induce apoptosis in KRAS-mutant EEC
cells. EEC cell lines harboring PTEN mutations were resistant to the p110
inhibitors GSK2636771 and AZD6482, and only combination with the p110
selective inhibitor A66 resulted in a decrease in cell viability.
Conclusions: Our findings provide evidence to suggest that selective
pan-PI3K and mTOR inhibition in EEC cells may be most effective in
PIK3CA- and PTEN-mutant cancers, respectively, and that these PI3K
inhibitors may even be effective in a subset of EECs concurrently
harboring KRAS mutations. Our results further demonstrate that p110
inhibition alone is not sufficient to sensitize PTEN-mutant EEC cells,
suggesting that combination with other targeted agents may be required to
increase efficacy.

