Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA variation at BARD1 predicts response to aurora kinase
inhibition in neuroblastoma.


Background: Neuroblastoma remains responsible for a disproportionately
high number of pediatric cancer deaths, necessitating novel treatment
approaches. Our lab has previously reported DNA variations in the
BRCA1-associated RING domain 1 (BARD1) gene to be significantly
associated with high-risk neuroblastoma in an ongoing genome-wide
association study (Capasso Nat Gen 2009). The expression of an oncogenic
isoform, BARD1, correlated with this disease associated common variation,
and isoform specific depletion showed differential growth inhibition in a
risk haplotype dependent manner (Bosse Can Res 2012). Furthermore, this
isoform was shown to bind to and stabilized aurora kinase A and B in
neuroblastoma cells, suggesting a mechanism for its oncogenicity and a
potential therapeutic strategy.Methods: Short interfering RNAs (siRNAs)
targeting AURKA, AURKB and BARD1 were tested individually in a panel of
neuroblastoma cell lines (n=8) stratified by risk haplotype. Cell growth
was measured by real time cell electronic sensing (RT-CES), and mRNA
knockdown was confirmed by quantitative PCR. The pharmacologic inhibitors
MLN8237, a selective aurora kinase A inhibitor; AZD1152, a selective
aurora kinase B inhibitor; and CCT137690, a pan-aurora kinase A and B
inhibitor were tested in vitro in an expanded neuroblastoma cell line
panel (n=10), and cell viability was measured with a CellTiter-Glo(R)
Luminescent Cell Viability Assay.Results: AURKB knockdown resulted in a
trend of greater growth inhibition in neuroblastoma cell lines harboring
a BARD1 risk haplotype, directly correlating with growth inhibition
following BARD1 knockdown (R2=0.57, p=0.03). AURKA depletion showed
significant growth inhibition (mean inhibition=45%, pBackground:
Neuroblastoma remains responsible for a disproportionately high number of
pediatric cancer deaths, necessitating novel treatment approaches. Our
lab has previously reported DNA variations in the BRCA1-associated RING
domain 1 (BARD1) gene to be significantly associated with high-risk
neuroblastoma in an ongoing genome-wide association study (Capasso Nat
Gen 2009). The expression of an oncogenic isoform, BARD1, correlated with
this disease associated common variation, and isoform specific depletion
showed differential growth inhibition in a risk haplotype dependent
manner (Bosse Can Res 2012). Furthermore, this isoform was shown to bind
to and stabilized aurora kinase A and B in neuroblastoma cells,
suggesting a mechanism for its oncogenicity and a potential therapeutic
strategy.Methods: Short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting AURKA, AURKB
and BARD1 were tested individually in a panel of neuroblastoma cell lines
(n=8) stratified by risk haplotype. Cell growth was measured by real time
cell electronic sensing (RT-CES), and mRNA knockdown was confirmed by
quantitative PCR. The pharmacologic inhibitors MLN8237, a selective
aurora kinase A inhibitor; AZD1152, a selective aurora kinase B
inhibitor; and CCT137690, a pan-aurora kinase A and B inhibitor were
tested in vitro in an expanded neuroblastoma cell line panel (n=10), and
cell viability was measured with a CellTiter-Glo(R) Luminescent Cell
Viability Assay.Results: AURKB knockdown resulted in a trend of greater
growth inhibition in neuroblastoma cell lines harboring a BARD1 risk
haplotype, directly correlating with growth inhibition following BARD1
knockdown (R2=0.57, p=0.03). AURKA depletion showed significant growth
inhibition (mean inhibition=45%, p<0.0001), but no correlation with BARD1
genotype was observed. Aurora A kinase inhibition with MLN8237 resulted
in significant cytotoxicity (IC50 30 -750nM), and further analysis of
published studies using MLN8237 in vivo on murine xenograft models of
neuroblastoma showed that the cell lines with the BARD1 risk haplotype
had significantly greater tumor reduction with this single agent therapy.
AZD1152 and CCT137690 were less potent inhibitors of growth (IC50
30nM-10mM and 250nM-3mM, respectively).Conclusion: Taken together, these
data support a model of BARD1 acting in a pathway involving the aurora
kinase proteins in neuroblastoma cells, suggesting that BARD1 genotypes
have the potential to be a biomarker of aurora kinase inhibitor activity,
but the associations are complex and unlikely to be binary predictors of
sensitivity or insensitivity. These data support the continued
investigation of MLN8237 in clinical trials for high-risk neuroblastoma
and further exploration of the mechanisms by which DNA variation at BARD1
influences neuroblastoma oncogenicity and therapeutic vulnerabilities.

