Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a multiplex quantitative immunofluorescence assay
to evaluate DNA damage repair deficient models in vitro and in vivo and
the response to cytotoxic agents.


The use of DNA damaging agents remains a mainstay in cancer therapy.
Deletions and mutations of key DNA repair proteins in tumor cells, can
dictate which of the DNA damage repair (DDR) processes will be critical
following exposure to cytotoxic agents. Quantitation of repair pathway
activation after drug treatment builds upon our validated qIFA for H2AX,
which scores individual nuclei as positive or negative for that biomarker
and calculates the percent of nuclear area positive for H2AX per imaged
field. We have previously reported a prototype multiplex quantitative
immunoflourescence assay (qIFA) for biomarkers of active Homologous
Recombination (HR) and Nucleotide Excision Repair (NER) pathways. This
first qIFA multiplex panel to quantify DDR response has been expanded to
include Rad51, a key component of HR in addition to Nbs1 phosphorylated
at S343 and H2AX, both early markers of DNA double strand breaks, and
ERCC1, critical to NER response. The assay currently in development uses
highly specific antibodies directly conjugated to fluorophores or
haptens, thereby eliminating the requirement for cross-absorbed
anti-species antibodies. This in turn decreases reagent-caused
autofluorescence and greatly simplifies assay QC. Addition of the
Definiens analysis software has enhanced analysis of the DNA damage
markers, including the ability to count foci per nucleus over an entire
image field incorporating thousands of data points at a high-content
capacity. This approach is useful in quantifying markers that occupy only
a small intranuclear area, such as Rad51 foci, where total nuclear area
measurements are less informative. Initial experiments using the
multiplex qIFA in vitro were performed on cell lines characterized for
DNA damage repair pathway defects. Differences in DNA damage marker Rad51
were observed between BRCA1 expressing and deleted cell lines
post-irradiation, demonstrating utility of the marker. Examination of in
vivo models revealed a differential activation of DDR pathways in
irinotecan-treated xenograft samples of a BRCA-deficient tumor model,
demonstrating the importance of using a multiplex approach in monitoring
DNA damage. Our results suggest that monitoring markers from multiple DNA
repair pathways using a multiplex approach could lead to important
insights into global DNA repair responses in tumors. This assay will be
expanded to clinical trials that obtain biopsies to assist in the
evaluation of combination therapy approaches targeting DDR deficiencies.
Funded by NCI Contract No. HHSN261200800001E.

