Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of multiple cellular stresses by the NO generating
antineoplastic agent JS-K.


The NO prodrug O2-(2,4-dinitrophenyl)
1-[(4-ethoxycarbonyl)piperazin-1-yl]diazen-1-ium-1,2-diolate or JS-K is
active against acute myeloid leukemia (AML), multiple myeloma,
hepatocellular carcinoma, prostate cancer, glioma and non-small lung
cancer. We have developed a nanoscale micelle formulation for JS-K
(P123/JS-K) using Pluronic P123 polymers to stabilize and solubilize the
drug. In the present study, the mechanism of action of JS-K was
investigated. We speculated that, being a NO-releasing drug, JS-K causes
nitrosative/oxidative stress. We therefore hypothesized that JS-K causes
multiple stress responses that ultimately trigger apoptosis in the cell.
We also hypothesized that JS-K affects the intrinsic component (defined
as cell cycle, survival and stress pathways in the cell) of leukemic
cells.In this work, using human myeloid leukemia HL-60 cells, we studied
the effect of JS-K on two major cellular stresses, namely ER stress and
nitrosative/oxidative stress. On treating HL-60 cells with 5M JS-K
formulated in DMSO (JS-K) or P123/JS-K for 4-8 hours, activation of both
GRP-78 and CHOP (markers of ER stress) was observed using western blot
analysis. ER stress could also be triggered by phosphorylation of JNK
protein. Again, using western blot analysis, JNK phosphorylation was
observed when HL60 cells were treated with JS-K or P123/JS-K for 4-6
hours. Oxidative stress was studied by quantifying intracellular levels
of reactive oxygen/reactive nitrogen species (ROS/RNS) using the ROS/RNS
sensitive fluorophore
5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-2-7-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate.
Treatment of HL-60 cells with 5M of JS-K or P123/JS-K for 30, 60 or 120
minutes lead to increased levels of ROS/RNS.These experiments show that
JS-K activates the intrinsic component of cell death by producing ER
stress and oxidative stress. JS-K is at an advanced stage of pre-clinical
development. Its novel and multiple mechanisms of action make it an
attractive therapy for the treatment of AML and other malignancies.

