Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Promoter hypermethylation of zinc finger proteins is the novel
epigenetic biomarkers of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas.


Objective: Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC) is the fifth
most common cancer worldwide with five-year survival rate of 50% despite
use of modern treatment modalities. We have employed a comprehensive
genome-wide integrated analysis of epigenetic and transcriptional
alteration in primary HNSCC tissues in order to discover novel biomarkers
of this disease.Experimental Design: A discovery cohort included 44
primary HNSCC and 25 normal mucosal samples was analyzed by Affymetrix
GeneChip Human Exon 1.0 and Illumina Infinium Human Methylation 27
arrays. An independent validation cohort included 32 primary HNSCC and 15
normal mucosal samples to confirm differential methylation by bisulfate
sequencing. A second validation cohort included salivary rinse and
primary tissue from 59 HNSCC and 31 healthy patients. Detection of DNA
methylation in bodily fluids and primary tissues from the later cohort
was evaluated by quantitative methylation-specific PCR (qMSP).Results: We
have applied novel screening approach based on Cancer Outlier Profile
Analysis (COPA) and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) to our array data
for the discovery cohort. With use of this approach we determined 81
significant differentially expressed and 37 significant differentially
methylated genes. Out of total 118 candidate genes we picked 36 tumor
suppressing genes with strong correlation between hypermethylation and
decrease of expression in tumor samples. 26 out of 36 genes (72%)
demonstrated strong differential methylation in tumor samples that was
confirmed on the independent validation cohort by bisulfate sequencing.
Five of these 26 genes belong to Zinc Finger Proteins (ZNF) group. We
analyzed the detection of the promoter methylation of ZNF14, ZNF160 and
ZNF420 in salivary rinse of HNSCC and healthy patients. DNA methylation
of at least one of ZNFs promoter was detected in HNSCC patients salivary
rinses with sensitivity of 22% (95% CI: 12.3%-34.7%) and specificity 100%
(95% CI: 89.9%-100%). Overall frequency and concordance of detection of
DNA methylation from at least one ZNFs promoter in salivary rinse with
signal found in primary tissues was 35.3% and 92.3%, respectively. ZNF
methylation was strongly associated with oral cavity SCC (p =
0.0049).Conclusions: Our new screening approach allowed the
identification of at least 36 candidate tumor suppressor genes aberrantly
methylated and transcriptionally suppressed in HNSCC. Promoter
hypermethylation for three ZNF genes in salivary rinse was detected with
100% specificity to HNSCC and may be a valuable salivary rinse biomarker
for HNSCC incidence and recurrence, especially among high-risk group
population.

