Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA-seq reveals association of pCR and changes in lncRNA
expression in pre-operative bevacizumab treatment of breast cancer.


Background: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are pervasively transcribed in
the genome yet their role in human disease is not well understood. Recent
studies show that expression of the lncRNA HOTAIR is increased in primary
breast tumors and is a predictor of metastasis. However, to date, it is
unclear how changes in lncRNA expression with treatment correlate with
response. We performed an RNA-seq study to characterize changes in lncRNA
expression following exposure to chemotherapy or biologic therapy and
evaluate association to achievement of pathologic complete response (pCR)
to neoadjuvant therapy.Methods: We sequenced transcriptomes of core
biopsy RNA from 50 pairs of breast tumors obtained from neoadjuvant
clinical trials BrUOG 211A/211B. Patients were given a run-in dose of
bevacizumab (B), nab-paclitaxel (N) or trastuzumab (T), followed by
combination biologic/chemotherapy (HER2- with B/carboplatin/N; HER2+ with
T/carboplatin/N). RNA was derived from biopsy pairs obtained pre/post 10
day exposure to run-in monotherapy. Paired-end sequencing was performed
with 74bp read length, yielding genome-wide transcriptomic data.
Transcriptomic abundance and differential expression were estimated
assuming Poisson-distributed read-counts. Paired-end sequence data was
aligned to a lncRNA database containing 14,572 unique lncRNAs. Changes in
relative abundance of lncRNA transcripts were tested for association with
pCR using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test.Results: On average, in each patient
1500 lncRNAs were differentially expressed between pre and post samples
(pBackground: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are pervasively transcribed
in the genome yet their role in human disease is not well understood.
Recent studies show that expression of the lncRNA HOTAIR is increased in
primary breast tumors and is a predictor of metastasis. However, to date,
it is unclear how changes in lncRNA expression with treatment correlate
with response. We performed an RNA-seq study to characterize changes in
lncRNA expression following exposure to chemotherapy or biologic therapy
and evaluate association to achievement of pathologic complete response
(pCR) to neoadjuvant therapy.Methods: We sequenced transcriptomes of core
biopsy RNA from 50 pairs of breast tumors obtained from neoadjuvant
clinical trials BrUOG 211A/211B. Patients were given a run-in dose of
bevacizumab (B), nab-paclitaxel (N) or trastuzumab (T), followed by
combination biologic/chemotherapy (HER2- with B/carboplatin/N; HER2+ with
T/carboplatin/N). RNA was derived from biopsy pairs obtained pre/post 10
day exposure to run-in monotherapy. Paired-end sequencing was performed
with 74bp read length, yielding genome-wide transcriptomic data.
Transcriptomic abundance and differential expression were estimated
assuming Poisson-distributed read-counts. Paired-end sequence data was
aligned to a lncRNA database containing 14,572 unique lncRNAs. Changes in
relative abundance of lncRNA transcripts were tested for association with
pCR using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test.Results: On average, in each patient
1500 lncRNAs were differentially expressed between pre and post samples
(p<0.05). Within each treatment arm 600-700 lncRNAs were differentially
expressed across a majority of the patients (65%). There are many lncRNAs
common among the three treatment arms (80% overlap). Genes from the
transcribed loci are enriched in Kegg pathways such as primary
immunodeficiency, cytosolic DNA sensing, B-cell receptor signaling and
T-cell receptor signaling. For the B arm, where response data was
available, we identified 38 lncRNAs for which change in level of
expression correlated with pCR after multiple hypothesis correction, of
which 25 were differentially expressed in the other treatment arms.
Previously characterized lncRNAs in breast cancer, MEG3 and GAS5 were
identified to be uniquely associated with response in the B
arm.Discussion: This is the first study to report that changes in lncRNA
expression upon brief exposure to B are associated with achievement of
pCR to subsequent neoadjuvant therapy. The overlapping changes in lncRNAs
across different treatment arms suggest systematic lncRNA-mediated
mechanisms at play. These preliminary observations need to be explored in
a larger group of patients. Next generation sequencing technologies will
likely allow further characterization of lncRNAs leading to improved
methods of stratifying, subclassifying and managing breast cancers.

