Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docosahexaenoic acid-induced oxidative stress increases cellular
apoptosis through a c-MYC-dependent mechanism in breast cancer.


MYC is a potent oncogene that transcriptionally regulates 15 percent of
the genome and is found to be deregulated in approximately 70 percent of
cancers (c-MYC), including breast cancer. Activation of c-MYC induces
association between its required partners, MYC-associated factor X (MAX)
or MAX dimerization protein (MAD), regulating pro-survival and
pro-apoptotic pathways, respectively. c-MYC has proved to be a difficult
molecular target of inhibition. Only recently have there been strategies
providing a way to inhibit c-MYC-dependent tumors and its downstream
targets. However, dietary factors like, long-chain fatty acids (LCFA),
have been shown to change activity and expression levels of c-MYC in cell
culture and animal models. LCFAs have also been reported to induce
apoptosis through c-MYC. The present study evaluated whether changes in
c-MYC expression or activity were responsible for induction of oxidative
stress and apoptosis in response to docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, C22:6)
supplementation in breast cancer. c-MYC mRNA and protein levels were
determined in vitro in the breast cancer BT-474, MDA-MB-231, and the
non-transformed MCF-10A cell lines. qPCR results showed increases in
c-MYC mRNA expression upon PUFA treatment in both BT-474 and MDA-MB-231
cancer lines, but not in the MCF-10A non-transformed line. Protein
analysis revealed no changes in total c-MYC expression, however total
phosphorylation at Thr58 and Ser62 are significantly upregulated in a
dose-response manner upon DHA supplementation in the BT-474 cell line.
Remarkably, transcriptional activity of c-MYC is highly upregulated as
well, suggesting that c-MYC activity increases in response to DHA
treatment. Using dihydrodichlorofluorescein diacetate (H2-DCF-DA) assay,
which measures intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) and oxidative
stress, we found increases in response to DHA treatment in all cell
lines. Finally, the increase in oxidative stress also resulted in an
increase in apoptosis, which we suggest is through c-MYC activation.
Further analysis of the c-MYC isoform status, association between MYC-MAX
and MYC-MAD complexes, as well as inducers and inhibitors of c-MYC are
currently underway to define specific targets where DHA is applying some
of its anti-cancer effects. Ultimately, with a goal that this research
will reveal dietary targets of DHA that could be used to enhance efficacy
to current therapies.

