Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant expression of TFPI-1 associated with low procoagulant
activity of liver cancer cells.


Background: Coagulation factor VII (fVII) is the key triggering enzyme of
the extrinsic blood coagulation pathway. Tissue factor (TF) is the
essential cofactor of activated fVII (fVIIa) and widely expressed in
normal and cancerous tissues in humans. In addition, evidences are
increasing that the TF/fVIIa complex also initiates key pathogenetic
mechanisms in cancer unrelated to coagulation, including angiogenesis,
cell migration /invasion or survival. Hepatocytes are the predominant
source of fVII under normal physiological conditions.Hepatocytes and
sinusoidal endothelial cells do not express TF, and no coagulation is
activated in the sinusoid or in the space of Disse. In contrast, we
demonstrated that some cancer cells aberrantly express both TF and fVII,
and the extrinsic coagulation is autonomously triggered on the surface of
these cells in vitro. It is not clear whether hepatic cancer (HC) cells
derived from hepatocytes express these coagulation factors to exhibit
procoagulant activity.Methods: We analyzed expression of TF and fVII by
western blotting (WB) with both cell lysate and conditioned medium
prepared from various cancer cell lines. We also performed activated
coagulation factor X generation analysis to know procoagulant activity on
the surface of these cells. Mechanisms that may affect procoagulant
activity of HC cells were further examined. Expression of TF and related
proteins in surgically removed normal and cirrhotic liver tissues and in
hepatocellular carcinoma tissues were also evaluated by western blotting
and immunohistochemistry (IHC).Results: Unexpectedly procoagulant
activity of HC cells was very low regardless of both TF and abundant fVII
expressions. We also found that TFPI-1, an endogenous anticoagulant
working on the TF/fVIIa complex, is highly expressed in the HC cell lines
and clinical samples of hepatocellular carcinomas. Normal hepatocytes or
sinusoidal endothelial cells were devoid of TF nor TFPI-1 expression
examined by western blotting and IHC. It was revealed that ectopically
synthesized TFPI-1 is responsible for low procoagulant activity of HC
cells in spite of the both TF and fVII production. We speculated that the
HC cells got some preferable phenotypes by expressing active TF/fVIIa
complex unrelated to coagulation in the course of carcinogenesis or
progression, and to avoid coagulation and loss of blood supply, they
further got to produce TFPI-1. The expression of aberrant TFPI-1 may also
confer some coagulation unrelated advantages to the HC cells. Our further
experiments revealed that the HC cell adhesion to extracellular matrix
components can be suppressed by TFPI-1, which might be convenient for
locomotion and spread of these cells.Conclusions: Ectopically synthesized
TFPI-1 potentially contributes to HC progression through inhibition of
coagulation and adhesion.

