Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Superb in vitro transfection efficiency and in vivo target gene
silencing effects on systemic siRNA delivery by 10-nm scale pH-sensitive
ultra-nanoparticles.


Introduction: A common hurdle of recent siRNA carriers, including
liposomes and micelles with mean diameters of 70-100 nm, whose size is
thought to be optimal for in vivo delivery is that systemic
administration often results in accumulation in reticuloendothelial
system (RES) and kidney. We have introduced a delivery system using 10-nm
scale super apatite (sApa) ultra-nanoparticles, which consist of
inorganic ions and are highly pH-sensitive, to improve in vitro siRNA
transfection efficiency in colon cancer cells. Moreover we have
successfully conducted the first in vivo systemic administration of sApa
ultra-nanoparticles to reveal the biodistribution at 4 h &12 h and the
anti-tumor efficacy. As results, sApa was unlikely to be trapped by the
RES and kidney. The continuously systemic administration of sApa
incorporating anti-survivin siRNA could suppress solid tumor growth.
However, the mechanism for the high in vitro transfection efficiency has
to be further investigated, and whether the down-regulated protein
expression of target gene could be achieved still remain to be clarified.
Here, we uncover the mechanism of in vitro transfection efficiency and
confirm the in vivo anti-tumor efficacy by clarifying the protein
expression level of target gene.Methods: Intracellular siRNA measurement
assay was performed in KM12sm colon cancer cell line, which was resistant
to transfection using Lipofectamine. The differential cellular uptake was
further analyzed with high-resolution confocal microscopy. As for the in
vivo assay of accumulation in tumor, live imaging was performed at 90 min
and day 2, and the in vivo western blotting assay was performed at day 3
and day 19 after the systemic administration of sApa incorporating
fluorescently labeled anti-survivin siRNA.Results & Discussions: Unlike
Lipofectamine 2000, the fluorescently labeled siRNA transfected by sApa
appeared in the cytoplasm at 4 h, and subsequently accumulated in the
entire cytoplasm at 12 h. The enhanced pH-sensitivity of sApa could
contribute to the high transfection efficiency to the cells that are
resistant to transfection using Lipofectamine 2000. As early as 90 min
after administration, in vivo two-photon live imaging clearly
demonstrated that green fluorescent siRNA spread out from vasculature in
a sApa-siRNAtreated tumor, but not in a naked-siRNAtreated tumor. In vivo
western blotting assay of sApa-survivin-treated tumor revealed the
protein expression was down-regulated at day 4, and fluorescent
immunostaining of survivin protein in the tumor tissues at day 19
exhibited the suppressed protein expression, which supported the
anti-tumor efficacy.Conclusion: The sApa delivery system is of vital use
to experimental approaches both in vitro and in vivo, and 10-nm scale
ultra-nanoparticles may constitute a new avenue in nanoparticle-based
medicine.

