Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fragment-based discovery of inhibitors of replication protein A
protein-protein interactions.


Replication Protein A (RPA) is a heterotrimeric protein that binds to and
protects ssDNA and plays an integral role in initiating the cellular
response to DNA damage. This response is mediated via protein-protein
interactions between a basic cleft on the RPA70N subunit and a number of
protein partners, including ATRIP, Rad9, Mre11, and p53. RNAi against RPA
has shown an expected toxicity against cancer cell lines, possibly due to
abrogation of the ssDNA binding function of RPA. Specific disruption of
the protein-protein interactions between the RPA07N subunit and its
binding partners has the potential to produce a more selective cytotoxic
response in cancer cells. To more accurately dissect the therapeutic
relevance of disrupting only the protein-protein interaction functions of
RPA, we sought to discover potent small molecule probes that bind to the
basic cleft of RPA70N.Inhibition of protein-protein interactions is
considered a difficult task. An NMR-based fragment screen has identified
more than 130 fragment molecules that bind to the RPA70N protein-protein
interaction cleft with affinities that range from 500 M to 2 mM and
corresponding ligand efficiencies from 0.18 to 0.30. Selected fragments,
representing several distinct chemotypes, have been optimized for binding
to the protein. Using X-ray crystallography, the binding modes of these
fragments have been defined. Fragments were found to bind primarily to
two main sites within the basic cleft of RPA70N. Additional
structure-guided optimizations have been carried out and ternary
co-crystal structures have been generated to guide fragment linking
strategies. Together, these activities have led to the creation of
multiple lead series of inhibitors of the RPA:ATRIP interaction, with
binding affinities improved by several fold over the initial fragments.
The SAR and biological activities of the fragments and lead compounds
will be discussed.

