Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Taxane sensitivity in prostate cancer is determined by androgen
receptor splice variants.


Although its pivotal role in prostate cancer care, androgen deprivation
therapy (ADT) is not curative as many patients progress to a
castration-resistant stage (CRPC) which remains driven by pathologic
reactivation of androgen receptor (AR). Taxanes represent the only
chemotherapy class that improves survival in CRPC and as such Docetaxel
(DTX) and Cabazitaxel (CTX) are standard of care.Recent evidence revealed
the presence of several AR splice variants lacking the ligand binding
domain and thus constitutively active in CRPC. Previous data from our lab
showed that taxanes impair the ligand-induced nuclear accumulation and
transcriptional activity of full-length AR (AR-FL) in taxane treated
human prostate cancer cells and CRPC patients. Indeed we showed that AR
cytoplasmic sequestration in patient's circulating tumour cells (CTCs)
was significantly correlated with clinical response to taxane
chemotherapy. This is due to AR binding microtubules (MTs) and using them
for nuclear accumulation supported by the dynein motor protein. However,
the effect of taxane on the nuclear accumulation and activity of the AR
variants is unknown. Thus, we set out to investigate the mechanism
underlying AR variant nuclear accumulation and the impact of taxane
treatment on AR variant function focusing on the two clinically relevant
AR splice variants ARv567 and AR-V7.A microtubule co-sedimentation assay
revealed that ARv567 is associated with MTs, in contrast to AR-V7. Serial
AR mutagenesis demonstrated that the MT binding domain comprises a region
aa 559 - 663 which is missing in AR-V7. Dynamitin overexpression
inhibited the nuclear accumulation of AR-FL and ARv567 but had no effect
on AR-V7, suggesting that AR-V7s nuclear translocation is independent of
dynein-based MT transport. To examine the impact of taxane treatment on
variant activity we microinjected GFP-tagged AR-FL, or AR variants into
the nucleus of PC3 cells and monitored the dynamics of AR nuclear
translocation using live-cell confocal microscopy. Moreover we stably
transfected M12 cells with AR-FL, AR-V7 and AR-v567 and assessed AR's
nuclear translocation in response to R1881 and in the presence or absence
of DTX. Our data showed that taxanes significantly inhibited the nuclear
accumulation and activity of AR-FL and ARv567 but not that of AR-V7 and
that this effect is androgen independent. We are currently elucidating
the effect of taxanes on AR variant transcriptional activity using
luciferase reporter and specific genes expression assays. Taken together
our data revealed that functional MTs are required for AR's nuclear
transport in a ligand independent manner, as in the case of ARv567.
However, this does not apply to AR-V7 which is not under MT control and
thus insensitive to taxane treatment. These data suggest that impairment
of AR variant expression might be predictive of clinical taxane
sensitivity in CRPC.

