Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A small molecular miR-21 inhibitor inhibits glioma cell invasion
and mesenchymal transition via upregulation of VHL expression.


Glioblastomas (GBMs) are the most common malignant brain tumors which
characterized by rapid and invasive growth. Accumulating evidence points
to a critical role of EMT like events during glioma progression and
malignant transformation. Cancer cells undergoing EMT can acquire
invasive properties and enter the surrounding stroma, resulting in the
creation of a favorable microenvironment for cancer progression and
metastasis. In this study, we identified a small molecular miR-21
inhibitor through a high-throught screening approach and found it
significantly repressed the U87 and LN229 glioma cell migration and
invasion. Meanwhile, VHL, a direct target of miR-21, was increased
expression in mRNA and protein level after this miR-21 inhibitor
treatment, but the -catenin expression was reduced. Silencing of VHL
using small interefering RNA (siRNA) also reduced -catenin expression.
Furthermore, suppression of -catenin transactivation by miR-21 inhibitor,
through upregulation of VHL expression, increased E-cadherin expression
and partially reversed the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). On
the other hand, confocal microscopy and Western blot assay presented that
N-cadherin, ZEB1, ZEB2 and MMP9 expression were reduced. Additionally, in
a U87 intracranial glioma xenograft nude mice model, we found a less
invading tumor edge of miR-21 inhibitor treated group in comparison with
DMSO group. Moreover, there was an increased expression of E-cadherin and
reduced expression of -catenin, N-cadherin, ZEB1, ZEB2 and MMP9 in tumor
samples after the inhibitor treatment. Together, these results provided
insight into the specific treatment efficacy of this small molecular
inhibitor in EMT and tumor metastasis, which achieved via up-regulation
of VHL expression. Therefore, it might be a novel and potentially
antimetastatic agent for therapeutic intervention in glioblastomas in
future.

