Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated genomic approach specifically dissects out the tumor
suppressor aspect of TGF- in breast cancer.


Transforming growth factor-s (TGF-s) have complex roles in tumorigenesis,
with context-dependent effects that can either suppress or promote tumor
progression. The dogma is that tumor suppressive effects are active in
the early stages of carcinogenesis, but that later pro-progression
effects come to dominate. Since TGF- antagonists of various types are in
early phase clinical trials in cancer, it is important to know whether
the tumor suppressive effects of TGF- are still intact in any tumors at
the time of diagnosis and treatment. Existing TGF--related gene
expression signatures were not designed a priori to discriminate the
tumor suppressive from the tumor promoting activities. To address this
question, we applied integrated ChIP-chip and transcriptomic approaches
in the MCF10A-based model of breast cancer progression. We have
previously shown that TGF- has tumor suppressor activity in the less
malignant cell lines of the series (MCF10A, MCF10AT1k, MCF10Ca1h), but
that this effect is lost in the most malignant cell line (MCF10Ca1a). The
tumor suppressor activity is dependent on the downstream signaling
component Smad3. Using promoter-wide ChIP-chip, we found that the genomic
landscape of TGF- induced Smad3 binding differed dramatically between the
four cell lines, despite their close genetic relatedness. Interestingly,
TGF- induced Smad3 binding only at genetic loci that were already
transcriptionally active, suggesting that TGF-s may primarily play a
modulator rather than an instigator role in regulating transcription.
This feature probably contributes significantly to the known
contextuality of TGF- activity. By focusing on the two malignant cell
lines (MCF10CA1h and MCF10CA1a), we identified a core signature of 26
TGF-/Smad3 regulated genes that were specifically associated with the
tumor suppressor activity of TGF-. Unexpectedly, the direction of
regulation of 25% of these genes by TGF- differed in vitro and in vivo,
highlighting a further novel contribution to TGF- contextuality, and
emphasizing the importance of including in vivo data in this type of
analysis. The in vivo weighted form of the TGF-/Smad3 tumor suppressor
signature was associated with good outcome in estrogen-receptor positive
breast cancer patients, suggesting that TGF- tumor suppressive pathways
are still active and influencing disease outcome in a subset of patients
tumors at the time of surgery. TGF- is a potent growth inhibitor for most
epithelial cells, but anti-proliferative effects made only a minor
contribution to the tumor suppressor activity in the breast cancer
cohorts. Instead, novel tumor suppressor effects of TGF- captured by this
approach included the restoration of tumor suppressive EphrinA signaling,
leading to increased tumor cell differentiation. The results have
important implications for patient stratification in ongoing clinical
trials with TGF- antagonists.

