Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of cytosine modifications in cellular sensitivity to
cytarabine.


Introduction: Inter-individual differences in cytosine modifications are
a result of genetic and environmental influences. 5-methylcytosine and
5-hydroxymethylcytosine are covalent cytosine modifications that occur in
CpG dinucleotides throughout the human genome. Objective: To characterize
inter-individual variation in cytosine modifications in HapMap samples
and investigate the contribution this may have on downstream phenotypes,
such as cellular sensitivity to chemotherapeutics, such as cytarabine.
Model: Cytosine modification levels at >485,000 CpGs were measured in the
International HapMap lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs). We utilized the
Illumina Infinium 450K HumanMethylation Beadchip array to measure
cytosine modification levels in 73 unrelated African (YRI - Yoruba people
from Ibadan, Nigeria) and 60 European ancestry (CEU - Caucasians from
Utah, US) LCLs. In addition, we evaluated LCL sensitivity to cytarabine
in these HapMap cell lines. Results: We performed a linear regression
model in order to identify novel associations between cytosine
modifications and cytarabine-induced cytotoxicity. From these analyses,
we found that promoter methylation of CDC6 and CCDC37 was associated with
cytarabine IC50 (p= 3.75 x 106 and p= 5.39x 106, respectively).
Furthermore, it has been shown previously that SNPs associated with
pharmacological traits in LCLs are enriched in expression quantitative
trait loci (eQTLs). We interrogated SNPs associated with cytosine
modification (mSNPs) to help us understand the role of mSNPs in
pharmacologic trait-associated genetic variants. We found that SNPs
associated with cytarabine are enriched in cis-acting mSNPs in LCLs
derived from individuals of European descent. Next, we integrated
genome-wide cytosine modification data with genotype and gene expression
data available for HapMap LCLs to allow for a more comprehensive
understanding of inter-individual genetic variation. We identified a SNP
in SLFN5 that was significantly associated with cytarabine sensitivity
that is a cis-acting eQTL and mSNP for SLFN5 gene expression and cytosine
modification. Conclusions: Analyzing cytosine modification-drug phenotype
data may identify novel candidate genes associated with sensitivity to
cytarabine. In addition, integrating genotype and gene expression data
allow for a better understanding of the biological function underlying
pharmacologic trait-associated SNPs.

