Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of Sh3gl2/endophilin A1 is an early event in urothelial
carcinoma that regulates malignant behavior.


Urothelial carcinoma (UC) causes substantial morbidity and mortality
worldwide. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying urothelial cancer
development and tumor progression are still largely unknown. Using
informatics analysis we identified Sh3gl2 (endophilin A1) as a transcript
and protein highly enriched in bladder epithelium (urothelium). The gene
encoding Sh3gl2 is located on chromosome 9p, a genomic region frequently
altered in UC. Sh3gl2 is known to regulate endocytosis of receptor
tyrosine kinases implicated in oncogenesis, such as the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) and c-Met. However, its role in UC pathogenesis is
unknown. Informatics analysis of expression profiles in Oncomine, as well
as immunohistochemical staining of tissue microarrays revealed Sh3gl2
expression to be decreased in UC specimens compared to non-tumor tissues.
Loss of Sh3gl2 was associated with increasing tumor grade and with muscle
invasion, a reliable predictor of metastatic disease and cancer-derived
mortality. Sh3gl2 expression was undetectable in 15 of 16 human UC cell
lines, but preserved in the low grade, well- differentiated cell line
RT4. In UC cell lines lacking expression of Sh3gl2, treatment with the
demethylating agent 5-aza-deoxycytidine led to upregulation of Sh3gl2
mRNA levels. Methylation-specific restriction analysis and PCR of genomic
DNA revealed hypermethylation of a CpG island in the Sh3gl2 promoter in
cells lacking Sh3gl2 expression, but no promoter methylation in RT4 cells
that express Sh3gl2, suggesting that lack of Sh3gl2 expression results,
at least in part, from methylation-induced gene silencing. Stable
knockdown of Sh3gl2 in RT4 cells by RNA interference (i) enhanced
proliferation and colony formation in vitro; (ii) inhibited EGF-induced
EGFR internalization and increased EGFR phosphorylation; (iii) stimulated
phosphorylation of Src family kinases and STAT3; (iv) altered sensitivity
to chemotherapeutic agents, including the dual-specificity EGFR/ERBB2
inhibitor lapatinib; and (v) promoted formation of RT4 xenografts in
subrenal capsule tissue recombination experiments. Together, these
findings identify loss of Sh3gl2 as an early event in UC development that
promotes disease progression. Sh3gl2 status in UC biopsies may provide a
potential marker of risk for UC progression or recurrence and may enable
determination of which patients require more aggressive intervention in
the form of surgery or chemotherapy in order to improve prognosis.

