Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical mouse model of recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer.


Purpose: Most women diagnosed with advanced stage serous epithelial
ovarian cancer exhibit a complete clinical response to surgical debulking
and platinum-based chemotherapy. Remission can last months to years, with
residual cancer cells eventually re-emerging to cause relapse. The
identity and nature of these cells is unclear, except that they are
believed to be slow growing or dormant during remission, and may consist
of a chemoresistant population of cancer stem cells. We previously
identified therapeutic agents that more effectively target slow growing
ovarian cancer cells and have hypothesized that targeting of slow growing
residual cancer cells during remission would delay or prevent disease
recurrence. Our objective here was to develop an in vivo ovarian cancer
xenograft model of recurrent disease to provide a platform for testing
this hypothesis in a preclinical setting.Procedures: We used a lentiviral
system to transduce ovarian cancer cells (carboplatin-sensitive CAOV2
cells and five SV40-immortalized cell lines either from primary ovarian
cancer tissues or ascites, iPOC) with the pGreenFire Lenti-reporter
construct (co-expresses GFP and firefly luciferase, SBI System
Biosciences). The GFP positive cells were selected by flow cytometry and
expanded in culture. Cells (3.5X105 per mouse) were injected IP into
6-7-week female Ncr-nu/nu mice. The mice were monitored every 2 days
using an IVIS Imaging System to detect appearance of
luciferase-expressing tumors following IP injection of luciferin. Tumors
were treated with IP carboplatin (40, 60 or 80 mg/kg) at 2-, 3- or 4-day
intervals for a total of five cycles. Tumor response was monitored twice
weekly using the IVIS Imaging System. Results:Tumor formation was evident
by live imaging at 4-5 days post cell injection. Carboplatin treatment
was optimized for dose and schedule to maximize response while preserving
health since the ultimate aim is to enable testing of novel drugs during
disease remission. We determined that treatment with four cycles of 80
mg/kg IP carboplatin at four-day intervals was optimal for producing near
complete reduction in tumor volume while maintaining robust health of the
mice. Surprisingly, tumor formation was also detected within 4-5 days in
mice injected with iPOC cells, although the tumors were overall much
smaller than those formed from CAOV2 cells (p = 0.0003). Ninety percent
of the mice developed tumors following iPOC injection. iPOC-derived
tumors appeared more sensitive to carboplatin than CAOV2 xenograft tumors
.Conclusions: We have developed and optimized a xenograft mouse model of
epithelial ovarian cancer that mimics treatment response and recurrence
of human disease. We are now implementing this model to test novel drugs
in the preclinical consolidation setting against slow growing tumor cells
that we hypothesize are responsible for disease recurrence.

