Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting of colorectal cancer stem cells by
TRAIL-inducing small molecule TIC10.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most commonly diagnosed cancer in
the USA. A growing body of evidence indicates that CRC tumors contain a
small population of stem/progenitor cells (colorectal cancer stem cells,
CRCSCs) capable of self-renewal that contribute to tumor maintenance,
resistance to therapy and metastasis. Selective therapeutic targeting of
CRCSCs in combination with approved therapies could improve treatment
response and prolong patient survival. The endogenous protein TNF-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL; Apo2L) selectively induces cell death
in cancer cells while sparing normal cells. This approach is particularly
attractive for targeting CRCSCs potentially avoiding toxic effects in
normal stem/progenitor cells in the colonic crypt. TIC10 is a
first-in-class anti-tumor agent that transcriptionally induces TRAIL via
the transcription factor Foxo3a, independent of tumor suppressor p53
status. We previously demonstrated that TIC10 activates Foxo3a by dual
inhibition of the upstream regulators Akt and ERK. TIC10 induces
TRAIL-mediated cell death in cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. TIC10
improves the half-life, tissue distribution, route of administration and
spectrum of activity of TRAIL. These attributes overcome therapeutic
limitations of recombinant TRAIL and TRAIL-agonist antibodies that have
been or are in clinical trials to combat human cancer. TIC10 exhibits
potent anti-tumor efficacy in a wide range of preclinical mouse models of
cancer including subcutaneous and orthotopic colon cancer without
observed toxicity. We hypothesize that the potent anti-tumor effect of
TIC10 in colon cancer involves targeting of the CRCSC population. In this
study we evaluated the effects of TIC10 on the CRCSC population in three
human colon cancer cell lines. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that
TIC10 significantly depleted CD133-, CD44- and Aldefluor-positive CRCSCs
in HCT116 and SW480 cells. TIC10 significantly induced surface TRAIL
expression in CD133- and CD44-positive CRCSCs. TIC10 also significantly
inhibited colonosphere formation in DLD1 and SW480 cells. A targeted
network analysis of gene expression profiles of HCT116 p53-null human
colon cancer cells treated with TIC10 revealed that several stem
cell-related pathways and proteins are affected by TIC10 and are likely
involved in the anti-CRCSC effects of TIC10. In particular, mRNA
transcript levels of Id2 (3.2 fold) and Wnt16 (13.5 fold) were
significantly downregulated. Ongoing studies will validate these
potential anti-CRCSC molecular targets of TIC10 and determine their
contribution to the overall anti-CRCSC effect, evaluate the anti-CRCSC
efficacy of TIC10 in vivo and examine combinatorial anti-CRCSC effects of
TIC10 with chemotherapies used to treat CRC. In conclusion, TIC10 targets
bulk tumor cells as well as CRCSCs, making this molecule a promising
novel agent for the treatment of CRC.

