Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-9 is an oncogenic microRNA specifically overexpressed in
MLL-rearrangement leukemia.


Acute Leukemia is a heterogeneous disease derived from different
hematopoietic cell lineages; acute leukemia both lymphoid and myeloid
contains chromosomal including translocation of MLL (Mixed Lineage
Leukemia), resulting in intermediate to poor survival. Aberrant
expression of microRNAs (miRs) is an emerging hallmark of cancer biology;
in particular, expression of microRNA-9 (miR-9) has been connected to
several malignancies including breast, colon, prostate, lung, and ovarian
cancers. However, miR-9 abnormalities have not been described in
leukemia. We report that miR-9 is specifically overexpressed in
MLL-rearranged acute myeloid leukemia (AML) relative to normal controls
or other subtypes of AMLs. We showed that MLL fusion proteins directly
regulate miR-9 expression by binding to its promoter region. Forced
expression of miR-9 alone does not transform normal hematopoietic
progenitor cells but in the presence of MLL-AF9, one of the most frequent
MLL-rearranged fusion gene resulting from t(9;11), results in a
significant enhance of the colony forming/replating capacity of normal
hematopoietic progenitor cells. The use of a competitor inhibitor (miR-9
sponge) resulted in a significant reduction of colony formation and an
increase in differentiated hematopoietic cells, indicating miR-9 is
required for MLL-AF9 colony-forming growth and maintenance of the
immature cell population. Through further functional analysis we found
that miR-9 is required for MLL-AF9-mediated cell transformation in vitro.
Using mouse bone marrow transplant assays we discovered that forced
expression of miR-9 could significantly accelerate leukemogenesis
mediated by MLL-AF9. The addition of miR-9 to MLL-AF9 also resulted in an
increase in immature hematopoietic progenitor cells indicating more
potent long-term leukemia potential in vivo. To identify miR-9 targets we
analyzed our in-house and publically available gene expression data from
the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) at the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCB I) in Acute Leukemia patients containing
MLL-rearrangements. We determined that MLL-leukemias contained a unique
deregulated gene signature. As microRNAs most commonly inhibit target
genes through binding of the 3 untranslated region (UTR) we identified
genes that were significantly inhibited in MLL-leukemias and were
predicted targets of miR-9. From the several genes we identified we
selected six genes (based on best inverse correlation to miR-9
expression) to validate as targets of miR-9 in MLL-rearranged leukemias.
We validated these genes as miR-9 targets and continue to investigate
their contribution to MLL-rearranged leukemias. As these genes are
potentially involved in several biological processes we believe that
miR-9 in the presence of MLL fusions is an important contributor to
leukemogenesis and could be a potential target for future antimir therapy.

