Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor targeting and enhanced efficacy of novel polyamine-cytotoxic
conjugates.


Rapidly proliferating cancer cells have a higher demand on polyamines
resulting in an over-activated Polyamines Transport System (PTS)1.
Polyamines entry can be exploited as a selective anticancer drug delivery
system. We synthesized polyamines-epipodophylotoxin conjugates with
improved physico-chemical and pharmacological properties. As proof of
concept, we demonstrated that the conjugation of epipodophylotoxin with
spermine changes the pharmacological profile of the cytotoxic moiety by
increasing the solubility, enhances the cellular distribution through the
PTS, and increases the capacity to inhibit topoisomerase II due to
stronger DNA interaction, as compared to the closest structurally related
compound etoposide. Among several conjugates, F145122 was selected as a
drug candidate and is currently undergoing a phase 1/2 clinical
evaluation in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML).Based on this clinically
validated objective to target cancer cells with the PTS, we set up a
chemical platform of conjugation of polyamine moieties. We extended our
approach to 3 natural products of interest in oncology: (i) an inhibitor
of elongation phase in protein translation, a modulator of redox cell
regulation and an inhibitor of polyADP-ribose polymerase. This approach
led to the synthesis of novel spermine-pancratistatine, -artemisinine and
-PARPi conjugates and their biochemical and biological characterization
in terms of protein synthesis, PARP inhibition, ROS induction,
anti-proliferative effects on cancer cells and their capacity to be
imported via the PTS. Cell internalisation through the PTS was measured
by differential cytotoxicity on PTS+ vs. PTS cells, or by competition
with a fluorescent probe. We also evaluated selected compounds in vivo
and investigated whether their modified properties translate into a
higher level of antitumor activity associated with an enlarged
therapeutic index in a PTS+ tumor model. For the PARP inhibitor-spermine
conjugates, an increase in cellular uptake was confirmed, without
impairing the cytotoxic properties.The dedicated polyamine conjugation
platform presented here can be adapted to many cytotoxic scaffolds to
enhance their solubility, preferential incorporation into cancer cells
through the PTS, and their pharmacological activity in vitro and in vivo.
The design of polyamine-vectorized cytotoxic agents will be presented.1
Delcros J.G. et al., Biochem. J., 1993, 2692 PCT Int. Appl. WO2005/100363
(Pierre Fabre Medicament); Barret J.-M. et al., Cancer Res. 2008, 68, 9845

