Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long term clinical and biochemical outcomes following
immunotherapy with an novel autologous immunomodulated vaccine in
patients with prostate cancer.


Background: VAP is an new autologous immunomodulate vaccine, that was
previously demonstrate to be safe in an initial phase I trial with local
advance prostate cancer patients. The extension of this initial trail
into a Phase IIb is now been reported. The primary endpoint of the study
reported here is clinical response (PSA and survival) in local advance
(T2 and T3) prostate cancer patients, with safety and immunologic
responses as secondary endpoints.Methods: Tumor cells from 107
prostatectomy patients were collected (HCPA - Porto Alegre - Brazil). 48
(45%) patients with T3 or T2 with co-morbidity factors were enrolled. 22
patients received the vaccine and 26 were in the control group. Vaccine
was given by intradermal injections (4x weekly, 2x monthly and after 3
months). First two doses also ontained BGC as adjuvant. DTH was measured
48 hours after the vaccine doses that did not contained BCG. PBMCs and
were collected via apheresis at baseline and D+54 for Tcell proliferation
assay in some patients. Clinical flow up was performed and all standard
care was given to all patients.Results: The overall follow up was 7.4
years. No grade 3 or 4 toxicity attributable to vaccine was noted. Side
effects were largely limited to grade 1 or 2 injection site reactions.
DTH was positive (= or higher than 5 mm) in 73% of the vaccinated
patients. Cancer related mortality was 9% (2/22) on the vaccinated group
and 19% (5/26) on the non-vaccinated group. PSA was undetectable (less
than 0.04 ng/ml) in 85% (17/20) of the vaccinated patients and in 48%
(10/21) of the non-vaccinated patients after 5 years of follow up.In
vitro specific T cell proliferation was demonstrated in
vaccinatedpatients.Conclusions: VAP is safe and well tolerated vaccine.
There is evidence of clinical activity and immune changes in selected
patients. Further studies to confirm these results are warranted.
(Financial support from FINEP - Brazilian Innovation Agency)

