Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of cancer stem cell states in a p53/PTEN
inactivated mammary epithelial cells.


Inactivation of the tumor suppressors, TP53 and PTEN in pre-neoplastic
lesions has been implicated in tumor progression as well as in regulation
of normal and malignant stem cell self-renewal. Down regulation of both
p53 and PTEN in non-transformed MCF10A cells synergized to expand the
cancer stem cell compartment transforming these cells and generating an
EMT phenotype in vitro which generated highly metastatic tumors when
injected in NOD/SCID mice.These tumors could be fractionated based on
their expression of CD49f and EPCAM. Gene expression analyses of these
sub-fractions demonstrate an EMT gene signature in CD49f+/EPCAM- and
CD49f-/EPCAM- cell populations. These findings are also supported by DNA
methylation analyses. Although CD49f+EPCAM+ cell population express
epithelial (MET) gene signature, these cells also generate tumors in mice
and give rise to cells with EMT phenotype. Interestingly CD49f+EPCAM+
subpopulation expresses higher ALDH than other two subpopulations with
EMT phenotype. Therefore we propose that breast CSCs may exist in two
states; EMT state may be represented by CD49f or CD44 and MET state by
ALDH expression. Consistent with our hypothesis, ALDH-positive cells
compared to ALDH-negative cells within the CD49f+EPCAM+ phenotype have
greater capacity to generate CD49f+/EPCAM- phenotype upon IL6 or TGF-b
stimulation. Interestingly blocking IL6 and TGF-b in CD49f+/EPCAM- cell
population results in MET-CSC phenotype characterized by ALDH expression.
It is well known that EMT is characterized by reversible epigenetic
changes and therefore we hypothesized that these epigenetic changes might
be involved in acquisition of different CSC states.Our results suggest
that interplay between genetic and epigenetic changes during malignant
transformation of mammary epithelial cells may activate multiple
signaling cascades resulting in expansion of stem cells which display an
EMT phenotype. Furthermore, these studies provide a strong rationale for
the development of alternative therapeutics which are able to target
these different states of cancer stem cells.

