Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular and histologic characterization a patient-derived
heterotransplant mouse model of head and neck squamous carcinoma.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a deadly and disfiguring
disease for which better systemic therapy is desperately needed. The
development of new therapies for HNSCC and the understanding of its
biology both depend upon clinically relevant animal models. An
increasingly promising xenograft model, the heterotransplant model, is
developed by surgically implanting tumor tissue directly from a patient
into an immunocompromised mouse.We have transplanted 30 HNSCC primary
tumors from untreated patients directly into mice that included 27 tongue
tumors, one maxillary gingival tumor, and two from the floor of the
mouth. Five of 30 (17%) transplanted tumors could be serially passaged
and used for therapeutic and mechanistic studies. One cell line has been
established from a tongue primary.Histopathologic characterization of our
panel showed a concordance between xenografts (up to the tenth
generation) and the corresponding patients tumors in terms of tumor
differentiation, cancer cell appearance, necrosis, and keratin
production.To further characterize our model, we conducted gene
expression analysis with Affymetrix U133A-microarrays on 20 patient
tumors; 5 third generation and one tenth generation tumor in mice; one
tumor-derived cell line; and 2 established cell lines (OSC19, Tu167).
Although unsupervised clustering clearly separates patient tumors,
xenografts, and cell lines into distinct groups, the early and late
xenografts that were derived from the same patient clustered together.
From the >54,000 probes tested, there were 1417 probes that were distinct
between the tumors growing in mice vs. the corresponding human tumors
from which they were derived (p,0.01, fold change 1.4). There were 992
probes that were distinct between the human tumors that subsequently grew
in mice vs. those that did not - suggesting that this model enriches for
cancers with distinct biological features (p,0.01, fold change 1.4). We
have successfully used one heterotransplant model for multiple studies of
cancer drug efficacy.Our results demonstrate the feasibility of a
heterotransplant model of HNSCC. Although the gene expression patterns
are distinct, the histology of the tumors in mice is similar to that of
the same tumor in humans. Additionally, gene expression patterns and
histology are relatively stable over multiple generations. Biologic gene
pathways analysis for similarities and differences in this model will
further refine the promise of heterotransplants as an in vivo model to
test the efficacy of anti-cancer drugs.This work was supported by
R01-CA143369-01

