Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing signal modulation in preclinical models and tumor tissue
from patients enrolled in a Phase 1 study of the HER3/EGFR dual action
antibody, MEHD7945A (MEHD), as an exploratory pharmacodynamic (PD)
analysis.


BackgroundAberrant activation of HER family members including EGFR
results in unregulated proliferative signals involved in tumorigenesis.
HER3 plays a unique role as both a dimerization-dependent allosteric
catalyst and critical activator of PI3 kinase signaling (PI3K). MEHD is a
dual-action antibody that blocks ligand binding to EGFR and HER3 to
abrogate signaling downstream from these two receptors. Early clinical
evidence shows PD modulation and biological activity. The two major
signaling pathways activated by ligand binding to these receptors are the
RAS/MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways. Phosphorylation of these critical
signaling proteins can be monitored to evaluate inhibition of ligand
driven receptor activity.MethodsPhosphorylation of signaling proteins in
the RAS/MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways was measured by Western blot analysis
and reverse-phase protein arrays (RPPA) in MEHD-sensitive cell lines and
xenograft models. Paired tumor biopsies from patients in the Phase 1 MEHD
study were collected pre and post MEHD dosing. Half of each sample was
formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded for immunohistochemistry (IHC) using
pS6 (S235/236), pPRAS40 (T246), and pMAPK (T202/Y204); the other half was
frozen and embedded in Optimum Cutting Temperature compound (OCT) for
analysis of multiple signaling pathway endpoints by
RPPA.ResultsInhibition of EGFR and/or HER3 activated signaling by MEHD
was confirmed in sensitive cell lines and xenograft models by western
blot analysis for key analytes including pMAPK and pS6. Broader analysis
of signaling in the RAS/MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways by RPPA demonstrated
additional markers that were inhibited by MEHD. Signaling from EGFR
driven models was blocked by EGFR inhibition alone but signaling in
models in which both EGFR and HER3 were contributing factors, as assessed
by tumor growth inhibition, were not inhibited by EGFR inhibition alone.
However, MEHD was equally effective at blocking signaling in both models.
Analytes that were inhibited by MEHD in these pre-clinical models were
measured by RPPA and IHC in paired biopsy specimens from the Ph1 MEHD
study as a PD assessment. Thirty-two paired biopsies were obtained. 20/32
had sufficient tissue and tumor for assessment and 11/20 showed decreased
phosphorylation of pERK, pPRAS40, or pS6 by IHC and/or
RPPA.ConclusionsPreclinical evaluation of RAS/MAPK and PI3K/AKT signaling
in MEHD-sensitive cell lines and xenograft models identified pERK,
pPRAS40, and pS6 as measurable indicators of MEHD target engagement and
biological activity. Evaluation of these markers in patient tumor
biopsies demonstrated that signaling pathways consistent with HER3 and/or
EGFR inhibition are downregulated in tumors, suggesting that MEHD is
biologically active in patients (see Juric et al., AACR abstract).

