Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trimeric G protein-CARMA1 axis links smoothened to NF-B activation
in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.


Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common lymphoid
malignancy in adults. Aberrant activation of Hedgehog (Hh) and NF-B
pathways is ubiquitously observed and known to mediate tumor growth,
survival and chemo-resistance in DLBCL. Previously, we found that
activation of Hh signaling is positively correlated with NF-B pathway in
DLBCL tumors and that modulating the activity of smoothened (SMO), the
signal transducer subunit of Hh pathway, but not GLI1, transcriptional
factor of Hh signaling, resulted in modulation of NF-kB pathway
activation. Hereby, we investigate the molecular mechanisms that link SMO
to NF-kB pathway. To elucidate whether there was interaction between G
protein superfamily and SMO, we immunoprecipitated representative members
of the G subfamilies (Gi, G16, Gq, Gs and G12), and found that SMO was
associated with Gi, Gq, and G12 in two DLBCL cell lines. Stimulation of
SMO with Shh recombinant increased the recruitment of Gi and G12 to SMO
and also increased the GTPase activity of Gi and G12. We also found that
the activation of SMO with Shh in DLBCL cell lines was associated with
increased total activity of PKC, phosphorylation of PKC1 and -2, and
recruitment of CARMA1-MALT1-BCL10-TRAF6 to SMO receptor complex
supporting that G proteins are involved in the transmission of the signal
between SMO and NF-B. Opposite results were seen when SMO was inhibited
or silenced. As polyubiquitination of TRAF6 and NEMO (IKK) at lysine 63
(K63) are also important events in propagating NF-B signaling, we
examined the effect of SMO overexpression on K63-linked
polyubiquitination of TRAF6 and NEMO. Transient overexpressing SMO
resulted in increased polyubiquitination of TRAF6 and NEMO, supporting
activation of both proteins by SMO. Moreover, functional inhibition of
SMO (cyclopamine-KAAD) enhances the cytotoxic effect of NF-B inhibitor
(BAY-11-7082). Altogether, our study reveal a non-canonical Hh signaling
pathway, in which SMO activates trimeric G proteins and CARMA1-associated
signaling complex, leading to NF-B activation. This signaling cascade
contributes to the survival of DLBCL, and may serve as potential targets
for combination therapies in DLBCL.

