Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis and biodistribution of 225Ac-substance P for
intracavitary radiopharmaceutical therapy of high-grade recurrent glioma.


Glioblastoma (GB) is the most common malignant brain tumor in adults and
prognosis of patients remains poor with median survival of only 14.6
months. The majority of patients recur with tumor growth beyond the
margin of the surgical cavity. The failure to significantly impact
overall survival with current treatments is mainly due to the aggressive
invasiveness of GB cells and their resistance to radiation and
chemotherapy. High linear energy transfer (LET) alpha particle radiation
offers an attractive approach to overcome resistance of GB and improve
survival. We propose to treat GB patients with intracavitary injected
alpha particle emitter 225Ac delivered on a synthetic peptide, substance
P of the tachykinin neuropeptide family (NK1 receptor), which can readily
penetrate brain parenchyma and target widely disseminated GB cells.
Importantly, increased expression of NK-1 receptors is correlated with
glioma malignancy and is thought to be responsible for tumor progression.
A recent clinical study evaluating alpha particle emitter 213Bi labeled
substance P for treatment of high grade gliomas demonstrated tolerable
toxicity and efficacy. The pharmacokinetic and SPECT/CT imaging studies
of 111In-substance P revealed large variability among patients in the
rate of clearance from the tumor cavity. These observations suggest that
better treatment planning with patient specific pre-therapy imaging based
dosimetry can optimize the absorbed doses delivered to the tumor cavity
while limiting toxicity to normal tissues. Based on this hypothesis, we
evaluated radiochemical property and biodistribution of 225Ac-substance P
in vitro and in mice. Both 225Ac and 111In were readily labeled to
substance P-DOTA at 95 C in an acetate buffer. After purification with
reverse phase HPLC, the purities of both radio-peptides were around 99%.
Binding affinity (Kd) of radiolabeled substance P was found to be 20 nM
with Scatchard analysis. In vitro cell kill assay showed that
cytotoxicity of 225Ac-substance P (A0=6.3nCi) significantly increased in
NK-1 expressing U251 cells compared to non-specific 225Ac-Rituximab
(A0=15.4nCi). Biodistribution studies following intracranial (right side
of the midline) injection of 225Ac- or 111In- substance P showed that
111In- and 225Ac cleared from right brain (injection side) in tumor free
mice with similar half-lives (11.2 hr vs. 16.5 hr) and penetrated into
left side of the brain with a similar peak uptake of 31.0 and 33.8 %ID/g
at 4 hours after injection. Moreover, both 111In- and 225Ac-substance P
was cleared quickly from the kidneys with a peak uptake of 2.5% and 2.2
%ID/g at 4 hrs after injection. No significant accumulation in other
normal organs was observed. These data suggest that intracavitary
225Ac-substance P might be a viable treatment option and pre-treatment
dosimetry planning based on 111In-substance P imaging is feasible.

