Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crenolanib inhibition of PDGFRA+ fibroblast-like cells in visceral
smooth muscle.


Platelet derived growth factors (PDGFs) and their receptors (PDGFRs) play
important roles in cell proliferation, survival, and migration . The
PDGF/PDGFR signaling pathway plays a crucial role in embryonic
development and for interstitial and mesenchymal cell proliferation .
Primary cancer cells in the GI with abnormal expression of receptor
tyrosine kinases like c-Kit and PDGFRs have been implicated in the
formation of gastro-intestinal stromal tumors (GIST).Fibroblast-like
cells (FLCs) exist in the smooth muscle of all visceral organs yet their
functional role throughout the viscera is unclear . It has recently been
demonstrated by studies within our group that these FLCs express PDGFR .
These studies demonstrated for the first time that PDGFR+ cells are a
novel class of excitable cells with the molecular and ionic apparatus to
mediate enteric inhibitory responses to purines in GI muscles.Using
Crenolanib, a novel potent inhibitor of PDGFR, we have disrupted PDGFR
expression and signaling in normal BALB/c mice. Crenolanib is being
developed to treat cancers with populations of primary cells
over-expressing PDGFR including GIST .To track the specific changes in GI
visceral smooth muscle cell populations and changes in post-junctional
neural responses, we examined changes in protein abundance, gene
expression, and used intracellular microelectrodes to examine
electrophysiological properties and responses to stimuli. Given the
intimate anatomical relationship between Kit+ ICCs and PDGFR+ FLCs, their
structural similarities, and their defining expression of receptor
tyrosine kinases, changes in the dynamics of both of these cell
populations during Crenolanib inhibition was monitored within this model.
Age and species matched pairs of mice injected with either vehicle or
Crenolanib were collected from postpartum days 10 through 25 and analyzed
for differences in gross anatomy and weight, electrophysiology, PDGFR
protein distribution by western blot and immunofluorescence, and gene
expression by both end-point PCR and qPCR.These analyses show a distinct
decrease in the protein abundance and gene expression of PDGFR in
Crenolanib injected mice; inhibitory neurological signaling is also
affected, with a highly significant decrease in purinergic inhibitory
responses to stimulation, which indicates this as one of the functional
roles of FLCs in the Tunica muscularis. Monitoring FLCs and ICCs in this
inhibition model has provided valuable information on the endogenous
cellular dynamics that exist between ICCs and FLCs; it also sheds light
on their relationship during pathophysiolgical disorders, including the
development of GISTs .

