Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinations of HDAC inhibitor, chemotherapeutic agent and
retinoic acid induce growth arrest, differentiation and tumor regression
in preclinical models of breast cancer.


The histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), entinostat, is being actively
explored as a new-generation epigenetic drug which can lead to the change
in the expression status of genes/pathways, but has low efficacy in
cancer monotherapy. All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) induces the
differentiation of various types of stem cells. Data from cell culture
and xenograft models from our lab showed that a combination of entinostat
(MS-275), doxorubicin and ATRA effectively decreased tumor size in three
breast cancer cell line xenograft models. Here, we sought to further
investigate the mechanism of action of the triple drug combination in
cancer cells; in particular, its effect on the breast cancer stem cell
population. We performed a comprehensive genome wide analysis of gene
expression of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells treated with ATRA, MS-275
and doxorubicin as monotherapies and as combination therapies. We saw
that the drug-response gene profile of ATRA is very similar to DMSO
(vehicle)-treated cells. Accordingly, the addition of ATRA (A) to MS-275
(MA), Dox (AD) and MS-275/Dox (MAD) displayed minimal changes in the gene
expression profile of each of the other treatments. Addition of Dox to
MS-275 (MD), on the other hand, potentiated the reprograming effect of
MS-275 and affected the expression of many antitumor genes known to be
related to cell cycle and growth arrest. It also altered expression of
genes involved in development and inflammation. The most differentially
expressed genes, validated by qPCR, were novel genes from the
cancer/testis antigens and tripartite motif (TRIM) family of proteins.
Interestingly, in MDA-MB-231and SUM149 cells, even the addition of low
doses of doxorubicin (12.5 nM) to MS-275 increased 2 and 2.6 fold the G2
cell cycle arrest in comparison to Dox and MS-275, respectively. Despite
the gene expression pattern similarity between MS-275/Dox (MD) and
MS-275/Dox/ATRA (MAD) groups, we saw that MAD was more effective in
inducing cell death and apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. The epithelium
specific ETS transcription factor-1 (ESE-1) was differentially regulated
between MAD and MD and is, in fact, part of the MS-275/ATRA (MA)
signature. Using limiting dilution transplantation assays in mammary fat
pads of immunodeficient mice we observed that MAD treatment in vivo most
effectively targeted breast cancer stem cells (BCSC) compared to any
other combination of drugs. The cancer stem cell frequency of the cells
isolated from MAD treated mice was 1 in 236,570. The second most
effective treatment for BCSC was MA (1 in 150,721), followed by ATRA>
MS-275>MD>Dox>DMSO>AD. In conclusion, the reprogramming events initiated
by HDACi and retinoid sensitize the cells to low doses of doxorubicin.
The combination therapy may have a significant effect in decreasing
breast tumor growth and recurrence.

