Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy and potential mechanisms of psychotropic drugs and
statins in the treatment of glioblastoma.


Background and Aims: Glioblastoma multiforme is an aggressive, highly
invasive tumour with poor prognosis for patients with a median survival
of less than 15 months. New treatment modalities are urgently required.
Meta-analysis of cancer in schizophrenic patients suggests a lower
incidence of some cancers leading to the hypothesis that antipsychotic
drugs taken regularly by these patients may inhibit tumour growth. The
aims of this study were to investigate the chemotherapeutic potential of
antipsychotic drugs, alone and in combination with a statin, in cells
lines and an animal model of gliboblastoma and to also determine their
mechanism of action.Methods and Results: Drug efficacy was initially
determined in U87MG and T98G cell lines using viability and clonogenic
assays and demonstrated that the IC50 and LD50 values for the
antipsychotic drugs (chlorpromazine, olanzapine and pimozide) are far
lower than those for the current chemotherapeutic, temozolomide. These
effects were enhanced when the drugs were used in combination with
simvastatin. A novel rat model of glioblastoma that allows tumour
monitoring via bioluminescence imaging following implantation of isogenic
luciferase-tagged F98 cells was used to assess the in vivo potential of
the drugs and indicated that treatment with olanzapine extended the
life-span of the rats beyond that of temozolomide. We have previously
investigated the mechanism of action of these drugs and determined that
they affect intracellular cholesterol trafficking (Kristiana et al,
2010). Further studies using a yeast deletion library screen with the
antipsychotic chlorpromazine revealed that it acts as a histone
acetyltransferase inhibitor (HATi). Two representative members of other
classes of phenothiazines, thioridazine and trifluoperazine, were
investigated in HAT activity assays, and also shown to be HATi.
Co-treatment with sodium butyrate, a histone deacetylase inhibitor,
alleviated the detrimental effect on viability confirming that the HAT
inhibitory activity was responsible for the cytotoxicity in cancer
cells.Conclusions: While histone deacetylase inhibitors are increasingly
being trialed as anti-cancer treatments, the phenothiazines could provide
an important complement based on their HAT inhibitory activity. Our in
vitro and in vivo studies indicate the potential of these drugs as
candidates for the treatment of glioblastoma especially since they are
able to cross the blood-brain barrier and, as they have been in clinical
use for decades, their pharmacokinetics and toxicology are
well-characterized.Kristiana I, Sharpe LJ, Catts VS, Lutze-Mann LH, Brown
AJ (2010). Antipsychotic drugs upregulate lipogenic gene expression by
disrupting intracellular trafficking of lipoprotein-derived cholesterol.
Pharmacogenomics J 10, 396-407.

