Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of RACK1 as a novel regulatory subunit of PP2A.


Protein Phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a major serine/threonine phosphatase in
cells. It consists of a catalytic (C), structural (A) and
regulatory/variable B-type subunits. PP2A plays a critical role as a
tumour suppressor. Changes in the activity of PP2A have a direct role in
maintaining the transformed phenotype in cancer. However, the mechanism
of action of PP2A during this process is poorly understood. Understanding
is limited by the complex nature of PP2A holoenzyme assembly, and because
it acts through a wide variety of signalling pathways. The regulatory
B-type subunits have a critical role in targeting PP2A to specific areas
of the cell and also in regulating the overall activity and substrate
specificity of PP2A. To date, at least 15 known PP2A B-type subunits have
been identified but their detection is difficult because of the transient
nature of their interaction with the PP2A holoenzyme. The scaffolding
protein RACK1 is a PP2A interacting protein and we have published a
mechanism by which PP2A regulates IGF-IR and adhesion signalling through
RACK1 [1, 2]. Our hypothesis is that RACK1 plays a critical role in
determining how PP2A functions in signalling pathways and may function as
a regulatory subunit of PP2A. We predict it does this by modulating the
activity of PP2A and regulating its distribution to a specific subset of
targets. We examined how the PP2A holoenzyme is assembled in MCF-7 cells.
We have found that both the catalytic subunit and structural subunit of
PP2A (PP2A C and PP2A A respectively) are assembled on the RACK1 scaffold
in response to IGF-I. Our findings indicate that both the C subunit and
the A subunit of PP2A are released from RACK1 in response to IGF-I and
reassembled after 30 minutes IGF-I stimulation. We used immobilized
peptide arrays representing the entire PP2A-catalytic protein to identify
amino acids on the catalytic subunit of PP2A that are required for the
binding of RACK1. Analysis of these residues revealed the binding sites
for RACK1 on PP2A and supports their role in mediating the interaction
with RACK1. When cells are transfected with specific mutations of PP2A C
that disrupt the association with RACK1, cells show decreased PP2A
activity and deregulated cell adhesion and migration suggesting that
RACK1 has an essential role to play in the overall activity and substrate
specificity of PP2A. This data supports our hypothesis that RACK1
functions as a B-type subunit of PP2A which is required for the
regulation of PP2A activity. Our data also indicates that RACK1 targets
PP2A to specific locations to promote IGF-I-mediated cell migration and
proliferation in tumour cells.1. Kiely, P.A., et al. Molecular and
cellular biology, 2006. 26(11): p. 4041-4051.2. Kiely, P.A., et al.
Journal of Biological Chemistry, 2008. 283(34): p. 22952-22961.

