Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of detecting systems for circulating tumor cells in
malignant pleural mesothelioma patients.


Background. To isolate and quantify of CTCs, the CellSearch system is the
most commonly used techniques, approved by the FDA. But in this system,
EpCAM negative CTCs are excluded. To detect CTCs in malignant pleural
mesothelioma patients, we have developed two novel approaches, CTC-Chip
and immunomagnetic beads which could be labeled with any type of
antibodies.Methods. To evaluate the accuracy of the number of CTCs, we
used the peripheral blood samples collected from healthy donors, spiked
definite number of tumor cell lines, ACC-MESO1 and ACC-MESO4. Both tumor
cell lines (obtained from ATCC) were derived from malingnant pleural
mesothelioma, positive of mesothelin and podoplanin. The recovery rate
was evaluated with two methods, the CTC-Chip and immunomagnetic beads,
coated with antibodies specific for mesothelin and podoplanin. In
addition, an 8 ml sample of peripheral blood was collected from a patient
with malignant pleural mesothelioma, and was served for the
immunomagnetic beads. To identify the captured cells as tumor cells,
immunocytochemistry was performed using with the cocktail of two human
cytokeratin-specific antibodies.Results. To confirm the efficacy of tumor
isolation by two methods, we used tumor cell suspicion as samples. In
CTC-Chip coated with anti-mesothelin and podoplanin, the recovery rate of
captured ACC-MESO1 was 99%, 97%, respectively. The recovery efficiency of
ACC-MESO1-spiked blood samples using CTC-Chip coated with anti-mesothelin
and podoplanin, was 45%, 80%, respectively. In immunomagnetic beads
coated with anti-mesothelin and podoplanin, the recovery rate of captured
ACC-MESO4 was 80%, 25%, respectively. The recovery efficiency of
ACC-MESO4-spiked blood samples using immunomagnetic beads coated with
anti-mesothelin and podoplanin, was 33%, 15%, respectively. The CTCs from
a patient was detected using with immunomagnetic beads coated with
anti-mesothelin antibody and CTC count was 440 per 8 ml of peripheral
blood. Conclusions. Both CTC-Chip and immunomagnetic beads could capture
CTCs, using antibodies specific for mesothelin and podoplanin. Detection
of CTCs from a patient with malignant pleural mesothelioma was performed
by labeling of mesothelin-coated immunomagnetic beads. But the recovery
rate of tumor cells in spiked samples were less than 30%. The step of
deletion of red blood cells is necessary to be improved.

