Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of combination of microtubule depolymerizing peptides and
vinblastine in breast cancer.


Background: Stathmin is a major cytosolic protein that promotes
microtubule depolymerization. Recent crystallographic data indicate that
both stathmin & the chemotherapeutic agent, vinblastine, act together by
binding simultaneously on free tubulin. Stathmin was shown to mediate
vinblastine activity by increasing the affinity of vinblastine for
tubulin. We had previously demonstrated that intracellular delivery of
short stathmin-like peptide(s) could inhibit the malignant proliferation
of breast cancer (BC) cells by disrupting microtubule assembly. Here, we
asked whether the anti-proliferative effects of stathmin-like peptides
could be further enhanced by vinblastine. Methods: The peptide(s) that we
used consisted of a short stathmin-like domain that was fused to a TAT
transduction domain & a hemagglutinin epitope tag to track the peptide
intracellularly. Since stathmin could be phosphorylated & inactivated
intracellularly by p34cdc2 kinase, we also used a mutant peptide in which
Ser-16 was mutated to an alanine to prevent its inactivation by
phosphorylation. As a control, we used a similar peptide in which the
stathmin-like domain was scrambled. Results: We tested the effects of
these peptides in combination with vinblastine in different BC cell lines
(MDA-MB-231, T47D, & SKBR-3). The rate of proliferation of untreated
cells or cells exposed to control peptide was not affected by 2 nM
concentration of vinblastine & was modestly inhibited at 5 nM
concentration. When cells were exposed to wild type (WT) stathmin-like
peptide & vinblastine, the rate of proliferation was further decreased at
2 nM concentration & nearly suppressed at 5 nM concentration of
vinblastine. In contrast, cells exposed to mutant (MT) peptide showed
complete cessation of growth when combined with 2 nM or 5 nM vinblastine.
Thus, exposure to MT peptide seemed to result in greater sensitization of
BC cells to the growth inhibitory effects of vinblastine. Similarly,
cells exposed to either WT or MT peptide showed a 22% & 39% reduction in
the colony formation respectively. When cells were exposed to either WT
or MT peptide in combination with vinblastine, the clonogenicity was
further reduced to 47% & 73%, respectively. This suggests that the
peptides can inhibit anchorage independent growth, which is markedly
enhanced by vinblastine. We next analyzed the ability of the designed
peptides to induce apoptosis either as a single agent or in combination
with vinblastine. TUNEL analysis of control cells showed essentially no
apoptosis. When the cells were exposed to either WT or MT peptides, there
was a 13% & 24% increase in the fraction of apoptosis respectively.
However, combination of vinblastine with either WT or MT peptide
significantly increased the fraction of apoptotic cells to 54% & 76%,
respectively. These data suggest that the anti-tumor activity of
stathmin-like peptides is markedly enhanced by vinblastine in BC cells in
vitro.

