Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective eradication of cancer cells by adenovirus-based delivery
of cytotoxic agents: an alternative method for targeting pancreatic
cancer.


Background: Most cases of pancreatic cancer (PC) are diagnosed at the
metastatic stage and current therapies are inefficient. K-Ras mutations
are present in 95% of the cases. Ras is a difficult target to inhibit
thus, we propose an alternative strategy which does not inhibit the Ras
pathway but exploits it. We have previously shown that recombinant
adenovirus, which carries the pro-apoptotic PUMA gene under the control
of Ets and AP1/Ras- responsive elements (RREs; Py2-SV40-PUMA), suppressed
the growth of cancer cells expressing mutated Ras. We have constructed
additional vectors; Py4-; Py5-SV40-PUMA containing several RREs repeats,
which were proven effective in selectively targeting Ras-mutated tumor
cells (Naumov et al., 2012; Lisiansky et al., 2012). In this study, we
utilized a MazE-MazF (MazEF) unique toxin-antitoxin (TA) system encoded
from the E. coli genome. Under silent conditions the antitoxin (antidote)
inhibits the toxin and the toxin-antidote complex acts as a repressor for
the TA operon, whereas in activation conditions, proteolytic degradation
of the antidote outpaces its synthesis.Aim: Improve the therapeutic
efficacy and specificity of the adenoviral vectors by substituting the
lethal gene with more toxic agents that are highly regulated.Methods: To
achieve efficient DNA delivery into mammalian cells; the ribonuclease
MazF-mCherry fusion gene, truncated derivative of Pseudomonas exotoxin
(PE38), the full regulated cassette encoding for the MazEF TA system, and
the corresponding control vectors were cloned into a first generation
E1/E3 human type-5 adenoviral-vector under the control of RRE or SV40
minimal promoter. Virus particles were propagated in HEK293
toxin-resistant packaging cells. Tumor cells harboring wild type (WT) and
mutated K-Ras were used to test inhibition of cell proliferation,
viability, and toxin-expression upon treatment. Apoptosis was detected by
FACS using the RedDot 2 and Annexin V stains, measuring the fraction of
dead cells.Results: Two modified helper cell lines and efficient vectors
for targeted gene delivery were established. Virus particles were
produced and their potency was tested. Specific massive cell death (>50%)
at low MOIs was induced in cells exhibiting activated K-Ras upon
treatment, compared to WT-K-Ras cells. Induction of cell death was
measured qualitatively by fluorescent microscopy and quantified by the
MTT assay. Viral infection induced a marked inhibition of cell growth and
induction of apoptosis in cells expressing high levels of Ras activity
whereas WT-K-Ras cells remained unaffected.Conclusions: These novel
adenoviral vectors carrying either, PE38, MazF or MazEF genes targeting
the K-Ras pathway can serve to selectively and efficiently kill PC cells
harboring K-Ras mutations while sparing normal cells with WT Ras, thereby
improving the outcome of this devastating disease.

