Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant DNA methylation of miR-219 is associated with long-term
shift work and cancer-relevant biological pathways.


Background: Shift work that involves circadian disruption has been deemed
by IARC to be "probably carcinogenic" to humans. Although several
theories have been put forth to explain the connection between shift work
and cancer, including suppression of melatonin production and
deregulation of circadian genes involved in cancer-related pathways,
other potential cancer-relevant pathways remain unexplored. In this
study, we test the hypothesis that aberrant methylation events in the CpG
islands of specific miRNA promoters may be induced by prolonged exposure
to shift work in an all-female population, which in turn can lead to
cancer development.Material and Methods: We performed a genome-wide
methylation assay of miRNA promoters using DNA extracted from 10 pairs of
long-term shift workers and day workers selected from participants of the
Danish Diet, Cancer and Health prospective cohort. A genome-wide
expression microarray analysis was then carried out using a
miR-219-overexpressed MCF-7 breast cancer cell line. Differentially
expressed transcripts were then analyzed for network and functional
interrelatedness using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA)
software.Result: The genome-wide methylation analysis indicated that 50
CpG loci of 30 miRNAs, including miR-10a, miR-219, miR-7-3, miR34b/c, and
25 other newly discovered miRNAs, were differentially methylated in shift
workers compared to day workers. Of these, miR-219 has previously been
implicated in circadian-related pathways. Genome-wide expression
microarray analysis identified 319 differentially expressed transcripts
in miR-219-overexpressed MCF-7 cells, which were subsequently analyzed by
IPA. The most statistically significant network formed from these
transcripts suggests that overexpression of miR-219 induced apoptotic and
tumor-suppressive activities in MCF-7. Additional analysis indicated that
a number of signaling pathways were affected following miR-219
overexpression, including interferon-/ (IFN-/) singnaling,
interferon-gamma (IFN-) singnaling, and JAK/STAT signaling. In addition,
miR-219 appears to also be involved in the initiation of apoptosis
signaling via the increase of TRAIL expression and induction of the
caspase cascade.Conclusion: Our results suggest that long-term shift work
can lead to aberrant methylation patterns in miRNAs, including miR-219.
Hypermethylation of the miR-219 promoter, as observed in our long-term
shift workers, may suppress the expression of miR-219, potentially
leading to downregulation of miR-219-mediated apoptosis and increased
risk for cancer. This study may help us develop a more complete
understanding of a potential mechanism for the increased risk of breast
cancer observed in female long-term shift workers, which could be useful
for providing additional insight in the development of preventative and
therapeutic strategies.

