Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3D spheroid culture model for studying cancer progression: fine
tuning the extracellular environment.


There is a need for more comprehensive and physiologically predictive
cancer progression models. Tumor cell aggregates or spheroids are more
demonstrative of tumors in vivo as they display several physiological
traits including comparable morphology, reduced proliferation rates,
elevated cell survival, cell-cell bond formation, tumor dormancy, and a
hypoxic core. Embedding these spheroids in a physiological hydrogel
composed of basement membrane proteins provides networks on which cells
can travel out of the spheroid, mimicking early events during metastasis.
Recent studies implicate the tumor microenvironment as a key component of
the cancer progression process, and changes in tissue rigidity and
collagen I content have been associated with this pathological process.
The purpose of this study is to model the effects of differing
extracellular matrix composition on morphology and invasiveness in
different metastatic cell types during early metastatic events. Here,
human cell lines representing different cancer types were grown in
spheroid culture and subjected to embedding in hydrogels of differing
extracellular matrix protein composition. The cell panel includes
MDA-MB-231 for breast cancer, PC-3 for prostate cancer, U-87 MG for
glioblastoma and HT-1080 for fibrosarcoma. Spheroids were photographed
every 24 hours, and photographs were subjected to image analysis. The
composition of the extracellular matrix hydrogel had a significant effect
on the morphology of the invading cells as well as the rate of invasion.
Increasing the collagen I content to model a more fibrotic environment
resulted in fewer but longer process formation, representing a more
motile cancer model; however, collagen I, alone, was insufficient to
support robust invasion. In conclusion, the 3D spheroid invasion model
suggests that the composition of the extracellular matrix proteins is
important for cancer cell behavior during metastasis.

