Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumorigenic effects of phenformin in human ovarian cancer cell
lines.


Introduction: Anti-diabetic biguanide drugs, such as metformin, have been
shown to have anti-tumorigenic effects by behaving as AMPK activators and
mTOR inhibitors. Phenformin is another biguanide with anti-diabetic
activity that was withdrawn from the market due to a risk of lactic
acidosis that was higher than that seen with metformin. In vitro and in
vivo studies suggest that phenformin may be more potent for inhibiting
tumor growth than metformin. Thus, our objective was to assess the effect
of phenformin on proliferation and apoptosis in ovarian cancer cell
lines.Methods: Three ovarian cell lines, SKOV3, IGROV1, and HEY, were
used. Cell proliferation was assessed by MTT assay after exposure to
phenformin and after exposure to phenformin under varying glucose levels.
Apoptosis was analyzed by Annexin V-FITC assay. Cell cycle progression
was evaluated by Cellometer. Western immunoblotting was performed to
determine expression of the downstream targets of phenformin, including
AMPK, ribosomal protein S6, cyclin D and E2, cyclin dependent kinase
(CDK) 4 and 6, p21 and p27. Inhibition of adhesion by phenformin was
assessed by in vitro adhesion assay.Results: Phenformin potently
inhibited proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in all three ovarian
cancer cell lines (IC50 = 2.5mM for SKOV3 and HEY, 1mM for IGROV1 at 48
hours) (p = 0.0035 0.00001). Inhibition of proliferation was found at
normal, low and high glucose concentrations, but greater potency was
observed under low glucose concentrations. Treatment with phenformin
resulted in G1 cell cycle arrest and induction of apoptosis. Cellular
adhesion was decreased by 14-32% in the ovarian cancer cell lines at a
phenformin dose of 2.5mM (p = 0.009 0.0001). Western immunoblot analysis
demonstrated that phenformin induced phosphorylation of AMPK, its
immediate downstream mediator, within 18 hours of exposure. In parallel,
treatment with phenformin decreased phosphorylation of the S6 protein, a
key target of the mTOR pathway. Phenformin was also found to increase the
cell cycle inhibitors, p21 and p27, and decrease cyclin D, cyclin E2,
CDK4 and CDK 6, corresponding with G1 arrest in these cell
lines.Conclusion: Phenformin potently inhibited ovarian cancer cell
growth via G1 arrest and increased apoptosis. Although the risk/benefit
ratio clearly favors metformin over phenformin for the treatment of
diabetes, this may not hold true for the treatment of cancer if
phenformin were found to have superior anti-tumorigenic activity.
Continued work is needed to explore the benefits of both metformin and
phenformin for the treatment of ovarian cancer and the optimal
therapeutic index.

