Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Marked reduction of sequence artifacts in massively parallel
sequencing of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded DNA by depletion of uracil
containing templates.


Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues are commonly used for
the detection of mutational biomarkers in cancer patients. One of the
challenges associated with FFPE DNA in genetic testing is its high number
of sequence artefacts, thus increasing the risk of false positive results
particularly for low level mutations. We have previously shown that
uracil lesions in FFPE DNA due to deamination of cytosines are the major
cause of C:G>T:A sequence artefacts and pretreatment of damaged FFPE DNA
with uracil-DNA glycosylase (UDG) prior to PCR amplification markedly
reduces the C:G>T:A sequence artefacts using methodologies suitable for
the testing of limited numbers of genomic loci. As the number of cancer
associated mutations increases, massively parallel sequencing (MPS)
approaches are increasingly necessary. In particular, the use of targeted
amplicon based strategies is being implemented in many laboratories. We
set out to test whether sequence artifacts were a serious problem and
whether the UDG pretreatment strategy is also applicable to a amplicon
based targeted MPS approach (Truseq Cancer Panel).Samples not treated
with UDG showed multiple sequence artefacts with a significant portion of
changes greater than background sequencing error, with C:G>T:A changes
forming the vast majority of artefacts. Treatment of the samples with UDG
prior to sequencing dramatically reduced the majority of C:G>T:A changes
without affecting the detection of known SNPs and somatic mutations.
Elimination of artefactual changes by UDG treatment also improved the
accurate detection of low-level sequence variants. Interestingly, most
C:G>T:A changes that occurred in the context of CpG dinucleotides were
resistant to the UDG treatment as a likely consequence of 5-methyl
cytosine being deaminated to thymine.This approach will greatly
facilitate accurate detection of mutations in FFPE samples using
amplicon-based approaches which is imperative for personalised cancer
medicine, especially when working with samples of low tumour purity. This
work also has implications for choice of tissue and protocols for the
assessment of heterogeneity in tumours.Citation Format: Hongdo Do,
Stephen Q. Wong, Jason Li, Alexander Dobrovic. Marked reduction of
sequence artifacts in massively parallel sequencing of formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded DNA by depletion of uracil containing templates.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 54.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-54

