Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancer associated fibroblasts are characterized by
widespread epigenetic reprogramming that leads to aberrant expression of
druggable target CXCR4.


The microenvironment where a tumor originates plays an important role in
its initiation, growth, progression and metastatic capability. Since in
most cancers the microenvironment is not derived from the malignant clone
and does not contain oncogenic mutations, it is likely that the tumor
microenvironment is reprogrammed epigenetically to support the growth of
the tumor. To test this hypothesis, Fibroblasts associated with primary
pancreatic adenocarcinomas (N=7) & healthy fibroblast controls (N=4) were
analyzed for genome wide alterations in DNA cytosine methylation by the
HELP assay (HpaII tiny fragment Enrichment by Ligation-mediated PCR).
Methylome profiling revealed widespread aberrant cytosine methylation in
Pancreatic cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) with demethylation of
many important gene promoters as the predominant epigenetic event. In
addition to loss of methylation, aberrant hypermethylation of GALNTS,
JAZF1, MTCH1, SP8, GRB14 was also seen in CAFs. In addition to epigenetic
differences, pancreatic CAFs were also found to have widespread
transcriptmoic differences as seen by parallel gene expression profiling.
Next, we analyzed tumor mediated reprogramming of microenvironment at a
higher resolution by a Massive parallel sequencing based methylation
analysis (HELP-Tagging) on CAFs differentiated from mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs) in the presence of pancreatic cancer cell conditioned
medium. HELP-tagging showed widespread epigenetic reprogramming with
11,100 hypomethylated and 1709 hypermethylated loci. Comparison of
in-vitro reprogramed loci with the aberrantly methylated loci from
primary CAFs showed a core set of 140 loci that were commonly
differentially methylated in both samples. The chemokine receptor CXCR4
was observed to overexpressed & demethylated in both cohorts & was found
to be expressed on the surface of primary pancreatic CAFs by
immunohistochemistry. Functional studies demonstrated that co-culture of
pancreatic cancer cells with CAFs (from MSCs) led to significant increase
in malignant cell invasion when compared to co-culture with nave MSCs.
This increased invasion was abrogated by blockade of CXCR4 by AMD-3100
and by knockdown of CXCR4 by siRNAs in orthotopically derived CAFs;
demonstrating a critical role for this receptor in regulating tumor
promoting abilities of the microenvironment. Thus our results reveal for
the first time that pancreatic CAFs are characterized by widespread
epigenomic reprogramming that includes loss of methylation at many
important loci. Validation of an aberrantly demethylated target, CXCR4,
shows that inhibition of this receptor can abrogate the ability of CAFs
in promoting cancer cell invasion. These results also provide a
preclinical rationale for the use of clinically relevant CXCR4 antagonist
AMD-3100 (plerixafor) in pancreatic cancer.

