Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone marrow microenvironment control of BCL-6 in acute lymphocytic
leukemia .


BCL-6 is a proto-oncogene that encodes for a BTB/POZ-zinc-finger
transcriptional repressor, classically described in the regulation of
germinal center (GC) formation. Relevant to the current study BCL-6
endows GCB-cells with enhanced proliferative capacity by protecting
proliferating cells from DNA damage induced apoptosis through repression
of p53 (Phan 2004) and through prevention of senescence by increasing the
proliferative lifespan of B-cells (Shavarts 2002). BCL-6 also represses
p53 in leukemic stem cells (Hurtz 2011) and is a key survival protein in
Ph+ acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cells during kinase inhibition
(Duy). Based on these observations the current study investigated
potential bone marrow microenvironment (BMM) influence on BCL-6 in Ph+
and Ph- ALL as the site of initiation, progression, and often relapse of
aggressive disease. Utilizing an in vitro model of tumor cells grown in
media alone compared to tumor cells cultured with primary human
osteoblasts (Promocell) or stromal cells we explored the effects of
varied cues on BCL-6 expression. Co-culture experiments suggest that
microenvironment derived signals decreased BCL-6 expression. We also
noted decreased BCL-6 protein when tumor cells were exposed to Ara-C.
Subsequently we evaluated long term co-culture experiments in which
co-cultures of stroma/tumor or ostoeblast/tumor which had been grown
together for 48hrs were challenged with chemotherapy for a period of 72
hrs. This resulted in tumors cells with less BCL-6 expression compared to
non-treated co-culture controls. Chemotherapy treated co-cultures were
provided drug free media every 5 days to simulate a recovery following
cessation of therapy to determine if residual tumor cells survived the
drug treatment and their capacity to repopulate the culture. Few tumor
cells where seen in culture until days 15 to 20 post-treatment at which
time cell number increased dramatically, coincident with high BCL-6
expression that subsequently decreased back to control levels at days
20-35. Tumor cells recovered at the termination of co-culture were
uniformly CD38+. These results suggest that BCL-6 may be very responsive
to a variety of cues in the context of chemotherapy exposure when a
leukemic cell resides in the BMM, potentially supporting a quiescent drug
resistant population of cells, in part, through down regulation of BCL-6.
However, the effect is reversible as BCL-6 is restored during a phase of
proliferative repopulation in a CD 38+ subset of cells. This scenario is
reminiscent of the niche's capacity to balance stem cell quiescence and
proliferation during steady state hematopoiesis where stem and progenitor
cells are drawn into cell cycle in a controlled manner. These preliminary
observations suggest BCL-6 as a potentially important factor in
maintaining quiescence and cell cycle entry in a leukemic model and draw
clinical relevance based on the potential role of BCL-6 in relapse of ALL.

