Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The therapeutic potential of ICG-001 and -catenin specific RNAi in
liver cancer development.


Liver cancer is one of the most common malignant tumors. It is reported
to be the third most lethal malignancy worldwide. Recent studies
including our own identified CD133+ cell population as the tumor
initiating cells for liver cancer. Tumor suppressor PTEN (phosphatase and
tensin homologue deleted on chromosome ten) is aberrantly expressed in
liver cancers. Liver specific Pten (Pm) null mice develop liver cancer
following an extensive phase of chronic lipid accumulation and
demonstrate escalating levels of hepatic injury markers from 6-12M, prior
to hepatic progenitor cell proliferation. Concomitantly, expression of
mRNA levels for Wnt ligands and receptors also increased progressively.
Wnt/-Catenin signaling pathway has various roles in regulating embryonic
development and tumorigenesis. In Pten null liver progenitor cell line
and tissues; we observed high levels of catenin, a downstream target
component of the Wnt signaling pathway compared to control cells.In this
study, we investigate the role of the Wnt/-Catenin pathway in the
activation of hepatic progenitor cells in the Pten deletion liver cancer
model using two methods: a novel Wnt/-Catenin inhibitor ICG-001 and
-Catenin specific RNAi. ICG-001 is a small molecule, which specifically
inhibits -Catenin/CBP interaction. Coactivator CBP/-Catenin/T cell factor
(TCF) mediated transcription has been reported as critical for stem
cell/progenitor cell proliferation.ICG-001 significantly attenuates the
proliferation of hepatic cancer stem cells in vitro and in vivo. Our
preliminary results demonstrate inhibition of Wnt/-Catenin pathway using
sh--Catenin in vitro can effectively inhibit the proliferation of CD133+
hepatic cancer stem cells.These observations indicate that Wnt/- Catenin
pathway likely mediates proliferation of hepatic cancer stem cell.
Targeting this pathway using ICG-001 and/or -Catenin directed shRNA holds
promise for the treatment and eradication of liver cancer.

