Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid induction of apoptosis by PI3K inhibitors is dependent upon
their transient inhibition of RAS signaling.


Hyperactivation of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway in tumors causes feedback
inhibition throughout the signaling network, including inhibition of
receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) expression and function. Exposure of these
tumors to mTOR or AKT inhibitors relieves this feedback and reactivates
RTK signaling. RTK reactivation promotes PI3K activity and attenuates the
antitumor effects of the drugs. We have now characterized the details of
PI3K-induced feedback using a selective class 1 PI3K inhibitor and
compared its effects with those elicited by a selective allosteric
inhibitor of AKT. In breast cancer cell lines with dysregulation of PI3K
signaling, both drugs cause marked inhibition of AKT phosphorylation and
relief of feedback inhibition of HER3, IGF1, and insulin RTKs. Whereas
both inhibitors cause tumor cells to undergo growth arrest, only the PI3K
inhibitor causes a rapid induction of apoptosis within 2 hours of drug
addition. As opposed to the PI3K inhibitor, the AKT inhibitor induces
PI3K activity and a set of substrates that are inhibited by the PI3K
inhibitor. We therefore sought to identify processes that are selectively
inhibited by the PI3K inhibitor to explain its selective induction of
apoptosis.AKT inhibition causes the induction of ERK phosphorylation in
these cells. In contrast, we found that PI3K inhibition causes rapid
inhibition of RAS-GTP levels, RAF activation and ERK phosphorylation in
tumor cells with wild type RAS, but not those with mutant RAS. Inhibition
of RAS is transient, recovering 2-3 hours after drug addition. We
determined that adding MEK inhibitors to AKT inhibitors is similarly
associated with a rapid induction of apoptosis within 2 hours. Moreover,
addition of EGF to tumor cells co-treated with PI3K inhibitors prevents
ERK inhibition and apoptosis, whereas addition of MEK inhibitors to the
PI3K inhibitor, EGF treated cells restores the apoptotic phenotype.We
conclude that PI3K is upstream of both RAS and AKT in RAS wild type
tumors. Inhibitors of PI3K cause sustained inhibition of AKT and
transient inhibition of RAS with both effects required for rapid
induction of apoptosis. These data suggest that pulsatile inhibition of
PI3K may maximize the therapeutic efficacy of this approach.

