Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Measuring extracellular pH within in vivo tumors using acidoCEST
MRI.


INTRODUCTION. Extracelluar pH (pHe) is a hallmark for tumor
microenvironment. We have developed a non-invasive MRI method that can
accurately measure pHe to assess tumor acidosis, termed acidoCEST MRI.
This method measures a ratio of the Chemical Exchange Saturation Transfer
(CEST) effects of Iopromide, a FDA approved contrast agent for CT.
Iopromide has two amides that generate different CEST effects, and a
ratio of these CEST effects is correlated with pH over a range of 6.0-7.2
pH units, with a precision of 0.06 pH units, and in a manner that is
independent of the agent's concentration and the sample's T1 relaxation
time. We have applied acidoCEST MRI to monitor the effects of bicarbonate
treatment on tumors.METHOD. A CEST-FISP pulse sequence (2.8 T, 5 sec, 90
Hz), with 54 saturation frequencies (+10 to -10 ppm) was used to acquire
an acidoCEST image in 4.7 min on 7T MRI scanner. Each CEST spectrum was
fitted to a sum of three Lorentzian line shapes (Matlab R2012B).A mouse
model of MDA-MB-231 mammary carcinoma subcutaneous flank tumor was
treated with 200 mM of bicarbonate ad libitum. acidoCEST MRI was
performed 1 day before and 1 day after introducing bicarbonate treatment.
A bolus of 200 L of 976 mM iopromide was injected i.v., followed by an
infusion of 150 L/hour of iopromide. Six series of acidoCEST
spectroscopic images were acquired for 28 min.RESULTS: We were able to
measure an increased in pH in tumor before and after bicarbonate therapy.
As shown in the table, only half of the mice studied showed a significant
increase in pH after bicarbonate treatment. This is because the limit of
quantification of acidoCEST using Iopromide as contrast agent was pH
7.20.Discussion: acidoCEST MRI using Iopromide as contrast agent can
measure pH of the tumor with good precision and can be applied to monitor
pH-modulating therapy such as bicarbonate treatment. Our method has
strong clinical translation potential because it uses low saturation
powers, incomplete saturation, and a clinically approved contrast agent.
Summary of acidoCEST measurements on mammary carcinoma tumors before and
after bicarbonate treatment

