Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly conserved ceRNA regulatory interactions cooperate with
genomic variability to modulate drivers of tumorigenesis.


MicroRNAs (miRs) have been repeatedly linked to tumorigenesis and tumor
progression, suggesting their potential value as biomarkers and targets
for therapeutic intervention. Recent evidence suggests that mRNAs compete
for binding and regulation by a finite pool of miRs, thus regulating each
other as competitive endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs). The extent of this new
regulatory layer and its potential to alter the expression of cancer
genes has been shown in several tumor types, but the actual impact of
ceRNA interactions on disease remains unclear.In this study, using TCGA
(The Cancer Genome Atlas) tumor datasets, we provide evidence that ceRNA
play an important role in tumor etiology. Leveraging millions of
shRNA-mediated perturbations from LINCS (Library of Integrated
Network-based Cellular Signatures), we extensively validated ceRNA
interactions in breast and prostate cancer. Moreover, we identified over
160,000 ceRNA interactions that are conserved across tumor types despite
being implemented by miR programs with tumor type-specific expression. We
present evidence that these ultraconserved interactions are
mechanistically responsible for the dysregulation of the majority of
oncogenes and tumor suppressors through TCGA-profiled genomic alteration
of their cognate ceRNA regulators. Using targeted biochemical validation
in cell lines, we verified the potential of ceRNA regulators to target
ESR1, an established oncogene and drug target in breast cancer, and APC,
an established tumor suppressor in colon adenocarcinoma.Our analysis
suggests that ceRNA interactions are implemented through competition for
multiple miRNAs, rendering them virtually independent of single miRNA
kinetics and availability, and more likely to be conserved across
contexts. Using TCGA samples, we demonstrated that conserved ceRNA
interactions enable systematic identification of genomic alterations that
contribute to aberrant expression of hundreds of cancer genes in each of
eight distinct tumor contexts. We submit this network as a resource for
analyzing ceRNA regulation in datasets where reverse engineering
context-specific networks is infeasible due to low sample number or lack
of miRNA expression profiles.

