Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fractionated radiation-induced tumor suppressor microRNAs in human
prostate carcinoma cells.


To understand the role of microRNAs (miRNA) in regulation of
radiation-induced gene expression and to help define potential
radiation-inducible targets, miRNA expression was studied in wild type
p53 LNCaP and p53-mutated PC3 and DU145 cells. We have previously
investigated the changes in the molecular profiles of tumor cells that
were exposed to single dose (SD) versus fractionated radiation (MF) in
vitro, and identified immune and stress response pathways that were
induced by fractionated but not single dose radiation. Methods: Cells
were exposed to 5Gy and 10Gy either as SD or MF radiation radiation.
Microarray analyses were done using human Agilent miRNA Microarray Kit
(V2). Data were analyzed using Gene Spring software. Validation of the
miRNA expression and gene expression of miRNA targets was evaluated by
real-time RT-PCR analysis. Target filter analysis of differentially
expressed miRNAs (>1.5 fold change and p value1.5fold change, p1.5fold
change, p<0.05) in LNCaP, PC3 and DU145 cells, respectively. MF radiation
affected more miRNAs than SD radiation in all cell lines. In LNCaP and
PC3 cells, MF radiation upregulated tumor suppressor microRNAs miR-34a,
miR-200, miR-135, miR-221 and let7. Baseline expression of miR-34a was
markedly reduced in PC3 cells and DU145 cells compared to LNCaP cells.
However, miR-34a was upregulated by fractionated irradiation in LNCaP and
PC3 cells, but not in DU145 cells. RT_PCR analysis of 22 experimentally
verified miR-34a targets, showed distinct expression patterns in PC3 and
LNCaP cells 6 and 24 hours after radiation. An inverse correlation of
NOTCH1, E2F5 and MDM4 expression was observed in PC3 cells 6 and 24 hours
after MF but not in LNCaP cells. On the other hand, IFNB1 showed an
inverse correlation only in LNCaP cells. Majority of the differences in
the expression patterns of miR-34a targets were at 24 hours after MF.
Conclusion: Differences in the miRNA expression exist between cell lines
and after varying radiation regimens. Among the three prostate carcinoma
cell lines, tumor suppressor miRNAs are upregulated after MF radiation in
LNCaP and PC3 cells. Currently, we are in the process of modulating
miRNAs and their targets to examine their effects on radio
sensitivity.This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of
the NIH, NCI, CCR.

