Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation specific digital karyotyping of human papillomavirus
type 16 E6E7 expressing keratinocytes identifies novel methylation
targets in cervical carcinogenesis.


Persistent infection with high-risk human papillomavirus (hrHPV) types is
causally related to the development of cervical cancer and a subset of
other anogenital and head and neck cancers. HrHPV-induced malignant
transformation of epithelial cells is associated with (epi)genetic
aberrations in host cell genes, including alterations in DNA methylation
often affecting tumor suppressor gene expression. This study aimed to
comprehensively unravel genome-wide DNA methylation events linked to a
transforming hrHPV-infection, which is characterized by deregulated
expression of the viral oncogenes E6 and E7 in dividing epithelial cells.
Hereto, primary human keratinocytes transduced with HPV16E6E7 and their
untransduced counterparts were subjected to methylation-specific digital
karyotyping (MSDK) to screen for genome-wide DNA-methylation changes at
different stages of HPV-induced transformation. Integration of the
obtained methylation karyotype with genome-wide expression profiles of
cervical carcinomas identified 34 genes with increased methylation in
HPV-transformed cells and reduced expression in cervical carcinomas. For
12 genes (CLIC3, CREB3L1, FAM19A4, LFNG, LHX1, MRC2, NKX2-8, NPTX-1,
PHACTR3, PRDM14, SOST and TNFSF13) specific methylation in HPV-containing
cell lines was confirmed using a real-time methylation specific PCR (MSP)
detection platform. Except from NPTX-1, methylation of none of these
genes has to the best of our knowledge been linked to hrHPV-induced
cancers before. Subsequent analysis of FAM19A4, LHX1, NKX2-8, NPTX-1,
PHACTR3 and PRDM14 in cervical tissue specimens revealed an increase in
methylation of all six genes with disease progression. All genes were
commonly methylated in cervical carcinomas, with highest frequencies of
up to 100% detected for FAM19A4, PHACTR3 and PRDM14. NKX2-8, PHACTR3 and
PRDM14 were already methylated in approximately one third of precancerous
lesions, indicating that their alterations represent relatively early
events in cervical carcinogenesis.In conclusion, MSDK analysis of HPV16
transduced keratinocytes at different stages of HPV-induced
transformation resulted in the identification of novel methylation events
in cervical carcinogenesis, including methylation of FAM19A4, LHX1,
NKX2-8, PHACTR3 and PRDM14 gene promoters. These genes may provide
promising triage markers for assessment of the presence of (pre)cancerous
cervical lesions in hrHPV-positive women.

