Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Steam distilled ginger extract inhibits endometrial cancer cell
proliferation by activating P53 and causing apoptosis.


Phenolic compounds present in dry ginger powder or solvent extracts of
ginger roots induce cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in skin, breast,
prostate, colon, and ovarian cancer cells. Another class of bioactive
compounds, the terpenes, can be isolated by steam distillation of the
ginger rhizomes. In this study, we examine the anti-cancer properties of
Steam Distilled Ginger Extracts (SDGE) on endometrial cancer cells.SDGE
at an IC-50 of 1.5 micrograms/ml inhibited the proliferation of two
endometrial cancer cell lines, ECC-1 and Ishikawa. Decreased
proliferation of Ishikawa and ECC-1 cells was a direct result of
SDGE-induced-apoptosis as demonstrated by Annexin V FITC staining and
increased expression of cleaved caspase 3. GC-MS analysis allowed us to
identify 22 distinct terpenes in SDGE. Gingerols and other non-terpene
phenolic compounds were not present in SDGE. Neral and Geranial
constituted 25-35% of the total SDGE terpenes and were found to inhibit
endometrial cancer cell proliferation. On the other hand, camphene and
-pinene, which together constitute 10% of SDGE, showed no effect on the
proliferation of ECC-1 and Ishikawa cells. SDGE at concentrations as low
as 25 nanograms/ml caused a rapid increase in intracellular calcium
levels and an approximate decrease of 20% in the mitochondrial membrane
potential. Ser-15 of p53 was phosphorylated after a 15 minute treatment
of the cancer cells with SDGE (250 nanograms/ml). This activation of p53
was associated with a 90% decrease in Bcl2, whereas no effect was
observed on Bax. Pifithrin-, an inhibitor of p53, attenuated the
anti-cancer effects of SDGE that result from apoptosis. In addition, SDGE
(1.5 microgram/ml) was unable to induce apoptosis in the p53-negative
ovarian cancer cell line, SKOV3. Our data therefore indicates that
specific terpenes present in SDGE are highly efficient in controlling the
growth of p53-expressing cancer cells. We therefore propose that SDGE and
its constituent bioactive terpenes should be further investigated as
anti-cancer agents.

