Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting the combination of gemcitabine and the Chk1 inhibitor
MK-8776 in vitro and in vivo: cell cycle perturbation and the impact of
administration schedule.


Gemcitabine inhibits ribonucleotide reductase, prevents synthesis of
deoxyribonucleotides, and induces arrest of cells in S phase. Subsequent
inhibition of Chk1 causes the stalled replication forks to collapse,
thereby increasing cell death. We have observed up to 10-fold decrease in
the growth-inhibitory concentration (IC50) of gemcitabine upon incubation
with the Chk1 inhibitor MK-8776 across multiple cell lines. In contrast
to most in vitro studies, we have briefly incubated cells with
gemcitabine to more closely reflect the exposure to drug that occurs in
cancer patients. This permits analysis of the recovery from S phase
arrest as would occur clinically. Following treatment, the rate of
recovery depends on the concentration of gemcitabine, with S phase arrest
lasting for 24 h at low concentrations and 48 - 72 h at higher
concentrations. MK-8776 (2 M) was then added for 6 h periods reflecting
the approximate exposure that occurs in human plasma at its maximum
tolerated dose. The maximum decrease in IC50 occurred when MK-8776 was
added 18-24 h after gemcitabine. In addition to there being more cells in
S phase at this time, we observed that replication forks also evolve over
time to become more Chk1 dependent. Homologous recombination of DNA as
assessed by the formation of RAD51 foci does not occur at the time cells
initially arrest, but begins to occur 8 - 16 h later. Inhibition of Chk1
prevents RAD51 foci formation leading to replication fork collapse. Hence
there are two interacting mechanisms that contribute to the optimum
schedule of this drug combination: gemcitabine-mediated accumulation of
cells in S phase, and Chk1-mediated stabilization of replication forks.To
assess cell cycle perturbation in vivo, tumors were stained for Ki67
which detects cells at all phases of the cell cycle except Go, and
geminin which stains cells in S and G2. Results were expressed as the
ratio of geminin:Ki67; i.e., the ratio of cells in cycle that are in
S/G2. In untreated AsPc-1 human pancreas tumor xenografts, about 25% of
the cells were in S/G2, while administration of 150 mg/kg gemcitabine
(equates to 450 mg/m2 in humans) showed 80-90% of the cells in S/G2 24 h
after drug administration. When 50 mg/kg MK-8776 was administered 18 h
after 150 mg/kg gemcitabine, there was greater tumor growth delay than
concurrent administration of the drugs.We are currently conducting a
clinical trial in patients with bladder cancer to assess the cell cycle
perturbation that occurs following administration of standard dose of
1000 mg/m2 gemcitabine. Initial results show a significant S/G2 arrest 24
h after drug administration. These results emphasize the importance of
assessing cell cycle perturbation in patient tumors, and provide
justification for a clinical trial of gemcitabine followed 1 day later by
MK-8776.

