Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) overcomes drug resistance
in triple-negative breast cancer.


Despite advances in treating breast cancer, disease recurrence rates
remain high and secondary tumors are often resistant to chemotherapy and
incurable. Currently, the treatment for triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC) relies upon conventional chemotherapeutics as there are no
targeted therapies available. Although these tumors initially respond
well, they paradoxically have the highest relapse rates.Y-box binding
protein-1 (YB-1) is an oncogenic transcription/translation factor
abundantly expressed in TNBC (70% of patients). It is activated
predominantly by phosphorylation via p90 ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK). Once
activated it up-regulates the tumor-initiating-cell (TIC) marker CD44 and
induces a TIC phenotype[1]. Due to their inherent drug-resistance, TICs
survive chemotherapy and go on to drive relapse[2]. We recently
identified RSK2 is critical to the survival of TNBC[3]. Inhibiting RSK2
blocks activation of YB-1 and induces apoptosis in TNBC, including
CD44+/CD24- cells. Interestingly, inducing YB-1 is sufficient for
transformation of human mammary epithelial cells into TNBC. Moreover,
P-YB-1S102 is associated with poor overall survival (PDespite advances in
treating breast cancer, disease recurrence rates remain high and
secondary tumors are often resistant to chemotherapy and incurable.
Currently, the treatment for triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) relies
upon conventional chemotherapeutics as there are no targeted therapies
available. Although these tumors initially respond well, they
paradoxically have the highest relapse rates.Y-box binding protein-1
(YB-1) is an oncogenic transcription/translation factor abundantly
expressed in TNBC (70% of patients). It is activated predominantly by
phosphorylation via p90 ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK). Once activated it
up-regulates the tumor-initiating-cell (TIC) marker CD44 and induces a
TIC phenotype[1]. Due to their inherent drug-resistance, TICs survive
chemotherapy and go on to drive relapse[2]. We recently identified RSK2
is critical to the survival of TNBC[3]. Inhibiting RSK2 blocks activation
of YB-1 and induces apoptosis in TNBC, including CD44+/CD24- cells.
Interestingly, inducing YB-1 is sufficient for transformation of human
mammary epithelial cells into TNBC. Moreover, P-YB-1S102 is associated
with poor overall survival (P<0.001) and relapse (P90% of
paclitaxel-naive SUM149s (SUM149-DMSO) by 72 hrs. These cells express
increased P-RSKS221/7 and P-YB-1S102 without alterations in total protein
levels. Despite their resistance to paclitaxel, these cells remain
sensitive to RSK/YB-1 signaling inhibition. We are currently comparing
the response of TNBC either with or without YB-1 to paclitaxel in an in
vivo orthotopic xenograft model.Collectively, these data indicate that
inhibiting RSK/YB-1 signaling can overcome drug resistance and
potentially reduce relapse in TNBC.1.To K, Fotovati A et al. (2010) 2.Li
X, Lewis MT et al. (2008) 3.Stratford A, Reipas K et al. (2012)

