Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of x-ray radiation on spheroids cultured in a 3D matrix
under different oxygen conditions .


The use of 3-dimensional (3D) matrices for cell culture has become
popular as it provides more representative models of the biological
situation in tissues, organs and tumors than the traditional 2D cell
culture. NovaMatrix-3D is an alginate-based cell culture system
comprising an alginate foam matrix and an alginate immobilization
solution. The cells are first suspended in the alginate solution and
applied to the foam. This induces in situ gelation by diffusion of
calcium ions to the added alginate and the cells are immobilized inside
the pores of the foam. Alginate is not recognized by cell receptors and
is considered inert towards cells. Cells form 3-dimensional structures
such as spheroids, and the system may be utilized as an in vitro tumor
model. The growth of spheroids inside the 3D matrix can be determined by
evaluating changes in spheroid volume. Hypoxic cells are more resistant
towards traditional cancer treatments such as chemotherapy and radiation.
This study used cells cultured in a 3D matrix to evaluate the effect of
different doses of x-ray radiation when cells were cultured under
different oxygen concentrations. NHIK 3025 cells (human cervical
carcinoma) were cultured in 2D and then established as spheroids in
NovaMatrix-3D under 20% O2 and 5% O2 continuous culture conditions. The
growth rate of spheroids was first determined without x-ray radiation of
the cells. In subsequent experiments the cells were irradiated after 8
days of culture at a dose of 5 Gy or 15 Gy. In all experiments the
spheroid growth rate was monitored by determining the volume of the
spheroids by vital staining and confocal imaging at regular intervals
over 30 days. The volumes were obtained by measuring the diameter of the
spheroids in both x- and y-directions. The radii were calculated from the
average of these diameters and were then used to calculate the volumes.
Spheroids were formed under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions and it
was possible to determine growth curves from the volume measurements. The
sigmoidal growth curves were similar for both normoxic and hypoxic
conditions without radiation treatment. An x-ray radiation dose of 5 Gy
was not sufficient to affect the growth rate of the spheroids showing
that NHIK 3025 cells are more radiation resistant when grown as 3D
spheroids than in traditional 2D culture. When the spheroids were
irradiated with 15 Gy, a decrease in growth rate was observed. The
spheroids cultured under 20% oxygen were affected more, i.e. the growth
curves showed a significant reduction in volume increase, compared to the
spheroids cultured under 5% oxygen. This study indicates that hypoxia
increases the resistance of NHIK 3025 spheroids against x-ray radiation,
and demonstrates the utility of a 3D cell culture matrix (NovaMatrix-3D)
in dose response experiments.This work was funded by the METOXIA project
no.222741 under the 7th Research Framework Program of the European Union.

