Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential anti-tumor activities of curcumin against apoptosis
and cell Cycle progression in Src- and Ras-activated human gallbladder
carcinoma cells.


Curcumin, a phytochemical in turmeric, has been studied as a potential
anticancer drug targeting multiple signaling molecules. However, the role
of Src and Ras signaling pathways in curcumin sensitivity remains
unknown. We investigated therefore the molecular mechanism of
anti-proliferative and apoptosis-inducing activities of curcumin in HAG-1
human gallbladder adenocarcinoma cells transfected with either activated
Src (HAG/src3-1) or Ras (HAG/ras5-1). Effects of curcumin on
proliferation, apoptosis, cell cycle perturbation, and signal proteins
for survival, proliferation, and apoptosis were evaluated by WST-1 assay,
FACS analyses and Western blotting. Activation of either Src or Ras did
not confer resistance to curcumin compared to HAG/neo3-5
vehicle-transfected cells, producing similar IC50 concentrations of
curcumin among these 3 cell lines. Upon treatment with curcumin,
constitutive activities of Erk1/2 were enhanced, but those of Akt were
significantly inhibited in these three cell lines, with subsequent
reductions of activities of downstream mTOR and S6K1. The sub-G0/G1
apoptotic cell populations were substantially increased in all cell lines
with demonstrable cleavage of PARP, but this increase was most prominent
in Src-activated cells. Reduced expression and phosphorylation of Bcl-2
and enhanced expression of Bax were demonstrated to have a causative role
for the curcumin-induced apoptosis in Src-driven, but not Ras-driven
cells. By contrast, drastic increases of the proportion of cells in a
G2/M phase were seen in Ras-activated cells, suggesting a potential role
of Ras/Erk1/2 activation in curcumin-induced G2/M cell cycle arrest.
These data indicate that curcumin-induced growth declines would be
mediated mainly by G2/M arrest of the cell cycle in Ras-driven cells but
by apoptosis induction in Src-driven cells. Taken together, the results
indicate that curcumin exhibits differential activities against apoptosis
and cell cycle progression, depending on activation mechanisms of signal
transduction, and that curcumin can overcome Src- and Ras-driven
activation of downstream signaling pathways, thus providing evidence of
potential application of curcumin for the treatment of human cancers with
activated Src or Ras.

