Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implications for cardiotoxicity with targeted therapies.


Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKi) have greatly improved the treatment and
prognosis of multiple cancer types. However, unexpected cardiotoxicity
has arisen that was not wholly predicted by current FDA mandated
pre-clinical tests. Thus a more robust tool to predict the cardiotoxic
potential of these compounds is warranted. For this purpose, we developed
a panel of in vitro tests in a clinically relevant human cardiomyocyte
model that assesses drug impact on overall cardiac health (cell
viability, apoptosis, and morphology), mitochondria and metabolic
intactness (reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, AMPK activity, and
lipid accumulation), and electrophysiological function (impedance (beat
rate) and ion channel blockage). To demonstrate the utility of our panel,
we examined the effect of 4 FDA-approved TKi with known clinical outcome
on cardiac health. The 3 drugs with known cardiac adverse events
(crizotinib, sunitinib, and nilotinib) all proved to be cardiotoxic by
our panel although each showed distinct mechanisms of toxicity. However
erlotinib, a cardiac-safe drug that targets EGFR and is used primarily in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), did not show any indications of
toxicity. Surprisingly, the most cardiotoxic drug by our panel was
crizotinib, an ALK/ MET inhibitor that has revolutionized treatment for
ALK+ NSCLC patients. Crizotinib potently impaired overall cardiac health
by increasing ROS and apoptosis but also impeded electrophysiological
function by inducing ion channel blockage and reducing cardiac beat rate.
Interestingly crizotinib also induced lipid and cholesterol accumulation
which was shown to be correlated with increased expression of the
sterol-regulatory binding protein (SREBP) pathway by transcriptome
analysis. The multi-targeted TKi sunitinib (used in renal cell carcinoma
and gastrointestinal stromal tumors) and nilotinib (used in chronic
myelogenous leukemia) also showed unique cardiotoxicity profiles. In
conclusion, our studies showed a distinct cardiotoxicity profile for each
TKi that correlates with clinical outcome. These results suggest that
caution should be taken with these TKi especially when used long-term or
in the adjuvant setting. Furthermore, these effects may be exacerbated in
patients with adverse cardiac genetic predispositions and studies are
ongoing in our lab on patient-derived cardiac cell lines to investigate
this possibility. This multi-parameter screening approach allows for a
more complete assessment of the potential for drug-induced cardiotoxicity
and may allow for earlier detection in the drug development process. In
addition, understanding the mechanisms of cardiac toxicities may lead to
the discovery of novel mitigation strategies and combination therapies to
improve cardiac cell health during treatment with oncology therapies.

