Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of FGFR-1 and -2 in hormone responsive and
resistant murine mammary carcinomas.


Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptors (FGFRs) are dysregulated in a
number of developmental and neoplastic conditions. In human breast cancer
samples we have previously demonstrated a significant association between
FGFR2 expression and estrogen receptors as well as a positive correlation
of FGFR1 and high histological grade. Most breast carcinomas that express
hormone receptors respond initially to an endocrine therapy, but over
time, they develop resistance (acquired hormone resistance). Others fail
to respond from the beginning (constitutive resistance). Using a breast
cancer mouse model, we have previously demonstrated that
antiprogestin-responsive tumors (C4-HI) show a higher expression level of
progesterone receptor isoform A than PR isoform B (PRB), while tumors
with constitutive (C4-2-HI) or acquired resistance (C4-HIR) to
antiprogestins, display a higher expression level of PRB. Moreover, we
have demonstrated, in an antiprogestin-responsive tumor that FGFR2
activated by FGF2 released by the stromal compartment participate in
tumor growth activating PR. The aim of this study is to investigate the
expression of FGF2, FGFR1, FGFR2 in C4-HI, C4-HIR and C4-2-HI tumor
variants. By immunohistochemistry and western blot we observed a decrease
in FGFR2 expression for C4-2-HI (pFibroblast growth factor (FGF)
receptors (FGFRs) are dysregulated in a number of developmental and
neoplastic conditions. In human breast cancer samples we have previously
demonstrated a significant association between FGFR2 expression and
estrogen receptors as well as a positive correlation of FGFR1 and high
histological grade. Most breast carcinomas that express hormone receptors
respond initially to an endocrine therapy, but over time, they develop
resistance (acquired hormone resistance). Others fail to respond from the
beginning (constitutive resistance). Using a breast cancer mouse model,
we have previously demonstrated that antiprogestin-responsive tumors
(C4-HI) show a higher expression level of progesterone receptor isoform A
than PR isoform B (PRB), while tumors with constitutive (C4-2-HI) or
acquired resistance (C4-HIR) to antiprogestins, display a higher
expression level of PRB. Moreover, we have demonstrated, in an
antiprogestin-responsive tumor that FGFR2 activated by FGF2 released by
the stromal compartment participate in tumor growth activating PR. The
aim of this study is to investigate the expression of FGF2, FGFR1, FGFR2
in C4-HI, C4-HIR and C4-2-HI tumor variants. By immunohistochemistry and
western blot we observed a decrease in FGFR2 expression for C4-2-HI
(p<0.001) and C4-HIR (pFibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptors (FGFRs)
are dysregulated in a number of developmental and neoplastic conditions.
In human breast cancer samples we have previously demonstrated a
significant association between FGFR2 expression and estrogen receptors
as well as a positive correlation of FGFR1 and high histological grade.
Most breast carcinomas that express hormone receptors respond initially
to an endocrine therapy, but over time, they develop resistance (acquired
hormone resistance). Others fail to respond from the beginning
(constitutive resistance). Using a breast cancer mouse model, we have
previously demonstrated that antiprogestin-responsive tumors (C4-HI) show
a higher expression level of progesterone receptor isoform A than PR
isoform B (PRB), while tumors with constitutive (C4-2-HI) or acquired
resistance (C4-HIR) to antiprogestins, display a higher expression level
of PRB. Moreover, we have demonstrated, in an antiprogestin-responsive
tumor that FGFR2 activated by FGF2 released by the stromal compartment
participate in tumor growth activating PR. The aim of this study is to
investigate the expression of FGF2, FGFR1, FGFR2 in C4-HI, C4-HIR and
C4-2-HI tumor variants. By immunohistochemistry and western blot we
observed a decrease in FGFR2 expression for C4-2-HI (p<0.001) and C4-HIR
(p<0.01) as compared to C4-HI. Moreover, we found an increased expression
of FGF2 and FGFR1 by western blot (pFibroblast growth factor (FGF)
receptors (FGFRs) are dysregulated in a number of developmental and
neoplastic conditions. In human breast cancer samples we have previously
demonstrated a significant association between FGFR2 expression and
estrogen receptors as well as a positive correlation of FGFR1 and high
histological grade. Most breast carcinomas that express hormone receptors
respond initially to an endocrine therapy, but over time, they develop
resistance (acquired hormone resistance). Others fail to respond from the
beginning (constitutive resistance). Using a breast cancer mouse model,
we have previously demonstrated that antiprogestin-responsive tumors
(C4-HI) show a higher expression level of progesterone receptor isoform A
than PR isoform B (PRB), while tumors with constitutive (C4-2-HI) or
acquired resistance (C4-HIR) to antiprogestins, display a higher
expression level of PRB. Moreover, we have demonstrated, in an
antiprogestin-responsive tumor that FGFR2 activated by FGF2 released by
the stromal compartment participate in tumor growth activating PR. The
aim of this study is to investigate the expression of FGF2, FGFR1, FGFR2
in C4-HI, C4-HIR and C4-2-HI tumor variants. By immunohistochemistry and
western blot we observed a decrease in FGFR2 expression for C4-2-HI
(p<0.001) and C4-HIR (p<0.01) as compared to C4-HI. Moreover, we found an
increased expression of FGF2 and FGFR1 by western blot (p<0.05) and
immunohistochemistry in the epithelium of the resistant tumor variants.
Similar results were obtained with another family of antiprogestin
responsive and unresponsive tumors (59-HI and 59-2-HI). These data
suggest that in this mammary tumor model hormone resistance may be
characterized by a switch from paracrine to autocrine FGF2 signaling
together with a decrease in FGFR2 and an increase in FGFR1. These results
contribute to understand the role of the FGFR pathway in hormone
resistance and support the use of FGFR inhibitors combined with hormonal
therapy to delay the onset of hormone resistance.

