Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel cell culture surface supports effective formation of three
dimensional cancer spheroids in suspension.


The study of cell biology via monolayer cell culture systems is not
entirely adequate for the investigation of complex inter-cell and cell to
extracellular matrix interactions in vitro. Three dimensional (3D) cell
culture systems better mimic more complex interactions and are extremely
useful in broad applications of cell biology. In human cancer biology, a
3D culture system is better able to simulate an extracellular
microenvironment to study tumor cell progression and sensitivity to
anticancer agents. However, variability in forming spheres has been a
persistent problem. This variability has been linked to medium
composition and volume, cell density, duration in culture, and most
importantly, the cellular interactions with the culture dish itself.
Here, we hypothesize that a hydrophilic polymer coated surface, Thermo
Scientific Nunclon Sphera, inhibits cell attachment to the culture dish
by blocking binding of the extracellular matrix (ECM). First we
demonstrated that the adsorption of ECM proteins (e.g. Collagen I and
Fibronectin) to the hydrophilic polymer coated Nunclon Sphera surface is
extremely low compared to that of the standard cell culture-treated
surface, implying minimal interactions between the hydrophilic polymer
and the ECM. We then examined spheroid formation on the hydrophilic
polymer surface in comparison to the standard cell culture treated
surface. We were able to show that unlike the standard cell culture
surface, the hydrophilic polymer surface was able to support spheroid
development in suspension with virtually no cell attachment by several
cancer cell lines including HeLa, MCF-7, HepG2, Panc-1, Saos-2, and A549.
In order to show that the hydrophilic polymer coating has no deleterious
effects on cell growth, we conducted spheroid culture of a cancer stem
cell line, P19.CL6, in the Nunclon Sphera dishes at relatively low cell
seeding densities. Over time, the spheroids of all initial seeding
densities were able to grow in volume, indicating that the hydrophilic
polymer coating has no adverse effect on cell survival and proliferation.
Finally, we demonstrated that the performance of Nunclon Sphera surface
in supporting cancer spheroid formation is comparable to that of a
similar product by a different manufacturer. Overall, the data supports
that the Thermo Scientific Nunclon Sphera provides a consistent and
reliable culture system for non-adherent spheroid growth, aiding in three
dimensional modeling of cancer cells in vitro.

