Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of intermediate filament nestin in cell growth of
small-cell lung cancer.


Small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) represents 13% of all newly diagnosed cases
of lung cancer. Clinical progression of SCLC is rapid and aggressive.
Unfortunately, 70% of SCLC cases have already metastasized at the time of
diagnosis, and the recent median survival time and two-year survival rate
in SCLC patients with extensive-stage disease is only 8-13 months and 5%,
respectively. Clinical trials of SCLC treatments have been conducted
since the mid-1980s, but have not achieved prolonged survival; this lack
of success is likely due to a lack of appropriate target molecules. To
improve outcomes for SCLC patients, new therapeutic strategies including
novel molecular targets for SCLC are desired. Nestin is a class VI
intermediate filament protein expressed in stem/progenitor cells during
the development of the central nervous system. Nestin is detected in
various types of tumors and reported to be involved in malignant
phenotypes. Here, we investigated the expression and function of nestin
in SCLC. At the beginning, protein expression of nestin and achaete-scute
homolog 1 (ASH1) was studied in 21 lung cancer cell lines. Nestin was
expressed in 9 of 10 SCLC cell lines. The nestin expression level in SCLC
cell lines was significantly higher than that in non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cell lines (PSmall-cell lung cancer (SCLC) represents 13%
of all newly diagnosed cases of lung cancer. Clinical progression of SCLC
is rapid and aggressive. Unfortunately, 70% of SCLC cases have already
metastasized at the time of diagnosis, and the recent median survival
time and two-year survival rate in SCLC patients with extensive-stage
disease is only 8-13 months and 5%, respectively. Clinical trials of SCLC
treatments have been conducted since the mid-1980s, but have not achieved
prolonged survival; this lack of success is likely due to a lack of
appropriate target molecules. To improve outcomes for SCLC patients, new
therapeutic strategies including novel molecular targets for SCLC are
desired. Nestin is a class VI intermediate filament protein expressed in
stem/progenitor cells during the development of the central nervous
system. Nestin is detected in various types of tumors and reported to be
involved in malignant phenotypes. Here, we investigated the expression
and function of nestin in SCLC. At the beginning, protein expression of
nestin and achaete-scute homolog 1 (ASH1) was studied in 21 lung cancer
cell lines. Nestin was expressed in 9 of 10 SCLC cell lines. The nestin
expression level in SCLC cell lines was significantly higher than that in
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines (P<0.01). There was a
statistically significant positive correlation between the expression
levels of nestin and ASH1 in SCLC cell lines, but not in NSCLC cell
lines. To assess the function of nestin, we transfected a short hairpin
RNA (shRNA) targeting nestin into two SCLC cell lines, DMS53 and SBC3,
and then obtained cloned cells that showed apparent down-regulation of
nestin. Nestin knock-down cells created by transfection with shRNA
exhibited decreased invasion and cell proliferation capabilities. In
conclusion, Nestin is expressed in SCLC in association with
neuro-endocrine feature and participates in malignant phenotypes
including cell growth. Therefore, nestin may be a novel therapeutic
target of SCLC. Additional in vivo study will be needed.

