Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCT271850, a novel, selective, highly potent and orally
bioavailable Mps1 kinase inhibitor.


The main role of the cell cycle is to enable error-free DNA replication,
chromosome segregation and cytokinesis. Surveillance mechanisms, the
so-called checkpoint pathways, monitor passage through mitosis at several
stages. One of the best characterised is the spindle assembly checkpoint
that prevents anaphase onset until the appropriate tension and attachment
across kinetochores is achieved. One of the first components of the
spindle assembly checkpoint signal, identified by a genetic screen in
budding yeast, was MPS1 (monopolar spindle 1; also known as TTK). MPS1
gene was shown to encode an essential dual-specificity kinase conserved
from yeast to humans. MPS1 activity peaks at the G2/M transition and is
enhanced upon activation of the spindle assembly checkpoint with
nocodazole. We and others, have identified the autophosphorylation of
T676 in the activation loop of MPS1 and shown that this is essential for
MPS1 function. MPS1 has been found aberrantly overexpressed in a wide
range of human tumours including breast, lung, oesophagus, and
prostate.MPS1 is required for the establishment and maintenance of the
spindle assembly checkpoint during mitosis. Aneuploid tumour cells
possess a compromised spindle checkpoint to allow onset of anaphase and
cell division. We have shown that depletion of MPS1 by siRNA induces cell
death selectively in PTEN-deficient breast cancer cell lines. We have
developed biochemical and cellular assays for MPS1 activity and a high
throughput screening of our compound library delivered multiple hit
series. We have previously reported the discovery of CCT251455 as a
selective and orally bioavailable MPS1 inhibitor that inhibits the growth
of a panel of human tumour cell lines, abrogates nocodazole-induced
mitotic arrest and reduces the time spent in mitosis. Medicinal chemistry
in combination with X-ray crystallography led to the discovery of
CCT271850, a novel inhibitor of MPS1 kinase activity. CCT271850
selectively inhibits MPS1 kinase activity with an IC50 of 0.004 M,
inhibits autophosphorylation of MPS1 in cells with an IC50 of 0.07 M and
reduces the growth of a panel of human tumour cell lines, particularly
PTEN-deficient cell lines. Tumour cells treated with CCT271850 contain
aberrant numbers of chromosomes and the majority of cells divide their
chromosomes without proper alignment. CCT271850 is orally bioavailable (F
= 68%) and shows modulation of biomarkers in vivo.

