Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer/testis antigens for immunotherapy and detection of multiple
myeloma.


Despite recent improvements in standard pharmacologic treatments of
multiple myeloma (MM), immunotherapy may prove to be more effective due
to its higher specificity and lower toxicity. Indeed, current frontline
MM therapies are based on the use of drugs such as thalidomide,
lenalidomide, and bortezomib, which are associated to serious side
effects and undermined by the development of multidrug resistance in
recurring disease. The potential for immune surveillance against tumor
recurrence has been clearly exemplified by the superior effectiveness of
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, residing in
alloreactive donor T cells, compared with autologous HSCT. However,
allo-HSCT has major side effects. Many of the antigens driving
graft-versus-tumor activity are shared by normal host tissues. Such a
setting generates graft-versus-host disease, strongly limiting complete
response rates and survival. Cancer testis antigens (CTAs) are a family
of proteins with testis-restricted expression that are not present, or
barely present, in other tissues, but are associated with many tumors. As
the testes are immunologically privileged sites lacking HLA expression,
CTA are suggested to be ideal targets for immunotherapy. Here we
characterized the expression of two novel MM CTA, Ropporin and AKAP4, in
tumor plasma cells from patients and cell lines. Additionally, we showed
that Ropporin and AKAP4 are strongly immunogenic and are therefore
potential targets for effective MM vaccines. Additionally, because of
their preferential expression in tumor cells, Ropporin and AKAP4 are
outstanding biomarkers for tumor detection and monitoring in vivo.
Similarly to other malignancies, virtually any innovative treatment for
MM requires a pre-clinical assessment, which largely relies on the use of
animal models to evaluate the anti-tumor potential and possible
toxicities. Recently, a modified NOD strain, carrying disrupted Rag1 and
the IL2-R chain genes (NOD-Rag1null/IL2rgnull, NRG), has been reported to
tolerate higher levels of radiation compared with NOD/SCID strain and to
allow for efficient engraftment of human tumors and HSC. The development
of successful animal models for MM also relies on the choice of the
biomarkers used to track the disease course and to identify tumor cells.
Here we used the NRG strain to establish an innovative model of MM,
allowing for the growth and the spread of MM cell lines and primary
patients cells, which can be monitored by using AKAP4 as a tumor
biomarker.

