Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The HDAC inhibitor romidepsin prevents the emergence of
drug-tolerant cancer cells.


Background: Drug resistance represents a major obstacle to successful
cancer treatment. Various resistance mechanisms have been described
(e.g., drug efflux pumps). Recent data points to the pre-existence of a
subpopulation of cancer cells termed drug-tolerant persisters (DTPs) that
exhibit an epigenetically-mediated tolerance to high concentrations of
chemotherapeutic drugs (Sharma, 2010). Although DTPs were largely
quiescent, a small fraction resumed growth even in the presence of high
drug concentrations, giving rise to drug-tolerant expanded persisters
(DTEPs). Levels of histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) methylation and H3K14
acetylation were decreased in DTPs and DTEPs, and co-treatment (Q3D) of
cancer cells with the anticancer drug in combination with histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) inhibited DTP/DTEP growth, implicating an
epigenetic mechanism.Purpose: To assess whether the HDACi romidepsin
(ROMI) can prevent the emergence of drug-tolerant cancer cells, to
determine the stage at which ROMI acts (killing DTPs or preventing DTEP
expansion), and to establish the dose-schedule requirements for the
effect.Methods: The M14 melanoma and HCC827 NSCLC cell lines were treated
in 24-well plates with AZ628 (B-Raf inhibitor) or Erlotinib (ERL; EGFR
inhibitor), respectively, alone or in combination with ROMI, TSA, or
azacitidine (AZA). ROMI, TSA, AZ628, and ERL were added every 3 days,
while AZA was added daily. Cell viability was monitored periodically over
45 days using CellTiter-Glo. In subsequent experiments, reduced schedules
from the continuous (Q3D for 45 days) schedule were tested, including Q3D
schedules given for 1-8 times. To evaluate minimal daily exposure, cancer
cells were exposed to ROMI for only 6 hours.Results: Massive cell death
was observed after 9 days of treatment of M14 and HCC827 cells with 100X
IC50 concentrations of AZ628 and ERL, respectively. With continued
AZ628/ERL treatments, however, the few remaining cells (DTPs) began to
proliferate, ultimately yielding a large population of
AZ628/ERL-resistant cells (DTEPs). Continuous (Q3D for 45 days)
co-treatment of cancer cells with AZ628/ERL in combination with
sub-lethal concentrations of ROMI and TSA, but not AZA, prevented the
emergence of DTEPs. Short (6-hour) exposures to higher ROMI and TSA
concentrations on the continuous schedule were also sufficient to prevent
DTEP growth. Interestingly, continuous dosing of HDACi was not required
to prevent DTEPs from forming, as reducing the schedule to 2 weeks Q3D
had the same effect, suggesting that there is a period of susceptibility
to the DTP or early DTEP population.Conclusions: ROMI prevents DTEP
emergence. Dosing ROMI for 2 weeks Q3D and 6-hour exposures are
sufficient for this effect. These results show that co-treatment with
ROMI can prevent drug resistance and provide guidance to the dose and
schedule requirements to consider for clinical evaluation in this setting.

