Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer cell proliferation is inhibited by specific modulation
frequencies.


Purpose: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) incidence in the US is
dramatically increasing. Five-year survival remains 3-5%, demonstrating
urgent need for additional therapies. Intrabuccal administration of
amplitude modulated electromagnetic fields (RF EMF) is a novel, minimally
invasive treatment modality which results in whole body absorption of
very low levels of RF EMF. Clinical studies show that this treatment
approach elicits therapeutic responses in patients with hepatocellular
carcinoma and breast cancer. Using an in vitro exposure system
replicating the levels of exposure achieved in humans, we have described
a phenotype in HCC cells following RF EMF exposure that included
proliferative inhibition, modulation of gene expression, and disruption
of the mitotic spindle. This phenotype was specific for HCC cells exposed
to HCC-specific RF EMF at exposure levels ranging from 0.03 to 0.4
W/kg.Methods: HCC cells were exposed to 27.12 MHz electromagnetic fields
modulated at specific frequencies from 400 Hz to 21 kHz, previously
identified in HCC patients. MicroRNA arrays compared exposed and control
groups of HCC cells, with microRNA validation followed by Western blot of
target genes and proteins. HCC xenografts were injected subcutaneously in
NOD SCID mice. Following palpable tumor establishment, mice were exposed
to HCC-specific RF EMF at a specific absorption rate of 0.4 W/kg,
euthanized following excessive tumor burden, and evaluated by
immunohistochemistry.Results: We identified increased levels of miRNAs
targeting proteins belonging to the PI3K pathway, specifically IP3/DAG
signaling and intracellular calcium release. This pathway is frequently
disrupted in HCC and breast cancer, making it an excellent candidate for
modulation by RF EMF; furthermore, downstream effects include: cell cycle
progression, proliferation, inhibition of apoptosis, and cell migration.
We observed tumor shrinkage in mice exposed to HCC-specific modulation
frequencies and residual xenograft tumor cells were infiltrated with
fibrous tissue and showed significantly decreased proliferation and
increased apoptosis. There was no evidence of altered cell proliferation
or fibrosis in other organs.Conclusion: These findings are the first
evidence of the efficacy and safety of RF EMF in HCC using a subcutaneous
xenograft model and uncover a novel mechanism that controls cancer cell
growth in vivo at specific modulation frequencies, possibly through
modulation of PI3K signaling and downstream release of intracellular
calcium.Citation Format: Hugo Jimenez, Jacquelyn W. Zimmerman, Michael J.
Pennison, Ivan Brezovich, Nengjun Yi, Celeste T. Yang, Ryne Ramaker,
Devin Absher, Richard M. Myers, Niels Kuster, Frederico P. Costa,
Alexandre Barbault, Boris Pasche. Cancer cell proliferation is inhibited
by specific modulation frequencies. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5612. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5612

