Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual role of mast cells in prostate tumors.


Prostatic carcinoma is most often a multifocal disease, with areas of
localized, well-differentiated adenocarcinomas coexisting with poorly
differentiated lesions within the same tumor. Mast cells (MC),
classically known as the primary responders in allergic reactions, have
been recently indicate of prognostic value in prostate cancer. We have
evidence of a dual role of MC in prostate cancer. Within the same human
tumor, MC are specifically enriched and degranulated in areas of
adenocarcinoma, whereas few around anaplastic foci. This observation has
been confirmed in tumors from TRAMP (Transgenic Adenocarcinoma of the
Mouse Prostate) mice, and in two novel tumor cells lines, derived from
them, phenocopying well and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma: T1525
and T23, respectively. MC promote the growth of the well-differentiated
adenocarcinoma T1525 that does not develop when transplanted into
MC-deficient mice, or when MC degranulation is pharmacologically
inhibited with sodium cromoglycate. In particular, mast cells are
essential for the outgrowth of early-stage tumors due to their matrix
metalloproteinase-9 production, become dispensable in advanced-stage,
post-epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and are protective against
neuroendocrine prostate tumor variants. Indeed, pharmacological
inhibition or genetic ablation of MC in TRAMP mice results in early
development of undifferentiated tumors characterized by marked anaplasia,
suggesting that the growth of anaplastic clones may be antagonized by
MC.Our data demonstrate that MC can influence the histotype of tumor
arising from the prostate and that their targeting may change tumor
outcome. As a possible corollary, MC depletion might favor the growth of
more undifferentiated and aggressive variants. The common expression of
c-Kit by mast cells and neuroendocrine clones suggests a possible
competition for the ligand Stem Cell Factor and offers the chance of
curing early-stage disease while preventing neuroendocrine tumors using
c-Kit-targeted therapy.

