Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitosis interference of cancer cells by NovoTTF-100A causes
decreased cellular viability.


Cancer cell death from traditional cytotoxic chemotherapy and radiation
is a result of triggering cell cycle checkpoint with p53 playing a
prominent role in orchestrating this effect. Unlike these traditional
approaches, the NovoTTF-100A device, which has been approved for the
treatment of recurrent glioblastomas, kills tumor cells by a novel
mechanism that interferes with the proper progression through mitosis. As
is the case with earlier therapeutic interventions, only a subset of
patients shows significant response to TTFields treatment. Our research
reveals that the tumor-treating fields (TTFields) affects processes
proximal to the metaphase-to-anaphase transition, leading to cell cycle
arrest in anaphase and eventual cell death. Tissue culture cells exposed
to the TTFields during mitosis exhibit a variety of outcomes, including
cell arrest in anaphase, cytokinesis with cytokinetic furrow regression,
and slippage out of mitosis without division. Time-lapse movies of cells
stained with the DNA stain DRAQ5 and exposed to the TTFields revealed
membrane blebbing and oscillation, as well as failed segregation of
sister chromatids from the metaphase plate, both of which were initiated
near the time of metaphase-to-anaphase transition. Immunoflourescence of
cells after short-term treatment with TTFields during mitosis showed
disordered separation of chromosomes from metaphase plates accompanied by
lagging chromosomes, dispersion of chromosomes from the metaphase plate,
chromosomes de-condensation in the absence of cytokinesis, and daughter
cells with asymmetric chromosomal segregation. Flow cytometry also
revealed the presence of cells with abnormal DNA content in cultures
treated with TTFields. In contrast to the p53 mutant cell lines,
MDA-MB-231 and HCT 116, U87 cells with wild-type p53 exhibit increased
Annexin V binding, Caspase activation and increased markers of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress after brief exposure during mitosis.
This suggests the TTFields induced cellular damage is able to trigger
p53-dependent cell death in cells that escape killing during M-phase.
These data show that the effects of TTFields on cellular damage during
M-phase and provide evidence for the notion that the differential
responses to treatment seen in patients may be rooted in the underlying
genetic alterations in their tumors.

