Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor Treating Fields inhibit the growth of pancreatic and ovarian
cancer in preclinical models .


Tumor Treating Fields (TTFields) therapy is an established anti-mitotic
treatment modality. The Novo TTF-100A system, which delivers TTFields to
the brain received FDA approval for the treatment of patients with
Recurrent Glioblastoma (GBM) Brain Tumors. The goal of the present study
is to test whether TTFields therapy is effective as a treatment in
pre-clinical models of pancreatic and ovarian cancer.TTFields of various
frequencies were applied for 72h to cancerous tumor cells using two pairs
of perpendicular insulated electrodes. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma and
ovarian carcinoma culture growth was significantly reduced compared to
controls (65%+10% and 21%+13%, respectively) with a maximal inhibitory
effect seen at 150 and 200 kHz (respectively). The surviving cells
exhibited increased cell volume (35%+11% and 61%+43% for pancreatic and
ovarian cell lines, respectively) and a reduced viability. Fluorescence
microscopy and FACS analysis revealed abnormal mitotic figure in the
treated cells cultures and an increase in the 4N population, suggesting
these cells failed to complete mitosis. Yet, the increase in the 4N cells
fraction was too small to explain for the observed increase in cell
volume in the entire remaining cell population. Combining TTFields with
gemcitabine and paclitaxel commonly used for the treatment of pancreatic
and ovarian cancer, enhanced treatment efficacy and led to a further
increase in cell volume.The efficacy of TTFields either alone or in
combination with 5FU or gemcitabine was tested in hamsters bearing
syngeneic, orthotopic pancreatic tumors. In vivo imaging as well as post
mortem analysis demonstrated a significant decrease in tumor weight and
volume. Compared to chemotherapy treatment alone, TTF had a sensitizing
effect and increased tumor response to chemotherapy.Based on previous
reports, the observed increase in cell volume is expected to shift the
peak response to TTFields to a lower frequency, allowing some of the
cells to escape the effect of TTFields. While this is the first proposed
mechanism of resistance to TTFields it also opens the possibility of
overcoming that resistance using serial application of several
frequencies.

