Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The facilitates chromatin transcription (FACT) protein complex
promotes neuroblastoma tumor initiation.


Tumour initiation in the TH-MYCN transgenic mouse model of neuroblastoma
is characterised by transient repression of p53 stress responses in
embryonal ganglionic neuroblasts, causing them to persist postnatally as
cancer-prone lesions 1, 2. p53 re-activation may be a potential
therapeutic strategy for removal of these lesions before they later
transform in response to oncogenic stimuli. One potential target for p53
activation is the FACT protein complex which is known to inhibit p53
signalling. Here we show that high mRNA expression levels of the two FACT
subunits, SSRP1 and SPT16, in human primary neuroblastoma tissue were
significantly associated with poor patient outcome (pTumour initiation in
the TH-MYCN transgenic mouse model of neuroblastoma is characterised by
transient repression of p53 stress responses in embryonal ganglionic
neuroblasts, causing them to persist postnatally as cancer-prone lesions
1, 2. p53 re-activation may be a potential therapeutic strategy for
removal of these lesions before they later transform in response to
oncogenic stimuli. One potential target for p53 activation is the FACT
protein complex which is known to inhibit p53 signalling. Here we show
that high mRNA expression levels of the two FACT subunits, SSRP1 and
SPT16, in human primary neuroblastoma tissue were significantly
associated with poor patient outcome (p<0.001) on Kaplan Meier analysis
of 650 neuroblastoma patients. Both SSRP1 and SPT16 levels had a strong
correlation with the level of MYCN expression, particularly in high risk
MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma tissues (pTumour initiation in the TH-MYCN
transgenic mouse model of neuroblastoma is characterised by transient
repression of p53 stress responses in embryonal ganglionic neuroblasts,
causing them to persist postnatally as cancer-prone lesions 1, 2. p53
re-activation may be a potential therapeutic strategy for removal of
these lesions before they later transform in response to oncogenic
stimuli. One potential target for p53 activation is the FACT protein
complex which is known to inhibit p53 signalling. Here we show that high
mRNA expression levels of the two FACT subunits, SSRP1 and SPT16, in
human primary neuroblastoma tissue were significantly associated with
poor patient outcome (p<0.001) on Kaplan Meier analysis of 650
neuroblastoma patients. Both SSRP1 and SPT16 levels had a strong
correlation with the level of MYCN expression, particularly in high risk
MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma tissues (p<0.05). Inhibition of MYCN
expression by a specific siRNA, lowered SSRP1 and SPT16 expression in two
neuroblastoma tumor cell lines (BE(2)C and Kelly). Alamar blue assays
revealed that a chemical inhibitor of FACT, Curaxin or CBL137, potently
and selectively promoted cytotoxicity in neuroblastoma cell lines as
compared to non-malignant MRC5 fibroblasts (pTumour initiation in the
TH-MYCN transgenic mouse model of neuroblastoma is characterised by
transient repression of p53 stress responses in embryonal ganglionic
neuroblasts, causing them to persist postnatally as cancer-prone lesions
1, 2. p53 re-activation may be a potential therapeutic strategy for
removal of these lesions before they later transform in response to
oncogenic stimuli. One potential target for p53 activation is the FACT
protein complex which is known to inhibit p53 signalling. Here we show
that high mRNA expression levels of the two FACT subunits, SSRP1 and
SPT16, in human primary neuroblastoma tissue were significantly
associated with poor patient outcome (p<0.001) on Kaplan Meier analysis
of 650 neuroblastoma patients. Both SSRP1 and SPT16 levels had a strong
correlation with the level of MYCN expression, particularly in high risk
MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma tissues (p<0.05). Inhibition of MYCN
expression by a specific siRNA, lowered SSRP1 and SPT16 expression in two
neuroblastoma tumor cell lines (BE(2)C and Kelly). Alamar blue assays
revealed that a chemical inhibitor of FACT, Curaxin or CBL137, potently
and selectively promoted cytotoxicity in neuroblastoma cell lines as
compared to non-malignant MRC5 fibroblasts (p<0.001). To examine the role
of FACT in MYCN-driven tumourigenesis we evaluated the effect of Curaxin
on tumor initiation in TH-MYCN mice. Low micromolar Curaxin doses
effectively restored normal in vitro, p53-dependent death responses to
primary ganglion cells deprived of serum from neonatal TH-MYCN mice,
while ganglion cultures from wild-type littermate mice were significantly
more resistant to Curaxin treatment, with or without serum deprivation
(pTumour initiation in the TH-MYCN transgenic mouse model of
neuroblastoma is characterised by transient repression of p53 stress
responses in embryonal ganglionic neuroblasts, causing them to persist
postnatally as cancer-prone lesions 1, 2. p53 re-activation may be a
potential therapeutic strategy for removal of these lesions before they
later transform in response to oncogenic stimuli. One potential target
for p53 activation is the FACT protein complex which is known to inhibit
p53 signalling. Here we show that high mRNA expression levels of the two
FACT subunits, SSRP1 and SPT16, in human primary neuroblastoma tissue
were significantly associated with poor patient outcome (p<0.001) on
Kaplan Meier analysis of 650 neuroblastoma patients. Both SSRP1 and SPT16
levels had a strong correlation with the level of MYCN expression,
particularly in high risk MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma tissues (p<0.05).
Inhibition of MYCN expression by a specific siRNA, lowered SSRP1 and
SPT16 expression in two neuroblastoma tumor cell lines (BE(2)C and
Kelly). Alamar blue assays revealed that a chemical inhibitor of FACT,
Curaxin or CBL137, potently and selectively promoted cytotoxicity in
neuroblastoma cell lines as compared to non-malignant MRC5 fibroblasts
(p<0.001). To examine the role of FACT in MYCN-driven tumourigenesis we
evaluated the effect of Curaxin on tumor initiation in TH-MYCN mice. Low
micromolar Curaxin doses effectively restored normal in vitro,
p53-dependent death responses to primary ganglion cells deprived of serum
from neonatal TH-MYCN mice, while ganglion cultures from wild-type
littermate mice were significantly more resistant to Curaxin treatment,
with or without serum deprivation (p<0.001). Most importantly,
prophylactic Curaxin treatment of 6 day old TH-MYCN mice had a marked
inhibitory effect on postnatal ganglion neuroblast persistence in vivo
for both hemizygote and homozygote TH-MYCN mice, as compared to
vehicle-only treated animals (p=0.01, p=0.035, respectively). Taken
together, our data for the first time identifies FACT as a novel effector
of MYCN-driven neuroblastoma tumorigenesis. Inhibitors of the FACT
complex may be a novel treatment for high risk MYCN-amplified
neuroblastoma and a potential strategy for neuroblastoma prevention.1.
Hansford, L. et al. Mechanisms of embryonal tumor initiation: Distinct
roles for MycN expression and MYCN amplification. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101,
12664-12669 (2004).2. Calao, M. et al. Direct effects of Bmi1 on p53
protein stability inactivates oncoprotein stress responses in embryonal
cancer precursor cells at tumor initiation. Oncogene [ahead of print]

