Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transient exposure to decitabine results in sustained cell growth
inhibition and long term DNA demethylation at specific loci.


Gene silencing mediated by aberrant promoter DNA hypermethylation is one
of the key features of cancer. Although such modification is heritable,
its dynamic nature and reversibility through pharmacological
interventions make it an attractive therapeutic target. Over the past few
decades, various DNA methyltransferase inhibitors have been developed
with the goal of reactivating aberrantly silenced genes. Two FDA-approved
demthylating agents, decitabine and azacitidine are efficacious for the
treatment of myeloid malignancies (MDS). It has been shown that transient
exposure of tumor cells to low dose decitabine and azacitidine results in
reduced tumorigenecity. However, the mechanism underlying clinical
efficacies of these DNA methyltransferase inhibitors remains unclear.
Here we investigate the long-term effect (up to 10 weeks) on population
doubling time and the returning of DNA methylation (rebound methylation)
after transient exposure to decitabine in three cancer cell lines,
HCT116, T24 and HL-60. We show that transient exposure results in
inhibition of cell growth and reduction of their colony formation
capacity (up to 42 days). Furthermore, we also show that the rebound
methylation occurs at different rates depending on the region and the
type of genes. The discrepancy in population doubling time between the
vehicle and decitabine treated cells disappears when rebound methylation
fully restores, suggesting the presence of a correlation between cell
doubling and rebound methylation. The majority of probes, which exhibit
fast rebound methylation, are located in gene bodies. We show a positive
correlation between gene body methylation and expression. However, there
is a small group of fast rebound probes located at the promoters. Many of
them belong to cancer-testis antigens, which get reactivated and quickly
re-silenced. On the other hand, the majority of probes, which exhibit
slow rebound methylation are located at promoters and show an inverse
correlation between methylation and expression. The presence of a
nucleosome-depleted region and enrichments of active histone marks,
H3K4me3 and H2A.Z are observed at the promoters of those genes up to 42
days after drug treatment. Interesting, this group is enriched for genes
down-regulated in colon adenocarcinoma when compared to normal colon
(p=3.3e6). Taken together, the sustained reactivation of those genes may
be the driving force in reducing tumorigenecity of cancer cells. Our
study elucidates the mechanism of decitabine, thus advancing our
understanding of epigenetic therapy.Citation Format: Gangning Liang, Han
Han, Daniel D. De Carvalho, Xiaojing Yang, Peter A. Jones. Transient
exposure to decitabine results in sustained cell growth inhibition and
long term DNA demethylation at specific loci. [abstract]. In: Proceedings
of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer
Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer
Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 677. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-677

