Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRCA1 promoter methylation and homologous recombination repair
status in primary chronic myeloid neoplasms.


Chronic myeloid neoplasms (CMNs) are characterized by excessive expansion
of terminally differentiated blood cells arising from myeloid
progenitors. This group of hematologic clonal disorders includes the
BCR-ABL1-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), myelodysplastic
syndromes (MDS) and MPN/MDS disorders with features overlapping both
subtypes. CMN patients are at risk of developing acute myeloid leukemia
(AML), however curative therapy is lacking with the exception of
allogeneic stem cell transplant. Since leukemic transformation portends a
dismal treatment outcome and survival, there is a need to identify novel
molecular events driving disease progression as a first step in effective
targeted therapy. Previously, we achieved complete clearance of leukemic
blasts in several CMN patients who had progressed onto AML when treated
with poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor ABT-888, carboplatin
and topotecan (McDevitt et al., ASH 2011 and Pratz et al., ASH 2011).
PARP inhibitors block single stand break repair which cumulates in an
increase in DSBs that cannot be repaired in tumor cells defective in
homologous recombination (HR) repair, resulting in the exquisite death
response of the malignant clone. In this study, we investigated whether
this favorable response can be attributed to defective DNA
double-stranded break (DSB) repair resulting from epigenetic silencing of
HR genes. To this end, we evaluated the promoter methylation of HR genes
and then assessed DNA DSB repair status in CMN patients. We detected
BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation in 10% of 99 unique MPN patient samples
using quantitative methylation-specific PCR (qMSP) and confirmed
decreased BRCA1 transcript expression in several samples. We did not
observe DNA promoter methylation of other HR repair genes (Fanconi Anemia
genes, Bloom, ATM, ATR, BRCA2). In addition, we characterized the
functional DSB repair status in primary mononuclear cells from CMN
patients by measuring Rad51 foci formation after irradiation and
identified a subset of patients with defective HR repair. Ongoing studies
of additional CMN patient samples are underway to further link HR repair
gene promoter hypermethylation, transcript expression and functional
Rad51 foci formation. These findings will also be compared to karyotype
information and in vitro PARP inhibition sensitivity results. By
presenting evidence of DNA repair defect that can be linked to epigenetic
silencing of HR repair genes in CMN patients, we highlight defective DSB
repair as a novel mechanism driving disease progression in myeloid
malignancies and also propose examining the DNA promoter methylation
status of HR genes as a biomarker to identify patients who will respond
favorably to PARP inhibition.

