Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of monocarboxylate transporter 1 as a therapeutic
strategy in small cell lung cancer: target validation studies using the
MCT1 inhibitor AZD3965.


Background. Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) accounts for 13% of lung
cancers and frequently presents as disseminated or extensive disease.
SCLC is a highly proliferative disease, with a median survival of 12-20
months with therapy, and whilst SCLC is initially chemo-sensitive relapse
of chemo-resistant disease is rapid and fatal, highlighting the
requirement for improved therapeutic options. Monocarboxylate
transporters (MCT) such as MCT1 and 4 allow the proton-linked diffusion
of monocarboxylates across cellular membranes. A number of these
molecules are involved in cellular metabolism including lactate which is
elevated in cancer cells that rely on glycolysis for ATP production.
Reliance on glycolysis is linked to a number of factors, including Myc
overexpression, rapid proliferation and a hypoxic microenvironment within
the tumour, all common in SCLC. Therefore we hypothesize that SCLC cells
produce high levels of lactate and will be sensitive to the MCT1
inhibitor AZD3965 and that MCT4 expression will predict for AZD3965
resistance. Results. There are a wide range of responses across the panel
of cell lines including sensitivity to AZD3965 under both normoxia and
hypoxia, under hypoxia only and no response to AZD3965 in either
environment. Cells responding to AZD3965 had a significantly increased
concentration of intracellular lactate after AZD3965 treatment whilst the
lactate concentration was not elevated in AZD3965-resistant cell lines.
AZD3965-sensitive cells tended to express MCT1 but not MCT4, whilst
AZD3965-resistant cell lines expressed relatively high levels of MCT4.
Knockdown of MCT4 in the AZD3965-resistant cell line DMS79, which
overexpress MCT4, led to increased retention of intracellular lactate and
sensitised these cells to MCT1 inhibition. Conversely, overexpression of
MCT4 in the AZD3965-sensitive cell line NCI-H1048 resulted in a decrease
in intracellular lactate and increased resistance to MCT1 inhibition.
Additionally we have shown that MCT1 is frequently expressed at high
levels in SCLC patient tumour samples, suggesting MCT1 is a bona fide
drug target for SCLC, and that MCT4 is also expressed in a subset of
tumours. Conclusions. MCT1 may represent a useful therapeutic target in
the treatment of SCLC patients, however there is significant variability
in response emphasising the requirement of a predictive biomarker. Our
preclinical data show that MCT1 and MCT4 expression could represent such
biomarkers. Additionally we suggest that monitoring of lactate levels
could serve as a pharmacodynamic biomarker of MCT1 inhibition.

