Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toxicity of aerosolized azacytidine (Vidaza) in mice.


Background: Azacytidine, a prototypical demethylation agent, has been
approved to treat myelodysplastic syndrome. Commercial azacytidine
(Vidaza) is delivered to patients by subcutaneous or intravenous
administration. In a previous study, we found that aerosolized
azacytidine can 1) inhibit human orthotopic lung cancers in a mouse
xenograft model, 2) demethylate several promoters of tumor suppressor
genes reported to be hypermethylated in human lung cancer, and 3) be
better tolerated and more effective than systemic administration. These
studies specifically addressed toxicity associated with aerosolized
delivery of Vidaza to the lungs; specifically hematologic and pulmonary
toxicity.Methods: Vidaza was dissolved into sterile water for injection
and aerosolized in a clinical standard aerosol system. Swiss mice male
and female 6/group were restricted into a nose-only exposure system for
receiving the aerosol. We treated the mice at 2 different doses, 7.5
mg/m2 daily x 7 days and 2.5 mg/m2 daily x 7 days. Blood, sternum (for
bone marrow), and lung were collected at 3 and 6 weeks after the final
aerosol treatment. The bone and lung were fixed in 10% neutral buffered
formalin and routinely processed to paraffin blocks, sectioned, stained,
and evaluated histologically. In a preliminary pharmacokinetic study,
azacytidine concentrations in the blood and lung samples from mice
receiving 2.5 mg/m2 of aerosolized azacytidine were determined by a
MS-HPLC method previously described by others.Results: Neither dose of
aerosolized Vidaza resulted in bone marrow changes. A mild pneumonitis
was present in lungs from mice treated with 7.5 mg/m2 at 3 weeks but was
not evident at six weeks (reversible). No pulmonary toxicity was observed
at the 2.5 mg/m2 dose. The preliminary pharmacokinetic study data
indicate very low drug concentrations in the blood and much higher
concentrations in the lungs.Conclusion: Our study demonstrates that low
dose aerosolized azacytidine can be safely administered to mice.
Reversible pulmonary toxicity (pneumonitis) was observed at 7.5 mg/m2 at
3 weeks post treatment. The recommended starting dose of aerosolized
azacytidine in human clinical phase I trial should be 2.5 mg/m2.Supported
by NIH grant 5R01CA154755 to Roman Perez-Soler and Yiyu Zou.

