Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated microfluidic device for circulating tumor cell
detection in pancreatic cancer patients.


Pancreatic cancer has one of the highest mortality rates of all cancers.
The mortality is associated with both resistance to therapeutics and late
stage detection. Often by the time symptoms are presented the disease has
advanced to an incurable state. Due to the aggressive nature of
pancreatic cancer and the difficulty in obtaining biopsies, it has been
challenging to examine the behavior and characteristics of pancreatic
tumors over time. Recently, circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have been
isolated from peripheral blood of cancer patients and correlated with
survival and therapeutic response. CTCs can also be analyzed to provide
insight into tumor genetics and metastatic capabilities. Since CTCs are
present in early cancers, they have the potential to be used as an early
screening marker of metastatic disease. Especially for pancreatic cancer,
isolating CTCs would perhaps allow for detection prior to advanced
disease states and aid in determining appropriate therapeutic treatments.
We demonstrate an integrated microfluidic device to detect CTCs in
pancreatic cancer patients. The three-part device which integrates an
inertial pre-sorter, a passive mixer and a magnetic sorter can process
1ml of blood in less than 20min to achieve nearly 100% pure cancer cells
at the outlet. High-throughput pre-sorting of CTCs from the diluted blood
is achieved using the inertial sorter and further specificity and
isolation of the CTCs is achieved through magnetic labeling and
re-sorting. First diluted whole blood is run through the inertial spiral
sorter at nearly 2ml/min.The curvature of the spiral focuses and aligns
cancer cells to the inner channel wall, thus making it possible to enrich
the cancer cells. The outlet of the spiral is designed to collect the
enriched CTC stream, which are then passed through a passive mixer with
EpCAM-labeled superparamagnetic beads. Only the cancer cells will be
labeled with the magnetic beads as leukocytes and erythrocytes do not
express the epithelial markers that are targeted during the mixing
process. The mixed and labeled sample is sorted by a continuous flow
magnetic sorter, where the application of an external magnetic field
deflects the magnetically labeled cancer cells to a single collection
outlet. Once isolated, the highly pure CTC population can be counted,
genetically profiled, immunostained, or cultured for further analysis.
Cells were stained usingCK7/8, N-cadherin, CD45, and DAPI to assess
epithelial and mesenchymal characteristics. Isolating pancreatic CTCs
with both high sensitivity and high specificity can enable earlier cancer
detection and downstream molecular analysis can identify key targets for
pancreatic cancer treatment. Thereupon, the development of effective CTC
isolation tools will improve patient prognosis and therapeutic treatment
plans.

