Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of tumor-specific CD8 T cells via interactions between
galectin-3 and surface glycoproteins.


This study is testing the hypothesis that galectin-3, a 31 KDa
carbohydrate-binding lectin, is involved in regulating T cell function
within the tumor micro-environment by interacting with oligosaccharide
chains on cell surface glycoproteins. Our interest in galectin-3 arose
when we found that patients responding to a granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) secreting allogeneic pancreatic tumor
vaccine developed post immunization antibody responses to galectin-3 on a
proteomic screen.Oligosaccharide chains on plasma membrane proteins form
a thick coat known as the glycocalyx that surrounds the entire cell. The
glycocalyx has been shown to be important in regulating a diverse array
of cellular processes such as adhesion, growth, and trafficking via its
interactions with ligands on neighboring cells or in the extracellular
environment. Lectin mediated clustering of receptors can lead to
activation of downstream signaling proteins or even impact the half-life
of a receptor on the cell-surface, thus affecting the duration of
signaling. Changes in oligosaccharide structure through differential
expression of enzymes involved in the glycosylation pathway may therefore
modulate cellular activity by altering the availability and structure of
binding motifs for glycan-binding proteins. Thus, the importance of
lectin-glycan interactions in tumor development and the corresponding
anti-tumor immune response cannot be ignored.Galectin-3 is over-expressed
in several different malignancies. It has also been shown to modulate T
cell responses through a diverse array of mechanisms including induction
of apoptosis, TCR cross linking in CD8+ T cells, and T cell receptor
(TCR) down regulation in CD4+ T cells. We have used the HER-2/neu (neu-N)
transgenic mouse model to study galectin-3 binding on adoptively
transferred high avidity neu-specific CD8+ T cells derived from TCR
transgenic mice. Galectin-3 binding was found to be associated with
increased expression of programmed death 1 (PD1) and apoptosis markers in
vivo, and diminished cytokine production in vitro. Abrogation of
galectin-3 expression by genetic knock-out in the high avidity CD8 T
cells resulted in increased IFN- production when compared to wild type
controls. Furthermore, we also observed that galectin-3 binding to the T
cell surface occurs in an autocrine manner, and is dependant on antigen
stimulation as well as sialylation of terminal galactose residues. Using
a combination of microarray and co-immunoprecipitation experiments, we
have identified several new binding partners through which galectin-3 may
mediate its immunosuppressive functions. These studies provide a
potential new mechanism by which the function of antigen-specific T cells
is down-regulated after trafficking into the tumor micro-environment.

