Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Is the ubiquitin ligase WWP2 playing a role in PTEN degradation in
endometrial cancer.


Objective: The ubiquitin ligase WWP2 has recently been described to
directly interact with PTEN, the major tumor suppressor gene in the PI3K
pathway commonly altered in endometrial cancer. Whether alterations of
WWP2 contribute to post-translational modifications of the PTEN protein
in endometrial cancer are unknown. We sought to determine if WWP2 gene
expression levels differ in human endometrial cancer tissues with
evidence of post-translational PTEN degradation. We also wished to
determine if elevated WWP2 gene expression was associated with clinical
prognostic variables.Methods: Twenty-four endometrial cancer specimens
collected at hysterectomy were available for analysis. These tumors were
stained for PTEN by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and scored using a scale
of 0-6. Frozen tissue was then used to determine PTEN and WWP2 expression
by Real time PCR (RT PCR). Gene expression was then compared with
findings on immunohistochemistry. Patient clinical characteristics
including stage, grade, lymph node metastases, recurrence or 2 year
disease status were then compared with PTEN and WWP2 expression.Results:
Three tumors had elevated PTEN gene expression (at least 2 fold) but low
(score of less than 4) PTEN protein on IHC, indicating post-translational
modification of PTEN. In these tumors, however, WWP2 expression was not
elevated (range 0.004-0.09). There were three tumors with elevation in
WWP2 expression (1.9-4.7). PTEN was low in these tumors on IHC, but was
also low by RT-PCR indicating genomic, epigenetic or post-transcriptional
modification of PTEN. Neither PTEN nor WWP2 expression on RT PCR was
associated with stage, grade, lymph node metastases, recurrence or 2 year
disease status.Conclusions: In this cohort of tumors, WWP2 did not
contribute to post-translational degradation of PTEN. WWP2 expression was
not associated with stage, grade, lymph node metastases, recurrence, or 2
year disease status.

