Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of a Sunitinib resistant cell line from ccRCC by
long term drug application.


Introduction: Sunitinib (SUN) acts as a multitargeted tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) in the treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma. It
addresses predominantly the neo-angiogenic pathway by inhibition of
proliferation and induction of apoptosis. But in clinical practice
patients fail therapy. To elucidate the mechanism behind the failure of
SUN we started to investigate the efficacy of SUN in long term cell
culture studies using permanent cell lines representing ccRCC.Material
and Methods: CAKI-1/2, A-498 and 786-O cell lines, normal fibroblasts and
HUVEC were subjected to different concentrations of SUN for up to 5 days.
Efficacy of SUN was monitored by quantification of viability (WST-1),
apoptosis (CDD+), necrosis (LDH+) and proliferation (BrdU). Under long
term SUN-treatment growth behavior was assessed by cell counting spanning
a cultivation period of several weeks. miRNA profiling was performed by
microarray analysis at different point within this schedule.Results:
ccRCC cell lines offer a decrease in viability down to 40-60% at 2-5M/L
SUN dependent on cell-type and cell concentration as a result of f
proliferation-inhibition. Endothelial cells and fibroblasts react more
sensitive showing a growth inhibition between 80-90% compared to
untreated controls. Long term application of SUN to these ccRCC-cells
results in SUN-insensitive cell clones offering no inhibition of
proliferation at 2-5M/l drug. Specific miRNA expression changes were
identified in insensitive cells.Conclusion: Drug resistance by a long
term SUN treatment provides cell lines to study the molecular mechanisms
underlying this phenomenon. We have shown that resistance is associated
with miRNA alterations. 3D-combination of these cell lines together with
endothelial cells and fibroblasts offer a powerful tissue-like model to
develop new therapeutic schedules to overcome the failure of actual
treatment.

