Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Head and neck and skin squamous cell carcinoma developed in a
BRCA2 knockout mouse model.


BRCA1 and BRCA2 were originally identified as breast cancer tumor
suppressor genes. Germline mutations of BRCA1 have been found to
predispose the carrier mainly to breast and ovarian cancers. However,
germline mutations of BRCA2 can cause a much wider spectrum of cancers,
including breast, ovarian, pancreatic and prostate cancers. There are
conflicting reports on whether BRCA2 mutations also contribute to the
tumorigenesis of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
Previously, it had been reported that K14-cre; BRCA2f/f mice do not
develop any cancer of epithelial origin even at 600 days of age in a
129/C57 background. Here, we generated a K14-cre mediated BRCA2 knockout
mouse model in a different mouse strain background than previously
reported. To our surprise, we found that K14-cre; BRCA2 f/f mice started
to develop tumors at seven months of age. Most of the tumors were in the
head and neck region, while others were skin tumors in other locations.
The head and neck tumors showed no skin involvement or ulceration. Tumor
growth in many mice eventually affected their food intake and they had to
be euthanized for humane reason. At around 11 months of age, we
sacrificed the remaining mice and subjected them to necroscopy. All the
visually suspicious tissues were processed for pathologic examination. In
total, we found 8 out of 31 K14-cre; BRCA2 f/f mice (26%) with
pathologically confirmed head and neck cancer and 4 out 31 K14-cre; BRCA2
f/f mice (13%) with skin cancer. None of the 28 control BRCA2 f/f mice
developed any cancer at this age. The head and neck cancers are squamous
cell carcinomas arising from the mucosa surface and form large, palpable
masses. In some areas, the tumors are well-differentiated with evidence
of abundant keratin production, while in other areas they are less
differentiated and exhibit high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratios, nuclear
aytpia, mitoses and central necrosis. These histological features are
highly reminiscent of the pathological characteristics of human HNSCC.
This finding strongly indicates that mutations of BRCA2 play an important
role in the tumorigenesis of HNSCC in a specific genetic background.

