Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor VS-5584 preferentially targets cancer
stem cells in vitro and in vivo.


The PI3 kinase/mTOR pathway plays a central role in cancer cell
proliferation and survival. Depending on the mode of pathway activation,
different PI3K isoforms and mTOR complexes have been shown to play
essential roles in oncogenesis. VS-5584 potently and selectively inhibits
PI3K/mTOR signaling with equipotency against all four human Class I PI3K
isoforms and the mTOR kinase. VS-5584 also displays potent anticancer
activities in a number of human cancer xenograft models in vivo either as
a single agent or in combination.In a high-throughput screen designed to
identify compounds that selectively target cancer stem cells (CSCs), the
PI3K/mTOR pathway was found to be an important target. The effect of the
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor VS-5584 was evaluated in multiple CSC assays. Using
HMLE immortalized human mammary cells driven through
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) by knock down of E-cadherin, the
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor VS-5584 selectively inhibited proliferation of
CSC-like mesenchymal HMLEs. Accordingly, VS-5584 preferentially decreased
the proportion of CD44Hi/CD24Lo CSC-like cells in Ras-transformed HMLER
cells in contrast to paclitaxel that increased the proportion of
CD44Hi/CD24Lo CSCs in the same model. CSCs express higher levels of
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), thus an ALDEFLUOR assay that measures the
enzymatic activity of ALDH was used to assess CSCs. In SUM159 triple
negative breast cancer cells, VS-5584 dose-dependently decreased the
percentage of ALDEFLUOR-positive cells, in contrast to paclitaxel which
again enriched CSCs in the same assay. Another characteristic of CSCs is
the enhanced ability to exclude cytotoxic agents. This drug-resistant CSC
population, termed the side population, can be identified by virtue of
exclusion of Hoechst 33342 dye. In SUM159 cells, VS-5584 effectively
eliminated the CSC side population, while paclitaxel increased this
population. The effect of VS-5584 on cancer stem cells was further
evaluated in the MDA-MB-231 triple negative breast cancer model in vivo.
After one week of oral dosing, VS-5584 reduced the proportion of cancer
stem cells in tumors as evidenced by decreases in the percentage of
ALDEFLUOR -positive cells, tumorsphere-forming efficiency, and
tumor-initiating capability in an in vivo limiting dilution
re-implantation assay. Lastly, VS-5584 caused tumor regression in a
primary triple negative breast cancer model, likely as a result of potent
inhibitory activities against both cancer stem cells and cancer cells in
general.These data taken together provide strong rationale for the
clinical development of VS-5584 for breast and other cancers to achieve
durable clinical responses.

