Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VHL dependent and independent regulation of HDAC expression and
activity in renal cell carcinomas.


Background: Histone modifications include addition and/or deletion of
acetyl and methyl groups to lysine, serine and arginine residues of the
histone tails leading to transcriptional inactivation or activation. The
enzymes governing these modifications are histone acetyl transferases
(HATs), histone deacetylases (HDACs), histone methylases (HMTs) and
histone demethylases (HDMTs). HDAC inhibitors exert their inhibitory
effects on tumor cell population through cell cycle inhibition,
apoptosis, decreased cell proliferation as well as their induction of
tumor suppressor genes (for eg: p53). Clear cell renal cell carcinoma
(ccRCC) represents the dominant major subtype of RCC malignancy with
frequent mutations, deletions or methylation in the tumor suppressor gene
Von-Hippel Lindau (VHL). Class I HDACs have been reported to be
overexpressed in ccRCCs and VHL protein is present in the same complex
containing class I HDACs. The present study was aimed at defining the
role of VHL in the regulation of HDAC expression and activity. Methods:
Approximately 15 ccRCC tumors and matched normal kidney samples from
nephrectomies were collected. Western blot analysis of UMRC-2 (VHL/ RCC
cell line) and UMRC2 (wt-VHL RCC cell line) were carried out under
conditions of normoxia, hypoxia and in the presence of proteasomal
inhibitor MG-132. Tumor cells (1 x 107) were injected subcutaneously in
SCID mice to establish tumor xenografts. Results: Our preliminary studies
in matched clinical tumor samples show overexpression of specific Class I
(2 fold increase; pBackground: Histone modifications include addition
and/or deletion of acetyl and methyl groups to lysine, serine and
arginine residues of the histone tails leading to transcriptional
inactivation or activation. The enzymes governing these modifications are
histone acetyl transferases (HATs), histone deacetylases (HDACs), histone
methylases (HMTs) and histone demethylases (HDMTs). HDAC inhibitors exert
their inhibitory effects on tumor cell population through cell cycle
inhibition, apoptosis, decreased cell proliferation as well as their
induction of tumor suppressor genes (for eg: p53). Clear cell renal cell
carcinoma (ccRCC) represents the dominant major subtype of RCC malignancy
with frequent mutations, deletions or methylation in the tumor suppressor
gene Von-Hippel Lindau (VHL). Class I HDACs have been reported to be
overexpressed in ccRCCs and VHL protein is present in the same complex
containing class I HDACs. The present study was aimed at defining the
role of VHL in the regulation of HDAC expression and activity. Methods:
Approximately 15 ccRCC tumors and matched normal kidney samples from
nephrectomies were collected. Western blot analysis of UMRC-2 (VHL/ RCC
cell line) and UMRC2 (wt-VHL RCC cell line) were carried out under
conditions of normoxia, hypoxia and in the presence of proteasomal
inhibitor MG-132. Tumor cells (1 x 107) were injected subcutaneously in
SCID mice to establish tumor xenografts. Results: Our preliminary studies
in matched clinical tumor samples show overexpression of specific Class I
(2 fold increase; p<0.05) and II HDACs (5 fold increase for HDAC 4).
Conversely, HDAC 6 expression (2 fold decrease, pBackground: Histone
modifications include addition and/or deletion of acetyl and methyl
groups to lysine, serine and arginine residues of the histone tails
leading to transcriptional inactivation or activation. The enzymes
governing these modifications are histone acetyl transferases (HATs),
histone deacetylases (HDACs), histone methylases (HMTs) and histone
demethylases (HDMTs). HDAC inhibitors exert their inhibitory effects on
tumor cell population through cell cycle inhibition, apoptosis, decreased
cell proliferation as well as their induction of tumor suppressor genes
(for eg: p53). Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) represents the
dominant major subtype of RCC malignancy with frequent mutations,
deletions or methylation in the tumor suppressor gene Von-Hippel Lindau
(VHL). Class I HDACs have been reported to be overexpressed in ccRCCs and
VHL protein is present in the same complex containing class I HDACs. The
present study was aimed at defining the role of VHL in the regulation of
HDAC expression and activity. Methods: Approximately 15 ccRCC tumors and
matched normal kidney samples from nephrectomies were collected. Western
blot analysis of UMRC-2 (VHL/ RCC cell line) and UMRC2 (wt-VHL RCC cell
line) were carried out under conditions of normoxia, hypoxia and in the
presence of proteasomal inhibitor MG-132. Tumor cells (1 x 107) were
injected subcutaneously in SCID mice to establish tumor xenografts.
Results: Our preliminary studies in matched clinical tumor samples show
overexpression of specific Class I (2 fold increase; p<0.05) and II HDACs
(5 fold increase for HDAC 4). Conversely, HDAC 6 expression (2 fold
decrease, p<0.01) and activity was down regulated in tumor samples. To
investigate the role of VHL in RCCs, UMRC2 and UMRC2-VHL were utilized
for HDAC expression and activity. Western blot analysis indicated HDAC 1
down regulation (1.5 fold) and HDAC 6 overexpression (1.5 fold) in the
UMRC2 cells as compared to the UMRC2-VHL cells. In contrast, HDAC 6
activity, measured by expression of its target protein acetylated
-tubulin, was lower in the UMRC2 cells. Under hypoxic conditions both
HDAC 1 and HDAC 6 were induced in the UMRC2-VHL cells suggesting VHL
dependent hypoxic regulation of these HDACs. MG-132 induced HDAC 1 and 6
in UMRC2-VHL; whereas proteasome inhibitor down regulated HDAC 1 and 6 in
UMRC2 cells suggesting a VHL independent mechanism of HDAC regulation. In
vivo studies of tumor xenografts generated from the cell lines
demonstrated hypoxic induction of HDAC 1 (5 fold increase) and HDAC 6 in
UMRC2 when compared to the UMRC2-VHL tumors. Conclusion: Our results
suggest that specific HDACs are differentially regulated by VHL dependent
(via hypoxia regulation) and independent mechanisms, providing a
rationale for testing selective HDAC inhibitors in RCCs.

