Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isothiocyanates promote cell death and sensitize glioblastoma
cells to radiation.


Sulforaphane (SFN) and beta-phenylethyl isothiocyanate (PEITC), are
organic isothiocyanate compounds found in dietary cruciferous vegetables
with previously characterized anti-proliferative properties; and more
recently, pro-apoptosis capabilities in several tumor types. The present
study was designed to determine the role of isothiocyanates, particularly
SFN and PEITC in vitro with human glioblastomas cells; and in vivo with a
murine orthotropic glioblastoma tumor model.Cultured glioblastoma cells
were treated with SFN in increasing doses to 80 M and PEITC to 20 M.
Cells were examined for changes in morphology characteristic of apoptosis
and with MTT for cell survival. Cells were exposed to both
isothiocyanates either alone or in combination. Our results indicate that
SFN inhibits cell proliferation as well as the activation of apoptosis in
three GBM cell lines, LD50 for SFN was at 25 M and essentially kill all
the cells at 50 M 24 hours post-treatment. In three cell lines the LD50
of PEITC is 5 M and loss of all the cells at 10M. Treatment with SFN 10 M
and PEITC 5 M promoted cell death to 80% in which cause 10% and 30% die
in U87 cells respectively. Furthermore, exposure of DBT cells to SFN at
10 M as well as radiation at 2.5Gy, 5Gy and 7.5 Gy resulted in remarkably
decreased of clones formation comparing to radiation only. Yield rate of
control only, SFN only, 2.5Gy only and SFN+2.5GY are 70.5, 12.7%, 4.8%
and 0.62% respectively. While visible clones were existed at 7.5 Gy only,
it was barely existing at 7.5Gy with SFN. In vivo studies with
subcutaneous murine DBT glioblastoma tumors which treated with SFN daily
IP injection for 5 days at dose 12.5mg/kg, decreased tumor size based on
weight by 28% compared with those treated with vehicle only. PEITC at
25mg/kg only had failed to decrease the tumor on weight. However, SFN
combine with PEITC decreased the GBM on weight by 68% (P =0.016, less
than 0.05). This decrease in tumor weight was significantly different as
assessed with a two-tailed Students t-test for independent variables.
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) was
assessed for apoptosis. The results are: vehicle-only (0.4+0.06%)(n=8);
vehicle-only+SFN (1.9+0.3%)(n=8); PEITC (0.9+1.2%)(n=8); and SFN+PEITC
(3.6+0.1%)(n=9), demonstrated a significantly greater incidence of
apoptosis compared with the vehicle-only group as determined with a
two-tailed Students t-test for independent variables. These studies
supported SFN as a potential anti-tumor drug to promote cell death and
enhance of radiosensitivity in glioblastomas in vivo. Our findings
suggest that, in addition to the known effects on cancer prevention,
isothiocyanates should be viewed as a therapeutic advantage in
established malignant glioma.

