Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic characterization of the putative myeloma stem cells clone
reveals alterations possibly correlated with the origin of disease.


Background Although the advances in Multiple Myeloma (MM) therapy, the
disease remains incurable. The existence of Myeloma Propagating Cells
(MPCs) is supposed to be one of the major causes of MM drug-resistance,
leading to relapse. However, very little is known about the molecular
characteristics of MPCs, even if some studies suggested that these cells
have phenotypic characteristics resembling the memory B cells.Aim and
methods In order to molecularly characterize the CD138+ neoplastic clone
and the memory B cells located both in BM and in PBL, we collected the
CD138+ and CD138-19+27+ cell fractions from bone marrow (BM) and
peripheral blood (PBL) of 50 newly diagnosed MM patients (pts), 7 MGUS
pts and 15 relapsed pts. For several pts we collected buccal swab sample
as a negative control. The complete set of genomic aberrations was
evaluated by SNP Array 6.0 and copy number analysis was performed with
Genotyping Console software and Partek Genomics.Results Both BM and PBL
CD138+ cell fractions showed exactly the same genomic
macro-alterations.In the BM and PBL CD138-19+27+ cell fractions any
macro-alteration was detected, whereas several micro-alterations (range:
1-834 Kb) unique of the memory B cells clone, were highlighted. These
micro-alterations were located out of any genomic variants region and are
presumably associated to the MM pathogenesis. The micro-alterations
involved HMGCLL1, DLGAP2 and RCOR3, PRR16, TSC1, ETS1, RBFOX1 in
CD138-19+27+ derived from PBL and BM, respectively. These genes
participated in cholesterol metabolism, embryonic development and
transcriptional regulation.Interestingly, three focal micro-deletions
(involving SKT, CES1P1, MIR650) were shared both by the PBL and the BM
memory B cells clones. The MIR650 gene is located on chr22 in the
immunoglobulin lambda gene locus, thus directly controlling its
expression.By applying a more stringent analysis, the CD138-19+27+ cell
fraction obtained from all pts analyzed showed a unique micro-deletion
(410 Kb) on chr 14, involving JAG2, BRF1, PACS2, NUDT4 and BTBD6. This
deletion has been already described as involved in a pediatric syndrome
of chr.14q, and its presence is correlated to a variety of developmental
disorders and mental retardation.Conclusions These data suggested that
the MM CD138+ clone might resume the end of the complex process of
myelomagenesis, proven by the presence of numerous macro-alterations,
which might be probably due to an established genomic instability. In
contrast, the memory B cells, which lack these macro-alterations, have
some intriguing micro-alterations, supporting the idea that these post
germinal center cells might be involved in the transforming event that
originate the neoplastic clone.Work supported by European LeukemiaNet,
AIRC, AIL, PRIN, University of Bologna and BolognAIL.

