Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantification of required surgical margins in a xenograft
osteosarcoma model with and without single-agent chemotherapy.


In addition to systemic therapy, complete surgical excision is essential
for successful treatment of osteosarcoma. Currently, the gold standard is
to perform a "wide excision," however the definition of a wide excision
is descriptive only. There is no current clear consensus on what
constitutes an adequate "wide excision." The purpose of this project is
to quantify an adequate "wide excision," defined by lack of local and/or
distant recurrence using a xenograft murine model both with and without
single agent chemotherapy. Patient-derived osteosarcoma tumor cells (OS17
and 187) were cultured and surgically implanted into the proximal
metaphyseal tibia of female SCID mice. Once tumors were papable,
amputations were performed under general anesthesia in either an
intralesional, marginal, or wide manner. Histological sectioning was
conducted in a standardized fashion to obtain measurements of bone and
soft tissue margins. Mice were followed for six weeks, after which
amputation stumps were evaluated for local recurrence while both the
lungs and livers were assessed for metastatic dissemination. Thereafter,
a second group of mice underwent implantation and amputation as
previously described. They were thereafter treated with either cisplatin
or doxorubicin over a course 4 weeks and followed for an additional 6
weeks to identify local and distant recurrence. In mice implanted with
either OS17 or 187 and treated without chemotherapy, surgical bone
margins lower than 100m reliably resulted in local recurrence while
margins greater than 700m showed no recurrence. A variable recurrence
rate was found between margins of 100m and 700 m. Similarly, soft-tissue
margins below 50m reliably resulted in local recurrence while margins
greater then 600m showed no recurrence. In mice implanted with OS17 and
thereafter treated with chemotherapy, no recurrence was seen above bone
or soft-tissue margins of 14m while mice implanted with 187 showed no
recurrence above bone margins of 25m or soft tissue margins above 10m.
Metastatic disease did not overtly develop and may require a longer
period of observation. In conclusion, single agent chemotherapy appears
to reliably decrease the surgical margin required to obtain adequate
local control in this xenograft model. Combination chemotherapy may prove
to further decrease necessary margins, which ultimately may have
ramifications on surgical morbidity and long-term reconstructive and
functional outcome for patients with localized high-grade osteosarcoma.

