Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Case-case comparison of smoking and alcohol risk associations with
Epstein-Barr virus-positive gastric cancer.


BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Although the bacterium Helicobacter pylori is the
primary cause of gastric cancer, monoclonal Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
nucleic acid is present in 8-10% of these tumors worldwide. Viral
prevalence is increased with male sex, non-antral subsite localization
and surgically disrupted anatomy. To further examine associations between
EBV and gastric cancer with sufficient statistical power, we have
organized an international consortium of multiple studies with consistent
tumor testing by in situ hybridization. Here we compare data on
EBV-positive and EBV-negative gastric cancers to identify behavioral risk
factors. METHODS: From eight case-control studies (four from Asia, two
from Europe and two from Latin America), we pooled individual-level data
for aggregated analysis of 1545 gastric cancer cases, including 152
(9.8%) that were EBV-positive. We assessed associations with cigarette
(61% smokers) and alcohol (69% drinkers) use in case-case comparisons
rather than the original case-control approach to account for possible
interactions with tumor-specific characteristics. Odds ratios (OR) and
95% confidence intervals (CI) were estimated by multi-level logistic
regression to control for within-population clustering. ORs were adjusted
(aOR) for distributions of sex (67% male), age (mean 60 years),
educational attainment (44% secondary school or greater), body-mass index
(49% obese, WHO Classification), tumor histology (63% Lauren
intestinal-type) and anatomic subsite (85% noncardia). RESULTS: In
unadjusted analyses, the OR for tumor EBV positivity among smokers was
2.4 (95% CI, 1.6-3.6) overall with no substantially difference between
current and former smokers (respective ORs, 2.4 and 2.5). The association
was attenuated by adjustment for the possible confounders but remained
statistically significant (aOR, 1.6; 95% CI, 1.01-2.5). There was a crude
association of tumor EBV positivity with drinking (OR, 1.8; 95% CI,
1.02-3.3) that was explained by smoking and the other confounders (aOR,
1.1; 95% CI, 0.6-2.1). CONCLUSIONS: The association of cigarette smoking
with gastric cancer may be stronger for EBV-positive than EBV-negative
tumors. Conversely, the null association of gastric cancer with alcohol
drinking does not apparently vary by EBV status. Distinct epidemiologic
characteristics of EBV-positive gastric cancer further implicate the
virus as an etiologic co-factor in gastric carcinogenesis.

