Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Over-expression of miR-146a in basal-like breast cancer cells
confers enhanced tumorigenic potential in association with altered p53
status.


Over-expression of miR-146a in basal-like breast cancer cells confers
enhanced tumorigenic potential in association with altered p53 statusp53
is the most frequently mutated gene in human cancers, mutated in 26-30%
of breast cancers. However, mutation rates differ according to breast
cancer subtype, being more prevalent in aggressive ER negative tumors,
basal-like and HER2 amplified subtypes. This heterogeneity suggests that
p53 signaling may differ across molecular subtypes of breast cancer.
Understanding the inherent differences in p53 pathway in luminal versus
basal-like breast cancers is important and could provide a target for
development of new treatment strategies. We used RNAi-mediated p53
knockdown in a panel of four cell lines (2 basal-like, two luminal),
together with antagomir-mediated knockdown of a p53-regulated microRNA,
to study how gene expression and cellular phenotypes of p53 loss differ
in luminal vs. basal-like breast cancer. We observed that p53 knockdown
significantly altered gene expression and miRNA expression. We identified
a common response shared by all cell lines indicating that certain
established p53 targets (e.g. p21 and miR-34 family) are down-regulated
and proliferation is upregulated. Interestingly, some p53-dependent
changes were subtype-specific. Basal-like cells lines demonstrated
increased correlation with a Claudin-low breast cancer signature in
presence of p53 KD, while luminal cell lines did not. Basal-like cell
lines with p53 KD also exhibited decreased levels of apoptosis, while
luminal cell-lines did not. Several miRs were differentially expressed in
luminal vs. basal-like knock down cell lines including miR-134, miR-146a,
and miR-181b. miR-146a was chosen for further analysis based on the most
significant fold change. Antagomir knockdown of miR-146a ablated several
p53-dependent phenotypic changes observed in basal-like cells, including
increased population doubling times and decreased steady state apoptosis
levels. The mechanism underlying these cellular phenotypes involves NF-kB
signaling alterations, with downregulation of the extrinsic apoptotic
pathway including TNFR, FADD, and TRADD. Antagomir-mediated knockdown of
miR-146a restored expression of these components in basal-like breast
cancer cell lines with p53 KD. This study documents that an alternate
p53-dependent survival pathway exists for basal-like breast cancer cells
with p53 loss, mediated by upregulation of miR-146a. Targeting miR-146a
expression may have value for altering the aggressiveness of p53 mutant
basal-like tumors.

