Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting E3 ligase PRAJA1 in hepatocellular cancer .


Background: Hepatocellular Cancer (HCC) is a rising and lethal disease,
that is difficult to treat due to late diagnosis and few viable targeted
therapeutics. Recent studies support a key role for TGF- signaling in
suppressing these tumors. Expression of the E3 ubiquitin ligase PRAJA, a
negative regulator of TGF- signaling via Smad3 and its adaptor 2-spectrin
(2SP), is dramatically raised in up to 70% of human HCCs. This indicates
that PRAJA1 overexpression suppresses Smad3 and 2SP mediated TGF- tumor
suppressor signaling hence promoting HCC progression.Hypothesis:
Disruption of TGF-/2SP tumor suppressor pathway by PRAJA1 leads to
uncontrolled activation of chromatin and tumor formation. Therefore,
small molecule inhibitors that specifically target PRAJA1 could be very
useful in HCC therapy.Materials & Methods: Cancer patient datasets were
retrieved from Gene Expression Omnibus and analyzed with Oncomine
analysis tools. We analyzed 3 group-arrays of liver tumor tissues (total
298 cancer tissues vs. 249 normal tissues, p-valueBackground:
Hepatocellular Cancer (HCC) is a rising and lethal disease, that is
difficult to treat due to late diagnosis and few viable targeted
therapeutics. Recent studies support a key role for TGF- signaling in
suppressing these tumors. Expression of the E3 ubiquitin ligase PRAJA, a
negative regulator of TGF- signaling via Smad3 and its adaptor 2-spectrin
(2SP), is dramatically raised in up to 70% of human HCCs. This indicates
that PRAJA1 overexpression suppresses Smad3 and 2SP mediated TGF- tumor
suppressor signaling hence promoting HCC progression.Hypothesis:
Disruption of TGF-/2SP tumor suppressor pathway by PRAJA1 leads to
uncontrolled activation of chromatin and tumor formation. Therefore,
small molecule inhibitors that specifically target PRAJA1 could be very
useful in HCC therapy.Materials & Methods: Cancer patient datasets were
retrieved from Gene Expression Omnibus and analyzed with Oncomine
analysis tools. We analyzed 3 group-arrays of liver tumor tissues (total
298 cancer tissues vs. 249 normal tissues, p-value<1E-4). We also
analyzed 55 arrays for other cancers (total 2850 cancer tissues vs. 779
normal tissues, p-valueBackground: Hepatocellular Cancer (HCC) is a
rising and lethal disease, that is difficult to treat due to late
diagnosis and few viable targeted therapeutics. Recent studies support a
key role for TGF- signaling in suppressing these tumors. Expression of
the E3 ubiquitin ligase PRAJA, a negative regulator of TGF- signaling via
Smad3 and its adaptor 2-spectrin (2SP), is dramatically raised in up to
70% of human HCCs. This indicates that PRAJA1 overexpression suppresses
Smad3 and 2SP mediated TGF- tumor suppressor signaling hence promoting
HCC progression.Hypothesis: Disruption of TGF-/2SP tumor suppressor
pathway by PRAJA1 leads to uncontrolled activation of chromatin and tumor
formation. Therefore, small molecule inhibitors that specifically target
PRAJA1 could be very useful in HCC therapy.Materials & Methods: Cancer
patient datasets were retrieved from Gene Expression Omnibus and analyzed
with Oncomine analysis tools. We analyzed 3 group-arrays of liver tumor
tissues (total 298 cancer tissues vs. 249 normal tissues, p-value<1E-4).
We also analyzed 55 arrays for other cancers (total 2850 cancer tissues
vs. 779 normal tissues, p-value<1E-4). To validate protein expression,
specimens from 13 HCC and normal liver tissues were immunostained with
anti-PRAJA1. Whole mount in situ hybridization histochemistry (ISHH)
assay was used to determine knock down PRAJA1in zebrafish embryos. Soft
agar assay and colony formation assay were performed to elucidate PRAJA1
oncogenic activity in HCC cells. Additionally, we screened a compound
library for E3 ligase inhibitors targeting PRAJA1.Results: (1) PRAJA1
expression is dramatically raised in human HCCs with loss of TGF-
signaling. (2) PRAJA1 interacts with 2SP/Smad3 and inhibits TGF- tumor
suppressor target gene activation. (3) Inhibition of PRAJA1 in the
developing Zebrafish embryo and HCCs leads to high levels of apoptosis.
(4) Overexpression of PRAJA1 leads to increased HCC growth; conversely
knock down of PRAJA1 suppresses its oncogenic activities. (5) TGF-
promotes complex of CTCF and 2SP in nucleus. (6) RTA402/RTA405 inhibits
PRAJA1 and restores TGF- tumor suppressor function in HCC cells. (7)
RTA402/RTA405 induces apoptosis and inhibits HCC cell growth and
tumorigenesis.Conclusions: PRAJA1 disrupts the TGF- tumor suppressor
pathway, and its overexpression promotes cancer cell survival and
proliferation. We have identified 2 novel triterpenoids that exhibit
PRAJA1 inhibitory activity, which have demonstrated that suppression of
PRAJA1 by specific small molecule inhibitors restores TGF- tumor
suppressor function and suppresses growth of HCC cells. Our results
provide a better understanding of the mechanisms that regulate HCC
development. Importantly, this study may lead to new therapeutics
targeting this lethal cancer and potentially to a Phase I clinical trial
in HCC.

