Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global discovery of dysregulated protein expression and
phosphorylation networks identifies Leo1 as a key substrate of PRL-3
phosphatase in leukemogenesis.


Cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia (AML) constitutes about
40-50% of human AML cases, is a highly heterogeneous and poorly
understood. Identification of novel oncogenic alterations and pathways
are the key to the better understanding and discovery of useful
therapeutic targets in the improved management of AML. PRL-3 is a small
20kDa prenylated dual-specificity phosphatase that is over-expressed in
about 50% of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and associated with poorer
survival, but the mechanisms regulating the associated malignancy remains
poorly understood. Our in vitro data demonstrates that ectopic PRL-3
expression in the factor-dependent TF1 AML cells confers
cytokine-independent growth, induces colony-forming ability in
methylcellulose media and tumorigenesis in vivo. To systematically
characterize novel substrates of PRL-3 in leukemia, unbiased large-scale
proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses were performed between the
parental TF1 cells and their malignant PRL-3 transfectant counterparts to
discover critical differences in signaling networks. We obtained
quantitative measurements on 803 proteins, where 331 were significantly
up-regulated (>1.5-fold) and 67 were under-expressed (Cytogenetically
normal acute myeloid leukemia (AML) constitutes about 40-50% of human AML
cases, is a highly heterogeneous and poorly understood. Identification of
novel oncogenic alterations and pathways are the key to the better
understanding and discovery of useful therapeutic targets in the improved
management of AML. PRL-3 is a small 20kDa prenylated dual-specificity
phosphatase that is over-expressed in about 50% of acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) and associated with poorer survival, but the mechanisms regulating
the associated malignancy remains poorly understood. Our in vitro data
demonstrates that ectopic PRL-3 expression in the factor-dependent TF1
AML cells confers cytokine-independent growth, induces colony-forming
ability in methylcellulose media and tumorigenesis in vivo. To
systematically characterize novel substrates of PRL-3 in leukemia,
unbiased large-scale proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses were
performed between the parental TF1 cells and their malignant PRL-3
transfectant counterparts to discover critical differences in signaling
networks. We obtained quantitative measurements on 803 proteins, where
331 were significantly up-regulated (>1.5-fold) and 67 were
under-expressed (<0.6-fold). More importantly, PRL-3 alters the
phosphorylation status of 192 proteins. Our proteomics profiling and in
vitro validation data revealed that Leo1, component of the Polymerase
II-associating factor 1 (PAF) complex, is upregulated and
dephosphorylated by PRL-3. Mechanistically, PRL-3 regulates Leo1 by
relieving the repressive H3K9me3 mark on Leo1 promoter through direct
binding of JMJD2C histone demethylase, promoting transcriptionally
permissive chromatin state leading to efficient Leo1 gene expression.
Conversely, abrogation of PRL-3 using RNAi reduced Leo1 levels and
destabilizes the PAF complex, consequently leading to the downregulation
of PAF-regulated pluripotency target genes like Sox2, Sox4 and Tbx3. Our
functional analyses corroborated the contribution of Leo1 towards PRL-3
oncogenicity, whereby inhibition of Leo1 in PRL-3 cells impeded cell
proliferation, induced significant apoptosis and abolished colony
formation. Finally, we relate these data to clinical relevance where 46%
of the human AML patient samples and 45.5% of the AML cell lines showed a
positive correlation between PRL-3 expression and abnormal Leo1
activation. In conclusion, our work allows the identification of bona
fide PRL-3 targets and signaling networks, which established starting
points for a complete enumeration of PRL-3 function in AML signaling. The
improved understanding of this network provides valuable leads for
designing future therapies targeting PRL-3 in leukemia and carcinomas.

