Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oligonucleotide-selective sequencing (OS-Seq): a rapid and
efficient targeting technology for ultra-deep detection of cancer
mutations and rearrangements.


Somatic mutations, chromosomal rearrangements and other genomic
aberrations in cancer genomes are critical events in the development of
cancer and increasingly used in identifying oncogenic events that may be
indicators for targeted therapies. For rapid and high accuracy analysis
of targeted candidate genes and regions from cancer genomes, we developed
OS-Seq that can be used to simultaneously discover cancer point
mutations, copy number variants and rearrangements. For this new
sequencing technology, we re-engineer the immobilized oligonucleotide
primer lawn on a solid phase support (e.g. Illumina flow cell) with
capture primer-probes such that it functions for both genomic target
capture and sequencing (Myllykangas et al. 2011, Nature Biotech). As a
result, in a matter of days we can rapidly sequence target regions in
cancer genomes. We designed an in-silico exome capture probe set,
enabling rapid design of disease-specific targeted capture primer probe
sets. Subsequently, we designed assays to cover 313 and 1,400 cancer
genes. Using the 313-gene assay targeting 5,000 exons, we can routinely
sequence cancer genomes with on-target coverage greater than 500X,
including for the entire length of exons as large as 1 Mb regions. Using
a smaller gene set we have established coverage depths over 8,000 that
enables the investigation of tumor evolution via mutations with low
allelic fractions. In addition, we have designed OS-Seq assays for
characterizing loci that are involved in rearrangements. We design
capture probes positioned on opposing strands upstream and downstream of
suspected rearrangement breakpoints and by localized assembly were able
to confirm certain rearrangements, including a long deletion and
inversions. For our current studies, we are using OS-Seq to identify
cancer mutations in colorectal adenocarcinoma and determine the extent of
genetic heterogeneity prevalent in these tumors. OS-Seq provides
high-depth, high quality cancer genome sequence data, opening the door to
potential diagnostic analysis of cancer genetic heterogeneity as seen in
tumor evolution and cancer rearrangements.

