Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the invading cells in glioblastoma using a
syngeneic intracranial transplant tumor model.


Local and distant invasion is a hallmark property of glioblastoma (GBM)
that prevents curative surgical resection, and may be the key reason for
GBM recurrence. Although cancer stem cells (CSCs) have been suggested to
cause tumor recurrence based on their resistance to radiotherapy and
chemotherapy, it is not clear whether CSCs are also involved in GBM
invasiveness. We hypothesize that the invading cells in GBM have
stem-like properties. To test our hypothesis, we propose to characterize
cells at the invasive front of GBM using a syngeneic intracranial
transplant tumor model.Three core regulatory networks are dysregulated in
most human GBMs, including the RTK/RAS/PI3K/PTEN, INK/Cyclin D/CDK/RB,
and ARF/p53 pathways. We have previously generated a genetically
engineered mouse (GEM) model for GBM development via adult-inducible
astrocyte-specific perturbation of RB, K-RAS and PTEN. These mice develop
astrocytomas that progress to high grade GBM, and faithfully recapitulate
the histopathology and molecular characteristics of most human GBMs. We
have isolated primary tumor cells from these mice that are maintained in
serum-free neural stem cell culture medium and expanded as neurospheres.
These primary and low-passage cultures contain a mixed population of
cancer stem cells and progenitor cells, and are highly invasive in vitro
by matrigel invasion assay. With > 90% penetrance, intracranial injection
of 25,000 cells leads to invasive GBM formation and a 32-day median
survival in syngeneic host mice. Thus, the model provides an efficient
approach for dissecting GBM cell invasion mechanisms in vivo. We will
further trace the migration/invasion of GBM cells in the host brain after
labeling with lentiviral-expressed mCherry. Host blood vessels are
labeled with YFP via Tie2-Cre endothelial expression of a Rosa26-YFP
allele. A time course analysis of stem cell marker expression will be
used to assess properties of invading cells at the diffusive tumor
margin. Laser capture microdissection will be used for invasive rim-cell
and non-invasive core-cell isolation, and RNA samples will be compared by
unbiased transcriptome studies. Results will provide hypotheses for
invasion mechanisms and may identify potential biomarkers for invasive
cells.

