Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of nicastrin in the mediating chemoresistance of breast
cancer cells.


Background: Nicastrin (NCT) is the gate keeper of the gamma secretase
(GS) enzyme complex. We have previously shown that high levels of NCT are
observed in breast cancer patients. Moreover, we recently highlighted the
importance of NCT expression for the expansion of breast cancer stem
cells and their invasive features.The involvement of NCT in development
of chemoresistance has been suggested by the evidence that 1) NCT is
increased in response to oxaliplatin, irinotecan and 5-FU in colon cancer
and 2) NCT regulates cell death within the p53 and AKT signalling pathway
in human embryonic kidney (HEK293) cells.Here, we have explored the
potential role of NCT in the chemoresistance of breast cancer
cells.Methods: Stable NCT overexpressing MCF10A cells and control cells
were produced by retroviral infections. siRNA strategy was used to
silence NCT expression in a panel of p53wt and p53mut breast cancer cell
lines. The sulphorhodamine B and Annexin V/PI staining were used to
measure proliferation and apoptosis rate in breast cancer cells
unstressed or treated with chemotherapeutic agents alone or in
combination with DAPT, Wortmannin or Nutlin. p53 levels and activity were
assessed by Western blotting, RT-qPCR and gene reporter assays.Results:
Stable overexpression of NCT in MCF10A cells induced resistance to
doxorubicin and cisplatin treatments as demonstrated by a decreased early
and late apoptotis. Moreover, NCT lowers p53 expression, its
phosphorylation at the phosphoSer15 site and its transcriptional activity
in both unstressed cells and doxorubicin-treated cells. Using DAPT and
Wortmannin as pharmacological inhibitors of Notch and AKT signalling
pathways and Nutlin to inhibit Mdm2-mediated p53 degradation, we
confirmed that NCT mediated chemoresistance in a p53 dependent manner
partially through the PI3K/AKT pathways, while it is role is completely
independent from GS activity.NCT knockdown was able to sensitize several
breast cancer cell lines (MCF7, T47D, ZR75) with a wild type p53 status
to doxorubicin. Moreover, NCT overexpression reduced the sensitivity to
cisplatin in p53wt HTC116 colon cancer cells while it had no effect on
p53mut cells.In order to translate these results to clinical settings, we
have developed anti-NCT monoclonal antibodies which have been showed to
inhibit proliferation and invasion of breast cancer cells. These
antibodies used in combination with chemotherapy mirrored the positive
effect of NCT siRNA in terms of response to doxorubicin in p53wt breast
cancer cell lines.Conclusions: Our study indicates that in breast cancer
cells NCT controls chemotherapy-induced cell death in a p53-dependent
manner through the regulation of AKT pathway. This function is
independent from the GS.We aim to investigate the association of NCT
expression and p53 mutation status with clinical outcome in breast
cancers in order to support potential combination of anti-NCT monoclonal
antibodies with chemotherapy.

