Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the role of PBRM1 in SNF5 regulated gene expression in
malignant rhadboid tumors.


Malignant Rhabdoid Tumors (MRTs), a pediatric renal cancer, lack SNF5, a
subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex, a regulator of
nucleosome positioning and gene expression. Recent studies showed that
PBRM1, another subunit of SWI/SNF, was mutated in adult clear cell renal
carcinoma (ccRCC). Intriguingly, both SNF5 and PBRM1 regulate the cell
cycle through control of expression of p21WAF1/CIP1. We hypothesized that
SWI/SNF complex mutations provide a link between adult and pediatric
renal cancers. To test this notion, we re-expressed SNF5 in MRT cell
lines and followed PBRM1 and p21 expression and cell growth. We also
examined SWI/SNF complex composition and recruitment to the p21 promoter.
Finally, we investigated PBRM1s role in SNF5-induced G1 cell cycle arrest
using PBRM1-deficient MRT cell lines. We utilized adenoviral vectors to
express human SNF5 (hSNF5) in several different MRT cell lines. The
expression of hSNF5 and other complex members was quantified through
immunoblotting and QT-PCR. Immunoprecipitation (IP) was utilized to
determine the composition of the SWI/SNF complex. Cell cycle analysis was
conducted using flow cytometry with BrdU and PI staining. PBRM1 knockdown
cell lines were generated using lentiviral-RNAis (Open Biosystems).
Reexpression of SNF5 in MRT cell lines led to increased PBRM1 protein
levels without concomitant increases in mRNA levels. Immunoprecipitation
experiments showed that SNF5 re-expression caused PBRM1 levels in the
complex to increase, as compared to the BRG1 ATPase levels that remained
constant after SNF5 reexpression. These results were consistent across 4
MRT cell lines examined. Interestingly, levels of other complex proteins,
such as BAF155, also increased in a similar fashion to PBRM1. After
reexpression of SNF5, we also observed an increase of both SNF5 and PBRM1
at the p21 promoter, with a peak at the transcription start site. In
contrast, other complex members showed only a modest increase across the
entire promoter region with no apparent peak of binding. To further
investigate PBRM1s role in SNF5-induced G1 cell cycle arrest, we
generated PBRM1-deficient MRT cell lines using RNAi technology. We are
currently testing these knockdown cell lines for cell cycle arrest and
p21 induction after hSNF5 reexpression. Our data show that SNF5
expression increases PBRM1 protein levels, presumably through
stabilization within the SWI/SNF complex, suggesting a high degree of
interplay between PBRM1 and SNF5 during chromatin remodeling activity.
Therefore, identifying genes regulated by both proteins will prove
critical in further understanding their contribution to MRT development.
Ultimately, our studies will identify key signaling pathways that
contribute to the initiation and/or progression of renal cancers
including MRTs and ccRCCs.

