Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of cystathionine beta-synthase in ovarian cancer growth,
metastasis and drug sensitivity.


Hydrogen sulfide (H2S), the third gasotransmitter, has recently attracted
a lot of attention for its cytoprotective action and role in
angiogenesis. Dysregulation of the major enzymes which produces H2S
namely, cystathionine beta synthase (CBS), cystathionine gamma lyase
(CSE) and 3-mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase (3-MST) have also been
implicated in a large number of pathological conditions that range from
neurological disorders to cardiovascular diseases. Surprisingly, studies
on the role of these enzymes in cancer is scarce, especially, that of
CBS. Relapse with a drug resistant and aggressive phenotype is a common
occurrence in ovarian cancer with an overall 5-year survival of
approximately 30%. Here we report that, CBS, a key enzyme required for
sulphur amino acid metabolism, plays a critical role in promoting ovarian
cancer growth, metastasis and drug resistance. Overexpression of CBS was
observed in a majority of ovarian cancer cell lines utilized in our study
compared to normal ovarian surface epithelial cells. Silencing CBS in
A2780 cells using siRNA or a CBS-specific inhibitor, aminooxyacetic acid
reduced proliferation of ovarian cancer cells by dramatically reducing
total glutathione levels, H2S levels and thereby enhancing oxidative
stress. Downregulation of CBS reduced activation of NF-kB and upregulated
p53 protein levels thereby inactivating the antioxidant network of the
cells. A deeper insight into the intracellular localization of CBS by
confocal fluorescence microscopy demonstrated a mitochondria specific
distribution and silencing CBS caused mitochondrial superoxide
accumulation that resulted in decreased mitochondrial respiration,
reduced ATP production and increased ADP-to-ATP ratio. Furthermore,
silencing CBS, augmented the activity of cisplatin in vitro in A2780
cells and in vivo in an orthotopic model of advanced ovarian cancer.
Nanoliposomal delivery of CBS siRNA significantly reduced the number of
tumor nodules in a chemoresistant orthotopic mouse model of ovarian
cancer. To our knowledge, this is the first study demonstrating the
importance of CBS in ovarian cancer progression and drug resistance and
therefore is a viable target for future anti-cancer therapies.

