Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exercise activates AMP-activated protein kinase in breast cancer
cells.


Objective: Cancer cells are characterized by a changed cellular
metabolism, favoring glycolysis. AMPK, a serine/threonine kinase
regulates cellular metabolism, and induces fatty acid oxidation and has
in regard to this, been shown to suppress tumor cell growth. During
physical activity, which is associated with a reduced cancer risk,
working muscles secrete myokines, known to activate AMPK. This could
indicate a connection between AMPK activity, myokine release from the
working muscle, and an anti-cancer response. We hypothesize that
exercise-induced myokine secretion causes an anti-cancer response via
AMPK activation. Methods: Exercise-induced AMPK activation was studied in
two models, 1) A cell study using the two breast cancer cell lines,
MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7, incubated with exercise-conditioned serum,
representing a myokine pool. Serum was collected from 9 females during a
2 hours cycling bout, and during a subsequent 3 hours rest. Following
incubation, cell viability and AMPK phosphorylation was determined in the
cells. 2) An In Vivo model, where the two cell lines were injected into
nude mice. When the tumors reached 6 mm in diameter, the mice were
subjected to 1 hour forced swimming bout, after which the tumors were
dissected and analyzed for pAMPK content. Results: 1) Cell study: Two
hours of cycling induced a 6-fold increase in serum IL-6, as expected.
Incubating cancer cells with this post-exercise serum resulted in a
significant reduction in the viability of MCF-7 cells, while no effect on
the viability of MDA-MB-231 cells were observed. Preliminary data show
increased AMPK phosphorylation in both MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells after
incubation with 5% exercise-conditioned serum. 2) In vivo study: 1 hour
of swimming resulted in significantly increased AMPK phosphorylation in
the MCF-7 tumors. Conclusion: Our preliminary data indicate that
exercise-induced factors can cause decreased viability and increased AMPK
activity in MCF-7 cells, while MDA-MB-231 cells need further
investigation. Acknowledgement: The Centre of Inflammation and Metabolism
(CIM) is supported by a grant from the Danish National research
Foundation (#02-512-55). This study was further supported by the Danish
Medical Research Council and the Lundbeck Foundation.

