Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of mTOR targeting with cetuximab and conventional
chemotherapy: a preclinical study on an orthotopic xenograft model of
head and neck cancer.


Background: Preclinical and clinical studies on head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) demonstrated synergistic anti-tumoral effects when
combining anti-EGFR agents with conventional chemotherapeutic drugs such
as cisplatin (C) and 5-fluorouracil (F). In a previous experimental
study, our group pointed out an enhancement of PIK3CA signaling (pAKT) in
tumors re-growing after cetuximab-based treatment (Bozec et al. Br J
Cancer 2007). This context justifies investigations on mTOR inhibitors
combined with cetuximab (Cetux) in HNSCC.Methods: The effects on tumor
growth of treatments combining an mTOR inhibitor (Temsirolimus (Tem)), an
anti-EGFR (Cetux) and a clinically validated-chemotherapeutic regimen
(C+F) were examined in an orthotopic (floor of the mouth) model of human
HNSCC (CAL33 cell line, over-expressing EGFR, secreting VEGF-A, H1047R
PIK3CA mutated). In parallel, in-vitro experiments were conducted in
order to strengthen the data arising from the in-vivo study. On day 0,
cells were injected in nude NMRI mice. Treatment was started on day 3 and
consisted of 8 groups (10 mice/group) treated as follows: Control, Tem (5
mg/kg i.p. five times a week), Cetux (2.5 mg/kg i.p. once a week),
cisplatin (6 mg/kg) + 5-fluorouracil (17 mg/kg) (i.p. once a week),
concomitant treatment combining Tem with either Cetux, C+F, or Cetux+C+F.
The tumor growth was recorded by IVIS imaging and on day 13 after animal
euthanasia with a caliper ruler.Results: All tested treatments produced
significant growth inhibition as compared to controls (pBackground:
Preclinical and clinical studies on head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) demonstrated synergistic anti-tumoral effects when combining
anti-EGFR agents with conventional chemotherapeutic drugs such as
cisplatin (C) and 5-fluorouracil (F). In a previous experimental study,
our group pointed out an enhancement of PIK3CA signaling (pAKT) in tumors
re-growing after cetuximab-based treatment (Bozec et al. Br J Cancer
2007). This context justifies investigations on mTOR inhibitors combined
with cetuximab (Cetux) in HNSCC.Methods: The effects on tumor growth of
treatments combining an mTOR inhibitor (Temsirolimus (Tem)), an anti-EGFR
(Cetux) and a clinically validated-chemotherapeutic regimen (C+F) were
examined in an orthotopic (floor of the mouth) model of human HNSCC
(CAL33 cell line, over-expressing EGFR, secreting VEGF-A, H1047R PIK3CA
mutated). In parallel, in-vitro experiments were conducted in order to
strengthen the data arising from the in-vivo study. On day 0, cells were
injected in nude NMRI mice. Treatment was started on day 3 and consisted
of 8 groups (10 mice/group) treated as follows: Control, Tem (5 mg/kg
i.p. five times a week), Cetux (2.5 mg/kg i.p. once a week), cisplatin (6
mg/kg) + 5-fluorouracil (17 mg/kg) (i.p. once a week), concomitant
treatment combining Tem with either Cetux, C+F, or Cetux+C+F. The tumor
growth was recorded by IVIS imaging and on day 13 after animal euthanasia
with a caliper ruler.Results: All tested treatments produced significant
growth inhibition as compared to controls (p<0.01). The Tem-Cetux and
Tem-Cetux+C+F regimens produced the strongest growth-inhibiting effects,
however the addition of C+F to the Tem-Cetux regimen did not result in a
significantly greater effect as compared to Tem-Cetux (p = 0.18). The
growth-inhibiting effects of Tem-Cetux were significantly stronger than
those of Tem or Cetux alone (pBackground: Preclinical and clinical
studies on head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) demonstrated
synergistic anti-tumoral effects when combining anti-EGFR agents with
conventional chemotherapeutic drugs such as cisplatin (C) and
5-fluorouracil (F). In a previous experimental study, our group pointed
out an enhancement of PIK3CA signaling (pAKT) in tumors re-growing after
cetuximab-based treatment (Bozec et al. Br J Cancer 2007). This context
justifies investigations on mTOR inhibitors combined with cetuximab
(Cetux) in HNSCC.Methods: The effects on tumor growth of treatments
combining an mTOR inhibitor (Temsirolimus (Tem)), an anti-EGFR (Cetux)
and a clinically validated-chemotherapeutic regimen (C+F) were examined
in an orthotopic (floor of the mouth) model of human HNSCC (CAL33 cell
line, over-expressing EGFR, secreting VEGF-A, H1047R PIK3CA mutated). In
parallel, in-vitro experiments were conducted in order to strengthen the
data arising from the in-vivo study. On day 0, cells were injected in
nude NMRI mice. Treatment was started on day 3 and consisted of 8 groups
(10 mice/group) treated as follows: Control, Tem (5 mg/kg i.p. five times
a week), Cetux (2.5 mg/kg i.p. once a week), cisplatin (6 mg/kg) +
5-fluorouracil (17 mg/kg) (i.p. once a week), concomitant treatment
combining Tem with either Cetux, C+F, or Cetux+C+F. The tumor growth was
recorded by IVIS imaging and on day 13 after animal euthanasia with a
caliper ruler.Results: All tested treatments produced significant growth
inhibition as compared to controls (p<0.01). The Tem-Cetux and
Tem-Cetux+C+F regimens produced the strongest growth-inhibiting effects,
however the addition of C+F to the Tem-Cetux regimen did not result in a
significantly greater effect as compared to Tem-Cetux (p = 0.18). The
growth-inhibiting effects of Tem-Cetux were significantly stronger than
those of Tem or Cetux alone (p<0.004). Moreover, a significant synergism
was demonstrated between Temsirolimus and Cetuximab effects (significant
interaction: p = 0.001, ANOVA). Furthermore, in contrast to mice
receiving the Tem-Cetux+C+F regimen, mice treated with Tem-Cetux had no
clinical signs of secondary effects. Accordingly, the mice weight loss
measured on day 12 was significantly lower in mice receiving Tem-Cetux
regimens as compared to mice receiving the Tem-Cetux+C+F regimen
(p=0.005). IHC analysis on tumor vasculature (VEGFR2), proliferation
status (Ki67) and downstream signaling phospho-proteins (pAKT, p-P70/S6k,
pERK) strengthen our data on tumor growth and proliferation.Conclusion:
These data on the association of temsilorimus with cetuximab could serve
as a strong basis for innovative treatments aiming at an optimal
management of patients with recurrent/metastatic HNSCC.

