Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The KISS1 metastasis suppressor appears to reverse the Warburg
effect by enhancing mitochondria biogenesis.


Cancer cells tend to utilize aerobic glycolysis even under normoxic
conditions, which is commonly called the Warburg Effect. Aerobic
glycolysis often directly correlates with malignant potential. Though its
purpose remains unclear, the Warburg Effect is thought to confer
advantages to proliferation, survival and dissemination to cancer cells
by increasing uptake of nutrients into biomass. KISS1 protein is secreted
and proteolytically cleaved into kisspeptins (KP) that block the
colonization of disseminated metastatic C8161.9 human melanoma cells at
secondary sites. In this study, we hypothesized that KISS1 metastasis
suppression occurs via regulation of aerobic glycolysis. Comparison of
bioenergetic and metabolic aspects of glucose metabolism showed that all
KISS1-secreting clones were less invasive, took up less glucose, produced
less lactate which corresponds to higher pH[Ex], effects which were
reversed when cells were transduced with shRNA to KISS1. The metabolism,
invasion, and metastasis changes did not occur when KISS1 was missing the
signal peptide (SS). Utilizing a Seahorse bioanalyzer, KISS1, but not SS
cells showed significantly decreased extracellular acidification rates,
increased O2 consumption and elevated mitochondria reserve capacity, an
indicator of mitochondrial condition and a parameter thought to improve
the cells ability to cope with oxidative stress. KISS1-expressing cells
have 30-50% more mitochondria compared to vector or SS-expressing cells.
Increased mitochondrial mass was accompanied by significantly increased
expression of mitochondrial genes involved in apoptosis and mitophagy,
protein processing and trafficking. Increased mitochondrial mass
correlated with higher PGC1 considered to be a master co-activator that
regulates mitochondrial mass and metabolism. Interestingly, KISS1
differentially affects PGC1-mediated downstream pathways, i.e. fatty acid
synthesis and -oxidation. KISS1-mediated up-regulation of mitochondria
biogenesis appears to rely on KISS1 interaction with NRF1, a major
transcription factor of mitochondria biogenesis. KP10 (which can activate
the KISS1 receptor) does not alter pH[Ex] since the metastatic tumor
cells do not express KISS1R. This paradox - metastasis and metabolic
changes require secretion, but responding cells do not have the receptor
- raises questions regarding the mechanism. Nonetheless, these data
appear to directly connect changes in mitochondria mass, cellular glucose
metabolism and metastasis. [Support: CA134581, Natl. Fndn. Cancer Res.,
Komen SAC110037].

