Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altered regulation of metabolic pathways by the hormone
glucagon-like peptide 1 in breast cancer induces growth inhibition.


Ample data indicate an association between Type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) and increased risk of breast cancer. The incretin hormone
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) is a 31-amino acids long peptide-hormone,
secreted from intestinal L cells in response to food intake and, through
activation of G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) located on pancreatic
cells, serves as the major regulator of postprandial insulin secretion.
In hepatocytes and adipocytes GLP-1 regulates metabolic pathways like
glucose uptake and lipid biosynthesis. GLP-1 levels are reduced in T2DM,
and long acting GLP-based medications are currently approved for
treatment of T2DM.We have recently discovered GLP-1 as a novel player in
the complex interaction between T2DM and breast cancer. GLP-1 inhibited
proliferation of breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo, induced cAMP
accumulation and inhibited AKT activation. Tumor cells acquire a
metabolic switch essential for their survival, allowing cells to function
under stress and produce precursors needed for the synthesis of
macromolecules. This phenomenon is associated with activation of the AKT
pathway and inhibition of AMP activated protein kinase (AMPK). Based on
our observations and on known metabolic activities of GLP-1in other cell
types, we hypothesized that it may reverse the metabolic switch in breast
cancer cells, thus, leading to cell death.AMPK inhibition, using compound
C and siRNA, abolished GLP1-mediated MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cell death,
implying this metabolic pathway as central to GLP-1 activity in breast
cancer. Indeed, GLP1 induced AMPK phosphorylation in breast cancer cell
lines. Accordingly, acetyl CoA carboxylase (ACC), an essential enzyme for
fatty acid synthesis and a downstream target of AMPK, was phosphorylated
by AMPK. Adenylate cyclase inhibitor 25dideoxy adenosine prevented
GLP-1-induced AMPK and ACC phosphorylation, suggesting cAMP as a
regulator of this pathway. AMPK can be activated generally by LKB1 or
CAMKK1. As MDA-MB231 cells do not express LKB1 we suspected that GLP-1
utilizes CAMKK1 for AMPK activation in breast cancer cells. Indeed, we
discovered that CAMKK1 inhibition abrogated AMPK activation by GLP-1. The
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway is regulated by AMPK. We
monitored pathway activity by measuring phosphorylation of S6-kinase and
its substrate S6 in MCF-7 cells. Phosphorylation of the two p-S6Kinase
isoforms (P85 and P70), and of pS6, was decreased following GLP-1
treatment. We conducted metabolomics screen using NMR and preliminary
data indicated reduced lactic acid levels and increased glutamic acid
levels following GLP-1 treatment.Thus, we show that regulation of
AKT-mTOR and AMPK metabolic pathways by GLP-1 in breast cancer, mediate
GLP-1 growth inhibitory effect. As GLP-1 levels are lower in T2DM, we
suggest this activity of GLP-1 as a novel link associating T2DM and
breast cancer.

