Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular inhibition of autophagy enhances
dihydroceramides-induced cell death in glioblastoma multiforme cell lines.


Introduction: Study aim was to characterize dihydroceramide-related cell
death in the glioblastoma multiforme cell lines, A-172 and T98G. Methods:
Cytotoxicity was evaluated using fluorescence digital image microscopy
(DIMSCAN). Apoptosis was analyzed by Annexin V-FITC and TUNEL assays.
Mitochondrial depolarization and Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) were
assayed by JC1 staining and DCFDA staining and flow cytometry. Autophagy
marker, LC3BII, and caspase-3 cleavage were assayed by immunoblotting.
Autophagy inhibition was by bafilomycin A1 and siRNA against ATG7 and
BECN1. Sphingolipid levels were assayed by radiolabeling and mass
spectrometry. Results: Fenretinide (4-HPR) increased dihydroceramides
coincident with cytotoxicity. Artificial L-threo-sphinganine analogs,
safingol (S) and C20-base safingol (C20-S), were incorporated into
L-threo variant dihydroceramides coincident with synergistic enhancement
of 4-HPR cytotoxicity. 4-HPR, alone or in combination with S or C20-S,
resulted in a significant (pIntroduction: Study aim was to characterize
dihydroceramide-related cell death in the glioblastoma multiforme cell
lines, A-172 and T98G. Methods: Cytotoxicity was evaluated using
fluorescence digital image microscopy (DIMSCAN). Apoptosis was analyzed
by Annexin V-FITC and TUNEL assays. Mitochondrial depolarization and
Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) were assayed by JC1 staining and DCFDA
staining and flow cytometry. Autophagy marker, LC3BII, and caspase-3
cleavage were assayed by immunoblotting. Autophagy inhibition was by
bafilomycin A1 and siRNA against ATG7 and BECN1. Sphingolipid levels were
assayed by radiolabeling and mass spectrometry. Results: Fenretinide
(4-HPR) increased dihydroceramides coincident with cytotoxicity.
Artificial L-threo-sphinganine analogs, safingol (S) and C20-base
safingol (C20-S), were incorporated into L-threo variant dihydroceramides
coincident with synergistic enhancement of 4-HPR cytotoxicity. 4-HPR,
alone or in combination with S or C20-S, resulted in a significant
(p<0.05) increase (5-fold) in ROS formation in T98G and 2-fold induction
in A-172 cells; L-threo sphinganines alone did not increase ROS
formation. At +36h, 4-HPR induced greater mitochondrial membrane
depolarization (62.3 +/- 4.1%) in T98G cells in comparison to A-172 (27.4
+/- 2.3%) cells. Mitochondrial depolarization with 4-HPR-alone trended
greater than combination treatments in both cell lines at all time points
(+12 - 36h). At +12h and +24h, 4-HPR +/- S/C20-S did not increase Annexin
V-FITC+/PI- staining in either cell line, suggesting lack of early
apoptosis, but Annexin V-FITC+/PI- staining increased in A-172 cells at
+36h. Although cytotoxicity was present at +24h, TUNEL assay and
caspase-3 cleavage were negative at +12h and +24 h. TUNEL-positivity
increased with a concomitant increase of cleaved caspase-3 at +36 h in
remaining cells. Autophagy was strongly activated (+6 - 36h) in response
to 4-HPR +/- S/C20-S exposure as evidenced by increased conversion of
LC3-I to the autophagic vesicle-associated form, LC3-II. Pharmacological
inhibition of autophagy using bafilomycin A1 demonstrated an active
autophagic flux in response to treatments. Suppression of autophagy by
siRNA (BECN1, ATG7) significantly (pIntroduction: Study aim was to
characterize dihydroceramide-related cell death in the glioblastoma
multiforme cell lines, A-172 and T98G. Methods: Cytotoxicity was
evaluated using fluorescence digital image microscopy (DIMSCAN).
Apoptosis was analyzed by Annexin V-FITC and TUNEL assays. Mitochondrial
depolarization and Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) were assayed by JC1
staining and DCFDA staining and flow cytometry. Autophagy marker, LC3BII,
and caspase-3 cleavage were assayed by immunoblotting. Autophagy
inhibition was by bafilomycin A1 and siRNA against ATG7 and BECN1.
Sphingolipid levels were assayed by radiolabeling and mass spectrometry.
Results: Fenretinide (4-HPR) increased dihydroceramides coincident with
cytotoxicity. Artificial L-threo-sphinganine analogs, safingol (S) and
C20-base safingol (C20-S), were incorporated into L-threo variant
dihydroceramides coincident with synergistic enhancement of 4-HPR
cytotoxicity. 4-HPR, alone or in combination with S or C20-S, resulted in
a significant (p<0.05) increase (5-fold) in ROS formation in T98G and
2-fold induction in A-172 cells; L-threo sphinganines alone did not
increase ROS formation. At +36h, 4-HPR induced greater mitochondrial
membrane depolarization (62.3 +/- 4.1%) in T98G cells in comparison to
A-172 (27.4 +/- 2.3%) cells. Mitochondrial depolarization with
4-HPR-alone trended greater than combination treatments in both cell
lines at all time points (+12 - 36h). At +12h and +24h, 4-HPR +/- S/C20-S
did not increase Annexin V-FITC+/PI- staining in either cell line,
suggesting lack of early apoptosis, but Annexin V-FITC+/PI- staining
increased in A-172 cells at +36h. Although cytotoxicity was present at
+24h, TUNEL assay and caspase-3 cleavage were negative at +12h and +24 h.
TUNEL-positivity increased with a concomitant increase of cleaved
caspase-3 at +36 h in remaining cells. Autophagy was strongly activated
(+6 - 36h) in response to 4-HPR +/- S/C20-S exposure as evidenced by
increased conversion of LC3-I to the autophagic vesicle-associated form,
LC3-II. Pharmacological inhibition of autophagy using bafilomycin A1
demonstrated an active autophagic flux in response to treatments.
Suppression of autophagy by siRNA (BECN1, ATG7) significantly (p<0.05)
decreased cell viability in 4-HPR + S/C20-S -exposed cells at +24 h.
Conclusions: Results suggest that multiple, distinct, cell death pathways
are induced by 4-HPR + S/C20-S treatment. Early cell death was
non-apoptotic and caspase-independent; late cell death was by apoptosis
with caspase-3 cleavage. Inhibition of autophagy synergized/accelerated
4-HPR + S/C20-S -induced cell death, indicating a pro-survival role for
autophagy in these cell lines. The results suggest that strategies that
exploit concurrent autophagy inhibition may be useful therapeutic
adjuncts for 4-HPR and dihydroceramide-based strategies.

