Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of matrix and intercellular interactions on
chemotherapeutic efficacy in a high-throughput format.


Many researchers believe that clinical results often do not coincide with
two-dimensional in vitro assays, prompting the need for better
correlative cellular models. 3D culture has gained much interest in
recent years for the effects of matrix and inter-cellular contacts on
tumor growth and progression. We have devised a high throughput assay to
look at the effects of matrix and intracellular interactions using a
standard 384 2D plate, matrigel in 384 well format and 3D Elplasia
micro-space plates with a 200 micron grid. We standardized the media
between all three platforms but decreased the cell number 3-4 fold in 2D
plates to keep growth within the linear range for a 6 day assay. Media
was changed once after 3 days. In all cell lines tested, there were at
least one doubling of cell number in 6 days and the rate of growth was
fairly consistent between 3D and 2D techniques, with 2D growth slightly
faster. We examined differences in potency and efficacy of 6 different
agents in 10 cell lines comparing 2D and 3D techniques. These agents are
directed at PI3K, DR4/5, MEK, EGFR, and BCL2. Effects due to matrix
interactions vs. suspension were noted along with potency and efficacy
changes of several compounds when compared to 2D but not in all cells
lines. Often EC-50 values for various agents were identical between
platforms. In a few cell lines, the potency of a PI3K/mTorr inhibitor was
increased three fold but the overall efficacy (defined by area under the
curve) was decreased in 2D vs. 3D. DR4/5 agonists also had a mixed
profile with some cell lines. TRAIL was dramatically more potent in 2D
for some lines and conversely, more potent for others in 3D. Ranges of
over 10 fold in EC-50 for Trail were observed between 2D and 3D in the
same cell line. This interesting variation between 2D and 3D endpoints
prompts the need to correlate 3D potency with clinical data and begs
insight into the reasons behind the differences in receptor mediated
signaling in 3D. If 3D is more correlative, which many studies suggest,
there will be a clear benefit to screening multiple cell lines for
efficacy and correlating them with gene expression data in 3D culture for
biomarker identification.

