Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ovarian carcinoma derived exosomes: miRNA signatures and role in
cancer progression .


Ovarian cancer (OC) is the leading cause of death from gynecological
cancer in Western countries. The disease is asymptomatic in the early
stages, and is usually diagnosed at an advance stage, leading to an
extremely poor prognosis. Primary solid tumor, solid metastases, and
effusions to the peritoneal and pleural cavities characterize the tumor
as it progresses.MicroRNAs (miRNAs, miRs) are small, non-coding RNAs.
They regulate gene expression by binding to the 3UTR of a target mRNA,
and decrease protein levels by inhibition of protein translation. In the
recent years, miRNAs were found to play an important role in cancer, both
as oncogenes and as tumor suppressor genes, depending on the target mRNA
and the type of cancer.In addition to cells, miRNAs are present in body
fluids in exosomes, 30-90 nm vesicles secreted by cells. Exosomes contain
proteins, mRNA and miRNA. Exosomal RNA content can be shuttled from one
cell to another, affecting the recipient cell. It has been implicated
that an "exosomal messenger system" exhibits paracrine bioactivities that
facilitate tumor communication within the local tumor microenvironment.We
compared the expression of miRNAs present in effusion fluid-derived
exosomes from 50 pre-chemo and 50 post-chemo patients of which 37 were
chemo-resistant and 31chemo-sensitive, respectively. The patient cohort
was in addition divided into 28 long and 72 short survivors,
respectively. TaqMan miRNA arrays were used to identify miRNA profiles,
and the qPCR miScript system for validation of the obtained results.
Web-based algorithms were used for further bioinformatics analysis.We
identified differentially expressed miRNAs in OC effusion-derived
exosomes compared to exosomal miRNAs from sera, malignant mesothelioma
effusions and reactive effusions. Fifty-seven miRNAs were differentially
expressed in specimens from patients with long vs. short survival and 62
differentially expressed miRNAs in specimens obtained before vs. after
chemotherapy treatment.We tested the effects of effusion derived exosomes
on cell behavior in-vitro and on tumor spread in-vivo. Our results show
that exosomes affect the interaction between cancer cells and their
microenvironment. Pre-injection of exosomes to female SCID mice, followed
by injection of cancer cells, caused shorter life span and larger tumor
burden, compared to mice not pre-treated with exosomes. OC effusion
derived exosomes might have autocrine and/or paracrine effects on cells,
thus enhancing the oncogenic potential of cancer cells, or sensitizing
the body to malignant dissemination.This is the first study to evaluate
the differential expression of miRNAs in exosomes derived from OC ascites
fluid. We believe that the differential expression and the distinct
signatures of miRNAs possess diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic
potential.

