Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting glioma growth and invasiveness by microRNA-1.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive primary
brain tumor. Median survival is about 14 months, even with the most
effective regimen of surgery followed by radiation and chemotherapy. GBM
is characterized by the hallmarks of cellular heterogeneity, rapid
proliferation, angiogenesis and extensive invasion. The dual feature of
high proliferation and infiltration constitutes the major challenge for
glioma therapy, as even extensive resection of the primary tumor mass
leaves a significant number of tumor cells in the brain and leads to
almost unavoidable recurrence. Despite abundance of data concerning
glioma growth/angiogenesis, the mechanisms underlying the regulation of
glioma cell motility and invasiveness are comparatively poorly
understood. Established anti-glioma therapeutical modalities (radiation,
chemotherapy) target preferentially rapidly proliferating rather than
infiltrating glioma cells. Moreover invading cells are resistant to
conventional therapies, and anti-angiogenic treatment was shown to induce
invasiveness. Thus novel therapies aiming at blockade of glioma invasion,
while curbing their proliferative potential are needed. MicroRNAs (miRs)
are small, single stranded, non-coding RNAs that act as key regulators of
gene expression, by reducing translation of target mRNAs with partial
complementarity in their 3UTRs. MiRs deregulation is a general feature of
cancer, including GBM, and was associated with tumor suppressor and
oncogenic activities. A number of studies have identified critical roles
for miRs in the regulation of tumor cell invasion, migration and
metastasis. In this study we report that miR-1 is down-regulated in
glioma patients (relatively to adjacent tissue) and that it is
down-regulated in migrating glioma cells in vitro (relatively to
non-migrating glioma cells). Its forced expression reduces glioma cell
growth and angiogenesis in vivo. MiR-1 inhibits migration in vitro and
invasiveness in vivo. Additionally, we demonstrated impaired cell-cell
adhesion and aggregation in glioma cells expressing miR-1. We identified
Annexin A2, recognized oncogene in glioma, as a direct target of miR-1.
Annexin A2 is up-regulated in various tumor types, including glioma. In
vivo studies revealed a critical role for Annexin A2 in driving glioma
growth, angiogenesis, progression and invasion. Our results show that the
effects of miR-1 on glioma cells are consistent with Annexin A2
down-regulation, including a reduction in glioma cell proliferation and
invasiveness, and re-expression of Annexin A2 rescues the effect of miR-1
expression. When glioma cells stably expressing miR-1 were injected
intracranially, we observed significantly improved survival when compared
to control cells. Our results suggest that miR-1 inhibits simultaneously
glioma growth and invasiveness in vivo and as such may be a candidate for
the therapeutic targeting of glioma cells.

