Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gamma-tocotrienol upregulates the ceramide transporter, Arv-1, in
pancreatic cancer cells.


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death in
the United States. Treatment options are limited and novel therapeutic
agents that can inhibit signaling pathways implicated in the
proliferation and survival of pancreatic cancer cells are of interest.
Tocotrienols are members of the vitamin E family but, unlike tocopherols,
possess an unsaturated isoprenoid side-chain that confers superior and
mechanistically different anti-cancer properties on pancreatic cancer
cells. The ability of tocotrienols to selectively inhibit the HMG CoA
reductase pathway through post-translational degradation of HMG CoA
reductase, inhibit the PI3/Akt, ERK pathways through downregulation of
Her2/ErbB2 receptors as well as suppression of the activity of
transcription factor NF kappa B, could be the basis for some of these
properties.Recent studies have shown increase in cellular ceramide levels
in cancer cells treated with tocopherols, leading to arrest in tumor
proliferation and apoptosis. The actual mechanism of increase in ceramide
levels is not clearly understood and is thought to be due to increased
synthesis. We explored the hypothesis that the increase in ceramide on
the cellular membrane could be due to increased transport from the ER to
the membrane. The ARV1 (ACAT-related enzyme-2 required for viability)
gene encodes an ER- localized protein involved in lipid homeostasis and
ceramide transport in yeast and mammals. Deletion of the ARV-1 gene in
yeast causes accumulation of ceramide in cytoplasm. Our previous work
indicated that gamma-tocotrienol (GT3) has potent anti-proliferative
activity in k-ras mutated pancreatic cancer cell (MIA-Paca-2) through the
inhibitory effect on Akt, Ras/Raf/Erk and ErBb2 receptor as well as
induction of apoptotic pathways through Fox-03 and GSK-3b. Our current
data shows GT3 may decrease expression of caveolin, a cell survival
marker, and cause up-regulation of ARV-1 that encodes a ceramide
transport protein. We further show via HPLC (Babraham Bioscience
Technologies Ltd, Cambridge, U.K) that total ceramide levels remain
unchanged in the cell. There may be a change in ceramide (monoclonal
anti-ceramide IgM, Sigma Chemicals) cellular distribution as indicated by
immunofluorescence data.Upregulation of ARV-1 may be involved in increase
in cellular ceramide transport or redistribution of ceramide to the cell
membrane. Transport of ceramide to membrane lipid rafts or mitochondrial
membrane channels may cause loss of survival signaling and induce
apoptosis. Thus it is likely that GT3 apoptotic effect on k-ras mutated
MIA-Paca2 cells is related not to changes in the total ceramide levels,
but rather to its increased transport and redistribution. Further work is
necessary in order to better understand the role of GT3 in ceramide
redistribution in pancreatic cancer cells.

