Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DIRAS family members inhibit cell growth and proliferation while
inducing autophagy in human ovarian cancer cells.


Among the three members of the DIRAS family, DIRAS3 (also known as
AplasiaRasHomolog Member I; ARHI) has been best characterized. ARHI is a
maternally expressed imprinted tumor suppressor gene that encodes a 26
kDa GTPase with 60% homology to Ras and Rap. ARHI is downregulated in
many tumor types including ovarian cancer where its re-expression at
physiologic levels inhibits cancer cell growth, reduces motility, induces
autophagy and promotes tumor dormancy. ARHI induces autophagy by multiple
mechanism including:1) blocking PI3K-Akt signaling and inhibiting mTOR
activity, 2) displacing Bcl-2 from Beclin and participating directly in
the autophagy initiation complex; and 3) inducing expression of Atg4 and
participating directly in the formation of autophagic vesicles,
co-localizing with MAP-LC3-II in the vesicle membrane. In human cells,
knockdown experiments have demonstrated that ARHI is essential for the
induction of autophagy. During evolution, murine cells have lost the ARHI
(DIRAS3) gene, yet can still undergo autophagy. Mice and humans express
two closely related Ras-related GTPases,DIRAS1 and DIRAS2. These 22 kDa
GTPases, have 30-40% overall homology with H-Ras, and 50-60% homology
with ARHI (DIRAS3) with the only major difference being the truncation of
the N-terminal extension. In this study, we show that transfection of
DIRAS1, 2 or 3 with a selectable marker inhibits clonogenic growth of
SKOv3 human ovarian cancer cells. Whereas DIRAS3 produced complete
inhibition, DIRAS 1 produced 50% inhibition and D IRAS2 35% inhibition of
clonogenic growth. One possible mechanism for the growth inhibition
observed could be attributed to the induction of autophagy which has been
shown by the formation of LC3 punctae in SKOV3 cells and the increased
conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II by western blot analysis when DIRAS1 and
DIRAS2 were overexpressed by transfection. These findings suggest that
these DIRAS family homologs may have similar functions in limiting human
tumor progression and in inducing autophagy. Future studies will examine
whether DIRAS1 and DIRAS2 serve as surrogates forARHI (DIRAS3) in murine
cells.

