Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue image analysis tool to quantify HER2 RNA and protein
expression by colorimetric in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry
for breast cancer diagnosis.


Early cancer diagnosis and risk assessment are powerful drivers in
discovery of oncology biomarkers for diagnostic tests and simultaneous
improvement of already identified biomarkers. Molecular tools such as RNA
Colorimetric in situ hybridization (CISH) and immunohistochemistry (IHC)
combined with conventional histopathology promise to increase the
sensitivity and specificity of cancer staging and overall survival
prediction. Changes in oncogene and proto-oncogene expression are a
hallmark of cancer. For this reason, simultaneous quantification of mRNA
and protein expression using RNA CISH and IHC combined with
image-analysis is of interest. One such proto-oncogene is HER2, which is
encoded by ERBB2 gene located at the long arm of human chromosome 17
(17q12). Here, we combine RNA CISH and IHC with image-analysis to develop
a reliable quantitative HER2 assay that enables quantification of HER2
mRNA and protein expression in the context of human breast cancer. Since
HER2 is only over-expressed in a subset of human breast cancers, we
initially focused our analysis by screening tissue microarrays (TMAs)
using RNA CISH and IHC. TMAs containing 20 normal and 20 breast tumor
tissues were tested and whole-slide imaging was used to obtain CISH and
IHC signals. HER2 mRNA and protein expression were analyzed, quantified,
and compared both at tissue- and individual cell-levels using proprietary
image-analysis based tools. Moreover, we compared heterogeneity of RNA
and protein expression and further extended our studies to several other
cancer-related genes. Finally, since oncogene expression plays a role in
cancer pathologies, successful quantification of oncogene in situ
expression in human cancer tissues may prove to be beneficial to further
understanding of cancer pathology, for drug screening and development of
biomarkers and ultimately diagnostic tests.

