Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of folic acid supplementation on epigenetics and cancer
stem cell populations in established colorectal cancer cell lines.


Mandated fortification of folic acid, a B vitamin involved in nucleotide
synthesis and DNA CpG methylation, has led to a subsequent increase in
blood folate concentration as well as a simultaneous increase in
colorectal cancer incidence in North America. Recent findings suggest
that a proportion of tumor cells, termed cancer stem cells (CSC), share
properties with native stem cells and are vital in the development and
perpetuation of tumor metastasis. Both epigenetic DNA modifications as
well as the activation of established stem cell signaling pathways are
responsible for the activation and maintenance of (CSC). CSC share
properties with native stem cells and are vital in the development of
primary lesions and the perpetuation of tumor metastasis. We hypothesize
that folate, a CpG methylation altering agent, and extracellular
microenvironment factors can influence the development and maintenance of
CSCs. By isolating and characterizing the CSC fraction in established
human colorectal cancer cell lines HCT116, Caco2, and SW480, LS174T and
PC7, a subline of DLD-1, we have assessed the effect of folate on CSC
signaling pathways and global DNA methylation. Cell lines were grown in
suspension and supplemented with specialized stem cell media to promote
the growth and expansion of the CSC fraction. Western blot analysis and
immunofluorescence were used to characterize the protein expression and
nuclear localization of proteins associated with established CSC
maintenance pathways, respectively. Global DNA methylation status was
assessed using an ELISA-based assay. HCT116 and SW480 show an increased
ability to form colonospheres in culture compared to Caco2 and IEC18
(normal rat intestinal cell line). Cells grown in suspension show
variable activation of stem cell renewal pathways compared to monolayer.
Low folic acid levels led to reduced methylation status and colonosphere
yield while high folic acid levels led to increased global methylation
and an increased in colonosphere yield. Thus, altered folic acid exposure
in vitro can influence the methylation status and CSC self-renewal
ability of human colorectal cancer cells. The relationship between folic
acid and cancer stem cell maintenance may be an important factor in the
apparent duel modulatory effect of folic acid on colorectal cancer and
warrants further investigation.

