Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and evaluation of small molecule inhibitors of
lysophosphatidic acid acyltransferase-beta.


Abstract: Lysophosphatidic acid acyltransferase-beta (LPAAT-) catalyzes
the production of phosphatidic acid (PA) from lysophosphatidic acid
(LPA). PA is a lipid cofactor that contributes to the activation of
c-Raf, BRAF, mTOR and PKC-. LPAAT- expression is a prognostic factor in
gynecologic malignancies and is being investigated as a therapeutic
target in a variety of tumor types. We previously reported that knockdown
of LPAAT- by siRNA led to a significant inhibition of both
anchorage-dependent and -independent growth in pancreatic cancer cell
lines. Having thus established LPAAT- as a valid therapeutic target in
pancreatic cancer, we screened small molecule libraries for compounds
which block LPAAT- enzymatic activity in vitro.Methods: We utilized a
96-well plate screening assay for LPAAT- enzymatic activity modified from
Aguado and Campbell, J Biol Chem 273(7):4096-4105, 1998. Briefly,
compounds were introduced into a mixture containing full-length,
recombinant, baculovirus-produced LPAAT- (Blue Sky Biotechnology),
oleoyl-LPA, and oleoyl coenzyme A. The ability of the compound to inhibit
the enzyme activity was assayed by the measurement of the reaction of the
thiol group of the released coenzyme A with the DTNB, resulting in an
increase in the optical density of the sample when read at an absorbance
of 413 nm. To rule out non-specific compounds identified from the DTNB
plate assay, we confirmed activity using a secondary thin layer
chromatography (TLC) assay that directly measures the ability of LPAAT-
to catalyze the synthesis of PA from oleoyl-LPA and a
fluorochrome-labeled (NBD) palmitoyl coenzyme A.Results: We screened a
total of ten libraries containing 11204 compounds, and achieved a 1.2%
hit rate for inhibition of >50% at the tested concentration (100M for
nine libraries; 10M for one library). Further testing identified several
compounds with IC50s ranging from 0.1-15 M. One hit identified with an
IC50 of 100 nM was chosen for further investigation and for synthesis of
analogs to optimize potency and undertake SAR. We verified the activity
of this hit and its analogs against LPAAT- by determining their
inhibitory activity of the synthesis of NBD-labeled PA in a TLC assay.
Finally, we demonstrated that the best analog from this group inhibited
the proliferation of several pancreatic cancer cell lines.Conclusions: We
have developed a library of compounds which show inhibitory activity
against LPAAT- in a screening assay, and have confirmed their ability to
inhibit LPAAT- directly in a TLC assay which monitors the production of
PA. These compounds show low micromolar activity against LPAAT- in vitro,
and micromolar activity against the proliferation of pancreatic cancer
cell lines in culture.

