Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aurora-A promotes radio- and chemo- resistance through regulation
of DNA damage response proteins.


Background: Poor prognosis of cancer is usually resulted from radio- and
chemo-resistance. Aurora-A, a serine/threonine kinase, associated with
spindle separation and centrosome duplication, is overexpressed in many
cancers.Purposes: High expression of Aurora-A negatively regulates BRCA2,
indicating that Aurora-A is probably associated with DNA damage repair,
which may mediate resistance of radio- and chemo-therapy. This study was
to investigate the role of Aurora-A in radio- and chemo-resistance in
order to seek novel therapeutic methods for human cancer.Materials and
methods: Cell lines from breast cancer, pancreatic cancer and ovarian
cancer, including those with either low Aurora-A expression (MCF-7,
PANC-1 and OVCA420), or high Aurora-A expression (MDA-MB-231, BXPC3 and
OVCA429), were used to overexpress or silence Aurora-A, BRCA1, or BRCA2.
Cell growth curve and colony formation were tested by cell counting and
soft agar assay. Flow cytometry and MTT were used to examine cell
apoptosis or cell viability (IC50) after treatment with radiation and
cisplatin or VX680 (Aurora-A inhibitor). Western blotting was used to
test the expression of DNA damage responsive proteins. Immunofluorescence
was used to detect intracellular localization of above proteins.Results:
Our data showed that introduction of Aurora-A or silencing of BRCA1 and
BRCA2 increased cell growth and colony formation, while silencing of
Aurora-A or introduction of BRCA1 and BRCA2 decreased cell proliferation
and colony formation. Introduction of Aurora-A also reduced apoptosis in
response to gamma-irradiation and cisplatin treatment, while silencing of
Aurora-A or treatment of cells with VX680 enhanced apoptosis.
Introduction of Aurora-A increased cell viability and IC50 in response to
cisplatin treatment, while knockdown of Aurora-A or treatment with VX680
decreased cell viability and IC50. Western blot suggested that Aurora-A
had a negative association with BRCA1 and BRCA2. Moreover, overexpression
of Aurora-A either by introduction of Aurora-A cDNA or knockdown of BRCA1
or BRCA2 attenuated the expression of DNA damage responsive proteins
including RAD51, H2AX, H2AX, ATR, ERCC2, Chk1, pChk1, Chk2, pChk2,p53,
pp53, DNApol, which was confirmed by Immunofluorescence.Conclusions:
Aurora-A regulates DNA damage responsive proteins including BRCA1, BRCA2,
RAD51, H2AX, ERCC2, Chk1, Chk2, ATR, DNA pol to confer cancer radio- and
chemo-resistance. Therefore, DNA damage pathway should be essentially
considered in the targeted therapy against Aurora-A in cancer patients
either with activated Aurora-A or with inactivated BRCA1 or
BRCA2.Citation Format: Huizhen Sun, Ziliang Wang, Jiao Meng, Yan Wang,
Zihao Qi, Han Xu, Fengjuan Lin, Wen Gao, Jianmin Sun, Jing Hou, Gong
Yang. Aurora-A promotes radio- and chemo- resistance through regulation
of DNA damage response proteins. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 1605. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1605

