Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SETD6-mediated deregulation of NF- B signaling in 4-ABP-induced
bladder carcinogenesis.


Epidemiological data support an etiological role for chemicals from
occupational exposure and cigarette smoke with increased risk of bladder
cancer. However, epigenetic effects of these chemicals remain to be
elucidated. Protein methyltransferases (PMTs) methylate protein lysine
and arginine residues and play an important role in regulating gene
transcription. Deregulation of SET-domain-containing PMTs has a crucial
role in carcinogenesis. SETD6 has been shown to monomethylate RelA (a
principal subunit of NF-B at Lys310). Monomethylated RelA recruits GLP
(G9A-like protein), a histone dimethyl transferase to the NF-B target
genes, which results in transcriptional repression. The role of SETD6 in
bladder cancer is unknown. We used qPCR and immunoblotting to determine
changes in SETD6 at the mRNA and protein level in bladder cancer cells
relative to primary urothelial cells. We also found that knockdown of
SETD6 significantly decreases the viability and proliferation of bladder
cancer cells suggesting that SETD6 may function as an oncogene in bladder
cancer. Furthermore, we also found that message and protein levels of
SETD6 are induced in primary urothelial cells following treatment of
4-aminobiphenyl (4-ABP), an important constituent of cigarette smoke.
Preliminary results indicate that induction may be mediated by
4-ABP-induced ROS. RelAK310Me1 level also increased with 4-ABP treatment
showing the increase in SETD6 functional activity with 4-ABP exposure. We
also found the decrease in expression of RelB, one of the target genes of
RelA. Overall our results show that SETD6 may function as an oncogene in
4-ABP induced bladder cancer by deregulating transactivation property of
RelA. These results show for the first time the relevance of PKMTs and
epigenetic regulation of NF-B in carcinogen induced bladder cancer.
Supported by RO3 CA136058 (RG).

