Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The pharmacokinetics of letrozole in brain and brain tumor in rats
(orthotopically implanted C6 glioma) assessed using microdialysis.


The presence of blood-brain or blood-tumor barrier is well known to
restrict access of drugs to CNS malignancies. For most drugs, there is
limited quantitative information pertaining to the time course of drug
absorption, distribution and elimination and the resulting drug exposure.
In this study, we employed intracerebral microdialysis to access the
extracellular fluid (ECF) to assess the pharmacokinetics of letrozole in
brain and primary glioma in rats. Intracerebral microdialysis (perfusion
rate; 2 l/min) was performed in female rats to determine the unbound
letrozole ECF concentrations. Serial ECF samples were collected over a 30
min period up to 8 hrs following drug administration. Blood samples were
simultaneously collected through the jugular vein cannulation. Letrozole
concentrations in extracted plasma and dialysate samples were analyzed
employing HPLC. In vivo relative recovery was estimated to be 9.5%.
Normal brain versus plasma pharmacokinetic study employed four doses (4,
6, 8 & 12 mg/kg; i.v.). For tumoral pharmacokinetic studies, C6 glioma
cells were orthotopically implanted in the right striatum while the left
hemisphere served as control. Ten days after tumor implantation, dual
probe microdialysis was performed under the aforementioned experimental
conditions following letrozole administration at 4 and 8 mg/kg doses.
Pharmacokinetic analyses were carried out using WinNonlin 6.2 (Pharsight
Inc., CA). Normal brain ECF and plasma peak concentrations (Cmax) and the
Area Under the Curve (AUC0-8hr) increased linearly with increase in doses
of letrozole administration up to 8mg/kg dose. However, at higher dose of
12mg/kg brain and plasma AUC0-8hr increased non-linearly. The relative
brain distribution coefficient, calculated as (AUCbrain ecf/AUCplasma),
was 0.122 at the lowest dose of 4mg/kg letrozole, whereas, 0.3 for the
other three doses. The distribution of letrozole into the brain was rapid
with the time to attain the peak levels (Tmax) ranging between 1.3-1.5 hr
for the four doses. Furthermore, the tumoral uptake of letrozole was 1.5
- 2 folds higher relative to tumor-free region of the brain for the two
doses of letrozole, 4 and 8 mg/kg. Histological evaluation confirmed the
presence and restriction of glioma in the right hemisphere, and the
passage of the microdialysis probe in the tumor mass. Our extensive in
vivo pharmacokinetic study represents the first quantitative assessment
of letrozole exposure to the brain and brain tumor tissues. These studies
clearly demonstrate a rapid and high partitioning of letrozole to the
brain with higher accumulation in the tumoral region of the brain.
Further pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics modeling and simulations of
the observed unbound ECF concentrations are in progress to assess
clinical implications of our findings.

