Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of PIN1 suppresses tumorigenicity of EBV-associated NPC.


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an EBV-associated epithelial malignancy
which is prevalent in southern China and south-east Asia. EBV-encoded
EBNA1 is consistently expressed in NPC cells and implicates the
replication and stable persistence of latent viral genome. As a
phosphorylated protein, the function of EBV is believed to be affected by
phosphorylation.In this study, we aimed to investigate whether the
phospho-Ser/Thr-Pro specific prolyl-isomerase PIN1 alters EBNA1 function
and plays a role in the tumorigenesis of EBV-associated NPC.By western
blotting and immunohistochemical staining, we have found that PIN1 was
highly expressed in almost all 6 NPC tumor lines and 70 primary tumors.
In the EBV-positive C666-1 cells, co-localization and interaction of
EBNA1 and PIN1 was detected by immunofluorence staining and
co-immunoprecipitation assay respectively. The interaction between PIN1
and EBNA1 at the specific serine-proline motif (Ser383 and Ser393 in
EBNA1;WW domain in Pin1) was also demonstrated. To investigate potential
role of PIN1 in NPC tumorigenesis, we established a stable nasopharyngeal
epitheliacell line NP69 overexpressing PIN1. In this model, we found that
overexpression of PIN1 up-regulated cyclin D1 and activated MAPK/JNK
pathway. Increased anchorage-independent growth of NP69 overexpressing
PIN was shown in soft agar assay.To further validate the oncogencity of
PIN1, we knocked down its expression in the NPC cell line C666-1 by RNA
interference (siRNA). The study confirmed the PIN1-mediated cyclin D1
suppression. Importantly, knocking down of PIN1 significantly inhibited
the cell proliferation, DNA synthesis and migration of NPC cells.Similar
findings were also detected in the NPC cells treated with PIN1 inhibitor,
Juglone. Treating EBV-positive C666-1cell with Juglone,we found it can
significantly induce apoptosisand suppress the cyclinD1expression in
C666-1cells. The anti-tumor effect of PIN inhibitor was demonstrated in
the in vitro NPC model. To elucidate the anti-tumor potential of PIN1
inhibitorin vivo, the mice implanted with NPC cells were subjected to
treatment with different doses of Juglone. A dose-dependent inhibition of
tumor growth was observed in the mice treated with PIN1 inhibitor. In
conclusion, our findings imply that PIN1overexpression plays important
role in the development of NPC. Targeting Pin1 may serve as a potential
therapeutic approach for treating patients suffering from this
EBV-associated cancer.

