Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent anti-tumor activity of blocking stromal Dll4 in ovarian
xenograft models.


Potent anti-tumor activity of blocking stromal Dll4 in ovarian xenograft
modelsDelta-like ligand 4 (Dll4) is an emerging anticancer target given
its predominant tumor vasculature expression and its role in regulating
angiogenic sprouting. We have previously demonstrated that
pharmacological blockade of the Dll4-Notch axis results in an excessive
production of aberrant non-functional tumor vessels, and these changes
were associated with reduced tumor growth. Using VelocImmune mice, we
identified a fully human IgG1 monoclonal antibody, termed
REGN421/SAR153192, which binds human Dll4 and potently neutralizes Notch
signaling. REGN421 treatment caused potent and dose-dependent inhibition
of a number of human tumor xenografts grown in immunodeficient mice
engineered to express human Dll4. In the current study, we found that
REGN421 treatment of ovarian xenograft models produces potent anti-tumor
effects that are dependent on targeting Dll4 in the tumor stroma as
opposed to tumor cell-expressed Dll4. In particular, REGN421 treatment
(2.5 mg/kg, once weekly) of humanized Dll4 mice bearing established
subcutaneous TOV-112D or intraperitoneal A2780 human tumor xenografts
resulted in growth inhibition of 86% and 83%, respectively. The
inhibition of ovarian tumor growth by REGN421 was associated with a
marked increase in tumor vascular structures but reduced vascular
perfusion, consistent with the function of Dll4 as a regulator of
angiogenic sprouting. Similar anti-tumor effects were observed by
strictly targeting stromal Dll4 with a mouse Dll4-specific surrogate
antibody REGN1035 in SCID mice bearing OVCAR3 tumors. In contrast, the
specific blockade of tumor cell-expressed human Dll4 did not exhibit any
appreciable anti-tumor activity, indicating the lack of tumor
growth-promoting autocrine Dll4-Notch tumor cell signaling in these
models. Finally, the combined treatment of Dll4 antibody with the
anti-VEGF agent ziv-aflibercept (VEGF Trap) resulted in enhanced
anti-tumor effects and virtually the complete suppression of
intraperitoneal A2780 tumor growth, suggesting clinical benefit for the
combined blockade of VEGF and Dll4 in ovarian cancer. These studies lend
further support for the therapeutic targeting of Dll4 as a promising new
angiogenesis-based anticancer strategy in ovarian cancer, both as a
single agent and in combination with anti-VEGF agents.

