Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth factor signaling is critical in the maintenance of cancer
stem cell population in head and neck squamous cell cancer.


Tumor heterogeneity is an important concept in the carcinogenesis of
solid tumors, and forms the background for the cancer-stem cell (CSCs)
hypothesis. Emerging data suggests however that there is plasticity
within various cancer sub-populations, and that CSCs exists in a
contextually regulated equilibrium, which is multi-directional and less
rigid than previously hypothesized. The aim of this study was to
establish an in vitro system that recapitulates stem cell plasticity in
head and neck squamous cell cancers (HNSCC), and identify factors that
play a role in the maintenance and re-population of CSCs.Tumor spheres
were established using patient-derived tumor cells via
anchorage-independent cell culture techniques. RT-PCR showed higher
expression of KLF4, SOX2 and Nanog in tumor spheres compared to monolayer
culture cells. Cells grown as tumor spheres were more resistant to
-radiation, 5-fluorouracil, cisplatin and etoposide treatment compared to
cells grown in monolayer culture. Using the ALDEFLUOR assays to identify
CSCs, we showed that more cells in tumor spheres had high aldehyde
dehydrogenase (ALD+ cells) activity. Monolayer cultures were subject to
single cell cloning to generate clones with high and low ALD+ fractions.
As expected, ALDHigh clones showed higher expression of stem cell markers
Oct4, Bmi1 and Nanog and EMT markers N-Cadherin, Slug, Snail, -Catenin,
Vimentin compared to ALDLow clones. When ALDHigh clones from HNSCC cells
were cultured over time, ALD+ fractions were found to reduce gradually
and equilibrate at a specified ALD+ fraction specific to each cell line
grown in regular culture media. When growth factors EGF and/or insulin
were added to the media, ALD+ fractions could be maintained at higher
levels as compared to baseline. ALDHigh clones also showed increased EGFR
and IGF-1R phosphorylation when grown in regular culture conditions, with
increased activation of downstream factors involving the AKT and ERK
pathways compared with ALDLow clones. Blocking these pathways using
specific inhibitors against EGFR and IGFR reduced stem cell fractions
drastically.Taken together, these results show that HNSCC CSCs exhibit
plasticity, where the maintenance of the stem cell fraction was dependent
on the EGF and IGF pathways, which are therefore vulnerable to
therapeutic targeting.

