Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast HGF elicits c-MET-mediated signaling and migration in
ovarian cancer cells.


Background: Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) has the highest mortality
rate of all gynecologic malignancies diagnosed in the U.S. due to its
rapid progression without symptom. Stromal components in the ovary
contribute to rapid progression of cancer and interruption of their
interaction with cancer cells are being explored as important therapeutic
target. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is expressed primarily in
mesenchymal cells and acts on epithelial cells. HGF is also a unique
cytokine that induces pleiotropic biological responses, involving
proliferation, invasion, and dissemination of cancer cells. We studied
c-MET/HGF axis as a mediator of tumor-stromal interactions in ovarian
cancer using human ovarian fibroblast and their derived extracellular
matrices (ECM).Methods: Six EOC cells were each cultured alone or in the
presence of three human ovarian fibroblast cultures and their derived ECM
in Transwell plates and the number of migrated cells was quantitated.
ELISA was used to measure the concentration of HGF secreted by cancer
cells and fibroblasts or released from fibroblast-derived ECM. EOC cells
were treated with conditioned media derived from fibroblast that secretes
high level of HGF and c-MET mediated signalling was assessed by
immunoblotting.Results: Five out of the six EOC cells tested highly
expressed c-MET and none produced detectable levels of HGF. IHFNO-303, a
human ovarian fibroblast line, secreted the highest level of HGF (3,800
pg/mL) and markedly enhanced migration (2 to 140-fold increase) of the
EOC cells that express c-MET. Recombinant HGF and a HGF neutralizing
antibody were used to validate HGF as a major migratory factor secreted
by fibroblast. HGF sequestered within the fibroblast-derived ECM was also
able to stimulate cell migration by 1.5 to 24-fold, when released via
EOC-associated degradation of the ECM. In cells containing constitutive
c-MET phosphorylation, recombinant HGF and fibroblast-derived HGF
negligibly affect c-MET phosphorylation on Tyr1234 and Tyr1003. However,
both sources of HGF increased the phosphorylation of c-MET on Tyr1349,
the multisubstrate docking site, by more than 6-fold and led to
activation of downstream signalling transducers, e.g., AKT and ERK, in
all c-MET expressing EOC cells. Therefore, signalling mediated by c-MET
and HGF likely occurs in a paracrine manner in ovarian cancer.Conclusion:
Our study demonstrates the functional contribution of c-MET and HGF
signalling in malignant progression driven by important tumor-stromal
interactions. We demonstrate for the first time that phosphorylation of
c-MET on Tyr1349 requires extraneous HGF and phosphorylated c-MET level
on Try1349 might be a good indicator of c-MET activation in the
microenvironment and likely responsive to c-MET targeted therapy.

