Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phase Ib-IIa study evaluating the nanopharmaceutical CRLX101 in
combination with bevacizumab in the treatment of patients (pts.) with
advanced renal cell carcinoma.


Background:Topoisomerase-1 (topo-1)-inhibiting agents demonstrate
activity across multiple cancer types but use of these agents remains
limited by insufficient tumor exposure and toxicity. CRLX101, a novel
cyclodextrin-containing polymer conjugate of camptothecin (CPT) that
self-assembles into nanoparticles, delivers sustained levels of active
CPT into cancer cells while substantially reducing systemic exposure. In
vitro and in vivo data suggest superior activity of CRLX101 compared to
approved agents in multiple animal tumor models. A monotherapy maximum
tolerated dose (MTD)/recommended phase 2 dose (RP2D) of 15 mg/m2 IV every
2 weeks (wks.) was reported previously and over 100 cancer pts. have now
been treated with CRLX101 across three ongoing phase 2 clinical trials.
To be presented separately at this conference, CRLX101 further appears to
inhibit HIF1, a hypoxia-induced transcription factor implicated in tumor
angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis. We hypothesize that observed
synergistic activity between CRLX101 and the VEGF-inhibiting monoclonal
antibody bevacizumab occurs as a result of overcoming HIF-mediated
resistance to VEGF-inhibition. Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC),
accounting for approximately 85% of RCC, provides an ideal clinical
setting in which to evaluate the potential of this drug-drug combination.
The most commonly observed genetic abnormality in ccRCC results in higher
intracellular levels of HIF1. Bevacizumab was chosen as a combination
partner here because of its proven activity in the treatment of RCC as
well as a history of successful combination with chemotherapy partners
including topo-1 inhibitors.Methods:This clinical trial examines the
combination of bevacizumab and CRLX101 in the treatment of pts. with
advanced metastatic RCC. The primary objective is to determine the RP2D
of CRLX101 administered in ombination with bevacizumab. In a preliminary
stage 1b, a standard 3+3 dose-escalation design is being employed and no
fewer than 6 pts. will be evaluated at the MTD. A secondary objective is
to evaluate progression-free survival (PFS). Based on a preliminary test
for futility, the study will be terminated if 3 of the initial 12 pts.
survive without progression to 16 wks. Otherwise, an additional 10 pts.
will be enrolled for a total of 22 pts. and the combination will be
viewed as active and worthy of further examination if the PFS rate at 16
wks. is 50%. Additional exploratory endpoints include a comparison of
bone marrow histology and molecular features among pts. treated with 12
mg/m2 vs. 15 mg/m2 of CRLX101. Finally, tumor expression of CAIX, a
well-studied surrogate for HIF1 activity, will be measured using
124I-cG250, a CAIX antibody, with real-time PET imaging employed to
determine the degree of CRLX101-mediated HIF1 modulation.

