Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next generation cell line models: conditionally reprogrammed cells.


Introduction: For decades, scientists have attempted to develop models
for growing and studying primary tumors outside of the human body. Even
today, one of the greatest challenges in cancer research has been
generation of stable cancer cell lines from primary tumors. Most primary
cell cultures, regardless of the method used to generate them, suffer
from limited lifespan due to cellular senescence. Cultured cells
transformed with SV40 virus large T antigen or over-expression of hTERT
has been limited by genomic variation and other changes that vary with
the passage number. Recently, a new approach was described by the
Schlegel group at Georgetown (Liu et al, AJP 2012) called conditionally
reprogrammed cells (CRCs). They showed these cells (derived from primary
tumors or normal tissue) could be grown indefinitely under defined
conditions without using any extrinsic genetic immortalization technique.
These cells have been shown to maintain the karyotype similar to the
tissue of origin even after prolonged passaging. Here we show that we can
obtain confirmatory results at a separate institution and further show
that in lung cancer, the CRC lines maintain histotype specific
characteristics.Method: The CRC technique requires mouse irradiated J2
cells as feeder cells and a ROCK inhibitor to rapidly grow and expand
patient's epithelial cells. We have grown cultures from six tissue types
including lung, breast, pancreas, kidney, colon, and salivary gland. All
tissue samples were collected by Yale University Pathology Tissue
Services and processed in our lab for generating CRC lines. We have
characterized lung CRC lines for morphology and immunophenotyping using
H&E stains and histological markers including CK7, p63 and TTF1. We have
also performed gene expression profiling using Illumina bead arrays on
selected lung and pancreatic samples.Results: We have successfully
established CRC lines from all six tissue types. Our success rate exceeds
70% for lung and breast tumor samples while other tissues show somewhat
lower rates. Even traditionally challenging cells to culture, like
pancreatic and salivary gland tumors have been successfully cultured.
Preliminary morphological and histological analysis on lung CRC lines
show that features of lung adenocarcinoma (ADCA) and lung squamous cell
carcinoma (SQCC) are maintained in CRC lines. Gene expression profiling
shows that lung CRC lines from SQCC samples clustered together and are
separate from ADCA. Profiles from a pancreatic CRC line recapitulated the
profile of the corresponding frozen tissue.Conclusion: This novel CRC
technology represents a new approach to culturing cells from tumors and
normal cells, including tumors that have been historically challenging to
grow. The resulting cells appear highly similar to the tumors from which
they were derived. Future studies are needed to further characterize the
CRC system and to test its value for assessment of personalized drug
sensitivity.

