Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibiting glycolysis and HIF1: a novel approach to cancer therapy.


Cancer cells satisfy their increased need for energy under conditions of
normal oxygen tension by undergoing a high rate of glycolysis followed by
lactic acid fermentation, a process known as the Warburg Effect, rather
than oxidative phosphorylation as observed in normal cells. Unlike
proliferating cancer cells, the internal environment of most solid tumors
is hypoxic due to an inadequate or disorganized blood supply. This
results in tumors generating ATP through anaerobic respiration, a process
many times less efficient than oxidative phosphorylation. The importance
of anaerobic glycolysis for cancer cell energy generation makes it an
attractive target for inhibiting cancer growth. However, agents currently
in use for regulating energy production in tumors are relatively
ineffective analogs of glucose or intermediates of the glycolytic
pathway.We performed a high throughput siRNA screen using an siRNA
library targeting all known open reading frames of the human genome
(Dharmacon Inc.) to identify genes that when inhibited would block
hypoxia inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1) transcription factor luciferase
reporter activity. A significant number of genes selected and validated
were members of the glycolysis pathway. It is known that many glycolysis
enzymes are induced by HIF-1 providing a feed forward loop between
glycolysis and HIF-1. We have addressed two questions: (1) what is the
biological mechanism by which these two signaling systems regulate one
another?; and (2) can specific inhibitors of glycolysis be developed with
the added effect of inhibiting HIF-1? Our mechanistic studies have shown
that of the 40 enzymes of glycolysis involving 11 enzymatic steps and
various enzyme isoforms, siRNA knockdown of Aldolase A (ALDOA) produces
the maximum inhibition of HIF-1 activity. Further work indicated that
ALDOA siRNA inhibition of HIF-1 is mediated through AMPK, a sensor of low
ATP levels in the cell, since siRNA knockdown of AMPK results in rescue
of HIF-1 activity. The effect of ALDOA inhibition is not mediated through
a reduction in HIF-1 protein suggesting that, contrary to the canonical
AMPK pathway, mTOR and its regulation of translation is not involved.
Instead, p300 is phosphorylated by AMPK thus inhibiting its function as a
co-activator of HIF-1.A structure based drug design approach was employed
for lead identification and optimization using the crystal structure of
ALDOA (4ALD) and GOLD virtual screening platform. Three compounds have
been identified as having effects on the modulation of ALDOA activity in
a protein based biochemical assay as well as inhibitory effects on
glycolysis itself using the XF96 Analyzer from Seahorse Bioscience. Here,
we present an overview of ALDOA target identification, its mechanism as a
regulator of HIF-1 activity and virtual drug design methodologies used in
the search for novel pharmacological probes which act as dual inhibitors
of energy production and the HIF-1 survival pathway.

