Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome candidate 1 plays an important role in
the pathogenesis of head and neck cancer.


Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome candidate 1 (WHSC1) is a histone lysine
methyltransferase (HMT) which was initially found to be deregulated in a
subset of multiple myeloma cells with the t(4;14) (p16;q32) translocation
and poor prognosis. Recently, our group as well as others found that
WHSC1 was overexpressed in a variety of tumors, including lung and
esophageal squamous cell carcinomas, with low or no expression in normal
tissues except the testis. Long-term survival of patients with squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) remains poor and thus new
therapeutic strategies are urgently needed. Epigenetic alterations have
mainly been studied as a potential mechanism of progression from
dysplasia to squamous cell carcinoma. Given the promising potential of
HMTs as novel drug targets and the aforementioned interesting expression
patterns, we further investigated the role of WHSC1 in carcinogenesis
through immunohistochemical analysis (IHC) using tissue microarrays of
123 locoregionally advanced SCCHN patients, and 6 samples of
fibroepithelial hyperplasia lesions obtained from oral biopsies. We
classified its expression levels with a scoring scale of 0 (no
expression), +1 (mild), +2 (moderate) or +3 (strong). WHSC1 expression in
the nucleus and cytoplasm was moderate (score +2, 37%) or strong (score
+3, 38%) in 75% of SCCHN samples, while 25% showed mild (score +1, 24%)
or no (score 0, 1%) expression. WHSC1 staining of normal epithelial
regions revealed an exclusively nuclear expression pattern in the basal
and parabasal layers. This is consistent with reports suggesting a
physiologic role of the Wnt-pathway, which was recently found to be
induced by WHSC1, in the differentiation process of the squamous
epithelium. We also performed Western blot analysis of WHSC1 in 8 SCCHN
cells lines, 3 control fibroblast cell lines and 1 keratinocyte cell
line. We observed moderate to strong overexpression of WHSC1 in 4 of 8
SCCHN cell lines, while no expression was detected in the normal
keratinocytes or the fibroblast cell lines. These findings support a
potential role of the WHSC1 pathway in the pathogenesis of SCCHN and
provides a new therapeutic avenue for drug discovery in this fatal
disease.

