Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PAT-1102, a novel HDAC inhibitor exhibits potent anti-tumor
efficacy in patient-derived refractory solid tumors.


Histone deacetylases (HDAC) have been shown to be involved in oncogenic
transformation by mediating transcription factors. Although a few HDAC
inhibitors (HDACi) have been shown to be effective in patients with rare
leukemia, there is a need to develop best in class HDACi with higher
therapeutic index in solid cancers. PAT-1102 is a novel HDACi that
exhibited potent histone deacetylase inhibitory activity and growth
inhibitory activity against a panel of cell lines in in vitro and in vivo
models. Studies indicated that PAT-1102 mediates target modulation
(histone hyperacetylation), p21 up regulation, angiogenesis inhibition,
and induction of cell cycle arrest in these models. PAT-1102 possesses
drug like properties including good aqueous solubility, oral absorption,
metabolic stability and favorable pharmacokinetic profile in rodents. It
did not show any hERG inhibitory activity, CYP liability and was well
tolerated in tumor bearing mice. It had showed a dose dependent tumor
growth inhibition of up to 72% in cell line based xenograft models of
lung and colorectal cancer. Our data further indicated that the
anti-tumor efficacy of PAT-1102 was superior to Vorinostat and comparable
with Pracinostat (SB-939) while being more tolerable than Pracinostat.
Although it has pan histone deacetylase properties, it showed
preferential inhibition of HDAC-3 & HDAC-6.PAT-1102 efficacy was further
assessed using Oncoprint platform, a clinically relevant preclinical
technology that has been demonstrated to have very high correlation to
clinical outcome for chemotherapeutics as well as targeted drugs in
multiple solid and hematological cancers (with overall sensitivity of 88%
and specificity of 90% in N=500+ patients). Using Oncoprint, PAT-1102s
efficacy was assessed in patient derived solid cancers (Pancreas,
Gastric, Esophagus, Head & Neck, and Colorectal). Further we assessed the
efficacy of PAT-1102 alone as well as in combination with various
Standard-Of-Care drugs (SOCs) and compared the outcome with efficacy
derived from the use of SOCs alone. Our study has been powered to include
75-100 patient derived refractory/recurrent tumors in each indication.
Current results indicated the superiority of PAT-1102 when combined with
SOCs in a subset of patients with solid cancers. Pre-clinical data shows
that PAT-1102 has no toxic effect when given alone or in combination with
SOC at efficacious doses . PAT-1102 has the potential to be more
effective in a defined patient population than other molecules in this
class.In summary, we have identified a novel, potent HDACi with drug like
properties. Our data suggest PAT-1102 has the potential to be best in
class HDACi when combined with SOC in solid cancers. Clinical development
of PAT-1102 in solid cancers will be initiated in 2013.

