Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor effect of prostaglandin D2 by peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR)-dependent pathway in gastric
carcinoma.


Introduction: Prostaglandin D2 (PGD2) has been demonstrated to have not
only physiological responses but also anti-tumor effects against some
types of cancer cells such as a lung cancer. PGD2 act through two major
receptors, DP1 and DP2 of chemoattractant receptor-like molecule on the
Th2 cell. Recently, some papers reported that PGD2 may act through PPAR,
suggesting that the effects of PGD2 are involved in either PGD2 dependent
or independent pathway. PGD2 metabolite, 15-deoxy-12 14-PGJ2, activates
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) which induces growth
inhibition of various cells. PPAR is expressed in various types of
cancers including gastric cancer. Since the role of PGD2 on gastric
cancer cells is still unknown, this study is aimed to investigate the
effect of PGD2 signalings on the proliferation of gastric cancer
cells.Materials and Methods: Three human gastric cancer cell lines,
OCUM-2M, OCUM-12, and MKN-74, were used. Effect of PGD2 or PPAR
antagonist on the proliferation of cancer cells was examined by MTT
assay.The expression level of PGD2 receptor, DP1 and DP2, and PPAR of
gastric cancer cells was examined by RT-PCR. The effect of PGD2 on cell
cycle was examined with PI staining by flowcytometry.Results: PGD2
significantly decreased the proliferation of OCUM-2M and MKN-74 cells at
a dose-dependent manner, but not that of OCUM-12. PGD2 receptors, DP1 and
DP2, were not expressed in 3 gastric cancer cell lines while PPAR was
expressed in OCUM-2M and MKN-74. BADGE, a PPAR antagonist, significantly
suppressed the growth-inhibitory effects of PGD2 on OCUM-2M and MKN-74
cells. PGD2 increased G0/G1 phase of cancer and decereased G2/M
phase.Conclusion: PGD2 decreased the proliferation of gastric cancer
cells through PPAR dependent pathway. PGD2 might be a promising
therapeutic agent for gastric cancer with PPAR expression.

