Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential downstream effects of nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NAD) salvage pathway-inhibition in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) and multiple myeloma (MM).


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and multiple myeloma (MM) represent
the two most common hematologic malignancies in western countries. Up to
date both diseases are mainly treated palliatively rather than curatively
which reinforces the need for new treatment options. Targeting
metabolism-associated pathways is a novel route for treatment of
hematologic malignancies. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) is not
only a central molecule for metabolic processes such as ATP-generation,
but is also involved in several other cancer-relevant events. The
NAD-dependent enzyme Sirtuin 1 (Sirt1) has been described to function as
an oncogene. Further, the rate-limiting enzyme for NAD-generation via
salvage-pathways nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) is
upregulated in several cancers, making it an attractive
metabolism-associated drug target.We used the NAMPT-inhibitor FK866 to
treat the MM-cell line IM9 and the CLL-like cell lines JVM3 and Mec2 as
well as primary CLL-cells. Cellular energy status was assessed by means
of ATP content and functioned as a measure of viability. Sirt1 levels
were assessed by immunoblotting.The MM-cell line IM9 was highly sensitive
to FK866 with regard to ATP-reduction (50% reduction at 51.7nM). Also the
tested CLL-like cell lines JVM3 and Mec2 were sensitive to FK866 with 50%
reduction of ATP content at 76.6nM and 51.1nM, respectively. Primary CLL
cells showed very heterogenous response. Some samples were highly
sensitive with 50% reduction of ATP-content at 21.6nM, while others were
completely resistant. We could not detect any correlation to available
clinical data such as ZAP70 status or white blood cell counts. All three
cell lines were positive for Sirt1. While the two CLL-like cell lines
Mec2 and JVM3 showed a concentration-dependent downregulation of Sirt1
upon FK866 treatment for 72h, Sirt1 levels remained stable in the MM-cell
line IM9. Primary CLL-cells showed various baseline levels of Sirt1 and a
concentration-dependent downregulation upon FK866 treatment.We conclude
that FK866 activity in CLL-like cell lines involves downregulation of the
NAD-dependent oncogene Sirt1, while FK866 activity in the MM-cell line
IM9 is Sirt1-independent. In primary CLL-cells Sirt1 baseline levels may
predict responsiveness to FK866 treatment.

