Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell-based image analysis of nuclear receptor levels and
activity in breast cancer cells reveals heterogeneous subpopulations:
Development of biological response fingerprints for ligands and endocrine
disruptors.


Modern microscopy- and flow cytometry-based analyses indicate tumor cell
populations can be markedly heterogeneous. Yet, the vast majority of
approaches used to investigate tumorigenic mechanisms and therapeutic
responses are based upon average single-point analysis of bulk
populations of cells, where subpopulation responses are undetectable and
therefore unexplored. For example, breast cancers are generally
classified by IHC as either estrogen receptor-alpha positive (ER+) or
negative (ER-); however, in ER+ tumors, there is a broad range of ER
levels in individual cells. Despite a growing awareness of the importance
of tumor cell heterogeneity and outlier biology in cancer therapeutics,
there is a paucity of data on the potential interplay between multiple
nuclear receptors and coregulators, their heterogeneity of expression and
functions, and their combinatorial role in determining therapeutic
response, or in sensing environmental stressors (e.g., endocrine
disruptors).To specifically quantify biological responses on an
individual cell basis rather than averaged responses from bulk
populations, we performed single cell-based high content analysis (HCA)
to examine MCF-7 breast cancer cells in terms of simultaneous expression
of several type-1 nuclear receptors (e.g., Estrogen, Androgen and
Glucocorticoid receptors - ER, AR and GR) and coregulators (e.g., SRC-2
and SRC-3). Quantitative immunofluorescence reveals a wide range of
heterogeneity in the expression and ratios of ER, AR, and GR.
Multi-parametric analyses describing NR expression and spatial
distribution were used to evaluate ligand dose responses and time pattern
of the three nuclear receptors, simultaneously. Next, we are expanding
our analysis to endogenous target gene expression via mRNA fluorescence
in situ hybridization (RNA FISH) and to cell cycle marker analysis to
link heterogeneity of NRs/coregulators expression with transcriptional
output and cell cycle phases. We are also implementing robust analysis
pipelines to describe and quantify NRs and coregulators patterns of
phenotypic heterogeneity to create biological response fingerprints,
which we are using to classify the effects of individual or mixed ligand
treatments with particular focus on chemotherapeutic drugs and endocrine
disruptors. We are also starting to expand our HCA approach to other
breast cancer cell lines moving towards primary tumors microarrays
analysis to evaluate the prognostic/diagnostic significance of NR
heterogeneity. Collectively, these high throughput-amenable approaches
are poised to greatly aid in the understanding the role of heterogeneity
in breast cancer, and serve as a robust model for next-generation drug
screening and endocrine disruptor assays moving toward personalized
medicine.

