Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GPX3 promoter hypermethylation predicts platinum sensitivity in
colorectal cancer cells.


An estimated 52,000 people will die from colorectal cancer (CRC) in 2012
in the U.S. Unfortunately, these tumors do not respond uniformly to the
available chemotherapeutic agents and molecular heterogeneity in these
tumors is an important factor in determining their sensitivity to the
different agents. Epigenetic regulation of gene expression is a critical
determinant of normal and tumor cellular phenotypes. By combining tumors
epigenetic alterations with existing knowledge of drugs mechanisms,
specific DNA methylation alterations can serve as predictive biomarkers
for the efficacy of particular chemotherapeutic agents which can then
direct patients treatments for improved outcomes. The glutathione
peroxidase family of enzymes is a critical cellular antioxidant system
and increased glutathione peroxidase activity has been linked to platinum
resistance in tumors such as prostate and ovarian cancer. Using
methylation-specific PCR (MSP), we demonstrate that the glutathione
peroxidase 3 (GPX3) promoter is hypermethylated in six of nine colorectal
cancer cell lines and those lines with methylated GPX3 have significantly
decreased GPX3 mRNA expression by real-time polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). Importantly, the cisplatin IC50 for the CRC cell lines with
methylated GPX3 and thus lower GPX3 expression ranges between 2.5 and 6
micromolar compared to 15-50 micromolar in the cell lines with
unmethylated GPX3. Initial studies demonstrate similar findings with
oxaliplatin. We also examined primary colorectal cancer xenografts and
find that 11 of 42 (26%) have GPX3 promoter hypermethylation, with
reduction in GPX3 expression also demonstrated for methylated tumors.
Analysis is underway to assess the impact that methylated GPX3 has on
these primary tumor samples sensitivity to platinum agents. To further
define the importance of GPX3 promoter hypermethylation in platinum
sensitivity, experiments using azacitidine to demethylate GPX3 in cells
with methylated GPX3 will be used to determine if increased platinum
sensitivity can be restored. Our studies suggest that epigenetically
silenced GPX3 may serve as a valuable predictive biomarker for platinum
agent sensitivity.

