Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of hsa-miR-135b in human neuroblastoma cell line
SK-N-BE(2).


Background: MicroRNAs (miRs) are an abundant class of small (22
nucleotides), non-coding, single-strand RNAs (ncRNA) that negatively
regulate gene expression at a post-transcriptional level. miRs are
thought to act by inhibiting the translation of messenger RNAs (mRNAs)
into protein in addition to promoting mRNA degradation. These regulatory
ncRNAs play an important role in the control of many biological processes
and their deregulation has been implicated in a variety of pathological
conditions, including many cancers. Emerging evidence supports the
concept that in many cancer types a pool of cancer cells responsible for
cancer maintenance and long-term remission failure exhibit stem-like
properties. Using a high throughput miR microfluidic card assay qRT-PCR
approach, we identified 26 miRs (23 up-regulated and 3 down regulated) as
stem-like associated miRs in six pediatric cancer cell lines, including
neuroblastoma cell line SK-N-BE(2). hsa-miR-135b was one of the miRs that
was up-regulated. The purpose of this study was to characterize the
functional consequences of hsa-miR-135b silencing in the SK-N-BE(2) cell
line.Methods: hsa-miR-135b expression was knocked down (KD) using
Lipofectamine transfection reagent and a stable cell line was generated
in the presence of puromycin. Cell cycle distribution as well as the
effect of inhibition on the ability to form neurospheres (read-out for
self-renewal) was determined. To investigate the effect on
anchorage-independent growth, the ability of the KD cells to form
colonies in soft agar was measured. Cell capacity for invasion was tested
using basement membrane matrix invasion culture system. Western blot
analysis was performed on the components of the Wnt/****B-catenin
signaling pathways.Results: Our results indicated that inhibition of
hsa-miR-135b impaired sphere formation (read-out for self renewal) as
well as growth of colonies on a semi-solid culture media. No significant
difference in cell cycle distribution was observed between control and
hsa-miR-135b KD cells.Conclusion: Our findings suggest that in our model
system, hsa-miR-135b likely plays a role in the maintenance of cancer
stem cells and tumor progression. Therefore, it is a promising
therapeutic target in neuroblastoma patients.

