Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of genetic alterations using next-generation sequencing
in postmenopausal women with hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative
advanced breast cancer: results from the BOLERO-2 phase III trial.


The BOLERO-2 phase III trial compared the combination of everolimus and
exemestane to placebo and exemestane in 724 postmenopausal women with
hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer. Results
showed significant improvement in progression-free survival, response
rate, and clinical benefit rate. Although significant benefit has been
observed in all prospectively defined subgroups, variations were seen
among patients. As the first step to delineate the molecular determinants
of sensitivity to everolimus and interactions between estrogen receptor
and mTOR pathways, we used next-generation sequencing technology to
comprehensively assess the genetic alterations in archival tumor
specimens. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded archival tumor samples were
obtained from 496 patients. DNA was extracted from 348 samples of
sufficient quantity and 230 samples (representing approximately 1/3 of
all patients) qualified for the analysis. No indication of sampling bias
was observed when the data were assessed and compared against several
covariates as well as to the full trial data. The coding regions of 182
cancer-related genes were analyzed using an Illumina HiSeq 2000.
Mutations and copy number variations were evaluated in 230 samples for
which DNA extraction, library construction, and hybrid capture were
successful and sequencing depth was sufficient (250-1500). Alterations
predicted to be germline events were discarded. One hundred seventy-three
genes were found to be altered in at least one tumor sample. The number
of alterations per sample varied from 1 to 24 (average 9 4). Sequence
variations (N = 1565) consisted primarily of point mutations (85%),
followed by deletions (9%) and insertions (6%). 225 of 230 (98%) patients
had at least two sequence variations. The most frequently mutated genes
included PIK3CA (49%), TP53 (24%), and ARID1A (16%). ESR1 and IGF1R
mutations were detected in 9% and 4% of the cohort, respectively. PIK3CA
and AKT1 (6%) mutations were found to be mutually exclusive. Copy-number
alterations comprised of 524 amplifications and 27 bi-allelic deletions.
The most frequently amplified genes included CCND1 (32%) and FGFR1 (18%).
Specific rearrangements assayed in 14 genes occurred infrequently (9% of
the samples). These results demonstrated the feasibility of performing
large-scale next-generation sequencing in a global phase III clinical
trial. High alteration frequencies were observed in specific genes,
resulting in activated PI3K, FGFR1, and estrogen receptor pathways,
corroborating the rationale of concomitant targeting of the mTOR and
estrogen receptor pathways. The results generate testable hypotheses for
the development of combinations of new targeted therapies in this patient
population.

