Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA profile of triple-negative breast cancer and prognosis.


Background: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC, estrogen receptor [ER]-,
progesterone receptor [PR]-, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
[HER2]-negative) is often aggressive and lack molecular targets for
therapy. As gene regulators, microRNAs (miRNA) are important in cancer
etiology but their utility as tumor biomarkers for cancer diagnosis and
prognosis is yet unclear.Methods: To characterize the differential
expression pattern of miRNA in TNBC from non-TNBC, we performed a whole
miRNome profiling using TaqMan based quantitative PCR array of 754 miRNAs
constructed based on miRBase 19 (Life Technologies, CA). Total RNA was
extracted from frozen breast tumors and only RNA samples with good
quality were included in the array experiment. Rigorous post-experiment
quality controls were further conducted to remove unreliable plates.
Moderate t-test was used to identify TNBC-specific miRNAs and Cox
proportional hazard model was used to explore miRNAs that predict
progression-free survival. Benjamini and Hochberg's false discovery rate
method was used to correct for multiple testing.Results: Samples from 85
patients were included in the final analysis, including 71 Caucasians, 7
African Americans, and 7 others. The average age (SD) was 54.9 9.1 years.
17 patients had stage 1 tumor, 30 stage 2A, 26 stage 2B, 7 stage 3A, and
5 stage 3B. There were 42 samples with ER+, 37 PR+, 25 HER2+, and 25
categorized as TNBC. 363 out of 754 miRNAs showed expression in at least
half of the samples and were included for further analysis. Of the 363
miRNAs, we found 98 to be significantly different between TNBC and
non-TNBC after multiple testing correction. The most significant miRNA
(miR-190b) was down-regulated in TNBC by about 20-fold (p=1.6x10-9). In
fact, most of these miRNAs are down-regulated in TNBC compared to
non-TNBC. During a median follow-up of 10.9 years, 29 patients died and 7
patients survived but had progressive disease of breast cancer. After
multiple testing correction, we found 6 miRNAs showing significant
association with progression-free survival. Interestingly, none of these
6 miRNAs were related to TNBC, suggesting that their prognostic value is
independent of breast cancer subtypes.Conclusion: Our study demonstrates
the existence of a set of miRNAs specific to TNBC, which has a clear
fingerprint to differentiate TNBC from non-TNBC. We also identified
different set of miRNAs that could serve as prognostic markers. Despite
the small sample set, our results promisingly indicate the potential of
miRNA as diagnostic and prognostic tool for breast cancer. A replication
study with larger sample size would be in order.

