Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneous response to antiangiogenic therapy in ovarian cancer
xenografts: a tool to investigate biomarkers of resistance.


Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF), one of the major player of
tumor angiogenesis, is over-expressed and secreted in large amount in
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) patients, thus the VEGF/VEGFR pathway
represents an important therapeutic target for this malignancy. The VEGF
neutralizing monoclonal antibody bevacizumab has shown activity in Phase
III clinical trials when added to standard chemotherapy in first line
treatment and on recurrent ovarian cancers. Also, small molecules,
multiple-receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKRI) are progressing into
clinical development in ovarian cancer. Unfortunately, the benefit
associated with this class of treatments is often limited and not
durable. After an initial response, patients manifest disease progression
and resistance; in other cases patients are inherently resistant to
therapy.With the aim to find biomarkers of resistance to antiangiogenic
therapy, useful to stratify eligible patients for best response, here we
investigated the antiangiogenic activity and the influence on tumor
progression and survival of bevacizumab and a TKRI (anti-VEGFR1,2,3) in a
panel (n=12) of patient derived EOC-xenografts, established in our
laboratory. These xenografts show the different histopathological
features observed in EOC patients and maintain the gene mutation profile
of the tumor of origin. Transplanted orthotopically in nude mice they
produce ascites, invade and metastasize the organ of the peritoneal
cavity, thus reproducing the biology of the disease.The response to
bevacizumab and TKRI varied among the EOC-xenografts and allowed their
classification in distinct groups: responsive to bevacizumab and TKRI,
resistant to both, or responsive to one of the two. All the xenografts
were tested for response to cisplatin and taxol, the standard-of-care
treatment for EOC; their sensibility to the angiogenesis inhibitors was
independent from the response to chemotherapy.The expression and the
release of soluble factors associated to tumor angiogenesis (e.g. VEGFA,
VEGFC, VEGFRs) were analyzed as baseline and along the antiangiogenic
treatments. The EOC-xenografts released VEGF in plasma and ascites,
though a correlation with the response to treatments was not evident. At
variance, the modulation of soluble VEGFR1,2 was associated to tumor
progression and response to therapy.Patient derived EOC-xenografts that
retain the individual biological-pharmacological differences and genetic
heterogeneity of the original tumor are an unique source for the
preclinical analysis of new therapeutic strategies and for the discovery
of associated biomarkers.* A.D. fellow of the Italian Foundation for
Cancer Research (FIRC)

