Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recombinant Vaccinia virus expressing CD40L: a multipotent
antitumor immunogenic reagent.


Recombinant vaccinia virus (rVV) is one of the most immunogenic viral
vectors. Its immunogenicity can be further modulated by the insertion of
transgenes or deletion of viral genes which are involved in immune
responses or specific cellular pathways. We generated a rVV encoding
human CD154 (CD40L) and confirmed an efficient licensing of antigen
presenting cells (APC), upon infection with a non-replicating (psoralen
UV-inactivated) CD40L-rVV, as demonstrated by increased expression of (i)
surface ligand/receptors (MHC I/II, CD80), (ii) Th1 cytokines (IL-12,
IL-15, TNFa) and most importantly (iii) an increased capacity to
stimulate TAA specific CTL proliferation. The hereby presented results
are further characterizing some aspects of the pleiotropic roles in
immuno-oncology of CD40 triggering via CD40L expressing recombinant
vaccinia virus.One of the immuno-modulatory functions of CD40L-CD40 is to
play a key role during CD8+ priming for the generation of memory
responses. Using sorted naive CD8+ Tcells (CD45RA+CD62L+) primed with
allogeneic CD14+ infected with rVV 40L we observed an increased central
memory phenotype (CD45RO+ CD62L+) as compared to culture primed with wild
type virus infected cells. Moreover, rVV-CD40L stimulation of CD14+ cells
also led to the inhibition of co-cultured tumor cells proliferation,
correlating with increased TNF expression. Finally, apoptosis of CD40+
tumor cell lines was induced upon direct infection with this CD40L
non-replicating recombinant virus.These data are confirming the potent
capacities of recombinant vaccinia viruses expressing CD40L to
efficiently trigger multiple CD40 mediated anti-tumor pathways. Not only
this vector enhances the generation of tumor specific CD8+ T cells
effector and memory responses, but it also promotes anti-tumoral
functions of innate immune cells and is even able to directly induce
apoptosis in CD40+ tumor cells. These in-vitro observations underline the
strong clinical potential of recombinant vaccinia virus expressing CD40L
in cancer viro- and immunotherapies.

