Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and synthesis of AZD3463, a novel orally bioavailable dual
ALK and IGF1R inhibitor, inhibits growth of crizotinib resistance cell
lines with multiple mechanisms of acquired resistance.


Although the ALK inhibitor crizotinib has clinical efficacy in selected
ALK positive NSCLC patients, the majority of patients who initially
respond eventually relapse. Several mechanisms of resistance have been
proposed including amplification, resistance mutations, as well as
alternative pathway drivers including EGFR, cKIT and IGF1R. We report
here the discovery of a novel scaffold of ALK inhibitors and optimization
effort that led to the discovery of AZD3463 a novel dual in vivo active
ALK and IGF1R inhibitor.An in house subset screening of kinase inhibitors
and de novo studies identified 4-(1H-indol-3-yl)pyrimidin-2-amine analogs
as potent ALK inhibitors. Modeling studies were utilized to guide the SAR
strategy around the aminopyrimidine group which afforded several lead
compounds. Early SAR efforts quickly determined that smaller
substituents, chloro and methyl, were optimal in the C5 position of the
pyrimidine, and that aniline is preferred over several other amino
heterocycles investigated. Parallel medicinal chemistry strategies were
executed for the optimization of the aniline and indole. These studies
suggested that a 2,4-substituted aniline provided optimal potency and
selectivity in conjunction with a variety of heterocycles in C4 position
of the pyrimdine. Cyclic amines in the C4 position of the aniline led to
simultaneous improvement of potency and metabolic stability. The
inhibition of IGF1R in vitro was maintained and modulation of glucose
levels in vivo was observed with the optimized compounds and AZD3463.
AZD3463 demonstrated superior potency to crizotinib in vivo (H3122 PD
unbound EC50=0.16 nM).In summary, detailed SAR studies were executed on
the 4-(1H-indol-3-yl)pyrimidin-2-amine template that produced potent
inhibitors of ALK with improved physical chemical and ADME properties,
and identified AZD3463, a novel equipotent ALK and IGF1R inhibitor,
potent in ALK-driven preclinical models and in a variety of
crizotinib-resistant models. We present herein the design and synthesis
of AZD3463 as well as its overall properties.

