Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of B-cell activation genes and negative regulators of
apoptosis determines resistance to bendamustine in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia cells.


Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), the most common leukemia in Western
countries, is characterized by the accumulation of monoclonal CD5+ B
cells in the blood, bone marrow, lymph nodes, spleen and other lymphoid
organs. Bendamustine hydrochloride, a cytotoxic agent comprising
structural features of both an alkylating drug and a purine nucleoside
analog, was recently approved by the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for the treatment of CLL
and indolent B cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). Although several recent
clinical trials have documented the activity of bendamustine in CLL, the
mechanisms of bendamustine resistance in CLL cells have not been yet
elucidated.We analyzed the ex vivo cytotoxicity of bendamustine in cells
from 48 CLL cases by incubating them with bendamustine 25 M for 24 hours.
Cell death was assessed by annexinV-PI labeling and cases were classified
as bendamustine-resistant (cytotoxicity below 30%) or
bendamustine-sensitive (cytotoxicity over 30%) cases. We found that
sensitivity of CLL primary cells correlated with the mutational status of
IGHV gene, being the IGHV-unmutated cases significantly more resistant to
bendamustine (pChronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), the most common
leukemia in Western countries, is characterized by the accumulation of
monoclonal CD5+ B cells in the blood, bone marrow, lymph nodes, spleen
and other lymphoid organs. Bendamustine hydrochloride, a cytotoxic agent
comprising structural features of both an alkylating drug and a purine
nucleoside analog, was recently approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for the
treatment of CLL and indolent B cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL).
Although several recent clinical trials have documented the activity of
bendamustine in CLL, the mechanisms of bendamustine resistance in CLL
cells have not been yet elucidated.We analyzed the ex vivo cytotoxicity
of bendamustine in cells from 48 CLL cases by incubating them with
bendamustine 25 M for 24 hours. Cell death was assessed by annexinV-PI
labeling and cases were classified as bendamustine-resistant
(cytotoxicity below 30%) or bendamustine-sensitive (cytotoxicity over
30%) cases. We found that sensitivity of CLL primary cells correlated
with the mutational status of IGHV gene, being the IGHV-unmutated cases
significantly more resistant to bendamustine (p<0.015) than those cases
with mutated IGHV. Although the number of cases analyzed was low, no
correlation with the mutational status of NOTCH1 or SF3B1 was observed.We
compared the gene expression profiling of bendamustine-resistant and
bendamustine-sensitive groups by performing a high-throughput analysis of
basal gene expression in CLL cells with the U219 Affymetrix array. After
a supervised analysis using the Rank Products method and a FDR below
0.001, we observed 393 up-regulated genes and 415 down-regulated genes in
the bendamustine-resistant group. Annotation of the differentially
expressed genes identified some well-known markers of prognosis in CLL,
together with genes related to apoptosis regulation and B cell
activation. One of the genes with a highest positive fold-change and most
relevant according to its role in cell cycle progression, apoptosis and
transformation was C-MYC.These results suggest that overexpression of
genes related to proliferation and B-cell activation could be involved in
CLL resistance to bendamustine therapy, which is known to be clinically
more effective in indolent than in aggressive lymphomas. Further studies
will assess whether this set of overexpressed genes might be useful as
biomarkers to predict the sensitivity to bendamustine and open the door
to new combinatorial strategies that might overcome resistance to
bendamustine in CLL patients within the context of tailored medicine

