Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell evolution of AKT pathway activation drives T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia relapse.


The aggressive and unpredictable behavior of relapsed T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) presents a major clinical challenge, with
>70% of children and >90% of adults unable to survive relapsed disease.
Relapsed T-ALL often acquires mutations that are not found in the primary
malignancy. It is these new mutations that allow clones to survive
treatment and drive relapse growth. In order to identify the genes and
pathways responsible for T-ALL relapse, we have developed a transgenic
zebrafish model of relapsed T-ALL where single fluorescently-labeled
leukemic cells are transplanted into genetically identical recipient fish
and functionally assessed for differences in relapse growth. Using serial
transplantation of single T-ALL cells and >6,000 recipient animals, we
have followed single-cell evolution of T-ALL and identified critical
drivers of relapse. These experiments showed that 6 of 49 individual
T-ALL cells significantly increased their ability to form relapse over
time. Analysis of T-ALL clones pre- and post-evolution showed that AKT
pathway activation was correlated with increased relapse potential.
Subsequent studies utilizing transgenic zebrafish that over-expressed
activated AKT in developing T-ALL demonstrated that AKT signaling
increased relapse potential 10-fold. Transgenic epistatic experiments
revealed that AKT signaling plays two distinct roles in T-ALL relapse:
the AKT/mTORC1 pathway directly enhanced relapse potential, while AKT
mediated stabilization of the Myc protein increased T-ALL aggressiveness.
Moreover, small molecule inhibition of AKT signaling reduced T-ALL
relapse potential in vivo by 25-fold and synergized with Dexamethasone, a
common cytotoxic chemotherapy, to significantly enhance cell killing in
both zebrafish and human T-ALL. Activation of AKT signaling is associated
with poor prognosis and drug resistance in human T-ALL, which, together
with our work, suggests that AKT will be a useful molecular target in the
treatment of T-ALL. Our experiments have documented the functional
heterogeneity of single leukemic cells and identified AKT as a critical
driver of T-ALL aggression, relapse formation, and insensitivity to
therapy. These are first studies performed in any model to follow single
cell evolution as it relates to relapse, opening new and exciting avenues
of study to uncover genetic pathways that drive cancer malignancy.

