Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of abnormally expressed lincRNAs in breast cancer
using high-density SNP arrays.


Background: The intergenic portion of the human genome is pervasively
transcribed to produce large numbers of long intergenic non-coding RNAs
(lincRNAs), which are tentatively defined as RNA molecules of more than
200 nucleotides. LincRNAs participate in and regulate a wide array of
transcriptional and posttranscriptional processes in both physiological
and disease conditions. While dysregulation of lincRNAs expression has
been observed in some cancers, their expression signatures in breast
cancer are poorly characterized. Here, we established a novel genome-wide
approach, employing high-density SNP arrays, to globally identify lincRNA
genes whose expression is altered in breast cancers.Methods: Both genomic
DNA (gDNA) and double-stranded cDNA (ds-cDNA) samples from primary breast
tumor and matched adjacent normal cells were hybridized onto Illumina
HumanOmni5 BeadChips. This platform includes a total of 2,435,915 SNP
loci dispersed at an average interval of 700 nt through the intergenic
region of the human genome. We mapped annotated lincRNA genes or the
linc-transcriptome to a subset of 332,539 or 8,661 SNP loci, which were
included in our analysis for five tumor-normal paired primary human
mammary epithelial cells (HMECs). Using gDNA intensity signals as a
reference, differential expression of lincRNAs between tumor and normal
samples were obtained through normalization, filtering and statistical
analysis using paired t-tests.Results: We found 47 lincRNA transcripts
that were dysregulated in tumors (PBackground: The intergenic portion of
the human genome is pervasively transcribed to produce large numbers of
long intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs), which are tentatively defined
as RNA molecules of more than 200 nucleotides. LincRNAs participate in
and regulate a wide array of transcriptional and posttranscriptional
processes in both physiological and disease conditions. While
dysregulation of lincRNAs expression has been observed in some cancers,
their expression signatures in breast cancer are poorly characterized.
Here, we established a novel genome-wide approach, employing high-density
SNP arrays, to globally identify lincRNA genes whose expression is
altered in breast cancers.Methods: Both genomic DNA (gDNA) and
double-stranded cDNA (ds-cDNA) samples from primary breast tumor and
matched adjacent normal cells were hybridized onto Illumina HumanOmni5
BeadChips. This platform includes a total of 2,435,915 SNP loci dispersed
at an average interval of 700 nt through the intergenic region of the
human genome. We mapped annotated lincRNA genes or the linc-transcriptome
to a subset of 332,539 or 8,661 SNP loci, which were included in our
analysis for five tumor-normal paired primary human mammary epithelial
cells (HMECs). Using gDNA intensity signals as a reference, differential
expression of lincRNAs between tumor and normal samples were obtained
through normalization, filtering and statistical analysis using paired
t-tests.Results: We found 47 lincRNA transcripts that were dysregulated
in tumors (P<0.01, FDR2-fold change), including 28 lincRNA transcripts
being up-regulated, and 19 lincRNA transcripts being down-regulated.
RT-qPCR was used to validate the top 14 gene hits (P2-fold change),
including 28 lincRNA transcripts being up-regulated, and 19 lincRNA
transcripts being down-regulated. RT-qPCR was used to validate the top 14
gene hits (P<0.005, FDR4-fold change). Expression profiling for these
candidate lincRNAs were also extended to 12 established breast cancer and
4 non-cancerous cell lines. The up- and down- regulation patterns of
these lincRNAs among different cell lines showed great variability in
both their direction and magnitude of changes, indicating differential
regulation of lincRNA levels and the roles they play in breast cancer
cell lines.Conclusions: This study established a novel high-resolution
SNP array-based approach to identify specific lincRNAs. These breast
cancer-susceptible lincRNAs could be putative regulators that contribute
to breast tumorigenesis and offer tremendous potential for future
investigations of their functional roles.This work was kindly supported
by the FCCC Personalized Risk and Prevention Keystone, the Susan G. Komen
for the Cure (KG100274), and Eileen Stein Jacoby Fund.

