Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of heterozygosity as a molecular second hit In familial
pancreatic cancer.


BACKGROUND/HYPOTHESIS: Familial Pancreatic Cancer (FPC) has an autosomal
dominant, variable penetrant mode of inheritance with >80% of its genetic
cause yet to be discovered. We hypothesize that a high density DNA
microarray analysis of Formalin-Fixed Paraffin Embedded (FFPE) FPC tumors
will yield novel regions of genomic loss harboring disease causing FPC
gene(s).METHODS: 158 FFPE FPC tumor specimens with matched normal tissue
were reviewed by a pancreatic pathologist and tumors with 70% cellularity
were microdissected directly from marked unstained slides. A total of 74
samples were DNA extracted, whole genome amplified and processed on the
Affymetrix 660K Oncoscan Microarray. Copy number analysis was performed
using Nexus Copy Number Variation Version 6.1 software employing the
SNP-FASST2 segmentation and Allele Specific Copy Number Analysis of
Tumors (ASCAT) algorithms.PRELIMINARY RESULTS: A pair-wise analysis of 55
FPC samples with matched normal tissue was performed. Recurrent regions
of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) were known loci of importance in
pancreatic tumorigenesis, including CDKN2A, p53 and SMAD4. Copy
neutral/gain LOH was observed throughout the genome and may account for
>35% of chromosomal loss. Recurrent novel genetic loci displaying LOH was
observed on chromosomes: 3p(25%), 5q(18%), 6p(22%), 12q(18%) and Xq
(42%). Examination of 2 FPC siblings elucidates shared loss regions
spanning the 3p22.2-3p22.3 and 17p13.3 loci. Candidate tumor suppressor
genes (TSGs) of interest include DCLK3, SERPINF1, SERPINF2 and
SMYD4.CONCLUSION: We have described for the first time the presence of
copy neutral/gain LOH in FPC highlighting previously unknown regions
displaying genetic loss. Further confirmation with quantitative PCR,
integrating with germline exome sequencing data, and validation of
putative TSGs shared by members of high risk FPC kindreds will help
uncover novel genes associated with this disease.

