Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting polo-like kinase 1 with novel inhibitors of the polo-box
domain.


Polo-like Kinase 1 (PLK1) is a central player in cell cycle regulation
and mitotic progression. Observations that PLK1 is over-expressed in many
cancer types have led to efforts to target this protein therapeutically.
Several ATP-binding site inhibitors of PLK1 have advanced to clinical
trials, but these compounds inhibit at least three of the four known
mammalian PLKs to varying degrees. This is problematic because, for
example, PLK3 acts as a tumor suppressor and has opposing functions to
PLK1. Moreover, a recent study identified a single point mutation near
the ATP binding site that renders PLK1 resistant to several structurally
unrelated ATP-based inhibitors, while retaining kinase activity. The
Polo-box domain (PBD) of each PLK is a phospho-peptide binding motif that
determines substrate recognition and subcellular localization. Our
approach is to target the PBD of PLK1 to achieve desired PLK1 selectivity
and improve efficacy. We recently reported a structure-activity
relationship for a series of fragment-ligated inhibitory peptides (FLIPs)
designed to be selective for the PBD of PLK1 (Mol. Cancer Ther., 2012,
11, 1683-1692). Our most potent compound in that class possessed a
binding affinity to the PLK1 PBD (IC50 value of 8.6 M), and insignificant
levels of PLK3 binding up to 600 M, which represents at least a 100-fold
selectivity. The compound was able to induce cellular phenotypes
consistent with a PLK1 knockdown, including aberrant mitoses and
induction of apoptosis. Here, we report the development of new FLIP
analogues with improved potency in binding to the PLK1 PBD. Specifically,
we have designed, synthesized, and tested new benzoic acid capping groups
to exploit a hydrophobic cleft in the PBD binding site. This newer
generation of compounds possess binding affinities to the PLK1 PBD with
IC50 values below 1 M. Studies are in progress to determine PLK1
selectivity and activity in cells. Future studies will explore the
ability of PBD-targeted compounds to circumvent resistance to ATP-based
compounds.

