Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pegylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) increases
tumor perfusion in mouse xenografts and phase 1 cancer patients.


Pegylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) is an
investigational therapeutic agent under clinical development for use
alone or in combination with other cancer therapies for the treatment of
patients with non-hematologic malignancies that may accumulate hyaluronan
(HA), a glycosaminoglycan that is a significant component of the
extracellular matrix of many solid tumors. HA accumulation has been
correlated with local invasion, the presence of distal metastasis, higher
tumor grade, and poorer overall survival. Preclinical studies have
demonstrated that sustained HA removal, accomplished with PEGPH20,
decreases tumor interstitial pressure, increases vascular area, inhibits
tumor growth and enhances chemotherapeutic activity in HA-rich xenografts
and genetically engineered mouse tumor models. As dynamic
contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) is a clinically
translatable MRI perfusion protocol, we used DCE-MRI imaging to evaluate
the effects of PEGPH20 treatment on tumor vascular permeability, vascular
surface area and/or blood flow. In mice, prostate cancer PC3 cells were
implanted adjacent to the right tibial periosteum. When tumors reached
500 mg, animals were staged into vehicle or PEGPH20 (4.5 mg/kg) treatment
groups. Utilizing gadopentetate dimeglumine (Gd-DTPA) as a contrast
agent, pre-treatment baseline DCE scans of the tumors were acquired.
Animals were subsequently IV dosed with test article and post-treatment
scans were acquired at 24 h. Initial area under the curve (IAUC) and
Ktrans were calculated voxel-by-voxel using a 2-compartment PK model.
Although vehicle alone did not increase or decrease Ktrans or IAUC,
PEGPH20 treatment increased Ktrans (1/sec) and IAUC (mmol.s) by 74% and
78.7%, respectively. Concurrent to preclinical studies, DCE-MRI imaging
was conducted pre- and post- PEGPH20 in 9 patients in a Phase 1
dose-escalation, safety, tolerability, PK/PD study of PEGPH20 treatment
in patients with advanced solid tumors. Patients were treated with 1.6, 3
or 5 g/kg PEGPH20 1-2/weekly. Baseline, day 1, day 2-5 and end-of-cycle
(EOC) scans were acquired (w/ Gd-DTPA) in 3 patients. Images were fit on
a pixel-by-pixel basis to a 2-compartment, 3-parameter, PK model and
Ktrans and extracellular volume (Ve) calculated. Results suggest an early
and rapid increase in tumor perfusion in target lesions, compared to
baseline (mean Ktrans = 428%; N=3; Day 2-5 scans), as well as an
expansion of the extracellular space with a reduction of these parameters
towards baseline by EOC (mean Ktrans = 28% above baseline). Taken
together, these studies suggest that PEGPH20 increases vessel
permeability, blood flow and/or vessel surface area in HA-rich solid
tumors. Additional preclinical and clinical studies, complete with
DCE-MRI imaging, are ongoing to further evaluate PEGPH20 in the treatment
HA-rich malignancies.

