Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delay in the progression of lung adenoma to adenocarcinoma in mice
by oral consumption of pomegranate fruit extract.


Lung cancer has the highest United States and worldwide rate of cancer
mortality, exceeding the mortality rates of colorectal, breast and
prostate cancers combined. Tobacco smoking is well established as the
major etiological risk factor for lung cancer, contributing to an
increased risk in long-term smokers compared with non-smokers. The risk
of the development of lung cancer in lifelong smokers is 20-40 times
higher than that in non-smokers. Moreover, tobacco use accounts for 30%
of overall lung cancer mortality. Given the large population at increased
risk of developing lung cancer, the development of approaches to prevent
smoking related lung cancer would have great clinical benefit.
Pomegranate (Punica granatum, Punicaceae), is an edible fruit cultivated
in Mediterranean countries, Afghanistan, India, China, Japan, Russia and
the United States. Based on matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) analysis, pomegranate
fruit extract (PFE) was found to contain anthocyanins (such as
delphinidin, cyanidin and pelargonidin) and several hydrolyzable tannins
(such as punicalin, pedunculagin, punicalagin, gallagic and ellagic acid
esters of glucose) which account for 92% of the antioxidant activity of
the whole fruit. We have earlier reported that PFE inhibits prosurvival
signaling pathways in human lung carcinoma A549 cells and tumor growth in
athymic nude mice (Carcinogenesis 2007; 28:163-73) and A/J mice (Cancer
Res 2007; 67:3475-82). In this study, the effect of PFE consumption
during progression of lung adenomas to adenocarcinomas was investigated
in two mouse tumor protocols. NNK, a tobacco-specific N-nitrosamine, is
believed to be one of the most promising candidates of lung carcinogen in
humans. B(a)P is one of the most ubiquitous environmental polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons present in automobile exhaust and cigarette smoke
and it induces lung tumors in mice. Since majority of current and
ex-smokers have small nodules, it is highly desirable to prevent
additional growth of lung cancer after the appearance of nodules. To
mimic this situation, PFE (0.2% PFE, w/v) was given to A/J mice in
drinking water after the establishment of lung adenomas induced by NNK
and B(a)P. Treatment with PFE significantly reduced the lung tumor
multiplicity by 33% in mice treated with NNK and 29% in B(a)P-treated
mice. PFE also caused significant reduction in the expression of COX-2,
RAR-, VEGF, CD-31 and angiopoietin-2 in lungs of mice treated with NNK
and B(a)P. On administration of PFE, there was decrease in the
multiplicity and incidence of lung adenomas and adenocarcinomas in mice
treated with NNK and B(a)P. Thus, our results indicate that PFE has the
potential to be developed as an agent against tobacco smoke-induced lung
cancer and for improving the quality of life of early stage lung cancer
patients and ex-smokers.

