Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential roles of E2F1 in melanoma.


Melanoma, the malignant tumor of melanocytes, accounts for 4% of all skin
cancer incidence but approximately 78% of skin cancer related deaths. No
current treatment significantly enhances disease-free survival once
distant metastases have established. The 5 year survival rate drops
dramatically from 99.9% to 9% when melanoma progresses. To facilitate the
development of effective treatment strategies, it is imperative that we
obtain a better understanding of the biology of melanoma cells as they
progress through the various stages of disease. Previous studies have
shown that E2F1, a transcription factor, is over-expressed in melanoma
cells. Interaction between E2Fs and tumor suppressor, Rb is essential for
regulation of cell cycle progression. E2F1 is known to be involved in
many other important biological processes, including DNA damage, DNA
repair, differentiation, development, autophagy and apoptosis.
Involvement of E2F1 in so many diverse functions underscores the
importance of this protein under normal and pathologic conditions
including melanoma. Previously we have found that primary melanoma cells
have high level of E2F1 message and protein, and that the acetylation of
E2F1 (active form) is higher in late stage melanoma cells. This led us to
propose that E2F1 may function differentially in various stages of
melanoma progression. Therefore we generated stable E2F1 knockdown cells
in early stage primary and advanced metastatic melanoma cells. Our
results show that E2F1 reduction works more effectively to inhibit cell
growth in primary melanoma cells. Further, we also found differential
effects on apoptosis and invasion in early and late stage melanoma cells.
There is increased spontaneous cell death in primary melanoma cells after
E2F1 knockdown, while there is increased apoptosis resistance in response
to UV or valinomycin. These results taken together suggest that E2F1 has
pleotropic effects in melanoma. It can switch between oncogenic or tumor
suppressive functions during melanoma progression. A better understanding
of the mechanism involved in this switch may allow combining gene
therapies with other therapies for improved therapeutics for malignant
melanoma. Supported by R21 CA125719 (RG).

