Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastatic breast cancer cell phenotype is regulated by autophagy.


Autophagy is a catabolic process that is tightly regulated during normal
cell growth, development, and homeostasis. Although it may be death
inducing, it is also an important survival mechanism for cells in
stressful environments, including hypoxia, nutrient deprivation, chemical
or physical pressure, or detachment from colonies. Considering the stress
associated with the process of metastasis, we hypothesized that autophagy
may play a role in the ability of breast cancer cells to survive and
metastasize. To test this, we first compared cell proliferation after
autophagic induction between metastatic breast cancer cell lines
(MDA-MB-231 and -435), a non-metastatic breast cancer cell line
(MDA-MB-436), and a normal breast epithelial cell line (MCF10A). Both
metastatic cell lines continued to proliferate following induction of
autophagy; however, the non-metastatic and normal cell lines were
growth-inhibited. Autophagy was also more rapidly induced by rapamycin in
the metastatic cell lines as demonstrated by an increase in LC3II
expression. To test the different survival capabilities between
metastatic and normal cells, we selected cells through five rounds of
starvation with Earle's balanced salt solution (EBSS) and compared their
ability to induce autophagy. Although both the normal and metastatic
cells maintained their ability to proliferate under normal conditions,
the MDA-MB-231 cells that survived starvation (231-EB5) proliferated more
rapidly than the parental population following induction of autophagy. In
contrast, both MCF10A and MCF10A-EB5 cells were growth-inhibited. The
231-EB5 cells induced autophagy more rapidly than the parental population
as demonstrated by increased expression of LC3II (analyzed by immunoblot)
and increased LC3 puncta (analyzed by immunofluorescence). Migration of
parental 231 cells was inhibited by rapamycin; however, there was no
change in the ability of 231-EB5 cells to migrate after treatment with
rapamycin. Growth in three dimensions also was significantly altered.
MCF10A-EB5 cells were more extended compared to the spherical growth of
the parental MCF10A cells. Protrusions emitted from the 231-EB5 cells
were more rounded compared to the extended spikes of the parental 231
cells. Altogether, these results demonstrate that select populations
derived from metastatic breast cancer cells have different abilities to
survive, proliferate, and migrate following induction of autophagy,
suggesting that autophagy may be a key mechanism for tumor progression
and metastasis.

