Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: T cell responses against mutations in oncoproteins/tumor
suppressor proteins and their induction by vaccination with long peptides.


Vaccination with peptides comprising tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) is
a promising approach in cancer immunotherapy. TAAs derived from mutated
genes are exclusively expressed in the tumor and are not shared with
normal tissue. This reduces the risk of autoimmunity compared to
non-mutated proteins when employed for cancer peptide vaccination.
Moreover, the effectiveness of the vaccine can be enhanced by combining
epitopes to induce cytolytic CD8+ as well as T helper (CD4+) cell
responses. We therefore use long peptides (28-35 amino acids) to
facilitate a presentation of MHC I and II epitopes. More precisely, we
designed a panel of long peptides, with sequences derived from the most
frequent mutated variants of the tumor suppressor Trp53 and the
oncoproteins Kras and Braf described for colorectal (CRC) and pancreatic
carcinomas. To investigate the relevance of immune responses against the
chosen mutations we screened blood and bone marrow from 26 CRC patients
for T cell responses against the long peptides using IFN ELISpot
analysis. We found a tendency towards stronger responses against the
mutated peptides compared to those against corresponding wild-type (wt)
peptides. Furthermore, we correlated the ELISpot results with the
abundance of Trp53 and Kras mutations identified in the patients primary
tumors and metastases. This revealed that patients carrying mutations
were more likely to be responsive against wt and mutated peptides than
patients with no detectable mutation. In order to analyze the potency of
our long peptides for active vaccination, we utilized C57BL/6J mice as
well as a MHC-Class I/II humanized mouse strain (2m-deficient,
HLA-A2/Db/h2m [HHD chimera] and HLA-DR1 double transgenic) in a
multi-peptide vaccination setting. Immune responses were monitored with
flow cytometry by measuring cytokine secretion after in vitro
restimulation of T cells from immunized mice. Thereby we observed
responses for the majority of the long peptides tested. Interestingly,
some of the mutated peptides showed a significantly higher induction of
cytokine levels than corresponding wt sequences suggesting
mutation-specific responses. In addition we were able to monitor both
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses, in which the presence of CD4+ T cells
enhanced CD8+ T cell responsiveness. This observation was made for
several peptides in different combinations suggesting the induction of a
multi-epitope response. As a final goal we plan to investigate the
tumor-protective capacity of our vaccination approach. Therefore, the
MHC-Class I/II transgenic mice were treated with the carcinogen
3-methylcholanthrene to generate a syngeneic tumor cell line. We were
able to establish a fibrosarcoma cell line growing in vivo, which is
engineered to express the most-immunogenic mutations from our vaccination
panel to be tested in tumor challenge experiments.

