Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rap2b, a novel p53 downstream target, promotes cell survival after
DNA damage.


The tumor suppressor p53 is a critical regulator of apoptosis and cell
survival. It evokes both pro-survival and pro-apoptosis programs upon DNA
damage. However, the mechanisms underlying this cell fate decision are
largely unclear. To identify p53 targets in a global and unbiased manner,
we performed gene expression microarray and ChIP-chip assays using mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells. I
treated MEFs and mES cells with adriamycin, a DNA damage agent, for 8
hours. Comparing to the untreated cells (negative controls), I obtained
common genes that were dramatically induced both in MEFs and mES cells.
Subsequently, we further analyzed these genes and obtained a list of 90
common genes. Then, I compared these 90 genes with published p53 targets
in human cell lines U2OS and HCT116, and found 10 genes (Alox5, Eda2r,
Btg2, Mdm2, Adrb2, Cdkn1a, Tnfrsf10b, Rap2b, Ddit4, Bbc3) that are
conserved p53 targets between mouse and human. Most of these genes have
been well studied except for Rap2b. Both mouse and human Rap2b share the
same amino acid residue sequence, which indicating Rap2b might have
important conserved functions both in human and in mouse. Using
conventional chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay and luciferase
reporter assay, I identified one p53 binding motif in Rap2b promoter
region. After DNA damage, p53 binds to the promoter of Rap2b and
activates its transcription. The reduction of Rap2b levels by small
interference RNA increases the apoptosis of cells under the damaged
condition, suggesting that Rap2b helps cell survive upon DNA damage. This
pro-survival role of Rap2b is very similar to the function of another
well-known p53 target, Mdm2. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that Rap2b
is over-expressed in many types of tumors, consistent with its
pro-survival function. Anchorage independent growth assay showed that
Rap2b only has weak transformation activity, suggesting that it is not a
typical oncogene. Importantly, Rap2b activates RalGDS-Ral survival
pathway after DNA damage. Therefore, our results identified a novel
player, Rap2b, in the pro-survival program conducted by p53 and revealed
a connection between the p53 signaling and the RalGDS-Ral cell survival
pathway. Future studies will focus on investigating whether the
inhibition of Rap2b may increase the apoptosis of tumor cells.

