Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Site specific profiling of histone methyltransferases in cancer
cells using histone peptide microarray containing a comprehensive set of
histone peptides.


Post-translational modifications (PTMs) of histones play a critical role
in diverse biological processes including chromatin compaction, gene
expression and cell differentiation. Among a myriad of PMTs, histone
methylation catalyzed by histone methyltransferases (HMTs) has been
increasingly recognized as an important player responsible for a major
signaling mechanism in eukaryotic cells. This suite of epigenetic
modifiers represents a new and promising class of therapeutic targets. In
cancer, there is a growing body of evidence that suggests changes in the
activity of HMTs (a class of chromatin-modifying enzymes) contribute to
the uncontrolled cell proliferation that is a hallmark of this
devastating disease. The sequence specificity of the substrates of HMTs
under a cellular condition are largely unknown but known targets have
been mostly identified through a conventional candidate-based approach by
using purified HMTs. However, such an experiment frequently does not
reflect what could be occurring in cellular contexts or in vivo. In this
study, we designed and synthesized a comprehensive histone peptide
microarray (PepArray) on a microfluidic chip which contains 3,919
peptides. The peptides contain nine residues with the methylation sites
and mutant sites situated in the middle of the sequence so that each
peptide has a unique possibility for modification such as methylation or
acetylation. We obtained nuclear extract from the breast cancer cell line
T47D, and applied the protein lysates to the histone methylation PepArray
chip. After incubation of the chip with a methyl-specific antibody,
significant signals were detected at the sites containing peptides
corresponding to H2AK74, H3K122, and H4K59. We found null signal at
mutant sites where the target lysine(K) was replaced with alanine(A).
These results reveal the specific activity profiles of HMTs at defined
histone sites in a cellular system. Planned further investigation will
compare the different histone methylation or acetylation profiles in the
various cellular systems, especially in different cancer systems. The
current experiment demonstrates an effective solution to comprehensive
studies of epigenetic modification. This information may be translated
into therapeutic targets of histone methylation inhibition by focusing on
identifying inhibitors of specific HMTs as targets for a new generation
of therapeutics.

