Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endoneurial macrophages induce perineural invasion of pancreatic
cancer cells by secretion of GDNF and activation of RET tyrosine kinase
receptor.


Perineural invasion of cancer cells (CPNI) is found in most patients with
pancreatic adenocarcinomas (PDAs), prostate or head and neck cancers.
These patients undergo palliative rather than curative treatment due to
dissemination of cancer along nerves, well beyond the extent of any local
invasion. Although CPNI is a common source of distant tumor spread and a
cause of significant morbidity, its exact mechanism is undefined.
Immunohistochemical analysis of specimens excised from patients with PDAs
showed a significant increase in the number of endoneurial macrophages
(EMs) which lie around nerves invaded by cancer compared to normal
nerves. Video microscopy and time-lapse analysis revealed that EMs are
recruited by the tumor cells in response to colony stimulated factor-1
secreted by invading cancer cells. Conditioned medium (CM) of
tumor-activated EMs (tEMs) induced a 5-fold increase in migration of PDA
cells compared to controls.Compared to resting EMs, tEMs secreted higher
levels of glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), inducing
phosphorylation of RET and downstream activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinases (ERK) in PDA cells. Genetic and pharmacologic
inhibition of the GDNF receptors GFRA1 and RET abrogated the migratory
effect of EM-CM and reduced ERK phosphorylation. In an in-vivo CPNI
model, CCR2-deficient mice which have reduced macrophages recruitment and
activation showed minimal nerve invasion, while wild-type mice developed
complete sciatic nerve paralysis due to massive CPNI. Taken together, our
results identify a paracrine response between EMs and PDA cells which
orchestrates the formation of cancer nerve invasion.Citation Format: Oren
Cavel, Richard J. Wong, Olga Shomron, Moran Amit, Ziv Gil. Endoneurial
macrophages induce perineural invasion of pancreatic cancer cells by
secretion of GDNF and activation of RET tyrosine kinase receptor.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1529.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1529

