Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Racial differences in physical activity after breast cancer
diagnosis.


Background: The established benefits of physical activity (PA) after
breast cancer diagnosis, including reduced mortality and
treatment-related side effects and improved quality of life, suggest that
PA should become a component of breast cancer care. Research shows that
breast cancer survivors decrease PA post-diagnosis, but these studies
have been underpowered to examine racial differences or were not
population-based.Methods: The Carolina Breast Cancer Study, a
population-based study of incident breast cancer cases, assesses PA
levels pre- and post-diagnosis in a large sample (n=1,735) with a
substantial proportion of African-Americans (21%). PA was calculated as
the number of minutes spent performing moderate and/or vigorous activity
per week.Results: Women were less likely to meet PA recommendations of
>150 minutes of weekly activity after their breast cancer diagnosis (35%)
than before diagnosis (61%). African-American, lower income and less
educated women were less likely to meet recommendations both
pre-diagnosis and post-diagnosis, but the decline in meeting
recommendations following diagnosis was consistent across these
characteristics. Though the majority of women (63%) decreased activity
post-diagnosis, 19% increased and 18% did not change their activity
levels. The average decrease in weekly minutes of PA was 230 minutes (95%
CI: 190, 270). On average, African-Americans reduced their PA by more
minutes than whites (276 versus 218 minutes, respectively; p-value=0.14)
as did lower income compared to higher income women (311 versus 199
minutes, respectively; p-value=0.002). Compared to those with decreased
post-diagnosis PA, women who were white (OR: 1.3, 95% CI: 1.0, 1.7),
higher income (OR: 1.6, 95% CI: 1.2, 2.1), or higher educated (OR: 1.5,
95% CI: 0.9, 2.5) were more likely to increase activity
post-diagnosis.Conclusions: After breast cancer diagnosis, cases who were
African-American, had lower income, or were less educated were less
likely to meet PA recommendations, less likely to increase activity, and
tended to reduce PA by more minutes. Interventions should seek to
increase post-diagnosis PA overall, with a focus on these subgroups.

