Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of predictive genes in triple negative breast cancer in
response to a gamma-secretase inhibitor.


Defined by the lack of estrogen and progesterone receptors and
amplification of human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER-2), triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a devastating disease with no approved,
targeted therapy to date. Characterized by aggressive behavior which
includes high rates of metastasis and very poor prognosis, TNBC is
presently treated with DNA-damaging agents such as cisplatin or
carboplatin. The overall survival outcomes for women with TNBC is dismal
and consequently TNBC research requires identification of biomarkers that
specifically mediate signaling pathways that lead to disease progression
and metastasis. Notch receptors which are necessary for self-renewal and
survival of breast cancer stem cells are excellent candidate biomarkers
to investigate in various subtypes of TNBC. Based on the critical need to
identify predictive biomarkers, we hypothesized that inhibition of the
Notch pathway via -secretase inhibition (GSI) will provide an effective
blockade of TNBC growth in specific subtypes where predictive Notch gene
expression profiles are significantly up or downregulated. A panel of
three TNBC cell lines were used in this study: MDA-MB-231 (mesenchymal
stem-like), MDA-MB-468 (basal-like 1), and BT549 (luminal). Using
real-time PCR, Notch pathway-associated genes were measured which include
Notch-1 and Notch-4 receptors, Notch target genes (i.e. Deltex-1, Hes-1,
Hes-5, and Hey-1), and genes such as IL-8 and MMP-9 which are associated
with aggressive tumor behavior. Both anchorage-dependent and
anchorage-independent growth assays were measured in response to MRK-003
GSI, carboplatin, and the combination. We have identified for the first
time a TNBC line (MDA-MB-468) that expressed the highest level of Hes-1,
a Notch gene target, and is the most sensitive to single agent MRK-003
GSI treatment. We also identified that this cell line with the highest
sensitivity to MRK-003 GSI upregulates Notch-4 and IL-8 in response to
the GSI to a greater extent than either of the two other TNBC lines.
Furthermore, the addition of carboplatin at its IC50 concentration
significantly increased the sensitivity of MRK-003 GSI in otherwise
insensitive TNBC lines. These results suggest for the first time that: 1)
Hes-1 could potentially be a valuable predictive biomarker of Notch
activity in TBNC; 2) induction of Notch-4 and/or IL-8 could predict
response to MRK-003 GSI; and 3) carboplatin might provide a means to
increase sensitivity to MRK-003 GSI in resistant TNBC.

