Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of autotaxin enhances radiosensitivity in human and
murine glioblastoma cell lines.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), a grade IV astrocytoma, is a very
aggressive and prevalent primary brain tumor with a median survival rate
of 12-15 months. Though the standard treatment relies on combinations of
chemotherapy, radiation therapy and surgical resection, GBM remains
radio-resistant with a high recurrence rate after resection.
Understanding the molecular mechanisms involved in the therapeutic
response could lead to the identification of novel targets to improve
therapy. Radiation can trigger the activation of cytosolic phospholipase
A2 (cPLA2), leading to production of lipid second-messengers such as
lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC). Autotaxin (ATX), also known as
lysophospholipase D (LysoPLD), is a secreted enzyme that catalyzes the
production of lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) in the tumor microenvironment
by cleaving the head-group of LPC. Specific G-protein coupled receptors
(GPCRs) mediate the autocrine and paracrine effects of LPA such as
migration, angiogenesis and proliferation in cancer. ATX is highly
expressed in glioblastoma cells and is known to contribute to its
invasive properties. We studied ATX as a potential target to enhance
radiosensitivity in GBM by targeting ATX with PF-8380, a specific
inhibitor developed by Pfizer Inc., and genetically by using shRNA.
Pre-treatment with 1M PF-8380 followed by irradiation with 4Gy resulted
in decreased clonogenic survival, decreased migration and decreased
invasion in mouse glioblastoma GL-261and human glioblastoma U87-MG cells.
We confirmed these results by knocking down ATX with shRNA in GL-261 and
U87-MG cells. Inhibition of ATX by PF-8380, or its knockdown by shRNA,
lead to attenuation of Akt phosphorylation in GL-261 and U87-MG
cells.Inhibition or knockdown of ATX resulted in significantly reduced
radiation-induced neovascularization as assayed with GL-261 tumor
vascular window model. The effect of ATX inhibition by PF-8380 in-vivo
was studied using a heterotopic mouse GL-261 tumor model. Tumor bearing
mice were treated with DMSO or 1 mg/kg PF-8380 followed by irradiation
with 1.8Gy for 5 consecutive days. Tumor growth delay was analyzed using
a non-parametric (Kruskal-Wallis) test to determine the amount of days to
reach a tumor volume of 0.7 cm3 and ANOVA to determine the difference
between treatments. Tumors treated with DMSO or PF-8380 took 11.2 and
12.2 days respectively to reach a volume of 0.7 cm3. Tumors treated with
radiation alone took 23.3 days while the combination of PF-8380 with
radiation significantly delayed tumor growth to 32 days.In this study, we
found that inhibition of pro-survival cellular signaling pathways,
migration, invasion and radiation-induced neovascularization can be
achieved by targeting ATX. Thus, ATX could serve as a novel and effective
molecular target for the development of radiosensitizers of GBM, and may
provide a new approach to treating patients with this lethal form of
brain cancer.

