Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancement of the T cell-stimulating ability of dendritic cells
by 5-FU via regulation of the expression of ligands for programed cell
death 1.


Purpose: Dendritic cells (DCs) are professional antigen-presenting cells
that play a central role in initiating adaptive and innate immune
responses. DC-based vaccination is widely tested as a promising
therapeutic cancer vaccine in multiple clinical trials. Programed cell
death 1(PD-1)/PD-1 Ligands (PD-Ls) pathway are involved in the negative
regulation of T cell-functions. PD-1 is expressed on T cells, and PD-Ls
are expressed on DCs as well as some cancer cells. More recent studies
have indicated that certain chemotherapeutic agents might enhance the
cancer vaccine-mediated immune responses. In the current study, we
conducted the in vitro experiments to examine whether or not
chemotherapeutic drugs which are used for patients with head and neck
cancer, may enhance T cell-stimulating ability of DCs via regulation of
the expression of PD-Ls.Methods: Healthy volunteer-derived human
peripheral blood monocyte were cultured with IL-4 and GM-CSF for 5 days
to generate immature DCs, and then the DCs were matured by the
stimulation with OK-432 which is a streptococcal immune adjuvant, for 24
hours, followed by the treatment with each chemotherapeutic drug such as
5-FU, CDDP, docetaxel or gemcitabine for 24 hours. Viability of DCs was
assessed by WST-8. IL-10 and IL-12 in the supernatants from the DC
cultures were measured by ELISA. Expression of mRNAs and proteins for
PD-Ls was analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR and flow cytometry,
respectively. DCs were co-cultured with allogeneic T cells (E/T
ratio=1/20, 1/200 or 1/2000), then IFN- in the supernatants were measured
by ELISA to evaluate T cell-stimulating ability of the DCs.Results: IL-12
production by DCs was significantly enhanced by OK-432 stimulation.
Although CDDP, docetaxel and gemcitabine inhibited the OK-432-induced
IL-12 production on the DCs, 5-FU did not. 5-FU and gemcitabine
significantly inhibited the IL-10 production by OK-432-stimulated DCs.
Expression of PD-L1 and PD-L2 genes as well as of their proteins on the
DCs which was increased by OK-432 stimulation, was significantly
suppressed by the treated with 5-FU or docetaxel. OK-432-stimulated
DCs-treated with 5-FU strongly enhanced both proliferation and IFN-
production of allogeneic T cells as compared with DCs stimulated only
with OK-432.Conclusions: The findings obtained from the current study
suggested the possibility that 5-FU may enhance the T cell-stimulating
ability of dendritic cells via regulation of the expression of PD-L1 and
PD-L2, and that the combination therapy of DC-based cancer vaccine with
5-FU may elicit better anti-tumor efficacy than only vaccination.

