Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analysis of gene expression, CpG island methylation,
miRNA and gene copy number in cancer.


Recently, a large number of specific genomic alterations between
individuals have been described in cancer studies. Despite of these
advances, the impact of several aberrations in the patient's physiology
is still poorly defined. We have developed a method that integrates
genomic, transcriptomic and epigenetic alterations by detecting key
mutations that drive cancer progression. Our score guided algorithm
searches for genes that are both recurrently aberrant in copy number,
miRNA and methylation data and associated with variance of expression
patterns in tumor samples. This proposed method uses concepts derived
from gene network inference and address a recurrent problem in this
approach. Usually, the main limitation of network inference methods is
related a small number of samples with large dimensionalities and the
noisy nature of the expression measurements. To address these
limitations, alternatives are necessary to obtain better accuracy on the
inference problem. One of them, presented in this study, is the
integration of different data in order to reduce errors during the gene
prediction. The algorithm has a regulatory module separated into layers
that contains four-dimensional dataset consisting of gene expression,
CGH-array, large-scale methylation and miRNA expression profiles measured
on the same samples. Weights are applied in the data matrices, selecting
the genes of different layers that are likely to contribute jointly to a
specific gene expression profile. To identify key gene predictors the
algorithm selects the best combination with the highest score, and also
considers the role of rare copy number variation, amplification and
homozygous deletion. In the context of the gene interaction network, the
algorithm performs a protein-protein interaction (PPI) with the selected
genes and the hubs are also connected to their associated aberrant
neighbors, allowing the study of gene alteration pathway. With the aim to
test this score-based algorithm, it was used 31 penile carcinomas model.
Penile cancer is a rare neoplasm usually associated with low
socioeconomic status, poor personal hygiene and HPV infection
(particularly 16 and 18 subtypes in 40-50% of cases). Our analysis
identified some regions with known and recurring alterations related to
immune response and inflammation pathway, such as JUN (transcript
downexpression, hypermethylation, and miR-133/miR-204/miR-139
overexpression) and IL-22 (copy number gains, transcript overexpression,
miR-155 overexpression). miR-155 overexpression is reported as
responsible for enhanced tumor growth and IL-22 overexpression. DNMT1
presented the best score in HPV positive cases, with transcript
overexpression, hypomethylation and hsa-let-7c overexpression. In
overall, these data demonstrate the ability of the integrative data
algorithm to identify drivers in penile carcinogenesis.

