Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptomic and pathogen analysis in bladder cancer primary
tumor and metastasis pairs.


Urothelial carcinoma (also called transitional cell carcinoma, most
commonly of the bladder) is the fourth leading cause of new cancers in
men in the United States, and accounts for 13,000 deaths per year.
Five-year survival for patients with muscle invasive disease is below
50%. Both genetic mutations and epigenetic events are important in
urothelial cancer pathogenesis and prognosis, and environmental triggers
such as Schistosoma infection and tobacco have been identified.In this
study we have undertaken a transcriptomic analysis of fourteen paired
primary tumors and distant metastases in order to identify mutations and
potential pathogenic viruses that may play a role in the pathogenesis of
urothelial cancer.The contribution of infections to urothelial cancer
pathogenesis remains a hotly contested issue with data both supporting
and refuting the role of polyomaviruses in the disease. Recently, our
colleagues at the Broad Institute discovered a striking similarity in DNA
mutation pattern between cervical cancer, which is virally driven, and
bladder cancer. Based on this finding, we hypothesize that a subset of
urothelial cancers are triggered by a microbial pathogen that can be
detected using nucleic acid sequencing methods. The majority of clinical
translational studies to date have investigated patient urine samples.
While these studies have been unsuccessful in identifying a strong
candidate microbial trigger of urothelial cancer, direct analysis of
tumor tissue for pathogen discovery has not been rigorously pursued. In
order to investigate a potential microbial cause of urothelial cancer, we
propose undertaking a deep sequencing approach where all RNA will be
sequenced, followed by taxonomic classification of microbial sequences.In
addition to the microbial characterization of these samples, the
transcriptomic data will be analyzed to identify disease-associated
mutations, fusions and splicing variants of significance in primary and
matched metastasis pairs. This study represents an analysis of the
largest matched primary tumor-distant metastasis cohort to our knowledge,
to date. We anticipate that discovery of a novel pathogen or significant
transcriptomic changes that trigger urothelial cancer could dramatically
alter clinical management by enabling development of screening methods
and protocols, targeted therapies and vaccines.

