Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of hypoxia in 3D human melanoma spheroids leads to c-Met
activation and resistance to Vemurafenib.


Melanoma is highly heterogeneous in vivo compared to two-dimensional (2D)
monolayer adherent cells in culture. Using human A375 and WM793 mouse
xenografts, we consistently observed a significant increase of HIF-1
expression in many live tumor cells by Immunohistochemistry. This
distinct feature confirms that some melanoma cells exist under hypoxia in
vivo. We hypothesize that melanoma cells survive under hypoxic conditions
due to unique growth and survival pathways, which are likely to alter
their sensitivity to current therapeutics. We employed a
three-dimensional (3D) culture system with an inorganic nanoscale
scaffolding (SCIVAX NanoCulture Plate, NCP), to mimic part of the in vivo
system. Human B-RAF(V600E) mutated melanoma cell lines, 451Lu, A375, and
MEL1617, were confirmed to form spheroids with NCP in standard RPMI
medium with 5% FBS under normoxic incubator conditions. The majority of
melanoma cells in spheroids were identified as hypoxia as indicated by
the hypoxic probe LOX-1. The fluorescence of LOX-1 is quenched by oxygen
and increased in response to low levels of oxygen, which was consistently
negative in parallel monolayer cultures of these same three melanoma cell
lines. Furthermore, cells within the melanoma spheroids differentially
expressed HIF-1 and VEGF, at both mRNA and protein levels; also both were
undetectable in monolayer cultures in all three tested cell lines. Using
this system, melanoma spheroids and 2D-monolayer cultures were treated
with the B-RAF(V600E) inhibitor, Vemurafenib. Then the cell viability and
expression of signaling markers were compared between 2D and 3D cultures.
Data from our MTT assays indicated that the 3D melanoma spheroids were
more resistant to Vemurafenib than 2D-cultured cells by 20-30% in all
three tested cell lines. We then employed a human phospho-kinase array
(R&D System) to study multiple kinase pathways related to hypoxia, and
found that the phosphorylated c-Met was significantly increased in 3D
melanoma spheroids than 2D-cultured cells, and was confirmed by western
blot. This data suggested that hypoxia drove c-Met activation in melanoma
spheroids. By employing preclinical c-Met inhibitor in 3D culture, we
found that it significantly prevent 3D-spheroid formation (4060%) and
HIF-1 expression. Combined, evidence suggested that hypoxia drove c-Met
activation and resistance to Vemurafenib in melanoma cells of 3D
spheroids, which may partially reflect the cellular signature of melanoma
cells under hypoxia in vivo. Taking advantage of the ability of c-Met
inhibitor preventing melanoma spheroid formation, we proposed that
combination of c-Met inhibitor and Vemurafenib was a potential therapy
strategy to overcome resistant melanoma cells under hypoxia in patients.
Further experiments on melanoma spheroids and mouse model to address this
concept are in progress.

