Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Somatic induction of bioluminescent lung tumors in mice.


Genetically engineered (GEM) mouse models of cancer currently comprise
the most accurate phenocopies of the human disease available to
researchers. It is therefore highly desirable that these models be used
beyond tumor etiology studies and to evaluate the efficacy of novel
therapeutic treatment strategies. Complicating the application of these
models for such purposes, however, is that tumor onset and progression
are stochastic and cannot be visualized directly when developing within
internal organs. Therefore it is often challenging to know when to start
treatment or how to assess tumor response to treatment.Bioluminescence
imaging is a highly sensitive and relatively high-throughput preclinical
imaging modality well suited to overcoming the inherent difficulties of
applied research with GEM's. We describe here a series of new lentiviral
vectors that can be used to infect somatic cells in the mouse and to
induce bioluminescent tumors, without the need to develop additional
transgenic reporter strains of mice or extensive breeding.The basic
vector contains a tamoxifen-inducible and self-inactivating Cre
recombinase, as well as conditional firefly luciferase and mStrawberry
transgenes. As proof of concept, we administered our vector (1x106
lentiviral particles) to the lungs of mice possessing conditional
KrasG12D and homozygously floxed p53 alleles via intranasal instillation
in an attempt to induce bioluminescent non-small cell lung adenocarcinoma
(NSCLC). This approach gave rise to between two and five bioluminescent
lung lesions per mouse, some of which showed evidence of progressing from
low to high-grade adenocarcinoma at 7 months post-vector administration
and induction. Further, we could accelerate the development of tumors
from KrasG12D only mice with a variant lentiviral construct that
additionally expressed a shRNA against mouse p53. Light originating from
infected and recombined cells increased over the course of the experiment
in all mice, indicative of an expansion in the number of luciferase
labeled cells and tumor development. Our imaging sensitivity was also
very high and light could be detected and monitored at all stages
post-Cre induction.A significant advantage of our approach to modelling
tumorigenesis in this manner is its versatility. Spontaneous tumors can
be induced and rendered imageable without the development or breeding of
new transgenic reporter mouse strains. Further, the expression of
additional tumor-related genes may be introduced (subject to virus
packaging limits) or knocked-down in somatic cells of the base model,
again without necessitating the development or breeding of additional
transgenic mice. These vectors should also be useful for inducing
imageable tumors in organs other than the lung provided that the tumor
genetics are highly penetrant and that the cells are permissible to
infection with a VSV-G pseudotyped lentiviral particle.

