Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The proliferation-inhibiting effects of Efatutazone, a novel
third-generation peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
agonist, on esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in vitro and in vivo.


Background: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR)
inhibits the proliferation of several cancers. Efatutazone, a novel
third-generation thiazolidinedione PPAR agonist, demonstrated acceptable
tolerability with evidence of disease control in patients with advanced
alignancies in the phase 1 study. However, the status and function of
PPAR in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains unclear and the
effects of the PPAR agonist are unknown.Methods: Immunohistochemical
staining was performed using paraffin sections of specimens obtained from
145 ESCC patients who underwent curative resection. The anti-tumor
effects of Efatutazone were investigated in ESCC cell lines both in vitro
and in vivo.Results: The expression of PPAR was detected in the nucleus
of the normal esophageal squamous epithelium in all patients, while
positive staining in ESCC was observed in 24.8% of the patients. The
expression of PPAR decreases according to the depth of invasion and
exhibits an inverse relationship with the expression of ki-67.
Efatutazone inhibited the proliferation of the ESCC cell lines in a time-
and dose-dependent manner in vitro. The anti-proliferation effect of
Efatutazone was more evident in cell lines with high PPAR expression than
in those with low PPAR expression. Efatutazone inhibited the sphere
formation of TE-4, which is one of the high PPAR expression cell lines.
Efatutazone upregulated the cell cycle kinase inhibitor p21 WAF1 / CIP1
and induced G1 arrest. We confirmed that the antitumor effect of this
drug occurred in a PPAR dependent manner using si-RNA for PPAR. In a
mouse xenograft model established with TE-4, we compared three arms: the
control group (n=8), the Troglitazone group (10 mg/kg, n=8) and the
Efatutazone group (10 mg/kg, n=8). Although tumor volume did not differ
between the control group and the Troglitazone group, 50.413.6% (average
SD) reduction in tumor volume was observed in the Efatutazone group
compared with the control group. The mRNA expression of PLIN-2, a
transcription product of PPAR, was two-fold higher in the Efatutazone
group than in the control group. Immunohistochemical staining
demonstrated enhanced p21 WAF1 / CIP1 expression and decreased the ki-67
expression in the Efatutazone group in comparison to either the control
or Troglitazone group. Conclusions: The expression of PPAR decreased in
ESCC compared with normal esophageal epithelium. The anti-proliferation
effect of the third-generation PPAR agonist, Efatutazone, for ESCC was
observed both in vitro and in vivo. Efatutazone is a candidate for novel
anti-cancer agent against ESCC.

