Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of patient primary gastric cancer xenograft models
for test of anticancer agents.


Background. Human xenograft tumor models established by inoculating human
tumor cell lines into immunodifficient mice have been routinely used for
preclinical test of anticancer agents. But tumor cell lines have a
relatively low transplantability, which resulted in a limited number of
tumor models available for selection of right tumor modes for test of
targeted therapeutics. Recently, we have developed a large number of
patient primary gastric cancer xenograft models by transplanting human
fresh gastric tumor fragments into nude mice, which have been employed
for preclinical test of clinically used drugs and novel anticancer agents
for their chemosensitivity screening. Mehtods. The fresh gastric tumor
samples were collected from local hospitals. The tumor fragments of 2-3
mm were subcutaneously implanted in the flanks of nude mice by trocar
needle. Sixteen tumor fragments were grafted into four mice from one
patient tumor tissue (passage 0). The clinically used drugs included
5-FU, gemcitabine, and doxorubicin. The histology and gene sequence of
the established primary gastric tumor models were analyzed and compared
with patients original tumors. Results. A total of 110 patient gastric
cancer samples were implanted into nude mice; and 30 primary tumor models
have been established with a tumor taking rates of 27% for the first
passage. The tumor taking rates were higher in the later passages ranged
from approximately 70-95%. The therapeutic efficacy of the test
anticancer drugs was consistent with their clinical findings. The
patients primary gastric cancer xenografts from all 5 passages retained a
similarity in architecture, histopathological morphology, and genomic
mutation status to their patients original tumors. Conclusions. The
patient primary tumor model system can provide a larger number of models
within same tumor histological type for selection of right models for
preclinical testing novel agents based on their anticancer mechanism. The
primary tumor models retain a similarity in histology and genomic
mutation status to their patients original tumors. They may predict more
relevant clinical response rate and higher correlation with clinical
findings than use of traditional xenograft models established from
long-term cultured cancer cell lines. Especially, they have advantages
for test of target-oriented therapeutics in new drugs discovery and
development programs.

