Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel survivin-mediated adaptive response induced by very low
dose imaging-level exposures and radiation therapy.


Exposure of cells to a very low dose of ionizing radiation can induce an
enhanced resistance or adaptive response to a subsequent larger radiation
dose as evidenced by an increase in cell survival. This expression of an
adaptive response has been attributed to the result of signaling
processes induced by very low radiation doses in the range of 0.5 to 100
mGy. The radiation-induced adaptive response is garnering considerable
attention now due in part to the burgeoning increase in the use of
imaging technologies such as computerized axial tomography and portal
imaging to monitor tumor response and positioning during multi-dose
standard radiation therapy protocols. The focus of this study was to
investigate whether this process could occur when the delivery of the
very small radiation dose was administered before or in between the
administration of two typically used radiation therapy level doses.
Specifically, could this signaling process be perturbed by the addition
of a second 2 Gy dose of ionizing radiation delivered at a relatively
short time interval from the exposure of cells to the very low dose? A
human colon carcinoma cell line (RKO36) along with transformed mouse
embryo fibroblasts (MEF), both wild type (WT) or tumor necrosis factor
receptor 1 and 2 knockout cells (TNFR12) were grown to confluence in
vitro or as MEF tumors in the flank of C57BL/6 mice. Changes in SOD2
enzymatic activity, survivin protein, apoptosis, and cell survival as a
function of radiation conditions and transfection of cells with SOD2-or
survivin siRNA were determined. An adaptive response was induced in cells
at all doses tested from 5 to 100 mGy. The adaptive responses measured in
all three cell lines were associated with a reduction in apoptosis
frequencies, a 5 to 20% increase in cell survival, and a rapid 2 to 3
fold elevation in survivin protein levels. Very low dose
radiation-induced elevation in survivin levels was completely inhibited
by transfection of cells with survivin siRNA. This was accompanied by an
increase in apoptosis and a loss of the expression of these survival
related adaptive responses. We have identified a very low radiation
dose-induced survivin-mediated adaptive response that may affect
therapeutic outcomes associated with increased usage of imaging
procedures in radiation therapy. This work was supported by NIH/NCI grant
R01 CA132998 and DOE Low Dose Program/Project Grant DE-SC0001271 (D.J.G.)

