Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53 activation through stress induction mediates differential
regulation of target genes.


p53 is a sequence specific transcription factor that gets up regulated in
response to stress such as DNA damage, microtubule disruption or
oxidative stress. p53 protein gets stabilized upon stress induction and
functions by activating and repressing large number of downstream genes
involved in varying functions like cell cycle, DNA repair, apoptosis or
senescence depending upon type of stress. Gene activation and repression
is crucial for p53 to perform its functions in the cell. p53 mediates its
activation functions through its ability to bind to cis-acting DNA
elements within regulatory regions. However, p53 regulates negative
expression of genes either through direct recruitment on the promoter or
through indirect mechanisms. Studies show that genotoxic as well as
nongenotoxic stress leads to accumulation of p53 protein in cell, though
the downstream effects vary under both conditions. The various cellular
mechanisms that take place in the cell following DNA damage are well
studied; however less is characterized about agents that disrupt
microtubule assembly.To put an insight into such differential regulation
mechanism, we focused to study the difference in cellular fate upon
genotoxic and non genotoxic stress. In the present study, we observed
that two varying stresses that include DNA damage caused by bleomycin and
microtubule disruption by colchicine mediate cell cycle arrest and
increased levels of p53. At the gene level, it was observed that upon
bleomycin treatment, Sin3/HDAC corepressor complex is docked onto the
promoters of p53 target genes whereas colchicine treatment results in
dissociation of Sin3/HDAC complex from the same promoters. Moreover,
recruitment of Sin3/HDAC complex is reflective of downregulation of p53
target genes and dissociation of this complex from the promoter brings
about transactivation of the same genes.Therefore, our studies highlight
that mere activation of p53 in varying kind of stress is not a decisive
factor in gene regulation, rather interaction of p53 with corepressor or
coactivator directs succeeding processes depending upon the type of
stress.

