Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing of PAPSS1 (3-phosphoadenosine 5-phosphosulfate synthase
1) potentiates cisplatin activity against non-small cell lung cancer.


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for more than 80% of all lung
cancers with two out of three patients having an inoperable disease at
the time of diagnosis. Standard first-line treatments for these patients
are combinations of two chemotherapy drugs, with one typically being
cisplatin. Despite the use of new targeted therapies and attempts to
develop triplet combinations, the overall 5-year survival rate for NSCLC
remains below 20%. A genome-wide siRNA (small-interfering RNA) screen was
performed in A549 cells to rapidly identify individual genes that, when
silenced, would enhance cisplatin activity. One of the top targets that
emerged from the screen was 3-phosphoadenosine-5-phosphosulfate (PAPS)
synthase 1 (PAPSS1), a bi-functional enzyme that synthesizes PAPS, the
universal sulfate donor. Here, we evaluated PAPSS1 as a
cisplatin-potentiating gene target in NSCLC. The effect of PAPSS1
inhibition on cisplatin activity was assessed across eight different
chemo-nave NSCLC cell lines. Cells were transfected with lipid-complexed
siRNA targeting PAPSS1 and treated with various concentrations of
cisplatin 24 hours later. The dose response was determined based on
viable cell count 72 hours post-treatment using the IN Cell Analyzer.
Gene knockdown was confirmed via qPCR and Western blot analysis.
Silencing of PAPSS1 resulted in significant reduction in the IC50 of
cisplatin in five chemo-nave NSCLC cell lines at siRNA concentrations
that would not induce significant lipid toxicity over a 72-hour culture
period. For example, PAPSS1 silencing was associated with a 5-fold
decrease (pNon-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for more than 80%
of all lung cancers with two out of three patients having an inoperable
disease at the time of diagnosis. Standard first-line treatments for
these patients are combinations of two chemotherapy drugs, with one
typically being cisplatin. Despite the use of new targeted therapies and
attempts to develop triplet combinations, the overall 5-year survival
rate for NSCLC remains below 20%. A genome-wide siRNA (small-interfering
RNA) screen was performed in A549 cells to rapidly identify individual
genes that, when silenced, would enhance cisplatin activity. One of the
top targets that emerged from the screen was
3-phosphoadenosine-5-phosphosulfate (PAPS) synthase 1 (PAPSS1), a
bi-functional enzyme that synthesizes PAPS, the universal sulfate donor.
Here, we evaluated PAPSS1 as a cisplatin-potentiating gene target in
NSCLC. The effect of PAPSS1 inhibition on cisplatin activity was assessed
across eight different chemo-nave NSCLC cell lines. Cells were
transfected with lipid-complexed siRNA targeting PAPSS1 and treated with
various concentrations of cisplatin 24 hours later. The dose response was
determined based on viable cell count 72 hours post-treatment using the
IN Cell Analyzer. Gene knockdown was confirmed via qPCR and Western blot
analysis. Silencing of PAPSS1 resulted in significant reduction in the
IC50 of cisplatin in five chemo-nave NSCLC cell lines at siRNA
concentrations that would not induce significant lipid toxicity over a
72-hour culture period. For example, PAPSS1 silencing was associated with
a 5-fold decrease (p<0.001) in the cisplatin IC50 in A549 cells. No
significant toxicity or enhancement in cisplatin activity was observed
when PAPSS1 was knocked down in primary epithelial and endothelial cells
of the airway. Preliminary studies performed with sodium chlorate, a
known non-selective PAPSS1 inhibitor, yielded a 1.5-fold decrease in the
IC50 of cisplatin in A549 cells. We have also demonstrated that the
extent of cisplatin potentiation positively correlates with the level of
PAPSS1 inhibition at the protein level. These results highlight the need
for more potent PAPSS1 inhibitors to further investigate the feasibility
of developing PAPSS1 as a cisplatin-potentiating therapeutic target.
These results identify PAPSS1 as a novel cisplatin potentiating target in
NSCLC and also confirm the validity of a drug combination discovery
program designed to identify genes that when silenced/inhibited, enhance
the action of standard of care cytotoxic agents used against chemo-nave
cancers.

