Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Weight changes in African American and White breast cancer
patients undergoing chemotherapy.


PURPOSE: Weight gain after a breast cancer diagnosis is associated with
cancer recurrence, worse cancer prognosis, higher comorbidity, and
increased likelihood of inaccurate chemotherapy dose reductions during
treatment. This health problem is especially relevant for African
Americans, as they are more likely to be obese and to present comorbid
conditions compared to their White counterparts. However, limited
research describes patterns of weight change by race. The goal of this
study was to assess and compare weight change after chemotherapy in Black
and White breast cancer patients.METHODS: Ninety-eight Black and White
women diagnosed with invasive non-metastatic breast cancer were recruited
from two metropolitan areas. Medical records were abstracted to obtain
clinical (e.g. cancer stage) and treatment variables (e.g. chemotherapy
regimen). Weight change was examined in women who underwent chemotherapy
and it was conceptualized as the relative percent of weight change and
change in body mass index (BMI - kg/m2) categorized as normal,
overweight, and obese. Differences in baseline characteristics by race
were evaluated using the chi-square or Fisher's exact test for
categorical variables and t-test for continuous variables. We performed
bivariate associations between study variables and relative weight
change.RESULTS: African-American women had higher BMI at baseline (at the
start of therapy) as compared to Whites (pPURPOSE: Weight gain after a
breast cancer diagnosis is associated with cancer recurrence, worse
cancer prognosis, higher comorbidity, and increased likelihood of
inaccurate chemotherapy dose reductions during treatment. This health
problem is especially relevant for African Americans, as they are more
likely to be obese and to present comorbid conditions compared to their
White counterparts. However, limited research describes patterns of
weight change by race. The goal of this study was to assess and compare
weight change after chemotherapy in Black and White breast cancer
patients.METHODS: Ninety-eight Black and White women diagnosed with
invasive non-metastatic breast cancer were recruited from two
metropolitan areas. Medical records were abstracted to obtain clinical
(e.g. cancer stage) and treatment variables (e.g. chemotherapy regimen).
Weight change was examined in women who underwent chemotherapy and it was
conceptualized as the relative percent of weight change and change in
body mass index (BMI - kg/m2) categorized as normal, overweight, and
obese. Differences in baseline characteristics by race were evaluated
using the chi-square or Fisher's exact test for categorical variables and
t-test for continuous variables. We performed bivariate associations
between study variables and relative weight change.RESULTS:
African-American women had higher BMI at baseline (at the start of
therapy) as compared to Whites (p<0.001). African American women were
also more likely to have at least one comorbid condition compared to
Whites. Most (62%) participants maintained their pre-treatment weight.
About a third of the sample (29%) experienced a weight gain of more than
5% of their baseline weight after treatment for breast cancer.Only 9% of
women lost more than 5% of their pre-treatment weight. Normal weight
women had the highest mean relative weight increase (3.57%; 95% CI:
1.05%, 6.10%) compared to those that were overweight or obese. Fifteen
percent of women shifted to a higher BMI category; 26% of those that were
normal became overweight; 17% of overweight patients became obese. Blacks
were more likely than whites to shift to a higher BMI
(p=0.006).CONCLUSIONS: The American Cancer Society guidelines recommend
cancer survivors to maintain a normal weight and avoid weight gain. We
found that women in all BMI categories were likely to gain weigh with
those in the normal category having the highest risk of weight gain.
Results underscore the need for integrating weight control within cancer
treatment plans to prevent weight gain and promote weight maintenance in
patients undergoing chemotherapy. Interventions that address dietary
habits and promote increased physical activity to maintain fat-free mass
may be warranted. Future studies that help to elucidate behaviors and/or
biological factors that contribute to weight gain overall and in blacks
will be important.

