Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ableson kinases negatively regulate invadopodia function and
invasion in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma by inhibiting an HB-EGF
autocrine loop.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) has a proclivity for
locoregional invasion. HNSCC mediates invasion in part through
invadopodia-based proteolysis of the extracellular matrix (ECM).
Activation of Src, Erk1/2, Abl and Arg downstream of epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) modulates invadopodia activity through
phosphorylation of the actin regulatory protein cortactin. In MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells, Abl and Arg function downstream of Src to
phosphorylate cortactin, promoting invadopodia ECM degradation activity
and thus assigning a pro-invasive role for Ableson kinases. We report
that Abl kinases have an opposite, negative regulatory role in HNSCC
where they suppress invadopodia and tumor invasion. Impairment of Abl
expression or Abl kinase activity with imatinib mesylate enhanced HNSCC
matrix degradation and 3D collagen invasion, functions that were impaired
in MDA-MB-231. HNSCC lines with elevated EGFR and Src activation did not
contain increased Abl or Arg kinase activity, suggesting Src could bypass
Abl/Arg to phosphorylate cortactin and promote invadopodia ECM
degradation. Src transformed Abl-/-/Arg-/- fibroblasts produced ECM
degrading invadopodia containing pY421 cortactin, indicating that Abl/Arg
are dispensable for invadopodia function in this system. Imatinib treated
HNSCC cells had increased EGFR, Erk1/2 and Src activation, enhancing
cortactin pY421 and pS405/418 required for invadopodia function. Imatinib
stimulated shedding of the EGFR ligand heparin-binding EGF-like growth
factor (HB-EGF) from HNSCC cells, where soluble HB-EGF enhanced
invadopodia ECM degradation in HNSCC but not in MDA-MB-231. HNSCC cells
treated with therapeutic inhibitors of the EGFR invadopodia pathway
indicated that EGFR and Src are required for invadopodia function.
Collectively our results indicate that Abl kinases negatively regulate
HNSCC invasive processes through suppression of an HB-EGF autocrine loop
responsible for activating an EGFR-Src-cortactin cascade, in contrast to
the invasion promoting functions of Abl kinases in breast and other
cancer types. Our results provide mechanistic support for recent failed
HNSCC clinical trials utilizing imatinib.

