Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The biological and molecular characterization of clinically
relevant prostate cancer xenograft lines (LuCaP series), including
responses to therapy.


Introduction:Prostate cancer (PCa) is a heterogeneous disease, which
results in an unpredictable and varied response to therapy. A limitation
in unraveling the complexities of PCa and developing / evaluating novel
therapeutic strategies has been the lack of pre-clinical models that
closely replicate this heterogeneity. To overcome this limitation we have
established over 3 dozen PCa xenograft lines (LuCaP
series).Methods:Characterization of the xenograft lines derived from PCa
primaries and metastases includes: (a) growth properties, (b) expression
of 45 biomarkers by immunohistochemistry (IHC), (c) gene expression, (d)
copy number gains and losses, (e) expression of the androgen receptor
(AR) and its splice variants, (f) bone response (i.e. osteoblastic,
osteolytic or mixed), and (g) response to therapy, i.e. androgen
ablation, docetaxel and anti-IGF-1R.Results:Forty distinct xenograft
lines comprise the current LuCaP panel. Four are neuroendocine, 12 are
castration resistant (CR) sublines and 7 are abiraterone or MDV-3100
resistant sublines. Comprehensive characterization studies have been done
on 24 lines. All lines histologically resemble the originating clinical
specimen. Unsupervised gene expression array clustering analyses revealed
(a) association between the xenograft and the originating clinical
specimen, (b) pairing of androgen-sensitive lines with their CR sublines,
(c) a distinction between adenocarcinoma and neuroendocrine phenotypes
and (d) insignificant drift over a 2-5 year period of serial passage.
Biomarker expression is quite heterogeneous and in most cases, protein
expression correlated well with gene expression.Importantly, 7 LuCaP
models elicit an osteoblastic reaction in the bone, 5 models are PTEN
negative, and 8 lines have the TMPRSS2:ERG fusion. The xenograft lines
express different levels of AR with some expressing AR splice
variants.Heterogeneity was also observed in responses to therapy;
prolonged survival (PS) following androgen ablation or docetaxel
treatment ranged from 1 - 7 fold. Interestingly, LuCaP 86.2, expressing
predominantly ARv567es, was among the least responsive to androgen
ablation (PS 1.1) whereas it is one of the most responsive to docetaxel
(PS >4). Several novel anti-androgen therapies are currently under
investigation as individual agents and in combination; heterogeneous
responses are being observed. To explore mechanisms of resistance, we are
also maintaining sublines that developed resistance to abiraterone and
MDV-3100.Conclusions: These LuCaP PCa xenograft lines are highly diverse
and clinically relevant models to study PCa biology and to evaluate new
treatment modalities. The diversity of phenotypes and responses to
therapy most importantly suggests that misleading conclusions can be
drawn from the use of only one or two models in preclinical evaluations.

