Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comprehensive untargeted UPLC-MS based metabolomic analysis of
ASS1-deficient solid tumor cell lines treated with arginine deiminase.


BackgroundArginine is an important amino acid for tumor cell growth and
development. Argininosuccinate synthetase 1 (ASS1) is a key enzyme
required for biosynthesis of arginine. Preclinically, ASS1-deficient
tumor cells are particularly sensitive to arginine depletion, and
randomised trials exploring this strategy are in progress in
hepatocellular carcinoma and mesothelioma using the drug pegylated
arginine deiminase (ADI-PEG20). In this study, we determined the
metabolic changes induced by ADI-PEG20 treatment in a panel of bladder
cancer and mesothelioma cell lines with promoter methylation-dependent
silencing of ASS1. We used two cancer cell lines expressing ASS1 as a
control.MethodsMalignant mesothelioma, ASS1-negative (H2591, MSTO and
JU77) and ASS1- positive (H28) cell lines were used. For bladder cancer,
ASS1-negative (T24, 253J, UMUC-3) and ASS1-positive (RT112) cell lines
were also used. All cells were treated with 750 ng/ml of ADI-PEG20 for 24
hours which induces up to 90% killing of arginine-dependent cell lines.
Then, ultra performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS)
technique was employed for untargeted quantitation of the metabolomic
changes induced by ADI-PEG20.Results:All cell lines treated with
ADI-PEG20 could be clearly discriminated from their untreated control
pair when using PCA multivariate analysis. Arginine depletion was noted
in all treated cell lines irrespective of ASS1 expression, however the
reduction was at least one-log-fold greater in the ASS1-negative tumor
cells. Citrulline, n-a-acetylcitrulline, and glutamine were upregulated
specifically in ASS1-negative tumor cell lines. The main impact of
ADI-PEG20 treatment was on pyrimidine metabolism in the ASS1-deficient
tumor cells with upregulation of thymine and downregulation of thymidine,
ureidosuccinic acid, uridine monophosphate and 5-hydroxymethyluracil.
Notably, we identified that the reduction of the thymidine nucleotide
pool was linked to suppression of thymidylate synthetase and
dihydrofolate reductase, and paradoxically, reduced uptake of 3H-FLT.
Finally, ADI-PEG20 caused variable effects on cytidine, uridine and
ornithine levels in different cancer cell lines.ConclusionThis study
provides an insight into possible metabolic pathways affected by
ADI-PEG20. The impact of ADI-PEG20 on thymidine metabolism, in
particular, may be employed as a potential biomarker for optimizing the
efficacy of ADI-PEG20 in the treatment of arginine auxotophic cancers.

