Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: drugCARD: a database of anticancer treatment regimens and drug
combinations.


Physiomics and Pharmacometrics have collaborated to design a new database
of anti-cancer drugs and therapeutic treatment information. The objective
is to provide a database of anti-neoplastic agents, regimens and
combinations for use by clinicians and researchers in oncology.The
drugCARD database, accessible through the web, offers data on more than
130 anti-cancer drugs (small molecules and biologics) used in research
and in the clinic. It contains information on drug combinations as well
as several hundreds of cancer chemotherapy regimens used routinely in the
clinic. The data are classified according to tumour type, species and
experimental system (in vitro or in vivo). This database will be
regularly expanded and curated with the most current
information.Individual drug information contained within the database
comprises pharmacokinetic profiles, mechanisms of action and resistance,
dose-response effect, dosing limits, therapeutic index and
immunosuppression data. Drug combinations are also referenced. The
database covers synergy or antagonism, and includes the combination
therapeutic index and cross-resistance information. Drug combinations
where the level of synergy is dependent upon the drug schedule, drug
sequence or administration timing are also referenced and thoroughly
discussed. The user can browse and compare chemotherapeutic regimens, and
analyse the overall drug dose over a course of treatment, by tumour type,
in animal and clinical models. Moreover, the database enables users to
design new combinations and regimens that obey dosing constraints (such
as MLD and MTD), and can be used to determine drug candidates that could
be combined with a new chemical or biological entity, given the
respective mechanisms of action and other PK/PD data. Data can be
exported for analysis in spreadsheets, modelling software or simulation
packages. Advanced functions will include the ability to carry out
statistical analysis on drug usage and dosing in various contexts.
Finally, the database allows the expression and nomenclature of
chemotherapy regimens to be standardized, which is of paramount
importance in improving efficacy, as well as reducing medication errors
(Kohler et al 1998).

