Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TACC3 promotes EMT through the up-regulation of PI3K/Akt and ERK
signaling pathways.


Transforming acidic coiled-coil protein 3 (TACC3) is a member of TACC
family, essential for the maintenance of centrosome integrity and the
regulation of microtubule assembly and spindle stability during mitosis.
In addition to its function in mitosis, TACC3 has been shown to be
involved in controlling cell growth, differentiation and transcriptional
regulation. Interestingly, deregulated expression of TACC3 has been found
in many human cancers, including breast, ovary, bladder, glioblastoma and
non-small cell lung cancer. Moreover, our previous microarray analysis
suggested that overexpression of TACC3 may be associated with the
progression, metastasis and chemoresistance of cervical cancer. Although
these findings indicate that TACC3 may play an important role in human
cancer, the fundamental molecular mechanisms underlying how TACC3
contributes to cancer initiation, progression and metastasis, and its
clinical significance remain elusive. Here, we explored the significance
of TACC3 in cervical cancer. Using cervical cancer tissue microarrays, we
found that TACC3 is overexpressed in cervical cancer compared with normal
cervix. By modulating the expression of TACC3, we found that
overexpression of TACC3 leads to changes in cell morphology,
proliferation, transforming capability, migratory/invasive behavior as
well as the expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related
markers. Moreover, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt and
extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases (ERKs) signaling pathways
are critical for TACC3-mediated EMT process. Notably, depletion of TACC3
is sufficient to suppress EMT phenotype. Our findings, therefore,
identify a novel mechanism that promotes EMT, possibly leading to a more
malignant and metastatic tumor phenotype as well as a potential biomarker
for diagnosis, prognosis and therapy for cervical cancer.

