Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional silencing of c-Myc by promoter-directed siRNA
efficiently target prostate cancer stem cells.


Prostate cancer is the most frequent epithelial cancer in elderly men in
Western countries. Depending on the stage, prostate cancer treatment
requires surgery, hormone therapy, radio- and chemo-therapy. c-MYC is a
transcription factor activated by mitogenic signaling pathways and
playing a central function in stem cell biology. Over-activity of c-Myc
plays a central role in tumorigenesis by affecting cell proliferation,
metabolic adaptation and survival. Amplification of c-MYC is one of the
most common genetic alterations occurring in cancer genomes. c-Myc
expression is significantly elevated in invasive prostate adenocarcinomas
compared to benign prostatic hyperplasia and normal prostate tissue.
Particularly, c-Myc is highly expressed in prostate cancer cells having
the CD44+/CD24- phenotype, which is described as a hallmark of cancer
progenitor/stem cells (CSCs). Importantly, several studies link therapy
resistance and disease progression to the CSC subpopulation within the
highly heterogeneous cellular composition of the tumor. CSCs are likely
the tumor initiating population that produces metastasis and disease
recurrence. These lines of evidence suggest a central role of c-Myc in
the maintenance of CSC compartment in human tumors and justify c-Myc as a
therapeutic target.Previously, we showed that the c-Myc gene could be
silenced with small interfering RNAs (siRNA) targeting its promoter.
Interestingly, single transfection with myc targeting siRNA (myc-siRNA)
induced long lasting effects on cell proliferation and clonogenicity,
indicative of a persistent loss of proliferative and clonogenic
potential. In this study, we investigated the effects of transcriptional
silencing of c-Myc on the CSC subpopulation in human prostate cancer cell
lines in vitro and in vivo. We found that treatment with myc-siRNA
significantly reduced the fraction of CSCs defined by expression of stem
cell surface markers CD44 and CD24, in vitro sphere forming ability and
self-renewal. Furthermore, combined analysis of senescence and cell
surface markers showed that senescence occurred prevalently in the
CD44+/CD24- cell subpopulation leading to its depletion, and reduced self
renewal capability, in vivo tumorigenicity and metastatic potential.
Moreover, repeated intraperitoneal administration of myc-siRNA over a
4-week period reduced tumor growth in a xenogeneic prostate cancer model.
These results are consistent with the role of c-Myc in the maintenance of
the CSC subpopulation in human prostate tumors and suggest that c-Myc
downregulation induces an irreversible loss of clonogenic and
tumor-initiating capability linked to the induction of cell senescence in
CSCs. Our findings show also that an RNAi-based transcriptional therapy
directed to genes directly involved in the maintenance of the cancer stem
cells could be an efficient approach to block progression and relapse of
prostate cancer.

