Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis and biological evaluation of 2,4,5-substituted
pyrimidines as highly selective CDK9 inhibitors for cancer treatment.


Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are a family of Ser/Thr kinases involved
in cell cycle and transcriptional regulation. Most of the CDK inhibitors
reported to date have multiple targets and it is unclear whether specific
inhibition of one of the CDKs or combined inhibition of several CDKs
results in optimal anti-proliferative activities, and in what context.
CDK9 is a key regulator of RNA Polymerase II function in the initiation
and elongation phases of RNA synthesis, inhibition of which selectively
targets pro-survival signalling and reinstates apoptosis in cancer cells.
We hypothesise that the selective inhibition of CDK9 is sufficient to
induce cancer-specific apoptosis because multiple cancer-related pathways
are inhibited at the same time. We will report the design, synthesis and
biological evaluation of highly selective CDK9 inhibitors. Compounds have
been designed based on new CDK-ligand complex crystal structure data,
computational modelling and previous established SARs. Detailed SAR
information was obtained by functional kinase assays and a 48-hour MTT
assay against HCT-116 (colonic) and MCF-7 (breast) cancer cell lines. All
the compounds were first tested against CDK2, CDK9 and two cancer cell
lines, and several selective compounds were further tested against CDK1
and CDK7. Compounds with greater than 100-fold selectivity for CDK9 were
identified. One of the most selective compounds was subjected to more
extensive kinase screening and an evaluation of its cellular mode of
action. This compound showed potent anti-proliferative activity in
diverse human tumour cell lines with sub-micromolar GI50 values. A good
therapeutic window was indicated by the selectivity for tumour over
normal human cell lines. Phosphorylation of Ser-2 of RNAP II and
expression of Mcl-1 and Mdm-2 proteins were reduced, indicating cellular
CDK9 inhibition. The mechanism will be discussed in detail. In
conclusion, highly selective CDK9 inhibitors were identified which showed
potent CDK9 inhibition in both kinase and cell-based assays. Our study
provides a rationale for further development of CDK9 inhibitors for the
treatment of cancer and suggests that highly selective CDK9 inhibitors
may have the potential to be anti-cancer agents.

