Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A c-Met inhibitor increases the chemosensitivity of cancer stem
cells to the irinotecan active metabolite SN38 in gastric carcinoma.


Purpose: Gastric cancer remains a major global health threat and most
patients with advanced stage disease require chemotherapy. The
development of drug resistance is a major obstacle in the treatment of
gastric cancer and only few effective therapies for combating
chemoresistance are currently available. It has been demonstrated that a
small subset of cancer cells with stem cell properties, referred to as
cancer stem cells (CSCs), survive intensive anticancer therapies better
than proliferating progenitor cells or differentiated tumor cells. CSCs
have been reported to be postulated mediators of chemoresistance, so it
might be important to comprehend the drug resistance mechanisms of CSCs
to develop a promising therapy to combat chemoresistance. The stemness
signal might be associated with the chemosensitivity of CSCs. In the
present study, we analyzed the effect of c-Met inhibitors on the
chemosensitivity of stem-like cancer cells in gastric cancer. We
demonstrated that a c-Met inhibitor synergistically increased the
antitumor activity of SN38 in CSCs. To determine mechanisms underlying
this observed synergism, we observed that a c-Met inhibitor combined with
SN38 also led to a significant increase in UGT1A1 and its subsequent
interaction with apoptosis-related genes, i.e., bcl-2 and
caspase-6.Experimental Design: We used three gastric cancer cell lines
and three side population (SP)-enriched cell lines. We used three signal
inhibitors, c-Met inhibitor SU11274, GSK3 inhibitor AR-A014418, and mTOR
inhibitor rapamycin, and five anticancer drugs. We examined the combined
effects of signal inhibitors and anticancer drugs on proliferation, mRNA
expression, and cell cycle.Results: The IC50 of irinotecan, oxaliplatin,
taxol, and gemcitabine in SP cells were 10.5, 2.0, 2.8, and 2.0 times
higher than their parent cells, respectively. In contrast, the IC50 of
5-fluorouracil did not differ between the two cell lines. There was a
synergistic anti-proliferative effect with a combination of c-Met
inhibitor and SN38 in SP cells. In contrast, the GSK3 inhibitor and mTOR
inhibitor had no synergistic effects in combination with any anticancer
drugs. The SP cell lines had higher expression levels of UGT1A1, ABCG2,
and ABCB1 than their parent cell lines, while the c-Met inhibitor
significantly decreased the expression of UGT1A1, but not ABCG2 and
ABCB1. G0-phase of SP cells was higher than their parent cells. c-Met
inhibition induced S-phase arrest in SP cells.Conclusions: CSCs are
associated with multiresistance during chemotherapy. c-Met inhibitors
could be a novel strategy to overcome chemoresistance. c-Met inhibitor
may be a promising target molecule for irinotecan-based chemotherapy of
gastric cancer. A UGT1A1 alteration might be involved in the irinotecan
refractory process in CSCs.

