Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A flexible antibody-based strategy targeting CD71 for the
treatment of AIDS-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.


AIDS related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (AIDS-NHL) remains a significant
clinical problem in the era of effective multiple-agent highly active
anti-retroviral therapy (HAART). While an overall decrease in the
incidence of AIDS-NHL has been seen in the HAART era, the risk for
AIDS-NHL remains elevated, and not all AIDS-NHL subtypes have decreased
in incidence, with the incidence of Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) remaining
unchanged. In fact, AIDS-NHL is now the most common AIDS-related cancer
in developed countries, where NHL accounts for 23-30% of all AIDS-related
deaths. We have previously developed an antibody-avidin fusion protein
(ch128.1Av) specific for the human transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1/CD71), a
receptor that is overexpressed on cancer cells due to their high demand
for iron. This fusion protein exhibits an increased in vitro cytotoxicity
against malignant hematopoietic cells compared to the parental antibody
without avidin (ch128.1). This cytotoxicity is due to the ability of
ch128.1Av to decrease cell surface TfR1, triggering its intracellular
sequestration and degradation, with the subsequent induction of lethal
iron deprivation. However, both ch128.1Av and ch128.1 confer protection
in murine models of human disseminated multiple myeloma. ch128.1Av is
also a universal delivery system and its cytotoxicity can be further
enhanced by its conjugation with biotinylated drugs making it a unique
molecule capable of a two-pronged attack against malignant cells through
drug delivery and direct cytotoxic activity through iron starvation. The
main goal of this study is to evaluate the potential use of ch128.1Av
alone and as a delivery vehicle as a possible AIDS-NHL therapy. We found
that, when used alone, ch128.1Av exhibits significant cytotoxic activity
against two representative AIDS-NHL cell lines: 2F7 (AIDS-Burkitt's NHL)
and RRBL (AIDS-diffuse large B-cell lymphoma). Importantly, the level of
cytotoxicity was similar to that observed using the highly sensitive
human B lymphoblastoid cell line IM-9. In addition, the cytotoxicity
dramatically increases when this fusion protein is conjugated to
biotinylated saporin 6 (b-SO6), a plant ribosome inactivating protein
that blocks protein synthesis, resulting in an immunotoxin. We also found
that non-activated (resting) B cells isolated from the peripheral blood
of healthy individuals are resistant to ch128.1Av, but sensitive to
ch128.1Av complexed to b-SO6, which can be explained by the different
mechanisms of action of the fusion protein alone (iron starvation) and
that of the immunotoxin (protein synthesis inhibition). We have
previously reported ch128.1Av alone, or complexed to b-SO6, are not toxic
to normal human hematopoietic stem cells, which can be explained by the
lack of TfR1 expression on such cells. Our results suggest the potential
use of anti-TfR1 antibody-mediated approaches as therapeutic
interventions against AIDS-NHL.

