Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lurbinectedin (PM01183) specifically targets RNA Pol II for
degradation via the proteasome pathway in a TC-NER-dependent fashion.


Lurbinectedin (PM01183), a new synthetic tetrahydroisoquinoline alkaloid,
is a minor groove specific DNA binder that interacts directly with
specific factors involved in DNA repair and transcription pathways. In
living cells, PM01183-DNA adducts stall replication and transcription
giving rise to double strand breaks, inducing accumulation of cells in
the S-phase of the cell cycle and triggering apoptosis. In both the
ongoing phase II trials (pancreas and platinum-resistant ovarian cancer)
the first stage was concluded with positive results in clinical activity,
ensuring the continuity of the studies. Also, phase I trials in
combination with doxorubicin and gemcitabine as well as in advanced acute
leukemia are ongoing. Here, we examined the effects of PM01183 on the
activity and stability of the RNAPol II as well as on other factors of
the transcriptional machinery, including TBP (TFIID), p62 (TFIIH), XPG
and XPF. Our results showed that PM01183 induced a rapid, time- and
concentration-dependent degradation of RNA Pol II in a panel of different
human tumor cell lines, including HCT-116 (colon), A549 (NSCLC), HeLa
(cervix) and A763 (sarcoma). This degradative process was efficiently
abrogated in the presence of transcriptional (DRB or Actinomycin D) or
proteasome inhibitors (MG132), demonstrating that PM01183 specifically
targets the transcriptionally active RNA Pol II for degradation via the
proteasome pathway. In addition, it was also shown that the effect of
PM01183 on the RNA Pol II was dependent on the presence of a functional
TC NER repair machinery. PM01183 induced degradation of RNA Pol II in
global NER (XPC) deficient cells, but failed to do it in TC NER (CSB, XPD
and XPG) deficient cells. Importantly, these effects were confirmed to be
specific for the RNA Pol II, since other factors of the transcriptional
machinery, such as TBP (TFIID), p62 (TFIIH), XPG or XPF or the RPA194
subunit of the RNA Pol I were not affected. Together, these results show
up the complex mechanism of action of the drug on tumor cells.

