Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineered matrix to study the effect of microenvironment on
cancer stem cell maintenance.


Introduction: Tumors are highly heterogeneous. The heterogeneity of the
tumor tissue is rooted in the existence of cancer stem cells (CSCs).
Therefore, understanding the mechanism of CSC maintenance and its
regulation by the microenvironment is critical to cancer prevention and
treatment. Since cancer takes many years to grow, it is important to
develop in vitro models to study the molecular basis of tumorigenesis and
progression. 3D cell culture systems with biologic materials that support
adhesion and growth of many cell types have emerged as another approach
to cancer stem cell research. However, it is not possible to isolate
individual factors in the microenvironment and the effect on cell
response with naturally derived materials. In an effort to control the
cell microenvironment, we have developed novel inert permissive gels with
controlled physical, mechanical, and biological properties that support
the maintenance of CSCs and tumorsphere formation. The objective of this
work was to investigate the effect of matrix stiffness and a CD44 binding
peptide, conjugated to the inert hydrogel matrix, on tumorsphere
formation and CSC maintenance.Methods: Mouse 4T1 and human MCF7 breast
cancer cells were encapsulated in the inert PEGDA gel with conjugation of
CD44BP. Control groups included dissolved CD44BP and the gel conjugated
with mutant CD44BP. Tumorsphere size and density, and expression of CSC
markers were determined with incubation time in tumor CSC culture medium.
Effect of CD44BP conjugation on breast CSC maintenance was compared with
those gels conjugated with integrin binding RGD peptide (IBP) and
fibronectin-derived heparin binding peptide (FHBP). For in vivo, cell
encapsulated gels were inoculated in syngeneic Balb/C mice and tumor
formation was determined with time.Results: The gel stiffness had a
strong effect on tumorsphere formation and the effect was bimodal.
Tumorsphere formation and expression of CSC markers by the encapsulated
cells peaked after 8 days of incubation. 4T1 and MCF7 cells encapsulated
in the gel with 5-kPa stiffness formed the largest and highest density of
tumorspheres, and had highest expression of breast CSC markers CD44 and
ABCG2. Conjugation of CD44 binding peptide to the inert gel inhibited
breast tumorsphere formation in vitro and in vivo. The ability of the
encapsulated cells to form tumorspheres in the peptide-conjugated gels
correlated with the expression of CSC markers. Tumorsphere formation in
vitro was enhanced by FHBP while it was abolished by IBP.Conclusion: The
PEGDA hydrogel cell culture system provides a novel tool to investigate
the individual effect of factors in the microenvironment on CSC
maintenance without interference of other factors. This model system can
be used to understand the effect of individual factors in the
microenvironment on epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
tumorigenesis.

