Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spectroscopic imaging unveils altered cholesterol metabolism in
prostate cancer .


Metabolic reprogramming allows cancer cells to sustain high proliferative
rates and resist cell death. Whereas alterations to glucose and amino
acid metabolism have been extensively studied, altered lipid metabolism
in cancer is increasingly recognized based on the findings of imbalanced
lipid signaling network and dysregulated lipogenic enzymes. Storage of
neutral lipids in lipid droplets (LDs), an essential aspect of lipid
metabolism, is however long underappreciated until recent advances in LD
biology. In human prostate cancer cell lines, neutral lipid accumulation
was commonly seen and partially attributed to the up-regulation of fatty
acid synthase, a key lipogenic enzyme catalyzing fatty acid biosynthesis
and implicated in many human malignancies including prostate cancer.
However, because the composition of LDs is not accessible with
fluorescence microscopy, the exact role of lipid accumulation in prostate
cancer progression remains elusive. By vibration-based spectroscopic
imaging of 65 specimens collected from 61 prostate cancer patients and
healthy donors, we found for the first time a marked shift from
lipofuscin-like autofluorescent granules in normal, benign, and prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia lesions to cholesteryl ester (CE)-rich LDs in
high-grade and metastatic prostate cancers. Quantitatively, CE amount was
found 5 folds higher in high-grade relative to low-grade prostate
cancers. Cellular studies demonstrate that the activated
PI3K/Akt/mTOR/SREBP pathway accounts for accumulation of CEs via elevated
LDL uptake and cholesterol esterification. Blockage of cholesterol
esterification with an acetyl-coA cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT)
inhibitor significantly slows the growth and induces apoptosis of
prostate cancer both in vitro and in vivo. These findings suggest that CE
can be a quantifiable molecular marker for diagnosis of prostate cancer,
especially for differentiation between low-grade and high-grade prostate
cancers which currently has up to 40% inter-observer discordance.
Moreover, targeting the altered cholesterol metabolism opens new
opportunities for treating advanced prostate cancer in human
patients.Citation Format: Shuhua Yue, Junjie Li, Seung Young Lee, Tian
Shao, Bing Song, Liang Cheng, Chang-Deng Hu, Xiaoqi Liu, Timothy L.
Ratliff, Ji-Xin Cheng. Spectroscopic imaging unveils altered cholesterol
metabolism in prostate cancer . [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 1893. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1893

