Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thailandepsin A, a new HDAC inhibitor, reduces cellular
proliferation and activates the Notch pathway in human carcinoids cancer
cells.


Introduction: Carcinoids are neuroendocrine (NE) tumors that secrete
hormones causing the carcinoid syndrome. Metastatic carcinoids are not
amenable to curative surgery. Our previous research has shown that Notch
signaling has a tumor suppressor role in NE tumors. In the present study,
we sought to examine Thailandepsin A (TDP-A), a newly discovered HDAC
inhibitor as a Notch activating drug and carcinoid cancer agent.Methods:
TDP-A is a bacterial natural product isolated from the fermentation broth
of Burkholderia thailandensis E264. The cytotoxicity of TDP-A on human
pancreatic (BON) carcinoid cells was measured by determining the IC50
value.The antiproliferative effect of TDP-A on BON cells growth was
assessed by the methylthiazolyldiphenyl-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) rapid
colorimetric assay.The mechanism of growth inhibition was determined for
cell cycle and apoptosis markers by Western blot and flow cytometry
analyses. Expression of Notch isoforms 1-3 was assessed at the
transcriptional level (real time RT-PCR) and protein level (Western blot)
from parental and TDP-A treated BON cells. Functional analysis of Notch
Intracellular Domain (NICD) was done by measuring the degree of
luciferase activity by CBF1 binding assay. The gene expression of HES and
HEY (Notch signaling mediators) was quantified by real time RT-PCR.
Effect of TDP-A on NE markers -chromogranin A (CgA) and achaete-scute
complex-like1 (ASCL1) - was assessed by Western blot analysis.Results:
The IC50 value for TDP-A treatment of BON cells was determined to be 7
nM. TDP-A treatment decreased cell proliferation in a dose and time
dependent manner. Western blot analysis and flow cytometry experiments
indicated that the growth inhibition was due to cell cycle arrest (at
G2/M phase) followed by apoptosis.Treatment of BON cells with TDP-A led
to an induction of Notch isoforms in a dose-dependent manner. Functional
Notch signaling was demonstrated by an increase in the CBF1 binding
activity and upregualtion of transcriptional levels of HES and HEY
families. More importantly, Notch activation led to a dose dependent
reduction of NE markers ASCL1 and CgA.Conclusions: We demonstrated that
TDP-A is a potent Notch pathway activator and an inhibitor of BON
carcinoid cell proliferation at low nanomolar concentrations. TDP-A
suppressed carcinoid cell growth by promoting cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis and decreased NET marker expression (ASCL1 and CgA). These
results indicate that TDP-A has therapeutic potential for carcinoid
cancer.

