Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The receptor tyrosine kinase layer of breast cancer cell lines is
predictive of the response to therapeutic drugs.


Currently, clinicians use the levels of the hormone receptors for
estrogen (ER) and progesterone (PR) and amplifications of the ErbB2
receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) to distinguish three groups of breast
cancers and guide the choice of therapeutic treatments. In this work we
show that a limited number of measurements characterizing breast cancer
cell lines at the level of RTKs can be used to predict cell line
sensitivity to therapeutic inhibitors.We chose a panel of approximately
40 breast cancer cell lines, treated them with 22 different growth
factors and cytokines at a saturating and subsaturating dose for 10, 30,
and 90 min and measured the phosphorylation of key kinases downstream of
the receptors. In addition, we measured the expression and
phosphorylation levels of approximately 20 RTKs under serum starvation
conditions. We used the measurements to predict the GI50 values of the
cell lines in response to over 45 therapeutic inhibitors by partial least
square regression. We found that our measurements are sufficient to
predict the response to about half of the drugs studied. The majority of
drugs we are able to predict target RTKs directly or kinases immediately
downstream of the receptors. In some cases we are able to predict the
response to drugs that target processes seemingly unrelated to our
measurements. We are currently exploring the data to uncover what drives
sensitivity and resistance to drugs, gain mechanistic insight in the
action of cancer therapeutics, and find predictors of drug response that
may be useful in a clinical setting.Our results suggest that a carefully
selected set of measurements might be sufficient to classify
responsiveness of breast cancers to a number of cancer drugs currently
used in the clinic. This is particularly relevant in the case of cancers
like triple negative breast cancers for which choosing effective
treatment has proven difficult.

