Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44+ prostate cancer cells are regulated by microRNA-708: A novel
role of microRNA with potential prognostic and diagnostic significance in
prostate cancer .


A challenging aspect of prostate cancer (PCa) is the high rates of
recurrence associated with the disease. About 40% of men with localized
prostate cancer suffer from relapse after initial therapy. In these
cases, androgen ablation therapy is used to reduce tumor
burden/circulating PSA to low or undetectable limits. However, most
patients suffer from disease recurrence, as monitored by rising PSA and
tumor progression to hormone refractory/castration resistant prostate
cancer that is essentially untreatable. Tumor recurrence has been
attributed to the existence of tumor-initiating cells (TIC) within the
bulk of the tumor; CD44 is an important marker for these cells. In this
study, we demonstrate that miR-708 is a key negative regulator of CD44+
subpopulation of PCa cells. miR-708 was underexpressed in CD44+ cells
from PCa xenografts. Reconstitution of miR-708 in PCa cell lines or CD44+
PCa cells led to decreased tumorigenicity in vitro. Intratumoral delivery
of synthetic miR-708 oligonucleotides triggered regression of established
tumors in a murine xenograft model of human prostate cancer. Conversely,
miR-708 silencing in a purified CD44- population of PCa cells promoted
tumor growth. Functional studies validated CD44 to be a direct target of
miR-708. Also, we identified Androgen Receptor (AR) and the
serine/threonine kinase AKT2, a member of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway
as functional targets of miR-708. Clinically, low miR-708 expression was
associated significantly with poor survival outcome, tumor progression
and recurrence in prostate cancer patients. In view of these results we
propose that reduced miR-708 expression leads to prostate cancer
initiation, progression and development by regulating expression of CD44,
AR, AKT2, which in turn regulate proliferative, invasive and migratory
abilities of prostate cancer cells. Therefore, miR-708 may represent a
novel therapeutic target for prostate cancer.

