Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel 6-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine thienoyl antifolate
regioisomers target folate receptor alpha positive ovarian cancer cells
via inhibition of de novo purine nucleotide biosynthesis.


Epithelial ovarian cancers (EOC) represent a unique treatment challenge
as over 50% of patients are diagnosed with advanced stage disease when
surgical and chemotherapeutic interventions prove futile. Approximately
90% of EOC are folate receptor (FR) positive and FR levels correlate with
stage and grade. FR-targeted therapies represent a rational treatment
option for patients with advanced EOC whose treatments fail. There are
three primary mechanisms of folate transport in mammalian cells, the
reduced folate carrier (RFC), the proton-coupled folate transporter
(PCFT) and FRs. RFC is the major transporter for folates and is expressed
ubiquitously in normal tissues and tumors. Hence, developing novel
antifolates that bypass cellular accumulation by RFC should reduce
dose-limiting toxicities. PCFT is expressed in many solid tumors
including ovarian cancer and is active at acidic pH. Previous studies
established that a novel 2-amino-4-oxo-6-substituted
pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine antifolate with an isosteric thienoyl
substitution and a three carbon bridge (AG94) showed selective cellular
uptake by FR and PCFT over RFC. [1,3]Thienoyl regioisomers (AG150 and
AG154) of AG94 showed subnanomolar potencies toward both KB
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (IC50s = 0.1 and 0.09 nM, respectively) and
IGROV1 ovarian carcinoma (IC50s of 0.64 and 0.1nM, respectively). While
AG150 and AG154 were substrates for both PCFT and FRs, like AG94, their
inhibitory effects at low drug concentrations were mediated primarily via
FR, as indicated by their capacities to bind with high affinities to FR
and protection by excess folic acid. Nucleoside protection assays with
adenosine and 5-amino-4-imidazole carboxamide established that the first
folate-dependent enzyme in the de novo purine biosynthesis pathway,
glycinamide ribonucleotide (GAR) formyltransferase (GARFT), was the
primary intracellular target for AG150 and AG154. GARFT targeting was
confirmed by in situ metabolic labeling with [14C]glycine and measurement
of accumulated [14C]formyl GAR in KB cells, for which IC50s were 1.35 and
1.46 nM, respectively. The purine salvage enzyme methylthioadenosine
phosphorylase (MTAP) is frequently co-deleted with CDKN2a in solid tumors
including ovarian cancer. Growth inhibitory effects of AG150 and AG154
were reversed in the presence of methylthioadenosine in MTAP-deficient
IGROV1 cells transfected with MTAP cDNA. Our results demonstrate potent
anti-tumor activities of the 6-pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine thienoyl
regioisomers of AG94, AG150 and AG154, associated with their FR-mediated
cellular uptake and inhibition of GARFT in de novo purine biosynthesis.
Preservation of purine salvage including MTAP is likely an important
cellular determinant of antitumor efficacy for this class of novel
tumor-targeted agents.

