Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 14-3-3z-mediated suppression of tumor cell death.


For many cancer patients, cytotoxic chemotherapy is the primary treatment
option. While the goal of these treatments is to induce tumor cell
apoptosis, treatments too often fail as tumor cells possess the dynamic
ability to subvert cell death and become chemoresistant. We are
interested in determining the mechanisms by which tumors develop
chemoresistance, with the goal of identifying potential therapeutic
targets/pathways to increase the efficacy of chemotherapy. One context in
which tumor cells are though to gain.14-3-3 is a small acidic protein
that binds to phospho-serine proteins. 14-3-3 binding can have wide
ranging effects, from the activation of enzyme function, to the
orchestration of protein-protein interactions. 14-3-3 is highly expressed
in many cancer types, and high levels of expression have been shown to
correlate with the aggressiveness of tumors and lower rates of patient
survival (1). However, the mechanisms by which 14-3-3 may promote tumor
growth/tumor cell survival have yet to be determined. In this study we
show that siRNA-mediated depletion of 14-3-3 potently sensitizes breast
tumor cells to apoptosis induced by metabolic stress (e.g., hypoxia and
glucose withdrawal_stresses commonly found within solid tumors) and
chemotherapy. Moreover, gel filtration data suggest that metabolic cell
stress induces a shift in 14-3-3 from high to lower molecular weight
protein complexes. Drawing from these data, we performed a proteomics
experiment to characterize 14-3-3 interactors under these conditions. We
found that 14-3-3 associates with numerous pro-glycolysis- and cell
growth-regulating enzymes (several of which are novel 14-3-3
interactors), and under conditions of metabolic stress, many of these
interactions are diminished or lost. We are currently examining the
functional consequences of these dynamic 14-3-3z interactions with
respect to tumor cell survival. Together, our data suggest that 14-3-3
may play an apical role in regulating the metabolic response to stress,
and provide insight into the mechanism by which 14-3-3 promotes tumor
growth and survival.

