Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene co-expression network analysis of small cell lung cancer
(SCLC) identifies new subclasses and novel therapeutic targets including
Src family kinase Fyn and Spleen Tyrosine Kinase Syk.


Oncogenic mechanisms in SCLC remain poorly understood leaving this tumor
with the worst prognosis among all lung cancers. Unlike other cancer
types, traditional genomic approaches have been of limited success in
SCLC. For instance, no patterns of prevalent mutations associated with
SCLC progression or targeted therapeutics have emerged. Gene expression
profiling based on differential expression have yielded potentially
useful signatures in SCLC, but they have proven to be independent of each
other and with minimal overlap, reducing translational potential.
Nonetheless, since integrative systems biology studies of SCLC are
warranted, we hypothesized that gene co-expression analyses can unveil
key signaling hubs of specific networks that regulate SCLC proliferation
and survival. We applied weighted gene co-expression network analysis
(WGCNA) to a lung cancer patient gene expression dataset comprising of
normal lung (NL), SCLC and Non-SCLC (NSCLC) such as squamous cell
carcinoma and adenocarcinoma, and identified hierarchical gene networks
highly specific to SCLC. The hubs of these SCLC-specific networks formed
a SCLC-specific hub network (SSHN) signature that: 1) classified SCLC
from NSCLC and NL on 3 independent patient and 1 cell line datasets; 2)
was validated in independent RNAseq and shotgun proteomic patient
datasets; 3) identified 2 SCLC subtypes with high and low SSHN expression
in patients and cell lines. Three top SSHN hubs, Fyn, Syk and BRCA1, are
involved in oxidative stress (OSR) and DNA damage response (DDR),
respectively. At the protein level, Fyn, Syk and BRCA1 were significantly
co-expressed in tissue microarrays and classified SCLC patients into 2
subtypes: High and Low Fyn/Syk/BRCA1 (F/S/B). High F/S/B staining
significantly correlated with longer recurrence-free survival of patients
treated with standard chemotherapy, suggesting that efficient OSR and DDR
may enhance chemo response. This possibility was tested in established
SCLC cell lines, which also could be separated into high vs low F/S/B
groups corresponding to the clinical subtypes. High F/S/B cell lines
exhibited lower proliferative rates, suggesting that OSR and DDR may
still exert influence over cell cycle. Syk knockdown in these cell lines
caused significant reduction in cellular viability and proliferation, as
well as increased levels of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS). Induction of
oxidative stress in High F/S/B cell lines resulted in early activation of
Fyn, Syk, p38, Erk and Akt. Thus, OSR may be overactive in SCLC and play
a role in its natural history and response to treatment. In summary, our
WGCNA combinatorial approach yielded novel insights into SCLC
pathogenesis, separated two novel SCLC molecular subtypes with distinct
functional OSR and DDR properties, and pointed to unsuspected potential
therapeutic targets.

