Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-leukemia effect of Casein Kinase II (CK2) inhibitors in vivo
is mediated by the Ikaros tumor suppressor.


An increase in the expression and activity of pro-oncogenic Casein Kinase
II (CK2) is associated with the development of acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in humans. The mechanism
by which CK2 promotes leukemogenesis is unknown. Previously, we
demonstrated that CK2 kinase phosphorylates the Ikaros tumor suppressor
in vivo and that phosphorylation of Ikaros at specific amino acids
interferes with the normal function of the Ikaros protein. We
hypothesized that CK2 exerts its pro-oncogenic effect by reducing the
tumor suppressor activity of Ikaros and that inhibition of CK2 could
enhance Ikaros tumor suppressor activity in leukemia. Here we show that
Ikaros binds to the promoter regions and represses transcription of
several genes that promote cell cycle progression in leukemia. Inhibition
of CK2 results in: 1) enhanced Ikaros DNA-binding affinity to its target
genes as indicated by quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation (qChIP)
assay); 2) increased Ikaros-mediated transcriptional repression of Ikaros
target genes as demonstrated by luciferase reporter assay; 3) impaired
proliferation of leukemia cells and 4) increased sensitivity of leukemia
cells to Doxorubicin. The use of specific CK2 inhibitors in vivo in a
human-mouse leukemia xenograft model produced a strong anti-leukemia
effect. Functional analysis of leukemia cells from xenografts
demonstrated that CK2 inhibition results in strong binding of Ikaros at
the promoters of its target genes and reduced transcription of these
genes as indicated by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Our results
provide evidence that CK2 inhibitors have a potent anti-leukemia effect
in vitro and in vivo, and suggest the mechanism through which CK2
inhibitors exert their therapeutic effect. The presented data demonstrate
that one of the mechanisms of action for CK2 inhibitors involves
increasing Ikaros activity as a transcriptional repressor in leukemia
cells, resulting in enhanced tumor suppressor activity. These results
provide a rationale for the use of CK2 inhibitors as a novel therapeutic
modality for leukemia. Supported by National Institutes of Health R01
HL095120, a St. Baldrick's Foundation Career Development grant, and the
Four Diamonds Fund Endowment (to S.D.).

