Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ZMAT3, a signature gene for sporadic osteosarcoma.


Osteosarcoma (OS) is a primary bone malignancy with high incidence in
children and young adults. It frequently occurs in patients with strong
cancer history (Li-Fraumeni syndrome, retinoblastoma), but the etiology
of sporadic OS is still uncertain. The present study is an intensive
investigation on susceptibility to sporadic osteosarcoma by genome wide
copy number analysis. We evaluated the hypothesis that germline copy
number variants (CNVs) could act as a source of genetic susceptibility
that may contribute to the development of sporadic osteosarcoma. We
analyzed 78 sporadic pediatric OS cases and 2375 controls using
Affymetrix SNP 6.0 Array.Two independent methods, Genotyping Console
(Affymetrix) and Birdsuite (Broad Institute) were employed to call for
CNVs. Outliers with large genomic alterations and TP53 mutations were
flagged and filtered out. Both bioinformatics methods show similar
distribution of CNVs per chromosome, with slightly higher range depicted
by Genotyping Console, with an enriched set of CNVs in the diseased data.
Bioinformatics analysis predicts overlap of copy number variable regions
with several candidate genes (PIK3CA, STK11, AKT3, ZMAT3, BAI1), for
selected samples. We validated these findings by performing real time
quantitative PCR experiments that not only verified most of the
computational results, but also identified more amplifications, in an
extended selection of samples and regions. The most affected candidate
gene, showing gain in 66% of osteosarcoma samples tested, is ZMAT3 (Chr.
3q26.32). A very recent method, digital droplet PCR (BioRAD), with very
high sensitivity, also confirms qPCR results, although for a smaller
number of samples.In addition to calling for CNVs, pathways analyses have
been also pursued, to address the hypothesis that disruption of multiple
genes from the same pathway in the germline of a particular individual
may cause susceptibility for developing osteosarcoma. DAVID software
predicted several pathways that are enriched, p53 being one of them.
Further investigations by KEGG suggest that several genes, including
ZMAT3, are disrupted in the p53 signaling pathway. In order to validate
these findings, functional assays on osteosarcoma derived lymphoblastoid
cell lines are designed and currently in progress. In all, the current
study suggests that ZMAT3 could represent a good candidate signature gene
for susceptibility to sporadic osteosarcoma.

