Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IgE-mediated immune activation targeting the prostate specific
antigen: a potential prostate cancer therapy.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer deaths among
men in the United States. The prostate-specific antigen (PSA), often
found at high levels in the serum of PCa patients, has been used as a
marker for PCa detection and as a target of immunotherapy. The murine
IgG1 monoclonal antibody AR47.47, specific for human PSA, has been shown
to enhance antigen presentation by human dendritic cells and induce both
CD4 and CD8 T-cell activation when complexed with PSA. In this study, we
explored the properties of a novel mouse/human chimeric anti-PSA IgE
containing the variable regions of AR47.47 as a potential therapy for
PCa. Our goal is to take advantage of the unique properties of the IgE
molecule in order to trigger immune activation against PCa. The properly
assembled and secreted anti-PSA IgE binds the antigen and the Fc epsilon
RI (FcRI) as demonstrated by ELISA and flow cytometry, respectively. This
novel IgE antibody is capable of triggering effector cell degranulation
in vitro as determined by the release of -hexosaminidase from rat
basophil leukemic effector cells that express human FcRI (RBL SX-38).
Furthermore, the IgE triggered degranulation in vivo in human FcRI
transgenic mice using the passive cutaneous anaphylaxis assay.
Degranulation was only observed when the IgE was artificially
cross-linked, but not in the presence of the natural soluble antigen,
suggesting that such an interaction will not trigger systemic anaphylaxis
in patients. Importantly, when incubated in vitro with human dendritic
cells the anti-PSA IgE complexed with the antigen (PSA) triggered
autologous CD4 and CD8 T-cell activation, suggesting enhancement of
antigen presentation. Immune activation was also observed in vivo where a
prophylactic vaccination with the anti-PSA IgE complexed to PSA
significantly prolonged the survival of human FcRI transgenic mice
challenged with PSA-expressing tumors, under conditions in which its
chimeric mouse/human anti-PSA IgG1 counterpart failed to confer
protection. Our results provide initial proof-of principle that the
anti-PSA IgE can stimulate immune activation against tumor cells
expressing PSA, and further studies on the anti-tumor activity of this
antibody are warranted. These studies belong to the new field of
AllergoOncology that aims to reveal the function of IgE-mediated immune
responses against cancer and develop novel IgE-based cancer therapies.

