Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cucurbitacin B suppresses breast cancer growth by inhibiting
TGF-mediated integrin-HER2 signaling.


Integrins have recently been shown to play an important role in promotion
of cell motility and survival in various cancers through cooperative
signaling with EGFRs. Integrins transmit cell survival signals through
ILK-Paxillin complex and further play role in activating AKT signaling.
Curcubitacin B (CuB) is a steroidal class of chemical present in the
plants belonging to cucurbitaceae family. CuB has shown cytotoxic
potential in several cancers by causing G2/M cell cycle arrest and
inhibition of JAK/STAT3 pathway. However, the exact mechanism of CuB and
its role in metastasis and cell survival is not known. Our results show
that CuB significantly suppressed the growth of MDA-MB-231, SKBR3, MCF-7,
MDA-MB-231 (HER2) and MCF-7 (HER2), five different breast cancer cells in
a concentration and time-dependent manner. CuB also induced apoptosis and
down-regulated Integrin linked kinase 1(ILK1) expression. In addition,
CuB down-regulated Integrin 4 (ITGB4) and Integrin 6 (ITGA6) protein
expression and suppressed the phosphorylation of AKT at Ser473, paxillin
at Tyr118. Previous studies have shown that Transforming growth factor
(TGF) mediates crosstalk between ITGB4 and HER2, through Src kinase to
enhance cell survival and motility. Interestingly we observed significant
downregulation of Src, EGFR and HER2 in various breast cancer cells,
suggesting that CuB suppresses cooperative signaling of Integrins and
HER2. We also observed that TGF pretreatment imparted protection against
CuB induced cytotoxic effects, indicating that CuB modulates TGF mediated
Integrin signaling. Taken together our results indicate the anti-cancer
effects of CuB in breast cancer cells by targeting ITGB4/ITGA6, Src, ILK
and TGF. Further detailed mechanistic work is in progress. [Supported in
part by R01 grants CA129038 (to S.K.S) awarded by the National Cancer
Institute].

