Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Marked augmentation of the polyglutamate derivatives as the basis
for the enhanced activity of pralatrexate relative to methotrexate.


Pralatrexate (PDX) is a new-generation dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR)
inhibitor with high affinity for the reduced folate carrier (RFC) and for
folypolyglutamyl synthetase (FPGS), the enzyme that mediates the addition
of glutamate moieties at the -carboxyl of folates and antifolates
(Sirotnak et al., Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 42:313, 1998). The
polyglutamate derivatives are better accumulated and retained into the
cells. Recently, PDX received FDA approval for the treatment of relapsed
or refractory peripheral T-cell lymphoma. This report represents the
first analysis of PDX cellular pharmacology using the tritiated
derivative, comparing its properties with methotrexate (MTX) in HeLa
cells. The influx Kt was determined at 0.5 M in comparison to a MTX
influx Ki of 3 M. Consistent with RFC-targeting, [H]PDX was a lesser
substrate for the proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT) than MTX.
While the net uptake of [H]MTX reached steady-state conditions within 30
min, net uptake of [H]PDX continued to increase, exceeding the [H]MTX
level by a factor of 15, by 6 hrs. This difference in net uptake could be
attributed to a marked increase in PDX polyglutamates. At 24 hrs, the PDX
mono-, di- and triglutamate levels in the cells were 14%, 12%, and 70% of
the total antifolate, respectively. When polyglutamation was suppressed,
the subsequent intracellular [H]PDX level was markedly decreased now
exceeded the [H]MTX level by a factor of only 3. The importance of PDX
polyglutamation was reflected in the marked difference in growth
inhibition relative to MTX when exposure to the drugs was transient. When
cells were exposed continuously to PDX or MTX for six days the IC50 for
the former was 1/25th the latter (7 nM vs 180 nM, respectively). However,
when the exposure was limited to 6 hrs followed by growth in drug-free
medium, the pharmacological advantage of PDX over MTX was markedly
increased with an IC50 of 70 nM and 30 M,respectively, now 1/450th that
of MTX. Hence, in the first direct measurement of the transport and
polyglutamation of PDX, the data confirm a much higher affinity for RFC
relative to MTX along with a markedly greater rate of polyglutamation in
cells. It is this difference in the extent of accumulation of these
active polyglutamate derivatives that is the basis for the marked
difference in the antitumor activities between these antifolates. The
apparent low affinity of PDX for PCFT suggests that changes at the
nitrogen-10 position are one determinant of the affinity of 4-amino
antifolates for this transporter. Further, since PCFT is the mechanism by
which folates and antifolates are absorbed across the proximal small
intestine, the data suggests that the low affinity of PDX for this
carrier would result in a low rate of re-absorption of this antifolate
during its enterohepatic circulation, with a consequent higher level of
fecal excretion, than for MTX.

