Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sumoylation enhances the stability of the proto-oncogene EVI1
however negatively regulates its DNA binding and transcriptional activity.


Aberrant expression of the proto-oncogene EVI1 (Ecotropic virus
integration site1) has been implicated not only in lymphoid or myeloid
malignancies but also in several other solid tumors like colon, ovarian
and breast cancer. Despite its crucial role in oncogenesis, the
regulatory factors and mechanisms that control the function of EVI1 are
partially known. Post translational modifications play a crucial role in
regulating various cellular processes by controlling the function of
several proteins. Here we show that EVI1, a transcription factor is
post-translationally modified by SUMO1. Indirect immunofluorescence
studies revealed that EVI1 and SUMO1 colocalized in the nuclear speckles
in the cells transiently transfected with EVI1 and SUMO1 as well as cells
that constitutively expresses EVI1. Sumoylation is known to stabilize
their target protein which was also observed in case of EVI1 through
pulse chase assay with cycloheximide. Reporter gene assay revealed that
sumoylation impaired EVI1 mediated transactivation of Bcl-xL and SIRT1
promoters and also reduced the DNA binding efficiency of EVI1 which was
confirmed through ChIP assay. PIAS proteins are known as SUMO E3 ligase
which enhances the sumoylation of the proteins. PIAS proteins are also
known to regulate the function of several proteins independent of its
ligase activity. Co-immunoprecipiation assay revealed that EVI1 directly
interacts with SUMO E3 ligase PIASy, which was also found to enhance EVI1
sumoylation. Our study also demonstrates that PIASy negatively regulated
EVI1 transcription activity which is independent of its ligase activity.
Thus PIASy was found to be an interacting partner that regulates the
function of EVI1 in sumoylation dependent as well as independent manner.
In summary, we present a new modifier of EVI1 which controls its
stability and deregulates its transcriptional activity. Further study in
context with EVI1-SUMO1-PIASy may give a better idea in understanding the
functions and the regulation of EVI1 in normal and diseased cells.

