Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying long noncoding RNAs in breast cancer microarrays.


Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNA) are powerful regulators of gene expression.
The emerging role of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNA) is facilitated by the
development of new technologies such as tilling array and next generation
sequencing. In this study, our research focused on lncRNA's regulatory
mechanisms in breast cancer.Methods: The Gencode v7 lncRNA and FANTOM5
lncRNA datasets were integrated as our lncRNA transcriptome. The
expression profile was from four publications of microarray analysis in
breast cancer. First, we checked the Affymetrix probe dataset U133 plus
with our lncRNA transcriptome. If a probe was on the same strand and 100%
fell into the exonic region of one lncRNA transcript, then the probe
could this lncRNA. We integrated all lncRNAs from our transcriptome which
matched the probes from the supplementary data of four papers and
selected those occurred more than once.Results: There were 23
nonredundant lncRNA candidates identified. Among those 23 candidates,
PTENP1 was identified. PTENP1 is the pseudogene of tumor suppressor gene
PTEN. The 3UTR can bind the same miRNAs as the related protein-coding
gene, PTEN. This suggests that pseudogenes may have a biological function
as decoys, sequestering miRNAs and thereby affecting their regulation of
expressed genes. Another candidate identified was ENST00000415285.1,
which is the antisense gene of FGF14. FGF14 is a member of the fibroblast
growth factor (FGF) family. FGF family members possess broad mitogenic
and cell survival activities, and are involved in a variety of biological
processes, including tumor growth and invasion.ENST00000415285.1 is
up-regulated in breast cancer, while the expression level of FGF14 is
unknown, so further research is necessary to predict the possible
mechanism of regulation to FGF14.Conclusion: LncRNAs are identified in
datasets for breast cancer that may elucidate further regulatory
mechanisms driving the pathogenesis of breast cancer.

