Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short-term treatment with pregnancy levels of estradiol prevents
breast cancer by delaying promotion and progression.


A full term pregnancy early in life reduces the risk of breast cancer in
women. A similar phenomenon is also observed in rats and mice. Recent
findings indicate that estradiol alone replacement therapy in
postmenopausal women also reduces the risk of breast cancer. We have
earlier demonstrated that short-term treatment with pregnancy levels of
estradiol (STET) is very effective in preventing mammary carcinogenesis.
In the current study our objective was to determine whether STET
conferred protection against mammary carcinogenesis by blocking
initiation or promotion. Rats were injected with N-methyl-N-nitrosourea
at 7 weeks of age and divided into 2 groups. One group (n=30) did not
receive any further treatment and served as controls and the second group
(n=30) of rats was treated with 1 microgram of estradiol per day for 3
weeks using a subcutaneous implant of Alzet osmotic mini pump. A subset
(n=5) were terminated 3 and 6 months post carcinogen treatment. The other
animals were terminated 9 months post carcinogen treatment. Mammary gland
wholemounts were prepared at each termination timepoint and examined for
the presence of latent microscopic mammary cancers (LMMC). In another
experiment we surgically isolated LMMC and transplanted them back into a
host from the same group (control to control or STET to STET) or to a
host from the other group (control to STET or STET to control).
Short-term treatment with pregnancy levels of estradiol drastically
reduced the incidence of overt mammary cancers. Although a significant
reduction of overt cancers was observed in the pregnancy levels of
estradiol treated groups, there was no difference in the incidence of
LMMC between the estradiol treated and the controls. LMMC were isolated
from the mammary glands. Breast cancer and estrogen receptor signaling
specific microarrays were performed to find differences in gene
expression in LMMC between the controls and STET groups. We were able to
identify clear differences in gene expression in LMMC between the two
groups. Genes involved in angiogenesis (Thbs1, Vegfa), apoptosis (Bad,
Bcl2) and cell cycle (Ccnd1, Cdk2) were differentially expressed. Further
several transcription factors (Esr1, Esr2, Gata3, Rb1) were also
differentially expressed in LMMC between the controls and STET groups.
The transplantation experiment indicated that the progression of LMMC was
dependent on the systemic environment it is exposed to. The LMMC derived
from control were not able to progress further to make overt cancers when
transplanted STET hosts, while the LMMC derived from STET were able to
progress to overt cancers when transplanted to control hosts. These
findings demonstrate that STET confers protection against mammary cancer
development by blocking promotion and progression of transformed cells.
Understanding this phenomenon shall assist in the design of novel
prevention and therapeutic strategies against breast cancer.

