Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel Chk1 inhibitor MK8776 sensitizes AML cells to HDAC
inhibitors by targeting the intra-S checkpoint and DNA replication and
repair.


While histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs, e.g., vorinostat) are
approved for CTCL, they have limited single-agent activity in AML.
Consequently, new mechanisms and targeted agents capable of improving
HDACI anti-leukemic efficacy are urgently needed. Recently, new insights
into HDACI mechanisms of actions have implicated interruption of DNA
replication and DNA damage checkpoints, raising the possibility that
agents targeting Chk1, a key modulator that monitors the DNA replication
process and mediates activation of DNA damage checkpoints, may improve
HDACI activity. To test this hypothesis, interactions between the novel
Chk1 inhibitor MK8776 and the HDAC inhibitor (HDACI) vorinostat were
examined in human AML cells harboring wild-type (wt) or deficient p53
and/or FLT3-ITD. MK-8776 synergistically potentiated vorinostat-mediated
apoptosis in various AML cell lines, although lethality was significantly
more pronounced in p53-deficient cells. Notably, AML cells carrying
FLT3-ITD were particularly sensitive to the MK8776/vorinostat regimen,
regardless of p53 status. Synergistic interactions were associated with
inhibition of Chk1 activity (e.g., diminished Ser296 phosphorylation),
interference with the intra-S phase checkpoint (cell cycle analysis),
disruption of DNA replication (EdU incorporation), and down-regulation of
proteins involved in DNA replication (e.g., CDT1) and repair (e.g., CtIP
and BRCA1), resulting in sharp increases in DNA damage, reflected by
enhanced H2A.X formation and increased Chk2 Thr68 phosphorylation, and
apoptosis. Moreover, AML cells expressing kinase-dead Chk1 (D130A) or
Chk1 shRNA were significantly more sensitive to HDACIs compared to their
wt-counterparts, and displayed down-regulation of CtIP and BRCA1
phosphorylation following HDACI exposure. Interestingly, MK8776 induced
Ser15, but not Ser20, phosphorylation and accumulation of p53 in p53-wt
cells, events that were largely blocked by HDACIs. Moreover, p53 knock
down by shRNA significantly sensitized these cells to MK8776 or HDACIs,
particularly in combination. Finally, the MK8776/vorinostat regimen was
active in primary AML blasts, particularly against CD34+/CD38-/CD123+
populations enriched for leukemia-initiating cells. In contrast,
identical regimens were relatively sparing toward normal cord blood CD34+
cells. Together, these findings indicate that the novel Chk1 inhibitor
MK8776 markedly potentiates HDACI lethality in AML cells displaying
various genetic backgrounds through mechanisms involving disruption of
DNA replication, the intra-S checkpoint, and DNA repair. They also argue
that leukemic cells, and particularly those bearing oncogenic mutations
associated with poor prognosis e.g., p53 deletion/mutation or FLT3-ITD,
may be more susceptible than their wt-counterparts to this strategy.

