Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative proteomic analysis of melanoma cell secretomes reveals
autophagy-related biomarkers.


Autophagy is a highly conserved mechanism of cellular self-digestion that
serves as a major protein and organelle degrading pathway and a critical
adaptive response to nutrient, endoplasmic reticulum, and oxidative
stress. Autophagy has been implicated as a survival mechanism in melanoma
tumorigenesis and has been recognized as a primary mechanism of
chemotherapeutic resistance. Pre-treatment analyses of autophagy levels
in melanoma tumor samples have shown a high degree of heterogeneity
across patients, with high levels of autophagy correlating with
significantly shorter survival. However, quantitative assays for
autophagy remain elusive at the pre-clinical level, impeding further
understanding as to its role in melanoma progression. Another challenge
to developing effective markers of autophagy is the striking difference
in autophagic response of cells grown in conventional monolayer culture
versus cells growing in the tumor microenvironment. Recent studies have
found that autophagy regulates unconventional protein secretion pathways,
resulting in secretion of a subset of cytosolic proteins. Therefore, the
focus of this work was to investigate molecular changes in the melanoma
cell secretome as a means of identifying key proteins diagnostic of
autophagy levels. To approximate autophagy dynamics in the tumor
microenvironment, human melanoma cells were grown as spheroids in Type I
bovine collagen matrices. To enrich for autophagy-related secretions,
secretomes of low-autophagy WM793 cells and the genetically closely
related high-autophagy 1205Lu cells were directly compared at baseline.
Conditioned media was collected and separated using 1-D gel
electrophoresis, digested with trypsin, and analyzed using liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis on an LTQ-Orbitrap
hybrid instrument. Mass spectra were analyzed using the Rosetta
ELUCIDATOR proteomic pipeline, and significance analysis of microarrays
(SAM) was used to identify differentially secreted proteins. From Gene
Ontology (GO) analysis, candidate biomarkers were enriched for
extracellular matrix components, inflammatory mediators, and metabolic
enzymes implicated in autophagy and melanoma progression. A subset of
these proteins was predicted to be secreted via a non-classical mechanism
using SecretomeP and SignalP secretory protein prediction servers.
Network analysis using the shortest paths algorithm identified densely
connected sub-networks that illustrated interplay between inflammatory
cytokines and metastasis-related proteins, providing insight into
molecular pathways that may regulate constitutively elevated autophagy.
Our findings indicate that differences in basal autophagy in human
melanoma manifest as secretory changes that could be novel serological
biomarkers of autophagy for cancer prognosis and therapy.

