Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulating the APE1/NPM1 interaction in cancer.


DNA repair pathways protect the genome from endogenous and environmental
DNA damage. Such defensive mechanisms, however, enable tumor cells to
survive DNA damage caused by chemo- and radio-therapy. Moreover,
alterations of DNA repair pathways that may occur during tumorigenesis
can make cancer cells reliant on a subset of repair enzymes for survival.
Hence, knowledge of the mechanisms involved in the control of DNA repair
proteins is of great interest for cancer diagnosis and treatment.The
Apurinic/apyrimidinc endonuclease 1 (APE1) is an essential protein in
eukaryotic cells. As the main AP-endonuclease in mammals, this protein is
central to the base excision DNA repair pathway (BER). Beside its role in
the maintenance of genomic stability, APE1 modulates gene expression by
tuning the redox status of several transcription factors. Moreover,
recent reports suggest that APE1 may take part in RNA processing and
degradation, thus controlling the transcriptional output of the cell.
Overexpression and aberrant localization of APE1 are recurrent phenotypes
in tumors. Both situations are prognostic indicators of aggressiveness
and onset of resistance. Interestingly, downregulation or inhibition of
APE1 sensitizes cells to pharmacologically relevant gentoxins.We
identified and characterized the molecular association between APE1 and
Nucleophosmin (NPM1), a multifunctional protein involved in the
preservation of genome stability, rRNA maturation and chromatin
remodeling. The association with NPM1 modulates subcellular localization
and endonuclease activity of APE1. Accordingly, NPM1/ cells show lower
BER capacity, and expression of an APE1 mutant unable to interact with
NPM1 severely impairs cell proliferation. We recently reported a
correlation between APE1 and NPM1 expression levels in ovarian cancer,
along with a poorer prognosis for patients having higher NPM1 levels.
These observations suggest that tumors that display an augmented
APE1/NPM1 association may exhibit increased aggressiveness and
resistance. Targeting the APE1/NPM1 interaction therefore represents a
novel strategy for the development of anticancer drugs, as tumor cells
which rely on higher levels of APE1 and NPM1 for proliferation and
survival may be more sensitive than normal cells.We exploited the
AlphaScreen technology to screen for small molecules that act as
inhibitors of the APE1/NPM1 interaction. Our approach detected a set of
compounds able to interfere with the APE1/NPM1 association in vivo.
Interestingly, some of these molecules display anti-proliferative
activity and sensitize cells to genotoxins. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first attempt to target the APE1 interactome. Given the
prognostic significance of the APE1 and NPM1 overexpression, these
compounds might prove particularly effective in the treatment of tumors
that show abundant levels of both proteins, such as ovarian or hepatic
carcinomas.

