Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin and the thioredoxin system influence the
radiosensitivity of luminal versus basal/triple-negative phenotype breast
cancer.


Patients with basal/triple-negative breast cancer have a worse prognosis
to radiotherapy (RT) than those with luminal tumours. Deregulated redox
proteins, such as the thioredoxin (Trx) system, often provide protection
from increased oxidative stress, such as that induced by ionising
radiation. We sought to determine if altered redox homeostasis, with a
focus on the Trx system, could explain such differences between breast
cancer phenotypes. In vitro clonogenic assays were performed to compare
inherent radiosensitivity of basal (MDA-MB-231) and luminal (MCF-7)
breast cancer cell lines. When irradiated in 2D conditions both lines
exhibited similar response to single and fractionated irradiation. As
tissue architecture can influence phenotypic behaviour, radiosensitivity
was also examined when cells were irradiated in 3D (matrigel). In the 3D
system, the surviving fraction (SF) of MCF-7 was significantly lower than
that of MDA-MB-231 (SF 6Gy: MCF-7 0.009% v MDA-MB-231 0.15%), which is
consistent with the clinical response. Metformin (used for type2 diabetes
and which affects Trx expression/activity) was used to examine whether
modulating Trx family expression alters radiosensitivity and whether any
difference is observed between basal v luminal breast cancer cells.
Western blot analysis showed that Trx and TxNIP (the endogenous inhibitor
of Trx) levels were lower in MCF-7 than MDA-MB-231s and that metformin
decreased Trx expression in MCF-7 with no effect on MDA-MB-231s.
Expression of TxNIP was dramatically attenuated, in both cell lines, by
metformin. In 2D assays of radiosensitivity 10mM metformin did not alter
MDA-MB-231 response but substantially increased MCF-7s (sensitizer
enhancement ratio =1.5). To elucidate potential mechanisms Human
Phospho-Kinase Arrays (R&D systems) were used, metformin, and showed that
MDA-MB-231 had higher endogenous P53 activity than MCF-7, and that AMPK1
activity (a target of metformin), was elevated in MCF-7 but inhibited in
MDA-MB-231 following treatment. The expression of total and phospho-AMPK
(pAMPK) was subsequently assessed, using standard immunohistochemistry,
on a tissue microarray of 166 early stage breast cancers from patients
treated by breast conserving surgery and RT. Althougth pAMPK results did
not reach significance high levels of total AMPK was significantly
associated with ER positive tumours (PPatients with basal/triple-negative
breast cancer have a worse prognosis to radiotherapy (RT) than those with
luminal tumours. Deregulated redox proteins, such as the thioredoxin
(Trx) system, often provide protection from increased oxidative stress,
such as that induced by ionising radiation. We sought to determine if
altered redox homeostasis, with a focus on the Trx system, could explain
such differences between breast cancer phenotypes. In vitro clonogenic
assays were performed to compare inherent radiosensitivity of basal
(MDA-MB-231) and luminal (MCF-7) breast cancer cell lines. When
irradiated in 2D conditions both lines exhibited similar response to
single and fractionated irradiation. As tissue architecture can influence
phenotypic behaviour, radiosensitivity was also examined when cells were
irradiated in 3D (matrigel). In the 3D system, the surviving fraction
(SF) of MCF-7 was significantly lower than that of MDA-MB-231 (SF 6Gy:
MCF-7 0.009% v MDA-MB-231 0.15%), which is consistent with the clinical
response. Metformin (used for type2 diabetes and which affects Trx
expression/activity) was used to examine whether modulating Trx family
expression alters radiosensitivity and whether any difference is observed
between basal v luminal breast cancer cells. Western blot analysis showed
that Trx and TxNIP (the endogenous inhibitor of Trx) levels were lower in
MCF-7 than MDA-MB-231s and that metformin decreased Trx expression in
MCF-7 with no effect on MDA-MB-231s. Expression of TxNIP was dramatically
attenuated, in both cell lines, by metformin. In 2D assays of
radiosensitivity 10mM metformin did not alter MDA-MB-231 response but
substantially increased MCF-7s (sensitizer enhancement ratio =1.5). To
elucidate potential mechanisms Human Phospho-Kinase Arrays (R&D systems)
were used, metformin, and showed that MDA-MB-231 had higher endogenous
P53 activity than MCF-7, and that AMPK1 activity (a target of metformin),
was elevated in MCF-7 but inhibited in MDA-MB-231 following treatment.
The expression of total and phospho-AMPK (pAMPK) was subsequently
assessed, using standard immunohistochemistry, on a tissue microarray of
166 early stage breast cancers from patients treated by breast conserving
surgery and RT. Althougth pAMPK results did not reach significance high
levels of total AMPK was significantly associated with ER positive
tumours (P<0.0000001). Furthermore, high total-AMPK was also associated
with progression-free (P=0.021) and overall survival (P=0.000018).
Results suggest that luminal breast cancer has higher inherent
radiosensitivity than basal/triple-negative phenotype, that metformin
radiosensitizes luminal but has no effect on basal phenotype, which may
relate to the ER state, Trx system and AMPK expression and activities of
P53 and AMPK1.

