Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of twenty three novel prostate cancer
susceptibility loci using a custom assay (the icogs) in an international
consortium: PRACTICAL.


Identification Prostate cancer (PrCa) is the most frequently diagnosed
male cancer in developed countries. To identify common PrCa
susceptibility alleles, we genotyped 211,155 SNPs on a custom chip
(iCOGS) in blood DNA from 25,074 PrCa cases and 24,272 controls from 32
studies in the international PRACTICAL consortium. The chip was composed
of GWAS hits from a meta analysis of 4 GWAS [11,085 cases and 11,463
controls from UK,Australia, Cancer Genetic Markers of Susceptibility
(CGEMS); Cancer of the Prostate in Sweden (CAPS) and the Breast and
Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium (BPC3)], fine mapping of known regions
and genes in candidate pathways. Results from the GWAS component are
reported here. Twenty-three new PrCa susceptibility loci were identified
at genome-wide significance (P 8, PSA >100, disease stage of distant
(i.e. outside the pelvis) or death from PrCa. The majority of SNPs showed
clear association when analysis was restricted to aggressive disease (13
SNPs significant at P 8, PSA >100, disease stage of distant (i.e. outside
the pelvis) or death from PrCa. The majority of SNPs showed clear
association when analysis was restricted to aggressive disease (13 SNPs
significant at P<.01) and for 22 of the 23 SNPs the estimated OR was in
the same direction for aggressive and non-aggressive disease. Two SNPs
were associated with PSA level in controls. Six SNPs showed a trend in OR
with age at diagnosis, with a higher OR at younger ages. GeneGo pathway
enrichment analysis showed the most strongly associated pathways were
cell adhesion (P=1.31 x106), extracellular matrix (ECM) remodelling
(P=3.6x109), and transcriptional regulation by androgen receptor (P=
3.5x108). Comparison of the direction of effects in the GWAS and COGS
replication stages indicate that more than 1800 loci on the array are
associated with this disease. More than 70 PrCa susceptibility loci,
explaining 30% of the familial risk in this disease, have now been
identified. Based on the combined risks conferred by these loci, the top
1% of the risk distribution has a 4.7fold increased risk compared with
the average of the population. These results will facilitate population
risk stratification for clinical studies.

