Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The use of a synthetic peptide-DNA complex as an internal
reference for chromatin immunoprecipitation.


Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) is an analytical method used to
investigate interaction of proteins with specific genomic DNA regions in
vivo to provide a better understanding of mechanisms of gene regulation,
DNA replication and DNA repair. However, variations in the efficiency of
immunoprecipitation, background signals from carryover in
immunoprecipitation, and loss of material during immunoprecipitation and
purification of the ChIP DNA are sources of variability that restrict the
use of ChIP as a quantitative tool. To address these limitations, we have
developed a simple spike-in control that enables labs to generate results
that are more consistent and more quantitative. The approach we have
developed uses a synthetic peptide-DNA reagent that is spiked into
chromatin immunoprecipitation reactions. Because this reagent mimics the
behavior of cross-linked chromatin and can be quantitatively recovered by
immunoprecipitation, it can be readily incorporated in to virtually any
ChIP protocol. To utilize this internal control, a fixed amount of the
synthetic peptide-DNA complex is spiked into the chromatin and co-ChIPed
simultaneously with the antibody of interest. The recovered synthetic DNA
is then used to normalize the results obtained with the antibody of
interest. This spike-in control can be designed using a peptide specific
to the ChIP antibody of interest and recovered using a single antibody.
Alternatively, a universal spike-in control can be designed using a
peptide that is recognized by an epitope tag antibody. This universal
spike-in control and epitope tagged antibody are used along with the
antibody of interest in a standard ChIP reaction. Our data show that the
inclusion of our internal control significantly reduces variability
between ChIP assays, thus increasing the accuracy of the ChIP data.
Because of the universal feature, this method can also be used to compare
ChIP data between different antibodies or to normalize data variations
that often result between users and multiple experiments.

