Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection and comparison of EGFR mutations in matched tumor
tissue, cell block, pleural effusion and serum with PNA clamping and
direct sequencing in NSCLC with malignant pleural effusion.


Background: Peptide nucleic acid (PNA)-mediated real-time PCR clamping
was recently used to detect mutations because it has higher sensitivity
than conventional direct sequencing. Pleural effusion and serum samples
could be good sources of detecting the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) mutational status of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
Methods: We studied 37 NSCLC patients with malignant pleural effusion. In
each patient, EGFR mutational status was measured from the samples of
tumor tissue, cell block, pleural effusion and serum using both PNA
clamping and direct sequencing. The concordance between PNA clamping and
direct sequencing, and the diagnostic performance of pleural effusion was
investigated. Results: The detection rate of EGFR mutation in the pleural
effusion and the serum was 27% and 2.8%, respectively by both PNA
clamping and direct sequencing. The coefficient between the two methods
were 0.68 (p-value = 0.0007), 0.91 (p-value Background: Peptide nucleic
acid (PNA)-mediated real-time PCR clamping was recently used to detect
mutations because it has higher sensitivity than conventional direct
sequencing. Pleural effusion and serum samples could be good sources of
detecting the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutational status
of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Methods: We studied 37
NSCLC patients with malignant pleural effusion. In each patient, EGFR
mutational status was measured from the samples of tumor tissue, cell
block, pleural effusion and serum using both PNA clamping and direct
sequencing. The concordance between PNA clamping and direct sequencing,
and the diagnostic performance of pleural effusion was investigated.
Results: The detection rate of EGFR mutation in the pleural effusion and
the serum was 27% and 2.8%, respectively by both PNA clamping and direct
sequencing. The coefficient between the two methods were 0.68 (p-value =
0.0007), 0.91 (p-value < 0.0001), 0.75 (p-value Background: Peptide
nucleic acid (PNA)-mediated real-time PCR clamping was recently used to
detect mutations because it has higher sensitivity than conventional
direct sequencing. Pleural effusion and serum samples could be good
sources of detecting the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutational status of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
Methods: We studied 37 NSCLC patients with malignant pleural effusion. In
each patient, EGFR mutational status was measured from the samples of
tumor tissue, cell block, pleural effusion and serum using both PNA
clamping and direct sequencing. The concordance between PNA clamping and
direct sequencing, and the diagnostic performance of pleural effusion was
investigated. Results: The detection rate of EGFR mutation in the pleural
effusion and the serum was 27% and 2.8%, respectively by both PNA
clamping and direct sequencing. The coefficient between the two methods
were 0.68 (p-value = 0.0007), 0.91 (p-value < 0.0001), 0.75 (p-value <
0.0001) and -0.01 (p-value = 0.8639) in tissue, cell block, pleural
effusion and serum, respectively. The diagnostic performance of pleural
effusion compared with combined tumor tissue plus cell block showed
sensitivity 89%, specificity 100%, positive predictive value 100% and
negative predictive value 95% with PNA clamping, and sensitivity 67%,
specificity 90%, positive predictive value 75% and negative predictive
value 86% with directing sequencing. Interestingly, a patient who was
confirmed EGFR mutation only with the PNA clamping showed significant
response to EGFR TKI (tyrosine kinase inhibitor). Conclusion: Despite the
limited role of serum samples, pleural effusion had a diagnostic
performance comparable with tumor tissue and cell block to detect EGFR
mutational status in NSCLC. Although the diagnostic performance of PNA
clamping was similar to that of direct sequencing, additional benefit is
expected considering the response to the EGFR TKI.

