Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implication of the 3UTR region of TGFR1 with MSS HNPCC and
sporadic colorectal cancer.


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is among all common malignancies one
with the highest percentage of familial clustering. Thus almost 20% of
cases develop in families with at least another affected member.
Individuals in these families have a higher risk of developing CRC. Known
mutations responsible for several CRC syndromes only explain a small
proportion of familial cases but the underlying basis of most still
remains unknown. Over half of CRCs that are highly suspicious for an
autosomal dominant hereditary pattern of malignancy, as expressed by the
Amsterdam criteria, are not explained by known genetic mutations. These
cases are known as microsatellite stable hereditary non-polyposis CRC
(MSS-HNPCC) or colorectal cancer type X. Aims: To identify new genetic
variants that can potentially modulate CRC risk and contribute to
hereditability. Methods: We sequenced the coding sequence of MGMT, AXIN2,
CTNNB1, TGFRI and TGFRII genes and we genotyped 10 common low risk
variants, in 30 MSS-HNPCC patients. Potentially relevant variants were
genotyped in 308 sporadic cases and 425 cancer-free controls. Logistic
regression was used to estimate cancer risk (OR (95%CI)) associated with
the genetic variants identified using SPSS (IBM v20.0). Results: A
haplotype containing 3 variants (rs67687202, rs868 and rs334354) in high
linkage disequilibrium (LD) was found to be associated in a very strong
manner with MSS-HNPCC patients and to a lesser degree with sporadic CRC.
Thus both MSS-HNPCC and sporadic CRC showed a significantly lower minor
allele frequency (MAF) than controls (MAF 0.07, MAF 0.23 vs MAF 0.29) for
rs67687202. The AA genotype of rs868 associates with a strong risk for
CRC in MSS-HNPCC patients (OR=7.9 (2.7-23.1) PBackground: Colorectal
cancer (CRC) is among all common malignancies one with the highest
percentage of familial clustering. Thus almost 20% of cases develop in
families with at least another affected member. Individuals in these
families have a higher risk of developing CRC. Known mutations
responsible for several CRC syndromes only explain a small proportion of
familial cases but the underlying basis of most still remains unknown.
Over half of CRCs that are highly suspicious for an autosomal dominant
hereditary pattern of malignancy, as expressed by the Amsterdam criteria,
are not explained by known genetic mutations. These cases are known as
microsatellite stable hereditary non-polyposis CRC (MSS-HNPCC) or
colorectal cancer type X. Aims: To identify new genetic variants that can
potentially modulate CRC risk and contribute to hereditability. Methods:
We sequenced the coding sequence of MGMT, AXIN2, CTNNB1, TGFRI and TGFRII
genes and we genotyped 10 common low risk variants, in 30 MSS-HNPCC
patients. Potentially relevant variants were genotyped in 308 sporadic
cases and 425 cancer-free controls. Logistic regression was used to
estimate cancer risk (OR (95%CI)) associated with the genetic variants
identified using SPSS (IBM v20.0). Results: A haplotype containing 3
variants (rs67687202, rs868 and rs334354) in high linkage disequilibrium
(LD) was found to be associated in a very strong manner with MSS-HNPCC
patients and to a lesser degree with sporadic CRC. Thus both MSS-HNPCC
and sporadic CRC showed a significantly lower minor allele frequency
(MAF) than controls (MAF 0.07, MAF 0.23 vs MAF 0.29) for rs67687202. The
AA genotype of rs868 associates with a strong risk for CRC in MSS-HNPCC
patients (OR=7.9 (2.7-23.1) P<0.001) and also in sporadic CRC patients
but much more modestly (OR=1.6 (1.2-2.2) P=0.001). According to
prediction models, the AA genotype for rs868 results in a tighter
complementary binding for the family of let-7 miRNAs, which inhibits
TGFR1 translation. On the other hand, the GG genotype increases the
hybridization energy of binding for miR-98 and let-7c and completely
eliminates the binding for let-7d. We did not identify any association of
10 low risk variants or an accumulation of these risk alleles in
MSS-HNPCC patients, which suggests that clustering of common risk alleles
is not contributing to cancer development in these families. Conclusions:
We describe for the first time a haplotype presumably involved in
controlling TGFR1 expression that has an extremely high association with
MSS-HNPCC suggesting a deep contribution of this genetic component to
familial CRC. The effect could be due to the more efficient binding of
miRNA let-7, which inhibits the TGFR1 transcript. This further supports
other findings that suggest the important role of TGFR1 as a
susceptibility factor in CRC. An accumulation of low susceptibility
variants is an unlikely explanation for the high cancer risk in MSS-HNPCC.

