Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic evaluation of novel dual
channel spray dried enteric coated self-emulsifying capsules for
anti-cancer agents in dogs.


Purpose: Oral administration of anti-cancer agents presents a series of
advantages for patients. However, most of the anticancer agents are
hydrophobic (poor water solubility) thus associated with low
bioavailability. Self-emulsifying drug delivery systems (SEDDS), known to
improve the oral absorption of highly lipophilic compounds, are normally
prepared in a liquid form. However, solid-SEDDS has several advantages
over conventional SEDDS. Thus we have incorporated spray drying for this
purpose using customized spray gun system, which allows
simultaneously/pulsatile flow of two different liquid systems through
single nozzle. This modification allowed us to formulate Enteric coated
SEDDS by using SEDDS as one liquid system and Enteric coating solution as
second liquid system. Objective of this study was to design and evaluate
this formulation in-vivo using DIM-C-pPhC6H5 (DIM-P), a novel anti-cancer
agent, in dogs.Methods: SEDDS formulations were prepared as capsules and
optimized based on pseudo-ternary phase diagram analysis as well as
characteristics such as turbidity or phase separation prior to
self-emulsification, emulsion droplet size and self-emulsification
efficiency before/after spray drying. Evaluation for enteric coating was
done by drug release of spray dried E-SEDDS. Pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic properties in dogs were determined following intravenous
and oral administration of formulations. Pharmacokinetic parameters were
determined using non-compartmental and compartmental techniques with
WinNonlin 5.0 software. Efficiency of anti-tumor activity was carried out
using metastatic H1650 tumor model in nude mice using M size
capsules.Results: Three formulations of SEDDS were selected based on
pseudo-ternary phase diagram and physicochemical properties of SEDDS.
Droplet size of emulsion was in range of 5-10 m. In-vitro drug release
study showed 5 suggesting coating of SEDDS particles. Pharmacokinetic
evaluation in dogs showed improved absorption of SEDDS formulations
compare to solution; increased Cmax (39.18 7.34 vs 21.68 6.3 g dL-1),
higher AUC0-t (34481.34 1125.46 vs 14159.53 702.20 g min dL-1). The
relative oral bioavailability of SEDDS calculated on the basis of AUC0-t
was about 43% as compared to solution. Also, plasma concentration vs time
profile following intravenous administration and tissue distribution
analysis confirmed three compartment distribution of DIM-P. SEDDS
formulation showed 20-25% tumor volume and weight reduction in-vivo H1650
tumor models.Conclusion: The results emanating from these studies
demonstrate a potential use of dual channel spray dried enteric coated
self-emulsifying capsules for enhanced oral absorption and thus increased
anti-cancer activity for treatment of Lung cancer.

