Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel phage display-derived neuroblastoma-targeting peptides
potentiate the effect of drug nanocarriers in preclinical settings.


Purpose: Molecular targeting of drug delivery nanocarriers is expected to
improve their therapeutic index while decreasing their toxicity. The
identification of novel peptide ligands specific for cells present in
high-risk neuroblastoma, a childhood tumor mostly refractory to current
therapies, is needed.Experimental design: We performed combined in
vitro/ex-vivo phage display screenings on human neuroblastoma cell lines
and on tumors derived from orthotopic mouse models of human
neuroblastoma. Binding validation and homing in vivo of selected phage
clones were tested by immunohistochemistry/immunofluorescent analyses.
Cell association experiments in vitro with the corresponding synthetic
biotin-labeled peptides were performed. In vitro cytotoxicity and in vivo
tumor accumulation and therapeutic experiments were performed using
peptide-targeted, doxorubicin-loaded, nanocarriers.Results: By designing
proper subtractive protocols, we identified phage clones specific either
for the primary tumor, its metastases, or for the stromal components.
Globally, we isolated 121 phage-displayed neuroblastoma-binding peptides;
of these, 26 bound the primary tumor, 15 the metastatic mass, 57 and 23
their respective microenvironments. Of these, five phage clones were
further validated for their specific binding ex-vivo to biopsies from
stage IV neuroblastoma patients and to neuroblastoma tumors derived from
mice. All five clones also targeted tumor cells and vasculature in vivo
when injected into neuroblastoma-bearing mice. Coupling of the
corresponding targeting peptides with doxorubicin-loaded nanocarriers led
to a significant inhibition in tumor volume and enhanced survival in
preclinical neuroblastoma models.Conclusions: Our findings demonstrate
that novel ligands of neuroblastoma-associated markers are functional in
the design of nanocarriers with therapeutic efficacy paving the way to
their clinical development.

