Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated micro nanotechnology for the sensitive isolation of
circulating tumor cells.


Introduction and Objective: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have been
identified in the art in peripheral blood from cancer patients and are
likely the origin of metastatic disease. Isolation and capture of CTCs
represent a potential alternative to invasive biopsies during diagnosis
of disease. In the recent past, vVarious microfluidic- based CTC
isolation technologieschips have been developed to capture, indentify,
sort, and enumerate CTCs. but, they need to be more sensitive, reliable,
and specific for CTC detection in early stage cancer patients. Here we
present a microfluidic CTC-chip with functionalized nanomaterials to
capture and culture CTCs.Methods: Micro-sized structuresposts
functionalized with anti-epithelial-adhesion-molecule antibodies
(Anti-EpCAM) are is the common approachstructures to capture CTCs. Here
we present a microfluidic device with functionalized planar structure to
capture CTCs. The CTC-chipmicrofluidic device has a PDMS chamber and
patterned gold postatterns . functionalized with graphene oxides as
nanomaterial and anti-epithelial-cell-adhesion-molecule antibodies
(Anti-EpCAM). To investigate the capture efficiency before running cancer
patients samples, a low number of cells were spiked into 1 mL of whole
blood. We stained the captured cells with cytokeratin, CD45, and DAPI to
identify CTCs. For clinical studies, we searched for CTCs in 10
pancreatic cancer patients, 6 breast cancer patients, 4 early lung cancer
patients, and 5 healthy donors.Results: It is much easier to scan, count
and grow captured cells in comparison with previous micro-sized
post-based structure. CTCs were isolated by assembling Graphene oxide on
the planar structures for enhanced sensitivity. is easy to functionalize
the surface and sensitive to detect biomaterial. The functionalized
graphene oxide has been used to selectively capture MCF-7 breast cancer
cells with a capture rate higher than 8790 %. This new CTC-chip
identified CTCs in the peripheral blood of patients with pancreatic,
breast, and lung cancer in 20 of 20 samples (100%).Conclusion: We present
a sensitive CTC-chip using graphene oxides as nanomaterial to isolate,
capture, identify, and characterize extremely rare CTCs. This CTC-chipIt
is much easier to scan, count, and grow captured cells in comparison with
previous micro-sized post-based structure. We believe this CTC-chip
offers great potential for clinical research on cancer.

