Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of ABCG2 lysosomal degradation by xanthines: Role of
the PI3K/AKT pathway.


ABCG2 confers multidrug resistance to a wide range of structurally
unrelated chemotherapeutic drugs, often resulting in the failure of
cancer chemotherapy. Accordingly, the downregulation of ABCG2 expression
and/or function has been proposed as part of a regimen to improve cancer
therapeutic efficacy. Previously, we have reported that a group of
xanthines including caffeine, theophylline and dyphylline can
dramatically decrease ABCG2 protein in drug resistant cells, causing a
significant increase in the intracellular retention of ABCG2 substrates
and sensitization of the cells to chemotherapeutic agents (Ding et al.,
Mol Pharmacol 81:328-337, 2012). This downregulation of ABCG2 is due to a
selective acceleration of its lysosomal degradation by xanthines. We now
show that xanthines induce the endocytosis and subsequent degradation of
ABCG2. In addition, PI3K/AKT/mTORC1 signaling was found to be involved in
mediating the effect of xanthines on ABCG2, since both caffeine and
theophylline strongly inhibited activation of AKT and mTORC1, and
inhibition of both AKT and mTORC1 mimicked the effect of xanthines on
ABCG2. Furthermore, adenosine, a nucleoside vital for purine metabolism
and energy homeostasis, fully reversed the downregulation effect of
caffeine on ABCG2. Interestingly, this adenosine-mediated effect occurs
intracellularly and independent of adenosine receptor signalling,
identifying a novel mechanism whereby the xanthine-degradation of ABCG2
is influenced by intracellular levels of adenosine. Importantly,
adenosine also blocked the lysosomal degradation of ABCG2 that was
induced by PI3K/AKT inhibition, indicating that the adenosine-mediated
intracellular events cross-talk with the PI3K/AKT pathway in regulating
ABCG2 degradation. This study enhances our understanding of the
regulation of ABCG2 internalization and degradation, and identifies new
targets for the development of ABCG2 expression/function modulating
agents for chemosensitization.

