Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gamma-tocotrienol not alpha-tocopherol is cytotoxic to prostate
cancer cells through modulation of phospho-c-Jun and phospho-Erk.


Chemical differences in gamma-tocotrienol including the presence of an
isoprenoid side chain are responsible for differences in cytotoxic
potency of gamma-tocotrienol compared to alpha-tocopherol.
Alpha-tocopherol has been shown to be ineffective in prostate cancer
chemoprevention in the SELECT trial; in fact, there was an increased
incidence of prostate cancer in the alpha-tocopherol arm indicative of
deleterious effects. Therefore, we explored the cytotoxic effects of
alpha-tocopherol (AT), gamma-tocopherol (GT) and gamma-tocotrienol (GT3)
in prostate cancer cell lines, PC-3 (androgen independent) and LNCaP
(androgen dependent). Prostate cancer cell lines were grown in culture
and treated with various concentrations and duration with the vitamin E
isoforms. Cytotoxicity was determined by MTT and cell viability assays.
We also explored possible molecular mechanisms to further understand
differences in effects between the tocopherols and tocotrienols.GT3
showed cytotoxic effects in a dose and time-dependent manner, in both
cell lines. PC-3 cells were noted to be more sensitive to growth
suppression effects of GT3 than LNCaP cells. GT did not show significant
cytotoxicity on cell growth at any given dose or time end point, whereas
AT may promote prostate cancer cell growth. We also found that the
combination of AT (40um) with increasing dose concentration of GT3 showed
less pronounced cytotoxicity at 24 hours, when compared with various
concentrations of GT3 alone, again suggesting a possible antagonistic
role of AT.Exposure of PC-3 and LNCaP cells to increasing dose of GT3 was
also examined for p-AKT, p-Erk, p-ERBB2 and phospho-c-Jun activity via
Western blot at various time points. Our results show a dose dependent up
regulation of pc-Jun and p-Erk in GT3 treated cells. No effects were
noted on p-Akt or p-ERBB2 at the time points and concentrations studied.
Some earlier studies found JNK and MAPK/Erk activation as playing a
central role in the tocopherol induced apoptosis. C-Jun is downstream
effector in JNK signaling pathway, activates transcription factors, which
in turn modulate gene expression, to generate appropriate biological
responses leading to apoptosis. In contrast to Erk recognized role in
cancer cells proliferation we found Erk 1/2 up-regulation in GT3 induced
apoptosis. This finding has also been reported earlier in some studies on
prostate and other cancer cell lines. Our work shows that GT3 has
cytotoxic effects on prostate cancer cells and induces cellular apoptosis
through the modulation of phospho-c-Jun and MAPK pathways, while AT has
either none or promotes prostate cancer cell growth in culture. Further
studies are under way to dissect the molecular mechanisms of c-Jun and
Erk activation by gamma-tocotrienol in prostate cancer cells.

