Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Twist box is required for Twist1-induced prostate cancer
metastasis.


The Twist1 gene has diverse roles during development and pathologic
states such as cancer. Twist1 is best known for its roles in cancer by
inducing an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) transcriptional
program implicated in facilitating tumorigenesis, tumor progression and
treatment resistance. Twist1 is a bHLH transcription factor that has both
repressor and transactivation functions, but the importance of these
different activities for Twist1 cancer phenotypes are unknown. We
hypothesized Twist1 may mediate these various functions using distinct
structural domains and/or motifs. We disrupted the putative
transactivation domain in the Twist box of Twist1 by mutating a critical
phenylalanine residue (F191) to glycine. We then created stable isogenic
prostate cancer cell lines overexpressing wildtype and F191G versions of
Twist1. We assessed the role of the Twist box using in vitro and in vivo
assays, which mimic the various stages of cancer progression to
metastasis. These include loss of homotypic cell-cell contacts, cell
migration and invasion, anoikis resistance and soft agar colony
formation. We also observed biophysical cell traction forces on a
fabricated substratum and finally performed experimental lung metastasis
assays. The overexpression of Twist1 in prostate cancer cells lead to an
EMT biomarker phenotype and the F191G mutant lacked expression of some of
these markers. The F191G mutant was deficient for transcriptional
activity using promoter reporter based assays. Using single cell
measurements we found that Twist1 expressing Myc-CaP cells exert more
force on the substratum than vector control cells. Additional in vitro
assays suggest Twist1 can confer cellular properties associated with
increased tumor aggressiveness including increased migration/invasion,
cell death/anoikis resistance and in vitro tumorigenic potential by soft
agar colony formation. The Twist box mutant, F191G, displayed compromised
activity compared to wildtype Twist1 in many of the in vitro assays
described above revealing that the Twist box is necessary for many of the
pro-metastatic functions of Twist1. We compared the gene expression
profile of Twist1 and F191G overexpressing prostate cancer cells by
microarray and observed that the F191G mutant had an expression profile
that was similar to wildtype Twist1 but attenuated. Lastly, Twist1
overexpression compared to vector control prostate cancer cells showed an
increased frequency of metastatic lung tumors using the experimental lung
metastasis assay. Interestingly, Twist1 overexpression also resulted in
the appearance of extra-thoracic metastases. The F191G mutant was less
able to confer prostate cancer cells the ability to colonize metastatic
lesions in the lung and resulted in no extra-thoracic metastases. Our
results show that F191G mutation behaves as loss of function and is
necessary for Twist1-induced metastasis of prostate cancer cells.

