Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibronectin domains engineered for specificity to individual
murine Fc gamma receptors modulate tumoricidal activity of immune cells.


Activating and inhibitory Fc gamma receptors (FcRs) can play a large role
in the efficacy of certain antibody therapeutics. The Fc regions of the
antibody bind to the FcRs expressed on immune cells and modulate
responses against antibody-coated tumor cells. Previous studies with FcR
knock-out mice have shown that antibody-mediated tumor clearance is
improved when activating FcRs are bound preferentially over inhibitory
FcRs. The ectodomains of FcRs are highly homologous, making it
challenging to engineer Fc regions to specifically bind individual FcRs
with high affinity and lack binding to the other FcRs. To address this
challenge, we engineered the human tenth type III fibronectin (Fn3)
domain scaffold to bind individual murine FcRs at epitopes that are
distinct from the Fc binding region for testing in a mouse model. The
most established pre-clinical models of cancer are mouse models;
therefore studying the effect of modulating individual murine FcRs should
provide insight into engaging specific FcRs as an anti-cancer therapeutic
for humans.Using directed evolution with yeast surface display, we
isolated Fn3 clones specific for murine FcRI, FcRII, FcRIII, and FcRIV
through a combination of depletion, enrichment, and mutagenesis steps.
Cell titrations measured with flow cytometry confirmed the binding
specificity of the Fn3s. Binding epitopes were determined by fluorescence
activated cell sorting of a single-point mutant yeast library of FcR and
competition studies. To confirm the biological activity of the Fn3
clones, a tumor-targeting single-chain variable fragment (scFv) was fused
to each Fn3 clone. Each scFv-Fn3 construct was antigen specific and bound
specifically to the FcR that it was designed to target. The murine colon
carcinoma cell line MC38 stably transfected with carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA) was used for our studies. Tumor cells were pre-incubated with
scFv-Fn3 constructs targeting CEA and then combined with thioglycollate-
induced peritoneal macrophages pre-treated with interferon gamma. The
phagocytic activity of the macrophages was measured using flow cytometry.
Pre-incubation with scFv-Fn3 constructs specific for FcRI or FcRIV
significantly increased phagocytosis compared with pre-incubations with
the control scFv-Fn3 construct. Pre-incubation with a combination of both
the FcRI- and FcRIV-specific constructs resulted in a phagocytosis level
close to that of murine IgG2a, which can interact with all of the FcRs.
These Fn3 tools will allow us to conduct future studies on the immune
response that is generated by triggering individual FcRs in other in
vitro assays and in vivo models of cancer.This work was supported by a
Sanofi Aventis Biomedical Innovation Award and the NIH/NIGMS
Biotechnology Training Program.

