Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression of EdU proliferating cells made possible with
improved click chemistry.


Gene expression profiling of cancer cells has become increasingly common
over the past five years. Especially important is identifying changes in
gene expression caused by drug treatment leading to side populations with
altered pathways. These populations can escape drug treatment and lead to
recurrence. Characterizing gene expression of proliferating cells
requires a method of identifying proliferation while simultaneously
maintaining high quality RNA. Typically, cells are screened in a drug
panel in the presence of tritiated thymidine or BrdU to identify the drug
resistance in the proliferating population. Proliferation detection with
these methods is neither rapid nor does it yield high quality RNA for
profiling. A new proliferation method based on click chemistry using an
alkyne modified thymidine analog (EdU), which can be used to rapidly
identify replicating cells appears ideally suited for this application;
however, copper used for the catalysis of the click reaction causes
undesired degradation of RNA. Recent improvements to the copper based
click reaction are presented here whereby the copper is tightly
controlled, resulting in higher quality RNA useful for sequencing.In this
study we demonstrate gene expression changes in the proliferating
population of a drug resistant cancer cell line compared to the parental
cell lines. Proliferating cells were identified using an improved click
reaction comprising of a copper(I) ligand combined with a picolyl
modified dye azide detection reagent. Total RNA from these cells was
isolated and gene expression was assessed by targeted RNA sequencing
using an RNA Apoptosis panel and an RNA Cancer panel using proton based
sequencing technology.Use of an improved copper safe click reaction for
detection of nascent DNA, allows for detection of incorporated click
analog for measuring proliferation and subsequent isolation of high
quality RNA for use in sequence analysis.

