Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Addressing diverse perceptions of cancer in Asia: Lifestyle and
awareness study in China as preliminary step towards the creatin of an
Asian cancer barometer.


Although Asia is a region where incidence of cancer is rapidly
increasing, it is a region with unique difficulties for providing uniform
measures for cancer control and treatment, due to significant disparities
in medical and healthcare standards and regional cultural diversity.
Given the long-term nature of the disease and treatment regimens, cancer
is affected not merely by medical factors, but also by a diversity of
social factors, including politics, economics and culture. It is for this
reason that actual perceptions of cancer as a threat and as a disease may
be assumed to differ from region to region. Although a number of
epidemiological studies have been implemented in Asia, there has not been
any region-based comparative study implemented that takes into account
varying lifestyle factors and seeks to obtain information about people's
perceptions of cancer and its psychological impact. Facing changes in the
global burden of disease and seeking to advance measures for cancer on
the global health agenda, the Asia Cancer Forum has launched a
university-based, multidisciplinary program referred to as Cross-boundary
Cancer Studies, and preparations for an international collaborative
projects between Japan, China and Korea are being made. From the platform
of this program, by implementing a lifestyle and awareness survey on
attitudes to cancer in Asia, the Asian Cancer Forum aims to: 1) identify
differences and commonalities in the perception of cancer, 2) assess
individual and shared needs, and 3) use the results as a barometer for
cultural attitudes and social systems relating to cancer. The ultimate
aim is to reflect regional lifestyles, customs and other environmental
factors in cancer prevention and treatment as a means of contributing to
cancer control in Asia. As a preliminary study for creating an Asian
Cancer Barometer, a survey on attitudes to cancer was implemented in
China in 2011. The correlation analysis of the results of the survey
shows significant differences between men and women and different age
groups concerning cancer prevention needs and trust in social systems.
Applying the latest behavior science techniques to the results of the
preliminary study, the Asia Cancer Forum will consider issues for further
study and surveys, as well as methods of selecting study subjects, with a
view to creating an Asian Cancer Barometer that can be comprehensively
utilized in the diverse Asian region.

