Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The European Paediatric Oncology off-patent medicines Consortium
(EPOC) pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic study of doxorubicin.


Background: Doxorubicin is a key component of a number of treatment
regimens used in paediatric oncology despite the very limited
pharmacology data on which current dosing regimens are based. In
recognition of this, doxorubicin was included on the EMA priority list
for paediatric off-patent medicines for which more information was
required, particularly on pharmacokinetics.Methods: The EPOC consortium,
with collaborators in the UK, France, Germany and Italy, performs
paediatric oncology pharmacology clinical trials. This study is a
multicentre, multinational phase II pharmacokinetic study investigating
age-dependency in the clearance of doxorubicin in children with solid
tumours and leukaemia. All patients are being treated according to a
tumour-specific national or European therapeutic trial. The aim was to
recruit 100 patients, with a particular focus on children less than 3
years. The plasma levels of markers such as troponin T, are being
measured to evaluate their use as clinical markers for cardiotoxicity.
Data is being analysed using a population pharmacokinetic approach and
the impact of pharmacogenetics is being investigated.Results: The study
has been open to recruitment in 20 clinical centres across the four
participating countries. The target 100 patients have been recruited from
all the contributing study protocols, with 26 patients less than 3 years.
Of these 26 patients, 5 patients are less than 1 year. An interim
pharmacokinetic analysis has been performed on the data from the first 31
patients. The results of the analysis are consistent with the primary
aims of the overall study.Conclusion: The data generated during this
study should provide comparative data on the age-dependent
pharmacokinetics and pharmacogenetics of doxorubicin. The results will
contribute to optimising the safe use of doxorubicin in children with
cancer.Acknowledgements: Study funded under the seventh framework
programme of the European Commission (FP7)

