Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the antitumor effects of inhibiting translation
initiation in glioblastoma multiforme.


Oncogene addiction is the process by which a tumor cell becomes
increasingly dependent on the expression of a particular gene for the
maintenance of its tumorigenicity. Alleviating this dependence via
genetic or pharmacological means may profoundly inhibit tumor growth.
However many cancers are not dependent on a single gene for survival.
Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) presents itself with many genetic
aberrations contributing to its aggressive phenotype. These include loss
of PTEN, amplification of CDK4 and EGFR among others, making targeting a
single genetic node ineffective where other oncogenic networks may buffer
any therapeutic benefit. Over the last 10 years it has been shown that
targeting protein translation initiation results in the simultaneous
targeting of many oncogenic pathways. Translation initiation is highly
implicated in tumorigenesis with over 10 initiation factors acting as
either proto-oncogenes or tumor suppressors, the most well described
being the eIF4E. The overexpression of eIF4E in many cancers results in
messenger RNA discrimination giving rise to an increased translation of a
subset of oncogenic mRNAs with highly structured 5UTRs. However the
precise role translation initiation plays in maintaining tumorigenicity
in GBM and the subsequent anti-neoplastic properties of its inhibition
are not known. Here, we characterize the anti-tumor effects of targeting
protein translation in three glioblastoma cell lines U87MG, U251N and the
highly aggressive U87EGFR, using a small molecule inhibitor of eIF4E,
4EGI-1. We show that 4EGI-1 severely impairs cell survival over a 72 hour
time interval, in a dose-dependent manner. This is marked by an arrest of
cell proliferation starting at 24 hours, induction of apoptosis at 48
hours with increased annexin V staining and a decrease in cell motility.
We found these effects coincide with a decrease in protein expression of
several oncogenes with highly structured 5UTRs after treatment with
4EGI-1 including cell proliferation proteins c-Myc and Cyclin D1 which
are completely lost by 48 hours and regulators of apoptosis such as
Bcl-xL, Mcl-1 and Survivin which decrease and are lost by 72 hours, while
not affecting overall transcription of these genes. Our results
demonstrate the sensitivity of gliomas towards inhibition of translation
initiation. This further highlights translation regulation control as a
strong force in cancer therapy, particularly in glioblastoma where
options are limiting.

