Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unexpected lack of activity of Bardoxolone (5MeCDDO) in
progression period of rodent models of breast, intestinal and head and
neck cancers. What does it mean for the ARE as a primary prevention
target.


The preventive efficacy of the triterpenoid 5MeCDDO was evaluated in
multiple preclinical models of cancer. This included three models of
breast cancer, the Min mouse model of intestinal cancer, and the
4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide (4NQO) induced model of head and neck cancer. In
the ER+ model of breast cancer, Sprague Dawley rats were administered
MNU, i.v., at 50 days of age and 5MeCDDO (27 ppm) was administered in the
diet beginning 5 days post MNU for the duration of the study. 5MeCDDO
failed to alter tumor latency or multiplicity and, in fact, increased the
size of the tumors which did occur. This concentration of 5MeCDDO
increased liver to body weight ratios. 5MeCDDO was also examined in a
transgenic model (MMTV Neu /P53KO) in which mice develop ER negative
cancers; which over-express Neu and have a P53 alteration. Similarly to
results in the MNU model, the compound failed to alter either tumor
latency or multiplicity. The effect of 5MeCDDO was then examined in an
additional mammary model in which ER+ tumors are induced by the
procarcinogen dimethylbenzanthracene (DMBA). In this model, which
examines the ability of an agent to alter the activation of DMBA, the
preventive agent was administered beginning 7 days prior to DMBA and
continued 7 days post DMBA. 5,6 Benzoflavone (500 ppm), a positive
control, decreased tumor multiplicity >90%, while 5MeCDDO (27 or 2.7 ppm)
decreased multiplicity 65 and 35%, respectively. The efficacy observed in
this cancer initiation model fits with our finding that 5MeCDDO induces a
variety of ARE related Phase II drug-metabolizing genes; e.g., GST Pi,
AKR 7A3 (aflatoxicol) epoxide hydrolase, and quinone reductase as
determined by proteomic analysis. As expected, high induction of the ARE
response element and associated genes yielded decreases in
carcinogen-induced tumor initiation. Additionally, we examined the
effects of 5MeCDDO on the development of intestinal adenomas in Min mice
and head and neck tumors. In the 4NQO treated rats, 5MeCDDO failed to
decrease the progression stages of development. In the Min model, a high
dose of 5MeCDDO (80 ppm) was weakly effective, reducing adenoma
multiplicity roughly 30% (PThe preventive efficacy of the triterpenoid
5MeCDDO was evaluated in multiple preclinical models of cancer. This
included three models of breast cancer, the Min mouse model of intestinal
cancer, and the 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide (4NQO) induced model of head and
neck cancer. In the ER+ model of breast cancer, Sprague Dawley rats were
administered MNU, i.v., at 50 days of age and 5MeCDDO (27 ppm) was
administered in the diet beginning 5 days post MNU for the duration of
the study. 5MeCDDO failed to alter tumor latency or multiplicity and, in
fact, increased the size of the tumors which did occur. This
concentration of 5MeCDDO increased liver to body weight ratios. 5MeCDDO
was also examined in a transgenic model (MMTV Neu /P53KO) in which mice
develop ER negative cancers; which over-express Neu and have a P53
alteration. Similarly to results in the MNU model, the compound failed to
alter either tumor latency or multiplicity. The effect of 5MeCDDO was
then examined in an additional mammary model in which ER+ tumors are
induced by the procarcinogen dimethylbenzanthracene (DMBA). In this
model, which examines the ability of an agent to alter the activation of
DMBA, the preventive agent was administered beginning 7 days prior to
DMBA and continued 7 days post DMBA. 5,6 Benzoflavone (500 ppm), a
positive control, decreased tumor multiplicity >90%, while 5MeCDDO (27 or
2.7 ppm) decreased multiplicity 65 and 35%, respectively. The efficacy
observed in this cancer initiation model fits with our finding that
5MeCDDO induces a variety of ARE related Phase II drug-metabolizing
genes; e.g., GST Pi, AKR 7A3 (aflatoxicol) epoxide hydrolase, and quinone
reductase as determined by proteomic analysis. As expected, high
induction of the ARE response element and associated genes yielded
decreases in carcinogen-induced tumor initiation. Additionally, we
examined the effects of 5MeCDDO on the development of intestinal adenomas
in Min mice and head and neck tumors. In the 4NQO treated rats, 5MeCDDO
failed to decrease the progression stages of development. In the Min
model, a high dose of 5MeCDDO (80 ppm) was weakly effective, reducing
adenoma multiplicity roughly 30% (P<0.01); however, a lower dose was
totally ineffective. These findings brings into question whether merely
measuring induction of the genes associated with the ARE response (e.g.,
quinone reductase, GST Pi or AKR 7A3) is sufficient to imply the general
preventive efficacy of a given agent or mixture. That is, 5MeCDDO highly
activated the ARE response, but was inactive in various prevention models.

