Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of whole-body heat treatment on antigen specific T cells
responses.


Studies in mice showed that heat treatment in fever-range (approx.
38.5-40.5 deg C) stimulates a variety of T cells functions in vitro, ex
vivo and in vivo. We previously introduced the heckel HT3000; an infrared
A-irradiation device specifically designed for whole-body hyperthermia,
and we are now studying how to combine it with cancer immuno-cell therapy
such as adoptive transfer of activated T cells and autologous
monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DCs)-based vaccination. In this study,
using healthy volunteers, we examined the effects of fever-range whole
body heat treatment on the function of peripheral T cells, and in
particular their cytokines productions in response to various
stimuli.Volunteers were exposed to infrared A until the rectal
temperature reached at 38.5 deg C. They were then wrapped in synthetic
leather tent for 60 min in order to maintain the core body temperature in
fever-range. Peripheral blood was obtained four times; prior to the
treatment, immediately after the treatment, 24 h after the treatment, and
48 h after the treatment. PBMC were then prepared and co-cultured with
antigen-loading autologous DCs for 24 h in order to induce antigen
specific cytokine productions in T cells.We first examined IFN production
in T cells in response to MHC class I restricted epitope peptides of CMV,
EBV and Flu. When PBMCs were co-cultured with these peptides-labeled DCs,
a marked increase in IFN production was observed in PBMCs prepared
immediately after and 24 h after the heat treatment. Production of IFN in
PBMCs prepared 48 h after the heat treatment returned to approximately
the same level as in those without the treatment. These results indicate
that heat treatment stimulates viral antigens-specific T cell responses,
and its effect lasted for at least 24 h even after the heat treatment.
Similarly, enhanced production of IFN in response to the tuberculin
purified protein derivative was also observed immediately after and 24 h
after the heat treatment. Compared with the responses to these recall
antigens, non-recall antigen; KLH did not induce IFN production from
PBMCs at any time popint of preparation. On the other hand,
PMA/ionomycin-induced IFN production in PBMCs did not change during any
time point of preparation.Taken together, whole-body heat treatment in
fever-range appeared to make profound impact on antigen-specific T cell
responses, and could be a possible combination therapy to enhance the
efficacy of cancer immuno cell therapy, such as adoptive transfer of
activated T cells and DCs-based vaccination.

