Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the transcription regulatory network in differentiating
human acute myeloid leukemia cells.


The acute myeloid leukemia cell line, HL-60, has been studied extensively
as a model system for hematopoietic cell differentiation. Treatment with
phorbol esters establishes a signaling network that causes genetic
reprogramming resulting in cell cycle arrest, macrophage differentiation
and apoptosis. We have used DNA microarray analyses to define changes in
genome-wide expression patterns at multiple time points during the
24-hour period post-treatment.As the cells abandon the leukemia program
and transition to a macrophage-like state, approximately 1500 genes
undergo a statistically significant change in their expression levels.
Here we report on the subset of those genes encoding DNA
sequence-specific transcription factors (GO:0003700) and regulators of
gene expression (GO:0010468). These genes are hypothesized to mediate
genetic reprogramming through the activation or repression of target
genes responsible for the physiological changes observed. Cluster
analysis of the 78 genes defined as transcription factors reveals a group
of rapidly induced "immediate early" genes whose expression is maintained
throughout the time course and includes members of the EGR,
AP-1(FOS/JUN), and NR4A gene families. A set of "delayed early"
transcription factor genes show elevated and sustained expression by 3
hours post treatment and include members of the MAF, GATA and NF-B
families. Transcription factor genes showing sustained down-regulation of
expression by 3 hours post treatment are represented by MYC, TSC22D3 and
FLI1. Similarly, we report the expression patterns for 90 genes involved
in transcription regulation and together describe the network of
transcription effectors that likely modulate the expression of many of
the remaining 1300 genes showing significantly changing expression
levels.To begin to identify the key drivers of genetic reprogramming at
the level of transcriptional regulation, the promoters of these 1500
genes have been scanned for enriched sequence motifs, and the resulting
combinatorial occurrence pattern used to predict expression cluster
membership. We report the results of promoter sequence structure
clustering and its correlation with expression clusters.Preliminary
results suggest the transcription factor Egr1 is a driver of
transcriptional reprogramming, so we are establishing an Egr1-inducible
HL-60 cell line using the "Tet-On" expression system. A comparison of the
changes in gene expression resulting from Egr1 up-regulation alone with
the phorbol ester induced reprogramming will help dissect the specific
role Egr1 plays in transitioning the leukemia cells away from the cancer
phenotype and toward the differentiated and ultimately apoptotic
phenotypes.

