Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of delay to cryopreservation on RNA integrity and
genome-wide expression profiles in resected tumor samples.


Background: The quality of tissue samples and extracted mRNA is a major
source of variability in tumor transcriptome analysis using genome-wide
expression microarrays. During and immediately after surgical tumor
resection, tissues are exposed to metabolic, biochemical and physical
stresses characterized as warm ischemia. Current practice advocates
cryopreservation of biosamples within 30 minutes of resection, but this
recommendation has not been systematically validated by measurements of
mRNA decay over time.Methods: Using Illumina HumanHT-12 v3 Expression
BeadChips, providing a genome-wide coverage of over 24,000 genes, we have
analysed gene expression variation in samples of 3 hepatocellular
carcinomas (HCC) and 3 lung carcinomas (LC) cryopreserved at times up to
2 hours after resection.Results: RNA Integrity Numbers (RIN) revealed no
significant deterioration of mRNA up to 2 hours after resection.
Genome-wide transcriptome analysis detected non-significant gene
expression variations of -2.4%/hr (95% CI: -5.5%/hr to 0.6%/hr; p=0.12).
In LC, no consistent gene expression pattern was detected in relation
with warm ischemia. In HCC, a signature of 6 up-regulated genes (CYP2E1,
IGLL1, CABYR, CLDN2, NQO1, SCL13A5) and 6 down-regulated (MT1G, MT1H,
MT1E, MT1F, HABP2, SPINK1) was identified (FDR Background: The quality of
tissue samples and extracted mRNA is a major source of variability in
tumor transcriptome analysis using genome-wide expression microarrays.
During and immediately after surgical tumor resection, tissues are
exposed to metabolic, biochemical and physical stresses characterized as
warm ischemia. Current practice advocates cryopreservation of biosamples
within 30 minutes of resection, but this recommendation has not been
systematically validated by measurements of mRNA decay over time.Methods:
Using Illumina HumanHT-12 v3 Expression BeadChips, providing a
genome-wide coverage of over 24,000 genes, we have analysed gene
expression variation in samples of 3 hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) and
3 lung carcinomas (LC) cryopreserved at times up to 2 hours after
resection.Results: RNA Integrity Numbers (RIN) revealed no significant
deterioration of mRNA up to 2 hours after resection. Genome-wide
transcriptome analysis detected non-significant gene expression
variations of -2.4%/hr (95% CI: -5.5%/hr to 0.6%/hr; p=0.12). In LC, no
consistent gene expression pattern was detected in relation with warm
ischemia. In HCC, a signature of 6 up-regulated genes (CYP2E1, IGLL1,
CABYR, CLDN2, NQO1, SCL13A5) and 6 down-regulated (MT1G, MT1H, MT1E,
MT1F, HABP2, SPINK1) was identified (FDR <0.05).Conclusions: Overall, our
observations support current recommendation of time to cryopreservation
of up to 30 minutes and emphasize the need for identifying
tissue-specific genes deregulated following resection to avoid
misinterpreting expression changes induced by warm ischemia as
pathologically significant changes.

