Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative tumorigenesis of progranulin and fibroblast growth
factor 4 and in adrenocortical carcinoma cells.


Adrenal carcinomas are almost always fatal, but the mechanisms that
influence transition from low malignancy adenomas to metastatic
carcinomas are ill defined. SW-13 adrenocortical carcinoma cells are not
tumorigenic in nude mice and do not support anchorage-independent growth
at low cell density unless stimulated by secreted forms of fibroblast
growth factors (FGF) family, such as FGF4, or the growth factor-like
proteins progranulin (PGRN) which is over produced by many cancers. This
growth factor-dependent acquisition of tumorigenesis may model the
transition from benign to malignant adrenocortical cancer. Both PGRN and
FGF4 were shown to stimulate phosphorylation of MEK1/2 in SW-13 cells.
The aim of this study is to investigate the tumorigenic mechanisms of
PGRN and FGF, in particular to identify core malignancy responses shared
by both tumorigenic pathways. We employed Affymetrix Human Genome U133A
microarrays to examine the transcriptome profiles in SW-13 cells with
elevated PGRN or FGF4. We employed Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) to
visualize differentially expressed genes in the context of biological
pathways. In SW-13 cells with elevated PGRN, those transcripts that were
significantly up-regulated were related to cell morphology, cellular
assembly and organization, nervous system development and function,
carbohydrate metabolism, molecular transport. In cells with elevated
FGF4, significantly up-regulated molecules were associated with lipid
metabolism, molecular transport, small molecule biochemistry, cell death.
80 transcripts that were up-regulated in common by FGF and PGRN were
identified, and were significantly associated with gene expression, cell
death, cellular development. 28 of those genes were related to cancer,
including nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in
B-cells inhibitor, alpha, v-rel reticuloendotheliosis viral oncogene
homolog (avian), BCL2-associated X protein, early growth response 4,
nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in B-cells 2
(p49/p100), etc. 65 FGF and PGRN common down-regulated genes were
identified, and were significantly associated with reproductive system
development and function, cellular development, cellular growth and
proliferation. We found, however, that the majority of genes were
regulated differentially between PGRN and FGF. Our results suggest that
PGRN and FGF4 share common signals which contribute to tumorgenesis, but
also reveal that the common malignant phenotype attributed to both PGRN
and FGF4 differs significantly at the transcriptional level suggesting
unique pathways linking PGRN and FGF to tumor progression in these cells.

