Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective inhibitors of nuclear export (SINE) display single agent
efficacy against gastric (NCI-N87) and colon (HCT-116) xenografts.


AbstractChromosomal Maintenance Protein 1/Exportin 1 (CRM1/XPO1) is a key
nuclear export protein whose inhibition leads to the nuclear accumulation
of Tumor Suppressor Proteins (TSPs) such as p53, FOXO, PTEN, pRB and I-B.
SINE are a novel class of compounds currently in clinical development for
a variety of cancers. SINE irreversibly block CRM1-dependent nuclear
export and force the nuclear retention of TSPs, inducing apoptosis in
cancer cells. Here we report in vitro activity of SINE on a broad range
of cancer cell lines and in vivo efficacy results in NCI-N87 gastric and
HCT-116 colorectal carcinoma murine tumor xenograft models.MethodsMTT
cytotoxicity assays were used to determine IC50s of KPT-SINE on various
cell lines. The effects of SINE on the cell cycle and gene expression
were investigated by FACS and quantitative RT/PCR respectively.
Inhibition of CRM1 nuclear export was determined by immunofluorescence of
CRM1 cargos. The effects of SINE treatment on tumor growth in vivo were
assessed by measuring tumor volumes and by imaging with FluoroThymidine
Positron Emission Tomography (FLT-PET). In tumors, gene expression was
analyzed and immunohistochemistry performed to detect TSP, proliferation
and apoptosis markers.ResultsSINE showed potent cytotoxicity on the
majority of the cell lines tested with IC50 values 80%. Treated tumor
samples showed very low levels of Ki67 and increased TUNEL staining
consistent with induction of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in
SINE-treated groups. Also, marked upregulation of the TSPs p53 and p21
was observed, indicating that SINE induced nuclear localization of these
proteins in situ. In the NCI-N87 gastric carcinoma xenograft model, oral
SINE treatment inhibited tumor growth >75% compared with vehicle- treated
animals. Immunofluorescence analysis with biomarkers of proliferation,
along with FLT-PET results, indicated significant inhibition of
proliferation in tumors. Histological analysis of the tumors confirmed in
vitro observations of cytotoxic effects on tumors, induction of apoptosis
and the replacement of cancer cells with fibrotic tissue.ConclusionsThese
studies demonstrate potent in vitro and in vivo efficacy of single agent
SINE CRM1 inhibitors against NCI-N87 and HCT-116 xenografts. These data
further support the development of SINE-based therapies for gastric and
colorectal cancers.

