Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The spleen as a key player in chemotherapy resistance.


The development of resistance to chemotherapy is one of the most
important obstacles to continued effective treatment of cancer in
patients. Chemotherapy resistance is generally believed to be mediated by
tumor cell-intrinsic factors or by the tumor microenvironment. We
recently identified an important network that is responsible for
reversible systemic resistance to chemotherapy. Mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs), activated by chemotherapy, secrete two specific polyunsaturated
fatty acids that confer resistance to a broad spectrum of anti-cancer
agents. These two distinct platinum-induced polyunsaturated fatty acids
(PIFAs), 12-S-keto-5,8,10-heptadecatrienoic acid (KHT) and
4,7,10,13-hexadecatetraenoic acid (16:4(n-3)), can independently induce
chemotherapy resistance at picomolar concentrations. Our findings clearly
showed that these PIFAs do not directly cause chemotherapy resistance in
the tumor cells. Here, we show that the intermediate compartment between
PIFAs and chemoresistance are F4/80 positive cells residing in the
spleen. Several lines of evidence identified these splenocytes as key
mediators of systemic chemoresistance. First, PIFAs were unable to induce
resistance in splenectomized tumor-bearing mice. Second, administration
of conditioned medium from splenocytes (sCM) activated by the PIFAs to
splenectomized mice was able to re-introduce systemic chemotherapy
resistance in various mouse models (mean tumor volume in mm3 8 days after
treatment SEM control: 290.7 33.4, cisplatin: 118.2 8.9 and cisplatin +
sCM: 261.1 29.7). Third, analysis of the different cell types present in
the spleen indicated that PIFA-activated F4/80+ /CD11blow expressing
cells were able to induce systemic resistance in splenectomized mice.
Finally, administration of liposomal clodronate to tumor-bearing mice
treated with chemotherapy and PIFAs was able to inhibit induction of
resistance. Thus, we propose a model where PIFAs activate F4/80+/CD11blow
plenocytes leading to the production and secretion of secondary factors
that induce resistance to chemotherapy. In addition, mass spectrometry
analysis of the sCM from F4/80+/CD11blow splenocytes revealed that
several lipid-like molecules were differentially present in the sCM of
splenocytes cultured with 12-S-HHT versus splenocytes cultured with a
vehicle control. Total lipids fractions extracted from spleen CM
containing these lipid-like molecules were able to induce resistance in
splenectomized mice. Taken together, our findings provide a novel role
for the spleen in inducing a systemic protection against chemotherapy.

