Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-135b influences androgen and estrogen receptor protein
levels and regulates proliferation of hormone-receptor positive prostate
and breast cancer cells.


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate genes and impact on a wide range of cellular
signaling pathways and biological processes in both physiological and
pathological states. To understand their role in prostate and breast
cancer, we have carried out systematic functional high-throughput
miRNA-overexpression studies in cell lines, and assessed the effect of
miRNAs on androgen receptor (AR) and estrogen receptor (ER) protein
levels and on cell proliferation.We have observed that overexpression of
miR-135b affected the growth of cells where the endogenous expression of
miR-135b was low. Furthermore, the cells with low miR-135b expression
mostly had a higher expression of AR and ER in prostate respective breast
cancer cells. We identified that miR-135b is able to target AR and
regulate the AR protein level in prostate cancer cells.Our aim was thus
to further explore the function and significance of miR-135b in prostate
and breast cancer. We found that miR-135b inhibited the growth of
AR-positive prostate cancer (LNCaP, 22Rv1 and VCaP) and ER-positive
breast cancer (MCF-7 and BT-474) cells, whereas it did not have any
effect on the AR- and ER-negative cells. Here, we demonstrate that
miR-135b decreases the ER protein level in breast cancer cells and that
miR-135b expression inversely correlates with ER protein and mRNA as well
as AR mRNA levels in 101 clinical breast cancer samples and with AR
protein level in 47 clinical prostate cancer samples.In order to
characterize novel target genes and to understand the mechanisms for the
observed effect, we conducted gene expression analyses and identified 65
genes that were deregulated by miR-135b at three different time points
(12 h, 24 h and 36 h). We discovered that for almost 50% of the genes,
the expression significantly (p0.05) positively or negatively correlated
with the expression of miR-135b in clinical breast cancer samples,
suggesting that they may be relevant. For 14 genes we observed a
significant inverse correlation with miR-135b in the clinical material.
Hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha inhibitor (HIF1AN) showed an inverse
correlation and is predicted to be targeted by miR-135b by TargetScan
6.2. Our results indicate that miR-135b influences the protein level of
HIF1AN. This could imply that miR-135b is involved in the regulation of
oxygen homeostasis, and subsequently angiogenesis and glycolytic
metabolism, in breast and prostate cancer tumors by negatively regulating
the inhibitor of HIF1 that plays an important role in cancer.

