Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Zidovudine (AZT)-induced aneuploidy, mediated by Stathmin 1
(STMN1), involves a loss of polymerized -tubulin.


The nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor AZT induces multiple
manifestations of genotoxicity, among which aneuploidy, observed as
micronuclei containing whole chromosomes, has been reported (Borojerdi et
al., Mut Res, 2009). We have seen a loss of -tubulin polymerization in
about 23% of normal human mammary epithelial cells (NHMECs) exposed for
24 hr to 200 M AZT, and demonstrated down-regulation of hsa-miR-770-5p, a
microRNA known to target STMN1, in the same AZT-exposed cells. STMN1
prevents microtubule polymerization, resulting in destabilization of the
mitotic spindle and chromosome misalignment. We therefore hypothesized
that, if AZT exposure downregulates hsa-miR-770-5p, there should be
increased expression of STMN1, which would result in loss of microtubule
polymerization leading to aneuploidy. In this study we exposed cells of
the human breast line MCF-10A to 100 M AZT continuously for 1 to 3
passages (P). By Western Blot we showed that total STMN1 was 3.5-fold
increased at P1, in AZT-exposed cells, compared to the unexposed
controls. Using the same STMN1 antiserum, by immunohistochemistry (IHC),
we observed that some cells stained heavily for STMN1, while others had
virtually no staining, and that the overall STMN1 fluorescence was
increased in AZT-exposed cells, compared to unexposed controls. When
tubulin polymerization was evaluated by IHC, using -tubulin antiserum,
10.1% of AZT-exposed cells showed a loss of tubulin polymerization, while
only 0.7% of unexposed cells showed the same effect (p=0.004). The data
suggest that AZT induced aneuploidy may be mediated by inhibition of
hsa-miR-770-5p, upregulation of STMN1, impaired polymerization of
-tubulin, aberrant mitotic spindle formation and consequent chromosome
misalignment resulting in aneuploidy. If confirmed, this will constitute
a novel mechanism of AZT-induced genotoxicity that may or may not be
related to AZT-DNA incorporation. Ongoing experiments will explore these
relationships further by localizing STMN1 and -tubulin in specific cells,
and examining the same cultures for spindle aberrations at mitosis.

