Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy inhibition enhances the antitumor effects of
combretastatin A4 phosphate (CA4P).


Vascular disruptive agents such as CA4P cause an acute shutdown of the
tumor vasculature resulting in metabolic stress and central tumor
necrosis. However, tumor recurrence may ensue from peripheral tissue that
survives the vascular insult because of less severe metabolic conditions
(i.e, viable rim).Autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved cellular
response to stress that is either enabling cell survival or mediating
cell death, depending on the circumstances. During cancer therapy,
autophagy is usually thought to contribute to cell survival and thus to
therapeutic resistance. Hence, we hypothesized that autophagy inhibition
would amplify the antitumor effects of CA4P by lowering the threshold of
peripheral tumor cells to withstand the metabolic stress due to CA4P
administration.Since available pharmacological autophagy inhibitors lack
specificity, we established pairs of isogenic autophagy-defective
(ATG4BC74A) and autophagy-competent (vector control, i.e., mstr) prostate
cancer cells by means of retrovirally transducing PC-3 and C4-2 human
prostate cancer cells with ATG4BC74A (an inactive and dominant-negative
mutant of the autophagy related gene atg4B). These paired cell lines were
characterized in vitro (autophagy and proliferation assays in cells
exposed to CA4P), and PC-3 xenograft tumors were grown subcutaneously in
mice subjected to CA4P (100 mg/kg ip). We collected tumors after 24 hours
and 1 week for cryosectioning and preparation of protein lysates. To
document the autophagy status in tumors, lysates were analysed by LC-3
Western blotting. The degree of necrosis and senescence in tissue
sections was measured by H&E and senescence-associated -galactosidase
histochemistry, respectively. Microvessel density was assessed by CD31
immunofluorescence.CA4P associated inhibition of proliferation was not
influenced by the autophagy status of PC-3 and C4-2 (CA4 IC50 7 nmol/L
for both PC-3 and C4-2). We also observed similar growth kinetics of PC-3
ATG4BC74A and mstr tumors in control and CA4P treated mice. Furthermore,
we documented a comparable decrease in CD31 microvessel density 24 hours
after C4AP administration in PC-3 ATG4BC74A and mstr xenografts, a change
that was reversed 1 week following C4AP treatment. However, CA4P caused
more extensive central tumor necrosis as well as a larger number of
senescent cells in autophagy-deficient PC-3 tumors both 24 hours and 1
week following CA4P therapy.In summary, autophagy inhibition amplifies
the necrosis- and senescence-inducing properties of CA4P. Further
investigations are aiming at assessing the impact of the autophagy status
of PC-3 tumors on CA4-mediated apoptosis and hypoxia. We also plan to
expand our analyses to the C4-2 model. Finally, we are currently studying
if combined CA4P therapy and autophagy inhibition results in improved
long-term tumor control. Such combination therapy could be rapidly
translated into the clinic.

