Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating microRNA biomarkers for cancer exist in multiple
biophysical states.


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small regulatory RNA molecules that function in a
wide range of normal and pathologic cellular processes. Cell-free miRNAs
circulate in blood (i.e. plasma, serum), are stable and can be diagnostic
for cancer. Circulating microRNAs in cancer have been reported to exist
in multiple biophysical states, including most famously as cargo of
50-100 nm extracellular vesicles known as exosomes. In prior studies of
healthy individuals, we have found that a majority of plasma miRNAs are
not vesicle-associated and are substantially present as part of a
ribonucleoprotein complex containing Argonaute-2 (Ago2). In order to
determine the state of miRNAs in the circulation of cancer patients, we
quantitatively profiled the distribution of >300 miRNAs in progressive
physical and biochemical fractions of plasma from individuals with
metastatic prostate cancer and matched, healthy controls. Stepwise
differential centrifugation was performed at 12,000g (to collect cell
debris, etc.) and 120,000g (to collect exosomes), followed by
Ago2-immunoprecipitation. Exosome fractions generally contained little
miRNA, both in cases and in controls. Prostate cancer miRNA biomarkers
(miR-141, miR-375) were predominantly soluble, partially associated with
Ago2 (15-35% of total) and only marginally present in the exosome
fraction (MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small regulatory RNA molecules that
function in a wide range of normal and pathologic cellular processes.
Cell-free miRNAs circulate in blood (i.e. plasma, serum), are stable and
can be diagnostic for cancer. Circulating microRNAs in cancer have been
reported to exist in multiple biophysical states, including most famously
as cargo of 50-100 nm extracellular vesicles known as exosomes. In prior
studies of healthy individuals, we have found that a majority of plasma
miRNAs are not vesicle-associated and are substantially present as part
of a ribonucleoprotein complex containing Argonaute-2 (Ago2). In order to
determine the state of miRNAs in the circulation of cancer patients, we
quantitatively profiled the distribution of >300 miRNAs in progressive
physical and biochemical fractions of plasma from individuals with
metastatic prostate cancer and matched, healthy controls. Stepwise
differential centrifugation was performed at 12,000g (to collect cell
debris, etc.) and 120,000g (to collect exosomes), followed by
Ago2-immunoprecipitation. Exosome fractions generally contained little
miRNA, both in cases and in controls. Prostate cancer miRNA biomarkers
(miR-141, miR-375) were predominantly soluble, partially associated with
Ago2 (15-35% of total) and only marginally present in the exosome
fraction (<1% of total). In order to quantify the amount of miRNA
associated on average with an exosome, we used Nanoparticle Tracking
Analysis (NTA) to quantify exosomes isolated from multiple in-vivo and
in-vitro sources by differential ultracentrifugation, followed by miRNA
extraction and quantification. We found that exosomes contain very few
copies on average of their most abundant miRNAs (less than one copy per
individual exosome). In contrast, a significant miR-141 biomarker signal
was observed in the 12,000xg-pellet from plasma (approximately 30-45% of
input), indicating some miRNA could be associated with larger and/or more
dense particles (e.g., oncosomes). In summary, these results indicate
that (i) prostate cancer-associated miRNAs are not predominantly
contained within exosomes, (ii) the majority of exosomes do not carry
significant amounts of miRNAs, and (iii) established biomarkers for
prostate cancer are present in multiple physical states, including
soluble (e.g., Ago2-associated) and large-particle associated (i.e.
12,000xg pellet) forms (possibly as cell debris or oncosomes). A more
accurate understanding of the physical state of miRNA biomarkers will
help guide their development to fully realize their diagnostic potential.

