Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mRNA biomarkers of colorectal cancer development tested on biopsy,
fresh frozen and formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) specimens in an
automated workflow.


Introduction: The early molecular detection of the colorectal
dysplasia-carcinoma transition may enhance the classification of colonic
tissue samples. Recently, a colorectal cancer-specific transcript set
including COL12A1, CXCL2, CA7, Il1B, MMP3, IL8 was identified on colonic
biopsy samples using whole genomic microarrays (WG MA).Aims: Our aim was
to evaluate the applicability of these markers on independent biopsy and
also on fresh frozen and formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue
specimens from healthy and CRC patients by expression arrays and RT-PCR.
Furthermore, automated RNA isolation was introduced and evaluated for
increased sample number in one run.Materials and methods: Total RNA from
3 normal and 3 CRC FFPE specimens were analyzed by using Affymetrix
U133Plus 2.0 WG expression arrays. Total RNA was isolated from 30 biopsy
samples stored in RNALater (15 CRC, 15 normal), 20 fresh frozen
surgically removed colonic tissues (10 CRC, 10 adjacent normal) and 60
FFPE (30 CRC, 30 adjacent normal) samples with the automated MagNA Pure
96 Cellular RNA Large volume kit and reverse transcription was done using
Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Roche). Gene expression
analysis was performed with real-time PCR using RealTime ready assays and
the LightCycler 480 system (Roche).Results: The FFPE specimens could be
clustered correctly in 100% by the results of the microarray analysis.
According to the gene expression levels of the set of 11 transcripts, the
biopsy samples could be distinguished by 93,3% sensitivity and 93,3%
specificity by RT-PCR. The discriminatory power of the marker set was
proved to be high also on fresh frozen and FFPE samples (sens:>90 %,
spec: >80 %). The automated RNA isolation technique has not influenced
the classification power of the markers, but decreased the workaround
time by 100% (4 hours to 2 hours).Conclusion: The analyzed set of markers
in an automated environment could correctly characterize the healthy and
the tumorous colonic tissue samples on biopsy, fresh frozen and also on
FFPE tissue samples by MAs and RT-PCR. On the basis of these results,
these markers can enhance the automated, early and differential detection
of colorectal cancer.

