Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of extracellular calcium on MAPK signalling cascade in
colon cancer cells.


Background: The calcium sensing receptor (CaSR) is a G-protein coupled
receptor, which is capable of sensing even minute changes in
extracellular calcium levels. The main role of the CaSR is regulation of
calcium homeostasis. Besides the organs responsible for calcium
homeostasis the receptor is expressed in a number of tissues including
colonic epithelium and can be activated by several ligands, stimulating
various downstream signalling pathways. Thus the CaSR is involved in
numerous biological processes such as cell proliferation, differentiation
and lipid membrane metabolism. Previous studies demonstrated that calcium
regulates cell proliferation in colonocytes but the pathways or factors
involved in this process still need to be elucidated.Aim: The aim of this
study is to investigate the impact of CaSR activation on the
Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) signalling cascade in colon
cancer cell lines. We hypothesize that in colonocytes, activated CaSR
down regulates proliferative pathways.Methods: We studied the effect of
CaSR ligands on downstream pathways through gene expression assays and
protein analysis.Results and Conclusion: We could show that the
differentiation status of the cells (TC-7 a colon cancer cell line)
determines whether a pathway is activated or rather inhibited by calcium
treatment. Gene expression studies performed by luciferase assay and
protein analysis by western blots reflect that extracellular calcium
activated MAPK cascade in subconfluent TC-7 cells. On the other hand,
short time (10 to 30 minutes) treatment of confluent/ differentiated
cells with extracellular calcium showed no activation of ERK. Treatment
for longer time (e.g 8h) inhibited ERK phosphorylation. The treatment of
the cells with 100nM R-568, a calcimimetic that act only through the CaSR
slightly inhibited ERK phosphorylation compared with the vehicle control,
suggesting an anti-proliferative role of the CaSR.

