Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the mitotic spindle protein RHAMM in early stage
bladder malignancy.


Purpose:To determine if RHAMM is involved in early steps in bladder
tumorigenesis.Hypothesis:RHAMM has pro-malignant function in bladder
cancer and suppression of this protein in tumorigenic bladder derived
cells is expected to reduce malignant characteristics.Results:We have
successfully infected three human bladder cancer cell lines (UMUC-13,
T24, and T24M) with shRNA that reduces the expression of RHAMM.
Quantitative RT-PCR was performed on RNA samples from knockdown (RH5 and
RH7 lentiviral clones) and non-target siRNA infected (NT) cells. We
demonstrated that the RH5, but not the RH7 virus reduced message levels.
RHAMM protein expression was reduced by almost 100% for RH5, and by 60%
for RH7, as early as 72 hours post infection, the reduced expression for
the RH5 infected cells is maintained even after a freeze/thaw passage.A
96-well format MTT viability assay was used to indirectly assess the
proliferation rates of the UMUC13, T24 and T24M cell lines infected with
NT or RH5. RH5 drastically reduced the viability of T24 and T24M cells.
Microscopic observation revealed an increase in apoptotic cells in the
knockdown cultures. We observed an increase in c-PARP expression in the
RH5-infected U13 and T24 cells, but not in the T24M cells. This was
unexpected in the case of the T24M knockdown cells since viability, as
determined by the MTT assay, was lower suggesting an alternate mechanism
for the reduced viability.Another possible explanation for the apparent
differences in viability between NT and knockdown cells could be
differences in their adhesive properties. This was examined by measuring
absorbance using the MTT assay after short time periods (2 and 4 hrs
after plating). Our results indicate RH5 increased the adhesion of
UMUC-13 cells but, decreased it in T24 and T24M cells. These changes were
not large (10-20% difference) but statistically significant. Scratch
wound assays were also performed and indicated reduced migration with the
RH5 cells.Other groups have observed a G2/M block in RHAMM deficient
mouse embryo fibroblasts isolated from RHAMM null mice. A FACS cell cycle
experiment was performed assessing DNA content via propridium iodide
staining. Our results were not consistent with a G2/M block, however we
did observe increased quantities of sub-G1 particles in the RH5 knockdown
T24 and T24M cell lines.Conclusion:We conclude that RHAMM is a potential
marker of bladder premalignancy that could also have a very early
etiological function in bladder tumorigenesis. In addition, our siRNA
data suggests the possibility of targeting RHAMM for treating
premalignancy or even malignancy. This work could advance our
understanding of the process of bladder cancer development and will help
validate RHAMM as a potential biomarker for bladder premalignancy.[The
project described was supported by Grant Number F31CA153934 from the
National Cancer Institute.]

