Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rare DNA variants are enriched at the BARD1 locus and likely
influence neuroblastoma susceptibility.


BACKGROUND: A genome-wide association study (GWAS) in neuroblastoma
identified 8 regions where common polymorphisms are associated with
neuroblastoma susceptibility. However, the biological mechanisms and
causal SNPs are largely unknown. Rare variants, potentially in linkage
with common polymorphisms but with a higher effect size, may contribute
to cancer susceptibility at GWAS-defined loci and provide biological
insight into mechanism.METHODS: To identify rare variants at
neuroblastoma GWAS loci we performed ultradeep targeted resequencing of
BARD1 and LMO1 on peripheral blood DNA using RainDance microdroplet
RDT1000 PCR enrichment, and HiSeq2000 single end 100 bp reads. We
aggregated existing whole-genome and exome sequence data from
constitutional DNA of neuroblastoma cases (Molenaar et al, Nature 2012;
NCI TARGET) on all replicated neuroblastoma GWAS regions.RESULTS: Exon
sequence data were available for 517 cases for BARD1, and 330 cases for
LMO1, LINC00340, LIN28B-HACE1, LMO1, DUSP12, DDX4-IL3RA, and HSB17B12
(all genes with replicated associations to NB). The highest frequency of
rare potentially damaging variants occurred in BARD1 with 7/517 cases
(1.4%) containing novel (n=4) or rare (n=3) variants as defined by
ESP6500, 1000 genomes project, and dbSNP135. Rare variants at BARD1 were
associated with homozygosity or heterozygosity for the protective
alleles. Using SIFT, PolyPhen-2 or MutationTaster, 6/7 variants were
predicted to be deleterious, including a nonsense mutation in the domain
mediating BARD1-BRCA1 heterodimerization and a nonsense mutation in a
BRCT domain implicated in homology directed repair. Sanger sequencing of
tumor DNA and RNA confirmed both nonsense mutations were present in their
respective primary tumors. HEK293 cells transfected with BARD1 nonsense
variants showed decreased stabilization of BRCA1.CONCLUSION: Novel and
potentially damaging mutations in BARD1 exons are present in the
constitutional DNA of 1% of patients with neuroblastoma and may
contribute to disease susceptibility. However, BARD1 rare variants were
not tagged by the common risk alleles providing an alternative mechanism
to prime neuroblasts towards transformation. Further functional work,
expansion of the targeted resequencing discovery cohort as a prelude to a
larger case-control comparison, and incorporation of ENCODE data into
analysis of non-coding SNPs may provide critical insights into
neuroblastoma pathogenesis.

