Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Education of macrophages through modulation of NF-kappaB: an
opportunity for targeted therapy.


Macrophages are a plastic cell type, capable of adapting to numerous
signals within their environment. As part of the innate immune system,
macrophages were traditionally considered anti-tumor (M1), but it has
been well established that macrophages can also help to create a
pro-tumor, pro-metastatic tumor niche (M2). NF-B transcription factors
can regulate both pro- (MMP's, VEGF) and anti-tumor (iNOS) downstream
targets within macrophages, suggesting that modulation of NF-B may play a
role in the two different macrophage phenotypes. However, our
understanding of NF-B signaling specifically within macrophages during
tumor progression is limited. To this end, we have developed murine
transgenic models that enable us to induce expression of an activator or
dominant inhibitor of NF-B in macrophages by adding doxycycline to the
drinking water of mice. We have combined these novel transgenics with the
polyoma model of mammary cancer for our studies.We have recently shown
that activation of NF-B in macrophages significantly limits metastasis in
a tail vein model of tumor progression. In this model, constitutive IKK2
activity within macrophages leads to an anti-tumor immune response
including altered immune cell populations within the lung
microenvironment, changes in chemokine and cytokine expression and rapid
killing of tumor cells during the seeding phase mediated by reactive
oxygen species. Our current work has extended these findings to an
orthotopic mammary tumor model. Again, we find that activation of NF-B in
macrophages results in decreased primary tumor growth and decreased tumor
seeding into the blood. To model this activation in vitro, we have
utilized immortalized bone marrow derived macrophages from IB knock-out
mice compared to a wild type line. IB KO macrophages display changes in
morphology and adhesion relative to wild type macrophages. This
correlates with increased cytotoxic behavior in co-culture with polyoma
tumor cells, mirroring the in vivo phenotype of the cIKK2 expressing
macrophages. Given these findings, we believe that targeted activation of
NF-B signaling in macrophages could be harnessed to overcome the
education of macrophages by tumor cells, and could be exploited as a
novel targeted therapy.

