Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decreasing the AKT feedback loop with arsenic trioxide enhances
mTORi anti-tumor effects.


Inhibitors of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTORi) have exciting
clinical activity in renal cell carcinoma, breast cancer, and some
hematologic malignancies. However, the potential benefits of mTOR
inhibition may be limited by a feedback mechanism that results in AKT
activation. While mTORi can block important growth promoting events
downstream from TORC1, an increased activation of AKT may inhibit
apoptotic signals. Increased AKT activity resulting from mTOR inhibition
is a result of increased growth factor/MAPK signaling or alternatively,
via the second mTOR complex, TORC2. We have previously shown that arsenic
trioxide (ATO) inhibits AKT activity and in some cases, decreases AKT
protein expression. Therefore, we propose that combining ATO and mTORi
may circumvent the AKT feedback loop and increase the anti-tumor effects
of these drugs. Using a panel of breast cancer cell lines, we find that
ATO, at clinically achievable doses, can enhance the inhibitory activity
of the mTORi temsirolimus in some, but not all, cell lines. MCF-7,
MDA-MB-468, and SKBR3, but not T47D cells, exhibit a decrease in cell
number that correlates with an increase in the percentage of cells
arrested in the G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle. In all these cell lines,
temsirolimus treatment resulted in AKT activation, which was decreased by
concomitant ATO treatment only in MCF-7, MDA-MB-468, and SKBR3 cell
lines. Treatment with mTORi also results in activated ERK signaling,
which is decreased with ATO co-treatment in MCF7, MDA-MB-468, and SKBR3.
These data indicate that, when effective, ATO decreases phospho-AKT and
ERK concomitantly. We next tested the toxicity and efficacy of rapamcyin
plus ATO combination therapy in a MDA-MB-468 xenograft model. The
combination was well-tolerated, and rapamycin did not increase
ATO-induced liver enzyme levels. In contrast, the combination was
significantly more effective at inhibiting tumor growth. The increased
anti-tumor effects corresponded with ATO decreasing the rapamycin-induced
phospho-Akt, phospho-ERK, and phospho-4EBP1 within the tumor. Therefore,
we propose that adding ATO to mTORi treatment may overcome the negative
feedback loop by decreasing MAPK and activated AKT in addition to the
downstream targets of mTOR/TORC1.

