Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of miR-10b associated with breast cancer metastasis
to brain .


Background: Breast cancer is the most common non-skin cancer amongst
women in the US. Breast cancer-related mortality is primarily due to
metastatic disease, especially brain metastasis which also impacts
patient's quality of life. The molecular mechanism of brain metastasis of
breast cancer is largely unknown; however, finding molecular signatures
of the primary breast cancer that have the propensity for brain
metastasis would be very important for designing optimal primary
treatment of breast cancer to prevent and eliminate brain metastasis. To
that end targeting MicroRNAs (miRNAs) could become a novel prognostic and
therapeutic strategy to prevent the future development of brain
metastasis.Design: Breast cancer cases with brain metastasis diagnosed
from 1994-2011 were retrieved from the computerized hospital database.
The study cohort comprised of breast cancer cases with brain metastasis
(n=18) and age, stage and follow-up matched breast cancer cases without
brain metastasis (n= 10). All cases were microscopically reviewed to
select tumor blocks with >50% tumor cells. RNA was extracted from
formalin fixed paraffin embedded tumor tissue blocks. The miRNA
expression analysis was done using RT-PCR. Data was statistically
analyzed to determine the clinical significance using the Wilcoxon signed
rank test.Results: Among several miRNAs that were analyzed in this study,
we found that miR-10b was highly expressed in the primary breast cancer
specimens of patients who subsequently developed brain metastasis
compared to those who did not develop brain metastasis. Interestingly,
the expression of miR-10b was reduced in brain metastatic specimens
compared to primary breast cancer specimens. Using Wilcoxon signed rank
test, there was statistically significant difference between the paired
tumors from breast cancers and brain metastasis (p value Background:
Breast cancer is the most common non-skin cancer amongst women in the US.
Breast cancer-related mortality is primarily due to metastatic disease,
especially brain metastasis which also impacts patient's quality of life.
The molecular mechanism of brain metastasis of breast cancer is largely
unknown; however, finding molecular signatures of the primary breast
cancer that have the propensity for brain metastasis would be very
important for designing optimal primary treatment of breast cancer to
prevent and eliminate brain metastasis. To that end targeting MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) could become a novel prognostic and therapeutic strategy to
prevent the future development of brain metastasis.Design: Breast cancer
cases with brain metastasis diagnosed from 1994-2011 were retrieved from
the computerized hospital database. The study cohort comprised of breast
cancer cases with brain metastasis (n=18) and age, stage and follow-up
matched breast cancer cases without brain metastasis (n= 10). All cases
were microscopically reviewed to select tumor blocks with >50% tumor
cells. RNA was extracted from formalin fixed paraffin embedded tumor
tissue blocks. The miRNA expression analysis was done using RT-PCR. Data
was statistically analyzed to determine the clinical significance using
the Wilcoxon signed rank test.Results: Among several miRNAs that were
analyzed in this study, we found that miR-10b was highly expressed in the
primary breast cancer specimens of patients who subsequently developed
brain metastasis compared to those who did not develop brain metastasis.
Interestingly, the expression of miR-10b was reduced in brain metastatic
specimens compared to primary breast cancer specimens. Using Wilcoxon
signed rank test, there was statistically significant difference between
the paired tumors from breast cancers and brain metastasis (p value
<0.001).Conclusions: Increased expression of miR-10b appears to be
associated with metastatic potential of the primary breast cancer;
however, once the cancer metastasized to the brain (homing), its level
was reduced. This interesting finding requires further mechanistic
studies. Clinical relevance: Our findings are clinically very relevant
since miR-10b could serve as a potential target for anti-metastatic
therapy. The expression of miR-10b could be silenced using miR-10b
antagomirs (chemically modified anti-miRNA oligonucleotides) for the
prevention of brain metastasis, whereas once brain metastasis develops
then it could be treated with miR-10b mimics for inducing its expression
for the treatment. Therefore, development of miRNA-based prophylactic
therapies could serve as personalized medicine against future brain
metastasis of breast cancer which will improve patients quality of life
and improve overall survival.

