Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted gene expression sequencing from FFPE: NPSeq.


A robust targeted sequencing assay with simple, automated set up that
provides accurate and sensitive measurement of gene expression from FFPE
has been developed, referred to as NPSeq. This assay is based on HTG's
nuclease protection array-based qNPA assay, which has been launched as a
diagnostic and translational research platform automated on the HTG EDGE
System. Briefly, FFPE is lysed and processed through the standard qNPA
protocol on EDGE, then unique barcodes, adaptors and primer seqeuences
are added for sequencing. Samples are pooled, concentrated, and run on a
gel for QC and clean-up before submitting for colony formation and
sequencing. NPSeq retains S1 hydrolysis for specificity, while
eliminating the array and hybridization capture/detection specificity
steps from the qNPA protocol, replacing them with direct sequencing and
counting of each nuclease protection probe. NPSeq measurement from FFPE
is accurate, sensitive, and quantitatively reproducible. Performance has
been evaluated using a focused assay measuring gene expression. Accuracy,
defined as the correlation of measurements from frozen sample to matched
FFPE, is R2 > 0.95. Compared to the qNPA ArrayPlate diagnostic assay,
measuring clinical FFPE and using in each case 0.25 cm2 area of a 5
micron thick breast cancer section, the correlation of measurements was
R2 = 0.93. The NPSeq assay conserves sample, with high sensitivity to
routinely use small amounts of FFPE (less than 0.25 cm2 area of a 5
micron section). NPSeq was quantitative and highly reproducibility, with
avg CV's of 3%. NPSeq is a true universal assay because it can measure
sets of a few genes to sets of 1,000 or more genes without any change in
protocol or platform. Thus, it can be used for biomarker discovery and
then those biomarkers can be focused into a drug discovery or diagnostic
assay without any change in reagents, protocol or platform, while
delivering the same quantitative and ultra-high quality data. Since NPSeq
samples can be tagged and pooled before sequencing the sequencing
cost/sample can be reduced substantially, making both biomarker discovery
and targeted diagnostic sequencing assays cost efficient. NPSeq exploits
the qNPA advantage of a lysis only, extraction-free protocol to
simultaneously measure mRNA and miRNA dependably from FFPE even where the
mRNA is degraded. Additional application results from retrospective
studies of clinical FFPE will be presented that validate the performance
of the NPSeq assays, including an NPSeq assay containing content of the
miRBase version 19 of 2000 miRNA and mRNA housekeeper genes that is in
development and being used for miRNA biomarker identification from FFPE.

