Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Possible involvement of glycolipids in anticancer drug resistance
of human ovarian serous carcinoma-derived cells.


To further characterize the molecular basis on anticancer drug-resistance
of human ovarian carcinoma, we compared glycolipid and transporter gene
expressions in ovarian serous carcinoma-derived KF28 and 2008 cells with
those in their paclitaxel- and cisplatin-resistant cells. Lipid
compositions were determined by TLC and TLC-immunostaining and gene
expressions of transporter proteins and glycosyltransferases were by
RT-PCR. Although the amounts of major lipids, i.e. cholesterol, ceramides
and phospholipids, in the resistant cells were same with those in the
sensitive cells, Gb3Cer was commonly increased in all resistant cells,
irrespective of whether the resistance was to paclitaxel or cisplatin.
Also, expressions of the MDR1 gene and gangliosides, GM3 for KF28, and
GM1 and GD1a for 2008 cells, were enhanced in paclitaxel-resistant cells,
but gangliosides were absent in cisplatin-resistant cells. In accord with
the decreased amounts of gangliosides in cisplatin-resistant cells, the
gene expression and specific activity of GM3 synthase were greatly
decreased in cisplatin-resistant cells. One can suggest that increased
amount of Gb3Cer in cisplatin-resistant cells is brought about by the
metabolic shifts of LacCer-modifying pathway from GM3- to
Gb3Cer-synthases. Furthermore, paclitaxel- and cisplatin-resistant cells
were converted to forms more sensitive to the respective anticancer drugs
on cultivation with D-PDMP, an inhibitor of GlcCer synthase, and GM3,
respectively, prior to the addition of anticancer drugs. Thus,
coexpression of the MDR1 gene and glycolipids including gangliosides was
thought to be necessary for survival of cells in media containing
paclitaxel through regulation of transporter proteins with glycolipids in
membrane rafts. Also, the decreased amounts of gangliosides might
contribute to the cisplatin resistance, probably by the reduced
incorporation of cisplatin.

