Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impaired tumor growth and extended animal survival with Abraxane
treatment in neuroblastoma xenograft models.


Background: Abraxane (ABI-007), a novel, solvent free, protein-stabilized
formulation of paclitaxel, was developed to reduce the toxicity of
solvent-based paclitaxel and improve drug efficacy. It has recently been
approved by FDA for metastatic breast cancer and the first-line treatment
of locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer. In this
study, we investigated the anti-tumor effect of Abraxane on neuroblastoma
(NB) both in vitro and in vivo. We also compared drug distribution
between Abraxane and DMSO-based paclitaxel in NB xenografts.Methods: A
panel of eight NB cell lines were exposed to increased concentrations
(103 -103 ng/ml) of Abraxane in vitro for 72 hours. Cell viability was
evaluated with Alamar Blue assay. Anti-tumor effect of Abraxane was
further assessed in vivo with NB xenograft models with 4 different
intravenous dosages, 2, 5, 10mg/kg daily and 50mg/kg weekly. Animal
survival was also evaluated in metastatic NB models. To uncover the
regulators of anti-tumor effects of Abraxane and potential biomarkers for
predicting drug response, SPARC and PTEN expression was assessed by
Western Blot. In addition, plasma and intratumoral paclitaxel
concentrations were measure by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.
Ratio of intratumoral and plasma concentration was compared between
Abraxane and DMSO-based paclitaxel treatment groups.Results: Among all NB
cell lines tested, CHLA-20 showed the highest EC50 (36nM), while LAN-5
and SK-N-BE(2) had the lowest EC50 (Background: Abraxane (ABI-007), a
novel, solvent free, protein-stabilized formulation of paclitaxel, was
developed to reduce the toxicity of solvent-based paclitaxel and improve
drug efficacy. It has recently been approved by FDA for metastatic breast
cancer and the first-line treatment of locally advanced or metastatic
non-small cell lung cancer. In this study, we investigated the anti-tumor
effect of Abraxane on neuroblastoma (NB) both in vitro and in vivo. We
also compared drug distribution between Abraxane and DMSO-based
paclitaxel in NB xenografts.Methods: A panel of eight NB cell lines were
exposed to increased concentrations (103 -103 ng/ml) of Abraxane in vitro
for 72 hours. Cell viability was evaluated with Alamar Blue assay.
Anti-tumor effect of Abraxane was further assessed in vivo with NB
xenograft models with 4 different intravenous dosages, 2, 5, 10mg/kg
daily and 50mg/kg weekly. Animal survival was also evaluated in
metastatic NB models. To uncover the regulators of anti-tumor effects of
Abraxane and potential biomarkers for predicting drug response, SPARC and
PTEN expression was assessed by Western Blot. In addition, plasma and
intratumoral paclitaxel concentrations were measure by liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry. Ratio of intratumoral and plasma
concentration was compared between Abraxane and DMSO-based paclitaxel
treatment groups.Results: Among all NB cell lines tested, CHLA-20 showed
the highest EC50 (36nM), while LAN-5 and SK-N-BE(2) had the lowest EC50
(<1pM). In vivo, Abraxane demonstrated antitumor activity in a
well-defined dose-dependent manner in SK-N-BE(2) xenograft model.
Especially, at 50mg/kg dosage, average tumor volume on day 15 of Abraxane
treatment reduced to 29% of the original tumor volume. With CHLA-20
xenograft model, tumor growth inhibition was achieved only at a higher
dosage, 50mg/kg, which is consistent with less drug response of CHLA-20
cell line in vitro. In SK-N-BE(2) metastatic tumor model, Abraxane
treatment significantly extended animal survival compared to control
animals (pBackground: Abraxane (ABI-007), a novel, solvent free,
protein-stabilized formulation of paclitaxel, was developed to reduce the
toxicity of solvent-based paclitaxel and improve drug efficacy. It has
recently been approved by FDA for metastatic breast cancer and the
first-line treatment of locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell
lung cancer. In this study, we investigated the anti-tumor effect of
Abraxane on neuroblastoma (NB) both in vitro and in vivo. We also
compared drug distribution between Abraxane and DMSO-based paclitaxel in
NB xenografts.Methods: A panel of eight NB cell lines were exposed to
increased concentrations (103 -103 ng/ml) of Abraxane in vitro for 72
hours. Cell viability was evaluated with Alamar Blue assay. Anti-tumor
effect of Abraxane was further assessed in vivo with NB xenograft models
with 4 different intravenous dosages, 2, 5, 10mg/kg daily and 50mg/kg
weekly. Animal survival was also evaluated in metastatic NB models. To
uncover the regulators of anti-tumor effects of Abraxane and potential
biomarkers for predicting drug response, SPARC and PTEN expression was
assessed by Western Blot. In addition, plasma and intratumoral paclitaxel
concentrations were measure by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.
Ratio of intratumoral and plasma concentration was compared between
Abraxane and DMSO-based paclitaxel treatment groups.Results: Among all NB
cell lines tested, CHLA-20 showed the highest EC50 (36nM), while LAN-5
and SK-N-BE(2) had the lowest EC50 (<1pM). In vivo, Abraxane demonstrated
antitumor activity in a well-defined dose-dependent manner in SK-N-BE(2)
xenograft model. Especially, at 50mg/kg dosage, average tumor volume on
day 15 of Abraxane treatment reduced to 29% of the original tumor volume.
With CHLA-20 xenograft model, tumor growth inhibition was achieved only
at a higher dosage, 50mg/kg, which is consistent with less drug response
of CHLA-20 cell line in vitro. In SK-N-BE(2) metastatic tumor model,
Abraxane treatment significantly extended animal survival compared to
control animals (p<0.01). Median survival time for Abraxane treated
animals was 59 days compared to 32 days for control animals. Furthermore,
we demonstrated that Abraxane treatment had 5.4-fold higher ratio of
intratumoral/ plasma concentration compared to paclitaxel treatment,
which indicates improved intratumor accumulation of Abraxane. From
molecular aspect, we observed variable expression levels of SPARC and
PTEN in eight NB cell lines tested. However, we found no significant
correlation between SPARC/PTEN expression and anti-tumor effects of
Abraxane in NB cells in vitro.Conclusions: Abraxane impairs NB tumor
growth and improves animal survival in NB xenograft models. Therapeutic
improvement of Abraxane may be related to enhanced drug intratumor
delivery. Further studies are required to define the roles of SPARC and
PTEN in Abraxane drug response.

