Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A critical role of bone marrow-derived cells for hedgehog-mediated
carcinogenesis.


Amounting evidence indicate that the tissue microenvironment in a
developing tumor is created by the tumor to orchestrates molecular and
cellular interactions. As a major pathway involved in tumorigenesis,
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is known to regulate tumor microenvironment, but
the underlying molecular mechanisms in hedgehog-driven tumors remain
unclear. Here we show that smoothened (SMO)-mediated tumor development is
accompanied by TGF activation in a variety of cell types of the tumor
microenvironment, such as keratinocytes, fibroblasts and myeloid-derived
suppressor cells. To determine the role of TGF signaling for SMO-mediated
tumor development, we generated cell type specific TGFR2flp/flp mice in
which SmoM2 expression is accompanied by TGFR2 knocking out. We found
that while K14cre-mediated TGFRII knockout promoted tumor development,
Mx-1cre-mediated TGFRII knockout suppressed tumor development, indicating
a tumor promoting effect of stromal TGF signaling. Using EGFP expressing
mice for bone marrow transplantation, we determined that most stromal
cells with TGF signaling activation are derived from bone marrow. To
further determine the role of stromal TGF signaling for hedgehog
signaling-mediated tumor development, we performed bone marrow
transplantation experiments in mice that can be induced to develop basal
cell carcinomas (BCC). We found that bone marrow cells with TGFR2
knockout, but not the wild type cells, inhibited tumor development and
reduced the size of developed tumors. Reduction of tumor development was
associated with decreased expression of multiple inflammation stimulatory
cytokines as well as the number of myeloid-derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs). The tumor promoting effect of TGF signaling is not limited to
BCC because tumor growth of B16-F10 cells was also affected by TGFRII
elimination in bone marrow-derived cells. Our data indicate that TGF
signaling in the tumor microenvironment, not in the keratinocytes, is
critical for maintaining the tumor microenvironment to foster tumor
development and growth.

