Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altered DNA methylation at imprinted insulin-like growth factor-2
(IGF2) resulting from heavy metal exposure in vitro and in vivo in
infants from the newborn epigenetic study (NEST).


Early life exposure to heavy metals, including lead, has adverse
consequences on health and development but the mechanism(s) underlying
these effects are unclear. Epigenetic deregulation resulting from lead
exposure may underlie these effects, and imprinted genes may be
particularly vulnerable since imprinting is established and maintained in
large part through DNA methylation. Imprinted genes are powerful
regulators of growth and energy utilization. The best studied imprinted
genes are insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) and H19 which are regulated
by at least two differentially methylated regions (DMRs). Altered
methylation at the IGF2/H19 DMRs has been associated with obesity,
neurodevelopmental disorders, and cancer. Data from the Newborn
Epigenetics STudy (NEST), which is focused on the influence of early life
environmental exposures on children's health, has indicated that
epigenetic alterations resulting from environmental exposures can be
sex-specific and exacerbated in African Americans as compared to
whites.We sought to determine if in vitro exposure to lead alters DNA
methylation at two regulatory DMRs important to imprinting and expression
of IGF2 and to assess how these results compared to the effects of lead
exposure in the NEST cohort.Immortalized normal human embryonic kidney
cells (HEK-293) were exposed to lead acetate (0-25 g/dL) for up to 72
hours followed by purification of genomic DNA. Bisulfite modification of
HEK-293 and NEST cohort DNA specimens was followed by pyrosequencing to
quantify DNA methylation. The North Carolina State Laboratory for Public
Health performed the blood lead level testing as part of a routine
check-up for children between the ages of 1-3 years old. The NEST cohort
participants were born between 2005-2008 at obstetrics-care facilities in
Durham County, North Carolina. For this study we used a sub-population of
participants whose mother lived at the same address since conception in
order to more accurately determine early and consistent environmental
lead exposure. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) testing was done on the in
vitro data to examine the difference between mean values of the lead
treatment conditions. For the NEST samples we used generalized linear
models in a sample of n=182 participants to examine aberrant methylation
at the IGF2 DMRs in children exposed to environmental lead from
conception to ages 1-3 years.In our in vitro model of early environmental
lead exposure we saw a 3-5% decrease in IGF2 DMR methylation with
increasing lead acetate concentration. Similar to the hypomethylation
seen in the in vitro studies, within the NEST cohort we observed a 4%
decrease in methylation at the H19 DMR in female children with blood lead
levels between 2-4 g/dL and an 8% decrease in methylation for female
infants with blood lead levels equal to or higher than 5 g/dL of lead.

