Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of cabazitaxel in mouse models of pediatric brain tumors.


Successful treatment of pediatric brain tumors is limited by significant
long-term toxicities associated with surgery and radiation therapy on the
developing central nervous system There is an unmet need for chemotherapy
with improved efficacy in difficult to treat tumors, such as
supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumors (sPNET) and atypical
teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (ATRT), as well as diagnoses that currently have
good long-term survival, such as medulloblastoma. Overcoming the blood
brain barrier is a large hurdle in effectively treating brain tumors,
particularly when there is a need, as with very young patients, to avoid
radiation therapy. Cabazitaxel is a promising taxane derivative shown to
effectively kill tumor cells in pre-clinical in vitro and in vivo
experiments. Similar to docetaxel, cabazitaxel has favorable drug
properties and a manageable safety profile in patients with advanced
solid tumors, with the advantage of being able to cross the blood brain
barrier. Additionally, cabazitaxel has shown efficacy in docetaxel
resistant tumors. The experiments presented here, tested the relative
efficacy of cabazitaxel and docetaxel in mouse models of pediatric brain
tumors. A spontaneous mouse model of medulloblastoma driven by Smo
activation was evaluated by magnetic resonance imaging for tumor growth
and blood brain barrier integrity before and after treatment with
cabazitaxel or docetaxel. Efficacy of cabazitaxel and docetaxel against
patient-derived pediatric brain tumors was tested in flank and orthotopic
xenograft models of medulloblastoma, sPNET, ATRT, and ependymoma. We
observed regression in some flank xenograft tumors after treatment with
cabazitaxel or docetaxel, with evidence of superior action of
cabazitaxel. These data support further testing of cabazitaxel as a
therapy to treat human pediatric brain tumors.This work has been funded
by Sanofi Inc.

