Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of AKT signaling promotes FOXO3a-dependent apoptosis in
castration-resistant prostate cancer cells.


Treatment for aggressive prostate cancers involves hormonal ablation
therapy, radical prostatectomy, radiation therapy, chemotherapy or in
combination. Despite their initial sensitivity to these treatments,
prostate cancer eventually progresses to castration -resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC), which is both aggressive and refractory to current
therapeutic modalities. Hence, CRPC demands the identification of novel
targeted therapies with minimal side effects. We identified Withaferin-A
(WA) a major bioactive compound derived from the medicinal plant,
Withania somnifera, is extensively used in Asian herbal medicines to
treat a variety of ailments, including cancer. Earlier, we reported that
WA induced the pro-apoptotic gene, prostate apoptosis response-4 (Par-4)
and apoptosis in CRPC cells. These results encouraged us to determine the
mechanism of action of WA on CRPC cells. It is known that activated AKT
negatively regulates forkhead transcription factor class O family protein
(FOXO3a) that regulates genes involved with tumorigenesis, cell cycle
arrest or apoptosis.In the present study, we found that FOXO3a is an
upstream of Par-4 signaling which transactivates Par-4 function in CRPC
cells. Inhibition of AKT activation by WA facilitates nuclear
translocation of FOXO3a which in turn activates Par-4 mediated apoptosis
in CRPC cells. Our confocal and immuno-precipitation studies confirmed
that upon activation. FOXO3a and Par-4 were co-localized in the nucleus.
Similar results were found with overexpression of FOXO3a showing
transactivation of Par-4 and growth arrest in CRPC cells. Treatment of
actinomycin-D or cyclohexmide along with WA, confirmed that FOXO3a
regulation on Par-4 function in CRPC cells. On contrary, inhibition of
FOXO3a by siRNA resulted in down regulation of Par-4 and apoptosis by WA
in CRPC cells suggesting FOXO3a activation is necessary for the induction
of Par-4 mediated apoptosis. Promoter bashing studies suggest a direct
interaction of FOXO3a with Par-4 promoter; a sequential deletion of
FOXO3a DNA binding sites in Par-4 promoter fails to induce Par-4
activation upon WA treatment in CRPC cells. Overall, our studies conclude
that Par-4 is a target of FOXO3a, and Par-4 activation is required for
induction of apoptosis in CRPC cells. Activation of FOXO3a is an
attractive target for the treatment of CRPC and molecules such as WA can
be explored further for the treatment of CRPC.

