Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression profiling of cofilin-1 in breast cancer cell lines and
biopsies.


Introduction. Despite oestrogen and human epidermal growth factor
receptor (HER2) targeted therapies improving patient survival, breast
cancer continues to be a significant cause of premature death since many
tumors do not respond to treatment or acquire resistance. Hence there
remains the need to identify novel targets for therapy and biomarkers for
prediction of response to treatment. A quantitative proteomics study of
matched normal and tumor biopsies identified 63 proteins to be
significantly increased or decreased in stage-specific tumors. Some have
previously been associated with breast cancer, while others such as
cofilin-1 represent new targets for investigation. Cofilin-1 was subject
to a range of analyses to determine its association with breast
cancer.Materials and Methods. Western blotting (WB) was performed on
protein extracts from breast cancer cell lines and matched normal and
tumor biopsies from Cypriot patients with different stages of the
disease. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was carried out on core biopsies from
the Leeds Breast Tissue Bank. Multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mass
spectrometry was performed on trypsin-digested protein extracts from
biopsies. Data from protein (Human Protein Atlas) and genomics (BioGPS,
TiGER, UniGene) databases were assimilated with the experimental
results.Results. WB indicated that cofilin-1 was ubiquitously expressed
in tumor cell lines, representative of Luminal A, Luminal B, basal-like,
claudin-low and HER2 phenotypes, at higher levels than normal breast cell
lines. WB also indicated increased expression of cofilin-1 in invasive
carcinoma tissues, compared to matched normal. Patients with ductal
carcinoma in situ or fibroadenoma exhibited less clear results, either
increasing slightly or remaining unchanged. MRM analysis of three
cofilin-1 peptides in tissue extracts of invasive carcinoma patients
indicated expression only in tumor. IHC of core biopsies exhibited strong
staining for cofilin-1 in ductal invasive carcinoma tissues with no
staining in normal breast cells. Genomics and proteomics databases
indicate that cofilin-1 is expressed in a diverse range of normal tissues
including major organs, gastro-intestinal tract, skin and tonsils.
However, mRNA and protein levels are observed to be increased in skin,
lung, liver, pancreatic and breast tumors.Discussion. The original
quantitative proteomics data indicated only relatively small changes in
expression (less than 2-fold) due to dynamic range limitations of the
technique. Additional analytical approaches substantiated that cofilin-1
is significantly up-regulated in advanced breast cancer patients. Further
patient sets are required to confirm the importance of cofilin-1 levels
in early stages of breast cancer compared to benign tissues.
Bioinformatics provided further confidence in our findings, highlighting
the value of utilising databases for evidence of disease-specific
proteins.

