Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aurora kinase A (AURKA) expression in colorectal cancer liver
metastasis is associated with poor prognosis.


Introduction: Approximately half of all colorectal cancer (CRC) patients
die as a consequence of metastases. Hemihepatectomy, occasionally in
combination with radiofrequency ablation (RFA), is the only curative
treatment available for patients with CRC liver metastases (CRCLM).
Patient eligibility is based on established prognostic
clinicopathological variables, however, 70% of patients still die within
5 years indicating that better prognostic markers are needed. Aurora
kinase A (AURKA) is a driver of 20q gain-associated tumor progression and
is associated with disease recurrence in stage III CRC patients. AIM:
This study aimed to investigate the prognostic value of AURKA protein
expression in liver metastases of CRC patients who underwent
hemihepatectomy with curative intent. Patients and Methods: Tissue
microarrays (TMAs) were generated from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
CRCLM of 507 patients who underwent hemihepatectomy in the Netherlands
between 1990 and 2010. Matched primary CRC tissue was collected of 234
patients. TMAs were stained for AURKA by immunohistochemistry, nuclear
expression of neoplastic cells was assessed and subsequently associated
with patient overall survival (OS) in a training and validation set.
Results: High AURKA expression in CRCLM was associated with poor OS in a
univariate analysis (HRR 1.68; 95%CI 1.04-2.73; P=0.03) and upon
correction for established prognostic clinicopathological variables (HRR
1.77; 95%CI 1.02-3.08; P=0.04). Furthermore, AURKA expression in liver
metastases was correlated to its expression in corresponding primary CRC
(P=0.0002). Conclusion and Discussion: AURKA protein expression is a
molecular biomarker with prognostic value for CRC patients with liver
metastasis, independent of established clinicopathological variables.
This study opens novel opportunities to investigate AURKA inhibitors for
personalized therapy.

