Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA expression subtypes in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.


Background: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a
heterogeneous disease whose underlying etiology is unknown. Gene
expression (GE) subtypes were detected in HNSCC by Chung et al. (Cancer
Cell 2004) and validated in a recent study by our group. However, to the
best of our knowledge no corresponding investigation of microRNA (miRNA)
expression subtypes in HNSCC has been performed, as previous studies
compared miRNA expression patterns in tumor and normal
samples.Techniques: After receiving informed consent, we obtained tumor
samples from an incident surgical sample of HNSCC patients at the
University of North Carolina Hospital. miRNA and GE assays were performed
using Affymetrix GeneChip miRNA 1.0 and Agilent 44K Gene Expression
platforms, respectively. miRNA expression subtypes were discovered using
ConsensusClusterPlus, statistical significance of miRNA expression
patterns was assessed with SigClust, SAM was used to identify
differentially expressed miRNAs, and the miRBase and DAVID databases were
used to identify target genes and enriched pathways.Results: After
applying quality control procedures, miRNA expression data was available
for 103 patients and 830 hsa-miRNAs, while GE data was available for 138
patients and 15,597 genes. Both miRNA and GE data was available for 75
patients. Clinical data was available for all patients. Three miRNA
expression subtypes were detected, and all pairwise comparisons of the
expression patterns in the subtypes were statistically significant after
performing a Bonferroni correction. The association between GE and miRNA
expression subtypes was not statistically significant. Differentially
expressed miRNAs were identified when expression in each subtype was
compared to the remaining subtypes. Examples include miR-15a, which was
underexpressed in one subtype and has been shown act as a tumor
suppressor miRNA, as well as both miR-155 and miR-21, which were
overexpressed in a different subtype and have been shown to have
oncogenic effects. Target genes corresponding to each collection of
differentially expressed miRNAs were also identified, and results from
the DAVID functional annotation database suggest that a number of
cancer-related pathways are enriched for each set of target genes.
Pearson correlation coefficients were computed for expression of each
differentially expressed miRNA and the expression of its target genes.
Several statistically significant negative miR-target gene correlations
were found after adjusting for multiple comparisons, including miR-15b
and SOX5, miR-520e and VEGFA, as well as miR-98 and FRAS1.Conclusion:
miRNA expression subtypes of HNSCC provide a valuable method for
categorizing tumors that complements known GE expression subtypes.
Moreover, the subtypes identify known and novel miRs with tumor
suppressor and oncogenic effects via their interaction with target genes.

