Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short overall telomere length and chromosome 17p-specific telomere
length in peripheral blood leukocytes are associated with increased risk
of esophageal adenocarcinoma.


Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is a deadly cancer. The incidence of EAC
has increased dramatically in the United States in the past three
decades. The biological mechanisms of EAC development are not fully
understood. Telomeres are specialized chromatin structures essential for
the maintenance of chromosomal integrity. Telomere shortening in somatic
tissues has been shown as an early event during carcinogenesis. Previous
studies also suggested that constitutive short telomeres in peripheral
blood leukocytes (PBLs) are associated with increased risks of several
cancers, including esophageal cancer. In this study, we measured overall
telomere length in PBLs using real-time PCR in a large case control study
of 805 EAC cases and 805 age and gender-matched controls. Furthermore, we
developed a fluorescence in site hybridization (FISH) based method to
evaluate several chromosome-specific telomere length with the risk of EAC
in a subset of subjects. The mean overall telomere length in cases was
significantly shorter than that in controls (pEsophageal adenocarcinoma
(EAC) is a deadly cancer. The incidence of EAC has increased dramatically
in the United States in the past three decades. The biological mechanisms
of EAC development are not fully understood. Telomeres are specialized
chromatin structures essential for the maintenance of chromosomal
integrity. Telomere shortening in somatic tissues has been shown as an
early event during carcinogenesis. Previous studies also suggested that
constitutive short telomeres in peripheral blood leukocytes (PBLs) are
associated with increased risks of several cancers, including esophageal
cancer. In this study, we measured overall telomere length in PBLs using
real-time PCR in a large case control study of 805 EAC cases and 805 age
and gender-matched controls. Furthermore, we developed a fluorescence in
site hybridization (FISH) based method to evaluate several
chromosome-specific telomere length with the risk of EAC in a subset of
subjects. The mean overall telomere length in cases was significantly
shorter than that in controls (p<0.001). Dichotomized at the median
telomere length in controls, individuals with short PBL telomere length
was associated with a 1.53-fold (95% CI, 1.26-1.87) increased risk of
EAC. There was a significant dose-effect in quartile analysis:
Individuals in quartile with the shortest telomeres showed a nearly
2-fold (95%CI: 1.47-2.57) elevated EAC risk compared to the reference
group of the longest quartile of telomere length. In chromosome-specific
telomere length analysis, we found that short chromosome 17p-specific
telomere length (defined as the ratio of chromosome 17p-specific telomere
length to overall telomere length), but not 2p- and 7q-specific telomere
length, was associated with a significantly increased risk of EAC
(OR=2.02, 95% CI, 1.00-4.08). This study validates that short overall
telomere length in PBLs predisposes to EAC with a much larger sample size
and supports the role of chromosome 17p aberrations in EAC development.

