Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibiting androgen receptor-associated Src signaling by VAL201
inhibits prostate cancer metastasis in an orthotopic mouse model.


VAL201 is a specific inhibitor of androgen receptor (AR) and estrogen
receptor (ER) associated src signaling that has shown promising effects
to reduce prostate cancer growth, and the compound is considered as a
potential treatment for castration-resistant prostate cancer. Inhibition
of src by VAL201 takes place after androgen binding, allowing inhibition
of growth without blocking desirable receptor-dependent transcriptional
activity, and thereby eliminating the majority of side effects associated
with androgen deprivation therapies. The ER positive human prostate
cancer cell line PC-3 is usually cited as AR negative, but there is
evidence of low levels of AR expression as a form without transcriptional
activity that could associate with src. We have studied the effects of
Val201 on PC-3 cell proliferation in vitro and growth and metastasis in
vivo in an orthotopic xenograft model. The proliferation effects were
studied for 100 pM, 1 nM, 10 nM, 100 nM and 1 M concentrations of VAL201
by measuring WST-1 values at days 3, 5, 7 and 9. Groups with vehicle and
1 M gemcitabine as reference compound were included in the study. The
xenograft study was performed with 6-7 week-old immunodeficient BALB/c
nude mice that were allocated to 6 groups (with n=15/group) according to
the body weight, one group receiving vehicle and the others VAL201 at
doses 0.04, 0.4, 4, 10 and 20 mg/kg. PC-3 cells in Matrigel were
inoculated orthotopically into the prostate. Subcutaneous dosing was
started at day 1 and continued daily for 28 days. The mice were weighed
twice a week. Orthotopic tumors were measured by caliper and the prostate
and the regional lymph nodes were harvested at sacrifice. Metastases in
lymph nodes were determined from HE stained paraffin sections. VAL201
showed dose-dependent inhibition of PC-3 cell proliferation that was
statistically significant with all doses above 100 pM. In the xenograft
study VAL201 had no effect on body weight. Statistically significant
effects on orthotopic tumor growth were not observed despite of a 35%
decrease observed in tumor volume with the 0.4 mg/kg dose. However, 0.04
and 0.4 mg/kg doses of VAL201 showed a significant 50% inhibition of the
development of lymph node metastases. As a conclusion, VAL201 inhibited
proliferation of PC-3 cells in vitro and development of lymph node
metastases in a xenograft model, demonstrating its potential in
inhibiting prostate cancer growth and metastasis without adverse effects
associated with androgen deprivation.

