Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microenvironmental regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal
transitions in breast cancer metastasis.


Metastatic spread is the main cause of death in breast cancer patients.
To successfully develop metastatic lesions, tumor cells exhibit
plasticity to adapt to the changing microenvironment that they encounter
at both the primary and distant sites. Notably, tumor cells undergo
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) to acquire metastatic potential.
In the metastatic organ, the disseminated tumor cells are thought to
undergo mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) to form lethal
macrometastatic lesions. However, while EMT/MET has been well
demonstrated in cancer cell lines in vitro, whether such transitions
occur in vivo is debated.Our study is based on an emerging paradigm that
microenvironmental regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transitions
contributes to tumor growth and metastasis. To evaluate this, we have
devised a lineage tracing approach where a unique EMT-induced
Cre-mediated fluorescence switch system monitors epithhelial-mesenchymal
transitions in physiologically relevant orthotopic and spontaneous breast
cancer metastasis in vivo. Using this system, we found that the
CD11b+F4/80+ tumor-associated macrophages promote EMT in the primary
tumor by secreting TGF1 and PDGFA, while the CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid
progenitors facilitate MET of disseminated tumor cells in metastatic
lungs by secreting proteoglycan versican thereby providing novel
mechanistic insights into how the tumor-stroma cross talk confers
prometastatic properties.Our finding that different subsets of
inflammatory cells are associated with EMT in the primary tumor and MET
in the metastatic organ has provided clinical translation opportunities.
Previously, the therapeutic targeting of EMT (i.e. TGF1 blockade) has
been associated with the caveat that it may actually promote the
formation of fatal macrometastases. Here, the identification of unique
cellular EMT and MET regulators provides an opportunity for inhibiting
one process without promoting the other, or inhibiting both EMT and MET
simultaneously. Importantly, administration of non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs impaired metastases by targeting specific
inflammatory populations that contribute to the EMT/MET-promoting
microenvironment in preclinical mouse models of breast cancer.

