Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of nuclear factor-kB in human oral squamous cell
carcinoma and its relationship with clinical factors.


[Background] Nuclear factor-B (NF-B), a key transcription factor plays a
major role in carcinogenesis, regulate many important signaling pathways
involved in tumor progression. The overexpression of NF-B in the nuclei
has been reported to be a poorer prognostic factor in various
malignancies. However, the prognostic value of NF-B expression in
patients with oral cancer is less understood.[Purpose] The aims of
present study were to evaluate the expression of p65 protein, which is
NF-B subunits, in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and to elucidate
the relationships among the p65 expression, clinical stages, histological
differentiation and classification of invasion mode.[Materials and
Methods] Tissue specimens were obtains from 78 patients with OSCC after
surgery or biopsy. Immunohistochemistry was used to assess the p65
subunit of NF-B, using >10% nuclear staining-positive cells as a
surrogate of activation. Human OSCC cell lines, B88, cells were used in
this study. After B88 cells were inoculated into the tongue of nude mice,
tumors and metastatic lymph nodes were cut off, and applied to
immunohistochemical analysis of p65.[Results] Immunohistochemical
analysis of 78 cases of OSCC showed that the expression of cytoplasmic
p65 was detected in all OSCC and in 4/6 cases of epithelial dysplasia,
but not in normal epithelial cells. 19 (24.3%) cases of 78 OSCC patients
expressed nuclear p65 protein. There was no relationship between nuclear
p65 expression and clinical stages, or classification of invasion mode.
There were significant differences between nuclear p65 expression and
histological differentiation or metastasis. Nuclear p65 expression of
cancer cells in metastatic lymph nodes increased compared with cancer
cells of primary sites. Although nuclear p65 expression of B88 cells
tumor in the tongue was not almost detected, nuclear p65 expression of
cancer cells in metastatic lymph nodes was increased.[Conclusions] These
findings suggested that the expression of nuclear p65 in OSCC could be
related to histological differentiation and metastasis.

