Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted inhibition of STAT3 dimerization by garcinol suppresses
the growth of human hepatocellular carcinoma in vitro and in vivo.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common malignancy
worldwide and the third cause of global cancer mortality. Activation of
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is commonly
encountered in tumor cells and is a critical mediator of oncogenic
signaling in HCC and controls the expression of several genes involved in
proliferation, survival, metastasis and angiogenesis. Current
drug-targeted therapies, besides being expensive, are associated with
serious side effects and morbidity. Thus, novel agents that can suppress
STAT3 activation have potential for both prevention and treatment of HCC.
In the present report, we investigated whether the potent HAT/KAT
inhibitor, garcinol, (a polyisoprenylated benzophenone), could suppress
STAT3 activation in HCC cells and nude mice model. We found that garcinol
could inhibit constitutive STAT3 activation in a dose- and time-dependent
manner both by inhibiting STAT3 phosphorylation and acetylation in HCC
cells. When investigated for molecular mechanism(s), we found that
garcinol interferes with the dimer formation of STAT3 thereby inhibits
its nuclear localization. Computational modeling showed that garcinol
could bind to the SH2 domain of STAT3 and suppresses its dimerization in
vitro. To understand the cellular mechanism(s) of inhibition of STAT3
function by garcinol, we observed that upon inhibition of STAT3
dimerization by garcinol, STAT3 DNA binding ability gets repressed. The
inhibition of STAT3 activation by garcinol led to the suppression of
various gene products involved in proliferation, survival, and
angiogenesis. Finally, when administered i.p., garcinol inhibited the
growth of human HCC xenograft tumors in male athymic nu/nu mice. In
conclusion, results from in vitro and in vivo studies suggest that
garcinol exerts its anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects through
suppression of STAT3 signaling cascade in HCC by inhibiting its
phosphorylation, acetylation and ultimately dimerization.

