Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genistein protects hematopoietic stem cells against G-CSF induced
DNA damage.


Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is widely utilized in
multiple clinical settings to lessen the effects of neutropenia. Although
clearly beneficial, a particular concern is that G-CSF therapy may
increase the risk of MDS and or AML. The most striking example is that of
Severe Congenital Neutropenia (SCN). While G-CSF clearly improves
survival on SCN patients, there are several lines of evidence to suggest
that G-CSF treatment contributes to development of leukemia. We
hypothesize that G-CSF induced excessive hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
proliferation leads to DNA damage and genome instability. To test our
premise, mice were treated with G-CSF for 4 months and bone marrow cells
were analyzed. Results demonstrated a 3 fold increase in the LSK
population and a 2 fold increase in the amount of dsDNA breaks via the
presence of nuclear pH2AX. To determine if the G-CSF induced
proliferation lead to chromosome alterations, we performed array CGH
analyses. DNA from bone marrow cells from animals treated with G-CSF for
4 months were compared to untreated mice. Our results demonstrate
variations in several chromosome regions. FISH analysis of Lin-Sca+ bone
marrow cells confirmed loss on regions of chromosome 2 (6%) and 17 (30%).
Since prolonged G-CSF exposure promotes genomic instability in HSCs we
hypothesize that an alternative strategy would be to co-administer a drug
that selectively blocks the effect of G-CSF on HSCs. Previous studies
suggested genistein as an attractive compound with excellent bioavalibity
that has anti-oxidant and anti-proliferative properties. Mice were
concomitant treated with G-CSF and genistein 3 times a week. Genistein
partially blocked the G-CSF induced proliferation of LSK cells, measured
by BrdU incorporation, and reduced pH2AX levels in this population by
40%. This was also accompanied by a reduction in LSK cells with an
abnormal FISH signal (50% reduction). Importantly, genistein did not
block the G-CSF driven expansion of mature neutrophils as total number of
neutrophils in mice treated with G-CSF and genistein are the same as
those treated with G-CSF alone. We demonstrate that G-CSF treatment
induces GSK3 phosphorylation and Cyclin D1 and D3 expression. Genistein
blocked GSK3 phosphorylation and Cyclin D1 and D3 induction.
Collectively, our results imply that prolonged G-CSF treatment induces
DNA damage in HSCs by initiating cell cycle progression. HSCs are long
lived, quiescent cells that utilize NHEJ, a relatively error prone
process, for DNA repair when progressing from G0 to G1. We demonstrate,
that genistein, at levels obtainable through oral supplementation, is
able to reduce DNA damage by attenuating G-CSF induced HSC proliferation
without compromising G-CSFs ability to accelerate terminal neutrophilic
differentiation. These results suggest that genistein may be an effective
therapeutic agent in patients with SCN who require prolonged G-CSF support

