Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pantethine, a new therapeutic approach against ovarian cancer.


Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death from gynecologic malignancy
among women in developed countries with an estimated incidence of 205,000
cases worldwide per year, resulting in 125,000 deaths. Although the
prognosis in cases detected at early stage is quite favorable, the vast
majority of cases are diagnosed at an advanced stage, when five-year
survival rates are only 30-40%. The poor prognosis of ovarian cancer is
due to a combination of the aggressive characteristics of the disease and
a lack of effective therapy, further compounded by late detection of the
disease and resistance of most tumors to current treatments. Metastases
and malignant ascites, a devastating condition that significantly
contributes to poor quality of life and mortality, are complications
frequently observed in terminal ovarian cancer. New therapeutic
strategies exploiting novel targets are urgently needed to minimize
morbidity and improve survival rates for ovarian cancer patients. In the
present study, we applied non-invasive MRI to determine the use of
pantethine as a therapeutic agent in an orthotopic model of ovarian
cancer. Pantethine is the stable disulfide form of pantetheine, a
derivative of vitamin B5; it is the precursor of coenzyme A. In a mouse
model, pantethine has been shown to prevent the perivascular inflammation
associated with cerebral malaria (1) and to inhibit cell transendothelial
migration (Gharib B, unpublished data). To detect the effect of
pantethine on ovarian cancer progression, metastases, and ascites
build-up, we used an orthotopic model in which the relevant tumor
physiological environment is maintained, and that frequently result in
metastases and malignant ascites. OVCAR3 human epithelial ovary
adenocarcinoma cells were used in the present study. The orthotopic
implantation was performed by surgically transplanting a piece of OVCAR3
tumor tissue on the ovary of severe combined immunodeficient female mice.
We started the treatment 4 weeks post-implantation, when the tumors were
approximately 100 mm3 with a daily i.p. injection of pantethine at a dose
of 750 mg/kg. Under these conditions, no side effects were observed. A
control group was injected daily with saline. Tumor growth was followed
weekly non-invasively by MRI on a 4.7T spectrometer. Slower tumor growth
was observed in the treated group. Interestingly, when we sacrificed the
mice after 4 weeks of treatment, we observed liver metastases in 6 out of
7 control mice, but only in 3 out of 7 treated mice, lungs metastases in
2 out of 7 control mice, and 0 out of 7 treated mice and finally, ascites
in 6 out of 7 control mice, and 2 out of 7 treated mice. Our study
identifies pantethine as a new promising drug against ovarian cancer,
showing effects on tumor progression, metastases occurrence, and ascites
formation.(1) Penet MF et al. PNAS 105:1321-6, 2008. This work was
supported by a Career Award to M-FP from NIH P50CA103175, The HERA
Foundation, and The Honorable Tina Brozman Foundation.

