Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transgenic model for early prostate metastasis to the lymph nodes.


Background: The emergence of recurrent, metastatic prostate cancer
following the failure of androgen-deprivation therapy represents the
lethal phenotype of this disease. However, little is known regarding the
genes and pathways that regulate this metastatic process, and moreover,
it is unclear whether metastasis is an early or late event. The
SSeCKS/Gravin/AKAP12 (SSeCKS) gene, previously shown to suppress prostate
cancer metastasis upon re-expression (1,2), as well as the tumor
suppressor gene, Rb, are either transcriptionally downregulated or
deleted in human prostate cancers (3,4). Mouse models deficient in either
SSeCKS or Rb exhibit prostatic hyperplasia (5,6). Moreover, SSeCKS-null
fibroblasts as well as SSeCKS-null prostates display Rb-dependent
premature senescence markers (7). Methods: In order to determine whether
the combined loss of AKAP12 and Rb in the prostate synergizes to induce
oncogenic progression, Akap12-/- mice were crossed with
Pb4-Cre;RbloxP/loxP mice to generate Akap12-/-;RbPE-/ progeny, with the
Probasin-Cre passed only through males. Results: The combined loss of
SSeCKS and Rb results in prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN)
starting at 6 months of age that fails to progress to malignancy
(adenocarcinoma) after 18 months. The PIN lesions were marked by
increased Ki-67 proliferation of cytokeratin 8 (CK8), p63-negative
luminal cells as well as p63-positive basal cells. Interestingly, these
lesions also had increased numbers of androgen-receptor (AR)-positive,
p63-positive, CK5-negative cells. There was evidence of reactive stroma
including mural hyperplasia and inflammatory cell infiltration.
Strikingly, 83% of mice with PIN lesions exhibited metastases to draining
lymph nodes (LN), marked by well-differentiated tumors cells expressing
markers of basal (p63, CK14) and luminal (CK8 and AR) epithelial cells,
although none expressed the basal marker, CK5. PCR-based tests for the
deleted floxed Rb allele from laser capture microdissected LN lesions
confirmed the prostatic origin of these metastatic cells. The LN lesions
showed very limited inflammation, based on very few cells staining with
the histiocyte marker, CD68. Conclusions: Taken together, these data
suggest that in the context of Rb loss, SSeCKS suppresses the oncogenic
proliferation and early metastatic spread of transitional, basal-luminal
prostate tumor cells.

