Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel MPS1 inhibitors with potential anticancer activity.


MPS1, a mitotic kinase that is overexpressed in several human cancers,
has been shown to contribute to the alignment of chromosomes to the
metaphase plate, as well as to the execution of the spindle assembly
checkpoint (SAC). Here, we report the identification and functional
characterization of three novel inhibitors of MPS1 from two structurally
independent chemical classes, Mps-BAY1, Mps-BAY2a and Mps-BAY2b. In
biochemical assays, these molecules inhibited the kinase activity of MPS1
with IC50 values in the low nanomolar range. By selectively inactivating
MPS1, these small molecule inhibitors can arrest the proliferation of
cancer cells, causing their polyploidization and/or cell death. Cancer
cells treated with Mps-BAY1 or Mps-BAY2a manifested multiple signs of
mitotic perturbation including inefficient chromosomal congression during
metaphase, unscheduled SAC inactivation, and severe anaphase defects.
Videomicroscopic cell fate profiling of GFP-histone 2B-expressing cells
revealed the capacity of MPS1 inhibitors to subvert mitotic timing by
inducing a premature anaphase entry in the context of misaligned
metaphase plates. Hence, in the presence of MPS1 inhibitors, cells either
divided in a bipolar (but often asymmetric) fashion or entered one or
more rounds of abortive mitosis, generating gross aneuploidy and
polyploidy, respectively. In both cases, cells ultimately succumbed from
the mitotic catastrophe-induced activation of the intrinsic pathway of
apoptosis. Of note, MPS1 inhibitors and paclitaxel (a microtubular
poison) combined at low doses synergized at increasing the frequency of
chromosome misalignments and missegregations in the context of SAC
inactivation. This resulted in massive polyploidization, followed by the
activation of mitotic catastrophe. A more than additive interaction
between paclitaxel and MPS1 inhibitors could also be demonstrated in vivo
in a HeLa-Matu human cervical xenograft model. The combination of these
agents reduced the mitotic index in xenograft tumors and exerted superior
antineoplastic effects (T/C 0.04) as compared to the administration of
vehicle, as well as paclitaxel (T/C 0.38) or MPS inhibitor (T/C 0.51)
alone. Altogether, these results suggest that MPS1 inhibitors may have
potent anticancer activity, either as standalone agents or in combination
with microtubule-targeting agents.

