Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ESE1/ELF3 and constitutive activation of NF-kB in human prostate
cancer: prognostic relevance and rationale for context-dependent
therapeutic strategies.


Activation of inflammatory circuits occurs frequently in human cancers.
Here, we show that ESE1/ELF3 exerts oncogenic functions and is an
important link between inflammatory signaling and prostate cancer
progression. We found that ESE1/ELF3 is overexpressed in human primary
and metastatic prostate tumors, mediates key transforming phenotypes in
prostate cancer cells and induces transcriptional changes in relevant
oncogenic pathways. Moreover, ESE1/ELF3 contributes to IL-1beta induced
and constitutive activation of NF-kB by multiple transcriptional and
post-transcriptional mechanisms. ESE1/ELF3 interacts with p65/RELA and
p50/NFKB1, enhances nuclear localization and transcriptional activity of
the NF-kB complex, and induces transcription of p50/NFKB1by binding to
the gene promoter. This positive feedback loop leading to ESE1/ELF3
upregulation and NF-kB activation is also active in human prostate
tumors. Bioinformatic analyses revealed that the ESE1/ELF3
transcriptional program converged with NF-kB and IL-1beta target genes in
experimental models and human tumors. Furthermore, human prostate tumors
with high ESE1/ELF3 expression were enriched of ESE1/ELF3 and NF-kB
target genes. Evaluation of tumor tissue microarrays by
immunohistochemistry and of multiple gene expression datasets revealed
that combined upregulation of ESE1/ELF3 and p65/p50 was associated with
significantly reduced overall survival and increased disease recurrence.
Furthermore, we speculated that the positive feedback loop between
ESE1/ELF3 and NF-kB could be selectively disrupted by NF-kB inhibitors.
To test this hypothesis, we used BAY-117085, a known inhibitor of NF-kB,
and a second compound, EC-70124, which was recently reported to potently
inhibit NF-kB. Both compounds inhibited NF-kB reporter activity in
prostate cancer cells and reduced phosphorylation of IkB. Moreover,
expression of genes induced by ESE1/ELF3, cell migration and
proliferation were significantly reduced by NF-kB inhibitors selectively
in ESE1/ELF3 expressing cells. Collectively, this study provides a
mechanistic link between inflammation and prostate cancer progression and
suggests new tools for patient stratification and design of
context-dependent strategies for a subset of prostate cancer patients
with clinically aggressive and high risk tumors marked by ESE1/ELF3 and
NF-kB activation.

