Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The efficacy of the PARP inhibitors olaparib and veliparib for
prevention of breast cancer in a mouse model of BRCA1 deficiency.


Women with inherited mutations in a BRCA gene have a 65-85% lifetime risk
of developing breast cancer. Currently, watchful waiting or bilateral
prophylactic mastectomy is offered to these high risk women, although
they are ideal candidates for effective chemoprevention. Because BRCA
proteins play crucial roles in homologous recombination, inhibiting base
excision repair, the default pathway in BRCA-deficient cells, induces
cell death in these cells but not in normal cells. PARP (poly ADP ribose
polymerase) inhibitors block base excision repair, and PARP inhibitors
such as olaparib and veliparib are being evaluated in clinical trials.
However, these drugs have not been tested for their ability to prevent
cancer. When conditional knockout (co) of BRCA1 is coupled with a
mutation in p53, Brca1Co/Co;MMTV-Cre;p53+/ mice develop ER- mammary
tumors by 6-10 months of age. In a pilot feeding study, female mice were
fed olaparib (200 mg/kg diet) or veliparib (100 mg/kg diet) for 2 wks,
and tissue levels averaged 40 nM and 100 nM in plasma and 20 nM and 100
nM in the mammary glands, respectively. When started in diet at 10 wks of
age and fed continuously, both drugs significantly (P 14 mice/group).
Although both drugs were well-tolerated at these doses, the lowest
effective dose of a drug should be used for prevention. In a dose
de-escalation study, mice were fed olaparib at 50-100 mg/kg diet. Both
doses significantly (P 14 mice/group). Although both drugs were
well-tolerated at these doses, the lowest effective dose of a drug should
be used for prevention. In a dose de-escalation study, mice were fed
olaparib at 50-100 mg/kg diet. Both doses significantly (P < 0.05)
delayed tumor development by 3.3-3.5 wks compared to the controls. An
intermittent prevention strategy was also used. This approach is
clinically significant because the introduction of rest periods between
doses should minimize drug resistance or any unforeseen toxicities from
PARP inhibitors that may appear upon prolonged drug exposure. In this
strategy, mice were fed olaparib (200 mg/kg diet) for 2 wks at a time,
followed by 4 wk rest periods of control diet. Intermittent treatment
with olaparib is nearly as effective as continuous feeding and increases
the age of tumor onset to 34.7 0.9 wks vs. 29.7 1.0 wks in the control
group (P 16 mice/group). Ongoing studies are testing whether olaparib
induces apoptosis in the mammary glands and tumors of these mice. In
summary, these studies demonstrate that the PARP inhibitors olaparib and
veliparib are effective for delaying tumor development in BRCA1-deficient
mice. Moreover, dose de-escalation and intermittent treatment are
important new strategies that need to be developed for chemoprevention.
Supported by Susan G. Komen for the Cure

