Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-canonical telomere maintenance mechanism in B-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia.


Unlimited cancer cells proliferation requires mechanisms that counteract
telomere attrition. In the majority of cancer cells this is possible
through up-regulation of telomerase activity. Alternatively, cancer cells
use homologous recombination between telomeres. This second mechanism
called ALT (Alternative Lengthening of Telomere) implicates proteins that
either elongates telomeres or that either prevents telomere loss
(maintenance). Among these proteins a complex composed of the
topoisomerase III alpha (hTopoIII), BLM, RMI1 and 2 is require to repair
stalled replication forks.Little is known about the involvement of the
ALT mechanism in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL), which shows
low telomerase activity, shelterin defect and telomeric dysfunctions.We
found that hTopoIII gene expression is downregulated in almost all B-CLL
patients tested (94%; n=31), with 60% of B-CLL patients presenting a two
time decreased compared to control samples. That prompted us to build the
first CpG islands map of the hTopoIII promoter and to characterize those
that are methylated in B-CLL patients. To investigate the methylation
impact, we first treated CLL cell lines with 5-Azacytidine, a chemical
analogue of cytidine that induces hypomethylation, and demonstrated that
this treatment increases hTopoIII expression. In line, luciferase
experiments revealed that SSSI-induced CpG islands methylation inside the
TopoIII promoter leads to a transcriptional inhibition. Nevertheless,
deletion mutants of the TopoIII promoter suggested that CpG islands found
to be methylated in B-CLL patients are not implicated in TopoIII
expression regulation through methylation.Interestingly, we didn't
observe a good correlation between mRNA and protein expressions in all
B-CLL patients (n=6). Indeed some patients with a moderate amount of mRNA
showed low level of the corresponding protein hTopoIII (Unlimited cancer
cells proliferation requires mechanisms that counteract telomere
attrition. In the majority of cancer cells this is possible through
up-regulation of telomerase activity. Alternatively, cancer cells use
homologous recombination between telomeres. This second mechanism called
ALT (Alternative Lengthening of Telomere) implicates proteins that either
elongates telomeres or that either prevents telomere loss (maintenance).
Among these proteins a complex composed of the topoisomerase III alpha
(hTopoIII), BLM, RMI1 and 2 is require to repair stalled replication
forks.Little is known about the involvement of the ALT mechanism in
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL), which shows low telomerase
activity, shelterin defect and telomeric dysfunctions.We found that
hTopoIII gene expression is downregulated in almost all B-CLL patients
tested (94%; n=31), with 60% of B-CLL patients presenting a two time
decreased compared to control samples. That prompted us to build the
first CpG islands map of the hTopoIII promoter and to characterize those
that are methylated in B-CLL patients. To investigate the methylation
impact, we first treated CLL cell lines with 5-Azacytidine, a chemical
analogue of cytidine that induces hypomethylation, and demonstrated that
this treatment increases hTopoIII expression. In line, luciferase
experiments revealed that SSSI-induced CpG islands methylation inside the
TopoIII promoter leads to a transcriptional inhibition. Nevertheless,
deletion mutants of the TopoIII promoter suggested that CpG islands found
to be methylated in B-CLL patients are not implicated in TopoIII
expression regulation through methylation.Interestingly, we didn't
observe a good correlation between mRNA and protein expressions in all
B-CLL patients (n=6). Indeed some patients with a moderate amount of mRNA
showed low level of the corresponding protein hTopoIII (<50% compared to
controls; n=3). Downregulation of hTopoIII may increase recombination
rate between sister chromatid. Hence, experiments aiming to evaluate
sister chromatid exchange and telomeric sister chromatid exchange rate on
B-CLL patients samples according to their hTopoIII expression level have
been performed and the data will be discuss.Our results suggest that
there is no canonical mechanism maintaining telomeres in B-CLL but rather
an overall recombination arising during replication, due to hTopoIII
downregulation, leading to a silenced genetic instability in the early
step of the disease.

