Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of PI3K Inhibitor chemosensitivity in human tumor
explants using the Mosaic Blue assay and relationship to biomarkers by
immunohistochemistry.


The AKT protein family plays an important role in cellular survival by
inhibiting apoptotic processes and is one of the major downstream targets
of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway. Mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) is a key kinase acting downstream of the activation of
PI3K. Several chemotherapeutic agents target this pathway and are in
clinical trials to treat patients with solid tumors. The use of
chemosensitivity testing using human cancer explants is very useful in
identifying biomarkers that relate to the intrinsic sensitivity of the
tumor to a chemotherapetuic agent. The Mosaic Blue assay is a soft agar,
ex vivo tumor response assay that utilized non-expanded patient cancer
cells.Human tumors with matched fresh tissue and formalin-fixed, paraffin
embedded (FFPE) tissue were used for this study. Fresh tissues were
disaggregated into single cells and exposed to various inhibitors of the
PI3K pathway. Samples were classified as resistant or sensitive. The
corresponding FFPE tissue block was stained by immunohistochemistry for
several phosphorylated proteins, which included AKT, PRAS40, 4EBP1, S6
kinase, S6 ribosomal protein, and PTEN in accordance with validated
protocols. Additional fresh cells were also treated with inhibitors,
harvested, and phophorylated proteins were evaluated in the pre and
post-dose tumor cells. Results were compared the chemosensitivity results
and 2 relationships were identified. First, biomarker status of the
archival tissue was evaluated in order to understand the intrinsic
chemosensitivity. Second, biomarker status upon treatment was evaluated
to understand modulation of proteins due to therapy.In summary, use of
soft agar ex vivo tumor response assays such as the Mosaic Blue assay is
a useful tool to predict relative sensitivity across tumor types and
allow investigation of potential biomarkers.

