Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Astrocyte Elevated Gene-1 (AEG-1) interacts with retinoid X
receptor (RXR) and abrogates its function.


The oncogene Astrocyte Elevated Gene-1 (AEG-1), also known as Metadherin
(MTDH), is overexpressed in a diverse array of cancers, including
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and plays an important role in promoting
tumor development and progression. Protein-protein interaction
predominantly mediates the tumor promoting effects of AEG-1. We now
describe screening of a human liver cDNA library by yeast two hybrid
assay resulting in identification of Retinoid X Receptor (RXR) as an
AEG-1-interacting protein. Site-directed mutagenesis assays identified an
LXXLL motif in the N-terminus of AEG-1 mediating interaction with RXR. We
employed human HCC cell lines stably overexpressing AEG-1 or with
knockdown of AEG-1 and mouse hepatocytes isolated from a transgenic mouse
with hepatocyte-specific expression of AEG-1 (Alb/AEG-1) and from AEG-1
knockout (AEG-1 KO) mouse for our studies. Luciferase reporter assays in
these cells demonstrate that AEG-1 profoundly inhibits RXR-mediated
transcriptional regulation of its heterodimer partner, such as Retinoic
Acid Receptor (RAR), Thyroid Hormone Receptor (TR), Liver X Receptor
(LXR) and Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor (PPAR), in the
presence or absence of their corresponding ligands. In this study, we
focus on retinoic acid (RA) and thyroid hormone (T3) function. AEG-1
markedly inhibits expression of RA- and T3-induced genes. Overexpressed
AEG-1 in cancer cells and in transgenic hepatocytes accumulates in the
cytoplasm and inhibits RXR function by trapping RXR in the cytoplasm
precluding its nuclear translocation. Additionally, AEG-1 induces
phosphorylation of RXR, via ERK and p38 MAPK pathways. Phosphorylated RXR
has low transcriptional activity, functions as dominant negative
inhibitor of RXR and might facilitate hepatocarcinogenesis by AEG-1.
Indeed, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay using RA-target genes,
RARB and HOXA1, shows decreased DNA binding of RXR, even upon
ligand-treatment. Overexpression of AEG-1 significantly protects human
HCC cells, mouse hepatocytes and human promyelocytic leukemia cells from
the killing effects of retinoic acid and its synthetic analogs. By
inhibiting the expression of T3-regulated gene type I deiodinase (DIO1),
AEG-1 abrogates peripheral conversion of inactive T4 to active T3 which
is reflected by significantly low T3 level in the circulation of
Alb/AEG-1 mice compared to WT mice. Since AEG-1 is upregulated in a
wide-variety of cancers it might play an important role in regulating a
diverse array of RXR-dependent signaling pathways that are critical for
regulating the oncogenic process. Synthetic retinoids are being evaluated
as chemopreventive agents for HCC as well as a therapeutic modality for
PML. AEG-1 expression level might determine the sensitivity of the
patients to these retinoids. Additionally AEG-1 might play a key role in
low T3 syndrome associated with cancer.

