Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heat shock cognate protein HSPA8 (Hsc70) regulates migration and
xenograft growth of breast tumor cell lines.


In order to identify genes involved in the metastatic phenotype we had
previously developed isogenic cell lines from the human breast carcinoma
cell line MDA-MB-435 that have different metastatic phenotypes in
immunocompromised mice. Proteomic profiling of the extracellular
component of this model identified the heat shock cognate protein HSPA8
(Hsc70) as over-expressed in the metastatic cell line (M4A4) relative to
its non-metastatic counterpart (NM2C5). Heat shock proteins are primarily
implicated in a cytoprotective role when cells are exposed to stressful
stimuli. They are intracellular molecular chaperones but are also found
in the surface of embryonic stem cells and a variety of tumor cells. With
the purpose of investigating the role of HSPA8 in tumor growth and
metastasis, we first verified that this protein was expressed on the cell
surface and in the conditioned medium of M4A4 cells, in addition to its
intracellular location. Then we generated stable HSPA8 knockdown clones
of the M4A4 cells and cell behavior was tested in a panel of analyses in
vitro and xenograft growth was tested in immunocompromised mice.
Knockdown of HSPA8 expression in M4A4 cells resulted in reduction of cell
doubling time and of their migration potential in vitro. When individual
M4A4-HSPA8 knocked down cell clones were injected into the mammary fat
pad of immunocompromised mice significant reduction of the tumor size was
observed relative to non-silencing control cells. The invasive and
metastatic potential of the M4A4-HSPA8 knockdown clones as well as their
transcriptional profile are currently under investigation. Our findings
suggest that HSPA8 plays a role in cell growth in vitro and in vivo and
may be involved in metastasis of breast cancer cells. Extracellular heat
shock proteins have recently been shown to mediate a range of powerful
effects in inflammatory, neuronal and immune cells through a number of
cell surface receptors. The mechanisms involved in tumor dissemination
and metastasis are potential targets for therapeutic intervention

