Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and validation of the specificity of a novel
azulene-based COX2 probe for cancer imaging.


The overall objectives of this research are to (i) develop azulene-based
PET probes and (ii) image COX2 as a potential biomarker of breast cancer.
Several lines of research have demonstrated that COX2 is overexpressed in
breast cancer and that its presence correlates with poor prognoses. While
other studies have reported that COX2 inhibition can be modulated and
used beneficially as a chemopreventive strategy in cancer, no viable
mechanism for achieving that approach has yet been developed. This
shortfall could be circumvented through in vivo imaging of COX2 activity,
particularly using sensitive imaging techniques such as PET. Toward that
goal, our laboratory focuses on the development of novel 18F-labled COX2
probes. We began the synthesis of the probes by transforming tropolone
into a lactone, which was subjected to an [8+2] cycloaddition reaction to
yield 2-methylazulene as the core ring of the probe. After exploring
numerous synthetic routes, the final target molecule and precursor PET
compounds were prepared successfully using convergent synthesis.
Conventional 18F labeling methods caused precursor decomposition, which
prompted us to hypothesize that the acidic protons of the methylene
moiety between the azulene and thiazole rings were readily abstracted by
a strong base such as potassium carbonate. Ultimately, this caused the
precursors to disintegrate. This observation was supported after
successfully using an 18F labeling strategy that employed a much milder
phosphate buffer. The 18F-labeled COX2 probe was tested in a breast
cancer preclinical mouse model. The data obtained via successive
whole-body PET/CT scans indicated probe accumulation and retention in the
tumor. Overall, the probe was stable in vivo and no defluorination was
observed. A biodistribution study, using the PET probe and Western blot
analysis corroborate with the imaging data. Taken together, these data
demonstrate the potential for the use of this novel PET probe for imaging
COX2 as a biomarker for the early detection and prediction of the
progression of colorectal cancer. Currently, several probe optimization
processes are presently being carried out in our laboratory, including
the toxicity study and in vivo metabolite analysis. Detailed results of
the biometric validation of the probe will be reported in a timely
manner. In conclusion, this novel COX2 PET probe was shown to be a
promising agent for cancer imaging and deserves further investigation.

