Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combating resistance to EGFR inhibitors: eIF4B as a novel target.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients suffer from a highly
malignant and aggressive cancer that currently has no efficacious
therapy. These patients have a high rate of relapse and often develop
resistance to chemotherapy. Many TNBCs, both in vitro and in vivo, have
elevated levels of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) but are
resistant to EGFR inhibitors as a monotherapy. The TNBC cell line, BT20,
has increased levels of EGFR and is resistant to EGFR inhibitors. To
identify the signaling pathways that remain phosphorylated after
treatment with gefitinib, an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), we
used mass spectrometry based phospho-proteomics. Through these assays we
identified many components of the mTOR pathway phosphorylated in the
presence of gefitinib and further sought to explore this pathway as a
mechanism of resistance to EGFR inhibitors in TNBC. mTOR inhibitors have
been investigated in the clinic due to their ability to inhibit the
PI3Kinase/Akt pathway thus decreasing cell survival and proliferation.
Inhibiting mTOR also importantly inhibits translation. Despite activation
of these pathways our TNBC cell lines, BT20, MDA-MB-123, and MDA-MB-468
are resistant to temsirolimus, an mTOR inhibitor. Our studies have found
that dual treatment with an mTOR inhibitor and an EGFR TKI has a
synergistic effect on decreasing TNBC cell viability, but the mechanism
of this synergy is not understood. We have found that the abrogation of
both EGFR and mTOR signaling does not alter the phosphorylation status of
key signaling pathways including MAPK and Akt. Instead, our preliminary
data have identified the translational control protein eIF4B as
potentially key fragile point in EGFR and mTOR inhibitor synergy.
Therefore, in this study we hypothesized that mTOR inhibition will
sensitize TNBC cells to EGFR TKIs through the inhibition of eIF4B
phosphorylation. Small molecules have yet to be identified to abrogate
the function of eIF4B, which when phosphorylated enhances the helicase
activity of eIF4A critical to translation. Therefore, we knockdown eIF4B
expression and found a decrease in cell survival comparable to the
decrease observed with gefitinib and temsirolimus treatment. In addition,
we have identified p70S6K and p90RSK as kinases directly responsible for
eIF4B phosphorylation, such that both molecules need to be inactivated in
order for eIF4B phosphorylation to be inhibited. This inactivation
correlates with a loss of cell growth and viability and a decrease in
clonogenic cell survival. Lastly, we have shown that the downstream
functions of eIF4B phosphorylation are abrogated with EGFR and mTOR
inhibitors. Therefore, taken together these data suggest that in the
presence of activated MAPK and AKT, EGFR and mTOR inhibitors have the
ability to abrogate cell growth, viability, and survival via disruption
of the translational control mechanisms through eIF4B.

