Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tie2-expressing monocytes (TEMs) as potential biomarkers of
angiopoietin-Tie2 (Ang/Tie2) directed therapies: correlative analysis of
a phase I study of AMG386 + temsirolimus (T).


Background: The Ang/Tie2 pathway plays a critical role in tumor
angiogenesis, and several agents targeting this axis are in development.
Tie2 is expressed by monocytes (M), and TEMs may be angiogenic mediators.
Thymidine phosphorylase (TP), an angiogenic enzyme, is increased in TEMs
upon Tie2 stimulation. We used flow cytometry to evaluate TEMs in a phase
I study of AMG386 (Ang1/2 peptibody) + T in patients (pts) with solid
tumors.Methods: Peripheral blood was collected from healthy volunteers
and pts with advanced cancer (n=10 each) for assay development. For phase
I study pts (n=5 to date), blood was collected on Cycle 1 Day 1 (D1), D3
and D8. Extracellular Tie2 staining was performed after hypotonic red
blood cell lysis. TP staining followed formaldehyde fixation and Triton
X-100 permeabilization. M and lymphocytes (L) were gated with CD45 and
CD33. Median fluorescence intensities (MFI) were measured and normalized
by calculating a M/L ratio. Tumor response was assessed every 2
cycles.Results: Tie2 staining was present on all M (absent in other
leukocytes) in healthy controls and cancer pts, with no discrete Tie2+/-
populations. Tie2 and TP M/L were similar between these 2 groups. Tie2,
TP and response data from the first 5 pts receiving AMG386 + T are
presented. Preliminary results reveal an association between change in TP
D1 to D3 and tumor response. TP M/L decreased in all pts with tumor
shrinkage (mean -18%), but increased (+6%) in the pt with tumor growth.
No consistent association between Tie2 M/L and response was
observed.Conclusions: Measurement of Tie2 and TP in circulating M is
feasible. No discrete Tie2+ M population is identifiable. Tie2 and TP
staining are similar in cancer pts and healthy volunteers. Preliminary
analyses reveal an association between an initial reduction in TP and
tumor shrinkage in pts receiving AMG386+T. Enrolment continues and
additional data will be presented.
Tie2, TP and tumor response in the first 5 pts receiving AMG386+T

