Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the CXCL5-CXCR2-CREB signaling axis suppresses growth,
survival, and invasion of lung adenocarcinoma.


The role of chemokines and chemokine receptors has been evolving in
cancer. Besides their functions in the immune system, they also play a
critical role in tumor initiation, promotion and progression. Since the
tumor microenvironment play a critical role in cancer development and
progression, the immune components of the tumor microenvironment have
gained attention in the recent decades for its critical role in
tumorigenesis and tumor control. Recent studies have clearly demonstrated
the importance of CXCR2 in the development of lung cancer. Our recent
studies showed that CXCR2 expression in tumor cells was associated with
poor prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients (n=262).
Analysis of gene expression profiles from the National Cancer Institute
(NCI) Director's Challenge Cohort of in lung adenocarcinoma patients
(n=442) revealed that overexpression of CXCR2 ligands and CXCR2 genes was
clustered together in approximately 25% of lung adenocarcinoma patients.
Expression of CXCR2 and its associated ligand gene cluster in tumor cells
was associated with poor prognosis, smoking status, and poor histologic
differentiation. Furthermore, CXCL5 was involved as an potent angiogenic
factor in NSCLC. The objective of the current study was to establish the
role of the CXCL5/CXCR2 axis in tumor growth and invasion and to
determine its related molecular mechanisms. In the study, CXCL5 activated
the CREB transcription factor via the pERK1/2-p90Rsk-pCREB signaling
pathway. In addition, inhibitors of CXCR2 and downstream signal
transduction molecules blocked the activation of pERK1/2-pRsk-pCREB
signaling molecules. Blockade of the CXCR2 receptor, CXCR2-dependent
signal molecules, or CREB resulted in suppression of NSCLC cell growth,
survival and invasion. These results suggest that the CXCL5-CXCR2-CREB
signaling axis may be a source of potential therapeutic targets in lung
adenocarcinoma..

