Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel HER2 targeting antibody-drug conjugates based on
DNA-interacting duocarmycin and an unique linker technology with great
potential in breast cancer and NSCLC.


We have generated cleavable linker-duocarmycin payloads that previously
have been shown to be highly stable in human plasma and to cause
excellent in vitro and in vivo efficacy when conjugated to antibodies
directed against multiple targets in different models. In our HER2
program, we have used these linker-duocarmycin payloads to generate
HER2-targeting antibody-drug conjugates (ADCS) and prepare these for FIM
studies. HER2 is a validated target in breast (BC) and gastric cancer
(GC) that is currently used to target trastuzumab towards HER2-positive
BC and GC tumors. We have generated a set of cysteine-coupled ADCs using
newly developed duocarmycins conjugated to a therapeutic HER2/neu
antibody. In vitro studies with the anti-Her2 ADCs showed that compared
to the naked Ab, the ADCs tested have gained a more than 100-fold potency
and more than two-fold efficacy in cell killing capacity. Studies in HER2
positive and negative cell lines indicated that cytotoxicity was HER2-
mediated. HER2 binding and ADCC activity was not affected by conjugation.
Single dose and multiple dose xenograft studies in mice using a human
HER2-positive breast cancer cell line showed dose-dependent anti-tumor
activity of the ADCs in vivo. Patient-derived xenografts (PDx) using
primary tumors from HER2-positive breast cancer and NSCLC patients
demonstrated the ability of the ADC to induce complete remission of
tumors that remained unresponsive to the naked Ab trastuzumab. Also taken
into account toxicology studies in rodents and cynomolgous monkeys, we
conclude that we have generated a new class of HER2-based ADCs that have
great potential to become effective treatment for HER2-positive tumors,
including breast cancer and NSCLC. From a series of compounds, a
preclinical candidate was selected that is currently being prepared for
Phase I clinical trials that will start in 2014.

