Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GRP78 is induced and can be targeted after systemic therapy in
breast cancer.


Purpose/Objectives: Currently, there is no effective treatment or drug
delivery system to specifically target cancer metastasis. Our approach is
to use a systemic agent to induce neoantigens in breast tumors and target
these neoantigens using small peptides. The 78-kDa glucose regulated
protein (GRP78) is a major endoplasmic reticulum chaperone that
suppresses stress-induced apoptosis. Recent studies from our group show
that GRP78 is an important neoantigen that is upregulated in response to
ionizing radiation. We tested the hypothesis that GRP78 is induced by
systemic agents and use our GIRLRG targeting peptide to recognize this
receptor on the surface of breast tumors after treatment with systemic
agents. Methods: We used ex-vivo immunohistochemistry (IHC) analyses to
determine the levels of GRP78 in breast tumors. We used an in vivo
imaging system to determine peptide binding on breast tumors in mice.
Nude mice were injected with MDA-MB-231 tumor cells in both hind limbs.
Mice were treated with vehicle control, sunitinib, sorafenib, pazopanib
or 5-FU once daily for 5 consecutive days. The tumors on the left hind
limb remained unirradiated. The tumors on the right hind limb received 3
Gy of radiation daily for 3 days. For the IHC analyses, the mice were
sacrificed at 24 hours after the last treatment, and the tumors were
processed using an anti-GRP78 antibody. For the imaging studies, the mice
were analyzed immediately after the last therapy was applied. This novel
3-step imaging protocol involves injecting the peptide conjugated to
biotin, a 12 hour delay, an intraperitoneal injection of the avidin
chase, a 2 hour delay, and a tail-vein injection of streptavidin
conjugated to Alexa Fluor 680. Results: IHC analyses revealed that GRP78
is induced in these breast tumors in response to sunitinib, sorafenib,
pazopanib and 5-FU radiation, and not to untreated controls. We found
that the GIRLRG peptide discriminately binds to breast tumors treated
with sunitinib, sorafenib, pazopanib, and 5-FU radiation. These findings
were statistically significant (p Purpose/Objectives: Currently, there is
no effective treatment or drug delivery system to specifically target
cancer metastasis. Our approach is to use a systemic agent to induce
neoantigens in breast tumors and target these neoantigens using small
peptides. The 78-kDa glucose regulated protein (GRP78) is a major
endoplasmic reticulum chaperone that suppresses stress-induced apoptosis.
Recent studies from our group show that GRP78 is an important neoantigen
that is upregulated in response to ionizing radiation. We tested the
hypothesis that GRP78 is induced by systemic agents and use our GIRLRG
targeting peptide to recognize this receptor on the surface of breast
tumors after treatment with systemic agents. Methods: We used ex-vivo
immunohistochemistry (IHC) analyses to determine the levels of GRP78 in
breast tumors. We used an in vivo imaging system to determine peptide
binding on breast tumors in mice. Nude mice were injected with MDA-MB-231
tumor cells in both hind limbs. Mice were treated with vehicle control,
sunitinib, sorafenib, pazopanib or 5-FU once daily for 5 consecutive
days. The tumors on the left hind limb remained unirradiated. The tumors
on the right hind limb received 3 Gy of radiation daily for 3 days. For
the IHC analyses, the mice were sacrificed at 24 hours after the last
treatment, and the tumors were processed using an anti-GRP78 antibody.
For the imaging studies, the mice were analyzed immediately after the
last therapy was applied. This novel 3-step imaging protocol involves
injecting the peptide conjugated to biotin, a 12 hour delay, an
intraperitoneal injection of the avidin chase, a 2 hour delay, and a
tail-vein injection of streptavidin conjugated to Alexa Fluor 680.
Results: IHC analyses revealed that GRP78 is induced in these breast
tumors in response to sunitinib, sorafenib, pazopanib and 5-FU radiation,
and not to untreated controls. We found that the GIRLRG peptide
discriminately binds to breast tumors treated with sunitinib, sorafenib,
pazopanib, and 5-FU radiation. These findings were statistically
significant (p < 0.005). We discovered a strong binding of GIRLRG to
treated breast tumors at 24 hours and not to untreated tumors, which was
consistent with the results obtained with IHC analyses. Conclusions: We
found that GRP78 is induced in these breast tumors in response to
systemic treatment, alone or when combined with radiation. The GIRLRG
peptide can discriminately bind to breast tumors that have been treated
with 5-FU chemotherapy, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, or radiation. Since
5-FU is used clinically as capecitabine to treat metastatic breast cancer
patients, our ultimate goal would be to conjugate this targeting peptide
to a drug delivery system in order to increase chemotherapy efficacy to
metastatic tumors while reducing systemic toxicities.

