Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dependence receptor TrkC is a putative colon cancer tumor
suppressor.


Backgrounds & Aims: The TrkC neurotrophin receptor belongs to the
functional dependence receptors family, members of which share the
ability to induce apoptosis in the absence of their ligands. Such a trait
has been hypothesized to confer tumor-suppressor activity. Indeed, cells
that express these receptors are thought to be dependent on ligand
availability for their survival, a mechanism that inhibits uncontrolled
tumor cell proliferation and migration. TrkC is yet a relatively classic
tyrosine kinase receptor and therefore generally rather considered as a
proto-oncogene. We investigated here whether, because of its dependence
receptor activity, TrkC is a putative tumor suppressor in colorectal
malignancies.Methods: The level of TrkC was analyzed in a panel of 45
primary sporadic colorectal carcinomas. Loss of heterozygosity and
epigenetic alterations in the TrkC promoter were also analyzed. The level
of TrkC was also analyzed in a panel of colorectal cancer cell lines. The
TrkC tumor suppressive activity was investigated by expressing TrkC and
related TrkC variants in colorectal cancer cell lines and by measuring
apoptosis, anchorage-independent growth, migration and tumor growth in a
chicken model.Results: We show here that TrkC expression is
down-regulated in a large fraction of human colorectal cancers, mainly
through promoter methylation. Moreover, we show that TrkC silencing by
promoter methylation is a selective advantage for colorectal cell lines
to limit tumor cell death. Consequently, we show that reestablished TrkC
expression in colorectal cancer cell lines is associated with tumor cell
death and inhibition of in vitro characteristics of cell transformation
and in vivo tumor growth.Conclusions: The loss of TrkC expression
observed in human colorectal cancer is a selective advantage for tumor
cell survival. Thus, TrkC appears to be a putative new colon cancer tumor
suppressor.

