Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a biochemical High Throughput Screening (HTS) assay
for chemical inhibitors of MALT1, a target for lymphoma therapeutics.


MALT1 plays critical role in antigen receptor-mediated lymphocyte
activation and lymphomagenesis. MALT1 acts both as a scaffold protein to
recruit upstream signal transducers and as an intracellular cysteine
protease with proteolytic activity that cleaves substrate proteins
involved in NF-kB induction. Dysregulation of MALT1 activity occurs in
lymphoma as a result of chromosomal translocations that fuse the
catalytic domain of MALT1 with portions of BirC3 (c-IAP2). Previous
studies have shown that MALT1s proteolytic activity is required for its
participation in NF-kB induction and for promoting cell viability of
certain types of lymphomas, particularly the activated B-cell (ABC) type
of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.To lay a foundation for discovery of
drug-like chemical inhibitors of MALT1, we developed a
fluorescence-based, biochemical assay for measuring protease activity of
MALT1 in vitro in 384 and 1,536 well formats. The assay components
included recombinant purified full-length MALT1 protein, the
MALT1-binding protein, Bcl-10, and the fluorigenic substrate Ac-LRSR-AMC
(Ac-Leu-Arg-Ser-Arg-7-amino-4-methylcoumarin). Experiments showed that
addition of Bcl-10 increases MALT1s protease activity up to 20-40 fold.
The high throughput screening (HTS) assay was validated with excellent Z
factors (>0.7) in both 384 and 1,536 well formats, with performance
remaining robust for more than 6 hours, and thus suitable for screening
of large chemical libraries. The HTS assay was validated by performing
pilot screens with two small collections of compounds enriched in
bioactive molecules (n = 1280 for LopacTM and 2000 for SpectrumTM
library), yielding confirmed hit rates of 0.2 % and 0.7%, respectively.
Counter-screening assays were also generated using other types of
intracellular cysteine proteases, specifically Caspase-3 and Autophagin-1
(ATG4B), for eliminating non-specific inhibitors. Various supporting
cell-based assays have also been generated to support hit
characterization. In conclusion, we have generated a robust biochemical
HTS assays for detection of chemical inhibitors of the MALT1 protease. We
plan to utilize the HTS assay for screening large compound libraries as a
starting point for discovery of novel therapeutics for treatment of
lymphoma, autoimmunity, and allograft rejection.

