Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic profiling identifies PI3K and DNA repair pathways as
potential markers of response to PARP inhibitor BMN673 in SCLC.


Background: Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive malignancy
that accounts for 13% of lung cancers in the US and has a 5-year survival
rate Background: Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive
malignancy that accounts for 13% of lung cancers in the US and has a
5-year survival rate <10%. Novel therapeutic approaches are critically
needed to improve clinical outcomes. Using proteomic profiling, we
previously identified high levels of PARP1 expression in SCLC cell lines
and tumors. We also demonstrated in vitro sensitivity of SCLC to two PARP
inhibitors, olaparib and rucaparib. Here we explore markers of response
and pathways modulated following PARP1 inhibition as a basis for
developing potential predictive markers and rational drug
combinations.Methods: Sensitivity of SCLC lines to BMN673 and cisplatin
was determined by CellTiter-Glo cell viability assay. Total and
phospho-protein expression of 200 markers was measured at baseline and
following drug treatment in SCLC cell lines by reverse phase protein
array (RPPA). Correlations between baseline protein expression and drug
sensitivity were determined by Spearman rank correlation. Modulation of
protein expression post treatment was assessed by ANOVA.Results: The
novel PARP inhibitor BMN673 had potent in vitro activity in a panel of 12
SCLC cell lines with IC50s ranging from 1.7-15nM. A higher expression
level of several DNA repair proteins was associated with greater BMN673
sensitivity. For example, protein expression levels of ERCC1, DNA PKcs,
ATM, FANCD2, and pChk2 were inversely correlated with IC50 values (Rho
values -0.93 to -0.81; p0.02). In contrast, high baseline expression of
phosphorylated Akt (T308) (R=0.91, p=0.005) and pAkt (S473) (R=0.81,
p=0.02) were associated with decreased sensitivity to BMN673. We also
observed increased phosphorylation of mTOR, Akt, and S6 (pBackground:
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive malignancy that accounts
for 13% of lung cancers in the US and has a 5-year survival rate <10%.
Novel therapeutic approaches are critically needed to improve clinical
outcomes. Using proteomic profiling, we previously identified high levels
of PARP1 expression in SCLC cell lines and tumors. We also demonstrated
in vitro sensitivity of SCLC to two PARP inhibitors, olaparib and
rucaparib. Here we explore markers of response and pathways modulated
following PARP1 inhibition as a basis for developing potential predictive
markers and rational drug combinations.Methods: Sensitivity of SCLC lines
to BMN673 and cisplatin was determined by CellTiter-Glo cell viability
assay. Total and phospho-protein expression of 200 markers was measured
at baseline and following drug treatment in SCLC cell lines by reverse
phase protein array (RPPA). Correlations between baseline protein
expression and drug sensitivity were determined by Spearman rank
correlation. Modulation of protein expression post treatment was assessed
by ANOVA.Results: The novel PARP inhibitor BMN673 had potent in vitro
activity in a panel of 12 SCLC cell lines with IC50s ranging from
1.7-15nM. A higher expression level of several DNA repair proteins was
associated with greater BMN673 sensitivity. For example, protein
expression levels of ERCC1, DNA PKcs, ATM, FANCD2, and pChk2 were
inversely correlated with IC50 values (Rho values -0.93 to -0.81; p0.02).
In contrast, high baseline expression of phosphorylated Akt (T308)
(R=0.91, p=0.005) and pAkt (S473) (R=0.81, p=0.02) were associated with
decreased sensitivity to BMN673. We also observed increased
phosphorylation of mTOR, Akt, and S6 (p<0.02) at 24h following PARP
inhibitor treatment, suggesting that PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway activation may
be associated with both inherent and acquired resistance. Consistent with
clinical studies suggesting greater PARP inhibitor activity in
platinum-sensitive tumors, markers of BMN673 response overlapped with
markers of cisplatin sensitivity, with higher DNA repair protein levels
and lower pAkt levels associated with greater cisplatin activity in vitro
in the same SCLC cell line panel.Conclusions: Here we demonstrate
significant, single-agent in vitro activity of the PARP inhibitor BMN673
in SCLC and potential predictive markers of response. Interestingly, for
the first time we show an inverse correlation between PARP inhibitor
sensitivity and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway activation. This observation
parallels recent data suggesting that PI3K inhibition may sensitize
breast cancer to PARP inhibition and suggests a potential coordinated
regulation between DNA repair and PI3K pathways. The activity of BMN673
and these candidate response biomarkers will be further investigated in a
Phase I cohort expansion of BMN673 in patients with SCLC.

