Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictors of breast cancer clinical trial participation by
logistic regression analysis in minority women residing in medically
underserved regions.


BackgroundEnrollment investigation literature estimates that 3% of newly
diagnosed breast cancer patients participate in clinical trials annually
in the United States. Participation levels decrease significantly when
varied by race and geographic location. African American women,
specifically those residing in medically underserved regions, are
historically underrepresented in clinical trials as compared to their
white/non-Hispanic counterparts. The focus of this study is to capture
characteristics of African American women who would participate in a
breast cancer trial. Significant trial participation factors were
identified using logistic regression analysis.MethodsUsing data from the
Texas Cancer Registry (TCR), U.S. Census Bureau, and Survey Epidemiology
and End Results (SEER) Database, Cherokee County, Texas was identified as
a medically underserved region. We collected opinions about breast cancer
clinical trial participation by surveying 13 local stakeholders
(including breast cancer survivors, religious leaders, community leaders,
local hospital employees and educators) within the minority community. On
the basis of stakeholder survey results and health disparities literature
review, a relevant and culturally sensitive survey was developed to
identify the different demographic, economic and social characteristics
in the general minority female population. A total of 115 surveys of
African American women were planned. The sample size was calculated based
on the percentage of African American women residing in Cherokee County
with a 95% level of confidence and a +/-5% margin of error. Logistic
regression analysis revealed the association of characteristics with
trial participation.ResultsAt the time of this analysis, 44 surveys were
completed between 06/2012 and 10/2012. Median age of participants was 43
years (range 31-65), 100% were African American women residing in rural
Cherokee County. Age, cancer diagnosis of a relative, education level,
and religious institution affiliation were associated with trial
participation in unadjusted analyses. Multi-variative analyses indicate
that patient age was the strongest independent predictor of trial
participation. Insurance coverage and income level were also observed
interaction effects. The most common reason reported for trial
participation was altruism.ConclusionInterim results of this study reveal
correlation between the potential of African American women to
participate in clinical trials and the following factors: age, family
history of cancer, and religious institution affiliation. Further
understanding of this relationship will possibly contribute to the
development of intervention initiatives and policies to influence those
who are adverse to such participation.

