Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of autophagy proteins ATG7 and BECN1 correlates with
increased interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF1) protein expression
through STAT1 phosphorylation.


Approximately two-thirds of newly diagnosed invasive breast tumors
express the estrogen receptor- protein (ER+) and most will be treated
with an endocrine therapy such as an antiestrogen or aromatase inhibitor.
Despite the widespread clinical efficacy of antiestrogens in the
treatment of ER+ breast cancers, approximately half of these women will
exhibit de novo or acquired resistance to endocrine therapies. One
mechanism by which breast cancer cells evade antiestrogen-induced cell
death is through stimulation of autophagy. Autophagy is a catabolic
process in which cells digest subcellular organelles in an attempt to
maintain homeostasis. Evidence for increased autophagy has been shown to
protect cancer cells against various therapies, including radiotherapy
and the antiestrogen, tamoxifen. Previous studies from our lab have also
established interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF1) as a tumor suppressor
gene and mediator of antiestrogen sensitivity. High mRNA levels of IRF1
in breast cancer core biopsies correlated significantly with a pathologic
complete response after neoadjuvant systemic treatment. However, the link
between autophagy and this immune function gene is largely unknown. Here,
we show that reduced expression of autophagy-related protein, ATG7,
correlates with increased nuclear IRF1 protein in 107 human breast cancer
core biopsies. Knockout of a single ATG7 allele in mice induced IRF1
activation in both mammary and spleen tissue compared to wild-type mice.
In antiestrogen sensitive and resistant breast cancer cells, knockdown of
ATG7 and BECN1, but not ATG5, using siRNA resulted in increased IRF1
protein expression. We go on to show that increased IRF1 expression is an
effect of increased phosphorylation of STAT1, suggesting that autophagy
inhibits the interferon signaling pathway. Using the contrary approach,
we found that inhibition of IRF1 using siRNA inhibits the lipidation of
LC3 and autophagosome formation. Furthermore, antiestrogen sensitive LCC1
cells become resistant to the growth inhibitory effects of faslodex
(Fulvestrant; ICI182780;ICI), 3-methyladenine, and doxorubicin following
knockdown of IRF1. Overexpression of IRF1 in antiestrogen resistant LCC9
cells inhibits ATG7 protein expression and induces mitochondrial outer
membrane permeability. Thus, the disruption of autophagy machinery in
breast cancer cells activates the interferon signaling pathway to induce
apoptosis and breast cancer cell death.

