Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Manganese porphyrins in combination with ascorbate act as
pro-oxidants and mediate caspase-independent cancer cell death.


Resistance to therapy-mediated apoptosis in inflammatory breast cancer
(IBC), an aggressive and distinct subtype of breast cancer was recently
attributed to increased antioxidant expression (superoxide dismutase
[SOD]; reduced glutathione) and decreased accumulation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) resulting in redox adaptation and increased cell survival.
Mn porphyrins (MnPs) are amongst the most potent synthetic mimics of the
antioxidant, superoxide dismutase (SOD). In the present study, we
demonstrate the unique ability of two Mn porphyrin (MnP)-based SOD mimics
(MnTE-2-PyP5+ and MnTnBuOE-2-PyP5+) to act as pro-oxidants when combined
with ascorbate (vitamin C) and enhance ROS-mediated cell death. We
identified that the ethyl species, MnTE-2-PyP5+, was less stable than its
butoxyethyl analog, MnTnBuOE-2-PyP5+, resulting in greater potency in
inducing cytotoxicity via radical-driven oxidative degradation in
cellular models of IBC isolated from patient tumors and an isogenic
derivative with acquired resistance to therapeutic apoptosis. The
combination of MnP and ascorbate induced accumulation of mitochondrial
superoxide and H2O2-derived radicals in both therapy-sensitive and
therapy-resistant cell lines. High intracellular ROS resulted in
decreases in both pro-survival signaling (pNF-B, pERK1/2) and expression
of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP), the most potent
caspase inhibitor. Although markers of classical apoptosis were observed,
including PARP cleavage and Annexin V staining, administration of a
pan-caspase inhibitor (QVD-OPh) did not reverse the observed
cytotoxicity. Nuclear translocation of apoptosis inducing factor (AIF)
was observed, suggesting a caspase-independent cell death following
mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization after treatment with this
combination. In conclusion, this study provides the molecular basis of a
novel MnP-based anti-cancer strategy and suggests the feasibility of
using MnPs to sensitize cancer cells to many chemotherapies and
radiotherapy that are dependent on potent induction of the oxidative
stress response.Citation Format: Myron Evans, Artak Tovmasyan, Ines
Batinic-Haberle, Gayathri Devi. Manganese porphyrins in combination with
ascorbate act as pro-oxidants and mediate caspase-independent cancer cell
death. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5552.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5552

