Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The sublethal dose radiation induces cellular senescence and
potent bystander effects through c-Myc oncogene.


The sublethal dose radiation may induce cellular senescence and promote
secondary maligancy during radiotherapy. However, the molecular
mechanisms are unclear. It has been reported that a variety of early
response oncogenes can be up-regulated by the low dose radiation. Because
oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) has been considered important for tumor
development, we are interested in investigating whether the sublethal
dose radiation also raises OIS to affect the malignancy. To this end,
human diploid fibroblasts WI-38 cells and human non-small lung cancer
H1299 cells were exposed to less than 2Gy of X-rays delivered by the
RS2000 X-rays machine. Both cell types exhibited senescent phenotypes
within a dose-dependent manner using the senescence-associated
-galactosidase (SA--gal) staining. Subsequently, we investigated the
expression of c-Myc and c-Ras oncogenes, and the results showed that
sublethal dose radiation could induce c-Myc, but not c-Ras, in both
transcriptional and translational levels. Additionally, up-regulated
c-Myc exhibited transcriptional activity as demonstrated by the
promoter-based reporter gene assys. Although the sublethal dose radiation
caused cellular senescence and growth delay in exposed cells, the
collected culture medium could increase the motility of non-irradiated
H1299 cancer cells using the wound healing assay. Interestingly, the
culture medium obtained from irradiated H1299 cancer cells caused higher
motility in non-irradiated cells than that from irradiated WI-38
fibroblasts. Furthermore, the sublethal dose radiation induced senescent
phenotype was suppressed in cells treated with siRNA against c-Myc.
Meanwhile, the motility of non-irradiated cells was not increased by the
cultured medium obtained from irradiated c-Myc silenced cells. Taken
together, the current data suggest that the sublethal dose radiation
causes a c-Myc oncogene induced senescence, and this event may promote
the bystandard effects that influence the motility of non-irradiated
cancer cells.Citation Format: Chia-Chien Lo, Yen-Ting Chou, Su-Jun Chiu,
Jeng-Jung Hwang, Yi-Jang Lee. The sublethal dose radiation induces
cellular senescence and potent bystander effects through c-Myc oncogene.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 440.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-440

