Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3K/ inhibition has greater efficacy compared to PI3K-selective
inhibition in NHL with activated NFkB pathway .


Follicular lymphoma (FL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) are
the two of the most common Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL) wordwide. Although
the introduction of anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies has improved the
outcome of patients with follicular lymphoma, a curative treatment or an
improved treatment strategy for relapsed FL are still to be developed.
DLBCL is an incurable, aggressive subtype of NHL with a high unmet
medical need for effective therapeutics. Activation of the PI3K-AKT
pathway by B cell receptor signaling and its role in the pathogenesis of
FL and DLBCL have been highlighted in a number of studies, however, the
relative importance of PI3K isoforms and effective application of PI3K
inhibitors for the treatment of FL and DLBCL have not been fully
addressed. To answer this question, we selected and characterized a panel
of cell lines representing major subtypes (e.g. ABC and GCB) and frequent
mutations (e.g. CD79, Bcl2, MyD88, CARD11, or EZH2) in FL and DLBCL.
Analyzing the expression of PI3K isoforms indicated that not only PI3K,
an isoform known to be enriched in lymphocytes, but also PI3K is highly
expressed in DLBCL and a subset of FL cell lines. Sensitivity profiling
of the PI3K/ inhibitor BAY 80-6946 (biochemical IC50=0.5 nM and 0.7 nM
against PI3K and PI3K, respectively) and the PI3K-selective inhibitor
CAL-101 confirmed that inhibition PI3K/ is more effective than inhibition
of PI3K, particularly PI3K/ inhibition showed a broader anti-tumor
spectrum in the cell line panel. For example, unlike CAL-101, BAY 80-6946
revealed potent anti-tumor activity in NFB activating MyD88 or CARD11
mutated DLBCL cell lines both in vitro and in vivo. Further analysis of
mutation status and pathway inhibition discovered an unknown PI3K
isoform-dependent crosstalk to the NFB pathway in DLBCL. The detailed
molecular mechanism and the strategy of developing PI3K/ inhibitor as a
single agent and rationale-based combination in FL and DLBCL will be
discussed. Taken together, these findings provide further insights into
the mechanism of action of BAY 80-6946 and support ongoing Phase I
studies in FL and DLBCL patients (Lotze et al., J Clin Oncol 30, 2012,
suppl, abstr 3019, data to be updated in the presentation).

