Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New paradigms for the modulatory actions of p38 MAPK restorative
expression in esophageal squamous cancer cell growth, migration and
response to chemotherapy: A possible future therapeutic target.


Background: Esophageal cancer is an aggressive tumour which responds
poorly to both chemotherapy and radiation therapy and has a poor
prognosis. Approximately half of patients diagnosed with localized
esophageal cancer die of metastatic disease within the first 2 years
following tumour resection. Thus, a greater understanding of the biology
of esophageal cancer is needed in order to identify novel therapeutic
targets. Among these targets p38 MAPK isoforms are becoming increasingly
important for a variety of cellular functions. A better understanding of
the role(s) of p38 MAPKs may provide useful therapeutic tools for the
management of human cancers. Methods: We analysed p38 MAPK isoform
expression in both cancer cell lines and corresponding human normal and
tumour tissue including esophageal, liver, lung, prostate, colon, renal
and pancreatic. We observed that over 75% of both cell lines and human
tumour tissue samples fail to express the specific isoform p38 MAPK. To
evaluate the role(s) of p38 and active p-p38 MAPK in esophageal cancer
progression we developed a series of constructs: p38 MAPK
(pcDNA3-FLAG-p38 MAPK), active p-p38 MAPK
(pcDNA3-MKK6b(E)-(Gly-Glu)5-FLAG-p38) and inactive p38DN MAPK
(pcDNA3-MKK6b(E)-(Gly-Glu)5-FLAG-p38DN). The active p-p38 plasmid was
generated by removing the MKK6b(E) stop codon in pcDNA3-MKK6b(E).
Secondly, FLAG-p38 was amplified with a 5(Gly-Glu)5 linker. Linear
blunt-ended pcDNA3-MKK6b(E) and blunt ended (Gly-Glu)5-FLAG-p38 were
ligated. The dominant negative p-p38 plasmid (p-p38DN) was generated from
pcDNA3-MKK6b(E)-(Gly-Glu)5-FLAG-p38 by replacing Thr180 with Ala and
Tyr182 with Phe. Stable esophageal squamous cancer cell lines expressing
these plasmids were generated. Results: Re-introduction of p38 or p-p38
proved to be (a) anti-proliferative, (b) anti-migratory and (c)
pro-apoptotic. We observed a time-dependent decrease in proliferation in
esophageal cancer cells stably transfected with p38 MAPK. This
anti-proliferative effect was exacerbated with cells transfected with
p-p38 MAPK. Using a Boyden chamber and a wound healing assay we observed
a decrease in cellular migration and invasion with cells transfected with
p38 or p-p38 MAPK. Finally using Annexin V-FITC/PI double labeled flow
cytometry we observed that p38 and p-p38 MAPK confers a greater
sensitivity of esophageal cancer to certain chemotherapeutic drugs but
resistance to others. Conclusion: We now provide data for the
anti-tumourigenic effect of p38 MAPK in esophageal cancer. Our research
may provide a new potential target for the treatment of esophageal cancer
and metastases. Interestingly, our findings are also applicable to other
cancer types namely renal, prostate and pancreatic cancer which also lack
p38 MAPK isoform expression.

