Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyisoprenylated methylated protein methyl esterase
overexpression in prostate cancer: implication in cancer metastasis.


Objectives: Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer among
men in the U.S, with an estimated 241,740 new cases and 28,170 deaths for
2012. The need to identify biomarkers/therapeutic targets for the
early/companion diagnosis and development of novel therapies against the
recalcitrant form of prostate cancer is imperative. Mutation and
overexpression-induced abnormal activities of polyisoprenylated proteins
such as of the Ras and Rho families of monomeric G proteins have been
implicated in prostate cancer. Also, signaling mediated by
polyisoprenylated Rho family of GTPases through the actin cytoskeleton in
migratory responses is necessary for cancer cell metastasis.
Polyisoprenylated methylated protein methyl esterase (PMPMEase) catalyzes
the only reversible and terminal reaction of the polyisoprenylation
pathway. We hypothesized that PMPMEase activity may influence the effects
of these G proteins on cell viability, metastasis and aggressiveness and
thus may be of importance in the detection and treatment of prostate
cancer.Method: Prostate cancer tissue microarray was probed for relative
PMPMEase expression by immunohistochemistry. Specific activities of
PMPMEase and the effect of its inhibition on viability of various
prostate cancer cells were also studied. Effect of specific PMPMEase
inhibitor L-28 on actin cytoskeleton organization was also determined by
phalliodine staining of treated PC-3 cells.Results: PMPMEase specific
activities were 4 and 6-fold higher in androgen-dependent 22Rv1 and LNCaP
cells and 2- and 17-fold higher in androgen-independent PC-3 and DU 145
prostate cancer cells respectively compared to normal WPE1-NA22 prostate
cells. Treatment of the cells for 72 h with L-28, a specific
polyisoprenylated PMPMEase inhibitor induced apoptosis with EC50 values
ranging from 1.8 to 4.6 M. The PMPMEase activity of the different cell
lines followed a similar profile with IC50 values ranging from 2.3 to 130
M. L-28 also significantly disrupted the actin filament arrangement.
Immunohistochemical analysis of PMPMEase expression revealed
intermediate, strong and very strong staining in 94.5% of the 92
adenocarcinoma cases compared to only trace and weak staining in the
normal and normal adjacent tissue controls.Conclusion: These results
indicate that PMPMEase activity, immunoreactivity and inhibition could
serve in the diagnosis and targeted therapeutic management of prostate
cancer. Also inhibition of PMPMEase disturbs actin filament organization
in cytoskeleton.

