Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biochanin A, a natural isoflavone inhibits angiogenesis in glioma.


Malignant gliomas like glioblastoma multiforme are the most lethal form
of adult brain tumor. Patients with this disease survive for only 12-15
months after diagnosis. Angiogenesis, a process of formation of new blood
vessels is a pathological hallmark of glioblastoma and plays an important
role in tumor growth and survival. Although angiogenesis holds promise as
a drug target, recent studies have highlighted that glioblastoma acquires
aggressive invasive characteristics when treated with anti-angiogenic
monotherapy. Therefore, there is an urgent demand for therapies which
effectively target angiogenesis and limit invasion in glioblastoma.
Previously, our laboratory has found that biochanin A, a dietary
isoflavone inhibits invasion in human glioblastoma cells. In this study,
we determined the effects of biochanin A on brain tumor angiogenesis
using rat brain tumor cells (C6) and endothelial (bEnd.3) cells. Our cell
survival data indicate a dose dependent decrease in cell survival of both
C6 and bEnd.3 cells treated with biochanin A (5M-70M) for 72 hours.
Biochanin A also inhibited ERK and AKT pathway in these cells. Zymography
invasion assay demonstrated a decrease in enzymatic activity of MMP's in
biochanin A treated C6 and bEnd.3 cells. Apart from these signaling
molecules, angiogenesis is also driven by hypoxia through upregulation of
hypoxia inducible factor (HIF-1) which releases vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), a key player of angiogenesis. We found that
biochanin A at 35 M inhibited protein expressions of both HIF-1 and VEGF
in C6 cells treated with cobalt chloride, a chemical inducer of hypoxia.
Biochanin A was also effective in inhibiting angiogenesis in an ex vivo
chick chorioallantoic membrane model. These findings indicate that we may
use biochanin A as a dual targeted agent that inhibits two processes,
invasion and angiogenesis at similar concentrations. Thus, our study will
allow the formulation of new and improved therapies for glioblastoma and
ultimately enhance patient survival. (This study was supported by NIH
INBRE grant #P20R16454, University Research Committee grant and Mountain
States Tumor and Medical Research Institute grant).

