Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next-generation sequencing for mutation discovery in Ewing sarcoma.


Background: Ewing sarcoma (EWS) is the second most common type of primary
bone tumor to affect children and adolescent and accounts for 2.9% of all
childhood cancers. Despite advances in multidisciplinary treatment
leading to improved outcomes over time, long term survival still remains
less than 50% for patients older than 15 years of age and only 65% in
younger patients. In an effort to identify novel prognostic and
therapeutic targets, we utilized next generation sequencing techniques to
evaluate EWS samples for somatic mutation.Methods: Whole genome
paired-end sequencing using the Complete Genomics method was performed on
the DNA from 6 EWS matched tumor-normal samples. Somatic mutations were
identified and classified using standard bioinformatics techniques and
mutations of interest were verified using capillary sequencing. To extend
discoveries and evaluate for mutational recurrence, targeted sequencing
was performed on a validation cohort of 61 EWS tumors and 22 EWS cell
lines using a custom multiplex PCR design followed by high-coverage
sequencing on the Ion Torrent system.Results: In the discovery cohort, we
detected an average of 361 somatic mutations per tumor in non-repetitive
regions and an average of 6 somatic mutations per tumor in protein coding
regions (=0.15 mutations/Mb of coding sequence). The well-established
FLI1-EWSR1 gene fusion was detected by the whole genome sequencing in all
6 samples. Additional previously reported genetic events were also seen
including frequent chromosomal trisomy and deletion of the CDKN2A
containing locus on chromosomal region 9p21 in 2 of 6 samples. In the
validation cohort of tumors, known recurrent mutations such as in TP53
(3/61 = 4.9%) were seen at rates similar to that previously reported in
EWS. Continued efforts are underway to verify novel recurrent
mutations.Conclusion: Next-generation sequencing provides a powerful tool
to characterize the genetic landscape and evaluate for recurrent
mutations in cancer. We utilize this tool in Ewing sarcoma in a project
that provides both a comprehensive genomic evaluation from whole genome
sequencing data and as well evaluates for recurrent mutations using a
targeted sequencing approach.

