Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KPNA7, a nuclear transport receptor, promotes malignant properties
of pancreatic cancer cells in vitro.


Pancreatic cancer is an aggressive malignancy and one of the leading
causes of cancer deaths. The high mortality rate is mostly due to the
lack of appropriate tools for the early detection of the disease and a
shortage of effective therapies. We have previously shown that
karyopherin alpha 7 (KPNA7) is frequently amplified and overexpressed in
pancreatic cancer. KPNA7 is a recently characterized member of the alpha
karyopherin family of nuclear import receptors. The nuclear import
machinery is composed of a complex network of proteins required for the
appropriate transport of proteins from the cytoplasm to the nucleus.
Abnormal function of this machinery leads to incorrect localization of
nuclear proteins and disturbances in cellular homeostasis, which may
subsequently contribute to the development of various diseases including
cancer. Indeed, previous evidence has linked members of the karyopherin
alpha family, especially KPNA2, to cancer pathogenesis.In this study we
demonstrate that KPNA7 expression is absent in practically all normal
human adult tissues but elevated in several pancreatic cancer cell lines
as well as in some other cancer types. Inhibition of KPNA7 expression in
AsPC-1 and Hs700T pancreatic cancer cells led to a striking reduction in
cell growth due to the induction of the cell cycle regulator p21 and
subsequent G1 arrest of the cell cycle. In both of these cell lines KPNA7
silencing also resulted in decreased anchorage independent growth, and
additionally in the AsPC-1 cells reduced cell migration and invasion.
Furthermore, in the Hs700T cells KPNA7 silencing resulted in dramatic
morphological change where the cells acquired fibroblast-like shape. This
phenotypic change was not explained by induction of EMT or senescence.In
conclusion, our data strongly demonstrate that KPNA7 silencing inhibits
the malignant properties of pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and thereby
provide the first evidence on the functional role of KPNA7 in human
cancer. Moreover, the lack of KPNA7 expression in normal adult tissues
highlights it as a potential novel therapeutic target for cancer. Further
studies are needed to identify the cargo proteins transported by KPNA7.
These studies are likely to reveal important new information on nuclear
transport and may highlight the molecular mechanisms involved in KPNA7
mediated phenotypes in cancer cells.

