Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential anticancer drug response by high-dimensional protein
monitoring.


Cellular signal transduction responses to drugs are not always identical;
rather, they depend on concentration, administration method, and time
after administration. To monitor drug-induced signaling, we produced
reverse-phase protein arrays (RPPAs) using cell lysates from three
anticancer drugs (5FU, CIS, CPT), two administration methods (sustained,
Sus; temporal, Tem), and three concentrations (High, Medium, Low) of drug
administration over a 24-hour period. The combination of drug types,
concentrations, and administration methods collectively yielded 18 unique
drug administration conditions. Each RPPA was individually probed with 37
primary antibodies from our antibody panel; these antibodies recognize
the proteins involved in genotoxic stress response. The quantitative
readout was then analyzed to see if there was: (i) a general trend in
protein dynamics in response to each drug condition; and (ii)
significance in those proteins that exhibited similar dynamics. We first
classified 666 time-course protein dynamics. About 38% of the protein
dynamics showed an increasing trend, whereas about 32% showed a
decreasing trend. Proteins exhibited earlier peaks when stimulated by Low
or Medium concentrations for all drugs, while proteins exhibited later
peaks when stimulated by High concentrations. Clustering analysis of
protein dynamics induced by drugs revealed that each dynamic class
included proteins of diverse functions. Hence, it is unlikely for cells
to respond to particular drugs in a defined pattern. Subsequently, to
clarify whether any functional associations are prioritized in drug
responses, we evaluated the similarities between the protein dynamics by
distance correlation (DC, which is known to have a higher value the
tighter the association), to see if any pair of protein dynamics
demonstrated a geometric similarity associated with its known
interaction. It appeared that apoptosis-related proteins tended to show
high DC to other proteins when anticancer drugs were administrated at
high enough concentrations to induce apoptosis. We also found that
structural cell proteins, such as keratins, showed high DC to
apoptosis-related proteins, and confirmed that when these two functional
protein groups interact, what results is degradation in the progression
of drug-induced apoptosis.These observations indicate that
high-dimensional drug response protein dynamic monitoring by RPPAs may
offer a unique opportunity to find drug-specific general dynamic trends
and potentially novel protein interactions unique to drug administrative
conditions such as dose.

