Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization and targeting of BRIT1 deficiency in liver cancer.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the leading causes of
cancer-related death worldwide, and there are no safe and effective
therapeutic agents yet to treat HCC after diagnosis. However, in HCC,
genomic instability is the major remarkable hallmark, especially in the
tumors at the late stage and metastatic tumors.Thus, we wonder if
targeting genomic instability can inhibit tumor growth inHCC. BRIT1/MCPH1
has been identified to be one of the key DNA damage and repair proteins,
which harbors three BRCT domains, conserved in BRCA1 and some other
proteins involved in DNA damage response pathways. Our previous studies
and other reports have illustratedBRIT1s essential roles in mitotic and
meiotic homologous recombination DNA repair and maintaining genomic
stability, which functions through interacting with BRCA2/Rad51 and/or
chromatin structure remodeling protein SWI/SNF. Recently, we identified
that BRIT1 is aberrantly expressed in 25% of HCC samples (n=28).In these
samples, the locus of BRIT2 gene showed notable loss of heterogeneity
(nearly50%). We also found a somatic mutation in BRIT1, which occurred in
the splicing donor site of intro 10 in the BRIT1 gene, leading to a
truncated protein.Functional analysis showed that this mutation can cause
failure of foci formation of BRIT1 under irradiation. Importantly, given
that BRIT1-deficient cells exhibited defective DNA repair described
above, our in vitro studies showed that the BRIT1-low expressing HCC
cells HepG2 and Hep3B are more sensitive to olaparib, the inhibitor of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARPi), compared to the BRIT1-proficient
cell SNU-449, which was determined by WST-1 and colony formation
assays.Furthermore, we also test the inhibitory effect of olaparib in the
xenograft mouse model, and found that PARPi can significantly suppress
tumor growth of Hep3B xenografts. Collectively, our results clearly
demonstrate thatBRIT1 is mutated or aberrantly expressed in HCC, and
targeting BRIT1 deficiency by PARP inhibitors may lead to novel and
effective targeted therapies to treat BRIT1-deficientHCC.Citation Format:
Yulong Liang, Lihou Yu, Dongxiao Zhang, Hong Gao, Shiaw-Yih Lin, Kaiyi
Li. Characterization and targeting of BRIT1 deficiency in liver cancer.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 3342.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-3342

