Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) in myeloid lineage cells
increases with maturation and regulates primary tumor growth in
MMTV-PyVmT murine model of breast cancer.


Myeloid lineage cells are critical mediators of innate immunity that
contribute to the inflammatory environment associated with tumor
formation and progression. Our research explores the role of adhesion
signaling through Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) in myeloid lineage cells as
a potential regulator of breast tumor outgrowth. Previously, we have
demonstrated that recruitment of cd11b-positive monocytes to sites of
thioglycollate-induced inflammation was impaired in the absence of FAK.
Additionally, we showed that bone marrow-derived macrophages exhibit
reduced migration toward chemotactic factors commonly found in the breast
tumor milieu. Given these results, the goal of the current study is to
address the fundamental contribution of FAK toward myeloid cell functions
that regulate breast tumor growth and progression. Mice with FAK
conditionally deleted in myeloid lineage cells (FAKmyeloid) were crossed
with mice that develop spontaneous breast carcinomas due to expression of
the MMTV-PyMT transgene. FAKmyeloid MMTV-PyMT mice showed significantly
enhanced primary tumor outgrowth compared to wildtype (WT) littermate
MMTV-PyMT animals. Tumors from both genotypes contained equivalent
numbers of mature, F4/80-positive tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs),
demonstrating that these cells were not dependent upon FAK to
infiltrate/survive in the tumor. This was reinforced by adoptive transfer
studies showing equal numbers of WT and FAKmyeloid bone marrow monocytes
at the tumor site 30 minutes post-injection. Further analysis revealed
that FAK expression was developmentally regulated, such that bone marrow
cells and the immature Ly6C+cd11b+ cells present in circulation expressed
nearly undetectable amounts of FAK protein. However, a substantial number
of the cd11b+ cells within the tumor were Lyc6C-negative and had gained
expression of FAK. Interestingly, the Ly6C-negative cells were shown to
be more migratory than the Lyc6C+ monocytes, and this increased migration
was dependent upon FAK expression. Based on these data, we propose that
monocytes mature and upregulate FAK once they have successfully
extravasated out of the tumor vasculature. This, in turn, allows
increased movement of these cells within the tumor microenvironment,
which may help to control tumor size/outgrowth through more effective
clearance of necrotic cells and/or more global distribution of factors
that could ultimately mediate an anti-tumor effect. Experiments are
currently underway to test these possibilities.

