Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3-Dimensional growth reveals KRAS dependency.


Advances in the development of clinically effective therapeutic
strategies for targeting KRAS mutant tumors have been hampered by the
lack of suitable in vitro tools and the inability to correlate findings
from current in vitro KRAS dependency models with clinical results.
Studies to evaluate targeted agents in KRAS dependent and independent
cell systems have traditionally utilized panels of cell lines grown in
2D, which differ not only in KRAS status but also exhibit multiple
genetic differences. An additional confounding element is that
traditional 2D assays do not accurately mimic tumor architecture or
growth. Our study focused on addressing two essential questions: (1) Can
the consequence of a KRAS mutation be studied without the influence of
other genetic factors? (2) Is there a requirement for more in vivo-like
conditions to reveal KRAS dependency in vitro? To overcome confounding
genetic factors, Horizon Discovery's proprietary gene editing technology
GENESIS was used to knock-out an endogenous KRAS G13D mutation from DLD-1
colon carcinoma cells in order to create a pair of isogenic cell lines
that differ only in terms of their KRAS status. Extensive profiling of
the KRAS mutant and wild type cells under a range of growth formats was
then performed to identify conditions which reveal dependency on KRAS. In
standard 2D formats, cell growth was independent of KRAS with both cell
lines demonstrating identical growth rates. However, knock-out of the
KRAS mutation severely compromised cell growth under 3D conditions which
more closely mimic true tumor biology. Interestingly, growth of the wild
type cells was compromised when grown in two distinct 3D formats; soft
agar or grown without a supporting matrix under low anchorage conditions.
These results demonstrate the essential nature of 3D conditions for
revealing KRAS dependency. In order to profile anti-cancer compounds
using a truly KRAS dependent system, cellular responses to a series of
targeted agents were compared in DLD-1 cells in 2D and 3D assays.
Multiple MEK inhibitors demonstrated clear sensitivity under KRAS
dependent conditions, with increased potency seen in the 3D assay
compared to the 2D assay. Targeted agents unrelated to KRAS such as JAK
and SYK inhibitors and non-targeted agents such as Paclitaxel exhibited
similar potency in both 2D and 3D assays, further validating this KRAS
dependency model. The increasing evidence that 3D conditions are critical
for revealing KRAS dependency suggests that previous studies performed
under standard 2D conditions may have underestimated levels of
dependency. To address this, a study to systematically evaluate KRAS
dependency across a panel of more than thirty KRAS mutant and wild type
cancer cell lines under 2D and 3D conditions is now underway. Greater
knowledge surrounding the biology and an understanding of how best to
model KRAS dependency will be key to advancing effective KRAS pathway
targeted agents into the clinic.

