Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of intracellular loops 1 and 3 in folding and cell surface
expression of human P-glycoprotein (ABCB1).


P-glycoprotein (ABCB1) is an ATP-Binding Cassette (ABC) transporter that
effluxes a variety of structurally diverse compounds including anticancer
drugs out of the cell. Known crystal structures of ABC transporters show
that the transmembrane domain (TMD) is connected to the
nucleotide-binding domain (NBD) through a ball and socket joint. Also,
the intracellular loops (ICLs) 1 and 3 are shown to be in close proximity
to the NBDs, creating an extensive interaction surface between the TMDs
and NBDs. Computational models of human P-gp in the apo and
nucleotide-bound conformation have been developed based on structures of
mouse mdr1a, C. elegans P-gp, Sav1866 and MsbA transporters. In these
models, the adenine group of ATP forms hydrogen bonds with conserved D164
and D805 on ICLs 1 and 3, respectively, which are located at the
interface between the NBDs and TMDs. We investigated the role of D164 and
D805 by substituting these residues with cysteine in a cys-less
background. The D164C/D805C mutant P-gp was expressed in High-Five insect
cells as well as in HeLa cells using the BacMam baculovirus expression
system. In the insect cells grown at 27C, the expression of the mutant
P-gp was comparable to that of cysless-WT protein and exhibited the same
ATP-binding affinity but a lower Vmax for ATP hydrolysis. However, when
the mutant protein was expressed in HeLa cells at 37C, we found that the
D164C/D805C P-gp was mislocalized and failed to transport almost all
tested drug substrates. HeLa cells transduced with D164C/D805C mutant
baculovirus were grown for 16-18 hrs in the presence of cyclosporine A
(CsA), a substrate that is also known to function as a chemical
chaperone. This treatment resulted in expression of mutant P-gp at the
cell surface to the same extent as that of cysless-WT protein; similarly,
the transport was also restored to the level of cysless-WT P-gp. A
partial rescue of the mutant P-gp expression and function was observed in
the presence of the CFTR correctors VRT-325 and compound-4a. In addition,
when BacMam baculovirus-transduced HeLa cells were cultured at 27C for 40
hrs, the mutant protein rescued to the cell surface with transport
activity to the same extent as cysless-WT P-gp. Studies of each mutant
form separately revealed that the D164C mutant had intermediate cell
surface expression and was rescued completely to the plasma membrane in
the presence of CsA. On the other hand, the expression of D805C at the
cell surface was drastically decreased and even when HeLa cells were
grown in the presence of CsA, only 10-15% of mutant protein was expressed
at the cell surface compared to cysless-WT protein. These findings in
aggregate illustrate the role of residues in ICLs 1 and 3 in the proper
folding of P-gp and specifically show that the D164 and D805 residues are
not critical for ATP binding or hydrolysis as proposed earlier, but are
instead important for inter-domain interactions and assembly of a
functional transporter.

