Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resuscitating immune surveillance in cancer.


Cancer growth interferes with the Notch signaling that plays diverse
roles in lymphocyte commitment and differentiation, oncogenesis, and
peripheral immune responses. Our studies show that the stimulation of
hematopoietic Notch signaling following administration of a prototypic
therapeutic agent clustered multivalent Delta-like Notch ligand (DLL1),
in mouse lung tumor models can correct tumor-induced defects in
lymphocyte differentiation and improve antitumor lymphocyte responses,
without increasing tumor cell proliferation. Moreover, since the Notch
signaling complex is inactivated via the proteasome, its inhibitor
bortezomib, amongst its other potential effects, may sustain
DLL1-mediated pharmacological activation of the Notch signaling. Our data
demonstrate that the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib can selectively
sensitize solid tumors to apoptotic signals by upregulating death
receptors on tumor cells and amplifying caspase-8 activation in the
extrinsic cell death pathway, without any adverse effect on the
antigen-specific T cell proliferative or cytolytic functions in an in
vivo setting. In the current study, we investigated the effects of
bortezomib and DLL1 on Notch receptor/ligand system and its downstream
signaling network with an aim to enhance cancer immunotherapy. Results
show that bortezomib affects the expression of notch receptors and
ligands differentially in lymphocytes and in a wide range of solid tumor
cells: 4T1, PyMT, MDA-MB-231, C26, LLC, D459, and Renca-HA. Specifically,
the expression of Notch 4 receptor and its ligand Jagged 1 was reduced in
bortezomib-treated tumor cells. In addition, bortezomib treatment of
tumor cells modulated Notch downstream targets Hes1, Hes3, Hey1, Deltex1
and Deltex3, which act as transcriptional regulators of tissue-specific
differentiation. bortezomib also modulated the phosphorylation of Erk1/2
MAP kinases and AKT suggesting that bortezomib may mediate its effects
through downstream phosphorylation of Erk targets, such as STATs and
NFkB, or PI3K, which are key players in signaling cross-talk and
intersect with Notch signaling. Noreover, bortezomib administration
increased the expression of Notch target Hes1 in thymus, lymph node and
spleen of tumor-bearing mice, suggesting a potential synergistic action
of bortezomib and DLL1 activation of Notch signaling. These results
suggest that tumor cell-death sensitizing bortezomib and pharmacological
DLL1 cluster activating immunostimulatory Notch in tumor-bearing host
follow common signal transduction pathways and can synergize in antitumor
activity. These findings offer a novel three-pronged combinatorial
therapeutic approach of immunostimulatory Notch ligand DLL1 and
bortezomib to abrogate the immunosuppressive circuitries operating in the
tumor microenvironment with a potential to reduce tumor burden and
resuscitate tumor-specific immunity.

