Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MK-1775, a selective wee1 kinase inhibitor, overcomes cisplatin
resistance associated with high risk TP53 mutations in squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) affects over 500,000
patients worldwide annually and over half this number of patients dies
from the disease each year. Platinum-based chemotherapy is currently
employed in the treatment of advanced HNSCC to decrease distant
metastasis and to improve local-regional control through sensitization of
external beam radiation. Platinum based agents have been shown to be less
effective in the context of specific genomic events such as mutation of
TP53 tumor suppressor gene. Recent data from whole-exome sequencing of
HNSCC reveals that this gene is mutated in 60-80% of HNSCC. It is unclear
whether all mutations in TP53 equally trigger an aggressive HNSCC
phenotype which is resistant to platinum based agents. Therefore, we have
developed an algorithm termed Evolutionary Gradient and Structure (EGS)
which stratifies HNSCC patients based on the type of TP53 mutation and
correlates the score (high risk vs. low risk) with clinical outcomes.
Based on this system, twelve isogenic cell lines harboring different p53
mutants were created in a p53 null HNSCC cell line background. Cells
expressing high risk TP53 mutations were highly resistant to cisplatin
relative to wildtype TP53. Decreased cisplatin sensitivity associated
with these mutations was found to be driven by their inability to undergo
cellular senescence, the primary mechanism of death for cells with
wildtype TP53. It has been previously shown that tumors expressing mutant
TP53 rely more heavily on activation of the S- and G2-phase checkpoints
for mediating the growth arrest needed to repair DNA damage and survive
genotoxic stress, making these cells potentially sensitive to G2
checkpoint inhibitors. Wee1 is a tyrosine kinase that has been linked to
DNA damage induced G2 arrest, owing to its ability to inactivate cyclin
dependent kinase 1 (CDK1)) through phosphorylation of the Tyr15 residue.
Recent studies have shown that inhibitors of Wee1 sensitize TP53 mutant
colon cancer tumors to cisplatin in preclinical models by abrogating a G2
arrest. Therefore, we assessed the ability of the wee1 kinase inhibitor,
MK-1775, to sensitize the HNSCC cells to cisplatin. Treatment of HNSCC
cell lines expressing high risk TP53 mutations with MK-1775 and cisplatin
resulted in strong synergism with a combination index of 0.07.
Furthermore, the addition of MK-1775 to cisplatin did not restore
induction of senescence, but rather resulted in increased cell death
through mitotic catastrophe. This study demonstrates the potential for a
therapeutic strategy aimed at tumors expressing high risk TP53 mutations.
Through the use of synthetic lethality it appears possible to restore
cell death pathways and improve treatment outcomes in pre-clinical models
of aggressive HNSCC.

