Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Klotho-induced dissociation between activation and nuclear
localization of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2: A novel
growth inhibitory mechanism in breast cancer cancer.


Klotho is a transmembranal protein implicated in aging and in calcium and
phosphate metabolism. Klotho-deficient mice manifest a syndrome
resembling accelerated aging, whereas, klotho over expression in mice
extends life span. Klotho can be cleaved, shed and act as a circulating
hormone. We have recently identified klotho as a potent tumor suppressor
in breast and pancreatic cancers. We found that klotho is epigenetically
silenced in these cancers and treatment with klotho inhibits
proliferation of cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. We also showed that
klotho inhibits bFGF-induced ERK phosphorylation. The ERK cascade plays a
major role in tumorigenesis. Upon activation of the ERK cascade, ERK1/2
are phosphorylated and translocate to the nucleus, where they
phosphorylate numerous substrates.Using visualization of endogenous and
GFP-tagged ERK2 and cell fractionation studies, we discovered that klotho
inhibits nuclear translocation of phosphorylated ERK1/2. Furthermore,
upon either klotho transfection or treatment with soluble klotho we noted
activation of cytoplasmatic targets, but not of nuclear targets of ERK2.
Thus RSK, an ERK2 cytoplasmic target, is activated following klotho
co-treatment with bFGF. On the other hand, the ERK2 nuclear target Elk
exhibited reduced activity under these conditions. That was evidenced by
decreased Elk phosphorylation, and a decline in the mRNA expression of
Elk-regulated gene cFOS.One of klotho activities is regulation of calcium
homeostasis through activation of the calcium channels TRPV5/6, resulting
in increased intra-cellular levels of calcium. Interestingly, increased
calcium levels have been shown recently to prevent nuclear translocation
of activated ERK2. We hypothesized that TRPV6 may mediate klotho effects
toward ERK1/2. Indeed, using visualization of GFP-tagged TRPV6 we noted
that klotho recruited TRPV6 to the cell membrane and using
co-immunoprecipitation noted an interaction between klotho and TRPV6 in
breast cancer cells. Furthermore, overexpression of TRPV6 inhibited
colony formation of these cells and the effect was augmented by
co-transfection with klotho. Elevation in calcium levels by TRPV6 is
expected to affect genes involved in regulating cellular calcium levels.
Therefore, we analyzed the effects of klotho on the calcium binding
protein S100A6, and on stromal interaction molecule-1 (STIM-1) which
activates the "store-operated" ORAI1 calcium ion channels in plasma
membrane. We noted, for the first time, that klotho down-regulated these
genes.Taken together, our data indicate novel activities of klotho in
cancer cells: regulation of intracellular calcium trafficking and
dissociation between activation and nuclear translocation of ERK1/2.

