Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activating PLCG1 mutations in cutaneous T-cell lymphomas.


Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) is a heterogeneous group of diseases
characterized by clonal expansion of malignant T-cells in the skin. The
two predominant clinical forms of CTCL are mycosis fungoides (MF) and
Sezary syndrome (SS). Tumor-stage MF has an unfavorable prognosis with a
10-year survival of approximately 40%. Despite the molecular pathogenesis
of CTCL is still basically unknown, some data including Gene expression
profiling (GEP) studies have shown that increased signaling from the
T-cell receptor (TCR) can be considered a driving force of CTCL and that
the neoplastic T-cells can acquire Treg and Th17 phenotypes. However, the
molecular mechanisms responsible for this activation have not been fully
clarified.Based on the hypothesis that deregulated TCR activity may
depend, at least in part, on somatic mutations, we have studied the
coding exons of a selection of genes with known biological relevance in
T-cells, including TCR and MAPK signaling, cytokine activity and
survival/apoptosis regulators. By means of deep sequencing we analyzed
paired (non tumoral vs. tumoral) genomic DNA from 11 CTCL patients. Under
these premises, we first prepared enriched libraries for exons and
regulatory regions for 524 genes belonging to the aforementioned
pathways, and then proceeded to sequence with a Genome Analyzer GA2
(Illumina). The sequencing data was checked by FastQC and aligned to the
human reference genome (GRCh37) and somatic variants were identified
using GATK. Candidate variants were manually reviewed and validated by
capillary sequencing.Our results showed multiple somatic mutations in
essential genes implicated in the biology of T cells. Strikingly, we
found recurrent mutations in PLCG1 affecting 3/11 patients (two of them
sharing the same mutation) in our cohort. This protein can be considered
a mayor effector of TRC signaling as well as to play a central role in
the differentiation processes of T-cells towards the acquisition of a
Treg/Th17 phenotype. Using a combination of PLCG1-targeted DNA sequencing
and immune-staining in FFPE patient samples, we corroborated that up to
20% of a new cohort of 60 patients harbored the recurrent PLCG1 mutation.
Moreover we found a correlation between the presence of this mutation and
the nuclear accumulation of activated NFAT, a well-known PLCG1downstream
effector, suggesting that these mutations may confer a gain of function
activity to this enzyme. We corroborated this observation by comparing
the activity of exogenous expression of WT and mutant PLCG1 proteins
towards the activation of NFAT using a luciferase reporter gene assay.
Moreover we also found that the resultant activity from these mutants was
highly sensitive to the specific inhibition of CaN and PLC in our system
which may suggest that the finding of these mutations in CTCL patients
might be used as an indicative for targeted therapy.

