Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Different ROS control mechanisms and mutagenic consequences in
primitive subsets of normal human mammary cells.


Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are known mediators of DNA damage and
likely contributors to oncogenesis. However, very little is known about
the mechanisms controlling ROS in the cells that make up the normal human
mammary gland, in spite of its being a major site of cancer development.
To investigate how ROS are generated and their potential role in two
functionally distinct, primitive normal human mammary epithelial cell
compartments (luminal and basal), we isolated these subsets at high
purities by FACS and compared the levels within them of ROS, components
that positively and negatively regulate ROS, their responses to oxidative
stressors and evidence of ROS-associated DNA damage. The results show
that purified progenitors of the cells that line the gland lumen (defined
by their EpCAM+ CD49f+ phenotype) contain significantly higher levels of
superoxide (O2*) anions and H2O2 than the basal cells (defined as
EpCAMlow/- CD49fhigh cells and highly enriched in bipotent progenitors
and stem cells). We also find that the elevated levels of these ROS
elements in the luminal progenitors are associated with a higher content
of mitochondria and higher levels of all 3 superoxide dismutases (SOD-1,
2 and 3). The luminal progenitors are also highly resistant to
glutathione depletion and express higher levels of both non-canonical
non-glutathione anti-oxidant enzymes and multiple enzymes that control
ROS-induced nucleotide damage (i.e., OGG-1, MTH-1, MUTYH) providing a
likely explanation for their ability to survive following GSH depletion.
Interestingly, we found the mitochondrial antioxidant glutathione
peroxidase (GPX)-2 enzyme to be expressed almost exclusively and at high
levels in basal mammary cells and its depletion, using a shRNA
lentivirus, resulted in loss of progenitor viability/activity by basal
but not luminal cells. Luminal progenitors also displayed greater
resistance to acute oxidative insults (H2O2 and X-radiation) and
displayed an increased accrual of oxidative damage-induced (genomic
8-oxo-dGTP) mutations. Our findings reveal a major difference in the
molecular machinery that control ROS levels in normal human basal and
luminal mammary progenitors. These correlate with an ability of the
luminal progenitors to maintain and tolerate elevated levels of ROS and
the continuous acquisition of unrepaired ROS-induced DNA damage, thus
suggesting a novel and previously unanticipated vulnerability of these
cells to undergo oncogenic transformation.(Supported by Canadian Breast
Cancer Foundation/BC-Yukon and the Canadian Cancer Society)

