Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ARL4C, a novel ovarian cancer-related gene, its down-regulated
predicts poor survival in ovarian cancer.


Purpose: To identify the genes involved in ovarian cancer progression and
elucidate their biological actions in ovarian cancer.Experimental Design:
Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) was employed to screen the
chromosome fragments with different copy numbers between the ovarian
cancer cell line HO-8910 and its highly metastatic cell subline
HO-8910PM. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) via biotin-labeled
BAC clone probes was used to validate the results of CGH. Using gene
expression microarray, differentially expressed genes on the target
chromosome fragment were compared between the two cell lines.
Lentiviral-mediated transfection was used to investigate the effects of
candidate gene over-expression or knockdown on colony formation,
proliferation and motility of ovarian cancer cells. Two hundred twelve
epithelial ovarian cancer samples were analyzed for mRNA expression of
candidate gene using RT-PCR. Associations of the gene expression with
clinicopathological factors, progression free and overall survival were
evaluated.Results: Chromosome fragment 2q36.1-37.3 was found hemizygous
deletion in HO-8910PM cells by CGH and FISH. Comparing gene expression
data, we identified ARL4C, located on chromosome 2q37.1, to be
down-regulated in the HO-8910PM cells, compared with the HO-8910 cells.
Western blot showed ARL4C expression was low/null in most ovarian cancer
cell lines, including the HO-8910PM cells. ARL4C over-expression or
knockdown had no obvious effect on colony formation and cell
proliferation, but negatively regulated cell motility. ARL4C
over-expression suppressed ovarian cancer cells migration and invasion.
Inversely, ARL4C knockdown promoted ovarian cancer cells migration.
Clinicopathologic studies further supported the relevance of ARL4C in
ovarian cancers. Patients with medium or high levels of ARL4C mRNA were
at lower risk for death, compared to those with low levels (HR, 0.45; 95%
C.I., 0.27-0.76; P=0.003 for mid levels; and HR, 0.58; 95% C.I.,
0.35-0.96; P = 0.035 for high levels) after adjusting for age, disease
stage, tumor grade, histologic type and residual tumor size. Kaplan-Meier
survival analysis demonstrated similar results.Conclusions: ARL4C is a
novel ovarian cancer related gene that inhibits cell motility. It seems
to play a protective role in cancer progression and is an independent
prognostic factor for patient with ovarian cancer. More studies are
needed to further elucidate the molecular mechanisms of ARL4C in ovarian
cancer progression.

