Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling 1st- and 2nd-line therapy of BRAF mutant melanoma using a
novel BRAF inhibitor with DFG-out binding mode.


The BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib (VEM) was approved for treatment of
patients with BRAFV600E melanoma based on an ORR of 48% and a PFS of 5.3
months. Phase III data reported for the BRAF inhibitor dabrafenib (DAB)
as well as the MEK inhibitor trametinib (TRA) in BRAFmut melanoma
indicate similar outcomes. Phase I/II data published recently for a
combination of DAB and TRA suggest improved efficacy compared with
single-agent therapy; nevertheless, the short duration of responses even
for the combination points to an urgent need for further improvement.BI
882370, a potent and selective B/CRAF inhibitor, binds to the DFG-out
(inactive) conformation of BRAF, whereas VEM as well as DAB occupy the
DFG-in (active) conformation. BI 882370 inhibited proliferation of
BRAFmut melanoma cell lines with about 100x higher potency (EC50 1 - 10
nM) than VEM; BRAFwt cell lines were not affected at 1 M.For studies in
nude mouse xenograft models, VEM and DAB were dosed to provide exposures
achieved in patients; TRA was used at the MTD for mice, resulting in
exposures at or above the exposures tolerated by humans. In the G361
melanoma model (BRAFV600E), 1st line treatment with 25 mg/kg BI 882370
administered twice daily (bid) resulted in partial regression of all
tumors, superior to results achieved by VEM, DAB as well as their
combination.To model clinical resistance, a large cohort of A375 melanoma
(BRAFV600E) bearing mice was treated with VEM; without exception, all
tumors responded with partial regression and their median volume reached
a nadir on day 11. Thereafter, the majority of tumors resumed growth in
spite of continued treatment, whereas tumors in a subset of animals
regressed further. Progressing tumors were randomized to 2nd line therapy
on day 36 (median volume 280 mm3). TRA did not show any efficacy in this
resistant population. BI 882370 induced tumor regression, however,
resistance developed within 3 weeks. BI 882370 in combination with TRA
resulted in more pronounced regressions and resistance was not observed
until the end of the experiment, 6 weeks after initiation of 2nd line
therapy.Importantly, in multiple in vivo studies performed to date, mice
treated with BI 882370 at doses of 25 mg/kg bid for several weeks did not
show any body weight loss or clinical signs of intolerability. Mice
treated for 2 weeks were euthanized and major organs subjected to
histological analysis. No changes were observed in any of the animals; in
particular, there was no evidence for epidermal hyperplasia. Further, a
pilot study in male rats dosed at 25 mg/kg bid for 2 weeks did not result
in any toxicologically relevant findings in terms of clinical chemistry,
hematology, pathology and toxicogenomics of liver and skin.Our results
suggest that compared to 1st generation BRAF inhibitors, BI 882370 may
provide an improved therapeutic window, enabling more pronounced and
longer-lasting pathway suppression and thus resulting in improved
efficacy.

