Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of epidermal stem cells in SKH1 hairless mice, a
widely used mouse model to investigate ultraviolet radiation
carcinogenesis.


Human cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the second most common
type of non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) after basal cell carcinoma (BCC)
in US. Evidence indicates that the precursor cells are the precursor
cells for the origin of SCC. The SCCs probably arise from bulge stem cell
niche of hair follicle but not from the transit amplifying cells of
epidermis. The SKH1 hairless mice is a widely used mouse model for
ultraviolet radiation (UV)-induced carcinogenesis. However, SKH1 mice
have never been evaluated for status of skin stem cell probably due to
absence of hair and other associated hairless phenotype. It has recently
become possible to isolate living hair follicle stem and progenitor cells
from mouse skin because of the discovery of cell surface marker (CD34)
that facilitate enrichment. The cell surface protein CD34, more widely
known as a hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell marker, was found to be
uniquely expressed in the mouse hair follicle bulge region using
immunohistochemistry staining techniques. In addition, CD34 expression
was restricted to the hair follicle regardless of hair follicle stage,
making this a potentially important tool for selected enrichment of hair
follicle bulge region keratinocytes. In combination with alpha 6-integrin
staining and fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS), CD34 is used to
successfully isolate a small population of CD34+/alpha 6-integrin+ cells
from a single cell preparation of mouse keratinocytes. CD34-expressing
keratinocytes were confirmed to have properties consistent with stem and
progenitor cells in that they were shown to be slowly cycling and have a
high proliferative capacity in culture, growing larger colonies relative
to those from CD34 keratinocytes. In the present experiments, the SKH1
mouse skin stem cell population was identified using stem cell markers
(CD34+/6-integrin+, Keratin-15, Gli1, and Sox9). The results of FACS
analysis of live cells, isolated from untreated SKH1 mouse skin, indicate
that there are 0.23% CD34+ and 1.05% CD34+/6-integrin+ cells. The FACS
sorted double positive (CD34+/6-integrin+) stem cells of SKH1 are also
observed to be positive for K15, Gli1, and Sox9 markers of stem cells in
cytospin slides. In summary, the quantitative FACS analysis and
qualitative immunofluorescence data in skin tissues confirms the presence
of the stem cell populations in SKH1 mice. Support: (RO1CA102431).

