Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serine-Arginine protein kinase 1 (SRPK1) - A potential target of
angiogenesis in prostate cancer.


Angiogenesis is required for all tumors to grow and metastasize and is
mainly induced by the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
Alternative spliced isoforms associated with cancer progression have been
described in all areas of hallmarks of cancer, including angiogenesis.
VEGF mRNA is alternatively spliced at the terminal exon, to produce two
families of isoforms. The pro- angiogenic family, VEGFxxx, was shown to
be up-regulated in all cancers studied so far, where as the anti-
angiogenic family is preferentially expressed in normal non-angiogenic
tissues, but down-regulated in most cancers. One of the factors involved
in the regulation of VEGF alternative splicing is SRPK1. This is a
protein kinase that phosphorylates the splicing factor SRSF1 and favours
the production of the pro-angiogenic VEGF isoform. We therefore tested
the hypothesis that down - regulation of SRPK1 in prostate cancer cells
would increase the production of the anti-angiogenic isoform, preventing
angiogenesis and tumor growth.PC-3, DU145 and LnCap prostate cancer cells
showed an increased expression of SRPK1 when compared to Primary Prostate
epithelial cells. Stable SRPK1 knock-down (KD) in PC-3 and LnCap prostate
cancer cells was obtained using a lentiviral system (Dharmacon). This
resulted in a reduction in splice factor expression, mainly SRSF1, and
induced a switch in the expression of VEGF towards the anti-angiogenic
isoform, VEGF165b, when compared to control cells (transfected with
non-targeting shRNA). PC-3 SRPK1 KD and control cell lines were injected
subcutaneously in male nude mice. Knock down of SRPK1 resulted in an
inhibition of tumour growth, as shown by the significant difference in
tumor size between the SRPK1 KD (250.0 82.28 n=9) and control cell line
(994.7 243.5 n=9)(Day 29 post-injection). In addition to the reduction in
tumor volume, SRPK1 inhibition resulted in decrease in vascular density
of the tumors, as shown by the significant reduction in blood vessel
number in PC-3 SRPK1 KD (2.714 0.3686 n=7) mice compared with control
(4.292 0.5426 n=8). These in vitro and in vivo data suggest that the
regulation of VEGF splicing by SRPK1 alters prostate cancer tumour growth
and angiogenesis.

