Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGCG inhibits pancreatic cancer stem cell characteristics in human
primary tumors, and carcinogenesis in KrasG12D transgenic mice.


EGCG, a component of green tea, exerts antiproliferative and proapoptotic
actions on a number of different cancer cell lines through diverse
mechanisms. However, the mechanisms by which EGCG inhibits cell
proliferation and induces apoptosis are poorly understood. The objectives
of this study were to examine the molecular mechanisms by which EGCG
inhibits stem cell characteristics of pancreatic cancer stem cells (CSCs)
derived from human primary tumors and carcinogenesis in KrasG12D
transgenic mice. Human pancreatic CSCs (CD133+CD44+CD24+ESA+) are highly
tumorigenic and form subcutaneous tumors in NOD/SCID IL2R gamma mice.
Human pancreatic CSCs expressing high levels of CD133, CD24, CD44, ESA,
and aldehyde dehydrogenase also express significantly more Nanog, Oct-4,
Notch1, MDR1 and ABCG2 than normal pancreatic tissues and primary
pancreatic cancer cells. Similarly, CSCs from KrasG12D mice express
significantly high levels of pluripotency maintaining factors than
pancreatic tissues from Pdx-Cre mice. EGCG inhibits the growth (size and
weight) and development (PanIN lesions) of pancreatic cancer in KrasG12D
mice by suppressing the activation of Kras, ERK, AKT and FoxO. EGCG
inhibits the self-renewal capacity of pancreatic CSCs derived from human
primary tumors and KrasG12D mice. EGCG inhibits pluripotency maintaining
factors (Nanog, Sox-2, c-Myc and Oct-4) and drug resistance gene ABCG2 in
CSCs. Inhibition of Nanog by shRNA enhances the inhibitory effects of
EGCG on self-renewal capacity of CSCs. Finally, EGCG inhibits CSC's
migration and invasion and markers of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(Zeb-1, Slug and Snail). These data suggest that EGCG can inhibit
pancreatic cancer development in human and KrasG12D transgenic mice by
inhibiting stem cell characteristics. In conclusion, EGCG can be used for
the management of pancreatic cancer.

