Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A common docking (CD) domain in progesterone receptor-B links
rapid signaling events to STAT5-dependent gene expression required for
breast cancer cell proliferation.


Progesterone receptors (PR) are critical context-dependent transcription
factors required for normal uterine (PR-A) and mammary gland (PR-B)
development. Progesterone is proliferative in the breast, where PR target
genes include paracrine factors that mediate mammary stem cell
self-renewal. In the context of altered signal transduction that typifies
breast tumorigenesis, dysregulated (i.e. hyper-phosphorylated) PRs likely
contribute to tumor progression by promoting cancer cell pro-survival and
proliferation. Notably, in breast cancer cells, progestin-bound PRs
induce rapid MAPK activation leading to selective regulation of
growth-promoting genes by phosphorylated PR species. Functional domains
within PR that interact with c-Src and estrogen receptors (ER) have been
identified as indirect routes to MAPK activation. Herein, we describe a
common docking (CD) domain located within the PR-B N-terminus, a motif
first described in MAPKs that facilitates direct interactions between
MAPKs and MEK1 or MAPK-phosphatases (MKPs). Mutation of negatively
charged amino acids critical for CD domain function in MAPKs within PR-B
(mCD PR) did not alter MEK-binding or progestin-induced rapid signaling
(i.e. MAPK activation) and PR transcriptional activity as measured by
PRE-luciferase assays. However, in the presence of progestin, mCD PR was
more rapidly phosphorylated on selected Pro-directed sites (Ser294,
Ser345, and Ser400) relative to wt PR. Conversely, mCD PR failed to
undergo ligand-induced phosphorylation on Ser81, a ck2-dependent site
required for progestin-regulation of select growth-promoting genes.
Progestin-induced PR Ser81 phosphorylation mapped to CD domain-dependent
binding of PR-B to MKP3, but did not require phosphatase activity.
Inspection of endogenous PR-target genes revealed that receptors
containing either mutant CD domains (mCD PR) or pt mutations of Ser81
(S79/81A PR) failed to upregulate STAT5 and Wnt1, PR-target gene products
that act as critical mediators of mammary stem cell expansion. Inhibition
of JAK/STAT signaling blocked progestin-induced STAT5 and Wnt1
expression. ChIP assays demonstrated that wt PR-B, but not phospho-mutant
(S79/81A) PR-B was co-recruited to a PRE-containing enhancer region of
the Wnt1 gene along with both MKP3 and ck2. STAT5 was also present at
this site as well as multiple nearby regions in both the absence and
presence of progestin. Our studies reveal a novel scaffolding action of
MKP3 mediated by interaction with the PR CD domain and required for
ck2-dependent PR Ser81 phosphorylation. Co-regulation of select target
genes by phospho-Ser81 PR and phospho-STAT5 is likely a global mechanism
required for the activation of growth promoting programs active during
normal mammary gland development and relevant to mechanisms of breast
cancer progression.

