Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High expression of DUSP4 in ER-negative breast cancer cells
suppresses growth and invasion.


Background: Estrogen receptor (ER) -negative breast cancers are poor
prognosis tumors that occur more commonly in young women. Current
treatments for ER-negative tumors include cytotoxic chemotherapy, or for
those ER-negative breast cancers that overexpress HER2, the anti-HER2
antibody herceptin. Similar therapy for ER-negative, Her2 negative
tumors, particularly for (triple-negative breast cancers) is urgently
needed. In this project, we investigated whether phosphatases that are
differentially expressed in ER-negative as compared to ER-positive breast
cancers. We hypothesized that: (1) the specific phosphatases that govern
the growth of ER-negative cancers are different from those of ER-positive
cancers, (2) Induced expression of some of those phosphatases that are
lowly expressed in ER-negative breast cancers will suppress the growth
and invasion of ER-negative breast cancers.Methods: Using 102 human
breast tumors (57 ER-positive & 45 ER-negative) from the neo-adjuvant
studies from the Baylor Breast Center tumor bank, we isolated RNA and
performed Affymetrix microarray studies. cDNA was synthesized and
Biotin-labeled and hybridized onto an Affymetrix HGU133A GeneChipTM.
Statistical analysis was done with dChip software, and phosphatases more
highly (>1.5 fold; FDR Background: Estrogen receptor (ER) -negative
breast cancers are poor prognosis tumors that occur more commonly in
young women. Current treatments for ER-negative tumors include cytotoxic
chemotherapy, or for those ER-negative breast cancers that overexpress
HER2, the anti-HER2 antibody herceptin. Similar therapy for ER-negative,
Her2 negative tumors, particularly for (triple-negative breast cancers)
is urgently needed. In this project, we investigated whether phosphatases
that are differentially expressed in ER-negative as compared to
ER-positive breast cancers. We hypothesized that: (1) the specific
phosphatases that govern the growth of ER-negative cancers are different
from those of ER-positive cancers, (2) Induced expression of some of
those phosphatases that are lowly expressed in ER-negative breast cancers
will suppress the growth and invasion of ER-negative breast
cancers.Methods: Using 102 human breast tumors (57 ER-positive & 45
ER-negative) from the neo-adjuvant studies from the Baylor Breast Center
tumor bank, we isolated RNA and performed Affymetrix microarray studies.
cDNA was synthesized and Biotin-labeled and hybridized onto an Affymetrix
HGU133A GeneChipTM. Statistical analysis was done with dChip software,
and phosphatases more highly (>1.5 fold; FDR <0.05) or lowly (Background:
Estrogen receptor (ER) -negative breast cancers are poor prognosis tumors
that occur more commonly in young women. Current treatments for
ER-negative tumors include cytotoxic chemotherapy, or for those
ER-negative breast cancers that overexpress HER2, the anti-HER2 antibody
herceptin. Similar therapy for ER-negative, Her2 negative tumors,
particularly for (triple-negative breast cancers) is urgently needed. In
this project, we investigated whether phosphatases that are
differentially expressed in ER-negative as compared to ER-positive breast
cancers. We hypothesized that: (1) the specific phosphatases that govern
the growth of ER-negative cancers are different from those of ER-positive
cancers, (2) Induced expression of some of those phosphatases that are
lowly expressed in ER-negative breast cancers will suppress the growth
and invasion of ER-negative breast cancers.Methods: Using 102 human
breast tumors (57 ER-positive & 45 ER-negative) from the neo-adjuvant
studies from the Baylor Breast Center tumor bank, we isolated RNA and
performed Affymetrix microarray studies. cDNA was synthesized and
Biotin-labeled and hybridized onto an Affymetrix HGU133A GeneChipTM.
Statistical analysis was done with dChip software, and phosphatases more
highly (>1.5 fold; FDR <0.05) or lowly (<0.66-fold; FDR1.5 fold;
FDR=0.05), and 29 lowly-expressed (1.5 fold; FDR=0.05), and 29
lowly-expressed (<0.66-fold; FDR1.5 fold; FDR=0.05), and 29
lowly-expressed (<0.66-fold; FDR<0.05) phosphatases in ER-negative breast
cancers. We selected the lowly expressed phosphatase DUSP4 for further
study. Induced expression of DUSP4 in ER-negative cells inhibited
anchorage-dependent and independent growth but had no effect on
ER-positive cell. Induced expression of DUSP4 also suppressed the
invasion of MDA-MB-231 and SUM159 cells. DUSP4 expression also inhibited
MDA-MB 231 and SUM159 cells growth in vivo.Conclusions: We identified a
set of highly and lowly expressed phosphatases in ER-negative breast
cancers as compared to ER-positive cancers. Overexpression of DUSP4 in
ER-negative breast cancer cells inhibits growth and invasion of these
cells. By identifying the molecules that regulate breast cancer cells
growth we are identifying potential new targets for the treatment of
these aggressive ER-negative breast cancers. Supported by Komen Promise
grant KG081694 (PHB).

