Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic regulation of the ubiquitin+proteasome system.


The ubiquitin+proteasome system (UPS) is a highly complex network that
maintains protein homeostasis and cell viability through the highly
regulated and selective turnover of targeted proteins. The proteasome is
the major intracellular protease in eukaryotes and serves as the
catalytic core of the UPS. The cytotoxic effect of proteasome inhibition
has been translated therapeutically to dramatically improve the overall
survival of patients diagnosed with the plasma cell malignancy multiple
myeloma (MM). Bortezomib has emerged as the standard-of-care therapy for
MM to catapult the UPS into a position of prominence in cancer biology
and drug development but significant obstacles remain since many patients
do not respond to bortezomib, clinical responses are not sustained and
drug resistance inevitably emerges through unknown mechanisms. Gene
profiling was performed as an unbiased approach to address the precise
molecular events that promote bortezomib-resistance. Results indicated
that effectors of energy metabolism were differentially expressed in
cells resistant to bortezomib. Subunits of the cellular energy sensor
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) were expressed at lower levels in
resistant cells relative to the parental cells. Real-time, cell-based
metabolic measurements demonstrated that bortezomib rapidly and
dramatically reduced tumor cell oxygen-consumption while
bortezomib-resistant cells were less sensitive to metabolic deregulation.
Genetic ablation of the AMPK1/2 encoding-genes also reduced the effect of
bortezomib to promote autophagosome formation as well as
bortezomib-induced cytotoxicity. Similarly, knockout of the
AMPK-substrate and autophagy-initiating kinase ULK1 also reduced
bortezomib-induced autophagosome formation and cell death. Proteasome
inhibition promoted ULK-1 association with the autophagosome initiators
ATG13, FIP200 and beclin-1. The AMPK activator AICAR further enhanced
bortezomib-induced cytotoxicity in myeloma, lymphoma, leukemic and solid
tumor cells. Proteasome inhibitors induce AMPK+ULK-mediated autophagosome
formation that is coupled to apoptosis and can be exploited as a novel
anti-cancer therapeutic strategy.

