Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the mTORC1/S6K1 signaling pathway in ER-positive
breast cancer.


The mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is a central
signaling node in mediating cellular responses to mitogens, hormones and
nutrients. The 40S ribosomal S6 kinase 1 (S6K1) is a conserved
serine/threonine protein kinase that belongs to the AGC family of protein
kinases, which also includes Akt, RSK and many others. S6K1 is the
principal kinase effector downstream mTORC1. S6K1 is sensitive to a wide
range of signaling inputs, including growth factors, amino acids, energy
levels, and hypoxia. S6K1 relays these signals to regulate a growing list
of substrates and interacting proteins in control of oncogenic processes,
such as cell growth and proliferation, cell survival and apoptosis, and
cell migration and invasion.Growing evidence indicates that there exists
a close interaction between the mTORC1/S6K1 pathway and estrogen receptor
(ER) signaling. Notably, endocrine resistance is often associated with
ligand-independent activation of ER signaling due to hyperactivation of
the mTORC1 signaling pathway, and can be reversed by the mTORC1 inhibitor
everolimus in vitro.Several lines of evidence suggest an important role
for S6K1 in ER-positive breast cancer. We demonstrated that S6K1 directly
phosphorylates ER on Ser167, leading to activation of its transcriptional
activity. While the MAPK-regulated p90 RSK also contributes to
phosphorylation of this site, its contribution is early and transient,
while the phosphorylation of Ser167 by S6K1 is prolonged and sustained.
Intriguingly, we also found that S6K1 expression is estrogenically
regulated by a mechanism that involves the transcription factor GATA-3.
Thus it appears that S6K1 expression is maintained in two modes: a basal
level of expression, typical of normal cells, and an
estrogen/ER-dependent specific upregulation. Therefore, there exists a
feed-forward regulatory loop whereby S6K1 activates ER transcriptional
activity, leading to increased expression of S6K1. Our current work aims
to uncover the mechanistic details of the transcriptional regulation of
S6K1 expression, to delineate signaling cross-talk between mTORC1, S6K1
and ER, and to asses whether inhibition of S6K1 overexpression and
activation affects the development and progression of breast cancer.

