Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting telomerase in HER2 positive breast cancer: role of
cancer stem cells.


Background: The reverse transcriptase enzyme telomerase is reactivated in
85-90% of malignancies and is a potential target for anti-cancer
therapies due to its differential expression between normal and tumor
cells. One such therapy involves targeting the template region of
telomerase with an antagonistic oligonucleotide, imetelstat, which is
currently in clinical trials for breast and other cancers. Imetelstat has
been shown to be effective in inhibiting telomerase activity in breast
cancer cell lines, as well as inhibiting breast tumor growth and
decreasing lung metastases in an in vivo model. HER2 amplification
(and/or overexpression) is associated with a more aggressive disease, a
greater likelihood of recurrence, and decreased survival compared to
breast cancers without HER2 amplification. Recent work has shown that
HER2 overexpression increases both the normal and malignant
stem/progenitor cell population. This increase in malignant stem cells,
known as cancer stem cells (CSCs), drives tumorigenesis and invasion and
may explain the aggressive phenotype and drug resistance of this disease.
We hypothesize that CSCs have active telomerase and thus may be sensitive
to imetelstat treatment, thereby enhancing the effects of therapy for
HER2 positive cancers.Methods: HER2+/- breast cancer cells, grown as
mammospheres in culture to enrich for CSCs, were analyzed by flow
cytometry for CSC marker expression (CD49f+/EpCAM-, CD44+/CD24-, and
ALDH1hi). Mammospheres were analyzed for spheroid forming efficiency, a
functional measure of self-renewal potential, and telomerase activity in
response to imetelstat treatment.Results: Imetelstat treatment resulted
in inhibition of up to 90% of telomerase activity in mammospheres,
similar to adherent cell cultures. The percentage of CSCs based upon
analysis of marker expression decreased approximately 30% or 1.4-fold
after 5 weeks of imetelstat treatment compared to untreated controls.
Imetelstat pretreatment decreased spheroid counts by 84%. The spheroid
formation efficiency decreased from 9.36% in the untreated to 1.5% after
imetelstat pretreatment, a 6.24-fold decrease. Pretreatment with
imetelstat also had a durable inhibitory effect on mammosphere telomerase
activity, where over 60% of the enzyme's activity remained inhibited
after one week without additional treatment.Conclusions: CSCs have active
telomerase that can be inhibited using imetelstat. The percentage of CSCs
as well as spheroid formation efficiency decreases following imetelstat
treatment. The addition of imetelstat to therapy regimens may help
decrease metastases and reduce tumor recurrence.

