Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hornerin: a novel, non-VEGF mediated human tumor angiogenic
protein.


Angiogenesis is vital to the growth, progression and ultimately
metastasis of tumors. As such, many therapies have attempted to eradicate
tumors through anti-angiogenic strategies. Most current and past
preclinical and clinically approved therapies focus on the vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway. Unfortunately, these VEGF
therapies have not shown much success, leading oncologists and scientists
to become pessimistic about the usefulness of targeting angiogenesis as
an anti-tumor strategy. Compensatory pathways may explain the lack of
efficacy. Therapies against novel and/or non-VEGF proteins could hold the
key to effective anti-angiogenic cancer therapies. Therefore, we used an
in vivo phage display screen to find new, non-VEGF mediated angiogenic
proteins. After phage selection, non-VEGF binding phage clones were
identified by screening on human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)
treated with tumor conditioned media, VEGF conditioned media or vehicle
control. Those that bound tumor conditioned media, but not VEGF
conditioned media were selected for binding partner identification via
functional proteomics pioneered in our lab. The binding partner of one
clone was identified as hornerin, a previously unknown player in tumor
angiogenesis.Subsequent validation of hornerin by mRNA expression,
immunocytochemistry and immunohistochemistry showed that hornerin was
indeed not induced by VEGF. Hornerin expression was 7-fold more in
resected human PDAC tumor vasculature than adjacent normal pancreatic
vasculature. Interestingly, hornerin expression was also detected in
tumor cells of resected human PDAC and 20 other types of tumors,
providing a potential new biomarker of pancreatic and other cancers. A
functional role in angiogenesis was confirmed by intratumoral injection
of short siRNA against endothelial hornerin; treated tumor growth was
static and tumor vessels displayed a more physiologic phenotype.
Combination therapy consisting of siRNA against hornerin and a VEGF
inhibitor (AV-951) produced additive reduction of tumor growth,
consistent with the existence of separate and/or compensatory
pathways.The discovery of novel, non-VEGF mediated angiogenic proteins
provides the potential to develop therapies that synergize with current
anti-VEGF therapies. One such protein, hornerin was identified by our in
vivo phage screen and shown to be functionally important in angiogenesis.
Future studies include identifying the growth factor responsible for
endothelial expression, understanding hornerin's mechanism and role in
pathologic angiogenesis, and designing new therapeutic strategies.

