Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of the ATR/CHK1 pathway and decreased therapeutic
sensitivity in upper aerodigestive cancer cell lines with distal 11q loss.


Gemcitabine, a pyrimidine analog/antimetabolite, is commonly used to
treat breast, lung, head and neck, pancreatic, ovarian, biliary, urinary
bladder, and cervical carcinomas. Gemcitabine inhibits DNA synthesis by
direct inhibition of ribonucleotide reductase by its metabolite,
gemcitabine diphosphate, and the incorporation of its active form,
gemcitabine triphosphate into the elongating DNA strand, resulting in
chain termination. Gemcitabine-induced DNA damage leads to activation of
the ATR/CHK1 pathway and S-phase cell cycle arrest. Our previous studies
showed that carcinoma cells with our biomarker (distal 11q loss)
overexpress ATR and CHK1, resulting in decreased sensitivity to ionizing
radiation in biomarker-positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) and non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell lines. Several
studies in the literature have shown that inhibition of CHK1 increases
the sensitivity of tumor cell lines to replication inhibitors, including
gemcitabine. In pancreatic cancer cell lines, small molecule inhibitor
(SMI)-mediated disruption of CHK1 signaling has been reported to
potentiate the cytotoxic effect of gemcitabine. Based on the literature
and our previous findings, we now report that biomarker-positive HNSCC
and NSCLC cell lines also show ATR/CHK1 upregulation and decreased
sensitivity to gemcitabine, Further, we observed that siRNA knockdown of
the ATR/CHK1 pathway and SMI inhibition of CHK1 signaling in HNSCC and
NSCLC cell lines increase their sensitivity to treatment with
gemcitabine. Our previous results showed increased efficacy of ionizing
radiation combined with CHK1 inhibition in biomarker-positive cell lines;
our new results show increased efficacy of gemcitabine combined with CHK1
inhibition in biomarker-positive HNSCC and NSCLC cell lines. These
results provide further support for combining CHK1-targeted therapy with
standard therapy in conjunction with an appropriate companion diagnostic
biomarker, like distal 11q loss. As is the case with other targeted
therapies, biomarker-based selection of the right drug for the right
patient appears to increase therapeutic efficacy.

