Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Examining the function of the serine protease, Granzyme B, in
ALK-positive, anaplastic large cell lymphoma.


Anaplastic lymphoma kinase-positive, anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALK+
ALCL) is an aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) that accounts for
10-20% of childhood NHL. The normal cellular counterpart of this
malignancy is thought to be an activated T lymphocyte, based on the
observations that tumour cells often exhibit clonal T cell receptor gene
rearrangements and possess cytotoxic granules containing proteins such as
Perforin and serine protease, Granzyme B (GzB). Chromosomal
translocations involving the ALK tyrosine kinase gene are the defining
characteristic of this lymphoma. These translocations result in the
expression of oncogenic ALK fusion proteins (e.g. NPM-ALK), which are
able initiate signalling events crucial for the pathogenesis of ALK+
ALCL. We have previously found that signalling initiated by NPM-ALK and
the JunB transcription factor contributes to the phenotypic
characteristics of ALK+ ALCL by promoting the expression of GzB. GzB is
best characterized for its role as an effector molecule used by cytotoxic
T lymphocytes and natural killer cells to kill virally infected and
transformed cells; however, GzB can also be secreted from different cell
types and has the ability to cleave extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins.
Furthermore, GzB is expressed in some urothelial and bladder cancers and
was shown to promote invasion of bladder cancer cell lines in vitro and
GzB expression is associated with a greater level of tumour invasiveness
in patients with urothelial cancer. Given these findings, and that
NPM-ALK signalling promotes GzB expression in ALK+ ALCL, we hypothesized
that GzB plays a role in the pathogenesis of this malignancy by
influencing the interaction of ALK+ ALCL cells with ECM proteins. In this
regard we hypothesize that GzB released by ALK+ ALCL cells can cleave ECM
proteins which may affect the ability of ALK+ ALCL cells to adhere to
these ECM proteins and may also promote tumour cell invasion. We have
found that ALK+ ALCL cell lines express enzymatically active GzB that has
the ability to cleave the ECM proteins, fibronectin and vitronectin.
Furthermore, we have found that these cells also release active GzB and
we are now examining if GzB expression influences adhesion of ALK+ ALCL
cell lines to ECM proteins and whether GzB promotes the invasion of ALK+
ALCL cell lines in vitro. This work will determine if the expression of
GzB is more than just a phenotypic characteristic of ALK+ ALCL, and
whether this protein may contribute to the invasive potential of this
lymphoma. If so, these findings may help to explain why tumour cells are
found to be widely disseminated in ALK+ ALCL patients and murine
xenograft models.

