Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER4 cleavage and nuclear localization mediate Trastuzumab
resistance in HER2-positive breast cancer.


Background. Trastuzumab is used in HER2 positive breast cancer patients
and has been shown to increase survival in these patients. However, drug
resistance imposes a crucial limitation to the successful treatment of
HER2 positive breast cancer. Multiple mechanisms have been proposed but
the role of HER4 in relation to Trastuzumab treatment and resistance
remains unclear. This study aims to investigate the role of HER4 in
relation to Trastuzumab treatment and resistance in HER2 positive breast
cancer. Methods. The effects of Trastuzumab on the protein and mRNA
levels of HER4 were studied in both nave and Trastuzumab resistant cells
using western blot and RT-PCR. HER4 localisation after Trastuzumab
treatment was determined by confocal microscopy and nuclear
fractionation. A gamma-secretase inhibitor (GSI) and a pan-HER kinase
inhibitor, Neratinib, were used to inhibit HER4 cleavage during
Trastuzumab treatment. The role of HER4 was further validated using siRNA
experiments. HER4 level and its localisation were also assessed by IHC in
BT474 xenograft samples treated with Trastuzumab or control. To
understand the prognostic role of HER4, TMAs of a cohort of HER2 positive
breast cancer patients were stained for HER4 expression using IHC and the
levels were correlated with patients outcome. Results. The basal level of
HER4 in HER2 positive SKBR3 and BT474 is comparable to HER2 negative MCF7
cells. In SKBR3 and BT474, Trastuzumab treatment upregulated HER4 mRNA
and protein expression in a dose responsive manner. Moreover, HER480kDa
was also increased and an enhanced nuclear localisation was observed,
indicating that Trastuzumab promotes HER4 cleavage. Resistant cells
appear to have more nuclear HER4 and Trastuzumab withdrawal causes a
decrease in nuclear intensity. HER4 downregulation via siRNA reduces cell
viability in Trastuzumab sensitive and resistant cells. In SKBR3, GSI
decreased HER4 nuclear staining and decreased Trastuzumab induced HER4
nuclear translocation. In addition, GSI also enhanced response to
Trastuzumab in decreasing cell viability. Neratinib also blocks HER480kDa
formation induced by Trastuzumab, and combination treatment of
Trastuzumab and Neratinib had an additive inhibition effect on cell
viability. There was a significant upregulation of nuclear HER4 in a
Trastuzumab treated BT474 xenograft model compared to the control.
Nuclear HER4 was also prognostic in a cohort of HER2 positive breast
cancer patients. Conclusion. This study shows that Trastuzumab
upregulates HER4 in vitro and in vivo. Nuclear HER4 seems to mediate
Trastuzumab resistance in HER2 positive breast cancer cells. HER4
knockdown as well as drug treatments that decrease nuclear HER4 may
enhance sensitivity to Trastuzumab. We believe that the prognostic and
predictive values of nuclear HER4 in relation to Trastuzumab resistance
need to be further validated in HER2 positive breast cancer patients.

