Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological and genetic inhibition of FAK attenuates cancer
stem cell function in vitro and in vivo.


Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase that
orchestrates cell signaling through integrins and growth factor
receptors. FAK has been implicated in multiple steps of carcinogenesis
including tumor initiation, growth and metastasis. Amplification and
overexpression of FAK have been observed in multiple aggressive human
cancers including breast and ovarian. VS-4718 is a potent and selective
FAK kinase inhibitor that was previously shown by us to exhibit
preferential inhibitory activities on breast cancer stem cells. We have
further extended our investigation of the role of FAK on cancer stem
cells to other solid tumors and report here that pharmacological
attenuation of FAK activity by VS-4718 or RNAi-mediated depletion of FAK
exhibits preferential inhibitory effects on cancer stem cells.To
determine if FAK plays a role in the biology of cancer stem cells, we
depleted FAK expression in breast, ovarian and mesothelioma cancer cell
lines by RNAi. Our results indicated that shRNA-mediated knock-down of
FAK inhibits tumorsphere formation in vitro. In parallel, VS-4718 was
evaluated in a multitude of cancer stem cell assays both in vitro and in
vivo. Pre-treatment of SUM159 cells with VS-4718 in matrigel reduced the
percentage of ALDEFLUOR+ cancer stem cells and side population (SP).
Similar effects were observed in ovarian cancer cell lines OVCAR-8 and
OVCAR-5 where VS-4718 inhibited cancer stem cells as measured by multiple
CSC assays. In an analogous fashion, VS-4718 also reduced the proportion
of the ALDEFLUOR+ cells in H2052 human mesothelioma cells. In direct
contrast, standard-of-care agents paclitaxel, carboplatin or pemetrexed
increased the percentage of cancer stem cells, suggesting these agents do
not effectively target cancer stem cells. Importantly combination of
VS-4718 with standard-of-care agents attenuated chemotherapy-induced
increases in the percentage of cancer stem cells in vitro in all three
cancer models.The in vivo effect of VS-4718 on cancer stem cells was
evaluated in SUM159 and MDA-MB-231 human triple negative breast cancer
xenograft models. Following systemic administration, VS-4718
significantly reduced the proportion of cancer stem cells in tumors as
evidenced by decreases in the percentage of ALDEFLUOR+ cells and
tumorsphere-forming efficiency relative to vehicle-treated tumors and
significantly abrogated tumor-initiating capabilities of cancer cells in
a limiting dilution re-implantation assay.In summary, our results
indicate the importance of FAK in the self-renewal of cancer stem cells
in vitro and in vivo, and support the clinical development of FAK
inhibitors to target cancer stem cells for the treatment of multiple
cancers.

