Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro tool for discovering oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes
in a system's manner.


The molecular complexity of cancer still remains as the limiting factor
for developing efficient therapies with minimal side effects. However,
scientists succeeded in determining common alterations in most human
cancer types. Each of these alterations results from disruption of an
anti-cancer regulation mechanism and/or activation of cancer-promoting
networks by genetic and epigenetic changes. As a consequence, cancer
cells become capable of mimicking stem cells ability to proliferate
indefinitely while maintaining their cellular identity, or to self-renew,
which is crucial for any type of stem cell. Indeed, some of the networks
which are deregulated in cancer normally regulate self-renewal in stem
cells. However, self-renewal is tightly regulated in stem cells, while
cancer cells manage to escape the internal and external regulation
mechanisms. Hence, cancer cells differ from stem cells by displaying
disruptions in feedback mechanism controlling the rate of cell division,
aberrant differentiation programs and error-prone replication, so they
become invasive and even metastatic. We hypothesize that the stemness
regulatory cassette that serves limitless replicative potential and
undifferentiated state is a measure of cancer virulence and progression.
We believe that this gene cassette is established through different
mechanisms in each cell type, so it can be separated from invasion and
instability in a precise and defined manner. To test our hypotheses, we
set up a system reconstruction model consisting of induced pluripotent
cells and transformed cells as stem and cancer cell models respectively,
and their source of primary mouse embryonic fibroblast cells. From this
model system, we created a system's map for transformation using
differential expression patterns from whole genome expression arrays. We
discovered gene networks that are common between stem and cancer cells,
but different from their primary cells of origin. We also found
deregulated/activated cassettes which are unique for cancer cells and
which are hardwired by genomic rearrangements (copy number and structural
variations) identified by DNA paired end tag (DNA-PET) sequencing and
single nucleotide variations using RNA sequencing. We are now
investigating the role of candidate genes selected from this analysis in
cancer and stem cell maintenance through a high content siRNA screening.

