Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Osteopontin (SPP1/OPN) alternative splice variants and metastatic
potential in esophageal adenocarcinoma.


Objective: The incidence of esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) has increased
over 300% in the past decades in western countries. EAC is characterized
by an early metastasis, with a 5-year survival rate of only 19%, making
the identification of clinically-targetable proteins critical for
improving patient outcome. Osteopontin (SPP1/OPN) is a secreted
glycosylated phosphoprotein that is found overexpressed in many cancer
types including EAC. OPN protein functions in cell adhesion and cell
migration by regulating cell-matrix interactions and cellular signaling
through binding with integrin and CD44 receptors. However, little is
known about the role of OPN in EAC invasion and metastasis.Methods: We
analyzed the OPN gene expression in a series of 46 esophageal samples
including esophageal Barrett's, low-grade dysplasia, high-grade dysplasia
and adenocarcinomas mRNA using Affymetrix U133A arrays. Real-time RT-PCR
was performed to validate array results and examine a larger cohort of
130 EAC samples. Tissue microarrays (TMA) were made containing 64 EACs,
eight lymph node metastases, eight dysplastic and 11 none dysplastic
Barrett's mucosa sections from 59 patients. Primers flanking the
potential gene alternative splice regions were designed and the in-frame
transcript variants were sequenced. Expression of OPN in EAC cell lines
was analyzed using RT-PCR and western blot analysis. Ectopic OPN
expression of splice variants and OPN knockdown in EAC cell lines have
been performed to examine its roles in tumor invasion and EMT
assays.Results: OPN is highly overexpressed in EAC and overexpression of
the gene is associated with poorer survival in patients. Three OPN splice
variants were identified with their expression either proportionally
increased or differentially expressed in the primary EAC and EAC-derived
cells. Highly overexpressed OPN is a transcriptional event as no OPN gene
amplification was found in the corresponding EACs. In addition, abundant
OPN protein was found primarily in tumor cells in the tissue sections
using immunohistochemical (IHC)-TMA assays. OPN variants differ in their
N-terminal thrombin fragment with either exon 6 or 5 being absent in
OPN-b or OPN-c, respectively. We found that EAC cells treated with the
medium containing different OPN variants demonstrated distinctive
morphological phenotypes. We further identified that OPN variants played
different roles in tumor cell proliferation, epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), and chemosensitivity.Conclusion: Upregulation of OPN is
predominant event in primary EACs and associated with poorer survival in
patients. The alternative splice variants demonstrate differential tumor
invasion, EMT transition and chemosensitivity in EAC cells.

