Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Maritoclax, a selective Mcl-1 inhibitor, sensitizes melanoma cells
to the Bad BH3-mimetic ABT-737.


Melanoma is the most aggressive form of skin cancer. Despite the
development of the therapies it remains one of the most invasive and
highly drug resistance cancers. The dysregulation of apoptosis are
thought to be one barrier to effective systemic treatment of melanoma.
The overexpression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins has been
associated with inferior survival, poor prognosis and chemoresistance of
several cancers including malignant melanoma. ABT-737, a small-molecule
inhibitor of Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and Bcl-w, has demonstrated efficacy in
several forms of hematological and non-hematological cancers. However,
the efficacy of ABT-737 is diminished in cancer cells with high levels of
Mcl-1, another anti-apoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family. The
overexpression of Mcl-1 is frequently observed in melanoma and therefore,
specifically targeting of Mcl-1 may overcome the resistance of ABT-737.
In this study, we investigated the effects of Maritoclax, a novel
Mcl-1-selective inhibitor, alone and in combination with ABT-737, on the
survival of human melanoma cells. The treatments of Maritoclax reduce the
cell viabilities of melanoma cells with an IC50 of between 2.2-5.0M.
Further, treatment of melanoma cells with 2.5 M Maritoclax for 24 h
showed significant decrease in Mcl-1 expression. We found that Maritoclax
is able to induce apoptosis in melanoma cells in a caspase-dependent
manner. Moreover, Maritoclax induces Mcl-1 degradation via the proteasome
system, which is associated with its pro-apoptotic activity. Importantly,
Maritoclax markedly enhances the efficacy of ABT-737 against melanoma
cells. As a single agent, ABT-737 was not efficient in killing UACC 903
cells with IC50 values of >30 m. However, in combination with a
sub-optimal dose of Maritoclax (2.5M), the efficacy of ABT-737 was
enhanced (IC50 1.3 m). Similarly, Maritoclax potentiated apoptotic
effects of ABT-737 from 20%-71% and 18%-62% when measured by Live and
Dead and annexin-V assay, respectively. Taken together, these results
suggest that targeting of Mcl-1 by Maritoclax may represent a new
therapeutic strategy to sensitize melanoma cells to ABT-737-induced
apoptosis.

