Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-derived CCL2 promotes recruitment of CD11b/Gr1midmyeloid
cells to sustain colorectal cancer liver metastasis.


Metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most prominent causes of
cancer-related mortality. However, therapeutic options for patients with
metastatic CRC are limited and development of new and more effective
therapeutics aimed at downstaging the disease and prolonging survival is
urgently required. Primary tumor dissemination to secondary sites,
predominantly the liver, is a dynamic process dependent on the
interactions between tumor cells and the host tissue microenvironment.
Immune cells in the tumor microenvironment have been shown to play
pivotal roles in the metastatic process but their pro-metastatic
functions in CRC liver metastasis remains incompletely understood.To
simulate liver metastasis, MC38 colon carcinoma cells were injected into
the spleen of C57BL/6 mice. A population of CD11b/Gr1mid cells, distinct
from other metastasis-associated myeloid cells previously described,
increased dramatically during establishment of liver metastases. Adoptive
transfer of bone marrow cells confirmed that these CD11b/Gr1mid cells
were derived from bone marrow progenitor cells. MC38 tumor cells
expressed high levels of CCL2 and serum levels were elevated in
tumor-bearing mice compared to controls. Inhibition of tumor-derived CCL2
using shRNA, and absence of its cognate receptor in CCR2 KO mice
significantly diminished CD11b/Gr1mid cell infiltration into
tumor-bearing livers. Importantly, inhibition of CD11b/Gr1mid cell
recruitment led to a marked reduction in tumor burden. Moreover, when
CD11b/Gr1mid cells were depleted in a transgenic CD11b-DTR mouse model, a
striking decrease in tumor vessel density was observed, with a
concomitant reduction in tumor cell proliferation.Serum CCL2
concentrations were similarly elevated in CRC patients, including those
who present metastasis, compared to normal controls. Furthermore,
CD11b/CCR2 myeloid cells, analogous to the CD11b/Gr1mid population
described in our mouse model, were identified in liver metastases of
several CRC patients. Together, our studies demonstrate the importance of
a distinct CD11b/Gr1mid myeloid subset in sustaining CRC liver metastasis
and implicate a CCL2/CCR2-dependent pathway in their recruitment to
metastatic sites. Our findings reinforce how tumor cells utilize host
systems for successful propagation and identify a potential target for
therapeutic manipulation.

