Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel approach to the measurement of tyrosine phosphorylation
dynamics in intact single cells using capillary electrophoresis.


Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are key components of physiological and
pathological cell signaling, and are normally subject to tight regulation
by protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs). Irregularities on either side of
this equilibrium can lead to inflammation, metabolic disease, and cancer.
While many established and emerging techniques have been used to
characterize these signaling pathways, few approaches are well adapted to
the analysis of single primary cells, and fewer still measure enzyme
activity directly. We report a new method for measuring the balance
between RTK and PTP activity using fluorescent peptide substrates in
conjunction with capillary electrophoresis. Briefly, live cells are
visualized on an inverted microscope, microinjected with a fluorescent
peptide substrate which is acted upon by RTKs and/or PTPs. After the
desired time interval, a single cell is lysed using a microsecond laser
pulse and cell contents are aspirated into a fused-silica capillary where
electrophoresis is performed and reporter species are separated and
quantified based on phosphorylation status. We have applied this
technique to the characterization of PTP inhibition in single A431 cells
by several components of diesel exhaust particles, an important component
of air pollution linked to cancer. We have also adapted this system to
measure the effects of small-molecule epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) inhibitors on RTK activity in tumor cell lines as well as tumor
xenograft models, also at the single cell level.This approach provides a
unique set of advantages over alternative techniques and is a valuable
tool for the study of cell signaling in cancer. The integrated microscopy
permits selection of cells for analysis based on morphology, viability,
or vital staining, an important consideration for analysis of
heterogeneous samples such as tumor specimens, especially when total
sample size is small. High-sensitivity detection allows chemical
cytometry data from individual cells to be gathered and the presence of
phenotypic subpopulations is not lost by observing only the average
behavior of a large population. Additionally, peptide substrate reporters
can be tuned for enzyme specificity, and the analytical separation allows
multiple reporter pairs to be separated and detected in a single
experiment, permitting simultaneous analysis of multiple enzymes. The
introduction of reporter peptides by microinjection preserves cellular
architecture, while being equally applicable to immortalized and primary
cells since no genetic manipulation is necessary. This array of
advantages makes our approach uniquely well suited to the study of RTK
and PTP signaling in both cultured tumor cell lines and patient specimens
and a valuable new tool for cancer research.

