Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of the autophosphorylation-induced calcium-independent
activity of human elongation factor 2 kinase (eEF-2K) - a therapeutic
target for breast cancer.


Breast cancer is the most common malignancy in women in the Western
world, with over 40,000 deaths attributed to this disease. Studies have
demonstrated that breast cancer mitogens regulate the activity of
eukaryotic elongation factor 2 kinase (eEF-2K). The activity of eEF-2K is
increased in rapidly proliferating malignant cells, is inhibited during
mitosis, and may contribute to the promotion of autophagy in response to
anti-cancer therapies. We have recently shown for the first time that the
targeting of eEF-2K in an in vivo orthotopic model inhibits growth of
established breast cancer tumors and sensitizes the tumors to
doxorubicin, an important agent in a number of chemotherapy regimens. Our
data suggest that eEF-2K may enhance tumorigenesis through the
up-regulation of pro-tumorigenic proteins and pathways including cyclin
D1, c-Myc, c-Src/FAK and Akt, whose dysregulation are associated with a
poor prognosis in breast cancer. Thus, the targeting of eEF-2K in breast
cancer cells has potential as a therapeutic approach for the treatment of
breast cancer. In order to develop inhibitors of eEF-2K, an understanding
of the regulation of enzyme activity is essential. eEF-2K is an atypical
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMK-III), that through its
phosphorylation of elongation factor 2 (eEF-2), provides a mechanism by
which cells can control the rate of the elongation phase of protein
synthesis. The purpose of our study was to analyze the role of
calcium/calmodulin-stimulated autophosphorylation in the generation of a
calcium-independent form of eEF-2K. Analysis of the kinase activity using
[-32P]ATP indicates that autophosphorylation of eEF-2K induces
calcium-independent activity. Site-directed mutagenesis of the
autophosphorylation sites to alanine and aspartate suggests that the site
responsible for this calcium-independent activity is Ser-500. Moreover,
using a phospho-specific antibody we have determined that the time course
of incorporation of phosphate at Ser-500 correlates with the induction of
calcium-independent activity. Surprisingly, calmodulin appears to be
essential for this calcium-independent activity of eEF-2K. Mechanistic
studies indicate that phosphorylation of eEF-2K on Ser-500 increases its
affinity for calmodulin in the absence of calcium, potentially by
decreasing its rate of dissociation. We have also found that eEF-2K is
indeed phosphorylated on Ser-500 in cells, and we are currently studying
the dynamic nature of phosphorylation at this site, and its effect on
stability of the enzyme and its affinity for calmodulin.

