Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disparities in lymph node evaluation among women with breast
cancer.


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of death in U.S. women,
representing one out of every three cancer cases diagnosed annually in
this population. While breast cancer death rates have declined to 22.2
deaths per 100,000 women in 2009 from 33.2 deaths per 100,000 in 1990,
disparities persist by race and socioeconomic status in stage at
diagnosis and guideline-concordance of treatment. In 2005, NICCQ
(National Initiative for Cancer Care Quality) proposed that women with a
new diagnosis of stage I-III breast cancer undergo axillary node sampling
or at minimum be informed that this is recommended procedure. In this
study, we examined disparities in performance of regional lymph node
evaluation among primary breast carcinoma patients diagnosed in the
period 2004 to 2009. We seek to understand race-specific frequencies of
recommended lymph node evaluation and relationship of lymph node
evaluation rates with breast cancer mortality. Methods: Using data from
the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER), we identified
37,204 female primary breast cancer patients who were diagnosed from 2004
to 2009 with in situ/local/regional disease including stages 0, 1, 2, and
3. Patients who were diagnosed at stage 4 breast cancer were excluded
from this study, since they were not included in the NICCQ
recommendation. We estimated three logistic regression models to
investigate the relationships between lymph nodes evaluation and overall
or cause-specific death rates controlling for age, race, stage, grade,
marital status, radiation, surgery, and relevant county attributes. All
analysis was carried out using SAS 9.3 software. Results: We identified
36,462 patients diagnosed with stage I-III primary breast carcinoma
during 2004 to 2009. Overall, 12.13 percent (N=4,423) did not undergo
lymph nodes evaluation. Multivariate logistic models were estimated and
odds ratios (ORs) were calculated from model coefficients. The odds of
being evaluated with regional lymph nodes significantly increased for
patients who were white, younger than 65, and married. The same is true
for those who lived in nonmetropolitan counties and counties that had a
higher mammography rate within the previous 2 years. The odds of
surviving cancer were significantly decreased if regional lymph nodes
were not evaluated. For example, there was a 63% decrease in the odds of
overall survival for unevaluated patients, holding other predictors
constant. The percentage of patients with unexamined lymph nodes remained
similar (11.97%-12.38%) over the years observed. Conclusions: Study
findings support the need for quality improvement in cancer care, and the
relevance of evaluating regional lymph nodes for disparities in cancer
mortality. No significant improvement in rates of regional lymph node
evaluation occurred after the NICCQ recommendation, suggesting additional
policy interventions may be needed.

