Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic stellate cells and chemoresistant pancreatic cancer
cells induce EMT gene expression in normal pancreatic ductal cells.


Pancreatic cancer, one of the deadliest of human cancers, is associated
with a collagen-rich pronounced stromal reaction. Previously, we showed
that the collagen microenvironment increased the motility of human
pancreatic ductal epithelial (HPDE) cells (Ottaviano AJ et al, Cancer
Research 2006). Since stellate cells are one of the major contributors to
the stromal reaction, we examined the effect of stellate cells on HPDE
cells. HPDE cells were labeled with cell tracking dye and then
co-cultured stellate cells to allow intimate cell-cell contact. HPDE
cells were then isolated 72 hours later using FACS and changes in gene
expression analyzed by real time PCR. We found that HPDE cells
upregulated expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers
Zeb1, Snail and vimentin. Stellate cells also increased expression of
these EMT markers in HPDE cells expression Kras (HPDE-Kras). However, no
change in these EMT markers were seen when the HPDE and stellate cells
were prevented from direct cell-cell contact using transwell co-culture
system. Treatment with TGF-b type I receptor inhibitor SB431542 blocked
the effect of stellate cells on HPDE gene expression. Since ductal cells
also encounter malignant cells in vivo, we also examined the effect of
co-culture of ductal cells with cancer cells. HPDE cells failed to
upregulate EMT markers when they were co-cultured with HPAFII/CD18 cell.
However, when HPDE cells were co-cultured with chemo-resistant CD18 cells
(CD18-CR), HPDE cells upregulated EMT markers. The effect of CD18-CR
cells on HPDE gene expression was only observed when there was intimate
cell-cell contact. Also, treatment with SB431542 blocked the effect on
HPDE gene expression. These results indicate that the tumor
microenvironment may affect the behavior of peri-tumoral non-malignant
cells and thereby contribute to tumor progression.

