Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aspirin decreases side population cells by targeting the Wnt
pathway in esophageal cancer cells in vitro and enhances the combination
chemotherapeutic effect of 5-FU and cisplatin in vivo.


Introduction. The potential use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) in the prevention of esophageal cancer has been highlighted
recently. Taking aspirin was reported to reduce the risk of developing
Barrett's esophagus and prevent the development of both esophageal
squamous cell cancer and adenocarcinoma. However, the underlying
mechanism is still unclear. Some researchers indicated that aspirin could
induce tumor cells apoptosis and might modulate cancer stem cells
regulation through the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. Pervious results have
shown that side population (SP) cells in esophageal cancer cell lines
have stem cell-like properties and may be responsible for therapy
resistance. Our objective was to determine whether aspirin by targeting
Wnt signaling affects the biological properties of side population cells
in esophageal cancer and its therapeutic effect both in vitro and in
vivo.Methods. In vitro cytotoxicity assays using aspirin were performed
in three different esopahgeal cancer cell lines (OE19, OE21, and OE33).
After treatment with aspirin Hoechst 33342 staining was used to define
the proportion of SP cells. And the expression of Wnt signaling targets
with and without aspirin treatment was further evaluated by PCR array. SP
and non-SP cells in OE19 were isolated by flow cytometric sorting and
further treated with aspirin. The efficacy of aspirin alone and combined
with 5-FU and Cisplatin administration by intraperitoneal injection
regarding OE19 tumorigenicity was evaluated in a subcutaneous xenograft
model.Results. Aspirin inhibits in a dose and time dependent manner cell
proliferation in esophageal cancer cell lines. In OE19, SP cells were
dramatically decreased from 19.71.0 to 6.91.0, 3.40.9 and 1.80.4 (p 2
fold change). In particular, aspirin can reduce 5-FU or cisplatin induced
enhancement of SP and displayed a relative stronger effect on SP
proliferation as compared to non-SP cells together with a significant
reduction of ABCG2+ subpopulation. 5-FU and Cisplatin combined with daily
aspirin severely impaired tumor weight comparing to chemotherapy alone
(0.140.11g vs 0.750.2g, p=0.0004) However, administration of aspirin
alone did not have effect on tumor growth significantly as compared to
vehicle group (1.580.36g vs 1.500.28, p=0.728).Conclusion. Aspirin may
affect on esophageal cancer cells by targeting the chemoresistant side
population cells through wnt signaling pathway. This finding indicates a
potential therapeutic strategy considering NSAIDs for esophageal cancer.

