Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A role for miR-137 in enhancing efficacy of delphinidin in human
glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma is the most lethal brain cancer in humans. Heterogeneity of
cells in glioblastoma makes it extremely hard to control this tumor with
a single therapeutic agent. Combination of therapeutic agents with
diverse anti-cancer mechanisms must be used to manage this malignancy.
Failures of conventional therapies and systemic toxicity have forced the
search for newer agents, which may inhibit glioblastoma with less or no
toxicity. Recently, microRNAs (miRs) are emerging as important regulators
of different cellular processes such as proliferation, differentiation,
and apoptosis in different cancers. Recent studies also suggest that the
tumor suppressor miR-137 (TS miR-137) can induce differentiation and cell
cycle arrest in human glioblastoma stem cells. In colorectal cancer,
miR-137 is frequently silenced due to promoter hypermethylation. Use of
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (AzaC), an inhibitor of DNA methylation, may
increase expression of miR-137 in glioblastoma with significant
inhibition of proliferation of tumor cells. Delphinidin (DPN), which
belongs to a class of natural chemicals from colored fruits, has been
shown to inhibit cell growth and induce apoptosis in many different
cancers. We hypothesized that combination therapy with miR-137
overexpression and DPN treatment in presence of AzaC could be an
effective therapeutic strategy to control growth of glioblastoma. We used
MTT assay to examine the doses (10 to 50 M) of DPN for inhibition of cell
proliferation in three glioblastoma cell lines (U87MG, T98G, and LN18).
All cell lines demonstrated 50% inhibition of proliferation at 50 M DPN.
We performed Annexin V staining and flow cytometric analysis after
treatment with AzaC, transfection of precursor miR-137 mimic, and
treatment with DPN alone and in combination in all three glioblastoma
cell lines. Overexpression of only miR-137 could induce apoptosis, which
was dramatically increased when the cells were subjected to combination
therapy with DPN in presence of AzaC. Then, we examined efficacy of
combination of AzaC, miR-137, and DPN for inhibition of angiogenic
network formation and invasion properties in all three glioblastoma cell
lines. Co-culture of human microvascular endothelial (HMVE) cells with
control U87MG, T98G, or LN18 cells prompted HMVE cells for capillary-like
network formation, which was completely inhibited during co-culture of
HMVE cells and glioblastoma cells treated with combination therapy.
Following combination therapy, we observed suppression of expression of
angiogenic factors (VEGF and b-FGF), growth factor receptor (EGFR), and
invasive factors (MMP-2 and MMP-9) and also inhibition of Akt and NF-B
survival pathways in all three glioblastoma cell lines. So, combination
of the methylation inhibitor AzaC, overexpression of the TS miR-137, and
the relatively new flavonoid DPN could be a promising therapeutic
strategy for inhibiting growth of different human glioblastoma cells.

