Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inflammatory responses with infiltrating DC and functional
cytotoxic T lymphocytes in the dermal vaccination sites of
GVAX/ipilimumab treated prostate cancer patients.


We have been studying the safety and clinical efficacy of the Prostate
GVAX vaccine (consisting of two allogeneic GM-CSF secreting tumor cell
lines: LNCaP and PC3) and the CTLA-4 blocking antibody ipilimumab in
prostate cancer patients in a phase I/II dose escalation/expansion trial.
To assess immune reactivity against the GVAX vaccine, immune infiltrate
analysis of the vaccination sites was performed. Punch biopsies of the
vaccination site were taken 48 hours after the 1st, 5th, and 11th
injections and analyzed by immunohistochemical staining. Injection of the
GVAX vaccine evoked striking local reactions that were characterized by
local erythema, induration and swelling in all patients. Analysis of the
vaccination site biopsies revealed that the GVAX/ipilimumab combination
resulted in an inflammatory response in the skin with intradermal
infiltrates of CD1a+ dendritic cells (DC), DC-SIGN+/CD68+ immature
DC/macrophages, CD14+ monocyte-like cells, eosinophils, and of CD4+,
CD8+, and Granzyme-B+ T lymphocytes. Strikingly, CD56+ NK cells were
completely absent. The inflammatory response significantly increased over
the course of treatment and resulted in accelerated clearance of the
vaccine in vivo. Moreover, analysis revealed that the PC3 vaccine was
more immunogenic, and induced a more potent anti-vaccine T cell response.
The latter was confirmed in an in vitro cytotoxicity assay. Upon multiple
vaccinations T cell reactivity to PC3 was significantly enhanced in the
PC3 but not in the LNCaP vaccination sites, whereas reactivity to LNCaP
was not enhanced in either vaccination site. We conclude that the
GVAX/ipilimumab combination elicits a local immune infiltrate that
increases over time, consistent with an induced CD8+ effector T cell
mediated cytolytic response, only in vaccination sites of the PC3
component of the vaccine.

