Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytology in nipple aspirate fluid during a randomized soy food
intervention among premenopausal women.


Background. Epidemiologic studies support the hypothesis that soy foods
protect against breast cancer, in particular among Asian populations with
high intake. A previous report that observed an increase in the number of
women with hyperplasic epithelial cells after consuming soy raised
concerns that isoflavones in soy may elevate breast cancer risk due to
their estrogen-like structure. We examined the effect of a high-soy diet
on the presence of epithelial cells in nipple aspirate fluid (NAF), a
non-invasive method to obtain breast fluid and cells.Methods. In a
crossover design, 82 premenopausal women completed a randomized
intervention with a high-soy diet of 2 servings/day and a low-soy diet
with Background. Epidemiologic studies support the hypothesis that soy
foods protect against breast cancer, in particular among Asian
populations with high intake. A previous report that observed an increase
in the number of women with hyperplasic epithelial cells after consuming
soy raised concerns that isoflavones in soy may elevate breast cancer
risk due to their estrogen-like structure. We examined the effect of a
high-soy diet on the presence of epithelial cells in nipple aspirate
fluid (NAF), a non-invasive method to obtain breast fluid and
cells.Methods. In a crossover design, 82 premenopausal women completed a
randomized intervention with a high-soy diet of 2 servings/day and a
low-soy diet with <3 servings/week for 6 months each separated by a
1-month washout period. Adherence to the intervention strategy was
excellent as assessed by urinary isoflavonoid excretion and by 7
unannounced 24-hour dietary recalls. NAF samples were obtained at
baseline, after 6 months, and after 13 months. Papanicolaou-stained
cytology slides were evaluated in women with sufficient NAF and
classified as inadequate (Background. Epidemiologic studies support the
hypothesis that soy foods protect against breast cancer, in particular
among Asian populations with high intake. A previous report that observed
an increase in the number of women with hyperplasic epithelial cells
after consuming soy raised concerns that isoflavones in soy may elevate
breast cancer risk due to their estrogen-like structure. We examined the
effect of a high-soy diet on the presence of epithelial cells in nipple
aspirate fluid (NAF), a non-invasive method to obtain breast fluid and
cells.Methods. In a crossover design, 82 premenopausal women completed a
randomized intervention with a high-soy diet of 2 servings/day and a
low-soy diet with <3 servings/week for 6 months each separated by a
1-month washout period. Adherence to the intervention strategy was
excellent as assessed by urinary isoflavonoid excretion and by 7
unannounced 24-hour dietary recalls. NAF samples were obtained at
baseline, after 6 months, and after 13 months. Papanicolaou-stained
cytology slides were evaluated in women with sufficient NAF and
classified as inadequate (<10) mammary epithelial cells (class I), benign
mammary epithelial cells (class II), atypical mammary epithelial cells
(class III), and malignant cells present (class IV). Mixed models were
applied to examine the effect of the high-soy diet on epithelial cytology
as compared to baseline and the low-soy diet.Results. The mean NAF
volumes for women with and without cytology specimens differed
significantly; they were 5849 vs. 1916 L at baseline, 5937 vs. 1314 L at
the end of the high-soy diet period, and 5140 vs. 109 L at the end of the
low-soy diet period. At baseline, 33 women produced sufficient NAF for
cytological evaluation, 36 women at the end of the high-soy diet, and 24
women at the end of the low-soy diet. For 22 (67%) participants, no
change in cytological class was seen at the end of the high-soy diet and
for 12 (57%) at the end of the low-soy diet, but a decrease from baseline
to the end of the high-soy diet occurred in 8 (24%) and an increase in 3
(9%) women. In comparison, a decrease in 3 (14%) and an increase in 6
(29%) women was seen at the end of the low-soy diet. Although not
statistically significant (p=0.05), the high-soy diet was associated with
a trend in lower cytological class. Conclusions. Contrary to an earlier
report, the number of NAF samples with hyperplastic epithelial cells did
not increase after an intervention with soy foods in amounts consumed by
Asians.

