Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor- dictates the subcellular localization of ERK5
to control differential proliferation and invasion programs of breast
cancer cells.


Mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are key players in relaying
extracellular signals to the cell nucleus and are often overexpressed in
aggressive and endocrine-resistant breast cancers. Our previous studies
(Madak-Erdogan et al. Mol Cell Biol 31:226,2011) revealed that one such
kinase, ERK2, was recruited to distal enhancers of
estradiol(E2)-regulated genes together with estrogen receptor alpha (ER)
and collaborated with ER to regulate gene expression and cell
proliferation programs in response to hormone. In the current study, we
identified ERK5, a close relative of ERK2, as a factor that is recruited
to the transcription start site (TSS) of E2-stimulated genes. Use of
dominant negative and constitutively active forms, as well as small
molecule inhibitors of ERK5 and MEK5, revealed that activation of ERK5 by
upstream kinase MEK5 and activity of ERK5 itself was required for
recruitment of the kinase to the chromatin. Immunofluorescence studies
demonstrated that ERK5 localized to transcription factories in the
nucleus upon cell treatment with E2. Inhibitors of ERK5 completely
abrogated E2-dependent cell proliferation and colony formation for all of
the ER-positive breast cancer cell lines studied. In contrast to what we
observed in ER-positive cells, in ER-negative breast cancer cell lines we
did not detect any nuclear ERK5; instead, we found ERK5 localized to the
actin cytoskeleton, especially to sites where substantial remodeling
takes place. Upon expression of ER in these ER-negative cells, we
observed re-localization of ERK5 to the nucleus and a decrease in actin
reorganization associated with reduced cell motility and invasion.
Abrogation of ER expression using siRNA in ER-positive cell lines caused
loss of nuclear ERK5 and relocalized this kinase to the actin
cytoskeleton. Our studies with tamoxifen resistant cell lines revealed
that ERK5 localization to the nucleus was reduced and localization to the
actin cytoskeleton increased as resistance progressed, suggesting a
correlation between ER activity, ERK5 localization and motility of breast
cancer cells. Our data reveal that ER elicits nuclear localization of
ERK5, diminishing ERK5 localization to regions of high actin remodeling,
thereby possibly accounting for the generally lower metastatic potential
that is characteristic of many ER-positive breast cancer cells.(Supported
by grants T32 ES007326 and P50 AT006268 from NIH, and a grant from The
Breast Cancer Research Foundation.)

