Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unliganded progesterone receptors augment estrogen-induced growth
of breast cancer cells via co-regulation of estrogen receptor target
genes.


The ovarian steroid hormone receptors, Progesterone and Estrogen
Receptors (PR, ER), are important drivers of breast cancer proliferation.
Recently, ER and IGF1R were shown to function within the same signaling
pathways. Notably, PR cross-talk with the IGF signaling pathway has also
been reported. Herein, we further probed for signaling cross-talk between
ER and PR. Stable expression of PR-B in PR-low, ER+, MCF7 breast cancer
cells increased the sensitivity of cells to IGF and estrogen, as measured
in MTT and soft agar growth assays in the absence of exogenous
progestins. In MCF7 cells, PR co-immunoprecipitated with PELP1, IGF1R,
and ER. PR expressing MCF7 cells exhibited increased IGF-induced
signaling relative to vector controls. Genome-wide microarray analyses
revealed that in the absence of progestin, stably expressed PR-B
contributes to heightened estrogen responsiveness. We identified a
PR-dependent, estrogen-induced gene signature; several ER-target genes
required PR-B (unliganded) for robust expression, including CathepsinD.
Stable PR expression in T47D and MCF7 breast cancer cells lead to
induction of CathepsinD, but not pS2, in response to estrogen. Inhibition
of IGF1R and PI3K had no effect on estrogen-induced pS2, but blocked
CathepsinD upregulation in cells stably expressing PR-B. Notably,
estrogen-treated MCF7 cells stably expressing PR-B (but not vector
controls) exhibited enhanced ER recruitment to an ERE located in the
CathepsinD distal promoter. In addition to ER, estrogen treatment induced
robust accumulation of PR, IGF1R, and PELP1 on the CathepsinD ERE while
complexes containing ER and PELP1 alone were detected on the pS2
promoter. Importantly, stable knockdown of endogenous PR in unmodified
MCF-7-L cells blocked estrogen-mediated CathepsinD induction and
decreased estrogen-mediated growth in soft agar. Similarly, in unmodified
PR+/ER+ BT474 and MCF7-L cells, estrogen-dependent growth was blocked by
the PR antagonist, Onapristone. These data indicate that unliganded PR
mediates enhanced growth responses to IGF and estrogen, perhaps by
stabilizing a functional signaling complex that contains PR-B, ER, PELP1,
and IGF1R. This complex may serve to facilitate hormone-induced
activation of PELP1-associated kinase cascades required for robust
expression of transcriptional programs at newly defined ER/PR target
genes. Taken together, our data provide a strong rationale for targeting
PR in addition to ER and IGFR in combined breast cancer therapy. This
work was supported by NIH grant R01 CA159712 (to C.A.L).

