Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paclitaxel-induced apoptosis is BAK-dependent, but BAX and
BIM-independent in breast tumor.


Breast cancer is a leading cause of death among women. Understanding
breast cancer at the molecular level is imperative for finding more
effective approaches to successfully treat these patients. Microtubule
inhibitors are among the most frequently used agents for breast cancer
treatment, with proven efficacy in both localized and metastatic disease.
Paclitaxel (Taxol) is a member of the taxane class of anti-neoplastic
microtubule damaging agents and exhibits activity against a wide range of
human malignancies including breast cancer. Paclitaxel stabilizes
microtubules, resulting in G2/M cell cycle arrest, and continuous
treatment with paclitaxel ultimately leads to cell death. However, the
precise mechanisms of how this mitotic arrest triggers cell death are
still unclear.When cells undergo paclitaxel-induced cell death, the BCL-2
family-dependent mitochondrial apoptotic pathway is activated. Previous
studies indicate that a BH3-only protein BIM (BCL-2 Interacting Mediator
of cell death) plays a role in paclitaxel-induced apoptosis. We show here
that BIM is dispensable in apoptosis with paclitaxel treatment using bim/
MEFs (mouse embryonic fibroblasts), the bim/ mouse breast tumor model,
and shRNA-mediated down-regulation of BIM in human breast cancer cells.
In contrast, both bak/ MEFs and human breast cancer cells in which BAK
was down-regulated by shRNA were more resistant to paclitaxel. In human
breast cancer cells, paclitaxel treatment resulted in MCL-1 degradation
which was prevented by a proteasome inhibitor, MG132. A cdk inhibitor,
roscovitine, blocked paclitaxel-induced MCL-1 degradation and apoptosis,
suggesting that cdk activation at mitotic arrest could induce MCL-1
phosphorylation and subsequent degradation in a proteasome-dependent
manner. BAK was associated with MCL-1 in untreated cells and became
activated in concert with loss of MCL-1 expression and its release from
the complex. Our data suggest that BAK is the mediator of
paclitaxel-induced apoptosis and could be an alternative target for
overcoming paclitaxel resistance.

