Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Hsp90 in the stability of EGFR from radiation and
cisplatin-induced degradation.


Heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is an evolutionary conserved eukaryotic
molecular chaperone that has a large number of clients including
signaling molecules such as EGFR. Induction of Hsp90 upon cellular stress
induced by radiation or chemotherapy can enhance stabilization of its
clients which may lead to resistance to therapy and can often provide an
environment for metastasis. Therefore, targeting Hsp90 has been shown to
be a potential therapeutic approach to induce EGFR degradation and block
metastatic spread. The aim of this study is to further understand the
mechanism of Hsp90 induction and its post-translational modifications
within cancer cells as well as its microenvironment and their
significance in EGFR protein stability. We hypothesized that activation
of Hsp90 upon cellular stress induced by radiation and chemotherapy
provides stability to EGFR not only in cancer cells, but also in
tumor-associated endothelial cells, which allows cancer cell survival and
metastatic spread by increasing EGFR (and other clients) stability. Our
preliminary data indicate that an enhancement in EGFR protein interaction
with Hsp90 in both endothelial cells and head and neck cancer cell lines
correlate with cell survival upon radiation or cisplatin treatment.
Cisplatin treatment also caused an increase in Hsp90 activation as
reflected by an increase in ATP binding activity. Increase in EGFR
phosphorylation led to a decrease in its interaction with Hsp90. We also
found that inhibition of Hsp90 activity reduced this interaction, which
decreased EGFR half-life and promoted cell-death in cancer and
endothelial cells. We are now extending our research efforts to
understand the effects of radiation and cisplatin on the
post-translational modifications of Hsp90 such as phosphorylation and its
potential role in binding with EGFR. The long-term goal of this study is
to develop a specific protein-protein interaction antagonist (PPI) to
induce selective EGFR degradation and block the survival and metastatic
spread regulated by EGFR.

