Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The rGel/BLyS fusion toxin can overcome chemoresistance in
malignant B cells..


Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is an aggressive sub-type
accounting for 30-40% of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Approximately 95% of B
cell lymphoma expresses CD20 and 26% of relapsed B-cell lymphoma patients
demonstrate reduced CD20 expression on tumor cells after treatment with
the anti-CD-20 antibody rituxumab. This result suggests that novel agents
that can overcome rituximab resistance may be an excellent candidate for
the treatment of DLBCLs which are resistant to rituximab. MCL and
ABC-DLBCL cell lines (SP53, Mino, OCI-Ly3, OCI-Ly10 and U2932) were
resistant to rituximab whereas GC-DLBCL cell lines (SUDHL-4 and SUDHL-6)
were very sensitive to rituximab. To understand the mechanism of
rituximab resistance, we developed rituximab-resistant SUDHL-6 cell line.
Compared with parental rituximab-sensitive cells (SUDHL-6-S, IC50=0.2
g/ml), rituximab-resistant cells (SUDHL-6-R, IC50 > 1,000 g/ml)
demonstrated 5,000 fold resistance. The rituximab-sensitive cells formed
single-cell suspensions whereas resistant cells demonstrated cell
aggregates. We previously generated a highly cytotoxic fusion toxin
designated rGel/BLyS for receptor-mediated delivery of the rGel toxin to
malignant B cells. The rituximab-sensitive (SUDHL-6-S) and resistant
(SUDHL-6-R) both cells showed similar IC50 values (150 nM) for rGel/BLyS.
In contrast, intrinsically rituximab-resistant cell lines (SP53, Mino,
OCI-Ly3, OCI-Ly10 and U2932) were also sensitive to rGel/BLyS. Treatment
with rituximab specifically induced down-regulation of p-Akt (Ser473),
Akt, and Syk and activation of caspase-9, caspase-3 and PARP in a
dose-dependent manner in rituximab-sensitive cells (SUDHL-6-S) but not
rituximab-resistant cell lines (SUDHL-6-R, OCI-Ly3, or OCI-Ly10). The
interactions of marrow stromal cells (MSCs) with tumor cells appear to be
important in the development of tumor drug resistance through complex
cytokine and adhesion-mediated mechanisms. Treatment with rGel/BLyS
induced down-regulation of p-Akt, Akt, Syk, interleukin-6 receptor,
Mcl-1, and c-Myc in rituximab-resistant DLBCL cells in both the absence
and presence of MSCs. In addition, treatment of cells with rGel/BLyS
induced apoptosis through caspase-9 activation, caspase-3 activation, and
PARP cleavage. These results suggest that the Akt pathway is involved in
rituximab resistance and rGel/BLyS can overcome stromal cell-mediated
drug resistance which is a factor reducing the effectiveness of other
conventionally-used agents for the treatment of DLBCLs which are
resistant to rituximab. This research was conducted, in part, by the
Clayton Foundation for Research.

