Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of an isogenic model system for KDM6A/UTX loss in
multiple myeloma.


The gene KDM6A/UTX was recently identified as a putative tumor suppressor
(van Haaften et al). The gene is frequently lost in a variety of
malignancies but most commonly in esophageal squamous cell carcinomas
(8%) and multiple myeloma (10%). The initial characterization of UTX
abnormalities in multiple myeloma utilized a mixture of 58 cell lines and
patient samples. To establish the frequency of UTX inactivation in
multiple myeloma we studied the copy number profiling dataset (n=239)
available from the Multiple Myeloma Genomics Initiative (MMGI) and our
internal dataset of 68 human myeloma cell lines which were characterized
by array-based CGH (Agilent 400k), whole exome sequencing, and mRNA
sequencing. We identified homozygous deletions in 2.5% of patients and
26.5% of cell lines. There are no mutations in the available whole genome
and exome sequencing data from 38 patients in the MMGI that partially
overlaps the 239 copy number samples sequencing. However, in the cell
lines another 14.3% of samples showed loss of UTX through a variety of
mechanisms (missense, nonsense, frameshifts, single exon deletions and
insertions of LINE elements) detected by exome and mRNA sequencing,
bringing the total percentage of cell lines with UTX inactivation to
40.8%. The increased frequency of UTX inactivation in cell lines likely
suggests that it is associated with a more aggressive disease or promotes
the growth of the tumor outside of the normal bone marrow
microenvironment.As part of the cell line characterization phase of the
project we found that ARD has a homozygous deletion encompassing the
entire UTX locus while its isogenic counterparts, ARP-1 and CAG, express
wild-type UTX at a level comparable to other cell lines without UTX
abnormalities. To ensure these isogenic cell lines represent the same
tumor not different tumors from the same individual we cloned the
immunoglobulin receptor rearrangements in all there lines, which
confirmed these are derived from the same original tumor. To develop this
model system we first generated single cell clones from each of the three
cell lines. Six clones from each were randomly selected and their DNA
content was determined by flow cytometry. In all cases the clones matched
the parental population in ploidy (ARD 3.2N, ARP 3.3N, CAG 3.8N). We
randomly select one subclone from each cell line to characterize in
detail using spectral karyotyping, array-based CGH, whole exome
sequencing, mRNA sequencing, and CHIP-seq for H3K4me3, H3K27ac, H3K27me1,
H3K27me2, and H3K27me3. The detailed characterization of this isogenic
model system will make it an excellent platform for future work aimed at
understanding how UTX loss contributes to myelomagenesis.

