Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological reactivation of epigenetically regulated genes in
prostate cancer.


Transcriptional silencing caused by promoter hypermethylation is a
widespread mechanism for inactivation of known and putative tumor
suppressor genes in many types of cancers. GSTP1, CDKN2A, CDH1, APC, and
RASSF1A among others are known to be downregulated in prostate cancer.
The aim of this study was to search for hitherto unknown genes that are
upregulated after treatment by demethylating agents (i.e. DMNT
inhibitors) thereby marking them as potential new therapeutic targets and
putative biomarkers in prostate carcinogenesis.Prostate cancer cell lines
DU-145 and LNCaP were treated in three independent biological experiments
with 100M zebularine for ten days and monitored for cytotoxic and
apoptotic side effects. Efficacy of the treatment was verified on the RNA
expression level of known epigenetically regulated genes. Expression
changes of total RNA from treated and untreated cells were compared using
whole genome expression microarrays (Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST). A
number of conspicuously upregulated genes (>15.0-fold, presence of CpG
islands, higher expression in normal prostate) were further evaluated by
Q-PCR in 50 cases of paired normal and tumor tissue samples of prostate
cancer patients who underwent radical prostatectomy in our clinic between
2002 and 2004.The seryl-tRNA synthetase gene SARS was discovered by us
for the first time to be downregulated in 34/50 cases (66%; p = 0,04) in
prostate cancer. The DNA-damage-inducible transcript 1 (DDIT1), also
known as GADD45A and was downregulated in 42/50 cases (84%; p = 0,0004).
The discovery of a downregulated GADD45A in our independent experiments
supports the already known fact of a methylation-mediated repression of
GADD45A in prostate cancer (Ramachandran et al., 2009) and its
suitability as a potential therapeutic target. In addition, we found a
statistically significant inverse correlation of SARS expression and
raising patient Gleason scores.Based on our estimated upregulation-rate
of the promoter hypermethylation gold standard gene for prostate cancer
GSTP1 in 98% of our patient samples (48/50; p = 0,0001) we present a
robust workflow for the discovery of methylation-mediated
transcriptionally inactivated genes.

