Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BATF3 is a novel regulator of breast cancer cell invasion.


The escape from tumor dormancy has been shown to be mediated by the
acquisition of the angiogenic phenotype. Utilizing an in vivo model that
reliably recapitulates the transition from the preangiogenic to the
angiogenic phenotype, we have identified and validated the differential
expression of a number of genes including a basic leucine zipper
transcription factor, ATF-like-3 (BATF3). We further found that the mRNA
level of BATF3 is significantly upregulated in angiogenic tumor lesions
compared to preangiogenic lesions. In order to investigate the role of
BATF3 in breast cancer neovascularization, we established a panel of ER+
and ER- breast cancer cell lines, MCF7 and MDA-MB-231, respectively,
which stably overexpress BATF3 by lentiviral transduction. Cells
overexpressing BATF3 exhibited significantly increased levels of VEGF
(vascular endothelial growth factor) compared to their wild type
counterparts. Overexpression of BATF3 also significantly increased cell
invasion in both cell lines. Moreover, MMP-9 (Matrix Metalloproteinase-9)
levels and activity were significantly increased in MDA-MB-231-BATF3
cells. This latter observation suggested that the increased invasiveness
observed might be due to elevated levels of MMP-9, which has been shown
to regulate tumor cell invasion by remodeling the surrounding
extracellular matrix. TIMP-1, an endogenous inhibitor of MMP-9 activity,
was also significantly increased in MDA-MB-231-BATF3 cells, however the
ratio of MMP-9 to TIMP-1 is dramatically higher in these cells as
compared with control cells. Interestingly, BATF3 also significantly
suppressed cell proliferation in both the MDA-MB-231 and MCF7 cell lines.
Taken together, these data support the conclusion that BATF3 may play a
dual role in the regulation of tumor angiogenesis, growth and
progression. (Supported by NIH P01 CA045548, The Breast Cancer Research
Foundation, The Advanced Medical Research Foundation, and the Harvard
College Research Program).

