Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing of farnesoid X receptor in human colon cancer by
epigenetic mechanisms is associated with cancer progression.


Background: Colon cancer is the third leading cause of cancer related
deaths in the United States. Epidemiological studies suggest an increase
in the intestinal bile-acid load resulting from the consumption of a
high-fat diet is a significant risk factor for colon cancer. Bile acids
are the endogenous ligands for the farnesoid X receptor (FXR), a
ligand-activated transcription factor and member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily, and high levels of bile acids can promote colon cancer
development. FXR is essential for maintaining bile-acid homeostasis by
regulating bile-acid synthesis and transport, preventing the accumulation
of intestinal bile acid levels to cancer promoting levels. Previous
studies have demonstrated that FXR knockout mice are more susceptible to
the development of colon adenocarcinomas, indicating that FXR plays a
suppressive role in colon tumor formation. This study investigates the
role of FXR in the development of human colon cancer. Methods:
Immunohistochemistry was used to label for FXR in normal human colon,
colon polyps, and colon adenocarcinomas staged I-IV. SYBR green
quantitative PCR and western blot analysis were used to measure
expression of FXR and FXR target genes in normal human colon and colon
cancers staged I-IV as well as colon cancer cell lines. Reverse phase
protein array on colon cancer cell line lysates was used to correlate FXR
expression with oncogenic signaling cascades. To test if FXR expression
was suppressed by DNA methylation, colon cancer cell lines were treated
with a DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor and DNMT siRNA and FXR mRNA
measured by real-time PCR. Immunoprecipitation with an antibody against
5-methylcytosine (MeDIP) analysis was done in human colon cancer cell
lines to determine methylation of NR1H4 (gene encoding FXR) promoter.
Results: IHC and qPCR analysis reveals that the expression and function
of FXR is markedly reduced early in colon cancer progression, with
suppression seen within precancerous lesions. Furthermore, FXR expression
in colon cancer cell lines were negatively correlated to oncogenic PI3
kinase signaling cascades and associated with epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT). Results suggest DNA methylation as a mechanism of FXR
silencing in colon cancer and confirms methylation of the FXR promoter.
Conclusion: FXR deficiency in animals indicates FXR serves a tumor
suppressive role. Our studies show that FXR is silenced in early in human
colon cancer progression possibly by DNA methylation, which could be a
cancer promoting event. The overall mechanism of FXR's anti-tumorigenic
activity is not fully established but may be due to FXR's role in
regulating EMT and bile acid homeostasis. Restoration and enhancement of
FXR activity, by blocking DNA methylation or increasing baseline activity
of FXR, represents a potential therapeutic option for the treatment of
colon cancer.

