Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silibinin strongly modulates the cytokine interleukin-4/6 survival
signals in colon cancer stem cells.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the 2nd (both genders combined) leading cause
of cancer-related deaths in US; statistical estimates for 2012 indicate
103,170 new CRC cases and 51,690 associated deaths. While removal of
adenomatous polyps during screening helps in preventing CRC, only 40% of
the cases are diagnosed at this stage, mostly due to under use of
screening. The undetected cancer spreads to various organs and the 5-year
survival drops to 11% with distant metastasis. Also, nearly 50% of CRC
patients develop recurrent disease even after aggressive surgical
resection and chemotherapy. Interventions that reduce incidence of
adenomatous polyps and/or prevent their progression to CRC are,
therefore, urgently needed. In this regard, several studies have reported
the chemopreventive potential of a wide range of dietary/non-dietary
agents against CRC; however, their efficacy towards cancer stem cell
(CSC) generation leading to cancer initiation and tumorigenesis has not
yet been well-defined. In this regard, recent studies by our group have
demonstrated that silibinin, a non-toxic, chemopreventive agent, strongly
decreases the percentage of sphere formation of CRC cells (a stem cell
characteristic). The present study was aimed to provide an understanding
of the mechanisms involved in the inhibitory effect of silibinin on the
CSC population in CRC. It is evident from our earlier studies that
silibinin has the potential to target the self-renewal of CSCs in CRC
cell lines and that silibinin effect on CSC is mediated via blocking
interleukin (IL)-4 signaling in CRC cell lines. We next examined the
effect of IL-4 or IL-6 or a combination of both on the percentage of
floating spheroids (colonospheres) generated in the sphere cluster assays
after 1-2 weeks, and then determined how silibinin could affect the
growth kinetics of these colonospheres. Results indicated that in
presence of the IL-4/6 there was a significant increase in number of
colonospheres generated; the IL-4/6 combination causing a further
increase in the number of colonospheres compared to single agents alone.
Interestingly, treatment with silibinin not only had a negative effect on
the colonospheres generated in the presence of either IL-4 or IL-6, it
could also significantly inhibit the booster signals of the IL-4/6
combination on the CSCs. Since the role of IL-4/6 is also implicated in
increased resistance of CSC to chemotherapy agents and targeting the
associated signaling presents a rational approach for the prevention and
treatment of CRC, our results indicating that silibinin could
significantly block the IL-4/6 survival signaling in colorectal CSC,
might be of translational significance.

