Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic heterogeneity of HER2-positive breast cancers.


Breast cancers are at least five molecularly distinct diseases with
reported metabolic differences. Basal-like breast cancers are typically
more glycolytic as compared to luminal-like breast cancers. However,
HER2-positive breast tumors have variable FDG-PET maximum uptake values.
We hypothesized that HER2-positive breast cancer cell lines would reflect
the metabolic heterogeneity reported in breast cancer tumors. In the
current study, a panel of HER2-positive breast cancer cell lines (N = 8)
was profiled by their metabolic properties. To evaluate glycolytic
dependency for ATP production, ATP-synthase dependent oxygen consumption
rates were normalized to extracellular acidification rates using the
Seahorse Bioscience XF analyzer. The glycolytic dependency was highly
variable (12-fold range); ER-negative lines including AU565 and HCC1954
were the most glycolytic. Consistent with these results,
HER2-positive/ER-negative cell lines produced more lactate compared to
HER2-positive/ER-positive cell lines (1.5 versus 1.2 lactate
produced/glucose consumed, p = 0.02). The glycolytic phenotypes of
HER2-positive/ER-negative breast cancer cell lines were similar to that
of basal-like breast cancer cell lines. For the HER2-positive lines, the
highest rates of glutamine consumption were in ER-positive lines BT474
and HCC1419. Differential expression of mitochondrial glutaminase 2
(GLS2, p = 0.02), but not cytosolic glutaminase (GLS) or glutamine
synthetase (GLUL), may contribute to higher rates of glutamine
consumption by HER2-positive/ER-positive breast cancers. Consistent with
higher rates of mitochondrial respiration, ER-positive/HER2-positive
cells were also associated with higher expression of carbonic anhydrase
12 (CA12) and lower expression of the lactate transporter MCT1 (SLC16A1).
Metabolic heterogeneity of HER2-positive cells was only evident in
normoxic conditions. Per the Pasteur effect, all cell lines cultured
under hypoxia (1% O2) were equally glycolytic (average = 1.8 lactate
production/glucose consumption ratio) with correspondingly reduced rates
of glutamine uptake. We conclude that the heterogeneity observed in
FDG-PET may be influenced by fundamental metabolic differences between
HER2-positive breast cancers, in particular, for well-oxygenated regions
of the tumor.

