Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computer based virtual tumor simulation identifies novel use for
existing drugs - implication for personalized cancer therapy.


Background: Genomic tumor profiling studies have demonstrated that most
cancer cells embody a multitude of genomic aberrations that may
contribute to the tumor phenotype. However, development and use of
targeted molecular therapies tend to focus on the effects of single
genomic alterations. This is due in part to our inability to integrate
and understand the contribution of multiple mutations giving rise to the
tumor phenotype. The ability to develop new therapies and select
treatments for individual patients would be greatly aided by the
availability of a predictive technology capable of integrating and
determining the effects of multiple genomic aberrations on the tumor
phenotype. This patient specific customization can allow for screening
for sensitivity and resistance toward specific interventions.Methods:
Cellworks has developed a computer pharmacodynamic simulation model of
epithelial tumors (virtual tumor) that capture the signaling and
metabolic pathways for cancer relevant phenotypes and bio-marker
endpoints. This model integrates clinical and preclinical research
insights and contains over 25,000 crosstalk interactions between 6000
bio-molecules. Using this system, individual tumor profiles from clinical
samples and derived cell lines are overlaid on a control epithelial
baseline to create a personalized virtual tumor. In this study a digital
drug library comprised of 75 molecularly targeted drugs from different
indications were evaluated in combinations and at different doses (more
than 10,000 simulation studies) for their ability to inhibit growth of
mutant KRAS tumors. Therapeutic hits were shortlisted based on impact on
the apoptotic and survival pathways. The top hits were evaluated for
their ability to inhibit growth of tumor cells in vitro.Results: Using
the computer simulation based screen, we identified two drugs, that are
approved for non-oncology indications, that when used in combination, can
inhibit the growth of KRAS driven tumors: CW229 (anti-inflammatory drug)
and CW178 (metabolism target drug). The predictions were confirmed using
KRAS mutant cells lines, H1299 and HCT116, in vitro. Both CW229 and CW178
show low to moderate impact on cell viability as single agents in vitro.
However, the combination of CW229 + CW178 shows a greater than additive
effect, inhibiting cell growth by over 80%. Data from additional
preclinical studies will be presented.Conclusions: Using our virtual
tumor technology and methodology we identified a novel use for two non
oncology drugs, CW229 and CW178, as a potential combination therapy for
the treatment of KRAS mutant tumors. In addition this study demonstrates
how integration of patient genomic profiles into a personalized virtual
tumor can guide development of new therapies and aid clinicians in
selecting the most appropriate therapeutic intervention for individual
patients.

