Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eribulin recognizes the nucleotide states of soluble tubulin and
binds with high-affinity on a site distinct from known tubulin inhibitors.


Eribulin (E7389) is an antimitotic drug that inhibits microtubule
assembly in vitro and in vivo by binding to tubulin. Several studies have
been performed on eribulin mechanism of action; however, the mode of
interaction with soluble tubulin (-heterodimer) and binding site
differences with vinca alkaloids (vinblastine and vincristine) and
paclitaxel have not been well characterized. To understand binding
differences, we performed an in vitro conformational change assays and
established a surface plasmon resonance (SPR)-based direct binding assay
using chemical probes and soluble tubulin. Unlike vinca alkaloids and
paclitaxel, binding of eribulin with tubulin has little or no effect on
conformational change of tubulin which is consistent with previous
observations in the following three independent assays: 1) limited
proteolysis pattern, 2) intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence and 3) exposure
of hydrophobic area on the tubulin molecule. We therefore examined
whether eribulin binds to the vinca or paclitaxel site of tubulin in
competitive inhibition assay on SPR. Vinca alkaloids and paclitaxel
failed to inhibit the binding of tubulin to immobilized eribulin chemical
probe. Similarly, eribulin and paclitaxel did not inhibit the binding of
tubulin to immobilized vinblastine chemical probe. Thus, the eribulin
binding site on tubulin is different from that of vinca alkaloids and
paclitaxel. In addition, we further investigated the binding affinities
and characteristics of interaction of eribulin with GTP- or GDP-forms of
tubulin, respectively. Eribulin chemical probe binds both forms of
tubulin specifically with significantly higher affinity (40 nM) as
compared with vinblastine chemical probe (1 M). Interestingly, we found
that eribulin chemical probe preferentially recognizes GTP- over
GDP-tubulin and dissociation of GTP-form from eribulin chemical probe was
slower than that of GDP-form of tubulin. In contrast, vinblastine
chemical probe did not show significant difference in binding to the two
nucleotide states of tubulin. This indicates that eribulin distinguishes
different nucleotide state of tubulin and binds to GTP-tubulin more
tightly. These characteristic features of eribulin differ from those of
vinca alkaloids and paclitaxel. Overall, our results suggest that
eribulin exerts its unique antimitotic activity by inhibiting microtubule
assembly by binding with high affinity at a novel tubulin site at the
plus-end of the growing microtubule. This may potentially relate to the
mechanism of eribulin clinical efficacy and diminished neuronal toxicity.

