Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of micro RNAs in the racial disparity of endometrial
cancer .


In the United States endometrial cancer is recognized for having a
distinct racial disparity. This disparity by race occurs for both the
prevalence of disease and for survival outcome. Caucasians are about two
times more likely to develop endometrial cancer than are African
Americans. However, African American women are more likely to die from
this disease than are Caucasians. The basis for this disparity remains
unknown. Previous studies have identified differences in the types and
frequencies of gene mutations among endometrial cancers from Caucasians
and African-Americans suggesting that the tumors from these two groups
might have differing underlying genetic defects. In addition previous
studies have utilized gene expression microarray studies in an effort to
identify differentially expressed transcripts between African-American
and Caucasian women's endometrial cancers. MicroRNAs (miRNA) have emerged
as additional regulators of cell function and their aberrant expression
and function is noted in many diseases including endometrial cancers. We
performed an analysis in a set of early stage endometrial cancers to
identify whether differences in miRNA expression may underlie some
biologic aspect of this racial disparity. We assayed 50 laser
microdissected endometrial cancers using TaqMan Low Density arrays and
compared the expression of miRNAs between African-American (9 patients)
and Caucasian (41 patients) cancers. Similarly to previous mRNA
comparisons by our group, no global differences in miRNA expression were
evident between African American and Caucasian endometrial cancers. We
further refined our analyses using Partial Least Squares Regression
(PLSR) where race-, stage-, and grade-dependent variances were examined
which indicated that the depth of invasion affects global associations.
An analysis of variance (ANOVA) that considered race and stage as factors
and a Wilcoxon signed rank test of these groups revealed a small number
of differentially expressed miRNAs. Since the unbalanced sample sizes (41
Caucasian versus 9 African-American cases) may introduce bias, we
performed a paired analysis (9 AA cancers v. 9 C cancers). Of several
differentially identified miRNAs, hsa-miR-337-3p was consistently
identified in class comparisons. We validated the differential expression
of hsa-miR-337-3p in an independent set of endometrial cancers from
African Americans (n=24) and Caucasians (n=23). Analysis of normal
endometrial epithelial expression indicated that hsa-miR-337-3p
expression is down-regulated in cancers as compared to normal expression
and that there is no difference in expression of hsa-miR-337-3p in the
normal endometrium according to race. These data indicate that
hsa-mir-337-3p is specifically down-regulated in Caucasian women's
endometrial cancers and may play a role in the more frequent development
of uterine cancers in Caucasians.

