Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide association analysis identified genetic markers
associated with triptolide cellular sensitivity using HapMap LCLs as
model system.


Triptolide is a biological diterpenoid derived from the Chinese herb
Tripterygium wilfordii Hook f. It has shown to have immunosuppression and
anti-inflammation, and antineoplastic effect [Pan et al, Cancer Lett,
20102;3,5]. The anti-tumor effects of triptolide have been shown in wide
range of solid tumor and leukemic cell lines in vitro. Present study
focused on identifying the genetic markers using EBV transformed
(lymphoblast cell lines as model systems). International HapMap Project
LCLs derived from subjects with European ancestry (CEU; n=60 unrelated)
were obtained from the Coriell Institute for Medical Research. Genotype
data and gene expression data on these cell lines is available
publically. The cell lines were maintained at 370C in RPMI1640 medium
supplemented with 2mM Glutamine. In vitro cytotoxicity was determined by
plating LCLs in a 96 well plate at the density of 250,000 cells/mL
followed by treatment with six different concentration of triptolide
(500, 50, 20, 10, 6.67, and 1.3 nM) 24hr after plating. Cell viability
was determined 48 hr post drug treatment by MTT assays. Genome-wide gene
expression and genotype data was obtained from publically available
source and was evaluated for identification of SNPs and/or gene
expression signatures predictive of triptolide cellular sensitivity.
Interestingly we observed clumping of small p-values in a region on
chromosome 2 consisting of SNPs with smallest p-value. SNPs within this
region on chromosome 2 spanned across many biologically and functionally
important genes such as: genes of importance in apoptosis caspase 8,
caspase 10 and CFLR (caspase 8 and FADD like apoptosis regulator). The
most significant SNP rs6759004 occurred in the 3UTR of CFLAR gene and was
associated with triptolide cytotoxicity (p=2.5E-07). SNPs in genes
involved in DNA replication and repair as ORC2 (origin of replication
complex subunit2); in formation of reactive oxygen species as AOX1 and
AOX2P (aldehyde oxidase); proteins involved in transcription, RNA
processing and splicing as protein kinase CLK1 (CDC-kine linase-1),
NIF3L1 etc were also significantly associated with triptolide
chemosensitivity. The two most interesting candidate markers identified
by association of genome-wide expression with triptolide cytotoxicity
includes JAK1, (Janus kinase 1) which is involved in JAK/STAT signaling
and plays significant role in cell differentiation, growth,
transformation, apoptosis, proliferation etc. and DTX1, which plays role
in NOTCH1 signaling.Overall our results identified biomarkers of
biological and clinical significance that predict response to triptolide
and would be of clinical relevance to patients being treated by triptolide

