Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RGD-conjugated nanoparticles for targeted inhibition of adhesion
and migration of integrin v3-overexpressing breast cancer cells.


Background: Tumor cell adhesion and migration are critical in the
establishment of metastasis. This study aims to develop a RGD-conjugated
nanoparticle system that is able to target v3 integrin
receptor-overexpressing breast tumor cells while evading the liver
uptake, thus enhancing treatment of cancer metastasis through inhibition
of adhesion and migration of cancer cells.Methods: The nanoparticle
formulation was first optimized with a suitable concentration of RGD
targeting moiety on the nanoparticle surface to maximize nanoparticle
accumulation in tumor and minimize liver uptake. RGD-conjugated solid
lipid nanoparticles (RGD-SLNs) were synthesized with a fatty acid lipid
core and a poly(ethylene glycol) corona and decorated with varying
concentrations of RGD peptides (0%, 0.5%, 1%, 5% and 10% mol/mol ratio).
The quantity and kinetics of the nanoparticle binding to v3 integrin
receptor and in vitro cellular uptake on v3 positive MDA-MB-231 cells
were investigated by fluorescence microscopy and compared with the
results with v3 negative MCF-7 cells. The influence of RGD-SLNs on cell
adhesion and migration via binding to v3 integrin receptor was examined
using standard adhesion and transwell migration assays. Whole animal
biodistribution, tumor uptake and intratumoral distribution of quantum
dot-loaded nanoparticles were investigated to identify optimized
RGD-concentrations.Results: RGD-SLNs showed specific binding for v3
integrin receptors on MDA-MB-231 cells as compared to the negative
control (MCF-7 cells). The RGD-SLN formed clusters at the cellular
membrane and then entered the cells at a lower pace than SLN. The
RGD-SLNs also exhibited higher cellular uptake compared to SLN in
MDA-MB-231 cells while there was no detectable difference in uptake in v3
negative MCF-7 cells. RGD concentration of 1% on the SLN surface was
found to have most tumor retention and low liver uptake among all
formulations. Receptor mediated uptake of RGD-SLNs reduced cell adhesion
and migration towards fibronectin gradient, attributable to the
occupation of the receptors by the RGD-SLN and slow recycling of the
receptors to the cell surface.Conclusions: We have optimized the RGD-SLN
formulation to maximize tumor accumulation and minimize liver uptake. The
RGD-SLN formulation has the potential to prevent metastasis through
interference with cell adhesion and migration.

