Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differentially expressed microRNAs in adenocarcinomas of the lung
and tumor-adjacent normal lung tissue.


Introduction: Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer deaths
worldwide. The findings of new mutations and the development of targeted
therapies have improved lung cancer management. Still, the prognosis
remains poor and we need to know more about the genetic and epigenetic
alterations in the tumors to better understand the biology of lung
cancer.MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs that are involved in crucial
biological processes in carcinogenesis by regulating gene expression at
the post transcriptional level. In this project we have studied the
microRNA expression patterns of lung adenocarcinomas and correspondent
tumor-adjacent normal lung tissue and correlated the expression patterns
with clinical data and mutational status.Methods: We have examined
microRNA expression pattern in tumor tissues from 154 surgically resected
lung adenocarcinomas and from 20 tumor-adjacent normal lung tissue
samples. The expression of 1205 human microRNAs was conducted using the
60K microRNA microarray from Agilent technology. EGFR and KRAS mutation
analyses were also performed.The analysis of differentially expressed
microRNAs between groups of samples was done using significance analyses
of microarrays (SAM) in the J-express software. We also performed
survival analysis using univariate- and multivariate Cox regression
analysis. The results are about to be validated by qRT-PCR.Results:
Preliminary results show 129 differentially expressed microRNAs in tumor
compared to the tumor-adjacent normal lung tissue. EGFR and KRAS
mutations were found in 22/152 (14.5%) and 47/137 (34.3%) samples
respectively. We have detected 17 microRNAs that are differentially
expressed in EGFR mutated tumors compared to EGFR wildtype tumors. Two
microRNAs were identified to have a strong association with time to
progression in both univariate- and multivariate Cox regression
analysis.Discussion: The microRNAs are thought to play an essential role
in the development and progression of human malignancies, including lung
cancer. We have identified several aberrantly expressed microRNAs that
can discriminate lung adenocarcinoma tumor tissue from tumor-adjacent
normal lung tissue samples. This can lead to the identification of
biomarkers for early detection. 17 microRNAs were differentially
expressed between EGFR mutated- and EGFR wt lung adenocarcinomas
suggesting that microRNAs can be used as molecular biomarkers for lung
cancer classification. We have also identified microRNAs that can be used
as prognostic biomarkers. We are now confirming our results with qRT-PCR.
We hypothesize that microRNA can be used as biomarkers for classification
and clinical course.

