Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating Chk1 biology with selective oral Chk1 inhibitor.


Chk1 inhibitor as a chemo-potentiator in cancer therapy was proposed more
than 10 years ago. Most of the first generation i.v. dosing chk1
inhibitors were terminated in clinical trials recently. The second
generation oral chk1 inhibitors were just launched by several companies.
However, many questions in Chk1 biology remain unclear, which is
important to guide Pfizer to develop oral chk1 inhibitor in the
future.Chk1 biology team investigated preclinical scheduling, biomarker,
combination strategy, TGI, primary indication and patient selection with
chk1 tool compounds. Biomarker is critical in evaluating POM in clinical
trial phase I. Significant target modulations and dose responses of
biomarkers p-Chk1 345, r-H2AX, cleaved-PARP were observed in both in
vitro and in vivo studies, suggesting their potential application in
clinical setting. The scheduling study indicated its importance in chk1
project. Both administration of chk1 inhibitor soon after chemotherapy
and sustained inhibition of chk1 robustly improved efficacy in Miapaca2
pancreatic cancer model. There was no clear patient selection strategy
for Chk1 clinical trials in the past. To investigate the primary
indication and patient selection, 6 indications were indentified
according to clinical trial results and human tumor tissue genomics, more
than 100 cancer cell lines were screened with either chk1 inhibitor alone
or in combination with SOC. 75%(12/16) cell lines in mesothelioma and 44%
(4/9) in endometrial carcinoma demonstrated significant synergy in the
combination treatment. Next generation sequencing and SiRNA library
screening in DNA damage repair genes (DDR) will be used to clarify the
mechanisms.In summary, we have identified treatment schedule and
potential new indications for Chk1 inhibitor, which could significantly
increase efficacy, lower toxicity, and improve probability of success in
clinical trials.

