Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Demonstrating a role for nuclear Adenomatous polyposis coli in
intestinal cell differentiation.


Colon cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related mortality in
the United States, resulting in over 50,000 deaths annually.
Approximately 80% of colon cancers begin with a mutation in the gene
coding for the tumor suppressor protein Adenomatous Polyposis Coli, APC.
APC protein can shuttle between the cytoplasm and the nucleus of cells,
facilitated by two nuclear localization signals (NLS) and multiple
nuclear export signals. To better understand functions of nuclear APC,
our lab generated a knock-in mouse model with mutations introduced that
inactivate both Apc NLS. These ApcmNLS/mNLS mice show a dramatic decrease
in nuclear Apc. We previously showed increased proliferation and Wnt
target gene expression in intestinal epithelial cells from ApcmNLS/mNLS
mice, suggesting a role for nuclear APC in inhibition of proliferation
and Wnt signaling. We also showed increased tumor number and size in
ApcMin mice if they also harbor the ApcmNLS allele. Here we examine the
role of nuclear Apc in intestinal epithelial differentiation and stem
cell homeostasis. Paraffin-embedded tissue from the intestines of Apc+/+
and ApcmNLS/mNLS mice was sectioned and stained for markers of
enterocytes (alkaline phosphatase) and goblet cells (alcian blue).
Quantification of the positive cells indicated that ApcmNLS/mNLS mice had
fewer differentiated enterocytes and goblet cells than their wild-type
littermates. Intestines from ApcmNLS/mNLS mice were also stained for
markers of quiescent and active stem cells, DCAMKL-1 and Lgr5
respectively. Quantification of the various stem cell populations will be
described. Together, our data supports a role for nuclear Apc in
promoting enterocyte and goblet cell differentiation, in suppression of
tumors, and in inhibiting intestinal cell proliferation and Wnt
signaling. Information gathered from analysis of ApcmNLS/mNLS mice will
contribute to our understanding of the functions of nuclear APC in tumor
suppression and ultimately the mechanism of intestinal tumorigenesis.

