Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PCB153-induced angiogenesis depends on redoxsensitive Pyk2
signaling.


Estrogenic chemicals have been shown to increase the expression of the
growth factor VEGF in breast cancer cells. Hence, there is some concern
that environmental exposure to estrogenic chemicals such as
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) may excacerbate the growth of breast
cancer via angiogenesis. Highly metastatic breast cancer cells exposed to
PCB153 have been reported to produce a significantly greater amount of
ROS compared to non-metastatic breast cancer cells. A number of paracrine
effects have been reported in tumors exposed to estrogen, however, the
role of estrogen-induced ROS in signaling tumor angiogenesis remains to
be defined. We previously reported that PCB-induced angiogenesis can be
blocked byPyk2 siRNA. Therefore, the goal of this study was to determine
whether Pyk2 small molecule inhibitors block PCB-induced vascularization
in a 3-D breast tumor model. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVEC) or brain microvascular endothelial cells (hCMEC/D3) were used to
study the effect of small molecule inhibitors. The effect of Pyk2
inhibition on breast tumor spheroid angiogenesis was tested in a 3-D
co-culture of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. MDA-MB-231 cells exposed to
PCB153 produced ROS most likely H2O2; therefore we determined whether
external H2O2 exposure increased DNA synthesis of vascular endothelial
cells. Our results showed a significant increase in DNA synthesis from
exposure to H2O2 for18hrs. Breast tumor spheroids treated with PF431396
or Pyk2 siRNA showed a significant reduction in microvessel sprouting and
length when compared to control. Confocal microscopy of endothelial cells
co-cultured with smooth muscle cells and fibroblasts further showed a
significant increase in endothelial cell branching when exposed to
PCB153. The effects of PCB153 on endothelial cells in co-culture were
inhibited by treatments with the ROS scavengerN-acetylcysteine. We have
provided evidence for the role of Pyk2 redox signaling in the aggressive
angiogenic phenotype of endothelial cells. Our results suggest that
metastatic breast cancer cells exposed to PCBs release ROS that may
directly activate the redox sensitive kinase Pyk2 in neighboring
endothelial cells. Consequently, Pyk2 redox signaling in neighboring
endothelial cells may promote the aggressive spread of breast cancer.

