Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction between bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells and
tumor cells induces metallothionein gene expression in human colon cancer.


Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are reported to
contribute to the formation of tumor stroma. We reported recently that in
an orthotopic nude mouse model of human colon cancer, MSCs migrated to
tumor stroma, where they differentiated into carcinoma-associated
fibroblast (CAF)-like cells and promoted tumor growth and metastasis.
Furthermore, the migratory and invasive abilities of KM12SM colon cancer
cells were shown by Transwell invasion assay to be enhanced by indirect
co-culture with MSCs. However, the molecular mechanisms of this
phenomenon have not been elucidated. We performed microarray analysis of
gene expression in KM12SM cells and found that expression of
metallothionein (MT) mRNA increased markedly by indirect co-culture of
KM12SM cells with MSCs. Additionally, in an orthotopic nude mouse model
of colon cancer, MT mRNA expression levels were shown to be higher in the
tumors produced by KM12SM cells mixed with MSCs than in the tumors
produced by KM12SM cells alone. MTs comprise a family of
low-molecular-weight, cysteine-rich intracellular proteins that are
associated with protection against DNA damage, oxidative stress, and
apoptosis. The potential role of MTs in carcinogenesis remains unknown.
We examined MT expression in surgical specimens of human colon cancer and
colon adenoma by immunohistochemistry. A total of 101 tumors were
analyzed. MT immunoreactivity was detected in tumor cells and in atypical
stromal cells. Atypical stromal cells with strong MT expression were
found in invasive cancers, at the invasive edge, but not in mucosal
cancers or adenomas. Levels of MT expression in tumor cells correlated
inversely with disease stage. These findings suggest that the interaction
between MSCs recruited into tumor stroma and the tumor cells of invasive
colon cancers induces and depends on MT expression. Further studies are
needed to clarify the specific effects of MTs on tumor cells and stromal
cells.

