Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical disposition and pharmacokinetics of volitinib, a novel
selective cMet inhibitor .


Volitinib is a novel selective cMet inhibitor. This study is to evaluate
its preclinical ADME/PK profile. Volitinib has high membrane permeability
(Papp (A>B) 28106 cm/s) without efflux transport across Caco-2 cell
monolayer and exhibits negligible P-gp inhibition (IC50 > 17 M).
Metabolic stability of volitinib in liver microsomes and S9 fractions of
rat, dog, monkey and human was evaluated. Five phase I metabolites were
observed in liver microsomes and S9 fractions of different species, and
three major metabolites resulted from demethylation (M1), hydroxylation
(M2) and mono-oxygenation (M3) were found to be mediated by multiple
enzymes, including CYP450s and aldehyde oxidase. Rat was the most similar
species to human in terms of the in vitro metabolism and metabolite
profile. Metabolism is the main route of elimination for volitinib in rat
due to the fact that the fecal, urinary and biliary excretion of the
parent volitinib accounted for Volitinib is a novel selective cMet
inhibitor. This study is to evaluate its preclinical ADME/PK profile.
Volitinib has high membrane permeability (Papp (A>B) 28106 cm/s) without
efflux transport across Caco-2 cell monolayer and exhibits negligible
P-gp inhibition (IC50 > 17 M). Metabolic stability of volitinib in liver
microsomes and S9 fractions of rat, dog, monkey and human was evaluated.
Five phase I metabolites were observed in liver microsomes and S9
fractions of different species, and three major metabolites resulted from
demethylation (M1), hydroxylation (M2) and mono-oxygenation (M3) were
found to be mediated by multiple enzymes, including CYP450s and aldehyde
oxidase. Rat was the most similar species to human in terms of the in
vitro metabolism and metabolite profile. Metabolism is the main route of
elimination for volitinib in rat due to the fact that the fecal, urinary
and biliary excretion of the parent volitinib accounted for <2% of the
dose. The total of 16 phase I metabolites and 8 phase II metabolites were
identified in plasma and excreta of rat. M22, a sulfate conjugate of a
monooxidized metabolite M5, dominated with the abundance in all tested
matrices. Demethylation to M2 excreted in urine was also an important
elimination pathway in rat. Volitinib showed no significant reversible or
mechanism-based CYP inhibition in human liver microsomes, and no
induction of CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 in human hepatocytes. Volitinib had
moderate plasma protein binding rate (60%70% in rat, dog, and human; 40%
in mouse; 80% in monkey) and exhibited wide distribution to different
organs in rat, with high exposures in liver and kidney, very low in
brain, spinal cord and testis comparing to the plasma level. In PK
studies in mouse, rat and dog, Volitinib showed the rapid oral absorption
(TmaxVolitinib is a novel selective cMet inhibitor. This study is to
evaluate its preclinical ADME/PK profile. Volitinib has high membrane
permeability (Papp (A>B) 28106 cm/s) without efflux transport across
Caco-2 cell monolayer and exhibits negligible P-gp inhibition (IC50 > 17
M). Metabolic stability of volitinib in liver microsomes and S9 fractions
of rat, dog, monkey and human was evaluated. Five phase I metabolites
were observed in liver microsomes and S9 fractions of different species,
and three major metabolites resulted from demethylation (M1),
hydroxylation (M2) and mono-oxygenation (M3) were found to be mediated by
multiple enzymes, including CYP450s and aldehyde oxidase. Rat was the
most similar species to human in terms of the in vitro metabolism and
metabolite profile. Metabolism is the main route of elimination for
volitinib in rat due to the fact that the fecal, urinary and biliary
excretion of the parent volitinib accounted for <2% of the dose. The
total of 16 phase I metabolites and 8 phase II metabolites were
identified in plasma and excreta of rat. M22, a sulfate conjugate of a
monooxidized metabolite M5, dominated with the abundance in all tested
matrices. Demethylation to M2 excreted in urine was also an important
elimination pathway in rat. Volitinib showed no significant reversible or
mechanism-based CYP inhibition in human liver microsomes, and no
induction of CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 in human hepatocytes. Volitinib had
moderate plasma protein binding rate (60%70% in rat, dog, and human; 40%
in mouse; 80% in monkey) and exhibited wide distribution to different
organs in rat, with high exposures in liver and kidney, very low in
brain, spinal cord and testis comparing to the plasma level. In PK
studies in mouse, rat and dog, Volitinib showed the rapid oral absorption
(Tmax<2.5 h) with high exposures and the acceptable bioavailability at
27.2%, 42.6% and 86.3%, respectively. The in vivo clearance (CL) was
11.0, 11.8 and 3.5 mL/min/kg in mouse, rat and dog, respectively,
revealing a low extraction ratio. The volume of distribution in steady
state (Vss) was 0.4, 1.4 and 1.4 L/kg in those species, respectively,
indicating a moderate to low distribution pattern. Volitinib also
displayed linear pharmacokinetics (PK) in the dose ranges of 1 to 25
mg/kg in rat and 2 to 10 mg/kg in dog. Food hardly affected its PK
profile in dog. In contrast, volitinib in monkey showed a notably high
extraction ratio (CL=17.2 mL/min/kg) consistent with the in vitro
metabolism result. Considering the rapid absorption of volitinib
(Tmax=1.9 h) and moderately low distribution (Vss=0.7 L/kg), the poor
oral bioavailability (1.9%) of volitinib in monkey is considered to be
the result of excessive first-pass extraction. Overall, volitinib
exhibited favorable preclinical PK/ADME properties.

