Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of genes panel related to WNT- signaling in colorectal
cancer Human Papillomavirus-positive colorectal cancer.


The Wnt signaling pathway is conserved in various species and plays
significant roles in development, cellular proliferation and
differentiation. WNT signaling comprises three pathways: the canonical
pathway and two non-canonical pathways. Moreover, it is generally
accepted that both dysfunction of the Wnt signaling pathway, including
mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and b-catenin genes,
and genetic instability play important roles in colorectal
carcinogenesis. However, alterations of the components of the Wnt
signaling pathways in CRC have not been totally elucidated. Several
studies support a possible role of Human Papillomavirus in colorectal
carcinogenesis. The aim of this study was to comprehensively investigate
the expression profiles of Wnt signaling components in HPV-positive and
HPV-negative CRC cases using real-time PCR analysis.Methods: To determine
the expression profile of the association of HPV and CRC, we conducted an
age-matched case study in four HPV-positive and four HPV-negative CRC
cases. We employed the Human WNT Signaling Pathway RT Profiler PCR Array
(Qiagen) to assay the expression of 84 genes related to WNT-mediated
signal transduction. This array contains WNT signaling ligands and
receptors as well as other downstream signaling molecules for all three
WNT pathways. Results were evaluated with the RT PCR Data Analysis
Software provided by Qiagen.Results: Four male HPV-positive CRC cases
(mean ages was 56 2 years) and four HPV-negative CRC cases (mean ages 57
2 years) were analyzed using the RT Profiler PCR Array Human WNT
Signaling Pathway (Qiagen). We detected a decrease in the expression
levels of three WNT-canonical signaling molecules in HPV-positive CRC
cases when compared to HPV-negative cases. The BCL9, LRP5 and WNT3 showed
a 39% (p = 0.049), 43% (p = 0.020) and 60% (p=0.038) decrease in
expression in HPV-positive cases, respectively. Reduced expression of
three WNT signaling negative regulator genes was also observed: CTMP1
decreased 49% (p= 0.006), CXX4 decreased 49% (p=0.029) and FBXW11
expression decreased 41% (p = 0.041).Conclusion: Our findings suggest
that colorectal tumors infected with HPV could define a non-described
subtype of CRC based in the expression of a focused panel of genes
related to WNT-mediated signal transduction. These results suggest an
alteration of the WNT canonical pathway as a consequence of HPV infection
in CRC.

