Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential biomarkers of Smac mimetic tumor sensitivity: inhibitor
of apoptosis protein DNA copy number.


The inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) family of proteins block programmed cell
death and promote survival signaling. Birinapant (TL32711) is a bivalent
Smac Mimetic that antagonizes multiple IAPs to promote efficient
apoptosis and is currently in clinical trials as a single agent and in
combination with multiple chemotherapeutics. However, to enrich for
patient populations that will maximally benefit from each specific
treatment regimen, it is critical to identify predictive biomarkers to
achieve maximum response. Based on multiple individual studies, members
of IAPs have been reported to be overexpressed in multiple cancers.
Therefore, the main focus of this study was to evaluate DNA copy number
alterations of different IAPs in a variety of cancer cell lines, and to
evaluate their association with birinapant sensitivity. Our initial
analysis of the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) database revealed
that approximately 41% (397/972) of the cancer cell lines carried DNA
amplification of different IAPs. Detailed analysis showed copy number
amplification of ML-IAP in 214 cell lines (22%), cIAP1/2 in 85 cell lines
(9%), NAIP (BIRC1) in 37 cell lines (4%), BIRC8 (ILP-2) in 39 cell lines
(4%) and XIAP in 22 cell lines (2%). Tumor-type evaluation indicated that
50% pancreatic, 25% melanoma, 35% colorectal, 40% ovarian, and 7% AML
cancer cell lines carried DNA amplification of different IAPs, indicating
that IAPs are frequently amplified in cell lines of various cancer types.
To understand the association of IAP amplification and birinapant
sensitivity, we analyzed 94 cell lines present in the CCLE for birinapant
sensitivity with or without TNF, and with or without TRAIL. Our analyses
indicated that approximately 20% (19/94) of cancer cell lines were
birinapant single-agent sensitive, and 80% (75/94) were single resistant
cell lines. Furthermore, 50% (37/75) of the birinapant single resistant
cell lines showed synergistic induction of apoptosis when birinapant was
combined with either TNF or TRAIL ("synergy-positive"). Our analysis
showed that the frequency of cIAP1/2 amplification in birinapant
single-agent sensitive cell lines was 3-fold higher (4/19, 21%) than in
single-agent resistant cancer cell lines (5/75, 7%). However, there was
no difference in IAP gene amplification between birinapant
"synergy-positive" and "synergy-negative" resistant cell lines. This lack
of correlation with the synergistic response observed with the
combination of birinapant plus either TNF or TRAIL implies the
involvement of additional pathways that we are attempting to define. We
will present a comprehensive dataset for the role of IAP gene
amplification in birinapant tumor sensitivity.

