Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of various chemotherapeutic agents on 5-FU-resistant
human gastric cancer cell lines and their mechanisms.


Purpose: Four 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)-resistant human gastric cancer cell
lines were established by the long-term exposure of parent cell lines
(MKN45, MKN-74, KATO-III, and NCI-N87) to 5-FU. The cytotoxicity and
mechanisms of several chemotherapeutic agents were then investigated
using 5-FU-resistant gastric cancer cell lines.Method: 5-FU-resistant
cell lines were established by continuous exposure to escalating
concentrations (1-5 M) of 5-FU over a 1-year period. The sensitivities of
the cell lines to chemotherapeutic agents (paclitaxel, docetaxel,
cisplatin, oxaliplatin, epirubicin, and SN-38) were then evaluated using
the WST-8 colorimetric assay. To elucidate the mechanisms of resistance,
the gene expressions and copy numbers were measured using an Agilent
Technologies whole human genome oligo DNA microarray and a CGH
microarray. The protein and mRNA expressions of a target enzyme of 5-FU,
thymidylate synthase (TS), were also investigated using western blotting
and RT-PCR, respectively.Results: The IC50 ratios of the 5-FU-resistant
cell lines were 2.6 to 15.6 times higher than those of the parent cell
lines in vitro. MKN-45/5-FU showed cross-resistance to cisplatin and
oxaliplatin and KATO-III/5-FU showed cross-resistance to SN-38, while
MKN-74/5-FU showed collateral sensitivities to docetaxel, cisplatin, and
oxaliplatin, and NCI-N87/5-FU showed collateral sensitivities to
cisplatin, oxaliplatin, SN-38, and epirubicin. RT-PCR showed that TS mRNA
expression was higher in the parent cell lines than in the 5-FU-resistant
cell lines, and the TS protein expression level was also higher in all
the resistant cell lines. For MKN-45/5-FU and KATO-III/5-FU, not only the
mRNA expression level but also the TS gene copy number was increased.
Interestingly, the expression of MAP3K15, which is an
apoptosis-facilitating factor, increased in NCI-N87/5-FU, which showed
collateral sensitivity to cisplatin, oxaliplatin, SN-38, and
epirubicin.Conclusion: Analyzing the molecular mechanisms of
5-FU-resistant cell lines may be useful for the development of effective
chemotherapy regimens for relapsed gastric cancer after 5-FU-based
chemotherapy.

