Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of tumor hypoxia in mediating cellular resistance to
Gemcitabine and Cytarabine.


Gemcitabine and Cytarabine (Ara-C) are commonly used anticancer
nucleoside analogs. These cytotoxic agents, upon cellular uptake by
nucleoside transporters such as SLC29A1, are activated by multiple
phosphorylation steps, with deoxycytidine kinase (dCK) catalyzing first
rate-limiting step. Previous studies have shown development of resistance
to anticancer agents in hypoxia mainly due to activation of signaling
pathways that regulate processes like cell proliferation, angiogenesis
and apoptosis. However, hypoxic conditions can influence intracellular
levels of gemcitabine/Ara-C by altering expression levels of genes
involved in their influx and activation/inactivation. Additionally,
hypoxic environment can alter miRNA levels, thereby indirectly
influencing expression levels of gemcitabine/Ara-C pathway genes. Thus,
the aim of the study is to characterize the expression patterns of
gemcitabine/Ara-C pathway genes as well as miRNAs targeting these genes,
under hypoxic conditions, in order to understand the molecular mechanisms
underlying role of hypoxia in altering cellular sensitivity to nucleoside
analogs.We evaluated lymphoblast cell lines (LCLs) that are part of
International HapMap project for impact of hypoxia on gemcitabine/Ara-C
cellular sensitivity and determined expression levels of 8 genes in
gemcitabine/Ara-C metabolic pathway.We observed higher IC50 values for
gemcitabine (52.71 9.97nM vs 19.12 2.11nM) and Ara-C (14.15 7.11M vs 4.83
0.8M) in hypoxic conditions as compared to normoxia. The mRNA expression
levels of gemcitabine/Ara-C pathway genes showed nearly 1.5-fold decrease
in dCK levels and 3.9-fold increase in CDA levels after 48h in hypoxia as
compared to normoxia. The pharmacodynamic targets RRM1 and CTPS were
found to be 3.3-fold and 10-fold lower, respectively. Interestingly,
there was 1.3-fold increase in expression of SLC29A1 following 48h in
hypoxia. We observed no differences in expression of NT5C2, NT5C3 and
RRM2 genes under hypoxic conditions.We are also currently evaluating the
miRNAs with binding sites in gemcitabine/Ara-C metabolic pathway genes
for association with mRNA levels of these genes, as well as with cellular
cytotoxicity to gemcitabine/Ara-C in normoxia and hypoxia.In conclusion,
our study demonstrates that cellular resistance to gemcitabine/Ara-C
under hypoxic conditions could be partly explained by alteration in
expression of disposition genes of these nucleoside analogs. Future
studies would involve understanding molecular mechanisms underlying
hypoxia-mediated resistance to these agents by evaluating mRNA and miRNA
expression levels, and their relationship with cellular sensitivity.
Additionally, we plan to determine the effect of genetic polymorphisms on
hypoxia-mediated cellular resistance in gemcitabine and
Ara-C.Funding:This work was supported by NIH R01-CA132946 (Lamba)

