Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human organic cation transporter 1 (hOCT1) as a mediator of
bendamustine cytotoxic action.


Bendamustine hydrochloride is a cytotoxic agent that encompasses
structural features of alkylating and nucleoside-derived drugs. This drug
is currently used in the treatment of several haemotological
malignancies; among them Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL). CLL is the
most common leukemia in Western countries and is characterized by the
accumulation of monoclonal CD5+ B cells in the blood, bone marrow, lymph
nodes, spleen and other organs. The pathways facilitating the uptake of
bendamustine hydrochloride into target cells still remain poorly
understood. Here we have addressed this issue by monitoring the
interaction of the drug with selected plasma membrane transporter
candidates, which might be relevant to bendamustine pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics. We have used a panel of HEK293 cells stably expressing
selected drug transporter proteins to prove that bendamustine is able to
interact with human Organic Cation Transporter 1 (hOCT1) with a Ki of
140+/-10 M, as deduced from cis-inhibition studies using tritiated
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+) as hOCT model substrate. Genetic
variants known to modify substrate/transporter interactions, some of them
with high allelic frequency in humans, were also tested and, in
particular, hOCT1M420Del showed a significant decrease in its affinity
for the drug (Ki value 234+/-24 M, pBendamustine hydrochloride is a
cytotoxic agent that encompasses structural features of alkylating and
nucleoside-derived drugs. This drug is currently used in the treatment of
several haemotological malignancies; among them Chronic Lymphocytic
Leukemia (CLL). CLL is the most common leukemia in Western countries and
is characterized by the accumulation of monoclonal CD5+ B cells in the
blood, bone marrow, lymph nodes, spleen and other organs. The pathways
facilitating the uptake of bendamustine hydrochloride into target cells
still remain poorly understood. Here we have addressed this issue by
monitoring the interaction of the drug with selected plasma membrane
transporter candidates, which might be relevant to bendamustine
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. We have used a panel of HEK293
cells stably expressing selected drug transporter proteins to prove that
bendamustine is able to interact with human Organic Cation Transporter 1
(hOCT1) with a Ki of 140+/-10 M, as deduced from cis-inhibition studies
using tritiated 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+) as hOCT model
substrate. Genetic variants known to modify substrate/transporter
interactions, some of them with high allelic frequency in humans, were
also tested and, in particular, hOCT1M420Del showed a significant
decrease in its affinity for the drug (Ki value 234+/-24 M, p<0.05 vs the
wild type transporter). The whole panel of hOCT1 and hOCT1 allelic
variants were also tested for bendamustine-induced cytotoxicity and data
consistent with bendamustine being a hOCT1 substrate were obtained. This
was based upon the finding that hOCT1 expression triggered increased
sensitivity to the drug and variants known to decrease drug-transporter
affinity interactions were also shown to induce resistance. hOCT1 is
expressed in CLL cells and genotyping of a cohort of 125 CLL patients is
now allowing the analysis of the relationships between particular genetic
variants and ex vivo bendamustine-induced cytotoxicity, thus opening the
possibility that hOCT1 genotyping might be a useful tool in optimizing
bendamustine-based therapies.

