Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of tumor explant models using next-generation
sequencing.


Tumor explant models (human tumor tissue directly transplanted into mice)
are believed to conserve original tumor characteristics, including
molecular heterogeneity and tumor architecture. Thus, they better
represent patient population and can provide more relevant predictive
insight into clinical outcome. They potentially offer a clinically
relevant model in which to compare drug response to genomic and molecular
profiles. So called next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies (Exome
sequencing and RNA-seq) are becoming the standard choices for genetic
profiling due to the rich information they can provide. The sequence
based nature of these technologies offers the potential to differentiate
results by species and remove mouse derived stromal contamination when
assessing tumor cells directly. This also presents a unique opportunity
to differentiate and assess molecular interaction between the tumor and
the stromal tissue.To this aim, we have developed algorithms to
differentiate NGS sequences between human and mouse. Using mixtures of
human and mouse derived cell lines we demonstrated that the algorithm
achieved high sensitivity (99.8%) and specificity (99.5%). More than 90%
of sequence reads mapped to both human and mouse can be effectively
differentiated. We applied the approach to differentiate human and mouse
sequences for several explant models derived from both exome sequencing
and RNA-seq. We demonstrated that the process resulted in more accurate
expression quantification, and reduction of false positives in variance
calling. In addition, we compared the variance calling between paired
exome and RNA-seq and found that the two methods are complimentary to
each other where genes were expressed. We also highlighted a number of
interesting features and anomalies between RNAseq and exome data.In
summary, we demonstrated the feasibility of using exome and RNA-seq to
effectively differentiate human and mouse sequences in tumor explants
models. We highlight the value of this approach to rationally guide their
application in drug discovery.

