Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic profiling of castrate-resistant prostate cancer reveals
novel role for bile acids in driving castration resistance.


The 5-year survival for metastatic castrate-resistant prostate cancer
patients is less than 30% despite significant progress in the
understanding of prostate cancer biology and development of novel
therapeutic agents. A major contributing factor for the observed low
survival rate of patients with castrate resistant disease is the lack of
knowledge regarding metabolic alterations and their underlying
contributions during development of castrate-resistant phenotype. Studies
conducted in our laboratory and others identified a potential role for
2-methoxyestradiol (2-ME2) to prevent prostate cancer development and
progression through inhibition of the anti-apoptotic protein FLIP. The
goal of the current study was to identify biochemical changes in response
to castration and treatment with 2-ME2 in serum from transgenic
adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate (TRAMP) mice using mass spectrometry
based global profiling. We identified a total of 54 biochemicals of which
16 increased and 38 decreased in castrated animals compared to
sham-castration. Treatment of sham-castrated animals with low and high
doses of 2-ME2 altered 91 and 145 biochemicals respectively. On the other
hand treatment of castrated animals modulated 89 and 106 biochemicals.
Cumulative analysis of these data also identified alteration of 60
biochemicals associated with castration effect, 149 with treatment and 70
interactions between castration and treatment effects. Castration
affected metabolites involved in variety of metabolic pathways including
lipid, oxidative stress, energetics and bile acid. Given the data showing
enhanced expression of FLIP in castrate-resistant prostate tumors and
upregulation of bile acids in patients undergoing androgen deprivation
therapy, we examined the activation of FLIP in prostate cancer cells in
response to deoxycholic acid (DCA). Our data suggests that
transcriptional activity of FLIP was higher in PC-3 cells treated with
DCA. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report demonstrating
global metabolomic profiling of serum in response to castration and
provide a framework for therapeutic targeting of bile acid metabolism.
Supported by NIH CA 135451 (APK).Citation Format: Divya Chakravarthy,
Paul Rivas, Brian Keppler, Jianhua Ruan, Rita Ghosh, Addanki Pratap
Kumar. Metabolic profiling of castrate-resistant prostate cancer reveals
novel role for bile acids in driving castration resistance. [abstract].
In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association
for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA):
AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 5392.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-5392

