Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct inhibition of ERK1/2 by VTX-11e leads to increased
induction of apoptosis in a subset of pancreatic cancer cell lines as
compared to MEK1/2 inhibition by selumetinib (AZD6244).


Background: Intense efforts to improve current molecular therapy in
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) have focused on suppression of
the MAPK/ERK1/2 pathway. Inhibitors of MEK1/2, downstream target of the
frequently mutated RAS oncogene, are currently in development. Recently,
results of a phase II clinical trial revealed that selumetinib, a
second-generation MEK1/2 inhibitor, has not yielded its promising
preclinical efficacy in PDAC patients. A novel Extracellular Signal
Regulated Kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) inhibitor, VTX-11e, has been recently
developed as a potent and selective inhibitor of ERK1/2. In this study,
we evaluated the effects of VTX-11e on cell growth and apoptosis in
pancreatic cancer cell lines and compared VTX-11e to selumetinib.Methods:
Fifty percent Growth Inhibition (GI50) and Lethal Dose (LD) were
determined at 72 hours in 65 PDAC cell lines with increasing
concentrations of VTX-11e or selumetinib. Apoptosis was quantified by
Annexin V/PI following VTX-11e or selumetinib treatment at increasing
concentrations at 24 and 72 hours and 7 days. Elk1 phosphorylation levels
were determined by Western Blotting as a well-established readout for
downstream MAPK pathway output.Results: More than a third of
VTX-11e-treated PDAC lines showed GI50 concentrations of 2M. LD drug
response curves of cell lines treated with VTX-11e showed cell death
induction at lower concentrations than selumetinib in close to half the
cell lines tested. This finding was confirmed by assessment of apoptosis
by the AnnexinV/PI assay. We demonstrated that VTX-11e induced
significant increased apoptosis in a subset of the PDAC lines compared to
selumetinib, leading to as much as 50% apoptotic cells. Furthermore,
VTX-11e and selumetinib suppressed phosphorylation of downstream target
Elk1 equally.Conclusion: Our results show that the novel ERK1/2 inhibitor
VTX-11e leads to a significant increase in apoptosis as compared to the
MEK1/2 inhibitor selumetinib in a subset of pancreatic cancer cell lines.
This finding suggests that targeting ERK1/2 directly may be a more
effective therapeutic strategy than targeting upstream MEK1/2 in some
PDAC. Current studies are ongoing to determine the differential mechanism
of action between VTX-11e and selumetinib.

