Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated proteogenomic analysis of laser capture microdissected
breast tumors.


Introduction: Molecular characteristics of breast tumors play an
important role in determining patients’ survival outcome. Here, we
report preliminary findings of proteogenomic profiling of 50 breast
tumors using RNA-Seq and mass-spectrometry (MS) based proteomic
technologies. An additional 60 tumors are being analyzed, including WGS
for all samples. We are also collecting patient survival outcome data.

Methods: Cases used in this study were drawn from the Clinical Breast
Care Project, where patients were consented using an IRB-approved
protocol. A total of 50 breast tumors were selected and processed by
laser capture microdissection (LCM). This cohort includes 36 Caucasian
Americans (CA) and 8 African Americans (AA), and the age of the patients
is 57 ± 13 years. Protein and RNA were extracted using the Illustra
triplePrep kit, which isolates DNA from the same cells as well.
Quantitative global proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses were
performed using isobaric TMT 6-plex labeling with the “universal
reference” strategy and IMAC enrichment of phosphopeptides. Mass
spectrometry data were acquired using a Q-Exactive instrument and
analyzed using Proteome Discoverer with Byonic node. Phosphopeptide
abundance was normalized to abundance measurements of the parent protein
for all of the phosphorylation analyses. Phosphoproteomic data was also
searched for the presence of O-GlcNAc modifications. RNA-Seq analyses
were done on Illumina HiSeq and the data were analyzed using GSNAP.

Results: There were 19 Luminal A, 7 Luminal B, 8 HER2-enriched, and 16
basal-like subtypes based on the PAM50 algorithm. In the global
proteomics data, we were able to quantitate >8600 proteins. Unsupervised
clustering on the highly varying proteins across the samples resulted in
two primary clusters, with one being luminal-enriched. The other cluster
contains a basal-like tumor sub-cluster and a sub-cluster of mixed
subtypes. Differential protein expression analyses between the two
primary clusters confirmed known markers (e.g., overexpression of
KRT8/KRT18 in luminal-enriched cluster). The luminal-enriched cluster is
primarily CA with post-menopausal status.

A similar search of the phosphoproteomic data yielded quantitation of
>12500 phosphopeptides. Unsupervised clustering of the phosphoproteins
resulted in four primary groups, with one being basal-enriched and
another being luminal-enriched. We also observed >50 overexpressed
phosphopeptides. While some of these phosphosites have been previously
reported (e.g., on RANBP2), other phosphosites appeared to be novel
(e.g., on IRF2BP2).

Conclusion: Analysis of LCM breast tumors using proteogenomic
technologies resulted in basal- and luminal-enriched clusters, thus
enabling us to study protein and phosphopeptide markers across multiple
platforms.

The views expressed in this article are those of the author and do not
reflect the official policy of the Department of Defense, or U.S.
Government.


