Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of RALA in soft tissue sarcoma tumor growth and
metastasis.


Soft tissue sarcomas (STS) are a diverse collection of cancers of
mesenchymal origin arising from the connective and supportive tissues of
the body. While localized STS are well managed by surgery and radiation;
metastasis, particularly to the lung, is frequent. More than 30% of adult
STS patients develop lung metastases and the 5-year survival for these
patients is a dismal 16%. Treatment options for metastatic STS are
limited, thus there is an urgent unmet need for a better understanding of
the key molecular pathways that drive metastatic spread in STS and
identification of inhibitors of these pathways for clinical application.
Through analysis of gene expression data from metastatic STS patient
samples, we identified decreased expression of PPP2R1B as a hallmark of
metastatic STS. To directly test its function as a suppressor of tumor
growth and metastasis in STS, PPP2R1B was stably over-expressed in HT1080
cells, a model of metastatic STS. PPP2R1B expression almost completely
abolished HT1080 tumor growth in nude mice. PPP2R1B is a subunit of the
PP2A protein phosphatase complex that negatively regulates numerous
cancer signaling pathways. However, the functional consequences of
decreased PPP2R1B expression in STS are unknown. A combination of
high-throughput and targeted approaches were utilized to identify 37
phosphoproteins that are significantly dephosphorylated following PPP2R1B
expression in HT1080 cells. One of these phosphoproteins, the small
GTPase RALA, exhibited decreased phosphorylation on Ser194 following
PPP2R1B expression. RALA is significantly prognostic of STS metastasis
and is elevated in more aggressive STS subtypes relative to less
aggressive subtypes and normal tissue. RALA knockdown in HT1080
significantly slowed tumor growth and decreased the incidence of
pulmonary metastasis, mirroring PPP2R1B overexpression. Importantly, RALA
is an actionable therapeutic target for improved treatment of STS. Aurora
A inhibitors indirectly inhibit RALA function by preventing RALA Ser194
phosphorylation by aurora A. We found that RALA expression and activity
predicted response of STS cell lines to aurora A inhibition. Excitingly,
the aurora A inhibitor alisertib nearly eradicated growth of HT1080
tumors in vivo. Exploration of the biological mechanisms through which
RALA regulates STS metastasis identified regulation of vesicular traffic
as a likely critical function of RALA in this process. These findings
identify PPP2R1B, RALA, and aurora A as members of a key molecular
pathway that drives STS progression and advocate the use of treatments
targeting this pathway to improve outcome for STS patients with advanced
disease.


