Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional role of the tumor suppressor protein phosphatase,
PP2A-B55α, in breast cancer.


Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women and a leading cause of
death. Dysregulation of cellular signalling pathways controlling
proliferation, survival and migration, such as the PI3K/Akt and Ras/MAPK
pathways, are key features of breast cancer. Protein phosphatase 2A
(PP2A) negatively regulates many components of these pathways. PP2A is a
family of trimeric serine/threonine phosphatases, each consisting of a
structural, a catalytic and a regulatory subunit of which there are
multiple isoforms. The addition of specific regulatory subunits provides
subcellular targeting and substrate specificity to the enzyme. While PP2A
is generally considered a tumor suppressor, a specific role for
individual PP2A subunits in breast cancer has not been described. To
address this, we first examined PP2A subunit expression in human breast
tumors. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed significantly lower
expression of the structural subunit, PP2A-A, and regulatory subunits
PP2A-B55α and PP2A-B56α, in primary tumors and metastases, compared to
adjacent normal mammary tissue. We further found an association of low
PP2A-B55α with aggressive breast cancer subtypes, and with worse
disease-free and overall survival. Functionally, shRNA-mediated knockdown
of PP2A-B55α in normal mammary epithelial 3D cultures induced a
tumorigenic phenotype, characterised by increased proliferation and
enlarged multi-lobular acini. In contrast, overexpression of PP2A-B55α
in breast cancer cells inhibited proliferation. Thus PP2A inactivation,
in particular loss of B55α, is functionally important in breast
tumorigenesis. PP2A-B55α complexes play an important role in DNA damage
repair, and we found B55α knockdown impaired DNA damage repair. Thus low
PP2A-B55α may contribute to genomic instability. To examine the
functional role of PP2A-B55α in vivo, we have generated the first
PP2A-B55α (Ppp2r2a) knockout mouse. Constitutive knockout of Ppp2r2a is
embryonic lethal, with embryos dying during late development, post 14.5
days p.c. Heterozygous Pppr2ra mice (Ppp2r2a+/-) are viable, despite
expressing only ~10% of PP2A-B55α protein levels compared to WT mice.
Interestingly, Ppp2r2a+/- mice have significantly reduced branching in
the developing mammary gland, similar to that observed in mice with
mammary-specific loss of the breast tumor susceptibility gene, Brca1.
Analysis of breast tumor formation in these mice, either alone or when
crossed with MMTV-Neu animals, is underway. Finally, we show that
pharmacological activation of PP2A, using FTY720, or the
non-phosphorylatable analogue, AAL(S), inhibits tumor growth and
metastases in an orthotopic xenograft model of aggressive, triple
negative breast cancer (MDA-MB-231). Together this work demonstrates the
importance of PP2A as a tumor suppressor in breast cancer, and suggests
that targeting PP2A is a potential therapeutic strategy for poor outcome
patients.


