Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reliable gene expression profiling from smaller and H&E stained
clinical FFPE specimens using EdgeSeq platform.


Background: The scarcity of biological specimens and suboptimal quality
of collected material, make clinical biomarker studies challenging. The
EdgeSeq system, a novel genomics analysis platform which combines
quantitative nuclease protection assay (qNPA) technology with
next-generation sequencing (NGS), has the potential to mitigate the
aforementioned challenges. The technology allows for a limited sample
input and delivers high quality gene expression profiling data from
challenging material such as FFPE tissues. However, there is further
unmet need toward even smaller tissue input or in taking advantage of
archival stained FFPE slides to fill the data gap, specifically for
studying tumor microenvironment in the oncology clinical trials

Methods: We performed EdgeSeq analysis on six triplets of unstained, H&E
stained and IHC stained slides from non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients tumor tissue using Oncology biomarker panel (OBP). Next, we
extended the EdgeSeq OBP analysis to 44 pairs of unstained and H&E
stained slides from NSCLC to confirm the good correlation. To assess
feasibility of limited tissue input, we first optimized bead-to-DNA
volume ratio during NGS library cleanup by testing 4 ratios of
bead-to-DNA from 2.5 to 1.0. Next, crude lysate prepared from small cell
lung cancer (SCLC) FFPE tissue was 2-fold diluted from equivalent tissue
area of 5mm2 to 0.08 mm2, and was subjected to EdgeSeq OBP profiling
using the optimal bead-to-DNA ratio. Finally, correlation of gene
expression profiles between stained and unstained pairs were calculated.

Results: Within the six triplets of unstained, H&E stained and IHC
stained slides, the gene expression profiles from H&E slides showed good
correlation with the profiles from matched unstained FFPE. An extended
NSCLC sample set of 44 pairs of unstained and H&E stained FFPE further
confirmed overall good correlation with 84% (37 out of 44 ) pairs with
Pearson correlation coefficients of 0.9 or higher. In assessing the
limited tissue input, crude lysate was diluted to as little as equivalent
tissue area of 0.08mm2. The tissue area as small as 0.31 mm2 resulted in
Pearson correlation coefficients of 0.9 with 5mm2 surface area input.

Conclusion: We demonstrated feasibility of using EdgeSeq to generate
reliable gene expression data from H&E stained FFPE tissues. In addition,
we showed that EdgeSeq platform can be used to generate reliable
expression data from crude FFPE tissue lysate equivalent to surface area
as low as 0.31 mm2 (size of larger laser microdissection tile or half of
a tissue microarray core). The data show that EdgeSeq can be considered
as a platform of choice to analyze specimens of suboptimal quality or of
limited quantity and thus may help to fill the biomarker data gap in the
oncology clinical trials, including enabling research into patterns of
interactions and mechanisms of response and resistance of immune cell
engagement with tumor at the loco-regional level.


