Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural modification of the chemotherapeutic anandamide:
Designing anti-cancer agents and investigating their COX-2 metabolic
products.


Many epithelial cancers have been shown to overexpress the enzyme
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), an enzyme responsible for metabolizing
anandamide (AEA) to prostamides. AEA has demonstrated cytotoxicity in
COX-2 overexpressing cancers via its metabolism to novel J-series
prostamides, namely 15d-PMJ2. Fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) degrades
AEA into arachidonic acid and ethanolamine (EA), limiting the cytotoxic
capability of AEA. Cell lines with high FAAH expression have demonstrated
resistance to AEA. By understanding the metabolic characteristics of
FAAH, we can design AEA analogs which circumvent FAAH breakdown. To
examine the effects of altering polarity, steric bulk, and functional
groups on AEA-mediated cytotoxicity, we investigated known AEA
derivatives which possess these properties. Arvanil, Arachidonoyl
Diethanolamine (ADA), Arachidonoyl Serinol (AS), and R1-methanandamide
(m-AEA) add steric bulk to the molecule via aromatic rings, extra EA arms
and additional alcohol/methyl functional groups respectively.
Arachidonoyl glycine (NAGly) substitutes the terminal EA alcohol with a
carboxylic acid increasing polarity. Arachidonoyl-2’-chloroethylamine
(AC) substitutes the terminal EA alcohol with a highly soluble chlorine.
Furthermore, it is known that Arvanil, ADA, AS, and m-AEA resist
degradation of the molecule by FAAH and NAGly is a known substrate of
COX-2. Therefore our goal was to determine which structural modifications
improve AEA-mediated cytotoxicity. To determine this, JWF2 tumorigenic
keratinocytes were exposed to differing concentrations of the AEA analogs
for 24 hours and cell viability was measured by conducting MTS assays.
Arvanil demonstrated a 90% reduction in cell viability, NAGly
demonstrated a 70% reduction in cell viability, and m-AEA demonstrated a
100% reduction in cell viability at 20 µM, the optimal dosage of AEA.
Due to the fact that ADA, AS, and AC did not show a significant reduction
in cell viability these molecules were not further examined. MTS assays
were conducted in other epithelial cancer cell lines with varying
expressions of COX-2 and FAAH. Each cell line was exposed to varying
concentrations of either NAGly, Arvanil, or both for 24 hours. NAGly
demonstrated a 40% reduction in cell viability in HT-29 colon cancer
cells (low COX-2, high FAAH). Arvanil demonstrated a 60% reduction in
A431 tumorigenic keratinocytes. NAGly demonstrated a 60% reduction in
cell viability and Arvanil demonstrated a 100% reduction in cell
viability in patient-derived primary melanoma. These findings suggest
that modulation and substitute to the core structure of AEA will result
in decreased susceptibility to FAAH degradation and enhanced
antineoplastic activity.


