Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Zinc inhibits androgen receptor expression to inhibit prostate
cancer cell growth.


Background: Prostate gland contains high level of intracellular zinc
which is dramatically diminished during cancer development. Due to the
obscure role of zinc in this process, therapeutic application using zinc
and its supplement is very limited. This study aims to clarify the
role(s) of zinc and its intervening mechanism.

Material and methods: Treated by zinc chloride (15-150 µM), several
prostate cancer cell lines were applied to confocal microscopy for
intracellular trafficking of exogenous zinc, in vitro proliferation
assays for their growth, prostate specific antigen (PSA)-based
reporter-mediated transactivation, and Western blot for detection of
androgen receptor (AR), PSA and ubiquitination. Further in vivo studies
were performed to demonstrate the effect of zinc (10-20 mg/kg) on
xenograft cancer growth using syngeneic animals followed by tumor
analyses.

Results: Zinc chloride suppressed androgen-dependent proliferation of
human prostate cancer cells and accordingly zinc chloride dramatically
inhibited androgen-mediated transactivation and several androgen target
protein expressions, including PSA and p21. Further investigation showed
that addition of zinc chloride strikingly downregulated AR protein levels
after 4 hours up to 24 hours in both human LNCaP and murine TRAMP C2
prostate cancer cell lines. AR downregulation resulted from facilitated
protein degradation instead of transcriptional control. Further in vivo
study was carried out using syngeneic mice bearing C2 subcutaneous
tumors. Peritoneal injection of zinc chloride significantly reduced tumor
size. Analysis of these tumors revealed that there were reduced
expression of AR and increased cell death.

Conclusions: Zinc has been shown to inhibit incumbent oncogenic NF-κB
pathway. These results also suggest that intracellular zinc inhibits cell
growth via downregulation of AR to inhibit growth of prostate cancer.
Considering that AR functions as a major effector in prostate cancer
development and progression into castration resistant prostate cancer,
loss of zinc may be a critical step for this devastating disease and
further studies can be performed to develop zinc-based cancer
therapeutics.


