Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Connecting oxidative DNA damage to epigenetic alterations during
inflammation-driven tumorigenesis.


Inflammation contributes to the development of a diverse array of
diseases, including cancer. At sites of chronic inflammation epithelial
cells are exposed to high levels of reactive oxygen species and undergo
cancer-associated DNA methylation changes, suggesting that inflammation
initiates epigenetic alterations. Cancer cells are globally DNA
hypomethylated, but have aberrant gains in promoter DNA methylation that
transcriptionally silence tumor suppressor genes (TSGs), linking DNA
methylation directly to tumorigenesis. However, the mechanisms of
targeting and initiation for these stable disease-specific epigenetic
marks are unknown. We have linked inflammation and oxidative DNA damage
to acute changes in the interaction of epigenetic silencing proteins with
each other and the chromatin. Recently, we demonstrated that the mismatch
repair (MMR) protein heterodimer MSH2-MSH6 participates in the oxidative
damage-induced recruitment of DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) to
chromatin and provided evidence that the role of DNMT1 at sites of
oxidative damage is to reduce transcription. To connect these findings to
epigenetic changes in tumors we use a model of inflammation-driven
tumorigenesis where we infect mice with the human commensal bacterium
enterotoxigenic Bacteriodes fragilis (ETBF). ETBF infection causes colon
inflammation that drives tumorigenesis in Multiple intestinal neoplasia
(Min) mice. The central hypothesis for this work is that oxidative damage
at sites of inflammation causes acute genome-wide changes in the binding
of epigenetic silencing proteins that result in the permanent epigenetic
silencing of genes in tumors that form at the sites of exposure. Using
genome-wide DNA methylation techniques we identified TSGs with increased
promoter DNA methylation and decreased expression in tumors from ETBF
infected Min mice as compared to normal tissue. In Min mice lacking
expression of Msh2 in their intestinal epithelium (Msh2lox/loxVCMin)
there is a loss of the inflammation-induced change in binding of
epigenetic proteins that occurs in Min mice even though the cytokine
response to infection is normal. Because they lack functional MMR, ETBF
infection of Msh2lox/loxVCMin mice causes an increase in colon tumor
number and these tumors are positive for microsatellite instability,
unlike tumors from ETBF infected Min mice. Importantly, DNA hypo- and
hypermethylation changes in tumors from Msh2lox/loxVCMin ETBF infected
mice are reduced both globally and at promoter CpG islands of candidate
TSGs as compared to tumors from Min ETBF infected mice. Altogether, this
work suggests a novel mechanism by which oxidative damage induces acute
epigenetic changes through the interaction of DNMT1 with MMR proteins and
that this acute change drives DNA methylation alterations during
tumorigenesis.


