Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Rho/MRTF regulated gene transcription in drug-resistant
melanoma.


Much of the recent focus of melanoma targeted therapy has been on the ERK
pathway, which is aberrantly activated in approximately 90% of melanoma
tumors (over half of which express BRAFV600E). Current targeted therapies
such as vemurafenib (BRAFV600E inhibitor), or a combination therapy using
dabrafenib (BRAFV600E inhibitor) and low dose trametinib (MEK inhibitor)
shows profound initial effects in a majority of BRAFV600E expressing
tumors. However, these responses are often short-lived and resistances
typically develops within months. Resistance to these targeted therapies
can arise from multiple mechanisms, including activation of pro-survival
signaling pathways parallel to the ERK pathway. The goal of this work is
to identify pharmacologically targetable resistance mechanisms so that
effective combination therapies can be developed.

Despite the clear role of the RhoA subfamily of Rho GTPases (RhoA/B/C) as
melanoma oncogenes, their role in drug resistance is not well understood.
It is challenging to develop small molecule inhibitors which directly
target the activity of small Rho GTPases, so an alternative approach is
to inhibit downstream pathways. Through modulation of the actin
cytoskeleton Rho can induce gene transcription through multiple
transcriptional co-activators including Myocardin-Related Transcription
Factor (MRTF) and Yes-Associated Protein 1 (YAP).

My bioinformatics analysis demonstrates that MRTF-A gene expression is
correlated with poor overall survival in a large cohort of cutaneous
melanoma patients. Furthermore, expression of a set of 216 MRTF target
genes is enriched in dabrafenib/trametinib resistant cutaneous melanoma
tumors compared to matched pre-treatment tumors, suggesting that MRTF
activation may be involved in drug resistance. Based upon these results I
hypothesized that small Rho GTPases may promote resistance to MAPK
pathway targeted therapies through activation of MRTF/YAP.

To test this hypothesis, I generated vemurafenib resistant melanoma cells
through chronic exposure to vemurafenib. This vemurafenib-resistant cell
population is enriched for actin stress fiber positive cells, and these
cells have increased Myosin Light Chain 2 (MLC2) phosphorylation,
suggesting that there is increased Rho activation. Furthermore, these
drug resistant cells are more sensitive to pharmacological inhibition of
MRTF activity. These preliminary data suggest that vemurafenib resistant
melanoma cells may be re-wired to depend on the Rho-induced gene
transcription for their survival, and that a combination therapy
simultaneously targeting these two pathways may be an effective treatment
strategy for BRAF inhibitor-resistant melanomas.


