Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low coverage genome-wide sequencing of cell-free DNA enables
detection, therapeutic monitoring, and characterization of copy number
alterations in patients with solid tumors.


Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) has been detected in the blood of patients
with many cancer types and is thought to reflect the combined genetic
profile of the primary tumor and metastases. The majority of studies into
“liquid biopsies” have focused on detecting focal events including
single nucleotide variants, fusions, and specific copy number alterations
(CNAs); however, these assays are limited to mutations occurring in
targeted regions and require deep sequencing. The objective of this study
was to use low coverage, genome-wide sequencing of cell-free DNA (cfDNA)
to evaluate the frequency, distribution, and persistence of genome-wide
CNAs in the plasma of patients with solid tumors. cfDNA was isolated from
a total of 203 plasma aliquots from 72 patients diagnosed with a variety
of solid tumors. For almost half of the patients, multiple collections
were available (range: 2-13) to enable longitudinal monitoring of
treatment response. Greater than 25% of baseline cfDNA samples showed
evidence of one or more CNAs and greater than 40% of patients had a CNA
detected in at least one sample. Among patients with longitudinal
monitoring, greater than 35% of individuals showed evidence of CNAs at
baseline and approximately 25% of samples showed similar evidence in
subsequent sampling. Collectively, CNAs were detected on all autosomes,
suggesting that genome-wide profiling is necessary to fully assess CNA
distributions. Additionally, we devised a metric which quantified the
level of genomic instability. This metric, termed the genomic instability
number (GIN), was associated with disease classification. In patients
capable of longitudinal monitoring, GIN values were observed concomitant
with therapeutic response (including, interestingly, response to
immunotherapy) or disease progression and may provide information earlier
than standard imaging-based methods. In addition, total cfDNA amount was
evaluated as a predictor. When analysis was performed across all
patients, there was a poor correlation between total cfDNA amount and the
GIN; however, total cfDNA amount was strongly correlated with the
cumulative abundance of CNA events within individual patients, suggesting
that the CNAs detected in the cfDNA were derived from the additional
genetic material contributed by the tumor. These data demonstrate the
feasibility of detecting ctDNA in a significant portion of cancer
patients solely on the basis of low coverage CNA profiling. Further, the
nature of CNA events observed varied both between patients and across
longitudinal samples from individual patients, suggesting potential for
monitoring therapy response or disease progression. This study suggests
that genome-wide CNA profiling may be useful alone or as a complement to
standard variant detection strategies in the development of liquid biopsy
technologies.


