Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting specific regulatory subunits of protein phosphatase 1
phenocopies estrogen-induced apoptosis.


The growth of estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancers is
considered to be dependent on estrogen and its actions can be blocked by
selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMS), like tamoxifen, or by
inhibiting the synthesis of estrogen, by aromatase inhibitors (AIs). Both
of these classes of drug are used to treat ER+ breast cancers in the
clinic. Paradoxically, before the discovery of SERMs and AIs, high dose
estrogen was the choice of endocrine therapy to treat post-menopausal
breast cancers. Recent clinical trials have confirmed a 30% clinical
benefit rate with high, as well as low, doses of estrogen therapy in AI-
resistant breast cancers. However, the underlying mechanism by which
estrogen triggers the tumor regression remains unknown. Using an in vitro
cell model MCF7:5C cells, that undergo estrogen-induced apoptosis, we
demonstrate that sustained phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation
factor 2-alpha (eIF2-α), a downstream target of PERK activation, is
crucial in estrogen-induced apoptosis. Growth arrest and DNA damage
inducible-34 (GADD34) and constitutive repressor of eIF2α
phosphorylation (CReP) are two regulatory subunits of protein phosphatase
1 (PP1) complex, that provides substrate specificity towards eIF2α, and
are responsible for its de-phosphorylation. Our results show that
pharmacological inhibition of GADD34 and CReP, or their genetic
depletion, can enhance the phospho-eIF2α (p-eIF2α) levels and promote
apoptosis. Elevated levels of p-eIF2α attenuated global translation but
preferentially allowed high expression of activating transcription factor
4 (ATF4) and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) that are involved in
apoptosis. Both estrogen and inhibition of GADD34 and CReP promote
apoptosis by an identical mechanism. Importantly, inhibition of GADD34
and CReP induced apoptosis in another estrogen-independent breast cancer
cell line, LCC9, which is resistant to both tamoxifen and fulvestrant but
does not undergo estrogen mediated apoptosis. Overall, our study provides
crucial evidence that inhibiting specific regulatory subunits (GADD34 and
CReP) of PP1 complex, can mimic estrogen-induced apoptosis in breast
cancer cells that are not susceptible to estrogen mediated apoptosis.
Therefore, GADD34 and CReP can be targeted for potential therapeutic
intervention in endocrine therapy resistant breast cancers.


