Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual-strands pre-microRNA-150 (miR-150-5p and miR-150-3p) act as
tumor suppressor in prostate cancer.


Background: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common cause of
cancer and the sixth leading cause of cancer death among men in the
world. Androgen signaling through the androgen receptor (AR) is an
important oncogenic pathway for PCa progression. The initial response
rate of PCa to androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) can be up to 80%, but
most patients experience disease relapse and progress to
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Although several clinical
trials, such as molecularly-targeted therapies for CRPC have been carried
out, these treatments provide limited benefits and, are not curative.
Therefore, identification of effective biomarkers for detection of CRPC
and understanding the molecular mechanisms of androgen-independent
signaling and metastatic signaling pathways underlying PCa using current
genomic approaches would help to improve therapies for and prevention of
the disease. Currently, numerous studies have indicated that miRNAs are
aberrantly expressed in several cancers, including CRPC. In this study,
we constructed a miRNA expression signature to identify miRNA regulated
RNA networks in CRPC using autopsy specimens from patients with ADT.
Based on the signature, dual-strands of pre-miR-150 (miR-150-5p and
miR-150-3p) were significantly reduced in CRPC specimens. The aim of this
study was to investigate the functional significance of both strands of
miR-150-5p and miR-150-3p and these miRNAs regulated RNA networks in CRPC.

Results: Downregulation of miR-150-5p and miR-150-3p were validated in
hormone naive PCa and CRPC specimens compared to non-cancerous prostate
tissues (p Results: Downregulation of miR-150-5p and miR-150-3p were
validated in hormone naive PCa and CRPC specimens compared to
non-cancerous prostate tissues (p < 0.0001). Restoration of miR-150-5p
and miR-150-3p significantly suppressed cancer cell migration and
invasion in PCa cell lines (P Results: Downregulation of miR-150-5p and
miR-150-3p were validated in hormone naive PCa and CRPC specimens
compared to non-cancerous prostate tissues (p < 0.0001). Restoration of
miR-150-5p and miR-150-3p significantly suppressed cancer cell migration
and invasion in PCa cell lines (P < 0.0001). Gene expression data and in
silico database analysis showed that Sparc/Osteonectin, Cwcv AND
Kazal-Like Domains Proteoglycan 1 (SPOCK1) was regulated by both miRNAs.
Knockdown of SPOCK1 inhibited cancer cell aggressiveness. Overexpression
of SPOCK1 was observed in PCa clinical specimens.

Conclusions: In miRNA biogenesis, it is the general consensus that
processing of the pre-miRNA through Dicer1 generates a miRNA duplex (a
passenger strand and a guide strand), and that the passenger strand has
degradation and no regulatory activity and disintegrates in cells. Our
present data showed that both strands of pre-miR-150 (miR-150-5p and
miR-150-3p) inhibited cancer cell aggressiveness, suggesting these miRNAs
as tumor-suppressors. Identification of miRNA-mediated cancer networks
may provide novel molecular pathogenesis of the disease.


