Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oligodendrocytes might up-regulate the Invasiveness of
glioblastoma cells via angiopoietin-2 signaling.


Background & Aims: Glioblastoma (GBM, WHO Grade IV) is considered as the
most lethal neoplasm of all solid cancers due to its inherent intensive
invasiveness. GBM may arise de novo, or following progression from lower
grade gliomas. Recently, solid tumor progression has been recognized as
the product of an evolving crosstalk between the cancer cells and its
surrounding glial cells. The intensive invasion activity of GBM cells
might be regulated by surrounding normal cells such as oligodendrocytes
or fibroblasts. In this study, we evaluated the interactive factors
between GBM cells and normal glial cells to determine the role of
oligodendrocytes in regulating the invasiveness of glioblastoma cells.

Methods: Two GBM cell lines, T98G and U251, were used. Two
oligodendrocyte cell lines, ODC1 and ODC2, were derived one each from
surgical tissues of patients with low-grade glioma (WHO Grade II). Two
fibroblasts cell lines, GF1 and GF2, were derived one each from surgical
tissues of patients with GBM. Oligodendrocytes and fibroblasts were
confirmed by immuno-histochemical staining. The invasive property of GBM
cells was analyzed in the presence or absence of conditioned medium from
oligodendrocytes or fibroblasts by wound-healing assay and Boyden chamber
invasion assay. The proliferation ability of GBM cells was examined by
MTT assay. Subsequently Cytokine array was used to examine the cytokines
and growth factors in the conditioned medium from oligodendrocytes or
fibroblasts.

Results: Oligodendrocyte cells, ODC1 and ODC2 cells, significantly
(pResults: Oligodendrocyte cells, ODC1 and ODC2 cells, significantly
(p<0.01) increased the migration and invasion ability of GBM cells, T98G
and U251. In contrast, fibroblasts, GF1 and GF2 cells, did not affect the
migration and invasion ability of GBM cells. Cytokine array indicated
that Angiopoietin-2 was found in the conditioned medium from
oligodendrocytes, but not that from fibroblasts. Angiopoietin-2
significantly (pResults: Oligodendrocyte cells, ODC1 and ODC2 cells,
significantly (p<0.01) increased the migration and invasion ability of
GBM cells, T98G and U251. In contrast, fibroblasts, GF1 and GF2 cells,
did not affect the migration and invasion ability of GBM cells. Cytokine
array indicated that Angiopoietin-2 was found in the conditioned medium
from oligodendrocytes, but not that from fibroblasts. Angiopoietin-2
significantly (p<0.01) increased the invasiveness of GBM, but not their
proliferation ability.

Conclusion: Oligodendrocytes might up-regulation of the invasiveness of
GBM cells via angiopoietin-2 signaling pathway. Hence, angiopoietin-2 can
be considered as a promising target for the treatment of malignant
gliomas.


