Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA sequencing of bladder cancer patient-derived xenograft models
identifies genes associated with chemoresistance.


Background: Bladder cancer is among the top ten most common cancers, with
about ~380,000 new cases and ~150,000 deaths per year worldwide.
Platinum-based combination chemotherapy is commonly used to treat
advanced bladder cancer. It has been shown that only ~50% of the patients
with advanced bladder cancer respond to platinum-based therapy.

Methods: We have utilized a patient-derived bladder cancer xenograft
(PDX) platform to characterize the molecular mechanisms that contribute
to resistance of gemcitabine-cisplatin combination therapy in advanced
bladder cancer. We have also identified key regulatory pathways in our
PDX models that can be targeted to treat chemotherapy resistant bladder
cancer using RNAseq analysis. Transcriptome profiling of P0 (passage 0)
bladder cancer xenograft tumors from 4 PDX lines (2 gemcitabine-cisplatin
resistant lines and 2 drug sensitive lines) was performed by RNA-Seq
analysis, before and after a 21-day cisplatin/gemcitabine drug treatment
regimen.

Results: The RNA-seq data has indicated significant differences between
the transcriptional profiles of drug-sensitive and drug-resistant tumors.
PDXs retained morphology and shared 92-97% of genetic alterations of
parental cancer cells. We identified 333 genes >2 fold up or down
regulated in the drug resistant tumors compared to the drug sensitive
tumors. Significantly up-regulated genes in drug resistant tumors
analyzed include metabolic enzymes ALDH2, ALDH3A1, ALDH4A1 and ALDH7A1,
transporter proteins ABCA1, SLC1A4, SLC2A5, SLC30A1, SLC39A6, SLC7A5 and
SLC9A3, Notch ligand JAG2, Growth hormone receptor GHR and transmembrane
protein GPNMB. Consistent with the change of cell surface proteins such
as GHR and GPNMB, the MAPK and the PI3K-AKT pathways were upregulated
when PDXs became resistant to cisplatin treatment. Additional changes in
gene expression based on RNA-seq data before and after drug treatment
were also found.

Conclusion: Chemoresistance to gemcitabine and cisplatin is associated
with altered expression of several cell surface proteins and upregulation
of the downstream signaling pathways. Targeting these cell surface
proteins can possibly be harnessed to overcome chemoresistance. GPNMB is
a type I transmembrane protein that has previously been shown to be
up-regulated in many metastatic cancers including breast cancer.
Potentially targeting GPNMB with glembatumumab vedotin, an
antibody-drug-conjugate has shown promising results in treating several
cancers including breast cancer and osteosarcoma. Further studies will
elucidate whether targeting GPNMB is an effective strategy for the
treatment of chemotherapy resistant bladder cancer.

This study received funding by a developmental grant from the UCDCC. This
work was conducted under the auspices of the USDOE by LLNL
(DE-AC52-07NA27344). IM number: LLNL-688318


