Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving Gleason scoring in prostate cancer: Development and
clinical value of the Molecular Integrative Quantitative Gleason
(MIQ-Gleason).


We have recently shown that quantification of Gleason 4 patterns
(Q-Gleason) provides strong prognostic information beyond traditional
Gleason grade groups (3+3, 3+4, 4+3, 8, 9-10) in prostate cancer, and
that the prognostic power of Q-Gleason scoring can be further improved if
Gleason 5 patterns are integrated to build the Integrative Quantitative
Gleason (IQ-Gleason) score, a continuous value ranging from 0 – 117.5.
The current study was undertaken, to determine whether (and how)
factoring in molecular markers could further improve the predictive
power. We selected deletions of PTEN and 6q (by FISH analysis) as well as
DNA ploidy information obtained by flow cytometry as examples for
established molecular prognostic markers that provided strong and
independent prognostic information in our study cohort of more than
17,000 prostate cancers. A “molecular score” was established for
these markers including “penalty” points for presence of
deletions/aneuploidy and “bonus” points for lack of deletions/diploid
DNA status. Penalty and bonus points were separately determined for each
parameter based on differences in the recurrence rate between cancers
with and without deletions or aneuploidy. The “penalty” points were
then added to the IQ-Gleason score points while the “bonus” points
were subtracted from the IQ-Gleason in order to obtain the MiQ-Gleason
score. The MiQ-Gleason provided strong prognostic information in
univariate analysis (pWe have recently shown that quantification of
Gleason 4 patterns (Q-Gleason) provides strong prognostic information
beyond traditional Gleason grade groups (3+3, 3+4, 4+3, 8, 9-10) in
prostate cancer, and that the prognostic power of Q-Gleason scoring can
be further improved if Gleason 5 patterns are integrated to build the
Integrative Quantitative Gleason (IQ-Gleason) score, a continuous value
ranging from 0 – 117.5. The current study was undertaken, to determine
whether (and how) factoring in molecular markers could further improve
the predictive power. We selected deletions of PTEN and 6q (by FISH
analysis) as well as DNA ploidy information obtained by flow cytometry as
examples for established molecular prognostic markers that provided
strong and independent prognostic information in our study cohort of more
than 17,000 prostate cancers. A “molecular score” was established for
these markers including “penalty” points for presence of
deletions/aneuploidy and “bonus” points for lack of deletions/diploid
DNA status. Penalty and bonus points were separately determined for each
parameter based on differences in the recurrence rate between cancers
with and without deletions or aneuploidy. The “penalty” points were
then added to the IQ-Gleason score points while the “bonus” points
were subtracted from the IQ-Gleason in order to obtain the MiQ-Gleason
score. The MiQ-Gleason provided strong prognostic information in
univariate analysis (p<0.0001) and in multivariate models including PSA
level, pT / pN stage, and status of the resection margin. Comparison of
Reciever Operator characteristics (ROS) between the MiQ-Gleason and the
quantitative Gleason or classical Gleason revealed only a slight increase
of the prognostic power for the MiQ-Gleason (AUC=0.781) as compared to
the IQ-Gleason (AUC=0.771), while a massive difference was found as
compared to the classical Gleason grade groups (AUC=0.719). In summary,
our data demonstrate the power of quantitative Gleason scoring strategies
as compared to classical Gleason grade groups. That adding selected
molecular features improved predicitive power only slightly demonstrates
how difficult it is for molecular markers to compete with optimized
morphological grading systems. However, the use of more and better
molecular testing may provide further improvement beyond quantitative
Gleason scoring.


