Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of calcium channel blockers as
inhibitors of YAP/TAZ and glioblastoma cells.


Glioblastomas (GBM) are the most aggressive primary brain tumors. Despite
major advances in neuroimaging and neurosurgical techniques over the past
decades, the neurosurgical management of GBM patients remains
challenging. Median survival of the patients is about 14.6 months. In
order to radically alter the clinical course of these tumors, it is
important to develop targeted therapies based on identified oncogenic
mutations and signaling pathways that drive their development and sustain
their maintenance. In a screen for small molecules, which can inhibit the
growth of human glioblastoma cells, we identified a set of calcium
channel blockers (CCB). We found that these CCB induce cell death through
an apoptosis-independent process. To understand the mechanisms of the
non-apoptotic cell death induced by these CCB, we dissected cellular
signaling which is responsible for the cell death induction. We found
that these CCB are able to inhibit YAP and TAZ, two oncogenic effectors
of the Hippo tumor suppressor pathway. Importantly, GBM cells expressing
the YAP active mutant or overexpressing YAP are less sensitive to these
CCB. These results suggested that inhibition of YAP/TAZ is a mechanism by
which CCB suppress tumor cell growth. The Hippo pathway is an essential
signaling network in regulating tissue homeostasis. In this pathway, the
transcription co-activators YAP and TAZ promote a gene expression program
favoring cell proliferation, survival and self-renewal. In normal brain,
the nuclear accumulation of YAP is largely limited to regions harboring
neural progenitor cells. However, increased nuclear accumulation of YAP
is found in various brain tumors, especially those more aggressive
subsets of gliomas. In addition, high expression of YAP is associated
with reduced mean survival in astrocytoma patients. Our results
identified a novel approach to target the Hippo pathway for GBM
treatment. We will present our work in further characterizing these
regulations and therapeutic potentials of these calcium channel blockers
in the conference.


