Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of anti-human mesothelin chimeric antigen receptor
(CAR) messenger RNA (mRNA) transfected peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(CARMA) for the treatment of mesothelin-expressing cancers.


CD19-targeted chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-engineered T/NK-cell
therapies can result in durable clinical responses in B-cell
malignancies. However, CAR-based immunotherapies have been less
successful in solid cancers. This is partly due to specificity for shared
tumor antigens also present on normal host tissues that leads to
‘on-target/off-tumor’ toxicity. We therefore developed a non-viral
approach using repeated infusions of mesothelin-specific messenger RNA
(mRNA) CAR-transfected T cells to permit prospective control of
‘on-target/off-tumor’ toxicity. Early trials provided preliminary
evidence of the safety and anti-tumor activity of this strategy, but the
ex vivo selection, activation and expansion of lymphocytes is laborious
and expensive. We therefore explored the feasibility of using a rapid,
automated, closed system for cGMP-compliant mRNA CAR transfection into
freshly isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cells for clinical scale
manufacture (CARMA). The resulting cryopreserved cellular product
expressed CAR in >95% of cells, and recognized and lysed tumor cells in
an antigen-specific manner. Expression of CAR was detectable for 5-7 days
in vitro, with a progressive decline of CAR expression related to in
vitro cell expansion. In a murine ovarian cancer model, a single
intra-peritoneal (IP) injection of CARMA resulted in the dose-dependent
inhibition of tumor growth and prolonged the overall survival (OS) of
mice. Multiple weekly IP injections of the optimal CARMA dose enhanced
disease control and further prolonged OS, both of which improved with an
increasing number of injections. No significant off-tumor toxicities were
observed. These data support further investigation of serial IP CARMA
administration as a potential treatment for ovarian cancer and other
mesothelin-expressing tumors involving the peritoneum, and provide
preclinical proof of principle of CARMA for solid tumors.


