Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A multi-scale survey to assess the impact of inflammatory diseases
of the abdominal cavity and prostate cancer severity.


Introduction and Objectives: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common
cancer detected in men (181,000 annual cases), and nearly 26,000 American
men die each year due to PCa and related complications. Reports have
shown that PCa is more aggressive when its comorbid with inflammatory
diseases. However, the correlations and risks attributed to inflammatory
diseases of the abdominal cavity and oncophenotypes are not known.

Methods: To investigate how inflammatory pathways and PCa genes induce
aggressive oncophenotypes in the setting of PCa, we have compiled a
multiscale survey that includes data from surgical observations,
inflammatory phenotypes, clinical registries, biomarkers and mouse
models. We applied an integrative informatics approach with experimental
validation to understand the associations between inflammatory diseases
(e.g., Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, collagenous colitis,
indeterminate colitis, ischemic colitis, diverticulitis, hernia, etc.)
and PCa.

Results: We found distinct patterns of shared molecular features---gene
sets, pathways, and networks---and comorbidities across inflammatory
disease and PCa. For example, we found that diverticulitis tend to
increase inflammation in the abdominal cavity and could potentially lead
to aggressive prostate oncophenotypes. To test abdominal inflammation and
PCa correlation, we induced inflammation in a mouse model of hiatus
hernia, which resulted in an increase in the expression of the combined
markers of inflammation and PCa (TGFB, TNFA, and IL6). Evaluation of
pathology stage, Gleason scores and physical attributes of previous
inflammation observed during robotic prostatectomy surgery also reveals
trend towards aggressive tumor characteristics with an increase in
inflammation. Gene-set overlap analyses showed that several inflammatory
disease and prostate cancer genes share genetic modules.

Conclusion: Collectively, our findings provide the first set of
computational, experimental and clinical evidence to recommend clinicians
to evaluate the impact of inflammatory disease induced oncophenotypes in
patients with PCa. Given that 1.3 million patients undergo
prostate-specific antigen (PSA)-triggered invasive trans-rectal biopsy,
the present findings in combination with PSA could facilitate the
identification patient subset with aggressive cancer. Stratifying
patients at risk for prostate cancer who are undergoing surgical
interventions of abdominal cavity for inflammation diseases could also
evaluate other non-surgical or therapeutic strategies.

Funding acknowledgements: AKT is supported by grants from Prostate Cancer
Foundation and Deane Prostate Health.

JT is supported by grants from National Cancer Institute
NCI-U54-CA189201-02, National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences
NCATS-UL1TR000067 and Clinical and Translational Science Award (CTSA).


