Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting cancer stem cells with microRNA therapeutics and
particle radiation in challenging cancer models.


Remarkable progress has been made in the understanding and treatment of
human cancer, resulting in greatly improved survival for many patients.
However, such achievements remain incomplete or out of reach for some
hard-to-treat cancers, such as pancreatic cancer or triple-negative
breast cancer. Chondrosarcoma is resistant to conventional radiation
therapy and to chemotherapy. Innovative approaches focusing on those
challenging cancer models are therefore highly expected. There is now
wide acknowledgment that tumors are generally heterogeneous and that
cancer treatment failure, relapse or metastasis may be related a small
population of stem-like cells that are capable of self-renewing and of
causing the different lineage of cancer cells comprising a tumor. These
cancer stem cells (CSCs) are more radio-resistant than their non-CSC
counterparts and have a distinct molecular signature. CSCs and
differentiated cancer cells seem to coexist in a dynamic equilibrium
influenced by the micro-environment and by specific micro-RNA expression
patterns. The development of new therapeutic strategies (such as
micro-RNA modulating strategies) that selectively target CSCs is
currently receiving increasing attention. Particle radiation therapy
(such as carbon-ion therapy) is effective at treating various
radioresistant tumors and has already achieved promising results.
Approaches combining high-LET radiation therapy and targeted-therapy have
been suggested for tumors with bad prognosis.We have described a new
molecular pathway in basal-like breast cells, resulting in the generation
of breast CSCs. Maintenance of the CSC phenotype required the
downregulation of miR-29 expression and the upregulation of Klf4
expression. Restoring miR-29 with mimic administration might therefore
improve breast cancer therapy efficiency by targeting CSCs. For those
reasons, we have evaluated the ability of several microRNA-modulating
treatments to reverse CSC phenotype in three experimental in vitro models
(pancreatic cancer, chondrosarcoma, triple-negative breast cancer), in
combination with exposure spread-out Bragg peak (SOBP) carbon-ion beam
(at the HIMAC medical accelerator). In triple-negative breast cells,
miR-29 mimic administration increased radiation-induced cell death and
decreased the proportion of CSCs. We identified several other microRNA
mimic treatments capable of improving carbon-ion therapy efficiency by
targeting radioresistant CSCs in those experimental models.


