Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Programmed cell death ligand 1 expression in resected colorectal
adenocarcinomas: association with micrometastasis.


Background: Programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) and its ligand (PD-L1) are key
suppressors of the cytotoxic immune response. PD-L1 expression on tumor
cells may be induced by the immune microenvironment, resulting in immune
escape, and an adverse prognosis in many malignancies. In colorectal
carcinoma the response to PD-1/PD-L1 inhibition is correlated with
microsatellite instability. However, little is known about the
clinicopathologic, molecular, and prognostic characteristics of
colorectal carcinoma with PD-L1 expression.

In surgically resected colorectal adenocarcinoma, micrometastasis should
be crucial for recurrence, and micrometastasis may be related to PD-L1.
The aim of this study is to assess the PD-L1 expression and its
association with clinicopathologic manifestations.

Methods: PD-L1 expression was evaluated in 176 resected colorectal
adenocarcinomas using tissue microarrays. Immunohistochemical staining
was performed to evaluate the expression of PD-L1. The relationship of
clinicopathologic manifestations and PD-L1 expression in colorectal
cancer were evaluated by chi-squared test, Kaplan-Meier survival and Cox
regression test.

Results: High PD-L1 expression was present in 52.8% colorectal
adenocarcinoma and was not related pathologic T or N stage. High PD-L1
expression was associated with decreased recurrence rate (p Results: High
PD-L1 expression was present in 52.8% colorectal adenocarcinoma and was
not related pathologic T or N stage. High PD-L1 expression was associated
with decreased recurrence rate (p < 0.001), better disease-free survival
(p Results: High PD-L1 expression was present in 52.8% colorectal
adenocarcinoma and was not related pathologic T or N stage. High PD-L1
expression was associated with decreased recurrence rate (p < 0.001),
better disease-free survival (p < 0.001). Cox regression analysis
revealed that pathologic N stage and High PD-L1 expression was an
independent prognostic factors of disease-free survival (p Results: High
PD-L1 expression was present in 52.8% colorectal adenocarcinoma and was
not related pathologic T or N stage. High PD-L1 expression was associated
with decreased recurrence rate (p < 0.001), better disease-free survival
(p < 0.001). Cox regression analysis revealed that pathologic N stage and
High PD-L1 expression was an independent prognostic factors of
disease-free survival (p < 0.001).

Conclusion: High PD-L1 expression is an independent prognostic factor,
such as pathologic stage in colorectal adenocarcinoma. PD-L1 expression
is independent prognostic factor, relating immune response to
micrometastasis and immune suppression by PD-L1 may not be effective in
micrometastasis of colorectal adenocarcinoma.

Key words: PD-L1, colon, cancer, immunology, micrometastasis


