Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT1 dependent interferon-related DNA damage resistance signature
(IRDS) as a survival mechanism in castrate resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC).


Using the organoid culture system and aggressive Pten/Tp53-null mouse
model (GEMM), we have previously shown that the prostate cancer cell
population harbors two classes of self-renewing luminal progenitors which
are resistant to in vivo castration and to androgen receptor (AR)
inhibitors (enzalutamide) ex vivo. Understanding signaling pathways
governing intrinsic survival/self-renewal ability of luminal progenitors
in castrate conditions can highlight pathways that play a role in
acquired drug resistance. To identify mechanisms of castration resistance
in luminal progenitors, we performed RNAseq analysis of luminal
progenitor organoids derived from wild-type(WT) and Pten/Tp53-null mice
(intact and castrated (two weeks), n=5; each). Gene enrichment analysis
identified key signaling pathways altered in luminal tumor organoids (AR
signaling, lipid metabolism, protein secretion, inflammation etc.) that
have also been described for FACS-purified human prostate luminal
(CD49flo) fraction. Interestingly, we found no difference in
transcriptional profiles of intact and castrated tumor organoids,
suggesting intrinsic survival ability of luminal progenitors upon
castration. Of note, we observed most significant enrichment of
STAT1-dependent IRDS in luminal progenitor tumor organoids relative to
wild type luminal organoids. IRDS comprises of a subset of STAT1-driven
genes that have been previously associated with survival of cancer cells
and with breast cancer therapy resistance. Our analysis of human prostate
cancer datasets revealed IRDS as a prognostic marker for progression in
the TCGA primary prostate cancer cohort (pUsing the organoid culture
system and aggressive Pten/Tp53-null mouse model (GEMM), we have
previously shown that the prostate cancer cell population harbors two
classes of self-renewing luminal progenitors which are resistant to in
vivo castration and to androgen receptor (AR) inhibitors (enzalutamide)
ex vivo. Understanding signaling pathways governing intrinsic
survival/self-renewal ability of luminal progenitors in castrate
conditions can highlight pathways that play a role in acquired drug
resistance. To identify mechanisms of castration resistance in luminal
progenitors, we performed RNAseq analysis of luminal progenitor organoids
derived from wild-type(WT) and Pten/Tp53-null mice (intact and castrated
(two weeks), n=5; each). Gene enrichment analysis identified key
signaling pathways altered in luminal tumor organoids (AR signaling,
lipid metabolism, protein secretion, inflammation etc.) that have also
been described for FACS-purified human prostate luminal (CD49flo)
fraction. Interestingly, we found no difference in transcriptional
profiles of intact and castrated tumor organoids, suggesting intrinsic
survival ability of luminal progenitors upon castration. Of note, we
observed most significant enrichment of STAT1-dependent IRDS in luminal
progenitor tumor organoids relative to wild type luminal organoids. IRDS
comprises of a subset of STAT1-driven genes that have been previously
associated with survival of cancer cells and with breast cancer therapy
resistance. Our analysis of human prostate cancer datasets revealed IRDS
as a prognostic marker for progression in the TCGA primary prostate
cancer cohort (p<0.05). Further, high IRDS-expressing CRPC samples (SU2C
dataset) were enriched for low AR signaling (r= -0.33, pUsing the
organoid culture system and aggressive Pten/Tp53-null mouse model (GEMM),
we have previously shown that the prostate cancer cell population harbors
two classes of self-renewing luminal progenitors which are resistant to
in vivo castration and to androgen receptor (AR) inhibitors
(enzalutamide) ex vivo. Understanding signaling pathways governing
intrinsic survival/self-renewal ability of luminal progenitors in
castrate conditions can highlight pathways that play a role in acquired
drug resistance. To identify mechanisms of castration resistance in
luminal progenitors, we performed RNAseq analysis of luminal progenitor
organoids derived from wild-type(WT) and Pten/Tp53-null mice (intact and
castrated (two weeks), n=5; each). Gene enrichment analysis identified
key signaling pathways altered in luminal tumor organoids (AR signaling,
lipid metabolism, protein secretion, inflammation etc.) that have also
been described for FACS-purified human prostate luminal (CD49flo)
fraction. Interestingly, we found no difference in transcriptional
profiles of intact and castrated tumor organoids, suggesting intrinsic
survival ability of luminal progenitors upon castration. Of note, we
observed most significant enrichment of STAT1-dependent IRDS in luminal
progenitor tumor organoids relative to wild type luminal organoids. IRDS
comprises of a subset of STAT1-driven genes that have been previously
associated with survival of cancer cells and with breast cancer therapy
resistance. Our analysis of human prostate cancer datasets revealed IRDS
as a prognostic marker for progression in the TCGA primary prostate
cancer cohort (p<0.05). Further, high IRDS-expressing CRPC samples (SU2C
dataset) were enriched for low AR signaling (r= -0.33, p< 0.05). CRPC
patients in IRDS-hi cohort showed enrichment for cancer stem cell
phenotype and for genes associated with drug resistance, Consistent with
the bioinformatics analysis real time PCR, immunofluorescence and western
blot analysis of ex-vivo organoid cultures of castration-resistant
Pten/Tp53-null tumor organoids showed higher protein expression of STAT1
and IRDS genes in luminal tumor organoids relative to luminal WT
organoids. In vivo, castrated prostate tumors showed higher STAT1 levels
than the intact tumors. Treatment with enzalutamide of luminal tumor
organoids resulted in time dependent increase in STAT1 expression. STAT1
KD in tumor organoids decreased number of progeny organoids in subsequent
generations suggesting either a direct or indirect effect upon
self-renewal. Overall, our initial findings suggest STAT1 dependent
signaling as a potential mechanism of androgen-independent survival in
prostate cancer.


