Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sigma-1 receptor control tumorigenic and stem cell-like phenotype
in human cancers.


Tumor-initiating stem-like cancer cells drive tumor progression,
metastasis and treatment failure. Understanding the pathways driving
self-renewal and expansion of cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) in human
cancers may provide actionable therapeutic targets for developing novel
treatment strategies. Metabolic reprogramming and mitochondrial
homeostasis are emerging as key features of CSCs. The sigma-1 receptor
(Sig-1R) is a ligand-activated chaperone protein localized at the
ER-mitochondria membrane and involved in inter-organelle signaling,
mitochondrial homeostasis and stress response. Sig-1R is up-regulated in
many human cancers, although its role in tumorigenesis is unclear. Here,
we examined the role of Sig-1R on survival and expansion of cancer cells
with stem-like properties using genetic knockdown and selective
pharmacological antagonists. Transient and stable depletion of Sig-1R
using small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs),
respectively, affected clonogenic and tumor-sphere forming capability of
prostate cancer cell lines. Cell proliferation and viability under
standard culture conditions were minimally affected. Selective high
affinity Sig-1R antagonists also suppressed clonogenicity and
tumor-sphere formation, reproducing the effects of genetic depletion.
Notably, stable Sig-1R knockdown with shRNAs drastically reduced
development of tumor xenografts in mice, indicating a reversal of
tumorigenic and stem-like properties upon depletion of Sig-1R. Sig-1R
knockdown impaired mitochondrial function with reduced mitochondrial
membrane potential (flow cytometry JC-1 assay) and respiratory capacity
(Seahorse Mito Stress assay). These effects were more evident under
metabolic stress induced by glucose starvation and were associated with
drastic changes in morphology and intracellular distribution of
mitochondria. Similar metabolic effects were seen with selective Sig-1R
antagonists. These findings indicate that Sig-1R sustains tumorigenic
properties by enhancing mitochondrial homeostasis and metabolic
adaptability of stem-like cancer cells ensuring their long-term survival
and self-renewal capability. Targeting the Sig-1R with selective
antagonists could be an innovative approach to cancer treatment capable
of preventing survival and expansion of tumor-initiating stem-like cancer
cells in human cancers.


