Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive characterization of the role of T-type calcium
channels in glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs) have been implicated in tumor resistance
to radio- and chemotherapy. Proliferation of GSCs reportedly requires
calcium influx through T-type calcium channels (Cav3.2). In this study we
investigated the expression, function, mechanism of action and
therapeutic targeting of Cav3.2 with the FDA approved and repurposed drug
Mibefradil in glioblastoma (GBM), and GSCs. We found that Cav3.2 is
highly expressed in the majority of human GBM specimens and all GCSs.
TCGA data analysis demonstrated that approximately 11% of GBM tumors have
upregulated Cav3.2 and that overexpression of Cav3.2 is associated with
worse prognosis. Furthermore, we demonstrated that Mibefradil inhibits
GSC growth and survival and sensitizes GSCs to Temozolomide (TMZ)
chemotherapy. Mibefradil inhibited hypoxia inducible factor HIF1a and
induced GSC differentiation. To investigate the mechanism of action of
Mibefradil, were performed proteomic and transcriptomic screenings of
Mibefradil-treated GSCs using reverse phase protein arrays and RNA-seq,
followed by functional rescue experiments. Inhibition of Cav3.2 with
Mibefradil significantly altered multiple cancer regulatory signaling
pathways and molecules as well as the transcription of oncogenes and
tumor suppressors. Among other, Mibefradil suppressed GSC growth through
inhibition of pro-survival pathways such as AKT/mTOR, whilst
simultaneously inducing apoptosis through upregulation of survivin, BAX
and cleavage of caspase 9 and PARP. Notably also, RNA-deep sequencing of
Mibefradil treated GSCs revealed an increase in expression of tumor
suppressors such as TNFRSF14 and HSD17B14 along with a decrease in the
expression of several oncogenes such as PDGFA, PDGFB and TGFB1. We also
assessed the therapeutic effects of Mibefradil, on established
GSC-derived xenografts. Oral administration of Mibefradil significantly
inhibited tumor growth, prolonged animal survival and sensitized tumors
to inhibition by TMZ and radiation. This study represents the first
comprehensive characterization of Cav3.2 in GBM and GSC. The data
establish Cav3.2 inhibition by the repurposed FDA-approved drug
Mibefradil as a new strategy for GBM therapy.


