Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Durable efficacy and anti-cancer immunity following intratumoral
administration of messenger RNAs encoding IL-36γ, IL-23 and OX40L.


Immunologic responses to cancer involve complex interactions of cells
within the tumor microenvironment (TME). These interactions are mediated
in part through co-stimulatory and inhibitory transmembrane proteins,
cytokines and chemokines. Direct intratumoral (ITu) administration of
messenger RNA results in synthesis of proteins that can prime and enhance
an anti-cancer immune response. Priming, expansion and migration of
anti-cancer T-cell clones may also result in a systemic or ‘abscopal’
response in distal lesions. There is mounting preclinical evidence that
OX40-OX40L signaling boosts anti-cancer immunity via co-stimulatory
activity on T-cells. We generated mRNA constructs encoding OX40L with
miR-122 binding sites that have been shown to suppress protein
translation in hepatocytes yet not within tumor cells. A single ITu
injection of OX40L mRNA, formulated in a lipid nanoparticle, resulted in
transfection of up to 25% of live tumor cells, predominantly cancer and
myeloid cells. OX40L protein persisted for 7 days after mRNA injection,
and a resulting increase in tumor T-cells was observed. Repeat dosing of
OX40L mRNA induced complete responses in a model that is sensitive to
immune-meditated therapies, such as anti-PD1/PD-L1 blockade, yet was
ineffective in a related model that might better represent an
immunologically barren or immunosuppressive TME. The OX40L-resistant
tumor model was also resistant to anti-PD1 treatment and was shown to
contain fewer infiltrating immune cells. As this model may represent a
subset of human cancers that do not respond well to checkpoint
inhibitors, it was used to test various mRNA constructs designed to
cooperatively harness components of both the innate and adaptive immune
systems in igniting a productive anti-cancer response. Both IL-36γ and
IL-23 have established roles in mediating immune responses in humans and
have been implicated in driving various inflammatory diseases. IL-36γ
activates innate immune cells and promotes Th1 responses, whereas IL-23
has been implicated in Th1/Th17 immunity as well as in the modulation of
antigen presenting cells. Repeated weekly intratumoral co-administration
of mRNAs encoding IL-23 and IL-36γ resulted in durable complete
responses in both anti-PD1-sensitive and -resistant tumors in a
synergistic fashion. A further modest improvement in outcomes was
observed when the IL-23/36γ mRNA doublet was co-administered with OX40L
mRNA. Further pharmacodynamic and mechanism of action studies with this
combination are underway. ITu injection of mRNA encoding combinations of
co-stimulatory proteins and cytokines represents a novel platform for
cancer immunotherapy, and may be able to induce responses in patient
tumors that are resistant to checkpoint inhibition. The co-formulated
combination of mRNAs encoding human OX40L, IL-23 and IL-36γ is planned
to enter clinical trials in 2017.


