Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancement of the anti-tumor activity of CEA TCB via combination
with checkpoint blockade by PD-L1 and interleukin-2 variant
immunocytokine.


Cancer immunotherapy represents a promising therapeutic approach to
extend the overall survival of cancer patients. However, several
mechanisms within the tumor microenvironment orchestrate the suppression
of host immune response requiring combination strategies to prolong the
durability of effect. Among suppressive pathways, up-regulation of PD-1
ligand (PD-L1) and its interaction with PD-1 receptor plays a key role in
suppression of T-cell activity, a mechanism also called adaptive immune
resistance. Therefore, approaches able to inhibit the tumor immune
suppressive mechanisms along with those expanding the frequency of
intra-tumor T-cells and enhancing/prolonging their functionality are
required.

CEA TCB (RG7802, RO6958688) is a novel T cell bispecific antibody
targeting carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) on tumor cells and CD3 on T
cells, currently being investigated as single agent and in combination
with atezolizumab in Phase 1/1b studies in patients with advanced and/or
metastatic CEA-expressing tumors (NCT02324257; NCT02650713). CEA TCB
treatment leads to increased intra-tumoral T cell infiltration and T-cell
activation along with up-regulation of PD-1/PD-L1 suppressive pathway.
Here we show that combination of CEA TCB with PD-L1 blocking antibody in
vitro enhances T cell activation as detected by increased CD3 signaling
and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Combination in vivo
performed in both stem cell humanized NOG mice (HSC mice engrafted with
MKN45) and fully immunocompetent human CEA transgenic C56BL/6 mice (hCEA
Tg mice engrafted with MC38-hCEA) demonstrated significantly improved
anti-tumor activity of combination as compared to activity of single
agents, yielding to increased number of tumor-free animals. Randomization
of animals that progressed to CEA TCB monotherapy revealed that
combination of CEA TCB with PD-L1 blocking antibody is required to
control tumor outgrowth, as tumors treated with corresponding monotherapy
arms progressed to treatment. Efficacy of CEA TCB was also potentiated
when administered in combination with a half-life-extended IL-2 variant
(untargeted (IgG-IL2v) or fibroblast-activating protein-targeted IL-2
variant (FAP-IL2v)), resulting in stronger tumor growth inhibition in
MKN45-bearing HSC mice or prolonged survival in PanCO2-hCEA-bearing hCEA
Tg C56BL/6 mice. Synergy likely reflects ability of IL2v to enhance
anti-tumor efficacy by increasing number of effector T cells in tumors.

In conclusion, CEA TCB treatment leads to intra-tumoral T cell
infiltration and T-cell activation. This is accompanied by up-regulation
of PD-1/PD-L1 suppressive pathway, which can be overcome by combination
therapy with a PD-L1 inhibitor. In vivo efficacy of CEA TCB is further
potentiated when administered in combination with immunotherapies that
increase the pool of available tumor-infiltrating effector cells.


