Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The farnesyltransferase inhibitor tipifarnib causes dramatic tumor
regression and increases survival in murine HrasG12V driven aggressive
thyroid cancers: Consequent adaptive and acquired resistance mechanisms
inform combination treatments with improved responses.


Of the three RAS oncoproteins, only HRAS is delocalized and functionally
inactivated by farnesyltransferase inhibition (FTI), an approach that has
yet to be exploited clinically. We treated a murine model of poorly
differentiated and anaplastic thyroid cancer
(Tpo-cre/HrasG12V/p53flox/flox; Hras;p53) with the FTI tipifarnib, and
observed sustained tumor regression and increased survival; however,
tumors eventually recurred. Following HRAS delocalization by tipifarnib
in vitro, ERK phosphorylation was only inhibited transiently in
HRAS-mutant cell lines, which was associated with increased GTP loading
of wild-type RAS proteins in the setting of RTK ligand stimulation. This
adaptive reactivation of RAS-MAPK signaling was abrogated by selective
RTK (i.e. EGFR, FGFR) inhibitors, or by MEK inhibitors. Importantly,
tipifarnib combined with the MEK inhibitor AZD6244 led to improved
responses in Hras;p53 mouse tumors, whereas combination with the
EGFR/FGFR inhibitors erlotinib and ponatinib did not, suggesting
heterogeneity of upstream inputs. In order to identify acquired
resistance mechanisms, tumor-bearing Hras;p53 mice were treated with
tipifarnib until resistance developed (6 months). Whole exome sequencing
of resistant tumors identified a truncating NF1 mutation and an
activating mutation in GNAS at high allelic frequency. Upon NF1 knockdown
in the human HRAS- mutant cell line C643, tipifarnib failed to inhibit
pERK in vitro and caused resistance to tipifarnib in xenografts. By
contrast, activating GNAS mutations transduced into Hras;p53 mouse tumor
cell lines produced tipifarnib-resistant xenografts that activated the
GNAS-cAMP-CREB pathway and demonstrated signs of redifferentiation. These
data show that pharmacological targeting of RAS in a genetically
accurate, mouse model of a RAS-driven virulent cancer leads to objective
major responses and improved survival. We identified adaptive and
acquired resistance mechanisms, and show that combined treatment with
selective MEK inhibitors are beneficial. These data should also inform a
currently enrolling clinical trial of tipifarnib for HRAS-mutant
malignancies.


