Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGF2 is essential for tumor initiating cell activity in human
colorectal cancer.


A small fraction of all cells within individual tumours from colorectal
cancer (CRC) patients drives long term tumor growth and metastases in
immune-compromised mice. Targeting these tumor-initiating cells (TIC) may
improve the long-term outcome in advanced CRC. To identify candidate
genes which drive proliferation and survival of TIC, we have performed a
large scale high throughput loss of function shRNA screen in
three-dimensional TIC enriched patient spheroids. Spheroids were
transduced with the barcoded Cellecta decipher library comprising 27,500
shRNAs targeting 5043 genes associated with cell signaling pathways
(Module 1). Two weeks later, cells were harvested for DNA isolation,
barcode amplification and high-throughput barcode sequencing. Amongst
others, we found 5/6 shRNAs targeting Insulin growth factor 2 (IGF2)
scoring within a 20% depletion threshold, presenting depletion levels
very similar to positive control shRNAs. mRNA expression profiling and
qPCR analyses demonstrated low to moderate expression of the IGF2 gene
product in the majority of patient spheroid cultures analyzed (n=17). In
contrast, two out of 15 patient derived spheroid cultures analyzed
demonstrated very pronounced IGF2 overexpression (>250 fold). Integrative
SCNA profiling, expression and TAD profiling using the CESAM algorithm,
followed by 4C Seq, demonstrated a tandem duplication of the IGF2 locus
in these two patients which interrupts a IGF2 adjacent TAD boundary and
results in de novo contact domain formation between the IGF2 promoter and
a normally hidden distant super-enhancer. A dual luciferase reporter
assay revealed that the hijacked enhancer is functionally active in human
CRC cells and thereby may drive unphysiological IGF2 expression following
enhancer hijacking. To assess the functional relevance of IGF2 tandem
duplications, spheroids were transduced with RFP expressing lentiviral
vectors encoding for 3 shRNAs targeting IGF2 as well as control shRNAs
targeting EIF3A or scrambled shRNA. Strikingly, IGF2 knockdown led to a
marked reduction of RFP+ cells in competitive proliferation assays and
markedly reduced viability assessed by ATPlight assay. Moreover, IGF2
knockdown strongly reduced tumor formation following xenotransplantation
into immune deficient NSG mice. These data demonstrate that IGF2 is
required for survival, proliferation and tumor-initiation of primary
human TIC enriched spheroids. Notably, oncogenic miRNA-483 is encoded
within intron 8 of IGF2, however, its function in IGF2 locus tandem
duplicated cells remains elusive. Understanding the mechanisms of IGF2
dependency and the role of miRNA-483 in this context will be essential
for the future development of therapeutic approaches targeting IGF2
expression in this patient subset harbouring tandem-duplications of the
IGF2 locus.


