Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous detection of activating somatic DNA mutations and
expressed fusion transcripts from lung tumor FFPE samples.


Worldwide, lung cancer is the most commonly diagnosed form of cancer with
a survival rate among the lowest. Combined, somatic mutations (in the
form of SNVs and InDels) and gene fusions, account for the majority of
interpretable and actionable genomic alterations. Importantly, this
typically requires the analysis of DNA and RNA from limited amounts of
FFPE-preserved specimens. Currently, these analyses typically require
complex sample pre-processing for assay on separate platforms or separate
complex library preparation methods for assessment by high throughput
sequencing. To provide a unified and simpler alternative, NanoString’s
molecular barcoding technology has been modularized to permit
simultaneous digital measurement of cancer-relevant targets that span
these two analyte classes. Novel ‘SNV’ probes enable sensitive and
specific identification of DNA mutant allele sequences down to a level of
detection of ≤ 5% from 5 ng of FFPE-extracted genomic DNA. Fusion
transcripts are detected with 5’/3’ imbalance probes and
toehold-mediated junction probes. This dual analyte workflow requires
just a single 5-10 micron section of FFPE tissue and provides to
sample-to-answer results with approximately 5 minutes of hands-on time
per sample after nucleic acid extraction.

To demonstrate utility, 37 lung cancer samples were assayed
simultaneously with an SNV panel that targets >100 solid tumor somatic
mutations and a lung cancer fusion gene panel that provides general
evidence of ALK, RET, and ROS1 gene fusion events along with specific
detection of 35 unique fusion transcripts that correspond to known
break-points. In this particular cohort, 16 samples were positive for
activating KRAS SNVs (one of which was also positive for an activating
STK11 variant), 3 were positive for activating EGFR mutations including
two SNVs and an 18-base InDel and one was positive for an activating
KIF5B16:RET12 fusion transcript. Positive mutation calls obtained with
the SNV panel could only be confirmed by whole-exome sequencing (average
depth of 100X) for 13 of 20 variants detected; however, ultra-deep
(average depth of 4400X) targeted sequencing revealed that the 7
additional panel-detected mutations were, in fact, present. Measured
against the sequencing datasets, the SNV panel provided 100% sensitivity,
specificity, accuracy and precision for all variants present at 5% or
greater allele frequency. The KIF5B16:RET12 fusion event was also
confirmed by sequencing. Combined, these results show that these two
important classes of activating mutations can be readily and efficiently
assayed together on a NanoString nCounter® system (for research use
only).


