Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel immune oncology strategy for targeted cytotoxic lymphocyte
activation.


High-dose interleukin 2 (IL2) therapy was the first FDA-approved
immunotherapy, and still has an exceptionally high true long-term cure
rate for metastatic cancer. However, IL2 therapy has fallen out of favor
due to systemic toxicity and off-target side effects. We have recently
described a novel fusion cytokine comprised of a mutant form of IL2 with
inhibited α-receptor binding and an NKG2D-binding viral decoy protein
called Orthopox Major Histocompatibility Complex Class I-like Protein
(OMCP). Unlike wild-type IL2, our fusion cytokine (OMCP-mutIL2) binds to
and activates only NKG2D expressing cytotoxic lymphocytes. This targeted
IL2 activity results in superior efficacy and decreased toxicity over
wild-type IL2 therapy. Here, we present data which further establishes
the superior efficacy of OMCP-mutIL2 therapy as measured by biomarkers
such as systemic cytokine production and tumor lymphocyte infiltration.
Additionally, we present data which evaluates OMCP-mutIL2 therapy as a
potentiator of PD1 checkpoint inhibitor therapy.

To evaluate tumor lymphocyte infiltration mice with established Lewis
Lung Carcinoma (LLC) flank tumors were treated for three days with either
saline, wild type IL2, or OMCP-mutIL2 and tumor infiltrating lymphocytes
evaluated flow cytometrically.

A trend for increased tumor infiltrating NK cells was evident for both
IL2 and OMCP-mutIL2 treated groups over saline controls, and OMCP-mutIL2
tended to increase tumor infiltrating CD8+ T cells over either IL2 or
saline controls was evident as well. Additionally, tumor infiltrating
CD8+ T cells in IL2-treated mice had a higher level of exhaustion over
OMCP-mutIL2 treated mice as measured by PD-1 expression. Tumor
infiltrating CD4+ T cells also showed a trend toward a Foxp3 regulatory
phenotype in IL2 treated mice over OMCP-mutIL2. To study cytokine serum
profile mice were treated with high dose OMCP-mutIL2 with or without NK
depletion and serum cytokine levels measured by cytometric bead array.
Serum cytokine analysis of mice treated with supra-therapeutic doses of
OMCP-mutIL2 did not reveal an increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines
TNF-α, IFN-γ, and IL-6. A significant increase in serum levels of G-CSF
was evident in NK cell sufficient mice treated with OMCP-mutIL2.
Combination immunotherapy was initiated by the addition of PD-1 blockade
(clone RMPI-14) to OMCP-mutIL2 therapy in a lung LLC tumor model.
Combination therapy led to near complete control of LLC growth in the
lung compared to OMCP-mutIL2 or PD-1 blockade alone.

The data presented here suggest that in addition to our previously
published data suggesting increased safety of OMCP-mutIL2 over high-dose
IL2 therapy, OMCP-mutIL2 therapy may be functionally superior to classic
high-dose IL2 therapy. Continued development of OMCP-mutIL2 is ongoing.


