Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule inhibitors of SHMT1/2 validate serine metabolism as
a target in the treatment of c-Myc positive solid tumors.


Many oncogenes modulate metabolic pathways and altered metabolism is one
of the hallmarks of cancer. In order to sustain proliferation, cell
growth and adopt to a very specific tumor microenvironment, cancer cells
have to undergo metabolic reprogramming. Increased uptake of glucose,
consumed in anaerobic manner, allows to maintain essential bioenergetic
and biosynthetic pathways. Various reports indicated that many cancers
cells are crucially dependent on serine, which could be either imported
or synthesized by the serine synthesis pathway (SSP) branched from
glycolysis. Serine can be converted to glycine by Serine
Hydroxymethyltransferases isoforms 1 and 2 (SHMT1/2), which provide also
carbon for the folate cycle. There is a growing interest in targeting SSP
and SHMT1/2 have been proposed as druggable targets for the treatment of
various cancers. One of the major challenges is validation of these
concepts by high quality pharmacological and genetic tools, particularly
in the context of high tumor heterogeneity, artificial tissue culture
conditions and many branching points of tumor metabolism, which
eventually result in acquired resistance. We have identified and
characterized a series of sub micromolar dual SHMT1/2 inhibitors.
Affinity of these compounds to protein targets has been confirmed in
biochemical and binding assays and further corroborated by X-ray
crystallography studies. In order to confirm efficacy of these compounds
in cancer cells, both sensitive and resistant cells to the inhibition of
SSP have been identified by using conditioned serine and glycine depleted
media. Moreover functional roles of both paralogs: SHMT1, which fuels
cytoplasmic folate cycle and SHMT2, which is responsible for the
mitochondrial branch, were further confirmed by gene knockdown studies.
Cell lines resistant to depletion of serine in cell culture media were
characterized by elevated levels of proteins involved in the synthesis of
serine, namely PHGDH, PSAT1, SHMT2, c-Myc amplification and increased 13C
flux from glucose to serine and glycine. Metabolic flux analysis further
indicated that treatment with presented SHMT1/2 inhibitors effectively
blocked the production of glycine from glucose and serine in cancer
cells. Viability studies confirmed anti-cancer efficacy of SHMT1/2
inhibitors at concentrations consistent with metabolic flux studies in
the same cells. Moreover rescue experiments with media supplemented with
glycine and formate, which is a crucial intermediate between
mitochondrial and cytoplasmic branches of folate cycle, were sufficient
to reduce activity of SHMT1/2 inhibitors. Finally synergistic studies
with antifolates provided an insight how efficacy of SHMT1/2 could be
exploited therapeutically also in rational combinations with approved
drugs.


