Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular imaging of human esophageal cancer for early detection.


Esophageal cancer was the sixth common cancer for incidence and ranks
fourth for death rate in China, and squamous cell carcinoma is the main
histological type. It is usually in an advanced stage at the time of
diagnosis, resulting in an overall 5-year survival rate of Esophageal
cancer was the sixth common cancer for incidence and ranks fourth for
death rate in China, and squamous cell carcinoma is the main histological
type. It is usually in an advanced stage at the time of diagnosis,
resulting in an overall 5-year survival rate of <15%. Early detection can
lead to an improvement in patient outcomes but is limited by nonspecific
contrast mechanisms. As all we know, antibody and peptides establish a
biological basis for image contrast, which could achieve sufficient
target-to-background ratio for in vivo detection. In this paper, an EGFR
antibody (Cetuximab) conjugated with an NIR dye (NIRDye800) was used for
early detection of esophageal cancer. We demonstrated our technology
could identify esophageal cancer in small size (Esophageal cancer was the
sixth common cancer for incidence and ranks fourth for death rate in
China, and squamous cell carcinoma is the main histological type. It is
usually in an advanced stage at the time of diagnosis, resulting in an
overall 5-year survival rate of <15%. Early detection can lead to an
improvement in patient outcomes but is limited by nonspecific contrast
mechanisms. As all we know, antibody and peptides establish a biological
basis for image contrast, which could achieve sufficient
target-to-background ratio for in vivo detection. In this paper, an EGFR
antibody (Cetuximab) conjugated with an NIR dye (NIRDye800) was used for
early detection of esophageal cancer. We demonstrated our technology
could identify esophageal cancer in small size (<1 mm) and high-grade
dysplasia from low-grade dysplasia. And 4.2-fold greater fluorescence
intensity for esophageal cancer compared with surrounding normal
esophageal tissues. No toxicity was observed in our experiments. The
result indicated that this targeted, antibody-based imaging agents have
great potential in early detection of esophageal cancer and other
epidermal cancer.


