Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel 5-fluorouracil-thymoquinone hybrid kills colon cancer stem
cells.


Objectives: Recently, it has been shown that a subset population of
cancer cells in a tumor, the so-called cancer stem cells (CSCs), majorly
contributes to chemoresistance and the ability of a tumor to form
recurrences and metastases. Since the response to the standard
chemotherapeutic drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in patients with colorectal
cancer (CRC) leads only to an inadequate response, we aimed to synthesize
new hybrid molecules by combining 5-FU with the plant-derived drug
thymoquinone (TQ). Methods: The cytotoxic effect of hybrids, the single
drugs and the combination was investigated by crystal violet assays.
HCT116, HT29 and 5-FU-resistant colorectal tumor cells were used to
assess the spheroid forming capability after treatment with different
concentrations of the hybrid and the single drugs by staining with the
fluorescent stem cell marker CDy1 and Hoechst 3324 after 21 days of
incubation. Western Blot analysis for stem cell surface marker CD133 were
performed to verify these results. We have analyzed the anticancer
effects of the single drugs TQ and 5-FU and the most effective hybrid on
deregulation of cancer signaling pathways utilizing the NANOSTRING cancer
pathway panel. In addition, we performed a single cell cloning from
spheroids to generate monoclonal cell lines with enriched CSC
populations. In vivo effects were studied in the chick chorioallantoic
membrane (CAM) assay and in mouse xenografts. Results: The 5FU-TQ hybrid
has an increased cytotoxic effect towards CRC cells when compared to
single drug treatments. The spheroid formation assay revealed the
capability of the hybrid to reduce sphere number and size at fairly low
concentrations (10, 20 µM), however at 50 µM there was a complete
suppression of spheroid growth. NANOSTRING analysis showed that gene
expression of main components of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway was
significantly down-regulated after treatment with all drugs but most
prominently with the new hybrid. After data processing we found that
AKT3, IGF1, COL11A1, FGF10, GNG7, EPO genes were downregulated in
hybrid-treated cells, while CDKN1A, BAX, JUN, MDM2, FAS were upregulated.
This was verified via Western Blotting for a panel of markers. Next, we
investigated the effectiveness of the hybrid to kill clones having an
enriched CSC population. Indeed, CD133 protein levels were significantly
decreased in hybrid-treated clones. Histological analysis of in vivo CAM
grafts showed that HCT116 control cells developed a well vascularized
tumor mass whereas HCT116 cells that were treated with the hybrid showed
no more vital tumor cells, but extended areas of necrosis, calcification,
and desmoplasia. In vivo mouse xenografts verified the potential of this
hybrid as an antitumor agent reducing tumor volume significantly.
Conclusion: Our findings strongly suggest that the newly synthesized
5-FU-TQ hybrid might become a promising anticancer drug by directly
targeting CSCs.


