Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro induced regulatory T cells for understanding the nature
of peripherally induced regulatory cells in relation to cell mediated
immunotherapy for cancer.


Background: pTregs are appearing to be one of the major obstacles of
cellular immunotherapy of cancer. Tumor specific in vivo induced
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) are rapidly eliminated with concomitant
expansion of pTreg cells. In human melanoma in ex vivo condition, tumor
antigen specific CTL generated with CD8+ cells persisted for months while
ex vivo induced CTL with whole PBL stimulated with Mart-127-35 A2 (tumor
antigen) pulsed autologousDC, died within three weeks. Whereas Influenza
(Flu 58-66) antigen specific CTL continued to expand and remained
functional beyond four weeks.

Method: Peripheral blood and tumors were obtained from patients diagnosed
with metastatic melanoma after informed consent. Blood derived dendritic
cells, PBL, CD4+ and CD8+ cells were isolated for in vitro co-cultures
with Mart-1 or Flu peptide pulsed autologous DC or autologous tumor
cells. CD8+ CTL response and CD4+ positive Treg responses were measured.
Freshly obtained tumor tissue derived lymphocytes (TIL) were also used
for the study.

Results: Our results show that CTL response against Flu survived longer
in culture with total PBL than CTL response against Mart-1 in identical
culture conditions. CTL response using autologous tumor cells with PBL in
culture lasted for a shorter duration but growth of Treg cells were
observed. Cytokine analysis with expanding Treg cells showed secretion of
IL-10 upon re-stimulation with autologous DC or anti-CD3 ab. Similarly,
CD4+ cells isolated from freshly obtained tumor tissue (TIL, representing
in vivo condition), suppressed T cell activation and secreted high amount
of IL-10 upon re-stimulation.

Conclusion: These findings suggested that in vitro induced iTreg from
cultures or pTreg from TILs (in vivo), work identical way, to negatively
regulate effector immune response by secreting IL-10. Further analysis
with iTregs for their use of metabolic pathways would be important to
identify the specific signaling molecules used by autologous (person
specific) pTregs , as target molecules, to block the expansion of such
pTregs for the better outcome for CTL mediated immunotherapy for cancer.


