Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C1orf116, a gene with unknown function, is a novel driver of
epithelial phenotype in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in human
cancer.


Metastatic prostate cancer is an incurable lethal disease and is the
cause of death for 28,000 men in the US annually. In order for a cancer
cell to metastasize from the primary tumor, it must move. In a critical
early event of metastasis, a rare population of cells in the primary
tumor undergoes a phenotype switch from a proliferating epithelial cell
to gaining the migratory capacity of a mesenchymal cell, a process,
termed epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). To identify previously
overlooked regulators of EMT, we undertook a multi-study gene expression
array analysis (15 published gene expression studies; 95 total samples; 6
cancer types) and identified C1orf116 as a candidate driver of the
epithelial phenotype in EMT across multiple cancer types.

Of note, C1orf116 is an unnamed gene of unknown function that is largely
uncharacterized in any setting, including in cancer biology or in EMT.

To substantiate its potential role in EMT, we queried the NCI-60 cell
line collection gene expression dataset and found that C1orf116 shared a
similar expression pattern with epithelial marker genes (ESRP1, ESRP2,
OVOL1, OVOL2) and a converse expression pattern to mesenchymal marker
genes (CDH2, SNAI2, VIM). Moreover, we found that C1orf116 expression is
decreased in metastatic prostate cancer tumors compared to localized
disease (Oncomine), suggesting the potential for clinical translation.

To specifically interrogate the role of C1orf116 in EMT, we utilized the
PC3 cell line, an in vitro model of prostate cancer EMT. We found that
C1orf 116 expression was higher in an epithelial PC3 cell line (PC3-epi)
compared to PC3 cells that had undergone a stable EMT (PC3-emt).
Moreover, shRNA-mediated knockdown of C1orf116 expression in PC3-epi
cells resulted in decreased gene expression of canonical epithelial
markers (OVOL1, ESRP1, CDH1) and elevated expression of standard
mesenchymal markers (CDH2, ZEB1, VIM), suggesting a role as a driver of
the epithelial phenotype.

Interestingly, the sole publication specifically studying C1orf116
describes it as Specifically Androgen Regulated Gene (SARG). The authors
demonstrate the presence of an androgen response element upstream of the
C1orf116 start site the in androgen-responsive prostate cancer cell line
LNCaP. Our data indicate a role for C1orf116 in the androgen
receptor-negative prostate cancer cell line PC3, suggesting a
non-androgen-mediated role for C1orf116 in prostate cancer.

In addition to elucidating its role in EMT, work is underway to
characterize the RNA and protein products of C1orf116. Alternative
splicing results in two transcripts of varying length that likely give
rise to at least two protein product sizes. RNA sequencing and mass
spectrometry will reveal transcript and protein identity and provide
insight into potential isoform switching regulating EMT and other
processes.


