Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The development of EGFR resistant mutation, T790M, in lung
adenocarcinoma is acquired through a specific cytosine deamination
mechanism.


EGFR resistant mutation, T790M, in lung adenocarcinoma is acquired
through a specific cytosine deamination mechanism.

Background: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation mutations
occur in 15% of lung adenocarcinomas. This leads to constitutive
activation of EGFR, which triggers multiple downstream survival and
proliferation pathways. Currently, EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)
are first line therapy for stage IV non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients with EGFR mutations. Despite initial significant response to
TKIs, most tumors develop resistance. The main mechanism of resistance
detected in 50-60% of cases is a cytosine to thymine (C>T) single
nucleotide transition mutation at position 2369. This causes a threonine
to methionine amino acid change at position 790 (i.e. T790M). Our data
suggests that the C>T mutation is an acquired event secondary to cytosine
deamination by Activation Induced Cytosine Deamination enzyme (AICDA).

Results: Single cell clones of lung adenocarcinoma cell line, PC9, were
treated with EGFR TKI. At baseline, these clones have EGFR exon 19
deletion but no evidence of T790M mutation by digital droplet PCR
(ddPCR). However, after treatment with a serial increasing dose of EGFR
TKI, T790M mutation was detected by ddPCR. Assessing whether cytosine
deamination enzymes were altered by this treatment, a significant
increase in AICDA expression was seen. Furthermore, recombinant AICDA
protein could deaminate cytosine at position 2369 in vitro. In addition,
using mass spectrometry and methylation specific primers, we determined
that cytosine at position 2369 is in fact methylated. This further
supports our hypothesis since 5-methyl cytosine is deaminated into
thymine directly. Since in germinal center B-lymphocytes, AICDA is
activated through a non-canonical NFkB mechanism, we assessed NFkB
pathway in PC9 cell line. RelB and p52 expression were significantly
increased after TKI treatment. In addition direct interaction between
RelB and AICDA promoter was confirmed by ChIP Assay. These findings were
also seen in a mouse PC9 xenograft model. Daily oral gavage of EGFR TKI
caused significant increase in the expression of RelB as well as AICDA.
Adding NFkB inhibitor twice weekly inhibited the expression of RelB and
AICDA. Finally, knocking down AICDA by shRNA prevented the development of
T790M mutation in PC9 cell lines after TKI exposure.

Conclusion: Our data suggest that the T790M mutation could be actively
acquired after TKI treatment through a cytosine deamination process by
AICDA. This would have significant implications for treatment with
targeted therapy. In fact, Imatinib resistance in CML and GIST tumors
have a similar C>T single nucleotide transition mutation.


