Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative platform for the reconstruction and modeling of
mechanically arrested single cells in the brain vasculature under spatial
constraint and shear stress.


During metastasis of breast cancer, tumor cells dissociate from the
primary tumor, disseminate through the vasculature, and colonize
secondary organs such as the brain, lungs, liver and bones. The
mechanical arrest of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in capillary beds is
an essential step in the metastatic cascade for the successful early
colonization of secondary organs. During mechanical arrest, tumor cells
are subjected to extreme physical stresses such as shear stress and
spatial constraint exerted by blood flow, as well as from compression by
the constricting capillary on the restricted cell. These mechanical
stresses may critically impact metastatic success. However, the precise
physical and mechanical response of the disseminated tumor cells at the
time of arrest in the vasculature to the forces of spatial constraint and
shear stress remain largely unknown. Here we present an integrative
platform that combines the use of a microfluidic device and computational
model as a tunable system to reliably reproduce the mechanical arrest of
single cells and quantitatively determine their physical response to
precisely controlled mechanical forces of shear stress and spatial
constraint. Using confocal microscopy and computational modeling, we
found that during mechanical arrest, single tumor cells undergo extreme
morphological deformations. Furthermore, the cell morphology is dependent
on the magnitude of shear stress applied; with magnitudes above 60Pa
inducing elongation, blebbing, and rupture of the cell membrane. Our
results demonstrate that our integrative platform is a viable model
system for the qualitative and quantitative study of physical cell
behavior precisely at the metastatic stage of mechanical arrest.
Particularly, our results highlight the direct influence of physical
forces on the restricted tumor cell, and suggest the importance of these
external cues as dynamic determinants of cellular processes and
ultimately of metastatic success. We anticipate our platform to be a
starting point for future studies seeking to understand the reciprocal
molecular and biophysical interplay imposed by mechanical forces at the
greatly understudied stage of mechanical arrest in metastasis.


