Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER3 mediates acquired resistance to cetuximab in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma.


Cetuximab, an EGFR monocloanal antibody, is used to treat in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Despite the clinical efficacy of
cetuximab, the majority of patients who do initially respond suffered
acquire resistance to cetuximab as severe side effect. To understand
mechanisms of acquired cetuximab resistance, we developed a model of
acquired resistance to cetuximab by exposing head and neck cancer cell
line Cal27 to increasing concentration of cetuximab and established
recetuximab-resistant (Cr) clones derived from the cetuximab sensitive
(Cp). Cetuximab-resistant (Cr) clones showed robustly overexpression on
the HER family receptors HER3. Cr clones also expressed upregulated EGFR,
HER2, and HER3 activation resulting in activation of PI3K/ATK and ERK
signaling. We also showed that Cr clones exhibited increased EGFR/HER3
dimerization. Treatment of cetuximab and siHER3 RNA reduced EGFR
activation in Cr clones and decreased robustly cell proliferation to
resensitize cells against cetuximab. Next, we examined lapatinib, a
tyrosine kinase inhibitor inhibiting HER3 on cetuximab-resistant clones.
Combined treatment of Cr clones with cetuximab and lapatinib lead to
potent anti-proliferative effects. Co-treatment with cetuximab and
lapatinib blocked EGFR, HER2 and HER3 activities and inhibited downstream
signaling pathways. Co-treatment with cetuximab and lapatinib resulted in
suppression of cell growth more effectively than each drug alone and
induced apoptotic cell death through mitochondrial ROS. Furthermore,
Co-treatment with cetuximab and lapatinib also leads to decreased tumor
growth in HNSCC tumor xenograft mouse model. These results showed the
upregulation of HER3 as one mechanism underlying resistance to cetuximab
in HNSCC, supporting further clinical treatment strategy for tumors
displaying acquired resistance to cetuximab.


