Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuropilin-1 mediates neutrophil elastase uptake and antigen
cross-presentation in breast cancer cells.


We previously showed that soluble neutrophil elastase (NE) is rapidly
taken up by tumor cells that lack endogenous NE expression, including
breast cancer (BrCa). NE uptake led to cross-presentation of PR1, an
NE-derived HLA-A2-restricted peptide that is an immunotherapeutic target
in hematologic malignancies. The mechanism of NE uptake, however, remains
unknown. Here, we demonstrated that NE internalization was temperature-
and time-sensitive, dose-saturation was observed, and uptake was
partially blocked by chlorpromazine (CPZ) and wortmannin, supporting a
receptor-mediated process and suggesting a role for clathrin- and
PI3K-dependent mechanisms. To identify a candidate NE receptor, we
performed mass spectrometry (MS) of proteins after anti-NE
co-immunoprecipitation of NE-pulsed MDA-MB-231 BrCa cells and we
identified neuropilin-1 (NRP1) as an NE co-associated protein. Binding of
NE to NRP1 was confirmed by ELISA, and peptide epitope mapping studies
indicated NE bound via it consensus sequence RRXR, which is also known to
bind the b1b2 domain of NRP1. NE bound to NRP1 with high affinity
(Kd=38.7 nM) as measured with biolayer interferometry. To confirm the
role of NRP1 in cellular uptake of NE, we transfected MDA-MB-231 BrCa
cells with siRNA or shRNA against NRP1 and showed that NRP1 knockdown
resulted in a 2-fold decrease in NE uptake as determined with flow
cytometry. Similarly, blocking with an NRP1-neutralizing antibody
decreased NE uptake by 60% vs. isotype control antibody, an effect that
was also observed in other breast cancer cell lines that expressed NRP1.
Conversely, transient expression of NRP1 in the NRP1-deficient T47D BrCa
cell line was sufficient to induce uptake of NE. Importantly, knockdown
of NRP1 expression in MDA-231 cells also prevented PR1 cross-presentation
as determined with the anti-PR1/HLA-A2 monoclonal antibody 8F4. This was
confirmed by the loss of susceptibility of NE-pulsed MDA-MB-231 cells to
lysis by PR1-specific cytotoxic T cells following knockdown of NRP1
expression. Our data support a novel function of NRP1 in the uptake and
cross-presentation of neutrophil-derived proteins by

non-hematopoietic cancer cells. Because 8F4 mediates killing of
PR1/HLA-A2+ leukemia and NRP1 is broadly expressed on many tumors, our
results suggest a role for immunotherapy strategies that target
NE-derived peptides on NRP1+ tumors.


