Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eribulin rapidly impairs TGF-β signaling.


Microtubule targeting agents (MTAs) continue to be valuable in treating
breast cancer. While decades of research have shown that these drugs
cause mitotic arrest in cells by suppressing the dynamic instability of
microtubules, recent evidence demonstrates that the ability of MTAs to
disrupt the microtubule-dependent transport of key signaling components
in interphase cells likely contributes to their anticancer actions. Cell
signaling messages are relayed by proteins that organize or scaffold
signaling hubs. These signaling nodes facilitate the complex organization
and coordination of multiple signaling partners. NEDD9 is a member of the
CAS scaffold family and it has been shown to coordinate TGF-β signaling,
a driver of oncogenesis and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
Ligand-mediated stimulation of TGF-β receptors leads to the activation
of downstream canonical and non-canonical signaling pathways. These
pathways collectively induce the expression of Snail and Slug, key
transcriptional-repressors that promote EMT. We tested the hypothesis
that a short-term treatment of breast cancer cells with eribulin or 3
other clinically relevant MTAs would differentially disrupt interphase
microtubules and alter TGF-β-dependent signaling. BT-549 cells were
treated for 2 h with concentrations of MTAs that are clinically relevant
and cause maximum disruption of the interphase microtubule network; 100
nM was used for the destabilizers, eribulin and vinorelbine and 1 µM was
used for the stabilizers, paclitaxel and ixabepilone. The results showed
that eribulin and vinorelbine significantly inhibited TGF-β- induced
expression of Snail and Slug. The microtubule stabilizers had no effect
on Snail and Slug expression following TGF-β stimulation. Further
studies evaluated whether NEDD9 contributes to the downregulation of
Snail and Slug. Co-immunoprecipitation and knockdown studies suggest that
eribulin impairs the ability of NEDD9 to scaffold TGF-β signaling
partners, thus inhibiting downstream transcriptional signaling.
Consistent with the ability of eribulin to reverse EMT in experimental
models within 7 days, this study begins to shed light on the mechanisms
underlying its action. Funding for this work was provided by Eisai Inc.


