Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low release of exosomal miR-663a from hypoxic tumor cells and poor
tumor response to neoadjuvant radiotherapy in rectal cancer patients.


Introduction: Hypoxia is an important hallmark of the tumor
microenvironment and contributes significantly to radiotherapy resistance
in solid tumors. Exosomes are nanosized vesicles actively released from
tumor cells, and recent studies support their central role in the
aggravated biology caused by tumor hypoxia through their miRNA cargo. In
this study, we aimed to characterize miRNAs of exosomes from hypoxic
colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines and investigate these miRNAs in
circulating exosomes from rectal cancer patients with poor response to
neoadjuvant radiotherapy.

Methods: Five CRC cell lines were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium
supplemented with 1% bovine serum albumin under normoxia (21% O2) or
hypoxia (0.2% O2) for 24 hours. Exosomes were isolated from conditioned
media by differential ultracentrifugation, and integrity and size were
determined by cryo-electron microscopy and NanoSight tracking analysis
and further characterized by Western blot and flow cytometry analyses. In
a prospective biomarker study, plasma samples were collected from 29
patients with rectal cancer at the time of diagnosis, and histologic
tumor response (tumor regression grade, TRG) to neoadjuvant radiotherapy
was evaluated. Exosomes were isolated from plasma using the miRCURY™
Exosome Isolation Kit (Exiqon). Expression profiling of exosomal miRNAs
of the CRC cell lines and the patients’ plasma samples was conducted
using the miRCURY LNA™ Universal RT microRNA PCR Human panel I
(Exiqon). Data normalization was performed based on global array mean.

Results: Normoxic and hypoxic CRC cells released vesicles, 30-150 nm in
size, that expressed proteins known to be enriched in exosomes (CD9,
CD63, CD81, Alix) and with absence of markers of the endoplasmic
reticulum (GRP78, Calnexin) and the Golgi apparatus (GM130). Exosomes
from the CRC cell lines harbored strong cell line-specific miRNA
profiles; however, when comparing the hypoxic cell lines collectively
with the normoxic counterparts, four exosomal miRNAs (miR-195-5p,
miR-423-3p, miR-622, miR-663a) were significantly down-regulated by
hypoxia. Of these, circulating exosomal miR-663a was lower (p = 0.033) in
rectal cancer patients with poor tumor response (TRG 2-3) to neoadjuvant
radiotherapy.

Conclusion: Vesicles released from CRC cell lines were characterized as
exosomes carrying miRNAs that were retrieved in the circulation of rectal
cancer patients, where low level of exosomal miR-663a at the time of
diagnosis was associated with poor tumor response to neoadjuvant
radiotherapy. These findings suggest that repressed release of miR-663a
from tumor cells into the circulation may be a marker of radiotherapy
resistance caused by tumor hypoxia. The results are currently under
validation in an independent patient cohort. Trial registration:
NCT01816607


