Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Artemisinins enhanced the antileukemic efficacy of BCL2 inhibitors.


More effective, less toxic treatments are needed to improve longevity and
quality of life for patients with acute leukemias. Artesunate (AS), the
current WHO-recommended drug for severe malaria, is a semi-synthetic
derivative of the natural compound Artemisinin. AS has broad
antineoplastic activity in vitro, and is well tolerated, inexpensive, and
can be parenterally or orally administered in humans. Both AS and a more
potent synthetic derivative, artemisinin-derived trioxane
diphenylphosphate dimer 838 (ART-838), substantially inhibited acute
leukemia growth in vivo and in vitro, at doses where normal CD34+
hematopoietic stem-progenitor cell clonogenicity was essentially
unaffected. Moreover, AS and ART-838 synergized with several current
antileukemic drugs (Fox et al, Oncotarget, 2015). To identify additional
potential antileukemic drug combinations, we screened for the growth
inhibitory effects of AS and ART-838 against 3 acute leukemia cell lines
co-treated with a panel of 122 antileukemic compounds (mainly emerging
antineoplastic drugs). Both AS and ART-838 showed synergistic or additive
growth inhibition with several compounds. Two BCL2 protein family
inhibitors demonstrated among the highest levels of synergy. One of
these, ABT-199 (venetoclax), was recently approved by the FDA for the
treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and received breakthrough
designation for acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Therefore, we decided to
further investigate the combination of ABT-199 with AS or ART-838.
Synergy between AS (or ART-838) and ABT-199 was confirmed across several
acute leukemia cell lines with varying sensitivities to each drug. Both
leukemia cell proliferation and survival were affected synergistically by
exposure to the combination of AS (or ART-838) plus ABT-199. Utilizing in
vivo imaging, we assessed changes in growth kinetics of tail
vein-injected acute leukemia cell lines and primary patient-derived
samples constitutively expressing luciferase in mice treated with AS,
ABT-199, or the combination. The combination of AS plus ABT-199 had the
greatest antileukemic effect. Based on these data, we propose that
Artemisinins plus BCL2 inhibitors comprise an antileukemic drug pair with
high potential for incorporation into acute leukemia therapeutic regimens.


