Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer resistance protein (ABCG2) and P-glycoprotein
(ABCB1) transport ibrutinib and may restrict its oral availability and
brain accumulation, whereas CYP3A4 limits ibrutinib oral availability.


Introduction: Ibrutinib (Imbruvica, PCI-32765) is an orally administered
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) approved by the FDA in 2014 for treatment
of B-cell malignancies. Ibrutinib is a confirmed irreversible inhibitor
of Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) with promising clinical activity and
tolerability in B-cell malignancies. Ibrutinib is converted into several
metabolites, primarily by CYP3A4. Its main metabolite, PCI45227, has an
inhibitory activity towards BTK approximately 10 times lower than its
parent compound. We investigated whether ibrutinib is a substrate for the
multidrug efflux transporters ABCG2 and ABCB1 and whether these
transporters influence oral availability and brain and other tissue
accumulation of ibrutinib.

Materials: We used in vitro transport assays to assess human (h)ABCB1-,
hABCG2- or murine (m)Abcg2-mediated transport of ibrutinib. To study the
single and

combined roles of Abcg2 and Abcb1a/1b in oral ibrutinib disposition, we
used appropriate knockout mouse strains. To assess the role of Cyp3a in
the bioavailability of ibrutinib we used knockout strains as well as
humanized CYP3A4 strains and measured the ibrutinib and PCI45227
concentrations at various time points.

Results: Ibrutinib was transported reasonably well by hABCB1 and mAbcg2,
but not by hABCG2 in vitro. Upon oral administration of ibrutinib,
Cyp3a-/-, Abcg2-/-, Abcb1a1b-/-, and Abcg2;Abcb1a1b-/- mice displayed an
increase of 9.8-, 1.3-, 1.6- and 1.1 fold in ibrutinib plasma AUC0-20min
compared to wild-type mice. At 20 min, preliminary data indicated that
the relative brain accumulation of ibrutinib was not significantly
altered for the Abcg2;Abcb1a/1b-/- mice compared to wild-type mice.

Conclusion: Abcg2 and Abcb1a/1b possibly restrict oral availability of
ibrutinib. Based on our (preliminary) data ibrutinib may not
substantially cross the blood-brain barrier. Cyp3a restricts the oral
availability of ibrutinib and therefore inhibition of this enzyme may be
of clinical importance for patients undergoing ibrutinib therapy.


