Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor exosomes lead to positive feedback in tumor associated
macrophages leading to increased invasion and metastasis.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients have the highest risk of
recurrence and metastasis. This is in part due to the infiltration of
macrophages into the tumor that promote growth, survival, invasion, and
therapy resistance through secretion of growth factors and cytokines. We
previously demonstrated the metastasis suppressor Raf Kinase Inhibitory
Protein (RKIP) regulates the number and phenotype of tumor-associated
macrophages (TAMs) by blocking CCL5. Although CCL5 protein is sufficient
to recruit pro-invasive TAMs, alone it does not robustly induce
expression of pro-invasive genes, nor does it lead to a pro-invasive
macrophage phenotype. We therefore tested whether exosome crosstalk
within the tumor microenvironment was responsible for transmitting a
pro-invasive phenotype between tumor cells and TAMs.

To determine the role of exosomes in macrophage phenotype, we programmed
naive M0 bone marrow derived macrophages (BMDMs) with conditioned media
(CM) from TNBC cells, CM depleted of exosomes, or tumor exosomes alone.
Only tumor exosome treatment increased levels of pro-invasive genes
MMP12, PGRN, and CCL7, while CM or CM depleted of exosomes did not. This
pro-invasive macrophage phenotype was lost if exosomes from non-invasive
(RKIP+) tumor cells were used or if tumor exosome secretion was
inhibited. We determined that RKIP regulated the pro-invasive phenotype
of macrophages in part through cytokine mRNA in exosomes. Levels of
pro-invasive mRNAs like CCL5 were drastically lower in exosomes from
RKIP+ cells compared to control. Additionally, exosomes from CCL5
over-expressing cells further increased the pro-invasive nature of
macrophages while those from tumor cells with CCL5 knocked out using
CRISPR not drive a pro-invasive phenotype. For in vivo validation, mice
were injected with exosome-depleted tumor cells or co-injected with
exosome-programmed BMDMs. These results indicate exosomes reprogram TAMs
to reflect increased invasiveness of the tumor cells, leading to positive
feedback onto the tumor cells to drive invasion and metastasis.


