Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral heterogeneity of renal cancer is related to
differences in drug response and development of therapy resistance.


Background:

Patients with advanced renal cell cancer (RCC) have a poor prognosis not
least because of resistance towards standard drugs (SoC). Recently,
pronounced intratumoral heterogeneity (ITH) in RCC was shown. We were
interested whether this ITH is a potential cause for treatment failure.
We developed a large panel of patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models from
RCC, including subsets of models from different regions of one individual
tumor. The PDX models were evaluated for response to SoC. To better
understand correlations between inter- and intratumoral heterogeneity and
treatment response, tumor models were panel sequenced and expression
profiled.

Methods:

Specimens from primary and metastatic RCCs were collected from consenting
patients and transplanted into mice. Tumor engraftment was monitored for
up to 4 months. Tumor sections were examined histopathologically to
assess concordance between patient tumor and model and were stained for
RCC specific markers (Pax2, Pax8, CD31, and RCC). Stable growing PDX were
treated with SoC (sunitinib, sorafenib, bevacizumab and everolimus).
Global gene expression was analyzed in primary tumors and PDX models
using microarrays (Affymetrix). In addition, sequence variations
(Illumina NGS cancer panel) and MET and TERT gene copy numbers were
analyzed in PDX models.

Results:

A panel of 34 RCC PDX models was established from more than 200 patient
samples. Among these, 13 models were derived from different tumor regions
of three advanced tumors.

Original patient tumor and PDX showed a very similar and characteristic
RCC histopathology. Inter- and intratumoral heterogeneity was preserved
for several passages.

We treated all PDX with standard targeted drugs and observed response
rates comparable to results from clinical trials. One out of 8 regions
obtained from one aggressive RCC clearly differentiated in regard to its
response to bevacizumab and sunitinib. Genomic analysis revealed that
this region has differences in global gene expression and sequence
variation pattern. Besides a common MET mutation an additional variation
in the HRAS gene was detected.

In the whole PDX set we found 34 sequence variations in 20 genes, e.g.
ATM, MET, TP53 and VHL and copy number variations in the MET locus.

Conclusion:

We have shown that PDX derived from distinct regions within one
individual tumor exhibit differences in targeted treatment response as
well as in genetic profile. These differences and their correlation to
their molecular heterogeneity is subject of ongoing investigations to
explain failure in treatment response.

The available panel of renal cancer PDX provides an excellent source for
translational research and for preclinical testing of new drug candidates.


