Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism based quality control (MBQC) for the four-herb Chinese
medicine formulation, PHY906(YIV-906) and other herbal products.


PHY906(YIV-906), a four-herb Chinese medicine formulation, is inspired by
an 1800 year-old Chinese formulation called Huang Qin Tang historically
used to treat gastrointestinal symptoms. PHY906 can increase the
anti-tumor activity of immunotherapy antibodies or chemotherapies while
promoting damaged intestinal tissue recovery. Several clinical studies
showed that PHY906 had potential to increase the therapeutic index of
cancer treatments (chemotherapy, radiation) by prolonging life and
improving patient quality of life. When in vivo activities of three
different clinical batches (number 6, 10, 11) of PHY906 and F (which is
commercial batch of Huang Qin Tang, HQT) was compared to their similarity
of chemical profiles, the two set results could not be completely
matched. For example, F had very different in vivo activities from
PHY906-10 but F clustered closely to PHY906-10 based on their chemical
profiles. This information concludes that chemical profile analysis
without excluding irrelevant chemicals is not sufficient to evaluate the
in vivo activities of a polychemcial mixture. Therefore, we included
another two biological platforms based on the in vivo mechanism of action
of PHY906 for the quality control. First, we tested the activity of
different batches of PHY906 and F on our signaling transduction activity
response (STAR) platform which including 18 luciferase reporter cell
lines and 2 enzymatic assays. The results of correlation analysis and
clustering analysis based on the results from STAR could be matched to in
vivo activities of different batches of PHY906 and F. Second, we tested
the effect of different batches of PHY906 and F on a set of genes which
based on our previous DNA array data in cell culture and the mechanism
action of PHY906. Again, the results of correlation analysis and
clustering analysis based on qRT-PCR could be matched to to in vivo
activities of PHY906 and F. In conclusion, the quality control of a
herbal product should be dependent on its usage. Appropriate biological
assays based on its mechanism action should be developed for QC for
particular usage. Chemical fingerprint has limitation unless irrelevant
chemicals had been filter out. Similarity index is only useful when
relevant information is used. Mechanism based quality control could be
used for other herbal products. This work was supported by grant
(1PO1CA154295-01A1) from National Cancer Institute (NCI), NIH, USA. Dr.
Yung-Chi Cheng is a fellow of National Foundation for Cancer Research
(NFCR), USA.


