Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumour DNA following decompression using
selfexpandable metallic stent.


Background: Decompression using selfexpandable metallic stent (SEMS) has
been reported to improve short-term outcomes in patients with malignant
large bowel obstruction (MLBO). However, some reports suggest that SEMS
worsen long-term survival. Conversely, trans-anal drainage tubes (TDT),
which are similar to the ileus tubes widely used in Japan for MLBO, have
had no reports suggesting reduced survival. SEMS worsen long-term
survival by compressing tumor continuously and induce tumor cell death
which can lead production of various types of mediator which could
negatively affect prognosis. In this study, we investigated tumor cell
death induced by decompression procedure by using circulating tumour DNA
(ctDNA).

Methods: Plasma samples were obtained before and 1, 3 and 7 days after
decompression. First, we purified circulating cell free DNA (ccfDNA) from
1 mL of plasma and measured the concentration using fluorometer. Second,
we measured mutated fragment of ccfDNA (circulating tumour DNA) which is
derived from tumor cell. Mutational analysis from the main tumour was
performed using Ion PGM™ Sequencer following library preparation with
Ampliseq CHPver.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each mutant fragment in
ccfDNA was quantified using digital PCR (QuantStudio 3D® digital PCR
system).

Results: We enrolled 30 patients (22 SEMS and 8 TDT). CcfDNA levels on
day7 was significantly increased in the SEMS group (before; 623ng/ml,
day7; 1455ng/ml, p=0.006) but TDT group. Sequencing result revealed that
the average number of mutation per tumor was 3.7 (e.g. APC, TP53, and
KRAS) out of 50 genes. Mutant fragments (ctDNA) were detected in the
ccfDNA in all cases. Mutant fragment also increased after decompression
in SEMS group(before; 6.2copies/μl, day3; 22.6copies/μl, p=0.03)but in
TDT group.

Conclusion: SEMS insertions increased plasma levels of not only ccfDNA
but also ctDNA in patients with MLBO. This indicated that SEMS would
induce massive cancer cell death. This tumor cell death can drain various
mediators, including DAMPs, into blood flow and may worsen prognosis of
patients with MLBO. Conversely, TDT may not induce massive tumor cell
death.


