Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo chemopreventive of pseudosemiglabrin via inhibition of
tumor angiogenesis and manipulation of hormones in estrogen-responsive
breast cancer.


Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed form of malignancy and the
second leading cause of death in Western women. Mortality and most of the
complications associated with breast cancer are due to metastasis
developing in regional lymph nodes and in distant organs, including bone,
lung, liver and brain. Chemopreventive is administration of chemical
agents to prevent the initiational and promotional events associated with
carcinogenesis. Some chemopreventive agents can prevent reaction or
attacking molecules by different ways, these agents can suppress growth
factors or signaling pathway. On this study we examined
(-)-Pseudosemiglabrin (SSG) a natural compound extracted from Tephrosia
apollinea on breast cancer cells and tumor vascularization in vitro and
in vivo. Hormone sensitive breast cancer cell MCF-7 was found subtitle
susceptible to SSG, it showed profound antitumorgeneis via inhibiting
breast cancer cell migration, invasion and colony formation in vitro
settings. In silico investigation of potential PARP inhibitor, SSG showed
high binding affinity comparable to Rucaparib (standard PARP inhibitor).
The natural compound significantly inhibited the sprouting of new blood
vessels in ex vivo rat aorta ring assay; the antiangiogenic efficacy is
perturbed by targeting VEGF expression and VEGFR phosphorylation. SSG
completely inhibited the onset of breast cancer in animals pretreated
with the compound. Molecular docking study showed that SSG binds to
active site of Aromatase (the enzyme responsible for a key step in the
biosynthesis of estrogens) with binding affinity better than standard
aromatase inhibitor (Arimidex), moreover the compound has inhibitory
activity against estrogen receptor in the breast cancer cells comparable
to Tamoxifen. Our findings reveal that (-)-Pseudosemiglabrin can
potentially be beneficial in preventing breast cancer in high-risk women
or it can be adjuvant therapy with standard chemotherapy or even can be
used for the treatment of women who have been diagnosed with breast
cancer.


