Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma: a clinicopathologic and
molecular study reveals novel genetic aberrations by targeted
next-generation sequencing.


Background: Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas (EMCs) are rare
mesenchymal neoplasms comprising approx. 3% of all soft tissue tumors.
EMCs arise mainly from the deep soft tissues of the extremities,
accompanied with high rates of recurrence and metastases. The molecular
hallmarks of EMCs are various cytogenetic NR4A3 rearrangements,
generating chimeric -NR4A3 proteins. The most common reciprocal
translocation t(9;22)(q22;q12), results in a fusion of the EWS
RNA-binding protein 1 gene (EWSR1) to the nuclear receptor subfamily 4,
group A, member 3 gene (NR4A3 or TEC; approximately 75% of cases).
Further cytogenetic t(9;17)(q22;q11) rearrangements involve TAF15 RNA
polymerase II, TATA box binding protein (TBP)-associated factor (TAF15;
approximately 15% of cases). The less frequent reciprocal translocations
t(9;15)(q22;q21) and t(9;3)(q22;q12), result in transcription factor 12
(TCF12)-NR4A3 and TRK-fused gene (TFG)-NR4A3 fusion proteins. Although
the oncogenic -NR4A3 fusion transcripts seem to have a crucial role in
EMC tumorigenesis and progression, the specific biological function and
the mechanism of action remain to be defined.

Methods: We characterized the cytogenetic rearrangements of 25
comprehensive EMC tumors by RT-PCR and/or fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). Next generation sequencing (NGS) was performed
(Illumina MiSeq platform) to reveal additional genetic alterations
besides the known chromosomal translocation. Therefore, a comprehensive
cancer panel was designed, comprising 27 cancer-related genes known to be
frequently mutated across various malignancies.

Results: Overall, fusion transcripts were detected in 22 of 25 samples
(88%). Sixteen were positive for the EWSR1-NR4A3 and six for the
TAF15-NR4A3 fusion gene. The t(9;15) and t(9;3) translocations, resulting
in TCF12-NR4A3 and TFG-NR4A3 fusion proteins were not identified in any
EMC case. In Addition, several known oncogenic mutations were detected
which have not been previously reported in EMC.

Conclusions: The combination of RT-PCR and FISH on paraffin-embedded
tissue is a sensitive and specific method for the molecular detection of
the pathogenic translocations to be applied in the differential diagnosis
of extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas. Our results emphasize that
cytogenetic NR4A3 rearrangements are the initiating events in the
pathogenesis of EMC. Furthermore, our results indicate the occurrence of
additional genetic aberrations providing a rational base for novel
targeted therapeutic approaches.


