Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Zebrafish as a model organism to study human pancreatic CSC's.


Zebrafish is establishing itself as a powerful animal model for
understanding human disease, including cancer. Xenotransplantation of
human cancer cells into zebrafish is becoming an attractive research
tools for studying cancer behaviour, both for established lines and
primary tumours, however, its utility as a model for cancer stem cells
(CSCs) is still in its infancy. In addition, only when the differences
between primary tumours and established cancer cell lines are minimized
will we be truly one step closer to developing biologically relevant
personalized medicine platforms for cancer. To address these two
limitations, we set out to achieve a deeper behavioral understanding of
pancreatic CSCs inside the zebrafish embryo. The main methodology of this
study was focused on the xenotransplantation of human primary pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells (185 scd line) into zebrafish embryos
using two different conditions: adherent cells (non-CSCs) vs
sphere-derived cells (CSCs). Marked with a lipophilic dye, cells were
injected into zebrafish embryos and incubated at 36ºC during 48h/72h to
assess the proliferation of the injected cells. Self-developed Matlab
software was used to analyze the intensity and area of the injected cells
in order to give a ‘proliferation ratio’. Results obtained indicated
that the sphere-derived cells proliferated and migrated at a higher rate
than adherent cells. This is likely due to the different CSC content
present between the two conditions tested: adherent pancreatic 185 cells
contain 1% CSCs versus the 15% enrichment of CSCs in sphere-derived 185
cells. Apart from the differential CSC content, we also hypothesize that
the 3D environment afforded by the yolk sac of the zebrafish embryo
additionally favors the expansion of CSCs. Importantly, similar results
were obtained with CSCs isolated via FACsorting, using autofluorescence
as a marker for CSCs. This work not only contributes to the behavioral
understanding of pancreatic CSCs using the zebrafish model organism but
more importantly concludes that 1) PDAC CSC proliferation and migration
can be studied in zebrafish, 2) the zebrafish model represents a
potentially powerful surrogate model for the study of PDAC CSC biology in
vivo, and 3) this model can potentially be adapted for to test
chemotherapeutics that specifically target PADC CSCs, the cell type
considered to be the most chemoresistant and tumorigenic in pancreatic
cancer.


