Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor activity of cisplatin is enhanced by PD-1 blockade in
preclinical models of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.


Rationale: Cisplatin, which remains the most commonly used systemic drug
for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), reduces numbers of
circulating immune cells. However, recent studies suggest that cisplatin
may enhance some aspects of anti-tumor immunity in the tumor
microenvironment. We previously found that cisplatin increases expression
of major histocompatibility (MHC) class I and programmed death ligand 1
(PD-L1) in HNSCC cell lines in vitro.

Methods: In the current study, we investigated other components of the
antigen processing machinery (APM) by flow cytometry following treatment
with cisplatin. Using the syngeneic mouse oral cancer 1 (MOC1) model of
HNSCC, we then investigated the effects of cisplatin and anti-PD-1
antibody, alone or in combination, on tumor growth and survival.

Results: Using three different HNSCC cell lines, we found that levels of
the APM components LMP2, ERp57 and calreticulin increased in all cell
lines treated with cisplatin, whereas TAP1/2 increased dramatically only
in one cisplatin-treated cell line with wildtype TP53 (UMSCC-74A). In
MOC1 tumor-bearing mice, tumor growth was partially delayed by treatment
with cisplatin and anti-PD-1 antibody alone and substantially delayed
when these agents were given in combination, with resultant increased
survival. Comparison of different treatment schedules suggested that
concurrent administration is more effective than giving cisplatin one day
prior to anti-PD-1 or giving anti-PD-1 one day prior to cisplatin.

Conclusions: Despite upregulating PD-L1 on tumor cells and decreasing
levels of circulating immune cells, cisplatin may enhance some aspects of
anti-tumor immunity in the tumor microenvironment. While no mice were
cured with concurrent cisplatin and anti-PD-1 antibody, tumor growth was
substantially delayed. These results suggest a rationale for combining
cisplatin and anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibodies, perhaps with radiation or
other therapies, in additional preclinical studies and clinical trials of
HNSCC.

Supported by NIDCD intramural project ZIA-DC-DC000090.


