Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapamycin suppresses ErbB2-overexpressing mammary tumors through
selective inhibition of luminal progenitor cells and tumor-initiating
cells.


Rapamycin is a potent inhibitor of the mTOR pathway and has demonstrated
anti-cancer properties in various cancer models. Although rapamycin was
reported to inhibit mammary carcinogenesis at multiple stages, including
initiation, invasion, and metastasis, the underlying mechanisms remain
unclear, especially in individual breast cancer subtypes. Specifically,
ErbB2/Her2 amplification occurs in approximately 25% of invasive human
breast cancers, and is characterized by Akt-mTOR pathway deregulation.
Recent reports also suggest that cancer stem cells (CSCs) play a critical
role in tumor development and metastasis. Therefore, we investigated the
efficacy of rapamycin in the prevention of mammary tumor development in
MMTV-ErbB2 transgenic mice by focusing on its effects on
CSCs/tumor-initiating cells (TICs). In this study, MMTV-ErbB2 mice were
inoculated with syngeneic 78617 cells, which are derived from MMTV-ErbB2
mammary tumors, followed by rapamycin treatment (1.5 mg/kg/day) for 12
days. We found that rapamycin elicited strong anti-tumorigenic effects on
the syngeneic tumors, as indicated by substantially reduced tumor volume
and weight. To determine the effect of rapamycin on mammary epithelial
cells (MECs) in premalignant tissues, MMTV-ErbB2 mice were treated with
low-dose rapamycin (1 mg/kg/day) between weeks 10 and 20 of age.
Rapamycin significantly inhibited mammary morphogenesis at 20 weeks of
age as compared to the control mice. As such, the branching density,
ductal elongation, and proliferative index of the mammary glands from the
rapamycin-treated mice were markedly decreased. Flow cytometric analysis
of primary MECs demonstrated that rapamycin selectively inhibited the
CD61highCD49fhigh subpopulation, which are enriched with luminal
progenitor cells and TICs. 3D culture of FACS-sorted MEC subpopulations
indicated that CD61highCD49fhigh cells are the major subpopulation that
gives rise to 3D colonies. We further demonstrated that rapamycin
significantly suppressed colony-forming cell (CFC) number and
primary/secondary sphere formation of primary MECs and spontaneous
MMTV-ErbB2 tumor cells, indicating rapamycin-induced inhibition of
mammary progenitor cells and CSC self-renewal, respectively. Furthermore,
molecular analysis of MECs demonstrated that rapamycin inhibited
signaling associated with ER, ErbB2, and mTOR. In particular, rapamycin
strikingly inhibited Wnt/β-catenin and TGFβ/Smad3 signaling. Taken
together, our results demonstrate that rapamycin-mediated prevention of
MMTV-ErbB2 mammary tumor development involves selective targeting of
mammary progenitor cells and potential TICs in the premalignant mammary
tissues through regulation of MEC stemness and multiple signaling
pathways, which contributes to its potent anti-tumor effects on
ErbB2-overexpressing breast cancer.


