Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical update on targeting KRAS wild-type colorectal cancer
with an EGFR-targeted monoclonal tri-body mixture, MM-151.


Within KRAS wild-type colorectal cancer (KRAS-wt CRC), standard of care
treatment includes EGFR-directed monoclonal antibodies (mAb) in
combination with an irinotecan-based chemotherapy regimen. While such
combinations have clinically established synergy, the underlying
mechanisms of synergy remain elusive, and resistance invariably develops
against either the EGFR-targeted therapy or irinotecan, leaving patients
with limited treatment options. MM-151 consists of three anti-EGFR IgG1
mAbs that bind simultaneously to non-overlapping epitopes on the EGFR
extracellular domain (ECD). Preclinical and clinical studies have
demonstrated that oligoclonal targeting of EGFR with MM-151 results in
blockade of the EGFR pathway via potent inhibition of ligand-driven
signal amplification and receptor downregulation. Critically, these
activities are uniquely maintained in the presence of high-affinity EGFR
ligands as well as mutations in the ECD of EGFR, both of which drive
resistance to cetuximab and panitumumab. Here, we tested the preclinical
hypothesis that comprehensive inhibition of the EGFR pathway by MM-151
leads to enhanced antitumor activity when combined with chemotherapy in
models of KRAS-wt CRC. In vitro studies to investigate the activity of
MM-151 in combination with SN-38, the active metabolite of irinotecan,
showed that MM-151 potentiates SN-38-induced cell death in KRAS-wt CRC
models. Treatment with MM-151 potently suppresses EGFR pathway activation
caused by SN-38, and the combination enhances stress and pro-apoptotic
signaling, leading to increased apoptosis. Notably, these synergistic
activities are maintained in the presence of two key mechanisms of
resistance to cetuximab: high-affinity ligands and EGFR ECD mutations.
Dose scheduling studies demonstrated that sustained treatment with MM-151
following transient SN-38 exposure - a hallmark of small molecule therapy
- partially overcomes the sub-optimal activity of chemotherapy alone.
Finally, data from in vivo xenograft and PDX studies strongly supports
the addition of MM-151 to irinotecan-based chemotherapy regimens for
KRAS-wt CRC. In summary, we present data supporting the hypothesis that
comprehensive antagonism of the EGFR pathway via oligoclonal targeting of
EGFR with MM-151 leads to antitumor activity when combined with
chemotherapy in preclinical KRAS-wt CRC models. The ability of MM-151 and
SN-38 to overcome both de novo and acquired mechanisms of resistance
within CRC models supports further clinical evaluation of this
combination in metastatic CRC patients.


