Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRXE-009-1 has pan-acting anticancer activity and potently
inhibits colony formation of prostate cancer epithelial cell explants.


Background: TRXE-009-1 is a novel small molecule from the super
benzopyran (SBP) drug family under development as an intravenous
cytotoxic agent. Cantrixil (TRXE-002-1), our lead SBP candidate targeting
ovarian cancer, recently achieved Investigational New Drug (IND) status
and is undergoing safety assessment in a multi-center Phase I clinical
trial. Our aim was to investigate pathways associated with response to
TRXE-009-1 and identify cancer types for clinical translation.

Methods: Eurofins Oncopanel240 with multiplex analysis and bioinformatic
assessment was used to identify cytotoxic and pathway response across a
panel of cancer types. Western blot and live cell imaging were used to
investigate protein levels and cell cycle progression.

Results: TRXE-009-1 demonstrated broad cytotoxic activity across a large
panel of cell lines and was particularly active against kidney (RCC),
liver (HCC), head and neck cancer, lung cancer, sarcoma, prostate cancer,
osteosarcoma, and neuroblastoma. Further, TRXE-009-1 combined
synergistically with two targeted agents used extensively in the clinical
treatment of RCC patients. Cleaved caspase 3/7 and G2/M arrest were
strongly associated with TRXE-009-1 activity. Live imaging confirmed G2/M
arrest and implicated cytoskeleton disruption in TRXE-009-1 induced cell
death. When compared to 43 reference oncology compounds, TRXE-009-1
clustered with a known epigenetic modifier. Additional analysis indicated
that, compared to the least sensitive lines, the most sensitive cancer
cell lines were more likely to be positive for LIN28B, a stemness marker
associated with aggressive cancers. This is in line with historical
studies suggesting that SBPs may preferentially target cancer-stem like
cells. Using a panel of prostate cancer epithelial explants in a colony
forming assay, we confirmed strong activity against colony-initiating
cells. Studies are current to confirm protein changes associated with SBP
activity and to further investigate the impact of TRXE-009-1 on the
cytoskeleton. In vivo studies previously established activity of
TRXE-009-1 against melanoma, prostate, and brain cancer and additional
studies are current to optimize the delivery formulation to be used in
preclinical safety studies prior to clinical progression.

Conclusion: Given that cancer stem-like cells are typically more
chemoresistant and are thought to support tumor recurrence, the activity
of TRXE-009-1 against this subpopulation of cancer cells makes it a
particularly promising candidate for further development.


