Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycogen accumulation in aggressive breast cancers during hypoxic
exposure.


Isolation of specific metabolic alterations in aggressive triple negative
and inflammatory breast cancers represents a compelling avenue for the
development of treatments for these diseases. The ability of cancer to
utilize diverse metabolic pathways to modulate increased survival and
proliferation is well established. Indeed, we have previously described a
series of metabolic adaptations in the triple negative inflammatory
breast cancer cell line SUM149 and demonstrated a role for the small
GTPase RhoC in the metabolic phenotype of the cell line.

In this work we seek to describe a survival mechanism for cancer cells
that are subjected to hypoxic environments. Hypoxic survival or growth is
often necessitated at the center of a growing tumor mass or if the tumor
is growing in the lymphatic system, as is often the case for inflammatory
breast cancers. Here we investigate the regulation of glycogen levels in
breast cancer and normal-like cell lines in atmospheric and 1% oxygen
environments. Reserves of glucose are typically stored in liver and
muscle cells as the polysaccharide glycogen. Elevated levels of glycogen
have previously been observed in various cancers, and recent studies have
implicated the importance of glycogen metabolism in promoting cancer cell
survival. We hypothesize that aggressive breast cancers utilize
modifications of the glycogen synthesis and degradation pathways to
provide nutritional flexibility as they proliferate and invade into
diverse environments. MCF10A, SUM149, and SUM190 cell lines demonstrate a
greater than 10-fold increase in glycogen accumulation when subjected to
hypoxic growth conditions. MDA-MB-231 cells also increase glycogen
storage, though at levels on the order of 2-3 times higher in hypoxia
when compared to normoxic growth. Conditioned media for all cell lines in
normoxic and hypoxic conditions were analyzed for glucose and lactate
levels to determine changes in metabolite consumption.

The data presented indicate an unexpected accumulation of glycogen in
response to hypoxic conditions. Studies to determine the mechanisms
through which these changes occur and why they are important for
continued survival and growth of the cancer cells are ongoing and will be
presented.


