Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the 8q24 colorectal cancer risk locus via
CRISPR/Cas9 scarless genome editing.


Colorectal Cancer (CRC) is one of the leading causes of mortality in the
US, being the third most common cancer among both men and women. While an
exact cause of CRC has not yet been elucidated, the existence of a clear
heritable genetic component has been established. With the recent surge
of data from Genome-Wide Association Studies, a handful of CRC-associated
loci have been identified, each containing numerous Single Nucleotide
Polymorphisms (SNPs). We hypothesize that among the ~25 loci associated
with increased risk for CRC, there are driver SNPs functioning to
contribute to initiation or progression of CRC development. It is
crucial, in order to enhance our understanding CRC tumorigenesis, to
extract these functional variants from the pool of associated SNPs and
validate their causative significance within the cell. To model these
functional SNPs, we have developed a novel “scarless” isolation
pipeline for selecting isogenic clones with the desired single-base edit
without selection markers following CRISPR-Cas9 mediated HDR. With this
pipeline, we have successfully modeled our first selected SNP, rs6983267,
from the 8q24 risk locus in HCT-116 cells, producing the heterozygous
genotype (G/T) from the parental homozygous risk (G/G) genotype.
Rs6983267 is located within a known c-Myc enhancer and has been shown to
exert risk-allele specific increase in enhancer activity. Oncogenic c-Myc
is known to play a significant role in CRC pathogenesis. In line with
previous studies, we observe a slight decrease in c-Myc expression in our
heterozygous clones compared to wildtype homozygous risk. Moreover, we
observe a preferential binding of the transcription factor in control of
c-Myc transcriptional regulation, TCF7L2, to the risk allele over the
reference allele while binding of proximal factors such as CTCF show no
allelic preference. Interestingly, we also see significant changes in
expression of target genes of the WNT signaling pathway. Dysregulation of
WNT is a hallmark characteristic of CRC. These changes indicate there is
indeed an effect of the risk allele of rs6983267 on overall WNT activity
in CRC cells due to increased binding of transcription factor TCF7L2.
This novel SNP editing pipeline provides a method to study precise
effects of single base changes located anywhere in the genome. Utilizing
it to model other risk SNPs will enable the enhancement of our current
understanding of GWAS-identified risk loci in CRC pathogenesis at the
molecular level.


