Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of BAP1, de-ubiquitination enzyme, in
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.


BACKGROUND: BRCA associated protein 1 (BAP1) was discovered as a protein
associated with the breast cancer susceptibility gene (BRCA), and genetic
mutations of BAP1 gene have recently been found in some malignant tumors,
such as melanoma, mesothelioma, and renal cell carcinoma. Since the
mutations of BAP1 gene resulted in loss of function of this protein and
were associated with poor prognoses of the malignancies, BAP1 is now
considered as a tumor-suppressor gene. Recent studies have shown that
BAP1 mutations were also observed in patients with intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma (IHCC), which is one of the most aggressive carcinoma
with poor prognoses. However, only a few studies have investigated the
role of BAP1 mutation on biological function of tumor cells and on
clinicopathological features of IHCC. PURPOSE: The purpose of this study
was to elucidate the association of BAP1 and IHCC. METHOD: The expression
of BAP1 was immunohistochemically analyzed in surgically resected IHCC
specimens, and the cases were classified into three groups based on the
result of immunostaining concentration; positive or weakly positive or
negative. The clinicopathological factors, such as the disease stage of
IHCC, curability and overall survival (OS), were compared among the
groups. In cell culture analyses, the expression of BAP1 in IHCC cell
lines (HuCC-T1 and TFK-1) was down-regulated by Zinc-finger nuclease
(ZFN) and siRNA in vitro. Then, cell-proliferation assay, migration
assay, invasion assay, and drug-susceptibility test were performed on
BAP1 down-regulated cells. RESULTS: The immunohistochemistry of BAP1 on
IHCC specimens showed that OS was not significantly changed among three
groups. However, the cases with lower expression of BAP1 including weakly
positive and negative tended to be advanced in disease stage compared
with cases with BAP1 positive. Interestingly, in the patients received
postoperative gemcitabine, a standard chemo-drug for cholangiocarcinoma,
cases with lower expression of BAP1 showed prolonged survival compared
with cases with BAP1 positive. In cell experiments, the knock-down of
BAP1 did not affect cell-proliferation of IHCC cells, however, it
promoted migration and invasion of IHCC cells. Furthermore, the
suppression of BAP1 enhanced chemosensitivity to gemcitabine.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggested that lower expression of BAP1 was
associates with the progression of IHCC and with enhanced
chemosensitivity to gemcitabine. BAP1 might be one of the target genes in
the treatment of IHCC.


