Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss and retention of mutations in cell culture model systems.


Although relevant, the genomic and proteomic alterations between original
tumor tissue and newly established cell lines are frequently
uncharacterized. In developing a novel cell model (Powder) of high grade
serous carcinoma (HGSC), we followed the status of clinically relevant
biomarkers to identify changes taking place between the tissue and
cultured cell population. Understanding these changes enables proper
utilization of new models and continued model optimization. Using a
validated panel, we analyzed 592 genes in the Powder cell model and tumor
from which it was derived, detecting several classes of genomic
alterations. This included point mutations, indels, copy number
variations, fusions, and variant transcripts. p53 mutation status of
Powder was matched to a panel of previously reported HGSC cell lines. We
further subdivided the panel by p53 protein expression level by
reanalyzing previously published reverse phase protein array (RPPA) data.
Significance of differential expression between groups was determined
with a Welch's t-test. A majority (14/21 or 67%) of the mutations
detected in the HGSC tumor were conserved in the Powder cell model. Two
additional mutations, undetected in the tumor, were found in the cell
model. The tumor exhibited moderate to strong diffuse positive p53
immunostaining, and p53 mutations were measured in 79% of alleles. While
the p53 mutation did not carry to the cell model, the cells were positive
for CK7 and PAX8, consistent with ovarian cancer cells. In the panel of
HGSC cell lines, we examined p53 mutation status and protein level,
identifying 3 groups: (1) p53-mut/high protein, (2) p53-mut/low protein
and (3) p53-WT/low protein. Powder identified with the p53-WT/low protein
group. Previous work identifies the p53-WT/low protein group of cell
models as part of a larger set of novel ovarian cell models with a
stem-like molecular profile and higher drug resistance. Analysis of
differential protein expression revealed upregulation in the p53 low
protein group of both normal cell cycle genes and of notable
cancer-related proteins. This included p21 and BAD, which are upregulated
in cells with functional p53, eIF4E, a candidate cancer therapeutic
target, and BOP1, which is disregulated in multiple solid cancers,
including ovarian. These results underscore the need for further
characterization of the Powder cell model to clarify its applications to
specific research questions. Continued examination of Powder and other
p53-WT cell models derived from HGSC tumors may uncover independent
pathways driving disease. Additionally, understanding which mutations are
underrepresented by cell models is necessary for ongoing methods
development.


