Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AX09: an immunotherapy candidate targeting the breast cancer stem
cell protein xCT.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive form of breast
cancer that lacks the estrogen, progesterone and HER2 receptors, and
accounts for 15-20% of all breast cancers in the US. The particularly
aggressive features of TNBC may be due to the enrichment of breast cancer
stem cells (BCSC). Due to their resistance to traditional radio- and
chemo-therapies, BCSC represent a reservoir for the relapse, metastatic
evolution and progression of the disease after treatment. Therefore,
successful eradication of BCSC represents a major barrier towards
effective cancer treatments.

The ability of BCSC to resist common cytotoxic therapies relies on
different mechanisms, including improved detoxification ability. The
cystine-glutamate antiporter protein xCT (SLC7A11) regulates cystine
intake, conversion to cysteine and subsequent glutathione synthesis,
protecting cells against oxidative and chemical insults via the p38MAPK
pathway. xCT expression is highly restricted to a few normal cell types
but is upregulated in a variety of breast cancer subtypes where its
expression correlates with poor prognosis. xCT is highly expressed in a
variety of solid tumor CSC including BCSC where it interacts with CD44
and plays a functional role in BCSC biology.

Agilvax has developed a novel immunotherapy candidate (AX09) based on our
virus-like-particle technology for the treatment and prevention of
metastatic breast cancer that targets the BCSC protein xCT. Immunization
with AX09 elicited a strong antibody response against xCT including high
levels of IgG2a antibody. Immune sera from AX09 mice bound to tumorsphere
derived BCSC and impacted BCSC function and biology in vitro. To assess
if AX09 immunization would decrease metastases, we employed a syngeneic
transplantation model, in which purified BCSC derived from TUBO cells
were injected into the tail vein of vaccinated female BALB/c mice.
Multiple independent experiments showed that immunization with AX09
conferred a significant reduction in the number of pulmonary metastases
compared to vaccination with control VLP alone. In a pilot study, BCSC
were transplanted into the mammary fat pad and mice were treated with
AX09 after primary tumors were 1.5 mm in diameter. Results indicate that
AX09 immunization conferred a reduction in lung metastases compared to
controls.

These data show that an active immunization approach targeting xCT can
significantly reduce metastatic progression in preclinical models.
Ongoing experiments are further characterizing therapeutic mechanisms and
evaluating efficacy of AX09 in combination with front line chemotherapy
and checkpoint inhibitors.


