Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel lncRNA-mediated YAP1 signaling pathway activation in
epithelial ovarian cancer.


Background: The long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) urothelial cancer associated
1 (UCA1) is upregulated in many cancer types, including ovarian cancer.
In high grade serous ovarian cancers (HGSOCs), we had previously found
that UCA1 expression negatively correlates with patients’ total
survival and disease-free survival and that UCA1 knockout significantly
impairs tumor growth in vivo. In addition, UCA1 promotes ovarian cancer
cell growth via activating the YAP1 signaling pathway.

Purpose: Our present study aims to dissect the molecular mechanisms
underlying YAP1 signaling activation by UCA1.

Methods: To characterize the UCA1 interactome, we utilized a modified in
vivo RNA antisense purification method (UCA1-iRAP). This UCA1-iRAP method
uses streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads to pull down biotin-labeled
antisense probes which are complementary to the target RNA. In such a
way, UCA1 RNA will be specifically enriched together with its in
vivo-associated proteins, RNAs and/or genomic DNA, which can be profiled
using mass spectrometry (MS) and next generation sequencing (NGS),
respectively.

Results: Using UCA1-iRAP RNA-Seq and UCA1-iRAP protein MS, we
comprehensively annotated the UCA1-interacting RNAs as well as
UCA1-associated proteins. Interestingly many of the proteins identified
were not known to have RNA-binding potential. Integration of NGS and MS
data with multilayered functional and molecular characterization of UCA1
knockout, knockdown and overexpression models identified a YAP1 modulator
involved in UCA1-mediated regulation of YAP1 signaling. Through
repressing this YAP1 modulator via direct RNA-protein interaction, UCA1
promotes nuclear translocation of YAP1, resulting in activation of YAP1
target genes expression.

Conclusions: Our analyses indicate, for the first time, that UCA1
promotes ovarian cancer cell growth by activating YAP1 signaling via
direct interaction with a YAP1 modulator. The interaction between UCA1
and this YAP1 modulator leads to activation of YAP1 signaling by nuclear
translocation of YAP1. In summary, we characterize a novel UCA1-YAP1
signaling axis active in HGSOCs and also reveal that oncogenic lncRNA’s
binding potential of cytoplasmic signaling proteins could be a common
mechanism of post-translational control of signaling pathways deregulated
in cancer.


