Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastatic and non-metastatic colorectal cancer cells
differentially regulate fibroblast cell cycle via extracellular vesicles.


Cancer-associated fibroblasts are critical to tumor progression. There
exists a dynamic crosstalk between cancer and stromal compartments, which
maintains a permissive tumor microenvironment. Extracellular vesicles
(EVs) play a significant role in this intercellular communication.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) cells can be categorized according to
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) status, and therefore metastatic
capacity. We aimed to investigate the effect of EMT on EV-mediated
cancer-fibroblast signaling.

CRC cell lines (DLD-1, HCT116, SW620 and SW480) were characterized by
western blotting to determine EMT status. EVs were isolated from
conditioned media by serial centrifugation and validated by transmission
electron microscopy, western blotting and nanoparticle tracking analysis.
Fluorescently labeled EVs and cells were detected and evaluated by flow
cytometry and fluorescence microscopy. Increasing concentrations of EVs
from CRC cells were co-cultured with fibroblasts for 24h.
Activation/inhibition of signaling pathways was examined by western
blotting. EV microRNA (miRNA) profiles were obtained, validated by qPCR
and submitted for target and pathway analysis.

DLD-1, HCT116 and SW620 cells express E-cadherin and are considered
epithelial, whereas SW480 lacks E-cadherin, expresses ZEB-1, and is
considered mesenchymal. EVs were spherical, enriched in ALIX, TSG101,
CD63 and had a mean diameter of 90nm. EVs from CRC cells were shown to
transfer directly to primary ex vivo patient-derived fibroblasts and
fibroblast cell lines. Transfer of EVs from epithelial CRC cells
abrogated ERK activity in fibroblasts, even at the lowest concentration,
and was associated with reduced fibroblast proliferation, whereas EVs
from mesenchymal cells had no effect. MiRNA profiling of EVs from
epithelial and mesenchymal CRC cells showed a 10-fold upregulation of
miR-143-3p in epithelial compared to mesenchymal EVs. MiRNA target
analysis and experimental validation show that miR-143-3p directly
targets KRAS and HRAS, providing a potential miRNA-orchestrated mechanism
of action for the downregulation of fibroblast ERK activity in the tumor
microenvironment.

Importantly, CRC cellular ERK activity is not reflected in fibroblasts
treated with CRC EVs, suggesting that EVs do not directly transmit ERK
protein or mRNA. However, miRNAs are the most stable EV cargo, and we
show that epithelial but not mesenchymal CRC EVs contain upregulated
miRNAs, which target critical components of the ERK pathway.
Downregulation of ERK activity has been shown to induce fibroblast
senescence, a phenotype linked to cancer progression. We hypothesize that
differential regulation occurs because epithelial CRC cells are
juxtaposed with fibroblasts in the tumor core, where senescent cancer
associated fibroblasts are frequently observed, whereas mesenchymal CRC
cells are at the invasive front or in the circulation.


