Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of mitochondrial DNA copy number variation in
peripheral blood leucocytes with risk and prognosis of gallbladder cancer.


Gallbladder Cancer (GBC) is the most common malignancy of the biliary
tract with very high incidence in Northern India, especially around
Gangetic belt. Late diagnosis and poor prognosis are the important
features of this disease. For improving treatment strategies and
outcomes, novel non invasive prognostic biomarkers are needed. Variations
in peripheral blood mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number in various
cancers are widely studied but information in relation to gallbladder
malignancy is unknown. In this pilot study, we investigated leucocytes
mtDNA copy number variation in relation to risk and prognosis of GBC.

A total of 300 histologically confirmed or fine needle aspiration
cytology proven GBC patients were recruited along with equal number of
age and sex matched controls. The mtDNA copy number was measured by
real-time polymerase chain reaction through absolute quantification using
SYBR green chemistry. We also explore prognostic utility of mtDNA content
in relation to overall survival of GBC patients. Statistical analysis was
done by Student’s test and survival data was compared using Kaplan
Meier method. Two tailed p value less than 0.05 was considered to be
significant.

We observed high mtDNA content in cases as compared with controls
(mean±standard deviation, 1.21±0.88 vs. 1.02±0.76). Higher mtDNA copy
number was significantly associated with increased gallbladder cancer
risk (p=0.005). In this study, we compared overall survival (OS) for
gallbladder cancer patients in relation to mtDNA copy number median value
(median, 1.12). Kaplan Meir survival curve predicts decrease in OS
(p=0.03, Hazard ratio=2.54; 95% CI = 1.79-5.86) for GBC patients in
relation to high mtDNA content (>median) as compared with low mtDNA copy
number (We observed high mtDNA content in cases as compared with controls
(mean±standard deviation, 1.21±0.88 vs. 1.02±0.76). Higher mtDNA copy
number was significantly associated with increased gallbladder cancer
risk (p=0.005). In this study, we compared overall survival (OS) for
gallbladder cancer patients in relation to mtDNA copy number median value
(median, 1.12). Kaplan Meir survival curve predicts decrease in OS
(p=0.03, Hazard ratio=2.54; 95% CI = 1.79-5.86) for GBC patients in
relation to high mtDNA content (>median) as compared with low mtDNA copy
number (<median).

This study supports an association between increased mtDNA copy number
with susceptibility to gallbladder cancer in this endemic belt. Future
studies are warranted to confirm these findings and to elucidate the
biological role of mtDNA copy number in relation to gallbladder cancer.


