Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TCIRG1, T-cell immune regulator 1, functions as a metastatic
enhancing gene in liver tumorigenesis.


Recurrence and metastasis are a major challenge in the management of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients after HCC resection. In order to
identify metastatic molecular signature, we performed comparative gene
expression profiling analysis with recurred HCC tissues from HCC patients
who underwent partial or total hepatectomy and non-metastatic primary
HCC. From this, we were able to recapitulate molecular signatures
associate with HCC recurrence, and found that TCIRG1 (T-Cell Immune
Regulator 1) was one of the aberrantly overexpressed gene elements in
recurred HCC patients with total hepatectomy. We then observed that
TCIRG1 is significantly overexpressed in TCGA-LIHC (Liver Hepatocellular
Carcinoma Dataset of The Cancer Genome Atlas), and high expression of
TCIRG1 was significantly associated with poor prognosis of HCC patients
in 5-year disease-free. TCIRG1 knockdown suppressed tumor cell growth and
proliferation in Huh7 and SNU475, liver cancer cell lines. From flow
cytometric analysis for cell cycle analysis and cell death, we observed
that TCIRG1 knockdown caused a significant increase of G1/S phase, and
also induced programmed cell death processing in liver cancer cells.
TCIRG1 knockdown also reduced the metastatic potential of HCC cells by
selectively regulating epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) regulatory
proteins, E-cadherin, N-cadherin, Vimentin, Fibronectin, Snail and Slug,
in liver cancer cells. In addition, sustained expression of TCIRG1 in
liver cancer cell line reduced tumor growth rate in mouse xenograft
model. Moreover, targeted-disruption of TCIRG1 significantly attenuated
the metastatic potential of ras-transformed NIH-3T3 cells in vitro and in
vivo. In conclusion, our findings suggest that TCIRG1 functions as
metastatic enhancing gene by modulating cellular growth, death, and EMT
in liver cancer cells providing TCIRG1 as a therapeutic target for the
treatment of liver malignancy and metastasis.


