Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of Vitamin D deficiency with breast cancer in
African-American and Hispanic women in south Los Angeles.


Background: Experimental evidence supports a protective role of Vitamin D
level in breast carcinogenesis, but epidemiologic evidence is
inconsistent. African Americans have high prevalence of Vitamin D
deficiency and the African American women with breast cancer have the
highest mortality rate. The aim of this study is to investigate the
association of Vitamin D levels with breast cancer risk and disease
progression in African American and Hispanic women.

Methods: This is a cases-control study of 660 African American and
Hispanic women with and without breast cancer in South Los Angeles. Blood
samples were collected prior cancer treatment and the serum
25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH) D was measured by Quest Diagnostics.
Information regarding BMI and clinical factors were obtained by medical
record abstraction. Logistic Regression with multivariate analysis was
used for determining the association of Vitamin D deficiency (Methods:
This is a cases-control study of 660 African American and Hispanic women
with and without breast cancer in South Los Angeles. Blood samples were
collected prior cancer treatment and the serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D
(25(OH) D was measured by Quest Diagnostics. Information regarding BMI
and clinical factors were obtained by medical record abstraction.
Logistic Regression with multivariate analysis was used for determining
the association of Vitamin D deficiency (<20ng/ml) with breast cancer.
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Cox Regression with multivariate
analysis were used to assess disease-free survival and the relative risk
of disease progression.

Results: Our data shows that 69.2% of African American women and 37.8% of
Hispanic women suffer from Vitamin D deficiency in our cohort. African
American women had significant lower level of Vitamin D3 compared with
Hispanic women in all age groups. The lower Vitamin D3 level was observed
among age groups of 31 to 50 in African Americans. The deficiency in
Vitamin D levels was significantly associated with breast cancer in both
African Americans (OR=2.5, p=0.007) and Hispanics (OR=1.9, p=0.009).
Interestingly, we found that a significant association of Vitamin D
deficiency with trip negative breast cancer (TNBC) in African Americans
(OR=3.2, p=0.04), but not in Hispanics. The lowest Vitamin D3 level was
observed in African American women with TNBC. There was no significant
association of Vitamin D deficiency with tumor size, lymph node
involvement and tumor stage. The deficiency of Vitamin D3 level was not
associated with disease progression in this cohort of women.

Conclusion: Our data suggests that a significant association of Vitamin D
deficiency with breast cancer in both African Americans and Hispanics,
especially more associated with type of TNBC in African American women in
our cohort.


