Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Electronic cigarette aerosols increase cellular reactive oxygen
species and induce significant oxidative DNA damage.


Background: E-cigarettes (ECs), also known as electronic nicotine
delivery systems (ENDS) are battery-operated devices that deliver
nicotine through inhaled aerosols. The health risks associated with EC
use are unclear, but ECs have been promoted as a safer alternative to
tobacco smoking and a smoking cessation aid. Currently, more than 13% of
American high school students and 10% adults report using ECs. EC
aerosols contain unique constituents (e.g. silicate beads, tin and
flavorants), as well as other toxicants also present in tobacco smoke,
including carcinogens and reactive oxygen species (ROS). The potential of
EC aerosols to induce DNA damage has not been fully characterized.

Aims: (1) To examine the effects of EC aerosol exposure in the levels of
cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS); and (2) To evaluate the potential
of EC aerosols to cause oxidative DNA damage.

Methods: EC aerosols and mainstream smoke extracts were generated from
distinct brands of ECs containing diverse nicotine concentrations and a
reference combustible cigarette, in controlled conditions using a
modified smoking apparatus. Human normal epithelial and oral cancer cell
lines were exposed up to 2 weeks to diverse doses of EC aerosol extracts
equivalent to 1 to 100 EC puffs. Levels of ROS were evaluated using the
2’,7’ -dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFDA) cellular ROS detection
assay kit (Abcam). Overall DNA damage was quantified using two distinct
assays q-PADDA and Comet assay. 8-Oxoguanine, one of the most common DNA
lesions resulting from ROS, was quantified using a commercially available
ELISA kit. Data were analyzed by Student’s t-test.

Results: Exposure to EC aerosols caused a significant increase in ROS
levels. Exposure to EC extracts induce significant DNA damage measurable
by q-PADDA and Comet assay. Overall, EC aerosol extracts induced
significantly less DNA damage than mainstream smoke extracts. Yet, a
significant increase in 8-oxoguanine lesions was observed after acute and
long-term exposure to EC extracts compared to the control.

Conclusion: Both short- and long-term exposure to EC aerosols can
increase cellular ROS levels and cause significant DNA damage. Moreover,
EC aerosols cause oxidative DNA lesions which are highly mutagenic, and
can lead to tumor initiation and progression. Our study emphasizes the
urgent need to further investigate the potential short- and long-term
health effects of EC aerosols.

Grant support: This work was supported by the Oklahoma Tobacco Research
Center (LQ). Dr. Queimado holds a Presbyterian Health Foundation Endowed
Chair in Otorhinolaryngology.


