Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sequencing the human TCRβ repertoire on the Ion S5™ System.


Next-generation Sequencing (NGS) is proving an important tool in
increasing understanding of the human immune system, and thereby cancer
immunology. αβ-T cells are the primary constituents of human
cell-mediated adaptive immunity. The antigen specificity of each αβ-T
cell is encoded in the 500-600 bp transcript encompassing the variable
portion of the rearranged TCRα and TCRβ subunits, which can be read via
NGS in a process termed repertoire sequencing. Until now, the main
challenge the field faces is the lack of a technology that can provide a
contiguous read of 600 bp to minimize the complexity of designing
bias-prone primers and informatics challenges of stitching short reads.
Here we leverage the long read capability of Ion 530™ chip to
comprehensively sequence all three CDR domains of the TCRβ chain. The
Ion 530™ chip offers greater than 15 M productive reads, allowing a
multiplex of 2-4 samples with sufficient coverage for most repertoire
profiling studies. Initial testing with Leukocyte total RNA demonstrates
that this multiplex PCR assay produced repertoires that were much more
similar to data derived from 5’RACE protocol than the commonly used
BIOMED2 primer set. This result suggested that the use of long reads
minimizes bias by allowing targeting of less variable regions. To further
assess the performance of the assay, we designed a model system of 30
plasmid controls containing common human T-cell CDR3 sequences. Each
plasmid was amplified individually and sequenced to confirm the detection
of a single clonal population. Analytical sensitivity of the assay and
accuracy of the accompanied analysis solution were further evaluated by
spiking in plasmid concentrations from 10 pg to 0.0001 pg (5 million to
50 copies) in a background of 100 ng cDNA reverse transcribed from
leukocyte total RNA. Results showed the assay offers linearity over 5
orders of magnitude of decreasing input concentration. In summary, we
have demonstrated a NGS workflow for TCRβ sequencing that offers
multiplex flexibility on Ion S5 with sample to answer in less than 48
hours. For Research Use Only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures.


