Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activating transcription factor-6Î± dependent regulation of
Rheb-mTOR and Notch signaling contributes to chemoresistance in
osteosarcoma.


The standard treatment for patients with newly diagnosed osteosarcoma
(OS) consists of surgery in combination with multi-agent chemotherapy.
However, the optimal treatment strategy for patients with refractory
and/or metastatic disease is yet to be defined and continues to be a
persistent challenge in osteosarcoma treatment. The high degree of
genetic aberrations and tumor heterogeneity has impeded the
identification and testing of new and effective therapeutic targets.
Therefore, finding and characterizing cellular mechanisms, which
contribute to OS chemoresistance could be one promising strategy for
designing therapies that can change the outlook for patients with this
disease. Due to the well-known role of unfolded protein response (UPR) in
promoting chemoresistance in solid tumors our objective here is to
examine how this promotes chemoresistance in patients with OS. Using in
silico pathway analysis of gene expression datasets from patients with OS
we found that protein processing in the ER was one of the pathways that
was significantly enriched in OS tumors compared to normal tissue. We
then examined whether the UPR sensors ATF6a, PERK and IRE-1a were also
activated in OS cells in vitro. Using western blotting, qPCR and
immunofluorescence we confirmed that all three UPR pathways were
activated in human OS cell lines. However we found that only ATF6a
activation significantly enhanced chemoresistance to cisplatin,
irinotecan and combinatorial treatment with cisplatin and the mTOR
inhibitor rapamycin. This occurred via inhibition of Bax activation,
suppression of RHEB-mTOR and NOTCH signaling. Our findings highlight a
novel mechanism of chemo–resistance in OS. Furthermore, retrospective
analysis of banked OS patient samples for ATF6a expression followed by a
preliminary multivariate analysis using Cox regression model showed that
high levels of nuclear ATF6a, was an independent prognostic indicator
while also taking into account the presence of metastases and tumor site.
Moreover, we found that while 50% patients with high nuclear ATF6a levels
had a poor histologic response to treatment only 32% patients with low
nuclear ATF6Î± expression suggesting that ATF6a activation could be
associated with resistance to chemotherapy and poor outcome for OS
patients. Our findings emphasize a role for ATF6a as the nexus of a
versatile signaling network that regulates pathways that are crucial for
the pathogenesis and therapy resistance of osteosarcoma. Hence
therapeutic targeting of the ATF6a pathway holds promise as an innovative
and effective treatment strategy for OS.


