Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting HER2 in gastric cancer: Hints from a gastric PDX
platform.


Introduction: Gastric cancer is the 3rd leading cause of cancer mortality
worldwide. Surgery is the only curative treatment strategy and
conventional chemotherapy has shown limited efficacy. Trastuzumab (a HER2
mAb), is the only therapy targeting molecular alterations approved so far
in gastric cancer, for HER2+ patients with advanced disease. However only
a fraction (Introduction: Gastric cancer is the 3rd leading cause of
cancer mortality worldwide. Surgery is the only curative treatment
strategy and conventional chemotherapy has shown limited efficacy.
Trastuzumab (a HER2 mAb), is the only therapy targeting molecular
alterations approved so far in gastric cancer, for HER2+ patients with
advanced disease. However only a fraction (<20%) of HER2 amplified
patients benefits from treatment.

Methods: We have recently generated a molecularly annotated colony of
gastro-esophageal PDXs (at the moment, > 70 PDXs). The platform also
comprises primary cell lines and 3D-cultured organoids derived from
gastric cancer PDXs.

Results and Discussion: At present, we have identified several HER2+ PDXs
and generated the corresponding in vitro derivatives. Four HER2+ PDXs,
showing 3+ HercepTest score and HER2 amplification > 8 copies (thus
theoretically sensitive to Trastuzumab), were selected to undergo
‘xenotrials’ with the following anti-HER2 drugs/combos: Trastuzumab
(T); Pertuzumab (P, anti-HER2 mAb); Lapatinib (L, a dual HER2-EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor). According to RECIST-like criteria, T induced
tumor regression in only 1 out of 4 HER2+ PDXs. Interestingly, in all the
tumors but one the combos T+P and T+L were able to bypass resistance to T
monotherapy and to induce tumor regression. One tumor was resistant to
all the tested therapeutic approaches.

Conclusion: We identified PDXs displaying HER2 gene amplification. Only a
minor fraction of them benefited from the anti-HER2 mono-therapy, despite
the presence of a strong HER2 gene amplification, while the association
of two HER2 inhibiting drugs resulted in intense and prolonged response.
This suggests that monotherapy with T might not be the most effective
therapeutic approach in gastric cancer patients. We are currently
investigating the cause of resistance to anti-HER2 drugs to identify
mutations/CNV in tumors showing resistance to Trastuzumab.


