Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct phosphorylation and attenuation of the DLC1 tumor
suppressor by SRC kinase: a new mechanism of SRC-dependent activation of
Rho with translational implications.


Many tumors have high SRC activity and constitutive up-regulation of
Rho-GTP, which is frequently implicated in the neoplastic process and
tumor progression to metastasis, but the mechanistic link is unclear.
Here we identify the DLC1 tumor suppressor, which encodes a RhoGAP, as a
previously unrecognized direct target of the SRC kinase, in untransformed
cells and in tumor-derived cell lines, which upregulates Rho-GTP. SRC
kinase directly phosphorylates two Tyrosines in DLC1: Y451 and Y701. SRC
phosphorylation of DLC1-Y701, which is located in the DLC1 RhoGAP domain,
attenuates its RhoGAP activity and tumor suppressor function by
inhibiting the binding of active Rho-GTP to the RhoGAP domain, reducing
the hydrolysis of active Rho-GTP to inactive Rho-GDP and resulting in an
increase in Rho-GTP. The role of SRC phosphorylation of DLC1-Y451 is to
diminish DLC1 binding to tensin, which further reduces the tumor
suppressor functions, as measured by cell migration rate,
anchorage-independent growth, and tumor formation in nude mice,
independently of Rho-GTP. We also found that ERK1 cooperates with SRC by
phosphorylating DLC1-S129, which enhances the binding of the SRC SH3
domain to this region of DLC1, and increases SRC-dependent
phosphorylation of Y451 and Y701. The cooperative effects reduce RhoGAP
activity, increase Rho-GTP and Rho/ROCK/MRLC signaling, and attenuate
DLC1 tumor suppressor functions. DLC1 preferentially binds active SRC,
which reduces overall SRC activity. Therefore, SRC activity tends to be
lower in cells that express high levels of endogenous DLC1, compared with
cells in which DLC1 expression has been down-regulated. Although SRC
targets two DLC1 functions that contribute to its tumor suppressor
activity, DLC1 binds several ligands in addition to tensin that also
contribute to its tumor suppressor functions. Therefore, it would not be
surprising if high SRC activity were associated with selective pressure
for down-regulation of DLC1 expression. Consistent with this hypothesis,
the combination high SRC expression and low DLC1 expression was
associated with a poor prognosis in lung adenocarcinomas (p=0.005) in
TCGA. The potentially reversible nature of the SRC-induced attenuation of
DLC1 function can be exploited therapeutically. In two systems that have
high SRC activity and express DLC1 - the mouse MMTV-PyMT cancer model and
a human lung cancer cell line - the Src inhibitor PP1 has potent
antitumor activity, as it reduces DLC1 Tyrosine phosphorylation,
reactivates DLC1, and reduces Rho-GTP. However, PP1 has marginal
antitumor activity an isogenic DLC1-negative strain of the lung cancer
line, as the inhibitor does not reactivate DLC1 and does not alter
Rho-GTP levels. The results highlight the potential importance of tumor
suppressor reactivation as a biomarker for predicting and monitoring the
response to SRC inhibitors.


