Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fluorescence-guided soft tissue sarcoma surgery using a
cetuximab-imaging probe conjugate.


BACKGROUND: Soft tissue sarcomas (STS) are a heterogeneous group of solid
malignancies whose treatment includes margin-negative resection. Large
tumor size and anatomic constraints make margin assessment challenging.
Fluorescence-guided surgical resection can help delineate intraoperative
margins; preclinical studies demonstrate improved oncologic outcomes in
other malignancies using cancer-specific imaging probes. Recent
literature describes cathepsin activated probes selective for STS, but no
studies using disease-specific chemotherapeutic agents conjugated to
imaging probes. This novel strategy has potential to decrease unnecessary
healthy tissue resection and improve oncologic outcomes by reducing
margin-positive resections.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed in multiple
subtypes of STS and is a potential target for fluorescence-guided
surgery. Recent studies show fluorescently labeled cetuximab, an
FDA-approved, anti-EGFR antibody, to be safe and useful for margin
assessment in other malignancies. Our aim was to evaluate its potential
for STS, examining tumor-targeting specificity of two drug-probe
conjugates, and comparing them to the described cathepsin-activated
probes. We hypothesize the drug-probe conjugates would successfully
target STS, with superior tumor specificity. We also aimed to determine
the smallest tumor detectable by our conjugate.

METHODS: Athymic nude mice with subcutaneous HT1080 fibrosarcoma tumors
were injected with one of five probes: IRDye800CW fluorescent probe
conjugated to either cetuximab (anti-EGFR) or DC101 (anti-VEGFR2),
IRDye800CW conjugated to an isotype control (IgG), or a
cathepsin-activated probe (IntegriSense 750 and Prosense 750).
Fluorescence imaging was performed daily with open- and closed-field
systems. Tumor-to-background ratios (TBR), signal washout times and
normalized signal averages were evaluated. On day 9, smallest resectable
game evaluation was performed to assess sensitivity for detecting
residual post-resection tumor

RESULTS: At day 9 post-injection, the TBR of the cetuximab-IRDye800CW
group (11.1) was significantly greater than Integrisense750 (6.88,
p=0.005), the IgG-IRDye800CW control (4.44, p=0.00005), Prosense750
(2.35, p=0.00009), and DC101-IRDye800CW (1.87, p=0.00003). During in vivo
imaging, cetuximab-IRDye800CW outperformed all other agents by several
folds of contrast enhancement. The smallest resectable game evaluation
demonstrated 1mm3 fragment detection using the cetuximab-IRDye800CW probe.

CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates superiority of cetuximab-IRDye800CW
for disease-specific imaging in a subcutaneous animal model of STS. The
novel strategy of coupling improved margin-negative surgical resection
with established chemotherapy has considerable translational significance
and is an avenue for exploration with other drugs used to treat STS.


