Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel tubulin inhibitor DJ101 targets the colchicine binding site
and suppresses melanoma growth and metastasis.


Interfering with microtubule dynamics is a validated approach for
anticancer treatment and by selectively targeting the colchicine binding
site on tubulin, microtubule destabilizing agents can evade mechanisms of
drug resistance that commonly develop with other antimitotic agents such
as taxanes and vinca alkaloids. We have recently reported the discovery
of a potent and metabolically stable tubulin inhibitor (DJ101) that
specifically targets the colchicine binding site on the beta tubulin
subunit, disrupts tubulin polymerization and effectively circumvents drug
efflux pumps that decrease the efficacy of existing tubulin inhibitors.
To further pre-clinically evaluate DJ101 as a novel tubulin inhibitor and
confirm its mechanism of action, we first visually demonstrated the
ability of DJ101 to disrupt microtubule dynamics and elucidated the
changes in microtubule structure and cell morphology through
immunofluorescence techniques. Furthermore, we solved the crystal
structure of DJ101 in complex with tubulin to determine its molecular
interactions with the protein. We then demonstrated the significant in
vitro potency of DJ101 against a panel of metastatic melanoma cell lines
harboring major clinically relevant mutations observed in tumors and also
validated its cytotoxicity against a broader array of NCI-60 cell lines.
Further analysis revealed that DJ101 effectively thwarted
anchorage-dependent melanoma colony formation and drastically hindered
cell mobility and motility of those cancer cells. We further ascertained
that DJ101 shows negligible off-target effects for major physiologically
important receptors and ion channels, suggesting a good safety profile.
Encouraged by the preliminary results from our in vitro assessment, we
evaluated the in vivo activity of DJ101 in two different mouse models. At
a dose of 30 mg/kg via i.p. injections, DJ101 nearly completely
suppressed tumor growth in a human A375 melanoma xenograft model. It also
appreciably inhibited metastasis potential in a murine B16F10 lung
metastasis model at the same dose. In conclusion, we have described a
microtubule destabilizing agent that targets the colchicine binding site
on tubulin, confirmed its mechanism action, determined its potency in a
vast array of cancer cell lines, particularly metastatic melanoma,
demonstrated its inhibitory effect on cellular proliferation, motility
and migration, and evaluated its anticancer potential in terms of tumor
growth inhibition and metastasis in two in vivo models. Our findings
offer a compelling rationale to further develop and advance DJ101 as a
tubulin inhibitor for cancer therapy.


