Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smoking impacts endogenous estradiol and testosterone levels in
young healthy women.


Introduction The purpose of the study was to elucidate the association
between smoking and estradiol (E2) and testosterone (T) levels in young
healthy women from high-risk families. Cigarette smoke contains multiple
carcinogens and is considered a risk factor for breast cancer. However,
tobacco also contains aromatase inhibiting substances, but the impact on
hormonal levels in young women at the age when breast cancer is initiated
is unclear and needs further elucidation.

Material and methods Between 1996 and 2002, 258 healthy women from
high-risk breast cancer families in Sweden were enrolled in a study on
the impact of lifestyle factors in women Material and methods Between
1996 and 2002, 258 healthy women from high-risk breast cancer families in
Sweden were enrolled in a study on the impact of lifestyle factors in
women <=40 years. Blood samples and body measurements were obtained in
the luteal phase (5-10 days before predicted onset of the next menstrual
cycle) by a trained research nurse. Participants filled out
questionnaires on lifestyle and reproductive factors. Ongoing
breastfeeding, use of hormonal contraceptives other than combined E+P
oral contraceptives (OCs), as well as missing data on onset of next
menstrual cycle and smoking status led to exclusion of 28 women. Two
hundred thirty women including 33 known BRCA1/2 mutation carriers were
included in the analyses. Weight and hormonal levels were not normally
distributed and were transformed using the natural logarithm to obtain
better distribution. Since OCs influence endogenous hormones, the women
were stratified by current OC use. Multivariable linear regression were
used to obtain P-values, adjusted for age, nulliparity, menstrual cycle
day, waist-to-hip ratio (WHR), and weight. Geometric means for current
smokers and non-smokers were standardized at age 29 years, nulliparity,
number of days until onset of next menstrual period (7 days), WHR 0.76,
and LNweight (64 kgs).

Results In all women, the median age was 29 years old, (IQR 24-35), and
the median year of birth was 1969, the median weight was 64 kgs, and the
median WHR was 0.76. In total, 47% were parous, and 42% had ever smoked,
whereas 22% were current smokers, and 38% were current OC users (40% of
the smokers and 37% of the non-smokers). In non OC users, E2 levels were
similar in smokers and non-smokers (adjP=0.26), while standardized total
T levels were higher in smokers (51.8 vs 45.1 ng/dL; adjP =0.067). In
contrast, among current OC users, smokers had higher standardized E2
levels (22.7 vs 17.7 pg/mL; adjP =0.023) compared with non-smokers, while
total T levels were similar in smokers and non-smokers (adjP=0.56).

Conclusion In non-OC users, a more androgenic profile was observed in
smokers compared with non-smokers. While in OC users endogenous E2 levels
were higher in smokers compared with non-smokers, which suggests that
cigarette smoke may reduce the efficacy of the pill. Differential impact
of smoking on endogenous E2 and total T levels in current OC users and
non-users was thus observed. Therefore, history of OC use needs to be
incorporated in studies on associations between smoking and breast cancer
risk.


