Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneity in androgen receptor and IL-1beta expression by
prostate cancer cells in skeletal metastases.


Bone metastases are a prevalent complication of advanced prostate cancer
(PCa). The current standard of care for advanced PCa patients is androgen
deprivation therapy (ADT), which fails within approximately two years and
patients progress to castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). CRPC
presents with additional metastasis in soft tissues and is incurable. We
have found that in PCa patients, bone metastases have heterogeneous
Androgen Receptor (AR) expression, and that cells lacking AR are the only
PCa cell type that secretes the cytokine Interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β).
Furthermore, pre-clinical work in our lab has revealed the role for
IL-1β in promoting bone colonization by AR+ PCa cells and generation of
heterogeneous skeletal metastases. A significant barrier to studying
tumor heterogeneity in PCa metastasis has been the lack of an animal
model to study the interaction between multiple PCa phenotypes in the
bone microenvironment. By engrafting a suspension containing both AR−
and AR+ cells directly into the left cardiac ventricle of mice, our lab
has developed an in vivo model that allows us to study the progression of
both AR− and AR+ cells in skeletal and soft tissue metastases. AR−
and AR+ cells were genetically engineered to express two different
Luciferase constructs (630 nm Red-shifted Luc and 540 nm Luc2
respectively) thereby allowing the progression of AR− and AR+ cells to
be independently tracked and quantified. We used this model in
combination with histological and radiographic analyses to assimilate the
pathological features of our in vivo mixed AR+/AR− metastases to the
human clinical scenario. Finally, we used castrated mice to determine
whether IL-1β secreting PCa cells could support the growth and survival
of IL-1β–/AR+ cells in androgen deprived conditions.

Co-injection of AR− (PC3-ML) and AR+ cells (LNCaP, VCaP, and 22Rv1)
leads to increased establishment of soft tissue metastases as compared to
injecting AR− cells alone. Unlike the metastases generated by PC3-ML
cells alone, which show exclusively osteolytic activity, AR−/AR+ mixed
metastases are both osteosclerotic and osteolytic, thereby recapitulating
clinical pathology. Finally, preliminary results suggest that
co-injection with IL-1β-secreting AR− cells enables the growth of
androgen-dependent AR+ cells in castrated mice. This animal model of
metastasis heterogeneity recapitulates human pathology and enables
further interrogation of the mechanism by which IL-1β supports survival
of AR+ cells and the potential role for AR− in evading AR-targeted
therapy during castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).


