Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of oncogenic kinase LASK2 as a
diagnostic and therapeutic target for lung cancer.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. Since the
number of patients responding well to standard therapies is still
limited, further development of new anti-cancer agents with minimum risk
of adverse event is urgently awaited. To screen oncoantigens which could
be used for the development of new diagnostic biomarkers and molecular
targeted drugs, we have established a screening system as follows; i) To
identify overexpressed genes in 120 lung cancers by genome-wide screening
using the microarray representing 27,648 genes and pure populations of
tumor cells taken from cancer tissues by laser microdissection, ii) To
verify the genes for their very low or absent expression in normal
tissues by northern-blotting, iii) To validate the clinicopathological
significance of their expression with tissue microarray covering hundreds
of archived lung cancers, iv) To verify whether the target genes are
essential for the growth or survival of lung cancer cells by RNAi and
cell growth assays. During this process, we selected dozens of druggable
oncogenes with various enzymatic activities, and identified
overexpression of protein kinase LASK2 (lung cancer-associated kinase 2)
in the majority of lung cancers, but not in normal tissues except testis.
Immunocytochemical analysis found LASK2 to be mainly localized in the
cytoplasm and nucleus of lung cancer cells. Immunohistochemical analysis
revealed that strong LASK2 expression was an independent prognostic
factor for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) (PLung cancer is the
leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. Since the number of patients
responding well to standard therapies is still limited, further
development of new anti-cancer agents with minimum risk of adverse event
is urgently awaited. To screen oncoantigens which could be used for the
development of new diagnostic biomarkers and molecular targeted drugs, we
have established a screening system as follows; i) To identify
overexpressed genes in 120 lung cancers by genome-wide screening using
the microarray representing 27,648 genes and pure populations of tumor
cells taken from cancer tissues by laser microdissection, ii) To verify
the genes for their very low or absent expression in normal tissues by
northern-blotting, iii) To validate the clinicopathological significance
of their expression with tissue microarray covering hundreds of archived
lung cancers, iv) To verify whether the target genes are essential for
the growth or survival of lung cancer cells by RNAi and cell growth
assays. During this process, we selected dozens of druggable oncogenes
with various enzymatic activities, and identified overexpression of
protein kinase LASK2 (lung cancer-associated kinase 2) in the majority of
lung cancers, but not in normal tissues except testis. Immunocytochemical
analysis found LASK2 to be mainly localized in the cytoplasm and nucleus
of lung cancer cells. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that strong
LASK2 expression was an independent prognostic factor for non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) (P<0.0001). Suppression of LASK2 expression with its
specific siRNAs caused growth inhibition of lung cancer cells. The
enhanced cellular proliferation by introduction of LASK2 in mammalian
cells also supported its oncogenic function. Since LASK2 plays a
significant role in the cell proliferation and malignant nature of lung
cancers, LASK2 is likely to be a prognostic biomarker and a potential
therapeutic target for developing new anti-cancer drugs.


