Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of preclinical antitumor activity of regorafenib in
CRC-PDX xenografts with gene expression and clinical parameters of the
primary tumor.


Regorafenib is a small molecule inhibitor of multiple transmembrane and
intracellular kinases involved in normal cellular functions and in
pathologic processes such as oncogenesis, tumor angiogenesis, metastasis,
and tumor immunity. Regorafenib is approved for the treatment of patients
with metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) who have been previously treated
with fluoropyrimidine-, oxaliplatin- and irinotecan-based chemotherapy,
an anti-VEGF therapy, and, if RAS wild-type, an anti-EGFR therapy or with
locally advanced, unresectable or metastatic gastrointestinal stromal
tumor (GIST) who have been previously treated with imatinib mesylate and
sunitinib malate. Recently an overall survival benefit has been shown in
patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) who had previously been
treated with sorafenib (RESORCE). OncoTrack is an Innovative Medicines
Initiative (IMI) sponsored project with the goal to improve the basis for
identification of biomarkers based on the mechanisms of action of
therapies approved for this indication. For this purpose, a panel of
CRC-PDX xenografts was generated by the OncoTrack project. At the time of
the analysis reported here fifty xenografts had been treated with
regorafenib at a dose of 10 mg/kg/d or with vehicle for 24 days. The
analysis of tumor growth rates (TGR) showed pronounced differences
between different tumors and between vehicle and regorafenib treated
models. The relative antitumor activity (relative TGR) of regorafenib
varied between -0,13 (good response) and 0.0 (no response).
Investigations of relative TGR in relationship to (non-) clinical
parameters of the primary tumor such as age, gender, sidedness and tumor
histology identified a marginally significant (p= 0.04) better response
in tumors from younger patients. No other correlations were detected to
this end, which may be due to the small sample number. To correlate
antitumor activity of regorafenib with gene expression, RNA was isolated
from sections of selected vehicle and regorafenib treated xenografts and
hybrized on Affymetrix HuGene-2.1_st human transcriptome arrays.
Expression profiles were subsequently analyzed using the Random Forests
algorithm to identify gene expression signatures predicting response to
regorafenib. The best signatures did not perform better than signatures
derived after randomizing responses, i.e. no predictive signature could
be identified. Further studies with larger samples sizes are necessary to
improve the outcome of such an approach; however one should acknowledge
that to date no predictive gene signatures could be identified for
multikinase inhibitors, which may be intrinsic to their complex mechanism
of action. The research reported here received support from the
Innovative Medicines Initiative Joint Undertaking under grant agreement
115234 (OncoTrack).


