Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular insight into drug resistance in acute myeloid leukemia:
An in-silico and in-vitro approach.


INTRODUCTION:

Drug resistance of leukemic stem cells is a surmountable obstacle to
effective chemotherapy in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). P-glycoprotein
(Pgp) and FLT3 undoubtedly contribute to worse prognosis and mechanisms
of these proteins lead to shorter survival and chemotherapy resistance.
Due to heterogeneity of stem cells in AML, outcome of patients with a
normal karyotype is highly challenging and changes in drug resistance
genes likely to be identified which will contribute to a better
understanding of the disease biology, eventually leading to the
development of alternative therapeutic approaches regarding drug
resistance in AML.

METHODOLOGY:

Blood and Bone-marrow samples were collected from newly diagnosed adult
AML patients with normal karyotype. Gene expression analysis of MDR genes
like Pgp, MRP1, BCRP and LRP was done by qRT-PCR in FLT3-ITD+/- and
CD34+/- subgroups. Higher expression of Pgp amongst all MDR genes
instigated to undertake in-silico analysis of Pgp with natural compound
library using YASARA. MTT assay was used to find out IC50 value of
natural compounds shortlisted from in-silico analysis and used alone or
with cytarabine on THP-1 cell line and in primary AML stem cells. Pgp
inhibitory activity of natural compounds was assessed by fluorimetric MDR
assay.

RESULTS:

A significant upregulation of Pgp expression was observed in FLT3-ITD+,
CD34+ group after cytarabine exposure during their induction (7+3)
therapy. Docking analysis revealed curcumin, hesperidin and silymarin
having better binding affinity with Pgp as compared to its known
inhibitor Verapamil. Furthermore, these selected compounds were used
in-vitro, and results of MTT assay suggested 6.1µM, 40.73µM, 63.09µM
and 54.95µM IC50 values of cytarabine, curcumin, hesperidin and
silymarin respectively in THP-1 cell line. Combination index (CI)
analysis revealed that curcumin (25µM), hesperidin (30µM) and silymarin
(35µM) having synergistic effect with cytarabine and decreased IC50
value of cytarabine (1µM). In addition to this, Silymarin at 250nM and
500nM concentration showed equivalent inhibition of Pgp as compared to
control Verapamil.

CONCLUSION:

A combination of in-silico and in-vitro screening revealed Curcumin,
Hesperidin and Silibinin can be used as MDR modulators as well as
chemosensitizer to reduce the cytotoxicity profile and drug resistance in
AML.


