Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD37 tetraspanin as a novel biomarker for PD-1 blockade in diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma.


PD-1 immune checkpoint blockade reconstituting antitumor immunity has
changed the cancer treatment paradigm. PD-1 blockade has been successful
in many types of solid tumors and Hodgkin lymphoma, but not yet for
diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), the most common aggressive B-cell
lymphoma. We found several biomarkers including loss of CD37 tetraspanin
expression in DLBCL correlated with increased PD-1 expression suggesting
potential sensitivity of these DLBCL subsets to PD-1 blockade. CD37
(TSPAN26) is a member of the tetraspanin superfamily, widely expressed on
normal and malignant mature B-cells and downregulated in plasma cells. It
has been documented that CD37 plays important roles in T-cell-B-cell
interactions, B-cell humoral response triggered by B-cell receptor
cross-linking, and a balance between immune responses and tolerance.
Interestingly, in a large cohort of DLBCL patients, we found that loss of
CD37 expression in DLBCL predicts strikingly decreased overall and
progression-free survival rates, and that PDCD1 gene expression was
upregulated in CD37-negative activated B-cell-like (ABC) DLBCL by gene
expression profiling, whereas the costimulatory molecule ICOSLG was
upregulated in CD37+ germinal center B-cell-like (GCB) DLBCL. Using the
new fluorescent multiplex technology, we further measured PD-1 and PD-L1
expression at the protein level on lymphoma cells and immune cells in the
tumor microenvironment, and found that PD-1 protein levels were increased
on both cytotoxic and helper T-cells infiltrating in CD37-negative DLBCL
either of GCB or ABC subtype. These novel discoveries suggest that CD37
is important for sustained antitumor adaptive immunity, that immune
dysregulation plays an important role for poor clinical outcomes in
DLBCL, and that CD37-negative DLBCL may be sensitive to PD-1 blockade. In
summary, loss of a CD37 tetraspanin was found to correlate with PD-1
overexpression in DLBCL clinical samples, and CD37 may serve as a novel
biomarker for anti-PD-1 immunotherapy clinical trials in DLBCL.


