Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRD3 as a specific vulnerable therapeutic target in neuroblastoma.


Introduction: BET inhibitors have raised high expectations for cancer
treatment given their anti-proliferative effect by inhibiting BRD4
controlled enhancer activity of highly transcribed genes such as MYC(N).
However, current inhibitors also target BRD2 and BRD3 which are
functionally nonredundant with BRD4. In neuroblastoma only MYCN amplified
tumors respond well to these drugs.

Methods: We performed an integrated bioinformatics approach to scrutinize
BET family genes as well as further candidate epigenetic regulators as
targets for novel therapies in neuroblastoma.

Results: First we performed a time-resolved expression data analysis of
week 1 and 2 hyperplastic lesions and tumors derived from the TH-MYCN
transgenic mouse model and confirmed dynamic regulation during tumor
development for established neuroblastoma oncogenes and tumor suppressor
genes. Next, we filtered within the highest upregulated genes for Cancer
Gene Census (CGC) genes and identified 21 upregulated CGC genes mainly
involved in chromatin remodeling and DNA repair. Finally, after further
selection based on expression in CCLE and survival in neuroblastoma
patients, BRD3 was identified as the top-ranked candidate. BRD3 exhibits
drastic upregulation during tumor formation. Elevated BRD3 expression is
the highest expressed gene in neuroblastoma cell lines upon analysis of
the CCLE panel and associated with very poor prognosis. To explore the
nonredundant functions of BRD3 in relation to BRD4, we performed
RNA-sequencing after stable knockdown of BRD3 in neuroblastoma cell lines
and compared the downstream effects on the transcriptome as well as the
impact on cell viability to knockdown of BRD4 and pharmacological
treatment with BET-inhibitors (JQ1, OTX015). In addition, we dissected
the BRD3 protein complex by means of label-free mass spectrometry
analysis to gain further insights into the BRD3 specific functions in
relation to control of gene transcription and putative interaction with
transcription factors such as MYCN. Current efforts are ongoing to test
cooperative interaction of BRD3 versus BRD4 in dbh-MYCN driven
neuroblastoma formation in zebrafish as well as BRD3 and BRD4
ChIP-sequencing in neuroblastoma cells.

Conclusion: We identified BRD3 as a candidate novel driver gene in
neuroblastoma and will present differential transcriptional control and
protein interactions of BRD3 versus BRD4. This study can open the way
towards developing BRD3 specific inhibitors for neuroblastoma and other
BRD3 overexpressing cancers such as T-ALL and small cell lung carcinoma.


