Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of Beta-Catenin upon the tumor molecular biology and
growth in HNSCC: role of cancer stem cells.


Overview: Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) are the sixth
most prevalent type of malignancy worldwide. Recent reports have
demonstrated that nearly every tumor contain a small subpopulation of
cells called cancer stem-like cells (CSCs), which are responsible for
tumor maintenance, metastasis relapse and therapeutic resistance. Recent
studies demonstrate that even established HNSCC cell lines contain a
definite sub-population of CSC providing us with the opportunity to
discerning their roles in progression, treatment, and relapse of the
disease.

Background: We have previously demonstrated that a definite subpopulation
of CSCs exists in most HNSCC cell lines. Significant differences were
seen between the HPV+ and HPV- subtypes, confirmed by analyses of
stem-ness genes and EMT markers. In vivo tumor xenograft formation has
established the heightened tumorigenicity of CSCs. We investigated the
molecular and functional roles of Beta-catenin in HNSCC CSCs by shRNA
knock down and then subjecting the knocked down (KD) cells to various
molecular analysis and in-vivo tumor formations in nude mice. We have
also identified SOX2 as a down-stream effector gene that could exert the
tumor promoting effects of Beta-catenin. The promoter region of the Sox2
gene was found to contain several putative Beta-catenin binding sites.

Methods & Results: After identifying CSCs by in-vitro Sphere Forming
(SFA) capabilities and molecular gene signatures, we have knocked down
both Beta-catenin and Sox2 in both HPV+ and HPV- HNSCC cell lines
(UMSCC47 and UMSCC6). SFA with the Beta-catenin KD-cells depicts a 50%
decrease in sphere formation ability. Molecular analyses show lower
expression of stemness genes: Sox2 (~ 3 fold) and Oct4 (~ 2 fold);
metastatic genes: N-cadherin (~ 2.5 fold), Vimentin (~ 3 fold), Twist (~
4 fold), Snail (~ 2.5 fold), Slug (~ 2.5 fold) and Hif-1alpha (~ 1.5
fold). Two tissue microarrays (TMA) were stained for Oct4, Sox2, and CD44
gene expression by multiplex RNA in situ hybridization. Nearly all tumor
cells expressed high levels of CD44. Cells high in both Oct4 and Sox2
were quantified within duplicate cores and correlated with local control
(TMA-1) and radiation response (TMA-2).

Conclusions: Initial molecular analyses depicted that upon loss of
Beta-catenin, the crucial stem-ness genes are negatively affected and the
loss of stem-ness is also reinforced by decreased sphere formations. Both
the metastatic and hypoxic gene signatures are markedly altered. We
expect similar outcomes with the in-vivo tumor formations in nude mice.


