Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of palbociclib with enzalutamide shows in vitro
activity in RB-proficient and androgen receptor-positive triple-negative
breast cancer cells.


Background

Cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) inhibitors have in vitro
synergistic effects and significant clinical efficacy in combination with
hormone therapy for estrogen receptor (ER)-positive advanced breast
cancer. However, the effects of CDK4/6 inhibitors in triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC) are not well-elucidated. Retinoblastoma (RB, a known
substrate of CDK4/6) protein pathway deregulation is a frequent
occurrence in TNBC and in vitro studies have revealed that
pharmacological CDK4/6 inhibition yields a cooperative cytostatic effect
with doxorubicin in RB-proficient TNBC models, suggesting that RB may be
a biomarker for selecting patients receiving CDK4/6 inhibitors. In
addition, anti-androgen therapy have been shown preclinical efficacy in
androgen-receptor (AR) positive TNBC cells. Here we tested the
combination effect of a CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib with an AR
antagonist enzalutamide in TNBC cells.

Methods

MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-453 TNBC cell lines were used for in
vitro studies. Cell viability was examined by MTT assay. Apoptotic
effects were examined by flow cytometry. Signal transduction pathways in
cells were assessed by Western blot.

Results

We correlated the expressions of AR and pRB status in these TNBC cells
and identified that MDA-MB-453 were AR-positive/pRB-positive, MDA-MB-231
were AR-negative/pRB-positive, and MDA-MB-468 were
AR-negative/pRB-negative cells. Since CDK4/6 inhibition leads to
dephosphorylation of pRB, we examined effects of palbociclib and found
that palbociclib significantly inhibited the cell growth of pRB-positive
cell lines MDA-MB-453 and MDA-MB-231, but did not affect pRB-negative
MDA-MB-468 cells. Further combining palbociclib with enzalutamide showed
that the growth inhibitory effects of combination therapy were additive
in AR-positive/pRB-positive MDA-MB-453 cells, but not in
AR-negative/pRB-positive MDA-MB-231 cells, nor AR/pRB double negative
MDA-MB-468 cells. Moreover, palbociclib-induced G1/S arrest only
exhibited in pRB-proficient MDA-MB-453 and MDA-MB-231 cells. In contrast,
enzalutamide did not affect the cell cycle on any of these TNBC cell
lines but inhibited phosphorylation of AR signaling in AR-positive
MDA-MB-453 cells. In addition, both palbociclib and enzalutamide induced
little apoptosis, suggesting cytostatic effects of these agents.

Conclusions

In summary, both pRB and AR status are important for response of TNBC
cells to palbociclib. Combination of palbociclib with enzalutamide shows
more prominent cytostatic effects in RB proficient and AR positive TNBC
cells, comparing to AR-negative/pRB-positive or AR/pRB double negative
TNBC cells. Our data provide a preclinical rationale in selecting
patients who might have therapeutic benefit from combining CDK4/6
inhibitors with AR antagonists.


