Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Brassinolide, a plant steroid hormone, reverses drug resistance in
human small-cell lung carcinoma cells.


Small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) has a dismal prognosis in part because
of multidrug resistance (MDR). Epibrassinolide (EB) is a steroid hormone
present in higher plants, where it has numerous physiological effects and
acts via a LRR-RLK membrane receptor and GSK3/SHAGGY pathway, resulting
in stabilization of a transcription factor. The parallels to the Wnt
signaling pathway, which is activated in SCLC and results in increased
β-catenin, prompted investigations of the effects of EB on SCLC cells,
particularly showing MDR. SCLC cells were NCI-H69 and a derived line,
VPA17, showing resistance to etoposide (9-fold), doxorubicin (20-fold)
and vincristine (10-fold). EB was cytotoxic to both cell lines (IC50 = 2
uM), indicating a lack of cross-resistance. EB was pro-apoptotic after 24
h as measured by ELISA of BUdR-labeled DNA fragments. Apoptosis was also
indicated by an increase in caspase-3 specific activity (to 2.5 enzyme
units/mg protein vs. 0.01 for untreated controls). Matrigel assays showed
that EB reduced the SCLC cell invasion phenotype by 80% in a
time-dependent fashion. Pre-incubation of VPA17 cells in 1 µM EB for 96
h reduced the IC50 for etoposide (6.0 uM to 1.8 µM) and doxorubicin
(0.37 µM to 0.09 µM). Synergism between EB and chemotherapy drugs was
determined by exposure of VPA17 cells to 1:1 ratios at the appropriate
IC50 values of EB: etoposide or EB: doxorubicin. After 4 days, the
combination index (CI) was determined using CalcuSyn software. EB and
etoposide showed modest synergism (CI = 0.80 at ED50 and CI = 0.90 at
ED95); EB and doxorubicin also showed synergism (CI = 0.65 at ED50 and CI
= 0.90 at ED95). The Wnt - β-catenin signaling pathway was investigated
as a possible explanation for the pharmacological effects of EB. In the
presence of EB, SCLC cells showed a time- and dose dependent reduction of
β-catenin (maximum 80% reduction). Cell fractionation studies showed
that the reduction was primarily in nuclear β-catenin. Transcription
analyses of SCLC cells showed EB led to significant reduction in
expression of β-catenin-dependent genes that are anti-apoptotic (e.g.,
c-Jun, survivin), cell division-related (e.g., CCND1 cyclin, sox9), and
metastasis-related (e.g., MMP7, uPAR). Down-regulation of the β-catenin
promoter was confirmed by transfection of SCLC cells with a construct
containing the promoter coupled to a luciferase reporter (reduced by
85%). WIKI4, a known inhibitor of Wnt signaling, was cytotoxic to SCLC
cells (IC50 = 0.02 uM). Synergism between EB and WIKI4 was determined by
exposure of VPA17 cells to 1:1 ratios at the appropriate IC50 values of
EB: WIKI4, as above. EB and WIKI4 showed antagonism (CI = 1.09 at ED50
and CI = 1.35 at ED95), suggesting that EB and WIKI4 act on the same
pathway. Taken together, these data indicate that EB, a natural product
with widespread occurrence in plants, is pharmacologically active in both
drug-sensitive and drug-resistant SCLC cells and acts through the Wnt
signaling pathway.


