Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A tumor stem cell marker DCLK1 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma
by regulating β-catenin, EMT and clonogenic properties of hepatocytes.


Introduction: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second most common
cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide with a 5-year survival rate of
Introduction: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second most common
cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide with a 5-year survival rate of
<15%. Chronic viral hepatitis, NASH, and cirrhosis are major risk factors
for the HCC development. Thus, HCC represents a major public health issue
worldwide. Currently, sorafenib is the only FDA-approved drug used for
HCC treatment. Unfortunately, it increases patient's survival by only 3
months. Tumor stem cells (TSCs) are likely responsible for resistance to
chemotherapy, relapse, and metastasis. We have demonstrated that a TSC
marker, doublecortin-like kinase (DCLK1), is induced during hepatic
injury, cirrhosis and HCC and its overexpression in HCC patient’s liver
significantly reduces survival. Therefore, understanding of the
mechanism(s) hepatic TSCs regulation is important for the development of
effective therapy against HCC.

Methods: Hepatoma Huh7 cells and primary human hepatocytes were infected
with lentiviruses expressing recombinant RFP-DCLK1 fusion protein. The
RFP-DCLK1-positive cells were isolated using FACS and subjected to
immunofluorescence confocal microscopy, clonogenic assay, Western blot
and xenograft in mice.

Results: DCLK1-overexpressing human hepatocytes formed spheroids but not
the control cells. DCLK1 overexpression induced accumulation of active
β-catenin in the perinuclear and nuclear regions in Huh7 cells with
concomitant increase in c-Myc. The DCLK1-negative cells lacked active
β-catenin and total β-catenin was observed only in their cell
membranes. Hepatic β-catenin mRNA levels were unaffected during various
stages of HCC. Analysis of HCC patients’ liver tissues (n= 369)
suggested that elevated DCLK1 mRNAs expression significantly correlates
with increased levels of MMP2, vimentin, Zeb2, Twist1 and VEGF-C which
are involved in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and tumor
invasion. Huh7-derived tumors also exhibited high level expression of
these factors.

Conclusions: These observations suggest that DCLK1 induces tumor/cancer
stem cell-like properties and EMT in liver cells. DCLK1 appears to
enhance active β-catenin levels and its cellular localization to the
nucleus. Thus, the DCLK1 represents an important target for HCC therapy.


