Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancer specific glycosylations survay by a panel of
lectin staining; Tn antigen exposure as a result of o-glycan truncation.


The outermost coating of every cell type is predominantly composed of
cell-specific glycans, and glycosylation changes in cancer has been used
in clinical field as a tumor markers, such including AFP and CA19-9. We
focused pancreatic cancer, the most intractable cancer with difficulty in
early diagnosis, and insisted to glasp glycosylation patterns by using a
panel of lectin histochemical stainings. Lectins are subgroup of proteins
that specifically recognize and bind glycans, and thus helpful indication
of glycosylation patterns. Lectin microarry is one of the advanced
technologies which inables glycosylation patters of target materials at
onece, however, obtained data with homogenized protein matelials applied
lacks histological location and information. Instead, we used a panel of
20 types of lectins histochemical staining for cancer and normal tissues.
The staining patterns were firstlly classified according to the ratio
between cancer cells and stromal cells. a) Cancer high (cancer cell ++
and stromal cells -) b) equal (cancer cells ++ or + and stromal cells ++
or +) c) Cancer Low (cancer cells - or + and stromal cells ++ or +).
Further more, the stainig in cancer cell were compaired with that of non
cancerous pancreatic ductal epitherial cells. Among 20 lectins, CNL,
Clitocybe nebularis Lectin binds motifs containing α/βGalNAc, Tn
antigen, and blood group A, showed cancer cell staining higher than
normal tissue in pancreatic cancer. Pancreatic cancer cell (31 of 58
patients,71%) were positive for CNL, but normal pancreatic duct cells (2
of 42 patients,4%) were positive in patients of pancreatic cancer. CNL is
known to recognize Tn Antigen in O-glycosylation. Previously, it reported
that during malignancy, glycosylation displays abnormal expression of
shortened or truncated glycans, such as a Tn antigen, T antigen and their
sialylated forms, ST, STn antigen. CNL staining pattern we showed in this
report is considered to matching Tn staining. Our result indicated that
speccific affinity of CNL lectin in pancreatic cancer and counterpart
glycoprotein are STn antigen. We may insist that STn glycoprotein antigen
could be used as a diagnostic marker of Pancreatic cancer and also it
would be a target of new tumor-targetting strategies.


