Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A crowdsourcing-based clinical trial information curation and
searching system.


Targeted cancer therapies based on actionable mutations identified are
the future of cancer treatment. Besides those approved by the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for different types of cancers, many other
target therapy drugs are in development under different phases of
clinical trials. Access to information about these clinical trials is
important to health care professionals and patients. Public clinical
trials database (www.clinicaltrials.gov) provides a very comprehensive
resource for clinicians and researches to search for relevant clinical
trials based on different kinds of searching criteria. However, due to
the complexity of wording and phasing upon submission, some of the
searching results returned by native search engine did not perfectly
match the search criteria. Many undesired results are presented with
false positives and false negatives when users are searching for clinical
trials targeting specific actionable mutations. To tackle this problem,
we developed a crowd-sourcing based clinical trial curation and searching
system on top of the information extracted from public database. We
divide the information extracted from clinicaltrials.gov into three
different levels: standard, easy-to-clean and unstructured. With the
crowdsourcing approach, our online system can harness the brainpower of
biological scientists to translate the most unstructured information such
as cancer types, gene mutations into standard format that is easy to be
queried. In the searching phase, we combine the aspects of actionable
mutation, cancer type, location, and clinical trial phase to select the
best matches between patient conditions and clinical trials in our
curated database. With the same searching criteria, our system can
provide more relevant clinical trials compared with those provided by
clinicaltrials.gov. The curation system is currently open to reviewers
with eligibility check. And the search engine is publicly available at:
https://agis.admerahealth.com/AGIS/ClinTrials/.


