Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of DDR-targeting strategy using ATR inhibitor in
biliary tract cancer.


Background: The DNA damage response (DDR) is a multicomplex network of
signaling pathways involved in DNA damage repair, cell cycle checkpoints
and apoptosis. The ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related (ATR) protein
kinase is a key enzyme in the DDR that activates checkpoint kinase 1
(Chk1), resulting in cell cycle arrest. Tumor types with loss of ATM
function and/or high replication stress are expected to be more
susceptible to DDR targeting. In biliary tract cancer (BTC), DNA repair
pathway, which includes BAP1, MSH6, BRCA1, ATM, MLH1, MSH2, is altered in
about 20 % of cases. TP53 module is observed in 33.9% of BTC cases (Nat
Genet 2015). The purpose of this study is to test DDR targeting strategy
using ATR inhibitor in biliary tract cancer.

Methods: Using 9 kinds of BTC cells, MTT assay and colony formation assay
were done for determining growth inhibitory effect of AZD6738, an ATR
inhibitor. Cell cycle analysis was done by FACS Calibur flow cytometer
and the methods described by Chou and Talalay were used to determine
whether a synergistic effect existed between AZD6738 and cytotoxic
chemotherapeutic agents (cisplatin, 5-FU, gemcitabine). The alkaline
comet assay was done to measure of DNA damage in individual cells. Tumor
xenografts model was used for in vivo test of AZD6738.

Results: Among 9 BTC cells, SNU478 and SNU869 were most sensitive to
AZD6738, which showed low expression of both ATM and p53. AZD6738 blocked
ATR-mediated Chk1 phosphorylation and increased rH2AX, a marker of DNA
damage, in sensitive cells. AZD6738 significantly increased apoptosis
(cleavage of PARP and caspase-7) and G2/M arrest, increased level of p21,
and decreased cdc2. In addition, combination of AZD6738 and cytotoxic
chemotherapeutic agents demonstrated synergistic effects in colony
formation assay, cell cycle analysis and comet assay. In xenograft model
of SNU478, AZD6738 monotherapy decreased tumor growth. The combination of
AZD6738 and cisplatin showed more potent growth inhibitory effects,
decreased Ki67, increased Tunel than monotherapy of each drug.

Conclusion: In BTC, DDR targeting strategy using ATR inhibitor
demonstrated promising antitumor activity alone or in combination with
cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents. This supports further clinical
development of DDR targeting strategy in BTC.


