Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of tumor mRNA expression for patient selection in a phase I
study of the pan-fibroblast growth factor receptor inhibitor BAY 1163877.


BAY 1163877 is a potent and selective, oral, small molecule pan-FGFR
inhibitor with anti-tumor activity in a wide range of cancer types. In
vivo profiling in xenograft models identified tumor FGFR mRNA levels as a
predictor of drug efficacy. Anti-tumor efficacy was largely independent
of the tumor type surveyed or the FGFR isoform being overexpressed.
Preclinical models included a patient-derived squamous head and neck
cancer (HNSCC) xenograft (PDx) model overexpressing FGFR3 mRNA, a bladder
cancer PDx model overexpressing FGFR2 mRNA, and a squamous esophageal
cancer PDx model overexpressing FGFR1 mRNA. Against this background,
clinical proof-of-concept was assessed by enrolling patients into the
stratified expansion cohort of a Phase 1 study of BAY 1163877
(NCT01976741) based on tumor FGFR1-3 mRNA levels. FGFR1-3 mRNA was
quantified in archival or newly obtained FFPE tumor biopsies by RNA in
situ hybridization (RNAscope, ACD) and digital transcript counting
(NanoString). In total, biopsies from > 500 patients were studied for
FGFR1-3 mRNA expression levels. Based on preclinical xenograft
experiments showing that low to moderate FGFR1-3 mRNA overexpression was
not sufficient for a robust drug response, only patients with an RNAscope
score of 3 or 4 (range 0-4) or a normalized Nanostring signal of 800
counts were eligible for enrollment. By applying these stringent
criteria, FGFR1-3 mRNA positivity was on average observed with a 2- to
3-fold higher prevalence than published data for genetic aberrations of
FGFRs in the respective tumor types (including amplifications,
translocations, mutations). We further identified FGFR mRNA(+) tumor
types in which genetic FGFR aberrations have not been previously
reported. FGFR1-3 mRNA positivity ranged from 10% in lung adenocarcinoma
to 45% in squamous non-small cell lung cancer (sqNSCLC) and 54% in HNSCC.
As of August 2016, 57 FGFR mRNA(+) patients were enrolled and treated
with BAY 1163877. Six patients experienced a partial remission (PR) by
RECIST v1.1 criteria; including an FGFR3 mRNA(+) HNSCC patient without
FGFR3 amplification or translocation, an FGFR1 mRNA(+) adenoid cystic
carcinoma patient, and an FGFR1 mRNA(+) sqNSCLC patient (both without
FGFR1 gene amplification), as well as an FGFR3 mRNA(+) bladder cancer
patient without FGFR3 amplification, mutation or translocation. These
results suggest that high FGFR1-3 mRNA expression identifies patients
sensitive to FGFR inhibition. This population includes patients with and
without genetic aberrations of FGFR1-3 encoding genes. In summary, an
mRNA expression-based selection approach may identify a broader patient
population with potential benefit from BAY 1163877, including tumor types
not previously associated with altered FGFR signaling.


