Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual-profiling of CTC and exosome from the cultured circulating
tumor cells using stimuli-responsive degaradable hydrogels.


Introduction: Liquid biopsy based on sub-micron or nanosized particles in
human body fluid have been received vast attention due to their
non-invasive characteristics and enabling multiple check-up. Circulating
tumor cells (CTCs), as well as exosome are the most promising markers in
liquid biopsy, however, dual isolation and profiling have been hampered
due to their size difference and limited quantity for analysis. We
proposed the novel and simple methods for both isolation and study their
similarity between them. Using the label-free CTC filtration device and
anti-CD63 antibody-conjugated degradable hydrogel, the CTCs and the
CTCs-derived exosome are specifically isolated, and each samples were
followed by molecular study after recovery. This versatile platform
facilitates the comprehensive study of two biomarkers with reflecting
their inherent characteristics, thus paving the way for revealing their
roles in cancer progression and metastasis.

Methods: In order to make stimuli-responsive degradable hydrogel, poly
(vinyl alcohol) and alginate were mixed under constant stirring at 85
°C. The mixture was poured into the mold and dried for 24 hours. Then,
the dried sheet was immersed into 100 mM calcium chloride solution to
achieve gelation through ionic interaction. Subsequently, the anti-CD63
antibody was immobilized onto the prepared hydrogels via cross-linking.
For the dual-profiling, the hydrogel and the filters containing the
captured breast cancer cells by microfiltration were incubated with the
exosome-depleted cell culture media for 6 hours. The captured cells were
released from the device and the hydrogels were degraded by adding EDTA.
The cell and exosome lysate were prepared using RIPA buffer at 4 °C. The
supernatant was collected by centrifugation followed by western-blot
assay. Four different markers, including exosome-specific marker (CD63),
cancer-associated markers (EpCAM, vimentin), and a housekeeping marker
(β-actin), were used.

Results: All exosome and cell samples highly expressed the housekeeping
marker. Especially, two exosome samples dissociated from the hydrogel
showed CD63 predominantly, which support the secretion of exosome from
the cancer cells. The samples from the released cancer cells from the
device did not express CD63 remarkably. To verify the phenotypical
similarity between cell and exosome, expressions of the epithelial marker
(EpCAM) and mesenchymal marker (vimentin) were examined. The exosome and
cell from MCF-7, epithelial cancer cell, showed higher expression of
EpCAM then vimentin. On the contrary to this, the samples from
MDA-MB-231, mesenchymal cell, showed higher vimentin expression then
EpCAM.

Discussion and conclusion: We showed that exosome follow the phenotypical
characteristics of mother-cells. This dual profiling would be helpful for
in-depth study of cancer with consideration of its heterogeneity and
complexity.


