Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of microRNA, mRNA, and protein expression
utilizing MultiOmyxTM and NanoStringTM from formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded, lung, head and neck, breast, and melanoma tumors.


Cancer is characterized as a loss of normal cellular regulation, due to
accumulation of mutations and disruption of complex biological pathways.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulation of co-stimulatory and immune checkpoint
pathways have been implicated as one of the potential mechanisms for
cancer evasion in immuno-oncology. It is estimated that 30% of all mRNA
expression may be regulated by miRNAs, and some are either oncogenic or
tumor suppressive. Complexity of miRNA regulation highlights the need for
integrated assays, providing direct correlation between miRNA and mRNA,
and protein expression. From a single 4 µm FFPE section, MultiOmyxTM
hyperplexed immunofluorescent assay (demonstrated to stain up to 60
protein biomarkers) is utilized to measure CD3, CD4, CD8, CD16, CD56,
Granzyme B, FoxP3, ICOS, OX40, OX40L, PD1, PDL1, HLA-DR, and Ki67 protein
expression. From an adjacent 10 µm section, NanoStringTM nCounter
PanCancer Immune Profiling Panel and Human v3 miRNA expression panel were
utilized to comprehensively profile the expression of 770 mRNA and 800
miRNA.

Integrating MultiOmyx and NanoString technologies, the current study
measured miRNA, mRNA, and protein expression in lung, head and neck,
breast, and melanoma samples. For each indication, three samples were
selected from a larger sample set, based on high protein expression of
lymphocytes and macrophage markers (CD3, CD4, CD8, CD56, CD16),
co-stimulator markers (ICOS, OX40), and immune checkpoint markers (PD1,
PD-L1). Protein expression results indicate positive correlation between
expression of ICOS and OX40 with higher infiltration of Thelper
(CD3+CD4+), Tcytotoxic (CD3+CD8+), and effector T cells (CD3+CD8+Granzyme
B). NanoString normalized mRNA counts for the protein biomarkers profiled
indicate that all markers except for HLA-DR belong to low expressers
group with counts ranging from 20-700. Comparison of protein expression
to mRNA counts revealed inconsistencies in modulated markers (PD1, PD-L1,
ICOS, OX40) which are attributed to differences in population of cells
between the two sections. Direct assessment of up regulation of miRNA and
down regulation of target mRNA could not be made for miRNAs reported in
literature as negative regulator of PD-L1 (miR-34a, 34b, 34c), PD1
(miR-28, miR-107), FoxP3 (miR-210, miR-24, miR-31), and ICOS (miR-101).
Analysis of multiple miRNAs (combinatorial targeting) mapped in context
to mRNA, and their respective protein expression will be presented from
lung, head and neck, breast, and melanoma cancer samples.


