Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of the imipridone family of small
molecules, including analogues of clinical-stage anti-cancer small
molecule ONC201, reveals potent anti-cancer effects of ONC212.


We previously identified a novel, potent anti-cancer small molecule
ONC201, which upregulates the integrated stress response (ISR) through
ATF4/CHOP/DR5 and acts as a dual inactivator of Akt and ERK, leading to
TRAIL gene activation. After completing a first-in-human phase I clinical
trial that revealed exceptional safety, therapeutic pharmacokinetic (PK)
profile and tumor engagement, ONC201 is under investigation in several
advanced cancer Phase I/II trials. Given the unique imipridone core
chemical structure of ONC201, we synthesized a family of analogues in an
effort to identify additional chemical family members with distinct
therapeutic properties. Based on in vitro potency improvements in human
cancer cell lines and therapeutic window approximations with normal human
fibroblasts, select analogues were investigated in animals for toxicity,
maximum tolerated dose (MTD), and antitumor efficacy. ONC212 is one of
the most promising new imipridones that was further evaluated to
establish the PK profile, oral bioavailability, and efficacy in tumor
types that are less sensitive to ONC201. Compared to ONC201, we noted
distinct and more rapid kinetics of activity as well as improved potency
in multiple human cancer cell lines in vitro. ONC212 has a broad
therapeutic window, an acceptable PK profile, and is orally
well-tolerated in mice. With no evidence of toxicity at efficacious doses
in both colon and triple negative breast cancer, we have begun further
evaluation of antitumor efficacy studies in ONC201-resistant tumor types.
Efficacy studies with ONC212 are ongoing in melanoma models that are
sensitive to ONC212 but less sensitive to ONC201 in vitro. Preliminary
data indicates potent tumor growth reduction by ONC212 in vivo in
ONC201-resistant melanoma xenografts. With a wide safety margin, potent
antitumor activity in ONC201-insenstive tumors, and drug-like
characteristics, ONC212 is being further developed as a drug candidate
from the new imipridone class of compounds that complements the spectrum
of activity of ONC201.


