Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survey of spliceosome gene mutations and associated splicing
defects across 33 cancer types.


Hotspot mutations in the core spliceosome genes SF3B1, U2AF1, SRSF2 have
been reported at high frequency in hematological malignancies and with
lower occurrence in solid tumors. The TCGA Exome-seq and RNAseq data from
33 tumor types, the majority solid tumors, provides a unique opportunity
to define the landscape of spliceosome mutations and associated splicing
alterations in human malignancies.

To this end, we compiled a list of 404 genes known to be involved in
splicing. We performed 2 different mutational analyses; for the first
analysis each tumor type was evaluated independently using MutSig2CV and
68 significantly mutated genes (q ≤ 0.1) were identified. The second
analysis was performed by systematically looking for genes across all
tumor types with loss of function (LoF) or hotspot in-frame mutations,
which identified an additional 12 genes. Among the 80 genes, EEF1A1,
HNRNPCL1, PCBP1, PHF5A and ZC3H4 carry hotspot mutations in addition to
the previously reported spliceosome genes SF1, SF3B1, SRSF2 and U2AF1.
Interestingly, we observed that known leukemia mutation/deletion near P95
in SRSF2 were also present in uveal melanoma. Furthermore, the 2 hotspot
mutations in U2AF1 identified in leukemia and lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD)
were detected in an additional 9 tumor types. We identified new SF3B1
hotspot mutations p.L833F, p.E862K, p.E902K/G, and p.R957Q located in the
heat domains (HD) 9-12 in AML, bladder (BLCA), and endometrial cancers.
Unexpectedly, alternative exon usage was the most common splicing event
observed in p.E902K mutant BLCA samples. This observation differs from
the reported alternative 3’ splice site usage induced by SF3B1 hotspot
mutations located in the HDs 4-8.

The majority of mutated spliceosome genes (52/80) contained LoF mutations
across multiple tumor types. In particular, RBM10 showed the highest
mutation frequency in LUAD (6.5%) and BLCA (3.8%), and FUBP1 in low grade
glioma (8.0%). Differential splicing analysis comparing RBM10 LoF mutant
and wild type LUAD identified exon inclusion and intron skipping as major
splicing alterations, consistent with data showing RBM10 knock-down
induces alternative exon usage within specific genes. Additionally, we
identified cassette exon usage as the major splicing alteration in FUBP1
mutant versus wild type glioma samples. FUBP1 has been reported to bind
and repress inclusion of AT rich exons, and confirming this finding we
observed higher AT content in exons included in FUBP1 LoF mutant samples
when compared to unaffected following exons. These findings suggest that
LoF mutations in spliceosome genes impact splicing regulation and may
play a critical role in cancer.

In conclusion, the landscape of hotspot and LoF mutations in multiple
spliceosome genes and associated splicing alterations highlight the
increasing importance of the splicing machinery in tumorigenesis in solid
tumors beyond hematological malignancies.


