Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination FGFR4 and ER-targeted therapy for invasive lobular
carcinoma.


Background Invasive Lobular Carcinoma (ILC) is an understudied subtype of
breast cancer. Distinctive properties of ILC include growth patterns,
metastatic behavior, receptor status (almost universally estrogen
receptor (ER) positive), and survival outcomes (Long-term survival is
lower in patients with ER+ ILC compared to the other main histological
subtype, invasive ductal carcinoma). Our lab recently generated six
long-term estrogen deprivation (LTED) models of ILC cells. We performed
RNA-Sequencing on these six LTED cell lines and identified differentially
expressed genes compared to their parental cells cultured with estrogen.
We overlapped these results with a previously published analysis of a
tamoxifen-resistant ILC cell line and found that FGFR4 is the most
consistently overexpressed gene in the setting of acquired resistance to
endocrine therapy in ILC cells.

Hypothesis FGFR4 is an important mediator of resistance to endocrine
therapy in ILC.

Methods To study the role of FGFR4 in acquired resistance to endocrine
therapy, we used siRNA, multiple shRNAs, and specific small molecule
inhibition for growth assays of ILC cells. To study the role of FGFR4 in
de novo resistance to endocrine therapy, we collected 129 well curated
ER+ ILC tumor specimens. We performed gene expression analysis on the
pre-treatment samples using a custom NanoString panel.

Results FGFR4 inhibition decreases parental and LTED ILC cell growth in
classic 2D growth conditions, in the setting of ultra-low attachment, and
in colony formation assays. Mechanistically, FGFR4 and estrogen signaling
are antagonistic in parental ILC cells. In our clinical samples,
increased expression of FGFR4 is predictive of shorter time to distant
recurrence.

Conclusion FGFR4 may play an important role in both acquired and de novo
resistance to endocrine therapy in ILC. Future studies will assess the
efficacy of combining FGFR4 inhibitors with ER-targeted therapy for
patients with ILC.


