Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An intravascular magnetic wire for high-throughput in vivo
enrichment of rare circulating cancer biomarkers.


Background: Liquid biopsies have long promised to enable earlier cancer
diagnosis and tailored therapy. However, circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
are extremely rare (1-10 cells per mL blood), limiting their clinical
utility. There are too few CTCs in a standard 5-10 mL blood sample for
culture and drug susceptibility testing, or for comprehensively profiling
a molecularly heterogeneous cancer and its metastases for drug resistance
mutations. To achieve large-scale CTC enrichment, new strategies are
needed that can rapidly and effectively interrogate large blood volumes.

Aim: To design a flexible magnetic wire capable of high-throughput
intravascular enrichment and retrieval of rare biomarkers, including
CTCs, from the entire circulating blood volume to attain a much higher
biomarker yield for earlier cancer detection and personalized treatment.

Methods: We present a promising platform for in vivo enrichment of rare
biomarkers, the Magnetic Wire for Intravascular Retrieval and Enrichment
(MagWIRE): a flexible, self-contained magnetic wire consisting of a
string of small magnets with alternating polarities, achieving high local
field gradients along its entire length to capture magnetically labeled
targets from a large surrounding volume. The platform is proposed to work
as follows: Blood biomarkers are immunomagnetically labeled by injecting
a patient with antibody-coated magnetic particles (MPs), similar to
FDA-approved Feraheme®. The MagWIRE is then inserted through a standard
IV catheter into a superficial vein in the arm or through an existing
chemotherapy port to magnetically capture passing MP-bound biomarkers.
Within an hour, ~5 liters has circulated through a 2-3-mm-diameter human
vein, allowing most of the patient’s blood volume to be sampled. The
magnets can then be displaced from the MagWIRE sheath to elute the bound
targets into buffer for downstream analysis. We performed
proof-of-concept demonstrations in: 1) a closed-loop blood circulation
system consisting of a pump, tubing, and a blood reservoir, and 2) in
vivo within a porcine ear vein model. To model CTC capture, we targeted
H1650 lung cancer cells with 1-μm superparamagnetic iron oxide particles
coated with antibodies against epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM),
a commonly used CTC marker. We couple the MagWIRE with a unique approach
for rapid (Methods: We present a promising platform for in vivo
enrichment of rare biomarkers, the Magnetic Wire for Intravascular
Retrieval and Enrichment (MagWIRE): a flexible, self-contained magnetic
wire consisting of a string of small magnets with alternating polarities,
achieving high local field gradients along its entire length to capture
magnetically labeled targets from a large surrounding volume. The
platform is proposed to work as follows: Blood biomarkers are
immunomagnetically labeled by injecting a patient with antibody-coated
magnetic particles (MPs), similar to FDA-approved Feraheme®. The MagWIRE
is then inserted through a standard IV catheter into a superficial vein
in the arm or through an existing chemotherapy port to magnetically
capture passing MP-bound biomarkers. Within an hour, ~5 liters has
circulated through a 2-3-mm-diameter human vein, allowing most of the
patient’s blood volume to be sampled. The magnets can then be displaced
from the MagWIRE sheath to elute the bound targets into buffer for
downstream analysis. We performed proof-of-concept demonstrations in: 1)
a closed-loop blood circulation system consisting of a pump, tubing, and
a blood reservoir, and 2) in vivo within a porcine ear vein model. To
model CTC capture, we targeted H1650 lung cancer cells with 1-μm
superparamagnetic iron oxide particles coated with antibodies against
epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM), a commonly used CTC marker. We
couple the MagWIRE with a unique approach for rapid (<10 seconds)
magnetic labeling of CTCs in flow for immediate downstream capture by the
wire on a single pass.

Results: Considerable gains are achievable by sampling from large
volumes, even at relatively low capture efficiencies. In our closed-loop
setup, the MagWIRE demonstrated capture efficiencies in whole blood of
56.14+/-15.80% for pre-labeled cells and 10.17+/-5.41% for cells labeled
in flow. In a porcine ear model, we captured cells with efficiencies up
to 8%, corresponding to 80-fold enrichment when integrated over a 5-liter
blood volume compared with a 5 mL blood draw.


