Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VCF2CNA: a tool for efficiently detecting copy number alteration
using VCF genotype data.


Whole genome sequencing (WGS) is increasingly used in both research and
clinical settings. The Variant Call Format (VCF) specification is a
widely adopted file format for genetic variation data exchange partially
due to its smaller file size compared to raw WGS BAMs. Each variant in a
typical VCF file contains its chromosome position, reference/alternative
alleles and corresponding allele counts. This makes it possible to
identify copy number alterations (CNAs). To this end, we developed
VCF2CNA (http://vcf2cna.stjude.org), a web interface tool for CNA
analysis from VCF files.

A user of VCF2CNA, uploads a VCF file via the provided web interface. The
entire analysis runs remotely with an average run time of 23 minutes.
Results are emailed to the user as either a downloadable link or file
attachments. VCF2CNA also accepts input in the Mutation Annotation Format
(MAF) and the variant file format produced by the Bambino program.

We analyzed 22 TCGA glioblastoma tumor/normal pairs by Illumina
technology to evaluate VCF2CNA’s performance. It achieved high
consistency (average F1-score: 0.952 ± 0.082) with CONSERTING, a tool
that incorporated read-depth and SV data from raw BAMs for CNA detection.
A segment-by-segment comparison between results from CONSERTING and
VCF2CNA indicated that the latter was less sensitive to focal CNAs. This
is expected because there is less information in the VCF input than in
raw BAMs. Further analysis using samples with a “fractured genome”
pattern revealed that VCF2CNA was more robust to library artifacts and
produced relatively clean CNA profiles (on average 76.2-fold reduction
compared to the number of segments reported by CONSERTING).

Finally, we analyzed 137 pediatric neuroblastoma samples from the TARGET
project, sequenced by Complete Genomics, Inc. (CGI) technology. MYCN
amplification has been clinically validated in 33 samples. VCF2CNA
identified high amplitude MYCN gains in 32 samples and the remaining
sample carried a low-level broad gain covering MYCN. For comparison,
CGI’s HMM-based method reported MYCN gains in only 15 out of the 33
samples. VCF2CNA further identified two additional MYCN amplifications
among the remaining samples. Collectively, our analysis suggests that
VCF2CNA is a platform-independent, efficient, robust and accurate tool
for general WGS-based CNA analysis. It further complements CONSERTING,
which produces more accurate result in focal CNAs at the cost of
significantly higher computational burden.


