Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATM/ATR-SerRS pathway dominates hypoxic angiogenesis in tumor.


Hypoxia-induced angiogenesis is a critical response in multicellular
organisms to maintain oxygen homeostasis. It is also an important
mechanism to support tumor progression. Hypoxia activates
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) and HIF-independent pathways to
transcriptionally induce the expression of pro-angiogenic genes. However,
our knowledge on transcriptional repressors of angiogenesis and how they
are regulated during hypoxia are limited. Here we report that seryl-tRNA
synthetase (SerRS), a newly identified transcriptional repressor of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGFA), is a major inhibitor of
angiogenesis that is inactivated during hypoxia1-4. Inactivation of SerRS
is achieved through its phosphorylation at serine 101 and serine 241 by
ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and the related kinase ATR. Knockdown
of HIF is not sufficient to completely block hypoxia-induced VEGFA
expression in human cells unless a phosphorylation-deficient form of
SerRS (SerRSS101A/S241A) is simultaneously expressed to escape ATM/ATR
inactivation. Consistently, in mice, SerRSS101A/S241A can bypass hypoxia
response despite HIF activation to strongly inhibit angiogenesis in a
matrigel assay and a xenograft model of human breast cancer. These
findings reveal ATM/ATR-SerRS pathway as a key negative regulator of
angiogenesis related to hypoxia and a new target for cancer therapy.

References 1. Fukui, H., Hanaoka, R., and Kawahara, A. (2009).
Noncanonical activity of seryl-tRNA synthetase is involved in vascular
development. Circ Res 104, 1253-1259. 2. Herzog, W., Muller, K., Huisken,
J., and Stainier, D. Y. (2009). Genetic evidence for a noncanonical
function of seryl-tRNA synthetase in vascular development. Circ Res 104,
1260-1266. 3. Shi, Y., Xu, X., Zhang, Q., Fu, G., Mo, Z., Wang, G. S.,
Kishi, S., and Yang, X. L. (2014). tRNA synthetase counteracts c-Myc to
develop functional vasculature. Elife 3, e02349. 4. Xu, X., Shi, Y.,
Zhang, H. M., Swindell, E. C., Marshall, A. G., Guo, M., Kishi, S., and
Yang, X. L. (2012). Unique domain appended to vertebrate tRNA synthetase
is essential for vascular development. Nat Commun 3, 681.


