Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Germline mutations in NBN conferring DNA damage response defects
are found in patients with multiple cancer types.


Nibrin, the protein encoded by the NBN gene forms a complex with Mre11
and Rad51 (MRN complex) that is crucial for DNA damage repair. Mutations
in NBN are found in >90% of patients with Nimjegen breakage syndrome
(NBS), an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by growth
retardation, microcephaly, radiosensitivity, immunodeficiency and
increased cancer risk. Most of NBS patients harbor the common founder
mutation c.657del5 that leads to expression of a hypomorphic 70kDa
C-terminal fragment produced by alternative translation initiation. Cell
lines derived from these patients show increased sensitivity to
DNA-damaging agents, chromosome instability, and abnormal cell cycle
checkpoint function. Several studies have addressed cancer incidence in
individuals with germline NBN mutations, showing increased cancer risk
for individuals harboring the c.657del5 founder mutation and for carriers
of the R215W missense mutation across multiple cancer types. For other
NBN mutations conflicting reports exist as to their association with
cancer risk. Here, we report newly identified NBN germline frameshift and
truncating mutations in patients with multiple cancer types, including
prostate, lung, breast cancer, acute lymphocytic leukemia, and chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Modeling these mutations in an NBN-deficient
cellular background showed expression of a novel C-terminal truncated
fragment that can bind to Mre11. Cells expressing these mutant proteins
display attenuated DNA damage repair function and decreased overall
survival following induction of DNA damage. Impaired Chk2 phosphorylation
was also observed, indicating cell cycle checkpoint deficiencies. Thus,
the NBN germline mutations identified here could contribute to genomic
instability predisposing to tumorigenesis. Further in vitro studies with
these and additional germline mutations occurring in cancer patients are
ongoing, in order to better understand the role of this pathway of DNA
damage repair in susceptibility to malignancies.


