Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential sensitivity analysis for resistant malignancies
(DISARM), a novel approach for drug screen analysis, identifies common
candidate drugs across platinum-resistant cancer types.


Resistance to therapy, including conventional chemotherapy, targeted
therapy and immunotherapy, continues to plague cancer treatment.
Moreover, mechanisms governing resistance are poorly characterized
leading to a dearth of rational combinatorial and sequential treatment
strategies. While drug response data is abundant across myriad tumor
types and drug classes, there exists no high-throughput method to probe
such data with a query as simple as “If tumors are resistant to drug X,
to what drug(s) are they sensitive?”- a seemingly trivial problem beset
by immense data sets and imprecise definitions of sensitivity and
resistance. Here, we present DISARM, a novel approach designed
specifically to screen for drugs that are active in spite of resistance
to a reference drug. DISARM selects candidates based on the proportion of
samples that are resistant to a reference drug but sensitive to a
candidate drug with simultaneous consideration to relatively lower IC50
values for candidate drugs and higher IC50 values for reference drugs. As
candidates may work in only a subset of resistant models and precise
delineation between sensitivity and resistance may vary between
experimental settings, DISARM permits flexibility in dichotomizing drug
data and uses grid search to optimize specifications. To illustrate, we
analyzed publically available cell line data (IC50 data) from several
cancer types for which platinum-based therapy is a standard of care,
identifying multiple drugs that demonstrate activity in
cisplatin-resistant models across tumor types such as the BCL-2 inhibitor
obatoclax in small cell lung cancer, lung adenocarcinoma, gastric
adenocarcinoma and bladder cancer, and the farnesyltransferase inhibitor
tipifarnib in small cell lung cancer, bladder cancer, esophageal cancer,
colon adenocarcinoma and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Frequently, multiple drugs from the same class were selected by DISARM
for a single tumor type and, in these cases, we found statistically
significant similarity between sensitive cell lines suggesting a subset
of cisplatin-resistant cell lines that are repeatedly sensitive to a drug
class. While translating preclinical observations into approved clinical
use is often thwarted by an inability to identify predictive biomarkers,
DISARM also allows us to select cell lines that are especially sensitive
to candidate drugs or drug classes on which to perform biomarker
analysis. To demonstrate this approach, we chose drugs with activity in
multiple cancer types and compared mRNA and protein expression data to
highlight potentially novel common and tumor-specific biomarkers for
concomitant candidate drug sensitivity and cisplatin resistance. Thus,
DISARM offers a simple yet effective approach for both drug and biomarker
discovery within a specified clinical niche.


