Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The anti-tumor effect and the impact on gut microbiota of
gypenosides Rd and Rb3 in ApcMin/+ mice.


Gut commensal microbiota (GM) is closely associated with health and
diseases, including cancer. In our previous studies, we have demonstrated
that Gynostemma pentaphyllum saponins (GpS) exert anticancer effects in
both athymic and ApcMin/+ mice. Our recent study also showed that GpS
exhibited prebiotic effect by up regulating the beneficial bacteria and
improving the epithelial microenvironment of the gut. Gypenoside IV (Rb3)
and gypenoside VII (Rd) are the two constituents of GpS. The Rd exhibits
stronger anticancer effect than Rb3 in an in vitro cell model system
established in our lab. Our aim is to confirm the antitumor effect of
these two compounds, as well as their impact on GM in the ApcMin/+ mouse
model. In the study, single daily dose of Rb3 or Rd at 20mg/kg, and
solvent control were orally fed to the mice for 8 weeks, started at 6
weeks of age before the appearance of spontaneous intestinal polyps. The
fecal microbiome was analyzed by enterobacterial repetitive intergenic
consensus (ERIC)-PCR and 16S rRNA gene pyrosequencing technique. We found
that Rd was more effective than Rb3 in reducing polyp formation, and
improving the intestinal lining by up-regulating anti-inflammatory
cytokines IL-4 and IL-10. Rd, not Rb3, might facilitate intestinal tissue
repair by enhancing M2 marker while suppressing M1 markers expression.
Moreover, Rd treatment greatly enhanced the ratio of Bacteroidetes vs
Firmicutes, while profoundly reduced the abundance of
cancer-cachexia-associated bacteria, such as Parabacteroides goldsteinii
(22.25%), Dysgonomonas wimpennyi (48.54%) and Blautia coccoides (36.77%).
These findings suggested that the level of antitumor effect of the
gypenoside might be correlated with its ability to modulate the gut
microbiota from dysbiosis state to symbiosis.

This study was supported by Macau Science and Technology Development Fund
015/2014/A1.


