Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted cancer immunotherapy with engineered Salmonella
typhimurium secreting heterologous bacterial flagellin.


Salmonella typhimurium is a facultative anaerobic bacteria and can
selectively grow in tumors following systemic administration. Different
strategies have been used to deliver payloads to tumor tissues using
engineered Salmonellae. We report a novel method of cancer immunotherapy
using an attenuated S. typhimurium strain engineered to secrete Vibrio
vulnificus flagellin B (FlaB) in tumor tissues.Previously, we developed
an attenuated strain of S. typhimurium, which is defective in ppGpp
synthesis (ΔppGpp S. typhimurium), and manifested significantly
increased LD50 by 100,000 to 1,000,000-fold. To generate an inducible
vector system for bacterial expression of the therapeutic gene, we cloned
the flaB gene into the pBAD plasmid vector in which the pelB leader
sequence was cloned upstream of flaB to guide extracellular secretion;
gene expression from the plasmid (pFlaB) was induced only in the presence
of L-arabinose. To evaluate the antitumor activity of engineered S.
typhimurium, C57BL/6 mice transplanted with MC38 tumors were injected
intravenously (i.v.) with PBS, ΔppGpp S. typhimurium carrying an empty
vector, or ΔppGpp S. typhimurium carrying pFlaB (+/˗ L-arabinose
induction). To test whether the FlaB-secreting ΔppGpp S. typhimurium has
inhibitory effects on human metastatic cancer, we next implanted
HCT116-luc2 tumors into the intestinal wall of BALB/c athymic nu-/nu-
mice using a surgical orthotopic implantation (SOI) procedure. Engineered
FlaB-secreting Salmonellae significantly suppressed tumor growth and
metastasis in mouse models and prolonged survival. By using TLR5-negative
colon cancer cell lines (MC38 and HCT116), we have proved that the
FlaB-mediated tumor suppression upon bacterial colonization should be
associated with TLR5-mediated host reactions in the tumor
microenvironment. These therapeutic effects were completely abrogated in
TLR4 and MyD88 knockout mice, and partly in TLR5 knockout mice, strongly
suggesting that TLR4 signaling is a requisite for the FlaB-secreting
bacteria-mediated tumor suppression where TLR5 signaling augmented tumor
suppressive host reactions. Tumor colonization by engineered Salmonellae
appeared to induce the infiltration of abundant immune cells such as
monocytes/macrophages and neutrophils via the TLR4 signaling. Subsequent
secretion of FlaB from colonizing Salmonellae resulted in phenotypic and
functional activation of intratumoral macrophages with M1 phenotypes and
a reciprocal reduction in M2-like suppressive activities. Taken together,
these findings provide evidence that non-virulent tumor targeting
bacteria liberating multiple TLR ligands can be used as novel cancer
immunotherapeutics.


