Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of collagen receptor discoidin domain receptor-1 (DDR1)
reduces gastric cancer cell motility and metastasis.


Accumulating evidences suggest that a unique set of receptor tyrosine
kinases, known as discoidin domain receptors (DDRs), play a role in
cancer progression by interaction with their surrounding collagen matrix.
Although abnormal expression of DDRs is reported in some human cancers,
little is known about the expression and function of DDRs in gastric
cancer progression. In this study, we investigated expression and the
role of DDR1 in the tumor progression of human gastric cancer. The
expression and distribution of DDR1 was analyzed by immunohistochemistry
in 127 human gastric cancer cases, and the expression level of DDR1 in 7
human gastric cancer cell lines was analyzed by RT-PCR and western
blotting. Proliferation, migration, invasion, and tube formation assays
were conducted in DDR1 silenced gastric cancer cells. The effect of DDR1
on the tumor growth and metastasis were examined in orthotopically
implanted nude mice model and a model of liver metastasis. DDR1 was
expressed in human gastric cancer cell lines, and expression of DDR1 in
human gastric tumor was associated with poor prognosis. Among 7 gastric
cancer cell lines, MKN74 expressed DDR1 at highest level. DDR1-silenced
MKN74 cells showed unaltered proliferation activity. In contrast,
migration, invasion, and tube formation were significantly reduced. When
examined in an orthotopic nude mouse model, DDR1-silenced implanted tumor
significantly decreased angiogenesis and lymphangiogensesis, thereby
leading to reduction of lymph node metastasis and liver metastasis. We
showed that treatment of DDR1 inhibitor also inhibited lymph node
metastasis in an orthotopic nude mouse model These results suggest that
DDR1 is involved in GC tumor progression and metastasis. DDR1 could be
not only an independent prognostic classifier, but also a promising
therapeutic target in patients with GC.


