Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-stem-cell (CSC) marker, DCLK1-S, enhances invasive
potential of cancer cells by phosphorylating/activating NFATc2: role of
COL3A1 and SPARC in mediating metastatic effects of DCLK1-S/NFATc2.


DCLK1 expression is critically required for colon carcinogenesis in mice,
and for maintaining tumorogenic potential of human colon cancer cells
(hCCCs) (Singh et al, 2016). Down-regulation of DCLK1, combined with
chemoprevention, eliminates CSCs, and avoids colon cancer relapse
(Kantara et al, 2014). We recently discovered that long (L) and Short (S)
isoforms of DCLK1 (DCLK1-L/DCLK1-S) are transcribed by two separate
promoters (5’(α)/IntronV(β)) in the hDCLK1-gene (O’Connell et al,
2015). During adenoma-carcinoma sequence of colon-tumorigeneses,
L-isoform becomes silenced by DNA-methylation while S-isoform gets
upregulated by many fold (O’Connell et al, 2015). S-isoform
specifically imparts invasive potential to cancer cells, unlike L-isoform
(Singh et al, 2016); others have similarly reported metastatic potential
of DCLK1 expressing cancer cells (Ito et al, 2016). Thus the goal of our
studies was to evaluate molecular/genetic pathways mediating invasive
effects of DCLK1-S in cancer cells. Isogenic clones of HCT116-cells,
wild-type or down-regulated for DCLK1-S (HCT-C/HCT-D), were subjected to
next generation sequencing and pathways analysis. SPARC and COL3A1
emerged as two candidate genes/proteins, which were decreased/increased
by several fold in response to loss/overexpression of DCLK1-S,
respectively. We present data confirming a critical role of COL3A1 and
SPARC in mediating metastatic effects of DCLK1-S expression in hCCCs. We
additionally discovered that DCLK1-S functions as a specific kinase for
the transcriptional factor, NFATc2, and phosphorylates 53SPPS56 motif of
NFATc2, resulting in activation of NFATc2 and increased expression of
COL3A1. Conclusions. Our novel findings, suggest for the first time, that
DCLK1-S expression by colonic tumors in humans, mediates invasive
potential of colon cancer cells by phosphorylation/activation of NFATc2,
resulting in up-regulation of COL3A1/SPARC; the latter proteins re-model
extracellular matrix, assisting unhindered invasion of colon cancer cells.


