Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting tumor-amplified ODC1 with difluoromethylornithine (DFMO)
inhibits global protein translation and has antitumor activity in
neuroblastoma.


MYC genes are predominant oncogenic drivers in neuroblastoma, a lethal
pediatric tumor, often via amplification of MYCN. MYC genes coordinately
deregulate programs that link cell cycle entry with requisite biomass and
energy creation. Polyamine synthesis is one such deregulated program that
supports protein synthesis. Ornithine decarboxylase (Odc, encoded by
ODC1) is the rate-limiting enzyme in polyamine synthesis, a direct MYC
target, and a bonafide oncogene. In addition to hyperactivated MYCN
driving polyamine signaling, ODC1 itself is co-amplified in a subset of
high-risk tumors. We studied 30 neuroblastoma cell lines and 916 primary
tumors via SNP-array. ODC1 amplification (confirmed by qPCR) was found
exclusively in tumors with MYCN amplification, though amplification peaks
were distinct (ODC1 maps 5.5 Mb telomeric to MYCN). ODC1 amplification
was identified in 33 of 256 (13%) MYCN amplified primary tumors and 4 of
13 (31%) MYCN-amplified cell lines. Difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) is an
FDA-approved irreversible inhibitor of the oncogenic Odc enzyme, and we
have shown DFMO inhibits tumor progression and synergizes with
chemotherapy in complementary murine models of neuroblastoma. We
postulated DFMO inhibits protein translation as its principal mechanism
of anti-tumor activity. Polyamines support protein translation via
effects on both eIF5A and eIF4F-complex activities, yet their relative
contributions remain poorly defined. Using the puromycin-incorporation
assay we show a marked decrease in global protein translation following
DFMO exposure (up to 95% reduction), with translation inhibition largely
correlated with MYCN amplification status in the tumor cells. Studies to
define the dose-response and kinetics of DFMO-mediated inhibition in
tumors with distinct MYCN and ODC1 genotypes are ongoing, as are studies
of eIF5A-hypusination (by IEF) and eIF4F-complex status
(polyamine-dependent 4E-BP phosphorylation). Moreover, eIF5A is required
to resolve ribosome stalling at polyproline stretches, so we
characterized the human proteome for polyproline motifs (PPP of >3) to
define an eIF5A-dependent translatome. Candidate genes of diverse
polyproline content are being assessed for sensitivity to DFMO to define
whether ribosome pausing and selective translation inhibition contributes
to DFMO effects. Elucidating mechanisms of DFMO activity and correlating
this with genomic status (MYCN and/or ODC1 amplified) will identify
opportunities for drug synergy and provide a responder hypothesis to test
in pivotal Phase 2 and 3 clinical trial of DFMO for neuroblastoma.


