Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Topoisomerase IIβ silencing increases R loops at specific genomic
loci associated with an increase of γH2AX and cell cycle progression
delay in human cancer cells.


DNA topoisomerases (Top) are important players in maintaining the genome
stability of cells by removing negative and positive DNA supercoils
during transcription, replication and other DNA transactions. Recent
evidence demonstrated that Top 1 silencing and poisoning by camptothecin
affect the formation of R-loops, which are RNA/DNA hybrid structures
involved in genome instability and are favored by negative supercoils of
the DNA. The findings overall demonstrate that Top 1 reduces R loop
levels during transcription whereas it favors R loop formation at early
origins of DNA replication. Here, we address the question of whether DNA
topoisomerase IIβ can also contribute to steady-state levels of R loop
structures in the genome of U2OS cancer cells. We have then investigated
the effects of Top2β silencing and Top2 poisons, doxorubicin and
etoposide, on R loops and DNA damage in human U2OS cancer cells.
Similarly to published data with camptothecin (Marinello et al., Nucleic
Acids Research, 2013), Top2 poisons increase cellular R loops by IF after
short treatment times and reduce them after 1 hour of treatment. The
bi-phasic effect of poisons is mainly dependent on transcription.
Moreover, we have determined the changes of R-loop levels by IF after
Top2β silencing and the findings demonstrate that the enzyme can
strongly modulate the formation of R loops as a full Top2β depletion
increases nuclear R-loop levels. In addition, Top2β depletion leads to a
slight increase of phosphorylation of H2AX histone along with cell cycle
delay and eventually cell death. Thus, Top2β depletion can trigger
genomic DNA breakage through alterations of R-loops. In order to
establish which are the genomic regions of altered R loop levels, we have
mapped Top2β-dependent R loop alterations by the DRIP method showing
that specific genomic sites are affected by Top2β. Bioinformatic
analyses of R loop maps in U2OS cells will be presented and discussed at
the meeting. Altogether the findings demonstrate a critical role of
Top2β in governing R loop structures in human cancer cells indicating
that DNA torsional tension is a main driving factor of R loop formation
and hence genome instability in cancer cells.


