Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of curcumin in targeting cancer-associated fibroblasts and
modulation of tumor microenvironment in dendritic cell-based
immunotherapy.


INTRODUCTION: Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs), main component of
tumor microenvironment (TME), modulate the recruitment and functions of
tumor-associated immune cells by secreting various growth hormones,
miRNAs and cytokines; thus having an important role in generation of
immunosuppressive TME which is yet to be elucidated. Curcumin is known to
have various properties including capability to modulate numerous target
proteins including transcription factors, receptors, kinases, cytokines,
enzymes and growth factors. Thus, aim of the study was to evaluate the
effect of miRNAs and cytokines released by lung cancer patients’
derived CAFs and to assess immunomodulatory potential of curcumin on DC
maturation by targeting these CAFs through modulating their TME.

METHODOLOGY: CAFs were cultured from lung cancer patient derived tumor
tissue biopsy and characterised using CAF-specific markers. Further,
immature DCs (imDCs) were differentiated in presence of rGM-CSF and rIL-4
for 5-6 days. These imDCs were cultured in the presence of conditioned
media derived from CAFs (CAFs-CM) as well as NFs (Normal Fibroblasts,
NFs-CM) at day 6 for 48 hours to evaluate the effect of CAFs on DC
maturation. Mature DCs (mDCs) were characterized by the presence of
maturation markers CD80, CD83, CD86 and CTLA4 using qRT-PCR. Moreover,
expression of miR-221, miR-222, miR-155, miR-142-3p and miR-146a was
assessed to evaluate the role of epigenetic regulators on DC maturation.
Cytokine profiling of CAFs-CM as well as CAFs-CM treated with curcumin
was conducted.

RESULTS: α-SMA+Vimentin+ cells were considered as CAFs. A significant
upregulation of CD80, CD83 and CD86 was observed when cultured in the
presence of NFs-CM while a remarkable downregulation of these markers was
found when cultured in CAFs-CM. CTLA-4 was down regulated in NFs-CM as
compared to CAFs-CM, suggesting the role of CAFs in generation of
regulatory DCs. Amongst all miRNAs, miR-146a was shown to be up regulated
dramatically in CAF-DCs (DCs cultured in CAFs-CM) as well as in CAFs-CM,
suggesting the immunosuppressive role of miR-146a. Further, an increased
expression of miR-146a was positively correlated with increased
expression of anti-inflammatory cytokines like IL-6, IL-10, TGF-β and
decreased expression of TNF-α (pro-inflammatory) in CM derived from
CAF-DCs. Moreover, curcumin had the potential to convert regulatory DCs
facilitated by CAFs into mDCs, which were characterized by high
expression of co-stimulatory molecules, low expression of CTLA4, lower
levels of immune suppressive cytokines production, lower levels of
miR-146a.

CONCLUSION: These findings provide insight into understanding the
immunomodulatory role of curcumin in targeting CAFs and modulating the
tumor microenvironment, thus enhancing antitumor immune response in DC
based therapy.


