Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single-cell genetic analysis of ductal carcinoma in situ with and
without synchronous invasive breast cancer by multiplex FISH delineates
specific patterns of tumor clonality and heterogeneity.


We previously studied synchronous Ductal Carcinomas in Situ (DCIS) and
Invasive Ductal Carcinomas (IDC) using a novel approach of multiplexing
FISH probes that allows us to simultaneously assess the copy numbers of
up to 20 loci within intact nuclei providing new insights into tumor
clonality and heterogeneity. A high degree of chromosomal instability
already in DCIS, and frequently, but not always, a direct clonal
evolution from DCIS to IDC was detected. We now ask whether this degree
of instability is also present in DCIS that did not progress to IDC and
are therefore analyzing FFPE material from 20 patients with either
low-grade and high-grade DCIS who did not present with invasive breast
carcinoma during their follow-up (5-10 years), in addition to 10 patients
who presented with synchronous IDC. The multiplex FISH assay used targets
five oncogenes (COX2, MYC, CCND1, HER2, ZNF217) and three tumor
suppressor genes (DBC2, CDH1, TP53) frequently altered in breast
carcinomas. To date, we have analyzed two paired cases of synchronous
DCIS and IDC, DCIS-IDC 3 and 4, and three cases of DCIS without IDC,
OP-DCIS 1, 4 and 5. The paired cases exhibited very similar aberration
patterns for synchronous DCIS and IDC indicating the invasive carcinoma
is closely related to the DCIS lesion. Specifically, the major clones in
DCIS 3 (low-grade) and IDC 3 showed a diploid tumor cell population with
a gain of COX2, and losses of DBC2, MYC, TP53, and HER2. Of note, the
only difference observed was a gain of ZNF217 in the DCIS which was not
seen in the major clone of the invasive carcinoma. The other paired case,
DCIS 4 (high-grade) and IDC 4, showed major clones of triploid tumor cell
populations with gains of COX2, CCND1 and MYC and losses of DBC2, CDH1,
TP53 and ZNF217. The three DCIS cases without synchronous or subsequent
IDC exhibited varying degrees of aberration and complexity patterns in
their clonal populations. Case OP-DCIS 1, a high-grade DCIS, revealed a
tetraploid cell population which showed a major clone with an
amplification of CCND1 and a MYC gain combined with losses of DBC2, CDH1,
TP53 and HER2. A low-grade DCIS, OP-DCIS 4, exhibited a diploid cell
population with a major clone showing loss of CDH1 as the only
aberration. The third case OP-DCIS 5 (low-grade DCIS) exhibited a diploid
cell population with one major clone showing losses of CDH1, MYC, DBC2,
TP53, HER2 and CCND1. Our preliminary observations show a tendency of
diploid lesions with a predominance of loss patterns for low-grade DCIS,
while high-grade DCIS seem to reveal higher ploidy with more complex gain
and loss patterns. However, also low-grade DCIS with mainly loss patterns
progress to invasive cancers as seen in case DCIS-IDC3. We expect that
the analysis of the remaining cases will further elucidate the dynamics
of DCIS lesions which will hopefully help to assess and stratify
progression risk in patients with DCIS.


