Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the mitochondrial enzyme proline dehydrogenase with a
mechanism-based irreversible inhibitor induces selective mitochondrial
stress and enhances breast cancer cell death under hypoxia.


Proline dehydrogenase (PRODH) is a p53-inducible inner mitochondrial
membrane flavoprotein functionally linked to electron transport for
proline catabolism and intracellular ATP production, particularly under
nutrient stress conditions. We have previously shown that in breast
cancer cells, PRODH and glutaminase (GLS1) transcript levels are
inversely correlated, supplying anaplerotic glutamate to triple-negative
(GLS1) and luminal (PRODH) breast cancer subtypes by different means; and
that siRNA knockdown or competitive inhibition of PRODH induces synthetic
lethal interactions with both GLS1 inhibition and p53 upregulation in
various malignant (ZR-75-1, DU4475, MCF7) but not normal (MCF10A) breast
epithelial models. In the present study we have synthesized and
structurally modeled a novel mechanism-based irreversible (suicide)
inhibitor of PRODH, N-propargylglycine (PPG), that shows more than 2-fold
greater capacity to inhibit PRODH activity in isolated mitochondrial
assays when compared to competitive PRODH inhibitors (L-tetrahydrofuroic
acid, THFA; or 5-oxo-2-tetrahydrofurancarboxylic acid, 5-oxo). Modeling
human PRODH predicts a post-reactive PPG structure with PPG covalently
linked to the enzyme pocket’s FAD moiety, producing pocket distortion
that does not occur with competitive PRODH inhibitors. Reflecting PPG’s
irreversible binding to PRODH, mitochondria isolated from PPG treated
ZR-75-1 cells are unable to catabolize proline despite being able to
efficiently catabolize malate; in contrast, isolated mitochondria from
5-oxo treated cells remain efficient at catabolizing both proline and
malate. Unexpectedly, we observed that PPG but not the competitive
inhibitors induces selective degradation of mitochondrial PRODH protein
levels within 24 h of cell culture treatment followed by loss of other
mitochondrial proteins like complex-I NDUFS1 but not by concomitant loss
of cytosolic FAD-containing proteins like MTHRF. MitoTracker assays
confirm the selective cellular loss of mitochondrial mass in ZR-75-1
cells within 24 h of PPG treatment. To confirm that suicide inhibition of
PRODH can also induce synthetically lethal metabolic interactions, breast
cancer cells (MCF7) were cultured under normoxic (20% O2) or hypoxic (1%
O2) conditions and then treated with PPG and a p53 upregulator known to
induce PRODH expression (MI-63). Cell viability demonstrated that during
hypoxia PPG with p53 upregulation synergistically reduces cell survival
at 48 h, confirming the synthetic lethality of this treatment
combination. Altogether, these findings support the preclinical
development of suicide PRODH inhibitors as potential cancer therapeutics
capable of inducing mitochondrial stress, exploiting synthetically lethal
metabolic conditions, and selectively enhancing cancer cell death.


