Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Target RNA sequencing revealed the expression profile of cancer
genes in response to deacetylase inhibitor in primary culture of prostate
cancer cells.


Histone acetylation is a dynamic event to optimize cell functions through
the control of RNA transcription and gene expression. In cancer, the
histone deacetylation is a therapeutic target. Suppression of histone
deacetylase increased the growth arrest, apoptosis, and senescence in
cancer cells. Several histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACis) have been
developed and applied as a target therapy of various types of cancer,
including the prostate cancer. However, the altered gene expression in
HDACis treated prostate cancer cells is less reported. Little is known
about the gene expression profiles of primary cultures of prostate
cancer. In this study, we examined the cancer gene expression profile in
primary cultures of human prostate cancer. Cells were isolated from two
patient’s prostate cancer samples. Isolated cells were cultured in
prostate epithelium culture medium CnT-52. After 24 hours of exposure to
400nM of Trichostatin A (TSA), an inhibitor of histone deacetylase I and
II. RNA was extracted and quantified. The library was prepared with
Illumina’s TruSight RNA Pan-Cancer Panel. The sequencing was performed
on NextSeq 500 platform with NextSeq 500/550 mid output v2 kit
(150cycles). FastQ files were generated by BaseSpace Onsite and analyzed
further by TopHat alignment (Illumina) and Partek Flow (Partek). The
Trusight RNA Pan-Cancer panel targets 1385 cancer genes and covers 21043
exonic regions with 57010 probes. The results showed that 59 of the 1385
cancer genes were significantly changed (FDR p-value4 fold) in TAS
treated cells. In the treated cells 49 genes were unregulated and 10
genes were down-regulated. The altered expression of 59 genes is involved
in multiple cell functions. Genes that were upregulated included
apoptosis associated genes (MAP2K6 and BIRC3), tumor suppression genes
(DIRAS3, PEG3, PTPRO, and DNM3), and P53-target gene (CYFIP2). The genes
that were down-regulated included cell cycle regulation genes (CDK1 and
CCNA2), DNA damage response genes (BRCA1 and BRIP1), as well as cell
proliferation marker Ki67 gene (MKI67). However, the gene expression
response to TSA is complicated. Some altered gene expression favors tumor
growth and progression while other gene expression changes inhibit tumor
growth and promote apoptosis. In conclusion, we identified the gene
profile in primary culture of prostate tumor in response to a histone
deacetylase inhibitor, TSA. The therapeutic effects of HDACis could be
influenced by the summation of contradicting tumor promoting and
suppression gene expression profile changes.


