Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic profiling of the tumors harboring activating epidermal
growth factor receptor mutations.


Introduction: EGFR is a kinase of the HER/ERBB family and an oncogenic
driver, especially for NSCLC, HNSCC and CRC. EGFR targeted therapies have
been successfully used for treating cancer patients harboring activating
EGFR mutations. However a main challenge is acquired drug resistance due
to mutations or alternative signaling. While developing next generation
drugs is a promising strategy, targeting other alternatives is also an
attractive therapeutic option. The purpose of our study is to investigate
the mutational landscape of the tumors harbored activating EGFR mutations
and to pinpoint potential strategies for overcoming acquired drug
resistance and for combinational therapies.

Methods: CancerPlex, a NGS large panel test, which includes targeted,
full-gene sequencing of over 400 genes, was applied to analyze a cohort
of 2294 patient FFPE samples across majority of solid tumor types.

Results: 1, Among 293 (out of 2294, 12.8%) samples harbored EGFR
mutations, 86 (86/293, 29.4%) samples harbored actionable EGFR mutations
(namely AE group), such as exon 19 deletion and L858R, which includes 84
lung cancer (79 NSCLC), 1 glioblastoma, and 1 urothelial carcinoma. 2,
The genes/variants in the AE group are then subjected to further
functional analysis and mapped to several pathways/ biological functions.
Our results show that the mutational landscape of activating mutant EGFRs
covers most main signaling pathways and biological processes with several
features: a), Receptors at different classes, including PKHD1, ROS1, and
ERBB2, and genes involving in genome and epigenome stabilities, including
ARID1A,, KMT2D, and XPC, have the highest mutation rate in the context of
activating EGFR mutations. b), PI3K/AKT/mTOR and Ras-Raf-MEK are two main
pathways transducing ligand activated EGFR signals. Our results show that
the mutant variants in the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway are almost 50% more than
those in Ras-Raf-MEK pathway, suggesting that activating mutant EGFRs
might preferentially rely on effectors in the PI3K pathway, such as
PIK3CA and RICTOR, to transduce oncogenic signals. Of note, no KRAS
mutation is found in the AE group. c), As expected, mutations are also
found in the TP53/apoptosis and Rb/cell cycle pathways with higher
variant number in the TP53/apoptosis axis. d) Strikingly, the number of
mutant variants in the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway tops that in the PI3K and
TP53 pathways. Several recent publications demonstrated that the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is abnormally activated in NSCLC and may be a
main mechanism of the drug resistance. Our finding that the genes in the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, including APC, AXIN2, RNF43, and BCL9, are
mutated to a great extent in the context of activating EGFR mutations
supports the notion that targeting the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, in
combination with EGFR targeted therapies, is a promising therapeutic
strategy for the treatment and overcoming drug resistance of EGFR-driven
tumors.


