Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia-induced Cystathionine-β-synthase (CBS) expression: impact
on colonic epithelial cells metabolism, proliferation and migration.


Introduction: We have reported aberrant overexpression of CBS in human
colorectal cancers, where its activity (H2S production) promotes tumor
progression and metastasis. New data show that CBS expression increases
in adenomatous polyps. The aims of this study were to identify possible
mechanisms for CBS upregulation and determine the biological impact of
its upregulation using a premalignant colonic epithelial cell line NCM356.

Methods: Induction of CBS in response to LPS, TLR2&4 agonists, and
hypoxia was assessed by immunoblotting. CBS overexpression was achieved
using lentiviral expression vector (pReceiver-Lv103, GeneCopoeia™) in
NCM356 cells. Global metabolic profiling (Metabolon, Durham) was
performed on cellular extracts from NCM365 overexpressing cells (CBS-hi)
and vector-transduced controls. High-resolution respirometry (Orobors
Oxygraph-2k) assessed bioenergetics. H2S levels were measured using the
fluorogenic probe 7-Azido-4-methylcoumarin. A Coulter counter was used to
assess cell proliferation rates. Transwell assays were used to assess
cell migration. CBS activity was inhibited with aminooxyacetic acid
(AOAA).

Results: CBS protein expression was increased by ~3-fold in pNCM after 2
and 24 hr of hypoxia (1% O2). Treatment with LPS but not the TLR agonists
increased CBS expression 2-fold. Metabolic profiling of CBS-hi cells and
controls identified 85 metabolites that were differentially expressed (65
increased and 20 decreased; p≤0.05 Welch’s 2-Sample t-Test). The
metabolite lanthionine, which is produced by the CBS-dependent
condensation of cysteine to produce H2S, showed the largest increase
(12.3-fold increase, p=1.5E-06). A 4-fold increase in basal H2S
production was measured in CBS-hi cells compared to control cultures.
High-resolution respirometry showed that CBS-hi cells exhibited a
significant increase in maximum respiration rate, reserve respiratory
capacity and increased citrate synthase activity, suggesting increased
cellular mitochondria mass. Treatment of CBS-hi cells either with pentose
phosphate pathway inhibitor (oxythiamine) or lactate dehydrogenase
inhibitor (XF-11) reducing growth by 90% and ~25% at day 5, respectively;
the inhibitors had no effect on the vector control cells. Exposure of
NCM356 cells to hypoxic conditions resulted in increased migration to
conditioned media (pResults: CBS protein expression was increased by
~3-fold in pNCM after 2 and 24 hr of hypoxia (1% O2). Treatment with LPS
but not the TLR agonists increased CBS expression 2-fold. Metabolic
profiling of CBS-hi cells and controls identified 85 metabolites that
were differentially expressed (65 increased and 20 decreased; p≤0.05
Welch’s 2-Sample t-Test). The metabolite lanthionine, which is produced
by the CBS-dependent condensation of cysteine to produce H2S, showed the
largest increase (12.3-fold increase, p=1.5E-06). A 4-fold increase in
basal H2S production was measured in CBS-hi cells compared to control
cultures. High-resolution respirometry showed that CBS-hi cells exhibited
a significant increase in maximum respiration rate, reserve respiratory
capacity and increased citrate synthase activity, suggesting increased
cellular mitochondria mass. Treatment of CBS-hi cells either with pentose
phosphate pathway inhibitor (oxythiamine) or lactate dehydrogenase
inhibitor (XF-11) reducing growth by 90% and ~25% at day 5, respectively;
the inhibitors had no effect on the vector control cells. Exposure of
NCM356 cells to hypoxic conditions resulted in increased migration to
conditioned media (p<0.001, NCM356 normoxia vs. hypoxia); inhibition of
CBS using AOAA attenuated the hypoxia-induced migration.

Conclusions: Hypoxia and LPS can induce CBS expression in a premalignant
colonic epithelial cell line. Upregulation of CBS has a board impact on
cellular metabolism including enhanced flux through the transsulfuration,
glycolytic and pentose phosphate pathways, resulting in enhanced cellular
bioenergetics, growth and migration. These data suggest that enhance CBS
activity may be involved the adenoma to carcinoma sequence.


