Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HDAC6 regulates ERK1’s kinase activity via deacetylation.


Extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2) are important kinases
regulating cell proliferation and cell migration, and have been
established as therapeutic targets for cancer treatment. Previously, we
found that ERK1 phosphorylates histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a class IIb
HDAC, to regulate its enzymatic activity. HDAC6 plays an important role
in several types of cancers. HDAC6 governs cancer cells’ migration by
cooperating with cytoskeleton proteins and their associated proteins, and
HDAC6 is arising as a determinant for cisplatin-resistance in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and ovarian cancer. Here, we have shown that
HDAC6 manipulates ERK1’s kinase activity via deacetylation. We
demonstrated that both ERK1 and ERK2 interact with HDAC6 physically via
GST pull-down assays. To examine whether ERK1/2 are acetylated, we
transfected GST-ERK1 or GST-ERK2 into HEK293T cells, and treated the
cells with a pan-HDAC inhibitor, Trichostatin A. We showed that the level
of acetylated GST-ERK1/2 increased in a dose- and time-dependent manner.
Furthermore, when GST-ERK1 or GST-ERK2-expressed cells were treated with
an HDAC6-specific inhibitor, ACY-1215, the level of acetylated GST-ERK1/2
increased. These results suggest that HDAC6 is a deacetylase for ERK1/2.
In addition, we determined that acetyltransferases CBP and p300 acetylate
ERK1/2. We found a novel acetylation site located in ERK1 N-terminus by
mass-spectrometry analysis. We then mutated this lysine (K) site with
either Glutamic acid (Q) or Arginine (R) to mimic the acetylation or
deacetylation status, and performed kinase assays using ELK1 as a
substrate. The acetylation mimicking mutant exhibits a decreased kinase
activity toward ELK1, while the deacetylation mimicking mutant exhibits a
similar level of kinase activity as the wild-type ERK1 does, suggesting
that acetylation/deacetylation alters ERK1 enzymatic activities.
Therefore, HDAC6 may regulate ERK1’s kinase activity via deacetylation
of this site. Furthermore, we have shown that HDAC6 is overexpressed in
lung cancer tissue samples and plays an important role in
chemo-sensitivity in lung cancer. We predict that inhibition of the
HDAC6-ERK1 pathway may provide clinical benefit for lung cancer patients.


