Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel immuno-oncology approach: targeting cell-surface
mesothelin with a fusion construct containing human granzyme B.


Immunological approaches to target tumors have gained considerable
traction recently because of excellent clinical results. In addition,
targeted treatment with antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) can also be
effective in achieving regression of solid tumors. The challenge for ADCs
continues to be efficacy, stability of the construct and development of
resistance. We have developed a unique fusion protein composed of 1) a
novel human single-domain antibody (SD1) that uniquely targets Region III
of the mesothelin glycoprotein and 2) an engineered version of the human
serine protease Granzyme B (GrB). Mesothelin is highly expressed in
aggressive cancers such as malignant mesothelioma, pancreatic and ovarian
cancers, and NSCLC. Granzyme B generates an intense, irreversible
pro-apoptotic effect through direct cleavage of caspases, release of
cytochrome C from mitochrondria, and cleavage of nuclear matrix. Previous
ADCs targeting mesothelin have faced the drawbacks of toxic payloads,
formation of neutralizing antibodies, and competition with the serum
protein MUC16/CA125. SD1-GrB represents a new class of completely human
immunotoxins containing a payload with a unique mechanism of action.
Additionally, because of its unique binding properties, SD1 does not
compete with circulating CA125 and is not subject to cleavage. The
SD1-GrB construct was designed as a homodimer (~200kDa) containing an IgG
Fc domain and was expressed using transient-transfection of HEK293E
cells. The soluble SD1-GrB was isolated from conditioned media and
purified to homogeneity as assessed by SDS-PAGE and Western. Enzymatic
activity of the GrB component was assessed by IEPD and found to be
similar to authentic, native GrB. Binding to mesothelin was confirmed by
surface plasmon resonance. Additionally, binding to the human lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines H460 and HCC1703 was demonstrated by ELISA.
Initial cytotoxicity (IC50) of SD1-GrB against H460 and HCC1703 was in
the 30 nM range. Assessment against a larger panel of cell lines is
ongoing followed by in vivo efficacy in a human tumor xenograft model.
Our preliminary evaluation of SD1-GrB ADC suggests this construct has a
unique mechanism of action and is highly cytotoxic against target cells.
This molecule appears to be an excellent candidate for further
pre-clinical development as a therapeutic agent. Research conducted, in
part, by the Clayton Foundation for Research.


