Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD122-selective IL-2/anti-IL-2 complexes reduce regulatory T cell
function and promote CD8+ T cell polyfunctionality for durable ovarian
cancer immunotherapy.


The IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) is an attractive target for cancer
immunotherapy as it controls both immune-suppressive regulatory T cells
(Tregs) and anti-tumor T cells. We tested depleting Tregs as
immunotherapy using anti-CD25 (high-affinity IL-2R subunit) antibodies
(αCD25) in ID8agg mouse ovarian cancer (OC). αCD25 reduced ascites and
Treg numbers but failed to reduce tumor burden, possibly because it
depleted newly activated anti-tumor T cells in tumor-draining lymph
nodes. Thus, αCD25 could be novel malignant ascites palliation, but has
limited stand-alone efficacy. We then tested IL-2/anti-IL-2 complexes
(IL-2c) that selectively stimulate medium-affinity (CD122/CD132) IL-2R
thought to expand anti-tumor T cells preferentially, but with little Treg
effects. In contrast to several single agents we tested that failed to
treat ID8agg (e.g., αCD25, αPD-L1, IL-2 fusion toxin denileukin
diftitox), IL-2c alone durably reduced ID8agg tumor burden despite
lowering the tumor microenvironmental CD8+/Treg ratio. Thus, we
hypothesized that IL-2c improved CD8+ function, reduced Treg function, or
both. IL-2c increased polyfunctional IFN-γ+TNF-α+ anti-tumor T cells as
expected, an effect that persists weeks after drug clearance. IL-2c also
increased anti-tumor T cell CD25 expression that increased IL-2
sensitivity and STAT5 phosphorylation, a likely mechanism for increased
polyfunctionality. Unexpectedly, IL-2c reduced the Treg functional
mediators CD25, TIGIT and granzyme B, and reduced Treg suppressive
function. Thus, favorable Treg modifications are a novel IL-2c mechanism
of action. Adding αCD25 to IL-2c to deplete Tregs further unexpectedly
worsened IL-2c efficacy in ID8agg and reduced effector memory T cells and
polyfunctional T cells in the tumor microenvironment, suggesting a
previously unappreciated role for CD25 in IL-2c therapy. Similar data
were seen in B16 melanoma, suggesting αCD25 reduction of IL-2c efficacy
is not tumor or compartment-specific (ID8agg is peritoneal and B16 is
subcutaneous). αPD-L1, an ineffective monotherapy in ID8agg, combined
with IL-2c to promote complete responses, suggesting potential for
potent, novel combinatorial approaches. Our data suggest that
antagonizing high affinity IL-2R (such as to deplete Tregs with αCD25)
has limited cancer immunotherapy utility without more specific Treg
targeting. In contrast, stimulating medium-affinity IL-2R with
CD122-selective IL-2c has great translational promise by simultaneously
improving beneficial anti-tumor T cells and reducing detrimental Treg
function.


