Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the FGFR pathway in androgen receptor negative
castration resistant prostate cancer.


Metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) has a poor
prognosis and remains a significant therapeutic challenge. The continued
importance of androgen receptor (AR) signaling as a growth and survival
pathway in most advanced prostate cancer (PC) has prompted the
development of therapeutics directed toward further suppressing AR
ligands or the AR itself. However, total androgen blockade can give rise
to AR-negative PC and currently there are no effective therapies for
AR-negative PC. We have developed two novel patient-derived xenograft
(PDX) models from a liver metastasis and a rib metastasis of a patient
with CRPC: LuCaP 173.1 (Neuroendocrine; NE) and LuCaP 173.2 (Double
negative: DN (AR-negative and NE-negative)). Using RNA-Seq we observed
that both of these lines express high levels of fibroblast growth factors
(FGF’s) and downstream effectors. We hypothesized that FGF signaling
promotes survival and proliferation of NEPC and DNPC. To determine if
blocking the FGFR survival pathway can attenuate the growth of NEPC/DNPC
tumors, to characterize the molecular response and resistance to FGF
signaling inhibition, and to support further evaluation in the clinic, we
treated both PDX models with the FGFR inhibitor CH5183284. CH5183284
significantly reduced LuCaP 173.2 tumor volume (TV) (pMetastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) has a poor prognosis and
remains a significant therapeutic challenge. The continued importance of
androgen receptor (AR) signaling as a growth and survival pathway in most
advanced prostate cancer (PC) has prompted the development of
therapeutics directed toward further suppressing AR ligands or the AR
itself. However, total androgen blockade can give rise to AR-negative PC
and currently there are no effective therapies for AR-negative PC. We
have developed two novel patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models from a
liver metastasis and a rib metastasis of a patient with CRPC: LuCaP 173.1
(Neuroendocrine; NE) and LuCaP 173.2 (Double negative: DN (AR-negative
and NE-negative)). Using RNA-Seq we observed that both of these lines
express high levels of fibroblast growth factors (FGF’s) and downstream
effectors. We hypothesized that FGF signaling promotes survival and
proliferation of NEPC and DNPC. To determine if blocking the FGFR
survival pathway can attenuate the growth of NEPC/DNPC tumors, to
characterize the molecular response and resistance to FGF signaling
inhibition, and to support further evaluation in the clinic, we treated
both PDX models with the FGFR inhibitor CH5183284. CH5183284
significantly reduced LuCaP 173.2 tumor volume (TV) (p<0.0001). The
reduction in TV in CH5183284-treated animals bearing LuCaP 173.1 tumors
was not as significant. To address this difference, we analyzed FGFR1
expression at the transcript and protein levels. Analysis of the FGFRs in
the LuCaP 173.1 PDX model revealed a loss of FGFR1 expression. FGFR2 and
FGFR3 transcripts were expressed at similar levels in both PDXs. The loss
of FGFR1 expression may explain the low efficacy of CH5183284 in the
LuCaP 173.1 PDX model. We are currently assessing the molecular pathways
impacted by FGFR inhibition and mechanisms of resistance to treatment in
these studies. We have demonstrated that FGFR inhibition attenuated tumor
growth in FGFhigh AR-negative PC. We intend to target the FGFR survival
pathway in additional NE and DNPC PDX models to investigate tumor
heterogeneity in response to therapy and identify mechanisms of
resistance. These studies will provide translational evidence that FGFR
inhibitors could represent a new therapy for CRPC patients with
AR-negative PC.


