Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of protein arginine methyltransferase 1 as novel
epigenetic vulnerability in KRAS/p53 mutant PDAC primary patient models.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a rapidly progressing disease
associated with less than 10% 5-year survival rate. Various treatment
regimens failed to improve survival of PDAC patients, thus a critical
need exists to identify druggable targets essential for tumor
maintenance. We developed a powerful in vivo platform that enables the
identification of new molecular drivers in the PDAC context where
activating mutation of KRAS gene and loss of p53 dominate the genetic
landscape. Through an in vivo loss of function screen performed in
KRAS/p53 mutant PDAC primary patient models, we identify protein arginine
methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) as top scoring hit. This novel dependency in
PDAC was subsequently validated in multiple PDAC models using both shRNA
mediated as well as CRISPR base genetic inhibition and we demonstrated
that PRMT1 knockdown induces a significant growth inhibition in vitro.
Methylation of arginine 3 on histone H4 (H4R3me2a) as well as global
arginine methylation was also evaluated and showed a dramatic reduction
upon PRMT1 knockdown, correlating observed phenotype with target
engagement. To further confirm a role for PRMT1 in tumor maintenance, we
developed inducible PRMT1 knockdown in a primary patient model and showed
a dramatic tumor growth inhibition (TGI) in vivo upon PRMT1 knockdown.
PRMT1 is the primary enzyme responsible for arginine asymmetric
demethylation, however other members of the Type I family are also
involved in this process and we evaluated the role of protein arginine
methyltransferase 4 (PRMT4) and 6 (PRMT6) in our workhorse model.
Surprisingly, no significant phenotypic response was observed upon
genetic inhibition of PRMT4 or PRMT6 suggesting no redundancy between
different PRMT type I and a unique dependency on PRMT1. To strengthen and
complement the genetic validation, we leveraged a PRMT Type I inhibitor
and confirmed in vitro results as well as in vivo efficacy at tolerated
doses (xenograft vs allograft). Key models have been prioritized in order
to inform on PRMT1 dependency and to refine responder population. Our
research has identified and validated for the first time an arginine
methyltransferase as a novel genetic vulnerability in PDAC and strongly
suggest PRMT1 as a new therapeutic opportunity in PDAC cancers.


