Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting cancer progression genes upregulated in
CREB3L1-deficient breast cancer cells.


Introduction: Our laboratory is interested in determining ways to block
breast cancer metastasis. We discovered that CREB3L1 (cAMP responsive
element binding protein 3-like protein), a stress-activated transcription
factor, acts as a metastasis suppressor in breast cancer. CREB3L1 is
expressed ubiquitously in noncancerous human breast cells and restricts
expression of genes that promote cell growth, angiogenesis, and
migration. Loss of CREB3L1 expression is a frequent event in high-grade
metastatic human breast tumors and can result in enhanced metastatic
properties.

Experimental Procedures: To establish the mechanisms by which CREB3L1
exerts its tumor suppressive effects, a gene expression microarray
analysis was performed to determine which genes are upregulated in
CREB3L1-deficient breast cancer cells. Six hundred and eighty genes were
statistically significantly upregulated at least 2-fold in all 4 of the
CREB3L1-deficient cell lines assessed. To focus our analysis, 4 genes
were identified as potential targets for this study, given that they have
previously been shown to have a role in cancer progression. Knockdowns
were generated for each of the 4 genes in a CREB3L1-deficient breast
cancer cell line (HCC1806) and matched CREB3L1-expressing cells (HCC1806
+ HA-CREB3L1), as well as a nontumorigenic control breast cell line
(MCF10A). To knockdown expression of each of the 4 targets, shRNA
directed at the gene of interest was transduced via a lentiviral system
into the cells. Cell-based assays were performed to characterize the
properties of these cell lines, which included the Boyden chamber assay
to measure migration, soft agar assay to assess anchorage-independent
growth, and the MTT assay to evaluate cell proliferation.

Results: Successful knockdown at both the mRNA and protein level for each
target gene was validated using quantitative real time PCR and
immunoblotting. Results from the MTT assay verified that knockdown of
each of the 4 gene targets did not affect cell survival in MCF10A cells,
confirming that these test genes are not essential for survival in
noncancerous breast cells (p > 0.05). Similarly, knockdown of each of the
test genes did not affect cell proliferation in HCC1806 (± CREB3L1)
cells, except for a significant decrease in proliferation in HCC1806
CREB3L1-deficient cells with Gene 1 knockdown (p =0.02). Preliminary
results indicate that knockdown of Genes 1, 2, and 4 in HCC1806
CREB3L1-deficient cells reduces cancer cell properties, including cell
migration and anchorage-independent growth (p Results: Successful
knockdown at both the mRNA and protein level for each target gene was
validated using quantitative real time PCR and immunoblotting. Results
from the MTT assay verified that knockdown of each of the 4 gene targets
did not affect cell survival in MCF10A cells, confirming that these test
genes are not essential for survival in noncancerous breast cells (p >
0.05). Similarly, knockdown of each of the test genes did not affect cell
proliferation in HCC1806 (± CREB3L1) cells, except for a significant
decrease in proliferation in HCC1806 CREB3L1-deficient cells with Gene 1
knockdown (p =0.02). Preliminary results indicate that knockdown of Genes
1, 2, and 4 in HCC1806 CREB3L1-deficient cells reduces cancer cell
properties, including cell migration and anchorage-independent growth (p
< 0.05).

Conclusions: Promising candidates will be tested in follow-up mouse
xenograft studies. Encouraging results in these pre-clinical models would
provide a strong rationale for the development and testing of inhibitors
to one or more of these potential targets as a new therapeutic for the
30% of breast cancers that are CREB3L1-deficient.


