Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing acquired resistance to palbociclib in breast cancer.


The CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib is currently being used in combination
with endocrine therapy to treat advanced ER positive breast cancer
patients. While this treatment has shown great promise in the clinic,
about 25% of the patients do not respond, and almost all patients
eventually acquire resistance to palbociclib treatment. Hence,
understanding the mechanism(s) of acquired resistance to CDK4/6
inhibition is crucial to devise alternate treatment strategies. To
interrogate this, we developed MCF7 and T47D resistant cells by treating
them with increasing doses of palbociclib over a 6-month period. After
confirming that these cells were resistant to palbociclib, we performed
genome-wide expression analysis via RNA-seq, in comparison with the
parental (sensitive) cells. RNA- seq analysis revealed 2888
differentially expressed genes (pThe CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib is
currently being used in combination with endocrine therapy to treat
advanced ER positive breast cancer patients. While this treatment has
shown great promise in the clinic, about 25% of the patients do not
respond, and almost all patients eventually acquire resistance to
palbociclib treatment. Hence, understanding the mechanism(s) of acquired
resistance to CDK4/6 inhibition is crucial to devise alternate treatment
strategies. To interrogate this, we developed MCF7 and T47D resistant
cells by treating them with increasing doses of palbociclib over a
6-month period. After confirming that these cells were resistant to
palbociclib, we performed genome-wide expression analysis via RNA-seq, in
comparison with the parental (sensitive) cells. RNA- seq analysis
revealed 2888 differentially expressed genes (p<0.05) in the resistant
cells when compared to parental. Further, gene set enrichment analysis
(GSEA) revealed enrichment of immune pathways (interferon alpha and gamma
response, immune response) and pathways known to regulate EMT and cancer
stem cells (IL-6/Stat3, IL-2/STAT-5, Notch, Wnt) in the resistant cells.
Additionally, GSEA analysis revealed downregulation of G2/M checkpoint,
estrogen response and DNA repair pathways (double strand break repair).
Thus, this data suggests that combined targeting of two or more pathways
that are altered in the resistant cells can provide a novel therapeutic
strategy to combat CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance.


