Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A computational biology method to predict HMA or lenalidomide
treatment response in non-Del(5q) MDS.


60% of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) patients fail to achieve clinical
improvement with hypomethylating agents (HMAs). 26% of patients with
non-del5q MDS respond to lenalidomide (LEN), but the mechanism of
response is unknown. Treatment of non-del5q patients who fail HMA is
challenging and predicting response to LEN would address this unmet
clinical need.

Methods: A retrospective analysis was performed on non-del5q MDS patient
cytogenetics, gene mutations, treatments, and clinical response data.
Using Cellworks Group software, genomic data was used to generate
disease-specific protein network maps. Digital drug simulations were done
by quantitatively measuring drug effect and calculating a MDS inhibition
score. Each patient-specific map was digitally screened for the extent by
which LEN and HMAs inhibited MDS in a dose-dependent manner and compared
to the patient's clinical outcome.

Results: Patient 1 is a non-del5q patient with trisomy 8 (+8) and an
ASXL1 frameshift mutation. Simulation modeling revealed overexpression
(OE) of MYC leading to IRF4 and IKZF expression, key pathways for LEN
sensitivity. MYC OE also leads to CCND1 expression, aiding proliferation
of MDS cells. Simulated LEN treatment targets MYC-induced upregulation of
IKZF1, STUB1, CRBN, and CSNK1A1 to reduce MDS cell survival. Upregulated
TP53 inhibits MYC expression, augmenting the patient's response to LEN.
To compare response to other SOC drugs, azacitidine (AZA), was screened.
The ASXL1 mutation led to loss of PRC2-mediated DNMT1 function. +8
results in OE of GGH, reducing methylation of CpG regions. Given loss of
DNMT1 function, patient 1 was predicted be a non-responder to AZA.
Patient 2 is a non-del5q patient with +8, add(14q)(11.1-11.2),
add(8)(p23.3-q24.3), and an ASXL1 mutation. Modeling revealed the same
dysregulated pathways as patient 1, predicting sensitivity to LEN and
resistance to AZA. Patient 3 is a non-del5q patient with complex
karyotype and mutations in IDH2, TET2, and SRSF2. Modeling revealed OE of
CARD11 yielding sensitivity to LEN. OE of CDH1 and AXIN1 decreased
beta-catenin activity, a known resistance mechanism to LEN. OE of
apoptotic TP53, BAX, and BBC3 sensitize this patient's MDS cells to LEN.
Modeling revealed reduced EZH2 mRNA levels due to the SRSF2 mutation,
directly impacting the PRC2 complex needed for DNMT1-mediated CpG
methylation. EZH2 is further down regulated by L3MBTL2 OE. TET2 is
functionally challenged from the lack of CpG methylation, diminishing IDH
activity, resulting in AZA resistance.

Conclusions: Computer modeling of non-del5q MDS patient biology can
deduce the abnormal protein networks and consequent drug effects. This
method could be used to understand drug failure and highlight resistance
pathways that can be targeted to recover chemosensitivity. This
technology can also be used to predict MDS patient response prior to
treatment, increasing drug effectiveness and reducing side effects and
treatment costs.


