Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic reprogramming in non-small cell lung cancer: a precision
oncology approach.


Lung cancers are among the most common invasive cancers worldwide and
annually lead to high mortality and morbidity. Genomic alterations have
been known to control the evolution of hallmarks of cancer in a dynamic
way. These molecular alterations combined with epigenomic and
post-genomic modifications contribute to formation of these neoplasms.
Multiplicity of these changes has made development of personalized
therapeutic regimens for these cancers a complex problem. Metabolic
reprogramming is one of the main mechanisms in progression of cancers.
There have been efforts to model the metabolic reprogramming in cancer
using metabolic networks of cancer cells, but there has been no
computational framework to model these metabolic transitions in cancer
for precision and personalized medicine. We have combined computational,
mathematical and experimental methodologies to develop a platform for
precision oncology in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) by in silico
models of metabolic switches. Our integrative analysis of genomic data
from NSCLC has led to discovery of genomic signatures controlling
metabolic reprogramming in NSCLC with KRAS mutations. This discovery was
proved in vivo and in vitro using drugs blocking different metabolic
pathways. We have shown that NSCLC cells and tumors which carry KRAS
mutations and have these genomic signatures are addicted to the pentose
phosphate pathway (PPP). We have verified and proved the predictive value
of these genomic signatures using Patient Derived Xenograft (PDX) tumor
models of NSCLC. We are developing a mathematical and computational
framework to model these metabolic switches. Our platform is capable of
using genomic data from a cell line or tumor to determine the metabolic
dependency of them quantitatively and predict the optimized personalized
treatments for modulating metabolic pathways aiming to control cancer
progression.


