Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rotating magnetic beads for enhanced drug delivery:
characterization of bead velocity, imaging, and adherence to cellular
monolayers.


Background: Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) have been
touted as promising vehicles for enhancing drug delivery for cancer,
stroke, and other diseases. Unfortunately, successful clinical use has
been hampered by the problem of scale, since the attractive force between
iron particle and magnet is inversely proportional to at least the fourth
power of the intervening distance. Utilization of magnetically-induced
rotary traction (MIRT) offers a way to overcome this obstacle. Here, we
present initial data from the use of a new two-part system consisting of:
1) a patented rotating magnet, and 2) magnetic microbeads (MBs), which
have been optimized for MIRT.

Methods: MBs and the rotating magnet were provided by Pulse Therapeutics
(St. Louis, MO). MBs consist of single-crystalline magnetite cores (~70
nm), which form aggregates in response to a magnetic field. Here, the
field is generated by a neodymium-boron-iron permanent magnet, which is
rapidly rotated causing MBs to counter-rotate (like meshed gears) at
physiologic distances, and move by means of surface traction. Movement of
MBs through PBS, DMEM with 5% serum, and 100% serum was measured 7.5 to
30 cm from the magnet. Suspensions of the particles were imaged at
different concentrations by MRI and CT scan. 3 cancer cell lines (U87,
E297, LKB1-KO), and normal vascular endothelial cells, were maintained
using standard tissue culture technique. For adhesion studies, cells were
grown in 6-well plates to confluence, treated with 10 uL MBs for 30 min.,
washed with PBS, imaged with standard light microscopy, digitized, then
analyzed using Image J.

Results: In our experiments, MBs moved readily through PBS, DMEM and
serum at distances from 7.5 - 30 cm; with a maximum velocity at 22.5 cm
(0.45 +/- 0.04 cm/sec, for serum). While MR imaging produced significant
artifact as expected, MBs were clearly seen by CT scan. Adhesion of the
MBs to the cancer cell lines was markedly higher than to the endothelial
cells (10.9-12.0X) and to fixed cells, used as controls.

Conclusions: MBs are easily rotated and moved at physiologic distances,
even through 100% serum, by means of surface traction, and can be imaged
by CT scan. Adhesion of MBs to cancer cells is significantly greater than
to endothelial cells. These features show that the Pulse system is an
extremely promising one, for use in magnetic drug targeting in the
clinical setting.


