Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal antigen 1 (SA1) as a potential pro-neoplastic factor in
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).


Introduction:

SA1, encoded by the STAG1 gene, is a subunit of the higher-order
chromatin remodeler cohesin. SA1 deficiency has been implicated as a
driver of aneuploidy and tumorigenesis (Remeseiro et al, EMBO J 2012).
Furthermore, our lab has recently shown that SA1 functions as a tumor
suppressor protein in early colon cancer (Wali et al, Cancer Prev Res
2016). The aim of this project was to investigate the role of SA1 in
NSCLC. Combining data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), human lung
tissue, and in vitro gene knockdown, we have surprisingly identified SA1
as a potential pro-neoplastic factor in NSCLC.

Methods:

Data was extracted from TCGA and plotted to characterize STAG1 gene
alteration in NSCLC. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on human
lung tissue microarray assay (TMA) to assess SA1 protein expression.
Transient knockdowns were performed on A549 human lung adenocarcinoma
cells using STAG1 siRNA (Dharmacon) with an incubation time of 48 hours.
Following this, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR,
Life Technologies) and WST-1 cell proliferation assays (Promega) were
performed as per protocol.

Results:

STAG1 alterations occur in about 3% of lung adenocarcinoma and 17% of
lung squamous cell carcinoma. Of these alterations, the majority were
amplifications. Furthermore, although not reaching statistical
significance, there was a trend towards decreased survival with STAG1
alteration in adenocarcinoma patients (11.6 months vs. 46 months). IHC
demonstrated a 1.7-fold increase in SA1 protein expression in NSCLC when
compared with non-malignant lung tissue (pSTAG1 alterations occur in
about 3% of lung adenocarcinoma and 17% of lung squamous cell carcinoma.
Of these alterations, the majority were amplifications. Furthermore,
although not reaching statistical significance, there was a trend towards
decreased survival with STAG1 alteration in adenocarcinoma patients (11.6
months vs. 46 months). IHC demonstrated a 1.7-fold increase in SA1
protein expression in NSCLC when compared with non-malignant lung tissue
(p<0.001). Transfected A549 cells showed a 78% decrease in SA1 RNA
expression (qPCR, p=0.0002) and a 50% decrease in cell proliferation
(WST-1, pSTAG1 alterations occur in about 3% of lung adenocarcinoma and
17% of lung squamous cell carcinoma. Of these alterations, the majority
were amplifications. Furthermore, although not reaching statistical
significance, there was a trend towards decreased survival with STAG1
alteration in adenocarcinoma patients (11.6 months vs. 46 months). IHC
demonstrated a 1.7-fold increase in SA1 protein expression in NSCLC when
compared with non-malignant lung tissue (p<0.001). Transfected A549 cells
showed a 78% decrease in SA1 RNA expression (qPCR, p=0.0002) and a 50%
decrease in cell proliferation (WST-1, p<0.0001). Proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA), a marker of cell proliferation, was also
decreased by 37% in transfected cells (pSTAG1 alterations occur in about
3% of lung adenocarcinoma and 17% of lung squamous cell carcinoma. Of
these alterations, the majority were amplifications. Furthermore,
although not reaching statistical significance, there was a trend towards
decreased survival with STAG1 alteration in adenocarcinoma patients (11.6
months vs. 46 months). IHC demonstrated a 1.7-fold increase in SA1
protein expression in NSCLC when compared with non-malignant lung tissue
(p<0.001). Transfected A549 cells showed a 78% decrease in SA1 RNA
expression (qPCR, p=0.0002) and a 50% decrease in cell proliferation
(WST-1, p<0.0001). Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), a marker of
cell proliferation, was also decreased by 37% in transfected cells
(p<0.001).

Conclusions:

Using TCGA data, we found that STAG1 alteration occurs with some
frequency in NSCLC and that many of these alterations are amplifications
of the gene. Furthermore, there is a trend towards decreased survival
with a STAG1 gene alteration. Our IHC data shows robust over-expression
of SA1 in NSCLC when compared with non-malignant lung tissue. Our qPCR
data showed a profound decrease in SA1 mRNA expression following
transfection; accordingly, our WST-1 proliferation data suggests that
knockdown of the STAG1 gene significantly decreases proliferation of A549
lung adenocarcinoma cells. Decreased PCNA confirms a true
anti-proliferative effect, rather than a pro-apoptotic effect. This novel
data suggests a link between SA1 and NSCLC, of which there are no prior
published accounts. Even more compelling is the implication that in
NSCLC, SA1 may be pro-neoplastic rather than anti-neoplastic, which
introduces a new potential target for future gene therapy.


