Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The clinical relevance of targeting IFITM1 in three distinct
subtypes of aggressive breast cancer.


Breast cancer can be separated into estrogen receptor/ progesterone
receptor positive (ER+/PR+), Her2/neu positive (HER2+), and triple
negative (ER-/PR-/HER2-) subtypes. Additionally, breast cancer may
manifest clinically as either non-inflammatory or inflammatory disease.
Inflammatory breast cancer is a highly lethal subtype of breast carcinoma
that may express any of the three aforementioned receptors. Our
laboratory has found that a novel marker, interferon-induced
transmembrane protein 1 (IFITM1), is overexpressed in multiple subtypes
of breast cancer and its overexpression is associated with poor overall
survival as well as resistance to endocrine therapy, chemotherapy, and
radiation. IFITM1 is a type 1 interferon (IFN) stimulated gene that is
not expressed in normal breast tissue, and is only induced upon IFN
exposure. In this study, we conducted immunohistochemical staining for
IFITM1 in 94 ER+ human breast tumor samples and discovered that high
IFITM1 expression was associated with increased clinical stage and
resistance to endocrine therapy. Elevated expression of IFITM1 was also
detected in human triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) samples as
compared to normal breast tissue. Notably, this overexpression was most
pronounced in TNBC tumors from African American (AA) patients. We
screened a panel of nine cell lines that represent all major subtypes of
breast cancer and found IFITM1 overexpression in ER+ aromatase
inhibitor-resistant MCF-7:5C, AA-derived triple negative MDA-MB-468 and
MDA-MB-157, and triple negative inflammatory SUM149 cells. We used
inducible shRNA and CRSPR/Cas9 respectively, to investigate the effect of
IFITM1 knockdown on MCF-7:5C and SUM149 xenograft tumors using two in
vivo breast cancer models. The orthotopic (mammary fat pad) model
evaluated tumor proliferation, and the mammary intraductal (MIND) model
assessed tumor cell invasion out of the milk duct. We found that loss of
IFITM1 in MCF-7:5C and SUM149 cells significantly inhibited their ability
to form tumors in vivo and it completely blocked their ability to invade
out of the milk duct. Additional studies indicated that hyper-activated
JAK/STAT signaling was responsible for driving IFITM1 expression in
MCF-7:5C, MDA-MB-468, and SUM149 cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated that
JAK/STAT activation can be targeted in vivo with the FDA approved JAK
inhibitor ruxolitinib (Jakafi™). Oral treatment of mice with 50 μg/g
bodyweight ruxolitinib reduced IFITM1 expression and inhibited the growth
of both MCF-7:5C and MDA-MB-468 tumors by loss of STAT1/2
phosphorylation. The overexpression of IFITM1 in three distinct breast
cancer subtypes indicates that IFITM1 may be a targetable marker of
aggressive disease in general and may open the door for novel therapies
of treatment-refractory breast cancer.


