Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediction of ALK mutations associated with acquired resistance to
lorlatinib.


Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangements are important therapeutic
targets in non-small cell lung cancer. They are currently treated with
the first-generation ALK inhibitor crizotnib followed by more potent,
second-generation ALK inhibitors, such as ceritinib, alectinib, or
brigatinib. We reported different spectrums of ALK resistance mutations
in the biopsies from patients progressing on these drugs. G1202R mutation
was found more frequently after treatment with second generation ALK
inhibitors. In addition to these drugs, the third-generation ALK
inhibitor lorlatinib is currently being evaluated in phase 2 clinical
trial. Ba/F3 models indicated that all single ALK mutants are sensitive
to lorlatinib and some compound ALK mutations are resistant to
lorlatinib. In this study, we performed accelerated mutagenesis screen on
Ba/F3 models to predict the resistance mutations which potentially emerge
in the patients treated with lorlatinib. Briefly, Ba/F3 cells expressing
wild type EML4-ALK or mutant EML4-ALK containing C1156Y, F1174C, L1196M,
G1202R, or G1269A were exposed to N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU). After a
24-hour incubation in normal media, the cells were seeded in 96-well
plates and incubated in lorlatinib for 4 weeks. ALK kinase domain was
sequenced in clones growing in lorlatinib to identify possible new
mutations. As a result, Ba/F3 cells harboring wild type EML4-ALK did not
show any mutation on ALK kinase domain. Crizotinib was used as a control
to validate the efficiency of mutagenesis. We identified eight different
mutations in clones growing in crizotinib, and those were reflecting the
spectrum of mutations in the crizotinib-treated patients. Ba/F3 cells
with mutant EML4-ALK showed additional compound mutations after
incubation with lorlatinib. Those mutations included L1196M + L1198F and
G1202R + L1198F which showed high resistance to lorlatinib in Ba/F3
models. Ba/F3 cells with different mutant EML4-ALK showed a distinct
spectrum and different frequency of additional mutations. In conclusion,
this study predicted that no single mutation would emerge to confer
resistance to lorlatinib. Thus, compound mutations and ALK-independent
mechanisms become essential mechanisms for lorlatinib resistance.


