Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The muscarinic receptor antagonist, benztropine, blocks the
expansion of a temozolomide resistant subpopulation of glioma cells.


Virtually all malignant gliomas become drug-resistant and recur after
initial treatment, recurrent tumors are fatal within two-years, and no
therapies exist that cure gliomas. The recognition that subpopulations of
primitive cells with an oligodendrocyte precursor-like (OPC-like)
phenotype capable of resisting standard therapy and contributing to
recurrence, frames the question of whether adjuvant therapies designed to
modify or eliminate OPC-like cells could slow the progression of glioma.
Agents that force the differentiation of treatment-resistant OPC-like
glioma cells, a phenomenon that requires cessation of proliferation, are
compelling candidates for targeting OPC-like GSCs. Recently, it was
observed that OPC proliferation was driven by activation of the M1, M3
and M4 muscarinic receptors. In another report, a large-scale drug screen
designed to seek drugs to induce OPC differentiation in the context of
multiple sclerosis identified a muscarinic receptor antagonist,
benztropine (a.k.a. Cogentin), as a promoter of OPC differentiation and
cell cycle exit. We have conducted studies in glioma cell lines
supporting a role for benztropine in suppressing the development of
drug-resistance to the standard glioma chemo-therapeutic temozolomide
(TMZ). Upon treatment with TMZ, we identified the emergence of an
OPC-like subpopulation of glioma cells identifiable by the co-expression
of CD44, CD15 and PDGFRa. Treatment with pre-inhibitory doses of
benztropine significantly reduced the TMZ IC50 in all glioma lines
examined in association with blocking emergence of the
CD44/CD15/PDGFR-positive subpopulation. Ongoing studies are designed to
determine the tumor initiating potential of the CD44/CD15/PDGFR-positive
subpopulation and whether benztropine will suppress the development of
TMZ resistance in animal models of glioma.


