Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using off-target data from comprehensive genomic profiling to
characterize the genomic architecture of copy number alterations in tumor
sequencing data.


Background

Copy number alterations are common driver mutations in cancer.
Identifying genes which show altered copy number and knowing the
breakpoints of copy number alterations gives insight into their
functionality as well as the mechanisms responsible for the alterations.
While copy number alterations have been well-studied in common tumor
types, there are still many rare tumor types which have not been
characterized. Targeted genomic profiling using capture methods results
in sequencing a subset of genes to extremely high coverage (>500x) and
sequencing off-target regions spanning the rest of the genome to low
(0.5x – 1x) coverage. We used this data to identify the approximate
breakpoints of alterations that extend beyond targeted regions and to
identify novel, recurrent copy number alterations in clinical tumor
samples.

Methods

We used standard methods to identify copy number alterations in the
off-target regions. Briefly, we calculated coverage in 10 kb windows
across the genome, excluding the targeted regions which are sequenced at
high coverage, corrected for GC-bias, calculated the log ratio of
coverage for the tumor compared to an unrelated normal sample, and then
used a segmentation algorithm to segment the genome into copy number
regions and identify regions with significantly different copy number
than the surrounding regions.

We sequenced cell line DNA with known copy number variants and used this
data to assess the accuracy and precision of these methods. Copy number
alterations were filtered against known common copy number variant
regions, and we identified copy number alterations overlapping known
genes to identify potentially functional alterations.

Results

We applied these methods to tumor samples that underwent comprehensive
genomic profiling as part of clinical care. Our cohort consisted of a
large and diverse set of “real world” unbiased clinical specimens and
contained many rare and unusual tumors not included in larger sequencing
efforts. Using this data, we characterized the landscape of copy number
variants genome-wide in rare tumor types which have not previously been
characterized and identified unique copy number alterations in these
tumor types. Further, we characterized the breakpoints of copy number
alterations across the cohort.

Conclusions

We will present novel copy number alterations in rare tumor types and the
recurrent breakpoints for common alterations across multiple tumor types.
These findings will provide insight into the mechanisms of cancer
progression.


