Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imodi initiative: A novel holistic and integrative approach with
patient-derived tumor models against pancreatic cancer.


Patient-derived xenografts (PDX) are appearing as a prime approach for
preclinical studies despite being insufficiently characterized as a model
of the human disease and its diversity. Many reports support that
xenografts from PDX in mice recapitulate well the molecular diversity,
cellular heterogeneity, and histology seen in patient tumors. However,
several lacks such as the limited clinical diversity of the PDXs, the
absence of human drug metabolism and the reduced immune system are
limiting the predictive values of these PDX models. To set-up a holistic
integration of these criticisms, we have associated efforts from public
hospitals, academic groups, biotechs and private pharmaceutical companies
with the financial support of the French Ministry of Industry.

First, to improve the clinical diversity of the PDX collections, surgical
specimens or biopsies from patients with 9 different types of cancers
(pancreas, lung, breast, ovary, liver, prostate, AML, myeloma, lymphoma)
are collected since 2013 to establish large collections of PDXs in mice.
In addition, primary cultures of cells from these samples are established
leading to a collection of cell lines from the stroma and the tumoral
compartment. Pancreatic PDX from primary tumors and its metastasis were
obtained from either surgery or by endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine
needle aspirate and therefore representing a bio-banking with a unique
diversity. The established pancreatic models are being evaluated for
histological, extensive molecular characteristics and in vitro and in
vivo sensitivities to relevant anticancer drugs. We found i/ a variable
sensitivity on PDX-derived cells when treated in vitro with increasing
concentrations of clinically relevant drugs; ii/ that sensitivity to one
drug does not predict the sensitivity to the another one; and iii/
sensitivity to drugs in vivo reproduce, but not systematically, the
results in vitro. To be noted, no correlation between sensitivity and
genetic characteristics (mutations or CNV) or histological proprieties
was found. All model characteristics are being compiled in a web-based
database for efficient features search and interconnection.

Second, we are generating mice with humanized liver showing human drug
pharmacokinetic and metabolism profiles

We will present the first pancreatic cancer models characterized and will
discuss their usefulness and chance to bring benefit to patients via this
holistic strategy developed within IMODI initiative.


