Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A personalized medicine approach to identifying dysregulated
epigenetic enzyme activity in the development of castrate-resistant
prostate cancer.


Purpose: Recent advances in proteomic and chromatin immunoprecipitation
tools have been vital in studying cancer epigenetics, but the ability to
measure directly the enzyme activities of dysregulated histone-modifiers
understudied. We utilize a novel approach to identify altered
histone-modifying enzymes in the progression from hormone sensitive (HS)
to castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) progression.

Methods: We developed, validated and utilized a high-throughput peptide
microarray assay to identify altered histone lysine (de)acetylation
activity in tumor lysates. Functional assays, novel HS and CRPC human
tumor arrays and xenografts were utilized to confirm these findings.

Results: This microarray-based activity assay revealed up-regulated
histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity against specific histone H3
sites in a castrate-resistant (CR) PCa cell line compared to its
hormone-sensitive (HS) isogenic counterpart. NAD+-dependent deacetylation
assays revealed down-regulated Sirtuin activity in validated CR lines.
Levels of acetyltransferases GCN5, PCAF, CBP and p300 were unchanged
between matched HS and CR cell lines. However, auto-acetylation of p300
at K1499, a modification known to enhance HAT activity and a target of
deacetylation by SIRT2, was highly elevated in CR cells, while SIRT2
protein level was reduced in CR cells. Interrogation of HS and matched CR
xenograft lines reveals that H3K18 hyperacetylation, increased p300
activity, and decreased SIRT2 expression are associated with progression
to CR in 8/12 (66%). Tissue microarray analysis revealed that
hyperacetylation of H3K18 is a feature of CRPC. Inhibition of p300
results in lower H3K18ac levels and increased expression of androgen
receptor.

Conclusions: This novel microarray approach provides a method to identify
commonly dysregulated chromatin enzymes during progression providing a
personalized therapeutic strategy to direct available drugs to target
enzymes. Reduced SIRT2 expression and increased p300 activity lead to a
concerted mechanism of hyperacetylation at specific histone lysine sites
(H3K9, H3K14, and H3K18).Support: DOD PCRP (Jarrard)


