Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The efficacy of CD133 BiTEs and CAR-T cells in preclinical model
of glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is a uniformly fatal primary brain tumor,
characterized by a diverse cellular phenotype and genetic heterogeneity.
Despite the use of multi-modal treatment including surgical resection,
radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the outcome of patients with GBM remains
poor. Numerous studies have implicated CD133+ brain tumor initiating
cells (BTICs) as drivers of chemo- and radio-resistance in GBM. We
recently demonstrated that a CD133-driven gene signature is predictive of
poor overall survival and targeting CD133+ treatment-refractory cells may
be an effective strategy to block GBM recurrence.

Chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) and bispecific T-Cell engaging
antibodies (BiTEs) present promising immunotherapeutic approaches that
have not yet been validated for recurrent GBM. Using CellectSeq, a novel
methodology that combines use of phage-displayed synthetic antibody
libraries and DNA sequencing, we developed the CD133-specific monoclonal
antibody ‘RW03’. We constructed CD133-specific BiTEs that consist of
two arms; one arm recognizes the tumor antigen (CD133) while the second
is specific to CD3 antigen. The dual binding specificity was confirmed
using flow cytometry. Using CD133high and CD133low primary GBM lines, we
validated the binding of BiTEs to CD133+ cells. Further analysis showed
binding of BiTEs to human T cells known to express CD3 within a
population of healthy donor peripheral blood mononuclear cells. We
observed BiTEs redirecting T cells to kill GBMs, with greater efficiency
observed in CD133high GBMs, validating BiTE target specificity.
Incubating T-cells with BiTEs and the CD133high GBMs resulted in
increased expression of T cell activation markers. In parallel, we
derived the single chain variable fragment (scFv) from previously
generated RW03 and generated a second-generation CAR. Anti-CD133 scFv
with a myc tag was cloned in frame with a human CD8 leader sequence, CD8a
transmembrane domain, CD28, and hCD3ζ signaling tail in the lentiviral
construct pCCL-ΔNGFR. Following lentiviral packaging, the T cells
isolated from PBMCs were transduced with CD133 CAR construct. After
successful T cell engineering, the expression of ΔNGFR and myc tag was
analyzed using flow cytometry to confirm the efficiency of transduction
and surface expression of anti-CD133 respectively. CD133-specific CAR-T
cells were cytotoxic to CD133+ GBMs. Co-culturing CD133 CAR-T cells with
GBMs triggered T cell activation and proliferation. Treatment of GBM
tumor-bearing mice with CD133-specific CAR-T cells yielded extended
survival in mice and significant reductions in brain tumor burden.

The results of this study will establish a translational research program
that will form the basis of early phase clinical trials of a promising
CD133-based therapeutic strategy for patients with GBM.


