Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a novel class of RAS inhibitory compounds with
potent anti-tumor activity.


Introduction: Over 30% of all human cancers harbor activating RAS
mutations which induce deregulation of the cell cycle, uncontrolled
proliferation, and decreased apoptosis. Through a phenotypic screening
strategy, we have identified a series of indene derivatives which
potently and selectively inhibit growth of tumor cells harboring
activated RAS. A development candidate from this series, DC070-547,
disrupts RAS-RAF binding, inhibits RAS signaling, causes cell cycle
arrest and induces apoptosis, and exhibits strong anti-tumor activity in
a mouse KRAS mutant tumor model.

Methods: Viable cell number was measured using a luminescent indicator of
ATP. RAS activation was measured by GST-RAF1-RBD pull-down and western
blotting using an anti-RAS antibody. Disruption of RAS-RAF binding was
determined by pre-incubation of GST-RAF1-RBD beads with cell lysates or
recombinant RAS in the presence of test compounds for 30 min. Cell cycle
distribution was measured by DNA content and immunofluorescent detection
of cell cycle proteins. Antitumor activity was determined in a
subcutaneous mouse tumor model involving KRAS mutant colon tumors.

Results: Low nanomolar concentrations of DC070-547 selectively inhibited
growth of a diverse panel of tumor cell lines harboring activated RAS
relative to tumor cell lines lacking activated RAS. Transfection of HT-29
cells lacking activated RAS with mutant RAS conferred sensitivity to
DC070-547. The compounds blocked binding of RAF1-RBD to recombinant RAS,
RAS from cell lysates, as well as RAS in intact cells. Sustained and
potent growth inhibitory effects of DC070-547 were demonstrated by colony
formation assays. Immunoblotting showed that DC070-547 inhibited
EGF-induced signaling in HCT-116 colon tumor cells with activated RAS at
concentrations that inhibit growth. DC070-547 also induced apoptosis as
evident by Annexin V labeling and M-phase arrest in HCT116 cells as shown
by DNA content and immunostaining of phospho-Histone H3B and Cdc25C, an
important downstream mediator of RAS signaling. DC070-547 and three
analogs from this series were evaluated for antitumor activity in an
athymic mouse model using subcutaneously implanted KRAS mutant colon
tumor cells. Treatments either completely suppressed tumor growth or
caused tumor regression with no discernible toxicity.

Conclusion: While RAS is widely considered to be non-druggable, a novel
compound series was identified that potently and selectivity inhibit in
vitro and in vivo the growth of tumor cells harboring activated RAS by
inhibiting RAS-effector binding. Together, these findings support further
preclinical development of this compound class for Phase I/II clinical
evaluation for the treatment of RAS-driven cancers.


