Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A 5T4 x CD3 bispecific DART® molecule with extended half-life for
T-cell immunotherapy of cancers.


Introduction: 5T4 (trophoblast glycoprotein), an oncofetal antigen
involved in embryo development, is expressed on the cell surface of
multiple cancers. Several 5T4-directed interventions have been reported,
including a cancer vaccine and an antibody-drug conjugate. A
superantigen-driven redirected cell killing modality was also developed,
but obstacles, such as immunogenicity, remain to a successful 5T4
therapeutic molecule. We have developed an Fc-bearing 5T4 x CD3 DART®
bispecific protein designed to redirect T cells to target 5T4-expressing
tumors.

Methods: 5T4 x CD3, a humanized Fc-bearing DART molecule, was stably
expressed in CHO cells and purified to homogeneity via a standard
antibody-purification platform. In vitro characterization and functional
studies were performed with 5T4-positive tumor cell lines and human T
cells. In vivo studies were performed in immune-deficient tumor-bearing
mice co-implanted with activated human T cells or reconstituted with
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Pharmacokinetic studies
were performed in both human FcRn transgenic mice and cynomolgus monkeys.

Results: 5T4 x CD3 demonstrated bispecific binding properties to both
human and cynomolgus monkey antigens. In redirected cytolysis studies,
5T4 x CD3 mediated lysis of 5T4-positive pancreatic, lung, renal,
triple-negative breast, and ovarian cancer cell lines with EC50 values
ranging between 0.03 and 0.08 ng/mL. 5T4 x CD3 displayed favorable
pharmacokinetics with a prolonged circulating half-life in human FcRn
transgenic mice and cynomolgus monkeys. Tumor clearance studies in
NOD/SCID mice implanted subcutaneously with activated human T cells and
tumor cells demonstrated robust inhibition of tumor growth upon
intravenous administration of 5T4 x CD3 at doses as low as 0.8 μg/kg,
but not with a CD3-binding control DART protein. In addition, human
PBMC-reconstituted NOD/SCID/IL2 gamma-chain null mice were implanted
intradermally with renal and pancreatic tumor cell lines or
orthotopically with a triple-negative breast cancer line and, after tumor
establishment, were treated with 5T4 x CD3. Anti-tumor activity was
observed at doses as low as 4 μg/kg. Immunohistochemical analysis of
tumor xenografts confirmed tumor clearance was associated with T-cell
recruitment into the tumor mass.

Conclusions: In summary, 5T4 x CD3 displays robust antitumor activity
against several cancer cell lines in vitro and in vivo together with a
favorable pharmacokinetic profile and merits further consideration as a
potential treatment for 5T4-positive cancers.


