Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of Protocadherin-7 (PCDH7) in prostate
cancer (PCa) cells: a direct association between PCDH7 and castrate
resistant PCa.


Introduction: PCa is the most commonly diagnosed disease in American men
and the second leading cause of death among them. Most of PCa deaths are
a result of distant metastasis and due to emergence of castrate resistant
PCa. Protocadherin-7 (PCDH7), a Cadherin superfamily transmembrane
protein that is known to function in cell-cell recognition and adhesion,
is reported to be overexpressed in breast cancer and non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). PCDH7 has been shown to mediate brain metastasis of
breast cancer. Overexpression of PCDH7 was reported to be associated with
poor clinical outcome of NSCLC. However, there is no report on
involvement of PCDH7 in PCa tumorigenesis and metastasis. In the present
study we evaluated expression of PCDH7 in androgen dependent and androgen
independent PCa cells and in TCGA and Trento/Cornell/Broad 2016 clinical
data sets.

Materials and Methods: PCa cells- LNCaP, C4-2b, DU145, PC3, 22Rv1 and
RWPE1 were used in this study. Protein expression was checked by Western
Blotting. mRNA levels were checked by quantitative real time PCR.

Results: Our data reveal high PCDH7 protein expression in PC3 cells and
low levels of PCDH7 in LNCaP and RWPE1 cells. qRT-PCR confirmed an
increased transcript level of PCDH7 in PC3 and low levels in LNCaP cells.
We also observed elevated transcript levels for PCDH7 in castrate
resistant and Enzalutamide refractory PCa (22Rv1) cells. These data
suggest a direct relationship between castrate resistance and PCDH7
expression. Our results also show an inverse relationship between PCDH7
and E-Cadherin and a direct relationship between PCDH7 and EMT markers,
indicating expression of PCDH7 is associated with tumor progression.
Interestingly, there was no correlation between PCDH7 with tumor grade or
metastasis from TCGA data, but analysis of NEPC (Trento/Cornell/Broad
2016) data set revealed amplification of PCDH7 in 9% of NEPC tumors.
Collectively, these data suggest PCDH7 expression may be associated with
advanced PCa in general and NEPC phenotype PCa in particular.

Conclusion: Our results suggest direct association of PCDH7 expression
and castrate resistance in PCa cell lines. Role of PCDH7 in castrate
resistant PCa needs further evaluation.


