Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic activation of the serine synthesis pathway by the
scaffolding protein menin.


Developmental transcription programs are epigenetically regulated by
multi-protein complexes including the MLL-containing trithorax (TrxG)
complexes, which methylate H3K4 to promote gene transcription. We
recently reported that the TrxG protein MLL1 and its binding partner
menin are overexpressed by and function as oncogenes in Ewing sarcoma.
Moreover, small molecule inhibition of the menin-MLL1 protein-protein
interaction leads to loss of menin and MLL1 protein expression and to
inhibition of growth and tumorigenicity. For the current study we
investigated the mechanistic basis of menin-MLL1 mediated oncogenic
activity in Ewing sarcoma. Bru-seq analysis was performed to identify
changes in nascent gene transcription in Ewing sarcoma cells following
exposure to the menin-MLL interaction inhibitor MI-503. Identified
targets were validated by qRT-PCR, western blot, immunocytochemistry and
by interrogation of published databases. Loss of function was achieved by
lentiviral shRNAs and by inhibitor treatment. Exposure of three
independent Ewing sarcoma cell lines to MI-503 resulted in significant
and reproducible modulation of nearly 100 genes. Bioinformatics analysis
of MI-503-regulated genes revealed that the serine synthesis pathway
(SSP) was the most significantly impacted pathway downstream of MI-503
treatment. The SSP has recently emerged as a major mediator of
tumorigenicity in multiple human cancers. qRT-PCR confirmed reduced
expression of SSP enzyme-encoding genes PHGDH, PSAT1 and PSPH in MI-503
treated cells. To determine if the SSP contributes to Ewing sarcoma
pathogenesis we evaluated expression of SSP genes and proteins in tumors
and cell lines. Our findings showed that Ewing sarcomas express high
levels of PHGDH, PSAT1, and PSPH and interrogation of the Cancer Cell
Line Encyclopedia revealed that PHGDH expression is higher in Ewing
sarcoma than in any other cancer in the database. Studies of Ewing
sarcoma cells in serine and glycine free media showed that cells retain
viability but that exposure to the PHGDH inhibitor, CBR-5884, inhibits
survival in both standard and serine/glycine-free conditions, confirming
the importance of the pathway to tumor pathogenesis. To determine how
menin-MLL1 promote SSP activation we performed loss of function studies
and discovered that knockdown of menin, but not of MLL1, leads to a
significant reduction in SSP gene expression, implicating menin as the
primary mediator of SSP gene activation. Transcriptional up regulation
the SSP pathway has been linked to ATF4 in non-small cell lung cancer.
Significantly, ATF4 protein expression is high in Ewing sarcoma cells and
ATF4 transcript and protein expression are down regulated following
MI-503 treatment and menin knockdown. Together these data demonstrate
that the SSP is highly active in Ewing sarcoma and that its activation is
induced, at least in part, by a novel menin-ATF4 transcriptional axis.


