Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-exome sequencing reveals genetic variants in ERC1 and KCNG4
in complete hydatidiform moles from Chinese Han women.


Complete hydatidiform mole (CHM) is an uncommon pregnancy-related disease
with an invasive potential. The genetic background of the sporadic CHM
has not been addressed previously despite the possible mechanisms of
maternal genetic variants to the development of this disease with
biparental origin. We performed the whole-exome sequencing analysis on 51
CHM patients and 47 normal healthy women, then the second screening of
the probable mutations by mass spectrometry in 199 CHM patients and 400
normal healthy women. Finally the candidate genetic polymorphisms were
validated by direct Sanger sequencing in 247 cases and 599 controls with
another 205 new controls. We eventually found that two SNPs
c.G48C(p.Q16H) in ERC1 and c.G1114A(p.G372S) in KCNG4, were associated
with an increased risk for CHM (pComplete hydatidiform mole (CHM) is an
uncommon pregnancy-related disease with an invasive potential. The
genetic background of the sporadic CHM has not been addressed previously
despite the possible mechanisms of maternal genetic variants to the
development of this disease with biparental origin. We performed the
whole-exome sequencing analysis on 51 CHM patients and 47 normal healthy
women, then the second screening of the probable mutations by mass
spectrometry in 199 CHM patients and 400 normal healthy women. Finally
the candidate genetic polymorphisms were validated by direct Sanger
sequencing in 247 cases and 599 controls with another 205 new controls.
We eventually found that two SNPs c.G48C(p.Q16H) in ERC1 and
c.G1114A(p.G372S) in KCNG4, were associated with an increased risk for
CHM (p<0.05). These genetic variants will facilitate our understanding on
the pathogenesis of CHM and related tumors as well as the oogenesis and
embryonic implantation. They will provide beneficial information for the
pregnant women both in physiology and psychology. Further
multiple-disciplinary collaborations should be encouraged to clarify the
accurate pathogenesis of CHM.


