Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of air carcinogenic pollution on oncological morbidity.


Cancer morbidity in Ukraine (according to the National cancer Registry
data) of one and half times has increased over the last 20 years. At the
same time the changes occurred in the structure of diseases. These
changes can be caused by negative impact of environmental factors
especially air-pollution carcinogens which altered qualitatively and
quantitatively for this period.

The aim was to evaluate the role of air-pollution carcinogens in cancer
incidence forming and to establish quantitative parameters of their
influence.

Association between population cancer incidence and air pollution
carcinogens was investigated. We analyzed the dynamics of city
air-pollution and population cancer incidence of separate organs during
the last 20 years also.

Investigations were conducted in Ukraine several cities with different
character industrial development and air-pollution levels.

We studied 8 priority carcinogenic compounds. Benzo(a)pyrene,
N-nitrozodymetylamin, N-nitrozodietylamin have been studied according to
the result of own monitoring. Formaldehyde and heavy metals (cadmium,
nickel, plumbum and chromium VI) were investigated by analyzing database
of the Central Geophysical observatory of Ukraine Ministry of Emergency
situation.

We calculated indexes of individual, total and population cancer risks
for these carcinogens influence on the population with using Risk
Assessment Methodology (IARC, 1997). It was established territorial
peculiarities of cancer risk forming. We defined the atmospheric
air-pollution contribution in the development of population oncologic
morbidity.

We determined period of maximum manifestation of carcinogenic effect for
separate chemicals, i.e. latent period of appearing oncologic diseases.
For example there are 10 years for thyroid cancer, 7 years for
respiratory organs cancer, 8 years for stomach and urinary bladder.
Calculated regression coefficients allowed predicting incidence of some
nozologic forms of cancer at the levels change of total carcinogens
pollution or separate carcinogenic chemicals.

The obtained results allowed substantiating preventive measures to reduce
compounds hazard influence on population.


