Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-killing viruses combined with tumor-targeting immune
checkpoint modulation elicits an in situ vaccination effect and expansion
of tumor-specific T cells responsible for efficacious systemic
anti-cancer activity.


Oncolytic viruses are cancer-selective and disrupt immunosuppression
within the tumor, but they show suboptimal efficacy in patients. Immune
checkpoint modulation is efficacious in a variety of cancers but is
associated with nonspecific T-cell activation and a limited effect in
tumors with a nonimmunogenic microenvironment. We hypothesized that
combining these two strategies likely resulted in both efficacious and
specific cancer therapy. Therefore, we constructed oncolytic adenovirus
Delta-24-RGDOX expressing the immune co-stimulator OX40L and tested its
activity in orthotopic GL261-C57BL/6 glioma and B16-C57BL/6 melanoma
mouse models. Compared to its predecessor Delta-24-RGD, Delta-24-RGDOX
was more effective to induce inflammatory activation within the tumors,
enhanced the capability of the tumor cells to directly activate
cancer-specific T cells and the proliferation of the cell population
through OX40L expression on the cell surface, resulting in specific
anti-tumor immunity. To track the expansion and migration of
tumor-specific T cells during virotherapy, we first injected OVA-specific
CD8+ T cells from OT-I/Luc transgenic mice in the first tumor derived
from B16-OVA cells, followed by Delta-24-RGDOX injection in the same
tumor. Monitoring the T cells with bioluminescent imaging revealed that
the viral injection greatly augmented the T cell population than the PBS
treatment within the tumor, and promoted the T cell migration to distant
B16-OVA tumor but not to B16 tumor, suggesting local viral treatment
enhanced the expansion of tumor-specific T cells and the migration of
these cells to a distant tumor with the same tumor antigen. Consistently,
flow cytometry analysis with OVA-tetramer staining showed that virus
treatment greatly increased the frequency of OVA-specific CD8+ T cells in
the local and distant tumors, peripheral blood and spleen (from high to
low frequency). 70-80% cells of this cell population were CD44+ CD62L+
that are markers for central memory T cells. Hence, this new virus was
efficacious to inhibit the virus-injected tumor and distant tumor,
prolong the survival of the treated mice and induce immune memory
specific to the virus-injected tumor type. Importantly, intratumoral
injection of Delta-24-RGDOX and an anti-PD-L1 antibody synergized to
reject gliomas and significantly increased survival in mice. Our data
demonstrate that combining an oncolytic virus with tumor-targeting immune
checkpoint modulation elicits potent in situ cancer vaccination and skews
the injected tumor microenvironment from tumorigenic to immunogenic,
resulting in a local expansion of the tumor-specific T cells. Moreover,
this local effect is capable to extend to distant tumors, achieving
specific and long-lasting systemic therapeutic efficacy.


