Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Undifferentiated cell maker rBC2LC-N lectin have high affinity to
pancreatic cancer cells and residual cancer cells.


The glycosylation in cancer cells remains still unclear despite the whole
human genome understanding. Recent technical advances give us great
awareness about the consequence of the glycosylation. The glycomes of
cancer cell surfaces are often unique with aberrant glycans, including
sialylation, fucosylation, O-glycan truncation, and N-and O-linked glycan
branching. The sugar binding proteins named ‘lectins’ are helpful
materials to recognize the glycan structure and characterization. Recent
study suggested lectins are more widely accepted that involved in many
biological phenomena inside mammalian or as chemical research tools.
Despite years of effort to develop cancer therapies, there were no
effective molecular targeting drugs for pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
One possible reason for this difficulties, PDAC cells are densely covered
with glycans which may cause the recalcitrance to approach molecular
targeting drugs. Our group developed a high-density lectin microarray
using 96 kinds of lectins, in which a panel well-defined lectins is
immobilized onto a slide, has been successfully used for high-throughput
analysis of complex carbohydrates included in serum glycoproteins and
whole cells. Using this approach, we demonstrated that a recombinant
lectin probe, rBC2LC-N, specifically bound to undifferentiated
pluripotent stem cells (ES/iPS cells), but not differentiated somatic
cells; this has now been developed as a useful undifferentiation marker.
In this study, we employed this lectin microarray to investigate the
specific glycan that covered pancreatic cancer cells with stem cell
features. Firstly, we selected a cell line which reflect clinical PDAC
cells among 6 pancreatic cancer cell lines by morphological analysis and
cancer stem cell marker expressions. As previously reported, we regarded
Capan-1 cell line as a closest one which maintains both self-renewal and
differentiation capacity. As a result, we successfully identified top 10
highlighted lectins which have significant specificity to pancreatic
cancer cells. rBC2LC-N lectin was the most significant one (P value =
9.44E-17), followed by ADA (P= 7.05E-9), TJA2 (P= 1.4E-8), ACG (P=
1.11E-6). We reconfirmed the specific reactivity of these lectins to
Capan-1 by FACS and lectin histochemistry. rBC2LC-N lectin reactivity in
70 clinical cases of PDAC revealed that all cases were confirmed to be
positive. Furthermore, we investigated this rBC2LC-N lectin have a high
affinity to residual cancer cells after gemcitabine treatment in patient
derived xenograft models. These reactions well agreed with those of
undifferentiated iPS/ES cells. These coincidental match of glycan
expression between on iPS/ES cells and on pancreatic cancer cells may
suggest a great benefit to understand the ambiguous stem cell recognition
in cancer community and novel therapeutic strategy.


