Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYC-dependent transformation model of triple-negative breast
cancer in vivo.


Recent comprehensive breast cancer studies examining mutations and
genomic alterations have determined that deregulation of MYC and the PI3K
pathway occur frequently during breast cancer progression and may be
useful targets for therapy. As a result, there have been large efforts to
develop PI3K, AKT and mTOR inhibitors (PAM inhibitors) for clinical use,
however clinical trial data demonstrates that many patients treated with
PAM inhibitors develop resistant disease. An alternative strategy would
be to target Myc, though a lack of effective and specific inhibitors
makes this difficult. To identify the core vulnerabilities in these
cancers we developed an in vivo xenograft model of triple-negative breast
cancer driven by deregulated PI3K signaling and MYC. We hypothesize that
determining how these pathways co-operate to transform normal human
breast cells into breast carcinomas will reveal a tumor progression
signature and highlight new therapeutic opportunities. We developed our
model using the spontaneously immortalized, basal, triple-negative MCF10A
cell line. By expressing the hotspot PIK3caH1047R protein alone in MCF10A
cells (MCF10.H) in addition to MYC (MCF10.HM), we can model normal/early
breast cancer and invasive ductal carcinoma respectively. This is the
first in vivo human model of breast cancer dependent on MYC for
transformation. When injected into female NOD-SCID mice, MCF10A.H cells
form organized acinar ducts embedded in extracellular matrix. MCF10A.H
ducts form with hollow lumen and a single layer of myoepithelial cells,
recapitulating normal human breast histology. Alternatively, MCF10A.HM
cells grow as high-grade carcinomas indicative of invasive disease.
MCF10A.H benign growths and MCF10A.HM tumors remain basal-like and
triple-negative by immunohistochemistry. Importantly, MCF10A.HM tumors
are sensitive to MYC repression and therefore may be a suitable model to
evaluate direct and indirect anti-MYC therapies. Having relevant human
xenograft samples representing both normal and IDC tissue, we performed
RNA-seq to identify a MYC-signature driving breast cancer transformation.
Our current work will involve targeting the resulting MYC-driven pathways
identified by RNA-seq to therapeutically target MYC in breast cancer.


