Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of MST/Hippo signaling promotes tumorigenesis in a
genetically engineered mouse model of fusion-positive alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma.


While improvement in survival for pediatric cancer patients over the last
40 years has been encouraging, certain cancer types evade cure. One such
example is fusion-positive alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (aRMS), a pediatric
soft tissue sarcoma of mesenchymal origin with skeletal muscle features
and a 5-year survival rate of While improvement in survival for pediatric
cancer patients over the last 40 years has been encouraging, certain
cancer types evade cure. One such example is fusion-positive alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma (aRMS), a pediatric soft tissue sarcoma of mesenchymal
origin with skeletal muscle features and a 5-year survival rate of <50%.
A hallmark of this aggressive malignancy is the t{2;13} translocation
fusion gene PAX3-FOXO1 (PF). Primary cell-based modeling experiments in
our laboratory and others have shown that PF is necessary but not
sufficient for aRMS tumorigenesis, indicating additional molecular
alterations are required to initiate and sustain tumor growth. Previously
we showed that PF-positive aRMS tumorigenesis relies on alterations in
Hippo pathway signaling, including upregulation of the YAP
transcriptional co-activator, and downregulation of the MST/Hippo kinase,
which occurs when the scaffold protein RASSF4 (itself a PF
transcriptional target) binds and inhibits MST1/Hippo. We hypothesized
that ablating MST/Hippo signaling in an existing genetically engineered
mouse model (GEMM) of aRMS would accelerate tumorigenesis and provide
insight into the role of this pathway in aRMS.

To assess the role of MST/Hippo signaling in aRMS, MST1/2-floxed
(Stk3F/F;Stk4F/F) mice were crossed with an established MSTWT aRMS GEMM
driven by conditional expression of Pax3-Foxo1 from the endogenous Pax3
locus and conditional loss of Cdkn2a in Myf6-expressing cells.

Statistical analysis revealed that compared to MSTWT aRMS control
animals, MSTNull have significantly accelerated tumorigenesis (median
survival 112 vs. 224 days, pStatistical analysis revealed that compared
to MSTWT aRMS control animals, MSTNull have significantly accelerated
tumorigenesis (median survival 112 vs. 224 days, p< 0.0001) and increased
tumor penetrance (76% vs. 27%). MSTNull animals developed tumors
disproportionately in the head and neck as compared to control, and
incurred multiple tumors per animal. Tumors were analyzed via
immunohistochemistry for MyoD and myogenin, markers of RMS, as well as
Myf5, an early marker of myogenesis. Tumors in both cohorts were for
positive for aRMS markers. Tumor-derived cell lines were used for in
vitro cell-based assays and molecular interrogation.

We have identified the MST/Hippo signaling axis as an important tumor
suppressor mechanism in aRMS. The rapid onset and increased penetrance of
tumorigenesis in this GEMM provides a powerful tool for interrogating
aRMS biology and screening novel therapeutics.


