Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of mitochondrial DNA mutations and tumor
evolution in ulcerative colitis-associated colorectal cancer.


The role of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations in cancer is highly
controversial. While specific mtDNA mutations have been associated with
certain cancers, it has been recently reported that mtDNA mutations are
negatively selected in most tumors. We aimed to clarify the role of mtDNA
mutations in cancer progression by: 1) capitalizing on the multi-step
sequence of tumorigenesis in ulcerative colitis (UC), a premalignant
disease ideal for the study of tumor progression, and 2) employing a
highly accurate, ultra-deep sequencing method to fully characterize the
mtDNA mutational profile at different stages of tumor evolution. UC is an
inflammatory bowel disease characterized by chronic colonic inflammation
that increases the risk of colorectal cancer (CRC). UC CRC evolves
through a stepwise process that involves the accumulation of molecular
alterations in otherwise histologically normal epithelium, low-grade
dysplasia (LGD), high-grade dysplasia (HGD), and cancer. Our lab has
previously identified mitochondrial alterations as a facet of dysplastic
progression in UC. Here we have worked to fully characterize the spectrum
and frequency of mtDNA mutations in UC tumorigenesis by applying a novel,
highly sensitive NGS technology, Duplex Sequencing (DS), that can
accurately detect mutant allele frequencies (MAF) as low as 0.01%. For
two patients that developed cancer, we analyzed 15-20 colon biopsies
obtained at colectomy, representing all stages of tumorigenesis. The
median duplex sequencing depth was 4,000x, which allowed unprecedented
resolution to detect subclonal mutations (MAF 1-99%) and rare mutations
(MAF<1%). Several subclonal mutations were present in all biopsies, but
with variable MAF, thus enabling construction of phylogenetic trees via
PHYLIP analysis. Rare mutations were abundant in all biopsies; on average
one in every 10,000 nucleotides sequenced was mutated. Most rare
mutations were G to A transitions, indicative of replicative errors, but
G to T and C to A transversions, the oxidative damage mutational
signature, were prevalent in some biopsies. We conclude, therefore, that
most mtDNA mutations are caused by proliferation with a contribution by
inflammatory processes, and that this may have greater implications for
their role in other cancer types.


