Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Infiltration of neutrophils in the tumor was associated with poor
prognosis of patients with gastric cancer.


Background:Recent evidence shows that neutrophils often migrate into the
tumor and are associated with tumor progression. These tumor associated
neutrophils (TANs) neutrophils have potential to induce angiogenesis,
lymphangiogensesis and immunosuppression by inhibiting cytotoxic T
lymphocytes. Immune status is one of the important prognostic factor of
gastric cancer. We previously reported that lymphangiogenesis was
augmented in the primary tumor of gastric carcinoma.

Aim:The aim of this study was to investigate the correlation between
CD15+ TANs and clinicopatological features of patients with gastric
cancer.

Materials and Methods: We investigated the association of the density of
TANs in primary tumor with clinicopathological features by
immunohistochemistry. We used specimens from a total of 143 primary tumor
and 497 lymph nodes from 120 patients underwent gastrectomy between 2007
and 2008 in our department. We examined prognostic value of TANs
identified as positive CD15 cells in both of the primary tumor and tumor
draining lymph nodes.

Results:The median number of TANs in primary tumor and tumor draining
lymph nodes were 18.4 and 23 cells/HPF, respectively. High TANs in both
of the primary tumor and lymph nodes had correlation with depth of
invasion (primary tumor PResults:The median number of TANs in primary
tumor and tumor draining lymph nodes were 18.4 and 23 cells/HPF,
respectively. High TANs in both of the primary tumor and lymph nodes had
correlation with depth of invasion (primary tumor P<0.001, lymph nodes
P=0.036) and lymph nodes metastasis (primary tumor PResults:The median
number of TANs in primary tumor and tumor draining lymph nodes were 18.4
and 23 cells/HPF, respectively. High TANs in both of the primary tumor
and lymph nodes had correlation with depth of invasion (primary tumor
P<0.001, lymph nodes P=0.036) and lymph nodes metastasis (primary tumor
P<0.001, lymph nodes P=0.002). Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that patients
with high TANs in both primary tumor and lymph nodes had worse prognosis
than patients with a low TANs (primary tumor P=0.031, lymph nodes
P=0.014). Multivariate analysis revealed that high TANs in lymph nodes
were independent prognostic factors. (P=0.038)

Conclusion: Our results showed that patients with high CD15+TANs
infiltration in gastric cancer tissues had poorer prognosis because of
increasing lymph nodes metastasis. These findings suggested the TANs
might have important role of tumor lymphangiogenesis in microenvironment
of gastric carcinoma.


