Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adenosine signaling through A2AR limits the efficacy of anti-CTLA4
and chemotherapy in preclinical models.


Elevated levels of extracellular adenosine within the tumor
microenvironment create an immunosuppressive niche that promotes tumor
growth and metastasis. Adenosine signaling via the A2A receptor (A2AR) on
immune cells suppresses anti-tumor immunity and has been shown to limit
the efficacy of immunotherapies such as anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs).

CPI-444 is a potent and selective oral A2AR antagonist that is currently
being investigated in Phase 1/1b clinical trials alone and in combination
with an anti-PD-L1 antibody (Atezolizumab) in selected solid tumors. New
preclinical data suggests that combining CPI-444 with anti-CTLA-4 mAbs as
well as chemotherapy treatment are also promising therapeutic strategies
in solid tumors, suggesting a broad role for adenosine as an immune
suppressive mechanism.

The efficacy of CPI-444 + anti-CTLA-4 mAb treatment was evaluated in MC38
and CT26 syngeneic mouse tumor models. In CT26, combination treatment
eliminated established tumors in up to 90% of mice approximately 2 weeks
after treatment was initiated. In MC38, combination CPI-444 and
anti-CTLA-4 mAb treatment prolonged survival of 80% of mice compared to
only 40% of mice that received CPI-444 or anti-CTLA-4 mAbs alone. The
effect of CPI-444 + anti-CTLA-4 treatment on T-cell proliferation, T cell
activation, and TREG function will be discussed.

Chemotherapy releases adenosine and ATP into the tumor microenvironment
(TME). Multiple chemotherapies have also been shown to up-regulate the
ecto-enzymes CD39 and CD73 that produce adenosine and further suppress
immune function. In the MC38 model, CPI-444 treatment synergized with
doxorubicin and eliminated established tumors 80% of treated mice.
CPI-444 treatment was also synergistic with cyclophosphamide, inhibiting
the growth of RENCA tumors, a model that is considered resistant to
chemotherapy. Ongoing studies are evaluating the effect of CPI-444 +
chemotherapy on tumor infiltrating lymphocyte localization, activation,
and expression of CD73 and CD39.

These results suggest that blockade of the adenosine signaling pathway
may be vital for enhancing anti-tumor responses in solid tumors that show
an incomplete response to anti-CTLA4 therapy or chemotherapy.


