Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of a clinically actionable cancer core gene test for
solid tumors facilitating targeted molecular therapy and immunotherapy.


Molecular profiling of tumor mutations has expedited molecular targeted
therapy for cancer patients. Additionally, tumor mutation load and DNA
microsatellite instability (MSI) status can help predict patient’s
response to immunotherapy. We analytically validated a gene test
targeting clinically actionable cancer mutations of all 4 major types:
single nucleotide variations (SNVs); insertion/deletions (INDELs); whole
gene copy number variations (CNVs); and structural rearrangements
(translocations) as well as the MSI status. This test interrogates all
coding exons from 49 core cancer genes, introns for a subset of genes
selected for detection of prevalent gene rearrangements, and the TERT
(telomerase reverse transcriptase) promoter region. MSI status is
determined from a set of 5 intronic mono-nucleotide repeats collectively
associated with microsatellite instability. Targeted DNA regions are
captured by in-solution hybridization with complementary biotinylated RNA
baits and sequenced on the Illumina NextSeq®500 platform. Paired
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor samples and whole blood
samples are analyzed simultaneously for the detection of SNV, INDEL, CNV,
translocation and MSI status. FFPE samples can also be analyzed alone if
the whole blood sample is not available, eliminating the reporting of MSI
status. A minimum of 50 ng FFPE DNA and 100 ng of whole blood DNA are
required for this test. A total of 123 FFPE, 2 FFPE FNA samples, 19
paired FFPE and whole blood paired samples covering lung cancer,
colorectal cancer, melanoma and breast cancer were included in this
validation study. Analytical validation of assay performance demonstrated
that, on average, 700-fold read depth was achieved across all targeted
regions with >95% of these regions covered by a minimum of 300 unique
reads. Analytical sensitivity was ≥5% mutation frequency for SNV and
INDEL and ≥20% for translocation and CNV. Thirty-eight unique variants
were confirmed between this test and orthogonal methodologies: 22 SNVs, 6
INDELs, 5 translocations, and 5 CNV. Fifty-eight out of 59 (98%
concordance) paired FFPE/blood samples achieved the same MSI status
result with this targeted sequencing approach compared to the reference
National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) Bethesda PCR test.
MSI-positive samples, on average, were determined to have 5-fold higher
mutation count compared to MSI-negative samples, consistent with the
previously reported higher mutation burden. In conclusion, we have
developed and analytically validated a core cancer gene test employing
NGS technology with demonstrated high analytical sensitivity and
specificity. Coupled with clinical interpretation, this test will
facilitate clinical decision-making for molecular targeted therapy and
immunotherapy.


