Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput automation of the 10x Genomics® Chromium™
workflow for linked-read whole exome sequencing and a targeted lynch
syndrome panel.


Traditional 2nd generation sequencing strategies have significantly
reduced the cost of sequencing the human genome and provide flexibility
to query specific gene panels, the whole exome, or the whole genome.
However, these methodologies are based on short reads which limit their
ability to phase/haplotype over long genomic distances, accurately map
reads between highly homologous regions (e.g., genes vs. pseudogenes),
and robustly detect particular types of structural variants (e.g.,
inversions and translocations).

Advances in microfluidics technology and precision reagent delivery allow
long-range information to be rescued and preserved through the use of the
10x Genomics Chromium platform. Each input DNA fragment (~40-200kb) is
partitioned into a gel-bead in emulsion (GEM), and subsequent
biochemistry generates mini-libraries of NGS-ready molecules tagged with
a barcode unique for each GEM. Thus, long-range context is achieved by
linking short reads sharing the same barcode, and contiguity is
established because they were derived from the same input fragment.
Importantly, the barcoded mini-libraries are compatible with short-read
sequencers and can be implemented as an add-on to existing sequencing
infrastructures.

Here we describe and demonstrate how the user-friendly and uniquely-tuned
liquid handling capabilities of the PerkinElmer Sciclone® NGSx
Workstation interface with the 10x Genomics chip to successfully automate
the Chromium Genome workflow. We show the preservation of intact genomic
DNA during automated library preparation and demonstrate that these
libraries have comparable quality to those generated by manual
preparation. Following Chromium partitioning, mini-library generation,
and pooling of all the GEM mini-libraries, samples were processed again
on the Sciclone using a previously established automated workflow for
exome/panel target capture using Agilent SureSelectTM baits. This
end-to-end automated workflow was used to generate Linked-Read whole
exome data on samples with unresolved structural rearrangements and
targeted Linked Reads in a Lynch syndrome gene, PMS2. Linked Reads enable
us to 1) fine-map structural rearrangements detected by karyotyping and
2) resolve variants in PMS2 versus those in its homologous pseudogene,
PMS2CL, without invoking non-NGS methods such as MLPA or long-range PCR.

The benefits of automation are essential to the scale-up of
high-throughput projects by removing manual variability and increasing
efficiency. This partnership offers a unique workflow solution that
enables exome and panel-based Linked-Read sequencing at scale.

For Research Use Only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures.


