Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eribulin modulates tumor microenvironment through vascular
remodeling for antitumor effect in multiple mouse xenograft models.


Eribulin mesilate (Eribulin), a first-in-class halichondrin B-based
microtubule dynamics inhibitor, has been reported to remodel tumor
vasculature (i.e., improvement of tumor vessels and perfusion) in human
breast cancer xenograft models; however, the role of this vascular
remodeling in anti-tumor effects is not fully understood. Here, we
investigated the effects of eribulin-induced vascular remodeling on
anti-tumor activities in multiple human cancer xenograft models.
Microvessel densities (MVDs) were evaluated by immunohistochemistry (CD31
staining), and anti-tumor effects were examined in 10 human cancer
xenograft models treated with eribulin. Eribulin treatment significantly
increased MVDs compared to the corresponding control groups in 7 out of
10 models with a correlation between enhanced MVD levels and anti-tumor
effects (R2=0.55). Because of observed increases in MVDs, we next
utilized 111In-labeled PEGylated liposomes to examine if eribulin
treatment would result in increased tumoral accumulation levels of such
liposomes, and indeed, we found that eribulin, unlike vinorelbine another
tubulin inhibitor, enhanced them. Since eribulin treatment increased
accumulation of 111In-labeled PEGylated liposomes, we postulated that
this treatment might enhance anti-tumor effect of Doxil (a liposomal
anti-cancer agent). As expected, eribulin enhanced anti-tumor activity of
Doxil in the PE-H1650 xenograft model. Then, we evaluated whether
eribulin facilitated the recruitment of immune cells into the tumor.
Infiltrating CD11b-positive immune cells were significantly increased in
the multiple eribulin-treated xenografted tumors, and natural killer (NK)
cell depletion reduced anti-tumor effects of eribulin. Collectively,
these findings suggested a contribution of the immune cells for
anti-tumor activities of eribulin. Taken together, our results obtained
from multiple human cancer xenograft models suggested that vascular
remodeling induced by eribulin therapy would act as a microenvironment
modulator, and contributed to show anti-tumor effects of eribulin.


