Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell RNA sequencing reveals smoking-associated alterations
in bronchial airway epithelial subpopulations.


Rationale: We have previously shown that bronchial airway epithelial gene
expression reflects the physiologic response to cigarette smoke exposure.
We have also shown that gene expression differences in cytologically
normal airways cells can serve as a diagnostic biomarker for lung cancer.
In this study, we use single cell RNA-seq to profile transcriptomes of
individual bronchial epithelial cells from current and never smokers in
order to detect smoking-associated alterations within specific epithelial
cell types and to discover novel subpopulations that develop as a result
of smoke exposure. This approach may be useful for identifying cell
type-specific transcriptomic changes in the airways of cancer patients,
which may lead to a better understanding of lung carcinogenesis and new
approaches to early lung cancer detection.

Methods: We obtained bronchial brushings from current smokers (n=6) and
never smokers (n=6) and isolated single cells by FACS. The CEL-Seq RNA
library preparation protocol was used to sequence the transcriptomes of
1,140 cells (n=95/donor).

Results: Distinct populations of bronchial cells expressed known markers
of basal (KRT5), ciliated (FOXJ1), secretory (SCGB1A1, MUC5AC) epithelial
cells, as well as white blood cells (CD45). In the airways of smokers, we
observed an increase in abundance of MUC5AC+ secretory cells as well as a
decrease in abundance of KRT5+ basal cells and SCGB1A1+ secretory cells.
A novel subset of KRT8+ cells that lacked expression of other known cell
type markers was identified in the airways of smokers and may represent a
population previously described as undifferentiated intermediate cells.
Genes involved with metabolism of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(CYP1B1) were detected in smoker secretory cells, whereas genes involved
in the metabolic response to cigarette smoke toxins such as aldehydes
(ALDH3A1) and quinones (NQO1), were most highly expressed by smoker
ciliated cells. Interestingly, the novel KRT8+ cells identified in
smokers expressed genes known to promote MUC5AC+ secretory cell
differentiation (SPDEF), but did not express MUC5AC itself, suggesting
that these may be pro-MUC5AC+ secretory intermediate cells. Furthermore,
we found that genes previously associated with higher expression in the
airways of lung cancer patients were enriched among genes most strongly
associated with smoker ciliated and secretory cells, whereas genes with
lower expression in lung cancer were enriched among genes most strongly
associated with white blood cells.

Conclusion: We have identified cell type-specific transcriptomic
alterations and shifts in epithelial cell population abundance in smoker
airways. In future studies, profiling the transcriptomes of single cells
from bronchial airways of smokers with and without lung cancer may lead
to the identification of specific cellular subpopulations contributing to
the airway field of lung-cancer associated injury.


