Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation-induced vegf-targeted 4-1bb costimulation enhances
immune control of tumor growth.


Radiotherapy (RT)-potentiated immunomodulation is an emerging field in
solid tumor malignancies. RT induces peripheral antitumor immunity that
can lead to the reduction of distant, non-irradiated tumor lesions
(abscopal response). This has provided rationale for current early phase
trials combining existing checkpoint blockade and co-stimulatory mAbs
with stereotactic RT. Objective responses remain suboptimal with
checkpoint blockade monotherapy, and dose limiting toxicity is widely
observed with these modalities. We hypothesize that targeting
immunotherapy to the tumor using oligonucleotide aptamers that bind to RT
induced tumor stress products will significantly enhance the therapeutic
index.

We used the aptamer platform to generate a bi-specific construct
containing a costimulatory aptamer ligand specific to murine 4-1BB which
was conjugated to an aptamer specific to products secreted into the tumor
stroma (VEGF or osteopontin). Tumor targeting, local control, abscopal
responses and toxicity were compared to unconjugated 4-1BB-VEGF
constructs, or mAB based therapies, when used in combination with RT in
murine subcutaneous and autochthonous MCA tumor models.

RT induced VEGF upregulation was demonstrated in null/low VEGF secreting
tumors that led to preferential accumulation of VEGF-41BB aptamers in the
irradiated tumor.12Gy x1 elicited optimal tumor targeting of bi-specific
VEGF-4-1BB conjugate. Significant anti-tumor immune responses were
observed in s.c. murine tumor models. This conjugate showed dramatic
reduction in systemic toxicity compared to the equivalent gold standard
4-1BB mAb. RT-VEGF-4-1BB treatment significantly improved local control,
overall survival and induced potent abscopal responses compared to
unconjugated and non-irradiated controls in the Balb/c 4T1 and MCA murine
tumor models. Furthermore, RT-VEGF-4-1BB treatment showed similar
anti-tumor effects as CTLA-4 mAB with significantly less systemic
toxicity. This approach increased intra-tumoral CD4+ and CD8+ T cells,
the CD8+ to Treg ratio, and induced significantly more tumor cell death.

In conclusion, this strategy has been shown to induce potent anti-tumor
immune responses in relevant murine tumor models and significantly
improves the therapeutic index over non-targeted mABs. Furthermore,
radiotherapy can expand the scope of tumor targeted immune modulation to
virtually all solid malignancies and induce potent abscopal responses.
These results provide the rationale for developing clinical grade
bispecific aptamers for future testing.


