Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tracking cancer colonization in xenografts using ultrasensitive
accelerator mass spectrometry methods.


Background: The inability to effectively treat metastases is the main
reason for the limited progress in reducing the rates of cancer morbidity
and mortality. One major drawback is the lack of quantitative assays for
assessing the size and tissue prevalence of tumors in newly diagnosed
individuals. Current methods for quantifying tumor burden are mainly
qualitative and include measuring the gross weight of the affected organ,
counting tumors on the surface of the organ, or evaluating a small sample
of the organ using histologic sections. These methods are crude measures
of tumor burden and size distribution, and in the case of histology, they
are time consuming, difficult to process an adequate sample size and
non-quantitative.

Methods: Animal models of metastasis have been useful in identifying
genes that regulate susceptibility to the development and progression of
metastasis and have helped to highlight potential novel targets for drug
development. In particular several small animal imaging technologies
including magnetic resonance imaging, high frequency ultrasound, and
optical imaging have been recently applied to this task. Each of these
methods may be useful for specific research projects, based on their
unique combination of resolution, image acquisition time, animal
throughput, and cost-effectiveness, yet none of these modalities
adequately address the need for rapid quantification of tumors across the
entire organism, nor do they assess therapeutic effectiveness in
eradicating cancer in xenograft models. We have developed an Accelerator
Mass Spectrometry (AMS)-based high precision quantitative method for
assessing the metastatic potential of primary tumors isolated from newly
diagnosed patients.

Results: Our AMS-based methodology to study metastasis uses xenograft
cancer cells labeled with 14C-labeled thymidine that are delivered
intravenously into NSG mice and allowed to develop metastatic cancer over
the course of up to 10 weeks. At the end of the experiment, all vital
organs are collected; the DNA is isolated and is examined by AMS for the
presence of 14C-signal. The labeling was optimized to achieve sufficient
signal such that a tumor derived from a single cell could be detected by
AMS, in secondary tumors, in vivo, independent of histological data.

Conclusions: Using this approach we have determined that tissue
colonization by tumor cells is a very rare event, where most metastatic
tumors are initiated by less than 10 cells delivered into NSG mice.
Further optimization of these techniques will allow us to explore the
metastatic potential of primary tumors, isolated from biopsies and
expanded in Avatar mice.

This study was supported in part by NIH P41MI03483 and was conducted
under the auspices of the USDOE by LLNL (DE-AC52-07NA27344). IM number:
LLNL-678306


