Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A small molecule derivative effectively inhibits proliferation of
pancreatic cancer cells by targeting Sp1 and survivin.


Pancreatic cancer is one of the most fatal malignancies due to its poor
prognosis. With current standard treatment options, the overall 5 year
survival rate is about 16% and these treatment plans often cause high
toxicity. Therefore, there is an urgent need for identifying more
effective and less toxic agents for the treatment of this malignancy.
Tolfenamic acid (TA) is a generic drug used to treat migraine headaches
but has been demonstrated to have anti-cancer activity in pre-clinical
studies. It is known to downregulate the transcription factor Specificity
protein 1 (Sp1). Sp1 regulates several genes involved in cell
proliferation and apoptosis, including survivin, an inhibitor of
apoptosis protein. Interestingly, a recent discovery proposed that
copper(II) complex of TA can result in higher therapeutic response;
however its efficacy was not tested in gastro-intestinal cancers. In this
study, we assessed the therapeutic efficacy of a Cu(II)- containing
complex of TA (Cu-TA) using human pancreatic cancer cell lines. MIA
PaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells were treated with increasing concentrations of
vehicle (DMSO), equimolar CuCl2 (negative control), TA or Cu-TA and the
cell viability was measured at 24 and 48 h post-treatment using
CellTiter-Glo kit. CuTA was further tested for its effect on Sp1 and
survivin expression in MIA PACa-2 cells by Western blot (protein) and
quantitative PCR (mRNA). The activation of apoptosis was determined by
measuring the activity of effector caspases using the Caspase3/7-Glo kit
and the apoptotic cell population through flow cytometric analysis using
Annexin-V staining. Cell cycle arrest was assessed by flow cytometry with
propidium iodide staining. While both TA and Cu-TA caused
dose/time-dependent response to inhibit pancreatic cancer cell growth,
Cu-TA showed higher efficacy when compared to TA. Cu-TA was highly
effective in inhibiting Sp1 and survivin protein expression and showed
similar trend for inducing apoptotic markers and causing cell cycle
arrest in early phase (G0/G1). The results of qPCR demonstrated that the
expression of survivin mRNA was significantly lower following both Cu-TA
and TA treatment; however, the mRNA expression of Sp1 remained unchanged.
This indicates that TA and Cu-TA could be working in similar mechanism by
effecting Sp1 post-translationally, perhaps through proteasome-dependent
degradation. These results demonstrate that Cu-TA is more effective than
TA and potentially useful for pancreatic cancer treatment after clinical
testing. Studies to precisely understand the underlying mechanisms of
Cu-TA are currently under investigation through molecular profiling
analysis.


