Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delivery of a CD20 transferrin receptor VNAR bispecific antibody
to the brain for CNS lymphoma.


Penetration of the blood brain barrier (BBB) remains a significant hurdle
in the development of biologic therapeutics for CNS-related cancers.
Antibody-based molecules typically do not cross the BBB in amounts
required for therapeutic efficacy. Receptor-mediated transporters in the
luminal membrane of brain capillary endothelium, which normally transport
circulating endogenous peptides and proteins, offer a non-invasive
approach for the delivery of therapeutic molecules to the brain.Using a
combination of in vitro and in vivo phage display technology, we isolated
a panel of cross species (rodent, primate and human) binders to the
transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1) from synthetic libraries of shark variable
antigen receptors (VNARs). Initially, the anti-TfR1 VNARs were fused to
an immunoglobulin Fc backbone for testing in mice. At therapeutic (2
mg/kg) doses delivered by tail vein injection, high levels of the VNAR-Fc
antibodies were found in the brain after 18 hours, which exceeded 5% of
the plasma levels. Brain fractionation studies showed that the VNAR-Fc
antibodies to TfR1 translocated to the brain parenchyma and were not
retained in the capillaries. The lead anti-TfR1 VNAR was then used to
target aberrant B cells in the brain for conditions such as cerebral
lymphoma where existing CD20 therapies to not penetrate the CNS at
therapeutic doses. A family of anti-CD20/TfR1 bispecific molecules were
produced by linking the small VNAR to either the N- and C- terminus of
heavy and light chains to create both monovalent and bivalent fusions .
We used rituxan as the CD20 agent. The bispecifics were assessed for
binding to the two cognate antigens and then tested for brain penetration
after tail vein injection. At least 4 different formats gave excellent
brain penetration 18 hours after dosing at 3.75mg/kg. Unmodified rituxan
had a brain plasma ratio of 0.25 in line with published data while the
best anti-TfR1-rituximab bispecific formats were between 2 to 5%. The
bispecific formats also retain antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity and will be further tested for brain penetration in
non-human primates and in rodent models of CNS lymphoma. If these results
successfully translate from rodents to larger animals, the peripheral
delivery of a brain penetrant CD20/TfR1 bispecific antibody would provide
a safer and more effective alternative to CD20 antibody delivery by the
intrathecal route and could have broad utility in B cell driven brain
cancer.


