Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel sensitive flow-cytometry based platform for isolation and
molecular characterization of circulating tumor single cells and clusters.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are shed from solid tumors and found at
extremely low frequencies in the blood of patients in most cancers. A
subset of these cells can seed and give rise to metastases, which is the
primary cause of cancer-related mortality. Isolation and characterization
of these cells from blood as a ‘liquid biopsy’ can be a sensitive,
non-invasive method for early detection, disease monitoring and therapy
selection. CTCs can be found even at early disease stages in preclinical
models and patients. There is increasing evidence that clusters of CTCs
in blood are associated with higher metastatic potential; however,
efficient isolation and interrogation of these rare clusters is
challenging. In this study, we utilize an in-line rare cell enrichment
platform developed by Becton Dickinson (BD), coupled with the BD FACSTM
Influx cell sorter to rapidly isolate both single cells and clusters from
blood. This platform utilizes magnetic particle-based depletion of
unwanted leukocytes and combines acoustic focusing to remove red blood
cells and debris while enriching for rare cells of interest. We achieved
30-fold enrichment of tumor cells spiked into blood along with >6-fold
improvement in sort efficiency with the enrichment process as compared to
without. Importantly, the large 200μm nozzle and low sheath pressure
(3.5 psi) on the Influx minimizes shear forces and maintains cell
viability and integrity of clusters during sorting, thereby enabling
discrimination of single cells and clusters based on side scatter. Using
this strategy, we could sort enriched populations of viable cell clusters
(range 2-10 cells). Finally, this workflow can be seamlessly integrated
with downstream molecular analysis such as next-generation sequencing. We
successfully performed whole-transcriptome single-cell sequencing
(sc-RNAseq) on cells isolated with this streamlined platform where pooled
cells and bulk RNA were used as comparisons. As proof of principle, we
used this optimized workflow to isolate and characterize CTCs from a
pancreatic cancer mouse model (KPCY) in which all tumor cells are labeled
with Yellow Fluorescent Protein (YFP). We sorted YFP+ CTCs and CD45+
white blood cells (WBCs) from the blood of 7 KPCY mice along with YFP+
cells from the matched tumor. We recovered an average of 88 CTCs/ml of
blood (range 5–258). RNA sequencing was completed on pooled and single
cells from all samples. Epithelial genes including Krt18 and Krt19 as
well as lineage specific genes such as Sox9 were significantly
overexpressed in CTCs and tumors compared to WBCs, suggesting the utility
of this approach. This integrated CTC workflow provides a sensitive
approach to identify pancreatic cancer-specific markers, which will be
evaluated for their ability to improve sensitivity of positive-selection
of CTCs in patient blood and for development of a clinically relevant
diagnostic assay.


