Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEDI5395: An armed oncolytic Newcastle disease virus.


Oncolytic viruses are live, replication-competent viruses that infect
and/or replicate selectively in tumour cells leading to the destruction
of the infected cell. Cell lysis occurs as a natural consequence of the
viral life cycle and released virions can infect and kill neighbouring
tumour cells leading to an amplified therapeutic effect. Oncolysis has
the added benefit of releasing multiple tumour antigens that may further
induce an immune-mediated therapeutic response. Newcastle Disease Virus
(NDV) is an avian paramyxovirus, which has proven safety and demonstrated
efficacy against a variety of preclinical cancer models and in PhI
clinical studies as an oncolytic agent, oncolysate or whole cell vaccine.
Using reverse genetics, we have generated a recombinant strain of NDV
that overcomes environmental and regulatory concerns uncoupling oncolytic
potency and avian pathogenicity. Furthermore we have enhanced the immune
modulatory properties of NDV by engineering the virus to express
granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). We have
evaluated the biological characteristics of recNDVGM-CSF (MEDI5395) in
vivo and in vitro. MEDI5395 selectively replicates in and kills a wide
variety of human and mouse tumour cell lines. Additionally infection of
cancer cells with MEDI5395 results in the increased production and
secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines which are able to
recruit mediators of both the innate and adaptive immune responses.
MEDI5395 is a potent activator of the type I interferon response. In
vivo, using a range of syngeneic and xenograft models we have
demonstrated that NDV treatment has robust anti-tumour activity. In a
HT1080 fibrosarcoma xenograft model a single administration
(intra-tumoural or systemic) was able to cure 80% of tumour bearing mice.
In syngeneic mouse tumour models, which support minimal viral replication
MEDI5395 treatment causes significant changes in the local immune
suppressive microenvironment and results in long-lasting anti-tumour
immune responses. These responses are further enhanced in models that
permit greater replication and also when combined with immune checkpoint
blockade. The inherent properties of NDV (self-propagation,
tumour-selective replication, and immunostimulatory properties) coupled
with the ability to genetically engineer NDV to express therapeutic
transgenes may provide a multi-modal attack on the tumour, delivering
greater benefit to patients.


