Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delineating the role of multiple copies of RNA binding domains in
human nucleolin and its homologs using a computational approach.


All eukaryotes have nucleoli, the sub-nuclear compartments where
ribosomes synthesis occur. Nucleolin (NCL), an abundant RNA binding
phosphoprotein,constitutes 5-10% of total nucleolar proteins. This
multifunctional protein plays defined role/s in many critical cellular
processes e.g. chromatin remodeling, ribosome biogenesis, transcriptional
and translational regulation of various non-coding as well as coding
RNAs. NCL binds to its target RNAs via two or multiple RNA binding
domains (RBDs) to control gene expression during normal cell cycle as
well as during cellular response to stress. A variety of tumors express
elevated levels of NCL where NCL plays a direct role/s in increasing
expressions of genes involved in cell survival, angiogenesis and
metastasis. A comparison of NCL in various organisms shows that it is
highly conserved, especially in its RNA binding domains that can vary in
number (2 to 4 consecutive domains). Interestingly, the individual
NCL-RBDs are more conserved across different species rather than within
the same protein. RBDs are known to interact in pairs with RNA via RNA
recognition motifs called RNP motifs, and complementary nucleic acid
motifs or elements in RNA allow interaction with NCL. Vertebrate NCL
proteins contains four RBDs, however most studies have focused only on
the role/s of RDB 1,2; none probing the possible functional redundancy of
the additional RBDs nor identifying any target-specificity for the RBD
3,4 in human NCL and other homologs. Earlier data from our lab suggested
RBD 3,4 can bind RNA in a structurally analogous manner to RBD1,2 albeit
with altered affinity. Here, we continue this research by investigating
various homologs of human NCL to better understand the conserved
mechanism of its interaction with RNA and whether the additional RBDs,
are in fact, redundant in function. To test this hypothesis, RBDs from
various homologs were modeled using template based methods and analyzed
by a combination of sequence and structure analysis tools. We show that
there are key residue differences in individual RBDs from various
homologs that potentially manifest as differences in binding affinities.
This study reveals new insights into NCL RBD function and describes the
evolution of RBD function with respect to nucleic acid binding.


