Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Technical validation of a micro-flow cytometry platform for
prostate cancer biomarker discovery.


The analysis of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in biofluids is an expanding
area of biomarker discovery. To be effective, a diagnostic test must
differentiate EVs originating from cancer cells versus non-cancerous
origins, and also define biomarkers enriched in cancer EVs. Our team has
developed a micro-flow cytometry platform using the Apogee A50 to analyze
prostate cancer (PCa) EVs in different biofluids. While flow cytometry is
powerful tool for quantitative and qualitative evaluation of cellular
biomarkers, direct translation of most applications to EVs is
challenging. For example, EVs in biofluids typically range in size from
50-1000nm, and are present as low refractive index, polydisperse
populations. We have optimized 30 assay parameters for the identification
of prostate specific EVs so that disease specific biomarkers may be
evaluated. To illustrate the sensitivity of the system, conditioned media
from palmitoylated-GFP-LNCaP cells was used as a positive signal sample.
When spiked into increasing concentrations of unstained plasma EVs, the
GFP spike was detected linearly, even when present as low as 0.03% of the
total EV population. Furthermore, the rate of positive signal/uL sample
was quantitative after 15-30 seconds of sample analysis. The platform
also permits high throughput analysis using a 96 well plate autosampler.
To show sample reproducibility, we analyzed both low and high
positive-signal samples over an 8hr sampling window. Low positive samples
(120events/uL; 0.1% of total EVs) had a 4% CV over 96 samples whereas the
high positive signal samples (2300events/uL, 1.0% of total EVs) had a
2.2% CV. Similar CVs have been obtained with CD9 and CD63. Analysis of
sample aliquots over multiple days shows less than 6% CV. Conventional
flow cytometers acquire tens of thousands of events while the Apogee
system is able to collect millions of events with several
parameters/event, in a high throughput manner. This generates a
significant amount of data for which we have designed a unique machine
learning approach to detect specific EV populations within the whole
sample. In this manner, we utilize all data from the sample and not
simply a subjectively defined area of interest. Using fresh samples from
the clinic we have standardized a 2hr arm-freezer protocol for the
collection and preservation of serum and plasma. Comparison studies in
LNCaps and PC3 cells of 5 antibodies against PSMA, indicated the J591
anti-PSMA monoclonal antibody as a selective marker for prostate cancer
EVs. Positive signal for this antibody was linearly titrated in both a
LNCaP EV system and plasma EVs from metastatic prostate cancer patients.
Specificity was shown by saturating a plasma system with unconjugated
J591 and then reacting with PE-conjugated J591. Using the A50 micro-flow
cytometry platform, the J591 antibody to identify prostate specific EVs,
and a unique machine learning algorithm, we identified a multiple
biomarker, diagnostic signature for PCa.


