Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel oncogene, copine-7 (CPNE7), in colorectal
cancer.


Background: CPNE7, a member of copine family, is composed of
calcium-dependent membrane-binding proteins. The encoded protein may play
a role in calcium-mediated intracellular processes and membrane
trafficking mainly. Although this protein was known as tumor suppressor
in breast cancer, we identified the possibility as an oncogene in
colorectal cancer. In this study, we performed to evaluate the oncogenic
functions of CPNE7 in the colorectal cancer cell line and the clinical
significance of CPNE7 expression in colorectal cancer patients.

Method: The colorectal cancer cell lines (SW480, SW620, HCT116 and HT29)
were transfected with siRNA for knockdown CPNE7. The oncogenic functions
were identified in the transfected cell lines and compared them with
CPNE7 highly expressing control cell lines. In vitro functional studies
included cell proliferation assay, migration assay, invasion assay and
semisolid agar colony forming assay. The clinical significance of CPNE7
expression was evaluated in 250 cases of colorectal cancer tissue by
immunohistochemistry.

Results: The knockdowned cell lines significantly showed lower oncogenic
function (proliferation, migration, invasion and colony forming) compared
to the CPNE7 highly expressing control cell lines (pResults: The
knockdowned cell lines significantly showed lower oncogenic function
(proliferation, migration, invasion and colony forming) compared to the
CPNE7 highly expressing control cell lines (p<0.05). The overall survival
rate was decreased in patients of CPNE7 high expression (p=0.03).
Multivariate and univariate Cox-regression analysis showed that CPNE7
high expression was an independent prognostic factor in colorectal cancer
(HR=1. 54, 95% CI=1. 00-2.38: p=0. 048 / HR=1. 58, 95% CI=1. 03-2.41:
p=0. 032).

Conclusion: This study announces that CPNE7 is a novel oncogene, an
independent prognostic factor and therapeutic target in colorectal
cancer. In the future, studies on in vivo assay and identifying oncogenic
signal pathways of CPNE7 in colorectal cancer are necessary.


