Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulatory T cell recruitment limits the effectiveness of
checkpoint inhibition for claudin-low breast cancer.


Introduction: Breast cancer can be separated into five intrinsic subtypes
based on differences in the transcriptome of the tumor. We propose that
the intrinsic differences of specific tumor subytpes lead to extrinsic
differences in the tumor microenvironment.

Methods: We utilized human clinical and genetically engineered mouse
model (GEMM) samples of the intrinsic subtypes luminal A, basal-like, and
claudin-low breast cancers to evaluate the immune landscape in the tumor
microenvironment by histology and microarray analysis. Our claudin-low
GEMM was derived from BRCA-/-/p53-/- mice. The HER-2 overexpressing,
basal-like, and luminal A models have been previously descried. We
utilized the FoxP3-DTR transgenic mouse model as a method of regulatory T
cell (Treg) depletion to evaluate their function in these GEMMs.

Results: The claudin-low human tumors were heavily infiltrated with
immune cells, with CD4+ T cells being the most prominent, when compared
to the luminal A subtype (P = 0.01). There were also increased focal
areas of Tregs in human claudin-low tumors. To evaluate the mechanism for
these findings, we utilized a GEMM of claudin-low tumors in addition
HER-2 overexpressing, basal-like, and luminal A models. Mice with
claudin-low tumors recruited elevated numbers of immune cells to the
tumor microenvironment when compared to other breast cancer subtypes
(P=0.01). Additionally, there was increased expression of multiple
chemokine ligands in the tumor microenvironment among claudin-low tumors,
with CXCL12 being the most highly overexpressed. Because the claudin-low
tumors were heavily immune infiltrated, we hypothesized that blockade of
the inhibitory checkpoint receptors programmed death-1 (PD-1) and
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte associated antigen-4 (CTLA-4) could delay tumor
growth and improve anti-tumor immune response. Surprisingly, we saw no
delay in tumor growth in the claudin-low model using checkpoint
inhibition. To investigate if presence of Tregs limited the function of
checkpoint inhibitors, mice with claudin-low tumors were treated with
AMD3100, a CXCR4 inhibitor. This decreased Treg infiltration into the
tumor but did not alter tumor growth. We then utilized the FoxP3-DTR
transgenic mouse model, where depletion of Tregs alone resulted in a very
modest decrease in tumor growth, while depletion of Tregs plus checkpoint
inhibition significantly improved survival (P = 0.03) and increased
cytokine production by CD8+ T cells.

Conclusion: We found that an effective anti-tumor immune response in
claudin-low tumors is inhibited by the recruitment of Tregs to the tumor
microenvironment. These data highlight early Treg recruitment as a
possible mechanism for the lack of response to immune checkpoint
inhibition therapy for claudin-low breast cancer.


