Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specialized microRNP and translation mechanisms in quiescent
cancer cells.


Quiescence (G0) represents an assortment of reversible, cell
cycle-arrested states that are resistant to unfavorable conditions and
associated with cancer persistence. G0 involves regulated gene expression
with selective mRNA expression and decreased canonical translation. Low
mTOR activity in G0 activates the cap complex inhibitor, eIF4EBP, and
impairs canonical translation. The alternative translation mechanisms in
G0 remain to be uncovered. Our data show that microRNAs, regulatory,
non-coding RNAs that target distinct mRNAs to alter gene expression, can
associate with alternative complexes and translation factors to regulate
specific mRNA translation in G0. One subset of transcripts expressed in
G0 includes specific mRNAs recruited by an FXR1a-associated microRNP
(microRNA-protein complex) for translation activation in G0 mammalian
cells. MicroRNPs predominantly mediate repression and downregulation;
however, FXR1a-microRNP lacks conventional microRNP repressors, and
instead, contains a specific RNA binding protein isoform, FXR1a. FXR1a
promotes translation and is overexpressed and associated with poor
prognosis in several cancers. Our data reveal that microRNA-mediated
activation requires target mRNAs with unadenylated/ shortened poly(A)
tails to avoid the roles of PABP in enhancing microRNA-mediated
downregulation and in canonical translation that is impaired in G0.
Instead of canonical translation factors that are inhibited by eIF4EBP in
G0, we find alternative translation factors—a non-canonical 5’cap
binding factor and an eIF4G homolog that interacts with the
ribosome—are recruited by the 3’-UTR binding FXR1a-microRNP, and
promote specific mRNA translation. Our data show that G0 leukemic cells
are chemoresistant and their translation profile is similar to surviving
leukemic cells that are isolated after clinical therapy. We find
expression of critical cytokines and immune regulators in G0.
Significantly, inhibiting these immune regulators in resistant G0 cancer
cells reduces their survival and chemoresistance. These data reveal a
specialized translation mechanism in G0 cancer cells that promotes
specific mRNA translation in these conditions of reduced canonical
translation, and is important for chemoresistance.


