Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor effects of imipridone ONC201 in combination with
anti-angiogenic agents significantly impact on colorectal cancer growth
in vivo.


Small molecule imipridone ONC201 is an investigational anti-tumor agent
with a wide therapeutic index and broad-spectrum efficacy in vivo. ONC201
upregulates intratumoral TRAIL expression and the integrated stress
response pathway. A Phase I clinical trial using ONC201 as therapy in
advanced cancer patients has been completed and the drug has progressed
into several Phase II trials in multiple cancer types. Colorectal cancer
(CRC) remains one of the leading causes of cancer worldwide and
metastatic disease continues to have a poor prognosis. Clinical trials in
CRC and other tumor types have demonstrated that therapeutics targeting
the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway, such as
bevacizumab, are effective in combination with certain chemotherapeutic
agents. Bevacizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that targets VEGF
and is an FDA-approved treatment for advanced CRC patients, in addition
to other tumor types. We are investigating the potential combination of
VEGF inhibitors such as bevacizumab and ONC201 in both CRC xenograft and
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) studies. Our results demonstrate
significant tumor regression and occasional tumor ablation in human
xenografts with the combination of ONC201 with bevacizumab, and in
syngeneic MC-38 colorectal cancer xenografts using a murine VEGF-A
inhibitor. Non-invasive angiogenesis imaging demonstrated the impact of
this combination on decreasing tumor growth and tumor metastasis. With
the use of both a murine VEGF inhibitor in syngeneic models, and
bevacuzimab in human cell line-derived xenografts, we have demonstrated
that combining anti-angiogenic therapies with ONC201 could enhance
antitumor efficacy. Thus, ONC201 in combination with anti-angiogenic
therapies such as bevacizumab represents a promising combinatorial
approach that may be exploited in the clinic for the treatment of CRC.


