Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycolysis signals to Akt and promotes tumor proliferation and
immune evasion.


While the PI3K/Akt pathway has been shown to directly upregulate
glycolysis in cancer cells, signaling in the reverse direction has not
been studied in detail. We studied the novel hypothesis that glycolysis
can signal to the Akt pathway, and that this crosstalk can lead to
increased tumor proliferation and immune evasion. We used the murine 4T1
triple-negative breast cancer cell line for our studies.

Depletion of Lactate Dehydrogenase A (LDHA) has been shown to lead to
decreased tumor growth and metastasis formation, providing a link between
glycolysis and tumor proliferation. Building upon this result, we show
that Akt activation is dependent on glycolytic rates, as LDHA-depleted
4T1 cells show decreased phospho-Akt (pAkt) levels. Further, pAkt was
found to decrease upon acute (5-20min) inhibition of glycolysis using two
glycolytic inhibitors, 2-deoxy-glucose (2DG) and 3-bromo-pyruvate (3BP).
We hypothesize that a glycolytic metabolite or enzyme is responsible for
the observed cross-talk between glycolysis and Akt, and these studied are
under way.

We also show that T-cells are excluded from control 4T1 tumors, and that
LDHA depletion in tumors leads to dramatically increased T-cell
infiltration and survival (40% of mice are long-term survivors). Lactate,
the end product of glycolysis, has been shown to be toxic to T-cells, and
LDHA-depleted tumors produce less lactate compared to controls. Thus, we
propose that inhibiting tumor glycolysis leads to a less acidic
microenvironment, leading to increased T-cell infiltration. Further, PTEN
expression has been shown to be inversely correlated with PDL1 expression
in human triple-negative breast cancer, suggesting that the PI3K/Akt
pathway can promote PDL1 expression. Having established that glycolysis
can promote Akt activation, we are also studying if PDL1 is regulated by
glycolysis through Akt.


