Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying novel regulators of the Unfolded Protein Response
(UPR) by genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screens.


Development and growth of a tumor as well as its ability to metastasize
involves a complex relationship with its tissue microenvironment. A
proliferating tumor encounters several microenvironmental stress
conditions such as hypoxia, lack of nutrients and acidosis. To cope with
these conditions, cancer cells have developed elaborate cytoprotective
mechanisms which provide them with distinct advantages to thrive. Thus,
deciphering the signaling pathways which get activated in the tumor
microenvironment has been paramount to develop new therapeutic strategies
for treatment. The Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) is an adaptive
prosurvival pathway elicited by stresses in the tumor microenvironment
(e.g., hypoxia, low glucose) and involves translational and
transcriptional activation of effector genes which act to relieve
cellular stress and block cancer cell death. We developed a strategy to
comprehensively analyze critical mediators of cell fate in response to
UPR activation. We have delivered a lentiviral genome-scale CRISPR Cas9
knockout (GeCKOv2) library to Sq20B cells (human squamous head and neck
carcinoma) and A375 (human melanoma) cells. The library is targeting
19,050 genes with 123,411 unique guide sequences and enables both
negative and positive selection screening. We used the GeCKO v2 library
to identify genes essential for triggering the UPR in response to
thapsigargin and tunicamycin, known specific activators of ER stress. Our
highest-ranking candidates include BIRC5/Survivin, a well-studied
molecule that acts as an inhibitor of apoptosis and is highly expressed
in cancer cells and eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF6, whose
overexpression increases motility and invasiveness of cancer cells. Our
preliminary results indicate that loss of Survivin and eIF6 dramatically
enhance sensitization of cells to various ER stress conditions. Moreover,
this synergistic outcome is observed when cells are treated with YM155, a
small molecule that selectively suppresses Survivin and is used in phase
I/II clinical trials. Lastly, morphological changes like
endoreduplication are observed after long term absence of Survivin
indicating its endogenous ER stress inducing role. Taken together,
Survivin and eIF6 are important mediators of survival following ER stress
and characterizing the pathways involved can lead to the development of
novel targeted agents and therapeutic approaches.


