Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The olive biophenol oleuropein selectively induces apoptosis in
pancreatic cancer cells in vitro.


Pancreatic cancer is a devastating disease with a 5-year survival rate of
less than 5%. Resistance to conventional treatment options and toxicity
of current chemotherapy agents (gemcitabine) makes pancreatic cancer a
target for the development of novel therapeutic agents. Oleuropein is the
most abundant biophenol found in olive products; it has anti-atherogenic
and anti-inflammatory properties as well as activity against cancers of
the breast, colon and prostate. However, there has yet to be any
investigation into the effects of oleuropein on pancreatic cancer cells.
Consequently, this study aimed to assess the anti-pancreatic cancer
activity of oleuropein in vitro. Two cell lines were investigated; a
pancreatic cancer cell line (MiaPaCa-2) and a normal pancreas cell line
(HPDE). The viability of cells after treatment with 0-200μM oleuropein
was assessed using the Dojindo CCK-8 viability assay and compared to
gemcitabine. The induction of apoptosis was measured by way of caspase
3/7 activation, using a MUSE flow cell analyser, and expression of Bcl-2,
Bax and Bac using Western blot. Cell cycle analysis was conducted using
the MUSE flow cell analyser. RNA expression was assessed using Affymetrix
GeneChip® Whole Transcript (WT) expression arrays. The IC50 values for
oleuropein against MiaPaCa-2 cells was148μM. However, importantly,
oleuropein did not decrease the viability of HPDE cells within the
treatment range. In comparision, 20nM of gemcitabine did not show
selectivity; it reduced the viability of MiaPaCa-2 cells to 21% and of
HPDE cells to 2%. An increase in the expression of caspase 3/7 was seen
in MiaPaCa-2 cells when treated with oleuropein but it had no effect on
the HPDE cells. Furthermore, when treated with oleuropein, an increase in
the expression of genes involved in the NRF-2 (oxidative stress) pathway
was observed in MiaPaCa-2 cells, an effect not observed in HPDE cells.

Conclusion Oleuropein selectively induced apoptosis in the pancreatic
cancer cells (MiaPaCa-2), appearing non-toxic to normal pancreas cells
(HPDE) within the treatment ranges; this is significant, since
gemcitabine was comparatively more toxic to HPDE cells. Furthermore, the
link between oleuropein and the NRF-2 pathway in MiaPaCa-2 cells
justifies further study into the mechanisms of action of oleuropein and
its potential as a novel therapeutic approach for pancreatic cancer.


