Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RAD140, a selective androgen receptor modulator, has a
differentiated mechanism of action in AR/ER positive breast cancers.


Recent studies have shown that the androgen receptor (AR) is widely
expressed across all subtypes of breast cancer, with AR detected in
75-95% of estrogen receptor (ER) positive tumors. Prior to the
development of ER-targeted therapy, androgens were used to treat breast
cancers with favorable clinical responses. The lack of tissue-selectivity
and understanding of mechanism of action of classic androgens led to its
declined use in this disease. Selective androgen receptor modulators
(SARMs) are a class of molecules developed as tissue selective
non-steroidal androgens that modulate AR signaling. However, the effect
of SARMs on AR signaling in breast cancer cells is not well understood.
RAD140 is an orally available SARM with potent anabolic activity in
muscle and bone but a highly attenuated effect in seminal vesicles and
prostate. Its efficacy is being evaluated in in vivo xenograft models of
AR/ER+ breast cancer. To further our understanding of the mechanism of
action of RAD140 in breast cancer cells, we examined the effects of
RAD140 on AR and ER signaling pathways. The specificity and selectivity
of RAD140 were examined using competitive binding assays for AR, ER,
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and progesterone receptor (PR), and using an
AR reporter assay in AR/ER+ ZR-75 breast cancer cells and LNCaP prostate
cancer cells. RAD140 was found to bind AR with high affinity and
specificity, with 250-fold target selectivity over the next nuclear
receptor PR. The AR reporter assay results demonstrated a potent AR
agonist activity of RAD140 in ZR-75 breast cancer cells but not in LNCaP
prostate cancer cells, in contrast to the full agonist activity of DHT
seen in both cell types. RAD140 treatment led to substantial tumor growth
inhibition in AR/ER+ breast cancer xenografts. Samples of RAD140-treated
xenografts were analyzed by immunocytochemistry, western blotting and
quantitative real-time PCR to evaluate the modulation of AR and ER
pathways. It was found that the expression of known AR target genes
including KLK2, FKBP5 and the tumor suppressor gene, ZBTB16, were
potently induced in RAD140-treated tumors. Furthermore, RAD140 led to
substantial suppression of known ER target genes including progesterone
receptor (PR), TFF1 and GREB1. In conclusion, RAD140 is a potent
tissue-selective AR agonist in AR/ER+ breast cancer cells with robust
activation of AR targets genes, and a unique mechanism of action that
leads to the suppression of ER signaling, and marked anti-tumor activity.


