Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induced expression of PPM1A in ER-negative breast cancer cells
inhibits growth by suppressing CDK phosphorylation.


Background: Estrogen receptor (ER) -negative breast cancer is a clinical
subtype that is overrepresented among younger women and is associated
with a poor prognosis. Current treatments for ER-negative tumors include
cytotoxic chemotherapy, or for those overexpress HER2, the anti-HER2
antibody. Targeted therapy for triple-negative breast cancers is urgently
needed. In this project, we investigated phosphatases that are
differentially expressed in ER-negative as compared to ER-positive breast
cancers. We hypothesized that: (1) specific phosphatases govern the
growth of ER-negative cancers, (2) Induced expression of specific
phosphatases that are under expressed in ER-negative cancers will
suppress the growth of ER-negative breast cancers.

Methods: Using 102 human breast tumors (57 ER-positive & 45 ER-negative)
from the neo-adjuvant studies from the Baylor Breast Center tumor bank,
we isolated RNA and performed Affymetrix microarray studies. Statistical
analysis was done with dChip software, and phosphatases over (>1.5 fold;
FDR Methods: Using 102 human breast tumors (57 ER-positive & 45
ER-negative) from the neo-adjuvant studies from the Baylor Breast Center
tumor bank, we isolated RNA and performed Affymetrix microarray studies.
Statistical analysis was done with dChip software, and phosphatases over
(>1.5 fold; FDR <0.05) or under (Methods: Using 102 human breast tumors
(57 ER-positive & 45 ER-negative) from the neo-adjuvant studies from the
Baylor Breast Center tumor bank, we isolated RNA and performed Affymetrix
microarray studies. Statistical analysis was done with dChip software,
and phosphatases over (>1.5 fold; FDR <0.05) or under (<0.66-fold;
FDRMethods: Using 102 human breast tumors (57 ER-positive & 45
ER-negative) from the neo-adjuvant studies from the Baylor Breast Center
tumor bank, we isolated RNA and performed Affymetrix microarray studies.
Statistical analysis was done with dChip software, and phosphatases over
(>1.5 fold; FDR <0.05) or under (<0.66-fold; FDR<0.05) expressed in
ER-negative breast cancers as compared to ER-positive cancers were
selected for further study. One of the phosphatases under expressed in
ER-negative breast cancer was PPM1A. Regulated expression of PPM1A was
achieved using a Tet-regulated vector. Cell growth in soft agar and cell
cycle analyses were performed using previously published protocols. Mouse
xenograft experiments were performed by injecting inducible PPM1A-clones
and vector- clones in mammary fat pad of athymic mice and tumor growth
was measured over time in randomized groups. To induce PPM1A expression
one group was treated with doxycycline when tumor volume reached 50 mm3.
Survival analyses were done using Oncomine datasets.

Results: We identified 20 over-expressed and 29 under-expressed
phosphatases in ER-negative breast cancers. We selected the under
expressed phosphatase PPM1A, for further study. Multivariate cox
regression analysis shows PPM1A is an independent predictor for breast
cancer survival. Induced expression of PPM1A in ER-negative cells
inhibited anchorage-dependent and independent growth but had no effect on
ER-positive cell. PPM1A expression also inhibited MDA-MB 231 cells growth
in vivo. Induced expression of PPM1A blocked cell cycle progression at G1
phase. PPM1A interacts with CDK6 and inhibits phosphorylation of CDK and
MDM2.

Conclusions: We identified a set of over- and under- expressed
phosphatases in ER-negative breast cancers as compared to ER-positive
cancers. Overexpression of PPM1A in ER-negative breast cancer cells
inhibits growth. By identifying the molecules that regulate breast cancer
cells growth we are identifying potential new targets for the treatment
of these aggressive ER-negative breast cancers. Supported by Komen
Promise grant KG081694 & Komen SAB grant


