Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor necrosis factor-alpha signaling determines cytotoxicity
induced by BRCA2 deficiency.


Introduction

Breast cancer 2, early onset (BRCA2) is involved in DNA-damage repair via
homologous recombination (HR). Defective HR leads to severe genomic
instability and homozygous deletion of BRCA2 is therefore deleterious for
survival of normal cells. In apparent contrast, inherited heterozygous
mutations in BRCA2 increase the risk to develop cancer, which goes along
with somatic loss of the wild type allele. So paradoxically, BRCA2 loss
is lethal in normal cells, but can be tolerated in cancer cells. It is
currently unclear how tumor cells can survive without BRCA2. To address
this question, we performed a genome-wide functional genetic screen and
identify Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha (TNFα) signaling, via TNF receptor
1 (TNF-R1) and Src-associated-substrate-during-mitosis-of-68kDa (Sam68),
as an important determinant of cell death induction upon BRCA2
inactivation.

Material & Methods

A genetic screen was performed in human near-haploid KMB-7 cells. Two
monoclonal KMB-7 lines were engineered to express independent
doxycycline-inducible BRCA2 short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs). Cells were
randomly mutagenized using retrovirus carrying a strong splice-acceptor,
resulting in gene knock-outs. Deep sequencing of surviving colonies
revealed gene mutations that prevented shBRCA2-mediated cell death.
Validation of TNF-R1 and Sam68 was done by shRNAs in multiple breast- and
leukemic cell lines. Cell viability was determined by MTT and clonogenic
assays. Competition assays with vectors expressing shRNA including
IRES-driven mCherry were analyzed with flow cytometry. Biochemical
analyses were assessed by western blotting and ELISA. Immunoprecipitation
with FLAG-tagged TNFα was performed to study TNF-R1 complex formation.

Results

From our genetic screens, loss-of-function mutations involved in TNFα
signaling were found to significantly rescue cell death in BRCA2-depleted
cells. To validate these findings, BRCA2 was stably depleted in a panel
of cancer cell lines, which decreased viability. Subsequent co-depletion
of TNF-R1 or Sam68 rescued survival. Notably, BRCA2 depletion resulted in
the production of TNFα. In line with this finding, the majority of
tested cancer cell lines were found to be sensitive to recombinant TNFα
upon BRCA2 depletion. This phenomenon was not restricted to BRCA2
inactivation, since depletion of related DNA repair genes (BRCA1, FANCD2)
or hydroxyurea-induced replication stress also sensitized cells to
recombinant TNFα. Mechanistically, BRCA2 depletion was induced to
observe differential complex formation of TNF-R1 with downstream effector
proteins upon TNFα activation.

Conclusion

Our data reveal that down-regulation of TNF-R1 or its downstream
signaling component Sam68 rescued cytotoxicity upon BRCA2 inactivation.
These findings and mechanistic follow-up experiments describe a novel
mechanism by which autocrine TNFα signaling, induced by loss of BRCA2,
limits tumor cell viability.


