Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment of endometrial cancer cells with a new small tyrosine
kinase inhibitor targeting mutated fibroblast growth factor receptor-2.


Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most common uterine malignancy in
industrialized countries and is the most frequent gynecologic cancer in
the United States with an estimated 60,050 new cases in 2016.
Traditionally observed in peri-, postmenopausal women, the incidence rate
of EC has steadily increased among younger women of reproductive age over
the past two decades partially owing to a more sedentary lifestyle and
rampant obesity epidemic. Surgery in combination with either radio- and
or chemotherapy is commonly curative for the early stage of the disease.
However, patients with recurrent or metastatic disease, who only respond
poorly to cytotoxic chemotherapy are in desperate need of therapeutic
alternatives as are patients of reproductive age. Thus, innovative, safe
and more effective therapies are mandated. Several studies have
demonstrated the increased expression of various tyrosine kinase
receptors involved in the development of EC. We hypothesized that a
targeted therapeutic approach using a pan-tyrosine kinase inhibitor would
prevent the proliferation and progression of EC. Anlotinib (AL3818) is a
multi-targeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor targeting vascular
endothelial growth factor receptors 1 to 3 (VEGFR1-3), stem cell factor
receptor (C-kit), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGFβ), and fibroblast
growth factor receptors 1 to 3 (FGFR1-3). We tested a panel of seven
human endometrial cancer cell lines (AN3Ca, Ishikawa, HEC1A, HEC1B, KLE,
MFE280 and MFE296) to assess the cytotoxicity of anlotinib in vitro. A
lower IC50 value was observed in AN3Ca cells (25 nM), a cell line
characterized by a high level of expression of an FGFR2 mutant protein,
while cell lines expressing FGFR2 wild-type are less sensitive to
anlotinib (HEC1A: 33 μM, or HEC1B:36 μM). Somatic mutations of FGFR2
have been observed in 12% of EC, indicating the potential for this drug
in a subset of EC patients. In summary, these results suggest improved
efficacy of anlotinib for the treatment of ECs expressing an increased
level of FGFR2 mutant proteins. The safety and efficacy of anlotinib are
currently being evaluated in an orthotopic AN3Ca mouse model of EC.
Experimental groups include a tumor bearing control not subjected to any
treatment, anlotinib alone, carboplatin/paclitaxel, a combination of
anlotinib and carboplatin/paclitaxel. Primary study endpoints include
tumor growth retardation, the delayed onset of local metastases as well
as reduced toxicity as secondary endpoint.


