Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic enrichment analysis of gene expression profiling
studies identifies SPARC dependent consensus pathways implicated in
bladder cancer.


Bladder cancer (urothelial cancer of the bladder) is the most common
malignancy affecting the urinary system with increasing incidence and
mortality. Treatment of bladder cancer has not advanced in the past 30
years. Therefore, there is a crucial unmet need for novel therapies,
especially for advanced disease. We have recently reported Secreted
Protein Acidic and Rich in Cysteine (SPARC) as a tumor suppressor in
urinary bladder cancer that inhibits the multistep cascades on tumor
initiation, progression and metastasis. SPARC gene and protein expression
was among candidates associated with the tumorigenicity of the isogenic
T24/T24t cell lines. We reported that SPARC depletion in human bladder
cancer cell lines including T24 cells increased their tumorigenicity and
metastatic potential. In addition, SPARC protein and transcript
expression are significantly downregulated in advanced urothelial cancer.
To gain insight on the molecular mechanisms of the tumor suppressor
effects of SPARC in urothelial cancer, we did whole transcriptome
profiling of T24 cells depleted of SPARC to identify SPARC-signature
associated with bladder cancer invasiveness, progression, and metastasis.
Subsequently, we used gene signature enrichment analysis (GSEA) pathway
enrichment tools to define functionally related genes that are
consistently up- or down- regulated as a function of loss of SPARC. We
found that loss of SPARC expression is associated with enrichment of
multiple oncogenic signaling pathways that are enriched in muscle
invasive urothelial cancer and have been associated with poor prognosis.
These pathways include K-ras, Myc-oncogene, p53 pathways as well as DNA
damage/repair. Consistent with our earlier reports, loss of SPARC is
associated with genes and proteins involved in angiogenesis, inflammation
and hypoxia. In addition, we have identified novel signatures involved in
unfolded protein response, mTOR signaling, glycolysis and cholesterol
metabolism. These comprehensive signatures not only reveal
SPARC-dependent networks that cooperate to elicit its biological
responses but enables coherent understanding of the etiology of complex
bladder cancer disease. Importantly, these signatures identify novel
therapeutic opportunities for bladder cancer.


