Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of FERM domain-containing protein 5 (FRMD5) as a
novel target of β-catenin/TCF7L2 complex.


Deregulated Wnt signaling is one of the earliest steps in colorectal
tumorigenesis. The impairment results most frequently from APC mutations,
which leads to the accumulation of β-catenin and subsequent activation
of TCF7L2. Although previous studies have identified a number of target
genes of the activated β-catenin/TCF7L2 transcriptional complex such as
cMYC and CCND1, the comprehensive effect of the activation on
tumorigenesis remains to be elucidated. To understand the precise
molecular mechanisms underlying colorectal cancer, we searched for novel
genes regulated by the complex in colorectal tumors. We performed
expression profile analysis of HCT116 and SW480 colon cancer cells
treated with β-catenin siRNAs, and combined these data with public
microarray data of LS174 cells treated with a dominant-negative form of
TCF7L2. As a result, we identified a total of 134 genes that were
regulated by both β-catenin and TCF7L2. Subsequent ChIP-sequence with
TCF7L2 antibody selected 11 genes from the 134 genes as candidates of
direct target genes. In this study, we focused on FERM domain-containing
protein 5 (FRMD5) among the 11 candidates. Quantitative PCR confirmed
that its expression was reduced by β-catenin siRNA in HCT116 and SW480
cells. ChIP-quantitative PCR analysis with ant-TCF7L2 antibody also
corroborated the interaction of TCF7L2 with a region (hg19;
chr15:44,449,680-44,450,487) within intron 1 of FRMD5. Reporter assay
with plasmids containing this region revealed that the reporter activity
was down-regulated by the knockdown of β-catenin. These data suggested
that FRMD5 is a direct target of β-catenin/TCF7L2 complex, and that the
region is involved in the transcriptional activation through an
interaction with the complex. Consistently, its expression was elevated
in colorectal tumors compared to normal colonic mucosa in public
microarray data. To uncover the role of FRMD5 in colorectal
carcinogenesis, we analyzed expression profile of HCT116 cells treated
with FRMD5 siRNA, and combined the data with profile with β-catenin
siRNA. Gene set analysis with 53 commonly up-regulated and 36 commonly
down-regulated genes by both FRMD5 and β-catenin disclosed that the gene
sets of DNA replication, cell cycle, and extracellular matrix (ECM) were
altered by FRMD5. These data may be useful for the future studies of
colorectal carcinogenesis.


