Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploratory evolved strategies that limit cancer growth for
possible new therapeutic strategies.


Strong selection can promote mammalian evolution of a remarkably diverse
phenotypic range over a short period of time. With appropriate selection
forces, we tested the hypothesis that laboratory animals can evolve
phenotypes that are resistant to the growth of implanted tumors. We
propose that strong selection can produce evolution of different
strategies to generate resistance to the growth of inoculated tumors,1.
Changes in the supportive cell layer that decrease limited growth of
cancer cell populations. 2. Increase of immunologic response to tumor
antigens.

Hence, we examined the evolution of resistance in immuno-competent and
immuno-deficient mice. Fixed number of cells from luciferase tagged LL/2
(Lewis lung carcinoma) cancer cells were implanted in groups of 10 male
C57BL/6 and SCID mice. All tumor cells were obtained from frozen samples
of a single large tumor population to eliminate any contribution from
tumor cell evolution. Tumor growth in each animal was measured by
calipers and luciferase imaging. The two animals that exhibited the
slowest tumor growth in each cohort were bred with females from the same
litter. Over 12 generations, the selection pressures resulted in
emergence of SCID mice in which tumors grew at approximately 1/10th the
rate compared their initial generation. The immunocompetent C57BL/6 mice
evolved significant changes in immune-mediated parental tumor cell
killing but this has yet resulted in significantly delayed tumor growth
because the LL/2 cells rapidly evolve resistance strategies. Injection of
the same tumor cells into unevolved wild type strains of both SCID and
C57BL/6 mice produced rapid tumor growth identical to that seen in the
first generation.

Using immunohistochemistry we observed decrease in blood supply among
generations, proliferation, and apoptosis while no differences were
observed in Glut-1 and CA-9 expression. To investigate this observation,
first we examined changes in the molecular characteristics of the tumor
cells during in-vivo growth by microarray on tumor cells isolated from
“final” adapted cell population(s) in the animals that have been
selected to decrease tumor growth compared to the wild type as well as
normal cells in parallel. Our results showed that there are 158 genes
different between tumors growing in the evolved and selected mice, among
them are genes involved in extracellular matrix organization, hence we
used second-harmonic generation (SHG) microscopy to image and quantify
collagen,

our results showed significant increase in collagen at the edge as well
as the core of the tumor of the evolved mice compared to wild type mice.

In conclusion our evolutionary study has reduced tumor growth in SCID
mice but has had limited success in the C57BL/6. The SCID mice adaptation
to tumor was likely through alteration in function of the supportive cell
layer (Collagen), thus generating biomechanical forces and protective
cellular events during tumor progression at early stages.


