Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Feedback-phosphorylation of MKK4 by MAPKs promotes apoptosis.


Feedback-phosphorylation of MKK4 by MAPKs promotes apoptosis Moriizumi
Hisashi, Takanori Nakamura and Mutsuhiro Takekawa Div. of Cell Signaling
and Mol. Med., IMS, Tokyo Univ. The mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinase pathway is an important system for cellular responses to
extracellular stimuli. Each of the MAPK pathways is composed of MAPKKK,
MAPKK and MAPK. In mammalian cells, at least three subfamilies of MAPKs,
namely ERK, p38 and JNK, are present. The ERK pathway is activated in
response to mitogenic stimuli and plays a key role in proliferation and
differentiation. In contrast, the p38 and JNK pathways [collectively
called stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK) pathways] regulate cellular
stress responses such as apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. MKK4 is unique
among the members of the mammalian SAPKK family (i.e., MKK3/4/6/7) in its
ability to phosphorylate and activate both p38 and JNK. Interestingly,
inactivating mutations of the MKK4 gene are frequently found in many
types of cancer. Although MKK4 has been suggested as a tumor suppressor,
the molecular mechanism by which MKK4 inhibits tumorigenesis remains
unclear. Here we demonstrate that MKK4 can be phosphorylated at specific
serine and/or threonine residues by downstream MAPKs(named the
“feedback-phosphorylation”)and thereby regulates stress-induced
apoptotic cell death. By generating antibodies specific to these
phosphorylation sites, we found that under stress conditions both Thr and
Ser residues of MKK4 were phosphorylated by JNK, while only the Ser
residue was phosphorylated by ERK in response to mitogenic stimuli. In
order to clarify physiological significance of the
feedback-phosphorylation, we then generated a phosphorylation-deficient
mutant of MKK4 (MKK4-AA) by substituting both Thr and Ser residues with
Ala. Although the feedback-phosphorylation did not affect the enzymatic
activity, stability and subcellular localization of MKK4, we found that
cells expressing MKK4-AA mutant suppressed apoptosis induced by various
stresses stimuli such as UV irradiation and anticancer drug treatment.
These results suggest that feedback-phosphorylation of MKK4 regulates
stress-induced apoptosis. Moreover, we are currently investigating the
mechanism of how MKK4 affects apoptotic cell death in response to
feedback-phosphorylation.


