Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accurate and reproducible detection of fusions and exon skipping
events in NSCLC-derived samples using a comprehensive, targeted RNA-Seq
system across multiple laboratories.


Introduction: Reliable assessment of cancer-associated RNA markers in
lung cancer produced by gene-fusions or exon skipping events by
next-generation sequencing requires integrated reagents, protocols, and
interpretive software that can harmonize procedures and ensure consistent
results across laboratories. We evaluated a comprehensive system for
targeted RNA-Seq that includes reagents for nucleic acid quantification,
library prep, run controls, and companion bioinformatics software. The
reproducibility of this system was evaluated in a multi-phase study
design at 5 independent laboratories.

Methods: Total nucleic acid (TNA) was isolated from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) residual non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
tumor biopsies and cell-lines (RT-112, H596, HCC78). These TNA isolates
were used to prepare a set of 30 test samples, including a dilution
series to assess assay sensitivity. A non-template control and kit
positive control were also included. The sample set was evaluated using
the QuantideX® NGS RNA Lung Cancer Kit RUO (Asuragen) and sequenced on
the MiSeq® system (Illumina) at Asuragen and 4 independent laboratories.
Analyses were conducted using QuantideX® NGS Reporter RUO (Asuragen), a
software suite that includes a FASTQ processing pipeline and incorporates
pre-analytical QC information into the fusion-caller algorithm and
reporting tool.

Results: Laboratories were trained on the assay workflow and companion
bioinformatics software in less than two days followed by independent
library preparation and sequencing workflows. A total of 266 sample
libraries were evaluated from inputs down to Results: Laboratories were
trained on the assay workflow and companion bioinformatics software in
less than two days followed by independent library preparation and
sequencing workflows. A total of 266 sample libraries were evaluated from
inputs down to <10 ng. A single library was excluded from sequencing due
to a failed QC status. Specific targeted fusions (ALK, ROS1, FGFR3) and
splice variants (MET exon 14 skipping) were detected in 132 libraries and
were concordant at all sites. Designs to detect 3’/5’ expression
imbalances reported the presence of gene fusions for ALK and ROS1 in a
total of 96 libraries with one aberrant call and one missed call, which
occurred in libraries flagged as “at risk” by the interpretive
software.

Conclusions: The accuracy of this novel targeted NGS assay for RNA
fusions and splice variants in NSCLC was demonstrated in a multi-site
laboratory evaluation using clinically-relevant specimens and low inputs
of TNA. The ability of the panel to detect both common and rare gene
fusion transcripts and exon skipping events within an integrated wet- and
dry-bench workflow provides a foundation for the reliable detection of
oncogenic RNA fusions and aberrant splicing events that can respond to
current and emerging targeted therapies. This study highlighted the ease
of implementation and consistent performance that can be achieved in
different laboratories when the process from sample-to-report is highly
integrated.


