Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical activity of new liposomal formulation of doxorubicin
(TLD-1).


Background: InnoMedica is a young company with focus on clinical
translation of nanomedicine. The company employs its own manufacturing
technology that gives rise to a novel liposome platform. The platform
allows for specific shaping of nanosurfaces. This leads to a myriad of
different particle designs with highly distinct biological functions. In
a first approach, the lead-formulation TLD-1 (targeted liposomal
doxorubicin) was developed in order to ameliorate chemotherapeutic
outcome for patients, taking into account the patterns of biodistribution
in the entire organism as well as nanoparticle-cell interactions and
subcellular localisation.

Methods: Pharmacologic properties of TLD-1 were investigated in vitro and
in vivo. Human ovarian cancer cells A2780 were cultured in both 2D and 3D
settings and antineoplastic activity of different formulations of
doxorubicin was measured by quantification of cell viability. The same
formulations were also compared in three animal models of cancer
including murine breast cancer 4T1, human breast cancer MDA-MB231, and
A2780. MDA-MB231 and A2780 cells were grown in vitro and injected
subcutaneously (sc) in immunodeficient mice (Athymic Nude-Foxn1nu). 4T1
cells were injected either sc or in the mammary fat pad of
immunocompetent mice (BALB/c). The different drug products were injected
intravenously twice weekly for a total of three weeks. Activity was
determined with caliper measurements of tumor diameters every three days.
Animal body weight was recorded as index of toxicity. Doxorubicin was
determined in plasma and tissues by HPLC-MS.

Results: In 2D and 3D cell culture assays, TLD-1 showed a marked increase
in cytotoxicity compared to Caelyx and was close to free drug. In all
three animal models, TLD-1 showed activity superior to that of free
doxorubicin given at the same dose and compared well to Caelyx both in
terms of activity and toxicity.

Conclusions: A couple of nanoparticulate features of TLD-1 liposomes are
believed to attribute to the difference in antitumor activity.
Cytotoxicity data from cell culture experiments indicate that TLD-1
liposomes are readily taken up by cancer cells and release their drug
load into the cytoplasm. Commercial liposomes as in Caelyx seem to
largely remain outside of cancer cells. In sum, TLD-1 is a novel and
highly active antineoplastic nanodrug that has the potential to
outperform free drug as well as commercial liposomal formulations of
doxorubicin.


