Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockout of ST8SIA1 inhibits tumorigenesis in triple negative
breast cancer by inducing PTEN and ganglioside GM1 mediated tumor growth
arrest.


We found that ganglioside GD2 is a biomarker for breast cancer stem cell
(BCSCs) in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) and that GD2 biosynthesis
is tightly regulated by enzyme ST8SIA1 (GD3 synthase) in these cells. We
have reported that ST8SIA1 is highly expressed in TNBC and its expression
is highly correlated with TP53 mutations in primary tumors (based on TCGA
data set). Here we hypothesized that ST8SIA1 has a functional role in
BCSC mediated tumorigenesis in TNBC. To test this hypothesis, we deleted
ST8SIA1 in SUM159 cells using CRISPR-Cas9 technology. As expected,
deletion of ST8SIA1 in SUM159 cells reduced the absolute number of GD2+
cells from 17 ± 1.5% to 0.3 ± 0.1%. Although there was no significant
difference in 2D cell growth, anchorage-independent growth by soft-agar
and the mammosphere formation assays revealed a complete loss of colony
formation in ST8SIA1-KO cells. Moreover, transplantation of ST8SIA1-KO-
or Cas9 control- SUM159 cells in mammary fat pad of NSG mice revealed
that ST8SIA1-KO cells failed to produce tumor formation even after a
15-wk after implantation. In addition, most of the cas9 control cell
injected mice died within 4 wk after cell implantation whereas no deaths
were observed in the ST8SIA1-KO cells as long as 100 d after tumor
implantation. To investigate the mechanism involved in tumor growth
inhibition associated with the loss of ST8SIA1 expression, we analyzed
mRNA expression in ST8SIA1-KO- and Cas9 control- SUM159 cells by RNA
sequencing. At p 2, we found 1502 genes down-regulated and 842 genes
up-regulated in the ST8SIA1-KO-cells compared to controls. Ingenuity
pathway analysis revealed that several stem cell-associated signaling
pathways, including wnt, stat3, NFκB, nanog, and IL8, were
down-regulated. Conversely, the potent tumor suppressor PTEN was induced
in the ST8SIA1-KO-cells compared to controls. In addition, gene ontology
by gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed inhibition of oncogenic
signaling pathways including KRAS, p53, AKT, and RB. We have also
identified a significant down-regulation of breast cancer-associated
genes including BCL11A, PDGFRb, VCAM1, CXCR4, and wnt5a. Interestingly
DKK1, which acts as an antagonist for wnt-β-catenin signaling, was
up-regulated in the ST8SIA1-KO cells. These findings were validated by
qRT-PCR, flow cytometry and western blot analysis. Ganglioside GM1 has
been reported to have major in anti-tumor effect by inhibiting ERK
signaling. Flow cytometry analysis revealed that ST8SIA-KO cells
expressed ~10-fold higher GM1 compared to Cas9 control cells. In
addition, pERK was down-regulated in ST8SIA-KO cells, suggesting a loss
of tumorigenic potential of these cells. In conclusion, our data suggests
that inhibition of ST8SIA1 in TNBC cells depletes BCSCs and inhibits
tumorigenesis by down-regulating oncogenic pathways and up-regulation of
PTEN and GM1 mediated signaling.


