Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor suppressor BAP1 promotes a developmental switch from
pluripotency to differentiation.


Introduction: Our lab discovered that mutations in the tumor suppressor
BAP1 are strongly associated with metastasis and death in patients with
uveal melanoma. Subsequently, other cancers have been found to harbor
BAP1 mutations, including skin melanoma, kidney cancer, mesothelioma and
others. Germline BAP1 mutations are responsible for a newly described
genetic cancer syndrome. Therapeutic molecules that reverse the effects
of BAP1 mutations could represent a potent new treatment strategy for
BAP1-mutant cancers. Unfortunately, there are several obstacles to
developing such therapies. First, BAP1 is a tumor suppressor that is
inactivated by mutations, such that targeted therapy would need to be
directed against downstream effectors that are deregulated by BAP1 loss.
Second, the effectors of BAP1 that are relevant to cancer are not known.
Interestingly, most known proteins that interact with Bap1 are
developmental epigenetic regulators such as Asxl1/2, Cbx1/3 and Kdm1b.
Third, BAP1 is difficult to study in cultured cells because BAP1 loss
results in cell cycle exit and stem cell-like behavior. These obstacles
led us to shift to Xenopus laevis as an in vivo developmental model to
study the functions of BAP1. Results and conclusions: Loss of BAP1 during
embryo development results in a failure to turn off pluripotency genes
such as ventx 1, ventx2 (Xenopus orthologues of the mammal gene nanog),
oct 25, oct 91 (Xenopus orthologues of the mammal gene oct3/4) and pax3,
and a failure to induce lineage specification genes such as the
prospective epidermis marker keratin1 and the melanocyte precursor marker
sox10. This block in the shift from pluripotency to differentiation
programs results in a delay in gastrulation, neural crest specification
and migration, mesodermal differentiation and other phenotypes. The
BAP1-deficient phenotype can be rescued by Xenopus or human wildtype BAP1
or by the histone deacetylase inhibitor SAHA (vorinostat). We conclude
that BAP1 is a fundamental regulator of multiple developmental lineages,
including the neural crest from which melanomas arises, and that this in
vivo model can be used to screen for novel therapeutic compounds that
reverse the phenotypic effects of BAP1 loss.


