Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of transcriptomic signatures of organotropism in
pancreatic cancer metastasis.


Metastatic disease is the most common cause of death in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA) patients. The most common sites of metastatic spread
of PDA are to the liver, lung, and peritoneum. The acquisition of
advanced stage PDA tissue samples has greatly improved our descriptive
understanding of pancreatic cancer metastasis; however, important aspects
of PDA metastatic cell biology remain poorly understood. We have
previously shown that distant metastases arise from genetically evolved
subclones within the primary site of PDA. To understand the biologic
basis of PDA metastatic subclone formation we established a transgenic
mouse model of PDA based on heterozygous inactivation of Tgfbr2 in
association with p48-Cre mediated activation of mutant Kras and Trp53
alleles (KPTC mice). This model revealed that metastatic efficiency and
organotropism are related but independently controlled phenomena by
mutant Trp53 gain of function in association with TGFb signaling.
Pertubation of TGFb signaling reduced liver but not lung metastasis due
to a profound extravasation deficiency characterized by sinusoidal growth
and lack of desmoplastic stroma compared to KPC mice. Analogous findings
were confirmed in liver samples from patients indicating their clinical
relevance. Portal vein colonization as a direct mode of access to the
liver was observed in both mice and humans. To better understand the
cell- autonomous features that promote organ specific metastasis, we have
established cell lines from primary and metastatic PDAs of KPC mice
representing five different target organ sites (liver, lung, peritoneum,
omentum, lymph node). RNAseq and WGCNA performed on extracted RNA from
these established cell lines indicate gene expression modules that are
unique to metastases. Among metastases, gene expression modules have also
been identified that are unique to local versus distant metastases.
Analyses are ongoing to functionally validate these modules in additional
samples of mouse and human PDA. These findings establish a novel paradigm
for understanding pancreatic cancer metastasis and the observed clinical
latencies of liver versus lung metastases specifically. Identification of
cell-autonomous and micro-environmental mechanisms that support PDA
organotropism have the potential to reveal novel targets for therapeutic
intervention and modulation of the lethal metastatic phenotype.


