Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultrasound-mediated delivery and distribution of polymeric
nanoparticles in the normal brain parenchyma and melanoma metastases.


The blood-brain barrier (BBB) prevents the passage of nearly all drugs
into the brain, hindering brain cancer treatment. Nanoparticles (NPs)
have emerged as promising drug delivery vehicles, due to incorporation of
poorly soluble drugs, functionalization for controlled and sustained
release and combination of drug delivery with imaging. Transport of NPs
across the BBB, however, is equally complicated and can benefit from
versatile BBB opening techniques. Focused ultrasound (FUS) in combination
with microbubbles (MBs) ensures safe and reversible opening of the BBB.
Here we used FUS with a novel platform based on MBs stabilized by
poly(isohexyl cyanoacrylate) (PIHCA) NPs to permeabilize the BBB and
transport NPs into the brain in a melanoma metastasis model.

Intracardiac injection of patient-derived human melanoma cells was
performed in immunodeficient mice. Brain melanoma metastases developed
four weeks post-injection. A novel ultrasound system able to generate 1.1
MHz and 7.8 MHz FUS during the same experiment was used for FUS
treatments. Selection of the treatment area was guided by magnetic
resonance imaging. BBB was disrupted by FUS at 1.1 MHz, while FUS at 7.8
MHz was used to enable acoustic radiation force and, hopefully, push NPs
farther into the extracellular matrix away from blood vessels. Successful
BBB opening was verified using a gadolinium-based contrast agent. After
the FUS treatment, the brains were either frozen or fixed in formalin for
histological examination. NP transport across the BBB and distribution in
the brain parenchyma were assessed using confocal microscopy with
advanced image analysis. Levels of P-glycoprotein (P-gp), an integral
component of the BBB, were determined using immunohistochemistry.

FUS in combination with PIHCA NP-MBs successfully opened the BBB with an
acoustic pressure of 0.38 MPa. NPs were transported across the BBB and
distributed in the brain parenchyma in a manner dependent on the extent
of BBB opening. NP were also delivered to melanoma metastases, although
at this stage of tumor development their accumulation in metastases was
limited compared to the surrounding tissue, possibly due to reduced
vascularization of metastases. Little effect of 7.8 MHz FUS was observed,
possibly because FUS at 1.1 MHz already increased NP distribution in the
brain tissue. FUS exposure induced some extent of red blood cell
extravasation. P-gp levels were not altered immediately after sonication.
Overall, our results indicate that combining NPs and MBs in a single
unit, such as the one used in our study, can be used to deliver NPs
across the BBB in a substantial amount, showing its potential in NP-aided
drug delivery to the brain.


