Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic interrogation of pre-treatment low dose aspirin
effects in HER 2 positive breast cancer.


Background: Prior data (Barron et al. Cancer Res. 2014 74:4065-77)
suggests that pre-diagnostic exposure to aspirin can have significant
effects on breast tumor biology and patient outcome. It has been proposed
that aspirin inhibition of COX-2 may suppress lymphangiogenesis and
metastasis (Karnezis et al Cancer Cell. 2014. 21:181-95). Here, we sought
to recapitulate pre-diagnostic aspirin exposure in rodent models of Her2+
breast cancer and elucidate mechanisms of action. We also determined the
effect of aspirin on tumor stroma, using a co-culture system of human
tumor and mesenchymal stem cells (MSC).

Methods: NOD/SCID mice were orthotopically implanted with Her2+
MDA-MB-231 or HCC1954 cells. 48hr later, animals began a daily low dose
[30mg/kg or 120mg/kg] of aspirin, until tumors reached 250mm3. They were
then resected. 3 weeks later, HCC1954 implanted animals were treated with
trastuzumab (15mg/kg) and paclitaxel (5mg/kg) for 6 weeks. Primary
tissues were analysed by immunohistochemistry to assess VEGF-C, -D,
COX-2, LYVE1 and CD31. RNAseq was performed on tumours to identify
aspirin perturbed molecular pathways. To determine the stromal response
to aspirin, patient derived MSCs were cultured either alone or with
HCC1954 cells and exposed to aspirin (2.5 or 7.5mM). Secreted VEGF-C was
quantified. A tubule formation assay was performed to determine the
impact of aspirin on angiogenesis. Pro-angiogenic protein expression was
investigated using a human angiogenesis array platform.

Results: A significant delay in tumor growth was observed in both tumor
models following aspirin treatment (pResults: A significant delay in
tumor growth was observed in both tumor models following aspirin
treatment (p<.01). Assessment of metastatic progression revealed that 120
mg/kg aspirin significantly (pResults: A significant delay in tumor
growth was observed in both tumor models following aspirin treatment
(p<.01). Assessment of metastatic progression revealed that 120 mg/kg
aspirin significantly (p<.05) increased time to metastasis and reduced
primary regrowth in the MDA MB 231 model (pResults: A significant delay
in tumor growth was observed in both tumor models following aspirin
treatment (p<.01). Assessment of metastatic progression revealed that 120
mg/kg aspirin significantly (p<.05) increased time to metastasis and
reduced primary regrowth in the MDA MB 231 model (p<.01).
Immunohistochemical analysis of VEGF C, D and LYVE1 showed a significant
dose dependant reduction (pResults: A significant delay in tumor growth
was observed in both tumor models following aspirin treatment (p<.01).
Assessment of metastatic progression revealed that 120 mg/kg aspirin
significantly (p<.05) increased time to metastasis and reduced primary
regrowth in the MDA MB 231 model (p<.01). Immunohistochemical analysis of
VEGF C, D and LYVE1 showed a significant dose dependant reduction (p<.01)
in both models. RNAseq pathway analysis revealed a significant
over-representation of mitochondrial electron transport chain genes.
Downstream factors of AMPK showed significant (pResults: A significant
delay in tumor growth was observed in both tumor models following aspirin
treatment (p<.01). Assessment of metastatic progression revealed that 120
mg/kg aspirin significantly (p<.05) increased time to metastasis and
reduced primary regrowth in the MDA MB 231 model (p<.01).
Immunohistochemical analysis of VEGF C, D and LYVE1 showed a significant
dose dependant reduction (p<.01) in both models. RNAseq pathway analysis
revealed a significant over-representation of mitochondrial electron
transport chain genes. Downstream factors of AMPK showed significant
(p<.01) upregulation suggesting alterations in metabolism. Aspirin
(7.5mM) exposure resulted in loss of VEGF-C secretion from co-cultured
tumor / MSC cell populations. Conditioned media harvested following
aspirin treatment limited support tubule formation. Expression of
pro-angiogenic factors in HCC1954 cells showed alterations following
treatment, with the greatest decrease seen in Urokinase Plasminogen
Activator (-42%) and its inhibitor Serpine1 (+55%).

Conclusion: We have successfully recapitulated pre-treatment aspirin
response in surgical resection models of Her2+ breast cancer, with IHC
analysis confirming the impact of treatment on angiogenic and
lymphangiogenic factors. RNAseq analysis implicates aspirin mediated
alterations in cellular metabolism. Our data further reveals increased
response to aspirin in stromal cell populations.


