Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Untethering heterochromatin: how loss of HP1a enhances cell
invasion by altering nuclear envelope integrity.


Malignant cell invasion is accompanied by complex changes in nuclear
shape and organisation. The onset of invasion correlates with the loss of
HP1a in many solid tumours including those of the thyroid, kidney, colon
and breast, while in cancer cell lines HP1a suppresses invasive
potential. In normal cells HP1a maintains the condensation of
transcriptionally silent heterochromatin and sequesters it at the inner
periphery of the nuclear envelope; an event critical for the maintenance
of nuclear stability and envelope rigidity. This role for HP1a leads us
to hypothesise that the un-tethering of heterochromatin from the nuclear
periphery that would occur after loss of HP1 causes a remodelling of
nuclear envelope that enhances cellular invasion. If true this would
explain how the nucleus, the largest and most rigid cellular organelles,
becomes malleable enough to squeeze through interstitial spaces in the
surrounding tissue during metastatic invasion. In support of this
hypothesis we observed a 44% increase in the invasive potential of the
poorly invasive MCF7 breast cells when HP1a is knocked down. Lamin A
staining and electron microscopy also confirmed that these HP1a knockdown
cells had the expected alterations in nuclear morphology and loss of
heterochromatin at the nuclear periphery. Furthermore the loss of HP1 was
correlated with a decrease in the mechanical stability of the nuclei. The
significant enrichment (p-val 6.7x10-8) of nuclear envelope proteins
shown by RNAseq analysis of transcripts that are differentially expressed
in the MCF7 versus HP1a knock-down cells, suggests this loss of nuclear
envelope integrity is associated with alterations to its composition. The
most striking change identified in the nuclear envelope of cells lacking
HP1a was the loss of two Nesprin1 isoforms. While reintroduction of HP1a
in highly invasive MDA-MB-231 cells shows the return of these isoforms to
the nuclear envelope. As the Nesprin1 isoforms act as signalling
scaffolds connecting to the cytoskeleton or reaching into the nucleus,
they represent a means of modulating nuclear malleability. Together these
findings suggest that when loss of HP1a increases invasive potential
there is a corresponding disruption to the nuclear periphery that is a
weakness of these cells that could be exploited.


