Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of epithelial oral dysplasia in non-smokers:
working towards precision medicine.


Objectives: Although tobacco usage is still one of the strongest risk
factors associated with oral cancer risk, there is a subset of
non-smokers who develop oral cancer. Tobacco cessation efforts have
resulted in a drop in oral cancer rates associated with this habit,
leading to a growing interest in the increased proportion of cases
occurring among non-smokers (NS). Lesions with oral epithelial dysplasia
(OED) are at risk of progressing to oral cancer. Not only is the natural
history of OED in NS poorly understood, but the path to interception of
disease in NS is poorly defined. There is a gap in the knowledge
surrounding the clinicopathological and genetic characterization, and the
risk of progression in this growing category. This information is
critical to the evolution of precision medicine in this subgroup. The aim
of this study was to: 1) Describe the molecular and clinicopathological
features of OED in NS as compared to smokers in longitudinal follow-up;
and 2) To compare progression rates and time to progression in NS and
smokers with OED.

Methods: The study focused on cases with histologically confirmed mild or
moderate OED in follow-up in the Oral Cancer Prediction Longitudinal
Study. Clinicopathological data, including lesion site, size, texture,
colour, consistency, border characteristics, fluorescence visualization
(FV), and toluidine blue (TB) retention, were collected in addition to
detailed smoking history. A genomic based marker test (gMART) which uses
loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at key chromosomal loci to stratify lesions
to progression risk, was performed on baseline biopsies. Progression was
considered to be advancement to severe dysplasia, carcinoma in situ, or
squamous cell carcinoma.

Results: Out of 231 OED, 30% were NS related, based on self-reported
smoking status. Although there were more smokers with OED than NS, a
significantly higher proportion of the OED underwent malignant
transformation in NS (P=.048). Although not significant, time to outcome
was also faster in this group. Most clinical features were equally
predictive except for lesion site. Ever smokers (ES) were more likely to
have OED at the floor of mouth while OED was more likely to occur at the
tongue or gingiva (PResults: Out of 231 OED, 30% were NS related, based
on self-reported smoking status. Although there were more smokers with
OED than NS, a significantly higher proportion of the OED underwent
malignant transformation in NS (P=.048). Although not significant, time
to outcome was also faster in this group. Most clinical features were
equally predictive except for lesion site. Ever smokers (ES) were more
likely to have OED at the floor of mouth while OED was more likely to
occur at the tongue or gingiva (P<.001) in NS. LOH risk patterns were
strongly associated with progression (moderate risk = OR 4.84; high risk
= OR 28.1; P=.001) and equally sensitive in both NS and ES subgroups.

Conclusions: These findings support the premise that progressive lesions
in NS and ES have some similar genetic underpinnings, and emphasize the
need for clinicians to consider the molecular genomic profiles in the
triage of OED. LOH markers can sort high-risk lesions, despite risk
habits, and should be an important consideration in the treatment of OED.
This marker is of particular use in the targeting of candidates for
chemoprevention.


