Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ROR1 inhibits ASK1-mediated pro-apoptotic signaling in lung
adenocarcinoma.


We previously reported that the receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan
receptor 1 (ROR1) is transcriptionally activated by TTF-1/NKX2-1
lineage-survival oncogene in lung adenocarcinoma and maintains a
favorable balance between pro-survival PI3K-AKT and pro-apoptotic
ASK1-p38 signaling. Although in-depth mechanistic insight into how ROR1
sustains EGFR-mediated PI3K-AKT signaling in both kinase-dependent and
-independent manners has been obtained, it remains elusive how ROR1
inhibits pro-apoptotic signaling. In the present study, we investigated
the underlying mechanism of ROR1-mediated inhibition of the ASK1-p38MAPK
signaling pathway. Co-treatment with siASK1 resulted in partial but
significant alleviation of siROR1-mediated growth inhibition in the lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines PC-9 and NCI-H1975, which readily express both
ROR1 and ASK1. Significant decreases in auto-phosphorylation of ASK1 at
threonine 845 and p38 phosphorylation at threonine 180 and tyrosine 182
were observed in ROR1-transfected MSTO-211H cells in both steady state
and oxidative stress-elicited conditions, suggesting ROR1-mediated
negative regulation of the ASK1-p38 axis. ROR1 was shown to interact
physically with ASK1 through the C-terminal serine/threonine-rich domain
of ROR1. An in vitro kinase assay using cellular ASK1 prepared from
ASK1-transfected 293T cells as well as recombinant MBP-tagged
kinase-deficient MKK6 revealed that co-incubation of ASK1 with
recombinant GST-tagged ROR1 clearly diminished ASK1 auto-phosphorylation
and MKK6 phosphorylation. We further examined whether the kinase activity
of ROR1 is required for inhibition of ASK1 activity using MSTO-211H cells
stably transfected with either a wild-type or a kinase-dead mutant of
ROR1. In contrast to wild-type ROR1, kinase-dead ROR1 failed to
significantly repress hydrogen peroxide-induced ASK1 phosphorylation as
well as consequential p38 phosphorylation and increase in sub-G1 cells.
Since we previously found that ROR1 activates SRC, we also examined
whether SRC is involved in the ROR1-sustained ASK1 inhibition.
Introduction of constitutively active SRC significantly reduced
siROR1-induced ASK1activity in PC-9 cells, while co-transfection of SRC
and ASK1 resulted in tyrosine phosphorylation of ASK1, which was
accompanied with diminished ASK1 phosphorylation at threonine 845.
Finally, the interaction between SRC and ASK1 was found to be enhanced by
the presence of ROR1 by an in vitro pull-down assay. Taken together, the
present findings support our notion that ROR1 sustains lung
adenocarcinoma survival, at least in part, through direct physical
interaction with both ASK1 and SRC, which consequently results in
repression of the pro-apoptotic ASK1-p38 axis in a ROR1 kinase
activity-dependent manner.


