Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-penetrating peptide-coated nanoparticles as a novel strategy
for the targeted therapy of neuroblastoma.


Anticancer drugs loaded into tumor- and vasculature-targeted nanocarriers
(NC) can reduce side-effects and improve therapeutic efficacy in
pre-clinical studies. However, poorly perfused and dysfunctional tumor
vessels and lymphatics limit the transport of the payload into the
parenchyma of solid tumors. The use of NC decorated with
tumor-penetrating peptides (TPPs) might enhance tumor penetration and
antitumor effects.

A previously characterized neuroblastoma (NB)-targeting peptide ligand
was here modified (now referred as TPP-NB) by adding a consensus motif as
a mediator of cell, vascular and tissue penetration via neuropilin-1
(NRP-1) receptor recognition. NPR-1 expression was validated by FACS
analysis in NB cell lines and by IHC staining in tumor cells and tumor
stroma from NB-bearing mice. Recombinant NRP-1 was used to validate
TPP-NB specificity. In vitro and in vivo cell association and
internalization of TPP-NB, either free or coupled to Liposomes (L) were
tested by FACS and confocal microscopy. Vascular permeability assay after
treatment with TPP-NB-targeted, doxorubicin-loaded Liposomes
(TPP-NB-L[DXR]) was performed evaluating the in vivo accumulation of
Evans Blue dye within the tumor mass. Therapeutic experiments with
TPP-NB-L[DXR] were performed in mice orthotopically injected with human
NB cells.

NRP-1 expression is validated in a panel of NB cells and in tumors from
NB-bearing mice. Differently from the original peptide and some control
ones, TPP-NB is able to recognize recombinant NRP-1. The addition of the
NRP-1-recognizing sequence to the original peptide significantly
increases its NB cellular association in vitro. Interestingly, the
results seem to indicate that the enhanced capability by TPP-NB in
binding NB cells is related to the combination of the NRP-1-recognizing
and the original sequence. Importantly, TPP-NB coupled at the external
surfaces of L[DXR] significantly increases their cellular association on
NB cells in vitro. Competitive binding assay reveals that binding of
TPP-NB is specific and can be inhibited by an excess of the unlabeled
free peptide. The localization and the cellular distribution of L
evaluated by confocal microscopy in vitro and in mouse models of NB,
confirm the binding specificity, showing an increased selective
internalization of TPP-NB-L-FITC compared to that obtained with either
untargeted L or L decorated with the scrambled peptide. Moreover,
TPP-NB-L[DXR] further increases the vascular permeability into the NB
tumor mass, but not in non-tumor tissues. The therapeutic efficacy of
TPP-NB-L[DXR] has been investigating in terms of overall survival. On
running results indicate that the novel NC exerts an increased anti-NB
effect compared to DXR-loaded L decorated with the original peptide.

Our findings demonstrate that the achieved penetrating features by a
NB-targeting peptide might increase liposomal drug binding, homing and
antitumor efficacy.


