Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional control of glucocorticoid responses in leukemia.


Glucocorticoids (GCs) are central to all major therapy regimens for pre-B
cell-derived acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), but have no activity in
myeloid leukemia. Such divergent responses represent an empirically
established clinical standard; however, neither the mechanism by which
GCs induce cell death nor the biological basis for the distinct responses
in B-cell and myeloid leukemias is clear. Studying patient-derived
samples revealed that NR3C1 (glucocorticoid receptor) levels were 6- to
20-fold higher in pre-B ALL compared to chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).
High levels of Nr3c1 were reduced upon B- to myeloid-lineage conversion,
suggesting that regulation of NR3C1 expression and GC responsiveness
depend on a B-cell transcriptional program. B-cell transcription factors
(e.g. PAX5, IKZF1) are critical for B-cell development, yet they are
genetically lesioned in more than 80% of pre-B ALL cases. Despite such
high frequency, the significance of these inactivating lesions remains
elusive. Combining ChIP-seq and RNA-seq analyses, we identified a novel
B-cell transcriptional program for activation of NR3C1 and its
transcriptional target TXNIP (a negative regulator of glucose uptake).
Reconstitution of PAX5 or IKZF1 expression in haploinsufficient
patient-derived pre-B ALL cells increased NR3C1 and TXNIP levels.
Conversely, expression of dominant negative mutant of PAX5 or IKZF1
abolished NR3C1 expression. Loss of Nr3c1 or Txnip in murine
BCR-ABL1-driven pre-B ALL cells resulted in survival advantage in
competitive growth assays. Importantly, loss of Nr3c1 or Txnip
significantly elevated glucose uptake, lactate production and cellular
ATP levels. These findings suggest that GCs induce cell death by
exacerbating glucose and energy depletion. Notably, reconstitution of
PAX5 or IKZF1 rendered haploinsufficient patient-derived pre-B ALL cells
more sensitive to dexamethasone (dex) treatment. In contrast,
dominant-negative PAX5 or IKZF1 largely de-sensitized pre-B ALL cells
expressing wildtype PAX5 or IKZF1. These findings suggest that B-cell
transcription factors set the threshold for GC responsiveness in pre-B
ALL. Since relapsed ALL cells often acquire GC resistance,
drug-combinations may be useful to prevent GC-resistance. As expected,
loss of Nr3c1 abrogated responses to GCs. Interestingly, loss of Txnip
also largely rescued GC-induced cell death in pre-B ALL cells. On this
basis, we tested drug interactions between GCs and TXNIP agonists,
3-O-methylglucose (3-OMG) and D-allose. Treating patient-derived
GC-refractory pre-B ALL cells with 3-OMG or D-allose strongly synergized
with GC-treatment. Collectively, our findings provide a mechanistic
explanation for the empiric finding that GCs are effective in the
treatment of B-cell but not myeloid malignancies, and identify TXNIP as a
novel therapeutic target in pre-B ALL.


