Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Theranostic nanoparticles for detection and treatment of
pancreatic cancer.


Background: Despite continued efforts to improve early detection and
treatment of pancreatic adenocarcinoma, the disease still carries a poor
prognosis. The combination of multispectral optoacoustic tomography
(MSOT) and theranostic nanoparticles offers a possible solution by
providing tumor targeting using fluorescent dyes and treatment through
drug delivery. We describe a 40 nm colloidal mesoporous silica
nanoparticle (CMS) with vermiform pores and a chitosan coating and tagged
with the V7 peptide to provide pH-specific dual targeting to deliver a
contrast agent in a tumor-specific fashion.

Methods: CMSs were synthesized using a modified Stober method, coated
with chitosan, and conjugated with a V7 peptide, resulting in a dual
acidic pH targeting system. Particle characterization was performed using
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), UV-vis spectrophotometry, Zeta
potential, and dynamic light scattering . To determine acidic pH
specificity of V7-CMS, Panc1 and S2VP10 cell lines were incubated in cell
culture medium at either pH 7.4 or 6.6 followed by treatment with V7-CMS.
Particle uptake was determined using near infrared (NIR) fluorescence and
tissue phantoms. Finally, for in vivo testing, the same CMSNs were
injected into mice bearing S2VP10 pancreatic tumors. MSOT imaging was
performed 8 hours after CMS injection.

Results: TEM images demonstrated successful synthesis of approximately 40
nm V7-CMSs with vermiform pores. On NIR imaging, V7-CMS demonstrated
acidic pH specificity in both S2VP10 and Panc 1 cells at pH 6.6, with
particle localization and signal intensity 8-fold and 5-fold higher,
respectively, than that observed at pH 7.4. In tissue phantoms, increased
pH specificity was also observed in both S2VP10 and Panc 1 cells at pH
6.6. Particle location and signal intensity on MSOT was 20-fold and
4-fold higher, respectively, than that observed at pH 7.4. In the murine
orthotopic S2VP10 pancreatic tumor model, MSOT imaging 8 hours after IV
CMS injection demonstrated V7-CMS accumulation specifically within
pancreatic tumors.

Conclusion: The acidic pH specific dual targeting system using
chitosan-coated and pHLIP V7-tagged CMSs results in tumor specificity.
Preferential binding and dye release was increased as much as 20-fold at
pH 6.6 as compared to pH 7.4 in tissue phantoms. MSOT was able to detect
tumor specific accumulation of V7-CMS in vivo. These small, pH specific
particles hold significant promise for effectively identifying pancreatic
tumors with high sensitivity and specificity and for targeted drug
delivery.


