Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ADP- dependent glucokinase controls hypoxic gradients, ex vivo
avascular and in vivo tumor growth through modulation of HIF-1α/mTOR
signaling.


ADP- dependent glucokinase (ADPGK) is an evolutionarily conserved
archaeal glycolytic enzyme frequently upregulated in human cancers whose
role remains elusive. We have recently discovered that ADPGK contributes
to ROS- dependent stabilization of hypoxia- inducible factor (HIF)-1α
(and -2α) and hypoxic target gene transactivation in cancer cells.
Hereby, we deconvolute the effect of ADPGK loss-of-function (LoF) upon
the 3D hypoxic tumor microenvironment, a crucial pathobiological aspect
determining therapeutic responses in cancer patients.

ADPGK, HIF-1α and HIF-2α LoF was attained through shRNA- mediated
knockdown (>75%) in HCT-116 colon cancer cells. HIF-1α (and -2α)
transcriptional activity was measured through RT-qPCR arrays whereas
protein levels were assessed by immunoblot. O2 and glucose consumption
were measured in 2D with a real-time bioanalyzer (Seahorse). Avascular 3D
spheroids and xenografts were used to measure the effect of ADPGK LoF
upon tumor growth. Hypoxic gradients in 3D tumor spheroids were
quantified using the O2- sensitive nitroimidazole probe EF5 in
combination with confocal microscopy and 3D image reconstruction.

RT-qPCR arrays identified a core group of 11 hypoxia- inducible
transcripts dependent upon ADPGK expression (CA9, DDIT4, ERO1L, Igfbp3,
Scl2a3, Bhlhe40, Bnip3L, Egln1, Fam162a, Pgk1 and PKM), henceforth
referred to as ‘ADPGK- dependent HIF-α target signature’ (ADHTS).
Comparison of ADHTS transcriptional profiles with HIF-1α or -2α
deficient cells showed that ADPGK LoF is not selective for either HIF-α
paralog. Since ADHTS contained genes critical for mTOR signaling,
glycolytic activity and mitochondrial autophagy, we performed metabolic
profiling and found that ADPGK LoF increased O2 consumption in a
rapamycin- sensitive manner whilst increasing mitochondrial mass.
Moreover, ADPGK LoF enhanced xenograft growth and vascularization
associated with decreased protein levels of HIF-2α and the negative mTOR
regulator DDIT4. In avascular 3D spheroids, ADPGK LoF increased growth,
intra-spheroidal hypoxia and caused steeper hypoxic gradients in parallel
to enhanced mTOR→pS6K→p4EBP1 signaling. RNAseq data from colon
adenocarcinoma patients (TCGA; n= 382) confirmed that ADPGK expression
correlates with ADHTS, HIF-α target gene expression, hypoxia scores and
decreased overall survival. Consistent with our preclinical findings, the
ADHTS gene signature inversely correlated with an mTOR gene signature in
the same dataset.

Our results uncover a hitherto unknown function of ADPGK as a crucial
determinant of the degree and distribution of hypoxia within the tumor
microenvironment through modulation of HIF-1α→mTOR signaling. Our
analysis of TCGA data supports these preclinical findings thereby
suggesting that ADPGK is a suitable therapeutic target in patients
bearing hypoxic cancers.


