Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comprehensive analysis of autopsied specimens and
patient-derived cell lines in ALK-positive lung cancers with rapid
acquired resistance to alectinib.


Background

Alectinib, a highly selective anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI), demonstrated a stunning disease control rate
(95.7%) and unprecedented median progression-free survival (not reached:
95% CI: 20.3-) (Lancet Oncology 2013, ASCO 2016, Abstract #9008).
However, acquired resistance to alectinib is inevitable; some
ALK-positive lung tumors rapidly acquire alectinib resistance. Therefore,
we sought to investigate the mechanism of the rapid resistance to
alectinib using clinical samples and patient-derived ALK-positive cell
lines.

Materials and Methods

Autopsied samples (primary lung tumors and metastatic tumors from the
esophagus, liver, and bilateral kidney) were obtained from a 51-year-old
male with advanced ALK-positive lung cancer. The lung tumors acquired
resistance to first-line treatment of alectinib in three months, and
subsequent treatment with ceritinib or crizotinib showed only a moderate
and temporary effect. We established novel ALK-positive cell lines;
ABC-14 was established from a pleural effusion after alectinib treatment,
and ABC-17 was established from patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors of
autopsied liver metastases. Western blot analysis, immunostaining, a
receptor tyrosine kinase assay, fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH), and next-generation sequencing were performed.

Results

ALK overexpression was confirmed in all autopsied samples by
immunostaining. PCR revealed that ABC-14 harbored the EML-4/ALK fusion
variant 3. An in vitro cell proliferation assay showed that ABC-14
exhibited resistance to alectinib (IC50 > 1 µM), but was sensitive to
crizotinib (IC50 = 98 nM). The receptor tyrosine kinase assay revealed
the activation of MET and EGFR in ABC-14. Quantitative RT-PCR and FISH
confirmed MET gene amplification. Quantitative RT-PCR also indicated the
overexpression of an EGFR ligand, EGF, TGF-α but no EGFR mRNA
overexpression. The combination of crizotinib (dual ALK/MET-TKI) and an
EGFR-TKI, gefitinib, showed an additive inhibitory effect on cell growth
compared with each drug alone in vitro. ABC-17 showed resistance to both
alectinib and crizotinib; consistently showed no activation of MET and no
MET gene amplification. Interestingly, ABC-17 showed metastatic ability
in the lung in NOG mouse PDX models.

Conclusion

The mechanism of rapid resistance to alectinib may be complicated and
heterogeneous. Crizotinib combined with gefitinib, which inhibits the
ALK, EGFR, and MET pathways, may represent one potent strategy against
alectinib resistance. Further next-generation sequencing of clinically
relevant samples should provide deeper insights into its resistance.
(This work was supported by KAKEN 16K19454 and KAKEN 15H04830.)


