Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Melatonin inhibits mitochondrial transcription factor A expression
in glioblastoma U87MG cell culture inducing an anti-tumorigenic effect.


Melatonin, the major hormone of pineal gland, has been described to
induce intrinsic apoptosis in tumor cell, while it is inhibited in
non-tumor cell. In tumor cell, melatonin stimulates intracellular
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by a mechanism not completely
understood. Here we propose that melatonin inhibits the expression of the
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) in culture of glioblastoma
(GBM) cell lineage, leading to an increase of the production of ROS. TFAM
is an important mitochondrial protein that maintains the mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA) integrity and consequently the oxidative phosphorylation.
Human U87MG GBM cell lineage was treated with melatonin (1 mM) for 72 h
to evaluate the expression of TFAM and the mtDNA copy number through Real
Time PCR. Proliferation, apoptosis, cell cycle and ROS production were
also evaluated by cytometry (Muse - Millipore Corporation) and the
results were normalized to control (vehicle: ethanol 0.3 %). Melatonin
reduced the expression of TFAM in 17.5 % compared to the control group,
but had no effect on the mtDNA copy number. Moreover, the incubation of
U87MG with melatonin induced a reduction in cell proliferation in 14.24 %
± 4.3 compared to control, with an arrest of cell cycle in G0/G1 phase,
which increased from 67.4 ± 3.71 % to 72.78 ± 3.18 % in the group
treated with melatonin compared to the control. Production of ROS
presented an increase of 7.1 %, with no significant effect on apoptosis.
These results suggest that TFAM maybe a target for the melatonin function
for an anti-tumorigenic effect through an increase of ROS production,
inducing a delay in the cell cycle and a reduction of cell proliferation.
The melatonin effect onTFAM maybe a novel signaling pathway that could be
explored for the control of GBM progression.


