Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting invasive and drug-resistant PDAC with photodynamic
therapy.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is associated with an extensive
desmoplastic reaction and a characteristic extracellular matrix
(ECM)-rich stromal microenvironment which is a major determinant of
disease progression and therapeutic response. Using 3D cell culture
models of PDAC, we recently showed that an invasion-promoting ECM
composition leads to differential response to chemotherapy agents and
photodynamic therapy (PDT), in which cytotoxic response is triggered by
light activation of a photosensitizing agent. In particular,
ECM-infiltrating populations with characteristic mesenchymal phenotype
display a marked increase in sensitivity to PDT (using the
photosensitizer verteporfin), while the same cells exhibit increased
chemoresistance. Here, motivated by these findings we systematically
disentangle influences associated with the physical and biochemical
properties of ECM as regulators of PDAC growth behavior and treatment
response. In 3D tumor spheroids transplanted into invasion-promoting type
1 collagen gels, we use riboflavin-mediated photocrosslinking as a tool
to regulate ECM stiffness (independent of its concentration), combined
with high-content imaging to co-register invasive progression and
differential response to chemotherapy and PDT. Increased extent of
photocrosslinking correlates with increased collagen stiffness as
confirmed by bulk oscillatory rheology, and is associated with a decrease
in the invasive velocity (migration speed directed away from the primary
transplanted spheroid) of ECM-infiltrating PDAC cells. Preliminary
comparisons of PDT and oxaliplatin chemotherapy in low and high collagen
crosslinking conditions show that PDT is significantly more effective
than oxaliplatin in ECM-invading populations regardless of collagen
stiffness. We also compare oxaliplatin chemotherapy and PDT before and
after PDAC invasion into Matrigel ECM, and find that PDT efficacy is only
enhanced after extensive invasion into the surrounding matrix. These
results support the efficacy of PDT in targeting locally invasive PDAC
while stressing the importance of elucidating how both biochemical and
biophysical ECM interactions regulate therapeutic susceptibilities.


