Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-17A alone or in combination with IL-4/IFN-γ induces
Duox2/DuoxA2 expression and reactive oxygen production in human colon and
pancreatic cancer cells.


NADPH oxidase (NOX)-derived reactive oxygen species (ROS) contribute
significantly to inflammation-associated carcinogenesis. Expression of
dual oxidase 2 (Duox2), one of seven members of the NOX gene family, is
up-regulated in inflammatory bowel disease, chronic pancreatitis, and in
many human malignancies including carcinomas of the colon, pancreas,
prostate, lung, and breast. Previously, we demonstrated that Stat1 and/or
NF-kB play a critical role in modulating the enhanced expression of
Duox2, and its cognate maturation factor DuoxA2, by the pro-inflammatory
mediators IFN-γ and lipopolysaccharide in human pancreatic cancer cells.
This cytokine-mediated increase in Duox2 expression was responsible for a
significant increase in tumor cell H2O2 production, DNA damage, and
HIF-1α and VEGFA upregulation in pancreatic cancer cell lines. Using the
T84 human colon cancer line, and BxPC-3, AsPC-1, and HTB134 pancreatic
cancer cell lines, we now report that the pro-inflammatory cytokine
IL-17A, pivotal in the adaptive immune response against various
pathogens, and in the promotion of colon and pancreatic cancer
progression, strongly induces Duox2/DuoxA2 mRNA and protein expression
(alone or in combination with IL-4 or IFN-γ). In BxPC-3 cells, IL-17A
enhances the expression of Duox2/DuoxA2 in a time- and
concentration-dependent manner, which leads to a significant increase in
the generation of extracellular H2O2. When IL-17A is combined with IL-4
in either T-84 or AsPc-1 lines, Duox2-mediated ROS formation is
sufficient to produce a DNA damage response, indicated by the strong
induction of γH2AX expression; moreover, in AsPc-1 cells, Duox2-specific
siRNA significantly attenuated cytokine-induced ROS production and γH2AX
phosphorylation. IL-17A in combination with IL-4 also significantly
increases Stat3 phosphorylation and promotes proliferation in AsPC-1
cells. Ongoing cellular experiments are focused on whether the
cytokine-mediated upregulation of Duox2/DuoxA2 is responsible for Stat3
activation and cell growth promotion in the K-ras mutated AsPC-1 cells.
Bio-informatic analysis with the TCGA data set, as well as RT-PCR using
surgically-resected human colon cancer samples compared to adjacent,
uninvolved colonic epithelium revealed that Duox2 was significantly
upregulated in human colon cancers. These studies, in concert with our
previous data demonstrating high-level Duox protein expression in
pancreatitis, pancreatic intra-epithelial neoplasia (PanIN), and frank
pancreatic cancer, strongly suggest that ROS, produced as a consequence
of cytokine-related Duox2 up-regulation, may be associated with the
development of inflammation-related gastrointestinal malignancies.


