Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiRNA profile of excised cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma tissues
comparative to adjacent normal tissue.


Cutaneous Squamous Cell Carcinoma (cSCC) is the second most common form
of skin cancer commonly arising from sun-induced mutations. As most cases
of cSCC are treated by tumor excision, research aimed at understanding
factors influencing the metastasis, and possible alternative treatments,
of cSCC is limited. Cancer metastasis is a multistep process, including
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). During EMT, epithelial cells
undergo a dedifferentiation process whereby they transition to a highly
mobile and invasive mesenchymal cell type with metastatic capacities.
Although the factors influencing EMT are varied, one important mediator
of intercellular communication shown to be involved in oncogenesis is
miRNA. Our work focuses on miRNAs, which are small non-coding RNA species
that may be one epigenetic factor contributing to the progression of
cSCC. In this study, we compared the expression pattern of seven miRNAs
(miR-21, -31, -34a, -125b, -199a, -204, and -1246) between fresh primary
tumor samples and fresh adjacent normal tissue (ANT) collected from
patients diagnosed with cSCC, SCC in situ, or invasive SCC. Total RNA was
isolated from each of the samples and qPCR on all samples was performed
to determine the expression level of each miRNA relative to control. Of
the seven miRNA tested, three were significantly upregulated (miR-31,
-34a, and -199a) and one was significantly downregulated (miR-204) in the
patient SCC samples compared to ANT. As many of these miRNAs are
predicted to influence proteins involved in the progression of EMT in
other cancers, we have begun examining the expression of known EMT
markers via qPCR and/or Western blot from RNA and protein isolated from
both SCC and ANT tissues. Preliminary results indicate that expression of
E-cadherin is significantly reduced in cSCC relative to normal tissue,
indicative of a progression of EMT in the cancerous tissue. Other EMT
markers are being examined as well. Further work investigating the
function of these differentially-expressed miRNAs will help to begin
elucidating the role miRNAs are playing in the progression of cSCC.


