Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A three-dimensional RAFT™ co-culture as advanced model for
breast cancer drug discovery.


High-throughput screening (HTS) using two-dimensional (2D) cell culture
models (2D HTS) is essential for rapid identification of drug candidates
from chemical libraries. However, it often results in a large number of
poorly qualified leads that exert extra burden on the downstream,
preclinical animal studies and that cannot be translated into clinical
success, because 2D culture cannot represent the complexity of the tumor
microenvironment in vivo.

The progression of tumors and their response to drugs in vivo are
regulated by their interactions with neighboring cells, and the natural
gradients of nutrients, cytokines, wastes, oxygen, which can be better
mimicked with three-dimensional (3D) cell-culture models.

We constructed a breast cancer model using the RAFTTM 3D Cell Culture
System. The essential component of this system is a collagen matrix
condensed to the physiologically-relevant collagen density by removing
the majority of the liquid from the collagen hydrogel with specialized
absorbers.

Our 3D model is a co-culture of human mammary fibroblasts (HMFs),
embedded in the RAFT™ Collagen matrix, and the MCF7 human breast cancer
epithelial cells, overlaying on top of the matrix, to model the
interaction of breast cancer cells and stromal cells in vivo. As
non-tumorous control, human mammary epithelial cells (nHMECs), isolated
from normal breast tissue, were used to replace MCF7 cells in such a
co-culture. A medium formulation combining fibroblast medium FGM2™ and
mammary epithelial cell medium MEGM™ was optimized to grow both cell
types in the co-culture. The RAFT™ co-cultures were stained with
standard immunocytochemistry protocol to reveal the morphology of the
cells. After three days in culture, the HMFs, evenly interspersed in the
matrix, fully stretched out in the collagen matrix, and the nHMECs grew
to reach above 90% confluence on the collagen matrix.

The cell proliferation in the co-culture was quantified with the
ViaLight™ Plus Cell Proliferation and Cytotoxicity BioAssay, which
measures cell viability with bioluminescent detection of cellular ATP.
Based on this assay, the viabilities of the RAFT™ cultures of single
cell types, as well as those of the co-cultures, increased from Day 1 to
Day 3. Normal HMECs proliferated much faster than MCF7 cells on the
matrix.

We demonstrate here the feasibility of co-culturing HMFs and mammary
epithelial cells, in the RAFT™ System, as a 3D breast cancer model. The
efficacy of anti-cancer drugs can be assessed by measuring the cell
viability with the ViaLight™ Assay. This 3D model can be used to bridge
the gap between 2D HTS and preclinical animal studies. It may provide
physiologically-relevant data and better prediction of the in vivo
efficacy and dosage of the drug candidates identified in HTS, and reduce
the burden of animal studies in breast cancer drug discovery.


