Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-187-5p and miR-219a-1-3p: potential biomarkers associated with
chemotherapeutic response and prognosis in ovarian cancer.


Background: Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the fifth-most common
cause of female cancer death and is associated with high recurrence and
mortality despite recent advancements in therapeutic strategies.
Chemoresistance remains the main cause of treatment failure in EOC
patients. The aim of this study is to identify specific miRNA markers
closely associated with the chemoresponse in EOC patients.

Methods: We analyzed 374 serous ovarian cancer patients who receiving
combination chemotherapy from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and
identified the most significantly altered miRNAs between different groups
patients of chemotherapy response. We then used Kaplan-Meier and log-rank
methods to analyze the relationship between these miRNAs and
progression-free and overall survival in TCGA (n = 460) and Bagnoli (n =
130) datasets. In vitro study for response to chemotherapy agents were
performed in human ovarian cancer cell lines and their transfectants. The
biological relevance of putative miRNA targets was also analyzed using
bioinformatics.

Results: MiR-187-5p and miR-219a-1-3p were associated with better
response to chemotherapy and longer progression-free and overall survival
in two independent epithelial ovarian cancer patient cohorts (all p
Results: MiR-187-5p and miR-219a-1-3p were associated with better
response to chemotherapy and longer progression-free and overall survival
in two independent epithelial ovarian cancer patient cohorts (all p
<0.05). These two miRNAs also sensitized ovarian cancer cells to
chemotherapy, thus recapitulating the clinical observation.

Conclusions: This study showed that miR-187-5p and miR-219a-1-3p could be
useful biomarker for prediction of chemotherapy response and survival in
serous ovarian cancers. MiR-187-5p and miR-219a-1-3p may be potential
molecules in the treatment of EOC for sensitizing cancer cells to
chemotherapy.


