Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolism as checkpoint: Induction of anti-tumor immune response
with the novel glutamine antagonist JHU-083.


The metabolic characteristics of the tumor microenvironment (eg, hypoxia,
acidity, nutrient depletion, elevated adenosine) present a significant
hurdle for immunotherapy. Dysregulated glutamine metabolism plays a
crucial role in establishing this environment. We previously demonstrated
that the novel glutamine antagonist, JHU-083, profoundly alters tumor
metabolism and inhibits growth with minimal toxicity. Further studies
have demonstrated that JHU-083 can reprogram the immune contexture of the
TME leading to decreased regulatory T cells (Treg), increased CD8:Treg
ratio, decreased MDSCs, suppressed adenosine, and decreased acidification
and hypoxia. We now report that JHU-083 not only markedly enhances
antitumor response to anti-PD-1 and adoptive cellular therapy (ACT) but
also generates potent immune-mediated responses as a single agent. In an
MC38 tumor model C57BL/6 mice treated from day 10 with concurrent JHU-083
and low-dose anti-PD-1 therapy showed robust antitumor activity with
complete rejection and normal lifespan in 9/10 mice (vs. 0/10 complete
responses with anti-PD-1 monotherapy). The combination regimen was well
tolerated, causing only minimal, transient weight loss. In other studies,
a therapeutic ACT model with OVA-expressing B16 melanoma cells was
employed and showed that low-dose JHU-083 and adoptive transfer of
activated OVA-specific T cells led to markedly suppressed tumor growth
and increased survival versus vehicle treated controls. In the course of
these studies we found that incrementally increasing the dose of single
agent JHU-083 generated 100% complete response rates (5/5) with 60% of
mice rejecting tumor upon rechallenge, strongly suggesting an
immune-mediated rejection had been established. Indeed, subsequent tumor
studies in WT and RAG-/- mice confirmed that anti-tumor response to
single agent JHU-083 was critically dependent on the adaptive immune
system. This was unexpected as glutamine is known to be essential for T
cell expansion. To this end, we used a vaccinia-OVA model and found that
low-dose JHU-083 administered in the peri-vaccination period had minimal
suppressive effect on OVA-specific CD8 expansion, but importantly,
promoted generation of robust memory T cells with higher T-Bet expression
and increased mTORC1 activity upon rechallenge. These studies demonstrate
that, while the dosing and schedule of JHU-083 employed can disrupt tumor
metabolism and markedly inhibit tumor growth, these same doses can
promote long-lived changes in T cells that enhance memory response.
Overall, our studies indicate that glutamine antagonism within tumors
ameliorates critical checkpoints to immune function, dissipating
metabolic suppression of immune-mediated anti-tumor responses. As such,
targeting tumor metabolism can “unleash” endogenous anti-tumor
responses as monotherapy and can markedly enhance anti-PD1 checkpoint
blockade and adoptive cellular therapy.


