Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multifocal prostate cancer has high degree of genomic
heterogeneity.


Prostate cancer is the most common cancer type among men in the Western
world. Most prostate cancers are multifocal with individual tumors
harboring different aggressiveness. In recent genomics studies, the
multifocal nature of prostate cancer has been investigated only in small
sample cohorts. Here we have investigated the intra-organ mutational
spectra of multiple tumors from a large cohort of prostate cancer
patients. From radical prostatectomies performed between 2010 and 2012 at
Oslo University Hospital, 43 prostatectomy specimens with multiple and
clearly separated tumors were identified based on histology. From each of
these prostatectomy specimens, DNA from frozen samples from 2-3 different
tumor foci and corresponding normal tissue samples were analyzed by
high-coverage whole-exome sequencing, adding up to a total of 159
samples. We identified 3093 somatic substitutions, insertions and
deletions, with an average of 27 alterations per tumor sample. Both known
and novel significantly mutated genes were identified and their
distribution among different tumor foci from the same prostate was
examined. Mutations in genes such as SPOP, MED12, and FOXA1 have
previously been identified in prostate cancer and were also found to be
frequently mutated in this cohort. However, the same mutations were
rarely found in multiple tumor foci within the same prostate. In fact,
for 13 out of the 43 examined patients there were no common mutations
among tumors from the same prostate. For 12 patients, we found only one
overlapping mutation among tumor foci. Whereas the overall list of
mutated genes (n = 2101) overlap significantly with the 594 genes of the
Cancer Gene Census (100/594; p=9.6e-06), this was not the case for 142
genes with overlapping mutations among different tumor foci (2/594;
p=0.63). This indicates that the overlapping mutations are not typical
cancer driving genes. To conclude, results from exome sequencing of
multifocal prostate cancer show a large degree of heterogeneity in
genomic alterations between different tumor foci within the same
prostate. With very few common inter-foci mutations, an implementation of
genome-based personalized prostate cancer medicine will require sampling
of all tumor foci to tailor optimal treatment.


