Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer agent Aminoflavone restores the expression of tumor
suppressor miRNA 26a and inhibits putative stemness biomarker
α6-integrin in Tamoxifen resistant cells.


Despite the efficacy of anti-estrogen agent Tamoxifen, commonly used to
treat patients with estrogen receptor positive (ER+) tumors, up to 40% of
patients experience recurrence. Breast tumor-initiating cells (TICs), or
breast cancer stem cells, exhibit Tamoxifen resistance and contribute
substantially to recurrence. We recently demonstrated that
investigational anticancer agent Aminoflavone (AF) disrupts mammospheres
(in vitro clusters of cells enriched with TICs) by thwarting the
expression of α6-integrin. In the current study, we found AF potently
inhibited Tamoxifen resistant (TamR) cell growth and blocked
Tamoxifen-mediated stimulation of TamR cell proliferation using the
Alamar Blue assay. qPCR analyses revealed α6-integrin expression was
significantly elevated in ER+ breast cancer cell models of acquired and
de novo Tamoxifen resistance relative to Tamoxifen sensitive cells. In
particular, AF decreased the expression of both A and B variants of
α6-integrin, the B variant being essential for TIC function. Western
blotting revealed AF reduced total α6-integrin expression in TamR cells.
Furthermore, we found that an anti-α6-integrin blocking antibody
sensitized TamR cells to the active Tamoxifen metabolite,
4-hydroxy-Tamoxifen, and enhanced the efficacy of AF in these cells. AF
also reduced the protein expression of p-Src, a downstream target of
α6-integrin that is linked to Tamoxifen resistance and decreased breast
cancer survival. In addition, miRNA sequencing of Tamoxifen sensitive and
TamR mammospheres revealed differential expression of several miRNAs.
Notably, miR-26a expression was down-regulated 2-fold in TamR
mammospheres compared to Tamoxifen sensitive mammospheres and AF restored
miR-26a expression 5-fold in TamR mammospheres. Using miRNA target
prediction algorithms TargetScan and PicTar, we found miR-26a binding
sites on the α6-integrin promoter. Taken together, our data suggest that
AF re-expresses tumor suppressor miR-26a and inhibits the
α6-integrin/Src signaling axis to reduce TIC capacity and counteract
Tamoxifen resistance.


