Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of human and mouse myeloid panels on the NanoString®
nCounter® Platform.


Introduction: The innate immune system profoundly influences cancer
development as well as its response to various therapeutic approaches.
Multiple myeloid cell lineages are central to the innate immune response
during cancer and have been found to regulate diverse cellular processes
encompassing immune suppression, angiogenesis, invasion, metastasis, and
drug resistance. NanoString has collaborated with the laboratory of Prof.
Lisa M. Coussens to develop research gene panels for quantitative and
qualitative analysis of various myeloid subsets by evaluating relative
enrichment of genes that mark recruitment and presence of select myeloid
subtypes (e.g., granulocytes, dendritic cells, monocytes, macrophages,
mast cells), their cell function, activation and effector status.

Methods: Gene content for human and murine versions of the myeloid panels
were developed from an in-house high content proteomic screen of
macrophage activation (unpublished), genomic analysis of human tumor
associated macrophages (unpublished), and data mining from publically
available datasets featuring myeloid transcriptomes. In total, 692 genes
were included in the human panel and 675 genes in the murine panel. The
panels were optimized to work across a range of sample types including
fresh frozen tissues, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples,
peripheral blood mononuclear cells and cell lysates.

Results: To validate the panel content, we are profiling myeloid
infiltrates in syngeneic murine models of mesothelioma and mammary
tumorigenesis by flow cytometric analysis and the nCounter myeloid
panels. Since the quality of the myeloid tumor response can skew toward
adaptive immune activating (Th1) or suppressive (Th2) phenotypes, we will
profile the same tumor samples with the NanoString PanCancer Immune
Profiling panel to evaluate T cell activation status by gene expression
and flow cytometry as well as global immune response. Finally, myeloid
complexity and T cell activation status in both primary tumor and lung
metastases will be evaluated by NanoString to assess regulation of
adaptive immune responses by the innate compartment in distinct tumor
microenvironments.

Conclusions: Upon validation with these assays, the myeloid gene panels
may provide insight into how the innate immune system regulates cancer
development and response to therapeutic pressure. Improved
characterization of the myeloid compartment may lead to greater insight
into the fundamental biology of tumor-immune interactions, novel
therapeutic strategies, and other applications.


