Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cigarette smoke induced upregulation of endothelin axis in the
initiation of pancreatic cancer.


Background: Cigarette smoke is an established risk factor for pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Smoke induced inflammation accelerates the
progression of PDAC in presence of constitutively active K-Ras mutation.
Endothelin (ET) axis comprising of endothelin converting enzymes (ECE-1,
ECE-2, and ECE-3), endothelin isoforms (ET-1, ET-2 and ET-3) and two
receptors A (ETAR) and B (ETBR), is linked to pathobiology of
pancreatitis and its components exhibit aberrant overexpression in PDAC.
However, the expression of ET-axis in the oncogene-associated early
Pancreatic Intraepithelial neoplastic (PanINs) lesions following exposure
to cigarette smoke is unknown. We hypothesize that smoke induced
alterations in the ET axis facilitate acinar to ductal metaplasia (ADM)
in presence of oncogenic K-Ras. Thus, we characterized the impact of
cigarette smoke exposure on ET axis components in the pancreas of mice
harboring mutant K-Ras.

Methods: Expression of ECE-1, ET-1, ETAR and ETBR was analyzed by IHC and
RT-PCR first in the murine model of preneoplastic lesions [KC model:
(Pdx1-Cre, KrasG12D)). To determine the changes in ET axis after smoke
exposure, wild type (WT) and KC mutant mice were exposed to cigarette
smoke for 20 weeks and expression was analyzed in the pancreas. The
impact of smoking on ET-axis was also studied on murine acinar and tumor
cell lines derived from KC mice (UN-KC6141) and KPC (Pdx1-Cre, p53
(R172H) KrasG12D) mice (UN-KPC-961) by western blot and RT-PCR analysis.

Results: In contrast to the normal ducts, the expression of ECE-1, ET-1,
ETAR and ETBR was upregulated in the early PaNIN lesions (20-30 weeks).
In the advanced lesions (50 weeks), significant overexpression of all
four molecules was noticeable in the tumor cells and stromal compartment.
Smoke exposure resulted in significant increase in the transcripts of
ET-1, ETAR and ETBR (p values = 0.04, 0.03 and 0.01 respectively) in the
KC mice while the increase in WT mice was not significant. The changes in
the expression were also corroborated by tissue IHC. Expression of ET
axis components was predominantly seen in the islet cells in WT mice,
while low immunoreactivity was observed in the acinar compartment. Smoke
exposure of KC mice resulted in accelerated progression of PanIN lesions
along with concomitant increase in the expression of ET axis components
both in the ductal and stromal cells. In vitro exposure of cigarette
smoke extract (CSE) to UN-KC6141 and UN-KPC-961 cells for 24 hours
elicited a dose dependent upregulation of ECE 1 and ET-1.

Conclusions: In presence of mutated KrasG12D, smoking-mediated
inflammatory insult promotes PanIN progression and tumorigenesis. The
sustained increase and activation of ET axis with increasing dysplasia in
the ductal compartment during this progression in KC mice and its further
upregulation following smoke exposure suggests its possible role in
promoting inflammation-associated pancreatic tumor progression.


