Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AGEN1884, an IgG1 anti-CTLA-4 antibody, combines effectively with
PD-1 blockade in primary human T cell assays and in a non-human primate
pharmacodynamic (PD) model.


Cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) and programmed cell
death protein 1 (PD-1) play important non-redundant roles in negatively
regulating T cell immune responses. Therapeutic blockade of CTLA-4 or
PD-1 pathways has been demonstrated to enhance T cell reactivity to
tumor-specific antigens, translating to a significant improvement in
overall survival. This anti-tumor effect can be further augmented when
PD-1 and CTLA-4 antagonist antibodies are co-administered. The
therapeutic impact of this combination is exemplified by the approval of
this combination for advanced melanoma, as well as clinical benefit of
the combination observed in NSCLC, mRCC, and most recently, mUC.
AGEN1884, a human IgG1 antibody directed against CTLA-4, potently
inhibits CTLA-4 binding to CD80 and CD86, resulting in enhanced T cell
responsiveness in vitro, as well as in a vaccination model in non-human
primates. A Phase 1 clinical study (NCT02694822) is currently ongoing to
evaluate the safety and pharmacokinetic (PK)/pharmacodynamic (PD)
relationships in patients with advanced solid tumors. AGEN2034 is a human
IgG4 antibody that binds selectively to PD-1 with high affinity and
potentiates T cell responsiveness via the blockade of PD-L1 and PD-L2
binding to PD-1. Here we evaluated the pharmacologic effect of combining
AGEN1884 with AGEN2034, and other molecules targeting the PD-1/PD-L1
pathway, on primary human T cell immune responses. AGEN1884 combined
effectively with AGEN2034, and other antibodies targeting the PD1/PD-L1
pathway, to promote superior T cell immune responses compared to
monotherapies. Consistent with these in vitro findings, the
co-administration of AGEN1884 with an anti-PD-1 antibody in cynomolgus
monkeys (Macaca fascicularis) induced a dynamic PD effect, including a
proliferative T cell response in peripheral blood, as compared to animals
receiving either antibody alone. Finally, co-administration of an
anti-mouse CTLA-4 antibody together with Agenus’ tumor-specific
neo-epitope-based vaccine (AutoSynVax™) in mice induced effective
amplification of vaccine-driven T cell responses, compared to animals
that received the vaccine alone. These data further exemplify the
versatility of harnessing antibody-mediated CTLA-4 blockade to influence
apical events involved in T cell priming by antigen presenting cells.
Taken together, these in vitro and in vivo findings demonstrate that the
combination of AGEN1884 with PD-1 pathway blockade or with
neo-epitope-based vaccines has the potential to provide therapeutic
activity that is superior to that of either checkpoint- or vaccine-based
monotherapies.


