Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simple and easy monitoring of tube formation and migration assays
with the CytoSMARTTM Live Cell Imaging System.


Movement of cells plays a critical role in the development of cancer.
Analyzing the motility of cells in appropriate cell culture models is
therefore an important tool for cancer researchers. Live cell imaging is
particularly well suited to capture dynamic processes in cell culture.

The CytoSMART™ Device is an easy-to-use, small and affordable live cell
monitoring system suitable for the label-free analysis of cell motility
within a standard cell culture incubator. Label-free approaches offer the
benefit of cell analysis without potential cytotoxic or other
side-effects of the used markers or dyes on the cells. This presentation
shows the suitability of the CytoSMART™ Device for the analysis of
different cancer-relevant assays.

The formation of new blood vessels is required to ensure sufficient
nutrient and oxygen supply and to allow solid tumors to grow beyond a
certain size. This process can be mimicked in cell culture models in
so-called tube formation assays. In this study, Human Umbilical Vein
Endothelial Cells (HUVEC) were seeded on Engelbreth-Holm Swarm Sarcoma
derived Basement Membrane Extract (BME). The resulting formation of
endothelial tubes was monitored with the CytoSMART™ Device.
Subsequently, the average length of the formed tubes as well as the
number of closed tube circles was quantitatively determined. In addition,
the impact of Suramin on tube formation was evaluated as an example for a
tube formation inhibiting compound.

The migration of cancer cells is also required for the growth and in
particular the metastasis of tumors. In a first example, the closure of a
so-called wound or scratch in a confluent monolayer of cancer cells was
monitored with the CytoSMART™ Device. Determining the migration speed
of the cells by measuring the speed of wound closure is a simple assay to
determine the migration potential of cancer cells. Modifying the cancer
cells, e.g. by knocking down specific genes with siRNA, can help to
identify genes that play a role in cell migration. Compounds that are
expected to reduce cell motility and therefore reduce the metastasis
potential of cancer cells can be easily tested.

In a second example, the invasion of cancer cells into a
three-dimensional (3D) matrix was analyzed. Tumor cells were embedded in
a cancer-relevant matrix and their invasion into the 3D matrix was
documented with the CytoSMART™ Device. While this type of model is
slightly more difficult in set-up and analysis compared to simple scratch
assays, it may reflect better the in vivo situation where solid tumors
develop within three-dimensional tissues. The images captured with the
CytoSMART™ System were quantitatively analyzed using appropriate
software.

Overall, the CytoSMART™ System is an easy-to-use, small and affordable
live cell imaging system suitable for the label-free analysis of
different cancer-relevant assays.


