Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of apoptosis by anti-CD20 antibodies requires the
induction of EGR-1 and calcium influx.


Background: Anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are an essential
component of the treatment of patients with CD20-positive non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Anti-CD20 mAbs mediate
their antitumor effects by activating the immune system or by direct
apoptotic signaling in target cells. In a previous preclinical study, we
have shown that treatment of B-lymphoma cell lines with anti-CD20 mAbs,
rituximab and obinutuzumab, resulted in upregulated expression of the
transcription factor early growth factor -1 (EGR-1) (Dalle et al. 2011).
However, the role of EGR-1 in response to passive immunotherapies has not
been explored so far. Furthermore, EGR-1 has been described as a calcium
(Ca2+) regulated transcription factor and CD20 is hypothesized to
regulate transmembrane Ca2+ flux. In this study we aim to assess the role
of EGR-1 and Ca2+ flux in the cytotoxic activity of anti-CD20 mAbs.

Methods: EGR-1 modulation and cell death induction by anti-CD20 mAbs
rituximab and obinutuzumab were investigated in cells expressing
endogenous and exogenous CD20. The cytotoxic effect of anti-CD20 mAbs was
evaluated in SCID mice and in B-lymphoma cell lines overexpressing EGR-1
or knocked down for EGR-1. The impact of anti-CD20 mAbs on Ca2+ flux was
investigated by flow cytometry using Indo-1 AM stained cells. Ca2+
channel blocker agent nifedipine was used to investigate the role of Ca2+
flux on obinutuzumab efficacy.

Results: EGR1 expression is rapidly upregulated in CD20+ cells following
rituximab and obinutuzumab exposure. Decreasing EGR-1 expression by shRNA
abolished the direct cytotoxic effect of obinutuzumab both in vitro and
in vivo, indicating that EGR-1 is required for CD20-mediated apoptosis.
Additionally, the overexpression of EGR-1 resulted in enhanced cytotoxic
activity of obinutuzumab both in vitro and in vivo. Rescuing EGR-1
expression in EGR-1 knocked-down cells restored sensitivity to
obinutuzumab. Moreover, our results indicate that both rituximab and
obinutuzumab could induce calcium influx in the presence of suboptimal
concentrations of ionomycin. Blocking Ca2+ flux with the calcium channel
blocker nifedipine or the Ca2+ chelating agent EGTA abolished EGR-1
induction by anti-CD20 mAbs. In vivo, nifedipine treatment interfered
with obinutuzumab antitumor activity against established Granta (a human
mantle cell lymphoma line) xenografts in SCID mice.

Conclusion: EGR-1 plays a major role in the direct cytotoxic activity of
anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies and should be evaluated as a new
biomarker to predict response to anti-CD20 treatment. Our data also show
that calcium channel blockers interfere with the antitumor activity of
obinutuzumab in preclinical models.


