Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methionine restriction increases macrophage tumoricidal activity
and significantly inhibits prostate cancer growth.


Background: Our previous work showed a significant reduction of tumor
growth, macrophage infiltration, circulating IGF-1, and mTOR activation
with low protein diet in a patient derived xenograft model of prostate
cancer. The evolutionarily conserved, nutrient sensing, mTOR pathway
plays a central role in both development of advanced stage prostate
cancer and immune responsiveness. This study presents novel data on the
impact of dietary protein modification on the function of the host immune
system in response to prostate cancer and immunotherapy.

Methods: Our In vitro studies utilized bone marrow or tumor derived
(RP-B6 Myc) macrophages. In vivo studies utilized the recently
characterized RP-B6 Myc model. Mice were fed ad libitum control or
methionine restricted diets for four weeks prior to S.C. implantation
with ~1mm2 tumor pieces. Treatment of survivin peptide vaccine (1mg/ml
S.C. 1 X week) and anti-PD-1 (20mg/kg I.P. 2 X week) began at ~50mm2
tumor size. Tumor volumes were blindly recorded 2 X week. End point
analyses include: tumor weight, flow cytometric analysis, proteomic
profiler analyses, and microbiome analyses from each diet and treatment
group.

Results: We show here that while methionine restriction (MR) has little
impact on our RP-B6 Myc prostate cancer cell line, it does yield a
significant alteration in both the polarization and function of M1 and M2
macrophages. In the in vitro MR conditions, we observed significantly
enhanced polarization of M1 macrophages and reduced polarization of M2
macrophages. Functional analysis revealed increased tumoricidal activity
of both M1, ‘antitumor’, and M2, ‘pro-tumor,’ macrophages
suggesting a flip in M2 function from tumor-promoting to tumoricidal.
Further analysis of the released cytokines in MR media conditions yielded
significant increase of antitumor cytokines & chemokines, such as IL-12,
IL-27, CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL11, CCL2, CCL4, and TNF-alpha, a double-edged
sword which in our system correlates with decreased cancer cell viability
upon co-culture with amino acid restricted M1 and M2 macrophages. Our
preliminary results show dietary MR yielding a significant inhibition of
prostate cancer growth in the RP-B6-Myc model and our ongoing study with
survivin peptide vaccine and anti-PD-1 immunotherapies will be available
to present in the conference.

Conclusions: Our data suggest that restricting methionine is sufficient
to alter both the polarization and tumoricidal function of macrophages.
Our preliminarily results show that restricted dietary methionine is able
to inhibit prostate cancer growth, modify the host immune response and
better inhibit prostate cancer growth alone or in combination with
immunotherapy. These results provide a strong basis to consider diet
restriction as a means to limit cancer growth targeting tumor immune
system and potentially to enhance cancer patient responses to
immunotherapy.


