Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of xCT overexpression with RTKI resistance and
metastases in clear cell renal cell carcinoma.


Background: Cystine/glutamate exchanger xCT is a catalytic component of
system xc- involved in transport of ‘conditionally indispensable’
amino acid cystine. Cystine transport is a rate limiting step for the
synthesis of glutathione, a major intracellular redox regulator.
Recently, we and other groups reported the overexpression of xCT and its
association with drug resistance in several human cancers including
bladder, glioma, breast, and colon. There are no studies to show the xCT
expression in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) and its association
with tyrosine kinase inhibitors resistance and metastasis. In the current
study we have evaluated xCT expression in human ccRCC tumors arranged in
tissue microarray (TMA) and determined its role in receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (RTKI) resistance and metastases using the patient
derived tumor xenografts (PDX) models and TKI resistance ccRCC cells.

Methods: Human Renal cell carcinoma tumor nephrectomy specimens arranged
in tissue microarray (TMA) were used to determine xCT expression by
immunohistochemistry. Patient derived tumor xenografts (PDX) of primary,
metastasis, and sunitinib resistance were used to determine the role of
xCT in RCC. To understand the molecular alterations associated with RTKI
resistance, we have generated sunitinib resistance 786 OR ccRCC cells and
performed RNAseq analysis. To determine the xCT inhibition effect on
ccRCC tumor metastases, sulfasalazine, an inhibitor of xCT was used to
treat metastatic ccRCC tumor xenografts transplanted in SCID mice.

Results: Immunohistochemical evaluation of xCT in RCC TMA revealed that
70 % (19 out of 27) of the tumors express different levels of xCT.
Association with tumor response to RTKI will be presented. RTKI less
responsive PDX RP-R-02 was developed using the dose escalation treatment
strategy and was found to have an upregulation of xCT when the tumors
become less responsive to sunitinib. RNAseq analysis revealed
differential gene expression of various pathway genes including lysosome
biogenesis and function such as SLC7A11, HPS4, HPS5, CTSB, IFI30, PPT1,
SCPEP1, TPP1, ATP6AP1L, MCOLN1, PRKAG2, and VPS18 in sunitinib resistant
786 OR cells compared to parental cells supports the role of lysosomes
function in RTKI drug resistance. Furthermore, xCT inhibitor
sulfasalazine treatment significantly decreased the metastasis lung
nodules of RP-R-02LM in SCID mice demonstrated the xCT role in RCC tumor
metastasis.

Conclusions: We found preliminary evidence that overexpression of xCT may
be associated with RTKI resistance in ccRCC. These results suggest that
targeting the xCT in ccRCC may reverse the resistance and enhance the
efficacy of RTKI. Additional studies using larger numbers of ccRCC tumors
are required to identify xCT as a potential predictive biomarker for
response/resistance to RTKI in ccRCC patients.


