Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The oncometabolite fumarate prevents hypoxia-induced ER stress by
enhancing the pentose phosphate pathway.


Cancer cells co-opt mechanisms of adaptation to hypoxia to minimize
energy expenditure and halt proliferation thereby increasing hypoxic
tolerance, a major factor contributing to chemo- and radioresistance in
patients. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) kinase PERK is one of the three
signaling transducers of the unfolded protein response (UPR) that
inhibits mRNA translation via eIF2α phosphorylation to alleviate
hypoxia-induced ER stress. We have previously shown that accumulation of
fumarate, resulting from loss-of-function (LOF) of the mitochondrial
enzyme fumarate hydratase (FH), augments the antioxidant capacity of
hypoxic cancer cells through upregulation of the pentose phosphate
pathway (PPP). Here, we report for the first time that the
fumarate-dependent increase of antioxidants generated by the PPP prevents
hypoxic activation of the PERK→eIF2α axis enabling protein synthesis
and proliferation leading to an impairment of hypoxic tolerance.

HeLa (cervix), HCT-116 and LS174T (colon) adenocarcinoma cells were
transfected with lentiviral vectors encoding for shRNAs targeting FH.
Immunoblot assays showed that FH LOF impaired PERK activity under hypoxia
thus inactivating eIF2α. Moreover, the ability of fumarate to prevent
PERK activation was specific to hypoxia since fumarate did not affect the
pharmacological activation of the UPR by thapsigargin, DTT or
tunicamycin. A comprehensive analysis utilizing a RT-qPCR array to
profile the mRNA expression of 84 UPR genes, showed that FH LOF inhibited
the UPR in HCT-116 cells. A similar response was observed in
patient-derived UOK262 kidney cancer cells whereby bi-allelic FH
mutations resulted in downregulation of 72% of the UPR genes whereas FH
re-introduction restored UPR signaling. We employed LS174T mucinous
adenocarcinoma cells as a model to assess protein synthesis. Mucin
synthesis was not affected in hypoxic FH deficient cells whereas it was
abrogated in wild-type cells. Consistent with these results, FH LOF
increased 3D spheroid growth and decreased clonogenic potential in
HCT-116 and HeLa cells. Pharmacological inhibition of the PPP by
6-aminonicotinamide activated the PERK→eIF2α axis in FH silenced cells
thereby suggesting that PPP activation by fumarate is implicated in PERK
inhibition. RNAseq data analysis in melanoma, prostate, colon, breast,
lung and renal cancers from TCGA cohorts shows a negative correlation
between PERK and the PPP enzyme PGLS suggesting that the mechanism hereby
delineated occurs in cancer patients.

In conclusion, we show that fumarate impairs PERK→eIF2α UPR signaling
in hypoxic cancer cells. Clinical and molecular data show that UPR
activation is one of the mechanisms responsible for chemo- and
radioresistance in hypoxic tumors. This study suggests that fumarate
accumulation (either through extrinsic or FH LOF) represents a novel
approach to target hypoxic cancer cells and improve patient prognosis.


