Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining forces: Synergy of erlotinib and crizotinib in a
wild-type squamous non-small cell lung cancer cell line.


Oncogenic drivers are often overexpressed in adenocarcinoma non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, so this tumor type is often sensitive
to targeted therapies. Sensitizing mutations in the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) are good predictive biomarkers for response to
EGFR-small molecule inhibitors, eg erlotinib. Amplification or exon 14
skipping of cMET are good biomarkers for cMET-small molecule inhibitors,
eg crizotinib. In other subtypes of NSCLC, eg squamous, targeted therapy
is not considered to be active.

We tested the combination of erlotinib and crizotinib on a panel of
squamous NSCLC cell lines that were wild-type for both EGFR and cMET. The
effect of this drug combination was tested with different assays. The
sulforhodamine B-assay was used to determine growth inhibition and
combination indexes (CI) were calculated with the method of Chou&Talalay.
A CIWe tested the combination of erlotinib and crizotinib on a panel of
squamous NSCLC cell lines that were wild-type for both EGFR and cMET. The
effect of this drug combination was tested with different assays. The
sulforhodamine B-assay was used to determine growth inhibition and
combination indexes (CI) were calculated with the method of Chou&Talalay.
A CI< 0.8 was synergistic, 0.8We tested the combination of erlotinib and
crizotinib on a panel of squamous NSCLC cell lines that were wild-type
for both EGFR and cMET. The effect of this drug combination was tested
with different assays. The sulforhodamine B-assay was used to determine
growth inhibition and combination indexes (CI) were calculated with the
method of Chou&Talalay. A CI< 0.8 was synergistic, 0.8<CI1.2 was
antagonistic. With flow cytometry the cell cycle was studied. With the
wound-healing assay we determined the effect on cell migration. A 3D
spheroid assay was performed to determine the effect of limited nutrient
availability and hypoxia. Protein phosphorylation was studied with a
pathscan array and phospho-specific western blotting.

The LUDLU cell line gave a synergistic CI of 0.39±0.07, whereas the
Calu1 (CI = 0.81±0.04), H520 (CI = 0.87±0.06) and SKMES1 (CI =
0.81±0.02) were additive and the H1703 cell line (CI = 1.20±0.15) was
antagonistic. Cell cycle analysis revealed that erlotinib monotherapy
caused a G1 phase arrest (38 to 76%) and crizotinib caused a G2/M (13 to
64%) phase arrest. In cells treated with the combination, the effect of
crizotinib was dominant (13 to 52%). In the wound-healing assay the LUDLU
cells were not migratory. The pathscan revealed a decrease in the
phosphorylation of pERK1/2 (Thr202/204), pPRAS40 (Thr246) and pGSK3β
(Ser9). Western blotting showed that the levels of pPRAS40 were decreased
in the LUDLU cells after treatment with erlotinib or crizotinib, and
almost gone when treated with the combination. In the SKMES1 cells only
the combination decreased pPRAS40. H1703 cells showed no change in
pPRAS40.

These changes in phosphorylation make us hypothesize that Her3 and
PI3K/Akt signaling may be important in the interaction of both drugs.
Her3 is a promiscuous receptor that is able to heterodimerize with EGFR
and cMET. When blocking one of these receptors, Her3 is still able to
continue downstream PI3K/Akt signaling. When both EGFR and cMET are
blocked, Her3 and PI3K/Akt signaling is inhibited, leading to synergy.
The expression of total-Her3 was lowest in the antagonistic cell line.
The combination of both inhibitors lead to a complete inhibition of pHer3
(Tyr1289).

In conclusion: Blocking both EGFR and cMET signaling causes inhibition of
Her3 downstream signaling through PI3K/Akt, leading to synergy in
wild-type squamous NSCLC cells.


