Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CRISPR-Cas9 and siRNA screening in primary human immune cells.


A major focus in immuno-oncology research is finding new immuno-oncology
targets, including those that alter the character and frequency of
T-cell-mediated anti-tumour responses. Screens using CRISPR (Clustered
Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats)-Cas9-mediated genome
editing seem well placed to identify new targets. However, although
CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing works well in primary T cells using
electroporation, use of a lentivirus one vector system has proved
challenging in primary T cells compared with cancer cell lines. We have
used several different approaches to identify the most useful method for
transduction of primary human T cells with CRISPR components.
Electroporation of sgRNAs and mRNA encoding Cas9 into proliferating T
cells efficiently generate T cells with specific gene knock-outs or
knock-ins, with targeting rates of around 37% for gene knockout. Thus,
primary T cells are amenable to CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing, and the
capacity to rapidly modify loci enables generation of primary T cell
models suitable for comprehending the function of modified
receptor-ligand pairs involved in an immune checkpoint response. Our
pooled sgRNA-Cas9 screens in cancer cell lines have used our in-house
sgRNA libraries, which include a modified tracrRNA component improving
Cas9 affinity and subsequently the performance of a typical sgRNA for
promoting gene editing. However, use of the same approach in primary T
cells has not resulted in efficient transduction of the library.
Specifically, isolated CD3+ T cells stimulated in vitro with anti-CD3 and
anti-CD28 antibodies in the presence of recombinant IL-2 resulted in no
expression or low level expression of GFP after cells were transduced
with a one vector CRISPR-Cas9 sgRNA library. Our experiments indicate, in
line with published data, that T cells can be transduced effectively with
lentivirus, thus we are examining the use of a two vector CRISPR-Cas9
system and the use of CRISPRi to idealise CRISPR screening in primary T
cells. We are also carrying out target identification and validation in
myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs). We are using an siRNA approach
in these cells, which are generated by PBMC co-culture with cancer cell
lines for 7 days, or by culture in the presence of recombinant GM-CSF and
IL-6 for 7 days. Our initial data indicate that these MDSCs can
effectively suppress autologous, as well as allogeneic, CD8 T cell
proliferation mediated by anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 stimulation and that
siRNA knockdown is effective in MDSCs. We will use our druggable genome
plus arrayed siRNA library to identify targets that when knocked down
inhibit the capacity of MDSCs to suppress T cell proliferation. We
anticipate that these data will be useful in identifying new targets that
are involved in regulating an immune response to tumour development and
progression.


