Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Thailand initiative in genomics and expression research in
liver cancer: Race related common molecular subtypes among Asian
hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma identified by integrated
genomics.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC)
are two distinct histological liver cancers. They are clinically and
biologically heterogeneous and highly resistant to treatment, making
liver cancer the second most lethal malignancy in the world. In Thailand,
liver cancer represents the primary cause of cancer-related death and is
a major health problem. While HBV and HCV are major etiological factors
for HCC globally, liver fluke infection (O. viverrini) is a major
etiological factor for ICC in Thailand, especially in north-eastern
Thailand where O. viverrini is endemic and approximately 70% of liver
cancers are ICC. These unique risk factor patterns provide an opportunity
to study cancer heterogeneity and unique liver tumor biology. The
Thailand Initiative in Genomics and Expression Research for Liver Cancer
(TIGER-LC) consortium was established to identify genomic and expression
factors that may modify HCC and ICC susceptibility and progression. Here,
we determined molecular subtypes and features of HCC and ICC through
systems integration of genomic, transcriptomic and metabolic profiles.

We performed genome wide profiling of 398 surgical specimens derived from
199 Thai liver cancer patients. We employed the Affymetrix Human
Transcriptome Array 2.0, the Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0,
Metabolon's DiscoveryHD4 platform and Exome Sequencing to examine
transcriptome profiles, somatic copy number alterations (SCNA), cancer
metabolic profiles and mutation patterns, respectively. The results were
validated in 847 independent Asian or Caucasian HCC or ICC cases.

Transcriptomic analyses revealed that Thai HCC consisted of 3 stable
subgroups (C1-C3), while Thai ICC contained 4 stable subgroups (C1-C4).
Interestingly, HCC-C1 and ICC-C1 subtypes shared a similar gene
expression matrix, as did HCC-C2 and ICC-C2, which correlated with
patient survival. These prognostic subtypes were validated in independent
Asian HCC and ICC cohorts, but not in Caucasian patients, and were
associated with tumor biology rather than etiology. GSEA revealed that
the C1 subtype is enriched for mitotic checkpoint anomalies, while the C2
subtype is related to cytokine and chemokine signaling. We found that the
C1 subtype encompassed a higher degree of SCNA when compared to the C2
subtype, suggesting an association with a genomic instability phenotype.
Further analysis showed that the C2 subtype is linked to an increased
body mass index, inflammatory responses and unique tumor metabolic
activities.

HCC and ICC from Asian populations, while clinically treated as separate
entities, share common subtypes with similar actionable drivers which can
be targeted to improve precision therapy.


