Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A modulator of multidrug resistance protein 1 selectively depletes
glutathione and synergizes with L-buthionine sulfoximine to sensitize
MRP1-expressing cancer cells to chemotherapy.


Multidrug resistance protein 1 (MRP1) is frequently overexpressed in
tumors where it effluxes chemotherapeutic agents, protecting tumor cells
from chemotherapy. This is clearly illustrated in the pediatric solid
tumor neuroblastoma, where MRP1 expression is highly prognostic of
clinical outcome (1,2) and contributes to chemoresistance in mouse models
(3). MRP1 also effluxes low levels of glutathione (GSH), a crucial
intracellular antioxidant necessary to avoid damage from the reactive
oxygen species induced by radiotherapy and chemotherapy and an important
component of both Phase II and Phase III drug metabolism. Depletion of
GSH in cancer cells would be of therapeutic value, however the GSH
synthesis inhibitor L-buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) has only limited
selectivity for tumor over normal cells. We have identified a novel MRP1
inhibitor,
7-methyl-5-phenyl-2-[(4-phenyl-1-piperazinyl)carbonyl]pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimi
dine, that blocks MRP1-mediated drug efflux while greatly enhancing MRP1-
mediated GSH efflux and are investigating the utility of this
dual-function inhibitor for the treatment of MRP1-overexpressing cancers.

Methods: Cells expressing high levels of MRP1 were treated with MRP1 drug
substrates in combination with MRP1 inhibitors. Viability was assessed by
short-term cytotoxicity or clonogenic assays and GSH levels determined by
glutathione recycling assay.

Results: Our MRP1 modulator depleted intracellular GSH in an
MRP1-dependent manner and sensitized MRP1-expressing human neuroblastoma,
lung and ovarian cancer cell to chemotherapeutics. This effect was highly
synergistic with BSO, both in depleting GSH (CIResults: Our MRP1
modulator depleted intracellular GSH in an MRP1-dependent manner and
sensitized MRP1-expressing human neuroblastoma, lung and ovarian cancer
cell to chemotherapeutics. This effect was highly synergistic with BSO,
both in depleting GSH (CI<0.36, pResults: Our MRP1 modulator depleted
intracellular GSH in an MRP1-dependent manner and sensitized
MRP1-expressing human neuroblastoma, lung and ovarian cancer cell to
chemotherapeutics. This effect was highly synergistic with BSO, both in
depleting GSH (CI<0.36, p<0.05) and abolishing colony formation
(CIResults: Our MRP1 modulator depleted intracellular GSH in an
MRP1-dependent manner and sensitized MRP1-expressing human neuroblastoma,
lung and ovarian cancer cell to chemotherapeutics. This effect was highly
synergistic with BSO, both in depleting GSH (CI<0.36, p<0.05) and
abolishing colony formation (CI<0.01, pResults: Our MRP1 modulator
depleted intracellular GSH in an MRP1-dependent manner and sensitized
MRP1-expressing human neuroblastoma, lung and ovarian cancer cell to
chemotherapeutics. This effect was highly synergistic with BSO, both in
depleting GSH (CI<0.36, p<0.05) and abolishing colony formation (CI<0.01,
p<0.05).

Conclusion: Our MRP1 modulator blocks MRP1- mediated drug efflux while
greatly enhancing MRP1- mediated GSH efflux in MRP1 expressing cells,
potentially providing an increased therapeutic window for
chemotherapeutics in MRP1- overexpressing cancers. Synergy with BSO could
widen the range of drugs and cancers that this could be beneficial for.

References 1. Haber, M., et al., (2006) J.Clin Oncol 24, 1546-1553 2.
Norris, M. D., et al., (1996) New Engl J Med 334, 231-238 3. Burkhart, C.
A., et al., (2009) Cancer Res 69, 6573-6580


