Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: eFT508, a potent and highly selective inhibitor of MNK1/2
regulates immune checkpoint and cytokine expression promoting anti-tumor
immunity.


Dysregulated translation of messenger RNA (mRNA) plays a role in the
pathogenesis of multiple solid tumors and hematological malignancies.
MNK1 and MNK2 integrate signals from several oncogenic and immune
signaling pathways (including RAS, Toll-like receptors and T cell
receptor) by phosphorylating eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) and
other key effector proteins including hnRNPA1 and PSF. Phosphorylation of
these RNA-binding proteins by MNK1 and MNK2 selectively regulates the
stability and translation of a subset of cellular mRNA that control
tumor/stromal cell signaling, the tumor microenvironment and immune cell
function. eFT508 is a potent and highly selective inhibitor of both MNK1
and MNK2. Ribosome profiling has demonstrated that inhibition of MNK1 and
MNK2 by eFT508 selectively regulates the translational efficiency and
mRNA stability of a subset of genes that include inflammatory
cytokines/chemokines, regulators of stress response, and effectors of
anti-tumor immune response. Given the importance of MAPK signaling and
translational control to immune cell activation and differentiation, the
immunological effect of eFT508 was further evaluated in both normal human
immune cells in vitro and immunocompetent syngeneic cancer models in
vivo. eFT508 treatment of normal donor T cells has no deleterious effect
on αCD3/αCD28 stimulated IL-2 production, T cell proliferation or T
cell viability. However, eFT508 selectively down regulates the induction
of IL-10 and specific immune checkpoint receptors, including PD-1 and
LAG3. Further evaluation of the mechanism of translational regulation has
shown LAG3 mRNA contains specific sequence elements in the
5’-untranslated region (UTR) that confer sensitivity to eFT508. In
addition, IL-10 mRNA is destabilized upon treatment with eFT508 leading
to significant inhibition of IL-10 production in activated T cells.
Furthermore, eFT508 treatment results in upregulation of MHC class II
molecules on tumor cells, macrophage and dendritic cells through an
IL-10/MARCH1 dependent mechanism. The in vivo antitumor effect of eFT508
was assessed in the CT26 BALB/C syngeneic tumor model. CT26 mouse tumor
cell proliferation and survival are insensitive to eFT508 in vitro. In
vivo, daily oral treatment with 1 mg/kg eFT508 results in significant
anti-tumor activity, modulation of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes and
establishment of immune memory. In addition, combination of eFT508 with
either anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 monoclonal antibodies results in marked
efficacy, significantly increasing the percentage of responder animals.
eFT508 is currently under evaluation in two phase I/II clinical trials
for patients with advanced solid tumors and patients with advanced
lymphoma respectively. These findings support further clinical evaluation
of eFT508 in combination with checkpoint blockade.


