Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual role of p120ctn in cancer: epithelial vs mesenchymal.


Neuroblastoma, a paediatric cancer, accounts for 15% of childhood cancer
mortality. Even though neuroblastoma is an aggressive cancer, the exact
mechanisms by which the cells resist treatment is poorly understood.
Here, we hypothesise that neuroblastoma cells have high expression of
mesenchymal markers and hence could attribute to the aggressive
phenotype. P120ctn is downregulated in epithelial cancers and is known to
play a major role in EMT and aggressiveness. In this study,
immunohistochemical staining of neuroblastoma patient tissues suggested
that p120ctn is highly abundant. Hence, the role of p120ctn and N-Myc in
neuroblastoma aggressiveness was investigated by using RNA interference.
Amplification of N-Myc oncogene occurs in 20% of neuroblastoma patients
and is considered high risk as it correlates with aggressiveness and poor
prognosis. Interestingly, knockdown of p120ctn down regulated N-Myc both
at mRNA and protein levels. Upon knockdown of p120ctn and N-Myc, the
proliferation, invasion and migration of neuroblastoma cells were
significantly reduced. Quantitative proteomic and qPCR analysis of the
wild type and knockdown cells revealed that p120ctn knockdown cells
underwent mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition. Confocal microscopy and
Western blotting analysis of subcellular fractionation showed nuclear
accumulation of β-catenin upon p120ctn knockdown. Once in the nucleus,
β-catenin activated Wnt signalling pathway and up regulated Wnt target
genes including C-Myc. Interestingly, down regulation of p120ctn
sensitised the neuroblastoma cells to doxorubicin. Currently, there is no
published study that explores the role of p120ctn in neuroblastoma.
However, these findings are contradictory to scientific literature in the
context of the functional role of p120ctn in epithelial cancer. Hence to
validate our findings, we established knockdown of p120ctn in epithelial
colorectal cancer cells. Consistent with the literature, knockdown of
p120ctn induced EMT, proliferation and migration. These results suggest
that the role of p120ctn is cell type dependent. Overall, the findings
from this study suggest that p120ctn plays a pivotal role in progression
of neuroblastoma.


