Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Columbia University’s Center for Cancer Systems Therapeutics
(CaST) 2017 Scholars Program: A synergistic partnership with students
from Brooklyn College, CUNY.


The Cancer Systems Therapeutics (CaST) Outreach helps foster community
building throughout the NCI Cancer Systems Biology Consortium (CSBC). The
overall mission of the CaST Outreach Core is to advance progress in
cancer systems biology by tapping into and making connections across
research talent at all stages of educational and professional attainment.
A unique component is our partnership with motivated undergraduate,
post-baccalaureate, and graduate students from Brooklyn College of the
City University of New York (CUNY). These students comprise the first
cohort of the CaST Scholars Program and are immersed in the cutting-edge
biological and biomedical science underlying Cancer Systems Biology. In
subsequent years, CaST Outreach will partner with students from other
CUNY Senior Colleges while continuing interactions with our Brooklyn
College Scholars. This integrative approach will create a network of CaST
Scholars throughout the CUNY system. Because Systems Biology is highly
interdisciplinary, participants in the program can come from many
backgrounds, including biology, computer science, physics, chemistry,
genomics, engineering, and other fields.

The program has no fixed curriculum and each of nine Brooklyn College
students has developed an individualized CSBC educational plan tailored
to their interests. The CaST Scholars Program opportunities include 1)
tuition-free attendance at a master’s level Systems Biology course
taught by a CaST investigator and offered through Columbia University’s
School of Professional Studies; 2) supported attendance at the AACR
annual meeting; 3) monthly informal discussion meetings with CaST
investigators; 4) weekly formal tutorials in the design and applications
of CaST computational algorithms; 5) research internships with CaST
investigators; 6) participation in a wide-range of Center activities; 7)
a scholarship to support participation; and 8) ongoing mentorship from
CaST investigators.

This poster provides summaries of the collaborative, synergistic
experiences and achievements of each Scholar and of the group as a whole.
The CaST Scholars Program offers a unique opportunity for early-stage
scientists to learn how Systems Biology is transforming cancer research
and precision medicine at Columbia University Medical Center. Regardless
of their chosen professional path, CaST Scholars will obtain a solid
foundation in the methods and potential of Cancer Systems Biology.


