Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-dimensional flow cytometric immune profiling of malignant
gliomas.


INTRODUCTION:

Immune therapy is emerging as a treatment modality for patients with
solid tumors including intracranial metastases. Similar immune strategies
are being tested in patients with malignant gliomas; diseases with
uniformly poor prognosis. Whereas, recent work has demonstrated a
correlation between the immune landscape of solid tumors and response to
immune therapy, the immunologic landscape of CNS tumors has not been
thoroughly defined. To capture the phenotypic diversity of immune cells
in CNS tumors, we developed an 18-color flow cytometry panel and applied
it to mononuclear cells isolated from acutely resected brain tumor,
matched patient blood, and healthy donor blood specimens.

METHODS:

Linear discrimination analysis (LDA) and T-distributed stochastic
neighbor embedding (tSNE) dimensionality reduction techniques were used
to analyze flow cytometry data acquired from brain tumor, patient-matched
peripheral blood, and healthy donor peripheral blood specimens.

RESULTS:

LDA of 13 parameters collected by flow cytometry revealed that CD8
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) differed notably from peripheral
blood. CTLA-4 (TILs) and CD3 (peripheral blood) provided the greatest
degree of separation. Using the tSNE algorithm to analyze the same 13
parameters on CD8 T cells, we rapidly reduced 78 potential parameter
combinations by creating a clustering pattern representing lymphocytes
with similar staining patterns. Lymphocyte clusters created from TILs
were easily distinguished from clusters enriched in peripheral blood.
Analysis of TIL clusters identified markers consistent with
activated/memory populations as well as elevated levels of CTLA-4, LAG-3,
and PD-1 relative to peripheral blood; due to a higher percentage of
cells expressing these markers rather than increased expression on
individual cells. Identifying individual specimen points as well as
clusters of specimens (e.g. patients with the same tumor classification),
enabled comparisons across individual patient specimens (intra-patient
blood vs tumor), across tumor type or grade, and across disease state
(patient vs healthy donor).

CONCLUSIONS:

Dimensionality reduction techniques provided a rapid means to identify
markers that were differentially expressed in TILs relative to peripheral
blood. Importantly, these analyses were unrestricted by canonical gating
strategies. CD8 TILs express multiple markers of activation and
maturation, suggesting reactivity to tumor antigens and potential for
immune therapy. Application of these analyses to a broader patient
population will reveal the immunologic landscape of primary CNS tumors
and provide insight into the immunologic consequences of current
therapies. Further, this may lead to identification of specific immune
signatures that may predict therapeutic response to immune therapy.


