Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bromodomain and extraterminal proteins regulate the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer.


The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a developmental program
that cancer cells often activate to acquire a highly plastic phenotype
that promotes invasion, metastasis, but also chemoresistance and cancer
stem cell generation. As readers of epigenetic marks, bromodomain and
extra-terminal (BET) proteins BRD2, BRD3 and BRD4 participate in the
regulation of multiple transcriptional programs implicated in cancer
progression. We sought to unravel the roles of BET proteins in EMT in
breast cancer.

Despite their homology, we report that BET proteins differentially
regulate EMT. Based on an EMT PCR array, we identify a BRD2-specific
transcriptional profile that promotes EMT, whereas BRD3 and BRD4
signatures repress this program. These individual signatures are
unidentifiable upon pan-BET inhibition using JQ1, reinforcing the
necessity to target each BET member separately to better understand their
functions. Upon BRD2 depletion, basal-like breast cancer cells, which
present a mesenchymal phenotype, exhibit a reduced expression of
mesenchymal markers (N-cadherin, vimentin) and re-express epithelial
markers (E-cadherin, cytokeratins). Moreover, a large panel of EMT master
transcription factors is downregulated in BRD2-depleted cells, including
the Snail and ZEB families or Twist. Interestingly, we found that BRD3 or
BRD4 depletion leads to the opposite phenotype: an increase of
mesenchymal marker expression and repression of the epithelial markers.
In luminal A breast cancer cells which present an epithelial phenotype,
BRD2 overexpression leads to the expression of mesenchymal markers.
Similar results were obtained by depleting BRD3 or BRD4 in these cells,
confirming the differential roles of BET proteins in EMT regulation.

Taken together, our results establish that BRD2 positively regulates EMT,
whereas BRD3 and BRD4 repress this program. BET proteins possess separate
and opposite biological functions, reinforcing the relevance of an
individual targeting instead of a pan-BET inhibition using JQ1. We
hypothesize that BET proteins modulate EMT through the regulation of its
master transcription factors. We propose that the balance of BET proteins
presence at the promoters of the EMT genes is a novel mechanism of
regulation of this program in breast cancer cells.


