Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterisation of molecular events across the colorectal cancer
progression axis.


Uniquely amongst the major tumor types, the premalignant state in
colorectal cancer (CRC) is readily detectable and diagnosed. Indeed, a
multi-step process of CRC genesis was defined by the seminal work of
Vogelstein et al, who described the mutational events leading from
adenoma to adenocarcinoma. In addition to genetic aberrations, recent
evidence has highlighted the importance of the gut microbiome and
associated inflammation in predicting CRC progression. To date however,
these insights have not led to significant changes in the treatment
paradigm because efforts continue to be focused on the later stages of
disease.

We believe CRC presents an exceptional opportunity for disease
interception but to design effective interventional strategies, the exact
sequence of molecular events underlying progression needs to be better
defined and understood. To address these needs, we have assembled a
clinically annotated sample database encompassing all stages of CRC
(healthy colon, adjacent mucosa, adenomas, high-grade dysplasia, primary
CRC and liver metastases), including samples from the conventional,
microsatellite stable subtype, as well as from the serrated,
microsatellite instable pathway. The progression status of each sample
was characterized using standard pathology criteria. In addition,
molecular progression was determined by targeted mutation profiling and
targeted copy number profiling, as well as genome-wide expression
profiling.

This analysis confirms previous observations of early mutational events
at the adenoma stage, including known tumor suppressor and oncogene
driver mutations, e.g. KRAS G12 and G13 are mutated in 15% of the
conventional adenomas but not in sessile serrated adenomas, as well as in
23% of the colorectal tumors. Copy number aberrations were observed at
the adenoma and carcinoma stage, but with a lower prevalence then somatic
mutations.

Furthermore, genome wide expression analysis indicates that several
pathways known to be affected in colorectal cancer are already
disregulated at the adenoma stage. These pathways include Wnt signaling,
mucosal barrier defects, bile acid metabolism, and several immune respons
genes, again fingerpointing at the interplay between local inflammation,
the microbiome, and epithelial events. In addition, we observed that
while genetic events are very dissimilar between the serrated/MSI and
conventional/MSS pathway, the transcriptional regulation has many
similarities, indicating at a possibility at targeting these disease
subtypes using the same therapeutics.

These initial findings provide rational avenues to intercept CRC at the
adenoma stage and efforts are now focused on exploring the added role of
the colonic microbiota and immune system modulation. A more comprehensive
and integrated view of the changes associated with disease initiation
will lead to the identification of new paths for prevention, interception
and cure.


