Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inter metastatic genetic heterogeneity is a characteristic feature
of recurrent pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic cancer (PDA) is a 4th leading cause of cancer death with an
overall 5-year survival of 8%. Surgical resection remains the only option
for cure but only 10-15% of newly diagnosed patients are eligible. While
surgery clearly provides a survival benefit compared to those patients
who do not undergo potentially curative resection, the vast majority of
patients will recur in the pancreatic remnant, liver, lungs, and/or
peritoneum. Thus, there is an unmet need to better understand the
fundamental features of recurrent disease. To explore the fundamental
genomic features of recurrent PDA, patients were selected from
participating Gastrointestinal Cancer Rapid Medical Donation Program
(GICRMDP). 10 patients who underwent surgical resection; 8 patients had a
whipple procedure, 2 patients had a distal pancreatectomy and each
patient received a different type of chemotherapy after surgery, was
evaluated. We performed 250x whole exome sequencing (WES) of 82 unique
samples from these 10 patients, using frozen samples from autopsy and
FFPE tissues from matching surgical specimen. In addition to the
treatment naïve primary tumor, one or more samples of the local
recurrence and multiple metastases were studied. The mean depth of
coverage for all samples was 317x. Copy number variations were assessed
by FACETs. MSK-IMPACT was performed for orthogonal validation of a subset
of variants. We found that compared to the treatment naïve resected
tumor, recurrent disease contained novel mutations in genes associated
with MAPK and PI3K signaling. The most common mutational signature was
Signature 1 followed by Signature 3. All patients who received a platinum
drug as a form of therapy had a greater proportion of Signature 3 and 9
mutations in the recurrent disease than the primary tumor. Phylogenetic
studies revealed that recurrent disease is the result of three patterns:
1) dissemination of disease to distant organs before surgery was
performed, 2) dissemination of disease after surgery from residual
microscopic disease in the pancreatic remnant, or 3) development of a
second primary tumor in the remnant pancreas. This third scenario was
identified in one of six additional patients studied by IMPACT. We
conclude that recurrent pancreatic cancer is multifactorial, and at least
two of these scenarios could be eliminated by total pancreatectomy,
thereby increasing the rate of cure by surgical resection. Our study
serves as a window to an understanding of the clonal dynamics of
recurrent pancreatic cancer.


