Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved outcomes with drug-resistant immunotherapy in a human
xenograft model of glioblastoma multiforme.


INTRODUCTION: Conventional treatment strategies for high-grade gliomas
have been uniformly dismal. We have previously shown that both primary
and Temozolomide (TMZ)-resistant glioblastoma (GBM) cell lines upregulate
stress-associated NKG2D ligands (NKG2DL) during the first several hours
following exposure to TMZ, thereby creating an opportunity for
NKG2DL-directed cell therapy, particularly γδ T cells that directly
recognize these stress-associated antigens. Using a human/mouse
patient-derived tumor xenograft (PDTX) model, we combined TMZ
chemotherapy and TMZ-resistant ex vivo expanded/activated γδ T cells as
Drug Resistant Immunotherapy (DRI). Drug resistance in this example is
conferred by O-6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT) gene
transfer, thereby enabling cytotoxic lymphocyte function in a
chemotherapy-rich environment when the tumor is maximally stressed.

METHODS: A total of five GBM PDTX were examined, three parent (X12P,
X22P, X59P) and two TMZ-resistant (X12T, X22T). Tumor NKG2DL expression
and cytotoxicity of DRI were assessed using flow cytometry with cultured
human astrocytes as controls. Intracranial (IC) glioma xenografts were
established using either an unmodified (P) or a TMZ resistant clone (T)
of human GBM explants passaged exclusively in immunodeficient mice.
Tumor-bearing mice received intraperitoneal 60mg/kg TMZ on days 6, 8,13,
and 15 and received IC injection of 1.5 x 106 DRI 4 hours following TMZ
injection. Control mice received DRI T cells alone, TMZ alone or no
therapy. Survival was assessed using Kaplan-Meier analysis.

RESULTS: All xenografts were found to constitutionally express NKG2DL
which were upregulated upon exposure to TMZ. DRI T cells were cytotoxic
to all tumors in vitro, showing 65%-80% specific lysis at an E:T ratio of
20:1 with no evidence of toxicity against cultured human astrocytes.
Median survival (MS) for all groups of untreated mice was approximately
25 days, and γδ T cell therapy alone did not improve survival in the
absence of TMZ. For the parent tumors, TMZ therapy significantly improved
MS over untreated controls for both X12P and X59P (29 vs. 59 days and 20
vs 51 days respectively, p =0.0001) and eliminated tumors in X22P. DRI
γδ T cells + TMZ significantly increased median survival additionally
over TMZ alone with 80% of animals in both X12P and X59P surviving
long-term (p=0.0001 and 0.05 respectively). DRI had no clear effect over
TMZ for X22T (p=0.46), however, for X12T, DRI + TMZ significantly
increased median survival from 22 to 38 days (72.7%) over TMZ alone (p =
0.04).

CONCLUSIONS: Combined TMZ chemotherapy and drug-resistance modified γδ
T cell therapy can produce a significant increase in time to progression
and improvement in median and overall survival for both primary and
TMZ-resistant GBM using a strategy is readily adaptable to the clinical
setting.


