Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kaiso influences the exosome profile required to induce cell
proliferation, migration and metabolism in breast cancer.


Purpose: Breast cancer is the most frequent tumor in women, afflicting
African American (AA) females to a greater degree than Caucasians (CAs).
Recently, we and others have found that Kaiso expression is elevated in
AA patients relative to CA patients, and its expression correlates with
tumor recurrence and metastasis. Exosomes are considered important
modulators of cellular behavior through their cellular communication by
transferring mRNA, microRNAs, proteins among cells. Here, we study the
role of Kaiso on the biological function of breast cancer exosomes.

Experimental procedures: Exosomes were isolated by ultracentrifugation
method and characterized by antibody array. We performed exosome
internalization assay, cell proliferation assay and migration assay.
Cellular metabolic activity was measured by Seahorse Analyzer. Exosome
proteomics was performed by LC-MS/MS and analyzed quantitatively by
Panther and DAVID bioinformatics resources.

Results: Isolated exosomes were effectively internalized by MCF7 cells.
MCF7 cells treated with exosomes of Kaiso-knock-downed MDA-MB-231 cells
(sh-Kaiso) showed a decreased proliferation as compared to exosomes of
Kaiso-scrambled MDA-MB-231 cells (sh-Scr). We further observed that
treatment of MCF7 cells with sh-Kaiso exosomes decreased cell migration
when compared to sh-Scr. To determine the proteins responsible for this
observation, we performed exosome proteomics profiling. Exosomes released
from sh-Kaiso compared to sh-Scr cells showed differential enrichment of
protein expression. In sh-Kaiso exosomes, 36 proteins were down-regulated
and most of these proteins are involved in cell invasion and metastasis;
whereas 172 proteins were up-regulated in sh-Kaiso of which most of them
are involved in protein folding, protein complex assembly, biogenesis and
repair. In proteomics data, lactate dehydrogenases (LDH) A&B which are
metabolically important proteins and are involved in the critical step of
inter-conversion of lactate to pyruvate, expressed differentially between
sh-SCR and sh-kaiso. Furthermore, using Seahorse Analyzer we determined
enhanced oxygen consumption rate, an indicator of oxidative
phosphorylation and elevated extracellular acidification rate, an
indicator of enhanced metabolism; in sh-SCR exosome treated MCF7 cells as
compared to sh-Kaiso exosome treated MCF7 cells.

Conclusions: Our findings demonstrate that Kaiso plays an important role
in the content of exosome cargo, which in turn has an effect promoting
cell growth, migration and metabolism of breast cancer cells. We suggest
that Kaiso has defined role in limiting important cellular information in
breast cancer exosome cargo.


