Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Changes in gene expression of stromal and epithelial cells during
prostate cancer progression.


Prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) is a histologic abnormality
which arises within the secretory epithelium of prostate glands, without
disrupting the layer of basal cells which separates the epithelium from
the surrounding stroma. PINs are generally considered to be a step
towards development of prostatic adenocarcinoma (PCA). Molecular steps in
the transition from normal glands to PIN to PCA are poorly understood, in
part due to the difficulty of accessing and characterizing individual
PINs without contamination from surrounding tissue. Furthermore, stromal
cells surrounding pre-cancerous glands may play an active role in cancer
development and progression, but are difficult to profile.

We utilized the ultra-sensitive and quantitative TempO-Seq gene
expression assay of the whole transcriptome to profile microdisections of
stromal vs. epithelial cells in archival prostatectomy FFPE tissue.
TempO-Seq is highly insensitive to RNA degradation (measurements of
intact RNA RIN=9.1 to degraded RNA RIN=3.0 correlate with R2=0.97) and
does not require RNA extraction, allowing measurement of both soluble and
insoluble cross-linked RNA. This allowed deparaffinization and H&E
staining of prostate sections prior to the assay, so that morphology was
clearly visible and subsections could be readily extracted and profiled.
Microdissections were performed on individual 5 µm FFPE sections of
prostatectomies from patients with Gleason sum scores of 6, containing
PIN alongside PCA. We removed an ~300 µm diameter region of stroma
surrounding individual normal, PIN, and PCA glands, followed by targeted
dissection of the gland epithelium itself which was lysed and assayed
separately. Stroma and epithelial samples from 3 adjacent sections of the
same glands were pooled together (adding up to ~0.005 mm3
tissue/replicate), and then profiled.

We compared the whole transcriptome expression profile of stroma vs.
epithelium at every stage of progression. Our results indicate that
stroma and epithelium undergo separate and distinct changes in gene
expression patterns throughout the development of PCA, most notably in
genes involved in cell-cell signaling. Specifically, we found that
changes in cAMP signaling in stromal cells accompanied the shift from
normal glands to PIN. Furthermore, changes in androgen signaling pathways
were present in stromal cells as well as in epithelium during the
transition from PIN to invasive carcinoma.

These results shed light on the molecular progression to PCA and
demonstrate the feasibility of profiling gene expression at the level of
tissue microstructure to elucidate changes within the tissue
microenvironment. Since archival FFPE can be used, studies of progression
can be carried out and the findings translated to diagnosis and prognosis
as well as to the investigation of new therapeutic approaches.


