Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: “Smart” selenium compound ISC-4 inhibits androgen receptor
signaling and induces ROS- and p53-dependent apoptosis in LNCaP prostate
cancer cells.


“Smart” selenium compound phenylbutyl isoselenocyanate (ISC-4) was
developed by substituting sulfur in cancer chemopreventive compound
phenylbutyl isothiocyanate (PBITC) with selenium, resulting in increased
anti-cancer activity in several melanoma and colon cancer cell lines. The
in vivo anticancer beneficial effects of ISC-4 have been reported in both
melanoma and colon cancer mouse models as well. To explore the potential
chemopreventive attributes of ISC-4 against prostate carcinogenesis, we
selected LNCaP cells (with wild type p53 and functional androgen receptor
(AR) signaling) to examine the growth suppression and apoptosis responses
in cell culture and interrogated signaling mechanisms through
pharmacological and siRNA knockdown approaches. Results show that when
compared with PBITC, ISC-4 was more potent at suppressing cell growth and
inducing apoptotic cell death in LNCaP cells. ISC-4 induced
caspase-mediated apoptosis (as evidenced by cleavage of PARP) in dose-
and time-dependent manners in association with decreased AR and its best
known target prostate specific antigen (PSA) protein abundance and
upregulation of p53-DNA damage response (DDR) protein expression levels:
p53, its canonical target p21, and p-H2AX that marks DNA double-strand
break sites. Similar to the rapid induction of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) by isothiocyanates, ISC-4 exposure resulted in increased
dihydroethidium-detectable ROS in a concentration-dependent manner.
Preincubation with the ROS scavenger N-Acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC, 10 µM to
2 mM), markedly reduced ISC-4-induced cell death and attenuated p53, p21
and p-H2AX. Moreover, siRNA knockdown of p53 did not suppress ROS
production, but decreased ISC-4-induced Annexin V-positive apoptosis,
PARP cleavage and the DDR proteins. Taken together, these data suggest
that ISC-4 inhibits LNCaP cell growth and survival with concomitant
suppression of AR signaling and induction of ROS-p53-DDR mediated
apoptosis. Given the pivotal significance of AR signaling in prostate
epithelial survival, cancer genesis and progression, and the preservation
of wild type p53 in precancerous lesions and early stage prostate cancer,
our findings suggest attractive chemopreventive potential of ISC-4
against prostate carcinogenesis.


