Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Visualization of EPR effect and active targeting by using
microscopic mass spectrometry.


Microscopic mass spectrometry (MMS), in which a microscope is coupled
with an atmospheric pressure matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
(MALDI) and quadruple ion trap time-of-flight (TOF) analyzer has been
developed for the investigation of the distribution of various molecules
including drugs. The matrix-coated drug sample is ionized and then
separated on the basis of its mass-to-charge ratio (m/z). Images were
acquired from imaging mass spectrometry (IMS) or tandem mass spectrometry
(MS/MS) data. Recently, pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD)
studies have become important to evaluate the efficacy and toxicity of
the drugs. In these analyses, tissue homogenates are generally used for
the quantification by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) or
liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS). However, they lack the
information regarding the drug distribution in a specific anatomical
area. The information of the drug distribution would allow us to optimize
the drug design enabling more efficient drug delivery. (1) We studied the
tissue distribution of paclitaxel (PTX) and its micellar formulation
(NK105) using a MMS. NK105 showed much stronger antitumor effects on a
human pancreatic cancer BxPC3 xenograft than PTX. In the drug imaging, we
demonstrated that NK105 delivered more PTX to the whole tumor tissue. In
the mouse model, PTX caused the peripheral neurotoxicity but NK105 did
not. Multiple high drug-signal areas surrounding and inside the caudal
nerve were observed in the case of PTX, whereas the signals after NK105
administration were quite low. (2) The tissue distribution and controlled
drug release of ADC (antibody-drug conjugate) consisting of a tissue
factor specific antibody (TF) linked to the anticancer agent monomethyl
auristatin E (MMAE) was evaluated in comparison with control-ADC (control
antibody-MMAE conjugation). TF-ADC showed stronger antitumor effect on
BxPC3 xenograft than control-ADC. We then established the selective
detection method of MMAE for distinguishing free MMAE and its conjugated
form. The released MMAE signal detected following the accumulation of
TF-ADC was greatest 24 h after the administration, compared with the
control-ADC at the same time (PMicroscopic mass spectrometry (MMS), in
which a microscope is coupled with an atmospheric pressure
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) and quadruple ion
trap time-of-flight (TOF) analyzer has been developed for the
investigation of the distribution of various molecules including drugs.
The matrix-coated drug sample is ionized and then separated on the basis
of its mass-to-charge ratio (m/z). Images were acquired from imaging mass
spectrometry (IMS) or tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) data. Recently,
pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) studies have become
important to evaluate the efficacy and toxicity of the drugs. In these
analyses, tissue homogenates are generally used for the quantification by
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) or liquid chromatography
mass spectrometry (LC-MS). However, they lack the information regarding
the drug distribution in a specific anatomical area. The information of
the drug distribution would allow us to optimize the drug design enabling
more efficient drug delivery. (1) We studied the tissue distribution of
paclitaxel (PTX) and its micellar formulation (NK105) using a MMS. NK105
showed much stronger antitumor effects on a human pancreatic cancer BxPC3
xenograft than PTX. In the drug imaging, we demonstrated that NK105
delivered more PTX to the whole tumor tissue. In the mouse model, PTX
caused the peripheral neurotoxicity but NK105 did not. Multiple high
drug-signal areas surrounding and inside the caudal nerve were observed
in the case of PTX, whereas the signals after NK105 administration were
quite low. (2) The tissue distribution and controlled drug release of ADC
(antibody-drug conjugate) consisting of a tissue factor specific antibody
(TF) linked to the anticancer agent monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE) was
evaluated in comparison with control-ADC (control antibody-MMAE
conjugation). TF-ADC showed stronger antitumor effect on BxPC3 xenograft
than control-ADC. We then established the selective detection method of
MMAE for distinguishing free MMAE and its conjugated form. The released
MMAE signal detected following the accumulation of TF-ADC was greatest 24
h after the administration, compared with the control-ADC at the same
time (P<0.01). In summary, we succeeded in visualizing (1) the EPR
(Enhanced permeability and retention) effect and (2) active targeting
using MMS. The data obtained will facilitate more efficient drug
development in the preclinical setting.


