Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Runx1 possesses anti-tumor activity and inhibits stemness in
breast cancer cells.


Background: Despite advances in detection and therapies, breast cancer is
still the most common malignant disease in women worldwide. Cancer stem
cells (CSC) play an important role in formation, growth, drug-resistance
and recurrence of tumors. Transcription factor Runx1 has received recent
attention for its potential tumor suppressor activity in solid tumors. We
previously showed that Runx1 represses the epithelial to mesenchymal
transition in breast cancer cells. The objective of the present study is
to investigate Runx1 functional effects on cellular activities, and its
contribution to inhibiting CSC-like properties in breast cancer cells.

Methods: We generated Runx1 overexpression and Runx1 knockdown stable
cell lines in both malignant MCF10AT1 and metastatic MCF10CA1a cells.
Cells were analyzed for tumorsphere formation, protein (Western) and RNA
(RT-qPCR) expression analysis. Cellular activity assays (cell
proliferation, migration, and invasion) were performed to measure the
tumorigenic potential of the cells. Xenograft studies were used to
determine whether Runx1 overexpression in breast cancer cells represses
tumor growth in vivo.

Results: Upon overexpressing Runx1, both MCF10AT1 and MCF10CA1a cells
reduce their proliferation, migration and invasion, which support the
concept that Runx1 acts as a tumor suppressor in breast cancer cells.
Notably, overexpressing Runx1 inhibited the formation of tumorspheres and
effectively reduced the stem-like population in these two breast cancer
cells. These observations are consistent with the results of Runx1
knock-down in early stage ER positive MCF7 breast cancer cells which
showed increased tumorsphere formation efficiency. Furthermore, Runx1
tumor suppressor activity was confirmed in mouse xenograft by showing
that Runx1 overexpression inhibits tumor growth.

Conclusion: Our studies show that Runx1 inhibits proliferation,
migration, and invasion, reflecting its tumor suppressor activity. Runx1
mediated reduction of tumorsphere formation suggests that Runx1 also
contributes significantly to inhibit the population of the breast cancer
stem cells. Therefore these studies offer Runx1 as a novel
bio-therapeutic molecule for breast cancer intervention.


