Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IDWAS: Imputing drug response in large cohorts of cancer patients
to discover novel predictive biomarkers.


There are currently only 10 cancer genes with FDA approved drug treatment
options (source: OncoKB). Here, we present a conceptually novel
analytical method that can rapidly expand this small list of clinically
effective cancer drug treatment biomarkers.

Large sequencing studies, such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), have
greatly accelerated our understanding of the molecular basis of cancer.
However, because of the difficulty in collecting drug response data in
large cohorts of cancer patients, these studies have not been effectively
used for finding new biomarkers of drug response (i.e. pharmacogenomics
discovery). Thus, much cancer pharmacogenomics research is conducted in
pre-clinical disease models such as cell lines (e.g. the Genomics of Drug
Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC) project); but these studies are (among other
limitations) always restricted by comparatively smaller sample sizes.
Here, we present an analytical method that integrates data from large
clinical studies (e.g. TCGA) with data from pre-clinical disease models
(e.g. GDSC) and overcomes these critical obstacles, allowing studies such
as TCGA to now be effectively used for pharmacogenomics discovery. We
refer to this approach as an “Imputed drug-wide association study”
(IDWAS).

The method works by fitting a statistical model relating gene expression
and drug response in pre-clinical data (here we use the GDSC cancer cell
lines), then using this model to impute drug response from tumor gene
expression data in a clinical cohort (here we use TCGA). Next, we compare
these imputed drug response data to measured variants (e.g. somatic
mutations, copy number changes) in TCGA, thus finding new biomarkers of
drug response. We show that we can recapitulate known clinically
effective biomarkers and we have validated new clinically relevant
biomarkers, which remarkably could not have been identified using
conventional approaches.

Our method will set the stage for many future studies. Crucially, this
approach could easily be applied to any of the vast number of clinical
cancer sequencing studies now undertaken, meaning that it will be
possible to use all of these datasets for pharmacogenomics research. We
have included a set of computational tools to allow easy application of
our method and replication of our results. Given that this is a
conceptually novel methodology, it is also likely that many other studies
will attempt to improve upon our proposed implementation.

Furthermore, members of our group are currently leading the development
of the new Genomic Data Commons (GDC; https://gdc.cancer.gov/), which is
the NCI’s new access portal for TCGA data. We are currently working
towards making the imputed drug response data directly accessible on GDC,
along with all other TCGA data. This means that our imputed drug response
data will be easily accessible to the thousands of researchers already
accessing TCGA via the GDC.


