Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DRD2 is critical for pancreatic cancer and promises
pharmacological therapy by already established antagonists.


Introduction and aims: Although the overall five-year survival of all
patients with cancer stands at 63%, for pancreatic cancer patients, it is
a disheartening 8% - a number that remains largely unchanged for three
decades. Of the patients diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, about 85%
exhibit pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Most of these patients
die within 4 to 6 months after diagnosis. The poor prognosis is caused by
the detection at only late stages, and lack of effective options for
chemotherapy. The widely used chemotherapeutic agent gemcitabine, confers
a median survival advantage of only 6 months, and resistance to therapy
develops in the vast majority of patients. Given this poor prognosis of
patients with PDAC, there is an urgent need to find more effective
therapies.

Experimental procedures: Microarrays were used to perform global gene
expression profiling in 195 PDAC and 41 normal pancreatic tissue samples.
Using these profiling data, we undertook an extensive analysis of PDAC
transcriptome by superimposing the pathway context and interaction
networks of aberrantly expressed genes to identify factors with central
roles in PDAC pathways. Next, tissue microarray analysis (TMA) were used
to verify the expression of the candidate target in independent set of
152 samples comprising 40 normal pancreatic tissues, 49 chronic
pancreatitis sections (CP) and 63 PDAC samples. We further validated the
functional relevance of the candidate molecule through RNA interference
(RNAi) and pharmacological inhibition in vitro and in vivo.

Results: We identified dopamine receptor D2 (DRD2) as a key modulator of
cancer pathways in PDAC. DRD2 up-regulation at the protein level was
validated in a large independent sample cohort. Most importantly, we
found that blockade of DRD2, through RNAi or pharmacological inhibition
using FDA-approved antagonists hampers the proliferative and invasive
capacities of pancreatic cancer cells while modulating cAMP and
endoplasmic reticulum stress pathways. Also, we observed a potent effect
of DRD2 antagonists on inhibition of cancer cell proliferation using
different model of primary and metastatic tumor cells derived from
spontaneous pancreatic cancer mouse models and patient-derived pancreatic
adenocarcinoma mouse xenograft (PDX) models.

Conclusions: Our findings demonstrate that inhibiting DRD2 represents a
novel therapeutic approach for PDAC. Since DRD2 inhibitors are already in
the clinic for the management of schizophrenia, our results from this
study could support a drug repurposing strategy to expedite clinical
evaluation of these agents as novel therapy against pancreatic cancer.


