Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pan-cancer analysis framework for incorporating gene expression
information into clinical interpretation of pediatric cancer genomic data.


Genomic characterization used in pediatric cancer clinical trials is
limited to the detection of somatic mutations and gene fusions in
well-characterized cancer genes. However, these approaches do not reveal
actionable therapeutic targets for the majority of pediatric cancer
patients. Incorporation of gene expression information into clinical
genomic analysis is hindered by the lack of appropriate computational
methods, designed for single patients rather than patient cohorts. UC
Santa Cruz Treehouse Childhood Cancer Initiative
(treehousegenomics.soe.ucsc.edu) enables the incorporation of gene
expression information into the genomic evaluation of pediatric cancer
patients. We leverage large cancer RNA sequencing datasets, including The
Cancer Genome Atlas, Therapeutically Applicable Research to Generate
Effective Treatments, Medulloblastoma Advanced Genomics International
Consortium, International Cancer Genome Consortium, and published
research and clinical studies. Through our “pan-cancer analysis”, we
compare each prospective tumor’s RNA sequencing and/or mutational
profile to over 11,000 uniformly analyzed tumor profiles using our Tumor
Map method. Tumor Map visualizes single tumors together with the
reference compendium and identifies samples that are most similar to the
given tumor based on the gene expression profiles. We also developed a
gene expression outlier analysis to identify transcripts that are over
expressed in the given tumor. These pan-cancer gene expression analyses
are used in conjunction with mutation data to nominate molecular pathways
that may be driving the disease in each child, providing useful
information to the medical teams. We aim to evaluate this approach in
partnership with pediatric cancer clinical genomic trials at Stanford
University, UC San Francisco, Children’s Hospital of Orange County,
University of Michigan, Children’s Mercy Hospital, and British Columbia
Children’s Hospital. The analysis of the first 27 patients at Stanford,
most with refractory solid tumors, provided evidence of the potential
clinical utility of incorporating gene expression information into the
genomic evaluation of pediatric cancer patients. In all cases, we
identified candidate driver molecular pathways that could be targeted by
existing FDA-approved therapies or therapies available through a clinical
trial. The most frequently identified molecular targets were receptor
tyrosine kinases and cyclin-dependent kinases. For 3 patients with no
treatment options prior to our work, the analysis contributed to
treatment decisions. This study provides a framework for incorporating
gene expression information into the clinical interpretation of pediatric
cancer genomic data. We underscore the importance of releasing the data
to the community immediately following generation, so that they may
benefit new patients.


