Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the subclonal landscape of high-risk neuroblastoma.


We recently showed that relapsed neuroblastoma (NB) tumors harbor an
increased somatic mutational burden, enriched for ALK or RAS-MAPK
activating lesions, nominating targeted therapeutic strategies for a
condition that is largely incurable. We also showed that these mutations
can be present in subclonal tumor cell populations at diagnosis,
suggesting that they may contribute to acquired chemoradiotherapy
resistance. We hypothesize that subclonal mutations in NB oncogenes are
common at diagnosis, are biomarkers for treatment failure, and can be
targeted in conjunction with standard chemotherapy to improve patient
survival. Here, we focus on the first aspect of this broad hypothesis by
presenting the subclonal landscape of diagnostic, high-risk
neuroblastomas. A meta-analysis of our previously published
primary/relapse (N=23), whole exome (N=232) and whole genome (N=159)
diagnostic data, and recent sequencing study of 78 diagnostic and 67
relapse cases were used to inform design of a custom amplicon panel for
ultra-deep sequencing. The 28-gene panel covers 57 mutations in
frequently mutated genes. Here, 250 high-risk primary tumors were
sequenced to an average depth of 50,000X. More subclonal mutations were
called (mean=36) compared to clonal alterations (mean=3), demonstrating
the complex subclonal architecture in these tumors. We validated five
clonal ALK mutations we originally discovered and identified 15
additional pathogenic ALK mutations with mutant allele frequencies (MAFs)
ranging from 0.03-23%. Known ALK activating mutations were found at
codons 1170, 1174, 1196, 1245, 1275 in 15 of 38 diagnostic primary
tumors. This 39.5% frequency is much higher than the 14% frequency
defined by us using Sanger or other sequencing methods. Improvement of
subclonal mutation detection of actionable, relapse-specific driver
mutations demonstrates the clinical utility of utilizing this sequencing
methodology at diagnosis to enable timely improvement of outcomes for
children with high-risk refractory NB.


