Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amrubicin is effective for synovial sarcoma.


Background: Synovial sarcoma (SS) is representative sarcoma types, which
is account for 6% of sarcomas. Although the gold-standard of treatment is
surgery, SS is often diagnosed in an advanced clinical stage.
Chemotherapy is the primary treatment modality. Amrubicin (AMR), an
anthracycline agent, is converted in the body to amrubicinol (AMRol) by
reduction of the 13-position ketone, which has a higher antitumor
activity than the parentmolecule. In this study, we evaluate the
effectiveness in vitro and in vivo.

Materials and Methods: Cell lines and reagent. The SS cell lines, SW982,
HSSYII and SS1. Cell viability assay. WST-1 mixture was used. Cell-cycle
analysis. To evaluate the cell cycle, FITC BrdU Kit Flow Kit was used.
HSSY-II, SW982 were treated with AMRol for 4 hours and analyzed by flow
cytometry using BD FACSVerseTM. Animal experiments. Severe Combined
Immuno-Deficiency mice were used. SS cells were injected subcutaneously
or into right intrathoracic space. These mice were assigned randomly to
AMR group and normal saline group (NS). Micro-computed tomography (μCT).
The R-mCT system was used to measure the diameter of tumor in
intrathoracic space.

Statistical analysis: All of the results are expressed as meanSEM. The
Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate survival. Treatment groups were
compared using a two-sided log-rank test.

Results: Cell viability assay. AMR was highly metabolized into AMRol in
tumor tissue and AMRol was more toxic than AMR. AMRol was used to in
vitro assay. AMRol was equivalent to, or even more toxic than DXR in this
experiments. Cell-cycle analysis. After AMRol treatment, more cells were
found in S-phase compared with no treatment control. Subcutaneous SS
model. AMR showed cytostatic effect compared with normal saline (NS) in
each of HSSYII and SW982. Intrathoracic space SS model. SS-1 was
established from primary pleural SS patient. In preliminary experiments,
location of tumor was confirmed on μCT. Tumor growth was suppressed in
AMR group compared with in NS group and AMR showed cytostatic effect. In
survival analysis, it was shown that AMR group was tend to survive longer
than NS group.

Discussion: It was shown that AMR is effective for SS in vitro and in
vivo. Our results suggest an alternative treatment of SS patients,
including primary pleural SS. The effectiveness and safety should be
addressed in future studies.


