Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genome-scale ORF screen reveals an alternative splicing program
that regulates mesenchymal and stem-like cell states in breast cancer.


Cells residing in mesenchymal state are often associated with stem cell
properties. The phenotypic changes from epithelial to mesenchymal cell
state, or from non-stem-like to stem-like cell state contribute to tumor
heterogeneity and play important roles in tumor initiation, progression
and metastasis. To systematically interrogate the modulators of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, we performed a genome-scale ORF
screen to identify regulators of mesenchymal and stem-like cell states
using a barcoded human ORFome expression library in human mammary
epithelial cells. In the screen, we used flow cytometric analysis of the
CD44 cell surface marker and identified 68 ORFs that can switch cells
from CD44 low state to CD44 high state in 7 days. Among these genes, the
RNA splicing factors were highly enriched as analyzed by GO terms and
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA).We employed six different assays for
candidate validation: 1) Induction of CD44 cell surface markers; 2)
Evaluation of the expression of EMT markers; 3) Test of the ability to
form mammospheres; 4) Investigation of the expression during EMT
induction; 5) Test of the necessity of these splicing factors for EMT and
stem-like states; 6) Examination of the ability to promote tumor
formation in vivo. We discovered that QKI and RBFOX1 were both necessary
and sufficient to promote EMT and stem-like states. MBNL1, MBNL2 and
CELF4 were sufficient to induce some mesenchymal markers. We further
investigated the downstream targets of these splicing factors by
RNA-sequencing analysis. We found that QKI and RBFOX1 regulated the
alternative splicing of genes in 5 functional modules: 1) Cell motility
and ECM/cytoskeleton organization; 2) Stem cell fate determination; 3)
Oncogenic signaling; 4) Epigenetic targets; 5) cell polarity. Strikingly,
using molecular and biochemical assays, we found that QKI and RBFOX1/2
interacted and cooperatively regulated the alternative splicing of a
large number of overlapping transcripts, including Filamin B (FLNB). QKI
and RBFOX1 induced a shorter isoform via exon skipping. which plays a key
functional role in the regulation of EMT. Importantly, the expression of
QKI, RBFOX1/2 and the short isoform of FLNB are elevated in basal B type
of breast cancer cell lines and in basal-like breast cancer patient
samples, the subtype of breast cancer that displays higher degree of
mesenchymal and stem-like traits. In conclusion, alternative RNA splicing
plays a key role in the regulation of EMT and stem-like cell states. QKI
and RBFOX1/2 are both necessary and sufficient to promote EMT and
stem-like traits. Alternative splicing of FLNB controlled by QKI and
RBFOX1/2 is one of the key downstream targets that regulates EMT. Thus,
the molecular targets and mechanism identified in this study may aid in
the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for breast
tumors, especially for basal-like breast cancer.


