Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An epigenetic biomarker panel in HPV related oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma.


HPV related head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is known to
occur in a separate patient population in comparison to tobacco related
HNSCC, and also exhibits less mutational, genetic, and chromosomal
alterations, and a different composition of epigenetic alterations. In
particular, HPV is present in up to 70% of oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma (OPSCC), and is driving the increase in incidence rates of
OPSCC. Given the precedent for successful screening for cervical cancer,
it is attractive to consider similar population based screening for HPV
related OPSCC. Here, we developed an epigenetic biomarker panel that can
be combined with high risk HPV DNA detection with potential utility in
screening. We performed high throughput qMBD-seq analysis on 50 primary
HPV positive OPSCC samples and 25 UPPP normal samples. Subsequently, we
performed an outlier analysis and ranking strategy of 100 bp segmented
regions within this discovery cohort and defined 20 differentially
methylated regions to be used as biomarkers for detection.
Simultaneously, we validated these 20 biomarker candidates using TCGA
methylation array dataset and found that the methylation levels of these
20 candidates in HPV positive OPSCC were significantly higher than those
in normal samples. Moreover, we created QMSP assays for these genes, and
validated EMBP1 and KCNA3 in a separate validation cohort including
tissue and saliva from 46 HPV related OPSCC and 25 normal controls. The
sensitivity and specificity values for EMBP1, KCNA3 or both in tissue and
saliva are shown. EMBP1 has a high sensitivity in tissue and a high
specificity in saliva, while KCNA3 has a high specificity in both tissue
and saliva. A panel including both genes has an extremely high
sensitivity. Ultimately, we defined a panel of two differentially
methylation regions that has a high sensitivity in tissue. This study
might serve as a diagnostic biomarker development trial for HPV OPSCC
detection with potential application for development of a population
based screening test.

Sensitivity and specificity for HPV related OPSCC in tissue and saliva





Tissue

Tissue

Saliva

Saliva



Gene

Sensitivity

Specificity

Sensitivity

Specificity



EMBP1

97.7%

83.3%

13.3%

94.7%



KCNA3

76.7%

92.0%

13.3%

94.7%



EMBP1& KCNA3

100.0%

84.0%

13.0%

84.2%


