Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimizing vertical MAPK pathway inhibition for RAS mutant
non-small cell lung cancer.


Introduction: Non-small cell lung tumors (NSCLC) with mutations in genes
encoding for Ras proteins (H-, N-, K-Ras) exhibit activation of the MAPK
signaling pathway. Mek inhibitors, however, have limited efficacy in
patients affected by this genotype-defined tumor subtype and major
resistance derives from insufficient suppression or reactivation of the
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk) as a result of dynamic kinome
reprogramming. Erk inhibitors may overcome limitations of Mek inhibition
due to the bottleneck function of Erk proteins in submitting mitogenic
and anti-apoptotic signals. Combinations of both drug classes
(”vertical pathway inhibition“) may further increase treatment
efficacy but inevitably potentiate toxicity hence requiring alternative
dosing schedules.

Methods: We investigated the efficacy of vertical MAPK inhibition with
selumetinib (Mek inhibitor) and SCH772984 (Erk inhibitor) in commercially
available and patient-derived RAS mutant NSCLC models. A quantitative
RT-PCR based 12-gene signature was used as a surrogate to assess
Erk-dependent transcriptional output. Pulsatile drug regimens were
investigated in xenograft models.

Results: In a genetically simple, patient-derived NRAS-mutant lung cancer
cell line (DFCI168), we observed strongest in vitro suppression of
Erk-dependent transcriptional output and delay of feedback reactivation
by vertical MAPK pathway inhibition with a selumetinib/SCH772984
combination compared to either drug alone. Deeper MAPK pathway
suppression in our model cell line was accompanied by higher
anti-proliferative activity in a panel of RAS mutant cell lines in vitro
(n=5 patient-derived, n=19 commercially available cell lines) and in vivo
(n=2). The degree of transcriptional output suppression of cell lines
(n=8) with different sensitivities towards Mek/Erk inhibition did not
differ significantly at 24 hrs in vitro. Gastrointestinal toxicities
(i.e. peritonitis-like symptoms) occurred when continuously administered
SCH772984 was intermittently combined with selumetinib (4 days ON, 3 days
OFF) but resolved when both drugs were given intermittently (4 days ON, 3
days OFF). None of the drug treatments, however, could cure the mice.

Conclusion: We have demonstrated that deeper and prolonged
transcriptional output suppression by vertical MAPK pathway inhibition
translates into superior efficacy in RAS mutant lung cancer models
compared to single agent treatment. Other factors (e.g. signaling
pathways) are likely to influence the overall outcome of vertical MAPK
pathway inhibition. Toxicities observed in PDX models overlap with those
reported from genetically engineered mouse models (GEMM) with loss of
Mek1/2 or Erk1/2 and can be mitigated by pulsatile dosing schedules.


