Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enriched environment inhibits progression of acute myeloid
leukemia.


Background: Environmental factors and lifestyle have profound effects in
the initiation, promotion and progression of cancer. Our recent work on
environmental enrichment (EE), a housing environment boosting mental
health, has revealed a novel phenotype characterized by a robust
reduction in adiposity, resistance to diet-induced obesity (DIO),
enhanced insulin sensitivity, lower serum IGF-1 and leptin levels, higher
serum adiponectin level, enhanced immune functions, and inhibition in
melanoma and colon cancer growth. We have teased out one key mechanism
underlying the anticancer effect of EE: the stimulation of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression in the hypothalamus and the
subsequent activation of a specific neuroendocrine axis, the
hypothalamic-sympathoneural-adipocyte (HSA) axis. However, the EE’s
effects on hematologic malignancy are largely unknown. Here we
generalized this intervention to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) using the
MLL-partial tandem duplication (PTD) and Flt3-internal tandem duplication
(ITD) double knock-in mouse (MllPTD/WT:Flt3ITD/WT) that recapitulates
features of counterpart human AML.

Methods: For transplantation of AML cells, Ly5.2 spleen cells isolated
from leukemic MllPTD/WT: Flt3ITD/WT mice were resuspended in PBS.
Syngenic Ly5.1 recipient C57Bl/6 male mice (CD45.1+) were sublethally
irradiated (400 cGy). Five to six hours later, leukemic cells (4×106 per
mouse) were injected through the lateral tail vein. Those mice were
randomly assigned to either standard laboratory cage (SE) or EE housing.
To monitor AML progression, white blood cell (WBC) counts were measured
from peripheral blood. Survival experiments were performed.

Results: EE mice had a median survival 14% longer than SE mice (SE = 36
± 1.1 days, EE = 41 ± 1.2 days, p = 0.038) and improved hazard rate
(log-rank test z = 1.99, p = 0.047). Based on WBC counts (>10.9 k/µL),
100% of SE mice and 80% of EE mice had apparent AML at three weeks post
injection. At this time point, EE had a substantially lower WBC counts
(SE = 76.9 k/µL, EE = 26.4 k/µL, p = 0.0006). WBCs from EE mice had
lower neutrophil, monocytes, eosinophils and basophils counts, but had
similar lymphocytes, resulting in a reduced neutrophil to lymphocyte
ratio. Red blood cell (RBC) and platelet data were the same except for a
slightly reduced mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) in EE
mice. At four weeks, EE mice were substantially more active and mobile
than SE mice. At five weeks, at which point 3 SE and 5 EE mice remained
alive, WBC counts remained lower in EE mice.

Conclusions: This preliminary work demonstrated EE substantially improved
progression-free survival and conferred a significant survival benefit.
We will elucidate the underlying mechanisms of EE’s anti-AML effect by
assessing metabolic modulation and immune regulation.


