Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduction in prostate tumor growth and induction of anti-tumor
immunity after combined treatment with oncolytic VSV and radiation.


Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is a mainstay of treatment for
high-risk non metastatic and metastatic prostate cancer. Patients
initially respond to ADT, but eventually develop resistance to treatment.
To overcome these limitations, we have used oncolytic virotherapy which
has the potential to influence both local and systemic disease through
direct cytotoxic and immune mechanisms. Here, we investigated the
effectiveness of radiation therapy (RT) combined with Vesicular
Stomatitis Virus (VSV) vector expressing interferon β (IFNβ) in VSV
resistant prostate xenografts. In initial cell culture experiments,
microarray analysis indicated that PC3 cells treated with VSV-hIFNβ and
RT displayed several genes known to directly inhibit VSV replication
(e.g., MX2, OAS2, TRIM25, IFITM1) were downregulated compared with
VSV-hIFNβ therapy alone. Additionally, many apoptotic pathway-associated
genes (e.g. IL24, GADD45B, KLF4&10, TNF, EGFR) were upregulated several
fold during combination therapy. Gene expression changes were confirmed
by RT-PCR. Further, immunoblot analysis demonstrated expression levels of
IFNAR, BCL-XL, phosphorylated AKT, JAK2 and STAT3 were also markedly
decreased when VSV-hIFNβ was combined with RT. However, RIG-I was not
significantly altered after VSV-hIFNβ+RT treatment. A marked decrease in
MAVS, NFKB (p50), IRF7 and antiviral protein PKR was seen after combined
treatment. The role of IFN pathway in viral response was investigated
using an interferon-inducible promoter ISRE-luciferase (ISRE-Luc)
reporter construct. A significant difference (>600 fold) in the ISRE-Luc
activation was seen for PC3 compared to LNCaP cells, indicating that the
IFN pathway is highly active in PC3 cells after VSV infection alone. The
activation of ISRE-mediated transcription of luciferase was significantly
attenuated (pAndrogen deprivation therapy (ADT) is a mainstay of
treatment for high-risk non metastatic and metastatic prostate cancer.
Patients initially respond to ADT, but eventually develop resistance to
treatment. To overcome these limitations, we have used oncolytic
virotherapy which has the potential to influence both local and systemic
disease through direct cytotoxic and immune mechanisms. Here, we
investigated the effectiveness of radiation therapy (RT) combined with
Vesicular Stomatitis Virus (VSV) vector expressing interferon β (IFNβ)
in VSV resistant prostate xenografts. In initial cell culture
experiments, microarray analysis indicated that PC3 cells treated with
VSV-hIFNβ and RT displayed several genes known to directly inhibit VSV
replication (e.g., MX2, OAS2, TRIM25, IFITM1) were downregulated compared
with VSV-hIFNβ therapy alone. Additionally, many apoptotic
pathway-associated genes (e.g. IL24, GADD45B, KLF4&10, TNF, EGFR) were
upregulated several fold during combination therapy. Gene expression
changes were confirmed by RT-PCR. Further, immunoblot analysis
demonstrated expression levels of IFNAR, BCL-XL, phosphorylated AKT, JAK2
and STAT3 were also markedly decreased when VSV-hIFNβ was combined with
RT. However, RIG-I was not significantly altered after VSV-hIFNβ+RT
treatment. A marked decrease in MAVS, NFKB (p50), IRF7 and antiviral
protein PKR was seen after combined treatment. The role of IFN pathway in
viral response was investigated using an interferon-inducible promoter
ISRE-luciferase (ISRE-Luc) reporter construct. A significant difference
(>600 fold) in the ISRE-Luc activation was seen for PC3 compared to LNCaP
cells, indicating that the IFN pathway is highly active in PC3 cells
after VSV infection alone. The activation of ISRE-mediated transcription
of luciferase was significantly attenuated (p<0.05) in both the cell
lines after combined treatment with VSV-hIFNβ and RT. In subsequent in
vivo studies, we determined that radiation treatment combined with
intratumorally-delivered VSV-mIFNβ function synergistically to induce
oncolysis in both PC3 and LNCaP xenografts and a syngeneic RM9 murine
model. In the syngeneic model, combination therapy resulted in a robust
anti-tumor immune response with CD8 and CD4 T-cell expansion and
resistance to tumor rechallenge compared to either therapy alone. These
studies demonstrate that two mechanisms are involved in combined RT and
VSV-mediated oncolysis. These are, (1) the attenuation of the antiviral
response which increases the direct oncolytic effect of VSV on the tumor
cells and (2) improved generation of an adaptive immune response
earmarked by CD8+ lymphocyte expansion and anti-tumor activity. Our study
demonstrates that the combined strategy of RT plus VSV-IFNβ, affects
tumor cell death that are resistant to VSV through direct and systemic
activity that includes a pronounced enhancement of anti-tumor immunity.


