Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolically active macrophages: A novel link between obesity and
TNBC.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients have an extremely poor
prognosis due to their high metastatic potential and lack of targeted
drug therapies. Emerging epidemiological data suggest that obesity is
strongly linked to the incidence and severity of TNBC. However,
mechanisms by which obesity potentiates TNBC progression are unclear.
Adipose tissue macrophages (ATMs) are an attractive mechanistic link
between obesity and TNBC because they are the predominant type of
macrophage in the breast during early tumorigenesis and obesity causes
accumulation of ATMs. However, during obesity, the macrophage phenotype
was reported to switch from an apparent pro-tumorigenic M2-like phenotype
to an apparent anti-tumorigenic M1-like phenotype. This result raises a
paradox: how does obesity promote tumor progression if it activates an
anti-tumorigenic macrophage phenotype? Here we show that metabolic
dysfunction promotes a mechanistically distinct pro-inflammatory
phenotype (metabolic activation; MMe) in breast adipose tissue
macrophages isolated from obese women. These ATMs express cell surface
markers of MMe (CD36, ABCA1) but not M1 (CD38, CD319, CD274) macrophages.
We further demonstrate that pretreating TNBC cells with conditioned media
derived from MMe but not M1 macrophages promotes mammosphere formation as
well as invasion in vitro, and intravasation of cancer cells into the
blood in vivo. Moreover, pre-treated cancer cells showed a two-fold
increase in the expression of stem-like cell markers (OCT4, SOX2 and
NANOG). Remarkably, we saw the same effect on ‘stemness’ of tumor
cells in a spontaneous TNBC mouse model when fed a 60% high fat diet and
a significant increase in tumor incidence in obese mice compared to lean
mice in a syngeneic mouse model. We further show that blocking
inflammatory cytokines expression in MMe(s) using genetic knockouts
inhibits the ability of MMe(s) to promote both mammosphere formation and
invasion. These findings suggest that obesity-induced changes to mammary
adipose tissue reprogram macrophages to an MMe phenotype that potentiates
TNBC initiation and metastasis via inflammatory cytokines. A
comprehensive understanding of the signaling mechanism(s) involved in
metabolic activation of mammary ATMs would enable development of directed
therapies towards this specific pro-tumorigenic macrophage phenotype,
thereby leaving the immune system of cancer patients intact.


