Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular characterization of primary tumor & the paired liver
metastatic biopsies of colorectal cancer reveals a critical role of
immunosuppression, EMT & angiogenesis in cancer metastasis.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the leading causes of cancer-related
mortality worldwide. In United States alone, it was estimated that nearly
137,000 people were diagnosed, and more than 50,000 were dead from the
disease each year. CRC primary tumors often metastasize to liver which
accounts for most of CRC death. The molecular mechanism of tumor
metastasis is complicate and remains poorly understood. In this study, we
have collected 79 human CRC samples, and 60 of them are paired primary
tumor and liver metastatic surgically resected samples. Molecular
characterization of these samples was conducted by exome and RNA
sequencing, as well as SNP6.0 analysis. Genetic analysis revealed no
significant difference in genetic alterations including common oncogenic
mutations, whole genome mutations and copy number variations between
primary and their matched liver metastatic tumors. To further
characterize the molecular mechanism of metastatic progression, we have
assembled gene correlation networks by utilizing a genome-wide
interrogation of co-regulated networks based on RNA sequencing data of
these CRC samples. Computational analysis of these correlation networks
has identified gene signatures of immune-suppression,
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and angiogenesis as the key
events and potentially synergistic drivers associated with CRC
metastasis. Further independent cohort validation using published
datasets verified that these specific gene networks of tumor
microenvironment were progressively up-regulated throughout the
carcinogenesis, and represented distinct biological processes. These gene
networks were capable of discriminating the previously categorized CRC
molecular subclasses. In addition, we also showed an association of type
I interferon network with good clinical outcome of CRC, and gene networks
of EMT, angiogenesis, immune-suppression and T cell exhaustion are
closely associated with the poor patient outcome. We further demonstrated
that the networks of EMT and angiogenesis were related to innate
anti-PD-1 resistance, and the networks of immunosuppression and T cell
exhaustion were associated with resistance to radiation and checkpoint
blockade. Overall, we conclude that a genome-wide interrogation of
co-regulated networks utilized in this study represents a valuable
strategy to identify molecular mechanisms of cancer metastasis, and gene
networks of immune-suppression, EMT and angiogenesis are among the key
events associated with CRC metastasis.


