Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction with extracellular matrix enhance the chemoresistance
via CXCL12/CXCR4 and integrin signal activation by cancer-associated
fibroblasts in gastric cancers.


Purpose: Gastric cancers (GCs) is an aggressive cancer metastasizing with
a high propensity for peritoneal dissemination and liver metastasis. Some
studies have been shown that not only cancer cells but also cancer
environment, especially cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) play an
important role in tumor development. Previously, we reported that
CXCL12-CXCR4 and integrin beta 1 signal activation by CAFs co-operates
for promoting FAK phosphorylation and enhances the invasiveness of GC
cells in extracellular matrix (ECM). On the other hand, a previous study
presented that CXCR4 and integrin signaling co-operates in mediating
adhesion and chemoresistance in small cell lung cancer cells. Therefore,
we hypothesized that CXCL12-CXCR4 and integrin signal activation by CAFs
enhances the chemoresistance in GCs as well. The aim of current study is
to elucidate the significance of cancer microenvironment with CAFs
mediating signal activation for chemoresistance in GCs.

Experimental Design: We first performed reactive oxygen spices
(ROS)-sensitive assay and chemo-sensitive assays using GC cells cultured
with fresh medium or with CAF-conditioned-medium (CM), and these
experiments were conducted on non-coated and Matrigel-coated plates.
Next, we examined the CXCL12-CXCR4 and integrin related signaling by
western blotting analysis. Furthermore, we investigated the critical
molecule for chemoresistance using silencing CXCR4 or integrin beta 1 in
GC cells.

Results: ROS-sensitive assay and chemo-sensitive assays revealed that GC
cells cultured with CAF-CM showed more resistant to ROS and cisplatin
than those cultured with fresh medium. Moreover, GC cells with CAF-CM on
Matrigel-coated plates exhibited remarkable resistance in these assays.
On the other hand, western blotting analysis showed that Akt activity in
GC cells cultured with CAF-CM was up-regulated in concurrence with FAK
phosphorylation. Finally, the chemoresitance induced by CAFs was
significantly suppressed by CXCR4 or integrin beta 1 silencing.

Conclusions: These results suggest that interaction with ECM is important
for enhance chemoresitance mediated CXCL12/CXCR4 and integrin beta 1
signal activation by CAFs in GCs. This mechanism underlying the
chemoresistance may provide a novel therapeutic target in advanced GCs.


