Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interrogating the impact of pregnancy on breast cancer biology
using DNA copy number profiling.


Background

Epidemiological evidence indicates a clear relationship between pregnancy
and breast cancer (BC) risk. However, little is known regarding the
impact of pregnancy on BC biology. DNA copy number aberrations (CNAs)
play an important role in breast carcinogenesis. BC during pregnancy is a
rare disease, however it can be used as a model to study the impact of
pregnancy on BC biology.

Methods

We retrospectively included 54 pregnant and 113 non-pregnant BC patients
matched for age and stage with complete clinic-pathological, gene
expression and 5-year follow-up data. CNAs were assessed using Affymetrix
OncoScan FFPE arrays. First, we filtered genes whose expression was
driven by CNAs. Then, we identified genes that were differentially
affected by pregnancy both at the CNA and the gene expression level.

Results

After quality control, CNA profiles were obtained for 38 pregnant and 87
non-pregnant BC patients. There were no significant differences in
classical clinic-pathological features (pT, pN, grade, PAM50). We
selected 1981 genes whose expression was correlated with CNAs (ρ ≥
0.4). Among these, 77 genes were altered at the expression level (p ≤
0.01) between pregnant and control patients, whereas 171 genes were
altered at the CNA level (p ≤ 0.05). Twenty-eight genes were
concomitantly altered at the expression and CNA levels which was
significantly higher than expected (p = 0.021, permutation test). These
genes were mapped on three different chromosomes. Genes located on chr7q
and chr11q were associated with copy number gains and were up-regulated
in pregnant patients whereas genes located on chr22q were associated with
copy number loss in control patients. Of interest we identified 6
putative oncogenes (CDK6, ESRRA, S6K2, LIMK2, MKL1) that were
up-regulated in pregnant patients. A ‘pregnancy-associated breast
cancer signature’ was computed from the expression of the 28 genes.
There was a negative relationship between the signature and the
expression of ESR1 and PGR genes. This signature was significantly more
correlated with the proliferation-associated AURKA gene in pregnant
patients as compared to control (ρ = 0.73 vs ρ = 0.24, p = 0.001).

Conclusions

In this study, we were able to identify several genomic alterations
associated with pregnancy that could help elucidate the impact of
pregnancy on BC risk. Moreover, by combining CNAs with gene expression,
we were able to identify genes that could be responsible for the poorer
prognosis seen in pregnancy-associated breast cancer and could be
potential drivers of this rare disease.


