Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishing the natural history of the immunosuppressive myeloid
microenvironment in an inducible model of lung adenocarcinoma.


Tumorigenesis is accompanied by broad changes to the surrounding tissue
microenvironment in a tumor- and patient-specific manner. Phenotype
shifts in tissue-resident immune cells promote cancer progression by
establishing a proliferative inflammatory environment, activating
angiogenesis, stimulating tumor cell invasion and suppressing anti-tumor
immunity. While the former mechanisms are well appreciated and often
targeted by current cancer therapeutics, the nature of the mechanisms
controlling establishment of the local immunosuppressive state that
contribute to a failure of anti-tumor immunity are less clearly defined.
Blockade of tumor antigen-specific T cell killing is clearly a major
contributor to the failure to control tumorigenesis. However, evidence
suggests that phenotypic shifts in innate immune cell populations also
contribute to the failure of anti-tumor immunity. We hypothesize that the
emergence of early lung adenocarcinomas is accompanied by a shift in
myeloid phenotypes, rapidly establishing a microenvironment favorable to
tumor growth, survival and vascularization, and hostile to cell-mediated
anti-tumor immune responses. Through the utilization of a Cre-inducible
mouse model of p53-null, Kras-G12D+ lung adenocarcinoma, we have begun to
define the natural history of the myeloid component of the tumor
microenvironment, from tumor initiation to a point equivalent to human
stage I adenocarcinoma. Histological, flow cytometry and real-time PCR
approaches collectively demonstrate that tumor-associated myeloid
phenotypes emerge at a very early stage of disease. These data are
consistent with our hypothesis that the myeloid component of the tumor
microenvironment plays a crucial role in establishing an
immunosuppressive state during early tumorigenesis. Implications of these
findings for current and emerging immunotherapies will be discussed.


