Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tracking expression, post-translational modifications and
interactions of EGF signalling proteins in A431 cells with antibody
microarrays.


Elucidation of epidermal growth factor (EGF) signalling pathways in
cancer cells has helped to define the mechanisms for their neoplastic
transformation and potential drug targets for therapeutic intervention.
Antibody microarrays are promising tools to evaluate alterations in the
levels and phosphorylation status of hundreds of proteins of interest
with only microgram amounts of crude cell and tissue lysate protein.
However, interpretations of the results from traditional antibody
microarray approaches have been hampered by the problems associated with
sample preparation and protein detection, even when reliable antibodies
are deployed in these arrays. The Kinex™ KAM-900P antibody microarray
permitted semi-quantitative measurements of the expressions,
post-translational modifications and interactions of proteins with 100
µg or less of lysate proteins. These microarrays utilize approximately
878 different pan- and phosphosite-specific antibodies for tracking
protein kinases, phosphatases and other low abundance regulatory
proteins. Multiple detection protocols were developed with the KAM-900P
slides to enable high depth profiling of protein levels, phosphorylation
and protein-protein interactions in A431 cells in response to EGF
treatment. One method (KAM) involved the capture of in vitro
biotin-labeled proteins, followed by their detection with a secondary
dye-labeled anti-biotin antibody. False positive signals from associated
proteins in complexes with the targets were reduced by chemical cleavage
with NTCB prior to their capture on the array, and this also produced
more uniformity of the dye signals for protein targets despite vast
differences in their sizes. Transient changes in protein phosphorylation
in EGF treated cells that were typically lost when processed by
conventional methods were better preserved by chemical cleavage right at
time of sample homogenization. Biotin-labeling and subsequent detection
of the protein on the array with a dye-labeled secondary antibody further
reduced non-specific background signals, allowed for a greater dynamic
range of detection, and enhanced discrimination of subtle changes. In
conjunction with other detection protocols, such as the usage of
dye-labeled reporter antibodies for generic protein-tyrosine
phosphorylation in sandwich antibody microarrays (SAM format) or generic
protein phosphorylation with nanoparticles such as pAMIGO (PAM format),
it is also feasible to monitor changes in general post-translational
modifications of target proteins or their specific association with other
adapter, scaffolding and chaperone proteins of interest for which
antibody probes are available.


