Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HSP90 inhibition leads to a differential proteomics profile in non
small cell lung cancer cell lines.


Background: The cancer chaperone, Heat Shock Protein 90 (HSP90), is known
for its ability to regulate the stability of different oncogenic
proteins. Thus, its overexpression has been related to unfavorable
prognosis in some types of tumors. EGFR and EML4-ALK, two of the most
important drivers in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), are HSP90
clients and extremely depend on it. As a consequence, this chaperone is
especially important in NSCLC hence HSP90 inhibition shows a lot of
possibilities to future treatments in this tumor type. Nevertheless, to
obtain a successful clinical development, will be essential supporting
evidence of inhibitory efficacy in several molecularly defined subgroups
of NSCLC.

Methods: NSCLC cell lines carrying different gene mutations, whose direct
(HCC827: EGFR mutated and H3122: EML4-ALK rearrangement) and indirect
(A549: KRAS mutated) relationship with HSP90 has been reported, were
used. In these cell lines, along with H1781 (EGFR, KRAS, ALK wild type)
as control, the activity of the chaperone studied was interrupted. To
this end, pharmacological inhibition of HSP90 was achieved through
geldanamycin and resorcinol derivates. First, western blotting was
carried out to confirm the effect of this inhibition. Later, to identify
a proteomic profile associated with HSP90 inhibition, two-dimensional
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) of selected cell lines were
performed.

Results: The expression of the oncogenic HSP90 client proteins studied
was decreased by the inhibitors in the NSCLC cell lines. The oncoproteins
drivers EGFR and EML4-ALK showed a strong dependence on HSP90 observed
through a high sensitivity of the cell lines HCC827 and H3122 to the
inhibition. Therefore, these cell lines were selected with the purpose of
identify a proteomic signature linked to HSP90 inhibition by 2D-PAGE. The
untreated EGFR positive cell line presented 104 protein spots
significantly up-regulated, whereas 80 spots were down-regulated compared
to inhibited cell line. Meanwhile, the cell line harboring the EML4-ALK
translocation showed 16 spots up-regulated and 5 down-regulated in the
untreated versus inhibited cell line. In addition HSP70 overexpression,
compared to unprocessed cell lines, was detected after treatments. This
feedback, previously reported, confirmed HSP90 inhibition in the two cell
lines studied.

Conclusions: The evidence of treatment response, in the cell lines
studied, was showed through oncogenic client proteins reduction as well
as HSP70 induction. The proteomic profiles identified, of HSP90 inhibited
and untreated tumor cells, revealed several deregulated pathways involved
in the tumorigenesis.


