Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Flavokawain A, a kava chalcone, inhibits growth and invasion of
human osteosarcoma cells by targeting Skp2.


Purpose: Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary bone malignancy
with a high propensity for local invasion and distant metastasis.
Flavokawain A (FKA), a major chalcone from kava extract, has been
reported to have antitumor effects on multiple cancer cell lines. The
consumption of kava-containing beverage has been associated with a low
cancer incidence. In a previous report, mice treated with high-dose FKA
did not demonstrate any significant major organ toxicity. However, the
efficacy and anticancer mechanisms of FKA in OS is still to be elucidated.

Experimental Design: OS cell lines were treated with increasing dosage of
FKA and tested for cell motility, proliferation, and invasion by MTT
assay and Matrigel invasion assay. Cell cycle analysis was performed
using flow cytometry. We examined Skp2 expression in several OS cell
lines using western blot and in patient tissue array by immunostaining.
Kaplan-meier analysis and log rank test were used to compare overall
survival. Both Skp2-dependent cell cycle progression and Skp2-related
RhoA expression were also examined after FKA treatment. The effects of
FKA on lung metastasis were evaluated after orthotopic injection of OS
cells into the tibia.

Results: We show that FKA inhibits the growth and motility of multiple OS
cell lines in vitro. Flow cytometry analysis confirms cellular apoptosis
and arrest in G2/M phase after FKA treatment, whereas cellular invasion
is also inhibited in a dose-dependent manner. Skp2 is expressed in
several OS cell lines and is associated with a poor prognosis in OS
patients. Skp2 levels in OS cell lines decreased after FKA treatment. The
expression of cell cycle regulators including p21 and p27, which are
downstream of Skp2, was upregulated. Moreover, Skp2-related RhoA
expression is inhibited by FKA and confirmed at protein level.

Conclusions: Taken together, the evidence suggests FKA exerts
anti-invasive effects in association with Skp2-dependent cell cycle
progression and Skp2-related RhoA expression. Since Skp2 is a negative
prognostic factor for OS patients, FKA should be investigated further as
an anti-Skp2 therapeutic strategy for OS.


