Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunological landscape of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC):
PD-1 expression in lung TILs correlate with co-expression of other
checkpoint inhibitor molecules.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of annual cancer related mortality in
the United States. More than 150,000 people in the U.S. will die from
lung cancer this year which will lead to roughly as many deaths as
breast, prostate, colon, and pancreatic cancers combined. Lung cancer is
also of global concern as tobacco and cigarette use, a significant known
risk factor, in developing countries have risen significantly. Stage II
and III non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients often have a 5-year
disease free survival of less than 50% even after surgical resection and
post-operative chemotherapy and a dismal 5% overall survival for patients
with stage IV metastatic disease. Even with the advent of PD-1/PDL-1
checkpoint blockade immunotherapies, only about 20% of patients are
responsive to the treatment. This limited scope of success may be due to
our lack of understanding the immune landscape of NSCLCs. Therefore, we
set out to characterize the immune composition from surgical lung
resections via flow cytometry. We found that NSCLCs have a diverse set of
checkpoint inhibitor and co-stimulatory molecules expressed by T cells,
including PD-1, TIM-3, and TIGIT. Interestingly, even though PD-1 was
elevated compared to a normal donor, the expression level was lower than
either breast or melanoma tumor samples. We also discovered that PD-1
heavily correlates with co-expression of other checkpoint inhibitor
molecules. In our regulatory T cell analysis, FoxP3+ populations have a
profound presence in these lung tumors suggesting there is a highly
suppressive environment for tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). Our
lung resection screenings furthermore suggests a dynamic range of both
frequency and proportion of CD3-CD56+ natural killer (NK) cells. Finally,
our data indicates there is a large population of CD11b+CD33+
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) in the tumors, with varying
degrees of arginase-1 expression, a functional marker for MDSCs.
Altogether, these findings in concert suggest there are potential
goldmine of opportunities to target molecules on different immune cell
populations. This multi-modal approach, directing combination of
immunotherapies that influences multiple immune compartments yet
complement each other, may have significant implications for future
clinical studies.


