Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy improves survival in stage II
colon cancer? A propensity score matching analysis.


Objective : Stage II colon cancer with high-risk features have been
traditionally considered more likely to benefit from postoperative
adjuvant chemotherapy (POAC). National Comprehensive Cancer Network
(NCCN) guidelines do not recommend routine administration of adjuvant
chemotherapy for Stage II patients, except for those with high risk
features, such as poorly-differentiated tumors, T4 disease, perforated
tumors and those with inadequate lymph node sampling. However, the use of
POAC after surgery for patients with Stage II colon cancer remains
controversial. The current study was conducted to investigate the
effectiveness of POAC using propensity score (PS) matching analysis,
which can reduce or minimize the confounding that is seen frequently in
observational studies of the effect of treatment on outcomes, based on
prognostic factors.

Materials : Two hundred and nineteen patients with Stage II colon cancer
who underwent surgery with curative intent between 1995 and 2005 were
enrolled. The decision regarding the use of POAC was made for each case
based on individual patient/physician discussions. All patients were
required to provide informed consent. During the present study period,
patients received 5-FU drugs orally, starting 4~8 weeks after surgery.
The median observation period was 73.4 months (range: 2.2 - 184.2
months). Methods : PS matching analysis was used to adjust for
differences in clinicopathological severity between the patients with and
without POAC. Recurrence-free and cancer-specific survival were
calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method and univariate analyses were
performed using the log-rank test. The Cox proportional-hazard model was
used to determine Hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals.

Results : One hundred and nineteen patients (54.3%) underwent POAC. In
univariate analysis, there were significant differences in age, invasion
depth, lymphatic invasion and venous invasion between the patients with
and without POAC. After PS matching analysis, in univariate analysis,
there were no significant differences with respect to the
clinicopathological factors between the patients with and without POAC.
Before PS matching analysis significant survival benefits from POAC were
not recognized for recurrence-free survival (Hazard ratio= 0.76, 95% CI
0.40-1.45, P=0.41) or cancer-specific survival (Hazard ratio= 0.52, 95%
CI 0.22-1.19, P=0.12). After PS matching analysis significant survival
benefits from POAC were not recognized for recurrence-free survival
(Hazard ratio= 0.55, 95% CI 0.23-1.23, P=0.15) or cancer-specific
survival (Hazard ratio= 0.46, 95% CI 0.16-1.18, P=0.11).

Conclusions : The one-to-one pair PS matching successfully balanced the
clinicopathological factors between the patients with and without POAC.
The PS matching analysis demonstrated no significant difference in
survival in the patients with Stage II colon cancer.


