Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the molecular mechanism underlying SETD2-PI3Kβ
synthetic-lethal interaction in renal cell carcinoma (RCC).


Epigenetic regulators are emerging as major drivers of renal cell
carcinoma (RCC). SETD2, a tumor suppressor commonly mutated in RCC, is
the sole enzyme responsible for tri-methylating histone H3 on lysine 36
(H3K36me3) of actively transcribed genes. We recently discovered that
SETD2 also trimethylates the non-histone target α-tubulin on lysine 40
(α-TubK40Me3) of mitotic microtubules. We have demonstrated that
mutations altering SETD2’s ability to trimethylate H3K36 and α-TubK40
are associated with genomic instability in cancer progression. We
hypothesized that defective SETD2 methylating activity gives rise to
deleterious cell signaling cascades that promote the tumorigenic features
of SETD2 loss. Preliminary data show that RCC-derived 786-0 cells that
are deleted for SETD2 (SETD2-KO) or harbor pathogenic mutations are more
sensitive to treatment with the PI3Kβ-specific inhibitor TGX-221 than
their wild type counterparts. Phosphatidylinositol 3kinases (PI3Ks) are a
family of lipid kinases that coordinate signals from growth factors,
cytokines and other environmental cues, translating them into
intracellular signals controlling diverse signaling pathways. Several
members of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway, including the PI3K α and β
isoforms, are frequently mutated in a variety of cancers, making this
pathway a prime drug target for anti-cancer therapy. These pathways
control numerous biological processes, such as cell proliferation,
growth, and motility. Examination of structurally variant SETD2 mutants
suggests that the loss of SETD2 methylating activity mediates this
interaction, and future studies will examine the functional consequences
of inhibiting this pathway. In summary, these data suggest a
synthetic-lethal type of interaction between SETD2 loss (and specifically
loss of methylating activity) and an aberrant PI3K/AKT pathway.


