Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting post-surgical breast cancer metastasis through combining
natural killer T cell immunotherapy and low dose chemotherapy.


Breast cancer is the most common cancer in Canadian women and the second
leading cause of cancer deaths. Given that most mammary tumors are
surgically resectable and over 90% of breast cancer-associated deaths are
due to metastasis, new therapeutic strategies targeting metastasis are
required. Natural killer T (NKT) cells are a rare population of immune
cells that have been shown to limit primary tumor growth and target
distant metastatic disease in various animal models. We have shown that
NKT cell activation improves survival in a model of post-surgical
metastatic breast cancer. We are now expanding this work to determine
whether NKT cell activation can be combined with chemotherapies to
improve outcomes. In our model, 4T1 mammary carcinoma cells were injected
into the mammary fatpad of syngeneic BALB/c mice. Tumors were resected at
day 12, and mice were treated with cyclophosphamide or gemcitabine. On
day 17, NKT cells were activated by transfer of dendritic cells loaded
with the glycolipid antigen α-GalCer. We also examined whether
gemcitabine or mafosphamide (active component of cyclophosphamide) would
induce immunogenic cell death of 4T1 cells in culture. Chemotherapeutics
did not affect NKT cell activation as measured by serum IFNγ levels.
Treatment with cyclophosphamide, gemcitabine, or α-GalCer-loaded
dendritic cells alone reduced metastasis and prolonged survival. Combined
treatments significantly enhanced survival. NKT cell activation decreased
the frequency and immunosuppressive function of myeloid derived
suppressor cells (MDSCs). Treatments resulted in enhanced tumor specific
immunity as surviving mice exhibited slower tumor growth following
secondary tumor challenge. Gemcitabine and mafosphamide also increase the
immunogenicity of cancer cells in vitro by increasing the
exposure/release of MHCI, MHCII, CD1d, Calreticulin, HMGB1 and ATP. NKT
cell activation therapy can successfully be combined with low doses of
gemcitabine or cyclophosphamide to enhance protection against tumor
metastasis and recurrence. This work provides a clear rationale for
combining chemotherapy with NKT cell immunotherapy to target metastatic
disease in the clinical setting.


