Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A biochemical approach to discriminate between ATP-competitive and
non-ATP competitive protein kinase inhibitors.


Protein kinases are central to cellular signal transduction and
regulation of cellular processes, and are one of the most attractive
target classes in modern drug discovery. Multiple kinase inhibitors have
already been approved for treatment of various diseases including such
severe conditions as cancer. The first and up to today largest group of
drugs that effectively inhibits their respective kinase targets belong to
the class of ATP competitive compounds. They bind into or near the ATP
binding site of the enzymes and inhibit kinase activity by blocking
access of ATP to the active site. Although there are numerous examples of
highly specific ATP competitive compounds this mode of action is limited
by several factors: The ATP binding pocket structures of kinases show a
high degree of similarity, which makes finding highly selective compounds
challenging. Furthermore, competing with ATP for binding to the same
target site, compounds have to be of very high affinity due to the high
intracellular ATP concentrations. Therefore, the interest to develop
non-ATP competitive inhibitors has risen considerably over the last
years. Such inhibitors bind to kinases at sites apart from the ATP
binding site, inhibiting their activity e.g. by stabilizing an inactive
conformation (like DFG-out state binders), displacing essential cofactors
(like cyclins for CDKs) or by blocking activating modifications (like
phosphorylation by upstream kinases). We present data of an in-vitro
biochemical kinase activity assay setup which is suited to discriminate
between ATP-competitive and non-ATP competitive inhibitors. The IC50 of
an ATP-competitive inhibitor will increase with increasing ATP
concentrations and the IC50 value at a given ATP concentration may be
calculated using the equation of Cheng and Prussof:
IC50=Ki+(Ki*[ATP]/KM[ATP] (Cheng Y., Prusoff W. H. (1973) Biochem.
Pharmacol. 22: 3099-3108). By determining IC50 values for an inhibitor of
a specific kinase at different ATP concentrations we examined whether the
IC50 value changed according to the Cheng-Prusoff equation, indicating an
ATP-competitive mode of action, or if the IC50 values remained unchanged
in presence of elevated ATP indicating a non-ATP competitive or mixed
type mode of action. In our assay setup we determined the IC50 values at
ATP concentrations in a range of 0.1 to 10 fold the ATP KM of the kinase
of interest. By comparing the results obtained for the non-ATP
competitive MEK1 inhibitor selumetinib and the ATP competitive inhibitor
staurosporine we could verify that our assay setup is well suited to
discriminate between these different types of kinase inhibitors.


