Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CtBP1 and metabolic syndrome induce breast cancer progression and
lung metastasis.


Breast cancer (BrCa) is one of the most important public health problems
in the entire world. Metabolic syndrome (MeS) increases the incidence and
aggressiveness of BrCa. C-terminal binding protein 1 (CtBP1) is a
co-repressor of tumor suppressor genes that is activated by low NAD+/NADH
ratio. Recently, we generated a MeS-like experimental mice model by
chronically feeding animals with high fat diet (HFD) and we found that
CtBP1 and MeS modulated breast carcinogenesis and tumor growth. We also
showed that CtBP1 and MeS decreased BrCa cell adhesion, a crucial event
in the beginning of metastasis. Considering metastasis is still the main
cause of death, and around 30 % of women with BrCa diagnosed at early
stages will progress to metastatic stage, it is crucial to understand the
impact of non-inherited factors and the mechanism underlying this
process. The aim of this work was to explore CtBP1 and MeS role in BrCa
cell migration and metastasis. By wound healing assay, we found that
CtBP1 increased cell migration of MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 BrCa cells. To study
CtBP1 and MeS effect in tumor progression, MeS nude mice induced by
chronically feeding animals with HFD; and control diet fed animals, were
injected with CtBP1-depleted expression or -control MDA-MB-231 cells. Six
weeks post-injection primary tumors were surgically removed. After two
weeks, mice were sacrificed and the presence of metastasis in lung, liver
and ascites was analyzed by histology and/or quantified by RT-qPCR using
specific primers for human GAPDH. Consistently with the onset of
metastasis, MeS increased the number of mice that developed neoplastic
ascites (20% in MeS vs. 50% in control) with presence of tumor cells (TC)
detected by RT-qPCR. In addition, histological analysis and RT-qPCR
quantitation revealed that CtBP1 hyperactivation by MeS significantly
increased BrCa lung metastasis. Interestingly, human Vimentin mRNA was
induced in TC from ascites compared to primary TC; while it was
diminished in lung, suggesting the crucial role of EMT/MET processes in
metastasis. Finally, we analyzed expression of cell adhesion and
EMT-related genes in primary tumor tissue by RT-qPCR. We found that CtBP1
and MeS modulated cell adhesion and EMT expression genes: Vimentin, Slug,
ITGB4, ITGB6, Col17A, FABP4 and PRSS2. Altogether, these results suggest
a key role for MeS and CtBP1 inducing BrCa EMT and metastasis.


