Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: INCAGN1876, a unique GITR agonist antibody that facilitates GITR
oligomerization.


Glucocorticoid-induced TNFR family related protein (GITR, CD357 or
TNFRSF18) is a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily
(TNFRSF). Like other T cell co-stimulatory TNFR family members, GITR
utilizes multiple oligomerization states to regulate the initiation of
downstream signaling during T cell activation by antigen presenting cells
(APCs). The formation of receptor superclusters, comprised of two or more
trimeric molecules, has been defined for multiple TNFRs as a means of
regulating downstream signal amplification. For co-stimulatory TNFRs,
like GITR, CD137 and OX40, signaling outcomes in T cells are primarily
mediated via the NFκB pathway that promotes cell survival and effector
cell activities in response to suboptimal T cell receptor (TCR)
stimulation. It has been hypothesized that the manipulation of the
oligomeric states of co-stimulatory TNFRs using antibodies may have
therapeutic utility in enhancing the activity of tumor-reactive T cells,
either as single agents or in combination with other immunomodulatory or
immune education strategies. Here we describe a structure-based analysis
of two functionally distinct classes of anti-human GITR antibodies that
stabilize unique conformational states of the receptor. INCAGN1876, a
human IgG1 monoclonal anti-GITR antibody, was found to engage a
conformational epitope located within a β-turn of the extracellular
domain of GITR. This antibody binding site modified the equilibrium of
GITR monomer, dimer and trimers to promote receptor oligomerization,
resulting in downstream NFκB signaling. Notably, this mode of INCAGN1876
receptor engagement enabled it to effectively activate the GITR pathway
in recently primed T cells. By contrast, a second reference anti-GITR
antibody required concomitant TCR co-engagement in order to modulate the
GITR pathway. High content confocal analysis was used to evaluate the
kinetics of GITR clustering by both classes of anti-GITR antibody,
confirming our T cell functional analysis. The ability of INCAGN1876 to
engage and effectively activate GITR on recently primed T cells may
enable them to overcome suppressive features of the tumor
microenvironment. Notably, INCAGN1876 was shown to promote T cell
co-stimulation both as a single agent and in combination with other
antibodies targeting PD-1, CTLA-4 and OX40. Finally, we compared the
pharmacologic activity of INCAGN1876 to Fc variants of this antibody with
diminished binding to the inhibitory Fcγ receptor (FcγR), CD32B. The
superiority of an IgG1 antibody in these assays was consistent with the
potential to achieve optimal GITR clustering by FcγRs, while maintaining
the potential for FcγR-mediated effector cell activity directed toward
intratumoral GITRhigh regulatory T cells. INCAGN1876 is currently under
evaluation in Phase 1/2 studies in subjects with advanced metastatic
solid tumors (NCT02697591).


