Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying genetic modifiers of PTEN using the Collaborative
Cross mouse panel.


Tumor suppressor genes code for proteins that limit cellular
proliferation and cancer progression, and are often exploited in cancer
therapies. One such tumor suppressor gene, Phosphatase and Tensin homolog
deleted from Chromosome Ten (PTEN), mediates cell growth through negative
regulation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) dependent pathways.
PTEN is frequently deleted or mutated in a variety of human cancers. Mice
carrying a PTEN transgene (Super-PTEN mice) were found to be resistant to
tumor formation, and even small changes in PTEN expression and activity
have been shown to influence cancer susceptibility and progression. We
hypothesized that PTEN activity can be altered by modifier genes. To
determine whether PTEN modifiers are influencing its activity, we are
using the Collaborative Cross (CC), a panel of inbred mouse strains that
has a similar amount of genetic variation as human populations. In
CC-Super-PTEN crosses, we are utilizing an easily measured phenotype of
Super-PTEN mice, reduced body weight, to identify CC strains with altered
PTEN function. On average, weanlings carrying the PTEN transgene weigh
16% less than their wild type littermates, but this weight difference
varies significantly across strains, from no weight reduction to as much
as a 29% difference. This distribution of phenotypes has allowed us to
use quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping to identify potential
modifiers of PTEN. Through association mapping, we have determined that
the loci with the highest LOD scores reside on chromosomes 2, 12, 16, and
X, and we are now reviewing genes within those loci to identify candidate
modifiers of PTEN. Additionally, we are using several cancer models to
determine the effects of said candidate genes and confirm that an altered
PTEN weight phenotype correlates with changes in cancer susceptibility
and progression. Ultimately, this research will demonstrate the use of
the CC mouse panel to identify novel genetic modifiers and improve our
understanding of PTEN regulation.


