Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A digital droplet PCR assay for the quantitation of androgen
receptor and splice variant expression in CTCs from metastatic castration
resistant prostate cancer patients.


Prostate cancer (PC) is the second leading cause of cancer death in men
in the US. The aberrant functioning of androgen receptor signaling is the
central driving force behind prostatic tumorigenesis and its transition
into metastatic castration resistant disease. Hence, androgen deprivation
therapy (ADT) is the first line of treatment for PC patients. However,
many patients progress becoming resistant to ADT therapy, due to the
expression of AR splice variants (AR-Vs), which lack the ligand binding
domain and are constitutively active in the nucleus. Expression of the AR
splice variant, AR-v7, in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) isolated from
the blood of PC patients was correlated with resistance to enzalutamide
and abiraterone, which are the next generation AR signaling inhibitors in
CRPC. Further, there is evidence that AR-Vs may convey cross-resistance,
not only to enzalutamide and abiraterone, but also to taxanes,
highlighting that their assessment in the clinic may have clinical
utility.

We developed a novel, specific and highly sensitive assay to measure mRNA
expression of the AR full length (AR-FL) and the splice variants ARv7 and
ARv567es, by using Droplet Digital PCR in CTCs isolated from CRPC
patients. The analytical specificity of the assay was determined by
transfecting cells with plasmids encoding AR-FL, AR-v7 and AR-v567 and
showed that each probe detected signal only in cells expressing the
respective transcript. No signal was detected against genomic DNA,
indicating lack of non-specific binding. Also, the assay detected
endogenous expression of AR-FL and AR-v7 in VCAP or 22RV1 cells, while no
variant expression was detected in healthy donor blood. The analytical
sensitivity of the assay was determined in a series of serial dilution
experiments that showed sensitivity down to single cell.

We then used this assay to determine the clinical prevalence and
expression pattern of each of these variants in CTCs from about 200 mCRPC
patient samples and blood from 40 healthy donors. CTCs were enriched by
EpCAM- or PSMA-based positive selection or CD45 negative depletion in an
antigen-agnostic manner. AR-FL was detected in ~80% of mCRPC samples
irrespective of CTC-enrichment technology. AR-v7 was expressed in 65% of
the samples in which in CTCs were enriched either by PSMA-positive
selection or by negative depletion. In contrast, EpCAM-based CTC
enrichment showed lower AR-v7 expression both in terms of expression
levels and prevalence. In addition, CTC enrichment following negative
depletion showed that 30% of the samples had higher AR-v7 expression
levels as compared to AR-FL. This expression pattern was not observed in
the samples using EpCAM-based selection. Collectively, these data suggest
distinct CTC subpopulations are present in CRPC patient samples, with
differential expression of AR-Vs that could have important predictive and
prognostic implications.


