Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of STAT3 by antisense oligonucleotide treatment
decreases the immune suppressive tumor microenvironment in syngeneic and
GEM tumor models.


AZD9150, a gen2.5 antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) targeting human STAT3,
has improved drug-like properties compared to previous generation ASO
therapeutics, including increased stability and resistance to nucleases,
reduced proinflammatory effects, and enhanced potency. We have previously
reported that in tumors, STAT3 ASOs are taken up preferentially in
stromal and immune cells of the tumor microenvironment (TME). Since
AZD9150 is selective for human STAT3, we used a surrogate ASO (muSTAT3
ASO) to explore the pharmacodynamics of ASO-mediated STAT3 inhibition in
syngeneic and genetically engineered mouse (GEM) tumor models, focusing
on effects in the TME.

In mice bearing subcutaneous CT-26 tumors, treatment with muSTAT3 ASO at
50 mg/kg, s.c., on a qdx5/wk schedule decreased STAT3 levels in immune
cell subsets in the tumor and in circulating leukocytes by 40 - 60%,
similar to the decrease in STAT3 achievable in circulating leukocytes in
human patients after AZD9150 treatment.

In a Nanostring analysis (nCounter mouse immunology panel) of CT-26
tumors from muSTAT3 ASO treated mice, CD163 (M2 immune suppressive
macrophage marker) was the gene most consistently and significantly
downregulated, by an average of 84% in three independent experiments, and
was confirmed by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Flow cytometry analysis of
myeloid subpopulations - tumor associated macrophages (F4/80+ TAMs),
monocytic myeloid derived suppressor cells, and granulocytic cells -
showed a decrease in TAMs averaging 69% across three independent
experiments. The analysis was extended to include IHC for arginase (Arg,
a marker of functional immune suppression activity). Subpopulations of
cells identified included Arg+, CD163+, and Arg+CD163+. Treatment with
muSTAT3 ASO decreased these populations by 79%, 88% and 97% respectively,
compared to control treatment. These populations were also analyzed in
two GEM tumor models - the KPC pancreatic cancer model, and a PTEN -/-
prostate cancer model - which have a TME more representative of that
found in tumors in the clinic. While the specific changes varied across
the models, likely reflecting differences in TME makeup, a reduction in
immune suppressive cell populations was present in both GEM models,
including a decrease in CD163+ cells of 79% (along with modest antitumor
activity) in the PTEN -/- prostate model after muSTAT3 ASO treatment.

These results indicate that selective STAT3 inhibition can reduce immune
suppressive cell populations in the TME, and suggest that STAT3
inhibition has the potential to enhance the antitumor activity of T-cell
targeted therapies, such as those targeting the PD1-PDL1 axis. In support
of this hypothesis, we observed that addition of muSTAT3 ASO to
anti-PD-L1 Ab treatment significantly enhanced the antitumor activity of
PD-L1 Ab treatment in two subcutaneous syngeneic tumor models, CT-26 and
A20.


