Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiopoietin-Tie-2 functional axis in colorectal cancer liver
metastasis (CRCLM) provides a new marker for stratification and
evaluation of tumor progression.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third leading cause of cancer in
Canadians, with liver metastases being the major cause of death from this
disease. Tumors induce angiogenesis, a phenomenon known as the
‘angiogenic switch’, which is an essential step in tumor progression
whereby the balance of pro- and anti-angiogenic factors are important for
active angiogenesis. Clinical efficacy of targeted VEGF (anti-angiogenic)
treatment has been validated as a cancer therapy. Our group, together
with others, has identified unique histological growth patterns HGPs
(desmoplastic, replacement and pushing) within liver metastases that have
different responses to anti-angiogenic therapy. The patients with
Desmoplastic HGP (DHGP) that received anti-angiogenic plus chemotherapy
prior to resection had a significantly better pathologic response and
survival than patients with Replacement HGP (RHGP). The aim of this study
was to explore the role of Ang-1, Ang-2, Tie-2 and VEGF in the
development and progression of CRCLM tumors with distinct HGPs. Here,
human CRCLM tumor samples were analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR
(Q-PCR) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining. The Q-PCR results
demonstrated that the expression of Ang-2 was lower in RHGP tumor samples
compared with DHGP tumor samples. This data was validated by IHC, were
IHC scoring results showed that the ratio of Ang-2: Ang-1 expression in
DHGP tumors was higher compared to RHGP tumors. VEGF and Tie2 proteins
were expressed in both tumor patterns. Thus vascular quiescence
maintained by constitutive Ang-1/Tie-2 signaling, found in RHGP tumors,
prevails over destabilization and pro-inflammatory Ang-2/Tie-2 signaling,
which is higher in the DHGP tumor samples. Since vascular remodelling is
driven by Ang-2/Tie-2 in DHGP, which is dependent on VEGF we would expect
anti-angiogenic therapy to be effective on DHGP. Furthermore, the RHGP
had low levels of Ang-2 and high levels of Ang-1, together with the
presence of Tie-2, and then one would predict that VEGF is not required
for the growth of these tumors and thus would not respond to
anti-angiogenic therapy, as has been shown in our patients’ cohort.
Taken together, these data suggest that the Angiopoietin/Tie-2 functional
axis is an important player in CRCLM tumor progression and can be a
potential target for CRCLM cancer therapy with stratification of patients
by HGPs.


