Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2)
N-glycosylation modulates angiogenic signaling.


Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels from pre-existing
vessels, is required for tumor growth and metastasis. Vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) is one of the most
important receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) among the VEGF receptor
subfamily, and activation of VEGFR-2 is essential for tumor angiogenesis.
The extracellular domain of VEGFR-2 contains seven immunoglobulin-like
(Ig) domains, each with multiple potential N-glycosylation sites.
N-glycosylation is thought to play a central role in receptor stability,
ligand binding and trafficking. However, to date the occupancy and
glycoform distributions at each of the potential N-glycosylation sites
and their putative role(s) in VEGFR-2 function remain largely unknown.
The objective of this study is to investigate the functional importance
of VEGFR-2 N-glycosylation in VEGFR-2 angiogenic signaling.

Porcine aortic endothelial (PAE) cells with ectopic expression of VEGFR-2
were treated with PNGase F to remove N-linked glycans or heat-denatured
PNGase F as a control. Following PNGase F treatment for 4 hours, cells
were treated with VEGF-A ligand for 0, 5, 10 or 30 minutes. VEGFR-2
phosphorylation (activation) was measured via Western blot with an
anti-pTyr-1054-VEGFR-2 antibody. In addition, a polyclonal anti-VEGFR2
antibody was used to immunoprecipitate untreated and PNGase F-treated
VEGFR-2 from PAE cell lysates. Evaluation of the N-glycosylation sites
targeted by PNGase F was carried out by gel electrophoresis, followed by
protease digestion and MS/MS analysis. MS/MS data were processed using
Proteome Discoverer 1.4. To obtain site-specific glycosylation
information we performed proteolysis of VEGFR-2, glycopeptide enrichment
via hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) and subsequent
analysis of glycopeptides with an Agilent 6550 Quadrupole Time-of-Flight
(Q-TOF) MS using collision-induced dissociation.

We detected a dramatic increase in ligand-mediated activation of VEGFR-2
after treatment with PNGase F, suggesting that certain N-linked glycans
may hinder ligand access to the VEGF binding site, or that removal of
N-linked glycans results in conformational changes that lead to increased
activation of the receptor by VEGF-A. To explore this observation in
greater detail, we have created a series of VEGFR-2 N-glycosylation site
mutants, and we are now using the mutants to determine which
glycosylation sites are involved in the observed modulation of VEGFR-2
signaling.


