Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PhIP/DSS-induced colon carcinogenesis in CYP1A-humanized mice and
its prevention by tocopherols.


In order to establish a more physiologically relevant colorectal cancer
model, we recently developed a colon-carcinogenesis model induced by the
meat-derived dietary carcinogen,
2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP), and promoted by
dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced colitis in the cytochrome P450
1A-humanized (hCYP1A) mice. PhIP/DSS treatments caused rapid destruction
of the colonic mucosa with severe inflammation, followed by the presence
of reactive changes and low-grade dysplastic lesions, and then
manifestation of high-grade dysplastic lesions and finally
adenocarcinomas in the middle to distal colon of the hCYP1A mice after 10
weeks. Molecular analysis of the high-grade dysplastic lesions present at
early time-points indicates Ctnnb1/β-catenin mutations and β-catenin
nuclear accumulation in high-grade dysplastic lesions, but not in
low-grade dysplastic lesions or adjacent normal tissues. Using
hCYP1A/Lgr5-EGFP mouse, which harbors EGFP-tagged Lgr5 allele, we also
investigated the role of Lgr5+ colon stem cells in the PhIP/DSS-induced
colon carcinogenesis and found the presence of Lgr5-EGFP-expressing cells
amidst ulcerated mucosa, high-grade dysplastic lesions and
adenocarcinomas, suggesting a possible role of Lgr5+ stem cells in this
colon-carcinogenesis model. In addition, our study demonstrated strong
cancer preventive effects of tocopherols (T), the major forms of vitamin
E, in PhIP/DSS-induced colon carcinogenesis. Dietary supplementation with
δ-T and γ-T significantly reduced colon tumor formation and suppressed
the expression of markers of oxidative and nitrosative stress as well as
pro-inflammatory mediators in tumors and adjacent tissues. By
administering δ-T at different time points, we found that the inhibitory
effect of δ-T against colon carcinogenesis was mainly due to protection
against early cellular and DNA damages caused by PhIP. α-T was found to
be ineffective in inhibiting colon tumorigenesis and less effective in
attenuating the molecular changes. Altogether, PhIP/DSS-induced colon
carcinogenesis is likely initiated from residual epithelial cells
(possibly Lgr5+ colon stem cells) and promoted by colitis, and
subsequently developed into high-grade dysplasia and adenocarcinoma.
These events are effectively inhibited by δ-T and γ-T, but not α-T.
(This work was supported by the US NIH grants RO1 CA133021, RO1 AT007036,
and F31 CA168333 as well as shared facilities funded by center grant P30
CA72720 and P30 ES005022).


