Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ex vivo profiling of PD-1 blockade using organotypic tumor
spheroids.


Despite the impressive activity of PD-1/PD-L1 immune checkpoint blockade
in melanoma, lung, and other cancers, the majority of patients are
intrinsically resistant to this therapy. Furthermore, despite years of
effort few robust biomarkers of response exist, and tumor PD-L1
expression and mutational load are only partially predictive of activity.
Nearly all attempts at biomarker development have relied on fixed tumor
tissue or studies in plasma. Meanwhile, emerging functional approaches to
study patient derived samples, such as organoid development and
circulating tumor cell culture, lack features of the native tumor immune
microenvironment and thus are limited in the ability to assess ex vivo
anti-PD-1 response. We have developed a novel approach to study
short-term ex vivo response to immune checkpoint blockade based upon
short term culture of murine- and patient-derived organotypic tumor
spheroids (MDOTS/PDOTS) in a 3-dimensional microfluidic system. Spheroids
derived from fresh mouse and human tumor samples through partial
collagenase digestion and filtration retain autologous tumor infiltrating
immune cells, including PD-1 positive CD8 T lymphocytes. Using murine
syngeneic mouse cancer models with known responsiveness or resistance to
PD-1 blockade, we demonstrate the ability to recapitulate tumor killing
ex vivo or lack thereof. Multiplexed cytokine profiling of conditioned
media in this system further enables characterization of the cytokine and
chemokine response to PD-1 and/or CTLA-4 blockade. We thus analyzed the
secreted cytokine/chemokine response to PD-1 inhibition across a large
panel of PDOTS, and observed pronounced induction of CCL19/CXCL13, which
associated with % PD-1 positive CD8 T cells. This strategy further
uncovered production of a class of myeloid attracting chemokines and
cytokines in major proportion of samples, which clustered with the
presence of plasmacytoid dendritic cells and myeloid derived suppressor
cells. Importantly, the presence of this maladaptive cytokine/chemokine
signature correlated with lack of response in the subset of patients that
had been treated with PD-1 blockade. Together, these data demonstrate the
ability to profile the functional response to tumor PD-1 blockade ex vivo
and unveil a novel strategy to advance precision immuno-oncology.


