Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methyl2Acetyl: predicting epigenetic and transcriptomic activity
from DNA methylation.


DNA methylation and histone modifications are interconnected and
interdependent epigenetic mechanisms that regulate chromatin
accessibility in cells. They establish cell’s developmental identity
and modulate individual response to endogenous developmental stimuli and
environmental changes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
sequencing (ChIP-seq) is a popular assay to study genomewide histone
modification profiles. However, ChIP-seq assays require relatively large
amounts of starting materials (ranging from ~105 cells using a low cell
number protocol to 107 cells in a standard protocol), which remains as a
major obstacle for precious biological samples including primary tumor
specimens. On the other hand, tagmentation-based whole genome bisulfite
sequencing (TWGBS) protocol enables unbiased assessment of the genomewide
methylation pattern using ~3,000 cells. Therefore, a quantitative
relationship between DNA methylation and epigenetic/transcriptomic
activity is in great demand.

In the current study, we developed Methyl2Acetyl, a machine learning
framework to infer promoter epigenetic activities (e.g. H3K27Ac
enrichment) using TWGBS data as input. The proposed model utilizes random
forest learners, which allow automatic extraction of complex interactions
among DNA methylation features surrounding transcription start sites. We
applied Methyl2Acetyl to a set of pediatric solid tumor samples with high
quality H3K27Ac ChIPseq data to evaluate its performance. The model
accurately predicted promoter H3K27Ac enrichment in independent test
samples (Pearson correlation against measured enrichment: 0.81 ± 0.02).
To further test the robustness of our model, we trained a Methyl2Acetyl
model on solid tumors and applied it to a set of 10 pediatric leukemia
samples. Despite dramatic global methylome differences between solid
tumors and leukemia, Methyl2Acetyl predicted promoter H3K27Ac enrichment
showed strong concordance with target gene expression level in the same
sample (Pearson correlation: 0.75 ± 0.02, classification AUC: 0.89 ±
0.01). Collectively, our data suggested that DNA methylation is
predictive of promoter active histone modification enrichment and gene
expression activity. Epigenetically active promoters can be imputed from
TWGBS data in samples with limiting starting materials.


