Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted depletion of polo-like kinase 1 alters metabolic
regulation in melanoma.


Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1), a critical regulator of mitosis, is shown to
be overexpressed in a variety of cancers. PLK1 overexpression has also
been linked to poor disease prognosis and a lessened survival in cancer
patients. Previously, we have shown that PLK1 is overexpressed in human
melanoma and its inhibition causes significant anti-proliferative
response in vitro (in multiple melanoma cells) as well as in vivo (in
human melanoma xenografts). Further, in another study we demonstrated,
based on a large-scale label-free comparative proteomics analysis, that
PLK1 inhibition via the small-molecule inhibitor BI 6727 (Volasertib) in
human melanoma cells resulted in an alteration of certain
metabolism-associated proteins with an associated decrease in cellular
metabolism. In this study, to further explore the association between
PLK1 and cellular metabolism, we utilized a doxycycline-inducible PLK1
knockdown approach in A375 melanoma cells coupled with a Human Glucose
Metabolism PCR array that covers 84 key genes involved in the regulation
and enzymatic pathways of glucose and glycogen metabolism. We found that
PLK1 knockdown resulted in a significant downregulation of 29 genes and
upregulation of 3 genes (more than 2 fold change) associated with
cellular metabolism. IDH1, PDP2 and PCK1 were >3-fold downregulated while
FBP1 was >7-fold upregulated. Through Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA),
we identified glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway as major
canonical pathways altered by PLK1 inhibition. Further, IPA identified
that PLK1 inhibition-modulated genes were largely associated with the
proliferation of cells, where FBP1 appeared as a key regulatory player.
PCK1 was found to be highly downregulated in our array, and IPA
identified it as part of a monosaccharide regulation network. We further
validated our data in vivo and found that BI 6727 treatment resulted in a
decrease in PCK1 and increase in FBP1 in A375 melanoma cell implanted
xenografts. In addition, we observed a strong inverse correlation between
PLK1 and FBP1 in multiple melanoma cell lines, with FBP1 expression
significantly downregulated in a panel of melanoma cells compared to
normal melanocytes. Moreover, BI 6727 treatment resulted in an
upregulation in FBP1 in A375, Hs 294T and G361 melanoma cells.
Interestingly, in recent studies, FBP1 (fructose-bisphosphatase) that is
a rate-limiting enzyme in gluconeogenesis, has been shown to function as
a tumor suppressor in certain cancers. Overall, our study support the
hypothesis that PLK1 is a regulator of metabolism maintenance that
affects the melanoma cell growth.


