Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronopharmacology of cisplatin: role of the circadian rhythm in
modulating cisplatin-induced toxicity in melanoma mouse model.


Purpose: The goal of this research is to highlight novel and divergent
molecular mechanisms of the circadian system in modulating the response
of cisplatin therapy against melanoma tumors. Cisplatin is one of the
most commonly used chemotherapeutic drugs in treating a variety of tumors
including cancers of ovaries, testis, lungs, blood and solid tumors of
the head and neck, and is more recently under clinical trials for
potential application in melanoma tumors. However, the major limitation
of cisplatin as a chemotherapeutic drug is its tumor resistance and
nephrotoxicity. Hence, improving the effectiveness and reducing the
toxicities associated with cisplatin therapy are desirable outcomes.
Studies on human models have shown decreased renal and blood toxicity by
time-of-the-day. Consequently, our project seeks to study the
chronopharmacological effects and understand the mechanisms that have
been successfully demonstrated in human models. We hypothesize a
mechanistic, circadian rhythm-based cause for these outcomes.

Experimental Design: Studies were done on B16F10 melanoma mouse models of
wild-type and circadian disrupted Per1/2 -/- animals treated with 3 doses
of 5 mg/kg cisplatin in the morning (7 AM) and evening (5 PM). Animal
weights and tumor sizes were measured regularly post-treatment. Upon
sacrifice, tissues (skin, kidney, and tumor) were harvested and analyzed
for cisplatin-induced toxicities and DNA damage responses using H & E
staining, western blot, and KIM-1 and immuno-slot blot assays.

Results: Weight measurements show a clock-regulated response to cisplatin
toxicity. AM-treated wild-type animals showed significant weight loss
compared to PM-treated wild-type animals. This treatment time
differential is lost in the Per1/2 -/-. On a molecular level, kidney
tissue DNA samples showed clock-controlled cisplatin-DNA repair activity
in wild-type animals compared to Per1/2 -/-. These initial findings
strongly suggest that nephrotoxicity and DNA damage response function
might be regulated by the circadian rhythm.

Conclusions: These findings indicate a possible mechanism for the
chronopharmacology of cisplatin in minimizing the toxicity associated
with it and reveal a target for future study of additional mechanistic
causes of circadian dosing changes in cisplatin and other genotoxic
stress-mediated anti-cancer agents.


