Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual antibody blockade of TIM3 and PD1 on NYESO1 redirected human
T cells leads to augmented control of lung cancer tumors.


Background: Immunotherapy using checkpoint blockade has demonstrated
impressive, durable responses in select patients with solid malignancies.
This is especially true for the blockade of programmed death 1 (PD1).
Currently, efforts are focused on understanding non-response. One
hypothesis is that multiple inhibitory receptors (IRs) are upregulated on
hypofunctional tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and necessitates
blocking multiple IRs to increase the response rate. We describe data
from a unique xenograft model of human lung cancer where tumor-reactive
human T cells become hypofunctional and upregulate multiple IRs including
PD1 and TIM3 (T cell immunoglobulin and mucin-domain containing-3).
Combining a single IV dose of tumor-reactive T cells with blockade of
both PD1 and TIM3 led to greater control of tumor growth than combining
it with blockade of either alone.

Materials/Methods: The A549 human lung cancer cell line was transduced to
stably express the cancer-testis antigen, NYESO1, expressed in the
contact of HLA-A2 (A549-A2-ESO). 5x106 A549-A2-ESO cells were injected
subcutaneously into the flanks NSG mice. Activated T cells from healthy
donors were lentivirally transduced with a TCR targeting NYESO1 (Ly95).
After two weeks when tumors were established and measured ~150mm3, the
mice were randomly assigned to one of the following treatments: 1)
untreated, 2) non-transduced (NTD) T cells plus anti-PD1 and anti-TIM3
Ab, 3) Ly95 T cells, 4) Ly95 T cells + anti-PD1 Ab, 5) Ly95 T cells +
anti-TIM3 Ab, 6) Ly95 T cells + anti-PD1 and anti-TIM3 Ab. T cells were
injected IV at a single dose of 10x106/mouse. Abs were injected
intraperitonealy (IP) at 10mg/kg every 5 days from the time of T cell
injection. Tumor volumes were measured serially. At the end, the mice
were sacrificed and the tumors were harvested, digested, and processed
into single cell suspension. Flow cytometry was performed to look at
degree of TIL infiltration and expression of surface markers. Ficoll
gradient was used to isolate the T cells to conduct functional analyses.

Results/Conclusion: By twenty days post T cell injection, the tumors in
the Ly95 T cell group (3) were ~30% smaller than that of the untreated
(1) and the NTD T cell + Ab group (2). Anti-PD1 Ab augmented Ly95 T cell
control of tumor (4) (further decrease in size by ~30%) (4). Anti-TIM3 Ab
had no effect on Ly95 T cell tumor control (5). Anti-PD1 plus anti-TIM3
Abs had the greatest augmentation on Ly95 T cell control of tumor size
(6) (greater than 50% reduction in tumor size compared Ly95 T cells
alone) The greatest TIL infiltration and ex-vivo TIL function were seen
in tumors that received Ly95 T cell + anti-PD1 and anti-TIM3 Abs. Flow
cytometry analysis revealed dynamic, adaptive upregulation of one IR when
another IR was blocked. This explained why augmentation of Ly95 T cell
control of tumor was greatest with combinatorial Ab blockade.


