Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR amplification-A candidate predictive biomarker of PARP
inhibitor Talazoparib sensitivity in gliomas.


Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerases (PARP) are enzymes involved in DNA-damage
repair. Inhibition of PARP is a promising strategy for targeting cancers
with defective DNA-damage repair. Several PARP inhibitors are currently
in trials in the adjuvant, neoadjuvant, and metastatic settings for the
treatment of ovarian, BRCA-mutated breast, and other cancers. Glioma Stem
Cells (GSCs) exhibit higher oxidative base damage, single-strand DNA
breaks and genomic instability and is reliant on single-strand break
repair/base excision repair to tolerate additional stress. PARP critical
for maintaining genomic stability by regulating a variety of DNA damage
repair mechanisms is constitutively activated in GSCs. In this study, we
show that talazoparib -- a unique PARP inhibitor exhibits a strong single
agent activity to inhibit proliferation of GSCs in vitro and suppress
tumor progression in GSCs xenografts. Talazoparib cytotoxic activity was
through inhibiting PARylation and by trapping PARP-DNA complexes
resulting in accumulation of DNA damage during replication and ultimately
leading to apoptosis. More importantly, we found EFGR amplification,
which occurs in about 45% of GBM as a biomarker of response to PARPi.
Gene expression and RPPA data showed that GSCs with EGFR amplification
were associated with increased ROS, basal expression of DNA repair
proteins and more DNA damage following talazoparib treatment, which may
partially explain the sensitivity of this group of GSCs to talazoparib.
EGFR enzyme activity was important for PARPi sensitivity since kinase
dead mutant of EGFR or EGFR knock down cell lines were resistant to PARPi
as was also shown by decreased PARP/DNA complex formation. Talazoparib
showed strong inhibition of tumor growth in subcutaneous glioma model and
20% increase in median survival in an intracranial model with a 10% blood
brain penetration of talazoparib. These data provide mechanistic insights
into the anti-cancer activity of PARP inhibitors with mechanistic
rationale of PARP inhibition and potential EGFR amplification as
biomarker in the development for precision cancer.


