Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toll like receptors mediated inflammatory signals mediate
promotion of K-ras mutant lung cancer by chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide, and cigarette
smoking is its main cause. However, smoker with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disorder (COPD), an inflammatory disease of the lung, have an
increased risk of lung cancer (3 to 10 fold) compared to smokers without
COPD. Importantly, lung inflammation persists and lung function continues
to deteriorate as does the increased risk of lung cancer even after
cessation of cigarette smoking among former smokers. These facts suggest
a strong link between COPD-related airway inflammation and lung cancer
promotion, however, the precise mechanistic link is not known. We have
previously developed a COPD-like mouse model of airway inflammation
through repeated aerosol challenge to a lysate of nontypeable (i.e.,
unencapsulated) Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi). NTHi is the most common
colonizing bacteria in the lower respiratory tract of patients with COPD
and could be a potential cause of perpetuating and promoting airway
injury and inflammation in these patients. We then showed that this type
of airway inflammation promotes lung cancer in a K-ras mutant mouse model
of lung cancer (CC-LR), which was associated with the activation of
MyD88/NF-κB pathway and increased expression of its downstream targets
in the lung. We have further shown that lack of NF-kB or MyD88 (an
adaptor protein upstream to NF-κB) in the airway epithelium of CC-LR
mice changes the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid cellular component of CC-LR
mice and inhibits the promoting effect of COPD-like airway inflammation
on lung tumorigensis. Upstream to MyD88 and NF-κB and downstream to
bacterial stimuli is the toll-like receptors family (TLRs), which play
critical role in the innate immune response. Among TLRs, TLR-2, TLR4, and
TLR9 play critical roles in mediating inflammatory responses in lung and
are required for primary epithelial response to inflammatory stimuli and
activation of MyD88/NF-kB pathway in the airway epithelium. Accordingly,
we further hypothesized that TLR-2, 4, and 9 mediate promoting effect of
inflammtion on lung tumorigenesis in an MyD88/NF-kB dependent manner.
Therefore, CC-LR mice were separately crossed to TLR-2, TLR-4 and TLR-9
knock out mice in order to test this hypothesis. We found that genetic
ablation of these TLRs in CC-LR mice, causes significant reduction in
lung surface tumor numbers compared to age and sex matched control CC-LR
mice in the presence of COPD-like airway inflammation. This tumor
reduction was associated with significant reduction in the numbers of
inflammatory cells in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of mice with lack of
these TLRs. Taken these together, we conclude that promoting effect of
COPD on lung cancer is mediated through TLR2, 4, 9-mediated activation of
epithelial MyD88/NF-kB pathway.


