Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined strategy based on pre-activated analogs of
oxazaphosphorines for increased therapeutic index and immune modulation.


Oxazaphosphorines (Oxaza) represented by cyclophosphamide (CPA) and
ifosfamide (IFO) are still the corner stone of several polychemotherapy
protocols as they are widely indicated in the treatment of numerous
cancer from soft tissue sarcomas to lymphomas and immune-related
diseases. However, Oxaza are prodrugs requiring cytochrome (CYP) P450
bioactivation responsible of limiting adverse effects. In the case of
IFO, bioactivation leads to a low release of 4-OH-IFO (10%), which
generates the active nitrogen mustard displaying DNA cross-links.
Associated toxicities of IFO due to acrolein, (urotoxicity) and to
chloroacetaldehyde (neuro and nephrotoxicity) have been described. Thus,
increasing IFO therapeutic index could be of major interest. To
circumvent these toxicities, our team has designed new pre-activated IFO
analogs to avoid CYP bioactivation (Skarbek et al J Med Chem 2015). Among
these analogues some have the ability to self-assemble as nanoassemblies
(NAs), the others can be encapsulated within nano-lipid capsules (NLCs).
These new drug delivery systems (DDS) can take advantage of passive
targeting, as stealthiness of these DDS can be provided by PEGylation by
using Cholesterol-polyethylene glycol or the use of surfactant. These DDS
can also be functionalized by appropriate monoclonal antibodies leading
to multi stage DDS with active targeting properties. Regarding CPA, it
has been shown and described in literature that low doses of CPA enhance
the immunity by promoting differentiation of CD4+ cell toward Th1. As IFO
is isomeric form of CPA, it was assumed that IFO could also have such
properties. Studies on immunocompetent MCA205 mouse model, an immunogenic
fibrosarcoma mouse model, demonstrate a dose-dependent immunomodulation
of IFO towards a modulation of the secretion of IFNy, IL-17A and IL-6
cytokines. The ongoing experiments on mouse model depleted in CD4+ T
cells and CD8+ T cells show the antitumor efficacy of IFO 150mg/kg on
these immune cells in tumor regression. Both strategies could lead to the
design of nano-immuno-conjugates (NICs) which could benefit of the
immunomodulatory effects of X-Oxaza combined to their antiproliferative
properties targeted through immune checkpoint antibodies. These new
functionalized DDS may provide a useful strategy to give specificity to
active drugs used for many years in clinical practice. Both DDS could be
grafted with mAbs which could lead to a new family of DDS aiming to
combine antiproliferative and immunomodulatory properties for a dual
antitumoral action


