Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-205 replenishment in prostate cancer cells: A novel
nanoparticle approach.


Introduction

Prostate cancer (PrCa) is the most common male malignancy among men in
the United States. Recent studies suggest that low expression of miR-205
is seen in PrCa cell lines and tumors in comparison to normal prostatic
epithelial cells. A numer of studies have shown that restoration of
miR-205 in PrCa cells resulted in supression of cell growth,
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and chemosensitization. However,
due to the poor pharmacological kinetics and low in vivo stability of
miR-205, serious limitations are being experienced at the clinical level.
Therefore, we have chosen a novel nanoparticle-based approach to deliver
miR-205, for improved therapeutic benefits in PrCa.

Methods

A novel miR-205 nanoparticle formulation (named miR-MPG) was generated
which is composed of an iron oxide core layered with polyethylene imine
(PEI), and NHS-PEG-NHS (PEG) polymer. The miR-205 withholding and release
characteristic of miR-PEG were examined through fluorescence quenching
and agarose gel electrophoresis. Hemocompatibility of this formulation
was examined using a hemolysis assay. Cellular uptake of miR-MPG
formulation was evaluated using flow cytometry and confocal studies.
Further, therapeutic and chemosensitization activity of miR-205 were
assessed using cell-culture based assays. Molecular effects associated
with the PrCa cells growth inhibiton were evaluated through protein
profiling and qRT-PCR analyses.

Results and Dissusion

miR-MPG formulation exhibited optimal particle size and zeta potential,
which are suitable for cancer therapeutics. Agarose gel electrophoresis
binding studies suggested 5 µg of nanoparticle formulation is optimum to
hold 1 µg of miR-205 mimic. Release of miR-205 from miR-MPG was
determined with respect to concentration of anionic molecules and in a
time-dependent manner. We observed no hemolysis during miR-MPG
interaction with the red blood cells indicating its hemocompatibility. In
addition, miR-MPG particles exhibited superior internalization and
endosmal escape in PrCa cells. This formulation displayed enhanced
sensitization of PrCa cells to docetaxel. Additionally, it induced the
expression of apoptotic proteins (Bax, Bim, cleaved PARP, and caspase 3),
and downregulated the anti-apoptotic proteins (Bcl-2 and survivin).
Moreover, the expression of the chemoresistance-associated proteins (PSMA
and MDR1) was profoundly inhibited in cells treated with miR-MPG in the
presence of docetaxel. Further dataset of qRT-PCR studies showed induced
expression of the miR-205 and affected the expression of its downstream
genes. These results suggest that miR-MPG formulation may serve as an
ideal delivery vehicle to deliver miR-205.

Conclusion

Results from this study suggests that successful delivery of miR-205
through miR-MPG nanoparticles can induce sensitization potential for
docetaxel treatment. This novel therapeutic modality might be effective
for PrCa patients undergoing chemotherapy.


