Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin inhibits migration and growth of human colon cancer cells
through covalent modification of oncogenic SIRT1: Cysteine 67 as a
potential binding site.


Silent mating type information regulator 2 homolog 1 (SIRT1), an
NAD+-dependent histone/protein deacetylase, has diverse physiological
functions, including metabolic regulation and stress response. Despite
extensive research, however, the role of SIRT1 in tumorigenesis remains
controversial. Recent studies have demonstrated that SIRT1 is abnormally
overexpressed in several human malignancies, and elevated levels of SIRT1
are correlated with the tumor invasion and metastasis. Curcumin
(diferuloymethane), a major component of the spice turmeric (Curcuma
longa L.), has been reported to possess anti-inflammatory and
anti-carcinogenic properties. In the present study, we found that SIRT1
is predominantly overexpressed in the cytoplasm of several colorectal
cancer cells as well as colon tumors. Curcumin abrogated migration and
colony forming capability of human colon cancer (HCT-116) cells. This
prompted us to investigate the effect of curcumin on the expression of
SIRT1 and underlying molecular mechanisms in the context of its
inhibition of the migration and growth of these cells. When HCT-116 cells
were treated with curcumin, the protein expression of SIRT1 was
significantly reduced, but the level of its mRNA transcript remained
unchanged. The curcumin-induced suppression of SIRT1 protein expression
was abrogated by the proteasomal inhibitor, MG-132. When HCT-116 cells
were treated with curcumin, ubiquitination of SIRT1 was elevated.
Notably, tetrahydrocurcumin, a non-electrophilic analogue of curcumin
that lacks the α,β-unsaturated carbonyl moiety, failed to ubiquitinate
and degrade SIRT1. Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis revealed the modification
of the SIRT1 cysteine 67 residue. In line with this observation, the
protein stability of a mutant SIRT1 in which cysteine 67 was replaced by
alanine (SIRT1-C67A) was unaffected by curcumin treatment. Furthermore,
migration and anchorage-independent growth of cells expressing SIRT1-C67A
were barely inhibited by curcumin compared with those in cells harbouring
wild-type SIRT1. Lysates of HCT-116 cells incubated with
curcumin-conjugated Sepharose 4B beads exhibited covalent binding of
curcumin to SIRT1. However, such direct interaction was markedly reduced
in cells with SIRT1 cysteine 67 mutation. Taken together, these findings
suggest that curcumin exerts inhibitory effects on progression of colon
cancer through destabilization of oncogenic SIRT1. The electrophilic
α,β-unsaturated carbonyl group present in curcumin can covalently
modify SIRT1, preferentially at the cysteine 67 residue, facilitating its
degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in HCT-116 cells.


