Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of enhanced tumor-specific immunity by Hsp90 targeted
photodynamic therapy (Hsp90-PDT) combined with immune checkpoint
inhibition.


Background: Immunotherapy has become an emerging anti-cancer therapy, as
immune checkpoint blockade with PD-1 or PD-L1 inhibition have been active
against multiple cancer types. Nonetheless, there remain many
non-responders, suggesting that combinations may improve activity,
particularly combinations which can target tumors and have low toxicity.
Methods & Results: We have developed a novel Hsp90 targeted photodynamic
therapy (Hsp90-PDT), which causes local anti-tumor responses. Hsp90-PDT
can be combined with immune checkpoint blockade to generate potent
anti-tumor effects. We synthesized well characterized PDT agent,
verteporfin (VP) tethered to a HSP90 small molecule inhibitor, to create
a Hsp90-PDT agent (Hsp90i-VP). We first compared the uptake of VP and
Hsp90i-VP into the breast cancer cell lines (E0771-OVA) in vitro.
Hsp90i-VP showed stronger incorporation than VP when the compounds were
added 3μM or less in concentration. We next performed in vitro and vivo
PDT with Hsp90i-VP and laser exposure (690 nm wavelength). Killing
efficiency of VP and Hsp90i-VP was analyzed by MTT assay, which showed
increased killing in a dose dependent manner for both photosensitizers
(0-30µM) and laser (0-120J/cm2). Next, we treated E0771-OVA
tumor-bearing C57BL/6 mice with Hsp90i-VP (25nmol/mouse) administration
alone, laser irradiation (240J/cm2) alone, or the combination of
Hsp90i-VP and laser. Suppression of the tumor growth was confirmed only
in Hsp90i-VP and laser group. In addition, induction of tumor-specific
immune response by PDT was confirmed by ELISA, where the elevation of
anti-OVA antibody was seen only in PDT group. Furthermore, combination
treatment of Hsp90-PDT and anti-PD-L1 mAbs was able to enhance cytotoxic
T-cell response and suppress tumor growth significantly even with
relatively PDT-resistant cell line. Conclusions: Hsp90-PDT showed a
significant ability to induce antigen-specific immune response in both in
vitro and in vivo. These results suggest that Hsp90-PDT can play an
important role in anti-cancer immune therapy. Our future plan is to
investigate the effect of local photodynamic therapy combined with
various types of checkpoint inhibitor in breast cancer models.


