Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive analysis of long non-coding RNAs in human stomach
adenocarcinoma molecular subtypes.


Objective: Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) plays key role in cell biology
including epigenetic remodeling and post-transcriptional regulation. The
potential roles of lncRNAs as biomarkers and therapeutic targets have
been proven in solid tumors. Molecular profiling in stomach
adenocarcinoma (STAD) has been characterized using The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) database. However, there are no current lncRNA comprehensive
analyses and the relationships between patterns of molecular subtypes and
the signature of lncRNA in in human stomach adenocarcinoma are unclear.

Methods: (1) The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) 312 primary STAD RNA-Seq data
(bam files) and their related clinical data were obtained from the Cancer
Genomics Hub and TCGA Data Portal. (2) We filtered the dataset to remove
lncRNAs with low expression, defined as having an RPKM value Methods: (1)
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) 312 primary STAD RNA-Seq data (bam files)
and their related clinical data were obtained from the Cancer Genomics
Hub and TCGA Data Portal. (2) We filtered the dataset to remove lncRNAs
with low expression, defined as having an RPKM value <1 in at least 90%
of the tumor samples. (3) We generated a correlation matrix between
lncRNAs and mRNAs by computing the Pearson correlation coefficient
between all pairs of significant lncRNAs and mRNAs. A matrix was
constructed with entries in the ternary scale (-1, 0, 1), where the top
1% with negative correlation was assigned -1; the top 1% with positive
correlation was assigned 1; and the others were assigned 0. The matrix
was clustered and visualized using a Euclidian distance metric and
complete linkage clustering.

Results: (1) Using stringent criteria, we identified 1830 expressed
lncRNAs in human genome in STAD. (2) Unsupervised clustering of lncRNA
expression in STAD revealed five robust categories: clusters C1-C5. (3)
We further performed concordance calculation between lncRNA-based
clustering and other clusters identified in TCGA molecular, mRNA, miRNA
and SCNA subtypes, respectively. We also investigated the association of
lncRNA subclasses with distinct clinicopathological and genomic features
of STAD. We found that C2 is significantly associated with MSI molecular
subtype, MHL silencing, and mRNA C2, miRNA C2, methylation C2 subtypes.
Cluster C3 is significantly associated with EBV-positive molecular
subtype, CDKN2A silencing and mRNA C2, miRNA C2, methylation C1 subtypes;
C4 is most significantly associated with CIN molecular subtype, p53
mutation and high SCNA, methylation C4 subtypes; C5 is significantly
associated with GS molecular subtype, diffuse Lauren subtype, and mRNA
C1, miRNA C4, methylation C1 subtypes. Interestingly, C5 defines the most
aggressive tumors with the worst overall survival.

Conclusions: Our study represents the first comprehensive analysis of
lncRNAs in STAD cancers, with integrative analysis revealing that the
signatures of lncRNAs we characterize here appear to have prognostic
significance. The additional association with the STAD molecular subtypes
and genomic features supports new approaches to developing biomarkers and
setting the stage for a new framework for future research in the role of
lncRNAs in STAD.


