Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glucose-dependent regulation of PXR is modulated by AMPK.


The sensitivity of patients to drugs depends on the pharmacokinetics of
the drugs, but largely on the bioavailability of the drugs in the body.
Orally administered drugs must pass through the intestinal wall and the
portal circulation to reach the liver; both are sites of first-pass
metabolism. Thus, many drugs may be metabolized before optimal plasma
concentrations are reached, or before getting to target tissues,
resulting in diminished drug efficacy and acquired drug resistance. Among
the several drug-metabolizing enzymes (DME) is cytochrome P450 (CYP)
enzyme 3A4, the most abundant in the liver, metabolizes approximately 50
percent of marketed drugs and a main target of pregnane X receptor (PXR)
In addition, transporters including MDR1 are also regulated by PXR. There
is increasing evidence that drug metabolism can be affected by energy
metabolism and vice versa. PXR has been implicated to have a complex role
in energy homeostasis, and increased drug clearance was observed in
untreated diabetic patients. The elimination of any chemotherapeutic
agents in humans is markedly dependent on the relative expression and
activity of the various DMEs and drug transpoters. The heterotrimeric
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) serves as a monitor of cellular
energy status in most eukaryotic cell, and is activated under energy
stress conditions. Interestingly, AMPK is also regarded as a tumor
suppressor in various cancers because of its inhibitory effects on
anabolic processes that are important for tumor development. Despite the
knowledge of the cross-regulation between drug metabolism and energy
metabolism, the molecular pathways of this interaction remain vague. In
our study, we exposed HepG2 cells to varying glucose concentrations and
observed that PXR is greatly induced in high glucose conditions. This
finding is consistent with clinical observation of increased drug
clearance in untreated diabetic patients. We demonstrate that AMPK
modulates PXR transcriptional activity. As such, the pharmacological
manipulations of AMPK activation status show an inverse relationship with
PXR activity. Activation of AMPK was shown to decrease PXR activity as
observed by decreased CYP3A4 transcription, and consistent with that a
potentiation of response to drugs. Interestingly, we observed that PXR is
not a direct target of AMPK: it remains to be determined what the
intermediary between AMPK and PXR is. Taken together, our studies
identify novel links between the energy status of the cell, the
activation of AMPK and down regulation of PXR.


