Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Real-time imaging of adherent and non-adherent cell interactions:
utility of an automated microfluidic trap platform to recapitulate in
vivo cell culture microenvironment.


The study of dynamic cell processes and their interactions is of crucial
importance to understand the complexities of tissue microenvironments.
Simulation of in vivo cell culture microenvironments can greatly improve
biologic relevance of cell-cell interaction studies, and so there is an
ongoing demand for heuristic optimization of cell co-culture devices and
protocols. One particularly challenging task is establishing real-time
image analysis while co-culturing non-adherent cells in contact with
adherent cell layers under precisely controlled environmental parameters.
To address this challenge, we present a novel microfluidic approach to
trap two different cell types in precise locations in order to image and
study their interactions over time. The platform utilizes a well plate
format that contains multiple microfluidic units. Each unit consists of a
3 mm x 3 mm x 40 µm (L x W x H) chamber for culture, and an array of
microscopic trap areas tailored to the dimensions of the cells of
interest, typically ~15 µm. The micro-scale geometries of the traps
physically confine non-adherent cells, and co-cultures can be achieved by
trapping the non-adherent cells over a monolayer of cells. The
microfluidic plate is integrated with a system which enables
perfusion-based nutrient supply along with gas and temperature control
for long-term cell culture. Each chamber within the plate can be
addressed by programmable and on-demand perturbation of up to 6 reagents,
enabling uninterrupted real-time live cell imaging assays. We present
here the use of this microfluidic platform to replicate tumor
microenvironment by maintaining adjacent co-cultures of cancer and immune
cells. We have successfully imaged and cultured monolayers of tumor cell
lines for 7 days followed by subsequent loading and trapping of immune
(non-adherent) cells. In conclusion, the microfluidic platform enables
unique co-cultures with environmental control and real-time imaging to
facilitate the investigation of cell-cell interactions in a wide range of
applications such as drug response and screening in tumor
microenvironments, invasion, evasion pathways and other mechanisms
governing cell-cell interactions.


