Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNF12 inhibits the proliferation of hepatocellular carcinoma
through c-Myc and p21.


Purpose: RNF12/RLIM, a RING E3 ubiquitin ligase, plays an important role
in the epigenetic regulation of sex-specific nurturing tissues in female
mice. Recently, a few studies demonstrated a correlation between RNF12
and the proliferation of multiple cancers. The role of RNF12 in
hepatocellular carcinoma is incompletely understood. The purpose of this
study is to investigate the effect of RNF12 on the proliferation of human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells. RNF12 is also known to interact with a
number of nuclear proteins, including CLIM, HDAC2, and Smad4. We also
explored whether c-Myc and p21, an oncogene and tumor suppressor
essential to liver tumorigenesis, were affected by RNF12.

Methods: Immunohistochemistry of RNF12 and c-Myc was performed on
surgically dissected human hepatocellular carcinoma tissues. The
soft-agar cloning, flow cytometry and Transwell invasion assays were
carried out to investigate the role of RNF12 in SK-Hep1 cell
proliferation, cell cycle and invasiveness. Real-time quantitative PCR
and Western blotting were used to examine the mRNA and protein levels of
RNF12 and related proteins in SK-Hep1 cells.

Results: We found that the level of RNF12 was lower in hepatocellular
carcinoma, compared with the surrounding non-cancerous tissues, while the
c-Myc expression was higher. Using a SK-Hep1 cell line stably expressing
RNF12, we showed that RNF12 over-expression inhibited cell proliferation
and induced cell cycle arrest at G1 phase. Furthermore, we showed that
RNF12 over-expression decreased the level of oncoprotein c-Myc, while not
much affecting its mRNA level. Co-immunoprecipitation demonstrated that
RNF12 and c-Myc associated with each other, suggesting a direct
protein-protein interaction. RNF12 over-expression also markedly
increased the mRNA and protein levels of p21, a tumor suppressor and the
downstream target of p53, c-Myc and many other cancer-related regulators.
Consistently, silencing of RNF12 reduced p21 mRNA and protein levels and
increased c-Myc protein.

Conclusion: Our study demonstrated reduced expression of RNF12 in
hepatocellular carcinoma, and RNF12 over-expression inhibited the
proliferation and cell cycle progression of SK-Hep1 cells.
Mechanistically, RNF12 may directly regulate the level of c-Myc,
similarly as other transcription factors such as CLIM and Smad4. The
mechanisms underlying the increased expression of p21 is being
investigated. Taken together, RNF12 may serve as a tumor suppressor in
hepatocellular carcinoma, partly through oncoprotein c-Myc and tumor
suppressor p21.


