Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumour micro-environmental factors and the development of mammary
calcifications: Recent findings from an in-vitro model.


The presence of microcalcifications on mammographic images represents a
highly valuable tool in the early detection of breast cancer, often
allowing radiographers to diagnose mammary tumours at an early, in-situ
stage. The presence of microcalcifications has also been linked to a
number of unfavourable prognostic factors including decreased survival
and an increased probability of relapse. Despite their long history of
use in the clinic, the precise mechanisms by which microcalcifications
are formed remains poorly understood. Pathological soft-tissue
calcification is often considered the result of an imbalance between pro-
and anti-calcifying factors. However, the possible impact of such an
imbalance has not been studied in the context of breast calcification. We
have established an in-vitro model of microcalcification formation using
the triple-negative adenocarcinoma cell line MDA-MB-231. When cultured in
the presence of the osteogenesis-promoting reagents β-glycerophosphate,
ascorbic acid and dexamethasone, calcified deposits begin to form by Day
14, as verified by Alizarin Red staining and the quantitative
o-cresolphthalein assay. Following the establishment of our model, we set
out to identify the underlying molecular triggers initiating the
calcification process, in particular the role of micro-environmental
factors. Altered magnesium homeostasis has been suggested as an important
mediator of tissue calcification. We found that a slight increase in
magnesium concentration almost completely blocked calcium deposition in
our model. Previous studies in other tissues have shown this protective
effect to be dependent on the cation channel TRPM7 which is increased in
breast cancer patients with calcifications compared to those without.
Unexpectedly, inhibition of the TRPM7 channel by two separate compounds
(2-APB and NS-8593) not only failed to reverse the inhibition of
microcalcification formation by exogenous magnesium, but actually further
decreased calcium deposition by Day 28, suggesting that calcium influx
via the TRPM7 channel may be promoting development of mammary
calcifications. Finally, we investigated the effect of several tumour
associated cytokines on the rate of calcium deposition and found that
IL-1β and TNF-α blocked mineralisation whilst IL-6 and BMP2 lead to an
increase. Interestingly, co-administration of IL-6 alongside a soluble
form of its receptor (sIL-6R) was observed to promote mineralisation even
in the absence of dexamethasone, which had previously been essential to
the formation of calcifications in our model. To date, our model has
yielded a number of important insights into the formation of
calcifications in breast cell lines, many of which recapitulate
observations from patient studies. It is hoped that this work will
contribute to our understanding of the origin of these pre-invasive
diagnostic clues.


