Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC1 regulates TGFβ function in pancreatic cancer.


In 2016, Pancreatic Cancer (PC) has moved to 3rd leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the USA with 94% dying within 5 years of
diagnosis. 90% of PC is Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDA), of which
80% of PDA overexpress tumor associated Mucin-1 (tMUC1), a membrane bound
glycoprotein that is hypoglycosylated. Overexpression of tMUC1 is
associated with metastasis and poor prognosis. However the mechanism
remains obscure.

Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) plays a role in poor prognosis.
TGF-β is a cytokine with dual functionality. Within normal cells and
early carcinogenesis, TGF-β functions as a tumor suppressor and induces
apoptosis. This effect is mediated by activation of the canonical Smad
pathway via engagement of TGF-β Receptor 1 (TGF-βRI). However during
later stages of cancer, TGF-β becomes a tumor promoter and stimulates
epithelial to mesenchymal transition, migration, and invasion thus
enhancing metastasis. This TGF-β effect is mediated by the noncanonical
Erk1/2 pathway.

We have recently shown correlation between tMUC1 and TGF-β within an
exogenous tMUC1 model of PDA. Therefore, it is hypothesized that the
mechanism between the two newly connected pathways exists in PDA tumors
with high endogenous tMUC1 levels. We propose that the tyrosine kinases
present in the cytoplasmic tail of tMUC1 are intermediary between the two
pathways, thus leading to enhanced metastasis.

First the secretion levels of TGF-β1 were assessed in a panel of 13 PDA
cell lines with variable expression levels of tMUC1 by ELISA. The effects
of TGF-β1 to induce apoptosis versus invasiveness on a variety of tMUC1
high and tMUC1 low PDA cell lines were determined. The effects of tMUC1
knockdown were evaluated in tMUC1 high cell lines via siRNA. We studied
the role of tyrosine kinases and other protein complexes in mediating the
interactions between tMUC1 and TGF-β via proteomics analysis. Finally,
we evaluated the anti-tumor efficacy of neutralizing TGF-β1 in vivo in
high and low tMUC1-expressing PDA tumors.

In tMUC1 high PDA cells, TGF-β1 is secreted less when compared to tMUC1
low PDA cells, allowing for the more resistant cells to diminish TGF-β
mediated effects endogenously. It is shown that with TGF-β1 treatment,
tMUC1 high cells are more invasive, resist apoptosis, and activate Erk
pathway, while tMUC1 low cells activate SMAD pathway. However, tMUC1
knockdown via siRNA does not affect TGF-β receptor levels. When studying
the tyrosine kinases, c-Src becomes more phosphorylated in the presence
of TGF-β1 in tMUC1 high cells, while in tMUC1 low cells c-Src becomes
more deactivated in the presence of TGF-β1. Finally, within the mouse
model, tMUC1-high PDA tumors respond to the neutralization of TGF-β1 by
decreasing tumor size, while having no statistical effect on tMUC1-low
PDA tumors.

tMUC1 expression is influential in TGF-β function in an endogenous
model. Neutralizing TGF-β in tMUC1 high expressing tumors can be
considered as a possible treatment. This has high clinical significance
for patients with PDA.


