Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD99 plays an important role in glioblastoma cell migration.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and aggressive malignant brain
tumor in adults and the standard treatment consists of surgical resection
of the tumor followed by radiation and chemotherapy with temozolomide. A
combination of standard therapy with other biologically-based therapies
is necessary to improve the survival of patients with GBM, which
currently stands only to 15-17 months. In this sense many studies have
been developed in pursuit of expressed membrane proteins in GBM, which
are potential targets for immunotherapy. Our laboratory demonstrated
increased CD99 mRNA and protein expression in GBM samples. CD99 has a key
role in several biological processes, including cell adhesion, migration,
apoptosis, differentiation of T cells and thymocytes, diapedesis of
lymphocytes to inflamed vascular endothelium, maintenance of cellular
morphology and regulation of intracellular membrane protein trafficking.

In this study, the transcriptome of two GBM cell lines (U87MG and A172)
transfected with siRNA for CD99 were analyzed in relation to the
non-target control (NTC). A total of 728 genes (hypoexpressed with fold
change ≤-1.5 relative to NTC or hyperexpressed with fold change ≥1.5
relative to NTC) were observed in both cell lines. An enrichment analysis
by MetaCoreTM revealed the following processes as the most significant:
(1) Cytoskeleton_Regulation of cytoskeleton rearrangement, (2) Cell
adhesion_Cell-matrix interactions (3) Development_Blood vessel
morphogenesis. Further, both cell lines were silenced for CD99 expression
by shRNA (two clones) to perform functional assays, as wound healing
(migration assay), adhesion, invasion and apoptosis. The CD99 knockdown
reduced migration in both cell lines, with the highest decrease of the
migration observed in the highest CD99 knockdown. Adhesion assay was
performed using fibronectin as an extracellular matrix substrate. U87MG
cells showed greater adhesion to fibronectin than the control (scrambled
shRNA). On the other hand, A172 cells knocked down for CD99 presented
lower adherence to fibronectin than the control. Apoptosis analysis with
shCD99 U87MG cells showed a tendency of cells entering into late
apoptosis when treated with temozolamide for 48 hours, but the same was
not observed in shCD99 A172 cells. Additionally, CD99 (RPE) and phaloidin
(Alexa Fluor 488) colocalized at lamellipodia, suggesting that CD99 is
related to cytoskeleton rearrangement in both GBM cell lines. The
different phenotypic behavior of migration and apoptosis observed in
these two GBM cell lines with different somatic mutation background may
be due to distinct signaling activation. Migration/invasion is the major
characteristics of GBM which limits the surgical tumor resection, and
consequently leads to tumor recurrence. Therefore, further analysis of
CD99 activating pathways in the context of cell migration is worthwhile
to unveil new therapeutic strategies to halt GBM progression.


