Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of IHC staining protocols for assessment of PD-L1
expression in cytological samples.


Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
samples for programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) can help identify
patients that may benefit from anti-PDL1 therapy. However, resection or
biopsy samples cannot be obtained for some patients with NSCLC. Fine
needle aspiration (FNA) is a less invasive method for obtaining samples
in such patients, and it is yet to be determined if PD-L1 can be assessed
using cytological samples. In this study we had three objectives 1.
Develop staining protocols on the VENTANA BenchMark ULTRA automated
staining platform for cytology samples fixed with the most common methods
using cell lines as a model. 2, Determine the optimal cytology fixation
method for VENTANA PD-L1 (SP142) IHC Assay (PD-L1 (SP142)) staining, and
3. Assess PD-L1 expression in tumor cells (TC) and tumor-infiltrating
immune cells (IC) in cytological samples prepared from NSCLC patients.
KARPAS 299 cell line was used as a model system for the fixation studies.
Liquid-based preparations (LBPs) fixed in PreservCyt, conventional smears
(unstained and pap-stained) fixed in 95% ethanol, and paraffin embedded
cell blocks (CBs) fixed in 95% ethanol, 10% neutral buffered formalin
(NBF), PreservCyt, and SurePath preservative were optimized on the
BenchMark ULTRA using PD-L1 (SP142) antibody and OptiView DAB Detection
and Amplification Kits. NSCLC FNA CBs fixed in 10% NBF (N=69) and a
subset of FNAs with matched resections (N=20) were stained with the
optimized protocol. FNAs and resections were assessed for percentage of
TC and IC with PD-L1 staining. Staining parameters were optimized on the
BenchMark ULTRA for all sample types tested, and they all produced a
range of moderate to strong PD-L1 expression. CBs fixed in 95% ethanol
and 10% NBF produced the highest percentage of staining, with expression
in 90% of cells. CBs fixed in PreservCyt and SurePath preservative had a
lower percentage of staining, 40% and 75% respectively. LBPs had 25%
cells staining and smears ranged from 20%-60%. NSCLC FNA CBs fixed in 10%
NBF produced interpretable results when stained with PD-L1 (SP142). IC
staining was seen in 8.7% (6/69) of samples, TC staining was seen in 8.7%
(6/69) of samples, both IC and TC staining was seen in 14.5% (10/69) of
samples. The subset of FNAs with matched resections showed concordance
with PD-L1 IC staining in 60% (12/20) of samples and TC staining in 75%
(15/20) of samples. The discordant cases showed that FNAs were negative
for IC when the resection was negative and positive for TC in 5% of cases
when the resection was negative. The VENTANA PD-L1 (SP142) Assay staining
parameters were found to be optimal for staining NSCLC FNA CB fixed in
10% NBF. PD-L1 staining was detected in both TC and IC in FNA samples and
concordance of FNA and matched resections was high for both IC and TC. A
larger study is necessary to validate the use of FNAs for assessment of
PD-L1 expression in a clinical setting.


