Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of intrinsic and acquired resistance to antibodies
targeting IGF-1R in pediatric sarcoma cell lines.


Background: Pediatric bone and soft tissue sarcomas are heavily dependent
on the Type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-1R) signaling
axis, which promotes tumorigenic properties such as proliferation,
survival, angiogenesis and metastasis. While a substantial proportion of
patients demonstrate intrinsic resistance to monoclonal antibodies
targeting IGF-1R, a strong and sustained response is seen in a limited
number of patients, and disease stabilization in about 30% of patients.
Understanding these resistance mechanisms may identify combinations of
targeted therapies that optimize therapeutic efficiency of
IGF-1R-targeted antibodies. Methods: For intrinsic resistance, we used a
panel of Ewing sarcoma (ES; n=10) and rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS; n=10) cell
lines that, with the exception of Rh41, are all intrinsically resistant
to TZ-1, a monoclonal antibody that targets IGF-1R. For acquired
resistance, we developed a TZ-1 resistant RMS cell line, Rh41/TZ-1. We
utilized Receptor Tyrosine Kinase (RTK) Arrays to analyze the
phosphorylation status of 49 RTKs. The cell lines were treated with TZ-1
and changes in RTK expression were assessed by quantitative PCR. Results:
RMS cells intrinsically resistant to TZ-1 treatment expressed multiple
activated RTKs including EGFR family of receptors, IGF-1R, IR, PDGFR,
FGFR4, HGFR4, RYK, ALK, DDR1, AXL, DTK. Interestingly, ES cells (n=5) had
either a complex pattern of activated RTK expression similar to RMS cells
or a relatively less complex set (n=5) of activated RTKs (IGF-1R, IR,
HGFR, ERBB4, AXL, DTK). TZ-1 treatment of these cell lines with intrinsic
resistance demonstrated decreased phosphorylation of IGF-1R, but had
little effect on other RTKs. In contrast TZ-1 treatment of Rh41 cells
rapidly induced activation of several RTKs including: AXL, PDGFRB, FGFR4
and ALK. Increased expression of these receptors was confirmed by qPCR.
In contrast, Rh41/TZ-1 cells selected for acquired resistance to TZ-1
constitutively expressed activated RTKs (PDGFRB, FGFR4, AXL, DTK,
VEGFR1). In Rh41 cells treated with TZ-1, the BRD4 inhibitor, JQ1 (500
nM, 24 Hr), blocked the induction of IGF-1R, IRB, AXL, PDGFR-A/-B, VEGFR1
and ALK. However, it had less effect on the induction of FGFR 2/3/4
receptors. Further, combined treatment of TZ-1 and JQ1 reduced cellular
proliferation of Rh41 cells more than TZ-1 treatment alone. Conclusions:
We demonstrate that intrinsic resistance to the IGF-1R targeted antibody
TZ-1 is characterized by constitutive activation of multiple RTKs. In
response to TZ-1 treatment in a sensitive cell line there is rapid
induction of multiple RTKs indicating a dynamic response to inhibition of
IGF-1R. Our data suggests that BRD4 is involved in induction of these
signaling molecules and that combined inhibition of BRD4 along with the
IGF-1R targeted therapy can overcome this resistance and warrants further
investigation. Support: US Public Health Service Grant CA165995.


