Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toward mutation analysis of regulatory elements: Epigenetic
profiling of primary breast tumors.


Non-coding mutations found in regulatory elements can function as driver
mutations in breast cancer by changing the binding affinity of
transcription factors for DNA, thereby resulting in direct change of
expression of genes that promote cancer development. Identifying such
additional driver mutations can reveal the molecular mechanisms favorable
to breast cancer development and progression, as well as reveal new
biomarkers to better tailor personalized/precision cancer medicine. In
this study we have collected 20 primary luminal breast tumors and
optimized experimental workflow to dissociate solid tumors and map open
chromatin using ATAC-seq. In our initial experiments using ATAC-seq
profiling of bulk tumor tissues, we were able to call an average of
15x103 peaks. Subsequently, flow cytometry analysis showed the presence
of 15-25% of immune cells in our primary tumors. Therefore, we have
optimized a workflow to eliminate immune cells and focus mainly on
epithelial tumor cells. Primary breast tumors were digested using
collagenase and further dissociated with dispase. Cells were sorted into
two populations (mammary epithelial and immune cells) using anti-CD45,
anti-CD49f and anti-EpCAM antibodies. Sorted mammary epithelial cells
were then used for ATAC- and RNA-seq library preparation as well as for
generation of patient derived organoids. Our new workflow resulted in an
increased number of called peaks (40x103 vs 15x103), as well as a
significant increase in the percentage of unique peaks compared to bulk
sequencing (45% vs 15%). By refining our workflow to enrich for tumour
content, we will continue our ongoing effort to profile these open
chromatin regions and contextualize the mutations within in a large
cohort of luminal breast cancers using targeted sequencing. These data
will be compared with large-scale whole genome data generated by our
group and made publicly available by others.


