Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the efficacy of clotrimazole treatment in human
melanoma cell lines that overexpress the multidrug resistance-associated
protein (MRP) and the lung resistance-related protein (LRP).


Drug resistance to chemotherapy, mediated in part by overexpression of
P-glycoprotein (MDR-1), multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP), or
lung resistance-realted protein (LRP), continues to be a major problem in
the treatment of melanoma. Because we previously demonstrated the ability
of clotrimazole to enhance cytotoxicity in human metastatic melanoma
cells, here we evaluated the ability of clotrimazole to treat
drug-resistant human melanoma cells that overexpress MRP and/or LRP. We
utilized human melanoma cell lines that overexpress either MDR or LRP,
and human melanoma cell lines that overexpress both. Cell growth and cell
death were analyzed by flow cytometry, proliferation assays, and
immunoblotting after drug treatments and RNA interference. Clotrimazole
caused significant decreases in proliferation and increases in cell death
in both drug-sensitive melanoma lines and those overexpressing MRP and
LRP. No extensive cell death was induced by clotrimazole treatment in
noncancerous human skin cell lines. These results indicate that
clotrimazole selectively induces cytotoxicity in both drug-sensitive and
drug-resistant melanoma lines. As clotrimazole is known to inhibit
various transient receptor potential (TRP) ion channels, we pretreated
these melanoma lines with TRP inhibitors or RNAi. Inhibitors of the TRP
melastatin-8 channel (TRPM8) or TRP vanilloid-1 (TRPV1) failed to produce
comparable levels of cell death caused by clotrimazole. However, RNAi
silencing of the TRPM2 cation channel caused significant levels of cell
death in both drug-sensitive and drug-resistant melanoma lines. These
results indicated that inhibition of TRPM2 channels may have a primary
role in the ability of clotrimazole to treat drug-sensitive and
drug-resistant melanoma lines.

In conclusion, this study demonstrated that clotrimazole selectively
increases cell death in drug-resistant melanoma lines, with minimal
deleterious effects in normal skin cells. Taken together, we conclude
that clotrimazole has in vitro efficacy toward the treatment of
drug-resistant human melanoma cells. Thus, these preliminary studies
indicate that clotrimazole has the potential to successfully treat drug
resistant melanoma in the future.


