Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic inactivation of PTPRT and sensitivity to STAT3
inhibition in lung cancer.


Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription-3 (STAT3), a potent
oncogenic transcription factor is persistently activated in several
malignancies including lung cancer. Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase
Receptor-T (PTPRT) is an endogenous inhibitor of STAT3 transcriptional
activity, and is methylated in many types of human cancer.
Loss-of-function of PTPRT by promoter methylation contributes to STAT3
mediated growth and survival and represent one of the plausible mechanism
of STAT3 hyperactivation. We report identification of hypermethylation in
CpG islands of the PTPRT promoter which correlates with its
transcriptional silencing as well as expression of pSTAT3 protein and
STAT3 target genes in both lung cancer cell lines and primary human
tumors. Analyses of the TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) data revealed that
PTPRT promoter is frequently hypermethylated in a subset of lung squamous
cell carcinoma and approximately 25% of adenocarcinoma tumors in
association with downregulation of PTPRT mRNA expression. This
observation was verified in vitro using lung cancer cell lines. Out of
the 7 lung cancer cell lines examined, one lung cancer cell line showed
lack of methylation (only unmethylated sequences) of the PTPRT promoter
region and revealed mRNA expression (H520). All 6 cell lines which showed
PTPRT promoter methylation had nearly absent PTPRT mRNA and had high
levels of pSTAT3Tyr705, while H520 had little or no pSTAT3Tyr705 protein
expression. Silencing of PTPRT using siRNA in H520, where PTPRT was not
endogenously silenced by promoter hypermethylation, resulted in the
upregulation of the STAT3 target genes such as cyclin D1 and Bcl-XL mRNA
and protein expression as well as increased pSTAT3Tyr705 level. Analyses
of the methylation status in the PTPRT promoter region in primary lung
tumor samples revealed methylation in one of the 3 tumor samples. This
correlated with increased STAT3 target genes (cyclin D1 and Bcl-XL) mRNA
expression. In lung cancer cell lines, PTPRT promoter methylation is
associated with sensitivity to STAT3 inhibition. Our data suggests that
silencing of PTPRT by promoter hypermethylation is a frequent mechanism
of STAT3 hyperactivation, and targeting STAT3 may be an effective
molecular targeted approach in the treatment of this subset of lung
cancer.


