Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Compartment-resolved proteomics reveal NNMT as a master metabolic
regulator of cancer associated fibroblasts.


The poor outcome of ovarian cancer patients is due to late detection and
the ability of ovarian cancer cells to metastasize quickly throughout the
abdominal cavity. Recent research, including histopathological studies
and experiments with mouse models, suggest that ovarian cancer may
actually arise in the fallopian tube as serous tubal intraepithelial
carcinomas (STIC). Lesions of the ovary would, therefore, represent
metastases from the fallopian tube. To better understand the molecular
events that occur in both the tumor and stromal compartment during
ovarian cancer progression, we performed shotgun proteomics on
laser-microdissected tumor and stromal compartments from anatomic sites
representing the hypothetical progression series for ovarian cancer (STIC
→ fallopian tube → ovary → omentum). With an optimized sample
preparation technique, we successfully quantified 4-5000 proteins per
anatomic site with high reproducibility and with as few as several
thousand microdissected cells derived from formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) biobank specimens. Proteomics of the tumor
compartments revealed high inter-patient heterogeneity, with no conserved
protein signatures associated with invasion or metastasis. In strong
contrast, a highly conserved molecular signature of stromal proteins
associated with metastasis to the omentum was identified. In particular,
nicotinamide N-methyl transferase (NNMT) was highly upregulated in the
stroma of omental and peritoneal metastases. Functionally, NNMT was
necessary and sufficient for multiple aspects of the cancer associated
fibroblast (CAF) phenotype, including expression of CAF markers and
secretion of cytokines and oncogenic extracellular matrix. NNMT
expression was necessary for the ability of CAFs to support ovarian
cancer cell migration, proliferation, adhesion, and in vivo growth.
Mechanistically, high expression of NNMT in CAFs led to a depletion of
S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) and a reduction in histone methylation
associated with gene expression changes in the tumor stroma. This work
supports the use of ultra-low input proteomics for compartment-resolved
identification of candidate drivers of disease phenotypes and identifies
NNMT as a central, metabolic regulator of CAF differentiation.


