Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subsets of HLA alleles are capable of binding neoantigens derived
from mutations within cancer driving genes such as KRAS and EGFR.


Background: Immunoncology has shown great promise as a low toxicity tool
to combat several cancers. Use of checkpoint inhibitors against PD1 or
CTLA4 unlocks the immune system’s ability to recognize tumor antigens
and, more specifically, neoantigens caused by random mutations within
cancers. The vast majority of neoantigens consist of private mutations
unique to a patient’s tumor genome, but several cancers harbor
recurrent mutations. Mutations in the KRAS gene, such as p.G12V, occur in
roughly 25% of colorectal cancers. Mutations in EGFR occur in 10% and 35%
of patients with non-small cell lung cancer in the US and East Asia,
respectively. Even more prevalent are mutations within the TP53 tumor
suppressor gene, with roughly 23000 unique protein variants reported to
date. If these mutations in cancer driving genes are so prevalent in
cancers, why are neoantigens against these targets not more readily
available?

Results: We collected recurrent mutations across a variety of cancer
driving genes such as KRAS, EGFR, TP53 and MYC and performed binding
analysis using netMHC 3.4 to see which HLA alleles are capable of binding
specific cancer mutations such as KRAS p.G12V. Using this method, we
report all possible HLA alleles capable of binding these recurrent
mutations within cancer genes. We further performed 3-dimensional
modeling to determine whether complexes created by the HLA alleles and
cancer neoepitopes are stable.

Conclusions: Several HLA alleles are capable of binding recurrent cancer
mutations. These include both MHC Class 1 and Class 2 alleles. The
variation in alleles capable of binding commonly mutated genes such as
EGFR may explain the difference in prevalence of these mutations between
geographic populations. Determining whether a certain HLA allele confers
resistance to common cancer gene mutations may lead to identification of
immune cells within these populations that can recognize neoantigens from
commonly mutated cancer genes.


