Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic early detection biomarkers for ER+ breast cancer to
improve mammography screening.


There are clear clinical and public health needs to improve the early
detection of breast cancer in order to save lives. Breast cancer is the
leading cause of cancer death in women worldwide and is the second
leading cause of cancer mortality in women in the United States. Although
mammography is widely used to screen for breast cancer, it suffers both
from false negative and false positive readings resulting in later
diagnoses or unnecessary follow-up (e.g., biopsies), respectively.
Improvement of breast cancer early detection may be possible through the
measurement of minimally invasive, easy to perform blood based biomarkers.

Our studies were performed on pre-clinical plasma samples collected up to
12.5 months before breast cancer diagnosis from cases and matched
controls obtained from the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI)
Observational Study (a prospective cohort of 93,676 post-menopausal
women). We utilized high-density antibody microarray methods for both
discovery and preliminarily validation on distinct sample sets for early
detection biomarkers of estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer
(around 70% of all breast cancers are classified as ER+). Antibody
microarray features (i.e., spots) identified as having ≥30% sensitivity
at 80% specificity were considered to have met the cutoff criteria and
identified as potential markers. A total of 129 features, corresponding
to 101 proteins, were identified as potential markers in one WHI dataset
(90 cases vs. 90 controls). Of the 129 features (101 proteins), 47 (34
proteins) validated by our cutoffs and demonstrated over or
under-expression in cases compared to controls consistent with the first
dataset in the second set of WHI samples (121 cases vs. 121 controls).

Given this level of reproducibility, we believe these biomarkers could be
used to improve early detection of ER+ breast cancer for these clinical
scenarios: 1. Informing timing of a subsequent mammogram in women with a
negative screening mammogram; 2. Informing continuation of mammographic
screening among women 75-79 years; 3. Prioritizing women who should be
screened with mammography in areas with limited resources.

We are currently performing further validation of the protein markers in
Early Detection Research Network (EDRN) specimen reference set from
patients at the time of diagnosis. We plan to test our markers on a
pre-diagnostic cohort from the Cardiovascular Health Study using a
different, more clinically applicable platform. We used the same
high-density antibody microarray platform to measure
autoantibody-autoantigen complexes and sialyl Lewis-A and –X
modifications in one of the WHI sample sets and are now testing these
markers in the EDRN set for validation. Given the strength of our
biomarker candidates, the high quality sets of biospecimens we used, the
study designs employed, and the clearly delineated clinical applications
proposed, we believe these markers could have near-term clinical impact.


