Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MPF as a monitoring biomarker for a mesothelin-targeted therapy
against malignant mesothelioma and other cancer.


Introduction: Tumor antigen mesothelin had been shown to be elevated in
mesothelioma, ovarian, pancreatic, and lung cancer. The mesothelin gene
encodes a precursor protein of 69 kDa, which is cleaved into a 31 kDa
soluble megakaryocyte potential factor (MPF), and a cell membrane-bound
40 kDa mesothelin. There is a high degree of interest in targeting
mesothelin for mesothelioma and other cancers with various antibody-based
agents, and some successes in early stage clinical trials with some of
the agents. For the development of these targeted therapeutics, specific
biomarkers would be needed for monitoring treatment responses, and
detecting and evaluating tumor progression. The current test that detects
mesothelin is not suitable due to the antigen-binding from the
therapeutic antibodies. There is an urgent need to develop and validate
an alternative test to support these clinical trials and for disease
management.

Methods: Using ECLIA technology and proprietary antibody reagents, we
developed a new test for the cleaved MPF polypeptide. We further
conducted comprehensive analytical and clinical validation of the test
according to the guidelines for tumor antigen tests. Using samples from a
retrospective clinical trial with an anti-mesothelin immunotoxin and the
standard 1st line chemotherapeutic agents for newly diagnosed malignant
mesothelioma patients, we examined the effectiveness of the test for
treatment monitoring of the investigational therapy.

Results: Our data gives a strong validation for the analytical and
clinical performances of MPF test. While no other current test has been
proven to be able to monitor response of mesothelioma to systemic
therapies, our data provides the proof of clinical effectiveness for MPF
test. In the patients with the elevated tumor antigen, there is a
specific and highly significant reduction of MPF at the end of each
treatment cycle for a total of 6 cycles in the patients with objective
response. Later, about half of these patients with objective response and
MPF reduction regained the levels of MPF at the time of disease
progression.

Conclusion: The study indicates that MPF test is effective in monitoring
the treatment response to systemic therapies for mesothelioma patients
with elevated MPF. It may also provide pivotal information on the
expression of target mesothelin protein when tumors progress.


