Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New technologies to probe the systems glycobiology of cancer.


A robotic 384 well based platform was developed to release and label the
human serum N-glycome. Improved separation of the glycan pool, based on
hydrophilic interaction UPLC chromatography combined with mass
spectrometry (Waters Corporation) and computer assisted data
interpretation (NIBRT Glycobase) enabled us to build a database after
assigning the detailed structures of more than 170 N-glycans.

The aim of the project was to use these technologies and databases to
link glycosylation changes in individual patients’ serum with features
of cancer and with changes in a range of other –omics data acquired
from the same patients.

Alterations in glycosylation in various breast cancers were mapped to
changes in the serum glycomes and aligned with genetic, transcriptomic
and proteomic data. Pathway analysis showed strong associations between
these glycan changes and the –omics data. This revealed that many of
the glycan changes are directly associated with pathways involved in
cancer metastasis.

Our next aim was to demonstrate the feasibility of collecting
personalised data from individual patients from each of the –omics
analyses to build up a dataset of the changing glycosylation over time.
This opens up the possibility of linking these data to explore pathways
of disease and, in particular, nodal points where the patient can no
longer compensate for the effects of an altered pathway that is leading
to disease.

To this end, single glycoproteins from 8 controls and 26 ovarian cancer
patients were sequentially purified from 5ul of serum on affinity plates
and the released glycans were analysed. Rather than the conventional way
of looking at markers which compare a patients’ data with averages, the
control can now be the blood of the patient themselves taken at an
earlier time point.

The automation, sensitivity, quantitation and resolution of the new
technology platforms coupled with dedicated software open up new
possibilities for precision medicine and early intervention based on the
biochemical profile of the patient.

References:

Association of N-glycosylation with breast carcinoma and systemic
features using high-resolution quantitative UPLC. Saldova R, Asadi Shehni
A, Haakensen VD, Steinfeld I, Hilliard M, Kifer I, Helland A, Yakhini Z,
Børresen-Dale AL, Rudd PM. J Proteome Res. 2014 May 2;13(5):2314-27.

Serum N-glycan analysis in breast cancer patients--Relation to tumour
biology and clinical outcome.

Haakensen VD, Steinfeld I, Saldova R, Shehni AA, Kifer I, Naume B, Rudd
PM, Børresen-Dale AL,Yakhini Z. Mol Oncol. 2016 Jan;10(1):59-72.


