Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The long noncoding RNA SChLAP1 inhibits the SWI/SNF complex,
revealing a therapeutic opportunity in prostate cancer.


Background: Recently, we identified the long noncoding RNA SChLAP1 that
is expressed highly in 20-30% of prostate cancers and significantly
associates with metastatic and lethal disease. SChLAP1 enhances cell
invasiveness in part by interacting with and abrogating genome-wide
binding of the tumor-suppressive SWI/SNF complex. Approximately 20% of
all cancers harbor a mutation in SWI/SNF, and several recent studies have
identified therapeutic opportunities arising from SWI/SNF inactivation.
We hereby investigate the relationship between SChLAP1 and SWI/SNF and
its potential therapeutic implications.

Methods: In silico data mining was used to correlate the SWI/SNF complex
mutation frequency with SChLAP1 expression in prostate cancer samples. A
systematic tiling deletion approach was then used to map important
domains on the SChLAP1 gene. In vitro migration and invasion assays as
well as cell proliferation assays were used to quantify phenotypes
associated with over-expression of SChLAP1 or its deletion mutants.
Moreover, CHIP was used to study the influence of SChLAP1 on the genomic
binding of SWI/SNF.

Results: In prostate cancer samples, SWI/SNF mutations correlate with low
SChLAP1 expression while high SChLAP1 expression may represent a
mutation-independent modality of SWI/SNF inhibition. We identify a 250
nucleotide region necessary for SChLAP1 to bind to SWI/SNF and to confer
invasiveness to a prostate epithelial cell line. Further studies suggest
that SChLAP1 inhibition is selective for the BRG1-containing SWI/SNF
sub-complex, inferring potential genomic specificity. Moreover, we show
that SChLAP1 over-expression is associated with enhanced sensitivity to
BRM knockdown, in accordance with the BRG1/BRM synthetic lethality
previously described in BRG1-deficient cancers.

Conclusions: Our findings indicate that SChLAP1-mediated SWI/SNF
inhibition may function similarly to SWI/SNF mutation, exposing similar
therapeutic opportunities.


