Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new energy restriction mimetic decreases survival and FOXM1
expression in pancreatic cancer cells.


Pancreatic cancer is a deadly disease with only 6% of the patients living
longer than 5 years. Even if the disease is diagnosed when it is
localized, the 5-year survival rate is approximately 19%. A
characteristic of cancer cell metabolism is a shift from oxidative
phosphorylation to aerobic glycolysis known as the Warburg effect. It is
well known that calorie restriction (CR) is a powerful intervention that
suppresses tumorigenesis in animal models by targeting glycolysis and
oncogenic signaling pathways. Recent studies have shown that the
metabolic responses characteristic of CR can be obtained with the use of
energy restriction mimetics (ERM). The purpose of this study is to
evaluate a new ERM, OSU-CG5 in altering growth of pancreatic cancer cells
and nutrient-sensitive signaling pathways.

Tumors including those of the pancreas have uncontrolled proliferation
necessitating increased fuel demands by increasing glucose availability
and altering metabolic signaling pathways. Since ERM have been reported
to target glucose transport, we evaluated whether OSU-CG5 alters glucose
transport (Glut) proteins and glucose uptake.

Glut1, but not Glut2, 3, 4, and 6, were overexpressed in Panc-1 cells
with a 6-fold higher expression compared to HPNE cells. Glut proteins
were not altered in MiaPaca cells. OSU-CG5 did not alter Glut1 protein
expression in either cell line. Silencing Glut1 also had no effect on the
cytoxicity of OSU-CG5. OSU-CG5 did not alter glucose uptake when measured
in different concentrations of glucose in the media. Cell survival, as
measured with Pico green, was decreased after OSU-CG5 treatment with an
IC 50 of 3uM when cultured in physiological concentration of 5 and 10mM
of glucose.

FOXM1 is unregulated in pancreatic cancer and a promoter of the Warburg
effect. We found that OSU-CG5 significantly decreased expression of FOXM1
in Panc1 and MiaPaca cells. Our findings indicate that OSU-CG5 does not
inhibit the growth of Panc1 and MiaPaca pancreatic cancer cells by
decreasing glucose uptake but may target the FOXM1 signaling pathways.


