Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NKG2A checkpoint receptor expression on tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T
cells restrains efficacy of immunotherapy.


The inhibitory receptor CD94-NKG2A is expressed on subsets of NK cells
and cytotoxic CD8+ T cells, but not CD4+ T helper cells. It’s ligand is
the non-classical MHC class I molecule HLA-E, commonly over-expressed in
human cancers. We previously demonstrated that high HLA-E expression in
ovarian carcinoma and NSCLC may neutralize the survival benefit of T cell
infiltration, suggesting that NKG2A could represent an immune checkpoint
that tumors may exploit for immune evasion. We thus examined NKG2A
expression on human and mouse Tumor Infiltrating Lymphocyte (TIL)
populations and tested blockade of this receptor in mouse tumor models.
Multicolor flow cytometry analysis showed higher frequency of NKG2A+CD8+
T cells in TIL samples obtained from biopsies of human head- and neck-
carcinomas (n=17) compared to peripheral blood CD8+ T cells. Frequency of
NKG2A+ TIL was higher in patients with measurable immune reactivity to
HPV16-viral antigens than in patients without tumor immunity (14.8% vs
4.7%, respectively). Interestingly, only subsets of the NKG2A+ T cells
co-expressed other inhibitory receptors, including PD-1 and TIM3,
suggesting the existence of a ‘dedicated’ T cell subset for NKG2A. In
our mouse tumor models we observed similar findings and, moreover,
demonstrated that therapeutic vaccines comprising tumor antigens
increased the frequency of NKG2A+-positive CD8+ TIL up to 80%. Similarly,
expression of Qa-1, the mouse homologue of HLA-E, on tumor cells also
increased after therapeutic vaccination. As a proof of concept that the
NKG2A - Qa-1 axis limits the efficacy of immunotherapy, NKG2A blocking
antibodies were applied in the TC-1 model together with therapeutic
peptide vaccination. Combination treatment with vaccine and NKG2A
blockade significantly improved the therapeutic efficacy compared to the
vaccine alone, both in terms of survival (PThe inhibitory receptor
CD94-NKG2A is expressed on subsets of NK cells and cytotoxic CD8+ T
cells, but not CD4+ T helper cells. It’s ligand is the non-classical
MHC class I molecule HLA-E, commonly over-expressed in human cancers. We
previously demonstrated that high HLA-E expression in ovarian carcinoma
and NSCLC may neutralize the survival benefit of T cell infiltration,
suggesting that NKG2A could represent an immune checkpoint that tumors
may exploit for immune evasion. We thus examined NKG2A expression on
human and mouse Tumor Infiltrating Lymphocyte (TIL) populations and
tested blockade of this receptor in mouse tumor models. Multicolor flow
cytometry analysis showed higher frequency of NKG2A+CD8+ T cells in TIL
samples obtained from biopsies of human head- and neck- carcinomas (n=17)
compared to peripheral blood CD8+ T cells. Frequency of NKG2A+ TIL was
higher in patients with measurable immune reactivity to HPV16-viral
antigens than in patients without tumor immunity (14.8% vs 4.7%,
respectively). Interestingly, only subsets of the NKG2A+ T cells
co-expressed other inhibitory receptors, including PD-1 and TIM3,
suggesting the existence of a ‘dedicated’ T cell subset for NKG2A. In
our mouse tumor models we observed similar findings and, moreover,
demonstrated that therapeutic vaccines comprising tumor antigens
increased the frequency of NKG2A+-positive CD8+ TIL up to 80%. Similarly,
expression of Qa-1, the mouse homologue of HLA-E, on tumor cells also
increased after therapeutic vaccination. As a proof of concept that the
NKG2A - Qa-1 axis limits the efficacy of immunotherapy, NKG2A blocking
antibodies were applied in the TC-1 model together with therapeutic
peptide vaccination. Combination treatment with vaccine and NKG2A
blockade significantly improved the therapeutic efficacy compared to the
vaccine alone, both in terms of survival (P<0.05, median survival 44 vs
31 days) as well as overall response rate, defined as decreased tumor
size of more than 30% (93.8% vs 43.8%, respectively). Similar results
were obtained in Qa-1-deficient mice, suggesting that Qa-1 on tumor cells
is of importance. In conclusion, inhibitory receptor NKG2A is enriched on
CD8+ TIL and functions as an immune checkpoint that restrains therapeutic
efficacy of a cancer vaccine.


