Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effects of Bortezomib and JQ1 for human and canine
osteosarcoma treatments.


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary malignant bone tumor of both
humans and dogs, with the incidence in dogs being nearly 15 times that
observed in humans. Despite advances in treatment of other cancers, the
clinical outcome of OS remains poor for the past several decades.
Therefore, identifying novel and effective treatments for osteosarcoma is
an urgent need. Among the small molecular compounds we tested in a drug
screening study, we identified a bromodomain inhibitor (JQ1) that targets
bromodomains which modify chromatin and block transcription of key
factors, and a proteasome inhibitor that induces cell death through
various mechanisms (bortezomib) as having good growth inhibition effects
on three canine OS cell lines (D17, Abrams, and Gracie) and two human OS
cell lines (SAOS2 and U2OS). We then determined the IC50 values of these
two drugs, the concentration capable of inhibiting proliferation by 50%.
The IC50 values of bortezomib and JQ1 are both within achievable plasma
concentrations and tolerable levels. JQ1 inhibited OS cell proliferation
and survival by inducing G2 cell cycle arrest, while bortezomib induced
G1 cell cycle arrest. In addition, these two drugs decreased cell
migration ability in wound healing assay as well as invasion ability in a
Matrigel assay. Furthermore, in combination studies using both JQ1 and
bortezomib, we identified synergistic effects. With these promising
results from in vitro studies, we further examined JQ1 as therapeutic
agent in an orthotopic tumor xenograft mouse model. Using OS cells stably
transfected with a lucerifase vector, we were able to track the tumor
progression during the treatment period. Mice treated with JQ1 did not
show any signs of adverse effect to the drug, indicating that JQ1 was
safe and well tolerated at a daily dosage of 50 mg/kg (IP). While some of
the mice in treatment group showed decreasing tumor growth compared to
the control group, tumor growth trends in the two groups were not
consistent, suggesting that we have to optimize the model and the
treatment protocol as well as to evaluate combination treatments with
bortezomib and JQ1 in in vivo models.


