Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative analysis of two cancer signaling pathways using
multiplex immunoprecipitation and targeted mass spectrometry.


Background: The AKT/mTOR and RAS/ERK pathways represent key mechanisms
for cells to regulate cell survival, proliferation, and motility. In
addition to their independent signaling cascades, which provide
offsetting mechanisms, these two pathways extensively engage in
cross-talk in order to both positively and negatively regulate each
other. The quantitation of protein expression and modifications of
pathway targets are critical for characterization of disease, monitoring
cancer progression and determining treatment response. Some major
bottlenecks in the accurate quantitation of these proteins are the lack
of rigorously validated reagents and a reliance on semi-quantitative
results from available immunoassays. Mass spectrometry (MS) is
increasingly becoming the detection method of choice for proteins and
their post-translational modifications (PTMs). Immunoprecipitation
coupled with MS (IP-MS) enables assessment of antibody specificity and
identification of low-abundant targets. Multiplexed IP coupled with
targeted MS (mIP-tMS) can quantitate multiple proteins of interest, PTMs
and interacting partners in a single MS run. The objective of this study
was to determine the efficacy of mIP-tMS for quantitation of the AKT/mTOR
and RAS/ERK pathway proteins and to compare these results versus Western
blotting (WB).

Methods: Serum starved and LY294002 treated HCT116 and A549 cells were
stimulated with IGF-1. Antibodies to targets in the AKT/mTOR and RAS/ERK
pathways were selected for verification of antibody specificity by IP-MS.
mIP-tMS assays were developed and validated for absolute quantitation of
targets in these pathways and benchmarked with WB across two
unstimulated, IGF-1 stimulated and LY294002 treated cell lysates as well
as several tissue lysates.

Results: Previously, we showed that an optimized IP-MS workflow for
Protein A/G and Streptavidin magnetic beads increases target protein
yield with low non-specific background. In this study, we validated
antibodies to several AKT/mTOR and RAS/ERK pathway targets using the
optimized IP-MS workflow. mIP-tMS assays allowed absolute quantitation
for multiple total and phosphorylated targets from both pathways in low
to sub-nanogram concentrations across two unstimulated, IGF-1 stimulated
and LY294002 treated cell lysates. The benchmarking of mIP-tMS assays
showed low correlation for quantitation of total and phosphorylated
targets relative to WB. This lower correlation may be due to differences
in the specificity of antibodies used for each assay technique.

Conclusion: Overall, the mIP-tMS assays can be used for effective
identification and quantitation of AKT/mTOR and RAS/ERK pathway proteins
in multiple cancer cell lines and tissue samples. Major advantages of
this assay are high confidence in target identity coupled with
simultaneous absolute quantitation of multiple targets and their PTMs
from cancer signaling pathways.


