Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of AKT-1 for the treatment of human non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) in-vitro.


AKT is a serine-threonine kinase implicated in tumorigenesis as a central
regulator of cellular growth, proliferation, survival, metabolism, and
migration. Activated AKT is overexpressed in 50-70% of NSCLC tumors and
has exhibited an association with poor prognosis as well as
chemotherapeutic resistance to platinum-based therapy. Accordingly, AKT
inhibitors such as MK-2206 are currently undergoing clinical
investigation for the treatment of human NSCLC however, these agents
broadly target all three (1-3) AKT isoforms. Recent evidence suggests
opposing roles of the AKT isoforms in tumorigenesis where loss of AKT-1
inhibits while the loss of AKT-2 enhances lung tumor development in
transgenic mouse models. Based on these findings, we hypothesized that
preferential inhibition of AKT-1 would warrant a more effective
therapeutic strategy for NSCLC compared to the current clinical approach
of broad AKT inhibition. WST-1 cell viability assays have revealed that a
selective AKT-1 inhibitor A-674563 is a more potent regulator of survival
in 6 NSCLC cell lines compared to a pan-AKT inhibitor MK-2206.
Furthermore, off-target CDK2 inhibition likely contributes to the
observed benefits of the AKT-1 inhibitor as the reduction in cell
viability largely parallels the effects of a CDK2 inhibitor PHA-848125.
In addition, the cell lines with higher endogenous CDK2 and p-CDK2
expression are more sensitive to the AKT-1 inhibitor relative to the
pan-AKT inhibitor MK-2206. Basal protein and RNA levels in each of the
cell lines have also shown that high AKT-3 expression may confer
resistance to the pan-AKT inhibitor MK-2206. Thus, AKT-3 expression has
the potential to serve as a predictive marker for patient response to
AKT-1 versus broad AKT-inhibition. Cell cycle analysis demonstrated that
the AKT-1 inhibitor decreases the proportion of cells in the Go/G1 phase
and increases the proportion of cells in the S-phase, indicating a
possible S-phase cell cycle arrest. These differences are also more
significant in the cell lines with augmented sensitivity to the AKT-1
inhibitor. Therefore, altered cell cycle progression could be the major
driver of the therapeutic benefits of the AKT-1 inhibitor. Overall, our
findings suggest that AKT-1 inhibition is significantly more effective at
reducing NSCLC cell viability in-vitro compared to pan-AKT inhibition.
Furthermore, cell lines with higher CDK2 and AKT-3 expression have
marginally increased sensitivity to the AKT-1 inhibitor A-674563 compared
to the pan-AKT inhibitor MK-2206. Future research will focus on
understanding the mechanism of action of the AKT-1 inhibitor through
combined western blot, AKT antibody array, flow cytometry, and confocal
microscopy data. Additionally, we will investigate the toxicity of these
inhibitors on normal human small airway epithelial cells (HSAECs) to
ensure preferential activity against malignant over somatic cells.


