Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioluminescent pharmacokinetics of luciferin in preclinical brain
metastases of breast cancer models.


Background: Approximately 20% of breast cancer patients with disseminated
disease will develop brain metastases. Preclinical models of brain
metastases of breast cancer rely on ex-vivo histology to evaluate drug
efficacy. However, bioluminescence imaging allows more precise
quantification of tumor burden and progression through counting photons
per second without requiring animal sacrifice. This methodology has not
readily been applied to hematogenously derived brain metastases models
given the heterogeneity of tumor burden and growth. Herein we demonstrate
repeatable methodology to quantify brain metastases of breast cancer
progression which is verified with histology.

Methods: Approximately 1.75 x 105 JIMT-1 (n=3) and 231-BrLuc (n=4) brain
seeking subclones were injected intracardially to produce metastatic
brain lesions. Mice were given 150 mg/kg of luciferin IP and luminescence
was captured every 2-minutes for 60 minutes starting 24 hours after cell
implantation. Radiance (photons per second per square centimeter per
steridian) was plotted to observe peak luminescence. Imaging was repeated
twice weekly to evaluate progression until euthanasia.

Results: Following intracardiac injection, both brain seeking metastatic
models produced a maximum luminescence signal between 14-20 minutes after
luciferin injection. For all subsequent imaging, 5 minute imaging between
15-20 minutes after luciferin injection was used. Longitudinally, both
tumor cell lines produce bioluminescence 24 hours after cell injection,
which is used to ensure tumor implantation and randomization. The BLI
signal decreases to undetectable limits in both models between 3-7 days
after cell implantation. Re-emergence of signal occurs on day 14 for the
JIMT-1 line and day 21 for 231-Br line. JIMT-1 bioluminescence on day 14
begins at ~105 photons/sec/cm2/sr and then over time signal increases
with an ~slope of 5.6x105 until reaching a maximum of 107 units on day
28. 231-Br bioluminescence on day 21 begins at ~104 photons/sec/cm2/sr
and then over time signal increases with an ~ slope of 1.1x106 until
reaching a maximum of ~107 on day 53.

Conclusion: To accurately measure bioluminescence as a surrogate for
tumor burden in hematogenously implanted metastases, the optimal
circulation time is approximately 15 minutes with a 5 minute imaging
period. Bioluminescence of the 231Br line initially starts at a lower
magnitude and later in time than the JIMT-1 line, but slopes of both
intracardiac models are similar and result in similar bioluminescent
curves.


