Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FOXO proteins mediate adaptive resistance to PI3K inhibition in
mucinous colorectal cancers.


Purpose: Mucinous colon adenocarcinomas (MCAs) comprise a substantial
fraction (10-15%) of sporadic colorectal cancers (CRCs). MCAs show a
distinct range of genetic modifications compared to nonmucinous CRCs and
are more prone to peritoneal dissemination and distant metastasis. These
aggressive cancers show a poorer response to chemotherapy and are often
difficult to treat. A higher mutation rate in effectors of the
KRAS-RAF-MEK (80% vs 42%) and PI3K-AKT-mTOR (60% vs 22%) pathways in MCAs
over nonmucinous CRCs suggested potential targets for therapy. Our
previous results showed that, MCAs, though initially sensitive to PI3K
inhibition (PI3Ki), later develop adaptive resistance. The purpose of
this study was to test whether FOXO transcription factors mediate this
adaptive resistance to PI3Ki single agent treatment.

Methods: PI3K was inactivated in MCA cell lines, LS174T (KRAS G12D, PI3K
H1047R) and RW7213 (KRAS G12C, PI3K WT), by treatment with GDC0941
(Pictilisib), a small molecule inhibitor of class I PI3K. Alterations in
phosphorylation of effectors in the PI3K-AKT or MEK-ERK pathways were
determined using western blots. FOXO nuclear localization was assessed by
immunocytochemistry, confocal microscopy and nuclear fractionation
studies. Expression of FOXO proteins (FOXO1, FOXO3 and FOXO4) was reduced
by short inhibitory RNAs (siRNAs). FOXO1 was also inhibited in MCA cells
using AS1842856, a small molecule inhibitor.

Results: Immunohistochemical analysis and nuclear fractionation studies
showed significant nuclear enrichment of FOXO1 and FOXO3 in MCA cell
lines in response to PI3K inhibitor treatment. Upon siRNA-mediated
knockdown of FOXOs, rebound ERK phosphorylation seen in response to PI3Ki
treatment was substantially reduced. Concomitant with this decrease was a
reduction in expression of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) IR, IGFR,
HER2 and HER3. Combinatorial treatment of PI3K and FOXO1 inhibitors
resulted in a more pronounced loss of cell viability compared to single
agent treatment.

Conclusions: Our results suggest that resistance to PI3K single agent
inhibition seen in MCA cells is mediated, at least in part, by nuclear
translocation of FOXO proteins, particularly FOXO1. Our results support a
model where PI3K inhibition results in increased FOXO nuclear
localization which in turn, leads to transcriptional upregulation and
activation of RTKs which then lead to rebound activation of the MEK-ERK
pathway and increased survival and resistance. A role for FOXO proteins
in mediating PI3Ki resistance in KRAS-mutant MCA cells has not been
described before. Our results suggest that PI3Ki single agent therapy is
unlikely to be successful in KRAS-mutant MCAs due to FOXO-mediated
resistance thus providing a rationale for combination treatment
strategies.


