Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Maternal high butter fat intake heightens mammary cancer risk in
offsprings gestationally exposed to bisphenol A at environmentally
relevant dose.


In utero exposure to bisphenol A (BPA) at 250ug/kg BW was shown to
augment mammary cancer risk in rodent models. High fat diet is widely
believed to be a major risk of breast cancer (BCa). It is therefore
important to investigate whether maternal high fat intake could
potentially heighten mammary cancer risk associated to gestational BPA
exposure. In this study, we exposed Sprague Dawley rats with different
doses of BPA (2.5-2500ug/kg BW) mixed with high butter-based diet (HBF)
in the period from preconception to birth. DMBA-PND50 protocol was
followed. In the presence of HBF, we observed non-monotonic effects of
BPA in cancer incidence as well as in the number of terminal end buds of
PND21 mammary glands. Both results were peaked at a dosage of 25ug/kg BW
BPA and the effects were significant when compared with HBF alone group.
We further analyzed transcriptomic data of microdissected epithelia of
PND21 mammary glands from BPA (25ug/kg BW) group as well as HBF group and
revealed that two specific cancer networks involving ERK and androgen
receptor signaling were dysregulated. DNA methylation is one of the key
mechanisms to dysregulate and impair the transcription of two selected
top genes, Car7 and Kcnv2, as supported by our bisulfite-sequencing data.
These data suggest that in utero BPA exposure could epigenetically modify
gene expression and predispose cancer risk during early development. More
importantly, some BPA genes are of high human relevance because seven
selected BPA genes could dichotomize patients into two groups with
significant difference in overall survival in a TCGA cancer cohort. The
prognostic power of the genes was further enhanced in the survival
analysis of Caucasian with ER positive patients. In conclusion, our data
strongly suggest that BPA predisposes higher cancer risk by dysregulating
gene expression during early mammary gland development in the presence of
HBF, which could facilitate cancer development later in life.


