Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting TAM family members with antibody or small molecule
inhibitors enhances therapeutic modalities of HNSCC.


Radiation, cisplatin, and cetuximab are clinical therapeutics used in the
treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Despite
clinical success with these modalities, development of both intrinsic and
acquired resistance is an emerging problem in the management of HNSCC.
Thus, identifying and targeting molecules driving this drug resistance is
essential for improving efficacy of treatment approaches.

Recent studies have identified a role for the TAM family of receptor
tyrosine kinases (Tyro, Axl, and Mer) in tumor biology, especially the
Axl receptor in promoting tumor growth and metastasis. Previously, we
identified Axl as a logical molecular target in HNSCC and indicated that
it may play a pivotal role in resistance to radiation, cisplatin, and
cetuximab. In the current study, we advanced these early findings into
pre-clinical models using patient-derived xenografts (PDXs). We have
shown that small molecules targeting Axl can enhance therapy in PDXs that
express high levels of Axl and have been identified as resistant to
radiation, cisplatin, and cetuximab. Current studies are focusing on
antibody-based targeting of Axl using PDXs and genetically-modified
models of resistance. Furthermore, studies focused on co-targeting of Axl
and Mer in vitro and in vivo have shown striking results and denote the
importance of establishing logical approaches to target TAMs in the
management of HNSCC.

Finally, investigations into the molecular mechanisms of how Axl
signaling can lead to resistance have underscored the importance of
tyrosine 821 (Y821) of Axl. Overexpression of Axl rendered cetuximab
sensitive lines resistant, but cell lines overexpressing Axl-Y821F
retained their sensitivity to cetuximab. Advancing this line of study in
vivo indicated that tumors expressing Axl were resistant to cetuximab
whereas tumors harboring the Y821 mutation were sensitive demonstrating
that signals emanating from Y821 may be critical for cetuximab resistant
pathways.

Collectively, the studies presented herein identify the TAM family of
receptors as key players in radiation, cisplatin, and cetuximab
resistance. These results provide rationale for the clinical targeting of
TAM receptors to enhance the therapeutic modalities used in treating
HNSCC.


