Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2-targeted thorium-227 conjugate (HER2-TTC): Efficacy in a HER2
positive orthotopic bone model.


In 2015, the estimated incidence of new breast cancer (Ca) cases in the
US was 234.190 and number of deaths 40.730. Human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 (HER2) is encoded by the proto-oncogene c-erbB-2 and initiates
downstream signaling pathways leading to cell proliferation and
tumorigenesis. HER2 is overexpressed in several cancer types and has
emerged as one of the most strongly validated targets for the treatment
of breast and gastric cancer serving as both a prognostic and predictive
biomarker. Given that 20% of breast Ca patients are HER2 positive and 70%
of patients with metastatic disease will develop bone metastases and
associated morbidities, there is still an unmet medical need for improved
therapies targeting HER2. Radium-223 (Ra-223) is a novel targeted alpha
therapeutic for treatment of patients with castration-resistant prostate
cancer and bone metastases. Localized high energy alpha particle emission
induces double-stranded DNA breaks and cellular apoptosis. Thorium-227
(Th-227) is the immediate precursor for Ra-223 which, in contrast to
Ra-223, can be complexed by chelating agents at high affinity, allowing
targeted delivery to tumor cells via antibodies. We describe herein the
generation of a novel HER2-targeted Th-227 conjugate (HER2-TTC). HER2-TTC
consists of the humanized HER2 targeting IgG1 antibody trastuzumab
covalently linked via an amide bond to a 3,2-hydroxypyridino-based
chelator moiety, enabling efficient radiolabeling with the alpha particle
emitting radionuclide Th-227. Anonymized samples of consenting breast
cancer patients were analyzed by Immunohistochemistry (IHC). The IHC data
demonstrated HER2 positive expression in breast tumor and matched bone
metastases, supporting the preclinical evaluation of the anti-tumor
efficacy of HER2-TTC in the BT-474 orthotopic bone mouse model. HER2-TTC
was prepared at high radiochemical yield and purity. When tested for
binding to recombinant HER2, HER2-TTC was shown to retain comparable
binding affinity to trastuzumab. In vitro cytotoxicity experiment of
HER2-TTC demonstrated target mediated in vitro cytotoxicity in the
pM-range on breast cancer cell line BT-474 (430 000 mAbs bound/ cell as
determined by FACS). Anti-tumor efficacy of HER2-TTC was evaluated at 250
and 500 kBq/kg at a protein dose of 0.14 mg/kg. X-ray imaging, serum bone
formation marker PINP, micro CT 3D reconstruction imaging and
histological analysis demonstrated significantly reduced bone lesions and
tumor induced bone remodeling. The promising preclinical anti-tumor
activity supports the development of the HER2-TTC as a novel targeted
alpha therapeutic for the treatment of patients with HER2 positive bone
metastatic disease.


