Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post-mortem examination of an aggressive case of medullary thyroid
cancer characterised by catastrophic genomic abnormalities.


Catastrophic genomic alterations may drive aggressive cancer phenotypes.
We describe a diagnostically challenging and rapidly fatal case of
medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) occurring in a young, morbidly obese
man presenting with diffuse bone marrow involvement and disseminated
intravascular coagulation. Whole-exome (WES) and shallow whole-genome
sequencing (sWGS) were carried out for the primary tumour, adjacent
normal, bone marrow tissues, multiple metastases and blood samples
derived from the patient. We identified three germline single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) within the RET proto-oncogene that remained
undetected using routine hospital genetic testing procedures. One variant
(L769L) has been previously reported to be associated with aggressive MTC
presentation yet remains untested for in the routine diagnosis of MTC.
Supported by findings from both WES and sWGS, we report for the first
time in thyroid cancer on the occurrence of a “chromothripsis-like
pattern”, which involved shattering of chromosome 4 leading to complete
abrogation of normal chromosomal function, along with dramatic widespread
copy number aberrations across both primary tumour and bone marrow
samples. Based on the somatic variants identified, we describe the
evolutionary pathway of the case, showing that bone marrow metastasis
occurred separately to other metastatic sites. The presence of
disease-associated SNPs within the RET proto-oncogene supports their
inclusion as part of routine genetic testing for MTC cases. The copy
number aberrations and chromothripsis-like pattern affected a much
broader range of genes than single mutations and may have led to the
widespread chromosomal instability evident, possibly contributing to the
rapid fatal course of the case. These results provide a rationale for the
application of comprehensive genomic analysis of cancers presenting with
unusual and aggressive phenotypes to facilitate more appropriate
therapeutic options and diagnoses.


