Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel cancer-stem-cell biomarker, DCLK1-S, traffics to nuclei of
colon cancer cells: potential use as a biomarker for assessing colon
cancer risk after screening colonoscopy.


DCLK1 expression is critically required for maintaining growth of human
colon cancer cells (hCCCs). We and others recently reported that the
5’promoter of hDCLK1-gene gets hypermethylated and silenced in human
colorectal tumors (hCRCs) during adenoma-carcinoma sequence of colon
carcinogenesis (Reviewed by Singh et al. SCI, 2016). We also made the
discovery that hCRCs and hCCCs express a novel short isoform of DCLK1
(DCLK1-S) (isoform2) from β-promoter in intron V of hDCLK1-gene, while
normal-colons express the canonical long-isoform (DCLK1-L) (isoform1)
from 5’(α)-promoter, suggesting that DCLK1-S, and not DCLK1-L, marks
cancer-stem-cells (CSCs) (O’Connell et al, Sci Rep, 2015). Even though
DCLK1-S differs from DCLK1-L by only six amino-acids, we succeeded in
generating a mono-specific DCLK1-S-Antibody (PS41014), which does not
cross-react with DCLK1-L, and specifically detects DCLK1-S in several
assay platforms, including westerns and IHC. Sub-cellular localization of
S/L isoforms was examined by immune-electron-microscopy (IEM).
Surprisingly, besides plasma membrane and cytosolic fractions, S/L also
localized to nuclear/mitochondrial fractions, with pronounced
localization of S-isoform in the nuclei and mitochondria of hCCCs.
Sporadic CRCs develop from adenomas (Ads). Screening colonoscopy is used
for detection/resection of growths, and morphological/pathological
criteria are used for risk assessment and recommendations for follow-up
colonoscopy. But, these features are not precise and majority of the
patients with adenomas will never develop CRC. We hypothesized that
antibody-based assay(s), which identify CSCs, will significantly improve
prognostic value of morphological/pathological criteria. We conducted a
pilot retrospective study with PS41014-Ab, by staining archived adenoma
specimens from patients who developed (High-risk) or did not develop
(Low-risk) adenocarcinomas within 10-15 years. PS41014-Ab stained
adenomas from initial and follow-up colonoscopies of high-risk patients,
at significantly higher levels (3-5X) than adenomas from low-risk
patients, suggesting that PS41014-Ab could be used as an additional tool
for assessing CRC-risk. We previously reported that CRC-patients, whose
colonic tumors were positive for relatively high levels of DCLK1-S
expression (by qRT-PCR), had a worse overall survival and disease free
interval than low-expressers (O’Connell et al, Sci Rep 2015). We now
report that DCLK1-S-Antibody may help to identify patients at high-risk
for developing CRCs within 10-15 years, at the time of index/screening
colonoscopy, and thus serve as a useful biomarker at early time points of
colon carcinogenesis, unlike the currently available fecal/blood tests.


