Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of resistance mechanisms to IGF-IR targeting in
triple negative breast cancer.


The triple negative subtypes of breast cancer (TNBC) are associated with
poor prognosis. Unlike HER2+ and hormone receptor-positive BC, TNBC do
not respond to targeted therapy and chemotherapy remains the primary
treatment option. There is therefore an unmet need to develop effective
therapy for TNBC. The insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-I) axis plays a
critical role in BC progression by conveying survival and growth signals.
Our laboratory reported on the production of a soluble fusion protein
comprised of the extracellular domain of human IGF-IR fused to the Fc
portion of human IgG (the IGF-Trap). The IGF-Trap reduces the
bioavailability of circulating and locally produced IGF-I, thereby
limiting tumor growth. When human TNBC MDA-MB-231 cells were
xenotransplanted into nude mice and treated with the IGF-Trap, we
observed variability in the response as it ranged from complete tumor
regression to disease stabilization and tumor progression in some mice.
This suggested that MDA-MB-231 cells are heterogeneous in respect to
their sensitivity to IGF-IR signaling blockade. The aim of the present
study was to identify resistance mechanisms that allow the cells to
progress in the face of IGF-IR signaling blockade by the IGF-Trap.

We first analyzed the tyrosine kinase receptor profile of these cells and
confirmed by PCR that in addition to IGF-IR, they express epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR), c-Met, and fibroblast growth factor
receptor 1 (FGFR1). They also produce IGF-I, EGF and relatively high
level of FGF1 that could provide potential autocrine signaling to
compensate for IGF signaling blockade. Using limiting dilution cloning,
we isolated MDA-MB-231 cells with a range of IGF-IR expression levels, as
confirmed by qPCR and Western blotting. We found that clones with higher
basal IGF-IR activation levels, independently of expression levels had
increased sensitivity to IGF-Trap treatment in the presence of serum,
identifying them as IGF-addicted clonal subpopulations. Furthermore, an
IGF-Trap resistant population selected from MDA-MB-231 cells by prolonged
exposure to the IGF-Trap had an increased proliferation rate in the
presence of the IGF-Trap as compared to unselected cells, as assessed by
MTT and showed higher p-EGFR and p-ERK levels, suggesting that prolonged
IGF-Trap treatment enriched an IGF-I-independent population with
increased aggressiveness.

Collectively these results showed that MDA-MB-231 cells are heterogeneous
in respect to IGF-IR expression levels and that IGF-Trap sensitivity
correlated with constitutive IGF-IR activation levels. Moreover, IGF-Trap
resistance in these cells was associated with increased EGFR signaling
and proliferation. Further interrogation of the gene expression profile
of these cells will define a “resistance signature” with potential
relevance to personalized treatment with IGF-targeting drugs.

Supported by the CIHR and Mitacs.


