Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced anti-tumor efficacy of a checkpoint inhibitor in
combination with the HDAC inhibitor belinostat in a murine
hepato-cellular carcinoma preclinical model.


Introduction Belinostat is an HDAC inhibitor currently marketed in the US
for the treatment of PTCL. A new oral formulation is under development
(positive PoC in preclinical PK study) and provides an increase potential
to develop new indications of belinostat in combination with other drugs.
It has been extensively demonstrated that some anti-tumor agents, besides
their direct anti-tumor effect, may induce additional mechanisms
involving activation of immune responses. Thus, combination of these
drugs with other immunotherapeutic protocols may yield improved
therapeutic benefits. The objective of the present study is the
characterization of the therapeutic efficacy of a combination of
checkpoint inhibitors (anti-CTLA-4 antibodies) with belinostat in a
murine HCC model. In addition, immunoprofiling was performed in order to
assess the associated immune response. Methods In vivo efficacy was
performed in a Hepa 129 murine hepatocellular carcinoma model implanted
subcutaneously in immune-competent C3H mice using anti-CTLA4 alone,
belinostat alone or in combination. Treatments were optimized to be able
to demonstrate positive effect of the combination. Tumor volume was the
primary endpoint. Samples from the spleen were taken to analyze immune
mechanism mediating the antitumor activity. Percent of CD4, CD8 T cells
and regulatory T cells were determined by flow cytometry. Anti-tumor T
cell response was measured by IFN-gamma ELISPOT assay. Results Belinostat
improved anti-tumor therapeutic response induced by the anti-CTLA4
checkpoint inhibitor with a significant superior tumor growth inhibition
compared to control groups. Treatment with the combination resulted in a
complete cessation in tumor growth in all mice during the belinostat
treatment period which continued for 1 week after the final dose.
Mechanistic studies showed that the underlying immune response correlated
with the observed therapeutic effect of the combination with enhancement
of IFN-gamma production as antitumor T cell response and decrease in
regulatory T cells in the spleens of treated animals. Conclusion These
results provide a rational for using belinostat in combination with
checkpoint inhibitors to reinforce therapeutic response. Currently only
approx. 20% of patients respond to check point inhibitors alone. The oral
formulation of belinostat will allow greater flexibility in dosing
schedule and use in multiple clinical situations. Further studies are
ongoing in order to fully characterize this finding and to facilitate its
translation into patients.


