Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced role of the extracellular matrix in ovarian cancer
recurrence.


Purpose: Despite improvements in care and advancements in the
understanding of ovarian cancer (OC) pathobiology and genetic
alterations, the survival rate is disappointingly low when compared to
that of other types of cancer. One factor contributing to the poor
survival rate is the development of chemotherapeutic resistance and a
high rate of recurrent tumor growth in the months and years following
primary OC treatment. Our objective was to identify potential new
therapeutic targets for prevention of recurrence through examination of
changes in gene regulation that occur in recurrent versus matched primary
tumors.

Procedures: We used 16 primary-recurrent tumor pairs from patients with
stage III/IV serous epithelial OC from the Duke Gynecologic Oncology
Tissue Bank. Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChips and
Affymetrix Human Genome U133A arrays were used to quantify methylation
and gene expression, respectively. Expression and methylation of POSTN
and COL11A1 were analyzed using an independent OC dataset comprising 38
women with 7 years survival, 3 normal ovarian surface epithelium (OSE)
and 2 fallopian tube fimbriae epithelium (FTFE) samples. siRNA knockdown
of POSTN and COL11A1 in OC cells was followed by expression and
proliferation assays.

Results: Paired student t tests showed a >2-fold difference for 13 of the
1,569 significantly differentially expressed genes, seven with increased
expression in recurrent OC (POSTN, COL11A1, MMP1, MMP13, TNC, ASPN, and
EPYC), and six with decreased expression (GATA6, PEG3, SST, MAOB, TSPAN8,
and C7). Interestingly, all seven up-regulated genes are involved in
extracellular matrix (ECM) functions, an important component of the tumor
microenvironment. With an independent OC microarray dataset, we found
elevated COL11A1 mRNA in OCs as compared to OSE and FTFE tissues
(pResults: Paired student t tests showed a >2-fold difference for 13 of
the 1,569 significantly differentially expressed genes, seven with
increased expression in recurrent OC (POSTN, COL11A1, MMP1, MMP13, TNC,
ASPN, and EPYC), and six with decreased expression (GATA6, PEG3, SST,
MAOB, TSPAN8, and C7). Interestingly, all seven up-regulated genes are
involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) functions, an important component
of the tumor microenvironment. With an independent OC microarray dataset,
we found elevated COL11A1 mRNA in OCs as compared to OSE and FTFE tissues
(p<0.05). There are inverse correlations between COL11A1 expression and
methylation at five promoter CG sites (R=-0.58 to -0.65, pResults: Paired
student t tests showed a >2-fold difference for 13 of the 1,569
significantly differentially expressed genes, seven with increased
expression in recurrent OC (POSTN, COL11A1, MMP1, MMP13, TNC, ASPN, and
EPYC), and six with decreased expression (GATA6, PEG3, SST, MAOB, TSPAN8,
and C7). Interestingly, all seven up-regulated genes are involved in
extracellular matrix (ECM) functions, an important component of the tumor
microenvironment. With an independent OC microarray dataset, we found
elevated COL11A1 mRNA in OCs as compared to OSE and FTFE tissues
(p<0.05). There are inverse correlations between COL11A1 expression and
methylation at five promoter CG sites (R=-0.58 to -0.65, p<0.05).
Immunohistochemistry showed higher expression of POSTN and COL11A1 in
recurrent OC. Knockdown of POSTN and COL11A1 in OC cell lines led to
significantly reduced proliferation (pResults: Paired student t tests
showed a >2-fold difference for 13 of the 1,569 significantly
differentially expressed genes, seven with increased expression in
recurrent OC (POSTN, COL11A1, MMP1, MMP13, TNC, ASPN, and EPYC), and six
with decreased expression (GATA6, PEG3, SST, MAOB, TSPAN8, and C7).
Interestingly, all seven up-regulated genes are involved in extracellular
matrix (ECM) functions, an important component of the tumor
microenvironment. With an independent OC microarray dataset, we found
elevated COL11A1 mRNA in OCs as compared to OSE and FTFE tissues
(p<0.05). There are inverse correlations between COL11A1 expression and
methylation at five promoter CG sites (R=-0.58 to -0.65, p<0.05).
Immunohistochemistry showed higher expression of POSTN and COL11A1 in
recurrent OC. Knockdown of POSTN and COL11A1 in OC cell lines led to
significantly reduced proliferation (p<0.05).

Conclusion: Our findings indicate that the genes involved in
extracellular matrix function that contribute to the composition and
regulation of the tumor microenvironment play critical roles in OC
recurrence, and may offer new therapeutic opportunities.


