Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel nanoparticle formulation of doxorubicin is clearly
differentiated from free doxorubicin in overcoming resistance mechanisms
in chemo-resistant tumors.


Background and Aims. Chemo-resistance in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
tumor cells can be mediated by several mechanisms including P-gp efflux
pumps and drug sequestration by the autophagy process. This study
investigates the potential of doxorubicin loaded nanoparticle (NP) to
reverse chemo-resistance by these mechanisms compared to free
doxorubicin. We present the preclinical evaluation of anti-tumor effects
of NP as monotherapy and in combination with standard agents used in
treatment of HCC, pancreatic and sarcoma cancers. A phase III clinical
study comparing NP to Best Standard of Care (Relive study) in patients
with advanced HCC is in the final stages of recruitment with preliminary
results expected in 2H 2017.

Methods. Tumor cell lines were incubated with drugs in cell proliferation
assay. In vivo efficacy of NP alone (4-8 mg/kg) or in combination with
current and investigational treatments for pancreatic cancer (e.g.
Gemcitabine, Erlotinib, Abraxane) and HCC (Sorafenib, Regorafenib and
Lenvatinib) were performed in mouse tumor models using tumor weight as
primary endpoint. In all experiments NP was compared to administration of
free doxorubicin. Doxorubicin quantification in tumor and organs to asses
PK and biodistribution was also performed using an LC/MS based method.
Autophagy was measured by cell proliferation in the presence of
inhibitors e.g.. Concanamycin A, Hydroxychloroquine sulfate added 30 min
before incubation with the test compound.

Results. NP showed a dose-dependent inhibition of cell proliferation in
all resistant cancer cell lines tested with a superior activity compared
to free doxorubicin and other tested drugs. In contrast to free
doxorubicin, NP showed consistent anti-proliferative activity in the
absence/presence of inhibitors of P-gp pumps and autophagy. In a range of
in vivo models, NP was preferentially taken up by the tumor tissue and
significantly reduced tumor growth when compared with free doxorubicin
and with at least equivalent reduction in tumor growth compared to
current treatments. Furthermore NP administered in combination with
current treatments significantly increased the inhibitory effect of each
drug without additional toxicity (as measured by no change in body
weight). The results comparing efficacy of NP alone and in combination in
HCC, pancreatic and sarcoma cancer models will be presented.

Conclusions. These results demonstrate that NP is clearly differentiated
from free doxorubicin, in 1) overcoming resistance mechanisms linked to
efflux and autophagy, and 2) having a superior biodistribution profile
both of which results in significantly enhanced activity on
chemo-resistant tumors. NP also provides an opportunity to combine with
other agents, enhancing activity without increasing toxicity. The
implications of these results on the further development of NP will be
discussed.


