Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: YAP1 mediated CDK6 activation confers radiation resistance in
esophageal cancer: rationale for the combination of YAP1 and CDK4/6
inhibitors in EC.


Background: Esophageal carcinoma (EC) is a lethal disease with high
incidence globally and often exist therapy resistance. Alterations
(either overexpression or amplification) of YAP1 and CDK4/6 were found
frequently in esophageal cancer. Deregulation of these pathways may
represent key elements for resistance in esophageal cancer.

Methods: Expression of YAP1 and CDK4/6 were examined in esophageal tumor
tissues as well as cell lines using immunohistochemistry and
immunoblotting. Inducible YAP1 overexpression in EC cells by lentivirus
system was performed to test YAP1 mediated CDK4/6 expression and
activation and association with radiation resistance. YAP inhibitor CA3
and CDK4/6 inhibitor Lee001 were used to test their antitumor activities
in vitro and in vivo. Cell proliferation assay (MTS), Flow cytometry and
immunofluorecence and tumor sphere formation assay were performed to test
cell cycle distribution, cancer stem cell (CSC) population maintenance
and over growth and therapy resistance.

Results: We demonstrate that overexpressed YAP1 is positively associated
with CDK4/6 expression in resistant tumor tissues and EC cell lines.
Overexpression YAP1 by inducible lentivirus system in EC cells
up-regulates expression of CDK4/6 at level of its transcription, while
knock down YAP1 in JHESO EC cells dramatically decreased CDK6 expression
as well as its transcription. CA3, a novel YAP1 inhibitor, was able to
decrease activation of CDK4/6 and phosphorylation RB and cell cycle
progression induced by YAP1. Interestingly, we found that inducible YAP1
high EC cells are resistant to radiation resistance and CDK6 knockout by
Lenti-Crisp sensitize radiation resistant in EC cells induced by YAP1.
Further, we demonstrated radiation resistant cells are enriched CSC
population and demonstrated increased level of both YAP1 and CDK4/6,
while blocking the YAP and CDK4/6 pathway by using their inhibitor CA3 or
Lee001 reduced EC cell growth and CSCs properties especially in EC
resistant cells. Most importantly, we found combination of Lee001 and CA3
exert a synergistic anticancer effect in radiation resistant EC cells
with high YAP1 and CDK4/6 in Vitro and in Vivo.

Conclusions: Our data provide evidence that YAP1 mediated CDK4/6
up-regulation plays an important role in conferring radiation resistance
in esophageal cancer cells. Targeting both YAP1 and CDK4/6 may provide
novel therapeutic strategies in EC.

Corresponding Authors: Shumei Song, Tel:713-834-6144; Email:
ssong@mdanderson.org; or Jaffer A. Ajani, Tel: 713-792-3685; Email:
jajani@mdanderson.org


