Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrating multiomics discovery approaches to identify biomarkers
of therapeutic resistance in metastatic colorectal cancer through
analyses of multiple sequential tumor and liquid biopsies; Qcroc01:
NCT00984048.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the 2nd leading cause of cancer related-death
in Canada. Clinical responses of metastatic (m)CRC to first-line
treatment range from 35 to 60%, but even responders inevitably develop
therapeutic resistance. Studies aiming at understanding mechanisms of
resistance have largely investigated primary tumors. However, selective
pressures during therapy can lead to the expansion of resistant clones
and tumor heterogeneity. This highlights the need to characterize the
molecular changes of metastasis and plasma over time of treatment and
response to decipher tumor evolution and therapeutic resistance
mechanisms.

In this multicenter study, 52 tissue samples from liver metastasis were
collected at baseline (pre-biopsies) and at the time of resistance
(post-biopsies) in responder and non-responder mCRC patients (n=44)
undergoing the same standard first-line treatments. Multiple
post-biopsies also have been harvested in 4 patients, to allow the
assessment of tumor heterogeneity and as well as the evolution of the
genomic complexity after treatment exposure.

Analyses were carried out across multiple omic platforms to identify
resistant signatures and characterize molecular changes during treatment.
Biopsies were profiled using exome and transcriptome sequencing as well
as high-density SNP array analysis to capture chromosomal anomalies, loss
of heterozygosity (LOH) and copy number variations (CNV). Additionally,
serial blood samples were collected for proteomic, ctDNA and cytokine
analysis.

Our preliminary analysis of transcriptomes performed on serial biopsies
from a set of 11 patients identified genes consistently overexpressed at
resistance. Cytogenetics analysis showed similar genomic profiles of
matched pre- and post-biopsies and allowed the establishment of LOH and
CNV catalogues of liver metastasis, while exome sequencing revealed
cumulative somatic mutations over time of treatment, which suggests
subclonal and acquired “driver” mutations of resistance.
Plasma-derived ctDNA analysis was performed to investigate the mutational
status during treatment and whether they correlate with their relative
levels in biopsies. Immune gene expression analysis of a test set of 27
metastases revealed strong clustering of 7 metastases due to
overexpression of transcripts related to active immune response, allowing
to define novel subgroups of patients based on immune response status.
Our study, using a multi-omic strategy and integration of independent
molecular platforms to profile liver metastasis samples of responder and
non-responder mCRC patients, constitutes an innovative approach to
identify clinical biomarkers and molecular signature of resistance, which
may enhance individualization of cancer medicine and customized therapy.


