Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of circulating stroma-related biomarkers for
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most aggressive
epithelial malignancies characterized by a relevant amount of tumor
stroma. It is usually diagnosed late and has limited treatment options.
Plasmatic markers capable of detecting the disease in its early stages
and monitoring treatment effectiveness might change the fate of PDAC
patients. This study investigates the potential value of circulating
stroma-related molecules as PDAC biomarkers capable to detect the disease
and to monitor treatment response. Thirty-eight stroma-related candidate
biomarkers were selected from published proteomic studies on PDAC. Levels
of these molecules were tested by ELISA and Multiplex Luminex assays in a
first cohort of plasma samples from PDAC patients and healthy subjects.
Thirteen molecules -extracellular matrix proteins and proteolytic
fragments, matrix-degrading enzymes and their inhibitors, growth factors
and adhesion molecules-, were found to be differentially expressed in
PDAC plasma compared to healthy subjects. A second analysis in an
independent cohort of PDAC patients, chronic pancreatitis patients and
healthy controls confirmed the previous findings and allowed restricting
the number of biomarkers up-regulated in the plasma of PDAC patients. The
plasma analysis of two genetically engineered mouse models of pancreatic
cancer [Pdx-1-Cre;LSL-KrasG12D and
Pdx-1-Cre;LSL-KrasG12D/+;LSL-Trp53R172H/+] revealed an up-regulation of
four markers in association with PanIN development, indicating their
potential role in the early diagnosis of pancreatic cancer. These markers
were also elevated in the plasma of mice bearing patient derived
orthotopic PDAC xenografts (PDAC-PDX), but not in a mouse model of
caerulein-induced chronic pancreatitis. Their level was associated with
PDAC-PDX tumor growth and response to gemcitabine combined with
nab-paclitaxel. In conclusion this analysis has identified a panel of
stroma-related potential biomarkers associated with tumor progression and
drug response of PDAC.

Supported by Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC 5 per
mille grant n. 12182) and Fondazione “Eugenio Morandi” ONLUS per lo
studio e la cura dei tumori del pancreas.


