Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predesigned gene content for rapid deployment of custom oncology
panels.


Efficient utilization of targeted gene panels for oncology research is
challenged by the wide variation in gene constituents specific to a given
study. While focused gene panels efficiently provide the necessary depth
of coverage for low frequency variant detection, the high costs and
design challenges associated with de novo panel design present challenges.

The NEBNext DirectTM technology utilizes a novel approach to selectively
enrich nucleic acid targets ranging from a single gene to several hundred
genes, without sacrificing specificity. The approach rapidly hybridizes
both strands of genomic DNA with biotinyated probes prior to strepdavidin
bead capture, enzymatic removal of off-target sequence, and conversion of
captured molecules into sequencer-ready libraries. This results in a
unique read coverage profile that results in uniform coverage across a
given target. Unlike alternative hybridization methods, the approach does
not necessitate upfront library preparation, and instead converts the
captured molecules into dual-indexed illumina sequencer compatible
libraries containing an 8 basepair sample ID and a 12bp Unique Molecule
Index (UMI). The UMI individually tags each molecule prior to the final
PCR amplification of the library, enabling identification of PCR
duplicate molecules. The result is a 1-day protocol that enables the
preparation of sequence-ready libraries from purified genomic DNA
specific to the gene content included in the panel.

We have designed and developed baits specific to the full exonic content
of 450 genes associated with cancer. These are designed, balanced, and
pooled on a per gene basis, and can be combined into customized panels,
allowing rapid turnaround of specific custom gene subsets. Here, we
present the ability to rapidly deploy custom gene panels across a variety
of panel sizes and content, while maintaining high specificity,
uniformity of coverage across target content, and sensitivity to detect
nucleic acid variants from tumor samples.


