Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profiling and threshold expression of microRNAs in
mammary tissue of asymptomatic women.


Night shift-work and circadian dysfunction have been linked to increased
incidence of breast cancer. Circadian modulation of gene expression is
often mediated by microRNAs (miRNAs), small 18-25 nucleotide noncoding
RNA molecules that regulate posttranscriptional gene expression via mRNA
inactivation. Although miRNA dysregulation has been implicated in breast
cancer development, the relationship between breast cancer incidence in
women exposed to chronic circadian disruption and their miRNA profiles
has not been examined due to the lack of existing normal profiles of
expression. We first identified miRNA expressed in asymptomatic breast
tissue and defined their baseline profiles in women exposed to a regular
work schedule compared to those who experienced chronic circadian
disruption by night shift work. Normal mammary tissue was obtained from
women undergoing therapeutic breast reductions. Clinical metadata on
work, stress, sleep, pregnancy, medical, medication, family, and surgical
history were obtained through survey and chart review. We selected night
shift work starting from 0700 to 0300 as a marker of circadian
disruption. Our studies focused on two major comparisons. First, we
determined qualitative oscillatory differences in miRNA variants
expressed during day and night. Second, we determined statistically
significant expression levels of those day and night miRNAs in shift
workers. Mammary miRNA reads were mapped against the reference human
genome and mature miRNA set. One-way ANOVA was used to compare miRNA
expression levels between night shift and non-night shift workers, as
well as miRNA expression between other clinical metadata. At present,
twelve samples have undergone experimental and statistical analyses.
Three out of the twelve samples were from night shift workers. One-way
ANOVA was run on the top one hundred expressed miRNAs including
hsa-miR-143-3p, hsa-miR-99a-5p, hsa-miR-21-5p, hsa-miR-10b-5p, and
hsa-miR-148a-3p to exclude miRNAs with zero or extremely low counts.
Analysis showed no significant difference in miRNA expression of normal
samples between night shift and non-night-shift workers (p 0.06099),
pregnant and nulliparous (p 0.2658), and women who breastfed and those
who did not (p 0.111). There was significant difference in miRNA
expression of normal samples between patients who had breast cancer in
the opposite breast compared to those who did not (p 0.03269) and
patients with sleep problems and those who did not (p 0.003448). It is
interesting to note that night shift work and sleep problems both
represent forms of circadian disruption, yet only the latter showed
significant difference in miRNA expression between controls. It is
expected that patients with cancer in the other breast may exhibit
significantly different reads from patients who have never had breast
cancer. Future analyses will be performed using additional samples to
build on these findings.


