Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The oncogenic role of miR-150-5p in triple-negative breast cancer.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype of breast
cancer that confers disease recurrence, treatment resistance and high
mortality rates. MicroRNAs are a class of noncoding RNAs, that when
dysregulated, impact tumorigenesis through the control of the expression
of multiple mRNA targets involved in critical cancer signaling pathways.
MiR-150-5p has been shown to control the expression of several driver
oncogenes and/or tumor suppressor genes involved in these critical
pathways. Its pattern of expression varies according to the cancer type;
it has been observed mostly downregulated in hematological diseases and
GI cancers, and upregulated in hormonal dependent cancers, such as
prostate and breast cancer. The main objective of this study was to
assess the patterns of expression of miR-150-5p in TNBC and determine its
functional role in affecting the tumor phenotype. Archived paraffin
samples of 113 patients with ductal breast carcinoma (56 of the TNBC and
57 of the non-TNBC subtype) and 49 adjacent normal tissue (ANT), obtained
from the the pathology tumor bank of Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Washington DC, were profiled for miRNA using the wide-genome
Nanostring platform and a Taqman specific miRNA-150-5p assay. Significant
overexpression levels of miRNA-150-5p were observed in the tumor tissues
when compared to the ANT and in the TNBC cases when compared to the
non-TNBC cases, demonstrating its tumor and TNBC subtype specificity,
respectively. Overexpressed levels of miRNA-150-5p were also
preferentially observed in the TNBC cases from patients that presented
with LN metastasis and breast cancer recurrence, indicating its
association with poor prognosis. Interestingly, the TNBC of
African-American patients, which is the ethnic group mostly affected by
this cancer subtype, presented overexpression levels of this miRNA when
compared to the Non-Hispanic White patients. Functional analysis
performed in the TNBC cell lines, MDA-MB-231 and HCC1806, showed after
transfection with miR-150-5p inhibitor, reduced levels on cell
proliferation, clonogenicity, migration, drug resistance and expression
of the EMT promoter markers, SLUG and SNAIL. These findings, indicate an
oncogenic type of action of miRNA-150-5p in TNBC. In summary,
miRNA-150-5p is upregulated in TNBC clinical cases in association with
poor prognostic parameters and its functional inhibition, directly
confers to the cells a reduction of their tumorigenic phenotype.

Funding: This project was supported by the Georgetown University Center
of Excellence in Regulatory Science and Innovation (CERSI U01FD004319), a
collaborative effort between the university and the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration to promote regulatory science through innovative research
and education. This research does not necessarily reflect the views of
the FDA. Scholarship to B.S. was provided by Coordenação de
Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES).


