Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of the notch signaling pathway confers a
tumor-suppressive phenotype on melanoma-associated fibroblasts.


Objectives. The tumor microenvironment (TME) is an emerging therapeutic
target for cancer treatment. Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) play a
crucial role in cancer progression. We aim to target TME by altering
intracellular signaling which determines the biological function of CAF.
We have recently showed that the Notch signaling pathway likely functions
as a molecular switch in controlling the tumor regulatory role of CAF in
animal models and experimentally created “CAF”. Here, we investigated
the status of Notch signaling in human melanoma-associated fibroblasts
(MAF) versus their normal counterparts and tested whether manipulation of
the Notch pathway activity in MAF alter their tumor-regulating function.

Methods. We examined levels of Hes1, a canonical Notch target, in MAF of
human malignant melanoma at different stages (I-IV) and fibroblasts in
either adjacent or non-adjacent normal skin tissues using tissue
microarray. MAF were isolated from human metastatic melanoma tissues.
Notch pathway RT2-PCRArray and immunoblot were used to assess Notch
pathway activity in MAF versus normal human dermal fibroblasts.
Activation of Notch signaling pathway in MAF was achieved by lentiviral
vector encoding active form of Notch1 (NIC). The effect of
Notch1-engineered MAF on melanoma growth was tested by in vitro
co-cultures and in a mouse co-xenograft model (n=6/group). Tumor
angiogenesis was analyzed by immunochemistry.

Results. MAF expressed decreased levels of Hes1 compared with adjacent
skin fibroblasts. Isolated MAF also exhibited lower Notch activity than
normal human dermal fibroblasts. Notch1-engineered MAF significantly
inhibited melanoma cell growth in vitro (pResults. MAF expressed
decreased levels of Hes1 compared with adjacent skin fibroblasts.
Isolated MAF also exhibited lower Notch activity than normal human dermal
fibroblasts. Notch1-engineered MAF significantly inhibited melanoma cell
growth in vitro (p<0.01) and suppressed melanoma growth and tumor
angiogenesis in mice (pResults. MAF expressed decreased levels of Hes1
compared with adjacent skin fibroblasts. Isolated MAF also exhibited
lower Notch activity than normal human dermal fibroblasts.
Notch1-engineered MAF significantly inhibited melanoma cell growth in
vitro (p<0.01) and suppressed melanoma growth and tumor angiogenesis in
mice (p<0.05).

Conclusions. Notch pathway activity is down-regulated in MAF. Increase of
Notch pathway activity confers MAF with inhibition to melanoma growth and
tumor angiogenesis. Our study demonstrates that Notch signaling is a
critical molecular switch in determining the tumor regulatory role of MAF
and provides potential targets for cancer therapeutic interventions on
the TME.


