Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and development of COM701, a therapeutic antibody
targeting the novel immune checkpoint PVRIG.


Background: While blockade of the CTLA4 and PD1 pathways has emerged as
an effective treatment of cancer, the majority of patients do not derive
long term benefit. This provides a rationale for identifying and
targeting additional checkpoints. Employing our unique computational
algorithms, we identified PVRIG, a new member of the B7/CD28 family. We
report here the expression pattern, functional characterization, and
anti-tumor activity of blocking antibodies targeting PVRIG as well as
characterization of PVRIG KO mice.

Materials and Methods: PVRIG is expressed by T and NK cells within the
tumor microenvironment. We identified PVRL2 as its counterpart and
characterized the PVRIG-PVRL2 interaction. Antibody discovery was carried
out with phage display and hybridoma platforms and antibodies against the
human protein were screened for their ability to enhance T-cell activity
in vitro, while surrogate antibodies targeting the mouse protein were
assessed in syngeneic models for effects on tumor growth. PVRIG -/- KO
mice were generated and characterized including phenotyping and
anti-tumor immune response.

Results: PVRIG is expressed on different T cell subsets and on NK, NKT
and γδ T-cells. Within T cells, memory subsets possess the highest
level of PVRIG and its expression is induced upon long term activation
with different stimuli. Within tumor microenvironment, PVRIG was found to
be expressed on NK and CD8+ T cells in multiple cancers. A high affinity
lead Ab was selected, COM701, for further clinical development and
demonstrated blockade of the interaction of PVRIG with PVRL2 as well as
enhancement of activation of both primary and tumor-derived effector
immune cells through a PVRL2-dependent mechanism. Moreover, COM-701
showed notable enhancement of T cell function in-vitro when combined with
PD1 or TIGIT Ab blockade. The lead antibody, COM-701, is currently in
preclinical development. A surrogate antibody, that blocks PVRIG-PVRL2
interaction, was shown to inhibit growth of colon carcinoma and melanoma
in syngeneic models upon combined treatment with anti-PDL1 antibody.
Comparative analysis of PVRIG KO versus WT derived T cells revealed
enhanced reactivity of PVRIG null T cells upon polyclonal activation in
presence of PVRL2-Ig. Accordingly, MC38 tumors grew slower in PVRIG KO
than in WT mice and ex vivo analysis pointed to the quantitative and
functional differences in anticancer immunity developed in these mice.

Conclusion: We describe the identification of PVRIG as a novel T cell
immune checkpoint. We further demonstrate that antibody blockade of the
PVRIG-PVRL2 interaction has the potential to be efficiently combined with
PD1 or TIGIT blockade for enhancing anti-tumor immunity. COM-701 is a
high affinity antagonistic antibody that is currently in preclinical
development. Taken together, these data demonstrate the utility of
targeting PVRIG in addition to other B7 family checkpoints for the
treatment of cancer.


