Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phospho-akt: a potential resistance marker to chemotherapy and a
therapy-target to restore sensitivity in pancreatic cancer.


Oncogenic KRAS signaling is the main driving force behind pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC); however, targeting this pathway has proven
to be difficult. Conversely, the PI3K/Akt pathway represents an exciting
new target, because it has been associated with poor prognosis and
chemoresistance, and several inhibitors are under development. In
particular, perifosine prevents Akt translocation to the cell membrane,
while MK-2206 is an Akt allosteric inhibitor and BEZ-235 is a dual
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor. Therefore, we investigated the prognostic role of
phospho (p)-Akt in PDAC tissues, as well as the molecular mechanisms
underlying the interaction of Akt inhibitors with gemcitabine, using PDAC
cells, primary cultures and spheroids.

Immunohistochemistry of tissue microarrays with specimens from
radically-resected patients (n=100) revealed a correlation between high
p-Akt1 expression and worse outcome. Patients with low p-Akt expression
(as detected by digital scoring) had a median overall survival (OS) of
16.2 months (95% CI, 14.8-20.1), while patients with high expression had
a median OS of 12.0 months (95% CI, 9.0-14.9, P=0.03). Parallel
immunocytochemistry studies revealed high expression levels in LPC028
primary cells, while LPC006 were characterized by low p-Akt1. Akt
inhibitors reduced cancer cell growth in monolayers and spheroids, and
synergistically enhanced the antiproliferative activity of gemcitabine in
LPC028 (e.g., combination index CI of 0.2, in the gemcitabine-perifosine
combination for 72h, at fixed IC50 ratio), while this combination was
antagonistic in LPC006 cells. The synergistic effect was paralleled by a
5-fold reduction in the expression of the main gemcitabine target
ribonucleotide reductase. Inhibition of Akt decreased cell migration and
invasion, which was additionally reduced by the combination with
gemcitabine. However, the combination of Akt inhibitors with gemcitabine
increased apoptosis, associated with induction of caspase-3/6/8/9, PARP
and BAD, and inhibition of Bcl-2 and NF-kB in LPC028, but not in LPC006
cells. The Akt signaling is involved in the expression/localization of
the key glucose transporter Glut1, and increased glucose metabolism was
associated to resistance to axitinib (Hudson et al, Cell Death Dis 2014).
Remarkably, the resistant LPC006 cells were characterized by
overexpression of Glut1, which was not reduced after exposure to Akt
inhibitors. However, the novel Glut1 inhibitor PGL13 enhanced perifosine
and perifosine/gemcitabine-induced cell death. In conclusion, our
findings support the analysis of phospho-Akt1 expression as both a
prognostic and a predictive biomarker, for the rational development of
new combination therapies targeting the Akt pathway in PDAC. Finally,
inhibition of Glut1 might overcome resistance to these therapies and
warrants further studies.


