Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The functional role(s) of serum amyloid A1 (SAA1) polymorphisms in
integrin-mediated cell adhesion in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cells.


Serum amyloid A1 (SAA1) was previously identified as a tumor suppressor
gene with anti-angiogenic activities in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
Three SAA1 isoforms (SAA1.1, 1.3, and 1.5) were observed with
disproportionate frequencies among the NPC patients and healthy people.
SAA1.1 and 1.3 are the functional isoforms to inhibit angiogenesis
whereas SAA1.5 was the defective gene. Our immunohistochemical results
showed that the loss of SAA1 staining in the metastatic NPC tissues was
significantly associated with tumor progression. We aim to investigate
the functional roles of the three SAA1 isoforms in NPC metastasis in the
present study. We want to investigate whether the functional SAA1.1 and
1.3 isoforms can suppress tumor metastasis by antagonizing the
integrin-FAK signaling pathway in the NPC tumor cells. The focal adhesion
assay was performed by seeding the tumor cells with or without the
integrin alphaVbeta3/beta5 ligand vitronectin. Both the vector-alone
control and the SAA1.5-expressing NPC cells began to spread out and
adhered to the bottom of the culture dish in the presence of vitronectin
from 7 to 9 hours, whereas the SAA1.1 and SAA1.3-cells remained in the
round-up morphology with minimal attachment. Interestingly, after 48
hours the SAA1.1 and SAA1.3-expressing cells formed adherents junction
among the cells. In order to study the viability of the effects of the
three SAA1 isoforms on NPC cells, MTT viability assay was performed. The
results showed that the viability of the SAA1.1 and SAA1.3-expressing
cells were around 50 % lower than both the vector-alone and the
SAA1.5-expressing cells. It is likely that the loss of focal adhesion
after seeding of the SAA1.1 and SAA1.3-expressing cells will affect the
survival of NPC cells. Furthermore, we found that the presence of the
recombinant SAA1.1 and SAA 1.3 proteins could reduce the number of viable
NPC cells compared with the solvent control and the SAA1.5 protein. We
previously reported that the SAA1 proteins can physically interact with
the integrin alphaVbeta3. Taken together, we suggested that the secreted
SAA1 proteins from the NPC cells could directly affect the NPC focal
adhesion as well as the cell viability by blocking the integrin on the
NPC cell surface. We acknowledge the financial support of the General
Research Fund (grant number HKBU17115114 to HLL) of the Research Grants
Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.


