Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Image-guided focal irradiation in syngeneic preclinical oncology
mouse models.


Use of image-guided focal irradiation is a mainstay of human cancer
treatment. Image guidance allows for highly conformal treatment plans
that minimize normal tissue toxicity and systemic response. With the
advent of image-guided small animal irradiators such as the Small Animal
Radiation Research Platform (SARRP), targeted focal irradiation can now
be utilized in a broad range of preclinical oncology models. Of
particular interest is the possible use of focal irradiation to broaden
the efficacy and response duration of immuno-oncology therapy. The work
presented here evaluates tumor response in a number of syngeneic tumor
models following focal irradiation alone and in combination with immune
regulation.

Image-guided irradiation was performed using a SARRP system (Xstrahl
Inc., Suwanee, GA). Animals were imaged with an open field at 60 kV and
0.5 mA for a computed tomography (CT) image which was used for treatment
planning. Treatment was delivered at 220 kV and 13.0 mA using an
appropriately sized collimator to the total indicated dose (in Gray; Gy)
in 2 equally weighted beams. For daily treatments, the same treatment
plan was applied and adjusted for changes in animal positioning or target
alteration over time. Bilateral subcutaneous (SC) mouse tumor models
tested were A20 (B cell lymphoma; Balb/C mice) and RIF1 (sarcoma; C3H
mice) and an intracranial (IC) GL261-luc (glioblastoma; C57BL/6 mice)
model.

In the SC models, focal irradiation was delivered only to the right side
tumors and tumor growth changes tracked for both right and left side
implants. A20 was sensitive to both fractionated low doses (2.5Gy) of
radiation, which resulted in tumor stasis, and single bolus 20Gy, which
resulted in tumor regressions. Effects on the non-irradiated left sides
were dependent upon which dose regimen was utilized. RIF1 is a more
radiation resistant model and a single bolus dose of 10Gy only moderately
reduced tumor burden on the right side tumors but had no effect on the
contralateral tumors. In the GL261-luc IC model a single bolus dose of
15Gy was curative whereas 10Gy resulted in 60-75% mortality over the
study duration. In a follow on study we determined that combination of
10Gy focal radiation with systemic anti-PD-1 antibody therapy could
improve overall survival over either monotherapy.

In mouse models, radiation treatment has been shown to increase the level
of tumor antigen presentation and the variety of peptides available for
cross-presentation. Current work in the field focuses on using radiation
as a tool to bridge the gap from tumor equilibrium to tumor elimination,
which could improve the response rate of immuno-oncology agents. The
models presented here highlight the importance in choosing appropriate
focal irradiation targets, dose regimens and timing for each model. Tools
such as the SARRP greatly enhance the ability of preclinical models to
provide a first line assessment for advanced immuno-oncology therapy
combinations.


