Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation analysis of uveal melanoma reveals definitive patterns
in tumors harboring BAP1 mutations.


Introduction: Uveal melanoma (UM) is the most common primary intraocular
malignancy and can be classified by gene expression profiling into two
distinct molecular classes that correspond to metastatic risk: Class 1
(low risk) and Class 2 (high risk). The less aggressive Class 1 UMs
express a more differentiated phenotype and exhibit numerous
characteristics of normal uveal melanocytes, while the metastasizing
Class 2 UMs display loss of melanocytic differentiation and have acquired
a primitive, stem-like phenotype. The majority of Class 2 UMs harbor loss
of chromosome 3 in addition to inactivating mutations of the tumor
suppressor BAP1, which also catalyzes ubiquitin removal from histone H2A
and modulates gene expression. Histone modifications have been shown to
be associated with DNA methylation and this study investigates the global
methylation and gene expression changes in BAP1 mutant tumors.

Methods: RNA-Sequencing data and Illumina Human Methyl 450K BeadChip
Array data obtained from 92 primary uveal melanoma tumors was analyzed
using optimized pipelines.

Results: This analysis revealed that the more aggressive Class 2 tumors
exhibit a distinct pattern of hypermethylation and silencing of
developmental genes involved in neural crest migration and
differentiation. Chromosomal regions that were significantly enriched for
hypermethylated genes with decreased gene expression in Class 2 tumors
included chromosome 3p14-26, 3q12-29 and 8p12-22, whereas the only
significantly enriched region for genes that were hypomethylated with
increased gene expression in Class 2 tumors was chromosome 8q22-24.
Additionally, BAP1 itself was differentially hypermethylated in Class 2
UMs, suggesting that it may regulate its own transcription.

Conclusions: Class 2 UMs harboring BAP1 mutations displayed distinct
regions of differential hypermethylation in comparison to Class 1 UMs. In
these tumors, the most significantly hypermethylated regions occurred on
chromosome 3 and in regions that were enriched for genes encoding neural
crest guidance cue proteins that regulate homing, migration and invasion.
These findings suggest that BAP1 mutations are associated with marked
reorganization of the DNA methylome, providing new insights into the
pathophysiology of UM and suggesting that methylation may serve as a
diagnostic to further stratify metastatic risk. Furthermore, these
findings may open new opportunities for targeted therapy of Class 2 UMs.


