Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AF1q/Mllt11 regulates the expression of intercellular adhesion
molecule-1 in breast cancer.


Intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) is a cell surface glycoprotein
in the immunoglobulin superfamily. ICAM-1 expression is frequently
observed on many cell types including endothelial cells and different
cancer cell entities. Experimental data strongly indicate that ICAM-1 can
activate intracellular signaling pathways in cancer cells leading to
enhanced cell motility, invasion and metastasis. In clinical
investigation, however, ICAM-1 expression was negatively correlated to
tumor size, lymph node metastasis, and tumor infiltration. Also, there
was improved relapse-free and overall survival in patients with ICAM-1
positive tumors. Yet, the function of ICAM-1 expression during malignant
progression in breast cancer patients is not understood clearly. However,
ICAM-1 is still considered as a breast cancer target and biomarker may
lead to the development of a new strategy and platform for breast cancer
patients.

We observed AF1q, a metastasis enhancer, is only expressed in metastatic
cells, MDA-MB-231LN (invasive sub line from MDA-MB-231), not in the
primary tumor cells. To investigate whether AF1q has a responsibility in
acquisition of metastatic phenotype, we performed RNA-Seq and applied the
Metacore network building algorithm. Intriguingly, most genes were
directly linked with Intercellular Adhesion Molecule-1 (ICAM-1).
Likewise, we identified that ICAM-1 expression is attenuated in
MDA-MB-231LN compared to MDA-MB-231. Moreover, the expression of ICAM-1
was negatively regulated, when AF1q was overexpressed in MDA-MD-231LN.
Suppressed endogenous AF1q by shRNA could effectively increase the ICAM-1
expression. Attenuation of ICAM-1 by AF1q on tumor cells would
disadvantage host anti-tumor defenses by trafficking of lymphocytes,
which affect tumor progression and metastasis.

We observed that NF-κB activity which regulates ICAM-1 expression is
attenuated in response to AF1q expression in breast cancer cells.
Published reports shown that Wnt/β-catenin negatively regulates NF-κB
activity through protein-protein interaction in colon and breast cancer
cells. Previously, we reported that AF1q enhance the TCF7/LEF/β-catenin
complex binding affinity as a cofactor. Structurally, AF1q has highly
acidic peptide regions highly conserved between species that fulfill the
criteria for an acidic blob, a typical feature for cofactors. When we
performed immunoprecipitation with NF-κB antibody in MDA-MB-231LN
overexpressed AF1q, we observed that β-catenin and AF1q were pulled down
together. However, it is not clear yet whether AF1q promote protein
interaction between β-catenin and NF-κB. These results suggest that
activated β-catenin by AF1q would archive higher affinity to bind with
NF-κB and thereby attenuate ICAM-1 expression.


