Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sortilin controls the EGFR nuclear translocation.


The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) deregulations play a central
role in cancer progression. EGFR generates extra- and intracellular
signals through various pathways, including its release in the tumor
microenvironment through extracellular vesicles, as well as the nuclear
EGFR signaling. That ultimately results in oncogenic signals promoting
the tumor aggressiveness. Our previous report showed that sortilin, a
member of the VPS10P sorting proteins, is associated with EGFR to allow
its secretion through exosomes in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
cells. Furthermore, sortilin is mainly present in the Golgi which is an
essential compartment involved in the EGFR bypass towards the nucleus.
Therefore, our aim is to investigate the potential role of sortilin in
EGFR nuclear translocation.

EGFR and sortilin translocation into the nucleus has been validated by
proximity ligation assay and confocal microscopy analysis. Moreover, to
study the sortilin function in the EGFR nuclear translocation, we
resorted to the NSCLC cell line A549 in which the sortilin expression was
silenced using a shRNA delivery. Subcellular fractionations and nuclear
protein extractions were performed to study the impact of the sortilin
loss on the EGF-induced EGFR nuclear translocation.

EGF stimulation highly increases the nuclear translocation of the EGFR
and sortilin complex. Interestingly, sortilin depletion significantly
decreases the EGF-induced EGFR nuclear translocation in the A549 cells.
Strikingly, sortilin-depleted cells exhibit an overexpression of EGFR
target genes (MYC, ABCG2, AURKA and CCND1) compared to the control cells.
These results suggest that the overexpression of the EGFR target genes is
independent of EGFR nuclear translocation in sortilin-depleted cells.
Thus, we analyze the activation of the known transcription factors
directly involved in the control of EGFR up-regulated genes to determine
whether they are activated in sortilin-depleted cells. Moreover, to
better understand the sortilin-dependent EGFR nuclear translocation, we
compare functional properties (proliferation,

migration and angiogenesis assays) of sortilin-depleted and control cells.

Altogether, our findings suggest a key role of sortilin in the regulation
of the EGFR nuclear transport, towards the control of target genes that
are widely involved in cancer progression.


