Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-194 modulates paclitaxel resistance in ovarian cancer cells
through the regulation of MDM-2 expression.


Purpose: Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy.
Platinum-paclitaxel combination chemotherapy is the current standard
postoperative care for patients with advanced ovarian cancer. Despite
developments in current chemotherapy regimens in the last decades,
overall 5-year survival rate for patients with advanced disease remains
approximately 30%, mainly due to primary or acquired drug resistance.
Therefore, overcoming chemoresistance remains the great challenge in
ovarian cancer management. However, mechanisms underlying chemoresistance
to paclitaxel have not been fully understood. The aim of this study is to
identify key miRNAs which regulate paclitaxel resistance in ovarian
cancer and to pursue those potential as therapeutic targets.

Methods: Using two serous ovarian cancer cell lines, SKVO3ip1 and HeyA8,
paclitaxel resistant ovarian cancer cell lines were established by a
continuous exposure of paclitaxel. MiRNA PCR arrays were performed and
miR-194 was found to be one of down-regulated miRNAs in
paclitaxel-resistant cell lines. The effect of miR-194 on paclitaxel
resistance was assessed by transducing the precursor miRNA into ovarian
cancer cells. In silico analysis revealed MDM-2 is one possible putative
target of miR-194 and it was assessed using luciferase reporter assay.
Since MDM-2 is one of key regulator of P53 ubiquitination, the effect of
miR-194 on cell cycle in ovarian cancer cell was assessed. To analyze the
impact of miR-194 and MDM-2 expression on patient survival, Kaplan-Meier
and log-rank methods were used using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
dataset.

Results: While IC50 values of SKOV3ip1 and HeyA8 were 5.0 nM and 3.5 nM
respectively, those of paclitaxel resistant cell lines, named as
SKOV3ip1-TR and HeyA8-TR, were both over 300 nM. In both resistant cell
lines, miR-194 was found to be down-regulated compared with their
parental cell lines. Up-regulation of miR-194 sensitized resistant cells
to paclitaxel. Conversely, its downregulation induced paclitaxel
resistance in parental cells. Luciferase reporter assay revealed that
miR-194 directly suppressed MDM-2 transcriptional activity. In resistant
cell lines, MDM-2 was up-regulated compared with their parental cell
lines. MiR-194 induced P21 upregulation and G1 phase arrest in resistant
cell lines through the downregulation of MDM-2. In TCGA dataset, high
MDM-2 expression was associated with shorter progression-free survival of
ovarian cancer patients (concrete data, p=0.046).

Conclusion: miR-194 acts as a tumor suppressor miRNA through the
sensitization to paclitaxel and can be considered as a therapeutic option
to overcome paclitaxel-resistant in ovarian cancer patients.


