Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Harnessing synthetic rescues to evaluate and mitigate resistance
to cancer therapy.


Significance: The emergence of resistance to cancer therapy remains a
pressing challenge, as evident from numerous recent investigations
identifying molecular events conferring resistance to cancer drugs. Here
we demonstrate that many of these molecular events can be attributed to
synthetic rescue (SR) genetic interactions, where altered activity of a
specific (termed rescuer) gene restores cell viability caused by the
inactivation (including through gene deletion or targeted pharmacological
repression) of another gene.

Methods: We present a computational approach termed INCISOR, which
analyzes molecular, survival, and phylogenetic cancer data to predict SR
genes pairs that are under positive selection and their presence
decreases patient survival. It further screens for causal SR pairs that
show in vitro evidence of rescue.

Results: We applied INCISOR to mine 8000 patients’ omics and clinical
data in TCGA to identify the first genome-wide SR network, composed of SR
interactions common to many cancer types. The predicted SRs match
drug-specific molecular resistance signatures that have been recently
published in arduous clinical studies (with accuracy of 0.8 AUC). They
chart pathways of resistance on a genome scale and as we show, can
predict response and resistance to the majority of current cancer drugs
in patients. We conducted new experiments to test new predicted SR-based
combination therapies. Each combination consisted of a primary cancer
drug and a second adjuvant therapy inhibiting a predicted key rescuer of
the primary drug. Five of the 7 predicted combinations tested
synergistically sensitized all the five head and neck cell lines to the
original primary therapies. These results were further substantiated via
siRNA knockdowns of the predicted rescuers in combination with the
original treatment, confirming the effects observed with pharmacological
inhibition. Focusing on mTOR, a major cancer driver gene, we combined
drug treatment and pooled-shRNA to validate the rescue effect of 8 out of
10 predicted rescue interactions involving mTOR in a head and neck cancer
cell-line. Finally, we analyzed patient-derived mouse 960 xenografts
(PDX) treated with 25 different drug combinations. Mice exhibit much
better progression-free survival when treated with a drug combination
predicted by INCISOR compared with the mice treated with the primary drug
alone, testifying to the in-vivo benefits of SR-based synergistic
treatments.

Conclusions: This work presents a new paradigm harnessing synthetic
rescue gene-gene interactions to counteract resistance to cancer
treatment. Future implementations of this approach will have two broad
implications in the precision medicine era, first for determining the
most effective treatment regimen based on the molecular characteristics
of individual patient’s tumor; second for identifying supplemental
drugs to counteract resistance to existing primary therapies.


