Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DCLK1 is part of an EMT feedback loop and promotes colorectal
cancer cell invasion and drug resistance.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third leading cause of cancer death in the
U.S., with only a 6% 5-yr survival rate for stage IV disease. Its spread
and acquisition of resistance to chemotherapy, which are fueled by the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process and supported by tumor
stem cells (TSCs), are major challenges to improving patient outcomes.
New therapies that target stemness and EMT are desperately needed to
prevent or delay metastasis and improve patient survival. Recently
doublecortin-like kinase 1 (DCLK1) has been definitively proven to mark
TSCs in CRC by two independent groups. Previous studies have demonstrated
that DCLK1 is a prognostic factor in CRC and that targeted downregulation
or inhibition of DCLK1 results in decreased CRC proliferation, migration,
invasion, and other anti-oncogenic effects. However, the effect of
overexpression of DCLK1 and its kinase active mutant on CRC has not been
assessed. In this study, we investigate the correlative role of EMT and
DCLK1 expression in CRC progress. Human colon cancer cells (HCT116) were
infected with Lentivirus containing wild type DCLK1 or mutant DCLK1R326C
cDNA sequences to overexpress DCLK1, DCLK1R326C or green fluorescent
protein (GFP) cDNA sequence as control. The expressing levels of DCLK1
and EMT factors were analyzed by western blotting. The proliferative and
invasive potential of these cells were compared using a MTT assay for
proliferation, wound healing assay for migration, and Matrigel coated
transwell assay for invasion. Knockdown of either ZEB1 or DCLK1 by
specific siRNA in HCT116 cells was performed. The effects of siDCLK1 on
5-FU were performed in both HCT116 and SW480 cells using a Caspase 3/7
activity assay. Analysis of human CRC was performed using TCGA COADREAD
dataset. Here we report that compared to GFP control cells, HCT116-DCLK1
and HCT116-DCLK1R326C cells exhibited a more than 20% increase in
proliferation, approximately 30% increase in migration, and a 2-fold
increase (p Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third leading cause of cancer
death in the U.S., with only a 6% 5-yr survival rate for stage IV
disease. Its spread and acquisition of resistance to chemotherapy, which
are fueled by the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process and
supported by tumor stem cells (TSCs), are major challenges to improving
patient outcomes. New therapies that target stemness and EMT are
desperately needed to prevent or delay metastasis and improve patient
survival. Recently doublecortin-like kinase 1 (DCLK1) has been
definitively proven to mark TSCs in CRC by two independent groups.
Previous studies have demonstrated that DCLK1 is a prognostic factor in
CRC and that targeted downregulation or inhibition of DCLK1 results in
decreased CRC proliferation, migration, invasion, and other
anti-oncogenic effects. However, the effect of overexpression of DCLK1
and its kinase active mutant on CRC has not been assessed. In this study,
we investigate the correlative role of EMT and DCLK1 expression in CRC
progress. Human colon cancer cells (HCT116) were infected with Lentivirus
containing wild type DCLK1 or mutant DCLK1R326C cDNA sequences to
overexpress DCLK1, DCLK1R326C or green fluorescent protein (GFP) cDNA
sequence as control. The expressing levels of DCLK1 and EMT factors were
analyzed by western blotting. The proliferative and invasive potential of
these cells were compared using a MTT assay for proliferation, wound
healing assay for migration, and Matrigel coated transwell assay for
invasion. Knockdown of either ZEB1 or DCLK1 by specific siRNA in HCT116
cells was performed. The effects of siDCLK1 on 5-FU were performed in
both HCT116 and SW480 cells using a Caspase 3/7 activity assay. Analysis
of human CRC was performed using TCGA COADREAD dataset. Here we report
that compared to GFP control cells, HCT116-DCLK1 and HCT116-DCLK1R326C
cells exhibited a more than 20% increase in proliferation, approximately
30% increase in migration, and a 2-fold increase (p < 0.05) in invasion.
DCLK1 expression level is decreased more than 30% by knocking down ZEB1
in HCT116 cells. In addition, knockdown DCLK1 increased 5-FU induced cell
apoptosis more than 50% (PColorectal cancer (CRC) is the third leading
cause of cancer death in the U.S., with only a 6% 5-yr survival rate for
stage IV disease. Its spread and acquisition of resistance to
chemotherapy, which are fueled by the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) process and supported by tumor stem cells (TSCs), are major
challenges to improving patient outcomes. New therapies that target
stemness and EMT are desperately needed to prevent or delay metastasis
and improve patient survival. Recently doublecortin-like kinase 1 (DCLK1)
has been definitively proven to mark TSCs in CRC by two independent
groups. Previous studies have demonstrated that DCLK1 is a prognostic
factor in CRC and that targeted downregulation or inhibition of DCLK1
results in decreased CRC proliferation, migration, invasion, and other
anti-oncogenic effects. However, the effect of overexpression of DCLK1
and its kinase active mutant on CRC has not been assessed. In this study,
we investigate the correlative role of EMT and DCLK1 expression in CRC
progress. Human colon cancer cells (HCT116) were infected with Lentivirus
containing wild type DCLK1 or mutant DCLK1R326C cDNA sequences to
overexpress DCLK1, DCLK1R326C or green fluorescent protein (GFP) cDNA
sequence as control. The expressing levels of DCLK1 and EMT factors were
analyzed by western blotting. The proliferative and invasive potential of
these cells were compared using a MTT assay for proliferation, wound
healing assay for migration, and Matrigel coated transwell assay for
invasion. Knockdown of either ZEB1 or DCLK1 by specific siRNA in HCT116
cells was performed. The effects of siDCLK1 on 5-FU were performed in
both HCT116 and SW480 cells using a Caspase 3/7 activity assay. Analysis
of human CRC was performed using TCGA COADREAD dataset. Here we report
that compared to GFP control cells, HCT116-DCLK1 and HCT116-DCLK1R326C
cells exhibited a more than 20% increase in proliferation, approximately
30% increase in migration, and a 2-fold increase (p < 0.05) in invasion.
DCLK1 expression level is decreased more than 30% by knocking down ZEB1
in HCT116 cells. In addition, knockdown DCLK1 increased 5-FU induced cell
apoptosis more than 50% (P<0.05). Evidence from TCGA COADREAD
demonstrated that EMT predicts survival in CRC patients, and increased
expression level of DCLK1 in CRC patients correlate to EMT and
mesenchymal phenotype. These data suggest that DCLK1 is a part of an EMT
feedback-loop and may be exploited with DCLK1-targeted therapeutics for
CRC.


