Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Label-free enrichment and integrated full-length mRNA
transcriptome analysis of single live circulating tumor cells from breast
cancer patients.


Background Label-free methods for isolating circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) are attractive because they provide an opportunity to analyze a
larger set of CTCs that may otherwise be missed due to variable or no
expression of protein (label) markers. Understanding genetic and
functional heterogeneity in CTCs allows us to gain insight into the
mechanisms underscoring metastasis, drug resistance, and tumor
aggressiveness. Currently, a simple workflow for isolation and molecular
characterization of single CTCs by mRNA sequencing is lacking. In order
to address this challenge, we developed a label-free workflow to isolate
CTCs from breast cancer patients for full-length mRNA sequencing analysis
by integrating the ClearCell® FX System with the Polaris™ system. The
ClearCell FX system processes blood samples from cancer patients and
enriches for CTCs in a label-free antibody-independent manner. The low
level of nonspecifically isolated white blood cells from ClearCell FX is
further depleted on the Polaris system by negative enrichment of viable
CTCs. This unique integration of systems will enable researchers to
perturb single CTCs in a controlled environment, monitor and measure the
response due to perturbation, and link these response measurements to
downstream genomic and transcriptomic analysis.

Method and Results CTCs from 7.5 mL of peripheral blood sample from
breast cancer patients were enriched using ClearCell FX. To differentiate
larger blood cells from putative CTCs, we stained the enriched cells with
Alexa Fluor® 647-conjugated CD45 and CD31 to identify leukocytes and
endothelial cells, respectively. Calcein AM (live cell marker) and
CellTracker™ Orange (universal cell marker) were added to identify live
cells. Single CTCs were selected on Polaris (Fluidigm) system, lysed and
reverse-transcribed, and cDNA were preamplified on the Polaris integrated
fluidic circuit (IFC). Sequencing libraries were generated using the
Nextera® kit and sequenced on Illumina® MiSeq™ and NextSeq™
systems. We successfully processed blood samples from four patients.
Sequenced data showed high-quality metrics, with read depth of up to 2.5
million reads (MiSeq) or 60 million reads (NextSeq), with a low
percentage of mapped reads to ribosomal RNA and mitochondrial RNA.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of gene expression data showed
clustering by patient, but considerable heterogeneity was also observed
among the CTCs from the same patient. We will provide insights into
full-length mRNA transcriptome of single CTCs from triple negative breast
cancer patient.

Conclusion We present the feasibility of integrating two microfluidics
platforms to capture single CTCs for transcriptome and functional study.
Our data suggests that the heterogeneity of tumor sample and
characterization of metastatic processes can be elucidated from
single-cell mRNA sequencing of CTCs.


