Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neo-epitope detection and immune infiltrate analysis of colorectal
cancer samples.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common type of cancer in the
United States. Targeted therapies that use monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)
to EGFR have been shown to benefit some CRC patients. Until recently,
KRAS has been the only predictive biomarker for anti-EGFR therapy for
metastatic CRC. However, 40% to 60% of patients with wild-type KRAS do
not respond to anti-EGFR therapy. Previously we have stratified 55 CRC
samples by applying a RAS gene signature score which measures MEK pathway
functional output independent of tumor genotype. We showed that samples
that have RAS activating mutations such as KRAS and BRAF have significant
higher RAS scores (pColorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common type
of cancer in the United States. Targeted therapies that use monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) to EGFR have been shown to benefit some CRC patients.
Until recently, KRAS has been the only predictive biomarker for anti-EGFR
therapy for metastatic CRC. However, 40% to 60% of patients with
wild-type KRAS do not respond to anti-EGFR therapy. Previously we have
stratified 55 CRC samples by applying a RAS gene signature score which
measures MEK pathway functional output independent of tumor genotype. We
showed that samples that have RAS activating mutations such as KRAS and
BRAF have significant higher RAS scores (p<0.001). Here, we further
investigate the potential immune reactivity in these CRC samples, and
thereby the potential benefit of immunotherapy, by evaluating the tumor
neo-epitope burden, and the quality of immune cell infiltration based on
exome-seq and RNA-seq analysis. In the 53 samples that were sequenced,
779 unique non-synonymous mutations were detected by exome-seq. These 779
mutations spanned across 263 genes. The majority of these mutations are
not shared between samples (~ 5% of the mutations were shared by more
than 2 samples). Several driver gene mutations were identified in this
study, including KRAS, TP53, PIK3CA, APC and HER2. HLA prediction based
on Exome-Seq and RNA-Seq data shows that ~86.7% of the alleles predicted
to be present in 53 samples were concordant between the two RNA-seq
datasets. The predicted alleles based on exome-seq and RNA-seq results
have 67-69% concordance. Prediction of neo-epitopes show that HLA-binding
neo-epitopes are more frequent than TCR-binding ones, and that most
neo-epitopes are private and not shared between samples. A more in-depth
analysis of the tumor microenvironment was performed using the RNA-seq
data. The epithelial, stromal and immune content of the tumors was
comparable to tumors from TCGA CRC data. Next, the immune cell
compartment was further stratified into 7 different immune cell types
using signatures specific to CD8 andCD4 T, T-regulatory, NK, B-cells,
Macrophages and Myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC). The immune make
up of colorectal cancer is dominated by macrophages and MDSCs.
Interestingly, both granulocytic G- and monocytic M-MDSCs are present
together, supporting the idea that MDSCs confer an immune suppressive
microenvironment in this cancer. Significantly, high MDSC infiltrated
tumors showed upregulated expression of pro-tumorigenic insulin-like
growth factor pathway genes. Additionally, tumors with lower burden of
MDSC showed signature of complement activation suggesting innate
cell-mediated anti-tumorigenic mechanisms of tumor control in CRC. These
analyses provide potential biomarkers to stratify CRC patients based on
their immune reactivity and predict response to cancer immunotherapy
drugs.


