Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison between knockdown of Pim-1, Pim-2 and Pim-3 identifies
Pim-2 as the most relevant Pim oncogene in hepatocellular carcinoma.


Introduction Pim-Kinases (Pim - proviral integration site for moloney
murine leukemia virus; Pim-1, -2, -3) are a family of serine/threonine
kinases with oncogenic potential. They are overexpressed in various solid
tumors including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and have been found
responsible for malignant transformation, induction of cell proliferation
and inhibition of apoptosis. While the main focus has been on Pim-1 so
far, the other Pim kinases, esp. Pim-2, have not been explored in detail.

Objectives The aim of this study was to compare the tumor-inhibitory
effects of the single and combined of Pim family members in HCC, for
evaluating their individual contributions and potential as therapeutic
target. To this end, RNA interference (RNAi) for specific gene knockdown
was employed.

Materials and methods Different HCC cell lines were transfected with
small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) for inducing RNAi and transient target
gene downregulation. Various cellular and molecular effects were analysed.

Results Transient siRNA transfection led to robust and specific knockdown
of the selected Pim kinase(s) on mRNA and protein level. This resulted in
anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects. Most profound consequences
on cell growth, cell cycle and apoptosis were observed upon Pim-2
knockdown, with little additive effects upon combined inhibition. These
cellular changes were paralleled by alterations of various genes involved
in cell cycle, cell survival, EMT and other important cellular processes.

Conclusion In hepatocellular carcinoma, Pim-2 represents a functionally
relevant oncogene. We demonstrate its higher potential as compared to the
other Pim family members, and analyze various consequences of its
inhibition or knockdown on the cellular and molecular level. Taken
together, this identifies Pim-2 as a potentially relevant target gene for
therapeutic intervention.


