Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimizing transducer array configuration for treatment of
pancreatic cancer using Tumor Treating Fields (TTFields).


Introduction

TTFields is an antimitotic cancer treatment that utilizes low intensity
(1-3 V/cm) alternating electric fields in the intermediate frequency
(100-300 kHz) that are delivered in two orthogonal directions using 2
pairs of transducer arrays. TTFields are currently approved for
Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM). A phase II clinical trial (EF-20) showed
that TTFields in combination with gemcitabine was safe in patients with
locally advanced pancreatic cancer.

Preclinical studies show that the effect of TTFields is
intensity-dependent with a therapeutic threshold of 1 V/cm.
Simulation-based studies show that the field distribution changes with
array placement. Treatment planning with arrays positioned on the scalp
to maximize field intensity to the tumor is standard of practice when
treating GBM. Studies to examine array layout on the abdomen to maximize
the field distribution in this region have not been done. In the EF-20
study, a generic layout was used. We used computer simulations to test
how altering the transducer array layout on the mid-body alters the field
distribution within the abdomen and pancreas.

Methods

To simulate delivery of TTFields to the abdomen, we used a realistic
computerized model of a human male (DUKE 3.0 from ZMT-Zurich). Eight
different layouts utilizing combinations of arrays with either 13 or 20
disks placed at different locations on the abdomen were simulated. In
order to generate TTFields, an alternating voltage difference with a peak
to peak magnitude of 100V and a frequency of 150 KHz was imposed on the
outer surfaces of the disks of each pair of arrays. The simulations were
performed using ZMT's Sim4Life V3.0 electro-quasi-static solver. For each
pair of transducer arrays, the mean field intensity in the abdomen and
chest, and in the pancreas and liver, was calculated.

Results

All eight layouts delivered fields with mean intensities of about 2 V/cm
to the abdomen. The average field intensity delivered to the pancreas and
the liver exceeded the therapeutic threshold of 1 V/cm for all layouts.
The highest intensities were delivered to the pancreas by layouts in
which a 20-disk array was placed at the middle of the back, and either a
20 disk array placed at the middle of the abdomen or a 13 disk array
placed on the front-left side of the abdomen over the pancreas.
Generally, field intensities in the pancreas are lower than in the rest
of the abdomen because of the high electric conductivity of this organ.

Conclusion

This work shows that TTFields can be delivered to the pancreas with
intensities well above the therapeutic threshold of 1 V/cm, and that
altering the location of the arrays on the abdomen can influence the
field intensity and distribution within the body. This work forms the
basis for developing optimal strategies for delivering TTFields to the
pancreas.


