Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Algorithms for discovery of somatic single nucleotide mutation
display specific artifacts and different detection capabilities under the
effect of read coverage and sample heterogeneity.


Understanding the performance and capability of different bioinformatics
algorithms used for the discovery of somatic variants is very important
for helping scientists choose an appropriate tool for cancer research. In
this study, we developed a comparison approach and created a series of
data sets that could be used to provide such guidance. We mixed reads
from two well characterized individuals, NA12878 and NA24385, and
generated a series of data sets with different coverages and sample
heterogeneity. We then used these data sets to evaluate five commonly
utilized somatic mutation detection tools. Our results indicate that read
coverage has a significant impact on the accuracy and capability of
mutation calling by individual bioinformatics algorithms. The mutation
caller that performs well with high read coverage may perform poorly with
low read coverage. On the other hand, the tool that performed well in
calling variants in a relatively higher homogeneity sample may not have
the same power to detect rare variants with low mutation allele
frequency. In addition, we demonstrated that different mutation calling
algorithms are associated with specific artifacts that were sensitive to
read coverage. Furthermore, there were large numbers of false positives
and false negatives shared by five callers, indicating that other
factors, such as read alignment, library preparation, and even the
properties of the sequencing platform could be the sources of false
discovery for somatic variants. We observed similar behavior of the five
variant calling algorithms using the sequencing data of a pair of matched
tumor/normal cell lines, confirming the findings from the comparative
analyses on the mixture of reads from the two normal individuals. Our
findings are expected to facilitate selection of bioinformatics pipelines
that fit for specific purposes in cancer research based on sequencing
data.


