Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of palladin in cancer associated fibroblast impedes
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma associated desmoplasia.


Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC) claims 97% of patient lives in
less than 5 years after diagnosis. Treatment of PDAC is challenged by the
collagen-rich, highly dense, fibrous-like extracellular matrix (ECM)
known as desmoplasia. Desmoplasia is initiated by activated cancer
associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and disseminates throughout the stromal
compartment in a vicious cycle involving alterations to the
physical/structural and biochemical pathways in neighboring naïve
fibroblasts that ultimately enriches the CAF population. This
desmoplastic-ECM (D-ECM) encapsulates the tumor mass, thereby limiting
therapeutic perfusion. Paradoxically, ablation of D-ECM induces a more
aggressive PDAC progression.

Although the underlying biology remains unclear, the D-ECM is a
consequence of cytoskeletal rearrangements occurring amid the CAFs. The
goal of this study is to delineate the cytoskeleton dynamics engaged as a
potential mechanism to restore the innate tumor-suppressive properties of
a normal ECM. As such, this study focuses on the actin cross-linker
palladin which has been identified as an independent prognostic marker in
PDAC progression. We postulate palladin has an isoform-specific role in
PDAC desmoplasia as well as cancer progression.

Using an in vivo-mimetic 3D fibroblast-derived ECM model, we explore the
isoform-specific role of palladin during D-ECM onset as well as during
D-ECM-induced CAF activation in PDAC patient derived CAFs in which the
major palladin isoforms (isoforms 3 and 4) were knocked out via
CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing. Using these cells, we examined the activation
status of the CAFs while characterizing the ECM produced via quantitative
immunoblots, real-time polymerase chain reaction, and detailed microscopy
analyses. We then validated the effects of palladin knockout CAFs
activity in influencing kras mutated cancer cells’ metabolic activity,
invasion and proliferation.

Our data indicates palladin isoforms 3 and 4 expression are necessary to
drive CAF activation as well as perpetuate the D-ECM phenotype whereby
knockdown of either isoform prevents CAF activation while limiting cancer
cell behavior. Additionally, the ECMs produced by the palladin knockout
CAFs were no longer capable of activating naïve fibroblast in addition
to decreasing the inherent aggressive nature of kras-mutant cancer cells.
These results are similar to previous findings regarding the restrictive
nature of a normal ECM on CAF activation and cancer cell behavior.

These findings suggest that palladin isoforms 3 and 4 are required for
desmoplastic onset and D-ECM-induced fibroblastic activation and cancer
cell progression. Together, these results propose manipulation of
specific palladin isoforms could signify a strategy to restore a normal
tumor-suppressive stroma in PDAC.


