Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of determinants of sensitivity to AKT inhibition
using breast cancer (BC) patient-derived tumor xenografts (PDX).


The antitumor activity of AKT inhibitors is being investigated for the
treatment of BC with activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway. Putative
predictive biomarkers that are being tested in ongoing trials are PTEN
loss/mutation (mut) (around 40% of triple negative BC) and AKT1 mutation
(4-5% ER+/HER2- BC). The BEECH trial is evaluating the activity of the
pan-AKT1/2/3 inhibitor (AKTi) AZD5363 in combination with the
antimicrotubule agent paclitaxel in HER2-negative (HER2-) metastatic BC.
We aimed to identify response biomarkers to the single agent AKTi and its
degree of synergy in combination with paclitaxel, using HER2-
patient-derived tumor xenografts (PDX).

Fifteen PDX have been established from BC patients receiving standard
treatment at our Hospital, as well as from those participating in the
BEECH trial, when sample was available, by implanting their tumor
biopsies at baseline, on-treatment and at progression. The antitumor
activity of AZD5363 as single agent and in combination with paclitaxel
has been measured in these PDX. Genotyping and protein levels have been
analyzed by exome sequencing, capture-based sequencing, Western blot and
immunohistochemistry (IHC).

AZD5363 monotherapy results in disease stabilization or tumor regression
in 3 out of 15 PDX (2/9 ER-/HER2- and 1/6 ER+/HER2-). We found a positive
association between high levels of pAKT S473 by Western blot and
antitumor response. Interestingly, the two ER-/HER2- responding PDX
harbor a PTEN frameshift mutation or gene loss concomitant with an
activating mutation within the PI3K pathway (PIK3CA or PIK3R1). The
ER+/HER2- PDX responder harbors an AKT1-p.E17K mutation. AZD5363 plus
paclitaxel, at a clinically relevant dose, results in disease
stabilization in 2/11 PDX that progress to either single agent (1/7
ER-/HER2- and 1/4 ER+/HER2-); the latter PDX being derived from the
baseline tumor biopsy of a BEECH trial patient who benefited from this
combination for one year.

Altogether these results suggest that double-altering events in the PI3K
pathway, including PTEN loss/mut and a second PI3K-pathway alteration in
ER-/HER2- tumors, or AKT1-p.E17K in ER+/HER2- tumors, and consequent high
pAkt S473 levels could be associated with intrinsic sensitivity to AKT
inhibition. The predictive value of these alterations as determinants of
response to AKTi deserves further investigation.


