Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Atypical protein kinase c inhibitors can repress epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (type III) in malignant melanoma.


Melanoma is a type of cancer occurs in melanocytes. Approximately 90% of
melanoma occurs in skin (cutaneous melanoma) but can rarely arise from
the mucosal surfaces or areas which neural cells migrate. Examples are
eye, intestine and mouth [Eur. J. Cancer, 69: 39-42 (2016)]. 76,380 of
new cases and 10,130 number of deaths are expected in 2016 in the USA due
to melanoma [http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/melan.html
(11/05/2016)]. Atypical PKCs contains two structurally and functionally
distinct isozymes in human which are PKC-ι (iota) and PKC-ζ (zeta).
They are believed to be involved in cell cycle progression,
tumorigenesis, cell survival and cell migration. We believe that atypical
PKCs play an important role in cell motility of melanoma by involving the
signaling pathways which induces EMT-type III (Epithelial to Mesenchymal
Transition). In normal melanocytes, PKC-ζ was found in low levels and
PKC-ι was not detected. But both proteins are detected in very high
levels in malignant melanoma [Melenoma Res. 12:201-209 (2002)]. In the
current study, we have investigated the effects of novel atypical PKC
inhibitors [4-(5-amino-4-carbamoylimidazol-1-yl)-2,
3-dihydroxycyclopentyl] methyl dihydrogen phosphate (ICA-1) which is
specific to PKC-ι and 8-hydroxy-1, 3, 6-naphthalenetrisulfonic acid
(Compound-50) which is specific to PKC-ζ on the cell proliferation,
apoptosis and cell migration of two malignant melanoma cell lines
(SK-MEL-2 and MeWo) compared to a normal melanocyte cell line
(PCS-200-013). We showed that both inhibitors can decrease the levels of
total and phosphorylated levels of PKC-ζ and PKC-ι. Furthermore, both
inhibitors increased the levels of E-cadherin and decreased the levels of
Vimentin which is a mesenchymal marker associated with EMT. Treatments
with inhibitors altered the levels of CD44, a cell-surface glycoprotein
involved in cell-cell interactions, cell adhesion, migration and tumor
cell homing during metastasis. These results suggest that both PKC-ι and
PKC-ζ are involved in signaling pathways which upregulate EMT and which
can be effectively suppress using ICA-1 and Compound-50. Furthermore we
established that treatment with ICA-1/Compound-50 induced apoptosis as
shown by increasing Caspase-3 levels and decreasing Bcl-2 levels.


