Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT3 NH2-terminal domain inhibition sensitizes medulloblastoma
cells to chemotherapy.


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant brain tumor in children
that arises from cerebellar neuronal progenitor cells. Despite aggressive
treatment involving radiation and chemotherapy, the prognosis for
high-risk MB remains poor and long-term complications from current
therapies are common. Therefore, new effective therapies based on the
molecular features of MB are needed to improve therapeutic outcomes. The
STAT3 transcription factor is known to be constitutively activated in a
variety of human cancers, including MB and functions as an oncoprotein,
mediating cancer cell survival, proliferation, migration and
drug-resistance. We have delineated the functional role of STAT3
NH2-Terminal Domain (NTD) in MB by using a cell permeable peptide
derivative of the STAT3 second helix that specifically binds and perturbs
the structure/function of STAT3 and interferes with tetramerization of
STAT3 dimers, protein-protein interactions and target genes
transcription. Herein, we report that treatment of MB cells with
STAT3-NTD inhibitor (S3-NTDi) leads to growth inhibition, cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis. The inhibition of STAT3 signaling was also
confirmed by downregulation of its downstream targets, including MYC,
CCND1, BCl2L1, BCL2, PIM1 and APEX1. Moreover, we observed that S3-NTDi
exposure attenuated the migration of MB cells in a wound-healing assay, a
prerequisite for tumor invasion and metastasis. We also found that
S3-NTDi abrogated IL-6 induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
marker protein expression and inhibition of EMT-related transcription
factors SNAIL and TWIST. Most importantly, we observed that combination
therapy with S3-NTDi and cisplatin significantly decreased the highly
aggressive MYC-driven MB cell growth in a dose dependent manner and
induced apoptosis by downregulating STAT3 regulated anti-proliferative
and anti-apoptotic gene expression. To elucidate the mechanisms of
S3-NTDi mediated inhibition, we showed that S3-NTDi upregulated
expression of pro-apoptotic gene C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP) and
concomitantly decreased association of the STAT3 transcription factor to
endogenous proximal promoter of CCND1 and BCL2 in chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. Furthermore, we determined that S3-NTDi
mediated downregulation of miRNA-21 in MB cells, de-repressed Protein
Inhibitor of Activated STAT3 (PIAS3), a negative regulator of STAT3
which, in turn, attenuated STAT3 signaling pathway. Overall, our results
revealed an important role of STAT3 NTD and its downstream effector
molecules in regulating MB pathogenesis and disruption of this pathway
with S3-NTDi may serves as a promising new candidate for therapeutic
interventions in MB therapy, thereby improving the outcomesin high-risk
pediatric MB patients.


