Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of platelet-type arachidonate 12-lipoxyganse in murine
lungs exposed to a fibrogenic dose of irradiation.


Introduction: Ionizing radiation (RT) is employed in the treatment of
approximately half of patients with cancer, including those with thoracic
malignancies. Exposure of tumor adjacent normal lung may result in injury
and fibrosis. Arachidonate lipoxygenase oxidizes arachidonic acid,
yielding hydroperoxyl derivatives including hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic
acids (HPETEs) and the reduced form, hydroxyeicosatetraeonic acids
(HETEs). Arachidonate lipoxygenases are classified as 5-, 8-, 12-, or
15-LOX, according to the site of oxygen insertion within arachidonic
acid. There are two isoforms of arachidonate 12-lipoxygnases in mammals,
the platelet-type (12S-LOX; gene ALOX12), and the epidermal-type
(12R-LOX; gene ALOX12B). Recently, we found an increased expression
12S-LOX in murine lungs exposed to a fibrogenic dose of irradiation. We
hypothesized that 12S-LOX would be required for radiation-induced
pulmonary fibrosis (RIPF).

Methods: C57/BL6 mice (n>3 per group) were exposed to thoracic RT (0 Gy,
5 Gy, 17.5 Gy, or 6x5 Gy). Levels of 12S-LOX mRNA and protein were
assessed in isolated various cell types from lungs (In Vitro) and in lung
tissues (In Vivo) after RT with an immunohistochemical assay and
quantitative PCR. Levels of chemokine ligands mRNA were assessed in
isolated primary pneumocytes exposed to 17.5 Gy or 12S-HETE. Differential
polarization of bone marrow-derived macrophage cultures with/without
12S-HETE was examined by quantitative PCR of polarization markers.
Activity of arginase-1 was measured in lung tissue lysates at 16 weeks
after RT.

Results: An increase of 12S-LOX protein was observed in type2 pneumocytes
at 8 weeks after exposure with fibrogenic doses of RT (17.5 Gy and 5x6
Gy) compared to low dose RT (5 Gy) or controls (0 Gy). 12S-LOX mRNA was
significantly induced in type2 pneumocytes at 3 days after receiving
fibrogenic doses compared to other cell types in murine lung. Chemokine
ligands including CCL2, which are responsible for bone marrow-derived
monocytes recruitment, were induced in primary pneumocytes treated with
RT or 12S-HETE. Treatment with 12S-HETE (150 nM) augmented arginase-1
expression significantly in bone marrow-derived macrophages cultured with
IL-4. Macrophages expressing active arginase-1 accumulated in murine
lungs at 16 weeks after thoracic irradiation with fibrogenic doses.

Conclusion: These studies demonstrate that type2 pneumocytes express
12S-LOX in response to RT with fibrogenic doses of radiation, and
increased 12S-LOX contributes to the accumulation of alternatively
activated macrophages in irradiated murine lungs. 12S-LOX may serve as a
novel therapeutic target in mitigating RIPF.


