Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progression through mitosis promotes PARP inhibitor induced
cytotoxicity in homologous recombination deficient cancer cells.


Mutations in homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair genes BRCA1 and
BRCA2 predispose to tumorigenesis. HR-deficient cancers are
hypersensitive to Poly (ADP ribose)-polymerase (PARP) inhibitors, but can
acquire resistance and relapse. The mechanisms underlying PARP inhibitor
resistance are only partially understood. This lack of knowledge in part
stems from incomplete understanding of how PARP inhibitors induce
cytotoxicity in HR-deficient cancers. The aim of this study was to
investigate the contribution of mitotic failure to PARP inhibitor-induced
cytotoxicity. Using the DNA fiber assay we observed compromised
replication fork protection upon BRCA2 depletion, which was aggravated
upon PARP inhibition. In accordance with the loss of replication fork
stability, we found increased FANCD2 foci in interphase cells upon BRCA2
depletion, and a significant further increase when BRCA2-depleted cells
were treated with PARP inhibitor as assessed by immunofluorescence.
Importantly, these replication lesions were not resolved prior to mitotic
entry, as increased numbers of FANCD2 foci were observed in mitotic cells
of BRCA2-depleted cells, which were further increased upon PARP inhibitor
treatment. Subsequently we found that in mitosis, BRCA2 or BRCA1 and
Brca2 or Brca1 deletion resulted in elevated levels of chromatin-bridges
and lagging chromosomes which were greatly enhanced after PARP
inhibition. Live-cell microscopy showed that chromatin bridges in
anaphase often lead to cytokinesis failure with subsequent multinucleated
progeny cells or cell death. Furthermore, PARP inhibitor-induced
multinucleated cells failed clonogenic outgrowth and high percentages of
multinucleated cells were found in vivo in the remnants of
Brca2-/-;p53-/- and Brca1-/-;p53-/- mammary mouse tumors upon PARP
inhibitor treatment, suggesting that mitotic progression promotes PARP
inhibitor-induced cell death. Indeed, enforced mitotic bypass through
EMI1 depletion abrogated the cytotoxic potential of PARP inhibitor
sensitivity and indicates that progression through mitosis promotes cell
death in response to PARP inhibitors in HR-defective cells. These
findings add to our understanding how PARP inhibition induces
cytotoxicity. Furthermore, these results provide starting points in
tackling tumor resistance to PARP inhibitors, and point at combination
therapies which could potentiate the effects of PARP inhibitors for the
treatment of HR-deficient tumors.


