Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing microbial dysbiosis of electronic cigarettes and
cigarette smokers using oral and lung microbiome.


The link between smoking tobacco and changes in the oral microbiome in
response to tobacco smoking are well established. It is not known if
there are changes in response to electronic cigarettes (e-cig). These
changes in the microbiome are associated with increased numbers of
disease causing pathogens. Currently there are no published studies that
have investigated the relationship of smoking tobacco on both the oral
and lung microbiome. There is insufficient evidence showing whether
changes in oral cavity and lung microbiome are also seen in e-cig users.
We will study the oral cavity and lung of non-smokers, smokers and e-cig
users to examine concordance between oral cavity and the lungs as well as
comparing the three groups, examining the microbiomes and expression of
inflammatory markers. We hypothesize that microbial dysbiosis and
expression of inflammatory cytokines will differ for smokers and
non-smokers; and that e-cig users will have microbial dysbiosis similar
to cigarette smokers. A cross-sectional study is being conducted on three
groups, 1) never-smokers, 2) cigarette smokers, and 3) e-cig users. For
each study participant, saliva and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) are being
collected to measure microbiome. RNA is extracted from saliva and BAL
samples for total transcriptome analysis using RNA-seq. This analysis
will detect human and bacterial reads thereby allowing observations of
bacterial communities as well as human inflammatory cytokine response to
bacterial presence. 85% to 98% of BAL sample reads aligned to the human
genome compared to less than 50% from saliva samples. The alignment
results allow us to deduce that the majority of reads from BAL samples
are human and that the majority of the reads in saliva samples are
bacterial.

Preliminary results show detection of human RNA expression and of
bacterial reads are present in both saliva and BAL samples. More samples
are being processed and the comparison of BAL and saliva samples between
the three groups will be discussed.


