Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: African American esophageal squamous cell carcinoma expression
profile reveals dysregulation of stress response and detox networks.


Background: Esophageal carcinoma is the third most common
gastrointestinal malignancy worldwide and is largely unresponsive to
therapy. African-Americans have an increased risk for esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma (ESCC), this subtype that shows a marked variation in
geographic incidence. So far, the molecular architecture of
African-American ESCC is still poorly understood. It is unclear why
African-American ESCC is more aggressive and the survival rate of these
patients worse than those of other ethnic groups. Our aim is to
investigate the central question of whether there is a genetic basis for
the aggressive nature of ESCC among African-Americans through analysis of
genetic overlaps and differences between African-American ESCC and
reported Asian data.

Methods: We conducted microarray expression profiling in pairs of
esophageal squamous cell tumors and matched controls to define genetic
alterations that occur in African American ESCC. We then utilized
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) to analyze the differentially expressed
genes in African-American ESCC. We conducted a meta-analysis of
differentially expressed genes of African American ESCC and those of
Asian ESCC through IPA.

Results: Transcriptome profiling of African- American ESCC tumors versus
adjacent normal esophageal tissues revealed significant differential
expression of 756 genes. Among the most strongly up-regulated genes were
keratin 17, immunoglobulin genes and ornithine decarboxylase 1. Genes
that showed a great loss of expression included cysteine-rich secretory
protein 3 and sciellin. We performed pathway and network analysis on
significantly dysregulated genes using IPA to determine the overall
biological impact of the widespread transcriptional aberration in
African-American ESCC. We found significant dysregulation of genes
encoding drug-metabolizing enzymes and stress response components of the
NRF2- mediated oxidative damage pathway, potentially representing key
genes in carcinogenesis in ESCC in African Americans. Loss of activity of
drug metabolizing enzymes would confer increased sensitivity of
esophageal cells to xenobiotics, such as alcohol and tobacco smoke, and
may account for the high incidence and aggressiveness of ESCC in this
ethnic group. A meta-analysis of ESCC expression profiles in our African
American sample and those of several Asian samples determined genes in
the NRF2 pathway are uniquely and significantly altered in
African-American ESCC. Down-regulation of TP53 pathway components
represented the most common feature in ESCC of all ethnic groups.
Importantly, this analysis revealed a potential distinctive molecular
property of African-American ESCC a widespread and prominent involvement
of NRF2 pathway.

Conclusion: Taken together, these findings highlight the remarkable
interplay of genetic and environmental factors in the pathogenesis of
African-American ESCC.


