Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exportin-1 (XPO1) is a novel therapeutic biomarker for patients
with neuroblastoma.


Background: Half of patients with high-risk neuroblastoma succumb to
disease, yet these patients with inferior outcome cannot be identified at
diagnosis despite contemporary risk stratification that integrates MYCN
copy number status, tumor histology, and patient age. We have shown that
overexpression of Exportin-1 (XPO1) is associated with poor survival in
neuroblastoma, affirming what has been identified across a range of
malignancies. Selinexor (KPT-330, Karyopharm Therapeutics), an XPO1
inhibitor in early phase clinical trials, inhibits the nuclear to
cytoplasmic translocation of tumor suppressor and growth regulatory
proteins implicated in oncogenesis. We hypothesized that protein
expression level of XPO1 in neuroblastoma cell lines predict the
effective response of treatment with selinexor.

Methods: We used a panel of early passage patient derived neuroblastoma
cell lines including IMR5, NLF, KELLY, NB-EBC1, and SKNSH that are
representative of the spectrum and genetic diversity of human disease.
Cell lines were treated with varying concentrations of selinexor. RNA and
whole cell protein extract as well as nuclear and cytoplasmic
fractionated protein was obtained from untreated and treated conditions.
Treated and untreated cells were also pelleted, and, along with patient
tumor samples, formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded for microscopic and
immunohistochemical (IHC) evaluation.

Results: Compared to noncancerous cell lines, neuroblastoma cell lines
have high protein and mRNA expression of XPO1; higher expression
correlates with greater sensitivity to selinexor. Selinexor treatment
reduced XPO1 protein and increased XPO1 mRNA expression, and it lead to
nuclear retention of XPO1 cargo such as p53 and survivin. Comparison of
microscopic features and protein staining intensity of patient samples
with known XPO1 expression is ongoing.

Conclusions: This study provides rationale for XPO1 protein abundance as
a potential biomarker of therapeutic response to the drug selinexor. By
using patient derived neuroblastoma cell lines, we are able to evaluate
the response of selinexor and XPO1 expression in the context of this
enigmatic disease. These data suggest that initial drug response to
selinexor can be predicted early in the course of disease and more
investigation of the high expression of XPO1 seen in patients with poor
outcome will provide strategies for combinatorial treatment approaches.


