Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genes involved in development and differentiation are commonly
methylated in cancers derived from multiple organs: A
single-institutional methylome analysis using 1007 tissue specimens.


Aim: The aim of this study was to clarify the significance of DNA
methylation alterations shared by cancers derived from multiple organs.

Background: Little is known about DNA methylation alterations during
carcinogenesis shared by various organs. In this single-institutional
study, consistency of sample quality, diagnostic criteria and technical
platforms may be advantageous for providing an overall view of DNA
methylation profiles of cancers arising in multiple organs.

Methods: We analyzed single-institutional methylome data by Infinium
HumanMethylation27 or HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (Illumina) for 1,007
samples of non-cancerous tissue (N) and corresponding cancerous tissue
(T) obtained from the lung, stomach, kidney, breast and liver.

Results: Principal component analysis revealed that N samples of each
organ showed distinct DNA methylation profiles, DNA methylation profiles
of N samples of each organ being inherited by the corresponding T samples
and DNA methylation profiles of T samples being more similar to those of
N samples in the same organ than those of T samples in other organs. We
identified 2,636, 2,209, 1,915, 2,914 and 5,665 probes that were
aberrantly methylated in lung adenocarcinomas, gastric adenocarcinomas,
clear cell renal cell carcinomas, breast cancers (e.g. invasive ductal
carcinomas, ductal carcinomas in situ and invasive lobular carcinomas)
and hepatocellular carcinomas, respectively, in comparison with the
corresponding N samples. When we examined pairs of organs, only 6.9%
(between stomach cancers and kidney cancers) to 35.4% (between lung
cancers and breast cancers) of aberrantly methylated probes were shared
between cancers of any two organs, indicating that the majority of DNA
methylation alterations were diverse among multiple organs. In contrast
to such organ and/or carcinogenetic factor-specificity of DNA methylation
profiles, when compared to the corresponding N samples, 231 genes
commonly showed DNA hypermethylation in T samples in four or more organs.
Gene ontology enrichment analysis showed that such commonly methylated
genes were enriched among “transcriptional factors” participating in
development and/or differentiation, which reportedly show bivalent
histone modification in embryonic stem cells. Pyrosequencing and
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR revealed an inverse correlation
between DNA methylation levels and mRNA expression levels of
representative commonly methylated genes, such as ALX1, ATP8A2, CR1 and
EFCAB1, in tissue samples.

Conclusion: These data suggest that disruption of the differentiated
state of precancerous cells via alterations of expression, independent of
differences in organs and/or carcinogenetic factors, may be a common
feature of DNA methylation alterations during carcinogenesis in multiple
organs.


