Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A robust, non-destructive image analysis method for the
quantitation and characterization of patient derived organoids.


Patient-derived organoids are an emerging 3D model system that more
closely recapitulate the organ functionality of the tissue of origin
compared to traditional 2D cell lines. Further advantages to the organoid
system include tunability i.e. adding additional cell types, adjusting
matrix stiffness, and establishing nutrient gradients, in a
physiologically relevant setting, as well as the ability to quickly scale
up from a small initial sample. We have established an actively expanding
biobank of primary and metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) tumor organoids
under normoxic (21% O2) and physioxic (5% O2) conditions, from a diverse
patient population. Concurrently, we isolated and cultured matched
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). With these samples we are able to
generate data from a cohort that mimics the CRC population at large,
including different ethnic groups, and mutational status. Here we detail
a quantitative imaging platform that captures 3D morphometric information
in addition to traditional live/dead readouts.

Organoids from each patient are heterogeneous in size, shape, symmetry,
and various other phenotypic features. Furthermore, the perturbation of
microenviromental factors i.e. drugs, CAFs, etc. cause phenotypic changes
over time. Common population-based viability assays used in drug screens,
such as ATP or MTT, may be inappropriate to capture the complexities of
drug response since they are often single end point measurements of an
entire population of cells, and do not account for phenotypic variations.
Short term quantitative live cell imaging incorporates phenotypic
information, and can extend the lifetime of samples, yet still require
manipulating samples by using dyes. However, these dyes are phototoxic,
making them less than ideal for long term live cell imaging. By
restricting image acquisition to brightfield we are able to minimize
manipulation of patient samples, leaving them intact and viable. The
additional benefit of imaging organoids in 3D enables us to get spatial
information not available from assays with a single readout.

Using our non-destructive imaging technique we can track 3D morphometric
changes in the same organoid population over time. By using a flexible
analysis method, and unbiased machine learning algorithms to determine
relevant features we can account for these differences yet still get
comparable data. Our organoid repository combined with long term image
analysis and machine learning techniques provide a robust platform that
is flexible enough to handle the heterogeneity seen across the patient
population. This platform could be used to advance personalized medicine
allowing clinicians to quickly and more accurately determine the
appropriate treatment for a patient by screening their tumor prior to
determining a course of treatment.


