Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Canonical NFkB signaling in myeloid cells is required for the
glioblastoma growth.


Glioblastoma (GBM) development and therapeutic resistance has been
accompanying with the tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) in the tumor
microenvironment (TME). TAMs are heterogeneous cell populations of immune
regulatory myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and polarization of
anti-tumor macrophages (M1) into pro-tumor macrophages (M2). We
investigated the role of myeloid cell NF-κB signaling in orthotopic GBM
model using immune deficient and immune competent hosts. Interestingly,
conditional deletion of canonical NF-κB signaling (p65) with Lysm-Cre
(p65 KO) in myeloid cells, significantly inhibited syngeneic GL261 tumor
growth in immune-competent mice compared to control mice. We studied the
TAMs recruitment to the tumor and their polarization under the influence
of TME. P65 KO mice displayed decreasing trend of immune cell
infiltration (CD45), which phenotyped as decreased F4/80+, CD68+, CD206+
(M2) and Gr1+CD11b+ (MDSCs) macrophages, compared to control mice. This
was associated with the increased CD80+ (M1) macrophages, increasing
trend of CD4+ and CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, and decreased CD44+ mesenchymal
cancer stem cells (CSCs) populations in the TME. Cytokine array data
indicated that loss of canonical NF-κB signaling within the TAMs was
implicated in increased production of IFNγ, IGF1, MCP1, MIP1α, and
TNFα cytokines. Co-culture of T cells with p65 KO or control MDSCs
identified increased proliferation of T cells with p65 KO MDSCs compared
to control MDSCs. Conversely, GBM patient-derived xenografts and U251 GBM
cell line-derived tumors showed increasing trend of growth in
immune-deficient mice, following the transplantation of p65 KO bone
marrow (BM) compared to control BM. Pro-tumor macrophages and CSCs were
increased and T cell populations were decreased in human tumors grown in
immune deficient mice transplanted with p65 KO BM, compared with control
BM. In addition, analysis of human data set revealed higher expression of
p65 subunit of NF-κB complex in brain tumor stroma compared to the tumor
cells. The study suggests that canonical NF-κB signaling in TAMs is
required for the tumor-promoting macrophage polarization and GBM growth
in immunocompetent host compared to immune deficient host. Therefore,
targeting myeloid-specific NFκB signaling in GBM could inhibit the
immune suppressive TAMs and improve the anti-tumor immunity.


