Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of autoantibodies against tumor-associated antigens
(TAAs) improving immunodiagnosis in human osteosarcoma by serological
proteome analysis.


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common malignant primary solid bone-tumor.
Despite its relatively low incidence rate among overall cancers, it
remains one of the most harmful primary malignant tumors in childhood and
adolescence. Thus, a critical need in the diagnosis and management of OS
is to determine an optimal combination of clinical biomarkers that could
detect tumors early with high specificity/sensitivity and with limited
invasiveness. The objective of this study is to identify and characterize
the targeted tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) as biomarkers in OS by
serological proteome analysis (SERPA) approach, and further to analyze
the frequency and specificity of anti-TAA antibodies in OS patients. In
this initial study, autoantibodies to 29 TAAs were detected by ELISA and
Western blotting in 90 sera from patients with OS, Osteochondroma (OC),
and age matched normal individuals. Only 8 protein antigens including
DSF70, HMGB1, HCC1, RalA, c-myc, AnnexinA1, IMP1, PBP, can induce
significantly higher antibody responses in OS patients compared to normal
individuals, achieving the highest sensitivity and specificity, 66% and
95%, respectively. The cumulative positive rate of autoantibodies against
these eight selected TAAs in OS reached 70.7% with an observed AUC of
0.972 (95% CI: 0.867-0.988), significantly higher than that in normal
control sera. Positive results were also confirmed by Western blotting.
These preliminary data extensively evidence that not all proteins
identified in cancer can be used as TAA biomarkers in OS, and only some
of these proteins can induce immune responses, which could be potential
TAAs in OS immunodiagnosis or prognosis, and further studies of novel
targeted proteins in OS are currently in progress by SERPA approach. In
addition, it supports the hypothesis that a customized TAA array can be
used for enhancing anti-TAA antibodies detection, and it may constitute a
promising and powerful tool for immunodiagnosis of OS.


