Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of MCLA-158: A bispecific antibody
targeting LGR5 and EGFR using patient-derived colon carcinoma organoids.


Background. Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer and
remains a large unmet need. Dysregulation of Wnt and receptor tyrosine
kinase (RTK) signalling pathways are important oncogenic driving events
in CRC. Due to this dysregulation, Wnt target genes are expressed at
higher levels in CRC particularly in tumor initiating cells. We
previously performed an unbiased screen of bispecific antibodies (bAbs)
targeting Wnt and RTK targets that resulted in the selection of MCLA-158.

Methods. A cohort of 32 genetically and transcriptionally annotated
patient-derived colorectal cancer and normal colon organoids were used to
functionally characterize responses to antibodies based on morphological
changes with high content 3D imaging. Binding affinity was measured by
surface plasma resonance and cell based assays. The antibody binding
epitopes were mapped by shotgun mutagenesis and FACS based screening.
Ligand (R-spondin or EGF) blocking activity was measured in vitro by
competition for ligand binding or functional inhibition of ligand
dependent growth. In vivo activity was evaluated in xenograft models
generated from organoids subcutaneously implanted into immunocompromised
mice. Safety was evaluated via once weekly intravenous administration of
MCLA-158 to cynomolgus monkeys for 4 weeks and monitoring for
pathological changes.

Results. MCLA-158, an ADCC enhanced common light chain IgG1 bispecific
antibody, binds in domain III of EGFR and in the N-Cap/1st LRR of LGR5,
both ligand binding regions, however, only EGF binding was blocked by
MCLA-158. MCLA-158 demonstrated inhibitory activity in 74% of tumor
organoids independent of KRAS mutational status but was not active on
organoids of the cohort harboring both KRAS and PIK3CA mutations.
MCLA-158 was significantly more active on organoids derived from tumors
than from normal tissue in contrast to cetuximab, which demonstrated
equivalent activity on both (range 20-100 fold, n=4). In vivo activity
was evaluated against tumor organoids with different KRAS mutation status
shown to be sensitive to MCLA-158 in vitro. In all cases, MCLA-158
significantly inhibited the growth of the tumor compared to both control
and cetuximab treatment. Inhibitors of both the Wnt and EGFR pathways
have shown significant toxicity in humans. An initial evaluation of
MCLA-158 toxicity in cynomolgus monkeys did not demonstrate any
pathological finding after repeated dosing at 25mg/kg.

Conclusions. MCLA-158 demonstrates superior activity compared to
reference antibodies in both in vitro and in vivo tumor organoid based
assays regardless of KRAS status and was well tolerated in non-human
primates. These preclinical data suggest MCLA-158 could benefit patients
with metastatic CRC and warrant clinical evaluation.


