Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Incorporating in-line sample pre-enrichment with FACS and single
cell mRNA-seq to facilitate isolation and characterization of prostate
cancer circulating tumor cells.


For decades, circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have been used as biomarkers
to indicate disease progression and survival in patients with metastatic
tumors. Detection of CTCs is an attractive, non-invasive blood test for
early diagnosis of many types of cancer. However, CTCs are present at
extremely low frequency in blood, and it is challenging to recover them
in typical multi-step sample processing workflows. EpCAM, the widely
accepted marker for CTC, has been found being down regulated in protein
expression and RNA expression analysis in many cases thus EpCAM-dependent
CTC detection might not be sensitive enough.

We have developed a new sample pre-enrichment technology incorporated in
line with fluorescence activated cell sorting (BD FACS™) platforms to
demonstrate a one-step sample processing workflow to minimize cell loss
and maximize CTC recovery. The pre-enrichment technology combines
magnetic depletion of white blood cells and acoustic removal of lysed red
blood cells, sending enriched tumor cells directly to a cell sorter for
single CTC isolation. The in-line enrichment and sorting technology has
shown 90% removal of CD45+ cells and over 90% recovery of target cells
going through the system.

Furthermore, we have incorporated molecular indexing technology for next
generation sequencing (NGS) into the single CTC isolation to streamline
gene expression analysis. We conducted a pilot study in which prostate
cancer cell lines PC3, DU145, and LNCaP were spiked in healthy donors’
peripheral blood, quantitatively recovered, and individually sorted into
96-well BD™

Precise barcoded plates using a BD Influx™ sorter equipped with the
in-line pre-enrichment module. The sorted cells were then sequenced for a
prostate cancer targeted gene panels with approximate 100

genes, including EpCAM. Single cell sorting and sequencing were also
performed on cell line cells directly and confirmed the workflow did not
affect the gene expression. In LNCaP and PC3 cells, EpCAM was not the
high expression marker in the genes analyzed, and its protein expression
was also heterogeneous. The highly expressed genes discovered by single
cell mRNA sequencing such as GSTP1 and CAV1 were investigated to provide
additional cell surface markers for more sensitive CTC detection.
Finally, CTCs from blood samples collected from prostate cancer patients
were isolated based on marker panels beyond EpCAM and characterized at
the single cell level. The differences between gene expression profiles
of patient sample CTCs and cancer cell line cells were revealed.


