Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of memory T cell population and enhancement of Th1
response by lenvatinib potentiate antitumor activity of PD-1 signaling
blockade.


Introduction: Lenvatinib (LEN) selectively inhibits the kinase activity
of VEGFR1-3, FGFR1-4, KIT, PDGFRα, and RET, which are involved in tumor
angiogenesis and tumor cell proliferation in several cancer types.
Currently, Phase 1b/2 clinical trials of the combination of LEN and
pembrolizumab (a monoclonal antibody [mAb] that blocks the interaction
between PD-1 and its ligands) are ongoing for selected types of cancer
including renal cell carcinoma, melanoma and non-small cell lung
carcinoma. We have reported that tumor associated macrophage and
regulatory T cell population were downregulated by treatment of LEN. In
this study, mechanism of LEN and PD-1 mAb combination was investigated by
flow cytometory and RNA-seq analyses.

Experimental Procedure: We examined antitumor activity of combination
treatment of LEN (10mg/kg, qd) and anti-mouse PD-1 mAb (500μg/mouse,
twice weekly) in Ct26 and B16F10 syngeneic mouse models. In order to
investigate tumor-specific memory T cell response, re-inoculation of
fresh CT26 cells into tumor-free mice was conducted. For immune cell
population analyses, tumor or spleen samples were analyzed by flow
cytometry. Changes of molecular immune response in tumors were examined
by RNAseq followed by weighted gene co-expression network analysis
(WGCNA).

Summary of data: Combination of LEN with PD-1 mAb showed more potent
anti-tumor growth activity in CT26 and B16F10 models compared with either
treatment alone. Notably, complete tumor regression was detected in a
portion of mice that received combination treatment only. Re-inoculation
of fresh CT26 cells into these tumor-free mice did not grow tumor; in
contrast, all naïve animals grew tumor aggressively in the same
experimental condition. RNAseq analysis of treated CT26 tumors indicated
that combination of LEN with PD-1 mAb synergistically up-regulates IFN
signaling-related genes. Flow cytometory analysis revealed that LEN
increased memory T cell population compared with vehicle treatment.

Conclusions: The results indicate that the combination of LEN with PD-1
mAb was more effective than either single agent alone in multiple
syngeneic tumor models and was accompanied with a potent antitumor immune
response, especially the up-regulation of memory T cell and Th1
activation by LEN.


