Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive analysis of serum levels of VEGF and its receptors
in patients with uterine cervical cancer.


Objective: Angiogenesis is one of the processes that is critical for the
growth, invasion and metastasis of solid tumors, including uterine
cervical cancer (CC). The vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
family is one of the major pathways involved in tumor angiogenesis. The
aim of this study was to determine whether serum levels of these
angiogenic factors could be used as biomarkers in patients with
CC.Methods: A total of 107 patients with International Federation of
Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) stage IB to IIB CC who were treated at
Tottori University Hospital between 2006 and 2015 were enrolled in this
study. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the
School of Medicine of Tottori University. All patients gave written
informed consent before the collection of specimens according to
institutional guidelines. Serum samples were collected before initial
surgery and levels of VEGF-A, -C, VEGFR-1, and VEGFR-2 were analyzed by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). We evaluated the association
between the levels of these angiogenic factors and clinicopathologic
variables. With a median follow-up duration of 1743 days, survival
analysis of 93 patients treated between 2006 and 2013 was performed. We
also determined the mRNA expression of VEGF-A by real-time RT-PCR in
fresh frozen tumors and the protein expression by immunohistochemical
staining in paraffin-embedded tumors from CC patients. The mRNA levels of
VEGF-A relative to GAPDH were used for the analysis.Results: Median
levels of serum VEGF-A, -C, VEGFR-1, and VEGFR-2 were 313, 8122, 68, and
6210 pg/ml, respectively. We found a significant positive correlation
between VEGF-A levels and the maximum tumor diameter (P=0.010). Patients
with pelvic lymph node involvement (PLNI) showed significantly higher
levels of VEGF-A and VEGFR-2 than those without PLNI. Patients with bulky
tumor or parametrial infiltration (PI) also showed significantly higher
levels of VEGF-A. In contrast, patients with a bulky tumor or PLNI showed
significantly lower levels of VEGFR-1. Both histological types and FIGO
stage were not related to levels of these angiogenic factors. We set the
cutoff values of these factors at the median levels of the angiogenic
factors. The 5-year overall survival rate (OS) for patients with high
VEGF-A levels was significantly lower than those with low levels (92.9%
vs. 72.8%, P = 0.014). The 5-year OS for patients with high VEGFR-2
levels was significantly lower than those with low levels (94.7% vs.
73.8%, P = 0.012). PLNI and PI were prognostic factors for overall
survival. Multivariate analysis revealed that PLNI, VEGF-A, and VEGFR-2
levels were independent prognostic factors. The mRNA and protein
expressions of VEGF-A were strongly observed in the cancer cells. There
was no correlation between mRNA levels and serum levels of
VEGF-A.Conclusion: These results suggest that serum VEGF-A may be a
promising prognostic biomarker for CC.


