Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel tumor-targeted 4-1BB agonist and its combination with
T-cell bispecific antibodies: an off-the-shelf cancer immunotherapy
alternative to CAR T-cells.


Immune cell costimulation via 4-1BB agonism has shown anti-tumor activity
in the clinic and is an important element of next-generation
chimeric-antigen-receptor (CAR) adoptive T-cell therapy approaches.
However, the clinical development of first-generation, 4-1BB agonistic
antibodies has been hampered by significant hepatic toxicity. Activity of
such first-generation, 4-1BB agonistic antibodies typically depends on
their hyperclustering via Fc-gamma-receptor (FcgR)-binding. Here we
describe a next generation, tumor-targeted 4-1BB agonist whose activity
is independent of FcgR-binding. The molecule consists of an IgG fusion
protein composed of a trimeric, human 4-1BB ligand (4-1BBL), a targeting
Fab moiety recognizing fibroblast activation protein (FAP), and a
heterodimeric Fc region engineered to be devoid of interactions with
FcgRs and C1q. The molecule mediates potent costimulation of CD8 T-, CD4
T- and NK-cells, but only in the presence of FAP-expressing cells, such
as cancer associated fibroblasts, which are highly prevalent in many
solid tumors. This FAP-targeted 4-1BB agonist is significantly more
potent and efficacious than first generation, standard 4-1BB agonistic
antibodies when compared side-by-side in preclinical models. We show its
activity in a variety of preclinical models including reporter cell
assays, assays with primary T- and NK-cells, ex-vivo assays with patient
tumor-derived material including cancer cells, stroma cells and
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, fully immunocompetent murine tumor models
(employing a surrogate, murinized molecule targeting murine FAP and
carrying murine 4-1BBL), and in human hematopoietic stem cell-humanized
mice with human tumor xenografts. We also demonstrate its activity in
combination with checkpoint inhibitors and with T-cell redirecting
approaches, such as a CEA-CD3 T-cell bispecific antibody. We show that
hepatic toxicity of first generation, standard 4-1BB antibodies is
dependent on FgR interactions and the next generation, FcgR-independent
and FAP-targeted molecule described here is safe and does not induce any
hepatotoxicity in preclinical models including non-human primates where
it was tested at doses of up to 50 mg/kg and where it showed a long
circulatory half-life. Its combination with T-cell bispecific antibodies
induces a massive T cell accumulation in the tumor, accompanied with an
elevated CD8/Treg ratio, as compared to the respective monotherapies.
Therefore, we conclude that the tumor-targeted cross-linking of 4-1BB
provides a safe and effective way for the co-stimulation of T cells for
cancer immunotherapy and its combination with T-cell bispecific
antibodies may provide an alternative, but more convenient, off-the-shelf
approach to CAR T-cell therapies. The molecule is scheduled to enter
clinical trials soon.


