Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cholesterol biosynthesis is a critical metabolic dependency in
pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic cancer is rapidly rising to become the 2nd leading cause of
cancer deaths by 2020 in the USA. The rise in pancreatic cancer incidence
is paralleled by the epidemic of obesity, type 2 diabetes, and associated
increase in blood cholesterol, although mechanistic explanations for this
are currently unknown. We and others have demonstrated that cancers with
activated EGFR and KRAS signaling have increased demands for cholesterol
and are vulnerable to interference with cholesterol uptake or endogenous
cholesterol biosynthesis. We recently identified a metabolic step in the
distal cholesterol pathway, mediated by SC4MOL and NSDHL enzymes, as a
critical regulator of cell growth in the keratinocyte model of
KRAS-induced carcinogenesis via the LXR agonistic effect of accumulating
C4-methylsterols. Based on these preliminary data, we set out to test if
pancreatic cancer initiation and progression depend on accelerated
cholesterol biosynthesis in a genetic mouse model containing a
conditional cholesterol pathway enzyme deficiency (conditional knockout
of Nsdhlf/f) in the context of pancreatic cancer development in KPC mice
(LSL-KrasG12D;Tp53f/f;Pdx1-Cre).

Results: Conditional inactivation of NSDHL alone in pancreatic tissue
during normal development produced no apparent phenotype. As expected,
the NSDHL-sufficient KPC mice as well as heterozygous Nsdhlf/+
littermates did not survive beyond 8 weeks of age due to rapid
development of progressive pancreatic tumors showing complete
displacement of pancreatic tissue with adenocarcinoma and high-grade
PanIN lesions. Contrastingly, the survival of pancreatic conditional
NSDHL-null mice was significantly extended beyond the median survival of
50 days in NSDHL-sufficient age-matched controls. Furthermore, the
progression of pancreatic lesions from ADM to PanIN3 was remarkably
delayed on NSDHL-null background, with only a proportion of animals
developing adenocarcinoma. Evaluation of pancreatic tissues revealed a
dramatic reduction of tumor-induced desmoplasia at all stages of
pancreatic cancer development. Our ongoing studies will address the role
of cholesterol metabolism in pancreatic cancer progression via regulation
of tumor-specific production of stroma-recruiting growth factors.

Conclusions: Our studies demonstrated for the first time essential
genetic evidence for metabolic dependency of pancreatic cancer on
cholesterol metabolism. We identified NSDHL as a critical target in the
endogenous pathway of cholesterol biosynthesis, and determined that
blockade of NSDHL has dramatic consequences on the reciprocal signaling
between the KRAS-transformed pancreatic cancer cells and the stroma.


