Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Massively parallel single-cell RNA-Seq identifies diverse
subpopulations displaying EMT and stem-like features.


Single-cell transcriptome analysis enables a new paradigm for studying
complex systems in cancer. As opposed to bulk sequencing, which averages
genomic signals across thousands or millions of cells and obscures the
presence of rare subtypes, single cell sequencing enables the
interrogation of individual cells. In cancer, intratumoral heterogeneity
is observed at both genomic and epigenomic levels, and its analysis
enables the discovery of new actionable targets and treatment modalities
tailored to individual subpopulations. As an example, many cancer cell
lines and those derived from patients contain subpopulations marked by
distinct patterns of surface markers such as CD44, and are linked to drug
resistant and tumor initiating phenotypes. A complete characterization of
such cellular populations ideally requires marker-free sampling, followed
by clustering into distinct subgroups. In this study, we demonstrate the
significant advantages of such an approach; we utilize a high-throughput
single-cell RNA-Seq method to characterize the transcriptomic profiles of
cellular populations.

We performed single-cell RNA-Seq on thousands of cells in the matched
SW480 (primary) and SW620 (metastatic) colorectal cell lines using a
microfluidic droplet barcoding technology that enables the tracking of
single cells during library preparation. By focusing on genes with high
inter-cell variability, we discovered a small subpopulation of cells that
displayed a distinct gene expression signature from the major
subpopulation. Differential gene expression analysis of this
subpopulation yielded genes virtually all enriched in the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) pathway. These cells showed
significant increases in canonical mesenchymal marker genes such as VIM,
CD44, and SOX9. Gene expression profiles of these subpopulations also
correlated with established EMT signatures. Remarkably, this
subpopulation did not display mutual exclusivity in gene expression with
the epithelial marker EPCAM, which possibly indicates an intermediate
mesenchymal phenotype. We also observed in the major population cluster a
small subset of cells totaling less than 1% of the population that were
significantly enriched for LGR5 expression, a common stem-like marker in
colorectal cancer. Overall, we demonstrate the use of single-cell RNA-Seq
to discover and characterize a diversity of cellular states that would
otherwise be impossible from bulk analysis.


