Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide examination of topological variability reveals cell
type-specific mechanisms of oncogene activation.


INTRODUCTION:

The organization of chromatin within the nucleus into hierarchical
three-dimensional (3D) structures plays a key role in the regulation of
gene expression. Differences in 3D architecture, such as the presence or
absence of “loops” between specific enhancers and their target genes,
are a major driver of transcriptional and phenotypic variation. By
determining the accessibility of genes to transcriptional machinery and
distal regulatory regions, mechanisms mediating oncogene activation can
be discerned. Recent studies have implicated pathogenic alterations in
genome topology with the activation of proto-oncogenes in a multitude of
cancers.

METHODS:

To characterize the topological changes associated with different cancer
states, we developed a computational suite of tools that facilitates the
systematic discovery, annotation, and visualization of features in
chromatin topology and assigns statistical confidence estimates to
regions with variability between cellular phenotypes. Our framework
facilitates the integration of heterogeneous genomic data, including gene
expression, histone modification, DNA methylation, open chromatin, and
genetic variation, to further characterize changes in 3D genome.
Ultimately, we propose a joint model that functionalizes the effect of
epigenetic modifications on transcription as mediated through
hierarchical chromatin structure.

RESULTS:

We identify regions of topological variation unique to breast cancer,
cervical cancer, glioblastomas with and without an IDH1 mutation,
melanoma, and leukemia. Patterns of disrupted insulation and subsequent
localization of enhancers to proto-oncogenes can be attributed to
variation in the epigenome, including variation in DNA methylation and
open chromatin, at distal regulatory regions. These 3D alterations
provide a mechanism for activation of specific oncogenic pathways,
including signaling mediated by p38, PLK3, and BRCA.

CONCLUSIONS:

Variable patterns of chromatin topology provide a unique signature and
mechanism of oncogenes for the cancer phenotypes considered.
Additionally, our framework provides a novel means for interpreting
epigenetic variability, particularly at distal regulatory regions, and
explaining transcriptional variation associated with cancer phenotypes as
mediated through structural changes in the DNA.


