Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of aldolase C expression by NME1 may mediate metastasis
suppressor activity in malignant melanoma.


Although the metastasis suppressor activity of NME1 has been demonstrated
in a number of settings of

human cancer, the underlying molecular mechanisms are not well
understood. NME1 has two known

enzymatic activities, nucleoside diphosphate kinase (NDPK) and a 3’ to
5’ exonuclease. To determine

the relative contribution either of these activities has on the
metastasis suppressor function of NME1,

our lab previously generated site directed mutants to abrogate one or
both of the enzymatic activities

(Ma et al., 2004). These studies showed that disrupting the 3’ to 5’
exonuclease activity with the point

substitutions glutamate5-to-alanine (E5A) and lysine12-to-glutamine
(K12Q) also significantly compromised

the metastasis suppressor function of NME1 (Zhang et al., 2011). To
identify genes that are regulated by

NME1 and potentially modulate its metastasis suppressor activity, we
compared the gene expression

profile induced by forced expression of wild-type NME to those obtained
with the E5A and K12Q mutants.

Using the human Exon 1.0 Affymetrix microarray , we identified 13 genes
whose expression was

modulated by wild-type NME1 expression, but not by the
suppressor-deficient mutants, which were

designated as metastasis suppressor signature (MSS) genes. We are
currently refining the list to genes

that have the highest clinical relevance through observing expression
profiles of the MSS genes in

clinical datasets. Preliminary results of unsupervised hierarchal
clustering of GEO melanoma dataset

GSE8401 showed that expression of the MSS gene, aldolase C (ALDOC), was
significantly lower in a

subset of metastatic melanoma lesions compared to primary melanomas.
Western blot and qPCR

analysis confirm that NME1 induces expression of ALDOC in both WM793 and
M14 melanoma cell lines,

and that induction of ALDOC is dose-responsive to NME1 expression as
observed in the WM1158

metastatic melanoma cell line. Further, NME1 induction of ALDOC is
specific compared to the ALDOA

and ALDOB isoforms. Recent studies have indicated aldolase isoforms can
modulate motile and invasive

phenotypes of cancer cells (Li et al., 2015 & Hu et al., 2016),
suggesting regulation of ALDOC expression

may represent a key mechanism underlying the metastasis suppressor
function of NME1. Current work

is focused on measuring the impact of NME1-induced expression of ALDOC on
the metastatic potential

of melanoma cells in culture and in vivo.


