Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting BTK family in ER+ breast cancer with Ibrutinib for
personalized precision medicine: a double-edged sword.


Background: Metastasis is the principal cause of morbidity and mortality
from breast cancer. Although current therapies are effective in
early-stage of breast cancer, resistance to therapy is common leading to
the development of metastasis. The commonest site of metastases is the
regional lymph nodes. The presence and the number of involved lymph nodes
remains the single best predictor of metastases and an important guide
for the use of systemic adjuvant therapy. Identification of the
underlying molecular targets of lymph node metastasis and a better
understanding how to therapeutically target these will be a significant
step in the goal of prevention of metastases.

Experimental Design: To determine the key players associated with the
development of metastasis in breast cancer, we performed RNA sequencing
(Illumina Paired-end RNA-seq) analysis in a cohort of matched pairs of
primary and (nodal) metastatic tumors (n=18). Gene expression profiles
were analyzed using DESeq2. For targeted therapeutics, we performed
orthotopic tumor implantation into mammary fad pads of athymic nude mice
of breast cancer models.

Results: Our results identified significant differential expression of
the Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) family members in nodal metastasis.
Among the family members, BTK, BLK, RLK/TXK and JAK3 are expressed at
very high levels in the metastatic lesions as compared to matched primary
tumors. Among the 51 breast cancer cell lines analyzed, the BTK genes
were significantly upregulated in luminal, but not basal cell lines.
Categorized by the molecular subtypes of breast cancer, hormone receptor-
positive (HR) and /or HER2 overexpressing breast cancer cell lines
present higher BTK expression. Among the 51 breast cancer cell lines
analyzed, the BTK genes were significantly regulated in both ER+ HER2-
(T47D and ZR75.1) and ER+HER2+ (BT-474 and ZR75.30) breast cancer cell
lines. Ibrutinib, a selective and irreversible inhibitor of BTK targeting
the cysteine-481 residue in the active site, exhibited potent activity in
preclinical models of BTK-expressing targets. Ibrutinib decreased primary
tumor growth significantly in ER+HER2+ (BT-474) mouse xenograft model in
a dose dependent manner (10 mg/kg vs 25 mg/kg; PResults: Our results
identified significant differential expression of the Bruton's tyrosine
kinase (BTK) family members in nodal metastasis. Among the family
members, BTK, BLK, RLK/TXK and JAK3 are expressed at very high levels in
the metastatic lesions as compared to matched primary tumors. Among the
51 breast cancer cell lines analyzed, the BTK genes were significantly
upregulated in luminal, but not basal cell lines. Categorized by the
molecular subtypes of breast cancer, hormone receptor- positive (HR) and
/or HER2 overexpressing breast cancer cell lines present higher BTK
expression. Among the 51 breast cancer cell lines analyzed, the BTK genes
were significantly regulated in both ER+ HER2- (T47D and ZR75.1) and
ER+HER2+ (BT-474 and ZR75.30) breast cancer cell lines. Ibrutinib, a
selective and irreversible inhibitor of BTK targeting the cysteine-481
residue in the active site, exhibited potent activity in preclinical
models of BTK-expressing targets. Ibrutinib decreased primary tumor
growth significantly in ER+HER2+ (BT-474) mouse xenograft model in a dose
dependent manner (10 mg/kg vs 25 mg/kg; P< 0.05), whereas it promoted the
tumor growth in a significant manner in ER+HER2- xenograft models (T47D
and ZR75.1; PResults: Our results identified significant differential
expression of the Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) family members in nodal
metastasis. Among the family members, BTK, BLK, RLK/TXK and JAK3 are
expressed at very high levels in the metastatic lesions as compared to
matched primary tumors. Among the 51 breast cancer cell lines analyzed,
the BTK genes were significantly upregulated in luminal, but not basal
cell lines. Categorized by the molecular subtypes of breast cancer,
hormone receptor- positive (HR) and /or HER2 overexpressing breast cancer
cell lines present higher BTK expression. Among the 51 breast cancer cell
lines analyzed, the BTK genes were significantly regulated in both ER+
HER2- (T47D and ZR75.1) and ER+HER2+ (BT-474 and ZR75.30) breast cancer
cell lines. Ibrutinib, a selective and irreversible inhibitor of BTK
targeting the cysteine-481 residue in the active site, exhibited potent
activity in preclinical models of BTK-expressing targets. Ibrutinib
decreased primary tumor growth significantly in ER+HER2+ (BT-474) mouse
xenograft model in a dose dependent manner (10 mg/kg vs 25 mg/kg; P<
0.05), whereas it promoted the tumor growth in a significant manner in
ER+HER2- xenograft models (T47D and ZR75.1; P<0.05). The differences
might be due to the differences in model systems due to the HER2 presence.

Conclusion: Our data suggests that differential expression of target
genes can be used to select agents as treating breast cancer. However,
caution is necessary, as, in some situations, this might lead to
enhancement of the growth in in vivo in subsets of breast cancer.


