Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating drivers of disease progression in invasive lobular
carcinoma.


Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) is the second most common type of breast
cancer following invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) and accounts for 10-15%
of all cases. Unlike the masses or lumps formed by IDCs, ILCs grow as
small, dis-cohesive cells in a single-file pattern within dense layers of
extracellular matrix. Paradoxically, while patients with ILC display
favorable prognostic and predictive factors (ER+, PR+, HER2-, low Ki67),
their long-term response to endocrine therapy is worse than patients with
IDC. Despite such histological and clinical differences, ILC has remained
a gravely understudied subtype of breast cancer. Thus, there is urgent
need to investigate molecular drivers of ILC progression in order to
develop more effective therapeutic strategies and improve patient
outcome. To this end, we used the Nanostring platform to measure the
expression of 577 copy number variation-associated genes in 131 primary
ILC tumors and identified two candidate drivers that exhibit higher
expression in tumors from patients with recurrent versus non-current
disease: CTTN (cortical actin binding protein) and QSOX1 (quiescin
sulfhydryl oxidase). In follow-up studies, we observed high CTTN and
QSOX1 expression in human ILC cell lines, tumors and patient-derived
xenografts. In addition, QSOX1 expression was further increased in ILC
ovarian metastases compared to their matched primary tumors. In
functional in vitro studies, RNAi-mediated inhibition of CTTN led to
decreased adhesion and haptotaxis to Collagen I, while QSOX1 knockdown
diminished the growth of human ILC cell lines. We are currently assessing
the in vivo therapeutic utility of CTTN and QSOX1 inhibition in tumor
growth and metastasis using human ILC cell line and patient-derived
xenograft mouse models. This study greatly advances our understanding of
ILC disease mechanisms and identifies novel therapeutic targets towards
improving the clinical outcome of patients with this understudied subtype
of breast cancer.


