Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer extent and survival in diabetic women in a Finnish
population based cohort.


Introduction: Breast cancer and diabetes are two major health problems
for women. Around 1.7 million new breast cancer cases are diagnosed each
year, making breast cancer the most common cancer type in women. Number
of people with diabetes is estimated to be 415 million worldwide, thus
one in 11 adults have diabetes. However, evidence on the association
between diabetes and breast cancer prognosis is controversial. We
estimated breast cancer extent at diagnosis and survival in a Finnish
population-based cohort of female breast cancer patients.

Materials and methods: All newly diagnosed breast cancer cases among
women in Finland between 1995 and 2013 were identified from comprehensive
national Finnish Cancer Registry. To minimize possible bias due to
differing participation in cancer screening the study population was
limited to women with at least one mammography screening before the
diagnosis. In total 45,786 cases were included in our study cohort.
Information on recorded diagnoses of diabetes, hypertension,
hypercholesterolemia and obesity from in- and outpatient hospital visits
during 1995-2013 were obtained from national Care Register for Health
Care maintained by National Institute for Health and Welfare. Logistic
regression was used to evaluate the risk of having cancer extended to
axillary lymph nodes or beyond at diagnosis. Cox regression was used to
evaluate risk of breast cancer death and overall mortality after the
diagnosis. Analyses were adjusted for age, comorbidities and number of
mammography screens before the diagnosis. Survival analyses were further
adjusted for tumor extent and primary treatment.

Results: In total 1,419 women had diabetes. Compared to non-diabetic
women, breast cancer was more often advanced to axillary lymph-nodes (OR
1.19; 95% CI 1.05-1.34) or metastatic at diagnosis (OR 1.58; 95% CI
1.26-1.97) in diabetic women. Nevertheless, during the median follow-up
of 6.9 year after the diagnosis, risk of breast cancer death did not
differ between diabetic and non-diabetic women (0.99; 95% CI 0.81-1.21).
Overall risk of death was elevated among diabetic women (HR 1.34; 95% CI
1.19-1.51).

Conclusion: Diabetic women have more often advanced tumor extent at
diagnosis compared to non-diabetic women. However, diabetes did not
affect disease-specific survival within 6.9 years after the diagnosis.


