Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GLUT4 exhibits a non-canonical role of regulating lung cancer
metastasis.


Lung cancer continues to be fatal, in part due to the inability to
prevent and treat metastases. Highly metastatic cancers exhibit enhanced
glucose uptake to sustain proliferation and importantly, tumor invasion.
Among the SLC2A family of facilitative glucose transporters, GLUT1 is
largely attributed to be responsible for increased glucose uptake of
cancer cells. GLUT1 is however responsible for glucose transport across
the blood-brain barrier, expressed in many normal cell types and
therefore a less desirable therapeutic target. We previously reported
that multiple myeloma cells rely on overexpression and constitutive
plasma membrane localization of insulin-responsive glucose transporter,
GLUT4. In this study we investigated a role for GLUT4 in lung cancer. To
interrogate contributions of GLUT1 and GLUT4 in proliferation, invasion
and migration we generated H1299 and A549 GLUT 1 or GLUT4 knockdowns.
Knockdown (KD) of GLUT4 did not inhibit proliferation but suppressed
migration and invasion assessed through scratch and Boyden chamber
assays, respectively. On the contrary, knockdown of GLUT1 reduced
proliferation of these lines. Treatment of H1299 and A549 with our newly
developed GLUT4-selective inhibitors also reduced invasion, phenocopying
the effects detected with GLUT4 KD. GLUT4 inhibition also reduced H1299
invasion in a spheroid invasion model. We utilized H1299 cells to isolate
highly invasive less proliferative “leader cells” and less invasive
but highly proliferative “follower cells”. Interestingly, examination
of these two cell types exhibited a differential expression pattern of
GLUT1/GLUT4. Leader cells have elevated expression of GLUT4 and decreased
GLUT1. On the contrary, follower cells have high GLUT1 and low GLUT4
expression. Leader cells are more sensitive to GLUT4 inhibitors
indicating they are more dependent on GLUT4 than follower cells. In
addition, leader cells are more sensitive to mitochondrial complex I
inhibitors compared to follower cells, suggesting they rely more on
oxidative phosphorylation. A differential reliance on glycolysis/OXPHOS
was further supported by evaluation of glucose uptake/oxygen consumption.
Isotope tracer and bioenergetics analyses further support altered
nutrient dependencies of leader and follower cells. Lastly, we found that
GLUT4 is expressed in patient lung adenocarcinoma specimens including
more aggressive micropapillary lung adenocarcinoma. Examination of
collective invasion packs in human adenocarcinoma demonstrated patchy
GLUT1 expression suggestive of a subset of more proliferative
“follower” cells. These results suggest that in a lung cancer
population a subset of more invasive cells are reliant on GLUT4 with
reduced GLUT1 expression while more proliferative cells rely on high
GLUT1 expression, making GLUT4 a promising candidate for targeting
metastasis in lung cancer.


