Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect modification by isoflavones on the association between salt
intake and gastric cancer risk: A case-cohort study within the Korean
multi-center cancer cohort.


Backgrounds: Attenuation by genistein, an isoflavone abundant in soybean,
of gastric carcinogenesis induced by sodium chloride was reported in an
animal study. Up to date, role of isoflavone as an effect modifier on the
association between salt intake and gastric cancer risk is not clearly
established.

Methods: We randomly selected 640 subcohort subjects without cancer
history at enrollment from the Korean multi-center cancer cohort
participants. Ninety-nine gastric cancer cases were identified from the
inside (N=8) and the outside (N=91) of the subcohort after the 12.2 years
of median follow-up time. To estimate individual’s salt intake, we
measured 24-hour urinary sodium excretion from spot urine using the
Tanaka’s equation. Three isoflavone plasma concentrations (Genistein,
daidzein, and equol) of 167 subjects among case-cohort subjects had been
measured using time-resolved fluoroimmunoassay. Cubic spline curve for
gastric cancer risk according to urinary sodium level was used to define
optimal cut-off points of urinary sodium excretion concentration.
Weighted Cox proportional hazard regression was used to calculate hazard
ratios (HRs) and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Stratified
analysis by isoflavone level was conducted to assess effect modification
by isoflavone on the association between salt intake and gastric cancer.

Results: Gastric cancer risk in the high salt intake group (urinary
sodium excretion ≥6,000mg/day) was significantly increased (HR, 1.69;
95% CI, 0.99-2.90) compared to the reference group (urinary sodium
excretion 4500-5,999mg/day). Magnitudes of gastric cancer risk by high
salt intake were more strengthened in the group with low plasma
isoflavone concentrations (One or no genistein, diadzein or equol levels
over the median concentrations) (HR, 6.92; 95% CI, 1.80-26.56). Contrary
to the low isoflavone group, no significant differences in gastric cancer
risk according to salt intake levels were found in the group with high
isoflavone concentration.

Conclusions: High salt intake is associated with gastric cancer risk, but
this association can be attenuated by high concentration of isoflavones.
We suggest that sufficient intake of soybean products, the rich sources
of isoflavone, may give protection against gastric cancer in the
population with high salt intake.


