Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastatic colorectal cancer: characterization of distinct
histological growth patterns which demonstrate different response to
current treatment regimes.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer in North America,
and the third leading cause of cancer-related death. About 50% of
patients will be diagnosed with CRC liver metastasis (CRCLM) during the
course of their disease. We have identified two major histological growth
patterns (HGP) in CRCLM resected from patients. In the desmoplastic HGP
(DHGP), the tumor cells are enclosed within a desmoplastic stromal ring,
physically separating them from the normal liver tissue. In the
replacement HGP (RHGP), the tumor cells replace normal hepatocytes
without disrupting adjacent cells or structures within the liver
parenchyma. We have recently shown that patients with RHGP lesions who
received neoadjuvant bevacizumab plus chemotherapy had a worse
pathological response and five-year overall survival. Our group has also
shown that RHGP CRCLM is resistant to anti-angiogenic therapy due to it
promoting vessel co-option as a means of tumor vascularization, rather
than VEGF-dependent angiogenesis as seen in DHGP. However, the molecular
mechanisms that drive the CRCLM HGPs remain unknown.

This project aims to shed light on the biological processes that underlie
the diversity of HGPs, with an emphasis on the key genes and pathways
that support the RHGP. To test this, we have: Aim 1) performed RNAseq on
chemonaïve RHGP and DHGP CRCLM lesions to identify pathways that are
significantly upregulated in the RHGP. We have validated these genes via
real-time PCR (RT-PCR), and a subset by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Aim
2) To further refine the RHGP gene signature and to examine the effects
of cell-cell interactions on hepatocyte and tumor cell gene expression,
individual cells have been isolated from distinct regions within RHGP
CRCLM tissues using laser capture microdissection (LCM), followed by
single-cell transcriptomics analyses.

Our preliminary data have identified three major pathways with
differentially expressed genes: i. cell motility, ii. cell junctions, and
iii. ECM-receptor interactions, which are upregulated in RHGP relative to
the DHGP and normal liver. A panel of RHGP-specific genes has been
identified and validated via RT-PCR. We selected a subset of these genes
and are performing IHC to further validate and locate their expression.
We have also performed LCM and are in the process of performing
transcriptomics analyses – the data will be presented.

We expect to gain some insight into the mechanisms responsible for
driving and/or maintaining the RHGP lesions. In the longer term, this
work will result in identification of targets in the HGPs that will help
stratify patients in terms of treatment. It would appear that we have
fewer treatment options for the RHGP patients and it would be important
to utilize the data to develop new treatment strategies for those
patients. These new therapies would lead to further clinical trials.


