Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput chemical screening identifies Focal Adhesion
Kinase and Aurora Kinase B inhibition as a synergistic treatment
combination in Ewing sarcoma.


Ewing sarcoma is the second most common bone malignancy of childhood.
Current treatment employs chemotherapy, surgery, and radiation. Although
this approach cures approximately 70% of patients with localized disease,
treatments are largely ineffective for patients with metastases or
relapse. Furthermore, these treatments are associated with an alarming
rate of long-term toxicities. New treatment combinations are necessary to
improve cures and lower toxicities for these patients.

We recently found that Ewing sarcoma is dependent on focal adhesion
kinase (FAK) for cell viability and tumor proliferation. In order to
identify candidate treatment combinations for Ewing sarcoma, we performed
a screen of 1912 compounds to identify those with synergistic anti-Ewing
activity when combined with FAK inhibition. The A673 Ewing cell line was
treated with PF-562271, a FAK-specific inhibitor, in combination with
compounds from the Mechanism Interrogation PlatE (MIPE) 4.0 library. Cell
viability was measured after 48 hours of treatment. Multiple
computational metrics were utilized to identify and rank all compound
combinations for synergistic impairment of cell viability. Multiple
Aurora kinase inhibitors scored as synergistic with FAK inhibition in
this screen. Aurora kinases are important in the regulation of mitosis
and are highly expressed in Ewing sarcoma tumors and cell lines. We found
that Aurora kinase B inhibitors were synergistic across a larger range of
concentrations than Aurora kinase A inhibitors when combined with FAK
inhibition in multiple Ewing cell lines. We found that AZD-1152, an
Aurora kinase B-selective inhibitor, and PF-562271 when used in
combination induced apoptosis in Ewing cells at concentrations that had
minimal effect on cell survival when either drug was used alone. We also
found that the combination significantly impaired tumor proliferation in
zebrafish xenograft models of Ewing sarcoma and prolonged survival in
murine xenografts compared to either single-agent treatment alone.
Interestingly, treatment with AZD-1152 alone also significantly impaired
tumor proliferation and prolonged survival compared to vehicle treatment
in a mouse xenograft model of Ewing sarcoma.

Our data demonstrate that FAK and Aurora kinase B inhibition
synergistically impair Ewing sarcoma cell viability in vitro and
significantly inhibit tumor proliferation in vivo. With multiple FAK and
Aurora kinase inhibitors in early phase trials for adult malignancies,
these results have the potential to be translated into clinical trials
for patients with Ewing sarcoma. Previous studies have also suggested a
dependency of Ewing sarcoma on Aurora kinase activity; our data further
supports a role for Aurora kinase B inhibitors as therapeutic candidates
in this disease.


