Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: micoRNA in FA defective tumor.


The Fanconi Anemia (FA) pathway is essential for human cells to maintain
integrity following DNA damage. This pathway is involved in the
endogenous repair of double stranded DNA breaks and homologous
recombination as well as repair of DNA cross-linking caused by exogenous
agents. Cancers with defective FA pathway are expected to be more
sensitive to cross-link based therapy, or to treatments in which
additional repair mechanisms are targeted. We have recently reported the
detection of up to 20% of NSCLC to be FA functionally inactive (lack of
FANCD2 foci formation in the nucleus of proliferating cells by triple
stain immunofluorescence, FATSI negative). MicroRNAs (miRs, miRNA) are
small, 19-25 nucleotide, single stranded, non-coding RNA molecules that
have regulatory roles in humans by targeting mRNAs via cleaved or
translational repression which can affect the output of protein coding
genes and cause various changes in developmental and physiological
processes including cancer. It has been published that some miRNAs are
tumor suppressors, and others are oncogenes. However, microRNAs and the
FA pathway in relationship to lung cancer progression remain unknown. In
order to elucidate the role of FA related miRs in human lung cancer
development or treatment, we analyzed miR expression in lung cancer cells
and patient lung tumors. Several cell lines were generated using RNAi
technology with FANCD2 deficiency and confirmed via reduction in FANCD2
protein expression. Using Nanostring counter technology, microRNA array
analysis was performed on FANCD2 foci positive and foci negative tumors
as well as matching normal lung tissues. A cluster of microRNAs (mir-431,
377, 376c, 200c, 26a, 135a, and let-7e) were found to be up-regulated,
and miR-494,205, 630, 145,671 were found to be down-regulated in the foci
negative tumors samples compared to matching non-tumor lung tissue. The
same group of miRs were upregulated and its corresponding group were
down-regulated in the foci negative tumors as compared to foci positive
tumors. These findings indicate that the FA pathway may regulate
downstream genes through regulation of microRNAs in lung cancer. In order
to validate this hypothesis, specific miRs were be analyzed with
Real-Time Quantitative PCR via foci positive and foci negative samples
(cell and patient tissue) in hopes of finding significant and consistent
regulation. This study contributes to further understanding in miRNA and
cancer pathology that may be applicable to futuristic lung cancer
treatment.


