Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The in-parallel whole-genome ChIP-Seq analysis of primary tissues,
patient derived xenografts, and cancer cell lines from HPV-relative HNSCC
samples.


This project develops a novel experimental technique to perform ChIP-Seq
(chromatin immunoprecipitation with massively parallel DNA sequencing)
analysis of chromatin structure in primary tumor tissues from high risk
HPV-related head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HPV+ HNSCC). Recent
data suggest that chromatin structure is the central regulator and
predictor of cancer-specific expression and mutagenesis landscape of
diseased cells. Genome-wide gene expression dysregulation in many tumors,
including HPV+ HNSCC, are incompletely described by current knowledge.
Methods for study of chromatin structure in primary tumor tissue are
needed to better understand the role global epigenetic changes may play
in these tumors. However, ChIP-Seq, which is the state-of-the-art method
of elucidating chromatin structure, until now, has not been reliably
performed on any HNSCC samples. Because chromatin structure is disrupted
at room temperature, ChIP-Seq is especially complicated for primary
patient tissues, which are primarily obtained as surgical waste after
pathology review. Snap freezing of leftover waste surgical tissues and
further tissue thawing for the analysis decreases chromatin structure
integrity necessary for highly sensitive ChIP-Seq methodology, especially
for tumor samples with chromatin structure deformed during
carcinogenesis. To improve the chromatin structure integrity in tumor
sample we added a xenografting step and minimized the exposure of cancer
tissue to room temperature conditions after mouse surgery. We also
minimized patient non-cancer tissue preservation at ambient temperature
after patient surgery. We successfully performed ChIP-Seq for H3K4me3,
H3K9me3, and H3K9ac on frozen uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) primary
tissues, frozen patient derived xenograft tissues, and freshly-cultured
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines, revealing comparable
success rates between tissue type and sample preservation techniques.
ChIP-Seq techniques were performed and cross validated using tried and
true qRT-PCR methods to demonstrate data reproducibility. The biological
relevance of the ChIP-Seq data was confirmed through massive RNA-Seq
analysis of 47 HPV+ HNSCC samples and 25 non-cancer controls. Analysis
revealed that most H3K9ac and H3K9me3 enrichment is similar in primary
tissues, regardless of disease status. Only small portion of them showed
differential histone enrichment, which correlated with differential
expression of corresponding genes. On the other hand, H3K4me3 showed
strong tissue specificity and were found differentially enriched
especially in tumor samples. The proposed experimental pipeline
demonstrates high reproducibility between biological replicates,
diversity of tissue models, and low dependence of ChIP-Seq analysis on
tissue preservation techniques.


