Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation mechanisms of cancer associated MEK1 mutants.


Activating BRAF mutants drive human tumors by dysregulating ERK signaling
despite ERK-dependent feedback suppression of RAS. These RAF mutants
become RAS independent, by either of two mechanisms, and they are thus
unaffected by feedback inhibition of upstream signaling. Recently, it has
become clear that mutation activation of MEK1 or MEK2 occur at
appreciable frequency in human tumors, but the mechanism of activation of
these mutants and whether they remain dependent on upstream activation of
RAS or RAF signaling remains unknown. Here we characterized the mechanism
of activation of 18 recurrent MEK1 mutants identified in human cancer.
Based on these data, they fall into three classes. The kinase activity of
first class remains dependent on RAF mediated phosphorylation of S218 and
S222; the second class of MEK mutants has basal RAF-independent activity,
but can be further stimulated by RAF and the third class no longer
requires phosphorylation of S218 and S222 and signals in a RAF
independent manner. These features determined their sensitivity to
ERK-dependent feedback regulation and the ability to drive ERK signaling
output in cells. The more RAF-independent activity the mutants acquired,
the better they could activate downstream ERK pathway, leading to
increased transforming activities in MEF cells in the absence of RAF.
This is consistent with their genetic association with RAS, RAF and NF1
mutations in human tumors. The Class 3 RAF-independent MEK1 mutants tend
to be mutually exclusive with those mutants, while coexistence with
RAS/RAF/NF1 mutations is frequently observed in tumors with Class 1 or 2
MEK1 mutants. Moreover, functional class correlated with sensitivities of
ERK signaling driven by these mutants to MEK inhibitors that function by
different mechanisms. Unlike RAF dependent or regulated MEK1 mutants, the
ERK signaling driven by RAF independent MEK1 mutants is insensitive to an
allosteric MEK inhibitor that functions by preventing RAF mediated MEK
phosphorylation. However, signaling driven by all classes of MEK1 mutants
is sensitive to an ATP competitive MEK1 inhibitor which targets MEK1
kinase activity.


