Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi institutional evaluation of a new NGS assay for mutation
detection from cfDNA in lung cancer.


Introduction: The detection of actionable mutations in lung cancer is
still a major challenge due to the lack of tissue specimens for molecular
profiling of the tumor in approximately 25% of patients. The circulating
cell-free tumor DNA (ctDNA) isolated from plasma of cancer patients is an
alternative, minimally invasive source of tumor DNA that also allows
rapid determination of the mutational status of the tumor. However, the
intrinsic low abundance of mutations in cfDNA makes their detection and
quantification in plasma a challenging task. Here we report a
multi-institutional validation of the Oncomine cfDNA Lung Cancer assay
for the analyses of cfDNA in molecular pathology laboratories.

Methods: The Oncomine cfDNA Lung assays is a multiplexed sequencing assay
for liquid biopsy that generates reads containing targeted ctDNA regions
along with a molecular tag. In order to allow an initial uniform
evaluation of the assay, the Multiplex I cfDNA Reference Standard
(Horizon Dx) derived from human cell lines, and fragmented to an average
size of 160bp±10% (144bp–176bp) to closely resemble cfDNA extracted
from human plasma, was used. The reference sample covers 8 mutations in
the EGFR, KRAS, NRAS and PIK3CA genes at 5%, 1%, 0.1% allelic frequencies
and wildtype allele. The same lot of control sample was distributed to
the participating laboratories within the OncoNetwork Consortium. Samples
were sequenced twice in each laboratory either using the Ion PGM system
or the Ion S5 system. Libraries were templated using the Ion Chef and
multiplexed as four libraries on a 318/520 chip or eight libraries on a
530 chip. A bioinformatics pipeline within the Torrent Server software
allowed for automated variant calling.

Results: The laboratories involved in the study were able to detect the 8
hotspot base changes and indels present in the control samples at allelic
frequencies from 0.1% to 5% with an average 94.05% sensitivity (range
87.50% - 97.92%) and an average 99.87% specificity (range 99.53% - 100%).
When only considering variants at the 0.1% allelic frequency, the average
sensitivity was 83.04% (range 68.75% - 99.95%) and the average
specificity was 99.95% (range 99.68% - 99.95%). Notably, at the 0.1%
allelic frequency, all the participating laboratories were able to detect
the challenging EGFR p.T790M variant that is a marker of sensitivity to
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Conclusions: These preliminary data confirm the potential of the Oncomine
cfDNA lung assay for plasma genotyping to allow for the noninvasive,
multiplexed detection of complex, targetable genomic alterations in lung
cancer.


