Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of immunogenic SPANX antigens in distinct cancer stem
cell subsets within triple negative breast cancers.


Breast cancer is the leading cause of death in women, primarily due to
metastatic disease rather than the primary tumor. Median survival with
metastatic breast cancer is 3 years, with no statistically significant
change in survival in over 20 years. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)
lacks estrogen and progesterone receptor expression and ERBB2
amplification and is the most lethal form of breast cancer. It is
resistant to endocrine therapy and chemo-resistance and metastasis
invariably emerge. Increasing evidence indicates that cancer stem cells
(CSCs) are chemo-resistant and initiate metastasis. We have previously
identified and characterized distinct subsets of CSCs within TNBC cell
lines and patient-derived tumors. Within the surface CD44+ populations,
CD24 expression defines two subsets of CSCs: mesenchymal-like CD24neg and
epithelial-like CD24low+. Epithelial-like CD24low+ cells are more
aggressive than CD24neg cells, with increased self-renewal, migration,
invasion, tumor-initiation and metastatic potential. In addition,
CD24low+ cells are enriched following chemo- and radiation therapies;
greater than 80% of CD24neg cells die and the majority of cells that
survive are CD24low+. Hence, therapies that selectively eliminate the
CD24low+ population in TNBC have the potential to be of enormous benefit
to cancer patients. Therapeutic targeting of surface CD24 using
antibodies have not been successful due to the expression of CD24 on many
different cell types including B cells. Thus, there is a need for more
selective strategies to target CSC populations without affecting normal
cells. Here, we show for the first time, increased expression of a family
of cancer/testis antigens (CTAs) namely SPANX in the most aggressive
CD24low+ CSC population. CTAs belong to a class of testis-derived
proteins which are only expressed in germ cells in the male testis, and
the expression of CTA genes is entirely silenced in the adult somatic
tissues. Thus, SPANX may serve as a selective marker for targeting CSCs.
In addition, we demonstrate a functional role for SPANX in mediating CSC
phenotype. Knockdown of SPANX decreased the percent of CD24low+ CSCs in
TNBCs. It also attenuated the proliferation, migration and invasion of
CD24low+ cells. Radiation treatment increased SPANX expression levels and
enriched for CD24low+ cells. Loss of SPANX resulted in increased cell
death of CD24low+ cells after radiation treatment. Hence, we show that
SPANX may be promoters of the most aggressive CSC subset of TNBC. Since
SPANX is highly immunogenic, our data provide rationale for further
testing of combined radiation and immunotherapy approaches in the
treatment of this deadly cancer. It also supports the use of protective
and therapeutic SPANX vaccines against the most aggressive CSC subset in
TNBC.


