Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting MUC1 mediated nucleotide metabolism sensitizes
pancreatic tumors to radiation therapy.


Pancreatic cancer has the lowest survival rate of six perecent among all
the cancers in the US and is projected to be the second leading cause of
cancer related deaths in a decade. Radiation therapy provides only
marginal increases in the survival rate in pancreatic cancer, due to poor
responsiveness of pancreatic tumors. Clinical trials indicate a
significant response to radiation only in twenty percent of primary
pancreatic tumors. While multiple factors cause resistance to radiation
therapy, the biological mechanisms mediating such innate resistance are
currently being explored. Overexpression of MUC1 facilitates chemo and
radiation resistance in pancreatic cancer. MUC1 overepxression also
promotes pancreatic tumor growth through metabolic upregulation. We
investigated the in vivo role of MUC1 mediated metabolic alterations in
radiation response of pancreatic tumors. Our findings indicate that MUC1
expressing pancreatic tumors survive better upon radiation treatment.
Metabolomic analysis through liquid chromatography coupled tandem mass
spectrometry approach revealed that MUC1 expressing pancreatic tumors
exhibit higher glycolytic and nucleotide metabolites upon irradiation.
MUC1 expressing tumors also possess relatively higher PPP and nucleotide
metabolites. Glycolytic inhibition using bromopyruvate revealed that MUC1
induced radiation resistance could be abrogated through inhibition of
glucose carbon flux into nucleotide metabolism by BrPA. Treatment with
BrPA effectively reduced glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway and
nucleotide levels in irradiated MUC1 expressing cells. Furthermore, a
combination of BrPA and radiation reduced tumor growth in MUC1 expressing
tumors. Metabolomic analysis showed a decrease in the glycolysis, PPP and
nucleotide metabolites in MUC1 expressing tumors upon combination
treatment with radiation and BrPA. Hence, our findings demonstrate that
glycolytic inhibition could be used to effectively target MUC1 mediated
radiation-resistance in pancreatic tumors.


