Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional regulation of KAI1 by p73 in colorectal cancer
metastasis.


Background: p73 is a member of the p53 family transcription factors and
known tumor suppressor. However, its transcriptional activity is complex
owing to its multiple isoforms, and limited information is available
regarding the transcriptional and functional regulation of the p73 gene
in colorectal cancer. In this study, we examined the role of p73 in
colorectal cancer.

Methods: We established a TAp73 overexpressing cell line using the Tet-on
inducible expression system and analyzed global RNA expression by
RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq). We studied the effects of TAp73 expression on
the migration, invasiveness, and EMT of colon cancer cells. We conducted
experiments in animals with liver metastasis of colorectal cancer. To
investigate the roles of p73 in colon cancer, we examined the samples
from patients, who had undergone surgical resection for colorectal cancer
between 2009 and 2013. mRNA expression of TAp73 and KAI1 was analyzed in
108 colorectal cancer specimen and adjacent non-cancerous tissues by
real-time RT-PCR.

Results: RNA-seq showed the association between TAp73 and KAI1
expression. Migration and invasiveness of colon cancer cells were reduced
by TAp73 expression, but induced by KAI1 knockdown. TAp73 regulates KAI1
expression in colon cancer cell lines. TAp73-induced decrease in
invasiveness and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) was abrogated by
KAI1 knockdown in TAp73 overexpressing cells. Migration ability of TAp73
overexpressing cells was recovered by KAI1 knockdown. Hepatic metastases
were significantly reduced in mice injected with TAp73 overexpressing
cells and increased in those injected with TAp73 overexpressing cells
with KAI1 knockdown. mRNA expression of TAp73 and KAI1 was higher in
colorectal cancer tissues than in adjacent non-cancerous tissues.
Significant correlation between TAp73 and KAI1 mRNA expression was
detected in early stage primary colorectal cancer, but not in the
advanced stage.

Conclusions: This study suggests that p73 (TAp73) acts as a tumor
suppressor in the progression of colorectal cancer and regulates the
expression of KAI1, which is a key target of p73 in colorectal cancer
liver metastases.


