Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: γ-Mangostin, a natural xanthone derivative targets Wnt signaling
pathway in colon cancer cells.


Background: Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer in
incidence and cause of death in the United States. The current treatment
modalities include chemotherapy, radiation, and surgery. Many people are
genetically predisposed for colon cancer through mutations in genes such
as adenomatous polyposis coli (APC). While the absence of APC causes
aberrant Wnt/Beta catenin signaling, the APC mutations are found in more
than 80% of colorectal tumors. γ-Mangostin is a major bioactive compound
present in Mangosteen (Garcinia mangostana) which possess significant
anti-cancer activity. Herein, we investigated the effects of γ
-Mangostin on colon cancer growth and elucidated its mechanistic action
through Wnt signaling pathway.

Methods: HCT116, SW480 and RKO cell lines were used in the study. The
effects of γ-Mangostin on cell proliferation were assessed by
hexosaminidase and clonogenicity assays. Effects of γ-Mangostin on
apoptosis were evaluated by cell cycle and western blot analysis.
Moreover the effect of γ-Mangostin on colonosphere formation was also
evaluated. Furthermore, the effect of γ-Mangostin on Wnt signaling
proteins was evaluated by western blot analysis. The in vivo anti-cancer
effect of γ -Mangostin was investigated on the HCT116 subcutaneous tumor
xenograft model implanted in five-week-old male athymic nude mice.
Further, the effect of γ -Mangostin was assessed by the specific marker
expression in tissue samples by western blot analysis and
immunohistochemistry.

Results: γ-Mangostin treatment resulted in a dose and time dependent
inhibition of proliferation and colony formation in all the three cell
lines. Treatment also induced colon cancer cells to undergo G0/G1 and
S-phase arrest. Apoptosis was confirmed by increased levels of Bax/Bcl2
ratio, coupled with a reduction in cyclin D1. γ -Mangostin significantly
reduced the number and size of colonospheres. Moreover, γ-Mangostin
treatment decreased the expression of Wnt signaling proteins, which
suggest that γ-Mangostin inhibits the colon cancer growth through Wnt
signaling pathway. To determine the effect of γ-Mangostin on tumor
growth in vivo, nude mice harboring HCT116 tumor xenografts in their
flanks were administered with 5mg/Kg γ-Mangostin intraperitoneally for
21 days. γ-Mangostin treatment significantly reduced the tumor growth,
with notably lower tumor volume and weight. Western blot and
immunohistochemistry analyses revealed significant decrease in the
expression of Wnt signaling proteins.

Conclusion: Together, these data suggest that γ-Mangostin inhibits colon
cancer growth through Wnt signaling pathway. γ-Mangostin may be a
potential therapeutic agent for colon cancer.


