Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of chemically modified peptide inhibitor ERAP
targeting BIG3-PHB2 complex on hormone-resistant breast tumor.


Approximately 70% of breast cancer cells express estrogen receptor alpha
(ERα), and depend on estrogen (E2) for proliferative and metastatic
activity. The current endocrine therapies for breast cancer are mainly
based on targeting ERα signaling using selective ERα modulators, ERα
downregulators, and aromatase inhibitor. However, up to 50% of patients
with ERα-positive tumors either initially do not respond or become
resistant to these drugs. The precise molecular mechanisms for the
endocrine resistance contributes to be an active area of research.
Therefore, identifying the factors and pathways responsible for
resistance and defining ways to overcome it lead to develop novel
molecular-target therapies to endocrine resistance. Recent findings
support that the Brefeldin A-inhibited guanine nucleotide-exchange
protein 3-prohibitin 2 (BIG3-PHB2) complex plays a crucial role in
E2/ERα signaling modulation in these cells. Moreover, specific
inhibition of the BIG3-PHB2 interaction using ERα activity-regulator
synthetic peptide (ERAP: 165-177 amino acids) derive from a helical BIG3
sequence, a dominant-negative peptide inhibitor leads to the significant
anti-tumor effect. However, duration of its effect is very short for
clinical use. Here, we report the development of the chemically modified
ERAP using stapling methods (stapled ERAP) to improve duration of its
antitumor effects. The stapled ERAP specifically inhibited the BIG3-PHB2
interaction, thereby exhibiting the long-lasting suppressive activity and
their intracellular localization without membrane-permeable polyarginine
sequence supposedly through the formation of stable α-helix structure
induced by the stapling. Importantly, a combination of stapled ERAP and
tamoxifen caused a synergistic inhibitory effect in breast cancer cell
growth. Tumor bearing mice treated with every 7 days with stapled ERAP
treatment effectively prevented the BIG3-PHB2 interaction as well as
daily treatment, leading to the complete regression of E2-dependent tumor
in vivo. Our findings suggest that the stapled ERAP may be a promising
anti-tumor drug to suppress the growth of luminal-type breast cancer in
clinical use.


