Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of liver metastasis induced systemic suppression of
checkpoint inhibitor response.


Introduction: In stage IV melanoma and NSCLC, PD-1 checkpoint inhibitor
therapy is effective and now FDA approved as first-line therapy. However,
despite these rationally designed strategies to manipulate immune cells,
curative responses remain rare, and the majority of metastatic cancer
patients ultimately succumb to their disease. Emerging potential
biomarkers of response have required specialized technologies such as
next-generation sequencing or flow cytometry, which are difficult to
access, costly, and not immediately clinically applicable. To this end,
we have previously reported that presence of liver metastasis was
significantly associated with the lack of antitumor immune infiltrates at
distant biopsy sites as well as poor clinical response to PD-1 blockade.
Here, we sought to study the mechanism of liver metastasis related
non-response to PD-1 blockade using a syngeneic immunocompetent murine
tumor model.

Methods: C57BL/6 mice were implanted with a "primary” subcutaneous
tumor as well as a secondary “metastatic” tumor in the liver or the
lungs (control), and given systemic PD-1 blockade therapy to mimic the
clinical observation and study the effects of liver tumor involvement on
systemic antitumor immunity. Animals are monitored for survival and tumor
growth. The immune infiltrates of both the primary and metastatic sites
are phenotypically analyzed.

Results: Animals with liver tumor involvement appear to have
significantly shortened survival as well as difficulty rejecting tumors,
both at the primary and secondary site of implantation, when compared to
non-liver involved controls. The lack of response to PD-1 blockade in the
liver cohort is correlated with a significant decrease in
CTLA4+/PD-1+/CD8+ “exhausted” antigen experienced T cells (TEx)
within the tumor microenvironment of the subcutaneous and liver-embedded
sites. The deleterious effect on TEx appears to be liver-specific and not
tumor cell-line dependent, as delivery of different tumor cells to the
liver reproduces the same effect while delivery of tumor cells to other
organs does not change the quantity of TEx at the subcutaneous site.
Lastly, liver associated deletion of TEx appears to be a an antigen
dependent process, as delivery of mismatched tumor cell line to the liver
abrogates this effect and restores TEx within the tumor microenvironment
at the distant subcutaneous site.

Conclusions: Using an immunocompetent checkpoint blockade animal tumor
model, we recapitulated the clinically observed difference in response to
PD-1 blockade treatment that is associated with liver metastasis. Our
studies suggest that the liver is capable of suppressing effective T cell
mediated antitumor response systemically, rendering checkpoint blockade
less effective. The findings here propose a novel mechanism for which
non-responsiveness to PD-1 blockade therapy could occur and may impact
the treatment decision for cancer patients with liver metastasis.


