Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical selectivity profile of the CDK4/6 inhibitor ribociclib
(LEE011) compared with that of palbociclib and abemaciclib.


A hallmark of cancer is unchecked cell division. Retinoblastoma protein
(Rb) is a human tumor suppressor that guards a cell’s entry into S
phase by binding E2F transcription factors and keeping them inactive.
Many growth-promoting stimuli increase expression of D-type cyclins,
which bind to and activate cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 (CDK4/6). The
cyclin D–bound CDK4/6 holoenzymes phosphorylate Rb, resulting in
release of E2F, which in turn activates genes required for S phase entry
and DNA replication. Numerous oncogenic aberrations converge at the
CDK4/6–Rb pathway, providing a strong rationale for developing CDK4/6
inhibitors as cancer therapeutics.

Ribociclib (LEE011) is a selective CDK4/6 inhibitor that has received FDA
breakthrough therapy and priority review designations for treatment of
hormone receptor–positive breast cancer in combination with letrozole
and is being tested in additional clinical trials. Here we describe the
preclinical selectivity profile of ribociclib in biochemical and cellular
assays. Ribociclib inhibits both CDK4–cyclin D1 and CDK6–cyclin D3
kinase activity with nanomolar IC50s in biochemical assays. To
comprehensively address the selectivity of ribociclib in direct
comparison with 2 other clinical CDK4/6 inhibitors, palbociclib and
abemaciclib, we made use of the KINOMEscan assay consisting of >450
kinase active site–directed competition-binding assays. We adjusted the
test concentrations in the kinase-selectivity panel per the binding
constants for CDK4 and CDK6 to account for the higher potency of
abemaciclib. Data showed that both ribociclib and palbociclib have high
selectivity for CDK4 (CDK6 was not covered in the panel), with very few
distinct additional binding events detected. In contrast, abemaciclib is
a much more promiscuous kinase inhibitor.

Next, we sought to determine the relative potencies of the 3 inhibitors
against CDK4 vs CDK6 in cellular assays. When testing different routinely
used readouts of cellular viability, we found that assays that measured
metabolic activity (eg, CTG) tended to underestimate the effects of
CDK4/6 inhibition; thus, assays that either directly or indirectly
assessed cell number were used instead. We first identified cancer cell
lines primarily dependent on either CDK4 or CDK6 as judged by combined
RNA expression analysis and shRNA or CRISPR-based functional assays. When
determining IC50s of the 3 CDK4/6 inhibitors in these cell lines, we
found that ribociclib and abemaciclib demonstrated greater activity in
CDK4-dependent cells vs CDK6-dependent cells, whereas palbociclib was
similarly active in both cell types.

The high degree of CDK4 selectivity of ribociclib suggests that
off-target kinase inhibition is an unlikely complication in patients.
Moreover, the apparent preference for CDK4 over CDK6 could be an
advantage in certain cancer types that are primarily dependent on CDK4.


