Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral divergence of copy number alterations in NSCLC.


Intratumoral heterogeneity has been increasingly established as a
critical phenotype of cancer genomes. Its characterization at the DNA
level is based on the identification of somatic mutations consisting of
single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and copy number alterations (CNAs),
which include deletions, amplifications, and copy neutral loss of
heterozygosity. Currently, most methods for the detection of intratumoral
heterogeneity use an implicit “infinite sites” model for both SNVs
and CNAs. While this may often be appropriate for SNVs, we demonstrate
its violation for CNAs in unstable cancer genomes. Here, we propose a
novel method to identify CNAs that were created by independent mutational
events but alter the same genomic region. Our method identifies regions
where the germline heterozygous signals (allelic intensities for DNA
arrays or frequencies for next-generation sequencing) shift toward
different parental haplotypes between different samples from the same
tumor, thus indicative of divergent tumor clones. In this context we
define a divergent CNA as one found on multiple samples from the same
tumor but with different chromosomal changes giving rise to the CNAs. We
applied our method to data from core needle biopsies extracted from the
tumors of 31 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients and processed
using Illumina SNP arrays. We overlapped CNA calls from the same tumor,
and then tested whether overlapping segments showed divergent CNAs. We
observe instances of divergent CNAs in 23 of the 31 patient tumors
comprising 260 in total (median = 5 divergent CNAs per tumor).
Strikingly, one tumor had 34. We then assessed whether the level of
recurrent mutation correlated with clinical or genomic features. While
there was no association with smoking or histology, we did observe a
positive association between the rate of divergence and somatic mutations
(including loss) in putative genome “gatekeeper” genes, p53 and
CDKN2A (P = 0.001). We detected divergent CNAs that spanned shared
genomic regions in three or more NSCLC tumors. These included large (>
1Mb) events in chromosome 6 (q13-14, q21-22, q25) and chromosome 21
(q22), as well as smaller events, which included the integrin collagen
receptor locus ITGA1-PELO-ITGA2, 8p23.1, 8q24.3, 18q11.2 (ZNF521 gene),
and 21q21.3, which has bindings sites for GATA2, GATA3, and STAT3. Our
observed divergent genomic alterations represent half of the total number
expected since imbalances of the same haplotype will not be observable in
such data. In summary, our approach allows for the detection of genomic
regions that are divergently altered. This information may support
methods to identify CNAs under positive or negative selection in the
tumor microenvironment as well as regions of increased genomic
instability. This provides an added dimension to intratumoral
heterogeneity analysis for a more comprehensive characterization of
cancer genomes.


