Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic potential of dual-function small molecules for breast
cancers.


Epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressors is an important mechanism in
tumor initiation and progression. A tumor suppressor gene, BRCA1, is part
of complex molecules in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs),
and loss of BRCA1 contributes to both sporadic and inherited breast tumor
progression. Furthermore, recent studies have shown that the
ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) activity is abnormal in breast
cancer. Therefore, we tested the hypothesis that the dual-functional drug
that fused the HDAC inhibitor with an ATM activator may enhance killing
of breast cancer (BC) cells by increasing ATM activation. In addition,
the expression of ATM may enhance the synergistic antitumor effects of
HDAC inhibitors in combination with radiotherapy. To determine the HDAC
inhibitory potency, SP-1-303 was screened against a panel of Class I and
Class II HDAC enzymes in vitro and identified as a pan-HDAC inhibitor
(IC50=120 nM). Western blot confirmed that SP-1-303 increased acetylated
histone H3/H4, α-tubulin, and phosphorylation of ATM within 30 min - 4 h
in a time-dependent manner. Using two ER positive BC cell lines (MCF7 and
T-47D), two triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines (MDA-MB-231
and HCC 1937), and one normal breast epithelial cell line as a control
(MCF10A), the effects of SP-1-303 on cell growth and cell death were
examined by performing cytotoxicity assays and flow cytometry. SAHA and
Tamoxifen were used as controls. SP-1-303 conferred the values of
cytotoxicity (IC50) for the ER positive BC cells in a range of 0.25-0.4
μM, while the values are in a range of 1-3 μM for TNBC and 12 μM for
normal breast epithelial cells, respectively. Flow cytometry (FACS)
analyses demonstrated significant increases in G1 arrest (81%) in MCF7
cells and a further enhancement in the G1 phase (91%) in combination with
radiation. The data implies the mechanism of action from this
drug—cancer cells are being arrested in the G1 phase of the cell cycle,
a radiation sensitive phase, suggesting that SP-1-303 may have a
synergistic effect with radiation on cell killing. Taken together,
SP-1-303 had the largest impact on ER positive breast cancer over TNBC.
These data imply that an increased cell death is occurring in ER positive
breast cancers from these dual-action molecules through HDAC inhibition
and increased ATM activation, suggesting that SP-1-303 alone or its
combination with radiotherapy may improve clinical efficacy.


