Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of Merkel cell polyomavirus large and small T-antigen on
the thrombospondin and the periostin promoter.


Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a rare, but aggressive form of skin cancer
with rising incidence and high mortality rate. Approximately 80% of MCC
tumors are positive for Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV), suggesting a
causative relationship between MCPyV and MCC. Exosomes are 30-150 nm
vesicles that contain proteins, lipids, mRNAs, lncRNAs, and miRNAs.
Exosomes from virus-infected cells comprise also viral nucleic sequences
and proteins. Because tumor cell-derived exosomes may contribute to
cancer, we hypothesized that MCPyV may affect the composition of exosomes
and play a role in tumorigenesis. Therefore, we compared the proteins in
exosomes produced by MCPyV-positive MKL1 and MKL2 and MCPyV-negative
MCC13 and MCC26 MCC cell lines.

Our proteomic analysis of exosomes originating from polyomavirus-negative
and polyomavirus-positive MCC cell lines revealed the presence of the
oncogenic proteins periostin and thrombospondin. Western blot analysis of
exosomes and lysates of these MCC cells confirmed the presence of these
proteins in exosomes from all cell lines. Thrombospondin, but not
periostin was detectable in cell lysates, and an enrichment of both
proteins was detected in exosomes of all cell lines. The effect of MCPyV
large T-antigen (LT-ag) and small t-antigen (st-ag) on the periostin and
thrombospondin promoters was examined by transient transfection studies
with luciferase reporter plasmids. Transfection experiments in MCC13
revealed that LT-ag, but not st-ag significantly increased the activity
of the thrombospondin and periostin promoters. In MCC26 cells, neither
LT-ag nor st-ag had a significant effect on the thrombospondin promoter
activity, while both proteins alone or in combination significantly
stimulated the periostin promoter strength. Our results suggest that
MCPyV proteins may contribute to tumorigenesis by enhancing the
expression of the oncoproteins thrombospondin and periostin and promote
their secretion via exosomes.


