Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mefloquine enhances the cytotoxic effects of tyrosine kinase
inhibitors in blast phase chronic myeloid leukaemia by lysosome membrane
disruption.


Despite the remarkable clinical responses achieved with BCR-ABL tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in the treatment of chronic phase-chronic
myeloid leukaemia (CML), these TKIs have been less effective as single
agents in blast phase (BP) CML. Identification of new therapeutic
strategies is needed for the better clinical management of BP-CML. Given
the known pharmacokinetics and toxicity profile, drug repurposing
represents an alternative therapeutic strategy for CML. Mefloquine is a
FDA-approved antimalarial drug that has been recently reported to have
anti-cancer activities. In this work, we investigated the effect of
mefloquine and its underlying mechanisms in CML.

We show that mefloquine inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis of
CML cells in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, mefloquine is also
effective in targeting BP-CML CD34+ progenitor cells. It induces
apoptosis, inhibits colony formation and self-renewal capacity of CD34+
cells derived from a TKI-resistant BP-CML patient. Mefloquine
significantly enhanced anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects of
imatinib and dasatinib in CML cell lines (eg, K562, LAMA84 and KU812) as
well as BP-CML CD34+ cells, suggesting that mefloquine augments the
effects of BCR-ABL TKIs.

Mechanistically, mefloquine increases lysosome biogenesis in various CML
cell lines. The action of mefloquine on lysosome is further confirmed by
our observation that the lysosomal vacuolar ATPase bafilomycin A1 rescues
mefloquine-induced CML cell death. Mefloquine also induces oxidative
stress in CML cells as shown by the increased mitochondrial superoxide
levels. Importantly, α-tocopherol (known to inhibit lysosomal
lipid-mediated ROS production) but not N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC, known to
inhibit thiol redox-mediated ROS production) protects against
mefloquine-mediated cell death, suggesting that oxidative stress induced
by mefloquine in CML cells is lysosome-mediated. It is known that the
length of isoprenoid side chain of α-tocopherol is important for the
stabilization of biological membranes. Interestingly, α-tocopherol
analog Trolox, which differs from α-tocopherol by decreasing isoprenoid
side chain fails to rescue mefloquine-induced cell death, suggesting that
mefloquine may destabilize lysosome membrane in CML cells. In addition,
we show that mefloquine decreases phosphorylation of S6 and increases
LC3B II levels, suggesting that mTOR inhibition and autophagy induction
might be involved in the action of mefloquine in CML cells.

Taken together, our work suggests that mefloquine has a potential to be
repurposed for CML treatment, given its efficacy as a single agent and
synergism as combination with BCR-ABL TKIs in CML primary progenitors and
cell lines. Our work also highlights the therapeutic value of targeting
the lysosome in the treatment of CML.


