Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Physical and functional interactions of exon-skipping variants of
androgen receptor with the full-length counterpart.


The androgen receptor (AR) is arguably the critical driver of not only
early but also advanced prostate cancer. The recent comprehensive
splicing landscapes revealed that metastatic castration resistant
prostate cancer harbors multiple forms of AR variants (AR-Vs), many of
which have diverse patterns of inclusion/exclusion of exons (E4-8)
corresponding to the ligand-binding domain. We had used AR-negative M12
prostate cancer cell line and recently reported characteristics of AR-Vs
with respect to their subcellular localization and transcriptional
activation on luciferase reporter driven by probasin-based promoter
(AR2PB-luc)(1). While ARv5es is predominantly nuclear and constitutively
active like well-documented ARv567es, many others are castration -induced
variants are inactive. As many AR-Vs and the full-length AR (AR-FL) are
co-expressed in the same cell, it is important to determine how these
inactive AR-Vs interact with active AR including AR-FL. To this end, we
examined two inactive AR-Vs namely v7es and v56es in relation to AR-FL.
ARv7es, which skips exon 7, is predominantly localized in cytoplasm.
ARv7es physically interacted with AR-FL. Moreover, nuclear accumulation
of ARv7es was promoted by the addition of dihydrotestosterone (DHT) only
in the presence of AR-FL, suggesting that ARv7es and AR-FL heterodimerize
in the nuclear compartment. However, DHT-dependent transactivation of
AR-FL was not affected by the presence of ARv7es. More specifically, in
M12 cells, AR2PB-luc was transactivated by AR-FL to the similar extents
either in the presence or absence of ARv7es. In addition, in doxycycline
(Dox)-inducible ARv7es stable LNCaP cell line (LNCaP/ARv7es), the
presence of ARv7es did not affect DHT-induced expression of endogenous
PSA and NKX3.1 transcripts as well as transactivation of AR2PB-luc. In
the similar setting, when we examined ARv56es which also physically
interacted with AR-FL, Dox-induced expression of ARv56es in LNCaP/ARv56es
was sufficient to induce expression of endogenous PSA and NKX3.1
transcripts. Further, DHT-induced expression of these transcripts was
enhanced by ARv56es in LNCaP/ARv56es. Accordingly, we propose that AR-Vs
display differential modes of action on AR-FL as exemplified by ARv7es as
the bystander and v56es as the effector. 1. Oncogene (PMID: 27694897)


