Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of Novel MYC and p53 target
molecules from medicinal plants of North East India.


Background: Identification and characterization of novel molecular
inhibitors that target key regulators of cancer stem cell (CSCs)
self-renewal is promising in cancer therapeutics. MYC and p53, the two
major cellular transcription factors, acts as key molecular regulators in
stem cells and cancer stem cells self-renewal. While MYC enhances, p53
inhibits the self-renewal of stem cells. Thus, developing novel molecules
that could potentially target either MYC and or p53 might potential
therapeutic application. However, the search for small molecules that
could target the self-renewal aspect of these two proteins has been
elusive. Previously; we demonstrated that isoprenoid molecule squalene
could enhance bone marrow hematopoietic and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
by modulating MYC. Importantly, we found that ursolic acid, an isoprenoid
molecule found in Tulsi plant, inhibited HIF-1alpha, a transcription
factor regulated by MYC and p53. Hence, having these prior experiences on
isoprenoids, we speculate that novel isoprenoid may exist that could
modulate MYC’s role in cancer self-renewal. We are especially
interested in identifying novel isoprenoid molecules (metabolites of
mevalonate pathway) found in medicinal plants of North East India, where
KaviKrishna laboratory is located.

Methods: For the study, we proposed to develop an in vitro self-renewal
based assay platform(henceforth known as STEM-TECH platform) to identify
novel molecules that act on self-renewal aspect of MYC and p53. In this
assay, we subjected the oral cancer cell line SCC-25 to 3-D tumoringeic
growth using methylcellulose based method. Using this assay, we have
screened 20 herbal extracts of North East India, and selected 3 herbal
extracts for further evaluation. For the in vivo study, we added these
herbal extracts to drinking water of C57BL/6 mice treated with 4NQO (an
oral carcinogen) and FVB/N mice with MYC-induced thymic lymphoma. The
mice were observed for 10 weeks and subjected to evaluation of tumor
growth, and also evaluation of cancer stem cells using ABCG2, a cell
surface marker expressed by cancer stem cells.

Results: We found that herbal extracts from Tulsi and Soalu exhibited
strong anti-tumor activity in the in vivo mouse models. Importantly,
these extracts exhibited the ability to inhibit the self-renewal of MYC
driven ABCG2+ cancer cells (1). Also, these extracts were then subjected
to in vitro Stem-Tech assay and we found that one herbal extract could
modulate the transcriptional binding of MYC. Importantly, we found that
squalene, an isoprenoid found in several herbal extracts in NE India
could modulate MYC activity by an unknown mechanism.

Conclusion: Our results indicate that the vast, untapped herbal plants
available in India’s remote North East contain valuable herbal
medicinal plant having potential MYC inhibitor.

1. Das B et al. MYC through HIF-2alpha regulates the self-renewal program
in cancer stem cells (under review).


