Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative mapping of epidermal growth factor receptor
activation in single breast cancer cells treated with targeted therapies.


Twenty percent of breast cancers are triple-negative, lacking estrogen
receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2. There is currently no specific
FDA-approved targeted therapy for triple-negative breast cancer patients.
Approximately half of triple-negative breast cancers overexpress
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), however phase II trials have
only shown a 5% response rate with targeted inhibition. A quantitative
analysis of EGFR signaling pathway dynamics of single cells at the single
molecule level has the potential to shed light on the mechanism of lack
of response to targeted therapy, as well as the cell-to-cell
heterogeneity of response. Here, we combine single-molecule 3D imaging of
EGFR using fluorescent quantum dots (QDs) with cell geometry
normalization by micro-patterning to quantitatively map EGFR endocytosis
in single cancer cells. Triple negative MDA-MB-231 cells conformed to
defined geometries (rectangular with different aspect ratios) were grown
on soft polyacrylamide gels after micro-contact printing islands of
fibronectin. Two color QD conjugates of EGFR and its ligand, EGF, are
used to track ligand binding and receptor internalization upon activation
in the absence and presence of different families and dosages of
pharmaceutical EGFR inhibitors. We demonstrated that
microcontact-printing normalizes cell geometry while maintaining EGFR
localization so that EGFR signaling response can be quantitatively
assessed on a single-cell basis and that QD conjugates can specifically
label EGFR and EGF. Quantitative single-molecule imaging at single-cell
level revealed high level of heterogeneity in the amount and spatial
localization of EGF binding and EGFR endocytosis among the cell
population in the presence and absence of EGFR inhibitor, gefitinib.
Using this platform, we will investigate if spatial organization of EGFR
clusters within individual cells contribute to single-cell heterogeneous
response to EGFR inhibitors. We anticipate quantitative mapping of EGFR
activity with drug treatment will help to elucidate why EGFR drug
treatments fail and provide a means to develop combination therapy to
address heterogeneity in triple negative-breast cancer.


