Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of PEG chain length on antibody-drug conjugate tumor and
tissue distribution in tumor bearing xenograft mice.


Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) are a promising new therapeutic modality
having demonstrated clinical efficacy in the treatment of cancer. While
ADCs have better exposures than their constitutive chemotypes, it is
important that they maintain the favorable pharmacokinetics of their
antibody backbones. Previous work incorporating PEG into the drug-linker
as a sidechain helped to mask the hydrophobicity of the chemotypes,
resulting in improved ADC exposures in rats compared to ADCs with
non-PEGylated drug-linkers. The current studies were aimed at
understanding the effect of PEG chain length on ADC efficacy, tumor and
tissue distribution in tumor bearing mice.

Efficacy and biodistribution of radiolabeled ADCs with 2, 4, 8, 12 and 24
PEG units in the drug-linker as a side chain were investigated in SCID
mice bearing a subcutaneous xenograft of L540cy tumor cells. A
non-PEGylated ADC was used as control. Antibody based radioactivity in
plasma, tumor, liver, lung, kidney, spleen and brain were measured over
14 days. MMAE, the free drug released from the ADC, was measured by mass
spectrometry. Reduction in tumor weight was determined as a measure of
efficacy. Compartmental analysis of the plasma exposure data was
conducted to understand the change in rate constants with change in PEG
chain length.

ADCs with side chain PEGylated drug-linkers had greater plasma and tumor
exposures than the non-PEGylated control ADC. Increasing PEG chain length
in the linker led to increased plasma and tumor exposures, and lower
plasma clearances. Tumor distribution was binary with ADCs with 2 and 4
PEG units in the linker showing similar tumor exposures while the ADCs
with 8, 12 and 24 PEG units providing similar but significantly higher
tumor exposures. ADCs with 8, 12 and 24 PEG units in the linker had
significantly higher tumor to plasma exposure ratios than ADCs with 2 and
4-PEG units in the drug-linker. The reduction in tumor weights was also
binary. ADCs with 2 and 4 PEG units provided a 35-45% decrease in tumor
weights while ADCs with 8, 12 and 24 PEG units in the linker provided
75-85% reduction in tumor weights. The non-PEGylated control ADC
decreased the tumor weights by 11%.

In general, PEGylated ADCs increased the extent of tissue distribution,
but the tissue to plasma ratios remained the same indicating that the
increased tissue exposures was a function of increased plasma exposures.
However, PEGylated ADC tumor exposure increased beyond that expected
based solely on the increase in plasma exposure.

Incorporation of PEG as a side chain into the drug-linker improved the
tumor disposition of ADCs with little alteration in tissue disposition.
ADCs with 8, 12 and 24 PEG units in the drug-

linker showed preferential uptake into tumor, but not the tissues as
evidenced by tumor (or tissue) to plasma exposure ratios. Over all, the
ADCs with 8, 12 and 24 PEG units in the linker provided the optimal
combination of tumor distribution, efficacy and tissue distribution.


