Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated multi-level omics-based biomarker models for ovarian
cancer survival.


Background: Although a number of prognostic biomarkers for ovarian cancer
have been proposed, the pool of clinically useful biomarkers remains
small. While the predictive power of individual biomarkers may be weak,
the advent of more affordable high-throughput technologies and readily
available “omics” level data point toward the possibility of high
performance biomarker panels. In this study, we used tumor-based somatic
mutation, mRNA and miRNA expression, and DNA methylation data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) to construct integrated biomarker models for
overall and progression-free survival.

Methods: The somatic mutations, mRNA expression, and DNA methylation of
451 candidate genes, as well as the expression of the miRNAs targeting
them, were individually analyzed for association with overall and
progression-free survival in 488 TCGA serous cystadenocarcinoma patients
of predominantly Caucasian descent. Following correction for multiple
comparisons, molecular variations associated with survival were combined
to construct integrated cross-validated prediction models for overall and
progression-free survival. The discriminative power of these models was
then evaluated for 1-, 3-, and 5-year overall and progression-free
survival using ROC analysis.

Results: Our cross-validated integrated molecular models were
demonstrated to predict 5-year overall survival in the total patient pool
with a ROC AUC of 0.801 and 5-year overall and progression-free survival
in Caucasian patients with ROC AUCs of 0.866 and 0.809, respectively.

Conclusions: Our findings suggest the potential utility of our
multi-omics-based biomarker models in helping to inform clinical
decisions following ovarian cancer diagnosis. Although extensive efforts
were made to maximize the predictive potential of our models, further
retrospective and prospective validation efforts are necessary before
their clinical utility can be accurately assessed.


