Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A benchmark study for identifying cancer drivers in the non-coding
part of the genome.


Purpose: Prioritizing potential deleterious variants is an essential task
to guide research and validation of new pathological variants in the
immensity of the genome. Many tools have been introduced to detect new
variants in the coding part of the genome. Detailed knowledge of coding
sequences led to efficient statistical models for cancer driver
discovery. The challenge is greater for the non-coding part of the genome
due to its large size (>98% of the genome) which contains many
non-functional or unknown features. Several deleteriousness scores have
been proposed in the last decade, but no large-scale comparison has been
realized to date to assess their ability to identify cancer drivers.

Material and method: We compared the leading scoring systems (CADD,
FATHMM-MKL, Funseq2 and GWAVA) and some recent competitors (DANN, SNP and
SOM scores) for their ability to discriminate assumed pathologic variants
in the non-coding genome (as identified by 928 ClinVar variants / 44,158
recurrent COSMIC mutations) from assumed non-pathologic variants (100,000
randomly sampled 1000 Genomes project variants with minor allele
frequency > 1%). To define the pathogenic variants using COSMIC as
reference, we varied the threshold for number of COSMIC recurrences from
2 to 10. We compared the sensibility, specificity and precision of the
scoring systems using the area under the curve (AUC) of receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) and precision-recall (PR) curves.

Results: Most scores had good sensibility and specificity for the
detection of the ClinVar variants (AUCROC>0.90). As far as precision for
ClinVar variants was concerned, the top performing methods were CADD
(AUCPR=0.84), DANN (AUCPR=0.83) and, to a lesser extent, FATHMM-MKL
(AUCPR=0.75).

When using a threshold of 3 recurrences to define true pathogenicity of
COSMIC variants, the AUCROC ranged from 0.52 (DANN) to 0.80 (GWAVA) but
precision was low with AUCPR ranging from 0.05 (DANN, SOMmelanoma) to
0.18 (GWAVA). Increasing the pathogenicity threshold to 10 recurrences
increased AUCROC values (ranging from 0.50 (SOMmelanoma) to 0.89 (GWAVA))
but decreased precision values (AUCPR ranging from 0 to 0.02).

Discussion: This large scale benchmark study distinguished CADD as the
best tool to detect variants with features similar to those of ClinVar,
which are mainly located in protein coding regions. However, based on the
results using COSMIC, GWAVA outperformed CADD for variants in other
regions, including lincRNAs, pseudogenes and other parts of the genome
“dark matter”, for which there is increased interest. This should
nevertheless be balanced by the potential presence of non-pathologic
variants in the COSMIC database due to sequencing errors and limitation
of the recurrence criteria to define pathologic status in the instable
fragile genome regions. The development of a gold standard as consistent
as ClinVar for these regions will be necessary to confirm our tool
ranking.


