Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) phosphoproteomics.


Background: We hypothesized that the biphasic relapse pattern of TNBC
could be explained by a limited number of activation patterns of
signaling nodes. In addition, we sought to determine whether the
hyperactive signaling nodes, distinguishing the cases with favorable vs
adverse outcome, could be potential targets.

Methods: Training set of 34 frozen tumor samples divided in two sets, (A)
13 patients, relapsed in 12 years, (mimicking the percentage and relapse
patterns of unselected TNBC, but paired for T, N, G and Ki67). TNBC cell
lines: 7 indolent (no metastases in 60 weeks) and 3 aggressive, develop
metastases and kill recipient mice in 12 years, (mimicking the percentage
and relapse patterns of unselected TNBC, but paired for T, N, G and
Ki67). TNBC cell lines: 7 indolent (no metastases in 60 weeks) and 3
aggressive, develop metastases and kill recipient mice in <4 months.
Shotgun phosphoproteomics and TiO2-IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment coupled
with mass spectrometry runs in a Orbitrap Elite Mass Spectrometer was
performed. Spectra were processed with MaxQuant software. Differentially
expressed phosphopeptides were obtained by applying linear models R limma
package. Differential kinase activation driving the profiles segregating
cured vs. relapsing cases was done using linear sequence motif analysis.
The hyperactivated kinases were validated in an independent set of 113
consecutive TNBC cases with 12+ years of follow-up spotted in TMAs by
using an in-house algorithm for immunohistochemistry coupled with
computer-aided quantitation using an Ariol scanning, we took the kinases
in the upper quartile (high activity). Survival analysis was performed
with KM curves and log rank test; and Cox proportionate hazards model was
used for multivariate models.

Results: 11405 phosphopeptides were identified and quantified in the
training set. Supervised clustering of relapsed vs. cured cases showed
that 161 and 541 peptides were significantly up-regulated in the A and B
groups, respectively (FDRResults: 11405 phosphopeptides were identified
and quantified in the training set. Supervised clustering of relapsed vs.
cured cases showed that 161 and 541 peptides were significantly
up-regulated in the A and B groups, respectively (FDR<0.15). After
kinase-to-kinase co-linearity was ruled-out , gathering the high activity
(upper quartile) of six kinases (a combined variable, herein Var1) showed
statistically significant association with relapse, being these: PRKCE,
pERK, c-KIT, CDK6, pP70S6K and pPNKP. Cox proportional hazards model of
any of the six probes high (var1) vs rest: 9.9 vs. not reached years
(PResults: 11405 phosphopeptides were identified and quantified in the
training set. Supervised clustering of relapsed vs. cured cases showed
that 161 and 541 peptides were significantly up-regulated in the A and B
groups, respectively (FDR<0.15). After kinase-to-kinase co-linearity was
ruled-out , gathering the high activity (upper quartile) of six kinases
(a combined variable, herein Var1) showed statistically significant
association with relapse, being these: PRKCE, pERK, c-KIT, CDK6, pP70S6K
and pPNKP. Cox proportional hazards model of any of the six probes high
(var1) vs rest: 9.9 vs. not reached years (P<0.001). Patients that had
any of the 6 kinases high have 47% of chance to relapse (only 2 out of 42
relapsed patients have 0/6 active kinases) vs patients with Var1
negative, 7% of chance (29 patients out of 72 have 0/6 active kinases) we
also observed constants patterns of activations in the different sets
expressions of kinases. We considered the kinases at Var1 as a
potentially targets and we developed a pharmacological in vitro assay,
testing pairs inhibitors on 10 TNBC cell lines; 99.3% of the combinations
were supra-additive.

Conclusion: High throughput p-proteomics allows a parsimonious
segregation of early TNBC cases, easily detecting the cases with
long-term cure vs the remaining while identifying potential therapeutic
solutions for the patients falling in the adverse prognostic subgroups.


