Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PBRM1 regulates the transcription of cell adhesion genes in ccRCC.


Advances in parallel sequencing have facilitated the recent
identification of Polybromo-1 (PBRM1), a component of the PBAF
(Polybromo-associated-BRG1- or BRM-associated factors) chromatin
remodeling complex, as the second most frequently mutated gene in
clear-cell renal cell Carcinoma (ccRCC). While several studies have
described the diversity of PBRM1 mutations in ccRCC and established the
mutation of PBRM1 as a “driver” of ccRCC carcinogenesis, little is
known about the biological significance of PBRM1. With the intent of
shedding light on the mechanistic roles of PBRM1, we have employed Next
Generation Sequencing to delineate the transcriptional profile of
cellular models of ccRCC with or without PBRM1 expression and identified
genes associated with cell adhesion to be regulated by PBRM1 in 2D
monolayer cultures. Since 2D cultures lack the architectural complexities
to support studies pertaining to cellular adhesion, we evaluated the role
of PBRM1 in 3D culture on Basement Membrane Matrix to provide a
physiologically relevant analysis of gene expression and the resulting
cellular phenotype. The results showed that of the 97 cell adhesion genes
identified to be upregulated by PBRM1 in 2D cultures, 45 were also
upregulated in 3D cultures and a subset of 32/45 genes underwent
increased gene expression in 3D with respect to 2D cultures. The gene
expression profile of candidate genes were verified by qPCR and Western
Blotting. Mining The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) publicly available data,
we were able to correlate the gene expression profiles of cell adhesion
genes identified in 3D cultures with those of ccRCC patients bearing at
least 1 copy of the PBRM1 gene. Furthermore, we performed a
PBRM1-ChIP-seq to map the genome-wide targets of PBRM1 and revealed the
association of PBRM1 occupancy at proximal regulatory regions of 8/45
cell adhesion genes. All of these taken together, indicate a role for
PBRM1 in regulating the gene expression of cell adhesion genes which act
as important players in cellular morphogenesis and responsiveness to
changes in the external environment. Disruption of cell adhesion is
believed to affect signal transduction and pave the way facilitating
metastasis in neoplastic cells. Currently we are investigating the effect
of loss-of-PBRM1 on Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) and
metastasis in ccRCC.


