Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting lactate dehydrogenase-A promotes docetaxel induced
cytotoxicity predominantly in castration-resistant prostate cancer cells.


Introduction and objectives: It is well known as Warburg effect that
anaerobic glycolytic pathway is activated in various type of advanced
cancers including prostate cancer (PC). Lactate dehydrogenase-A (LDH-A)
controls the conversion of pyruvate to lactate and plays an important
role in glucose metabolism. Since LDH-A pathways have been implicated in
chemoresistance in various cancers, we investigated whether inhibition of
LDH-A pathway could mediate the sensitivity to docetaxel (DOC) in human
PC cells.

Materials and Method: Four PC cell lines (PC3, DU145, LNCaP, LN-CSS )
were used. LN-CSS is one of the LNCaP-derived castration-resistant PC
(CRPC) cell lines established in our laboratories. Sodium oxamate (SO)
was used as a specific LDH-A inhibitor. The protein expression was
detected by western blot analysis using specific antibodies. Cell growth
and survival were evaluated by WST-1 assays. Cell cycle progression and
apoptotic inducibility were evaluated by flow cytometry using propidium
iodide and Annexin V. The cytotoxicity of SO/DOC combination on PC cells
was evaluated using the Chou-Talalay combination index (CI) method which
offers quantitative definition for additive effect (CI = 1), synergism
(CI 1) in drug combinations.

Result: Western blot analysis showed that LDH-A protein was highly
expressed in LN-CSS cells compared with other PC cell lines including the
parental LNCaP. WST-1 assays showed that treatment with SO (50 mM) for 72
hours in PC cells resulted in growth inhibition (PC3; ~30%, DU145; ~55%,
LNCaP; ~20%,LN-CSS; ~55% ), while SO has little growth inhibitory effects
on normal lymphocytes in the concentrations between 1-100 mM. IC50 to DOC
in PC cells were showed to be 4 nM, 1 nM, 1nM, and 4.5 nM in PC3, DU145,
LNCaP and LN-CSS, respectively, suggesting that both PC3 and LN-CSS were
relatively resistant to DOC compared with DU145 and LNCaP. Synergistic
cytotoxicity was observed after the combination therapy with DOC and SO
in LN-CSS (CI: 0.5) but not in PC3 (CI: 1.9), DU145 (CI: 2.0), or LNCaP
(CI: 6.5). Cell cycle analyses revealed that the combination with DOC and
SO for 72 hours resulted in the accumulation of cells in G2-M phase
followed by sub-G1 accumulation in LN-CSS cells. Annexin V assays showed
that 43% apoptosis was induced by the combination therapy in LN-CSS
cells, while only 12% by DOC only in LN-CSS cells.

Conclusion: Our results strongly suggest that LDH-A plays an important
role in DOC resistance in advanced PC cells and inhibition of LDH-A
promotes DOC-sensitivity especially in CRPC cells. Our study may provide
valuable information for the future development of targeted therapies in
patients with CRPC.


