Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated genomic and proteomic analysis of human tumors
reveals key factors in neoantigen identification and enables epitope
prediction for cancer immunotherapy.


Background: Immunotherapy has become essential in the treatment of
advanced cancer, with the advent of drug approvals in multiple
indications and functional cures for a minority of patients. However,
overall survival gains from immunotherapy have been limited and
substantial progress remains. The discovery of tumor-specific neoantigens
as principal targets of T cells unleashed by immune checkpoint blockade
was a key breakthrough in immunotherapy research. Although example
neoantigens have been reported, the impact of genomic features on HLA
presentation and neoantigen identification has not been comprehensively
assessed. Moreover, in silico methods for predicting which mutations lead
to neoantigens are currently inadequate for most therapeutic
applications, with a false positive rate of >95%.

Methods: We performed deep tumor/normal exome sequencing (Illumina-based,
average unique depth 557x/149x), tumor transcriptome sequencing (avg.
111M unique reads), and mass spec HLA class I peptide sequencing (Thermo
Lumos, avg. 3,482 peptides) on fresh-frozen primary tumor specimens from
23 patients (22 NSCLC, 1 OC). Somatic mutations were called with a custom
GATK-based pipeline, gene expression assessed with RSEM, and peptides
matched to mass spectra using COMET/Percolator. We examined the effect of
NGS parameters on neoantigen identification, analyzed HLA presentation as
a function of genomic features, and created a novel deep learning model
for epitope prediction.

Results: We identified 6,252 nonsynonymous somatic mutations across the
cohort (avg. 272 per patient) and found 3,874 (62%) transcribed in mRNA.
Down-sampling tumor DNA NGS data to a more typical average unique
coverage of ~200x and RNA to ~60M reads revealed 3,275 transcribed
mutations, an overall 15% loss of candidate neoantigens and >25% loss in
low tumor content samples, demonstrating the importance of sequencing
depth. Gene expression measurement at the RNA level predicted HLA
presentation more strongly than expected, with peptides from genes
detected in RNA found presented >20X more often than peptides from
non-detected genes. With this and public datasets we trained a model to
predict HLA presentation and compared it to standard binding affinity
prediction (e.g., NetMHC or MHCflurry) at the strong-binder 50nM
threshold for well-characterized alleles. Whereas binding affinity-based
prediction gave a positive predictive value (PPV) of only 3%, our
integrated deep learning approach showed a PPV of >25% at equivalent
recall, a near ten-fold gain.

Conclusions: A novel genomic and proteomic analysis of human tumors
establishes NGS requirements for neoantigen identification, characterizes
key correlates of HLA presentation, and enables prediction for
personalized cancer immunotherapy research.


