Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NF-kB inhibitor DMAPT enhances cisplatin efficacy and reduces its
toxicity in a carcinogen-induced model of muscle-invasive bladder cancer.


BACKGROUND: Nuclear factor kappaB (NF-κB) blocks apoptosis and promotes
chemoresistance to drugs like cisplatin (CDDP). However, the clinical use
of NF-κB inhibitors is restricted to hematological malignancies and the
benefit of NF-κB inhibition in solid tumors has yet to be realized. The
novel agent dimethylaminoparthenolide (DMAPT) blocks NF-κB in bladder
cancer cell lines and can overcome chemoresistance as part of a
combination therapy. METHODS AND RESULTS: We tested DMAPT's ability to
enhance CDDP's efficacy against muscle-invasive bladder cancer. In vitro,
2.5 µM DMAPT was shown to up-regulate death receptor 4 and 5 expression
and induce poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) cleavage in UMUC-3 cells.
Both 2.5 µM DMAPT and 2.5 µM CDDP reduced UMUC-3 cell viability as
single agents, and their effect was enhanced when combined. We next
tested CDDP (4.0 mg/kg/week i.p) and DMAPT (100.0 mg/kg/day oral) in
combination and as single agents for 6 weeks in an immune-competent mouse
model of muscle-invasive (T2) bladder cancer induced by the
tobacco-related agent N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl)-nitrosamine (BBN).
Procedures followed the 2010/63/EU animal welfare directive. One
DMAPT-treated and 1 CDDP-treated mouse died during the experiments. The
cohorts were: negative control (no BBN exposure, n=15), positive control
(BBN but no therapy, n=19), BBN and DMAPT-treated (n=17), BBN and
CDDP-treated (n=18) and BBN and the combination of CDDP plus DMAPT
(n=19). Negative control, positive control, DMAPT, CDDP and
combination-treated mice showed 0.0%, 42.1%, 35.3%, 11.1% and 0.0%
bladder cancer incidence, respectively. T2 (muscle-invasive) lesions were
present in positive controls (15.8%), DMAPT (17.6%) and CDDP (5.6%), but
not in the combination group (0.0%). High-grade urothelial dysplasia, a
pre-malignant lesion, was observed at rates of: 57.9% (positive
controls), 29.4% (DMAPT), 16.6% (CDDP) and 0.0% (combination). CDDP
induced renal tubular necrosis and interstitial nephritis seen on H&E
with increased urea (BUN) and creatinine. The combination therapy reduced
interstitial nephritis, BUN (p˂0.05, Student's t test) and creatinine
levels. CDDP reduced gastrocnemius muscle mass, increased muscular
fatigue (grip strength test) and reduced body weight. These effects were
ameliorated in combination-treated mice. CDDP and the combination therapy
induced anemia and atrophy of bone marrow, thymus and spleen at identical
levels. CONCLUSION: The DMAPT-CDDP combination was more effective than
CDDP as single agent in vitro and in vivo, and totally eradicated
malignant and pre-malignant bladder lesions in an immune-competent mouse
model. The combination ameliorated CDDP-induced nephrotoxicity and muscle
wasting presumably by blocking CDDP mediated injury from NF-κB
activation in normal tissues, without imposing additional hematological
toxicity.


