Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simple, efficient, and quantitative approach for determination of
synergism, additive effect, and antagonism of drugs in vivo using
combination index method: a proposition for clinical protocol design and
regulatory synergy claims.


Based on the systematic dynamic rate derivations with the mass-action
principle and mathematical induction-deduction, the median-effect
equation of Chou, and the combination index (CI) equation and their
algorithm allow quantitative determination of synergism (CI1) (Pharmacol
Rev 58:621-681, 2006). Based on Google Scholar Citations, the CI
simulation has been cited 7,712 times in >800 bio-medical journals as of
10.19.2016. However, most citing papers were with experiments in vitro,
relative few in vivo and rarely in clinical trials. This is despite the
fact that the CI method equation, algorithm, and the CompuSyn software
are the same for in vitro and in vivo, although the practical aspects
such as sample size, time and cost, the readiness of the end-point
measurement, and the ethical considerations are different. Our recent
publication (in Fu J et al. Synergy 3: 15-30, 2016) of two-drug
combination (docetaxel and T-607 compound, 1:2) against HCT-116 colon
carcinoma xenograft in nude mice has demonstrated very desirable synergy.
We now illustrate the experimental and data-analytical details of the
experimental planning and design, execution, measurements, for docetaxel
and T-Compound combination against MX-1 mammary carcinoma xenograft in
nude mice. Treatment Q3Dx4 i.v. starting Day 7, and the tumor sizes and
bodyweight changes measured on Days 16, 19, and 22. A total of 50 nude
mice were used (each drug and combinations, 3 doses each (n=5) plus a
control group of 5). Full spectrum of synergism (CI=0.79 to 0.93) were
observed on Days 19 and 22. Automated simulation were carried out for
dose-effect curve, ME plot, Fa-CI plot, isobologram, and Fa-DRI
(Dose-Reduction Index) plot with CompuSyn software (Free download
available upon registration via www.combosyn.com). This simple,
efficient, “econo-green” bio-research paves the way for drug
combination clinical trial design and regulatory synergy claims.


