Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histologically defined intratumoral sequencing uncovers
evolutionary cues into conserved molecular events driving gliomagenesis.


Glioblastoma (GBM) represents an archetypal example of a heterogeneous
malignancy, harboring regions of invasion, necrosis, and vascularization.
To begin to understand the diverse molecular consequences of this complex
tumor ecology, we analyzed RNA-seq data generated from commonly
identified intratumoral structures in GBM that were isolated and enriched
using laser capture micro-dissection. Structures included the
infiltrative, leading edge, central tumor core, and cellular regions in
areas of necrosis. From this RNA-seq database consisting of 119
structural regions from 37 individual tumors generated from ~12,000
hematoxylin and eosin histologic images, we validated significant
intra-tumoral heterogeneity in GBM, with cells derived from the
infiltrating leading edge almost exclusively harboring the proneural
molecular subtype, while cells in regions of necrosis displaying the
mesenchymal subtype. In addition, we made the striking observation that
when evaluating the tumors transcriptional profiles in the context of
their derived structural regions, there was a relative small amount of
inter-tumoral heterogeneity in GBM, with significant clustering of
transcriptional profiles of specific structural regions from different
tumors. To begin to understand the specific molecular events driving
regional growth and their contributory role in gliomagenesis, we analyzed
the transcriptional programs in the context of evolutionary progression.
This level of analysis identified numerous pathways associated with
neuronal receptor signaling, autophagy, and fatty acid metabolism as
early events in tumorigenesis. Traditional cancer related signaling
pathways emerged as key mediators driving progression, with glioma and
p53 signaling ranking highest on the list. As the tumor progressed to
harbor regions of necrosis, in addition to expected changes in VEGF and
tumor signaling, we uncovered global metabolic changes associated with
progression, with metabolic pathways comprising 10 of the top 20 pathways
unique to this region. Collectively, these findings suggest that the
observed intra-tumoral heterogeneity in GBM may be a conserved,
predictable consequence to its complex microenvironment and therapeutic
strategies rationally designed to target these unique, unequivocally
present tumor cell biomes may lead to therapeutic gains in this otherwise
fatal malignancy.


