Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional analysis of the functional differences between M1
and M2 macrophages to identify new targets for myeloid cell modulation in
pancreatic tumors.


Macrophages exhibit dynamic plasticity in their function in response to
the accumulating genetic alterations that occur during tumorigenesis,
resulting in the establishment of an immune tolerized tumor
microenvironment. However, depending on their environmental cues, they
can switch between two functional phenotypes:
pro-inflammatory/anti-tumorigenic (M1) or
anti-inflammatory/pro-tumorigenic (M2). The importance of these two
macrophage subsets is well-recognized; however, identifying and
distinguishing M1 from M2 macrophages in patient tumors still remains a
challenge. Prior studies have utilized transcriptome profiling of
artificially skewed M1 and M2 macrophages from healthy donors to identify
individual genes or gene clusters unique to each macrophage subset.
However, these studies are limited to surface marker expression and gene
expression profiles alone to distinguish subsets and lack functional
validation of M1 and M2 macrophages. Surface marker and gene expression
profiling of human M1 and M2 macrophages provide an incomplete
characterization, as functionality is an important feature distinguishing
these macrophage subsets. To improve the characterization of M1 and M2
macrophages, we performed a thorough three-step validation of
artificially skewed M1 and M2 macrophages from healthy donor monocytes
using surface marker expression, gene expression profiling, and
multi-analyte ELISA analyses. Using our validation assays, we tested
previously published protocols for their efficacy in generating M1 and M2
macrophages. While M1 macrophages using these protocols generated as
expected M1 characteristics, M2 macrophages lacked hallmark functional
features, particularly IL-10 secretion. This necessitated the generation
of an optimized protocol to skew M1 and M2 macrophages that exhibited
distinctive surface marker expression, gene expression profiles, and
cytokine and chemokine production for their respective subset. We then
performed RNA-sequencing to interrogate the transcriptional landscape of
functional M1 and M2 macrophages and have found 1,472 transcripts that
have at least a two-fold change in differential expression between M1 and
M2 macrophages across 4 different donors. These results represent the
most in-depth characterization of human M1 and M2 macrophages and provide
insights into better biomarkers and targets for novel immunotherapy
approaches.


