Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative omics analysis in gastric cancer reveals SLC7A5
functional related to DNA mismatch repair system as a potential
therapeutic biomarker in GC.


Background: Metastasis is a major cause leading to high mortality rate
and poor prognosis in Gastric Cancer (GC) patients. Our previous studies
showed that SLC7A5 is an amino acid transporter gene meditated by a
pivotal post-transcriptional tumor suppressor mir-126 and associated with
tumor metastasis in GC. Purpose: (a) to further determine the SLC7A5
functional mechanisms in GC by involving more bio-omics data such as DNA
methylation, copy number variation (CNV) and mRNA expression; b) to study
the association of SLC7A5 bio-omics data with the clinicopathologic
features, prognosis and subtypes in GC patients.

Methods: We intensively performed the genome-wide association study for
bio-omics data of GC patients available from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA, n=421) and Gene Expression Omnibus published studies (GEO,
GSE13911, n=69, GSE15459, n=209). We did Kaplan-Meier survival analysis
and univariate Cox regression model analyses in SLC7A5 mRNA expression
from curated database (http://www.kmplot.com) with 882 GC patients for
overall survival and 646 GC patients for progression free survival
analysis.

Results: CNV of SLC7A5 is positively correlated with mRNA expression
(p=3.18e-07), which suggests that SLC7A5 is potentially a target driver
gene for GC. Further integrative analysis identified two important
methylation probes in promotor region (TSS200 position) negatively
correlated with mRNA expression of SLC7A5 (p=1.03e-3). In addition, the
aberrant high methylation and expression of SLC7A5, which were
significantly higher than the corresponding nonmalignant tissues, were
identified in a subset of gastric cancer patients. Interestingly, SLC7A5
showed statistically significant correlation with the mismatch
repair-deficient phenotype in sporadic microsatellite instability gastric
cancer (p=2.12e-5). Data mining from two independent datasets of GEO
validated SLC7A5 is positively correlated with DNA mismatch repair genes
MLH1, BRCA1 and BRCA2. And further Gene Ontology (GO) pathway analysis
suggested that SLC7A5 and DNA mismatch repair genes (MMR) together shared
the same metabolic processes. Importantly, the overall survival from 882
GC patients and progression free survival analysis from 646 GC patients
showed SLC7A5 high expression is associated with poor prognosis
tumorigenesis, which demonstrated that SLC7A5 is a potential independent
biomarker for GC.

Conclusion: We found SLC7A5 has positive interaction with DNA mismatch
genes through database mining, which result in microsatellite instability
phenotype in GC patients. We also found SLC7A5 over expression is
associated with poor prognosis and potentially an pivotal therapeutic
target in GC.


