Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selection inhibition of acute myeloid leukemia by targeting Taf12.


Recent studies have suggested that co-activators are good drug targets
for cancer therapy, as exemplified by BRD4, the small molecule inhibitors
of which have already entered clinical trials. The high potency of
targeting BRD4 in leukemia cells mainly rises from suppressing the
functions of multiple lineage specific transcription factors. However,
such pleiotropic effects of Brd4 on different transcription factors might
be problematic, considering many of the perturbed transcription factors
are equally required by normal cells. This prompted us to explore more
co-activators as potential drug targets, aiming to identify the
candidates that discretely disturb the function of oncogenic
transcription factors but not the general ones. In this study, we
explored the roles of one of the largest co-activator complexes TFIID in
the maintenance of acute myeloid cells.

To address this, we designed an shRNA library targeting each TAF subunit
of TFIID and tested the growth effect of these shRNAs in both mouse
leukemia cell line and primary bone marrow culture. We found that
multiple shRNAs targeting Taf12 shows strong toxicity in leukemia cells
but not normal cells in vitro. Knocking down Taf12 also inhibits leukemia
progression in vivo. To gain insight into the toxicity of inhibiting
Taf12 in different organs, we generated doxycycline inducible transgenic
Taf12 shRNA mice, where Taf12 can be inhibited in different tissues
specifically at adult stage. In consistent to our in vitro observation,
normal myeloid cells are not affected by Taf12 knockdown. Instead, the
lymphoid lineage cells are affected while removing doxycycline can
reverse the phenotype. To our surprise, all the other tissues that have
been examined and show significant Taf12 knockdown do not have any
defects.

At molecular level, we found that inhibition of Taf12 suppresses the
transcription of core targets of Myb, but not other transcription
factors, like Pu.1, Erg, Fli-1, which is in contrast to the pleiotropic
effects of Brd4. Interestingly, it has been shown before that leukemia
cells are hypersensitive to Myb inhibition compared to normal cells.
Furthermore, similar to Taf12 mice, mice with hypomorphic level of Myb
show defects in lymphoid but not myeloid cells. Taf12 is a small protein
with only one histone fold domain (HFD), which can dimerize with the HFD
of Taf4a within TFIID complex. We found that the histone fold dimer of
Taf12 and Taf4a can physically interact with the transactivation domain
(TAD) of Myb. Finally, we showed that the HFD of Taf4a can be utilized to
target Taf12 to inhibit growth of leukemia cells. Similar to Taf12 shRNA,
function of Myb is disturbed by overexpressing Taf4a HFD. More
strikingly, overexpressing Taf4a HFD is sufficient to cause regression of
leukemia in vivo.


