Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transparent tumor tomography (T3): 3D spatial immunoanalysis for
PD-L1 immune checkpoint blockade therapy.


Untangling the complexity of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression
within a heterogeneous tumor microenvironment is an urgent challenge in
PD-1/PD-L1 immune checkpoint blockade therapy. Here, we address this
challenge with a method, termed transparent tumor tomography (T3),
facilitating three-dimensional (3D) visualization and spatial analysis of
distributions of multiple biomarkers regarding to cancer cells,
vasculature, and immune cells in context in the tumor microenvironment.
With T3 analysis of transgenic mouse mammary tumors immunostained against
Her2, CD45, Ki-67, CD31, and PD-L1, we reveal that PD-L1 expression
within the tumor microenvironment is highly adaptable for efficiently
preventing immune cell infiltration into the tumor. Stronger correlation
of Her2 and PD-L1 expression in the tumor periphery where has a high
CD45+ immune infiltrate density is determined by tumor-wide analysis.
Also, tomographic analysis shows blood vessels expressing PD-L1 in the
tumor core, where PD-L1 expression is lower. Furthermore, high-resolution
T3 image localizes PD-L1 expression to a region between the endothelium
and the surrounding smooth muscle cells in blood vessels. We investigate
spatial pharmacokinetics of anti-PD-L1 antibody in the whole mouse
mammary tumor in the context of hypoxia, CD31+ blood vessels, and target
PD-L1+ cells. The 3D anti-PD-L1 antibody distribution is fit to a
two-compartment pharmacokinetic model, yielding estimated distribution
half-life of 4.7 min and terminal half-life of 2.5 days. We also evaluate
anti-tumor immune responses after PD-L1 blockade therapy using T3. We
observe broad distribution of tumor infiltrating CD3+CD8+ cytotoxic T
cells in 3D tumor section following combination therapy of radiation and
anti-PD-L1 antibody compared to PBS, anti-PD-L1 antibody alone, or
radiation alone treatment group. Moreover, we apply T3 for immunoanalysis
of whole core needle biopsy. We spatially map PD-L1 expression and
granzymeB-producing CD3+CD8+ cytotoxic T cells in pre-treatment and
in-treatment core needle biopsies at cellular resolution and in three
dimensions. Meanwhile, T3 analysis is nondestructive, allowing secondary
analysis by IHC and/or IF. We anticipate that T3 can be applied broadly
to facilitate preclinical studies of immunotherapy and also find use in
spatial, multiparameter analysis of patient biopsies, particularly to
improve predictive testing and analysis of immune responses to tumor
immunotherapy.


