Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic and epigenetic targets in multiple myeloma therapy.


The dynamic interaction of transcription factors (TFs) with promoters and
enhancers allows cells to continuously adjust gene expression. Whereas
the composition and binding of TFs at genomic sites is the focus of a
widespread research effort, relatively little is known about how these
complexes are being removed. We previously devised a method to detect
genomic locations that are associated with nuclear protein turnover
mediated by the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS).

Multiple myeloma, the second most common hematopoietic malignancy, has
become a model disease for drugs that interfere with the UPS through
either blocking or facilitating protein elimination. The proteasome
inhibitor Velcade, for instance, has become first-line treatment in
myeloma. Yet, our knowledge of how myeloma cells are killed by this drug
is incomplete. Our research is focused on defining how proteolysis
regulates transcriptional dynamics in this disease and how this impacts
Velcade sensitivity.

Following proteasome inhibition, we are utilizing next generation
sequencing to identify sites of nuclear protein turnover and evaluate
epigenetic changes. Our aim is to identify TFs and epigenetic marks that
may qualify as more specific targets for treatment compared to blunt
proteasome inhibition. Our findings reveal that certain TFs, including
metabolic and cell growth regulators, are particularly sensitive to
Velcade. Among these transcriptional regulators, the co-repressor NCoR1
plays a key role in controlling cell metabolism by adjusting
mitochondrial gene expression. We are currently validating the mechanism
of NCoR1 degradation, with a particular emphasis on the new role of its
E3-ubiquitin ligase Seven in absentia 2 (Siah2) in mitochondrial
regulation, to better understand how this degradation pathway impacts
myeloma proliferation and metabolism.

This research project will contribute to our understanding of epigenetic
and transcriptional dynamics in multiple myeloma. With the focus on gene
programs that are continuously adapting or changing, we seek to unlock
new attractive targets for molecular therapy.


