Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VB4-845 tumor cell killing in a combination study with the
anti-PD-1, Nivolumab.


VB4-845 is a Targeted Protein Therapeutic (TPT) comprised of a scFv
fragment specific for the Epithelial Cell Adhesion Molecule (EpCAM)
genetically fused to a truncated form of Pseudomonas exotoxin A (ETA),
via a flexible linker. Due to the inherent immunogenicity of the ETA
moiety, VB4-845 is only used for the treatment of loco-regionally
accessible tumors and is currently in a Phase III clinical trial for the
treatment of high grade, non-muscle invasive bladder cancer. In a Phase I
study in late stage squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck, direct
injection of VB4-845 led to shrinkage of the principal injected tumor, as
well as non-targeted tumors in some patients, suggesting the activation
of a T cell-mediated anti-tumor response through cross-priming. Only
cells undergoing immunogenic cell death, or ICD, are capable of
stimulating cross-priming. ICD is characterized by distinct “eat-me”
signals such as the release of ATP and HMGB1, and cell surface
translocation of calreticulin, an endoplasmic reticulum chaperone
protein. To evaluate whether VB4-845-mediated cell killing results in ICD
events, treated tumor cell lines were assessed for these distinct
signaling molecules. In vitro studies using flow cytometry and ELISA
showed both translocation of calreticulin and release of ATP and HMGB1 by
VB4-845-treated tumor cells. Immune T cell activation via an ICD pathway
suggests a complimentary outcome when combined with checkpoint
inhibitors. A study was performed in PDX tumor-bearing NOG mice
reconstituted with a human immune system to assess the combination of
intratumoral injection of VB4-845 with an anti-PD1 antibody, Nivolumab,
given i.p. VB4-845 showed growth suppression of the injected tumor
whereas the growth delay of the contralateral, non-injected tumor was
more pronounced with the addition of Nivolumab. In summary, the data
presented suggests that VB4-845 mediates tumor cell killing by an ICD
pathway and that the resulting cross-priming effect can enhance the
anti-tumoral activity of immune checkpoint inhibitors.


