Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A chemogenomic approach reveals the action of splicing modulators
at the branch point adenosine binding pocket defined by the PHF5A/SF3b
complex.


Dysregulation of RNA splicing can cause various forms of cancer and
neuromuscular disorders. Thus, developing compounds with
splicing-modulating activity represents a promising therapeutic approach
for these diseases. Natural products such as pladienolide, herboxidiene,
and spliceostatin have been identified as potent splicing modulators that
bind SF3B1, a member of the SF3b subcomplex that assembles into the U2
snRNP. Using integrated chemogenomic, structural and biochemical
approaches, we show that PHF5A, another core component of the SF3b
complex, is also targeted by these modulators. Whole exome sequencing of
E7107 (pladienolide analogue) and herboxidiene resistant clones
identified common mutations in either PHF5A-Y36, SF3B1-K1071,
SF3B1-R1074, or SF3B1-V1078, which confers resistance to these modulators
as assessed by splicing modulation and cell growth inhibition, suggesting
a common site of interaction for these splicing modulators. We determine
the crystal structure of human PHF5A and find that Y36 is located on the
surface in a region of high sequence conservation. Analysis of the
cryo-EM spliceosome Bact complex from yeast shows that these mutations
cluster in a well-defined pocket surrounding the branch point adenosine
suggesting a possible competitive mode of action for these modulators.
Whole-transcriptome RNA-seq analysis reveals that PHF5A Y36C alters the
profile of splicing modulators from inducing intron-retention events to
exon-skipping events. Furthermore, the differential in GC content between
adjacent introns and exons correlates with the relative intron strength,
making some splicing events more susceptible to modulation. Collectively,
we propose that PHF5A-SF3B1 is a central node for binding to these
small-molecule splicing modulators offering novel approaches to modulate
specific splicing events.


