Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PIK3CB inhibitors selectively block the survival of glioblastoma
cells.


Objective: To explore the divergent role of PI3K isoforms in glioblastoma

Background: Glioblastoma multiforme is the most malignant brain tumor in
adults. Despite aggressive treatments, the median survival and five-year
overall survival of glioblastoma patients remains low (14.6 months and
4.7%, respectively). Nearly 90% of patients experience recurrence within
two years, leaving patients with few treatment options. Recently, PI3K
pan inhibitors have been used to treat recurrent glioblastoma and
achieved modest effect in the clinic. PI3K has four catalytic isoforms
(PIK3CA, B, D, and G); hence, it is possible that these isoforms may have
different roles in glioblastoma and need to be selectively targeted. This
idea is further supported by our recent results, in which we have shown
that elevated expression of PIK3CB, but not other PI3K isoforms,
significantly correlated with higher rate, risk, and poor prognosis of
recurrent glioblastomas. Hence, we hypothesize that PIK3CB-selective
inhibitors are more effective for glioblastoma.

Design/Methods: We used a panel of glioblastoma cells with different
levels of PIK3CB, treated them with PI3K-isoform-selective inhibitors,
and compared them to pan PI3K inhibitors. We measured cell viability
using the MTS cell viability assay. Normal human astrocytes were used as
controls to determine toxicity.

Results: We found that PIK3CB inhibitors TGX-221 and GSK2636771
significantly blocked the proliferation of PIK3CB-high U87MG and SF295
cells, while it had no effect on the viability of PIK3CB-low A172 and
LN229 cells. In contrast, other PI3K inhibitors and pan inhibitors either
non-selectively blocked or had no effect on these cells. Importantly,
these compounds, but not PIK3CB inhibitors, blocked the growth of
astrocytes.

Conclusions: Selective blockade of PIK3CB, but not other PI3K isoforms,
is an effective therapy for glioblastoma with a low toxicity to normal
tissues.


