Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Absolute quantification of circulating tumor cell RNA enables high
specificity detection of hepatocellular carcinoma.


Background: Although liver cancer has the second-highest mortality rate
among cancers internationally, accurate and scalable assays for the early
detection and longitudinal monitoring of hepatocellular carcinoma are
lacking. Circulating tumor cells are released from invasive cancers into
the blood stream, but the difficulty inherent in isolating, identifying,
and characterizing these ultra-rare cells has precluded their widespread
implementation as a biomarker. By combining a high-throughput
microfluidic negative depletion CTC isolation strategy with the absolute
quantification of lineage-specific RNAs, we report the highly specific
detection of hepatocellular carcinoma CTCs from patient blood draws.

Methods: Blood draws from 48 hepatocellular carcinoma patients, 31
chronic liver disease patients, 25 healthy donors, and 44 patients with
primary cancers other than hepatocellular carcinoma were processed
through the microfluidic device (CTC-iChip). RNA was extracted,
whole-transcriptome amplified, and quantified using droplet digital PCR.
Transcript counts were used to fit a logistic regression model to
integrate distinct transcript levels into a single CTC-score. The
technical feasibility of utilizing RNA sequencing for identification of
novel CTC transcripts of interest was also demonstrated with a liver
cancer cell line spike-in study.

Results: 9 of the 16 untreated HCC patients were successfully detected,
while only 1/31 chronic liver disease patients were incorrectly
classified. HCC patients undergoing treatment showed a significant
decrease in their CTC-score; only 9/32 patients actively receiving
treatment were positive. The CTC-score was not correlated with the HCC
serum biomarker alpha-fetoprotein, and combining these two orthogonal
measures led to estimated positive and negative predictive values of 80%
and 86%, respectively, in a high-risk cohort. RNAseq analysis of cell
line spike-in data revealed the potential of RNA sequencing for
uncovering novel transcripts of interest.

Conclusion: Coupling microfluidic depletion with droplet digital PCR
allows for the highly specific detection of hepatocellular carcinoma. The
CTC-score generated from these data tracks with clinical intervention and
is orthogonal to the existing biomarker AFP; combining these two assays
has the potential to provide superior detection compared to either
individual approach.


