Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein synthesis modulates paraptotic death induced by inhibition
of cyclophilins in glioblastoma (GBM) cells.


In this study, we investigated the mechanisms underlying cell death
induced by the small molecule cyclophilin inhibitor NIM811. NIM811
effectively killed GBM cells through a non-apoptotic pathway, as there
was no nuclear shrinkage or caspase activation. Instead, death was
preceded by dramatic cytosolic vacuolization, stemming from enlargement
of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). RNA-seq revealed upregulation of genes
pertinent to the unfolded protein response (UPR) and autophagy. Western
blotting for UPR and autophagy mediators also supported a transient UPR
signaling and compromised autophagy during prolonged NIM811 treatment. By
utilizing a bicistronic reporter plasmid, we independently quantitated
Cap-dependent and Cap-independent translation. We further assessed the
long-term effects mediated by different short-term paraptosis inhibitors
via colony formation assay. We find that NIM811 initiates paraptosis in
GBM cells, due to an abnormal upregulation of protein translation that
caused accumulation of misfolded or unfolded proteins in ER. Transient
activation of pro-survival autophagy and UPR signals were shutdown during
prolonged treatment with NIM811, thus allowing cell death to occur.
Cycloheximide was previously reported by others to suppress paraptosis.
In our studies, we find instead that it temporarily delayed vacuole
formation, but actually enhanced paraptotic cell death in the long term.
The mTOR inhibitors rapamycin or torin-2 rescued cells from NIM811
induced paraptosis by sustaining autophagy and the UPR, and specifically
restrained cap-dependent translation. We propose that ER vacuolization
could be a protective response generated by cells to isolate defective
proteins within the ER in order to prevent misfolded aggregates to
interfere with cellular homeostasis. For that reason, simply inhibiting
vacuole formation without clearing protein accumulation in the ER was
insufficient to prevent cell death. These findings aid our understanding
of cellular mechanisms that contribute to non-apopotic death. Moreover,
this work underlines the importance of evaluating cellular responses in
cell death experiments over multiple time frames to judge the true impact.


