Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3D culture may better represent trastuzumab resistance associated
with PIK3CA mutation than 2D culture.


Background: It is becoming clear that presence of PIK3CA mutations is
associated with lower pathological complete response rate in patients
with HER2-overexpressing breast cancer when treated with
trastuzumab-based chemotherapy in neo-adjuvant settings. On the other
hand, in in vitro studies using traditional 2-dimentional (2D) cell
culture, differential cellular or biochemical response to trastuzumab
between PIK3CA-mutant (mt) and -wild-type (wt) cells has not been clearly
demonstrated. Further, while tumor shrinkage is occasionally observed in
breast cancer patients who are treated with trastuzumab as a single
agent, cyto-toxic effect of trastuzumab is not simulated in 2D culture
models. Recently, many studies reported 3-dimensional (3D) cell culture
mimics in vivo environment better than 2D culture. Therefore, we
hypothesized that 3D culture better represents clinically-observed
trastuzumab resistance associated with PIK3CA mutation than 2D culture,
and decided to comparatively investigate cellular and biochemical
response to trastuzumab in HER2-amlified PIK3CA-mt and -wt cell lines
cultured in 2D and 3D environments.

Method: HER2-amplified breast cancer cell lines, BT474 (PIK3CA-wt), and
UACC893 and MDA-MB361 (PIK3CA-mt) were seeded (day 0) and allowed to grow
in 2D and 3D (NanoCluture Plate®, ORGANOGENIX, Kanagawa, Japan) cell
culture plates. On day 3, trastuzamab (10 µg/ml) and/or BKM120 (1 and 5
µM), a PI3K inhibitor, were added. The effect of the drugs on cell
growth was evaluated with WST-8 assay on days 3 through 7. Apoptosis and
cell signaling were evaluated using Western blot on day 6 and days 3
through 5, respectively.

Result: In PIK3CA-wt BT474, treatment with trastuzumab led to decrease in
cell number, indicating cyto-toxic effect, only in 3D culture but not in
2D culture. In PIK3CA-mt UACC893 and MDA-MB-361 cell lines, treatment
with trastuzumab resulted in no cellular reduction either in 2D or 3D
cultures. Consistently, increase in cleaved PARP, indicative for
apoptosis, was observed only in 3D-cultured BT474 but not in 2D-cultured
BT474 or two PIK3CA-mt cell lines. Furthermore, in BT474, greater
decrease in phosphorylation of AKT (p-AKT) was observed in 3D culture
than in 2D culture. In PIK3CA-mutant cell lines, trastuzumab did not
change level of p-AKT regardless of cell culture conditions. In
PIK3CA-mutant UACC893, combined treatment with trastuzumab and BKM120
resulted in greater increase in expression of cleaved PARP than either
drug alone.

Conclusion: Trastuzumab-induced inhibition of PI3K/AKT pathway and
resultant apoptosis in HER2-overxpressing PIK3CA-wt cells may be observed
in 3D culture, which may be simulating cyto-toxic effect of trastuzumab
by itself observed in clinic. Furthermore, 3D cell culture represents the
resistance to trastuzumab associated with PIK3CA mutation better than 2D
cell culture.


