Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOCS-1 gene therapy combined with radiation therapy has a potent
antitumor effect for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.


INTRODUCTION Radiation therapy (RT) is one of the main strategies for
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) besides surgery and
chemotherapy. Although RT has shown remarkable clinical benefits for ESCC
patients, there remains the resistance for RT. Recently, some reports
show that STAT3 activation is induced by irradiation and can result in
treatment-resistance for radiotherapy in various cancer. Suppressor of
cytokine signaling-1 (SOCS-1) has been cloned as a negative regulator of
various cytokine signaling. We previously reported that overexpression of
SOCS-1 showed a potent anti-tumor effect for ESCC through targeting of
JAK/STAT and FAK/ERK signaling pathway. Since these results, SOCS-1 might
have a possibility to overcome the resistance of RT. The aim of this
study is to evaluate the antitumor effect of SOCS-1 gene therapy using
adenoviral vector (AdSOCS-1) combined with RT.

METHODS At first, we evaluated RT resistance by the STAT3 in ESCC cell
lines by using pEB-Multi-constitutive-STAT3(c-STAT3) vector. We examined
the colony forming assay between parent (TE8, TE9, TE11, TE14) and stably
expression of c-STAT3 cells. Next, we evaluated cell growth inhibition
effect of AdSOCS-1 gene therapy combined with RT in vitro and in vivo. As
in vivo model, we examined the combined effect of RT (2Gy) and AdSOCS-1
gene therapy by using TE14 xenograft mice (ICR nu/nu mice).

RESULTS At first, ESCC cell with stably expression of c-STAT3 showed a
significant increase in colony forming ability after RT as compared with
parent and mock cell. It suggested that activation of STAT3 might be
related to RT resistance in ESCC cell. Furthermore, ESCC cells with RT
were induced the secretion of IL-6, and the activation level of STAT3 was
elevated by multiple RT. In addition, they increased the expression of
anti-apoptosis protein (mcl-1, survivin), and might have a RT resistance.
Next, we confirmed that combination therapy with RT and AdSOCS-1 had
better proliferation inhibitory effect and decreasing of colony forming
ability. In addition, we showed that AdSOCS-1 gene therapy inhibited the
induction of the expression of anti-apoptosis protein (mcl-1, survivin)
by RT and induced apoptosis synergistically. As in vivo model, the
combination therapy group showed a significant anti-tumor effect compared
to the RT alone group and AdSOCS-1 gene therapy alone group.

CONCLUSIONS The activation of STAT3 is involved in resistance to
radiation therapy in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, and SOCS-1 gene
therapy combined with radiation therapy may have a potent anti-tumor
effect.


