Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting androgen receptor overcomes resistance to tyrosine
kinase inhibitors in advanced clear cell renal cell carcinoma.


Background: Advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC) responds initially to
anti-angiogenic therapies but eventually develop resistance which may be
driven by the expression of key intratumoral pro-survival protein and
overall kinome reprogramming. Androgen receptor (AR) expression has been
reported in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) but its biological
role remains elusive and its association with resistance to tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) has not been studied. Here we report the role of
AR and its association with resistance to TKIs in advanced RCC. Methods:
Human RCC cell lines; 786-0, 786-0R (with induced sunitinib resistance),
ACHN, URMC2 (with intrinsic sunitinib resistance) were used to assess the
combination effect of sunitinib and the AR antagonist enzalutamide in
vitro. In vivo studies utilizing 786-0 tumors assessed the combination
effect of enzalutamide and sunitinib following acquired resistance to
sunitinib. AR expression was detected by qRT-PCR and Western blot
analysis, and AR localization by immunofluorescence in treated and
non-treated cells. Gene array was used to assess 93 AR associated genes
in sensitive and resistant cells. Results: Quantitative RT-PCR data
revealed a significant increase in AR expression with sunitinib
resistance (>100 folds; p>0.001). In vitro and in vivo studies indicated
significant increase in nuclear and cytoplasmic expression of AR with
sunitinib treatment in resistant cells which was abrogated with single
agent enzalutamide and combination treatment. More interestingly,
combination treatment of enzalutamide and sunitinib significantly
decreased cell growth and induced tumor regression in vitro and in vivo,
respectively. Conclusion: Our data suggest the role of AR both in
intrinsic and acquired sunitinib resistance in ccRCC and provide a
rationale for combination strategies to restore TKI sensitivity that can
be tested in the clinical setting.


