Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ITGBL1 is a novel epithelial mesenchymal transition-associated
prognostic biomarker in colorectal cancer.


Purpose: Colorectal cancer (CRC) ranks as the third leading cancer
worldwide, and its incidence continues to rise gradually, highlighting
the need to stratify the risk of recurrence after curative surgery.
Recently, several genes have been identified which appear to associate
with metastasis, as they mediate epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in cancer. This study aimed to identify novel EMT and cancer
recurrence-associated biomarkers through systematic and comprehensive
discovery and validated strategy in multiple, independent CRC cohorts.

Experimental Design: Two independent gene expression microarray datasets
(n =173 and n =307 respectively) were used to identify novel
metastasis-recurrence biomarkers for CRC. Following carefully selection
and prioritization of biomarkers, we selected a candidate gene and
validated its performance as a recurrence marker in a large testing
cohort (n=566), and two independent clinical validation cohorts (n=201,
n=475, respectively). To confirm the protein expression of ITGBL1 in
cancer, immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed in paired 33 primary
CRCs and adjacent normal mucosa, as well as a subset of liver and lung
metastases tissues. In addition, we used Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
(GSEA) to determine the functional role of ITGBL1 in CRC.

Results: During the discovery step, gene expression profiles from
differentially expressed genes between recurrence positive and negative
primary CRCs, as well as evaluation of the metastatic sites compared with
primary CRC, identified ITGBL1 as a most promising candidate biomarker.
High expression of ITGBL1 associated with poor overall survival (OS) in
stage I-IV patients and worse disease-free survival (DFS) in stage I-III
patients. Subgroup validation of these results in two large and
independent patient cohorts confirmed these findings and demonstrated
that high ITGBL1 expression correlated with shorter DFS in stage II and
III CRC patients. In addition, high ITGBL1 expression emerged as an
independent prognostic factor for DFS in stage II and III patients. IHC
analysis revealed that both early stage CRCs and adjacent normal colonic
mucosa displayed low ITGBL1 expression, while ITGBL1 expression gradually
increased from tumor surface to the invasive front in late stage cancer,
indicating that ITGBL1 may facilitate EMT process and promote a more
aggressive phenotype in CRC.

Conclusions: High expression of ITGBL1 in primary tumors was associated
with tumor recurrence in CRC patients after curative surgery.
Collectively, we have identified ITGBL1 as a novel EMT-associated
biomarker which could be used for risk stratification for metastatic
potential in CRC.


