Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-specific copy number alterations uncover therapeutic
opportunities in osteosarcoma.


Osteosarcoma (OS) is a highly malignant cancer for which no targeted
therapies are currently available. Current treatment modalities are
limited to intensive, highly toxic chemotherapy and surgical resection.
OS is characterized by wide spread copy number alterations and structural
rearrangements. In contrast, no recurrent point mutations in
protein-coding genes have been identified, suggesting that copy number
alterations (CNAs) are key oncogenic drivers in this disease. However, as
copy number alterations are highly heterogeneous, it is likely that each
tumor has a distinct set of oncogenic drivers, making a unified treatment
approach difficult to define. To identify candidate patient-specific
drivers, we used a simple heuristic based on degree of amplification (as
assessed by Whole Genome Sequencing) and changes in gene expression (as
assessed by RNA sequencing). Using patient-derived tumor xenografts
(PDTXs), we assessed if individual OS tumors respond to targeted therapy
selected based on this approach. We rank-ordered CNAs in 9 PDTXs by the
amplitude of the copy number gain and identified 5 pathways for targeted
therapy including CCNE1, MYC, CDK4, PTEN/AKT and AURKB. Next, we
prioritized drug choices to those that are in clinical trials and that
are readily available and identified 5 drug matches for 9 PDTXs. We used
the CDK2 inhibitor Dinaciclib for CCNE1 amplification and observed TGI of
85.5% and 67.8% for 2 different CCNE1 amplified PDTXs tested. CDK9
inhibitor AT7519 was used to treat 2 different MYC amplified PDTXs
resulting in TGI of 104% and 83.9%. CDK4 amplified PDTXs were treated
with CDK4/6 inhibitor, Palbociclib, resulting in TGI of 82.7%. AKT1
inhibitor MK-2206 was used to treat either AKT1 gains or PTEN loss
resulting in TGI of 65.6% and 60.8% respectively. AURKB inhibitor
AZD-1152 for AURKB amplified PDTXs in combination with cisplatin
resulting in TGI 85.8%. These results support the hypothesis that
specific genes within CNA regions serve as oncogenic drivers and that
these represent therapeutic opportunities in OS. Our studies provide a
roadmap for personalized genome-informed therapy of osteosarcoma, a
cancer in which no new therapies have been identified in over 30 years.


