Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Green tea catechin, EGCG, enhances antitumor immunity by
down-regulation of PD-L1 expression in non-small human lung cancer cell
lines.


(-)-Epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) is now widely accepted as a
non-toxic, effective cancer preventive compound. EGCG also acts as a
synergist with anti-cancer drugs for cancer treatment. Considering the
wide beneficial effects of EGCG, we think EGCG might have antitumor
immunity. Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression on tumor cells is
involved in PD-L1/PD-1 pathway. PD-L1 protein levels varied among 6
non-small human lung cancer cell lines (NSCLCs): LC-AI and Lu99 cell
lines showed the highest PD-L1 expression, A549 and H322 cell lines were
medium, and H1703 and H1299 were very low, independent on cancer cell
lines. Since PD-L1 expression is induced by various cytokines and growth
factors, we studied the effects of IFN-γ and EGF on cell-surface PD-L1
level using flow cytometry, and its gene expression using RT-PCR.
Treatment with IFN-γ dose-dependently stimulated PD-L1 expression in
both A549 and H1299 cells, and not effective on Lu99 cells, whereas
treatment with EGF stimulated PD-L1 in Lu99 cells only.

Pretreatment with EGCG for 3 h, dose-dependently inhibited INF-γ-induced
PD-L1 gene expression and protein level on cell-surface in both A549 and
H1299. It is important to note that EGCG also inhibited phosphorylation
of STAT1. In addition, EGCG inhibited EGF-induced PD-L1 gene expression
and protein level in Lu99 cells via inhibition of phosphorylation of Akt.
In order to study the effects of EGCG in between rodent carcinogenesis
experiment and antitumor immunity, green tea extract (GTE) was given to
NNK-induced lung tumors in A/J mice, which showed significant reduction
of PD-L1 protein level, determined by immunohistochemical analysis using
anti-PD-L1 antibody. Furthermore, the group treated with NNK + GTE
significantly showed reduced number of tumors per mouse from 3.2 to 2.2,
and decreased tumor size. Treatment with Wortmannin, a PI3K inhibitor, as
a control, did not inhibit PD-L1 expression in A549 and H1299 cells. The
results strongly suggest that EGCG enhances antitumor immunity via
inhibition of PD-L1 expression in cancer cells, resulting in significant
cancer preventive activity.


