Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome wide study reveal microrna based methylation phenotype in
oral cancer.


Introduction: Oral cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer burden
in India. Studies over the years have enforced the role of deregulated
microRNA expression in oral cancer development and progression.
Incidentally not much is known about the cause of microRNA deregulation
or to what extent can it be attributed to methylation. Established genome
wide microarray platforms like 450K Illumina Bead Chip have probes for
very limited number of microRNAs along with restriction on distance of
the probes from microRNA transcription start site. We have used genome
wide methylation sequencing approach RRBS to get deeper insight on
microRNA methylation.

Aim: Genome wide methylation profile of 15 paired oral cancer and
adjacent normal tissue was compared to generate a detailed map of
microRNA methylation in oral cancer. The methylation results were further
correlated to microRNA expression data generated on a subset of these
samples.

Methodology: RRBS based global methylation sequencing of 15 pairs of
samples was conducted on HiSeq 2500 with an average 10X depth. Analyses
were done using DMAP software. Previously generated TLDA based microRNA
expression data was used for correlation analysis.

Result: Similar to protein coding genes, microRNAs also showed
methylation based clustering. Interestingly majority of methylation hits
were more than 2kb upstream of miRNA transcription start site which is
generally not considered in known microarrays. Distribution of hypo and
hyper methylation sites is different across the various CpG features like
cores and shelves as well as across chromosomes. MicroRNAs like mir-181c,
miR-99b, miR-23a among others showed significant negative correlation
between methylation frequency and expression level. IPA based pathway
analysis emphasized repression of apoptosis and cell death pathways along
with activation of cell proliferation and colony formation.

Conclusion: Understanding the role of methylation in microRNA
deregulation could help us detect and possibly prevent a chain of events,
which lead to disrupted pathways eventually leading to cancer, at the
onset.


