Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of centralization on health disparities in lung and bladder
cancer surgery.


Background: Centralization has been advocated for both cystectomy and
pneumonectomy, since it has been associated with reductions in mortality.
Racial disparities exist for both lung and bladder cancer surgical
outcomes despite trends in hospital centralization. We hypothesized that
disparities exist in the centralization process for both lung and bladder
cancer surgery, and that this has differentially affected surgical
outcomes in black and white patients.

Methods: The study population was extracted from the New York Statewide
Planning and Research Cooperative System (SPARCS) database spanning 1997
to 2011, and included 26,750 lung cancer surgeries and 8,168
cystectomies. Hospitals were classified according to procedure volume;
patient-hospital distance (PHD) and distance to the nearest high volume /
very-high volume (HV/VHV) were calculated. Logistic models were performed
to determine factors associated with the utilization of HV/VHV or low
volume / very-low volume (LV/VLV) hospitals. Additional models were then
performed to assess the association between race and in-hospital
mortality, stratified according to whether patients used HV/VHV or LV/VLV
hospitals.

Results:

For cystectomy, PHD increased over the study period while distance to the
nearest HV/VHV decreased; for lung cancer surgery, PHD increased but
distance to the nearest HV/VHV hospital was constant. For both surgical
procedures, black patients experienced increased odds of LV/VLV
utilization over time (for lung cancer surgery, ORadj: 1.20; 95%CI
[1.01-1.43]; for cystectomy, ORadj: 1.59; 95%CI [1.26-2.02]). When HV/VHV
hospitals were located farther from patients, the odds of HV/VHV
utilization decreased while the odds of LV/VLV increased for both lung
cancer and bladder cancer patients. Lung cancer and bladder cancer
in-hospital mortality was higher in blacks (ORadj: 1.50; 95%CI
[1.21-1.86]; ORadj: 1.80; 95%CI [1.12-2.90], respectively) compared to
whites.

Conclusions:

Racial differences persisted in hospital utilization and in surgical
outcome for both lung and bladder cancers. While proximity and insurance
are important determinants of quality care, other personal and community
variables not captured by SPARCS are influential in lung and bladder
surgical treatment and ultimately outcome. Specific interventions are
needed to address accessing and utilizing quality care in underserved
populations, including black and low SES patients, and patients with
large distances from high-volume hospitals.


