Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of soy isoflavones and SRC inhibitors on metastatic
activity in prostate cancer.


Background: In advanced prostate cancer (PCa), cells escape from the
primary tumor and enter the bloodstream, preferentially targeting the
bone. This results in weakened bones, spinal compressions, fractures and
intense pain. Efforts to interfere with early steps in the metastatic
cascade by affecting the tumor microenvironment have led to the
development of promising small molecule targeting agents. The tyrosine
kinase inhibitors, saracatinib and dasatinib, have been shown to inhibit
activation of Src and downstream effectors thought to be involved in
cancer cell dissemination. Soy-derived isoflavones (ISFs) have been shown
to have cytostatic effects on PCa cells without toxicity.

Aim: The aim of these studies was to determine if ISFs enhance the
effects of Src inhibitors on PCa cells, resulting in lower doses of these
agents needed to produce optimum results.

Methods: PC-3 ML and LNCaP cells were treated with either a Src inhibitor
(dasatinib or saracatinib), a soy isoflavone extract (ISFs), or a
combination. Modified Boyden transwell chambers were used to evaluate
migration and invasion. Cell cycle and proliferation were measured using
FACS analyses and trypan blue staining, respectively.

Results: ISFs and Src inhibitors did not cause cytotoxicity or reduce
proliferation. However, Src inhibitors produced an increase in cells in
G1 phase, while ISFs increased cells in G2/M phase. When ISFs were
combined with Src inhibitors, both phases were increased with a
concomitant decrease in S phase cells. In transwell migration studies,
all agents significantly decreased the number of cells found on the
bottom of the membrane: dasatinib>saracatinib>ISFs. Lower doses of Src
inhibitors were needed to produce inhibition of migration when ISFs were
added to the treatment. Invasion studies with PC-3 ML and LNCaP cells
suggest that ISFs can reduce metastatic activity by 39% and 35%,
respectively. Therefore, by adding ISFs, lower doses of inhibitors might
be used to achieve optimal response and decrease toxicity.

Conclusions: In vitro studies suggested that a combination of a Src
inhibitors and ISFs, at non-cytotoxic doses, results in greater
inhibition of metastatic or invasion activity than either alone. Further
studies are needed to determine if this strategy could be used clinically
to treat patients with lower doses of small molecule inhibitors by
including soy isoflavone concentrates in the treatment regimen.


