Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NanoString 3D Biology™ technology: simultaneous digital counting
of DNA, RNA and protein.


Introduction: Development of improved cancer diagnostics and therapeutics
requires detailed understanding of the genomic, transcriptomic, and
proteomic profiles in the tumor microenvironment. Current technologies
can excel at measuring a single analyte, but it remains challenging to
simultaneously collect high-throughput DNA, RNA, and protein data from
small samples. We have developed an approach that uses optical barcodes
to simultaneously profile DNA, RNA, and protein from as little as 5ng
DNA, 25ng RNA, and 250ng protein or just 2 5µm FFPE slides, and
simplifies data analysis by generating digital counts for each analyte.

Methods: The approach uses paired capture and reporter oligonucleotide
probes and optical barcodes to enumerate up to 800 targets. The platform
was initially developed to measure RNA, and we have adapted it to measure
DNA single nucleotide variants (SNVs), proteins, and phospho-proteins.
SNVs are detected by direct hybridization of sequence discriminating
probes to the wild-type and mutant sequence of interest. Proteins are
detected via binding of oligonucleotide-conjugated antibodies.

Results: Combinations of DNA, RNA, and protein in biological and
experimental contexts. SNV probes are able to detect variant alleles down
to 5% abundance within a wild type population and can discriminate
variants within mutation hotspots. It was >96% accurate at identifying
variants from samples displaying a range of allele frequencies and DNA
integrity when benchmarked against next-generation sequencing. Protein
detection has been developed for cell surface, cytosolic, and nuclear
proteins, as well as phospho-proteins. It was validated against flow
cytometry, western blot, and mass spectrometry using cell lines with
ectopic target expression and primary cells. To demonstrate concurrent
measurement of DNA, RNA, and protein from a single system, BRAFWT or
BRAFV600E cell lines were treated with the BRAFV600E inhibitor
vemurafenib and the MEK inhibitor trametinib. We measured the allele
usage at the BRAFV600 locus, as well as BRAFV600E dependent changes in
mRNA expression, protein expression and protein phosphorylation in a
single experiment.

Conclusions: 3D Biology has several advantages over other analytical
approaches. Direct, single-molecule digital counting allows detection
over a broad dynamic range with high reproducibility, often over 98%
concordance between technical replicates. The simultaneous interrogation
of DNA, RNA, and protein maximizes the amount of data obtained from
precious samples and minimizes instrumentation demands by leveraging a
single detection platform. The 3D Biology approach allows holistic,
digital analysis of biological samples with high specificity and
precision. This technology is currently available for research use, but
may also have clinical application in the future.


