Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic modeling of a new kinetically-controlled CD122 agonist
for cancer immunotherapy: NKTR-214 pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics,
and receptor pharmacology.


Introduction: NKTR-214 is a biologic prodrug currently in a Phase 1 / 2
clinical trial in patients with solid tumors, as a single agent and in
combination with anti-PD1. It is a CD122-biased cytokine agonist
conjugated with multiple releasable chains of polyethylene glycol and
designed to provide sustained signaling through the heterodimeric IL-2
receptor pathway (IL-2Rβγ) to preferentially activate and expand
effector CD8+ T and NK cells over Tregs. Here we describe a mechanistic
mathematical model that quantifies conjugated aldesleukin (IL-2) species
that are generated from NKTR-214, their sustained exposure, and biased
receptor pharmacology in rodent models.

Methods: A mechanistic mathematical model, using ordinary differential
equations (ODE), was developed using Matlab® programming language to
describe the dynamics of NKTR-214 PEG release, clearance, distribution,
and receptor occupancy in vivo. The model was conditioned using
experimental data for in vitro binding of unconjugated IL-2 and active
conjugated IL-2 derived from NKTR-214 to IL-2 receptors using surface
plasmon resonance, in vitro PEG release data, and mouse pharmacokinetics
data. Simulations were performed to 1) quantify the concentration-time
profiles of the various conjugated IL-2 species derived from NKTR-214 and
contribution of each of them to the NKTR-214 mechanism of action, and 2)
compare occupancy at IL-2Rβγ and IL-2Rαβγ receptors after
administration of therapeutic doses of NKTR-214 and aldesleukin.

Results: After NKTR-214 administration, PEG chains are released slowly
from the prodrug and active conjugated IL-2 species gradually increase
and reach maximum concentrations about one day post-dose, followed by
sustained exposure for up to a week. Compared to an equivalent dose of
aldesleukin, the active conjugated IL-2 species derived from NKTR-214
achieve a 26-fold higher area under the curve (AUC) of IL-2Rβγ
occupancy, and a 0.34-fold lower AUC of IL-2Rαβγ occupancy. The
significant difference is due to the combined effects of slow release of
active conjugated IL-2 species from NKTR-214 and their favorable binding
kinetics towards IL-2Rβγ. Aldesleukin, even when simulated at repeated
daily doses or constant infusion, is incapable of increasing the receptor
occupancy at IL-2Rβγ without simultaneously increasing the receptor
occupancy at IL-2Rαβγ in this model.

Conclusions: The mechanistic model demonstrated how NKTR-214’s
intrinsic design enables both biased receptor pharmacology and sustained
exposure in vivo. Such biased receptor binding could not be achieved by a
sustained delivery of aldesleukin.


