Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical characterization of a multi-specific DARPin molecule
targeting PD1 and VEGF.


Background: Combination therapy of immune-modulating drugs with
modalities targeting tumor cells directly or the tumor stroma are
increasing in clinical investigation and practice. In particular, the
combination of immune checkpoint modulators targeting PD1 and molecules
targeting the tumor stroma, like anti-VEGF therapeutics, are being
utilized in multiple permutations and have shown promising results. We
have developed a new class of protein therapeutics DARPin速 molecules for
simultaneous targeting of PD1 and VEGF. The multi-specific PD1 and VEGF
targeting molecules were tested for inhibition of PD1 and VEGF mediated
functions in cellular functional assays and in syngeneic mouse models.

Methods: Inhibition of human PD1 functions were tested in cell binding
assays, a reporter cell assay (Promega) and in human primary T-cell
assays like mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR). VEGF-A inhibition was tested
in functional assays showing inhibition of VEGFR2 signaling. Molecules
targeting murine PD1 were analyzed in cell binding assays and splenocyte
assays as well as in syngeneic mouse models. The anti-tumoral-effect was
monitored by caliper measurement and on T-cell infiltration and
angiogenesis by immunohistochemistry.

Results: The multi-specific human PD1-VEGF targeting DARPin速 molecule
inhibits PD1 mediated downregulation of T-cell receptor signaling in a
reporter cell assay in the range of the benchmark antibody Nivolumab.
Potent picomolar inhibition of VEGF mediated VEGFR2 signaling was also
demonstrated for the molecule. Moreover the molecule showed potent
inhibition of PD1 in an MLR assay to a similar level as compared to
Nivolumab. A murine surrogate molecule was also produced and showed
potent PD1 inhibition in vitro. Syngeneic mouse models demonstrate a
strong anti-tumoral effect of the surrogate molecule and an increase in
the infiltration of T-cells into the tumor was observed upon treatment.
The anti-tumoral effect was strongest by combining the anti-PD1 function
with the anti-VEGF function. This indicates that the multi-specific
DARPin速 molecule is functional, shows potency beyond blocking of only
PD1 or VEGF and has a strong potential for therapeutic benefit in the
clinic.

Conclusions: We have generated a multi-specific PD1 and VEGF targeting
DARPin速 molecule which is potently active in blocking PD1 and VEGF
mediated functions in tumor growth and immunity. The potency of the
molecule goes beyond targeting PD1 or VEGF alone and has a strong
potential for therapeutic benefit in the clinic.

* DARPins are small repeat proteins, designed to bind targets with high
affinity and specificity, and which can be combined in a modular fashion
to produce multi-functional agents.


