Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor gene fusions drive endocrine therapy resistance
in estrogen receptor positive breast cancer.


Dysregulation of estrogen receptor gene (ESR1) is an established
mechanism of inducing endocrine therapy resistance. We previously
discovered a chromosomal translocation event generating an estrogen
receptor gene fused in-frame to C-terminal sequences of YAP1 (ESR1-YAP1)
that contributed to endocrine therapy resistance in estrogen receptor
positive (ER+) breast cancer models. This current study compares
functional and pharmacological properties of additional ESR1 gene fusion
events of both early stage (ESR1-NOP2) and advanced endocrine therapy
resistant (ESR1-YAP1 and ESR1-PCDH11x) breast cancers. The YAP1 and
PCDH11x fusions conferred estrogen-independent and fulvestrant-resistant
growth in T47D, an ER+ breast cancer cell line in vitro and in vivo, in
contrast to the NOP2 fusion which was sensitive to hormone deprivation.
Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of mouse lungs revealed significantly
higher numbers of micrometastatic ER+ cells from the T47D tumors
expressing the YAP1 and PCDH11x fusions than YFP control and NOP2 fusion.
Estrogen response element (ERE) reporter and pull down assays revealed
that although all ESR1 fusions studied bound EREs, only the YAP1 and
PCDH11x caused ERE activation. Cell lines containing these
“canonical” ESR1 fusions upregulated expression of ER responsive
genes such as TFF1 and GREB1 in hormone deprived conditions. In contrast,
the NOP2 fusion neither induced ERE activity nor upregulated TFF1 and
GREB1 gene expression. The proliferative ability of canonical
fusion-containing T47D cells was inhibited by palbociclib, a CDK4/6
inhibitor, in a dose-dependent manner. In vivo growth of patient-derived
xenograft tumors naturally harboring the ESR1-YAP1 fusion (WHIM18) was
significantly reduced in mice fed palbociclib-containing chow. Mice
transplanted with WHIM18 also formed lung micrometastases, with an ER IHC
staining pattern similar to lungs from YAP1 and PCDH11x fusion expressing
T47D xenografts. In conclusion, in-frame ERE activating canonical fusions
occur in end-stage, drug resistant, advanced breast cancer and can be
added to ESR1 point mutations as a class of somatic mutation that may
cause acquired resistance. Endocrine therapy resistant growth induced by
these fusions can be treated with CDK4/6 inhibition, using an FDA
approved drug, palbociclib, which could potentially improve outcomes in
patients with ESR1 translocated tumors.


