Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of CaMK2A in reactive oxygen species homeostasis in lung
adenocarcinoma.


The role of Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II alpha (CaMK2A)
in reactive oxygen species homeostasis in lung adenocarcinoma Lung cancer
is the most common cancer worldwide and patients have poor prognosis and
low survival rate. The unsatisfactory outcomes of lung cancer treatment
are related to multiple factors including tumor recrudescence,
metastasis, cancer drug resistance, etc. Cancer stem cells are cell
subsets within a cancer that excel in tumor properties, especially
survival, renewal and resistance to treatment. Reactive oxygen species
(ROS) are high energy molecules produced during cellular
hyperproliferation and cell death. Studies have shown though a low level
of ROS is required to support stem cell functions but excessive ROS
damages DNA and predisposes to cell death. Therefore, the ability to
attenuate oxidative damage from ROS and maintain redox homeostasis is an
important property of aggressive and resilient cancer cells. The
multifunctional serine/threonine kinase calcium/calmodulin- dependent
protein kinase II alpha (CaMK2A) is a calcium signaling molecule involved
in cell growth and stress signals integration. It has been reported to
play a tumor-supportive role in osteosarcoma, prostate cancer and
leukemia. However, little is known about the impact and mechanisms of
CaMK2A on lung cancer and cancer redox homeostasis. This study aims to
investigate the role of CaMK2A in ROS regulation in lung cancer stem
cells. We measured ROS levels using H2DCFDA probes in cancer stem cells
isolated from two lung cancer cell lines by the known lung cancer stem
cell marker CD44 and CD166. Compared to CD44- and CD166- non-stem cells,
ROS levels were lower in both CD44+ and CD166+ cancer stem cells. In
cancer cells with stable CaMK2A knockdown by shRNA (CaMK2A-KD), ROS was
suppressed while CaMK2A overexpression led to ROS elevation, suggesting a
potential role of CaMK2A on ROS regulation in lung cancer stem cells. To
understand the mechanism, activated NRF2 levels, the master transcription
factor mediating ROS regulation, were measured in total nuclear protein
extracts. By Western blot, nuclear NRF2 protein showed upregulation in
CaMK2A overexpression cells and decreased levels in CaMK2A-KD cells,
implying NRF2 might be a mediator of CaMK2A in ROS regulation. To further
identify downstream regulators, mRNA expression analysis of five
ROS-regulatory NRF2 target genes (GSTP1, NQO1, GCLC, HMOX1, TRXR1) was
performed. Quantitative PCR results showed significant corresponding
changes of some these gene expressions in cell lines, which upregulated
in CaMK2A overexpression and downregulated in both CaMK2A-KD cells and
CaMK2A pharmacological inhibition cells. Together, the results indicate
CaMK2A might regulate ROS status through mediating downstream target
genes of NRF2.


