Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel combi-molecule engineered to target the putative synthetic
lethal interactions between the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
and poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase (PARP).


Over the past decade, PARP inhibition has been actively pursued as a
novel approach for the selective therapy of tumors with BRCA1/2
mutations. The therapeutic benefits of PARP inhibitors have now been
proven in the clinic against BRCA1/2 mutant ovarian cancers. This is
hitherto limited to BRCA1/2 mutations, which only accounts for 5-10% of
all cancers with hereditary mutations in the homologous recombination
pathway. Therefore, new strategies are not only required to enhance the
potency of PARP inhibitors but also to expand their use beyond BRCA
mutation. While several combination modalities have been reported for
PARP inhibitors, the concept of targeted PARP inhibitor has not yet been
explored. Here using our novel combi-targeting approach, we report on the
design of PARP inhibitors targeted to EGFR, a tyrosine kinase receptor
overexpressed in several solid tumors. Recently, reports on the
relationship between EGFR, PARP and BRCA have begun to emerge, one of
which described a contextual synthetic lethality between EGFR and PARP
(PloS one 7.10 (2012)). Here we report on the design and synthesis of
novel PARP-EGFR combi-molecule based on structural modification of
olaparib as a PARP inhibitor warhead and the quinazoline moiety for
targeting EGFR. The results showed that: (a) it is capable of inducing a
dose-dependent inhibition of PARP in isolated enzyme assay, (b) it
induced a dose-dependent inhibition of EGFR in an isolated kinase assay,
(c) it showed a dose-dependent inhibition of EGFR phosphorylation and
downstream signaling in whole-cell assay, (d) it was selectively potent
towards BRCA2 mutant and also EGFR-overexpressing cell lines, (d) it was
extremely potent with activities superior to that of olaparib or
gefitinib alone and their corresponding equimolar combination in three
established triple negative breast cancer cell lines, (e) subcellular
distribution analysis showed that it was abundantly localized in the
perinuclear region. These results in toto suggest that this new
combi-molecule could be developed as a single drug modality emulating the
combination of PARP and EGFR inhibitors with the added benefit of being
targeted to EGFR-expressing tumor cells.


