Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic deletion of insulin-like growth factor binding protein-7
(IGFBP7) promotes hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC): a novel role of IGFBP7
in regulating antitumor immune surveillance.


In the US, the incidence and mortality rates of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) are alarmingly increasing since no effective therapy is available
for the advanced disease. Activation of IGF signaling is a major
oncogenic event in diverse cancers, including HCC. Insulin-like growth
factor binding protein-7 (IGFBP7) inhibits IGF signaling by binding to
IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) and functions as a potential tumor suppressor for
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). IGFBP7 abrogates tumors by inducing
cancer-specific senescence and apoptosis and inhibiting angiogenesis. We
now document that Igfbp7 knockout (Igfbp7-/-) mouse shows constitutive
activation of IGF signaling, presents with pro-inflammatory and
immunosuppressive microenvironment, and develops spontaneous tumors in
lungs and liver and markedly accelerated carcinogen-induced HCC. Loss of
Igfbp7 resulted in increased proliferation and decreased senescence in
hepatocytes and mouse embryonic fibroblasts that could be blocked by an
IGF-1 receptor inhibitor. A significant inhibition of genes regulating
immune surveillance was observed in Igfbp7-/- livers which was associated
with marked inhibition in antigen cross-presentation by Igfbp7-/-
dendritic cells. IGFBP7 overexpression inhibited growth of HCC cells in
syngeneic immunocompetent mice which could be abolished by depletion of
CD4+ or CD8+ T lymphocytes. Our studies unravel modulation of immune
response as a novel component of pleiotropic mechanisms by which IGFBP7
suppresses HCC. Even though HCC has an immunosuppressive milieu, immune
targeted therapies are beginning to demonstrate significant objective
responses in clinical trials. IGFBP7 might be an effective anti-HCC
therapeutic by directly inhibiting cancer cells and stimulating an
anti-tumor immune response.


