Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tazemetostat displays synergistic antiproliferative activity with
backbone therapies in preclinical models of AT/RT and MRT.


Malignant Rhabdoid Tumors (MRT) and Atypical Teratoid Rhabdoid Tumors
(AT/RT) are typically pediatric cancers which are rare and aggressive
with extremely high unmet medical need. At a molecular level MRT and
AT/RT tumors are almost universally characterized by loss of the INI1
protein (also known as SNF5 or SMARCB1), a component of the Switch
Sucrose Non-fermentable (SWI/SNF) multimeric chromatin modifying complex.
In many cell types, the SWI/SNF complex and the PRC2 complex have an
antagonistic relationship in the regulation of tumor suppressor genes,
cell cycle checkpoints, hedgehog and myc pathway genes, among others
[Wilson et al, Cancer Cell. 2010 Oct 19;18(4):316-28.]. This explicated
the possibility of a novel treatment modality for these tumors, based on
inhibition of EZH2 - the catalytic subunit of PRC2. Tazemetostat
(EPZ-6438) is a potent and orally bioavailable small molecule inhibitor
of EZH2 currently in phase 2 clinical trials in adult patients with
non-Hodgkin lymphoma, INI1-negative tumors and mesothelioma. Dependency
of INI1-negative tumors on EZH2 catalytic activity was demonstrated in
preclinical models of MRT, where robust tumor regressions were induced
with tazemetostat treatment [Knutson et al, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013
May 7;110(19):7922-7]. Consistent with this, tazemetostat demonstrated
activity in relapsed or refractory patients with INI1-negative tumors
enrolled in the adult phase 1 clinical trial. In addition, a phase 1 dose
escalation study in pediatric patients with INI1-negative solid tumors is
currently ongoing. Backbone therapies for MRT and AT/RT are comprised of
cytotoxic chemotherapy which may or may not be administered in the
context of stem cell transplant, in addition to surgical resection and
radiation therapy. In support of combination clinical scenarios including
EZH2 inhibition in this setting, we sought to explore the
antiproliferative effects of combining tazemetostat with current small
molecule treatment therapies in cell line models of AT/RT and MRT.
Synergistic activity was observed when tazometostat was combined with
individual components of chemotherapeutic regimens and targeted therapies
such as vincristine, doxorubicin, alisertib and HDAC inhibitors.Further,
we investigated the effects of ionizing radiation together with
tazemetostat treatment. Application of X-ray irradiation concomitantly or
after tazemetostat treatment, induced robust antiproliferative activity
and reduction in clonogenic potential of both AT/RT cell lines
tested.Taken together these results suggest that pharmacological
inhibition of EZH2 enhances the activity of backbone therapy and may have
an advantage over monotherapy in INI1-negative cancers supporting the
therapeutic potential of combination regimens that include tazemetostat
in these tumors.


