Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathobiological implications of Trefoil Factors in the progression
and metastasis of pancreatic cancer.


Background: Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a highly lethal malignancy and the
disastrous statistics warrants an urgent need to develop new diagnostic
and prognostic marker(s) and therapeutic target(s) for its better
management. Trefoil factors (TFF 1/2/3) are a family of small, stable
molecules observed to co-express with mucin and secreted by
mucus-producing cells that facilitate mucosal repair after injury. Recent
studies have shown that TFF1 and TFF3 can differentiate between molecular
subtypes of PC. Based on this, we hypothesized that differential
expression of TFF1 and TFF3 could predict pancreatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (PanIN) as well as the early stage of PC. The present study
explores the diagnostic and functional significance of TFF in PC.

Material and Methods: Immunohistochemistry was used to determine the
expression status of TFF1 and TFF3 in PC tissue microarray containing
normal pancreatic (n=40), pancreatic intraepithelial lesion 1, 2, 3
(PanIN 1- 3, n=13) and well, moderately and poorly differentiated PC
tissues (n=149). Sandwich ELISA was used to detect TFF1 levels in serum.
The diagnostic significance of TFF1 was evaluated in the sample set
(n=331) comprising of benign control (BC, n=104), chronic pancreatitis
(CP, n=47), early stage PC (EPC, Stage 1 and 2, n=78) and late PC (LPC,
Stage 2-3, n=69). RT-PCR and ELISA were carried out to profile levels of
TFF1 and TFF3 in PC cell lines and cell supernatants respectively.
Recombinant treatment with TFF3 was performed to observe the impact on of
transmembrane (MUC4) and secreted mucins (MUC5AC) stability and
expression.

Results: Differential expression of TFF3 was observed in PanIN precursor
lesion, pancreatic cancer tissue in comparison to normal pancreatic
tissue (p Results: Differential expression of TFF3 was observed in PanIN
precursor lesion, pancreatic cancer tissue in comparison to normal
pancreatic tissue (p < 0.0003). Furthermore, the TFF3 expression was
significantly higher for well-differentiated tumor in comparison to
poorly differentiated cases (p = 0.006). For TFF1, expression was
significantly higher in PanIN lesions compared to normal pancreas (p
Results: Differential expression of TFF3 was observed in PanIN precursor
lesion, pancreatic cancer tissue in comparison to normal pancreatic
tissue (p < 0.0003). Furthermore, the TFF3 expression was significantly
higher for well-differentiated tumor in comparison to poorly
differentiated cases (p = 0.006). For TFF1, expression was significantly
higher in PanIN lesions compared to normal pancreas (p < 0.0001), and PC
versus normal pancreatic tissue (p Results: Differential expression of
TFF3 was observed in PanIN precursor lesion, pancreatic cancer tissue in
comparison to normal pancreatic tissue (p < 0.0003). Furthermore, the
TFF3 expression was significantly higher for well-differentiated tumor in
comparison to poorly differentiated cases (p = 0.006). For TFF1,
expression was significantly higher in PanIN lesions compared to normal
pancreas (p < 0.0001), and PC versus normal pancreatic tissue (p <
0.0001). In serum, significantly increased expression of TFF1 was
observed in EPC serum samples compared to BC (p-value = 0.035) and CP
(p-value=0.0058) cases. RT-PCR analysis revealed positive expression of
TFF1 and TFF3 in the majority of the PC cell lines. Treatment of PC cells
with recombinant TFF3 lead to differential expression of MUC4 and MUC5AC.

Conclusion: Overall, both tissue and serum based studies show that TFF1
and TFF3 are differentially expressed in early PanIN lesions as well
early stage of PC tissues compared to normal pancreas. Overall, these
results suggest a potential implication of TFF1 and TFF3 in PC
pathogenesis and provide a basis for functional impact of TFF 1 and 3 on
mucins stability and downstream signaling in PC pathogenesis.


