Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting obesity-related cancer progression with novel leptin
receptor antagonists.


Obesity is a global health issue that has been identified as a risk
factor for several types of cancer. High levels of body fat and
circulating leptin are typical identifiers of obesity in humans and
animals. Leptin is a 16kD protein hormone which is secreted by
adipocytes, and maybe secreted from cancer cells, that functions to
control satiation via leptin receptor binding. However, obese individuals
often develop “leptin resistance”, which is a mechanism that leads to
the accumulation of excess leptin. Increased binding of leptin to its
receptor (OB-R) due to leptin resistance has been associated with disease
progression and poor prognosis in human cancers. Our group has previously
shown that leptin-mediated cancer cell proliferation is inhibited by the
LPrA2 (leptin peptide receptor antagonist 2). We have prepared novel
leptin antagonists and tested their ability to block leptin-induced
survival and chemoresistance to Paclitaxel (TAX) and Gemcitabine (GEM) in
cancer cells and derived tumorspheres (pancreatic: PANC-1, MiaPaca2 and
triple negative breast cancer: MDA-MB231 and MDA-MB468). Western blot
protein analyses showed the ability of the antagonists to specifically
inhibit leptin-induced phosphorylation of STAT3, and expression of cyclin
D, and Notch1 in cancer cells. Additionally, potential toxicity of
antagonists was tested using MTT assay with concentrations up to 100X
higher than the effective dose in non-malignant breast cells (MCF-10A).
Data generated show no toxicity of the novel antagonists in vitro.
Leptin-induced proliferation of breast cancer and pancreatic cancer cells
(120-160%) was significantly inhibited by the novel antagonists. In
addition, leptin-mediated progression of S-phase was also reduced by the
antagonists. Leptin increased TAX and GEM chemoresistance in cells and
tumorspheres that were efficiently inhibited by the antagonists. These
data suggest that the new antagonists could be equally or more effective
than LPrA2 for adjuvant treatment of cancer.

Acknowledgements: This work has been supported by Pilot Project Award
from MSM/Tuskegee University/UAB Cancer Center partnership grant
5U54CA118638; PC SPORE Grant from UAB to RRGP, and facilities and support
services at Morehouse School of Medicine (1G12RR026250-03; NIH RR 03034
and 1C06 RR18386).


