Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA-sequencing reveals etiology-specific dysregulation of
PIWI-interacting RNAs in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) represents the sixth
deathliest cancer worldwide and the second fastest growing cancer in many
developing countries. A cancer characterized by heterogeneity, HNSCCs are
known to display varied genetic alterations based on a variety of
epidemiological and clinical factors, including etiology, making it
challenging to comprehensively profile and treat the disease. New studies
have shown that non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) may provide a promising means by
which to explore HNSCC pathogenesis due to their diverse genetic and
epigenetic roles and their recent emergence as potential biomarkers for
cancer. In this study, we decided to investigate etiology-specific
alterations of PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), the largest class of
ncRNAs that have roles in silencing of retrotransposons, heterochromatin
modification, and germ cell maintenance, in HNSCC. We particularly
focused on smoking, the most prevalent risk factor of HNSCC, and HPV, the
fastest growing cause of the disease today. Using 466 HNSCC
RNA-sequencing datasets from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we
identified 58 piRNAs significantly differentially expressed in HNSCC
current smokers vs. normal lifelong nonsmokers and 39 piRNAs
significantly dysregulated in HNSCC HPV16(+) vs. normal HPV(-) cohorts,
with 29 piRNAs commonly implicated in both etiologies (p Head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) represents the sixth deathliest cancer
worldwide and the second fastest growing cancer in many developing
countries. A cancer characterized by heterogeneity, HNSCCs are known to
display varied genetic alterations based on a variety of epidemiological
and clinical factors, including etiology, making it challenging to
comprehensively profile and treat the disease. New studies have shown
that non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) may provide a promising means by which to
explore HNSCC pathogenesis due to their diverse genetic and epigenetic
roles and their recent emergence as potential biomarkers for cancer. In
this study, we decided to investigate etiology-specific alterations of
PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), the largest class of ncRNAs that have
roles in silencing of retrotransposons, heterochromatin modification, and
germ cell maintenance, in HNSCC. We particularly focused on smoking, the
most prevalent risk factor of HNSCC, and HPV, the fastest growing cause
of the disease today. Using 466 HNSCC RNA-sequencing datasets from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we identified 58 piRNAs significantly
differentially expressed in HNSCC current smokers vs. normal lifelong
nonsmokers and 39 piRNAs significantly dysregulated in HNSCC HPV16(+) vs.
normal HPV(-) cohorts, with 29 piRNAs commonly implicated in both
etiologies (p < 0.05). Of the 58 piRNAs implicated in smoking-related
HNSCC, 4 piRNAs were found to significantly associate with clinical
variables and 1 transcript with patient outcome, with similar results for
HPV-mediated piRNA dysregulation (Kruskal-Wallis, Cox regression, p Head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) represents the sixth deathliest
cancer worldwide and the second fastest growing cancer in many developing
countries. A cancer characterized by heterogeneity, HNSCCs are known to
display varied genetic alterations based on a variety of epidemiological
and clinical factors, including etiology, making it challenging to
comprehensively profile and treat the disease. New studies have shown
that non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) may provide a promising means by which to
explore HNSCC pathogenesis due to their diverse genetic and epigenetic
roles and their recent emergence as potential biomarkers for cancer. In
this study, we decided to investigate etiology-specific alterations of
PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), the largest class of ncRNAs that have
roles in silencing of retrotransposons, heterochromatin modification, and
germ cell maintenance, in HNSCC. We particularly focused on smoking, the
most prevalent risk factor of HNSCC, and HPV, the fastest growing cause
of the disease today. Using 466 HNSCC RNA-sequencing datasets from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we identified 58 piRNAs significantly
differentially expressed in HNSCC current smokers vs. normal lifelong
nonsmokers and 39 piRNAs significantly dysregulated in HNSCC HPV16(+) vs.
normal HPV(-) cohorts, with 29 piRNAs commonly implicated in both
etiologies (p < 0.05). Of the 58 piRNAs implicated in smoking-related
HNSCC, 4 piRNAs were found to significantly associate with clinical
variables and 1 transcript with patient outcome, with similar results for
HPV-mediated piRNA dysregulation (Kruskal-Wallis, Cox regression, p <
0.05). In particular, we recognized transcripts NONHSAT081250,
NONHSAT123636, and NONHSAT108298 for their correlations with tumor stage,
metastatic status, and/or anatomic site, as well as presence of common
mutations and copy number variations in HNSCC. We then analyzed mRNA
expression data for the same 466 samples from TCGA and found PIWI
proteins PIWIL1 and PIWIL2 to be implicated in smoking-related and
HPV-related HNSCCs respectively, and also to associate with piRNA
candidate expression levels (p Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) represents the sixth deathliest cancer worldwide and the second
fastest growing cancer in many developing countries. A cancer
characterized by heterogeneity, HNSCCs are known to display varied
genetic alterations based on a variety of epidemiological and clinical
factors, including etiology, making it challenging to comprehensively
profile and treat the disease. New studies have shown that non-coding
RNAs (ncRNAs) may provide a promising means by which to explore HNSCC
pathogenesis due to their diverse genetic and epigenetic roles and their
recent emergence as potential biomarkers for cancer. In this study, we
decided to investigate etiology-specific alterations of PIWI-interacting
RNAs (piRNAs), the largest class of ncRNAs that have roles in silencing
of retrotransposons, heterochromatin modification, and germ cell
maintenance, in HNSCC. We particularly focused on smoking, the most
prevalent risk factor of HNSCC, and HPV, the fastest growing cause of the
disease today. Using 466 HNSCC RNA-sequencing datasets from The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA), we identified 58 piRNAs significantly differentially
expressed in HNSCC current smokers vs. normal lifelong nonsmokers and 39
piRNAs significantly dysregulated in HNSCC HPV16(+) vs. normal HPV(-)
cohorts, with 29 piRNAs commonly implicated in both etiologies (p <
0.05). Of the 58 piRNAs implicated in smoking-related HNSCC, 4 piRNAs
were found to significantly associate with clinical variables and 1
transcript with patient outcome, with similar results for HPV-mediated
piRNA dysregulation (Kruskal-Wallis, Cox regression, p < 0.05). In
particular, we recognized transcripts NONHSAT081250, NONHSAT123636, and
NONHSAT108298 for their correlations with tumor stage, metastatic status,
and/or anatomic site, as well as presence of common mutations and copy
number variations in HNSCC. We then analyzed mRNA expression data for the
same 466 samples from TCGA and found PIWI proteins PIWIL1 and PIWIL2 to
be implicated in smoking-related and HPV-related HNSCCs respectively, and
also to associate with piRNA candidate expression levels (p < 0.05). We
subsequently validated the dysregulation of all significant piRNA and
PIWI protein candidates in vitro in cigarette-treated and HPV
E6/E7-overexpressing normal oral epithelial cells. While a comprehensive
understanding of the functional and mechanistic relevance of a vast
majority of non-coding transcripts remains yet to be found, our findings
reveal the potential of these genes to mediate a variety of
etiology-specific clinical and genomic aberrancies in HNSCC and provide
novel insights to thwart the progression of this disease.


