Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blocking CD70+ cancer associated fibroblasts: Are we paving the
way towards immunotherapy in colorectal cancer.


Introduction: Numerous studies have reported that tumor progression and
invasiveness are determined not only by the malignant cancer cells
themselves but also by the surrounding tumor microenvironment, including
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). Although CAFs are implicated in
tumor progression, their total depletion of CAFs has been demonstrated to
induce more aggressive tumors, indicating that different CAF
subpopulations have opposing tumor-promoting or tumor-inhibitory roles.
Unfortunately, specific markers to target these subsets of CAFs are
lacking. Expression of the immune checkpoint CD70 is normally tightly
regulated and limited to cells of the lymphoid lineage only. Instead,
tumors hijack CD70 to facilitate immune evasion by increasing the amount
of suppressive regulatory T cells (Tregs), inducing T cell apoptosis and
skewing T cells towards T cell exhaustion. Recently, a lot of clinical
successes have been generated by the blockade of immune checkpoints.
However, in colorectal cancer (CRC) the efficacy remains limited to a
small subset of patients with mismatch repair-deficient (MSI) tumors
which might be caused by the intense dialogue between stroma and
malignant cells. Therefore, we have explored the expression patterns of
the immune checkpoint molecule CD70 in CRC, with a particular focus on
CAFs.

Methods: The prognostic value of CD70 was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry on 51 CRC specimens. In addition, the relationship
with Tregs and microsatellite instability was explored. Furthermore,
primary CAF cell lines were successfully cultured from 20 different
primary resection specimens. These cell lines were used to study the
effect of CD70 on the tumor microenvironment in vitro.

Results: We revealed expression of CD70, not just on the malignant cells
but on the majority of CAFs in invasive CRC specimens. Thereby,
CD70-expression was significantly correlated with negative
clinicopathological parameters such as metastasis (P=0.007),
differentiation (P=0.053) and advanced stage (P=0.001). Moreover,
CD70-positive CAFs proved to be a poor prognostic marker by univariate as
well as multivariate analysis. We have also detected a significant
association between elevated Treg amounts and CD70-expressing CAFs
(P=0.012). In vitro data on the effects of CD70 on CRC behavior and
immune escape are currently being analyzed.

Conclusion: We have identified a new targetable CAF subpopulation, marked
by the expression of CD70 and equipped with strong tumor-promoting
properties. Thereby, we have found evidence of a potential cross talk
between CD70+ CAFs and Treg, paving the way towards immune escape. The
lack of association of CD70 expression and MSI-status, which highlights
the potential of this target in CRC subsets that do not benefit from
immune checkpoint blockade. We believe that targeting CD70 holds great
potential in CRC, especially in light of the limited immunotherapeutic
options available.


