Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying likely breast carcinogens using complementary
mechanistic approaches.


Many commercial chemicals and environmental pollutants show chemical or
mechanistic similarity with known breast carcinogens such as ionizing
radiation, hormones, alcohol, and tobacco. Regulatory agencies like the
US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) are charged with evaluating
these chemicals for safety, which requires predicting theoretical effects
on cancer risk that are often small for any individual, but significant
across the population because exposures are widespread.

Current approaches to chemical screening and assessment are being
re-envisioned, driven by innovations in chemical safety testing, new
regulations, and demand for information on health effects. We reversed
the usual direction of inquiry by beginning with an outcome - breast
cancer - and using three complementary approaches to identify biological
processes that could be the focus of chemical toxicity screening.

First, an expert panel identified key processes whose perturbation may
alter breast cancer risk, including cellular and molecular events, tissue
changes, and factors that alter susceptibility. Comparison of these
endpoints with those included in US EPA’s ToxCast and Endocrine
Disruptor Screening Program identified important endpoints not currently
evaluated by US testing programs, including altered mammary gland
development, Her2 activation, progesterone receptor activity, prolactin
effects, and aspects of estrogen receptor β activity.

Second, investigation of the mechanistic basis for many known breast
cancer risk factors indicates biological processes relevant to breast
cancer. For example, the body of evidence indicates HRT as a tumor
promoter in the breast, while studies of DES show that hormone exposure
in utero alters breast development and subsequent breast cancer risk.
Chemicals with similar properties and biological activity may also pose
preventable risks.

Third, we compiled chemicals shown to increase mammary tumors or alter
mammary gland development in rodents and identified key modes of action.
We used data from ToxCast – a project that screened over 1000 chemicals
in almost 800 in vitro assays – for 75 rodent mammary carcinogens and
18 disruptors of mammary development to identify mechanisms of mammary
carcinogenesis and highlight gaps. Our analysis confirms that many
mammary carcinogens are genotoxic, estrogenic, or both. We also observed
that mammary toxicants increased activation of glucocorticoid and
androgen receptors, as well as of PXR and CYP19A1, xenobiotic
metabolizing systems involved in steroid hormone synthesis and
metabolism, compared to other chemicals in ToxCast.

Taken together, these approaches identify mechanisms by which chemicals
may alter breast cancer risk and can shape chemical testing programs to
increase their relevance to breast cancer. This approach can be extended
to identify biological processes and screening methods relevant for other
common cancers.


