Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of RAB25 cooperates with oncogenes in the transformation of
human mammary epithelial cells.


The RAB guanosine triphosphates (RAS-related in brain) belong to the Ras
superfamily of GTPases, and loss of RAB 25 expression has been reported
in a number of breast cancer cases containing H-Ras point mutations,
particularly triple negative breast cancers (TNBC), one of the most
aggressive subtypes of breast cancer and associated with a poor
prognosis. The mechanism involved in the progression of these tumors is
poorly understood.

In this study, we are trying to understand if loss of RAB25 expression in
Human Mammary Epithelial Cell (HMEC) lines co-operates with H-Ras
mutations and contributes to tumorigenesis. HMEC were immortalized by
transduction with LXSN CDK4 R24C, a mutant form of cyclin-dependent
kinase, followed by transduction with hTERT, catalytic subunit of the
telomerase enzyme that permits the cells to exceed the Hayflick Limit and
become immortal.

We have found that with loss of RAB25 and over expression of mutant
H-Ras61L, immortal HMEC undergo transformation. We have looked into the
co-operativity between loss of Rab25 and H-Ras61L mutant by in-vitro
studies to show their anchorage independent growth and increased ability
to migrate. Furthermore, cells express low CD24, high CD44, and very low
levels of Claudin indicating that cells acquire stem-like properties upon
transformation. Loss of RAB25 and over-expression of H-ras61L resulted in
increased expression of transcription markers Snail and Slug that drive
these cells to lose E-cadherin and undergo Epithelial Mesenchymal
Transition (EMT). We also intend to carry out nude mice studies to look
for the potential of these cells to form tumors and metastasize.

This study shows that loss of RAB25 and over-expression of mutant H-Ras
can transform HMEC and give rise to mesenchymal stem-like tumors. Our
findings reveal that RAB25 functions as a tumor suppressor gene, and loss
of RAB25 could serve as a novel biomarker in the prognosis of Claudin-low
type of TNBC.


