Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive characterization of genomic and transcriptomic
heterogeneity in advanced bladder cancer by multiregional analysis.


Background: Bladder cancer is a highly heterogeneous disease - both
clinically, and at the genomic and the transcriptomic levels. Despite
complete tumor resections, recurrent tumors share a high number of
mutations with the initial/earlier tumors, indicating that new tumors
arise from fields of transformed areas of cells in the urothelium (i.e.
field disease). Furthermore, the high mutational load found in bladder
cancer and the assumed high degree of heterogeneity may have huge
implications on therapy response. Thus, detailed knowledge on tumor
heterogeneity and mutational dynamics in adjacent normal urothelial cells
is needed in order to understand field disease, disease development and
disease progression. To address this, we performed comprehensive genomic
and transcriptomic analysis of multiple samples of tumor and normal
tissue procured from four cystectomy specimens and associated metastases.

Methods: Multiple tumors, lymph node metastasis, relapse biopsies and
adjacent normal tissue from four patients with muscle invasive disease
were analyzed. A targeted panel (illumina TruSeq Custom Amplicon v1.5)
was designed from whole exome sequencing of bulk tumor DNA and germline
DNA. Targeted sequencing of DNA from small cellular regions procured by
laser-microdissection from tumor biopsies and from adjacent normal tissue
was used for generating a comprehensive genomic map of the bladder.
Transcriptomic profiling (Fluidigm GE) was carried out using RNA from LMD
procured tumor regions matching the regions used for targeted sequencing.

Results: In total, whole exome sequencing was performed on DNA from 15
bulk tumors with an average coverage of 59.2X. We identified a total of
331, 862, 685 and 1344 mutations, respectively, in the four patients with
15-85% of the mutations being ancestral. Of all the mutations, 95, 380,
117 and 335, respectively, were estimated to have a functional impact.
Targeted sequencing of 207, 595, 538 and 483 mutations in the four
patients was performed on DNA from 137 small cellular regions, including
DNA from 17 adjacent normal tissue areas. We observed low local
heterogeneity while comparing more distant regions revealed significantly
higher levels of heterogeneity. This observation was in agreement with
the heterogeneity observed at the transcriptomic level, where some
regions within the same bladder appeared to have basal characteristics
while others appeared to have luminal characteristics.

Conclusion: Large intra-patient genomic and transcriptomic heterogeneity
can be observed in bladder cancer. However, even in multifocal tumors,
all the regions shared a substantial number of mutations, indicating a
common origin. Ongoing investigations indicate the presence of low
frequency tumor associated mutations in normal appearing tissue.


