Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel RAS inhibitors DC070-547 and ADT-006 potently and
selectively inhibit the growth of pancreatic tumor cells harboring
constitutively activated RAS by blocking RAS-effector binding and
signaling.


Gain-in-function mutations in RAS genes cause constitutive activation of
RAS and induction of downstream signaling pathways that drive tumor cell
proliferation, survival, and metastasis. Such driver mutations occur in
over 90% of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDACs), making RAS an
attractive cancer target. However, RAS is considered “undruggable”,
given the lack of suitable surfaces on the protein for small molecule
binding, as well as its high affinity for GTP binding. A phenotypic assay
was developed to screen a library of indene derivatives for growth
inhibitory activity in tumor cells harboring constitutively active RAS
versus tumor cells with low levels of active RAS. A novel compound series
was identified that potently and selectively inhibits the growth of tumor
cells with constitutively active RAS, while having minimal effects on
tumor cells lacking constitutively active RAS or cells derived from
normal tissues. Chemical optimization resulted in a drug development
candidate, DC070-547, and several back-up analogs (e.g. ADT-006), which
showed strong antitumor activity at doses that do not cause any
discernible toxicity in preclinical mouse models. Here we report
DC070-547 and ADT-006 inhibited the growth of PDAC cells with IC50 values
of approximately 2 nM and 20 nM, respectively, in MIA PaCa-2 cells
harboring constitutively active RAS and greater than 350-fold selectivity
over BxPC-3 cells, which lack constitutively active RAS. Both compounds
also decreased the clonogenic potential of MIA PaCa-2 cells at
concentrations that inhibit their growth. Within the same low nanomolar
concentration range, treatment of recombinant human K-RAS, MIA PaCa-2
cell lysates, and intact MIA PaCa-2 cells blocked RAS-effector
interactions as evident by performing active RAS pull-down assays using
GST-RAF1-RBD/glutathione agarose. Treatment of intact MIA PaCa-2 cells
also inhibited RAF/MAPK and PI3K/AKT phosphorylation within the same
concentration range. These results demonstrate that DC070-547 and ADT-006
inhibit PDAC cell growth by blocking RAS-effector interactions,
supporting further evaluation of this novel class of RAS inhibitors for
the treatment of pancreatic cancer, as well as other RAS-driven cancers.


