Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic characterization of aromatase inhibitor resistant
mammospheres reveal the presence of a novel nuclear chaperone.


Postmenopausal women with early-stage metastatic estrogen-dependent
breast cancer are generally treated with aromatase inhibitors (AIs)
(e.g., letrozole). However, acquired resistance remains a major clinical
obstacle. Previously, our group revealed a global proteomic signature of
a letrozole-resistant cell line (LTLT-Ca) associated with hormone
independence, enhanced cell motility and epithelial to mesenchymal (EMT).
Given recent evidence suggesting a convergence of EMT and cancer stem
cells (CSC), we chose to utilize a two-dimensional (2D) vs
three-dimensional (3D) culture system to compare the proteome of LTLT-Ca
cells, as 3D culture not only enriches for CSC, but more accurately
recapitulates the tumor microenvironment, morphology, function and
response to therapy compared to conventional 2D culture. We hypothesize
utilizing a novel systems biology approach may reveal previously
unconsidered molecular changes that could aid in understanding complex
signaling networks and be exploited as therapeutic targets. To address
this hypothesis ovariectomized immunocompromised female mice were
inoculated in the mammary fat pad with LTLT-Ca or letrozole sensitive
cells (AC-1) and intratumoral putative CSC marker expression was assessed
by immunohistochemistry. Results indicate LTLT-Ca tumors were
CD44high/CD24low while AC-1 tumors were CD44-/CD24low. Mammosphere
formation assays were conducted and LTLT-Ca cells formed mammospheres at
a 3.4-fold higher index than AC-1 cells. A quantitative proteomic
analysis of whole cell lysates from LTLT-Ca (2D adherent cells) versus
LTLT-Ca (3D mammospheres) was conducted. Results identified significant
protein expression changes within a panel of 1010 proteins; 173 were
upregulated and 186 downregulated (p1.20). Additionally, functional
enrichment analyses were performed and 19 gene ontology (GO) terms and
one KEGG pathway (hsa03010:Ribosome) were over-represented (BH adjusted
p-value 1.20). Additionally, functional enrichment analyses were
performed and 19 gene ontology (GO) terms and one KEGG pathway
(hsa03010:Ribosome) were over-represented (BH adjusted p-value < 0.01) by
the cognate genes. Notably, there was a 35.04-fold increase in midasin
(MDN1), a nuclear chaperone protein required for maturation and nuclear
export of pre-60S ribosome subunit. Increased MDN1 expression was
strongly correlated with highly tumorigenic breast cancer spheres.
Additionally, Kaplan-Meier survival plots demonstrate that increased MDN1
levels were positively correlated with decreased relapse free survival in
estrogen receptor negative breast cancer, and is constitutively expressed
as breast tumors progress from atypical ductal hyperplasia to ductal
carcinoma in situ to invasive, metastatic breast cancer. The TGCA
database was interrogated and MDN1 was frequently amplified or mutated in
breast tumors. Taken together our study for the first time implicates a
role for ribosomal assembly in AI resistant cells enriched for CSCs and
underscores a potential for MDN1 in the progression and responsiveness to
therapy.


