Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Host tissue stiffness regulates chemotherapy-induced cancer cell
dormancy.


This study investigates how the tumor microenvironment, namely host
tissue stiffness, affects the propensity of disseminated tumor cells to
become dormant at secondary sites.

Approximately 90% of cancer-related deaths result from metastasis. In
breast cancer, disseminated cancer cells cannot be detected at the time
of diagnosis of the primary tumor because they form “dormant”
micrometastases that are not clinically detectable. Thus, metastases in
secondary sites such as the lungs, bone marrow, liver and brain are

usually discovered months or years after the initial diagnosis and/or
treatment of the primary tumor.

A 2D polyacrylamide gel-based tissue culture model was used to
investigate the effects of host tissue stiffness on the proliferative
behavior of breast cancer cells. To assess the dormant phenotype, Ki67
and RNA staining were used to quantify proliferation and RNA

content, respectively. Additionally, changes in levels of cell-cycle
regulators were determined by quantitative RT-PCR. Dormant cells have
decreased levels of transcription and proliferation.

We found that both tamoxifen and 5-fluorouracil induce dormancy in
estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells cultured on soft and stiff
substrata. After repeated rounds of 5-fluorouracil treatment and
recovery, cells cultured on soft substratum, mechanical properties of
which represent common metastatic sites, had a higher tendency to recover.

This suggests that cell growth at secondary sites favors a soft
microenvironment, characteristic of organs where breast cancer metastases
often become clinically overt. Dormant cancer cells, or minimal residual
disease, cannot be detected with current

diagnostic tools and cannot be targeted by conventional therapies.
Therefore, current clinical practices rely on estimating the probability
of recurrence from various prognostic factors including the grade and the
stage of the disease. Elucidating the mechanisms that regulate the switch
from dormancy to proliferation at metastatic sites will pave the way for
new treatments to control this incurable disease.


