Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel N-mustard-quinoline conjugate is a potent agent against
colorectal cancer.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third leading cancer worldwide. The
prognosis of patients diagnosed with CRC at the stage IV is poor with a
5-year survival rate less than 10%. Combination chemotherapy with
platinum-based drugs and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) remains the first line
treatment, while the chemotherapy combined target therapeutic agents were
decreasing the mortality of CRC patients. However, the efficacy of
platinum-based drugs has often been limited because of the substantial
risk for severe toxicities, including nephrotoxicity or neurotoxicity.
Therefore, there is an unmet need to develop a novel drug for improving
the treatment of advance colorectal cancer. We have previously designed
and synthesized several series of DNA-directed alkylating agents with
potent antitumor activity. Recently, one derivative of
N-mustard-quinoline conjugates with hydrazinecarboxamide as a linker,
designated as SL-1, was selected to explore its anti-colorectal cancer
(CRC) activity because it was highly cytotoxic to a panel of CRC cell
lines in culture. Flow cytometric analysis showed that treatment of CRC
cells with SL-1 induced G2/M arrest and triggered apoptosis. We further
demonstrated that SL-1 preferentially targeted on the selective guanine
sequence by sequencing gel electrophoresis. By the aid of comet assay,
SL-1 in combination with 5-FU resulted in increased DNA tail moments and
induced more DNA damage. Evaluation of the potency of antitumor activity
both in culture and in xenograft models, we observed that SL-1 was more
potent than 5-FU and oxaliplatin against SW620, RKO and RKO-E6 (an
oxaliplatin resistant-subline) cells. Notable, SL-1+5-FU were more
efficacious than oxalipatin+5-FU in suppression the growth of RKO or
SW620 in xenograft models. We further found that SL-1 enhanced 5-FU and
induced more apoptosis by c-caspase 3 and TUNNEL staining. Additionally,
histopathological examination showed that SL-1 by itself has no obvious
kidney and liver toxicity in ICR mice comparing to cisplatin, oxaliplatin
or 5-FU. Taken together, SL-1 alone or in combination with 5-FU may
warrant our further development as a potential antitumor agent for the
treatment of CRC patients.


