Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: B cell receptor signaling regulates cellular metabolism in Chronic
Lymphocytic Leukemia.


Peripheral blood B cells in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) are
quiescent, yet have an active RNA transcription and protein translation
processes, suggesting that these malignant lymphocytes may be
metabolically active. However, CLL metabolism and its relationship to
disease biology has not been well-explored. In our previous
investigation, we reported that compared with proliferative B-cell lines,
metabolic fluxes of oxygen and lactate were low in quiescent peripheral
blood B lymphocytes from CLL patients (Vangapandu, H.V. et al, AACR
2014). In 45 patient samples tested, glycolysis (extracellular
acidification rate, ECAR) was consistently low (1 to 15 mpH/min/5 x 105
lymphocytes), whereas, oxygen consumption rate (OCR) varied considerably
(5 to 190 pMoles/min/5 x 105 lymphocytes). Among the prognostic factors,
high OCR correlated strongly with ZAP 70 positivity, unmutated IGHV
status, greater β2M levels and higher Rai stage. In contrast, glycolytic
flux (ECAR) from same patient samples did not associate with prognostic
factors. Further, OCR did not vary on the basis of frequently occurring
cytogenetic abnormalities, 13q14, 17p, and 11q deletions or trisomy 12.
Since, ZAP 70 and IGHV unmutated status are associated with augmented
B-cell receptor (BCR) pathway signaling, we tested the impact on OCR
after genetic ablation of B-cell receptor (CH2 region of IgM). A
CRISPR-Cas9-mediated BCR knockout mitigated OCR in a malignant B cell
line without impacting the rate of proliferation. A critical node in the
BCR pathway is PI3 Kinase and PI3K isoforms, δ and γ are involved in
B-cell malignancies. Consistent with BCR ablation results, knocking out
PIK3CD (codes for catalytic subunit δ), dramatically reduced OCR and
ECAR. Pharmacological inhibitors of the PI3K pathway, duvelisib (a PI3K
δ/γ inhibitor in phase III clinical trials) or idelalisib (FDA approved
PI3K δ inhibitor) also decreased OCR. Direct inhibition of AKT with
MK-2206 showed similar results. Collectively, these data suggest that CLL
cellular metabolism is associated with prognostic factors and linked to
BCR signaling pathway. Since, the PI3K inhibitors used in our study are
being tested clinically for patients with CLL, investigations on the
impact on metabolomics during therapy and translation of results to
combination strategies need to be explored.


