Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CSF-1R inhibitor prevented pre-metastatic lung niches in
metastatic mammary tumor.


Exosomes are small vesicle cellular products originating from the
endocytic pathway abundantly secreted by tumor cells. These exosomes have
the ability to alter their immediate microenvironment (ME) through
cell-cell interaction by fusion with plasma membrane and subsequent
endocytosis or release of their cargo. Exosomes are critical modulators
of pre-metastatic niche creation by increasing the recruitment of
inflammatory cells. In breast cancer, tumor-derived exosomes recruit
myeloid derived suppressor cells in the creation of an immunosuppressive
pro-tumorigenic lung niches. Colony stimulating factor 1-receptor
(CSF1R), which is a key regulator of myeloid cell proliferation,
survival, and differentiation can be blocked by a selective inhibitor
GW2580. Overexpression of CSF-1 has been implicated in the creation of
increased number of metastatic niches in numerous cancers. In our study,
we have demonstrated that the exosomes secreted under hypoxic conditions
can initiate early pre-metastatic niche creation in lungs in a metastatic
breast cancer model compared to normoxia-secreted exosomes. Exosomes were
injected intravenously into Balb/c female mice three days after the
implantation of 4T1 breast tumor and continued for a week with injections
on alternated days. The animals were pre-treated with GW2580 the day
before tumor implantation and continued for a week concomitantly with
exosomes on alternate days. Lungs, bone marrow, spleen and brain tissues
were collected and analyzed by flow cytometer to detect myeloid and
angiogenic cells populations. GW2580 was able to prevent myeloid cell
infiltration in lungs and bone marrow. Further, we observed significant
increase in anti-tumorigenic M1-macrophage population in the lungs of
exosome treated animals pre-treated with GW2580. However, these findings
were not observed in the bone marrows of the same group. Vasculogenic
leukocyte and angiogenic myeloid cell populations were significantly
decreased in the lung of exosome treated animals pre-treated with GW2580.
A similar decrease in these populations of cells was not seen in the
lungs of animals pre-treated with GW2580 only. These surprising results
have led us to hypothesize that GW2580 treatment can prevent the effects
of exosomes, which causes infiltration of myeloid cells in the lung to
create metastatic niche. These observations indicate a role of CSF1R
inhibitor in preventing the distant metastatic niche formation.


