Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Higher nucleolar index of nucleolin as an indicator of aberrant
cellular DNA damage response (DDR).


Nucleoli provide a survival advantage for various tumor types,
exemplified in prostate neoplasia, leukemia, lung, and breast carcinomas.
Unregulated expression and increased nucleolar localization of many
stress-responsive factors often correlate with hyper-proliferative
status. Therefore, nucleolar changes in cancer cells are the first
cytological indicators that can serve as an index for diagnostic and
prognostic purposes. In this study, we examine an abundant nucleolar
stress factor, nucleolin (NCL) for its sub-nuclear localization under
normal and DNA damage conditions. NCL is a multifunctional RNA-binding
phosphoprotein that plays critical role/s in many cellular processes
including regulation of gene expression during normal cell cycle as well
as in the cellular DNA damage response (DDR). NCL-mediated DDR involves
changes in its phosphorylation status, sub-nuclear translocation and a
multi-level regulation of p53-checkpoint signaling. However, the role/s
of p53 status and the signaling pathways triggered during NCL-mediated
stress response remain elusive, and forms the focus of this study. Taking
advantage of two human ductal breast epithelial tumor cell lines with
different genetic backgrounds (wild type, wt-p53 and mutant, mut-p53
L194F), we demonstrate that NCL is predominantly nucleolar in unstressed
conditions irrespective of the p53 status. Upon genotoxic stress,
however, wt-p53 is required for NCL to mobilize from nucleoli to the
nucleoplasmic region. We observed a significant increase in nucleoplasmic
index for NCL that is wt-p53 dependent and specific to the type of DNA
damage. In contrast, in the presence of mut-p53, NCL failed to
translocate even under various DNA damage conditions, resulting in a
higher nucleolar index. Interestingly, another nucleolar factor,
nucleophosmin (NPM) remained unaltered upon stress conditions even in the
presence of wt-p53. This study corroborates the previous research that
suggests NCL translocation requires wt-p53 and provides new insights into
the role of p53-mutations (e.g. the zinc finger mutation in the central
DNA binding region-L194F) in NCL-mediated DDR. Further, we also assessed
the role of NCL and p53 (wt vs. mut) in regulating stress signaling
(ATM/ATR and p38-kinase) pathways and gene expression in apoptosis.
Together, our study elaborates a novel approach that correlates NCL
sub-nuclear localization, downstream signaling pathways and gene
expression during the cellular DDR.


