Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antigen-capturing nanoparticles improve the abscopal effect and
cancer immunotherapy.


Introduction

Cancer immunotherapy, the utilization of patients’ own immune system to
treat cancer, has emerged as a powerful new strategy in cancer treatment.
The main limitation of this strategy is the low long-term durable
response rate. Therefore, there has been high interest in developing
strategies to further improve cancer immunotherapy. We hypothesized that
antigen-capturing nanoparticles (AC-NPs) could improve immune responses
to checkpoint inhibitor. The NPs can induce the abscopal effect by
capturing tumor antigens released during radiotherapy and improve the
presentation of antigens to professional antigen presenting cells (APCs).

Methods

We developed several types of antigen-capturing NPs (AC-NPs) using poly
(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA), a biocompatible and biodegradable
polymer. The surfaces of nanoparticles were modified to enable capturing
tumor antigens released after radiotherapy. Unmodified PLGA NPs absorb
antigens via hydrophobic-hydrophobic interactions. AC-NPs with positive
charged bind antigens through ionic interactions. AC-NPs having maleimide
group on the surface (Mal AC-NP) bind to antigens by reaction to thiol
groups of antigens. The B16-F10 tumor, a syngeneic mouse melanoma model
on C57BL/6 mice was employed to evaluate the efficacy of AC-NPs to
improve immune responses of checkpoint inhibitor combining radiotherapy.

Results

The in vivo efficacy study showed that AC-NPs can significantly improve
the efficacy of αPD-1 treatment in the B10F10 melanoma model, which
generates up to 20% cure rate as compared to 0%

without AC-NP. Mechanistic studies demonstrated that the AC-NPs can drain
to lymph node and be took up by APCs, which indicate that they are able
to deliver captured antigens during radiotherapy to APCs. In the
meantime, it was found that there are significant increases in CD4+ and
CD8+ T cell to Treg ratios, which indicate an expansion of the T-helper
cells and cytotoxic T cells. We also found that AC-NPs can induce
increased level of antitumor cytokine interferon-γ (IFN-γ) following
stimulation ex vivo, which implied that AC-NPs were able to elicit
systemic T cell activation. Therefore, a novel strategy for improving
cancer immunotherapy with nanotechnology was presented by our work.

Acknowledgements

The authors would also like to thank our funding sources. A.Z.W., J.E.T.,
S.T., and J.M.D are supported by funding from the National Institutes of
Health/National Cancer Institute (U54CA198999, Carolina Center of Cancer
Nanotechnology Excellence (CCNE)-Nano Approaches to Modulate Host Cell
Response for Cancer Therapy). B.V. is supported by funding from UNC
University Cancer Research Fund, Paul Calabresi Oncology K12 Award and
UNC CCNE Pilot Grant. A.Z.W. is also supported by funding from the
NIH/NCI (U54 CA151652 and R01 CA178748) for this work. A.Z.W. was also
supported by funding from the NIH/NCI (R21 CA182322).


