Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of p53 mutational status and SOX9 suppression in
chemotherapy response of ovarian cancer.


Ovarian cancers are highly heterogeneous where platinum based
chemotherapy which induces DNA crosslinking resulting in apoptosis of the
cell is the preferred treatment. However, many patients are intrinsically
resistant or quickly develop resistance. The Sox factors are a large
family of transcription factors that play important roles in tumor
development and progression in a variety of human malignancies and
diverse developmental processes, but their impact in clinical
tumorigenesis is still unclear. An analysis of genomic changes in ovarian
cancer has provided the most comprehensive and integrated view of cancer
genes for any cancer type to date. Ovarian serous adenocarcinoma tumors
from 500 patients were examined by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
Research Network and analyses are reported in a recent issue of Nature.
This evidence suggests that epigenetic deregulation, such as methylation,
may be a key factor in the onset and maintenance of chemoresistance.
Previous microarray analysis results in our lab correctly identified a
subset of about 300 genes that when methylated altered the
chemoresistance of the ovarian epithelium cells in culture. Of the genes
identified in the analysis we further set out to characterize oncogenes
and tumor suppressor genes that interact with the guardian of the genome,
TP53, to determine if we could elucidate the mechanism by which it
increased resistance. Using several in-vitro assays, we determined that
the loss of p53 in conjunction with SOX9 decreased the level of apoptosis
in response to carboplatin. Furthermore, in cells with mutated p53/SOX9
show an increase in tumorigenesis. Regulation of several pathways with
p53 mutations in ovarian cancer might represent a therapy response
prediction and could be a future therapeutic target for ovarian cancer.
In addition, the crosstalk between p53/SOX9 and epigenetic regulators may
present a valid treatment option for increasing carboplatin sensitivity
in resistant patients.


