Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel in vitro microenvironment modeling platform for HCC
therapeutics and biomarker development.


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is characterized by hypoxia,
hypoglycemia and lactic acidosis within the microenvironment due a highly
glycolytic phenotype. However, routine culture conditions of HCC cells
employ supra-physiological glucose, pH-buffered media, and normoxia. The
aim of the study was to simulate the microenvironment features of HCC in
vitro by culturing HCC cells in their native (NAT) conditions
(hypoglycemia, hypoxia and lactic acidosis) and examine phenotypic,
transcriptomic and pharmacological differences compared to cells cultured
in standard (ST) culture conditions.

Methods: Six HCC cell lines were cultured in NAT or ST conditions.
Pharmacological response to cytotoxic drugs and targeted agents were
evaluated using the MTS assay. Phenotypic differences were examined using
standard techniques. Transcriptomic analysis was carried out using the
Illumina HumanHT-12 expression kit.

Results: HCC cells cultured in NAT conditions have higher doubling time
than cells cultured in ST conditions. However, no remarkable differences
in the cell cycle profiles were observed when cultured in either NAT or
ST conditions. Protein analysis revealed an increase in phosphorylation
of AKT and decrease in the levels of AMPK in all cells cultured in NAT
but not in ST conditions. Increase in the protein levels of GLUT1, HK2,
LDHA, and a decrease in PDHA was observed only in cells cultured in NAT
conditions. Furthermore, the HCC cells in NAT conditions exhibited lower
levels of reactive oxygen species and ATP consistent with the elevated
glycolysis and inefficient oxidative phosphorylation phenotype of HCC.
Thirty-one genes were found to be aberrantly expressed by gene expression
analysis, most notably NDRG1, a hypoxia-associated gene was upregulated
in NAT cells, validated by qPCR. Upregulated NDRG1 was maintained even up
reversal of the NAT condition. The panel of thirty-one genes were found
to be associated with poor prognosis exclusively in HCC based on data
available via TCGA supporting the validity of NAT culture condition.
Differences in the IC50 of doxorubicin, sorafenib, PI3K, c-MET and HDAC
inhibitors but not AKT, MEK, mTOR, Wnt inhibitors were observed in cells
cultured in NAT compared with ST conditions suggesting microenvironment
modelling can influence pharmacological response of certain class of
compounds. Additional genomic and metabolomics analysis are currently
being undertaken to characterize the HCC cells in NAT conditions.

Conclusion: In conclusion, HCC cells when cultured in NAT condition
exhibit more of the tumor characteristics than cells in ST condition and
this can be utilized as an informative platform for better understanding
of disease biology and pharmacology.


