Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer brain metastasis (BCBM) model for determination of
therapeutic brain penetration.


Purpose

Brain metastases are presenting an increasing problem in the clinic, and
especially in treatment of patients with human epidermal growth factor
receptor-2 (HER2)-amplified breast cancer. Although extracranial
metastases respond well to HER2 inhibitors, human clinical data shows
brain metastases hide behind an intact blood-brain barrier (BBB) and are
largely untreatable. Many current preclinical models lack this barrier
integrity, limiting their utility in understanding delivery of drugs to
the brain. We present here the development of a new model suitable for
evaluating therapeutic brain penetration in addition to efficacy.

Experimental procedures

Human HER2-amplified BT-474 breast cancer cells were inoculated
intravenously (tail vein) in female Rag2-/-;Il2rg-/- mice (2 million
cells/mouse) to induce multiorgan metastasis. Formation of metastatic
brain lesions was monitored by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). For
comparison, BT-474 cells were inoculated intracranially for direct brain
tumor implantation (50,000 cells/mouse). Response to a suite of
HER2-targeted therapies known not to appreciably cross an intact BBB
(trastuzumab, lapatinib, etc.) was monitored by MRI for both metastatic
and implanted brain tumors. Mice were sacrificed following signs of
prolonged distress or loss of >20% body weight. Organs were collected for
standard histological and immunohistochemical analysis, as well as for
CLARITY tissue clearing and large-scale 3D macromolecule mapping.

Results

Intravenous inoculation of BT-474 cells into Rag2-/-;Il2rg-/- mice
consistently reproduced the full metastatic profile seen in humans, with
metastases in the lung, bone, liver, ovary, lymph, and brain tissues.
Brain metastases were detected in >90% of mice inoculated intravenously.
Histological analysis of metastatic brain tumors showed different
morphologies and invasive characteristics compared to those
intracranially implanted. Additional differences in vasculature between
metastatic and implanted brain tumors were identified by CLARITY.
Importantly, HER2-targeted therapy markedly delayed progression of
implanted brain tumors, but failed to control metastatic brain tumor
growth, recapitulating the clinical situation.

Conclusions

These data, together with ongoing efforts to further characterize
therapeutic transport to these brain tumors, suggest that intracranial
inoculation disrupts the BBB and creates artificial routes for
therapeutics to reach implanted brain lesions, resulting in anomalous
tumor response. In contrast, this new metastatic model reproduces the
discordant effects of HER2-targeted therapy in patients, and offers a
platform for studying the efficiency of therapeutic delivery across an
intact BBB as well as antitumor activity, both of which are critical to
effective clinical translation.


