Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ablation of oncogenic MYCN expression by hTERT-driven oncolytic
adenovirus induces cell death in MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma.


Background: Neuroblastoma (NB) is a primary malignant tumor of the
peripheral sympathetic nervous system. Amplification and overexpression
of the MYCN proto-oncogene occur in approximately 20% of NB. Since MYCN
activation is highly associated with poor prognosis, MYCN is an
attractive target for the treatment of MYCN-amplified NB. MYCN is a
transcriptional activator that induces the expression of many down-stream
target genes including human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT). We
developed two types of hTERT-driven oncolytic adenoviruses, OBP-301 and
OBP-702, in which the hTERT promoter drives the expression of the viral
E1A and E1B genes for tumor-specific virus replication, and OBP-702
further expresses tumor suppressor p53 protein. Although hTERT-driven
oncolytic viruses are expected to be effective against MYCN-amplified NB
with hTERT activation, the therapeutic potential of these viruses in
MYCN-amplified NB remains unclear. In this study, we investigated whether
OBP-301 and OBP-702 induce cell death and modulate MYCN expression in
MYCN-amplified NB cells.

Methods: We used 3 human NB cell lines with MYCN amplification, including
IMR-32, CHP-134 and LA-N-5. The antitumor effect of OBP-301 and OBP-702
was evaluated using XTT assay. Virus-mediated cell death and modulation
of MYCN and E2F1 expression were analyzed by Western blot analysis. The
mRNA expression of hTERT and MYCN was analyzed by real-time RT-PCR
analysis. To explore the role of E2F1 in the virus-mediated MYCN
modulation, Ad-E2F1, a replication-defective adenovirus expressing E2F1
gene, was further used.

Results: All NB cell lines showed high hTERT mRNA expression. OBP-301 and
OBP-702 showed profound antitumor effect through autophagy-related cell
death in all NB cell lines. Both viruses induced E1A and its target
mediator E2F1 expression in these cell lines. Expression of MYCN mRNA and
protein was downregulated by these viruses. Replication-deficient Ad-E2F1
infection also downregulated the expression of MYCN.

Conclusions: These results suggest that hTERT-driven oncolytic
adenoviruses are promising antitumor agent for the treatment of
MYCN-amplified NB. These viruses induce profound autophagy through
hTERT-dependent viral replication. E2F1 upregulation by viral infection
is supposed to be one of the causes for MYCN downregulation and
autophagy-related cell death. In vivo experiments are under way to
investigate the antitumor effect of these viruses against xenograft NB
tumors.


