Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting nanotherapeutics to the invasive glioblastoma margin via
the cell surface receptor Fn14.


The most common and deadly form of primary brain cancer, glioblastoma
(GBM), is characterized by significant intratumoral heterogeneity, high
vascularity, and infiltrative growth. Delivering effective and sustained
treatments to the invading GBM cells without worsening damage to the
adjacent brain is a major challenge. We aim to develop an innovative,
local delivery approach that couples chemotherapy-loaded brain
penetrating biodegradable nanoparticles with tumor cell-targeting
capabilities and convection enhanced delivery (CED). We formulated
sub-100 nm sized, close to neutrally charged, poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid)-poly(ethylene glycol) (PLGA-PEG) nanoparticles with ~5% w/w
carmustine (BCNU) payload coated with a fibroblast growth
factor-inducible 14 (Fn14) antibody to specifically target Fn14-positive
brain-invading tumor cells. We observed that PLGA surface modification
using non-adhesive PEG allowed nanoparticles to rapidly move through
brain tissue in ex vivo rat brain slices, potentially increasing the
distribution of delivered therapeutics. We showed that Fn14-targeted
nanoparticles were able to selectively bind to recombinant Fn14 but not
to brain extracellular matrix proteins in surface plasmon resonance
assays, as well as diffuse within brain tissue in multiple particle
tracking assays. In addition, when administered intracranially,
Fn14-targeted nanoparticles showed improved brain tumor retention in
C57BL/6 mice bearing orthotopic KR158B tumors compared to non-targeted
nanoparticles. We propose that targeting treatments to invading cancer
cells using non-adhesive nanoparticles will limit non-specific
interactions within brain and tumor tissue and thereby allow specific
interactions at target structures and increase the BCNU therapeutic
index. To test this hypothesis, we plan to determine the therapeutic
efficacy of Fn14-targeted and non-targeted, non-adhesive nanoparticles,
capable of releasing BCNU over a 3 week period, by intracranial CED
injections in C57BL/6 mice bearing orthotopic KR158B invasive tumors.


