Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paracrine effect of the endothelium on prostate cancer cells.


Prostate cancer (CaP) is the most commonly diagnosed cancer and the
second leading cause of cancer deaths among males in the United States.
Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is the standard treatment for advanced
or metastatic CaP. However, during ADT, CaP progresses from an
androgen-sensitive (AS-CaP) to a more aggressive, and eventually lethal,
castration-resistant (CRPC) phenotype. There is evidence to suggest that
the prostate tumor mass is under tight control of endothelial
microvasculature due to an increase in angiogenesis by tumor cells.
Nevertheless, now there is evidence to support that this influence is not
one-directional and that the endothelial cells secrete a large number of
active substances (angiocrine factors), which may directly or indirectly
influence tumor growth and progression. However, the direct impacts of
the endothelium on prostate tumor progression or the molecular mechanisms
that are involved in this communication remain unclear. Here we
investigated the potential influence of endothelium-derived paracrine
factors on prostate cancer biology and the role of connexins in these
interactions, since connexins play a major role in cell-cell
communication and form a bidirectional signaling pathway to assemble gap
junctions and alter cell behaviors. We measured the effect of conditioned
media (CM) obtained from a primary culture of human endothelial cells
isolated from umbilical vein (HUVEC) on viability, proliferation,
migration and invasion of CaP cell lines (LNCaP, LNCaP-C4-2 and PC3) and
in the metastatic potential by in vivo assays using co-injection of CaP
cell with HUVEC or injection of CaP cells pre-incubated with CM from
HUVEC in a zebrafish embryo model. Finally, we studied the expression and
the role of connexins on this stimulation using pharmacological (GJIC
inhibitors) approaches. All together, our results showed that CM from
endothelial cell induces an increases in the viability and proliferation
in all CaP cell lines (LNCaP, LNCaP-C4-2 and PC3) but only increases
migration of the CRPC cell lines (LNCaP-C4-2 and PC3). We also observed
in our in vivo model that endothelial cells either through cell-cell
interaction or by paracrine communication increases the metastatic
ability of the CaP cells. Moreover, the increase in viability and
migration of CaP cells observed with CM from endothelial cells was
blocked using inhibitors of gap junctions. Real-time PCR analyses
detected an up-regulation of Cx43 mRNA after exposition to CM from
endothelial cells. Our data suggest that angiocrine communication between
endothelial cells and CaP cells increases proliferation and migration of
more aggressive CaP cells which could be important for the acquisition of
the aggressive phenotype of the disease, and this interaction could be
mediated by Cx43. Delineation of such critical players may culminate in
identifying therapeutic targets or biomarkers to counteract CaP,
especially advanced CaP.


