Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of function of Arid1a synergizes with MYCN in neuroblastoma
pathogenesis.


ARID1A is a key component of the SWI/SNF-A (BAF) chromatin-remodeling
complex that is known to modulate chromatin structure and gene
transcription. Recent exome and whole-genome resequencing has identified
SWI/SNF as the most frequently mutated chromatin remodeler in human
cancers, and ARID1A as the most highly mutated component among the
SWI/SNF subunits, primarily in solid tumors. In high-risk neuroblastoma,
ARID1A is mutationally inactivated in one allele in ~1% of patient
tumors. In addition, ARID1A is deleted in one allele in at least 85% of
cases with chromosome 1p deletions, which is the most common deletion
found in neuroblastoma. Thus, ARID1A appears to function as a
haploinsufficient tumor suppressor in a substantial fraction of high-risk
neuroblastomas. The arid1a gene is duplicated in zebrafish, and the two
genes are hence named arid1aa and arid1ab. We targeted each allele of the
two genes using CRISPR/Cas genome editing system and recovered stable
lines with loss-of-function mutations in each arid1a gene. arid1ab but
not arid1aa homozygous mutation showed embryonic lethality. We bred these
lines with a transgenic zebrafish line expressing high levels of MYCN in
the peripheral sympathetic nervous system driven by the dopamine
beta-hydroxylase promoter. Loss of one copy of either arid1aa or arid1ab
dramatically accelerated the onset and increased the penetrance of
MYCN-induced neuroblastoma. Loss of additional copies of arid1aa or
arid1ab accelerated the tumor onset even futher, with the most rapid
onset in compound heterosygotes of both genes. The compound heterosygotes
showed increased fraction of sympathoadrenal cells in active cell cycle
compared to the MYCN transgenic fish with wild type arid1a allales. Our
long-term goal is to use the zebrafish model to elucidate the mechanisms
underlying the highly dose-dependent tumor suppressor role of this
component of the BAF chromatin remodeling complex in neuroblastoma, as a
first step toward designing targeted therapies synthetic lethal with
reduced expression levels of ARID1A.


