Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A unified model of RAF inhibitor action determines inhibitor
activity in BRAF-dependent tumors.


The FDA approved RAF inhibitors vemurafenib and dabrafenib have elicited
profound responses in melanoma patients with tumors harboring BRAFV600E
mutation, but resistance limits their effectiveness. Furthermore, RAF
inhibitors exhibit only modest efficacy in colorectal and thyroid
BRAFV600E tumors and they are not effective in tumors harboring non-V600
BRAF mutations. While RAF/MEK inhibitor combinations demonstrate
increased clinical efficacy, drug resistance develops as well, through
similar mechanisms to those identified in RAF inhibitor monotherapy. This
suggests that insufficient RAF inhibition limits treatment efficacy and
indicates the need for more effective therapeutic approaches to potently
and durably target RAF/ERK signaling.

Although the unique biochemical properties of RAF inhibitors have been a
topic of intensive investigation, a unified model of RAF inhibitor action
has been lacking. Our biochemical and structural analysis in a panel of
RAF inhibitors with different structural properties revealed that they
exert their effects via the combined outcome of two distinct allosteric
mechanisms. RAF priming and dimerization are the result of RAF/RAS-GTP
interaction upon inhibitor binding to RAF and stabilization of the
αC-helix in the IN (active) position. Resistance of the dimeric RAF to
vemurafenib and dabrafenib is the result of stabilization of the
αC-helix of the drug-bound protomer towards the OUT (inactive) position,
a conformation that sterically prevents occupancy of both RAF protomers.
Next generation RAF inhibitors that stabilize the αC-helix of RAF
towards the IN position (αC-IN RAF inhibitors) allow occupancy of both
RAF protomers and thus accomplish potent inhibition of the dimeric form
of RAF.

We further provide structural, biochemical and cell-based evidence that
next generation αC-IN RAF inhibitors (such as MLN480, TAK632, LY3009120,
AZ628 and others) will be more effective for the treatment of patients
with tumors expressing non-V600 BRAF mutants and in BRAFV600E colorectal

and thyroid tumors. However, αC-IN RAF inhibitors are predicted to have
a low therapeutic window, since they inhibit dimeric wild-type BRAF also
in normal cells.

Together our findings provide a blueprint for the development of RAF
inhibitors with defined biochemical properties and support therapeutic
strategies in which relatively lower, non-toxic concentrations of αC-IN
inhibitors will be administered in combination with currently approved
RAF and MEK inhibitor regimens for the treatment of BRAFV600E melanoma,
colorectal and thyroid cancers, as well as for tumors with BRAF mutations
other than V600.


