Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel targeting of tumor-infiltrating TNFR2 Tregs: removing
suppression with microenvironment-specific antibodies.


Background: A recognized and potent subtype of regulatory T cells (Tregs)
expresses tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (TNFR2), a member of the tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily. TNFR2 expressing Tregs are
overabundant in human and murine tumors and are the most potent
suppressors of host immune responses. In addition, recent data in diverse
human tumors show that TNFR2-expressing host T cells are the dominant
Tregs in the tumor microenvironment, expressed far in excess of OX40 and
GITR. Unlike many tumor markers, TNFR2 has limited expression in the
immune system and almost no expression on parenchymal cells. This makes
TNFR2 Tregs an attractive target for anticancer therapy.

Methods: We produced monoclonal antibodies to human TNFR2 with the goal
of inactivating the potent host Tregs that express TNFR2, competing with
the agonism of TNF and inactivating infiltating Tregs of human tumors.
Tregs from fresh ovarian ascites fluid were compared to Tregs from normal
human blood donors for antibody potency.

Results: Using a 48-hr cell-based Treg assay, we showed that TNFR2
antagonistic antibodies can inhibit Treg proliferation, suppress soluble
TNFR2 secretion on normal cells and allow T effector expansion. The
antagonism is dominant, succeeding even in the presence of TNF, which is
a TNFR2 agonist. Furthermore, the structural biology of dominant TNFR2
receptor antagonism uncovers a unique conformation that equally inhibits
downstream NFkB signaling. We also showed that dominant TNFR2 antibodies
in a dose dependent fashion kill Tregs in ovarian cancer infiltrates more
strongly than Tregs from healthy donors. Treg killing in the cancer
microenvironment was dependent on cell proliferation and turnover the
Tregs.

Conclusion: In sum, blocking TNFR2 signaling on the most potent Tregs of
the tumor microenvironment with a dominant antagonist antibody
selectively heightens death of the immunosuppressive Tregs in the tumor
microenvironment, at least in ovarian cancer. With the expanding
knowledge that TNFR2 Tregs are the most potent host cells of the immune
response, their dominance in diverse human tumor infiltrates and the
natural low expression of this marker on normal lymphoid cells makes
targeting of TNFR2 in the tumor microenvironment attractive.


