Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of LPAR1 and fibrosis in breast cancer metastasis.


Tumor metastasis is a complex process in which tumor cells disseminate
from the primary tumor to colonize distant organ sites. The majority of
breast cancer related deaths are from metastatic disease, in part due to
acquired resistance to chemotherapies. Aberrant tumor microenvironment
often resembles fibrotic lesions where dysregulated cell signaling
pathways alter tissue architecture and promote chronic inflammation. In
fact, multiple studies have demonstrated a positive link between cancer
metastasis and fibrosis, a condition characterized by increased activated
fibroblasts (defined as αSMA positive) and extracellular matrix (EMC)
such as collagen 1 secretion. Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a signaling
molecule that activates a family of G-protein coupled LPA receptors
(LPARs) in both metastasis and fibrosis. Specifically, LPAR1 is highly
expressed in metastatic breast cancer cell lines, and its activation is
involved in the colonization and proliferation of cancer cells during the
metastatic process. Our previous data have shown that inhibition of LPAR1
reduced the metastatic potential of breast cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo. We sought to further study the relationship between metastasis,
fibrosis and LPA signaling using mouse models of metastatic breast
cancer. First, we investigated the extent to which metastasis is
accompanied by fibrosis by utilizing 11 spontaneous mouse tumor models of
metastatic breast cancer. Mouse lung sections were stained with either
αSMA, collagen 1, or Masson’s trichrome (pan collagen fiber stain)
followed by Ashcroft scoring. To evaluate whether targeting the observed
fibrosis therapeutically could prevent metastasis, mice were injected
intravenously with the breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231T followed by
randomization to treatment with either Nintedanib or Pirfenidone (two FDA
approved drugs for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, IPF). Separately, mice
were also treated with doxorubicin or paclitaxel, both of which are used
clinically in treating metastatic disease. We found that fibrosis
occurred in the majority of the mouse tumor models examined (9 out of
11), although the extent of fibrosis was heterogeneous across models.
Treatment of lung metastases with IPF drugs alone, however, did not show
efficacy in reducing metastatic burden. Interestingly, we observed that
while treatment of lung metastases with chemotherapy reduced metastasis,
it significantly increased the amount of fibrosis observed compared to
vehicle treated mice. This finding is significant as most patients
diagnosed with breast cancer will receive at least one round of
chemotherapy in the course of treatment. Therefore, further studies will
look to evaluate whether targeting fibrosis with LPAR1 or LPA inhibitors
is more effective when given concurrently or post chemotherapy treatment
as a means to decrease overall metastatic burden.


