Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: USP15 inhibits HPV16 E6 degradation and catalytically inactive
USP15 has reduced inhibitive activity.


HPVs can be classified as either high-risk or low-risk depending on the
transforming potential of the virus. Most cervical cancers and a
significant proportion of other anogenital cancers have been associated
with infection by a small number of high-risk genital HPV types.
Tumorigenesis induced by high-risk genital HPVs has been linked to the
expression of two viral oncoproteins, E6 and E7, which cooperate in
cellular immortalization and transformation processes. HPV16 E6 is an
oncoprotein that causes the development of high-risk type human papilloma
virus (HPV) and induces cancers, including oropharyngeal, anal, and
cervical cancers. The stability of E6 is essential for its complete
function as an oncoprotein. Using the yeast two-hybrid system, we
identified ubiquitin-specific protease 15 (USP15) as an HPV16
E6-interacting protein. USP15 encodes a protein that consist of 952 amino
acids and functions as a deubiquitinating enzyme. Deubiquitination is an
essential process that releases ubiquitin chains from ubiquitin-protein
conjugates. Aberrations in the ubiquitin-proteasome system have been
recently connected to the pathogenesis of several human protein
degradation disorders, including cancer and neurodegenerative diseases;
as such, the proteasome is now considered to be important in the
mechanism of carcinogenesis.

USP15 cleaves polyubiquitin chains of HPV16 E6 and/or ubiquitin
precursors. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that USP15 was highly
expressed in normal cervical squamous cells, and cervical cancer cells.
Our results indicated that USP15 can increase the level of HPV16 E6 by
inhibiting E6 degradation. USP15 dose-dependently inhibited the
degradation of HPV16 E6. In contrast, catalytically inactive mutants of
USP15 had a reduced inhibitory effect on E6 degradation. In particular,
USP15 mutants of all three cysteine boxes and the NHL mutant of the KRF
box had a drastically reduced inhibitive effect on HPV16 E6 degradation.
In addition, HPV16 E6 mRNA was not induced by USP15; therefore, HPV16 E6
appears to be post-translationally regulated. These results suggest that
USP15 has the ability to stabilize E6 as a deubiquitinating enzyme, and
HPV16 E6 can affect biological functions as an oncoprotein in infected
human cells.


