Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The clonal composition of colorectal cancer cell lines is defined
by the maintenance of specific genomic imbalances, not by ongoing
chromosomal instability.


Tumor type specific genomic imbalances are the defining feature of
carcinomas. It remains elusive to which extent intratumor heterogeneity
and the clonal composition of cancer cell populations influences the
genetic makeup and the phenotype of tumors. Many studies aimed at
understanding the idiosyncrasies of cancer rely on the analysis of cell
lines derived from primary tumors. In an attempt to decipher patterns of
chromosomal heterogeneity we analyzed the widely used colorectal cancer
cell lines DLD-1, HCT116, H508, SW620, HT-29 and SW480 using FISH and
gene expression profiling. First, we applied a four color probe set that
targets the oncogenes EGFR, CCND1, CDX2 and TERC and enumerated 200
metaphase spread, which included chromosome counts, and 5,000 interphase
cells. Not surprisingly, the mismatch repair deficient cell lines DLD-1
and HCT116 were the most stable, whereas the aneuploid cell lines
displayed a higher degree of instability. These results prompted us to
apply our recently developed multiplex interphase FISH approach that
allows copy number analysis of 12 gene loci in individual cells to 11
single cell derived clones from both HT-29 and SW480. SW480 was
considerably more instable than HT-29. The parental lines consisted of
major clones, which were propagated in the single cell derived lines.
These analyses were complemented by gene expression profiling of the
single cell derived clones and the parental cell lines using the
Nanostring technology which measures expression levels of 770
cancer-associated genes. The SW480 clones separated into two distinct
clusters that reflect discrete ploidy levels that were also present in
the parental line. We then explored whether mutations of the BRAF (HT-29)
and KRAS (SW480) genes observed in the parental lines were maintained in
the derived clones; this was the case in all instances. Finally, we
reconstructed phylogenetic trees of tumor evolution using a specifically
developed algorithm, termed FISHTrees.

Our meticulous analysis of the clonal composition of these colorectal
cancer models shows that, despite a certain degree of chromosomal
instability, specific genomic imbalances are maintained. The results
challenge the concept of ongoing chromosomal instability in cancer cell
populations. This suggests a karyotype evolution that is driven by the
necessity to arrive at a different plateau of chromosomal copy number as
the driving force of carcinogenesis.


