Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The association between sarcopenia and cellular senescence of
cancer associated fibroblast in pancreatic cancer.


Background: Sarcopenia is a syndrome that is characterized by progressive
and generalized loss of skeletal muscle mass and strength. Several recent
studies have shown that sarcopenia has prognostic significance for
patients with malignant disease, including cancers of the esophagus,
colon, pancreas and liver. On the other hand, cellular senescence is
gaining increased attention from clinicians and researchers, yet
incompletely understood role in the development of malignant disease.
Previous studies reported that Caveolin-1 expression in cancer associated
fibroblast is associated with cancer progression, and it is known in
recent years that caveolin-1 plays a major role in controlling cellular
senescence. Therefore, we hypothesized that sarcopenia causes cellular
senescence of cancer associated fibroblast (CAF). The aim of this study
is to clarify the between sarcopenia and cellular senescence of CAF
through Caveolin-1 in pancreatic cancer.

Methods: All consecutive patients with pancreatic cancer underwent
curative resection between January 2004 and December 2014 were enrolled
in this retrospective study. Skeletal muscle and visceral fat amount at
the third lumbar vertebra (L3) in the inferior direction were quantified
using enhanced computed tomography. The patients were divided into two
groups, with and without sarcopenia, based on Japan Society of Hepatology
guidelines for sarcopenia. Next, Caveolin-1 expression was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Moreover, we investigated the relationship
between sarcopenia and Caveolin-1 expression.

Results: Forty-one (31.5%) of 130 patients were identified with
sarcopenia. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that patients with sarcopenia
had a significantly worse cancer specific survival than patients without
sarcopenia (3-year-survival: 37.2% vs 50.4%, respectively, p = 0.038).
While, a high level of Caveolin-1 expression was detected in 29.2%
(38/130) of our samples. High Caveolin-1 expression in CAF significantly
correlated with poor prognoses with respect to overall survival (log-rank
p = 0.014) and disease-free survival (log-rank p = 0.0015).
However, there was no relationship between sarcopenia and IHC score of
Caveolin-1 expression in CAF.

Conclusion: The present result suggested that sarcopenia and Caveolin-1
expression of CAF in patient with pancreatic cancer is respectively
associated with poor prognosis, but not associated each other. Now, we
focus on Caveolin-1 expression of CAF, and establish primary cultures of
CAF from the pancreatic cancer tissues and examine its function.


