Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BT1718, a novel bicyclic peptide-maytansinoid conjugate targeting
MT1-MMP for the treatment of solid tumors: Design of bicyclic peptide and
linker selection.


Bicycles® are novel binding agents comprising small bicyclic peptides
(1.5-3 KDa) constrained via a chemical scaffold, selected for high
affinity and selectivity to targets of interest. MT1 (MMP14/MT1-MMP) is a
membrane-associated metalloprotease overexpressed in many solid tumours
and is implicated in tumor invasion and metastasis. MT1 expression
positively correlates with poor prognosis.

Phage libraries containing 1015 unique peptide sequences were
post-translationally cyclized with thiol-reactive scaffold and used in an
optimized, high-throughput selection process to identify Bicycles® to
the hemopexin domain of MT1. Additional iterative rounds of directed
phage based screening were used to optimize affinity and off-phage
non-natural amino acids were introduced at select positions to improve
plasma stability to generate the lead Bicycle binder. The lead anti-MT1
Bicycle was further modified with a sarcosyl spacer to form N241. N241
binds specifically to the hemopexin domain of MT1 with a Kd of
approximately 2 nM with no binding observed to the catalytic domain of
the protease nor to any of the related MMP family members tested.
Importantly and in contrast to most antibodies, N241 binds with similar
affinity to MT1 from multiple species including rodent, dog and non-human
primate.

Since the expected rapid tumor penetration and specific binding of these
small peptidyl-binders makes them ideal for use in targeted delivery
approaches, a series of Bicycle drug conjugates (BDCs) were prepared;
N241 was conjugated to potent maytansinoid cytotoxics via linkers which
varied in their cleavability. Though all the BDCs maintained high
affinity for MT1, efficacy toward MT1-positive human tumor mouse
xenografts varied with linker stability. BDCs with the most stable
linkers were the least active suggesting that optimal tumor activation
was obtained with linkers that could be cleaved more rapidly. Due to the
rapid clearance and limited systemic exposure of these small-targeting
BDCs, only the most labile linker showed toxicity in the mouse studies.
Of the BDCs tested, BT1718, composed of N241 and DM1 conjugated via the
SPP linker, demonstrated an optimal therapeutic index. Potent anti-tumor
efficacy with BT1718 was observed across a panel of MT1-positive
xenografts with complete tumor regressions observed in most models at
doses that were well tolerated. In one example, HT-1080 fibrosarcoma
subcutaneous xenografts were intraveneously treated with BT1718 when the
tumor size had reached approximately 180 mm3. BT1718 given at 3 mg/kg
once a week resulted in tumor stasis while BT1718 given at 10 mg/kg once
a week or 3 mg/kg twice a week induced complete regression.

In summary, BT1718, a highly active, targeted drug conjugate with unique
pharmacological properties is a promising therapeutic candidate for the
treatment of MT1-MMP-positive solid tumors.


