Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel KRAS-targeting agent: systematic validation
using in silico, in solution, cell models, PDX and transgenic mouse
models.


Aberrant KRAS signaling plays an important role in the pathogenesis of
malignancies including pancreatic (PDAC), colon and lung cancer. Because
therapies targeting either downstream or associated factors of KRAS
pathway have shown dismal results in clinics, there is a need to identify
effective agents targeting active KRAS (GTP-KRAS) protein. In this study,
we screened a chemical library for their efficacy to inhibit KRAS
activity using in silico methods. Based on their binding energy, we
selected a candidate agent (LP1) that exhibited high potential of binding
to KRAS protein at a region where KRAS-activator protein “SOS1” binds
to, and GDP-GTP exchange takes place. We next investigated if LP1
exhibits the efficacy of KRAS binding in biological solution using
recombinant proteins and employing drug development techniques i.e.,
florescence (FL)-based competition, Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
(ITC) and Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) assays. The FL-based study show
that LP1 inhibits the binding of SOS1 protein and GTP molecules to KRAS
protein. The ITC and SPR analysis showed that LP1 binds to the KRAS
protein (at 10 μM). We next determined the KRAS-inhibitory potential of
LP1 in activated-KRAS cells representing premalignant and malignant
models of PDAC, colon and lung cancer. Dissociation study involving
incubation of KRAS/SOS1 proteins showed the LP1 inhibits the binding of
SOS1 to KRAS. Notably, LP1 therapy significantly decreased the (i)
KRAS-GTP protein levels (ii) growth and (iii) proliferation of
activated-KRAS single cell and 3D Organoid cultures. We next tested
KRAS-inhibitory efficacy of LP1 in PDAC patient-derived (PD) tumor
explants and found that LP1 therapy (10 days) significantly decreased
growth of, and KRAS-GTP levels in PD explants. Based on the in silico, in
solution, cell model and PD-explant data, we determined the efficacy of
LP1 as a KRAS inhibitor in in vivo conditions. We first performed the
pharmacokinetic study of LP1 in mice and observed that LP1 is
physiologically available in the blood (peak of 15-20 μM) after oral and
intraperitoneal administrations and detectable up to 24h
post-administration. We next tested LP1 therapy in tumor xenograft models
and show that LP1 therapy significantly reduces the tumorigenicity of
KRAS-activated PDAC and colon cell-derived tumors implanted in athymic
mice. We next tested efficacy of LP1 administration on the developmental
phases of PDAC disease (from normal to high grade neoplasia/early stage
carcinoma) and show that LP1 feeding for six months caused a significant
inhibition of PanIN development in KPCG12D transgenic mouse model.
Notably the analysis of tumors xenograft models and pancreatic tissues of
KPCG12D mice receiving LP1 therapy exhibited reduced KRAS-GTP levels.
Taken together, these data show that LP1 is a potent KRAS activity
inhibitor and a potential candidate for clinical use against KRAS-driven
cancers.


