Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel mRNA purification method with RNaseIII improves efficacy of
RNA chimeric antigen receptor T cells.


Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR) T-cells made with mRNA offer a transient
and safe alternative to viral CARs, mitigating the concern for persistent
unwanted side effects from constitutively active T-cells. Previous
studies have shown that mRNA CARs are transiently effective, but lack CAR
persistence and have struggled to show success across tumor types. We
hypothesized the efficacy of mRNA CARs could be improved by utilizing
recent advancements in RNA technology including the use of modified
uracil and a novel purification method with RNaseIII to prevent double
stranding that induces toxicity. Using the established CD19 CAR model in
B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, we created mRNA CARs using
previously described methods and compared them to mRNA CARs created using
modification of uracil and/or purification to remove any aberrant double
stranded mRNA. Comparing the modified and purified mRNA CAR T cells to
those created using prior methods of making mRNA, both modified and
purified mRNA CAR T cells showed a two-fold increase in expression of the
CAR on their surface initially, as well as a two-fold improvement in
cytotoxic killing of leukemia cells in vitro that persisted for up to
five days. Both the modified and purified mRNA CAR T cells also showed
reduced expression of negative checkpoint regulators compared to original
RNA CAR T cells. However, in vivo studies using a patient-derived
xenograft model with a single dose of CAR T cells revealed purified RNA
CAR T cells offered the most robust 2-log enhanced suppression of
leukemic burden. RNaseIII is a novel purification technique that has not
yet been reported in the literature for RNA manufacturing. Our results
provide a time efficient purification method that can be easily
incorporated into RNA production for use in clinical trials, and poise
RNA CARs for increased efficacy as new CAR targets emerge and are being
tested. Additional studies are ongoing investigating if the observed
improved efficacy will translate to improved cytotoxicity in solid tumor
models.


