Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel woodchuck model of hepatic artery infusion (HAI) with FACT
complex targeted drug CBL0137.


Background: The liver has unique anatomy in that most blood flow to
normal hepatocytes is derived from the portal venous system, while liver
tumors obtain their nutrient blood supply exclusively from the hepatic
artery. Hepatic artery infusion (HAI) concentrates chemotherapy agents
delivering them directly to the tumor bed with the first-pass effect.
Although, HAI chemotherapy as a regional therapy has been used clinically
for decades in the treatment of both primary and metastatic cancers of
the liver, significant toxicity remains a concern, and clinical results
have been mixed. The purpose of this study was to establish preclinical
HAI model in a woodchuck and administer the FACT (facilitates chromatin
transcription) complex targeted drug CBL0137.

Material and methods: Woodchuck hepatitis virus infected Eastern
Woodchucks (Marmota monax) were used for the study. Hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) developed spontaneously about 18 months after birth. The
size of HCC was monitored with ultrasound every 2 weeks, and 4 woodchucks
bearing over 2 cm tumors were used for the experimental group.
Prophylactic cholecystectomy was performed first, and then a 2Fr.
(ID=0.012”, OD=0.025”) vascular access port (VAP) was implanted in
the gastroduodenal artery (GDA) after collateral vessel ligations. HAI
was performed at room temperature via a VAP using 15mg/kg of CBL0137 at a
volume of 3 mL/kg for 30 minutes, and tumor responses were investigated
with MRI on day 0 (the surgery day of HAI port) and day 7 after HAI.

Results: Anatomy variations existed in the size and location of the
supraduodenal artery or pancreatico-duodenal artery. 4/4 success rate of
a port implantation was achieved without mortality, but 1/4 animals
suffered post-operative bleeding at the port head site, attributed to
coagulopathy secondary to hepatic dysfunction. And, 4/4 animals were
partially anorexic for up to 7 days post-surgery. Decreased tumor volume
and Ktrans (a measure of capillary permeability) were detected 7 days
after single HAI with CBL0137.

Conclusion: Although the anticancer effect of CBL0137 on HCC was not
clear because of a lack of the control group, we successfully implanted a
VAP into the GDA of 4 woodchucks bearing unresectable HCC for HAI. The
described woodchuck model may serve as a platform for identifying novel
drugs and optimal conditions for the treatment of primary and metastatic
liver tumors.


