Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-cancer evaluation of various solvent extracts of blue
honeysuckle berry (Lonicera caerulea L.) against prostate cancer cells.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common cancer among men in the
United Sates. It is estimated 1 in 6 men will be diagnosed with PCa and
approximately 180,890 new cases are predicted in 2016 alone. Standard
treatments for PCa include surgery, radiation, chemotherapy and hormonal
therapy or a combination of these treatments. However, factors like
patient health, drug resistance, specificity, and toxicity can result in
poor disease prognosis. In order to overcome these limitations and
improve patient prognosis, there is an urgent need to identify new
anti-cancer agents with minimal side effects. Current studies are being
focused on natural products and their components for alternative
therapeutics. Blue Honeysuckle (Lonicera caerule L.) a berry native to
northeast Asia, is known to be rich in Vitamin C and polyphenols such as
anthocyanins, flavonoids, and phenolic acids. Polyphenols are found to
have several therapeutic effects such as anti-inflammatory, antioxidant
and antimicrobial properties. Our present study used sequential solvent
extracts of Blue Honeysuckle (BHS) berry using Hexane, Ethyl Acetate,
Methanol, and Water respectively. These fractions were used to assess
various therapeutic effects of BHS on DU 145, PC-3, C4-2 and LNCaP PCa
cell lines. The goal was to identify the most potent BHS fraction that is
effective against PCa using pre-clinical studies. MTT assays were used to
identify the anti-proliferative effects of various BHS fractions. The
above indicated PCa cells were treated with different doses (10-150
µg/mL) of BHS factions over various time periods (24, 48, 72 hr). Our
data revealed that Hexane extract (HE) exhibited the highest inhibition
of cell viability in a time and dose-dependent manner. HE fraction showed
to have an IC50 of 89.6 μg/mL for DU 145, 117.4 μg/mL for PC-3, 163.3
μg/mL for C4-2 and 140.84 for LNCaP cells. Moreover, BHS HE fraction
showed a decrease in migration capacity and colony formation ability of
PCa cells in vitro. Cellular senescence assay was performed to assess
β-Galactosidase activity in PCa cells treated with BHS HE extract. All
the PCa cell lines treated with 100 µg/mL of BHS HE showed increased
senescence. Western blotting was performed to identify the potential
anti-cancer mechanism of BHS against PCa using DU 145 and PC-3 cell
lines. Results from this study indicated that DU 145 and PC-3 cell lines
after 24 hr treatment with 100 μg/mL of various BHS fractions especially
BHS HE showed an increase in apoptosis (Caspase 3,8,9 and PARP-1) and
autophagy (LC3 A/B) markers. Furthermore, cell cycle analysis of DU 145
and PC-3 cells treated with BHS HE extract showed increased apoptotic
cells. Further analysis of apoptotic and autophagy pathways modulated by
BHS treatments are required to illustrate its potential underlying
anti-cancer mechanisms in PCa. In conclusion, results from our study
warrant further evaluation of BHS berry for potential PCa management.


