Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Does poor prognosis in African Americans with MSI-H colorectal
cancer associate with altered immune markers.


BACKGROUND: Microsatellite instability high (MSI-H) of sporadic
colorectal carcinomas (CRC) is usually associated with improved prognosis
and a high density of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. However, African
Americans with MSI-H have poor prognosis.

AIM: To evaluate whether or not expression of different immune and tumor
markers individually or in combination in African American MSI-H CRC
associate with the prognosis status.

METHODS: Tissues Microarray (TMA) were prepared by microdissection from
FFPE (Formalin Fixed Paraffin Embedded) blocks of 15 MSI-H patients.
Immune markers (CD8+, Granzymes, Perforins, CD4+, STAT1, IRF1 and IRF5)
and PD-L1 status were analyzed by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Demography
and clinical data including TNM, tumor grading (WHO standard),
histological type of the tumor, date of diagnosis, date of the last
follow-up examination, treatment, comorbidities, metastasis, recurrence,
5-year disease-free survival and death were collected. RESULTS: There
were 4 patients with improved prognosis (27%) with relatively high CD4
density (2 with >50% and 2 with 11-50%) regardless of PD-L1 status
(3+/1-), stage (II,III), and other immune markers (CD8, CD4, Granzymes,
Perforins, IRF1, IRF5 and STAT1). One of the improved prognosis patients
with KRAS mutation has elevated expression of all considered immune
markers besides CD4. There were 9 patients (6 dead, 3 alive) with poor
prognosis, with different immune and tumor markers level (3 were PD-L1+
and 5 have relatively high CD4 count; but with low level of STAT1. There
were also 2 patients with expected improved prognosis based on their
immune markers level (stage II), however, they died within the 5 year
period post-diagnosis, due to their age (98 and 87 years old).

Conclusion: MSI-H Colorectal cancer from African American patients has
poor prognosis which may correlate with the nature of tumor-associated
immune response. Other factors such as MSH3 defects might cancel the
positive prognosis of MSI-H status. Nonetheless, low STAT1 and low CD4
may be indicators of poorer prognosis.


