Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel sulfonamide derivative inhibits JAK2-STAT3 signaling and
induces ROS-mediated apoptosis in colorectal cancer cells.


Colorectal cancer is a major worldwide health problem owing to its high
prevalence and mortality rate. Developments in screening, prevention,
biomarker, personalized therapies and chemotherapy have improved
detection and treatment. However, despite these advances many patients
with advanced metastatic tumors will still succumb to the disease. New
anti-cancer agents are needed for treating advance stage colorectal
cancer as most of the deaths occur due to cancer metastasis. A recently
developed novel sulphonamide derivative,
4-((2-(4-(Dimethylamino)phenyl)quinazolin-4-yl)amino)benzenesulfonamide
(3d) has shown to have potent antitumor effect; however the mechanism
underlying the antitumor effect remains unknown. Our study revealed that
3d treatment significantly reduced the viability of human colorectal
cancer cells HT-29 and SW620. This is further evidenced by the induction
of p53 and Bax, release of cytochrome c, activation of caspase-9,
caspase-7 and caspase-3 and cleavage of PARP in 3d treated cells. This
compound was found to have significant effect on the inhibition of
anti-apoptotic proteins, Bcl2, BclxL and XIAP. The results further
demonstrate that 3d inhibited JAK2-STAT3 pathway by decreasing the
constitutive and IL-6-induced phosphorylation of JAK2 and STAT3. 3d
further decreased JAK2- STAT3 target genes like Cyclin D1 and Survivin.
Furthermore 3d treatment induced the generation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) in human colorectal cancer cells. Confirming our
observation, NAC significantly inhibited ROS production, induction of
apoptosis, cytochrome c release and PARP cleavage. Additionally,
treatment with 3d resulted in decreased glutathione (GSH) levels. The
results further demonstrate that 3d inhibited cell migration by
modulating EMT markers and inhibiting TGFβ-induced phosphorylation of
Smad2 and Samd3. Collectively these findings indicate that 3d inhibited
JAK2-STAT3 signaling; induced apoptosis via generation of reactive oxygen
species and inhibition of cell migration by altering EMT markers and
TGFβ-Smad pathway.


