Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peroxiredoxin 2 mediates the survival of ECM-detached ovarian
cancer cells.


Non-tumorigenic epithelial cells require anchorage to the extracellular
matrix (ECM) in order to survive; however, it has been recognized that
metastatic cancer cells must have the ability to survive in anchorage
independence. Approximately 70% of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cases
are diagnosed after EOC cells have already metastasized, making EOC more
difficult to treat. EOC cells shed from the primary tumor and accumulate
in ascites in the peritoneal cavity before attaching and forming
secondary tumors throughout the peritoneal cavity. A better understanding
of the molecular mechanisms involved in the survival of this non-adhesive
subset of cells that survive in anchorage independence in the ascites
could lead to the development of improved chemotherapeutics and thus
resulting in better survival rates of EOC patients. Striking increases of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) mediated by ECM-detachment has been shown
to inhibit survival in non-tumorigenic mammary epithelial cells.
Furthermore, previous publications from our laboratory suggest that the
antioxidant enzymes catalase, superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), and
superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) are critical for metabolic maintenance and
survival of ECM-detached breast cancer cells; however, many other
antioxidant enzymes and their role in the survival of ECM-detached
ovarian cancer cells have yet to be unveiled. Here, we have found that
the antioxidant enzyme, Peroxiredoxin 2, is important in the survival of
ECM-detached ovarian cancer cells, and elimination of this enzyme in
SKOV3 cells results in decreased ability to survive in anchorage
independence. Thus, our data reveal that Peroxiredoxin 2 may be an
attractive target for the design of chemotherapeutics aimed at
eliminating metastatic ovarian cancer cells. Given these data, we are
working to understand the role of other members of the Peroxiredoxin
family, namely Peroxiredoxin 1, in the survival of ovarian cancer cells
in anchorage independence.


