Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent radiosensitization of adenoid cystic carcinoma in a patient
derived xenograft model using the MDM2 inhibitor AMG 232.


Purpose: Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is a relatively rare cancer that
typically arises in major or minor salivary gland tissues of the head and
neck. There are currently no approved systemic agents for ACC and no
established data supporting the delivery of chemoradiation for ACC
patients. The scarcity of validated preclinical model systems has
hampered research efforts. We report the successful establishment and
propagation of an ACC patient derived xenograft (PDX), genomic evaluation
of cancer associated mutations, and in vivo response to MDM2 inhibition
combined with radiotherapy. Because TP53 mutations are seen in Purpose:
Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is a relatively rare cancer that typically
arises in major or minor salivary gland tissues of the head and neck.
There are currently no approved systemic agents for ACC and no
established data supporting the delivery of chemoradiation for ACC
patients. The scarcity of validated preclinical model systems has
hampered research efforts. We report the successful establishment and
propagation of an ACC patient derived xenograft (PDX), genomic evaluation
of cancer associated mutations, and in vivo response to MDM2 inhibition
combined with radiotherapy. Because TP53 mutations are seen in <5% of
ACCs, we investigated the role of a small molecule MDM2 inhibitor, AMG
232.

Methods: An ACC PDX was established and assessed for common
cancer-associated mutations using the Illumina TruSeq Amplicon Cancer
panel. Xenografts were treated with focal radiation with or without AMG
232. Focal radiation was delivered at 0, 2, 5, or 8 Gy x 8 fractions
delivered twice weekly, with AMG 232 (50mg/kg) delivered daily by oral
gavage. Tumor size was measured by caliper and comparisons between
treatment groups made using a repeated measures ANOVA. A TCD50 was
calculated by fitting log-transformed data to a dose-response curve and
compared using the extra-sum-of-squares f test. Target inhibition and
anti-cancer effect was confirmed via immuno-blotting of tumor lysates,
and IHC staining or in situ hybridization of relevant targets within FFPE
sections of tumors harvested 2 and 48 hrs post treatment.

Results: The histologic characteristics of the primary human tumor are
maintained in subsequent murine passages of this ACC PDX. Mutational
profiling determined that the PDX was wildtype for TP53. AMG 232 alone
resulted in modest slowing of tumor growth. Radiation alone produced a
tumor growth delay in a dose dependent manner but did not result in
sustained local tumor control. Strikingly, the combination of AMG 232
with RT (including low dose radiation of 2 Gy) produced dramatic tumor
shrinkage and potent tumor control three months after the end of
treatment. Target inhibition of MDM2 was confirmed by western blot of
tumor lysates and IHC of FFPE samples taken 2 hrs post treatment.
Antiproliferative and apoptotic effects were confirmed by western blot of
tumor lysates and IHC of FFPE samples taken at 48 hrs post treatment.

Conclusions: This study suggests that MDM2 inhibition may provide potent
radiosensitization in TP53 WT ACC. While additional translational models
are warranted, the powerful response profile observed suggests that phase
I clinical trial evaluation of this combination is worthy for this
challenging malignancy.


