Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic potential of fingolimod against prostate cancer cells
is partly attributed to interrupting the cross talk between estrogen and
sphingolipid metabolisms.


Sphingolipids influence tumor microenvironment in different malignancies.
Estrogen and estrogen metabolites are involved in prostate cancer.
Fingolimod is Sphingokinase-1 (SphK1) inhibitor which possesses
anticancer properties in various tumor types. The aim of the current
study is to investigate the interference of Fingolimod with the cross
talk between sphingolipid and estrogen metabolisms within prostate cancer
cells as a novel therapeutic strategy. The design is based on determining
the mutual influence between estrogen metabolism/signaling and
sphingolipid metabolism within prostate cancer cells. Cytotoxicity using
SRB-U assay; cell cycle analysis using DNA cytometry and intracellular
caspase-3 concentration were assessed. Estrogen metabolites and estrogen
metabolizing enzymes were determined using LC/MS and RT-PCR,
respectively. Estrogen receptor (ERα and ERβ) expression and their
downstream signaling (CXCR4 and Cyclin-D1, respectively) were measured
using immunocytochemical staining and RT-PCR, respectively. Fingolimod
showed antiproliferative/cytotoxic effects against different prostate
cancer cells (LNCaP, DU145 and PC3) with IC50 ranging from 3.0±0.3 to
6.8±1.7 µM. Fingolimod induced significant decrease in estradiol,
estrone, 4-hydroxyestradiol and 16α-hydroxyestrone concentrations with
reciprocal increase in 2-methoxyestrone and 2-methoxyestradiol
concentrations. This was mirrored by significant down expression for the
enzymes, aromatese, CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 and over expression for the enzyme
COMT. Additionally, Fingolimod suppressed the expression of ERα and ERβ
within prostate cancer cells as well as their downstream signaling (CXCR4
and Cyclin-D1, respectively). Reciprocally, it was found that estradiol
and catechol estrogens induce the expression of SphK1 while methoxylated
catechol estrogen suppresses its expression. Our results give compelling
evidence that Fingolimod has therapeutic potential by modulating the
estrogenic micromilieu and interrupting its cross talk with sphingolipid
metabolism in prostate cancer cells.


