Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UHRF1 deficiency exerts anti-tumor immune responses in non-small
cell lung cancer.


Immune surveillance is essential for effective tumor clearance. However,
the tumor microenvironment is typically impermissive for proper
stimulation of both innate and adaptive immune populations. Epigenetic
inhibitors have recently been shown to function as immune sensitizing
reagents in the suppressive microenvironment. In our search for novel
epigenetic regulators with immunomodulatory functions, we found
ubiquitin-like with PHD and ring finger domain-containing protein 1
(UHRF1) being crucial for the suppression of immune activation. Loss of
UHRF1 in cancer cells led to significant reduction of tumor masses in a
syngeneic lung cancer model. The tumor shrinkage was due to increased
infiltration of T cells with the enhanced ability to proliferate and
produce IFN-gamma. Mechanistically, lung cancer cells deficient of UHRF1
had elevated expression of endogenous retrovirus genes due to DNA
demethylation, which associated with enhanced type I interferon
responses. Type I interferons are potent antitumor effector molecules by
promoting immune cell infiltration into the tumor microenvironment, yet
they can also dampen T cell activation by upregulating PD-L1 expression
in tumor cells. Surprisingly, UHRF1 deficient cancer cells failed to
upregulate PD-L1 even in the presence of excessive type I interferons,
indicative of additional regulatory pathways for PD-L1. We further found
that UHRF1 directly interacted with PD-L1 promoter regions and that UHRF1
promoted PD-L1 transcription. Therefore, the inhibition of UHRF1
augmented type I interferon responses while diminished PD-L1 expression,
which synergistically contributed to the immune activation phenotype.
Moreover, in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, UHRF1
expression was positively correlated with PD-L1 expression as well as
poor prognosis. Together, our data suggested that UHRF1 represents a
novel immuno-oncology target for NSCLC.


