Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ImmunoGraft® platform for the evaluation of Immuno-Oncology
agents in PDX tumors models.


Recent breakthroughs in Immunotherapy have given new hope to treating
previously untreatable tumor types and provide a better tolerated
alternative to standard agents. There is an unmet need for a pre-clinical
platform to test potential immune-oncology therapeutics that would also
provide a tool to examine the mechanisms of response to better predict
clinical outcomes. We have previously presented the Champions
ImmunoGraft®, an innovative pre-clinical model enabling
immunotherapeutic agents to be evaluated for efficacy in solid tumors.
This platform is more reflective of the human tumor microenvironment
(both immune and non-immune cell-based) and may be one of the most
translationally-relevant models to date for screening therapies targeting
the immune system. However, optimization of humanization and PDX
implantation protocols that allow a broader reconstitution of cell linage
and higher engraftment rate are necessary to further improve the
pre-clinical evaluation of immune-oncology therapeutics and enhance the
value of this modality for patient’s benefit.

To this end, immune-compromised NOG (PrkdcscidIl2rgtm1Sug) mice were
reconstituted (humanized) with human CD34+ cells using optimized
procedure and blood was collected at different time points post
engraftment to check for the major leukocyte linages. At ten weeks after
humanization, mature human CD45+ cells comprised close to 50% of the
leukocytes detected in the circulation and secondary lymphoid tissues of
the humanized animals. As a result of improved methodology of the
reconstitution protocol we have achieved an 85% success rate of
humanization with a shortened engraftment period utilizing fewer CD34+
cells that maintain humanization reconfirmed at 22 weeks post
reconstitution.

Champions TumorGraft® database contains more than one-thousand
clinically relevant well-annotated PDX models. We have complied data from
extensive genetic and protein expression analyses to design applicable
ImmunoGraft® studies for testing of Immuno-Oncology agents. We have
identified tumors expressing key markers that may predict response to
immunotherapy agents including PDL-1, CD40, IDO-1 and IDO-2 as well as
tumors that harbor a high mutational load. Here we present the efficacy
and clinically relevant endpoints of two well-studied checkpoint
inhibitors Ipilimumab and Pembrolizumab in this highly translational PDX
platform.


