Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pioglitazone inhibits periprostatic white adipose tissue
inflammation in obese mice.


Obesity is associated with an increased incidence of high-grade prostate
cancer (PC) and poor prognosis for PC patients. Recently, we showed that
obesity-related periprostatic white adipose tissue (WAT) inflammation,
characterized by crown-like structures (CLS) consisting of dead or dying
adipocytes surrounded by macrophages, was associated with high-grade PC
in men. It’s possible, therefore, that agents that suppress
periprostatic WAT inflammation will alter the natural history of PC.
Pioglitazone, a ligand of PPARγ, is used to treat diabetes and possesses
anti-inflammatory properties. Here our main objectives were to determine
if pioglitazone inhibited obesity-related periprostatic WAT inflammation
in mice and then to elucidate the underlying mechanism. Mice were fed
either a high fat (HF) diet or low fat (LF) diet to determine if obesity
caused periprostatic WAT inflammation as defined by the presence of CLS.
To determine if pioglitazone inhibited obesity-associated periprostatic
WAT inflammation, obese HF diet fed mice were either continued on HF diet
alone or treated with HF diet containing two doses (0.005% or 0.05% w/w)
of pioglitazone. Treatment with pioglitazone reduced the density of CLS
in periprostatic WAT, and suppressed levels of TNF-α, TGF-β and the
chemokine monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1). Importantly, the
ability of pioglitazone to suppress periprostatic WAT inflammation was
abrogated in MCP-1 knock out mice. Pioglitazone caused dose-dependent
induction of both adiponectin, an anti-inflammatory adipokine, and its
receptor AdipoR2 in cultured 3T3-L1 cells and in periprostatic WAT of
obese mice. Pioglitazone blocked TNF-α-mediated induction of MCP-1 in
3T3-L1 cells, an effect that was attenuated when either adiponectin or
AdipoR2 were silenced. Taken together, pioglitazone-mediated induction of
adiponectin suppressed the elevation in MCP-1 levels thereby attenuating
obesity-related periprostatic WAT inflammation. These findings strengthen
the rationale for future efforts to determine whether targeting the
PPARγ-adiponectin-MCP-1 axis will decrease periprostatic adipose
inflammation and thereby reduce the risk of high-grade PC or improve
outcomes for men with PC.


