Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An exergaming intervention to reduce breast cancer risk in Black
women.


Obesity and low physical activity rates contribute to high rates of
postmenopausal breast cancer in Black women. Use of new and exciting
strategies to increase physical activity should be tested in health
disparity populations at high risk of cancer. We tested the effect of a
six-month exercise intervention using the active videogaming systems
(exergaming) on anthropometric markers, body composition, and
cardiovascular fitness (VO2max) in overweight and obese Black women. We
conducted a six-month, two-arm randomized clinical trial comparing an
exergaming intervention group to a control group in 100 cancer-free,
overweight/obese, sedentary Black women who were 40-59 years of age.
Participants were randomized to a supervised facility-based exergaming
group (n=50) or a usual care control group (n=50). Participants in the
exergaming group followed an exercise program using the Nintendo Wii Fit
and/or the X-Box Kinect gaming systems under supervision of a clinical
exercise physiologist. Control group participants were asked to maintain
their normal daily activities. Endpoints were assessed at baseline, 3
months, and 6 months. Assessments included measurements of demographic
variables, medical history, physical activity, VO2max, anthropometric
variables (height, weight, waist and hip circumferences), and body
composition. Distribution of baseline characteristics between exergaming
and control groups was comparable except for education status and BMI.
Data on 3 month and 6-month follow-up were available for 66 participants.
Follow-up rates were similar for exergaming and control groups. Compared
to control group participants whose waist circumference on average
remained unchanged, exergaming group participants had lower waist
circumference at 3-months and 6- months compared to baseline (mean
change: -2.54 cm, P=0.05). Exergaming participants also had small changes
in weight (-1.4 lbs) at 6 months compared to control group in whom
average weight remained unchanged but this finding was not statistically
significant. Fat mass and lean mass as measured by DXA did not show any
changes at 3-months or 6-months in either the exergaming or the control
group. This pilot study of a short-term exergaming in overweight/obese
Black women was associated with small changes in waist circumference in
the intervention group. Given the challenges associated with traditional
physical activity interventions to reduce cancer risk, new and
non-traditional interventions like exergaming should be tested in larger
studies in health disparity populations.


