Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell penetrating proteins targeting Mcl-1 induce in vitro and in
vivo on-target cancer cell killing of Mcl-1 dependent cell lines.


The pro-survival protein Myeloid Cell Leukaemia-1 (Mcl-1) plays an
essential role in survival of numerous cancers. MCL-1 gene amplifications
occur in a variety of human cancers and overexpression of the Mcl-1
protein is often associated with chemotherapeutic resistance and disease
relapse. Complix has developed Cell Penetrating Alphabodies (CPAB), a
novel and unique therapeutic class of proteins engineered to efficiently
enter cells and inhibit proteins including Mcl-1.

High affinity Alphabodies (ABs) targeting Mcl-1 were engineered by a
combination of rational design and phage library screening. In affinity
assays, these ABs were shown to bind to Mcl-1 with picomolar affinities
whilst binding to Bcl-XL and Bcl-2 was below the detection limit of the
assay. In vitro, CPAB uptake was shown to occur rapidly with cytosolic
levels reaching up to 1 μM within 2 hours of CPAB exposure. Uptake was
associated with cell death of the Mcl-1 dependent multiple myeloma (MM)
cell line NCI-H929 (IC50=0.5 µM) and killing was correlated with
caspase-3/7 activation. Anti-Mcl-1 CPAB were also shown to disrupt
Mcl-1-Bak and Mcl-1-Bim complexes in H929 cells and induced
dose-dependent Bak activation. In a panel of MM cell lines, anti-Mcl-1
CPAB induced cell death with a median IC50 of 0.96 μM and cell killing
was not restricted to a specific subset of MM cell lines (CCDN1, MAF,
MMSET). Gene expression analysis revealed that the anti-Mcl-1 CPAB cell
killing potency correlates with MCL-1 gene expression but correlates best
with the MCL-1:BCL-2 gene expression ratio. The same gene expression
correlation analysis of the Bcl-2 targeting agent Venetoclax revealed an
inverse pattern to that achieved with the Mcl-1 specific CPAB.

In vivo, CPAB conferred with an albumin binding domain for extension of
half-life, showed a serum half-life in mice of more than 1 hour and
associated tumor concentrations of more than 1 µM. Immunohistochemistry
and direct detection of fractionated tumor tissue confirmed the
intracellular presence of the CPAB in the tumor cells. When given daily
IV at 20 mg/kg, anti-Mcl-1 CPAB induced tumor growth inhibition of 50%
versus control in two MM xenograft models (H929 and MOLP-8). Tumor growth
remained significantly inhibited even two days after the last treatment
in the MOLP-8 model and tumor growth inhibition was associated with
increased staining of cleaved caspase-3 as compared to vehicle treated
tumors.

In summary, anti-Mcl-1 CPAB efficiently kill Mcl-1 dependent cancer cell
lines by on-target effects as demonstrated by (1) disruption of Mcl-1-Bak
and Mcl-1-Bim complexes, (2) Bak activation and (3) correlation of
potency with MCL-1:BCL-2 gene expression ratio. These CPAB induced a
robust reduction in tumor growth in mouse models and represent a
best-in-class cell penetrating protein therapeutics for tackling
intracellular PPI critical to diseases with unmet medical need.


