Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell mRNA expression profiling reveals heterogeneity of
normal and malignant breast stem cell populations.


The normal breast contains epithelial populations which are
hierarchically organized, a profile recapitulated in breast cancer. At
the apex of these hierarchies are "stem like" cells defined by their
capacity to self-renew as well as to generate more differentiated
progeny. In breast cancer these "cancer stem cells" (CSCs) have been
shown to be important mediators of tumor metastasis and treatment
resistance. Although the phenotypes of normal rodent and human mammary
stem cells have been characterized, CSC populations are operationally
defined by their capacity for tumor initiation. In addition, putative
breast CSC markers such as CD44+/CD24low/- and or ALDH+ have proven
useful in enriching for cells capable of tumor initiation and previous
studies have suggested that these markers identify alternative
mesenchymal and epithelial stem cell states, respectively. However, it
remains unclear whether CSCs exist in discrete states or whether these
cells actually represent a continuum reflected in heterogeneity of cell
populations defined by expression of these markers. To address this
question we utilized single cell mRNA expression profiling of normal and
malignant breast stem cells. We first generated a panel of 96 genes
representing stem cell and developmental pathways and analyzed expression
of these 96 genes utilizing Fluidigm’s C1 and BioMark HD technologies
and TaqMan gene expression assays. We also utilized Fluidigm’s Polaris
to selectively isolate single cells that were then analyzed by illumina
RNA-Seq method. Utilizing these advanced technologies, we demonstrated
that both normal and malignant breast stem cells characterized by
CD44+/CD24low/- and or ALDH+ expression are highly heterogeneous. For
example, the ALDH isoforms ALDH1A1 and ALDH1A3 were each expressed in
some single cells and co-expressed in others. ALDH1A1 expressing single
cells appeared to express a unique gene pattern characterized by
SLIT/ROBO, PLXNA2, RHOU and HNF1a. These results suggest that at the
level of mRNA expression, normal and malignant breast stem cells display
a greater heterogeneity than has previously been reported. These results
have important implications for breast carcinogenesis as well as for the
development of therapeutic strategies designed to target CSCs in breast
cancer.


