Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel selective Mcl-1 inhibitor exhibits in vitro and in vivo
efficacy in melanoma.


Metastatic melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer that still has
limited treatment options and dismal 5-year year survival rates as low as
15%. Only recently has there been significant progress in the treatment
of metastatic melanoma, advent by molecular targeted drugs and
immunotherapy, but their limitations are exposed as these cancers are
quickly able to develop resistance. Dysregulation of apoptotic machinery
in melanoma allows the cancer cells to evade cell death and contributes
to treatment resistance. Up-regulation of Mcl-1, a member of the Bcl-2
family of anti-apoptotic proteins, has been correlated with melanoma
progression and metastasis. Mcl-1 amplification is one of the most common
genetic aberrations found in human cancers and has been labeled as a
marker of aggressive oncogenesis and poor patient prognosis. Previous
studies have pointed to Mcl-1 as a viable therapeutic target for the
treatment of melanoma and conclude that small molecule Mcl-1 inhibitors
may appeal this unmet medical need. We have discovered and characterized
a new class of selective small molecule Mcl-1 inhibitors using various
biochemical, functional, and cell based assays; further development of
these compounds allowed us to achieve potent low-nanomolar binding
affinity for Mcl-1 and more than 300-fold selectivity over Bcl-2/Bcl-xL.
Our most potent inhibitor, 483-LM, was screened across a panel of human
melanoma cell lines using a cell proliferation assay and revealed varying
levels of sensitivity. A BH3 profiling assay demonstrates that C8161, the
cell line most sensitive to our inhibitor, solely relies on Mcl-1 for
survival. The Mcl-1 dependence of C8161 might contribute to the known
metastatic nature of this cell line. Mechanistic studies revealed that
483-LM effectively engaged the endogenous Mcl-1 protein after treatment
of C8161, as determined by a CETSA assay, and prompted disruption of
protein-protein interactions between Mcl-1 and several pro-apoptotic
proteins, including Bax, Bak and Bim. This was followed by induction of
Bax/Bak dependent apoptosis and activation of hallmarks of the intrinsic
apoptotic pathway, including mitochondrial outer membrane depolarization,
caspase activation, and PARP cleavage. Importantly, treatment with 483-LM
caused massive up-regulation of the pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein Noxa,
an effect apparent after an 8 hour treatment, which contributes to the
induction of cell death. The in vivo efficacy studies with 483-LM showed
significant effect on tumor growth and caspase-3 activation in tumor
samples. Overall, our data indicate that Mcl-1 inhibitors are a promising
treatment option for aggressive metastatic melanoma and warrant further
preclinical investigation of 483-LM as a promising selective Mcl-1
inhibitor to be used as a single agent and in combination with
chemotherapy and immunotherapy.


