Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting CD47- SIRPα interaction by novel peptide-based
antagonists.


Background: Cluster of differentiation (CD47) is a trans-membrane
glycosylated protein which is upregulated in several cancers. Increased
expression of CD47 on tumor cells is associated with immune evasion and
cancer progression. CD47 through its interaction with signal regulatory
protein alpha (SIRPα), a cell-surface molecule on macrophages inhibits
phagocytosis of tumor cells. Disrupting CD47-SIRPα interactions by
monoclonal antibodies targeting CD47 and recombinant SIRPα proteins have
been used as therapeutic strategies for treating cancer. Our objective
was to discover and develop peptide/peptidomimetic based CD47 antagonists
for disrupting CD47-SIRPα interactions.

Methods: Through rational design based on crystal structure of
CD47/SIRPα interacting interface, we designed peptides having potential
to disrupt CD47-SIRPα interactions. FACS based cellular binding assay
was developed to assess the binding affinity of CD47 antagonists. SIRPα
protein labelled with fluorescent dye was incubated with Jurkat T cells
expressing high levels of CD47 in the presence/absence of peptides.
Binding affinity was measured by decrease in fluorescence. Functional
activity of the peptides was evaluated in a FACS-based phagocytosis
assays, in which tumor cells were incubated with human/mouse macrophages
in the presence/absence of CD47 antagonists.

Results: We identified CD47 antagonists demonstrating disruption of
CD47-SIRPα interaction in a cellular binding assay. These peptides
significantly inhibited phagocytosis of different tumor cells by
macrophages. The lead CD47 antagonist displaying good ADME properties
including moderate oral bioavailability was evaluated in a B16F10
syngeneic mouse tumor model. The lead CD47 antagonist inhibited primary
tumor growth as well tumor metastasis to lungs. Biomarker
characterization and efficacy studies in additional tumor models are
ongoing.


