Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Persistent oxidative stress in mouse intestinal and colonic
epithelial cells after exposure to 12C-ion radiation.


Purpose: 12C-ion radiotherapy is demonstrating favorable results compared
to photon radiotherapy for select cancers. While normal tissue exposure
is lower with 12C-ions relative to γ-rays, it cannot be completely
eliminated and therefore, late tissue toxicity, inflammation and
secondary carcinogenesis cannot be ruled out. The goal of this study was
to assess the extent of persistent oxidative stress (POS) after 12C
radiation exposure and compare the results to that after γ radiation
exposure.

Methods and Materials: Mice (C57BL/6J; 6 to 8 weeks; male) were
irradiated with 0.5 or 1.3 Gy of γ or 12C-ion, and intestinal (IEC),
colonic (CEC) epithelial cells and tissues were collected 2 months after
radiation exposure. In epithelial cells, intracellular ROS, mitochondrial
superoxide, mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), and cardiolipin
oxidation were studied by flow-cytometry. Superoxide dismutase (SOD),
catalase, and NADPH oxidase activity along with lipid oxidation were also
assessed in epithelial cells using biochemical assays.

Results: Our results clearly showed radiation quality and dose-dependent
induction of POS. Both intestine and colon showed a higher elevation of
intracellular ROS, mitochondrial superoxide, NADPH oxidase activity, and
mitochondrial cardiolipin oxidation after 12C relative to γ radiation.
Moreover, antioxidant enzyme activity in intestine and colon was also
significantly reduced in 12C-irradiated mice. Compared to γ radiation,
membrane lipid damage was remarkably higher in both intestine and colon
of 12C-ion irradiated mice. At 0.5 Gy, persistent oxidative damage
indicated by 4-hydroxynonenal was 3-fold in colon and 1.6 fold in
intestine after 12C relative γ radiation.

Conclusions: Mitochondrial deregulation, increased NADPH oxidase activity
and loss of SOD and catalase activities were the major contributory
events in 12C-ion-induced POS in mouse GI-tissues. Compared to intestine,
colon was more susceptible to POS induction that might be due to
progressive cell turnover in intestine resulting in faster elimination of
initial damage signal in a given time than colon. Taken together, our
data suggest that normal tissue exposure to 12C radiation carries higher
long-term risk relative to γ-rays at comparable doses and further detail
evaluation is warranted.


