Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring tumor growth and oxygen distribution of prostate cancer
xenografts in vivo using ultrasound and photoacoustic imaging.


Introduction

Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer-related death
in men. Initially, PCa growth and progression is primarily driven by
androgen stimulation of the androgen receptor (AR). As such, the standard
treatments for PCa target the androgen/AR axis and are collectively
termed androgen targeted therapies (ATTs). In spite of initial tumor
regression, tumor cells ultimately adapt and become resistant to ATTs and
progress to castration resistant PCa (CRPC) or metastatic CRPC. The tumor
microenvironment (TME) has long been recognized to modulate the response
of tumors to therapies, however, the impact of ATTs on the TME and their
contribution to the development of resistance has not been investigated.
This project aims to evaluate the potential of non-invasive photoacoustic
imaging combined with ultrasound imaging to assess the alterations of the
TME in response to ATTs in vivo.

Methods

PCa cell lines, PC-3 (androgen-independent) and LNCaP
(androgen-sensitive), were subcutaneously implanted into male severe
combined immune deficiency mice. When the tumor size reached 200-300 mm3,
mice were castrated and subsequently treated with enzalutamide once serum
PSA had reached pre-castration levels. Ultrasound and photoacoustic
(US-PA) scanning (Vevo LAZR) was performed at intervals during PCa
progression to simultaneously assess changes in tumor growth, anatomical
structure, vasculature, and intratumoral oxygen saturation.

Results

We provide evidence that US-PA imaging is a feasible approach to monitor
TME and the response of subcutaneous prostate tumors to ATTs in vivo.
PC-3 tumors (nPC-3=11) showed no response to castration in volume, but
slight changes in total hemoglobin and oxygen saturation. Growth of LNCaP
tumors and their subsequent responses to castration were variable
(nLNCaP=10). We identified a strong correlation between ultrasound and
caliper-derived tumor volumes in these models and in the majority of
tumors the tumor center was more hypoxic than the peripheral tumor area,
which is likely due to low oxygen and nutrient transmission and/or cell
apoptosis. However, in a subset of tumors higher oxygen levels were
observed in the center compared with regions nearer to the skin surface,
a pattern associated with a higher rate of tumor growth compared to the
rest of the cohort. Importantly, we were able to detect a relatively
increase in oxygen levels between pre- and post-castration tumors in
individual mice.

Conclusion

We have successfully used a non-invasive imaging method to simultaneously
assess multiple biological parameters in PCa xenografts in vivo. The
information gained in this study will provide a broader view of the
prostate tumor response to ATTs, which has the potential to reveal novel
mechanisms of therapy resistance.


