Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative analysis of multiple copy number alteration tools in
the detection of amplifications and deletions on both whole-exome and
targeted NGS panel platforms.


Somatic copy number alterations, or CNAs, are frequent occurrences in the
tumor landscape and can present in the form of focal alterations or as
chromosome level events. Reliable detection of CNAs is crucial to
understanding the impact of these events on a wide range of factors
including tumor progression and treatment outcomes. The clinical use of
NGS panels, and more recently exomes, continues to expand in cancer but
the reliable detection of CNAs remains a challenge. A major factor
contributing to the challenge is the availability of reliable tools that
have been well tested and validated.

We sought to characterize the sensitivity and specificity of multiple CNA
detection tools with a focus on clinically relevant genes in NGS panel
and whole-exome. Our approach utilized a variety of publicly available
CNA tools to identify whole gene amplifications and deletions in a set
clinically relevant genes identified in the Catalogue of Somatic
Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) database. The tested CNA tools included two
that supported both whole exome and panel NGS data, allowing cross
platform in addition to cross tool comparisons. This work involved more
than 20 well characterized cell lines derived from a broad spectrum of
tumor types, including breast, lung, melanoma, and prostate cancers. The
cell lines were analyzed in both tumor/normal and tumor only (which
utilizes a proxy normal) modes. Analyses of patient-matched and
proxy-normal data were performed with both assays.

Using our approach, we were able to identify clinically relevant CNAs on
both platforms. The performance of the tools tested varied, with some
tools performing best on either amplification or deletion events. These
results represent a comprehensive comparison of recent copy number
alteration tools and provides data that can be utilized to make the tools
even more robust and reliable.


