Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of anti-HER2 ADC XMT-1522 and checkpoint inhibitor
pembrolizumab for treatment of NSCLC in preclinical models.


The combination of antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) and immunomodulatory
cancer therapies is emerging as a powerful strategy for cancer treatment.
Tumor-targeted delivery of a cytotoxic payload capable of inducing
immunogenic cell death (ICD) can trigger both an innate and an adaptive
immune response, whereby increased recruitment of effector T-cells to the
tumor and formation of tumor specific immunological memory can result in
a durable treatment response. The ADC XMT-1522 consists of a novel human
IgG1 anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody and a novel, auristatin-based
cytotoxic payload (Auristatin F-hydroxypropylamide, AF-HPA). An average
DAR of 12 AF-HPA molecules is achieved via a biodegradable polymer
conjugation platform. We have characterized the ability of both the free
payload AF-HPA and the ADC XMT-1522 to induce ICD in vitro in multiple
cell lines (NCI-N87, HT-29, SKBR3), as measured by the cell surface
expression of the ICD marker calreticulin (CRT) by microscopy and flow
cytometry (FACS). CRT, usually contained in the lumen of the endoplasmic
reticulum, translocated to the cell surface within a few hours after
treatment with AF-HPA or XMT-1522. XMT-1522 as a single agent induced
significant tumor regressions in two patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
models of HER2-espressing non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) at a dose of
3 mg/kg weekly for 3 doses. The combination of XMT-1522 in combination
with the checkpoint inhibitor pembrolizumab was tested in one of these
patient-derived HER2-expressing PDX models in a mouse with a humanized
immune system. Expression of huPD-L1 in the tumor was confirmed by FACS
and immunohistochemistry (IHC). Lymphocyte sub-populations were
quantified in whole blood and in tumor by FACS and IHC. XMT-1522
treatment alone induced tumor growth delay after 3 weekly doses of 1
mg/kg. Pembrolizumab as a single agent administered every 5 days for 6
doses (q5dx6) at a dose of 2.5 mg/kg led to less tumor growth delay than
XMT-1522 treatment. The combination of these two treatment regimens
resulted in a better response than either of the two monotherapies. These
data provide a rationale for XMT-1522 to be tested clinically as a single
agent in HER2-expressing NSCLC, as well as a rationale for combination of
XMT-1522 and immunomodulatory therapies in NSCLC.


