Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High expression of CASZ1 is associated with poor prognosis in
ovarian cancer.


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) carries the highest mortality rate of all
gynecologic malignancies. This high mortality rate is attributed to the
fact that most cases of ovarian cancer are detected at late stages when
metastases are already present. We previously demonstrated that castor
zinc finger 1 (CASZ1) is up-regulated in EOC cells and promotes EOC cells
metastasis. However, the relationship between the ovarian cancer
patient’s prognosis and CASZ1 expression is not clear. In the present
study, we examined CASZ1 and CA125 expressions in EOC using
immunohistochemistry and correlated their expression levels with patient
survival. From January 2008 to January 2012, 144 EOC patients who
underwent staging or cytoreductive surgery at the National Cheng Kung
University Hospital (NCKUH) were consecutively enrolled. Clinical and
pathology information, including age, stage, cell type, chemo-response,
and survival, was collected from medical charts. The staging met the
criteria of the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
Classification (FIGO). Histological classification was defined according
to the classification standards of the World Health Organization. The
overall survival (OS) was calculated from the date of diagnosis.
Progression-free survival (PFS) was measured as the period from surgery
to the date of confirmed recurrence or disease progression or to the date
of the investigators’ last note of a disease-free status. CASZ1, CA125
expression was evaluated by TissueFaxs microscopy system using an image
analysis program. Five fields of the tumor in each slide (corresponding
to a mean of 10000 tumors cells per case) were photographed. Images were
acquired from using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)-like
tissue cytometry. The percentage of positive cells in each sample was
further quantified using TissueQuest software (TissueGnostics, Vienna,
Austria). The CASZ1 was significantly upregulated in advanced EOC
tissues, compared with early stage tumors. High CASZ1 expression levels
were significantly associated with worse EOC clinical characteristics. By
univariate survival analysis, high CASZ1 levels significantly correlated
with decreased overall survival, progression-free survival. In addition,
patients with both high expression with CASZ1 and CA125 carried the worst
prognosis. In conclusion, we demonstrate that high expression of CASZ1
levels correlates with an aggressive EOC phenotype and may contribute for
poor prognosis in EOC patient. Determination of CASZ1 could be clinically
useful in identifying high-risk EOC patients for a more aggressive
adjuvant therapy.


