Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic activity of effector function-enhanced,
non-fucosylated anti-CD40 antibodies in preclinical immune-competent
rodent tumor models.


Recent success of immune checkpoint inhibitors (CPIs) in the clinic
underscores the role of cancer immune surveillance and the therapeutic
potential of targeting immune receptors. Unlike CPIs, many members of the
TNF receptor superfamily (TNFRSF), e.g., CD40, 4-1BB, OX-40, and GITR
deliver agonistic signals to immune cells that may directly activate
antitumor immune responses and, in combination with CPIs, may improve
outcomes of active immunotherapy. Sugar-Engineered Antibody (SEA)-CD40 is
a non-fucosylated, humanized IgG1 anti-human CD40 monoclonal antibody
currently being evaluated in a phase 1 clinical trial in solid tumors and
lymphoma. It binds FcγR3A with higher affinity and demonstrates enhanced
immune stimulatory activity compared to its parent dacetuzumab. An SEA
version of an anti-mouse CD40 antibody (mouse IgG2a), SEA-1C10, has been
generated. As expected, SEA-1C10 bound to mouse FcγRIV, the functional
homolog of human FcγR3A in mice, at a higher affinity than parent 1C10.
Enhanced FcγRIV engagement by SEA-1C10 translated into stronger
antitumor activity in the CD40 (-) B16F10 melanoma and CD40 (+) A20
lymphoma models. In the A20 model, tumor free mice that survived the
initial A20 tumor implantation and SEA-1C10 treatment were re-challenged
with live A20 cells. Twenty nine out of thirty one such tumor free mice
rejected A20 tumor re-engraftment, suggesting that a strong memory immune
response was elicited by SEA-1C10 treatment. The SEA-1C10/anti PD-1
combination also showed greater antitumor activity compared to SEA-1C10
or anti-PD-1 alone, supporting the hypothesis that stimulation of
antigen-presenting cells by agonistic CD40 signaling can complement
immune checkpoint inhibition. In addition, a transgenic (TG) mouse strain
has been generated in which the endogenous Cd40 locus is inactivated by
the targeted insertion of a human-mouse chimeric CD40 gene. This allows
for incorporation of the extracellular domain of human CD40 while keeping
the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of mouse CD40.
Lineage-restricted expression of the CD40 TG on B cells and monocytes was
confirmed. CD40 TG cells responded to SEACD40-mediated agonistic
signaling in vitro by secreting CD40 signature cytokines and
up-regulating the costimulatory molecules CD86 and MHC class II.
Treatment of CD40 TG animals with SEA-CD40 resulted in cytokine induction
and B-cell depletion. Similar to studies in human PBMCs and non-human
primates, SEA-CD40 induced more robust cytokine production and immune
cell activation than its fucosylated parent dacetuzumab. These
experimental systems will be further applied to address clinically
important questions including mechanism(s) of anti-tumor effects,
biomarkers indicating immune activation, dosing strategies, and timing of
combinatorial regimens with CPIs.


