Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic biomarkers of PDAC - a cross-validation study.


Introduction: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) represents 90% of
pancreatic neoplasms and the fourth leading cause of cancer death in the
United States. Recently, several research groups have focused on
conducting metabolomics based clinical investigations to identify
metabolite markers of PDAC. Since a central biomarker repository for PA
is lacking, however, it remains challenging to delineate the total number
of metabolites reported, and importantly, which bio-signatures overlap
between the disparate studies.

Approach:

We performed an extensive literature search to delineate PDAC
case-control studies reporting dysregulated metabolite biomarkers for
PDAC utilizing three main sources: PubMed, EDRN and GDOC. We refined our
search to 36 publications that reported blood based
metabolomics/lipidomic biomarkers. Data from these studies was compiled
based on up/down-regulation of specific metabolites in PDAC, study sample
size, and other clinical determinants. The final list consisted of 12
metabolites (including amino acids, fatty acids and small organic acids),
that were reported by two or more research groups as being dysregulated
in PDAC. Of note, these 36 disparate studies were carried out using
different methodologies, analyzed on diverse analytical platforms, and
utilized different statistical and bioinformatics methodologies.
Resultant common features, therefore, were deemed significant as
candidate biomarkers for cross-validation.

Next, we used stable isotope dilution multiple-reaction monitoring mass
spectrometry (SID-MRM-MS) for targeted quantitation of these 12
metabolite markers in plasma samples obtained from patients that were
diagnosed with PDAC and compared the same profiles to matched normal
controls.

Results: We delineated of a sub-set of the original 12 metabolites that
showed concordance with those reported in the literature. Statistical
analyses to determine the sensitivity and specificity of the resultant
panel, and any influence provided by age, gender, and type 2 diabetes, on
the predictive performance of the biomarker panel are ongoing. These data
will be presented at the AACR meeting.

Conclusion: Developing a specific and sensitive panel of blood-derived
biomarkers offers a practical approach towards screening and allows
increasing overall survival rates for PDAC with early diagnosis. Such
disease-specific bio-signatures allow identification of molecular targets
for therapeutic development; improve early treatment strategies and
thereby clinical outcomes. Creating a compendium of existing biomarker
data and performing cross-validation studies represent the first steps
for developing clinical assays for the diagnosis and prognosis
determination of PDAC. The integration of data generated from multiple
analytic platforms and diverse subject cohorts is likely to help identify
robust bio-signatures that would then be ready for large scale validation
studies.

Supported by American Cancer Society


