Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual inhibition of MEK1/2 and PLK1 specifically targets aggressive
breast cancer cell population with CEP55 elevated expression.


Triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs), lacking the expression of ER, PR
and HER2 amplification, are the most aggressive form of breast cancer
(BC). Due to their heterogeneity influenced by high level of genomic
instability and aneuploidy, treatment of TNBC patients is one of the
biggest challenges faced in the clinics. CEP55, discovered first by our
laboratory, is a key regulator of cytokinesis malfunction of which has
been shown to cause multinucleation. Furthermore, ERK2/PLK1 critically
regulates the functional role of CEP55 via phosphorylation of CEP55 at
particular stages of mitosis, allowing it to localize to the midbody for
accurate cytokinesis. Research has demonstrated association of CEP55 with
various cancers especially BC as over-expression of CEP55 mRNA is
associated with worse BC prognosis and poor survival. We hypothesized
that, CEP55 regulates the fate of aneuploid cell population, which are
highly dependent on mitotic genes for tumor progression among aggressive
BC, thus can be targeted for therapy development. We have performed a
series of in vitro studies demonstrating that depletion of CEP55
sensitizes cells to anti-mitotic drugs like PLK1 inhibitor (BI2536) and
leads to unscheduled CDK1/Cyclin B activation and favor CDK1-Caspase
3-dependent mitotic catastrophe. We also demonstrate that ERK1/2
transcriptionally controls CEP55 mRNA and due to lack of a specific small
molecule inhibitor against CEP55, inhibition of MEK1/2 using the small
molecule inhibitor Selumetinib, can mimic depletion of CEP55 in vivo.
Thus, we rationalized the usage of a MEK1/2 inhibitor in combination with
a PLK1 inhibitor across a series of BC cell lines. We observed synthetic
lethality among the aggressive hormone receptor negative cell lines,
which expressed higher expression of CEP55 compared to normal like and
hormone receptor positive BC cell lines with lower CEP55 level. The
combination synergistically increased apoptosis of aneuploid population
via premature entry of these cells into mitosis in the presence of
antimitotic drugs due to exhaustion of CEP55. We have also validated this
synergistic effect of MEK1/2 and PLK1 inhibition using xenograft models,
results of which imitated the in vitro findings. Therefore, we propose a
novel treatment strategy of MEK1/2-PLK1 dual combination for selectively
targeting CEP55 over-expressing BC in the clinics.


