Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Agenus’ next generation cancer vaccine platforms.


Most cancer cells carry mutations unique to the patient’s individual
tumor and shared biochemical signatures that are not present in healthy
cells. Agenus has three vaccine platforms designed to treat cancers based
on the unique needs of a given patient. Our vaccine platforms are
designed to educate the patient’s immune system to recognize
tumor-specific aberrations, or neo-antigens, and mount an anti-tumor
immune response.

Agenus’ Prophage™ vaccine platform is an individualized vaccine made
from the patient’s own tumor tissue. Heat shock proteins (gp-96) that
naturally chaperone and bind tumor-derived peptides are extracted from
the patient’s tumor and constitute the vaccine. Some of these peptides
are neo-antigens. Agenus has completed Phase 2 clinical trials with
Prophage™ vaccine in newly diagnosed glioblastoma (ndGBM), and has
previously reported that there was improved progression-free and overall
survival with Prophage™ vaccine compared to standard of care.

Agenus’ AutoSynVax™ vaccines are uniquely designed and manufactured
for each patient based on NGS profiling of the patient’s tumor from a
biopsy. Leveraging the Agenus Immunogenic Mutation (AIM™) workflow, we
are able to generate a synthesis-ready blueprint for an optimal
immunogenic and personalized neo-antigen vaccine. The AIM™ platform
provides a robust and efficient approach to computational vaccinology
designed to deliver a set of likely immunogenic peptides, agnostic to
vaccine format, followed by generation of a format-specific blueprint
ready for vaccine synthesis and manufacture. The synthesized neo-epitopes
are complexed to recombinant heat shock protein 70 (HSC70) and are
administered along with our QS-21 Stimulon® adjuvant. HSC70 is known to
transport epitopes and play a role in displaying them to T cells.

While the first two of Agenus’ vaccine platforms are highly
individualized, our PhosphoSynVax™ vaccine is an off-the-shelf vaccine
format targeting a novel class of tumor neo-antigens arising from post
translational modifications (PTMs). Due to dysregulated cell signaling
pathways in cancer, self-peptides can be aberrantly phosphorylated, a
number of which are subsequently presented on HLA molecules. Using
mass-spectrometry, we have identified a library of over a thousand HLA
phospholigands. Many of these are tumor specific and found in multiple
patients across multiple indications, enabling pre-manufacture of
PhosphoSynVax™ vaccines for ready use.

Upon testing the HSP plus synthetic peptide vaccine format in murine
models, we have demonstrated effective tumor control in a therapeutic
setting and also effective immune memory in a long-term prophylactic
setting. Given Agenus’ diverse portfolio we have the opportunity to
combine our immune education strategies with immunomodulatory antibodies
to increase therapeutic efficacy.


