Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ADAM8 drives aggressive phenotype of triple-negative inflammatory
breast cancer & constitutes a novel therapeutic target.


Inflammatory Breast Cancer (IBC) is a rare, highly aggressive form of
cancer that is frequently locally advanced or metastasized at the time of
diagnosis. The Triple-Negative subtype of IBC (TN-IBC), in particular, is
characterized by very poor overall survival. TN-IBC lacks targeted
therapies and is primarily treated with radiation or chemotherapy, which
are inefficient. Recently, we identified the cell surface transmembrane
ADAM8 (A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase) protein as a driver of
Triple-Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) growth and metastasis via its
Metalloproteinase (MP) and Disintegrin (DI) domains, respectively. In in
vivo proof-of-concept experiments with a prototype reagent, we
demonstrated that simultaneous, antibody-based, targeting of the ADAM8 MP
and DI domains is an effective therapeutic approach for TNBC (Romagnoli
et al., EMBO Mol. Med. 6:278, 2014).

The aggressive behavior of IBC cells has been attributed to a stem-like
cancer cell compartment with high ALDH activity (ALDH+). Our studies of
the green tea compound epigallocatechin-3 gallate (EGCG) revealed that it
reduced growth of tumors derived from ALDH+ SUM-149 TN-IBC cells. We now
report that EGCG concurrently decreases tumor levels of ADAM8 mRNA. This
led us to assess the role of ADAM8 in TN-IBC. Tumor biopsies from 15
patients taken at the time of diagnosis and/or after neo-adjuvant
treatment with chemotherapy, as well as paired lymph node and skin
samples (when available) were analyzed by immunohistochemistry for ADAM8
expression. We report that 45.5% of primary TN-IBC patient tumors and
50.0% of metastases within the axillary lymph nodes express high levels
of ADAM8 and its expression is largely unaffected by chemotherapy. In
addition, ADAM8 expression was higher in the aggressive ALDH+ stem-like
SUM-149 cell compartment. Consistently, knockdown of ADAM8 dramatically
reduced the ability of SUM-149 cells to grow in an anchorage independent
fashion and to migrate through Matrigel. A newly prepared anti-human
ADAM8 mouse monoclonal antibody (ADP13) inhibited the MP and DI domains
of ADAM8 on SUM-149 cells. ADP13 reduced orthotopic growth of tumors
derived from SUM-149 cells by 40% in mice treated by i.p. injection 2
days a week with a dose of 4.5 mg/kg (n=7). Dose-response curves and
survival experiments are in progress.

Conclusions: ADAM8 expression is present in almost half of TN-IBC patient
tumors and their metastases, and promotes aggressive phenotype of TN-IBC
cells in in vitro 3D-assays. A pre-clinical mouse model of TN-IBC
validated ADAM8 as an accessible and promising new target for therapeutic
intervention against this highly aggressive disease.


