Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of a supervised exercise intervention on sarcopenic obesity
and metabolic syndrome in prostate cancer patients: A randomized pilot
study.


Purpose: Prostate cancer survivors (PCS) on androgen deprivation therapy
(ADT) experience adverse side effects such as skeletal muscle loss and
adiposity gain, together called sarcopenic obesity, and changes in
cardiometabolic factors that increase risk of metabolic syndrome (MetS).
Resistance exercise can increase skeletal muscle mass, but no exercise
interventions to date in PCS on ADT have concomitantly improved
sarcopenic obesity and cardiometabolic risk factors. Utilizing a 12-week
intervention of progressive resistance exercise designed to target
skeletal muscle mass, this ongoing pilot trial investigates sarcopenic
obesity and as a secondary analyses, MetS components, in PCS on ADT.

Methods: Eighteen PCS (65.6±8.8 yr) on current or previous ADT were
recruited from the USC Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center and randomized
to resistance training (RT; n=9) or a control stretching program (CS;
n=9). Body composition, measured through dual-x-ray absorptiometry, and
MetS outcomes, including waist circumference, blood pressure, fasting
blood glucose, triglycerides and HDL, were assessed at baseline and after
the 12-week intervention. Appendicular skeletal muscle index (ASMI), a
common index of sarcopenia, was calculated from body composition. RT
performed a supervised total-body resistance exercise and stretching
program 3 times/week. CS performed home-based stretching 3 times/week.
Baseline differences were tested with univariate ANOVA. Differences in
all outcomes were tested with 2(group) x 2(time) ANOVA.

Results: No significant differences in ADT duration, Gleason score, body
fat, skeletal muscle mass, or MetS components were found between groups
at baseline (P>0.05). RT program compliance was 98.3%, while CS program
compliance was 75.5%. Post-intervention, significant increases were
observed in RT compared to CS for appendicular skeletal mass (mean±SE;
0.8±.4 kg; P=0.04) and ASMI (0.3±.1 kg/m2; P=0.041). A nonsignificant
decrease in body fat (%) was observed in RT compared to CS (1.3±.7 %;
P=.067; d=0.89). No differences were found in MetS components.

Conclusions: While 12 weeks of resistance exercise in PCS on ADT improved
skeletal muscle mass, no changes in adiposity and MetS variables were
observed. Future interventions are needed for PCS to determine the
optimal exercise prescription to target both sarcopenic obesity and
cardiometabolic risk factors.


