Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ESR1 mutations confer novel metastatic functions in genome-edited
breast cancer models.


Background: Estrogen receptor alpha (ERα), encoded by the ESR1 gene, is
expressed in approximately 70% of breast cancers. Recent studies
conducted by us and others have shown that somatic mutations in ESR1 gene
play a key role in conferring endocrine resistance in ER+ breast cancer.
These hotspot mutations mainly occur on the ligand binding domain of
ERα, leading to poor outcomes in 25-30% of patients with ER+ metastatic
breast cancer in clinic. The mechanisms behind the potential enhanced
metastasis of these mutations have become an urgent issue to be
addressed, but they are not well understood due to a lack of ESR1 mutant
models.

Methods: We generated and characterized genome-edited T47D and MCF7
breast cancer cell lines with the two most common ESR1 mutations (Y537S
and D538G), using CRIPSR/Cas9 and rAAV systems respectively. Multiple
clones for each mutant were sorted and the mutation frequencies were
detected using digital droplet PCR (ddPCR). We subsequently performed an
RNA-sequencing to deeply differentiate the gene expression patterns in
these mutants. The growth of these pooled mutant-cells was determined in
both 2D and 3D plates. The cell-matrix adhesions were measured based on
ECM array, and 84-ECM adhesion related genes were further tested by qPCR
array. IncuCyte real-time image system was used to monitor the cell
migration based on the wound-scratching assay.

Results: We first identified the robust mutation frequencies at both RNA
and DNA levels in our cell models. The RNA-seq exhibits multiple
ligand-independent genes overlapping between either cell lines or
mutants, which were further conformed by qPCR. We also found that both
Y537S and D538G mutants present ligand-independent growth in 2D and 3D
ultra-low attachment plates. Using wound-scratching assay, we observed
significant higher migration rate in D538G mutant of T47D cell lines on
both matrigel and type I collagen, indicating a cell-line and
mutant-specific phenotype. We also detected lower attachment of both
mutants on type I collagen in both cell lines, and our qPCR array
revealed that alterations in the MMP pathways could be one of the major
mechanism causing this phenotype.

Conclusion: In sum, our study presents the first in-depth metastatic
functional analysis of the biology of ESR1 mutations in genomic knock-in
cell models, pointing out the enhanced migration and decreased
cell-matrix adhesion as a potential novel gain-of-function of the Y537S
and D538G mutant-cells. These findings suggest the potential role of
enhanced metastasis of these ESR1 mutations through remodeling of
transcriptional profiles, shedding lights towards the development of
efficient therapies of ESR1 mutant breast cancer.


