Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative genomic analysis of alterations driving anti-androgen
treatment resistance in vitro.


Prostate cancer is one of the most frequently diagnosed cancers in the
world. It is the second most common type of cancer and the fifth leading
cause of cancer death in American men. Enzalutamide (MDV) and apalutamide
(ARN-509) are selective competitive antagonists of the androgen receptor
(AR). Abiraterone acetate (ABI) is an androgen biosynthesis inhibitor
which is used in combination with prednisone in metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer. Although the anti-androgen and AR
inhibitors provide breakthrough treatments of metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer, approximately a third of patients
fail to show PSA response (>50% decline from baseline after 12 weeks of
treatment), while another third of patients progress after a few cycles
of treatment. Recently, the acquired F876L mutation of the androgen
receptor (AR) was identified in advanced prostate cancer cells with
acquired resistant to enzalutamide and apalutamide. To systematically
identify and understand the mechanisms of resistance, we evaluated 22RV1
and LNCaP prostate cancer cells which were resistant to the treatment of
enzalutamide (MDV), apalutamide (ARN-509), and abiraterone acetate (ABI).
We isolated the DNA and RNA from both resistant cells and their parent
cells. We did RNAseq for gene expression analysis, whole exome sequencing
to identify the DNA alterations, and array CGH for copy number change
analysis. We confirmed the acquired F876L mutation of the AR identified
in LNCaP cells resistant to apalutamide. We identified the novel G644R
and R630Q mutations of AR, R213* mutation of TP53, N372H mutation of
BRCA1, and E2621G mutation of ATM in LNCaP cells which were resistant to
the treatment of enzalutamide and apalutamide. For copy number
alterations, we identified acquired copy number gain on chromosome 3, 8,
and 18 on 22RV1 resistant cells, and acquired copy number loss on LNCaP
resistant cells. Besides acquired DNA alterations, we identified 16
up-regulated and 24 down-regulated genes which are common in both 22RV1
and LNCap cells resistant to enzalutamide and apalutamide. Through
pathway enrichment analysis, we identified the Wnt/B-catenin, cAMP
signaling, and TREM1 signaling pathways were up-regulated in 22RV1 and
LNCap cells resistant to enzalutamide and apalutamide. Detection of
acquired genetic alterations in cells resistant to anti-androgen
treatment provides us with important insights into the mechanisms of
their resistance. Further testing of clinical samples collected at
disease progression after treatment with these agents is required to
validate these findings.


