Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of Wnt/beta-catenin alters the Ewing sarcoma secretome
- Implications for tumor:tumor microenvironment crosstalk.


Ewing sarcoma is the second most common bone cancer in children and
adolescents. Patients with metastatic disease have less than a 25% chance
of survival making it imperative to understand the mechanisms that drive
metastasis. We previously showed that activation of Wnt/β-catenin
signaling in Ewing sarcoma cells alters the tumor cell transcriptome,
promoting transition to a more metastatic cellular phenotype. In
addition, primary tumors with high-level Wnt activation were associated
with worse clinical outcomes, supporting a role for canonical Wnt
signaling in metastatic progression. Significantly, extracellular matrix
(ECM) protein genes were among the most affected by Wnt/β-catenin,
suggesting that activation of the pathway might lead to alterations in
the local tumor microenvironment (TME). Crosstalk between the TME and
tumor cells regulates fundamental aspects of the metastatic cascade
including invasion, migration, and angiogenesis. It is our goal to define
the impact of Wnt/β-catenin signaling on the TME and elucidate how these
changes contribute to metastasis. Our specific hypothesis is that
activation of Wnt/β-catenin in Ewing sarcoma cells leads to changes in
the tumor secretome that result in altered TME composition and tumor:TME
crosstalk. To address this hypothesis, conditioned media from Ewing
sarcoma cell lines cultured in the presence and absence of Wnt3a was
collected for proteomic analysis. We used label-free mass spectrometry
with spectral counting to quantify proteins that passed a ≤1% FDR
threshold. Significance was defined as greater than 4.5 or less than 0.2
fold difference in counts between Wnt3a and control conditions. Western
blot of conditioned media was used to validate identified proteins.
Preliminary analysis of the TC32 cell line identified 49 proteins up
regulated in Wnt3a treated media in comparison to control. Significantly,
Tenascin C (TNC), was among the most significantly up regulated proteins,
validating our prior data that TNC is a transcriptional target of
Wnt/β-catenin and a promoter of the metastatic phenotype in vivo. Gene
ontology analysis of the significantly differentially expressed proteins
revealed enrichment of proteins involved in ECM-receptor signaling, ECM
organization, cell adhesion, and collagen catabolism. These biologic
processes all play critical roles in tumor:TME interactions and together
contribute to the early steps of adhesion, migration and invasion that
are responsible for initiation of metastasis. These preliminary studies
confirm that Wnt/β-catenin-dependent changes in the Ewing sarcoma
transcriptome are associated with changes in tumor cell secretome. We are
now validating these findings in additional cell lines and updated
results will be presented. These studies will elucidate how changes in
tumor cells can lead to changes in the local TME and in tumor:TME
crosstalk that promote metastatic progression of Ewing sarcoma.


