Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of phosphatase activity with lymphocyte infiltrates in
metastatic renal cell carcinoma tissues.


Introduction: Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) are important
regulators of signal transduction in immune cells. While most analytical
methods focus on the detection of these crucial enzymes at the RNA or
protein level, a method was lacking to monitor multiple enzymatic
activities in patient-derived materials like blood and (tumor) tissues.
Such a substrate-specific assay is a new tool for biomarker discovery in
immuno-oncology (I-O), because the I-O targets - checkpoint and immune
receptors like PD1, CTLA4, LAG3, 4-1BB, CD40, CD20, OX40, TIGIT and GITR
- are controlled by phosphatases. The aim of this study was to develop a
multiplex PTP assay and investigate the phosphatase activity in
metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC) tissues with high and low levels
of TILs (tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes).

Methods: On the basis of hematoxylin and eosin staining of mRCC tissues,
9 tissues with high TILS-scores were selected, as well as 10 tissues
without TILS, matched on basis of the percentage of viable tumor cells.
The technology used is a second generation peptide microarray, which is
fully automated with short turnaround times and a high throughput of
clinical samples in a 96-well setup. Arrays comprise 46 unique
nitrophosphotyrosine containing peptides derived from known phosphosites.
When a clinical sample is applied to this peptide microarray, this will
lead to a pattern of peptide dephosphorylations, which is monitored in
real time (kinetic readout).

Results: The PTP assay was first developed for PBMC profiling. 0.10 ug
protein/array was used, corresponding to 10000 cells. The signals were
concentration dependent and could be inhibited by PTP inhibitors. For
tissue profiling 2.0 µg protein input (0.02 mm3 tissue) was used. A
2-group comparison analysis of the phosphatase activity in tissues with
high scores of TILs (massive infiltration, N=9) vs. without (N=10),
revealed that 29 of 46 peptide substrates showed significantly higher
dephosphorylation (PTP) activities in the tissues with high levels of
lymphocyte infiltrates. A PCA revealed a clear separation between the
groups of high and low TILS scores. Discriminating phosphosites
(pResults: The PTP assay was first developed for PBMC profiling. 0.10 ug
protein/array was used, corresponding to 10000 cells. The signals were
concentration dependent and could be inhibited by PTP inhibitors. For
tissue profiling 2.0 µg protein input (0.02 mm3 tissue) was used. A
2-group comparison analysis of the phosphatase activity in tissues with
high scores of TILs (massive infiltration, N=9) vs. without (N=10),
revealed that 29 of 46 peptide substrates showed significantly higher
dephosphorylation (PTP) activities in the tissues with high levels of
lymphocyte infiltrates. A PCA revealed a clear separation between the
groups of high and low TILS scores. Discriminating phosphosites
(p<0.0002) were derived from the following 10 signaling proteins RET,
ERBB2, PAXI, PGFRB, CBL, FRK, PDPK1, INSR, PECA1 and the T-cell kinase
LCK.

Conclusions: Proof of concept was shown in mRCC samples that high PTP
activity correlates with high levels of TILS. As a TILS-score itself is
already regarded to be a candidate biomarker for I-O therapy response,
the observed correlation is a basis for the development of more
mechanistic biomarkers predicting therapy response. This method can be a
starting point for the development of an enzymatic and thus sensitive and
quantitative TILS test.

This study has received funding from the European Union’s Seventh
Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no 259939.


