Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of miR-34a in peritoneal mesothelioma relies on
c-MET and AXL inhibition: Persistent activation of ERK and AKT signaling
as a possible cytoprotective mechanism.


The value of microRNAs (miRNAs) as novel targets for cancer therapy is
now widely recognized. However, no information is currently available on
the expression/functional role of miRNAs in diffuse malignant peritoneal
mesothelioma (DMPM), a rapidly lethal disease, poorly responsive to
conventional treatments, for which the development of new therapeutic
strategies is urgently needed. Here, we evaluated the expression and
biological effects of miR-34a -one of the most widely deregulated miRNAs
in cancer and for which a lipid-formulated mimic is already clinically
available- in a large cohort of DMPM clinical samples and a unique
collection of in house-developed DMPM preclinical models, with the aim to
assess the potential of a miR-34a-based approach for disease treatment.
miR-34a was found to be significantly down-regulated in forty-five DMPM
clinical specimens and five established cell lines compared to normal
peritoneum. miR-34a reconstitution inhibited cell proliferation in a
time-dependent manner, though to a different extent and with a different
kinetics across individual cell lines. Such a variable antiproliferative
effect was paralleled by a different kinetics of apoptosis induction. In
addition, miR-34a ectopic expression significantly declined DMPM cell
invasion ability and impaired the secretion of angiogenesis-related
factors. Phenocopy experiments showed that miR-34a oncosuppressive
activities mainly rely on c-MET and AXL down-regulation and the
consequent interference with the activation of downstream signaling.
Interestingly, a persistent activation of ERK1/2 and AKT in two
miR-34a-reconstituted cell lines was found to counteract the
antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects of miRNA, yet not affecting
its anti-invasive activity. Most importantly, when three
subcutaneous/orthotopic DMPM xenograft models were used to examine the
impact of miR-34a on tumorigenicity, a significant reduction in tumor
take and growth was consistently observed. Our preclinical data, showing
impressive inhibitory effects induced by miR-34a on DMPM cell
proliferation, invasion and growth in immunodeficient mice, strongly
suggest the potential clinical utility of a miR-34a-replacement therapy
for the treatment of such a still incurable disease. On the other hand,
we provide the first evidence of a potential cytoprotective/resistance
mechanism that may arise towards miRNA-based therapies through the
persistent activation of receptor tyrosine kinase downstream signaling.


