Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triggering of OX40 on T cells by a novel monoclonal antibody
elicits robust antitumor immunity.


T cell costimulation is an attractive strategy for cancer treatment in
addition to check point inhibitors. Costimulatory molecule OX40 is a
member of the TNF receptor superfamily that is transiently expressed on
activated T cells. Activation of OX40 leads to enhanced T cell
proliferation and cytokine secretion and in turn results in better
anti-tumor efficacy as shown by multiple mouse syngeneic tumor models.
PF-04518600 (PF-8600) is a fully human IgG2 agonist antibody to human
OX40 with high affinity and specificity. We used in vitro and in vivo
methods to evaluate the co-stimulatory functions of PF-8600. PF-8600
demonstrated better agonist activity in a luciferase reporter cell line
expressing OX40 and NFκB as compared to a human IgG1 antibody. In human
primary T cells, PF-8600 dose dependently increased T cell proliferation
and cytokine secretion in vitro. Furthermore in a mouse line expressing
human OX40, PF-8600 in a mouse IgG1 framework increased the proliferation
of OT1 cells and inhibited EG7 tumor growth as compared to isotype
control antibody, further confirming the mechanism of action as an OX40
agonist. As regulatory T cells are a major inhibitory population in the
tumor microenvironment, their specific depletion in the tumor is highly
desirable. In an in vitro assay using monocyte derived macrophages as
effector cells, PF-8600 mediated the depletion of OX40 expressing cells
similar to a human IgG1 antibody, and this activity is dependent on the
binding to hFcγRIIA. In human FcγR knock-in mice, anti-OX40-hIgG1
showed increased Treg reduction in the tumor comparing to
anti-OX40-hIgG2, but less T cell proliferation and activation in the
periphery. In combination with an anti-PD-L1 antibody, both
anti-OX40-hIgG1 and hIgG2 showed similar enhanced anti-tumor activity in
the MC38 colon carcinoma model as comparing to anti-PD-L1 alone. Both in
vitro and in vivo results demonstrated PF-8600 enhanced T cells functions
and inhibited tumor growth in a mouse syngeneic tumor model. The activity
of the hIgG2 antibody is similar to that of an hIgG1 in both phagocytosis
assays and hFcγR KI in vivo assays. Based on the mechanism of action and
robust anti-tumor efficacy in preclinical models, PF-8600 is currently in
clinical development in a broad spectrum of malignancies.


