Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E7386, an orally active CBP/beta-catenin modulator, effects tumor
microenvironment, resulting to the enhancement of antitumor activity of
lenvatinib.


E7386, a novel orally active CBP/beta-catenin modulator, has an impact on
cancer cells with aberrant activation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
pathway driven by adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) mutation or
beta-catenin mutation and shows significant antitumor activity in
xenograft models. CBP/beta-catenin transcriptional activation has an
important role in not only malignancy of cancer cells but also regulation
of tumor microenvironment such as fibroblast, pericyte, endothelial cells
and immune cells. In this study, we investigated E7386 effect on tumor
microenvironment and if it leads to enhance antitumor activity of
lenvatinib. Lenvatinib is a potent anti-angiogenic inhibitor targeting
vascular endothelial growth factor receptors, fibroblast growth factor
receptors and other proangiogenic and oncogenic kinases. Firstly, we
tested the combination of E7386 with lenvatinib in Wnt-1 tumor isogenic
models, where tumors isolated from MMTV-Wnt1 transgenic mice were
inoculated in mice. While E7386 and lenvatinib individually suppressed
tumor growth and caused tumor dormancy, the combination resulted in
approximately 75% tumor reduction. To clarify the effect on tumor
microenvironment, we tested an isograft model of 4T1 murine breast cancer
cells which was resistant to E7386 in vitro proliferation. E7386 and
lenvatinib individual treatments showed a significant antitumor effect,
but the antitumor effect of the combination was significantly superior to
that of each mono-treatment. Therefore, we compared effects of E7386 and
lenvatinib on tumor microenvironment in immunohistochemical analysis
using CD31 Ab as an endothelial marker and alpha-SMA Ab as a pericyte and
cancerous fibroblast marker. E7386 significantly decreased alpha-SMA
positive cells and microvessel density in tumors. In addition, remaining
tumor vessels were not covered with pericytes. In lenvatinib treated
tumors, greater reduction of microvessel density was observed than in
E7386 treated tumors, but tumor vessels covered with pericytes, which are
known to be resistant against VEGF inhibitors, were remained. In
combination treatment, most of the tumor vessels disappeared. The
enhancement of antitumor activity in the combination was also observed in
SEKI human melanoma xenograft model which is relatively resistant to
lenvatinib. These data suggest E7386 sensitizes tumor to lenvatinib
through the modulation of the tumor microenvironment that is resistant to
VEGF inhibitors. Taken together, E7386 shows not only antitumor activity
via the effect on cancer cells but also through the modulation of tumor
microenvironment, and the treatment of E7386 with lenvatinib is a novel
combination therapy to overcome resistance to VEGF inhibitors.


