Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Innovative and predictive models against breast cancer.


Many reports support that xenografts from patient-derived xenografts
(PDXs) in mice or rats well recapitulate the molecular diversity,
cellular heterogeneity, and histology seen in patient tumors. However,
shortcomings including limited clinical diversity of the PDXs, absence of
influence of human microbiome, absence of drug human metabolism and
reduced immune system restrain the predictive values of these PDX models.
To set-up a holistic integration of these criticisms, we have associated
efforts from public hospitals, academic groups, biotechs and private
pharmaceutical companies with the financial support of the French
Ministry of Industry.

Patient surgical specimens from different breast tumor subtypes, among 9
other cancer pathologies, are collected to establish large collections of
PDXs in mice. In addition, in vitro primary cultures of cells from these
samples are conducted to establish a collection of cell lines from the
stromal and the tumoral compartments. The 40 established breast PDX
models represent the 4 major molecular clinical subtypes among which 37%
are triple negative, 33% are Luminal B HER2-, 22% are Luminal B Her2+ and
8% Her2+. The models are evaluated for ex vivo and in vivo sensitivities
to 4 clinically relevant anticancer drugs, for histology, immune
infiltrates, and molecular characteristics including the analysis of gene
polymorphism, RNAseq gene expression and NGS exome sequencing of 112
genes. The metagenomic sequencing of the gut microbiota from stools
collected in both patients and tumor-bearing mice before and after
chemotherapeutic treatments improves our knowledge on the role of
microbiota in cancer progression and treatment. Secondly, to increase the
predictability of the models, we are generating mice with humanized liver
showing distinct drug pharmacokinetic profiles as compared with parental
mice. Finally, the humanization of the immune system in mice is developed
by several approaches including the use of induced pluripotent stem cells
from cancer patients. These tumor collection and model characterization
were performed under harmonized procedures within the consortium,
allowing high quality material and results. All model characteristics are
being compiled in a web-based database for efficient features search and
data mining.

We will present the first characterized breast cancer models and will
discuss their usefulness and chance to bring benefit to patients via this
holistic strategy developed within the IMODI initiative.


