Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical development of a duocarmycin-based antibody-drug
conjugate targeting B7-H3 for solid cancer.


Introduction: B7-H3, a member of the B7 family of immunomodulatory
molecules, is overexpressed in a wide range of solid cancers. B7-H3
overexpression has been correlated with disease severity and poor outcome
in several cancer types. Proof-of-concept studies targeting B7-H3
demonstrated that auristatin-based B7-H3 antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs)
exhibited potent cytotoxicity in vitro and antitumor activity in vivo
toward a range of B7-H3-expressing tumor cell lines. Based on these
preliminary results, we undertook preclinical development of a B7-H3 ADC
comprised of a humanized B7-H3 mAb conjugated to a potent DNA alkylating
payload.

Methods: Chimeric B7-H3 mAbs were conjugated to
vc-seco-DUocarmycin-hydroxyBenzamide Azaindole (DUBA) (ADC conjugated and
provided by Synthon Biopharmecuticals B.V). In vitro and in vivo activity
studies were conducted with tumor cell lines that overexpress B7-H3.
Based on the potency analysis, together with the biophysical properties
and immunohistochemistry (IHC) profiles of the candidates, a lead mAb was
selected for preclinical development. The mAb was humanized via CDR
grafting and conjugated to DUBA to yield the development candidate
MGC018. In vitro and in vivo studies were then conducted with MGC018 to
confirm and extend the results with the chimeric ADCs.

Results: Confirming our previous data and consistent with a growing body
of literature, B7-H3 mAbs exhibited strong reactivity toward carcinoma
cells and the vasculature of solid cancers. Chimeric B7-H3-DUBA ADCs
demonstrated specific, dose-dependent cytotoxicity toward B7-H3-positive
tumor cell lines in vitro and potent antitumor activity in vivo. The
humanized ADC development candidate, MGC018, retained the favorable
biophysical properties and the normal tissue-versus-tumor IHC profile of
the parental mAb. MGC018 displayed cytotoxicity toward B7-H3-positive
tumor cell lines in vitro, with IC50 values in the sub-nM range, and
potent antitumor activity in vivo, resulting in tumor stasis and tumor
regression in mice bearing B7-H3-positive human tumor xenografts,
representing breast, lung and ovarian cancers.

Conclusion: MGC018, a preclinical candidate comprised of a humanized mAb
targeting B7-H3 conjugated to the potent DNA alkylating payload DUBA via
a cleavable peptide linker, exhibited a favorable preclinical profile,
with strong reactivity toward tumor cells and tumor-associated
vasculature, limited normal tissue reactivity, potent cytotoxicity in
vitro and antitumor activity in vivo toward a range of B7-H3-expressing
tumor cell lines representing several cancer types. Our findings support
further preclinical development of MGC018 to evaluate its potential as an
ADC therapeutic for B7-H3-expressing solid cancers.


