Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CPS1 as a therapeutic target and prognostic indicator in
LKB1-inactivated lung adenocarcinoma.


Liver Kinase B1 (LKB1), encoded by STK11, is a tumor suppressor and
somatically mutated in approximately 20% of lung adenocarcinoma. Aside
from the effects of LKB1 inactivation on tumor initiation, LKB1-mutant
cancers are biologically distinct from cancer with functional LKB1, and
the loss of LKB1 uniquely confers invasive and metastatic properties in
genetically engineered mouse models of cancer. While various pathways,
including energy metabolism, cell polarity, and cell growth, are
regulated by LKB1 and can play a pleiotropic role in cancer initiation
and progression, no therapies are currently available for clinical use
that specifically target LKB1 inactivation. Therefore, elucidation of the
functional mechanisms associated with LKB1 inactivation has translational
relevance.

We analyzed proteomic profiles of 45 lung adenocarcinoma cell lines with
and without LKB1 inactivation to identify molecular features associated
with LKB1 inactivation. Carbamoyl phosphate synthase 1 (CPS1) was
identified as a markedly overexpressed protein in LKB1-inactivated lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines. CPS1 is the first rate-limiting mitochondrial
enzyme in the urea cycle, and plays an intricate role in arginine and
pyrimidine metabolism. CPS1 knockdown reduced cell growth, decreased
levels of metabolites associated with nucleic acid biosynthesis pathway,
and contributed an additive effect when combined with conventional
chemotherapy agents including gemcitabine, pemetrexed, or CHK1 inhibitor
AZD7762. Tissue microarray analysis using 305 lung adenocarcinoma tumors
revealed that CPS1 was expressed in 65.7% of LKB1-negative and only 5.0%
of LKB1-positive lung adenocarcinomas. In addition, CPS1 expression was
significantly and independently associated with poor overall survival of
lung adenocarcinoma patients (P We analyzed proteomic profiles of 45 lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines with and without LKB1 inactivation to identify
molecular features associated with LKB1 inactivation. Carbamoyl phosphate
synthase 1 (CPS1) was identified as a markedly overexpressed protein in
LKB1-inactivated lung adenocarcinoma cell lines. CPS1 is the first
rate-limiting mitochondrial enzyme in the urea cycle, and plays an
intricate role in arginine and pyrimidine metabolism. CPS1 knockdown
reduced cell growth, decreased levels of metabolites associated with
nucleic acid biosynthesis pathway, and contributed an additive effect
when combined with conventional chemotherapy agents including
gemcitabine, pemetrexed, or CHK1 inhibitor AZD7762. Tissue microarray
analysis using 305 lung adenocarcinoma tumors revealed that CPS1 was
expressed in 65.7% of LKB1-negative and only 5.0% of LKB1-positive lung
adenocarcinomas. In addition, CPS1 expression was significantly and
independently associated with poor overall survival of lung
adenocarcinoma patients (P < 0.0001, HR = 3.03, 95% CI 1.74-5.25).
Concordant with the results of tissue microarray, analysis of the Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset consisting 403 lung adenocarcinomas revealed
that high CPS1 mRNA expression was significantly associated with worse
overall survival and is an independent prognostic indicator of lung
adenocarcinoma (P = 0.005, HR = 2.31, 95% CI 1.28-4.16). Our findings
suggest functional relevance of CPS1 and its association with worse
outcome in LKB1-inactivated lung adenocarcinoma. Therefore, CPS1 is a
promising therapeutic target in combination with other chemotherapy
agents, as well as a prognostic biomarker, enabling us to personalize the
treatment of LKB1-inactivated lung adenocarcinoma.


