Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel selective DNA-PK inhibitor, M3814, as a potential
combination partner of Etoposide and Cisplatin in the therapy of lung
cancer.


M3814 is a potent and selective inhibitor of DNA-PK, one of the key
cellular regulators of DNA damage induced by ionizing radiation or
certain cytostatics used in the treatment malignant disease. One of these
drugs, Etoposide, induces double strand breaks (DSB) in cellular DNA.
DSBs are most difficult to repair and, if left unrepaired, can lead to
induction of cell cycle arrest and/or apoptosis and ultimately cell
death. DNA-PK plays a critical role in the repair of DSB via the
non-homologous end-joining pathway. M3814 was tested for activity in
combination with Etoposide in a panel of 98 cancer cell lines derived
from lung cancer. A broad potentiation effect of DNA-PK inhibitor was
observed in most cancer cell lines. As a rule, cell lines sensitive to
Etoposide demonstrated increased sensitivity to the combination. M3814
did not show significant effect on cancer cell growth/viability in
combination with Cisplatin compared to Cisplatin alone at concentrations
that effectively inhibit DNA-PK activity. At the same time, M3814 did not
negatively affect the antitumor activity of Cisplatin. The therapeutic
effect of M3814 in combination with the standard of care (SoC) regimen of
Etoposide and Cisplatin was tested in the human small cell lung cancer
xenograft model, NCI-H520. Triple combination of M3814, Etoposide and
Cisplatin resulted in increased efficacy compared to SoC treatment arm.
Since myeloid and lymphoid suppression is one of the dose limiting
toxicities of the SoC regimen in patients, the effect of the triple
combination on myeloid and lymphoid blood cells was investigated in
immunocompetent mice. Whereas the SoC treatment showed reduction of the
myeloid and lymphoid compartments, the addition of M3814 did not
additionally reduce these cells neither in the treatment nor the recovery
phase. Our results warrant further investigations to explore the
potential of the combination in the clinical setting.


