Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Src-family kinases to combat acquired inhibitor
resistance in FLT3-ITD+ AML.


Activating internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutations in the FMS-like
receptor tyrosine kinase 3 (Flt3) are found in approximately 30% of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) patients. Flt3-ITD expression is associated with
aggressive, chemotherapy-resistant disease and decreased overall
survival. Multiple selective Flt3 kinase inhibitors have been developed
as targeted therapy for Flt3-ITD+ AML. However, the clinical utility of
these kinase inhibitors has been limited by the rapid recurrence of
drug-resistant disease that often results from Flt3 kinase domain
mutations that prevent inhibitor action. Recent studies revealed that
multiple non-receptor tyrosine kinases are over-expressed in AML,
including the myeloid Src-family kinases Hck, Lyn and Fgr, and may
cooperate with Flt3 to drive disease. These observations suggest that
kinase inhibitors with specificity profiles targeting Flt3 and these
AML-associated cytoplasmic kinases may be less prone to acquired
resistance. In the present study, we determined the contributions of Hck
and Fgr kinase activities to Flt3-ITD+ AML cell growth using a chemical
genetics approach. While RNAi-mediated knockdown of each of these kinases
reduces proliferation and increases apoptosis in primary AML cells, the
impact of pharmacologic inhibition of their kinase activities on AML cell
growth is not known. Because no selective Hck or Fgr inhibitors exist, we
developed kinase domain mutants that desensitize each kinase to the
broad-spectrum SRC-family kinase inhibitor, A-419259. Examination of a
previous crystal structure of Hck with A-419259 bound to the active site
suggested a role for the ‘gatekeeper’ residue in compound binding.
Substitution of the gatekeeper threonine of Hck and Fgr with methionine
conferred 3-fold resistance to A-419259 in vitro without diminishing
kinase activity. When expressed in human TF-1 myeloid cells transformed
with Flt3-ITD, these inhibitor-resistant Hck and Fgr mutants conferred
resistance to growth inhibition by A-419259 to a similar extent, while
expression of the corresponding wild-type kinases was without effect. The
sensitivity of the TF-1/Flt3-ITD cell lines to A-419259 correlated with
inhibition of mutant Hck and Fgr kinase activity in the cells. Our
findings suggest that suppression of AML cell growth by A-419259 is due
in part to inhibition of Hck and Fgr, and identify these AML-associated
kinases as therapeutic targets. Ongoing studies are addressing the role
of Hck and Fgr as inhibitor targets in Flt3-ITD+ AML cell lines and
patient samples as well as the propensity of A-419259 and other
multi-targeted inhibitors of AML-associated kinases for acquired drug
resistance.


