Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal Hedgehog pathway activation suppresses growth and
metastases of lung adenocarcinoma.


Aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, a crucial
developmental pathway, drives the tumor growth of Gorlin-type cancers.
However, recent data suggest that paracrine activation of the pathway is
tumor suppressive rather than oncogenic in sporadic epithelial cancers.
The role of the pathway in non-small lung cancer is poorly understood.
Thus, we explored the role of stromal Hh pathway activation in growth of
lung tumor epithelia. Human lung adenocarcinoma cell lines were used to
probe SHH mRNA and protein expression. Co-culture of high SHH expressing
cell lines with murine embryonic and lung fibroblasts were used to
confirm and probe the role of paracrine SHH expression on the growth of
lung cancer cells. The in vivo role of paracrine SHH was tested using
autochthonous lung cancer models with conditional KRASG12Dactivation, p53
loss,, and SHH loss compared to wild-type SHH. In human lung
adenocarcinoma patients, higher expression of SHH mRNA in lung
adenocarcinoma correlated with poor overall and progression free
survival. A scan of 35 human lung adenocarcinoma cell lines revealed
heterogeneous expression of SHH and IHH with high expression found
predominantly in mutant K-Ras lines. Co-culture of high SHH expressing
tumor epithelial cells and Shh-Light2 reporter cell lines demonstrated
that SHH activated the fibroblast reporter in a paracrine manner, rather
than an autocrine effect on cancer cells. Treatment with the SMO
inhibitor, KAAD-cyclopamine, also inhibited the growth of tumor
epithelial cells in co-culture with NIH-3T3 fibroblast cells but the
effect was decreased when co-cultured with lung fibroblasts. Genetic loss
of SHH in an autochthonous mouse model, LSL-KrasG12D/+;Trp53fl/fl;
Shhfl/fl (KPS) did not affect overall survival compared to
LSL-KrasG12D/+;Trp53fl/fl (KP) mice However, early inhibition of the Hh
pathway by anti-SHH/IHH antibody, 5E1, on KP mice resulted in
significantly worse survival rates with increased metastatic burden
compared to IgG treatment. Analysis of KP tumors revealed unexpected high
levels of IHH mRNA by in situ hybridization that may account for the
survival differences seen between genetic ablation and pharmaceutical
inhibition of the Hh ligands. In conclusion, the Hh signaling pathway
acts upon lung stromal cells in a paracrine fashion. Inhibition of Hh
activity in vivo worsened mortality rate due to increase in tumor growth
and metastases. Furthermore, mutant Kras lung cancers express high levels
of IHH that dominates the tumor suppressive effect of our mouse models.


