Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the vulnerabilities in cancer cells upon inhibition
of glutathione synthesis.


A hallmark of cancer is the rewiring of cellular metabolic pathways,
including those that mediate oxidative stress. Cancer initiation and
progression, which demands increased production of ATP and synthesis of
proteins, also results in elevated generation of toxic by-products such
as reactive oxygen species (ROS). Cancer cells counteract ROS by
increasing the production of antioxidants, which convert ROS into benign
species. It has been shown that production of glutathione (GSH), the most
abundant intracellular antioxidant, is necessary for many cancers to
initiate malignant transformation. Whether inhibition of GSH synthesis
can impact the survival of established malignant tumors remains poorly
understood. In this study we investigated the extent to which GSH is
required in cancer cells and across different subtypes of breast cancer.
Profiling of an extensive panel of breast cancer cell lines demonstrated
that the majority of cells are resistant to death after acute GSH
depletion, while only luminal breast cancer cells are sensitive to
chronic GSH depletion. To understand how most tumor cells are resistant
to GSH depletion and oxidative stress, we conducted a small-molecule
high-throughput screen interrogating more than 500 compounds in a
10-point dilution format. Importantly, screening plates were imaged and
cell numbers quantified to avoid any false positives/negatives
potentially associated with interrogating cellular metabolism using
classical high throughput techniques, such as CellTiter-Glo. This screen
revealed that depletion of glutathione sensitized breast cancer cells to
inhibition of deubiquitinases, resulting in a drastic induction of a
proteotoxic stress response. Furthermore, this sensitivity was found to
be specific to malignant cells, as non-transformed cells were resistant
to the combined treatments. It has been hypothesized that GSH, acting as
an abundant thiol group, non-enzymatically reacts with ubiquitin and
limits ubiquitination of proteins. Loss of glutathione, in combination
with deubiquitinase inhibitors, leads to deregulation of ubiquitinated
protein pools, and cancer cells undergo proteotoxic stress and cell
death. These findings elucidate a novel vulnerability in cancers cells
and shed light on an unexpected relationship between cancer metabolism
and protein homeostasis.


