Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) of peptide-linked
Indolino-Benzodiazepine (IGN) DNA-alkylator provides improved anti-tumor
activity over that of a crosslinker.


We recently disclosed highly active antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) that
incorporated the novel DNA alkylating indolino-benzodiazepine (termed
IGN) dimer, DGN549 (IGN-P1). The stereochemistry of the alanyl moiety of
the protease-cleavable alanine-alanine linker used was shown to impact
ADC catabolism, bystander killing activity, and in vivo efficacy
(Shizuka, et al., AACR 2016 #2959). Building upon these results, here we
describe preclinical results from a head-to-head comparison of ADCs of
the mono-imine containing DGN549 with its corresponding DNA cross-linking
diimine version, IGN-P1 diimine. IGN-P1 diimine and DGN549 were
conjugated to a folate receptor-α (FRα)-binding antibody and an
EpCAM-binding antibody. The resulting ADCs demonstrated similar high in
vitro potency (IC50 ~3-100 pM) and specificity towards several cancer
cell lines. Further in vitro studies revealed that the DNA alkylating
anti-FRα-DGN549 ADC demonstrated superior bystander cell-killing
activity compared to its DNA crosslinking counterpart, anti-FRα-IGN-P1
diimine. In vivo, this improved bystander killing ability translated into
better in vivo activity for the DNA alkylating ADC. In an endometrial
tumor xenograft model established with Ishikawa cells, the
anti-FRα-DGN549 induced complete regressions at a single dose of 140
µg/kg Ab dose (equivalent to 5 µg/kg linked IGN). The cross-linking
anti-FRα-IGN-P1 diimine had to be used at twice the dose to achieve the
same level of anti-tumor activity. The in vivo tolerability in CD-1 mice
also displayed differences in the two ADCs. We found that the ADC of the
DNA crosslinker was at least two-fold less tolerated than the
corresponding ADC of the DNA alkylator. These results indicate that a ~4
fold greater therapeutic index can be achieved when using a DNA
alkylating mono-imine DGN549 ADC as compared to the DNA crosslinking
IGN-P1 diimine ADC.


