Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of anti-ctla-4 and anti-pd-1 on memory T-cell
differentiation and resistance to tumor relapse.


The FDA has begun to expand the approved uses of immune checkpoint
blockade antibodies targeting CTLA-4 and PD-1. Blocking either checkpoint
relieves the negative regulation of T-cells resulting in significant
responses in patients with cancer. Data has now begun to emerge regarding
differences between these two therapies. While αPD-1 therapy has a
greater response rate (~30% vs. 11%) according to RECIST criteria, recent
reports have suggested responses to αPD-1 may not be as durable as
αCTLA-4. 25% of patients who initially responded to αPD-1 have tumor
relapse within 24 months. In contrast, the 3-year survival rate of
patients treated with αCTLA-4 is at least ~25% suggesting a durable
response. Previous studies in bacterial or chronic LCMV infectious models
have shown that αCTLA-4 can increase CD8+ memory T-cell formation,
whereas genetic ablation of PD-1 on T-cells often promotes the terminally
differentiated exhausted CD8+ T-cell phenotype, while attenuating memory
T-cell formation. However, the mechanism which leads to relapse following
αPD-1 treatment in tumor models is not clear. The goal of this project
is to understand how immunotherapies shape memory T-cell formation and
how that relates to the mechanism of tumor relapse.

To test whether αCTLA-4 or αPD-1 can induce a better memory T-cell
response, mice were vaccinated with irradiated B16F10 murine melanoma
cells and treated αCTLA-4 or αPD-1. Mice were re-challenged with B16F10
80 days after vaccination. Although both αCTLA-4 and αPD-1 improved
tumor rejection compared with controls, αCTLA-4 treated mice exhibited
superior tumor control compared to αPD-1 (p0.5). To test whether the
frequency of memory T-cells recruited to the re-challenged tumor could
affect memory T-cell response, antigen-specific pmel-1 T-cells were
infused to mice following vaccination with αCTLA-4 or αPD-1. Our result
suggested that there were more tumor-infiltrating pmel-1 T-cells in the
αCTLA-4 treated group compared to the αPD-1 treated group (p0.5). To
test whether the frequency of memory T-cells recruited to the
re-challenged tumor could affect memory T-cell response, antigen-specific
pmel-1 T-cells were infused to mice following vaccination with αCTLA-4
or αPD-1. Our result suggested that there were more tumor-infiltrating
pmel-1 T-cells in the αCTLA-4 treated group compared to the αPD-1
treated group (p<0.05). In order to augment the durability of αPD-1
treatment, αPD-1 was combined with αCTLA-4 following vaccination. The
combined treatment group has superior antitumor response compared to that
with αPD-1 (p0.05) during re-challenge, indicating that the effect of
the combined treatment is dominated by αCTLA-4.

Collectively, our studies facilitate the design of combination
immunotherapy treatments that enhance both response rates and generation
of memory T-cells to prevent relapse.


