Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hippo signaling promotes sarcomagenesis through the NF-kB pathway.


Nearly 200,000 individuals worldwide are diagnosed with a form of
soft-tissue sarcoma (STS) every year. Due to a lack of novel targeted
therapeutics sarcoma for these malignancies treatment has not changed
significantly in 25 years. Therefore, the discovery of novel targets and
mechanisms is critical. One promising avenue the Hippo pathway, which we
have identified as a key regulator of sarcomagenesis in undifferentiated
pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS), a commonly diagnosed and aggressive subtype of
sarcomas. Inactivation of the pathway, promotes nuclear localization of
YAP1, a transcriptional co-activator that promotes proliferation.
Whereas, many studies have defined YAP1’s transcriptional targets in
epithelial tumors and normal tissues, its role in mesenchymal tumors is
unclear. Here, we confirm that increased YAP1 mRNA expression correlates
with worse overall survival in UPS patients. To define mechanisms of
YAP1-mediated sarcomagenesis, we developed a novel genetic mouse model in
which YAP1 is conditionally deleted in UPS tumors. Microarray analysis of
these tumors revealed that YAP1 loss inhibits expression of NF-κB
targets. We have performed ChIP-seq and super-enhancer analysis of human
UPS tumors and found that many of the 900 identified super enhancers
regulate expression of NF-κB targets that are dependent on YAP1 in our
system. This finding is particularly relevant as NF-κB is a key
regulator of muscle cell proliferation and suppresses myoblast
differentiation. Together, these data suggest that upregulation of YAP1
activity promotes NF-κB-mediated proliferation and inhibits
differentiation, resulting in sarcomagenesis. Importantly, we have
discovered that a combination of JQ1, a BET family inhibitor, and SAHA, a
histone deacetylase inhibitor, decreases YAP1 expression, YAP1 protein
stability, and sarcoma cell proliferation. SAHA/JQ1 treatment
significantly increased expression of Angiomotin (AMOT), which binds
YAP1, sequesters it in the cytoplasm, and facilitates it degradation. We
have also found that AMOT expression is lost in sarcomas, likely due to
epigenetic suppression. Consistent with these observations, SAHA/JQ1
treatment also decreased gene expression of YAP1 targets and caused
re-expression of the muscle differentiation markers p57, MEF2C, and
MYOD1. We have investigated the effect of of SAHA/JQ1 in vivo and found
dramatic inhibition of tumor growth, as well as reduced YAP1 expression,
and increased AMOT expression. Importantly SAHA/JQ1 treatment also
inhibited NF-κB activity. Our studies have revealed for the first time
that YAP1 expression is epigenetically modulated through AMOT
de-regulation in sarcomas, resulting in elevated NF-κB activity and
sarcomagenesis. SAHA/JQ1 treatment re-establishes epigenetic control of
the Hippo pathway reducing proliferation and enhancing differentiation.
Ultimately, we will determine whether this approach represents a novel
course of targeted treatment for sarcoma patients.


