Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo pharmacokinetic properties and antitumor efficacy of
porcupine lead inhibitors in the orthotopic murine MMTV-Wnt1 breast tumor
model and the human HPAF-II pancreatic xenograft mouse model.


Porcupine (PORCN), a muti-pass integral membrane-bound-O-Acyl
acyltransferase (MBOAT), resides in the in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
and is required for biogenesis of Wnt ligands. The secreted mature Wnt
ligands bind to their cognate receptors (Frizzled, LRP5/6 and
transmembrane receptor ROR) to form the ligand - receptor complex which
is capable to activate the Wnt-β-catenin signalling cascade and
downstream signalling pathways such as mTOR, GSK3, Akt, and PKC. The
deregulation of and aberrant activation of the various components of
Wnt-β-catenin signalling pathway have been implicated in tumorigenesis,
cell proliferation, survival and differentiation. Hyperactivity of PORCN
is found to be associated with cancerous cell growth. Knockdown of Porcn
mRNA significantly reduced the proliferation of breast cancer cells and
resulted in the delay of MDA-MB-231 tumor formation in mouse xenograft
models (Covey et al 2012). Loss of function mutations of RNF43, a
negative regulation of Wnt-signalling via Frizzled receptor, is recently
reported to be involved with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Inhibition
of the PDAC cell lines bearing RNF43 mutations enhanced Wnt-β-catenin
signalling and resulted in suppression of proliferation and
differentiation of PDAC tumor cells (Jiang et al 2013). Taken together
porcupine could be an attractive therapeutic approach for a particular
Wnt-driven cancer population. We have identified the porcupine lead
compounds (ETC-159, ETC-535, ETC-611 and ETC-539) from different novel
chemical scaffolds. The aim of this study was to evaluate their
pharmacokinetic properties and antitumor efficacy in different cancer
mouse models, the murine MMTV-Wnt1 breast cancer and the human pancreatic
HPAF-II cancer. All porcupine lead compounds had good oral
pharmacokinetic properties with the absolute oral bioavailability greater
than 42%. They had the maximum tolerated dose (MTD-7d) up to 200 mg/kg.
They produced antitumor efficacy ranging from 24% to 79% at 1 mg/kg, 38%
to 89% at 3 mg/kg, and 58 to 97% at 10 mg/kg in MMTV-Wnt1 tumor mouse
model. In vivo inhibition of PORCN led to reduce the expression level of
Axin2 in MMTV-Wnt tumors upto 8h. At 100 mg/kg, they produced antitumor
efficacy ranging from 34% to 91% in human HPAF-II pancreatic xenograft
mouse model. Of 4 porcupine lead compounds, ETC-159 demonstrated great
oral pharmacokinetic properties and produced significantly antitumor
efficacy (p value Porcupine (PORCN), a muti-pass integral
membrane-bound-O-Acyl acyltransferase (MBOAT), resides in the in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and is required for biogenesis of Wnt ligands.
The secreted mature Wnt ligands bind to their cognate receptors
(Frizzled, LRP5/6 and transmembrane receptor ROR) to form the ligand -
receptor complex which is capable to activate the Wnt-β-catenin
signalling cascade and downstream signalling pathways such as mTOR, GSK3,
Akt, and PKC. The deregulation of and aberrant activation of the various
components of Wnt-β-catenin signalling pathway have been implicated in
tumorigenesis, cell proliferation, survival and differentiation.
Hyperactivity of PORCN is found to be associated with cancerous cell
growth. Knockdown of Porcn mRNA significantly reduced the proliferation
of breast cancer cells and resulted in the delay of MDA-MB-231 tumor
formation in mouse xenograft models (Covey et al 2012). Loss of function
mutations of RNF43, a negative regulation of Wnt-signalling via Frizzled
receptor, is recently reported to be involved with pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. Inhibition of the PDAC cell lines bearing RNF43 mutations
enhanced Wnt-β-catenin signalling and resulted in suppression of
proliferation and differentiation of PDAC tumor cells (Jiang et al 2013).
Taken together porcupine could be an attractive therapeutic approach for
a particular Wnt-driven cancer population. We have identified the
porcupine lead compounds (ETC-159, ETC-535, ETC-611 and ETC-539) from
different novel chemical scaffolds. The aim of this study was to evaluate
their pharmacokinetic properties and antitumor efficacy in different
cancer mouse models, the murine MMTV-Wnt1 breast cancer and the human
pancreatic HPAF-II cancer. All porcupine lead compounds had good oral
pharmacokinetic properties with the absolute oral bioavailability greater
than 42%. They had the maximum tolerated dose (MTD-7d) up to 200 mg/kg.
They produced antitumor efficacy ranging from 24% to 79% at 1 mg/kg, 38%
to 89% at 3 mg/kg, and 58 to 97% at 10 mg/kg in MMTV-Wnt1 tumor mouse
model. In vivo inhibition of PORCN led to reduce the expression level of
Axin2 in MMTV-Wnt tumors upto 8h. At 100 mg/kg, they produced antitumor
efficacy ranging from 34% to 91% in human HPAF-II pancreatic xenograft
mouse model. Of 4 porcupine lead compounds, ETC-159 demonstrated great
oral pharmacokinetic properties and produced significantly antitumor
efficacy (p value < 0.0001) in both cancer mouse models. ETC-1922159 was
selected as the preclinical development candidate and currently is under
investigation in Phase 1 clinical trial.


