Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CHD1 as regulator of cell adhesion in Ets fusion negative prostate
cancer.


Prostate cancer (PCa) develops into lethal disease in about 10% of men
diagnosed with this malignancy.

Common genomic changes are seen in PCa such as alterations in CDKN1B,
RB1, TP53, PTEN, NKX3-1, MYC and androgen receptor.

Oncogenic fusions involving the Ets family are seen in 50-70% PCa
patients, the most common of which is TMPRSS2-ERG. TMPRSS2-ERG influences
cell migration, particularly when PTEN is co-deleted or PIK3CA activating
mutations are present. However, in the absence of ERG fusions, molecular
drivers of the PCa phenotype are less clear but include alterations in
SPOP (6-15% of PCa), SPINK1 (10%), MAP3K7 (18-38%) and CHD1 (15-27%).

CHD1 (Chromo-domain Helicase DNA Binding Protein-1) is a chromatin
remodeling factor with many roles including homologous recombination
mediated DNA repair of double strand breaks and maintenance of genomic
stability and therefore it is hypothesized to cause the predominant
intrachromosomal rearrangements observed in Ets fusion negative tumors.
This study was undertaken to evaluate the cellular effects that follow
CHD1 deletion that could aid PCa initiation and progression. CHD1 was
knocked out in the non tumorigenic, HPV16 immortalised prostate
epithelial cell line, RWPE-1, using CRISPR/Cas9. Compared to parental
RWPE-1 and non target cells (NT2), the CHD1 KO cells had a smaller and
rounder morphology and were less adherent to tissue culture plates. To
study expression of extracellular matrix and adhesion molecules, RT
profiler assay was performed using RWPE-1 parental and CHD1 KO cells.
CHD1 KO cells showed a decrease in the expression of SPARC, MMP2, ITGA2,
ITGA5, ITGA6, FN1, LAMB3, collagen,

tenascin and vitronectin as compared to parentals and NT2. Reduction in
extracellular matrix and adhesion molecules and altered morphology of
CHD1 KO cells as compared to parentals and NT2 cells suggest that loss of
CHD1 reduces cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion.

These results suggest that in the absence of PTEN loss in Ets negative
tumors, deletion of CHD1 gene could change cell adhesion dynamics
ascribing a new role for CHD1 in the development and progression of PCa.


