Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The implications of splicing variant of AIMP2 lacking exon 2 among
various cancer types: An analysis of the ICGC/TCGA database and clinical
validation.


Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase interacting multifunctional proteins (AIMP) is
the multiple tRNA synthetase complex protein called the multi-tRNA
complex (MRC). In cancer, the splicing variant of AIMP2 derives a several
signaling cascades, which are crucial for cancer proliferation. Detecting
an exon-2 depleted splicing variant (AIMP2-DX2) is an issue of growing
importance in cancer therapy. This study suggests the evidence for
interrelation between the AIMP2-DX2 and cancer development. We analyzed
AIMP2 and AIMP2-DX2 gene expression and their ratio on 7 commercial
cancer cell lines and Multiple myeloma patient derived 536MM cell line by
RT-PCR and targeted RNA sequencing. Extended this profile, the
distribution of AIMP2-DX2/AIMP2 ratio and AIMP2-related major cancer
pathways were analyzed using the samples in the ICGC/TCGA database. Over
23 cancer types, 753 samples were used in WTS analysis. In the DEG set
analysis, 10 pre-defined major cancer pathways were analyzed among 16
cancer types. Some cancer types, especially acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
showed most significant association with AIMP2-DX2 in terms of cancer
signaling pathways. We focused on clinical implications of
AIMP2-DX2/AIMP2 ratio in the ICGC/TCGA database. 19 AML samples were
used, Overall survival (OS) showed that patients with AIMP2-DX2/AIMP2
ratio higher than Q1 shows poor OS and Most of the genes including
MEK1/2, ERK, MNK1/2 in this pathway had positive association with
AIMP2-DX2/AIMP2 ratio. In colon carcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma,
OS curves had a tendency in a similar way to AML. For the clinical
validation of the prognostic value of AIMP2-DX2, 51 AML patients were
included in this analysis. The correlation between AIMP2-DX2 expression
and survival outcomes was investigated in clinical validation cohort of
AML. The AIMP2-DX2-positive group had significantly inferior OS rate and
had worse RFS compare to AIMP2-DX2-negative group. Our sequential data
shows that the AIMP2-DX2/AIMP2 expression and their ratio can possibly be
an indicator to measure malignancy of various cancer types.


