Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic landscape of glioma reveals defective neuroactive ligand
receptor interaction pathway as a poor prognosticator in glioblastoma
patients.


Glioblastoma (GBM; grade IV), is highly proliferative, infiltrative and
treatment refractory. Hence, understanding the complete genetic
alteration profile of GBM would help us in identifying molecules or
pathways that have strong implications in GBM pathogenesis, thus opening
up avenues for targeted therapy. Recent large scale studies suggest that
three pathways - receptor-tyrosine kinase, TP53 and RB, are significantly
altered in GBM. However, even with the tremendous increase in our
understanding of the tumor, advancement in therapeutics is minimal and
the median survival still remains at 15 months. Hence, we need to
elucidate novel altered molecules and pathways in GBM progression such
that more effective therapeutic options can be explored.

Here, we have carried out whole exome sequencing of grade II, grade III
and GBM samples which revealed the mutation spectrum of glioma from our
patient set. Further, we performed integrative analysis of mutated genes
from our patient cohort as well as TCGA cohort (The Cancer Genome Atlas)
to find out mutated pathways that predict survival in GBM patients. The
most significant pathway - neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction
pathway was explored further. Patients with mutations in one or more
genes of this pathway had poor survival. The pathway comprises of
G-protein coupled receptors, ion channels and ligands which functions in
modulation of neural plasticity, memory processes, behavior etc. Of the
enriched genes belonging to this pathway, Calcitonin Receptor (CALCR),
which was highest mutated in GBM (2.75%), was taken up for further
investigation. CALCR was found to be downregulated in GBM and mutation or
downregulation of the gene was found to predict poor survival in
patients. Functional studies through cell-line based experiments revealed
CALCR is a tumor suppressor in GBM. The peptide hormone calcitonin (CT),
a high affinity CALCR ligand, inhibited proliferation, migration and
anchorage-independent growth of glioma cells expressing CALCR with a
concomitant decrease in the phosphorylation levels of ERK, AKT and JNK
signaling

molecules. However, CT failed to do these functions in CALCR silenced
glioma cells. Exogenous overexpression of CALCR in glioma cells
expressing low levels of the receptor was found to inhibit proliferation,
migration and anchorage independent growth and this effect was further
augmented when CT was added. Further, introduction of tumor-derived
mutations in CALCR led to the abrogation of its tumor suppressor
function. Studies are ongoing to demonstrate the tumor suppressive nature
of CALCR using in vitro astrocyte transformation and intracranial
orthotopic mouse glioma model. Thus, our study finds CT-CALCR signaling
axis is an important tumor suppressor pathway in glioma development and
underscores the importance of using CT as a novel therapeutic molecule
for GBM treatment.


