Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic DNA methylation profiling of triple negative breast
cancer: a quantitative NGS approach.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive disease with a high
degree of genomic instability. TNBC patients have poor prognosis and the
risk of metastasis and death is increased for women who relapse within
four years of treatment compared to other breast cancer subtypes.
Currently, there are no reliable prognostic markers to identify which
population is at risk for early relapse and the molecular mechanism for
disease recurrence is not well understood. Epigenetic changes, especially
DNA methylation, are common in breast cancer and have been found to be
associated with increased metastatic capability. Therefore, the
methylation states of genes in TNBC tumors compared to non-tumor breast
tissue was examined in order to identify potential biomarkers and
therapeutic targets in TNBC. Matched tumor and adjacent non-tumor tissue
from patients with TNBC were obtained following surgical resection and
genomic DNA was extracted. Epigenetic profiling of TNBC tumors and
non-tumor tissue was performed using a highly sensitive and quantitative
analytics platform, which utilizes methylation sensitive restriction
endonucleases to detect changes in methylation of CpG sites. Millions of
CpG sites exist within the human genome and many of these are altered
with tumor formation and progression, therefore, changes in methylation
profiles of CpG sites may be useful as a diagnostic and/or prognostic
biomarker in TNBC patients. Non-metric multidimensional scaling
ordination analysis of the CpG sites revealed highly distinct methylation
patterns between tumor and non-tumor tissue. Approximately 326 sites had
a significant methylation score difference (p&lt0.0025) between TNBC
tumor and non-tumor tissue, with most of the CpG sites having greater
than 2-fold change in methylation status. Analysis of functional gene
classes using KEGG classifiers revealed a significant change in
methylation patterns of genes involved in response to infections and
other immune related functions. Additionally, the top ten genes with
hyper- or hypomethylated sites within TNBC tumors when compared to
non-tumor tissue were identified. Interestingly, Gli-1 was one of the top
hypomethylated genes. Gli-1 has been shown in our lab and others to have
significance in chemoresistance and recurrence in TNBC patients.
Immunohistochemical analysis of TNBC tumors revealed Gli-1 overexpression
in TNBC tumors compared to non-tumor tissue. Expression levels of Gli-1
in TNBC tumors correlated with stage (p&lt0.001) and recurrence free
(p&lt0.0213) and overall survival (p&lt0.017). Thus, analysis of CpG
methylated sites in TNBC tumors and non-tumor tissue revealed differences
in epigenetic profiles allowing for distinction between tumor and
non-tumor tissue. Genes in TNBC tumors with significant changes in
methylation status may be potential candidate genes that serve as a
diagnostic or prognostic biomarker for TNBC.


