Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of FTY720 and tamoxifen inhibits drug-resistant
ovarian cancer cell proliferation.


Despite satisfactory initial responses to frontline therapies that
combine surgical debulking with platinum based chemotherapy, virtually
all women with advanced ovarian cancer relapse with drug resistant
disease. There is a critical need to identify alternative, effective
therapies.

Previously, we used patient derived xenograft (PDX) models of ovarian
cancer in mice to identify the sphingosine1 phosphate (S1P) pathway as
one of the pathways most affected by two agents frequently used to treat
ovarian cancer, carboplatin and paclitaxel. The S1P pathway contributes
to multiple biological processes recognized as essential for tumor
development, and aberrations in sphingolipid metabolism have been
directly correlated with advanced disease and with resistance to
chemotherapy and radiation. Further, recent studies indicate that
tamoxifen may counteract drug resistance mechanisms through modulation of
sphingolipid metabolism, specifically through inhibition of the ceramide
converting enyzmes acid ceramidase and glucosylceramide synthase.
Therefore, we evaluated the efficacy of modulating S1P metabolism using
the sphingosine analog FTY720 and tamoxifen as an approach to inhibit the
proliferation of drug-resistant ovarian tumor cells.

We used alamarBlue cell proliferation assays to compare the
anti-proliferative effect of FTY720 and tamoxifen with the effect of each
drug as a single agent. FTY720 + tamoxifen synergistically decreased the
cell viability of 3/3 ovarian cancer cell lines: estrogen receptor alpha
(ERα) positive SKOV3.TR (taxane resistant), ERα negative A280.cp20
(platinum resistant) and HeyA8.MDR (taxane-platinum resistant). The
combination also increased levels of apoptosis as reflected by Annexin V
staining and cleaved caspase 3 levels. Further, administration of 5mg/kg
i.p. FTY720 + 20mg/kg p.o. tamoxifen daily for 21 days to PDX-bearing
mice demonstrated that FTY720 + tamoxifen suppressed tumor growth by ~60%
compared to vehicle controls. Notably, immunohistochemical staining of
tumors harvested from treated mice showed that the combination decreased
expression of the proliferation marker Ki-67 and increased expression of
apoptosis indicators ceramide and cleaved caspase 3 to a greater degree
than in tumors exposed to either drug alone. We conclude that FTY720 +
tamoxifen merit further investigation as potentially effective agents for
the treatment of drug-resistant ovarian cancer.


