Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of a new system for collection, stabilization, and
purification of circulating tumor DNA.


Introduction:

The current preanalytical workflows for circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA)
analysis have limitations that affect the accurate detection and
quantification of these plasma cancer biomarkers. Release of genomic DNA
(gDNA) from white blood cells (WBCs) due to cell lysis or apoptosis
during whole blood storage in EDTA tubes creates higher gDNA background
levels, affecting the sensitivity of ctDNA assays. Current tubes that
stabilize WBCs often contain crosslinking reagents, which have negative
effects on sensitive downstream assays, including methylation-based
assays.

Using ctDNA assays, the new PAXgene® Blood ccfDNA System*, consisting of
a blood collection tube with unique, non-crosslinking chemistry and an
automated circulating cell-free DNA (ccfDNA) extraction kit, was
evaluated in three research studies.

Methods:

Blood samples were collected into paired PAXgene and EDTA tubes and
stored for 7 days at room temperature (RT). ccfDNA was isolated from
plasma using the PAXgene kit or the QIAGEN QIAamp® Circulating Nucleic
Acid Kit.

Study 1: The ccfDNA from lung cancer patients was quantified by real-time
PCR for the amount of the ERV sequence (as a measure of the total plasma
DNA quantity) and after bisulfte treatment for mSHOX2 as a marker for
ctDNA.

Study 2: Blood from healthy donors was spiked with fragmented,
fully-methylated CpGenome DNA. During storage, tubes were intermittently
inverted to simulate tubes in transit. Subsequent to bisulfite
conversion, PCR assays targeting ACTB and methylated BCAT1 and IKZF1 DNA
were used to determine the yields of ccfDNA and ctDNA, respectively.

Study 3: Restriction enzyme treated EGFR DNA containing exon 19 deletions
and exon 20 and 21 substitutions (T790M, L858R) were spiked into healthy
donors’ blood. ccfDNA was tested with the QIAGEN therascreen® EGFR
Plasma RGQ PCR Kit*.

Results:

Both study 1 and 2 demonstrated constant levels of the methylation ctDNA
markers, SHOX2, BCAT1 and IKZF1, over the investigated time course. There
was no significant release of gDNA in the PAXgene tube whereas a
significant release of gDNA was detected in EDTA samples. Likewise, study
3 showed constant EGFR Ct values in the PAXgene system with reliable
mutation detection, whereas the high DNA concentration from the EDTA
system resulted in false-positive callings.

Conclusions:

The new system allows researchers to accurately detect and quantify
plasma cancer biomarkers from blood samples that have been stored in the
tube for up to 7 days at RT. This includes challenging assays based on
methylated ctDNA. The system provides the required assay sensitivity to
allow the correct assay interpretation beyond the typical 3–6 hour
storage limit for EDTA tubes.

*For Research Use Only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures.


