Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary intake and risk of lung cancer in non-smoking women: a
hospital-based case-control study in Xuanwei and Fuyuan, China.


Xuanwei and Fuyuan are rural counties in China that have the highest lung
cancer rates in the country among non-smoking women. This alarming public
health burden has been attributed to the combustion of smoky (bituminous)
coal for heating and cooking, which can produce carcinogenic emissions
such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Previous studies found
that green leafy vegetables could absorb PAHs through air and direct soil
contamination. Further, oral ingestion of PAHs was found be to associated
with pulmonary adenoma development in animal feeding studies. Therefore,
we investigated the associations between lung cancer risk and dietary
intake of specific green leafy vegetables and other foods in non-smoking
women of this farming region.

We conducted a hospital-based case-control study of 1,074 female lung
cancer patients and 977 frequency-matched controls from Xuanwei and
Fuyuan, China in 2006-2013. Dietary intake was self-reported on
questionnaires and categorized as never, several times/year, several
times/month, several times/week, and every day. Unconditional logistic
regression models were used to estimate the odds ratios (OR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) of lung cancer in relation to intake of
specific green leafy vegetables (i.e. lettuce, cabbage, fennel, spinach,
hollow vegetables), corn, buckwheat, carrots, tomatoes, dried and fresh
chili, pickled vegetables, bean curd, mushrooms, and preserved meats.
Models were adjusted for age, county, first-degree relative with lung
cancer, passive smoke exposure, education, lifetime smoky coal tonnage,
respiratory disease history, time spent indoors, and menopausal status.
Separate models were fitted for each dietary factor.

We found that increased consumption of several green leafy vegetables was
associated with increased risk of lung cancer. Eating hollow vegetables
every day was associated with 2.50 (95% CI: 1.18, 5.27) times the odds of
lung cancer compared to never. Similarly, eating lettuce (OR=2.13, 95%
CI: 1.41, 3.21) and cabbage (OR=1.82, 95% CI: 1.21, 2.69) every day was
associated with increased risks compared to several times a year or less.
Conversely, eating bean curd (OR=0.54, 95% CI: 0.40, 0.72) several times
a week was associated with decreased risk compared to several times a
year or less; while eating buckwheat (OR=0.59, 95% CI: 0.40, 0.89)
several times a week was associated with decreased risk compared to
never. No significant associations were found for fennel, spinach, and
other foods.

Our findings suggest that increased consumption of a variety of green
leafy vegetables may be related to elevated lung cancer risk in
non-smoking women from Xuanwei and Fuyuan, China, independent of other
risk factors. The increased risk may be due to environmental
contamination of crops from coal combustion. Conversely, frequent
consumption of bean curd and buckwheat was found to be protective.


