Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An innovative immunotherapeutic strategy for ovarian cancer:
Glycomimetic peptides.


Successful treatment strategies for women with ovarian cancer remain
elusive. We hypothesize that novel means of activating anti-cancer immune
activity will be an important component of a multifaceted approach to
successful treatment. The present set of studies tests the hypothesis
that novel peptide mimetics of C-type lectin receptor ligands, sv4L and
sv6D, enhance anti-cancer immune activity and limit the progression of
ovarian cancer in a mouse model. We further test the hypothesis that sv6D
will function in synergy with additional immune modulators and
conventional cytotoxic therapy. C-Type lectin receptors were targeted
that are specific for N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc). Both svL4 and sv6D
bind GalNAc-specific C-type lectin receptors including CLEC10A/CD301 with
a KD in the low nanomolar range. CLEC10A is a transmembrane, endocytic
receptor expressed on dermal dendritic cells, macrophages and immature
dendritic cells. Further, studies with the B16 mouse melanoma model and
spontaneous tumors (histiocytic sarcoma and mammary gland tumor) in dogs
showed that treatment with svL4 correlated with reduced tumor-associated
Treg cells.

In the present studies subcutaneous injection of svL4 or sv6D every other
day over 5 days stimulated a several-fold proliferation of immune cells
in the peritoneal cavity of healthy mice. These results indicated that
svL4 and/or sv6D might exhibit significant activity on peritoneal tumors.
Efficacy of svL4 and sv6D each as a single agent and as a combination
therapy with paclitaxel or anti-PD-1 was tested in C57BL6 female mice
bearing ovarian ID8 intraperitoneal tumors. As a single agent, 0.1
nmole/g doses of svL4 or sv6D had a significant effect on suppressing
ascites formation, a measure of tumor progression, and overall survival.

Drug combination studies revealed a positive therapeutic interaction with
sv6D and the cytotoxic paclitaxel. As single agents, sv6D and paclitaxel
each had a significant effect on extending survival (median survival
140.5 and 150 days, respectively, vs. 122 days with no treatment).
Survival was extended further with combination treatment when sv6D was
administered to mice previously treated with paclitaxel (median survival
169 days). Also, a positive interaction was observed with sv6D and the
check-point inhibitor anti-PD-1. Administration of sv6D following
anti-PD-1 treatment resulted in a significant survival advantage compared
to treatment with either agent alone.

These data demonstrate 1) sv4L and sv6D mobilize immune cells in the
peritoneal cavity, 2) svL4 or sv6D as single agents slow progression of
ovarian cancer and enhance survival in a mouse model of ovarian cancer,
3) sv6D in combination with paclitaxel or anti-PD-1 extends survival past
that of either agent alone. Taken together these date demonstrate the
potential for this novel approach of harnessing lectin receptors as a
means toward effective cancer treatment.


