Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mode of action of LTX315-induced cell death.


The experimental anticancer agent LTX-315 is an amphipathic cationic
peptide that efficiently eradicates cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.
Attracted by its efficacy we launched an in depth mechanistic study on
LTX-315. First we focused on the mode of action of LTX-315 and found that
the agent failed to induce morphological signs of apoptosis but evoked
necrotic phenotypes. Accordingly, LTX-315 failed to stimulate the
activation of caspases, and the pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-fmk was
unable to reduce cell killing. We then studied its subcellular
localization by fractionation of LTX-315-treated cells, and revealed that
the agent was enriched in mitochondria and caused an immediate arrest of
mitochondrial respiration without any major uncoupling effect. LTX-315
disrupted the mitochondrial network, dissipated the mitochondrial inner
transmembrane potential, and caused the release of mitochondrial
intermembrane proteins into the cytosol. Cells lacking the two pro-death
multidomain proteins BAX and BAK, were less susceptible to
LTX-315-mediated killing. Moreover, cells engineered to lose their
mitochondria were resistant against LTX-315, underscoring the importance
of this organelle for LTX-315-mediated cytotoxicity. Further, we observed
that LTX-315 induced all known characteristics of immunogenic cell death,
including calreticulin exposure, ATP secretion, HMGB1 exodus and type-1
interferon induction. When injected into established cancers, LTX-315
caused a transiently hemorrhagic focal necrosis that was accompanied by
massive release of HMGB1 (from close-to-all cancer cells), as well
caspase-3 activation in a fraction of the cells. Collectively, these
results support the idea that LTX-315 triggers unregulated necrosis, and
kills cancer cells by virtue of its capacity to permeabilize
mitochondrial membranes. In addition, LTX-315 can induce ICD, hence
explaining its capacity to mediate immune-dependent therapeutic effects.


