Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The inhibitory effect of combinations of curcumin, ursolic acid,
and metformin on skin tumor promotion by TPA.


The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of combinations of
ursolic acid (UA), curcumin (Curc), and metformin (Met) for potential
synergistic chemopreventive activity to inhibit tumor promotion using the
mouse two-stage skin carcinogenesis model. UA and Curc have been shown to
inhibit tumorigenesis in several mouse models, and both have been shown
to inhibit mouse skin tumor promotion by
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). The anti-cancer activity of
these phytochemicals is due to their anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant, and
anti-proliferative effects. These effects are accomplished by acting on a
broad spectrum of signaling pathways. Met has also been shown to have
anti-cancer activity. In retrospective studies, type II diabetes patients
taking Met have been shown to have a decreased cancer incidence. Met has
also been shown to inhibit mouse skin tumor promotion by TPA. Met
activates AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), which in turn inhibits
mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling. mTORC1 is a
key kinase involved in the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt
pathway, one of the most commonly altered pathways in human tumors.

In initial short-term experiments (mice treated twice weekly for two
weeks with TPA), combinations of UA and Curc pretreated topically
inhibited TPA-induced activation of epidermal NF-κB, Cox-2, epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) and JNK to a greater extent than either
compound alone. Additionally, these compounds increased levels of AMPK
and programmed cell death protein 4 (Pdcd4). The alterations in these
signaling pathways by the combination of UA and Curc were associated with
decreased epidermal proliferation and skin inflammation as assessed by
measuring BrdU incorporation and inflammatory gene expression,
respectively. Further studies using dietary administration of a
combination of UA and Curc, as well as combinations of UA or Curc (in
diet) with Met administered in the drinking water were conducted. These
combinations produced greater inhibition of TPA-induced activation of
epidermal NFκB, Cox-2, and EGFR than the compounds given alone. These
combinations also decreased epidermal proliferation, again shown by an
inhibition of BrdU incorporation. In addition to these data, the results
from ongoing skin tumor experiments (mice initiated with DMBA and
promoted twice weekly with TPA) using both topical administration and
dietary administration of the various combinations will be presented. The
current results indicate that certain combinations of UA, Curc and Met
may inhibit mouse skin tumor promotion by TPA to a greater extent than
the compounds alone. The ability of the combinations to work when given
both topically as well as in the diet suggests the potential for broad
applications for chemopreventive strategies.


