Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical characterization of the
pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamics-efficacy relationship of novel
allosteric SHP2 inhibitors.


SHP2 is a non-receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase downstream of
receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK). Mutations yielding constitutive
activation of SHP2 primarily lead to activation of the MAPK pathway and
have been found in multiple tumor types. These observations make SHP2 a
potentially promising therapeutic target for the treatment of cancers
with RTK dependence. Recently, a novel allosteric mechanism of SHP2
inhibition was identified where the autoinhibited form of SHP2 is
stabilized via small molecule binding. Herein we describe efforts to
characterize the pharmacokinetic (PK)/pharmacodynamic (PD)/efficacy
relationship of orally bioavailable novel allosteric SHP2 inhibitors.

Single dose PK/PD studies were conducted in nude mice engrafted with the
EGFR amplified esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cell line, KYSE520. The
allosteric SHP2 inhibitor SHP099 achieved time and dose dependent
increases in plasma concentrations and concomitant reductions in tumor
pERK that could be described by an Emax model. Tumor pERK levels were
reduced by 50 to 70% when SHP099 unbound plasma concentrations exceeded
the in vitro cellular PD IC50, suggesting that exposure above this
threshold was required for pathway inhibition in vivo. A second
allosteric SHP2 inhibitor, SHP065, was also profiled in vivo and yielded
data consistent with this hypothesis. Two additional allosteric SHP2
inhibitors (SHP156, SHP393) that achieved unbound plasma concentrations
approximating their cellular IC50s failed to modulate tumor pERK. The
totality of these data support the hypothesis that unbound plasma
concentrations in excess of the cellular IC50 is required for allosteric
SHP2 inhibitors to inhibit the MAPK pathway in vivo.

We further demonstrated that SHP099 achieves dose dependent inhibition of
KYSE520 tumor xenograft growth in nude mice. Integration of the antitumor
efficacy data and pERK inhibition data revealed a direct linear
relationship between tumor growth inhibition and the fraction of time
between dosing intervals in which pERK is inhibited by at least 50%. To
test this model, SHP099 PK data from nude rats was applied to the Emax
model and the resulting predicted PD responses were applied to the
PD/efficacy model to predict SHP099 anti-tumor efficacy in nude rats.
Data generated from a SHP099 KYSE520 efficacy study in nude rats
demonstrated that the exposure/response model was remarkably robust.
Doses of 8 mg/kg qd, 25 mg/kg qd, or 75 mg/kg q2d yielded observed T/C of
70, 14, and 18%, respectively; versus a model predicted T/C of 75, 6, and
6%, respectively. In summary, we describe for the first time successful
efforts to characterize the PK/PD/efficacy relationship of novel
allosteric SHP2 inhibitors. These exposure/response models served as a
basis for further allosteric SHP2 inhibitor drug discovery efforts and
begin to inform rational approaches to dose and schedule selection in
clinic.


