Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Magnetization transfer and T2-weighted MRI studies are useful for
visualizing phenotypic presentations of orthotopic, patient-derived
xenograft mouse models of glioblastoma.


Introduction: Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models for glioblastoma
(GBM) from resected tumor tissues replicate several features of the
original tumor. They are considered to be representative models to study
tumor progression, and to test responses to putative therapies.
Longitudinal noninvasive imaging can be useful in such investigations. To
that end, we employed magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to visualize and
measure tumor burden in four different PDX models of GBM.

Experimental procedures: Four orthotopic mouse PDX models, HF2587,
HF2927, HF3077 and HF3253, developed from neurosphere cultures of four
different human glioblastoma samples were used in the study. The
neurosphere cells were implanted into the right striatum in
immunocompromised nude mice (n=5-8 per model) and allowed to grow for 2-8
weeks, depending on their known growth rates from previous studies. They
were imaged in a Varian 7T MRI system with the following weightings: T2,
T1, magnetization transfer (MT), and contrast enhanced MRI (CE-MRI) with
Magnevist as the contrast agent (CA). Following imaging, all the mice
were sacrificed and their brains processed for hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) histology and human major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
immunohistochemistry.

Results: Tumor masses were visible as hyperintense regions on MT and
T2-weighted images. The extent of such masses matched the H&E and MHC
staining patterns. Ventricle enlargements seen on MRI in several mice
were also confirmed by histology. Necrotic cores, when present, were
observed on both imaging and on histopathology with good spatial
correlations. Surprisingly, post-contrast T1 imaging did not enhance in
the tumor mass or peritumorally, except in one mouse in which some
intra-tumoral enhancement was observed. In all other instances from the
four PDX models tested, enhancement was observed only when the tumor
tissue or parts of it were contiguous with pial or dural vasculature.

Conclusions: At 7 Tesla, MT-MRI and T2-weighted imaging, rather than
CE-MRI, appear to be of better utility in visualizing these PDX models of
GBM if MRI is chosen as the imaging modality. Since the parent tumors
imaged at lower field strengths showed contrast enhancement, absence of a
similar feature in these models needs additional studies to understand
their vascular characteristics. Such properties may include low level of
vascularization and/or relatively less leaky tumor vasculature. Another
possible reason may be that the models tested represent the invasive
features of GBM better than the vascular features, e.g. peritumoral ring
enhancement, of larger clinical tumors with increased exposure to hypoxia.


