Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RESPECT (REsidue-SPEcific Conjugation Technology): A platform
technology utilizing native cysteine and lysine residues for the
generation of homogeneous antibody-drug conjugates.


The random conjugation of toxins, dyes, peptides, or other payloads to
monoclonal antibodies often targets free thiol groups generated by
partial reduction methods or lysine residues using succinimide- or
isothiocyanate-based chemistry. There remains a need for conjugation
technologies targeting specific amino acid residues as a way to produce a
homogeneous antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) product with a defined
drug-to-antibody ratio (DAR). Our REsidue-SPEcific Conjugation Technology
(RESPECT) utilizes two methods by which payloads can be conjugated to
specific residues in an antibody. Our cysteine-specific conjugation
method exploits a unique intrachain disulfide bond in the light chain of
rabbit antibodies between residues 80 and 171 of the variable and
constant domains, respectively. Our humanization strategy allows
retention of the cysteine at position 80 with a free thiol group that is
both amenable for residue-specific conjugation and compatible with
optimal antibody biophysical properties including antigen binding and
structural stability. This platform has been optimized via antibody
engineering strategy stems from in silico modeling, extensive
mutagenesis, and crystallographic studies, which have allowed defining
the contribution of neighboring residues to the retention of a reactive
thiol group as well as the desired humanized antibody’s properties. Our
C-terminal lysine-specific linkage method employs the transglutaminase
enzyme that catalyzes the formation of a stable isopeptide bond between
the γ-carboxyamide group (acyl donor) of a glutamine and the ε-amino
group (acyl acceptor) of a lysine. While we found no acyl acceptor sites
in recombinant wild-type IgG, all antibodies investigated lacked the
C-terminal Lys447 due to cleavage by carboxypeptidase B in the antibody
production cell line. Blocking the cleavage of Lys447 by addition of a
C-terminal amino acid resulted in transamidation of Lys447 by a variety
of acyl donor substrates in the presence of any non-acidic, non-proline
amino acid residue at position 448. Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs)
prepared using our RESPECT technology targeting the tumor
associated-mesothelin protein produced uniform drug-to-antibody ratios
(DAR) and were shown to be highly potent and specific in vitro and
effective in vivo in reduction of tumor growth in a highly aggressive
mesothelin-expressing xenograft tumor model.


