Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular vesicles derived from lung cancer cell may
contribute to the formation of malignant pleural effusion via activating
Stat3/Tissue factor/VEGF.


Malignant pleural effusion (MPE) is a poor prognostic sign for patients
with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and is noted around 15% at the
time of initial diagnosis and 50% in their later courses. Previously, we
have shown that IL-6/Stat3/tissue factor (TF)/VEGF pathway enhances lung
cancer angiogenesis, metastasis and the generation of MPE. In the current
study, we demonstrated that EVs derived from lung cancer cells may also
contribute MPE formation. We first used ultra-filtration (UF) method as
well as the classical ultra-centrifugation (UC) method to isolate EV from
lung cancer cell line and demonstrated that the EVs isolated by UF method
were characteristic with exosome marker in Western Blotting (Alix, CD63,
and Tsg101), morphology at Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and
size in Nanosight system (30 to 150 nm). After labeling these EVs with
the green fluorescent dye Cellvue, EVs uptake in AS2 cell can be imaged
by the fluorescent microscopy. After the EV uptake of recipient cell, the
oncogenic signal such as Stat3 and AKT were activated with increasing
phosphorylation at Western blotting comparing to those adding serum free
medium. Using the ELISA method, we found the cargos in these EV were
enriched in IL6. We also found these cargo derived from EVs, containing
high VEGF and TF, induced more prominent extravasation than serum free
medium did in Miles assays. In clinical sample, we also isolated cancer
cell from MPE and the purity of the cells was confirmed by
immunofluorescent staining with specific TTF-1expression of lung
adenocarcinoma. After short-term culture, EV from MPE cancer cell have
the characteristic of exosome marker and induced more prominent
extravasation than serum free medium as EV from AS2 cell did. And we also
isolated EV direct from MPE and pleural effusion from congestive heart
failure (CHF) patients. And we found EV derived from MPE induced more
prominent extravasation than those derived from CHF in Miles assays. In
conclusion, we demonstrated the UF is clinical assessable method for
isolating EV from body fluid and EV derived from lung cancer cell and MPE
may contribute oncogenic and angiogenic signal transmission accelerating
the formation of MPE.


