Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Emerging KRAS mutation can play a considerable role to get
acquired resistance to EGFR blockade.


Background: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) blockade can achieve
considerable tumor shrinkage in patients with metastatic colorectal
cancer (CRC). However, most patients who benefit from EGFR blockade
acquire resistance within a year. It was previously reported that nine of
24 (38%) patients whose tumors initially exhibited wild type KRAS
developed detectable mutations in KRAS in their sera after acquiring
resistance to EGFR blockade. However, the mechanisms of this acquired
resistance remain unclear. In this study, we aimed to identify the
mechanisms underlying acquired resistance to EGFR blockade by using
circulating cell-free (ccf)DNA to track emerging KRAS, BRAF and S492R
mutations during chemotherapy.

Methods: We enrolled 29 patients with metastatic CRC and no RAS mutations
in their primary tumors. Patients were treated with first-line systemic
chemotherapy that included EGFR blockade. We purified ccfDNA from 1 mL of
serum from each patient before they started chemotherapy, and every 2-3
months during chemotherapy until disease progression. We detected KRAS
(codons 12, 13, 61, and 146), BRAF (V600E) and S492R mutations using
digital polymerase chain reaction.

Results: KRAS mutations were detected in the ccfDNA of three of the 29
patients (10%) before chemotherapy. The response rate was 86% (25/29);
the four non-responders were the three patients with KRAS mutations, and
another who exhibited ccfDNA BRAF mutations before starting chemotherapy.
All patients with no KRAS or BRAF mutations in their ccfDNA before
chemotherapy responded to the chemotherapy (25/25). Of these 25 initially
responsive patients, 13 (52%) acquired resistance. We detected emerging
KRAS mutations in the ccfDNA of 11 of these 13 patients (84%); eight of
these patients had multiple mutations. We also detected BRAF mutations in
six patients (46%); none of the patients had solo BRAF mutations. Five
patients (38%) had S492R mutations; one had mutations in S492R only. Only
one patient had no KRAS, BRAF or S492R mutations.

Discussion: EGFR blockade has no beneficial effect in patients with KRAS
or BRAF mutations in their ccfDNA prior to starting chemotherapy.
Emergence of KRAS, BRAF or S492R mutations that were undetectable before
the start of chemotherapy may be a mechanism underlying acquisition of
resistance to EGFR blockade. Notably, emerging KRAS mutations were
detected in most of the patients (84%) who acquired resistance. This
indicates that the emergence of KRAS mutations may play a considerable
role in the acquisition of resistance to EGFR blockade.


