Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteome phenotype of stage III metastatic melanoma and response
to MEK inhibition.


Introduction: Melanoma accounts for 5% of all skin cancers, yet is the
most common cause of skin cancer-related deaths, and is the commonest
lethal malignancy in young people (Introduction: Melanoma accounts for 5%
of all skin cancers, yet is the most common cause of skin cancer-related
deaths, and is the commonest lethal malignancy in young people (<40yrs).
Patients with BRAF mutant melanoma show survival benefit from MAPK
pathway inhibition, although response rates vary. We conducted proteomic
screening using mass spectrometry to detect cellular processes that might
predict response to MEK inhibition more effectively than genotyping alone.

Methods: Protein extracts from early passages of ten AJCC Stage III local
lymph node metastatic melanoma cell lines with known MAPK mutational
status (BRAFmut, NRASmut, MAPKwt,) were used. Further, 32 fresh frozen
NRASmut or BRAFmut AJCC Stage IIIC metastatic melanoma (lymph node
metastases) specimens were obtained from patients with varying survival.
Lysed cells and tissue were digested with trypsin and analysed by
LC-MS/MS using a TripleTOF 5600/6600 mass spectrometer. Data-independent
acquisition (or SWATH-MS) was used to match multiplexed MS/MS spectra
against a spectral ion library enabling relative protein quantification.
Cell line viability in the presence of 2µM AZD6244 (MEKi) was determined
using a PrestoBlue assay.

Results: The SWATH-MS approach enabled quantification of ~2500 proteins
across all 10 cell lines. Principal component analysis clearly segregated
melanomas based on in vitro sensitivity to MEK inhibition, whereas
genotype alone did not. In total, we show 57 proteins whose abundances
correlate (r²>0.75) with response to MEKi, revealing roles in cell
pigmentation biosynthesis, lipid metabolism, adherence and inter-cell
communication. Survival analysis demonstrated that patients whose cell
lines were responsive to MEKi had lower mortality than patients whose
cells were resistant to MEKi (survival >7.5 years MEKi sensitive versus
Results: The SWATH-MS approach enabled quantification of ~2500 proteins
across all 10 cell lines. Principal component analysis clearly segregated
melanomas based on in vitro sensitivity to MEK inhibition, whereas
genotype alone did not. In total, we show 57 proteins whose abundances
correlate (r²>0.75) with response to MEKi, revealing roles in cell
pigmentation biosynthesis, lipid metabolism, adherence and inter-cell
communication. Survival analysis demonstrated that patients whose cell
lines were responsive to MEKi had lower mortality than patients whose
cells were resistant to MEKi (survival >7.5 years MEKi sensitive versus
<1.7 years MEKi resistant, p=0.01). Across the 32 tumour samples, ~2000
proteins were quantifiable. The proteome phenotype associated with MEK
inhibition observed in patient cell lines was a dominant signal in fresh
frozen stage III metastatic melanoma specimens, suggesting these patients
may have profited from MAPK pathway inhibition had these drugs been
available. In this patient cohort neither the genotype nor proteome
phenotype correlated with survival.

Conclusion: Proteomic profiling by mass spectrometry demonstrated a MEK
inhibition phenotype in early passage cell lines and fresh frozen
melanoma metastases which may provide utility for selecting patients to
treat with MEK drugs.


