Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying and targeting competing endogenous RNA (ceRNAs)
networks to inhibit lung metastasis in triple negative breast cancer.


Introduction: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), the most aggressive
breast cancer subtype, has high incidence rate of lung metastasis. Not
only protein coding transcripts, but also non-coding transcriptome, such
as microRNAs (miRNAs) and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), have active
roles in cancer progression and metastasis. Additionally, lncRNAs can act
as sponges for miRNAs. Here, we aimed i) to construct the first
mRNA-miRNA-lncRNA competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) network controlling
metastasis in TNBC, and ii) to prevent lung metastasis by targeting
identified central candidate genes.

Material/Method: We established primary tumor and human-in-mouse (HIM)
and mouse-in-mouse (MIM) lung metastasis models using TNBC cell lines in
nude and Balb/c mice, respectively. We visualized both primary and
metastatic tumors using in vivo imaging system, harvested tumors and
performed both RNA and small RNA sequencing. We obtained differentially
expressed miRNAs, mRNAs and lncRNAs between primary and metastatic
tumors. Using several bioinformatics tools, we did enrichment analyses,
miRNA target predictions, and network construction. Identified central
lncRNAs were overexpressed or knocked down and will be tested in in vitro
and vivo metastasis-related assays.

Results and Conclusions: We obtained 45 and 91 miRNAs which were
differentially expressed between primary and metastatic tumors in HIM and
MIM models, respectively. A miRNA family with an established role in
metastasis as well as several other miRNAs was identified as highly
differentially expressed in the same direction in both models. Moreover,
1127 and 3350 mRNAs, and 85 and 111 lncRNAs were differentially expressed
in HIM and MIM models, respectively. Metastasis-related processes based
on differentially expressed mRNAs were enriched in the data. We then
integrated these three layers of data, functional enrichments, pathway
maps and target predictions to construct the first ceRNA network
controlling lung metastasis in TNBCs. Currently, we are testing the
functional roles of candidate lncRNAs in in vitro and in vivo metastasis
assays. Ultimately, our study will uncover novel lncRNAs that can be used
as potential targets and/or biomarkers in breast-to-lung metastasis.

Funding: This study is supported by TUBITAK-CNRS Bilateral Grant with
project number 214S364.


