Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monoubiquitination inhibits the actin bundling activity of fascin.


Fascin is the most frequently upregulated actin regulatory protein in
metastatic tumors. The elevated expression levels of fascin universally
correlate with poor clinical course and shorter survival across different
cancer types. It is believed that fascin promotes cancer cell migration
and invasion by crosslinking actin filaments into bundles. However, the
molecular mehcanisms underlying the regulation of fascin bundling
activity are not completely understood. In this study we examine the
regulation of Fascin activity by monoubiquitination. IP and LC-MS/MS was
used to identify the posttranslational modification of Fascin A novel
chemical monoubiquitination method was employed to synthesize
monoubiquitinated Fascin. The monoubiquitinated fascin was purified, and
the effect of monoubiquitination on fascin bundling activity was
determined using low speed sedimentation assay, fluorescence microscopy
and transmission electron microscopy. Here we identified
monoubiquitination as a novel mechanism that regulates fascin bundling
activity and dynamics. The monoubiquitination sites were identified to be
K247 and K250, two residues located in a positive charge patch at the
actin binding site 2 (ABS2) of fascin. Using a chemical ubiquitination
method, we synthesized chemically monoubiquitinated fascin (mUb-fascin)
and determined the effects of monoubiquitination on fascin bundling
activity and dynamics. Our data demonstrated that monoubiquitination
decreased the fascin bundling EC50, delayed the initiation of bundle
assembly and accelerated the disassembly of existing bundles. By
analyzing the electrostatic properties on the solvent accessible surface
of fascin, we proposed that monoubiquitination introduced steric
hindrance to interfere with the interaction between actin filaments and
the positively charged patch at ABS2. Mutation of the monoubiquitination
sites (K247 and K 250) to arginine inhibited fascin monoubiquitination
and enhanced pro-migration ability of fascin, supporting the notion that
monoubiquitination inhibit fascin activity. We also identified Smurf1 as
an E3 ligase regulating the monoubiquitination of fascin. Our findings
revealed a previously unidentified regulatory mechanism for fascin, which
will have important implications for the understanding of actin bundle
regulation under physiological and pathological conditions.


