Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficient delivery of Bcl2 siRNA by DNA nanoparticles to inhibit
cellular growth and cancer progression.


Background: Short interfering RNA (siRNA) has emerged as a promising
molecular therapeutic tool for targeted cancer treatment. However,
systemically administered siRNA has demonstrated only limited success,
due to limited delivery to cancer cells. Therefore, the lack of a robust
and versatile siRNA delivery system is a critical issue in translating
this therapeutic tool for cancer treatment. Recent developments in DNA
nanotechnology have made programmable DNA nanoparticles (DNPs) a potent
drug delivery platform. This study focuses on the development of a novel
DNP-based siRNA delivery system to knockdown Bcl2 gene, as a targeted
cancer therapeutic. Methods: Structural DNA technology was applied to
design a library of DNPs with different sizes and shapes. Flow cytometry,
confocal imaging, and electron microscopy were utilized to study the
cellular internalization of DNPs. The efficacy of Bcl2 knockdown by
DNP-siBcl2 and the resulting influence on cell growth and progression
were assessed in cancer cells (in vitro) and in mice bearing
corresponding tumor xenografts (in vivo). Results: DNPs of varying sizes
(10-120 nm) and shapes (polyhedral or rod) were constructed using DNA
origami techniques and successfully verified by agarose gel
electrophoresis, atomic force microscopy, and transmission electron
microscopy. The cell internalization capabilities of three DNPs including
a tetrahedron (TET, diameter: 10 nm), a small rod (SR, 5x5x30 nm), and a
large rod (BR, 10x10x120 nm) were examined. BR internalized with
relatively higher efficiency and rate compared to TET and SR, and also
demonstrated the most efficient knockdown of Bcl2. BR-siBcl2 demonstrated
significant cell growth inhibition of DMS53 and H146 small cell lung
cancer (SCLC) cell lines after 48hrs of treatment. A pilot study with
BR-siBcl2 (1.25 mg/kg, iv) in mice bearing DMS53 tumor xenograft (n=3)
slowed tumor growth compared with buffer control and naked siBcl2.
Significant differences were observed in tumor volume by pairwise
comparison between the two groups: Buffer vs DNP-BR-siBcl2 (p=0.007), and
siBcl2 vs DNP-BR-siBcl2 (0.028), respectively. No toxicity was observed
in lung, liver, kidney, heart, brain, or spleen. Conclusions: Our novel
DNP formulations demonstrated substantial cellular internalization of
siBcl2. Targeting Bcl2 and its downstream signaling intermediaries
reduced cellular growth. We validated the strategy of silencing of Bcl2
using DNPs in order to inhibit cancer progression in vivo. We believe
that the DNPs and methodologies developed in this project will be
applicable to knockdown of Bcl2 and other gene targets and may be
applicable to future anti-cancer therapy. (This work is supported by NIH
grant R21EB022828-01).


