Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of human poliovirus receptor, an immune checkpoint
biomarker in lung cancer.


Background: Recently, immune therapy has shown notable efficacy in
melanoma, non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), among others, indicating
that the targeting of immune checkpoints may be a promising treatment for
malignant tumors. The human Poliovirus Receptor (CD155), an immune
checkpoint, has been found to be overexpressed on the membranes of
various tumor cells including colorectal and ovarian carcinoma. Examining
PVR’s expression in NSCLC could shine light on PVR’s potential role
and its possible correlation to the prognosis and outcomes for NSCLC
patients.

Material and Methods: Gene expression data for lung cancer cell lines and
tumor tissues was derived from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE
[www.broadinstitute.org/ccle]) and the TCGA database
(www.cbioportal.org), respectively. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was
performed on a Ventana Benchmark XT platform using an anti-PVR antibody
(Cell Signaling #D3G7H at a 1:100 dilution). IHC staining was evaluated
for a NSCLC Cell Line Tissue MicroArray (TMA) and a NSCLC patient cohort
TMA. The H-score system was used to generate a semi-quantitative score,
ranging from 0 to 300, that evaluates the intensity and prevalence of the
staining on tumor cells. Patient data was analysed to uncover
correlations between outcome and PVR expression in the NSCLC TMA cohort.
Western blot analysis was performed to confirm antibody specificity and
PVR expression levels in three NSCLC cell lines.

Results: Analysis of mRNA expression data from CCLE and TCGA databases
identified that PVR is highly expressed in lung cancer. Three lung cancer
cell lines were chosen based on mRNA expression for this study: NCI-H211
(high), NCI-H1650 (moderate) and NCI-H187 (negative). Cell line data
revealed that PVR demonstrated higher expression levels in lung cancer
than other immune checkpoints, such as PD-L1, PD-L2, and Gal-9 among
others. In addition, PVR expression was not correlated with other
negative immune checkpoints including PD-L1 and Gal-9. Western blot
analysis confirmed that the Cell Signaling antibody was specific to the
PVR protein in NSCLC cell lines. IHC staining of NSCLC cell lines
revealed that non-squamous NSCLC cell lines express higher levels of PVR
than do squamous cell cell lines (pResults: Analysis of mRNA expression
data from CCLE and TCGA databases identified that PVR is highly expressed
in lung cancer. Three lung cancer cell lines were chosen based on mRNA
expression for this study: NCI-H211 (high), NCI-H1650 (moderate) and
NCI-H187 (negative). Cell line data revealed that PVR demonstrated higher
expression levels in lung cancer than other immune checkpoints, such as
PD-L1, PD-L2, and Gal-9 among others. In addition, PVR expression was not
correlated with other negative immune checkpoints including PD-L1 and
Gal-9. Western blot analysis confirmed that the Cell Signaling antibody
was specific to the PVR protein in NSCLC cell lines. IHC staining of
NSCLC cell lines revealed that non-squamous NSCLC cell lines express
higher levels of PVR than do squamous cell cell lines (p<0.0001, Fisher
test). The prevalence of PVR in the NSCLC patient cohort was 68% (68/100)
using a H-score cutoff of ≥ 7. Analysis revealed a lower positivity of
61.7% (37/60) in squamous carcinoma as compared to 77.5% (31/40) in
non-squamous NSCLC. Analysis of the patient outcome data demonstrated
that higher levels of PVR protein expression is correlated with poorer
outcomes in patients with both squamous lung cancer and adenocarcinoma.

Conclusions: PVR protein expression could potentially serve as a new
immune checkpoint biomarker in lung cancer. This study demonstrates that
high PVR protein levels predict poorer outcomes in lung cancer patients;
suggesting that PVR may be an important target for future immune therapy.


