Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CLDN1 mediates tumor invasion in HNSCC by regulation of EMT
through AMPK-TGF-β signalling.


Background: Claudin-1 (CLDN1), a major component of tight junction
complexes in epithelium, maintains cellular polarity and plays critical
roles in cell-to-cell communication and epithelial cell homeostasis.
Although, the role of CLDN1 in cancer has been generally studied in
cancers, the exact regulatory mechanisms and downstream pathways in
cancer have been controversial and are not completely understood.

Materials and Methods: After, analysed mutational profiling of
tumor/non-tumor paired tissue in the patients with head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) by next-generation sequencing (NGS), CLDN1
expression levels were measured in human HNSCC cell lines and tissues
from HNSCC patients using next-generation sequencing. For functional in
vitro analysis, cell proliferation testing using a WST-1 assay, an
invasion assay, and Western blotting was performed after CLDN1 expression
regulation. In vivo validations were performed using nude mouse and
patient-derived tumor xenograft (PDTX) model.

Results: Mutational profiling of tumor/non-tumor paired HNSCC tissue by
NGS revealed that HNSCC tumor tissues and cell lines had relatively high
levels of CLDN1 expression. Although, CLDN1 regulation did not affect
proliferation of HNSCC cell lines, knock down of CLDN1 inhibited invasive
characteristics (migration/invasion) with down-regulation of EMT
associated proteins (vimentin and slug). We also found that CLDN1
negatively correlated with AMPK phosphorylation and AMPK activator
(AICAR) showed the same effect with CLDN1 suppression on HNSCC cells
without change in CLDN1 expression which lead to inhibition of
TGF-β-induced Smad phosphorylation and their transcriptional activity,
suggesting that CLDN1/AMPK/TGF-β cascade. Then, we confirmed
antitumorigenic effects of suppression of CLDN1 in HNSCC in a nude mouse
and PDTX model.

Conclusions: Our findings suggest that CLDN1 acts as oncogenic driver in
HNSCC via regulating EMT through AMPK/TGF-β signalling and if validated
in further studies, a CLDN1-targeting agent partnered with an existing
anti-TGF-β modality could be a novel tactic to overcome HNSCC.


