Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down-regulation of 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenate (HPD)
contributes to the pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) through
ERK / BCL-2 signalling activation.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most prevalent malignancies
in the world. Metastasis, recurrence and therapy resistance remain major
obstacles to the improvement of long-term survival and represent major
causative factors contributing to the rising mortality rates and poor
prognosis of HCC. Identification of key drivers important for clinical
prognostic utility and elucidation of mechanisms involved in
hepatocarcinogenesis is urgently needed to aid in the development of
novel treatment modalities. To this end, we began our study with an
analysis of a publicly gene expression dataset (GSE14520) comprising of
transcriptomic profiles from a large cohort of human non-tumor liver and
HCC clinical samples in hope to establish a prognostic gene signature
associated with metastatic risk / recurrence status so to identify novel
driver genes responsible for HCC development and progression. By this
method, 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase (HPD) was identified as a
candidate tumor suppressor gene in HCC. HPD was found to be frequently
down-regulated in primary HCC tumors as compared with peri-tumor liver
tissues. Its expression negatively correlated with aggressive HCC
pathological features, including tumor stage, metastasis, recurrence and
survival. Notably, down-regulated HPD expression in HCC is in part a
result of hypermethylation at the HPD promoter. The functional effect of
HPD was then examined in HCC cells with or without HPD stably repressed
or ectopically overexpressed. Upon knockdown of HPD, HCC cells displayed
significantly enhanced abilities to form tumors, metastasize and confer
sorafenib resistance in vitro and in vivo. Conversely, overexpression of
HPD in HCC cells led to an opposing effect. Consistently,
sorafenib-resistant HCC patient derived xenografts also displayed
attenuated levels of HPD as compared with parental sorafenib-sensitive
counterparts. Mechanistically, HPD down-regulation mediates aggressive
cancer features in HCC through activation of an ERK and BCL-2
pro-survival signaling pathway, as evidenced by rescue experiments
involving the ERK inhibitor U0126. Collectively, our findings suggest HPD
down-regulation in HCC tumors to promote tumorigenicity, metastasis and
sorafenib resistance through ERK / BCL-2 signaling activation and that
HPD may represent a novel prognostic biomarker for HCC.


