Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neuronal splicing regulatory factors are upregulated in models of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.


Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an essential developmental
program through which epithelial cells lose their polarity and junctions
with neighboring cells and acquire migratory and invasive properties.
Cancer cells hijack at least a portion of the EMT program to increase
their invasive properties, acquire resistance to senescence, and
metastasize. Major changes in cell signaling, transcriptional and
post-transcriptional regulation occur during EMT. To study
post-transcriptional changes we characterized gene expression and
splicing across EMT in 3 cell culture models of EMT: the luminal
epithelial MCF7ras breast cancer cell line with EMT induced by SLUG+SOX9
and in basal human mammary epithelial (HMLEras) cells, with EMT induced
by either SNAIL or ZEB1. RNA-seq was performed at 2-day intervals across
these transitions. We observed broad overlaps between these systems, with
821 genes that changed significantly in all three. In all three time
courses, genes associated with cell cycle and growth decreased in
expression, while genes associated with signaling, cell motion, adhesion,
extracellular matrix organization, and differentiation increased.
Intriguingly, genes associated with neurogenesis and angiogenesis were
also induced in the MCF7 and HMLER-Snail time courses. Those include
known axon guidance and angiogenic factors in the Robo and Slit families.
We also found many alternative splicing events shared in all 3 systems,
including 272 skipped exons. Sequence analysis of regions around these
exons revealed binding motifs for canonical splicing regulators,
including ESRP1 and ESRP2 and the RBFOX protein family, which are known
to play a role in EMT. While most genes encoding RNA binding proteins
decreased in expression in EMT, a small subset consistently increased in
expression, including some that matched our motif analysis. Specifically,
several splicing factors associated with nervous system development were
upregulated, including factors of the QKI and NOVA families. We have
validated the increased expression of QKI and NOVA1 proteins during EMT
in vitro, and of QKI and NOVA2 in tumor sections. Further, we found that
perturbation of QKI expression affects the motility of mesenchymal cancer
cells in culture. Together, our results point to the existence of a
program of alternative splicing shared between neuronal and mesenchymal
cells.


