Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemopreventive effects of dietary grapes on skin cancer.


Non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy
in the United States, affecting more than 3 million Americans each year.
Ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun, particularly its UVB component
(290-320 nm), is an established causative factor for ~90% of skin
cancers. The two most common forms of skin cancer, basal- and squamous-
cell carcinomas, are treatable if detected early. However, they can be
difficult to treat and potentially fatal if left until late stages.
Further, epidemiological studies have suggested an amplified risk of
other deadly cancers in individuals with a history of skin cancer.
Therefore, it is important to design novel approaches, especially
focusing on prevention, for the management of skin cancers. Studies from
our laboratory and by others have shown that topical application of the
grape antioxidant resveratrol possesses promise in the prevention of skin
cancer. However, ideally cancer preventive agents need to be orally
administrable for ease of use and broader human acceptability. With this
in mind, in this study, we determined the efficacy of dietary grape
powder (containing resveratrol in natural amalgamation with catechins,
anthocyanins, polyphenols and flavonols) against UVB-mediated skin
tumorigenesis in the SKH-1 hairless mouse model, which is regarded to
have relevance to human NMSC. We employed a UVB initiation-promotion
protocol in which the mice were subjected to chronic UVB exposure (180
mJ/cm2; twice weekly, for 28 weeks). The animals received either AIN-76A
or grape powder (GP) fortified diet (3% and 5% GP, obtained from the
California Table Grape Commission), all of which were sugar-matched to
the highest GP content. Our data demonstrated that the consumption of GP
at both 3% and 5% resulted in a significant inhibition in skin tumor
incidence and delay in the onset of tumorigenesis. The average
consumption of feed per mouse was 3.5 g/day, corresponding to 105 and 174
mg GP/day in the 3% and 5% GP treatment groups. This dosing regimen seems
to be easily achievable for human consumption, as it corresponds to 25.5
and 42.4 g/day, which are equivalent to 1.1 and 1.8 serving of fresh
grapes, respectively. Our data also demonstrated that the observed skin
cancer chemopreventive effects of grape powder were accompanied by
significant i) decreases in cellular proliferation markers Ki67 and PCNA,
ii) decreases in the oxidative stress marker 4-HNE, and iii) increases in
the levels of cleaved caspase 7 and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP).
Interestingly, NRF2, an activator of cellular antioxidant response, was
found to be downregulated in GP treated tumors, compared to UVB alone
groups, suggesting a potential protective role of NRF2 in the survival of
tumor cells. Overall, our study suggests a strong chemopreventive effect
of dietary grape and provides a basis for future human studies.


