Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic blockade of the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP1 augments
CAR T cell activity against PDL1 expressing solid tumors.


Background: Immunotherapy using chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells
has demonstrated profound, durable success in hematologic malignancies.
Solid tumors present hurdles to the successful application of CAR T
cells. One is the upregulation of inhibitory receptors (IRs), like PD1
and CTLA4, many of which rely on shared signaling molecules to shut off T
cell activation. One such molecule is SHP1 (Src homology region 2
domain-containing phosphatase-1) which dephosphorylates key components of
T cell receptor (TCR) signaling. We have engineered a unique
dominant-negative SHP1 (dnSHP1) that is able to augment CAR T cell
control of PDL1 positive solid tumors.

Materials and Methods: The human mesothelioma cell line, EMP, was
transduced to express high levels of mesothelin and PDL1 (EMMESO-PDL1).
Activated human T cells from healthy donors were lentivirally transduced
to express a mesothelin-directed CAR (mesoCAR) with and without a dnSHP1.
MesoCAR and mesoCAR/dnSHP1 T cells were cocultured with tumor cells x
18hrs and specific lysis was measured. These T cells were also
restimulated with plate-bound anti-CD3 overnight and were subjected to
intracellular flow cytometry staining (ICS) of cytokines. NSG mice were
injected subcutaneously in the flanks with 5x106 EMMESO-PDL1 tumor cells.
After tumors established and grew to ~150mm3, mice were randomly assigned
to one of the following treatments: 1) non-transduced (NTD) T cells, 2)
mesoCAR T cells, 3) mesoCAR T cells + sodium stibogluconate (SSG; a
chemical inhibitor of SHP1), 4) mesoCAR/dnSHP1 T cells. T cells were
injected IV once at a dose of 10x106 T cells/mouse. SSG was administered
IM at 20mg/kg every 2 days. Tumors were measured serially. At the end,
mice were sacrificed, tumors were harvested, digested, processed into
single cell suspension, and subjected to flow cytometry analysis. The
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) were also isolated and tested for
function ex-vivo.

Results/Conclusion: In vitro, mesoCAR T cells demonstrated suppressed
lysis of EMMESO-PDL1 tumor cells compared to EMMESO cells. MesoCAR/dnSHP1
T cells were able to lyse EMMESO-PDL1 and EMMESO tumor cells with similar
efficiency. Anti-CD3 restimulation of T cells revealed enhanced secretion
of TNF-alpha and IL2 by mesoCAR/dnSHP1 vs. mesoCAR T cells as measured by
ICS. In vivo, SSG injections had minimal impact on mesoCAR T cell control
of tumors, whereas mesoCAR/dnSHP1 T cells demonstrated significantly
enhanced control of EMMESO-PDL1 tumor growth compared to mesoCAR T cells
(60% greater decrease in tumor volume compared to mesoCAR T cells). TIL
infiltration was 3-fold higher in tumors harvested from mice that
received mesoCAR/dnSHP1 T cells compared to other groups. Isolated
mesoCAR/dnSHP1 TILs demonstrated the greatest ex-vivo lysis of fresh
tumor cells. DnSHP1 engineering is a powerful and novel way of blocking
the suppression of CAR T cells by PD1 and other similar IRs.


