Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphoproteomic analysis of pyruvate dehydrogenase in response to
environmental stress.


Pyruvate dehydrogenase is a mitochondrial enzyme that regulates the flux
of carbohydrates into oxidative phosphorylation. The activity of PDH is
largely regulated by reversible phosphorylation. The pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinases add inhibitory phosphorylations to PDH on the E1α
subunit at positions 232, 293, and 300. Interestingly, there is a family
of 4 related PDHK genes with overlapping affinity for the 3
phosphorylation sites. PDHK1 and PDHK3 have been identified as
hypoxia-inducible at the transcriptional level, and PDHK1 has been shown
to be important for the growth of model tumors. This work attempts to
more carefully define the functions of PDHK1 and 3 using CRISPR
technology in colorectal cancer lines in vitro and genetically engineered
mice in vivo.

Using antibodies specific for the phosphorylated sites on E1α, we find
that PDHK1 is essential for the phosphorylation of the 232 site in
response to hypoxia and partially responsible for the
hyperphosphorylation of 293 and 300. The level of phosphorylation in
response to hypoxia is also sensitive to nutrients in the environment,
with high levels of glucose enhancing E1α phosphorylation in hypoxia.
Analysis of the number of phosporylations on individual E1α molecules
using isoelectric focusing shows a range of events, with some molecules
having 2 or 3 phosphorylations, while a large fraction of the E1α
remains unphosphorylated in hypoxia. This type of pattern suggests a
non-random phosphorylation of the multiple sites.

Analysis of PDH activity supports the in vitro findings that any single
phosphorylation event is sufficient to inhibit PDH complex activity.
Preliminary mitochondrial oxygen consumption experiments show that
colorectal cancer cells are less dependent on PDHK1 for regulating
mitochondrial function compared to published data in pancreatic and head
and neck cancer. Finally, analysis of PDH phosphorylation in mice
supports a role for PDHK1 in the regulation of PDH activity in response
to fasting and blood glucose levels.

In conclusion, regulation of PDH in normal and cancerous colonocytes
appears to be sensitive to environmental oxygen and nutrients. PDHK1 is
the PDHK family member with the greatest influence on the addition of
non-random inhibitory phosphorylation events. These in vitro findings
will be analyzed with respect to the findings obtained using the new
PDHK1 fl/fl villin Cre mouse.


