Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Controlled and endogenous depletion of a synthetic lethal target
in human cancer cell lines via SMASh degron engineering.


The SWI/SNF multi-subunit complexes play an important role in regulating
processes such as gene transcription through ATP-dependent remodeling of
chromatin. The importance of this role is highlighted by the prevalence
of mutations in various SWI/SNF subunits across approximately 20% of
cancers encompassing various lineages and subtypes. Functional genomics
screening via pooled shRNAs has led to the discovery of distinct
vulnerabilities of SWI/SNF mutant cancers to loss of mutually exclusive
subunits. In particular, cancer cells with BRG1 loss become exquisitely
dependent on the remaining BRG1 counterpart, BRM. To further understand
the synthetic lethal relationship between BRM and BRG1, we have adapted a
recently described degron, the small molecule assisted shutoff (SMASh)
tag, showing for the first time the ability to apply this system to
control endogenous levels of target protein, in this case BRM. We used
the SMASh tag to target the endogenous BRM locus in both a BRG1 wild-type
and mutant cancer cell line. Using these engineered cell lines, we were
able to show that we can achieve tunable protein levels by varying the
concentration of the effector molecule. The ability to tune BRM depletion
allowed us to investigate the nature of the BRG1/BRM synthetic lethal
relationship. Our data interestingly suggests that while modest depletion
of BRM is sufficient to observe changes in the expression of a target
gene regulated by SWI/SNF in a dose-dependent manner, a higher level of
BRM depletion is required to elicit a growth arrest phenotype in the
BRG1-mutant non-small cell lung cancer line. Together these results
uncover a novel relationship between the catalytic SWI/SNF subunit and
gene expression, where we find that the latter responds in a dose
dependent manner to BRM levels. Additionally, we elucidate the level of
BRM depletion required to observe the synthetic lethal phenotype,
providing insight and informing on strategies for therapeutic targeting
whether by protein degradation approaches, such as PROTAC, or other small
molecule approaches. Finally, having provided a proof-of-concept, such
tools can be readily adapted for application to endogenous degradation of
other target proteins in different systems.


