Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical investigation of a 15 gene hypoxia profile in
different prostate cancer cell lines.


Purpose: Hypoxia is known to reduce the response to radiotherapy and has
been found to be a common feature in prostate cancer. Identifying
patients with hypoxic tumors will allow us to select those patients that
require specific hypoxic modifiers. Previously our department has
developed a gene profile consisting of 15 genes, which demonstrated
prognostic and predictive impact for hypoxic modification in head and
neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC). In the current study we
investigated the 15 gene profile in vitro in different prostate cancer
cell lines, and subsequently in vivo in the PC3 xenograft model.

Methods: For the in vitro experiments the prostate cancer cell lines
investigated were PC-3, LNCaP and DU-145. Cell lines were cultured under
normoxic (21% O2) or varying hypoxic conditions (0%, 0.5%, 1.0%, 2.0%,
and 5.0% O2) for 24 hours, totRNA was extracted and gene expression
levels measured by qPCR. Individual reference genes were selected (PSMC4,
TBP, NDFIP1) and applied in the normalization of the relative expression
levels, together with the reference genes previously used in the HNSCC
study. For in vivo experiments, the PC3 cell line was inoculated on the
flank of female NMRI nu/nu mice. Two hypoxia-sensitive tracers (18F-FAZA
and Pimonidazole) were administered in order to determine hypoxic and
non-hypoxic regions on excised tumor sections. These regions were
isolated by laser-assisted microdissection, after which totRNA was
extracted and gene expression levels measured by qPCR.

Results: In the in vitro experiments, all three prostate cancer cell
lines had 14 of the 15 genes induced by hypoxia, when comparing the
anoxic cells (0% O2) to the normoxic.cells (21% O2). The only discrepancy
was ALDOA, which was not upregulated in the hypoxic cells. In the PC3 and
DU-145 cell lines genes were investigated at additional hypoxic levels
(0.5%, 1.0%, 2.0%, and 5.0% O2), giving a more intricate expression of
the 15 genes. In vivo experiments are still ongoing but preliminary
results show a hypoxia induced upregulation in 10 out of the 15 genes, of
which 4 were significantly upregulated (ADM, ANKRD37, FAM162A, and LOX).

Conclusion: We investigated the 15 gene hypoxic profile in different
prostate cancer cell lines, both in vitro and in vivo. A hypoxia
dependent induction of genes was observed in both types of experiments,
however with a differential gene expression with regard to hypoxia level.
From the performed experiments, and looking only at oxygen dependency, it
appears that the gene profile could be suitable for prostate cancers as
well as HNSCC.

Funding sources: Danish Cancer Society ; The Danish Council for
Independent Research: Medical Sciences ; EC FP7 project METOXIA (project
no. 222741) ; CIRRO: The Lundbeck Foundation Center for Interventional
Research in Radiation Oncology and The Danish Council for Strategic
Research.


