Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of a panel of patient-derived xenograft models for
prostate caner and cell line models for preclinical drug evaluation.


Background: Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer worldwide
for males, and the fourth most common cancer overall, with more than a
million new cases diagnosed. However, progress toward understanding the
biology of prostate cancer and the development of new therapies has been
hampered by the lack of in vivo models that adequately represent the
spectrum of benign, latent, aggressive, and metastatic forms of the human
disease. Here we report the validation of a panel of patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) models and their utilization in preclinical studies
alongside cell line models of prostate cancer.

Methods: Prostate cancer samples obtained from patients undergoing
surgery were collected with ethical consent, disaggregated and
established subcutaneously in Rag2-/-γC-/- mice (The Jackson Laboratory)
to generate PDX models. Tumor material was diagnosed on the basis of
operative histology and immunohistochemistry (IHC for PSA, androgen
receptor expression). Tumor growth in both Rag2-/-γC-/- and NSG mice was
evaluated in comparison to cell line models such LNCaP and PC3M. Briefly
tumours were measured 3 times a week and tumour volumes were estimated
using the formula 0.5 (LxW2) by measuring the tumour in two dimensions
using electronic callipers for the duration of the study. For orthotopic
PC3M, tumour growth was checked once weekly by bioluminescent imaging
(BLI). Briefly, the mice were injected (s.c.) with 150mg/kg D-Luciferin
prior to imaging, anaesthetised following administration of D-Luciferin
and placed into the imaging chamber (Spectrum CT) and imaged for
luminescence (ventral view).

Results: We have established a bank of transplantable prostate cancer PDX
and stocks are maintained in liquid nitrogen which can be resuscitated in
in both Rag2-/-γC-/- and NSG mice. Two models were reported to be
hormone sensitive and 2 models represented castrate resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) one of which has a TMPRSS-ETS fusion. In comparison
cell-derived LNCaP requires testosterone to grow whereas the
bioluminescent PC3M CRPC orthotopic model develops metastasis in the
liver, lungs, lumbar lymph nodes, fore limbs and hind limbs representing
the late stage of cancer.

Conclusions: We have characterised both cell and patient-derived prostate
cancer xenograft models which will provide a clinically relevant platform
spanning the different stages of the disease for preclinical drug
evaluation.


