Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TIMP-1 expression is inversely correlated with miRNA125a-5p and
let-7e in non-small-cell lung carcinoma.


Epigenetic alterations are emerging as significant elements in our
understanding the biology of lung cancer which remains the leading cause
of cancer deaths worldwide. In earlier studies we have shown that tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP-1) overexpression in NSCLC cells
results in aggressive tumors in mice. We have also demonstrated
TIMP-1’s anti-apoptotic activity in these cells. It is well documented
that miRNAs are involved in many physiological and neoplastic processes,
including apoptosis. We have previously shown that knocking down TIMP-1
in A549 NSCLC cells alters the miRNA profile in these cells with
upregulation of miR-125a-5p. Subsequently, we have identified that miR
let-7e is also upregulated in TIMP-1 KD clones. The present study is
focused on confirming the involvement of miR-125a-5p with TIMP-1 by using
mimics and antagomirs of 125a-5p. Furthermore, we have sought to validate
this relationship in vivo by examining these patterns in clinical
samples. We added mimics of miR-125a-5p into the parental A549 cells,
which resulted in down regulation of TIMP-1 levels. We were then able to
rescue TIMP-1 downregulation by adding antagomirs of miR-125a-5p to the
same cells. MiR-125a-5p binding sites were identified in TIMP-1 3’ UTR
and using luciferase assay, we have confirmed that TIMP-1 is indeed a
bona fide target of miR-125a-5p. Translational studies were carried out
using archived NSCLC adenocarcinoma tissues from the Surgical Pathology
archives at AU Medical Center. We first measured expression level of
TIMP-1 by RT-PCR in 20 tumors and paired normal adjacent tissues and
divided the samples into 2 groups, those with low and high TIMP-1
expression levels. Tissues were then interrogated for TIMP-1 and
miR-125a-5p and let- 7e miRNA expression using chromogenic in situ
hybridization. We identified negative correlation pattern between tumor
and paired normal adjacent tissue samples. Generally, TIMP-1 was highly
expressed in the tumor region, while miRNA expression was relatively
decreased when compared with adjacent normal tissues. miRNA 125a-5p and
let- 7e are known tumor suppressors in NSCLC. Analyzing secondary data
(adenocarcinoma) by KM plotter we found that high TIMP1 correlated with
lower patient survival with a hazard ratio of 3.17 (2.3-4.37) and a log
rank p value of 8.1e-14. These studies provide additional clarity and
further extend our understanding of the relationship between these miRNA
families and TIMP-1 expression.


