Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of MELK, a growth regulator of triple-negative
breast cancer, is regulated by p53.


Background: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most aggressive
form of breast cancer with poor prognosis. Due to frequent distant
metastasis and lack of successful targeted therapies, the overall
survival rate in TNBC patients is significantly lower than estrogen
receptor positive (ER) and HER2 positive breast cancers. To identify
potential druggable targets, previously, we performed a gene expression
analysis and identified protein kinases that are highly expressed in
TNBC. Through these studies, we discovered that the expression of
maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase (MELK) is highly elevated in
TNBCs and correlated with p53-mutation status and metastasis-free
survival. Inhibition of MELK reduced the growth and invasiveness of p53
mutant breast cancer cells.

Methods: In this study, we analyzed the association of MELK expression
with p53 status using publicly available datasets, and examined the role
of wild-type and mutant P53 in regulating MELK expression. MELK
expression at mRNA and protein levels were determined through Q-RT-PCR
and western blotting analysis respectively. The association of p53 and
MELK expression was determined using Oncomine analysis. We also
investigated the effect of p53 knockdown and overexpression on MELK
expressing using Q-RT-PCR, western blotting and promoter luciferase
assays.

Results: Analysis of publicly available datasets revealed that MELK
expression is highly elevated p53-mutant breast cancer independent of
estrogen receptor status. Consistent with observation, high MELK
expression was found in p53-mutant cells compared to p53 wild-type cells.
Through luciferase, western blotting and Q-RT-PCR assays, we discovered
that the increased expression of MELK in TNBC cells is due to
inactivation of p53 wild-type function. Consistently, over expression of
p53 wild-type in p53-Null cells, using doxycycline inducible system
reduced MELK promoter activity and expression. Similarly, inhibition of
p53 wild-type by over expression of p53-mutants in p53-wild-type cells
also increased MELK expression through dominant-negative effect. In
contrast, knockdown of p53-mutants or over expression of p53-mutants in
p53-null cells did not alter MELK expression. Finally, through promoter
deletion studies coupled with luciferase studies, we identified a
potential p53-response region in MELK promoter.

Conclusion: Our results suggest that the expression of MELK, a critical
regulator of growth and invasion of TNBCs, is regulated by the tumor
suppressor gene, p53 wild-type. Inactivation of p53 wild-type either gene
deletion or mutations induces the expression of MELK. These results
suggest that MELK is a promising target for the treatment of women with
p53-mutant TNBC. This work was supported by Susan G Komen Promise Grant
(PB, SH, GM), SAB Komen grant (PB) and Young Foundation grant (PB).


