Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hydrogels to study ECM-oxygen gradient interactions for sarcoma
cell migration.


Hypoxia is a critical factor in the progression and metastasis of many
cancers, including soft tissue sarcomas. Frequently, oxygen (O2)
gradients develop in tumors as they grow beyond their vascular supply,
leading to heterogeneous areas of O2 depletion. Here, we report the
impact of hypoxic O2 gradients and collagen fibers on sarcoma cell
invasion and migration. We begun with O2 gradient measurements and found
that large sarcoma mouse tumors (>300 mm3) contain a severely hypoxic
core [≤0.1% partial pressure of O2 (pO2)] whereas smaller tumors
possessed hypoxic gradients throughout the tumor mass (0.1–6% pO2). To
analyze tumor invasion, we used O2-controllable hydrogels to recreate the
physiopathological O2 levels in vitro. Small tumor grafts encapsulated in
the hydrogels revealed increased invasion that was both faster and
extended over a longer distance in the hypoxic hydrogels compared with
nonhypoxic hydrogels. To model the effect of the O2 gradient accurately,
we examined individual sarcoma cells embedded in the O2-controllable
hydrogel. We observed that hypoxic gradients guide sarcoma cell motility
and matrix remodeling through hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α)
activation. We further found that in the hypoxic gradient, individual
cells migrate more quickly, across longer distances, and in the direction
of increasing O2 tension. Treatment with minoxidil, an inhibitor of
hypoxia-induced sarcoma metastasis, abrogated cell migration and matrix
remodeling in the hypoxic gradient. Next, we have developed hypoxic
hydrogels where we can control collagen fiber density and cross-linking
density independently from oxygen gradients. Using this new platform we
show that an increase in fiber density in conjunction with the hypoxic
oxygen gradient leads to an increase in sarcoma cell migration. This
increase in migration speed was also correlated with quicker stress
relaxation times of the collagen gel and larger pore size. Using these
platforms we are able to create a novel 3D experimental system with
control over mechanical properties (crosslinking density, binding sight
density, fiber density, stress relaxation time, and stiffness)
independently from oxygen concentration. Overall, we show that O2 acts as
a 3D physicotactic agent during sarcoma tumor invasion and that this
migration is modulated by collagen fiber density and pore size, in the
surrounding matrix. We propose the O2-controllable hydrogels as a
predictive system to study early stages of the metastatic process and
therapeutic targets.


