Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A preclinical study of the combined treatment of arginase and
canavanine in pancreatic cancer.


Background: Arginine deprivation is a novel approach for cancer treatment
as some cancers were found to be arginine auxotrophic. PEG-BCT-100, a
pegylated form of recombinant human arginase, was used to investigate the
effect of arginine deprivation on pancreatic cell lines. On the other
hand, Canavanine (CAV), a natural toxic analog of arginine isolated from
leguminous plant, has also demonstrated its ability in inhibiting cancer
cell proliferation. It alters the protein structure and causes critical
metabolic defects in the cells by replacing arginine into newly
synthesized proteins during translation. In this study, we have also
tested the efficacy of combined arginase and CAV treatment on pancreatic
cell lines.

Methods: Pancreatic cell lines (MIA PaCa-2, CFPAC-1) and normal
fibroblast cell line (WI-38), were either incubated in normal or arginine
free condition. The corresponding IC50 of CAV was determined by cell
viability assay. To evaluate the responsiveness to the combined
treatment, cells were monitored by live cell imaging under the conditions
of PEG-BCT-100 treatment alone (0.3IU/ml) or in combination with CAV
(10μM or 50μM). The apoptotic effect of the combined treatment was
examined by Western blotting and Annexin V assay.

Results: Either arginase or CAV treatment could inhibit pancreatic cancer
cell growth. The cells treated with CAV in arginine free condition
demonstrated an inhibition of cell proliferation and its corresponding
IC50 was significantly lowered from millimolar to micromolar
concentration when arginine was withdrawn. Strong synergism of CAV and
PEG-BCT-100 was observed after 48-hour treatment with enhanced apoptosis
in pancreatic cell lines, but not in normal fibroblast cells. Both early
and late apoptosis were observed in co-treated pancreatic cancer cells as
indicated by Annexin V assay and the detection of polyADP ribosyl
polymerase (PARP) in Western blot.

Conclusion: Arginine deprivation by PEG-BCT-100 combined with CAV
treatment showed a strong synergetic effect on inducing cell death in
pancreatic cell lines, suggesting that the supplement of CAV could
facilitate the treatment outcome of arginine deprivation by arginase.
This combined treatment may serve as a treatment strategy for pancreatic
cancer.


