Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent antitumor activity of duvortuxizumab, a CD19 x CD3 DART®
molecule, in lymphoma models.


Duvortuxizumab (JNJ-64052781 or MGD011) is a CD19 x CD3 DART® protein
designed to engage and redirect CD3+ T-cells to eliminate CD19+ B-cells
through T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Duvortuxizumab displays potent
killing activity in lymphoma cell lines and animal models and is
currently in clinical development for the treatment of B-cell
malignancies. Here we examined duvortuxizumab activity alone and in
combination with standard chemotherapy regimens in preclinical lymphoma
models.

Duvortuxizumab plus bendamustine increased T-cell mediated cytotoxicity
of CD19+ Raji and DOHH2 lymphoma cells in the presence of isolated human
pan T-cells (effector:target = 10:1). Minimal inhibition of T-cell
activation was observed at bendamustine concentrations up to 40 µM. A
Burkitt’s lymphoma model was used to evaluate the in vivo effects of
duvortuxizumab plus bendamustine. NOD scid gamma mice were subcutaneously
implanted with Daudi tumor cells and inoculated with either peripheral
blood mononuclear cells or purified, activated human pan T-cells.
Duvortuxizumab was dosed at 0.5 mg/kg (x7, twice weekly); bendamustine
was dosed once at 25 mg/kg on day 1. Dosing with bendamustine alone
inhibited tumor growth by 79% (p=0.0002) whereas duvortuxizumab alone
resulted in complete tumor regression with no signs of relapse for up to
90 days. Dosing with duvortuxizumab plus bendamustine resulted in
complete and durable tumor regression and elimination. Analysis of
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) 3 days after the start of therapy
showed that bendamustine inhibited CD3+ T-cell infiltration and
activation whereas duvortuxizumab increased both. The combination showed
greater activation of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells. At 48 days after the last
duvortuxizumab dose, TILs had a large percentage of CD3+ CD45RA- CCR7-
cells, indicative of effector memory T-cells. This activation was
accompanied by higher expression of PD-1 on T-cells and PD-L1 on tumor
cells.

Similar effects were seen when duvortuxizumab was combined with
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (CHOP). In
vitro, a decrease in T-cell activation was observed with
duvortuxizumab/CHOP, which may have been caused by inclusion of
prednisone; however, cytotoxicity against tumor cells was maintained. In
a patient sample-derived model of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma,
duvortuxizumab (twice weekly for 4 consecutive weeks) in combination with
CHOP (given once) resulted in rapid tumor regression that was more
sustained than CHOP treatment alone.

In summary, duvortuxizumab has potent anti-tumor activity as a single
agent and in combination with standard chemotherapy in lymphoma
preclinical models. Duvortuxizumab-mediated tumor killing and T-cell
activation were maintained or increased in the presence of multiple
chemotherapeutics, suggesting the potential clinical utility of combining
duvortuxizumab with standard therapies in the treatment of B-cell
malignancies.


