Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting small cell lung carcinoma heterogeneity and
chemotherapy resistance with mass cytometry.


Introduction: Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a high grade
neuroendocrine carcinoma of the lung responsible for up to 25% of lung
cancer deaths. Treatment in SCLC has not changed significantly in the
last 20 years. SCLC initially responds well to chemotherapy, but
inevitably recurs. Characterization of tumor heterogeneity and changes in
SCLC cell signaling and phenotypes after chemotherapy could yield new
insights and therapeutic options. Mass cytometry uses metal labeled
antibodies to profile expression and phosphorylation of more than 40
proteins in single cells and offers the opportunity to identify new
subpopulations including potential cancer stem cell populations as well
as targets for novel therapies in SCLC.

Methods: Nude mice with SCLC patient derived xenografts (PDXs) were
treated with one cycle of carboplatin/etoposide or saline injection.
Tumors were harvested at ~2000mm3, disaggregated, and cryopreserved. PDX
samples were stained with a 22 marker panel and an intercalator dye to
identify nucleated cells. This panel measured phospho-signaling,
neuroendocrine, immune, and mesenchymal cell markers, and functional
markers including ki67 and cleaved caspase 3. ViSNE analysis and biaxial
gating were used to identify major subpopulations of interest.

Results: PDX tumors released viable tumor and stromal cells suitable for
cryopreservation and mass cytometry. ACK buffer and enzymatic
dissociation yielded the best quality cells by depleting red blood cells.
Mouse cells, including leukocytes, were excluded using mouse MHC1 gating
and iridium intercalator was used to identify nucleated cells. Single
cell protein expression and phosphorylation was analyzed using viSNE and
yielded at least 9 distinct subpopulations based on density islands with
neuroendocrine (CD56+) and non-neuroendocrine (CD56-) populations.
Chemotherapy treated cells had dramatic changes in subpopulation
distribution compared to matched mock treated tumor. This included 2-3
fold expansion of SOX2+, CD117+, and pSTAT3+ populations with
chemotherapy treatment. A small CD44+ tumor subpopulation identified in
the chemotherapy treated cells was not present in the matched mock
treated tumor suggesting a potential chemotherapy resistant/ stem- like
subpopulation. Kinase activity showed stable p-AKT overall, but increased
p-S6 in the chemotherapy treated cells.

Conclusions: Mass cytometry was able to identify multiple neuroendocrine
and non-neuroendocrine cell populations from SCLC PDXs and characterize
their signaling. Chemotherapy treated PDX had differential subpopulation
distribution with enrichment of multiple stem-like signaling factors.
This work demonstrates the utility of mass cytometry and viSNE as novel
techniques to identify subpopulations associated with chemotherapy
resistance for future targeting and demonstrates the feasibility of this
technique for characterizing signaling heterogeneity in human SCLC tumors.


