Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of CD98hc might be a marker of radiation resistance
in HNSCC.


Introduction: Head and Neck squamous cell carcinoma(HNSCC) represents an
aggressive malignancy. Although new advanced therapeutic strategies have
been applied to date, the 5-year survival rate have not been considerably
improved. Generally speaking, high radio-sensitive HNSCC has good
prognosis, however, there are radio-resistant HNSCC. Recently, Sanne et
al, have reported CD98 is one of the marker of Cancer Stem Cell.
Moreover, the over expression of CD98hc is high associated with different
cancers including the colon cancer, renal cancer. CD98 is heterodimeric
protein that comprises a heavy chain and a light chain. The CD98 heavy
chain is type 2 linkage to one of 6 amino acid transporters. We
hypothesize that irradiation may contribute to overexpression of CD98hc
and expansion Cancer Stem Cell population in HNSCC.

Methods:cell culture: Ho-1-u-1(Mouth floor), Sa3(Gingiva), HSC2,
HSC3,HSC4(tongue) were used for this experiment. These cell lines were
exposed to 60 Gy (2Gy/day) to establish stable cell lines to
radiation.Flow cytometry: For analysis of CD98-positive fraction, cell
pellets were incubated with FITC-conjugated anti-human CD98hc mAb at the
dilution of 1:11 at 4℃ for 15min.Sphere formation assay: Cells were
cultured in a serum-free medium. 1x104 cells were seeded in 80μl of
serum free RPMI1640 medium. The recipe of which was mentioned above.
Containing 1.0% agar on 100μl of a solidified serum free RPMI1640 was
poured on the top of each well. The cells were incubated for 20 days in
the same atomosphere as that for the monolayer culture.Migration Assay:
Radius 24 well Cell Migration (Cell Biolabs, INC.) were purchased. The
experiment was conducted according to the decided plotocol.

Result: In radiation resistant cells, spindle-shaped and large
cytoplasmic cells were founded. After irradiation, the expression of
CD98hc increased in all cell lines. In Ho-1-u-1, the population was
divided into two distinct subpopulations showing a higher and a lower
expression of CD98hc. Irradiated cancer cells exhibit an efficient
ability to developed numerous large sphere. Irradiation had enhanced
self-renewal of Cancer Stem Cells. Cell motility was higher in
radio-resistant cells than their parental cells.

Conclusion: Radio-resistant cells overexpressed CD98hc. In other words,
CD98hc may be a marker of radiation resistance. Since incomplete
radiation therapy can expand Cancer Stem Cell population, so elucidation
of mechanism of radiation resistance will improved radiotherapy. CD98hc
might be the target for more efficient treatment.


