Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and validation of humanized mice models implanted with
patient derived colorectal cancer xenografts.


Introduction: Agents that reverse T cell inhibitory signals have
reinvigorated the strategy of cancer immunotherapy and are leading to
robust clinical responses. In colorectal cancer (CRC), objective
responses to single-agent therapy with anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies have
largely been restricted to the small proportion of CRC patients with
microsatellite unstable (MSI-high) disease. Although there are additional
subsets of advanced CRC patients that are responsive to immune checkpoint
inhibition in combination with tumor-targeted agents, preclinical models
have been hampered by their immune-compromised status. In order to gain a
better biological understanding of the context of immune responses and
facilitate preclinical evaluation of combination strategies incorporating
cancer immunotherapy, we developed a “hematopoietic” humanized mouse
model utilizing patient-derived CRC xenografts with the intent of
leveraging this model for the development of rational combinations.

Methods: BRG.NODSirpalfa newborn pups were humanized through
transplantation of 1x105 CD34+ cells purified from umbilical cord blood.
Mice were evaluated for chimerism at 8 and 12 weeks. At 16 weeks, tumor
tissue from established PDX models was implanted on the right and left
flanks of humanized mice. When the average tumor size reached a volume of
~150-300 mm3, the mice were randomized into vehicle or nivolumab (30
mg/kg twice weekly i.p.) treatment groups according to %chimerism. Mice
were monitored for signs of toxicity and tumor size was evaluated twice
weekly by caliper measurements (tumor volume= (length × width2) ×
0.52). At the end of the treatment, mice were euthanized while sera,
lymph nodes, spleen, bone marrow and tumors were collected for
immunological assessment.

Results: As preliminary proof-of-concept, we successfully established 3
humanized CRC PDX models and one breast cancer cell line (MDA-MB-231). In
one of the CRC (MSI-high) and in the breast model we observed tumor
growth inhibition in the treated groups vs control. We detected
differences in PD-1 expression among treated versus control mice, with
lower expression in the nivolumab-treated groups. We also observed an
increased number of TILs, CD8+ T cells and greater numbers of T cells in
the lymph nodes of treated mice, suggesting T cell expansion. Mice were
highly chimeric with high TILs whereas responder tumors exhibited an
increase of CD44 high IFN+ T cells, high CD8% and a higher effector
memory% (HLADR+, CD45RO+).

Conclusions: Humanized PDX models were successfully established and tumor
engraftment occurred in all humanized mice with nivolumab-treated mice
demonstrating the development of lymph nodes that were populated by
activated T cells. These preliminary results demonstrate that human
immunity and PD-1 expressing T cells exist in these models and provide
the basis for planned immunotherapy combination studies.


