Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UniD: unified and integrated diagnostic pipeline for malignant
gliomas based on DNA methylation data.


Prognostic and predictive molecular diagnostics for patients with gliomas
typically rely on multiple assays, requiring large amounts of tissue and
high cost. DNA methylation has been utilized to identify prognostic
subsets and high-throughput platforms exist that are suitable for
archival tissue. Therefore, we developed a unified and integrated
diagnostic pipeline that can assess multiple prognostic and predictive
biomarkers using only the Illumina Infinium Methylation array. This
pipeline includes two parts: data processing and diagnostic biomarkers.
Data processing starts from the raw data and followed with quantitative
sample, probe, and batch quality control. The diagnostic biomarkers
include a glioma methylation assay that predicts radiation response
(GaMA); tumor classification enriched for TCGA expression subclasses;
copy number alterations including phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)
loss, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) amplification, and
chromosomes 1p/19q co-deletion; CpG island methylation phenotype
(G-CIMP); isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) mutation, and
O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter hypermethylation.
WHO grade II-IV gliomas were analyzed in both publically available and
institutional datasets. A signature was identified to effectively
distinguished radiation resistant from radiation sensitive glioma
stem-like cells (GSCs). Signature has been applied to 272 TCGA GBM
samples from patients who received standard radiotherapy (RT). The
survival analysis showed that the subgroup with RT-sensitive and
RT-resistant have significant difference in survival time (log-rank test
p-value = 0.0016). Gene expression subclasses prediction biomarker was
build by using the revised TCGA gene expression subclasses as gold
standard. The prediction accuracy in test data set was 83.5% in the
homogeneous subgroup, 71.0% in the semi-heterogeneous subgroup, and 62.1%
in the heterogeneous subgroup. The prediction accuracy decreased as tumor
heterogeneity increased. Certain copy number alteration events were
predicted by developing specific signatures. Revised methylation
signatures were developed for IDH mutation and G-CIMP status
respectively, which can identified 99% of those samples. 230 GBM samples
with 450k data available were tested with MGMT methylation-specific
real-time PCR for MGMT methylation status. The methylation-based MGMT
prediction accuracy reached about 90%. In summary, we have developed a
single, FFPE-based pipeline for unified and integrated determination of
multiple biomarkers of malignant glioma.


