Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of Akt pathway and autophagy promotes resistance to
FASN inhibition in colorectal cancer patient-derived xenograft models.


Fatty Acid Synthase (FASN), a key enzyme of de novo lipogenesis, is
upregulated in many cancers including colorectal cancer (CRC); increased
FASN expression is associated with poor prognosis. Potent FASN inhibitors
developed by 3-V Biosciences demonstrate anti-tumor activity in vitro and
in vivo and a favorable tolerability profile in a Phase I clinical trial
in solid tumor patients. However, CRC characteristics associated with
responsiveness to FASN inhibition are not fully understood. The purpose
of our study was: (i) to determine the effect of FASN inhibition on tumor
growth in CRC patient-derived xenografts (PDXs); (ii) to identify
potential biomarkers associated with CRC responsiveness to FASN
inhibition; and (iii) to explore new combination strategies with FASN
inhibitors. METHODS. Tumor growth was assessed in 9 PDXs established in
NSG mice using freshly resected specimens. Once the xenografts grew to
~100 mm3, mice were randomized into two groups (n=5) to receive either
vehicle or TVB-3664 or four groups (n=10) for TVB-3664 treatment in
combination with either MK2206 or Chloroquine (CQ). Tumor volume and
animal weights were measured weekly. Western blot analysis and
immunohistochemistry staining were used to identify FASN-mediated changes
in signaling pathways. Changes in metabolites and lipids were analyzed by
nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectrometry in plasma and tumor
tissues. Next Generation Sequencing was used to assess the mutation
profile of 198 oncogenes in patient tumors and PDXs. RESULTS. PDXs showed
a wide range of sensitivity to FASN inhibition: TVB-3664 treatment
attained significant response (reduced tumor volume) in 3 PDXs,
significant response followed by developed resistance in one PDX, and no
response in 5 PDXs. Activation of Akt and AMPK pathways was associated
with resistance to FASN inhibition and combination of TVB-3664 with
either MK2206 or CQ led to a significant reduction in tumor volume as
compared to either drug alone. Moreover, TVB-3664 treatment significantly
decreased the total palmitate level in plasma and the levels of
triglycerides, diglycerides, phosphatidylserines,
phosphatidylethanolamines, and phosphatidylcholines in tumor tissues.
Furthermore, a significant decrease in the levels of AXP-1, AXP-2 and
myo-Inositol-2 was observed in tumors responsive to FASN inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS. Our studies demonstrate that TVB-3664 shows anti-tumor
activity in CRC. Importantly, our results suggest that activation of Akt
and autophagy are major mechanisms of resistance to FASN inhibition and
demonstrate that combine inhibition of these pathways and FASN may be a
new therapeutic approach in CRC. Ongoing studies of correlation between
mutation and metabolic profiles of tumors and tumor response to FASN
inhibition aim to identify a subset of CRC patients that are likely to
respond to FASN-targeted therapy.


