Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of DLK1 in sarcoma stem cells.


Sarcoma is a rare form of cancer that comprises about 1% of all
malignancies. A large proportion of deaths by sarcomas are caused by
tumor metastasis, of which the biological basis remains obscure. A
significant body of evidence suggests that only a small population of
sarcoma cells possess the ability to initiate and maintain tumors. These
tumor-initiating cells have the ability to self-renew, recapitulating the
cellular heterogeneity of the original cancer, and thus are often
referred as cancer stem like cells (CSLCs).Delta-like factor 1 (DLK1) was
cloned in the preadipocyte cells 3T3-L1 cDNA library. Previous studies
reported on the role of DLK1 in mesenchymal stem cell differentiation,
adipogenesis, myogenesis, and osteoblastogenesis. It was reported that
DLK1+ liver cancer cells have characteristics similar to those of CSLCs
and that DLK1 could be a potential therapeutic target against the liver
CSLCs. However, little is known about role of DLK1 in CSLCs of sarcoma.
The mRNA (real time PCR) and protein (Western blot) expression of DLK1
from 13 sarcoma cell lines was examined. CSLCs from sarcoma cell lines
were isolated using FACS with CD133 and sphere forming assay. The effect
of DLK1 on sarcoma tumorigenesis was examined using cell proliferation
and cell invasion assays by DLK1 siRNA treatment.Real-time PCR showed the
increased expression of DLK1 mRNA in sarcoma cell lines. In particular,
DLK1 mRNA was highly expressed in U2OS (osteosarcoma), SW872
(liposarcoma), A204 (rhabdomyosarcoma), and HS-SYII (synovial sarcoma)
cells. We observed a reduction in cell proliferation and invasion in
U2OS, A204, and sw872 cells treated with DLK1 siRNA. CSLCs were isolated
from U2OS, A204, and sw872 by the FACS sorting method using the CD133, a
CSLC marker in sarcoma. The number of active sarcoshperes in CD 133+
cells were significantly higher than that in CD133- cells by sphere
forming assay. Soft agar assays revealed the presence of many more
colonies in CD133+ cells than in CD133- or wild type cells. To
investigate the effect of DLK1 on sarcoma CSLCs, sw872 cells were
categorized into four groups: wild type, CD133-, CD133+ and spheres.
Real-time PCR and western blot were used to detect the DLK1 gene in all
four groups. We observed that DLK1 expression in sw872 CSLCs (CD133+ and
spheres) were relatively low. We found that suppression of DLK1 by siRNA
inhibited the invasiveness of CSLCs although it inhibited more
effectively to activation of invasive cells as well as cell proliferation
in sw872 non-CSLCs.These results suggest that DLK1 may play a role in
tumorigenesis of CSLCs and cancer cells in various sarcomas.


