Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression analysis identifies heterogeneity in cutaneous
melanoma subjects with disruptive MC1R alleles and BRAF hotspot mutations.


Background: Previous epidemiological and population sequencing studies
have established that subjects with melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R)
germline mutations, associated with red hair and light skin phenotypes,
have an increased risk of melanoma. However, several conflicting reports
about the role of BRAF somatic mutations in MC1R subjects exist in the
literature. We hypothesise that this conflict is due to biological
process driven heterogeneity within MC1R subjects carrying disruptive
alleles. To understand the heterogeneity, we analysed the TCGA cohort at
the gene expression level using mRNA sequencing data.

Method: From the previously published studies, we identified 68 cutaneous
melanoma subjects who were of white ethinicity, had at least one
disruptive allele of MC1R, and had BRAF mutations. Associated clinical
and mRNA sequencing data were downloaded from the Firebrowse website. An
unbiased hierarchical clustering analysis was performed using the
preprocessed mRNA data containing 14669 gene expressions. The resultant
clusters were then characterised using available clinical variables. A
differential expression analysis was performed to identify the genomic
signatures of these clusters. The resultant p-values were corrected for
false discovery rate (FDR) using the Benjamini-Hochberg approach. Genes
with corrected p-values less than 0.01 were further analysed using gene
set enrichment analysis (GSEA) preranked lists.

Results: An unbiased clustering identified two clear and separable
clusters with 40 and 28 subjects respectively. The UV-signature
(dipyrimidine C>T load) was correlated with these clusters (p-value =
0.047). However, no significant differences in age at the time of
diagnosis, overall survival, and total mutation load between clusters
were observed. At the genomic level, 2588 genes were significantly
differentially expressed between two clusters (FDR corrected p- value
less than 0.05). The top 10 differentially expressed genes included ATF2,
MSH6, SP3, MAP3K2, and VEGFB. Further GSEA revealed gene sets playing
roles in several pathways and biological processes, including oxidative
phosphorylation, UV response in keratinocytes, DNA repair, cell cycle,
and cellular response to stress.

Conclusion: Cutaneous melanoma subjects with disruptive MC1R alleles and
BRAF hotspot mutations have heterogeneous gene expression profiles with
several key oncogenes differentially expressed. This suggests potential
roles of other pathways, either independently or in cooperation with BRAF
mutations, in melanomagenesis in MC1R bearing patients.


