Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-independent
colorectal cancer.


When combined with standard of care treatment for colorectal cancer
(CRC), the use of monoclonal antibodies or small molecule inhibitors
against epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) show modest efficacy in
the clinic. Early detection efforts and more effective therapies have
reduced mortality, yet CRC remains the second mostly deadly cancer in the
United States with approximately 50,000 deaths expected this year. Thus,
it is imperative to better understand the mechanisms governing molecular
progression of CRC. Primary and secondary resistance to anti-EGFR
therapies occurs in approximately 80% of the patients with CRC. Mutations
in Kras explain some non-responding CRCs, but even in cancers lacking
Kras mutations, little is known about which cancers are likely to respond
to EGFR targeted treatment, suggesting an alternative and
EGFR-independent CRC progression mechanism. In this study, we used a
conditional Egfr allele (Egfrf) within the ApcMin/+ mouse model and
identified EGFR-independent tumors with faster growth rates than those
developing in EGFR-wild type mice. To assess aggressiveness of
EGFR-independent tumors, we used a metastatic CRC mouse model containing
conditionally inactivated Apc alleles (Apcf/f) in combination with a
conditionally active allele of Kras (KrasLSL-G12D). It has been reported
that delivery of Cre recombinase-expressing adenovirus to the distal
colon of these mice results in tumors that progress to carcinoma within
20 weeks, and liver metastases develop in approximately 20% of mice at 24
weeks. We discovered a 10% increase in the penetrance of tumors arising
in the absence of EGFR (Egfrf/f, Apcf/f, KrasLSL-G12D/+). Endoscopic
analysis suggests an increase in tumor multiplicity in EGFR-deficient
tumors when compared with tumors developing in EGFR-wild-type mice.
Biweekly colonoscopies confirmed that colonic tumors have a faster growth
rate in the absence of EGFR. High-frequency abdominal ultrasound suggests
liver metastasis at 16 weeks in 20% of mice lacking EGFR. These findings
demonstrate the existence of an EGFR-independent mechanism by which CRC
can arise and progress. Moreover, tumors lacking EGFR grow larger than
those developing under normal EGFR activity and may be a more aggressive
form of CRC. We also have evidence that ERBB3 and ERBB4, related EGFRs,
mediate compensatory and alternative pathways, suggesting an important
role for these receptors in the progression of EGFR-independent CRC. This
study will advance our understanding of ERBB family biology during
colonic tumorigenesis, ultimately contributing to better therapies for
CRC.


