Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Broad Genomics and Cancer Program development of comprehensive
blood biopsy sequencing capabilities to support direct-to-patient cancer
research initiatives.


Genomic profiling of cell free tumor DNA (Blood Biopsy) offers the
potential to revolutionize cancer precision medicine. As a proxy for
tumor tissue profiling, successful blood biopsy analysis can help select
appropriate patients for clinical trials, provide useful data for
treatment monitoring, and discover genomic mechanisms of disease
resistance. Recognizing these potential benefits, we aim to enable
large-scale genomic data generation and analysis of cfDNA samples to
support the patient driven Metastatic Breast Cancer Project
(mbcproject.org) and many other such efforts. The widespread adoption of
cfDNA sequencing technology in clinical research will require low cost,
efficient, and in some cases clinically-validated processes. Commercial
offerings in this field are focused on analysis of small targeted hotspot
panels due to the challenges of more complete sequencing approaches for
cfDNA (e.g. variability in the fraction of tumor present and high false
positive rates). Working in collaboration with the Broad Institute Cancer
Program, we have developed a process to overcome these challenges and
provide high quality comprehensive exome analysis of cfDNA. Our process
includes screening samples using ultra low pass, UMI-enabled whole genome
sequencing to quantify the % of tumor DNA available for sequencing.
Qualified samples are then moved into automated processes for exome
sequencing and somatic mutation detection. In our initial validation
study of 23 breast and prostate cancer patients with matched cfDNA and
tumor tissue sequencing, we are able to identify 90% of clonal and 45% of
subclonal mutations found in the matched tumor biopsy. In our effort to
scale this process, and fully characterize the benefits and limitations
of this technology we will present additional validation analysis. We
will evaluate the relative importance of using paired sample analysis
(tumors and matched normals) with analysis of tumor sequencing alone and
assess sensitivity and specificity of somatic alterations as a function
of tumor fraction and sequencing depth.


