Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The use of long-read sequencing to determine the structure of the
Her2 amplicon in breast cancer.


HER2 amplification is present in ~15% of breast cancers, and is present
in small subsets of other cancer types including gastric and lung
cancers. Therapy targeting HER2 is now routinely used in treatment of
HER2-amplificed breast cancer and has changed the natural history of this
disease. The region of chromosome 17q12 containing Her2 contains many
genes, and little is known about the actual genomic alterations that
underlie the amplification event. While it is known that parts of the
amplicon exist in multiple copies in a tumor, the exact structure of the
duplicated region is not known and their relative orientation and
positions in the genome is not clear. There is the potential for
rearrangements between the genes and for different segments of the
amplicon to exist and varied copy numbers. There is no clear way to
assemble the complete structure of this region using short reads, as they
cannot resolve repetitive regions and identify junction reads. Long read
sequencing has the potential to overcome these limitations, however the
sequencing depth is limited and difficult to apply to large genomes. To
apply long read sequencing to a limited part of the cancer genome, we
have used Nimblegen target enrichment coupled with Oxford Nanopore and
Pacific Bioscience sequencing in an attempt to sequence and assemble the
Her2 amplicon. The error rate of the sequencers are not of concern since
we are not looking at base-pair level variation. Instead, our need is for
long reads that can span the gene boundaries and repetitive elements to
give complete structure of the amplicon. Nimblegen custom capture probes
were designed for the 2mb chromosomal region containing Her2. DNA was
extracted from 3 breast cancer cell lines and enriched using the
Nimblegen kit. This DNA was then sequenced with long reads on the MinIon
and the PacBio to allow for complete assembly of the region. The DNA was
assembled to determine the structure of the HER2 amplicon in each cell
line. These results may give new insight into the molecular events that
led to formation of the HER2 amplicon.


