Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissemination of breast cancer.


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of death in US women. Despite
advances in early detection, diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer,
metastasis and tumor recurrence persist leading to continued morbidity
and mortality. Several breast cancer studies have highlighted the role of
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and its interaction with the tumor
microenvironment (TME) in breast cancer progression. The TME consists of
stromal cells that include fibroblasts, macrophages, the extracellular
matrix (ECM), and several secreted factors that contribute to
aggressiveness of the cancer and resistance to therapy. Increased density
of collagen 1 (Col1) fibers, a major structural component of the ECM in
solid tumors, and their alignment in tumors frequently result in
increased invasion and metastasis of cancer cells. To understand the role
of COX-2 at the lung metastatic site, and its relationship with Col1
fibers, COX-2 overexpressing triple negative SUM-149 human breast cancer
cells (SUM-149-COX-2) or empty vector SUM-149 cells (EV) were injected
through tail vein in SCID mice to compare Col1 fiber patterns in
metastatic lesions. We isolated the lungs, processed the tissue, and
imaged for Col1 fiber by second harmonic generation microscopy on H&E
stained sections. The number of cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) were
detected in adjacent sections by immunostaining for α-SMA. COX-2
overexpression did not increase the size of the cancer cell emboli in
blood vessels or the size of pulmonary metastasis formed in the lungs.
However, COX-2 overexpression did significantly increase the number of
pulmonary metastases. Significantly higher Col1 fiber volume was observed
in emboli compared to pulmonary metastases independent of COX-2
overexpression. Interestingly, the Col1 fibers were significantly more
aligned in the COX-2 overexpressing pulmonary metastases compared to
COX-2 overexpressing and EV emboli. The COX-2 overexpressing emboli had
significantly higher amounts of CAFs detected by α-SMA expression
compared to the EV emboli and the EV and COX-2 overexpressing pulmonary
metastases. Pulmonary metastases from COX-2 overexpressing cells were
detected further away from the nearest blood vessel compared to the
metastases from EV cells suggesting that COX-2 may facilitate the
formation of distant metastases. These data provide new insights into the
role of COX-2, Col1 fibers, and CAFs in enabling emboli to extravasate to
form pulmonary metastatic foci. These insights are important as COX-2
upregulation during treatment may potentiate metastasis. This work was
supported by NIH R01 CA82337.


