Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EP4 receptor antagonism in paclitaxel-resistant ovarian clear cell
carcinomas that overexpress class III β-tubulin.


OBJECTIVES: Advanced ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC) is associated
with a survival disadvantage relative to ovarian serous carcinoma
following platinum/taxane-based chemotherapy and optimal cytoreduction.
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) contributes to disease progression through
modulation of several G-protein coupled receptors (EP1-4) [Fig.1a]. The
addition of upstream COX inhibition to platinum/taxane-based chemotherapy
in the first-line phase II setting in ovarian cancer has been
disappointing,a possibly due to compensatory upregulation of COX
isoenzymes and negation of protective effects of EP1. Selective
antagonism of EP4 may therefore pose a more rational strategy than global
COX inhibition. Paclitaxel administration has been shown to upregulate
components of the COX pathway.b Class III β-tubulin is a marker for
paclitaxel resistance and is widely overexpressed in OCCC. The purpose of
this study is to demonstrate that EP4 inhibition may overcome paclitaxel
resistance in OCCC that overexpress class III β-tubulin.

METHODS: Expression of EP4 receptor and class III β-tubulin was
quantified using immunohistochemistry and Western blot in solid tissues
and cell lines. Standard metabolic growth and migration assays were
employed to test the effects of drug treatment (paclitaxel and EP4
inhibitors RQ-15986/AH-23848) with and without EP4 silencing using siRNA.

RESULTS: OCCC overexpress class III β-tubulin/EP4 relative to normal
ovary [Fig. 1b/c]. EP4 staining intensity was 2+ in 100% OCCC using an
ovarian cancer tissue microarray (62 cores, 13% OCCC); this rate was only
26-56% among other histologies. EP4 inhibition reduces growth of
paclitaxel-resistant cells [Fig. 1d]. Likewise, treatment with EP
inhibitors [Fig.1 e-top] and silencing of EP4 resulted in reduced
migration [Fig.1 e-bottom].

CONCLUSIONS: Selective antagonism of PGE2 through EP4 receptor inhibition
may represent a powerful targeted therapy for paclitaxel-resistant OCCC.
Further study including simultaneous treatment (EP4 inhibitor+paclitaxel)
and larger samples sizes is required.

REFERENCES: a Reyners et al. A randomized phase II study investigating
the addition of the specific COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib to docetaxel plus
carboplatin as first-line chemotherapy for stage IC to IV epithelial
ovarian cancer, fallopian tube or primary peritoneal carcinomas: the
DoCaCel study. Ann Oncol 2012; 23:2986-902. b Moos et al. Effects of
taxol/taxotere on gene expression in macrophages: induction of the PGH
synthetase-2 isoenzyme. J Immunol 1999;162:476-73.


