Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotypic analysis of single-cell breast cancer inhibition data
reveals insights into EMT.


Background: A leading model of cancer metastasis is
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We sought to determine
whether single-cell inhibition data targeting potential mediators of EMT
could uncover mechanistic insights into the EMT process.

Methods: EMT was artificially induced on Py2T murine breast cancer cells
by TGFb treatment. Additionally, a unique drug inhibitor was added to
each well of a multiplexed CyTOF experiment. 37 transcription factors and
cell surface markers were measured in each cell to assess epithelial and
mesenchymal states, SMAD, AKT, and MAPK signaling activity, cell cycle
regulation, and apoptosis pathway activation. The final single-cell
dataset consisted of 300 inhibition and control conditions (cell
populations), which we aimed to characterize in relation to one another
with respect to effect on EMT.

Analyzing the similarity between drug inhibitions amounts to a novel type
of clustering problem that involves computing the similarity between
diverse cell populations generated by each inhibitor. Traditional methods
for comparing cell populations are not robust to the intra-population
heterogeneity we observed amongst cells undergoing EMT. Thus, we
developed Phenotypic Earth Mover’s Distance (PhEMD). This method for
comparing cell populations leverages the insight that only a limited
number of “cell subtypes” (e.g. mesenchymal, epithelial,
transitional) are observed in unperturbed and perturbed EMT. By
classifying each cell as one of these distinct subtypes using
community-detection based clustering, PhEMD represents an inhibition or
control condition as its relative abundance of each cell subtype. It then
uses Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) to compare two relative abundance
distributions (i.e. heterogeneous cell populations). PhEMD thus derives a
single value representing the dissimilarity between two inhibition
conditions. Using PhEMD as measure of dissimilarity between each pair of
inhibition and control conditions, we constructed an inhibitor-inhibitor
graph and used graph clustering to identify groups of inhibitors that had
similar effects to one another.

Results: PhEMD analysis revealed that MEK, EGFR and Src inhibitors
significantly halted EMT by generating far fewer mesenchymal cells and
maintaining a large epithelial cell subpopulation. PhEMD also revealed
that different mTOR, PI3K, and Akt inhibitors tended to have similar
effects to one another and collectively generated a distinct,
transitional cell subpopulation with altered pS6 expression. The pS6
dysregulation may be explained by the fact that ribosomal protein S6 is
downstream of PI3K/AKT/mTOR, and the intermediate levels of both
E-cadherin and vimentin suggest that this subset of cells may have been
halted mid-transition. Finally, several Aurora Kinase and CDK inhibitors
resulted in a relatively high percentage of apoptotic cells, suggesting
these kinases may be important cell cycle regulators in the context of
EMT.


