Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel nonsense mutation in androgen receptor confers resistance
to CYP17 inhibitor treatment in prostate cancer.


Background: The standard treatment for prostate cancer (PCa) is androgen
deprivation therapy (ADT) that blocks AR transcriptional activity, which
is responsible to the initiation and progression of PCa. However, ADT
invariably leads to the castration-resistant PCa (CRPC) with restored
activity of AR. CRPC can be further treated with more intensive ADTs,
including CYP17-inhibitors to block intratumoral androgen synthesis and
more potent AR antagonist. By analyzing the tumor mRNA from a CRPC
patient biopsy who developed resistance to CYP17-inhibitor treatment, we
identified a novel nonsense AR mutation on ligand binding domain (Q784*),
which produces a C-terminal truncated form of AR protein containing only
a fraction of ligand binding domain (LBD) and may mimic the function of
some AR splice variants. We hypothesized that AR-Q784* may gain the
androgen-independent activity, or may enhance the transcriptional
activity of full-length AR (AR-FL) under low androgen environment through
dimerization with AR-FL.

Method: Luciferase reporter assays were applied to assess the
transcriptional activity of AR-Q784* in absence or presence of androgens,
and with or without AR-FL. Immunoblotting and immunofluorescence assays
were used to examine the protein stability and cellular localization of
AR-Q784*. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays were also used to assess
the chromatin binding ability of AR-Q784*. Moreover, the stable cell line
that expresses endogenous AR-FL and tetracycline-inducible AR-Q784* was
generated to determine the transcription activity on AR target genes and
assess the effects on cell proliferation, particularly under low dose
androgen condition.

Result: Although it was constitutively expressed in nucleus, AR-Q784*
does not elicit transcriptional activity despite the conditions of
ligands. However, when it was co-expressed with AR-FL, AR-Q784* can
enhance AR-mediated transcriptional activity and thus increased PCa cell
proliferation particularly under low androgen conditions.
Mechanistically, AR-Q784* can dimerize with AR-FL, enhance DNA binding
ability of AR-FL, and strengthen AR recruitment of p300 coactivator.

Conclusion: We show that CYP17 inhibitor treatment in CRPC may select for
a distinct class of AR mutations/variations, including nonsense
(AR-Q784*) or point-deletion mutations within LBD and certain splice
variants that only lose a fraction of LBD domain. This class of AR
mutants/variants is transcriptionally inactive but can enhance the
activity of AR-FL due to their abilities of constitutive DNA binding and
dimerization with AR-FL. However, this enhancing activity of those AR
mutants/variants can be prevented by antagonist treatments such as
enzalutamide. Therefore, this study provides an additional rationale for
treating PCa patients with combination therapy of abiraterone and
enzalutamide, which may prevent the selection for such AR
mutations/variations in CRPC.


