Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional genomic screening identifies USP11 as a novel regulator
of ERα transcription in breast cancer.


Approximately 70% of breast cancers overexpress the estrogen receptor α
(ERα) and depend on this key transcriptional regulator for growth and
differentiation. The discovery of novel mechanisms controlling ERα
function represent major advances in our understanding of breast cancer
progression and potentially offer attractive new therapeutic
opportunities. Here, we investigated the role of deubiquitinating enzymes
(DUBs), which act to remove ubiquitin moieties from proteins, in
regulating transcriptional activity of ERα in breast cancer.

To identify DUBs involved in the regulation of ERα transcriptional
activity, we performed an RNAi loss-of-function screen using a library of
shRNA vectors targeting all human DUB genes. The DUB library consisted of
pools of four non-overlapping shRNAs targeting all 108 known or putative
DUBs (432 shRNAs in total). We found that suppression of a number of DUBs
markedly repressed or enhanced the activity of an
estrogen-response-element (ERE) luciferase reporter following estradiol
(E2) stimulation. Of particular interest, suppression of the
BRCA2-associated DUB, USP11, was found to down-regulate ERα
transcriptional activity.

Subsequent validation using two individual siRNAs targeted to USP11
revealed a notable reduction in expression of endogenous ERα target
genes in the ZR-75-1 cell line, as quantified using qRT-PCR.
Immunoprecipitation of ERα revealed no physical interaction with USP11,
however E2 stimulation resulted in translocation of USP11 to the nucleus,
suggesting a potential role in E2-induced transcription. Furthermore,
USP11 expression was found to be upregulated in the estrogen-independent
cell line LCC1 when compared to their parental MCF7 cells. Knockdown of
USP11 in LCC1 cells resulted in decreased mRNA expression of a panel of
ERα target genes, suggesting a role for USP11 in an estrogen independent
setting.

To support the prognostic relevance of USP11, immunohistochemical
staining of a breast cancer tissue microarray (n=144) was performed.
Kaplan-Meier analysis of this cohort revealed a highly significant
association between poor overall survival (OS) (p=0.030) and breast
cancer-specific survival (BCSS) (p=0.041). In silico analysis of
publically available breast cancer gene expression datasets further
supported an association between high USP11 mRNA levels and poor
prognosis. We observed a significant correlation between high expression
of USP11 mRNA in ER-positive patients and poor distant metastasis-free
survival (DMFS) (HR 2, CI 1.37-2.91, p=0.00023). This correlation was
also significant in ER-positive patients who had received endocrine
therapy only (HR 2.9, CI 1.63-5.15, p=0.00015).

These results suggest a role for USP11 in driving cellular growth and
identify USP11 as novel therapeutic target in breast cancer.


