Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYC and HIF-2alpha mediates resistance to Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor (EGFR) antagonism in oral squamous carcinoma cells.


Background: Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is a devastating disease.
Recent findings suggest that the EGFR antagonist including erlotinib may
induce tumor regression alone or in combination with chemo/radiation. Our
preliminary clinical study conducted at KaviKrishna laboratory indicates
that many poor patients are taking the highly expensive drug Erlotinib,
and or equivalent EGFR antagonists. However, oral cancer lesions are
often hypoxic, and the hypoxia-induced cellular mechanisms might
contribute to drug resistance. Here, we investigated, whether resistance
to EGFR antagonists may involve MYC and HIF-2alpha, two transcription
factors upregulated during hypoxia by using established oral cancer cell
lines. We have also obtained primary oral cancer cells from patients
living in the Kamrup district of Assam, where KaviKrishna laboratory is
located. We intend to evaluate the drug sensitivity of these oral cancer
cells towards EGFR antagonists.

Method: We used SSC-25 and SCC-9 cell lines, as well patient derived
primary oral cancer cells (n=5) for the study. Immunomagnetic sorting was
performed to obtain ABCG2+ population. The self-renewal was studied using
in vitro clonogenic and in vivo serial transplantation assay in NOD/SCID
mice.

Results: First, we identified a rare ABCG2+ expressing, highly
tumorigenic cell population in SSC-25, and SCC-9 having cancer stem cell
(CSC) like characteristics. Second, we found that the ABCG2+ cells
exhibited sensitivity to PD158780 (10 uM; 62% inhibition within 48
hours), and AG1478 (10 uM; 56% inhibition within 48 hours), two small
molecular inhibitors of EGFR tyrosine kinase. These small molecular
inhibitors significantly inhibited the clonogenic capacity of the ABCG2+
cells. Next, we found that ABCG2+ cells also showed sensitivity to
Erlotinib in the in vitro clonogenic assay. Third, the ABCG2+ cells, when
exposed to hypoxia (Results: First, we identified a rare ABCG2+
expressing, highly tumorigenic cell population in SSC-25, and SCC-9
having cancer stem cell (CSC) like characteristics. Second, we found that
the ABCG2+ cells exhibited sensitivity to PD158780 (10 uM; 62% inhibition
within 48 hours), and AG1478 (10 uM; 56% inhibition within 48 hours), two
small molecular inhibitors of EGFR tyrosine kinase. These small molecular
inhibitors significantly inhibited the clonogenic capacity of the ABCG2+
cells. Next, we found that ABCG2+ cells also showed sensitivity to
Erlotinib in the in vitro clonogenic assay. Third, the ABCG2+ cells, when
exposed to hypoxia (<0.1% O2, 24 hours), exhibited enhanced expression
and transcriptional activity of MYC, and HIF-2alpha. The post-hypoxia
ABCG2+ cells exhibited complete resistance to PD158780, AG1478 and
Erlotinib treatment, which could be reversed by siRNA silencing of MYC
and or HIF-2alpha. ChIP assay revealed that HIF-2alpha directly binds to
MYC in ABCG2+ cells. We found similar results in ABCG2+ cells obtained
from primary oral cancer samples (n=4). Importantly, ABCG2+ cells
directly isolated from patients exhibited hypoxic phenotype, including
the high expression of HIF-1alpha, and HIF-2alpha, as well as resistance
to erlotinib. Furthermore, erlotinib enhanced the stemness of ABCG2+
cells by activation of the MYC/HIF-2alpha self-renewal pathway (1).

Conclusion: These data indicate that MYC and HIF-2alpha co-operate to
mediate intrinsic resistance of oral squamous cancer cells to EGFR
antagonist in the hypoxia microenvironment.

(1). Bhuyan et al. Cancer Research, volume 76 (14), abstract 935; 2016


