Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the MYC and WDR5 interaction at chromatin.


MYC is an oncoprotein that is overexpressed in the majority of
malignancies and contributes to an estimated 70,000-100,000 cancer deaths
in the United States every year. The broad pro-tumorigenic functions of
MYC stem from its role as a sequence-specific transcriptional regulator,
controlling the expression of thousands of genes linked to cell cycle
control, growth, and metabolism. Key to understanding how MYC causes
cancer, therefore, is understanding the mechanisms through which it
selects its target genes. Histone modifications, DNA sequence, and
interactions with other transcription factors have all been suggested to
influence where MYC binds chromatin, but a consistent signature has not
been defined. Our laboratory recently discovered that the chromatin
regulatory protein WDR5—a core component of histone modifying
complexes—interacts directly with MYC and co-localizes with MYC at a
majority of its target genes in human cells (Thomas et al., Mol. Cell,
58: 440-452, 2015). Point mutations in MYC that disable interaction with
WDR5 do not impact the ability of MYC to bind naked DNA, but they do
prevent MYC from recognizing target genes in the context of chromatin and
from driving tumorigenesis in mice. These studies led us to propose that
the MYC-WDR5 interaction is a critical determinant in MYC target gene
recognition, in a process we refer to as “facilitated recruitment.”
In the facilitated recruitment model, the presence of WDR5 at chromatin
promotes MYC binding at certain genomic loci over others. The role of
WDR5 in target gene selection by MYC can explain much of the plasticity
in genome-wide binding patterns of MYC that have been reported, and may
provide a new avenue for therapeutically targeting MYC in cancer. Two
important questions are raised by these studies, however. How does WDR5
recognize and select its target genes? And what other functions, if any,
does WDR5 play in regulating MYC target genes? To answer these questions,
we are employing traditional and quantitative proteomics, together with
biochemical approaches, to characterize the composition and stoichiometry
of the WDR5-containing complex that associates with MYC. These studies,
still ongoing, have demonstrated that this complex is devoid of canonical
WDR5-interaction partners such as RBBP5 and HCF-1, revealing that the
function of WDR5 in this setting is distinct from its well-characterized
roles in histone modifications. We propose that the WDR5 complex that
associates with MYC on chromatin is either entirely novel, or is a
‘ghost’ complex in which select protein components have been excluded
by the direct interaction of MYC with WDR5. We continue to define the
biochemical constituents of the MYC-WDR5 complex, and will interrogate
their role in facilitated recruitment using a combination of genetic,
biochemical, and genomic, approaches.


