Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive molecular analysis of pediatric thalamic tumors.


Childhood thalamic tumors are relatively rare cancers, accounting for 5%
of all pediatric brain tumors and categorized as midline gliomas such as
diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas (DIPGs). We and others have shown that
mutations in genes encoding for histone 3.3 (H3F3A), histone 3.2
(HIST2H3C) and histone 3.1 (HIST1H3B) along with their obligate partner
mutations are the major driver mutations in DIPGs. Where recent studies
have identified major histone partner mutations associated with DIPGs,
more research is required to provide a clear landscape of genomic
aberrations associated with thalamic tumors. We hypothesize that
comprehensive whole genome sequence, methylation and proteome analysis of
a large cohort of thalamic tumors will map differentially regulated
pathways and identify potential novel driver and obligate partner
mutations associated with thalamic gliomas. We have established a cohort
(CNHS and CBTTC) of 128 thalamic specimens, including 56 pediatric and
adolescent primary thalamic tumors with median age at diagnosis of 5.6
years (range 0-20 years); 40 normal controls with matched age and gender;
and 32 midline tumors with potential thalamic involvement with median age
at diagnosis of 7.6 years (range 0-19 years). Our cohort of primary
thalamic tumors contained 31 (55.3%) and 19 (33.9%) tumors reviewed as
high and low grade gliomas, respectively. From our midline tumors with
potential thalamic involvement, 22 (68.7%) were classified as primary
DIPG and 10 (31.2%) were other midline gliomas. Where available, MRI
reviews and histopathological analysis were performed. Preliminary
results showed that 7 of the extended tumors presented hypercellularity
and positive histone 3 K27M staining, confirming that these tumors in
fact extended to the thalamus as MRI showed. Additionally, Whole Exome
Sequencing (WES) from one DIPG sample extending to the thalamus showed
the same mutations found on the primary pons tumor: H3.1 K27M; ACVR1
G328V; PIK3CA H1047R; MAX R51Q and PTEN A126S. The remaining primary and
extended thalamic tumors will be analyzed by WES to understand the
molecular changes associated with this disease. In addition to our
results, we analyzed the genomic landscape from pediatric thalamic tumors
previously published (188), showing H3.3/H3.1 K27M (51%); BRAF (10.6%)
and TP53 (8%) as the most frequent mutations among thalamic high and low
grade astrocytomas. Further studies will allow us to compare
comprehensive molecular analysis of thalamic tumors (primary and
metastatic) and non-thalamic midline tumors (specimen and data already in
hand) and identify similarities and differences in genomic, epigenomic
and proteomic expression pattern which may guide a better
characterization of thalamic tumor as a separate entity.


