Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sustained tumor regressions and significant improvements in
therapeutic index for a lead monomethyl auristatin E nanoparticle-drug
conjugate, CRLX701, with the potential for improved anticancer effects.


Cerulean Pharma Inc. creates nanoparticle-drug conjugates (NDCs) designed
to significantly mitigate a payload’s limitations by providing
sustained drug delivery to the tumor and superior therapeutic index
through controlled release kinetics. By conjugating drug payloads to our
novel β-cyclodextrin-PEG (CDP) copolymer through linker strategies that
allow modulation of release and pharmacokinetics (PK), we provide
advantages over entrapped nanoparticle strategies, e.g., polymeric
nanoparticles and liposomes. Cerulean has two NDCs in the clinic, CRLX101
and CRLX301, evidencing the translatability of our technology. CRLX101
has been dosed in over 400 patients and CRLX301 is in an ongoing Phase
1/2a trial. A key and differentiating feature of our NDC platform is our
linker technology, which is tailored for an optimal fit with the active
pharmaceutical ingredient (API) conjugation functionality of the drug
payloads we incorporate into NDCs and customizable to achieve desired
drug release profiles. This linker technology works for most conjugatable
APIs that can be linked through alcohol, carboxylic acid, amine, amide
and urea functionality to our CDP polymer. To illustrate the capabilities
of our NDC platform we will present the biological impact of a series of
monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE)-containing NDCs. MMAE belongs to the
dolastatin family of natural cytotoxic pseudopeptides, demonstrating
potent disruption of tubulin polymerization and excellent in vitro
anti-cancer properties. However, because of its toxicity MMAE cannot be
used as a drug on its own. Our novel linkers provided the synthesized
MMAE NDCs with sustained and controlled release kinetics, targeting low
release rates (0.4-13%) to minimize toxicity of the MMAE drug payload.
Subsequent PK studies revealed that our optimized NDC, CRLX701,
demonstrated a superior in vivo release profile compared to our other
tested MMAE NDCs, with high released drug tumor levels (31% of total drug
in tumor) and low released drug plasma levels (0.16% of total drug in
plasma). CRLX701 demonstrated greater tolerability compared to MMAE with
an 8-fold increase in mouse maximum tolerated dose (MTD) for the NDC. At
this MTD, CRLX701 was projected to have a 4-fold increase in released
drug tumor levels over MMAE. Indeed, this improved tumor PK for CRLX701
translated into improved efficacy in a human prostate DU-145 xenograft
model, in which sustained tumor regressions (6 of 8 cures) were observed
for CRLX701 (4 mpk, qwx2) compared to reduced and unsustained efficacy
for MMAE (0.5 mpk, qwx2) at MTD doses. Cerulean continues to expand its
platform through the development of new and emerging capabilities,
including the conjugation of multiple payloads to a single NDC and the
development of antibody-conjugated NDCs, to treat patients living with
cancer.


