Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eribulin is a novel TERT-targeting inhibitor that penetrates into
intracerebrally grown glioblastomas and suppresses their growth in mice.


[Introduction] No effective molecular targeting therapy has been
clinically developed for patients with glioblastoma (GBM) despite of
intense genome analysis. Approximately 60-80% of GBM harbor mutations in
the promoter region of TERT that leads to its upregulation, making it the
most common single genetic abnormalities in GBM. TERT, a
reverse-transcriptase subunit of telomerase, has been an attractive
candidate for therapy target because of their observed upregulation in a
wide variety of cancers, including GBMs, a phenomenon that presumably
helps maintain telomeres for their indefinite proliferation. It has been
reported recently that TERT has an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP)
activity, with which TERT is involved in maintenance of stem cell
phenotype and mitotic progression. We have previously identified eribulin
as a specific inhibitor of RdRP activity of TERT through drug screening
and shown that eribulin suppressed growth of ovarian cancers with high
TERT expression. In order to investigate an efficacy of eribulin as a
novel TERT-targeted therapy against GBM, we investigated the antitumor
effect of eribulin in cultured cell and brain tumor model using GBM cell
lines.

[Methods] The TERT promoter status was examined in 20 glioma cell lines.
Seven cell lines were subjected to in vitro cytotoxicity assay. U87MG was
either subcutaneously or intracranially transplanted in athymic mice.
Tissue or plasma concentration of eribulin was measured by LC-MS/MS.

[Results] All GBM cell lines tested that harbored TERT promoter mutations
including U87MG, U251MG, U118MG as well as several patient-derived
glioblastoma sphere culture cells were highly sensitive to eribulin, IC50
below 1nM. Intraperitoneal administration of eribulin completely
suppressed the growth of U87MG subcutaneous tumor in nude mice, and the
RdRP activities in treated tumors were significantly decreased in a
dose-dependent manner. In the brain tumor model, a high concentration of
eribulin was detected in the brain tumor tissues as early as 15 minutes
after intravenous injection of eribulin, which remained stable even 24
hours later when the plasma concentration of eribulin became
undetectable. Finally, intraperitoneal administration of eribulin
significantly prolonged the survival of mice with intracerebrally
transplanted U87MG xenograft (p[Results] All GBM cell lines tested that
harbored TERT promoter mutations including U87MG, U251MG, U118MG as well
as several patient-derived glioblastoma sphere culture cells were highly
sensitive to eribulin, IC50 below 1nM. Intraperitoneal administration of
eribulin completely suppressed the growth of U87MG subcutaneous tumor in
nude mice, and the RdRP activities in treated tumors were significantly
decreased in a dose-dependent manner. In the brain tumor model, a high
concentration of eribulin was detected in the brain tumor tissues as
early as 15 minutes after intravenous injection of eribulin, which
remained stable even 24 hours later when the plasma concentration of
eribulin became undetectable. Finally, intraperitoneal administration of
eribulin significantly prolonged the survival of mice with
intracerebrally transplanted U87MG xenograft (p<0.001).

[Conclusion] Our results showed that eribulin efficiently transfers into
brain tumor tissues and has a strong antitumor effect against GBM cells
through inhibition of RdRP activity. Eribulin thus appears to be a
promising novel TERT-targeting therapeutic agent against GBM. A clinical
trial is being scheduled.


