Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral administration of a TLR9-adjuvanted nanoparticle
cancer vaccine stimulates more effective immunity in both injected and
un-injected tumor sites compared to subcutaneous administration.


Therapeutic success of a cancer vaccine requires substantial expansion of
vaccine-primed CTL and efficient differentiation to polyfunctional T
cells capable of migrating from the site of vaccination to metastatic
sites. We have evaluated the tumor itself as a potential site of
vaccination, compared to vaccination at subcutaneous sites distant from
the tumor. For vaccination, we have developed a highly efficient
nanoparticle platform comprised of multiple copies of a CpG-rich
oligonucleotide (a TLR9 agonist) and long peptide tumor antigens, both
covalently linked to the sucrose polymer Ficoll. Multiple peptide
antigens where studied, including ovalbumin and a long peptide comprising
epitopes from three melanocyte differentiation antigens. In all of these
models, intratumoral vaccination was superior to subcutaneous vaccination
for elimination of both injected tumors and, more importantly, distant
site skin and lung metastases. Intratumoral vaccination substantially
increased the magnitude of the systemic CTL response measured in the
blood and in the spleen and enhanced capacity cell homing to distant site
tumors. A greater fraction of tumor-antigen specific CD8+ T cells
generated in the tumor were polyfunctional, expressing both IFN-γ and
TNF-α. They were also less exhausted as measured by decreased overall
PD-1 levels, increased T bet and the increased number of PD-1+ cells that
retained cytotoxicity and proliferative capacity. Intratumoral
vaccination also induced spread of the CD8+ T cell response to tumor
antigens not included in the vaccine. These results demonstrate that
direct intratumoral immunization with peptide antigens combined with a
strong TLR9-activating adjuvant significantly increases the magnitude and
quality of vaccine-primed CTL and enhances control of metastatic disease.


