Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: B lymphocytes promote upregulation of an IL-1-NfkB dependent
signaling and increase invasiveness of triple negative breast cancer.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive form of breast
cancer that progresses quickly from a non-invasive carcinoma in situ to
an invasive state. Chronic inflammation associated to humoral immune
responses has been found to promote aggressiveness in a number of solid
tumor types. In breast cancer, B lymphocytes are associated with
microinvasive disease and correlate with expression of inflammatory
genes. The purpose of our work is to study the impact of B lymphocytes on
the tumor microenvironment and increased invasiveness of TNBC cells.
Through real-time PCR, we demonstrate that co-culture of B lymphocytes
and TNBC cells leads to increased mRNA levels of IL1β and its downstream
target interleukin 8 (IL8) in both B lymphocytes and in TNBC cells.
Western Blot analysis shows that co-culture also leads to increased
phosphorylation of p65, indicating IL-1 β activation of NFκB signaling.
Additionally, co-culture of B lymphocytes with TNBC cells leads to
increased expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and cellular
invasion through a matrigel invasion chamber. Gelatin zymography reveals
increased functional MMP2 and MMP9 in tumor cell supernatant following
co-culture with B lymphocytes. To complement our in vitro studies, we
examined the presence of CD20+ B cells and expression of inflammatory
cytokines IL-1β and IL-8 by immunohistochemistry in serial sections of
tissue microarrays from patients with estrogen receptor (ER) positive and
negative ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and invasive carcinoma. Large
areas of densely populated B cells were observed in ER-DCIS and in
invasive TNBC compared to ER+ DCIS. Furthermore, in ER- DCIS and TNBC,
both B lymphocytes and tumor cells are found to express IL1β whereas IL8
is found more specifically to be expressed by tumor cells. Our findings
support the hypothesis that B lymphocytes promote a chronic inflammatory
environment leading to increased invasion of TNBC cells.


