Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: β-arrestin 2 mediates tumor growth and metastasis in renal cell
carcinoma cells.


Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC) is one of the most lethal urological cancers
worldwide, with incidence and mortality rates increasing in the past two
decades. The disease does not present early clinical symptoms and is
commonly diagnosed at the metastatic stage, leaving the 5-year survival
rate at ≈ 10-20%. For a wide array of neoplasms, many key molecular
determinants involved in mediating the process of tumor cell growth,
invasion, and colonization at a secondary site (i.e. metastasis) have
been reported. However, few molecular predictors have been identified for
RCC, rendering the mechanism(s) underlying RCC metastases poorly
understood. This results in the lack of effective treatment for patients
with advanced RCC.

G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and their effectors, such as the
arrestin proteins, have been implicated in tumor growth, metastasis, and
angiogenesis. Arrestin proteins are well known for their function in the
desensitization and trafficking of GPCRs, but have also been implicated
in unique signaling pathways to regulate fundamental cellular functions,
including cell cycle progression, cell migration, and survival.
Furthermore, arrestin involvement has been identified in a number of
breast, colorectal, lung, and hematological malignancies. However, the
role of arrestin proteins in RCC is yet to be determined. Our preliminary
data show that β-arrestin 2 (βarr2) protein levels correlate with
growth and metastatic potential in several RCC cell lines, including ACHN
and SN12C. We hypothesize that βarr2 regulates RCC tumor progression,
specifically through involvement in proliferation, invasion, and
metastatic processes. To test our hypothesis, we used genetic-based loss
of function approaches such as interfering RNA and CRISPR/Cas9. βarr2
knockdown results indicated a role in RCC malignancy as it significantly
reduces the migration and invasion of RCC cell lines in vitro. βarr2
knockout (KO) impaired 3D spheroid formation of these cells and induced
morphological changes compared to control cells as observed under
confocal microscopy imaging. Moreover, epithelial marker E-cadherin
expression levels were elevated while mesenchymal markers twist1, twist2
and vimentin levels were decreased in the βarr2 KO cells compared to
control, indicating a mesenchymal to epithelial transition. In vivo data
support our hypothesis that βarr2 plays a critical role in tumor growth
and metastasis. Our data suggests a role for βarr2 in RCC malignancy and
present a possible target in development of therapies for patients with
advanced RCC.


