Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquisition of chemoresistance to mTORC1 inhibition due to
activation of the GSK-3 β/4EBP1 pathway might predict poor prognosis of
mRCC patients.


Background: PI3K/Akt/mTORC1 signaling pathway is aberrantly activated in
renal cell carcinoma (RCC). We previously demonstrated that glycogen
synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β) positively regulated RCC proliferation.
Herein, we aimed to investigate how the mTORC1 downstream substrate 4EBP1
is directly regulated by GSK-3β leading to acquisition of clinical
chemoresistance to mTORC1 inhibitor (mTORi). Methods: The expression and
phosphorylation of molecules in the subcellular pathways were examined by
immunoblotting in surgically resected RCC tissues and human RCC cell
lines including ACHN. Rapamycin-resistant ACHN cells (ACHN/RR) were
generated by chronic exposure to an mTORi, rapamycin. Cell viability was
investigated by MTS assay. The direct role of GSK-3β in regulating 4EBP1
was evaluated by an in vitro kinase assay. Pharmacological inhibition of
GSK-3β, PI3K/Akt/mTORC1 pathway, and mTORC1 was achieved by treatment
with AR-A014418, LY294002, and rapamycin, respectively. The effects of
drug combination were determined using CompuSyn software. GSK-3β
expression was evaluated in pathological RCC tissues obtained by
nephrectomy from patients with metastatic RCC (mRCC), nine of whom were
treated with mTORi as systemic therapies. GSK-3β expression was
immunohistochemically graded as high and low expression using a
semi-quantitative method based on positive staining intensity. Survival
intervals were evaluated using the Kaplan-Meier method and log-rank test.
Significance level was set as 0.05 in statistical analysis using a
freeware R. Results: Inhibition of PI3K/Akt/mTORC1 pathway and mTORi
treatment sufficiently decreased pS6RP, but only moderately decreased
p4EBP1. In contrast to the effect of rapamycin, AR- A014418 remarkably
inhibited cell proliferation, and rapidly suppressed p4EBP1 in ACHN and
ACHN/RR. In vitro kinase assays showed that recombinant GSK-3β
phosphorylated recombinant 4EBP1 at Thr37, Thr46, Thr70 and Ser65, and
these phosphorylations were blocked by GSK-3 inhibitor. A combination of
AR- A014418 and rapamycin produced an additive effect at lower
concentrations, and were antagonistic at higher concentrations.
Immunoblotting demonstrated that 4EBP1 and p4EBP1 expression in RCC
tissues was positively correlated with GSK-3β expression. Overall
survival was significantly short in patients with high GSK-3β
expression, compared with those having low expression (n = 25 and 14,
respectively, p = 0.04). In addition, high GSK-3β expression in tumors
tended to shorten progression-free intervals in mRCC patients treated
with mTORi. Conclusions: High GSK-3ββ expression and direct
GSK-3β/4EBP1 pathway can be a key mechanism for RCC acquiring clinical
chemoresistance to mTORCi. Activation of the direct pathway might be
predictive of poor prognosis of mRCC patients.


