Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The capacity of high-grade serous ovarian cancer cells to form
spontaneous multicellular structures (SMCS) in vitro predicts their in
vivo tumorigenicity.


High grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is the most frequent
histopathological subtype among epithelial ovarian cancers (OC). While an
increase in concentration of CA125 in the blood anticipates clinical
remission following standard of care, we lack biomarker/s to diagnose
early disease stage or predict progression speed. In this work we
question whether the capacity of HGSOC cells to form Spontaneous
Multi-Cellular Structures (SMCS) when incubated under culture conditions
that promote, not prevent, adherence to a plastic surface, correlates
with their degree of tumorigenicity. We studied 3 HGSOC cell lines
developed from the same patient’s ascites: longitudinally along disease
progression—established at platinum-sensitive relapse (PEO1); from
further progressive disease 10 months (mo.) later (PEO4); and after
failure to respond to high-dose cisplatin 3 mo. later (PEO6). We noticed
all cell types developed an adherent phenotype and a differential
capacity to form SMCS. This capacity was more evident in PEO6 cells
having high SMCS forming ability, followed by PEO4 cells denoting some
SMCS forming capacity, while PEO1 cells depicted no apparent capability
to form SMCS. Next, 2x106 PEO1, PEO4 or PEO6 cells were implanted into
the abdominal cavity of nude mice; the animals were sacrificed either
after having met an end-of-wellness endpoint criterion, or after a
maximum of 14 mo. if no such criteria were met. PEO6-injected mice
reached the humane endpoint due to accumulation of ascites 6-7 mo.
following injection, and presented discrete yet visible solid tumors in
the omentum, pancreatic-spleen region, liver base and diaphragm. Animals
injected with PEO4 or PEO1 cells, however, did not develop any apparent
disease 14 mo. following injection. Yet, when a 10-fold higher load of
PEO4 cells but not PEO1 cells (i.e., 20x106) were injected, animals met
euthanasia criteria due to ascites accumulation 6 mo. later and displayed
macroscopic disease similar to that caused by 1/10 of the load of their
successors (PEO6 cells) within the same timeframe. Furthermore, the
anatomical localization and histopathological aspect of the lesions
generated with PEO6 cells were similar from that generated with PEO4
cells, suggesting that the more aggressive PEO6 cells were likely
present, although in fewer quantities, within the less aggressive PEO4
cell population. Our data demonstrate, then, that the in vitro SMCS
forming capacity of HGSOC cells has a positive correlation to their
capacity to sicken the animals. Moreover, this study suggests that the in
vitro SMCS forming capacity of epithelial OC cells obtained from ascites
of patients diagnosed with HGSOC may be used to predict their
aggressiveness and, consequently, guide prognosis.


