Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: YAP1-mediated circadian oscillation in sarcoma.


Soft tissue sarcomas have presented a unique challenge to researchers due
to their heterogeneity. One common mechanism underlying more than 25% of
diagnosed sarcomas is the deregulation of the Hippo pathway, a critical
signaling cascade that responds to cell contact inhibition, among other
factors, and negatively regulates cell proliferation. In quiescent cells
the pathway remains “on,” which maintains activation of a kinase
cascade that phosphorylates and degrades YAP1. However, inactivation of
the pathway stabilizes YAP1 allowing it to translocate to the nucleus and
activate transcription of pro-proliferative gene targets. Microarray
analysis of muscle tissue from the LSL-KrasG12D/+;Trp53fl/fl (KP) mouse
model of undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS) revealed that YAP1
deletion (KPY) reduces cell proliferation and increases expression of
circadian rhythm genes including PER1. UPS is a commonly diagnosed and
aggressive type of muscle-derived sarcoma. The KP model recapitulates
human UPS morphologically and histologically, as well as by gene
expression profiling. Although PER1 has primarily been characterized as a
negative regulator of the circadian clock, upregulation of PER1 is known
to modulate the G2/M cell cycle checkpoint at both the protein and mRNA
level independent of p53. However, our findings represent a novel link
between the circadian clock and the hippo pathway. Notably, deletion of
YAP1 in KP tumors leads to a statistically significant 2.5 fold increase
in expression of PER1. The study has two specific aims: 1) to identify
the YAP1-dependent function of PER1 in sarcoma and 2) determine whether
YAP1 directly or indirectly regulates PER1. We have validated the
microarray results in KP tumor derived cell lines as well as in KP and
KPY tumor tissue. I have also confirmed PER1 suppression in KP cells
under YAP1 short hairpin RNA conditions. Our lab has previously observed
that treatment with epigenetic modulating drugs JQ1, a BET inhibitor, and
SAHA, an HDAC inhibitor, significantly decreased sarcoma growth in vivo
and in vitro when administered alone and had an additive effect when
combined. These effects can be explained in part by the finding that
treatment with these inhibitors significantly reduces YAP1 expression.
Under these conditions, as well as YAP1 knockdown conditions, I
demonstrated via qRT-PCR and western blot that PER1 is significantly
increased at both the protein and transcriptional levels in KP cells.
Additionally, preliminary evidence from an MTT proliferation assay showed
loss of PER1 increased sarcoma cell proliferation. Further supporting the
hypothesis that PER1 modulation impacts sarcoma proliferation, it has
been reported that MyoD, the master regulator of muscle cell
differentiation, is itself a clock-controlled gene. Together, these
results suggest that YAP1 represses PER1 expression in sarcoma, and that
epigenetic treatments can cause re-expression of PER1 which functions to
inhibit cell proliferation and may promote differentiation.


