Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved detection of cancer specific serum exosomal aspartyl
(asparaginyl) beta hydroxylase (HAAH).


By means of an ELISA, we have found the pan-cancer biomarker HAAH to be
closely associated with serum exosomes primarily in cancers of the
breast, lung, colon, and prostate. This new understanding of the HAAH
target has led to a dramatically improved serological detection assay,
and in turn diagnostic reagent kit. In keeping with the multivalent
particulate nature of exosomes, appropriately reformatting the ELISA
assay has yielded a simplified so-called simultaneous-homologous format.
Currently in this format, a single monoclonal anti-HAAH antibody (FB50)
serves both as microplate capture and as a biotinylated detector. All
reagents, including peroxidase-streptavidin, are co-incubated in the
FB50- coated microplate simultaneously with serum samples, in the absence
of intervening sequential steps.

This considerably shorter exosome-enabled ELISA format requires half the
time and yields generally on average a two-fold or higher increase in
detection of HAAH. This format was evaluated with over 100 banked serum
samples from several early stage cancers. While increasing the
sensitivity for HAAH in cancer samples, the improved detection and
performance has not caused any undesirable increases in false positives
among more than 30 normal serum samples from healthy subjects. The
reagent kit components include recombinant HAAH calibrators, positive
/negative controls, vialed detection reagents and a Mylar packaged FB50
pre-coated microplate. The simplified reagent kit format has yielded
close inter-operator and day to day trending consistency with a limit of
detection (LOD) of 3 ng/mL.

Recognizing the exosomal nature of the HAAH target has resulted in some
changes in blood sample procurement, sample processing, and sample
shipping. Such field testing of the HAAH reagent kit was recently done
with serum samples from 48 high risk or mildly symptomatic volunteers
with general concerns about cancer. Upon testing these samples 9 had an
HAAH level greater than 3.0 ng/ mL (range 4.2 to 116.7) and 39 had less
than 3.0 ng/ mL. Based upon the post-analysis diagnostic determination,
there were two false negatives and one false positive, hence an overall
accuracy of 93.8%.


