Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct genomic landscape of upper urinary tract urothelial
carcinoma.


Backgrounds:

Upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC) is relatively rare,
accounting for 5-10% of urothelial malignancies with frequent multifocal
development. To clarify distinct characteristics of UTUC, we
comprehensively investigated the genetic alterations of this disease.

Materials & methods:

Surgical specimens of UTUC and matched normal samples were obtained from
99 patients with various stages who underwent nephroureterectomy, and
subjected to whole exome and RNA sequencing. We compared our results in
UTUC with datasets previously reported in bladder urothelial carcinoma
(BUC). Mutations in apparently normal urothelial epithelia in 5 cases
were also interrogated.

Results:

Genetic alterations were most frequently observed in TERT promoter (51%
of cases), followed by KMT2D (48%), FGFR3 (44%), CDKN2A (42%), TP53
(31%), and RAS pathway (HRAS/KRAS/NRAS, 21%). More than 95% of cases
harbored either TP53/MDM2, FGFR3, or RAS pathway mutations in an almost
mutually exclusive manner, based on which UTUCs are classified into 3
distinct subgroups with unique molecular and clinical features;
FGFR3-mutated tumors showed a significantly better postoperative overall
survival than those with TP53/MDM2 (pGenetic alterations were most
frequently observed in TERT promoter (51% of cases), followed by KMT2D
(48%), FGFR3 (44%), CDKN2A (42%), TP53 (31%), and RAS pathway
(HRAS/KRAS/NRAS, 21%). More than 95% of cases harbored either TP53/MDM2,
FGFR3, or RAS pathway mutations in an almost mutually exclusive manner,
based on which UTUCs are classified into 3 distinct subgroups with unique
molecular and clinical features; FGFR3-mutated tumors showed a
significantly better postoperative overall survival than those with
TP53/MDM2 (p<0.001) and RAS pathway (p=0.010) lesions. KMT2D mutations
were common in patients with TP53, MDM2, and FGFR3 alterations, but rare
in those with RAS pathway alterations.

Mutation patterns were compared between different urothelial cancers with
regard to their location. Despite common genes affected, their mutation
frequencies were substantially different; KMT2D mutations were more
frequent in UTUC, while RB1 alterations were more prevalent in BUC. In
addition, KMT2D mutations were significantly more common in UTUCs in the
ureter than those in renal pelvis (85% vs. 35%, pMutation patterns were
compared between different urothelial cancers with regard to their
location. Despite common genes affected, their mutation frequencies were
substantially different; KMT2D mutations were more frequent in UTUC,
while RB1 alterations were more prevalent in BUC. In addition, KMT2D
mutations were significantly more common in UTUCs in the ureter than
those in renal pelvis (85% vs. 35%, p<0.0001). UTUC showed 4 predominant
mutation signatures; age-related, APOBEC, Transcriptional coupled repair
(TCR), and mismatch repair (MMR) associated ones. Among these, TCR and
MMR signatures were more specific to UTUC, although the latter is only
detected in 4 hypermutated cases with biallelic MMR-gene deficiencies.

In the analysis of normal ureter tissues (N=25 from 5 patients), driver
mutations were identified in 6 samples from 2 patients. In one case,
tumor and normal samples shared 10-42 mutations, indicating that the
cancer evolved within a background of clonal precancerous proliferation
in apparently normal epithelia. By contrast, in the other case, none of
the mutations were shared between tumors and normal epithelia, suggesting
the presence of a field effect on urothelial carcinogenesis.

Conclusions:

UTUC tumors are classified into 3 molecularly and clinically distinct
subtypes based on the status of mutations in TP53/MDM2, FGFR3, and RAS
pathway. Depending on their location, urothlial cancers have different
genetic backgrounds, where a field effect unique to urothelial epithelia
might contribute to multifocal occurrence of UTUC.


