Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bortezomib enhances CD8+ T Lymphocyte antitumor effector function:
Potential mechanism(s) via notch regulation.


The immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment disturbs host antitumor
immunity by multiple mechanisms including interference with the Notch
system, which is important for various metazoan cell fate decisions and
hematopoietic cell differentiation and function. We observed that
treatment with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib in mice bearing
various solid tumors resulted in an upregulated expression of various
Notch signaling components in lymphoid tissues, thereby increasing CD8+ T
lymphocyte IFNγ secretion and expression of effector molecules, perforin
and granzyme B, as well as the T-box transcription factor eomesodermin.
Of note, bortezomib reversed tumor-induced downregulation of Notch
receptors, Notch1 and Notch2, as well as increased the levels of cleaved
Notch intracellular domain (NICD) and downstream targets Hes1 and Hey1 in
tumor-draining CD8+ T cells. Moreover, bortezomib promoted CD8+ T cell
nuclear factor-κB (NFκB) activity by increasing the total and
phosphorylated levels of the IκB kinase and IκBα as well as the
cytoplasmic and nuclear levels of phosphorylated p65. Even when we
blocked NFκB activity by Bay-11-7082, or NICD cleavage by γ-secretase
inhibitor, bortezomib significantly increased expression of Notch Hes1
and Hey1 genes as well as perforin, granzyme B and eomesodermin in
activated CD8+ T cells. Data suggest that bortezomib can rescue
tumor-induced dysfunction of CD8+ T cells by its intrinsic stimulatory
effects promoting NICD-NFκB crosstalk. We are also elucidating
components of microRNA regulation affecting NICD-NFκB crosstalk. Our
preliminary data suggest that bortezomib is also able to positively
regulate miR-155 expression in CD8+ T cells from mice bearing tumor. As
well as, miR-155 suppression downregulates bortezomib-induced increase in
Notch target genes in T cells. We are currently investigating alternative
proteasome inhibitors in order to understand whether bortezomib’s
effect on miR-155 expression in CD8+ T cells is specific to bortezomib or
primarily conducive to a proteasome inhibition effect. These findings
provide novel insights on using bortezomib not only as an agent to
sensitize tumors to cell death, but also to provide
lymphocyte-stimulatory effects, thereby overcoming immunosuppressive
actions of tumor on antitumor T cell functions.


