Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A model for capturing and integrating complex molecular
alterations related to clinically relevant efficacy evidence.


The ability to capture data relevant to different types of
oncology-related variations, including single nucleotide variations,
deletions, insertions, copy number variations, and fusions in a single
system is crucial to a comprehensive understanding of cancer biology.
However, collectively linking these varied types of molecular alterations
to capture their compound impact to clinically relevant efficacy evidence
within a database can prove challenging. Thus, we have built the JAX
Clinical Knowledgebase (JAX-CKB), a flexible relational database that
allows curation of complex molecular profiles and provides the ability to
associate these profiles with documented efficacy evidence, thereby
providing a more detailed overview of therapeutic relevance. To
demonstrate the utility of creating complex molecular signatures in
relation to efficacy evidence, the JAX-CKB was queried to first determine
the overall degree of efficacy evidence content related to complex
profiles. Additionally, two specific types of complex molecular profiles
were queried, which included EML4-ALK plus a missense mutation(s) and
BRAF V600E plus any type of molecular alteration(s). Within the JAX-CKB,
there are 1,383 unique efficacy evidence lines linked to complex
molecular profiles. The complex molecular profiles consisting of EML4-ALK
and one or more additional missense mutations were associated with 174
unique efficacy evidence lines. Of the 174 lines, 69 were annotated with
a resistant response type, while 68 were annotated with a sensitive
response type. The combination of BRAF V600E with one or more molecular
alterations was linked to 229 unique efficacy evidence lines. The
majority of the lines, 118, were specific to a resistant response type
and 83 were associated with sensitivity. Comprehensive genomic profiling
of cancer patient samples can often reveal complex molecular signatures.
The JAX-CKB is an inclusive knowledgebase that allows one to interpret
these complex signatures and rapidly identify appropriate targeted
therapies, which could be critical in a clinical setting.


