Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RBP2 promotes tamoxifen resistance by altering ER function and
activating IGF1R and EGFR/HER2 signaling in histone methylation-dependent
and -independent manners in breast cancer.


Retinoblastoma binding protein 2 (RBP2, also known as JARID1A), a member
of the JARID1 family of histone H3 lysine K4 demethylases, has been
considered to have an oncogenic potential in several types of human
cancers including breast cancer. Although physical interaction between
RBP2 and estrogen receptor (ER), a crucial factor for hormone-dependent
breast cancer, has been implied, the role of RBP2 in ER-positive (ER+)
breast cancer remains largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate that RBP2 is
a novel therapeutic target for tamoxifen resistance in ER+ breast cancer
as an ER co-regulator and an activator of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
signaling. In large cohorts of breast cancer patients including METABRIC,
high expression of RBP2 was associated with poor response to tamoxifen
therapy in ER+ breast cancer. Consistently, RBP2 induced tamoxifen
resistance in ER+ breast cancer both in vitro and in vivo. Using
RNA-sequencing analysis, we identified that many RBP2 target genes are
overlapped with ER-dependent- and tamoxifen resistance-associated genes.
Mechanistically, RBP2 induced not only hyperactivation of ER-dependent
transcription but also estrogen agonist activity of tamoxifen-bound ER
via the interaction with ER, thus increasing the expression of NRIP1, a
co-repressor of ER. RBP2 also formed a transcriptional repressive complex
with ER, NRIP1, and HDAC1 to induce H3K4 demethylation-mediated
epigenetic gene silencing of IGFBP4 and IGFBP5, leading to the activation
of IGF1R and its downstream, PI3K/AKT pathway. Furthermore, enhanced AKT
phosphorylation by RBP2 was mediated by not only IGF1R but also EGFR/HER2
signaling via increasing the stability of EGFR and HER2 proteins in a
demethylase activity-independent manner. We further confirmed that
combinational treatment with tamoxifen and PI3K inhibitor BKM120 restored
tamoxifen sensitivity in RBP2-overexpressing breast cancer. Taken
together, these findings suggest that RBP2 mediates tamoxifen resistance
in ER+ breast cancer by altering ER activity and activating IGF1R and
EGFR/HER2 signal pathways in both a histone methylation-dependent and
-independent manner. Therefore, RBP2 may be a promising prognostic marker
and therapeutic target for endocrine therapy-resistant breast cancer.


