Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitive, specific detection of Her-2 positive tumors in mice
using superparamagnetic relaxometry (SPMR).


Superparamagnetic Relaxometry (SPMR) is a non-invasive technique that
utilizes superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) detectors to
localize and quantify the magnetization of superparamagnetic iron oxide
(Fe3O4) nanoparticles (NPs) specifically bound to cancerous tumors. In an
SPMR measurement, polyethylene glycol (PEG) coated NPs are functionalized
with a tumor-targeting monoclonal antibody and injected intravenously.
NPs that reach and bind to the target tissue are measured by the MRX™
instrument, while unbound nanoparticles, such as those freely circulating
in the bloodstream, are not detected.

Here, we demonstrate the use of SPMR for specific cancer detection using
long-circulating anti-Her2 antibody conjugated PrecisionMRX® NPs in
vitro and in vivo. The stability and biofunctionality of conjugated
nanoparticles were measured by dynamic light scattering, gel
electrophoresis, and ELISA. A cell competition assay was developed to
measure specific binding of NPs to Her2 positive (BT474) and Her2
negative (MCF7) cells in vitro. Specificity was defined by the ability of
the native antibody to competitively block the binding of the anti-Her2
conjugated NPs to the Her-2 antigen expressed on the cell surface. For in
vivo studies, nude mice with xenograft BT474 tumors were intravenously
injected with anti-Her2 NPs at a dose of 20 mg/kg of body mass, while
control mice were injected with PEG only NPs. Mice were measured
individually on the MRX™ instrument at successive time points over the
course of 24 hours. At selected intervals during the 24-hour period,
blood, tumor, and organs were harvested and analyzed for SPMR signals and
anti-Her2 content.

In vitro, the anti-Her2 NPs exhibited specific binding to BT474 cells,
with little to no binding in MCF7 cells. In vivo, MRX measurements of
mice injected with anti-Her2 NPs showed a measurable magnetic signal in
the tumor that reached a near maximum approximately four hours after
injection. Conversely, mice injected with unconjugated nanoparticles had
no measurable tumor uptake. Finally, 24 hours post-injection, 4 – 8% of
NPs and anti-Her2 were measurable in the blood, indicating long-term
stability of the NP construct in circulation. Together, these results
suggest targeted delivery of conjugated NPs to cancerous tissue in vivo
and the utility of SPMR for the sensitive and specific detection of
cancer in vivo.

This work was performed, in part, at the Center for Integrated
Nanotechnologies, an Office of Science User Facility operated for the
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science. Sandia National
Laboratories is a multi-program laboratory managed and operated by Sandia
Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Corporation,
for the U.S. Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security
Administration under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000.


