Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF-B upregulates GSK3B and mediates NK dysfunction in cancer.


Transforming growth factor-B (TGF-Β) is an important regulator of
tumorigenesis. Initially, it was discovered to have anti-cancer
activities by promoting apoptosis and preventing hyperproliferation of
cells. However, abundant presence of TGF-Β in the tumor microenvironment
is known to hinder cancer eradication by suppressing anti-tumor
activities of immune cells. The molecular switches that regulate the role
of TGF-Β are not fully understood. One main target of TGF-Β-mediated
immune cell dysfunction are natural killer (NK) cells. NK cells are
innate immune cells that lyse virally-infected and cancer cells.
Recently, we have discovered that glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta
(GSK3Β) upregulation in NK cells leads to NK dysfunction. Another study
has indicated that GSK3 phosphorylates SMAD3 to inhibit TGF-B-mediated
growth dysfunction in AML12 cells. In addition, GSK3Β inhibition has
been linked to increased sensitivity of cancer cells to NK killing but
the role of GSK3Β in NK function is understudied. This study examines
how the role that GSK3Β has on TGF-B-mediated NK cell dysfunction.
Methods: NK cells were isolated from the peripheral blood of healthy
donors and expanded in vitro for 14 days. NK cells were either treated
with or without 5ng/mL TGF-Β for 72 hours, and GSK3Β expression, and
the expression of NK activating receptors was measured via flow
cytometry. In addition, GSK3B expression is abrogated using a siRNA in NK
cells. The NK cells were treated with or without TGF-Β, and NK cell
cytotoxicity is measured with a fluorometric cytotoxicity assay. Results:
TGF-Β pretreatment of NK cells led to 2-fold GSK3Β expression in NK
cells. TGF-Β pretreatment led to decreased expression of NK activating
receptors NKp46 and NKG2D. Also, TGF-Β led to decreased expression of
lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1), an adhesion molecule
necessary for NK cells to adhere to target cells prior to lysis of the
target cells. TGF-B pretreatment of NK cells led to 33.3% reduced killing
of both leukemic and solid tumor targets. Pharmacologic and genetic
abrogation of GSK3 minimized TGF-B-mediated NK dysfunction as measured by
calcein-AM based cytotoxicity assays. Importantly, inhibiting GSK3B
activity with TGF-B treatment rescued NK cell cytotoxic function.
Discussion: Our data suggests that TGF-Β leads to upregulated GSK3Β
expression, and downregulation of NK activating receptors. In addition,
TGF-B reduced NK killing of cancer cells. We believe that TGF-Β-mediated
NK dysfunction is facilitated by GSK3Β upregulation. Further studies are
underway to determine how TGF-Β affects the expression of other NK
receptors, and to elucidate the mechanism by which TGF-Β directs GSK3Β
upregulation.


