Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New concepts for quantifying the benefits of mono and combination
therapy in an era of big data.


I will describe new (unpublished) approaches to quantifying drug response
at two points in the drug development pipeline: pre-clinical studies in
cell lines and clinical trials of combination therapies in patient
populations. Drug sensitivity and resistance in cell lines is
conventionally quantified by IC50 or Emax values, but these measures
suffer from a fundamental flaw when applied to growing cells: they are
highly sensitive to cell division number, which varies with cell line,
experimental condition, seeding density etc. The dependency of IC50 and
Emax on division rate creates artefactual correlations between genotype
and drug sensitivity while obscuring important biological insights and
interfering with biomarker discovery. I will describe alternative growth
rate inhibition (GR) metrics that are insensitive to division number and
can directly measure both endpoint sensitivity and adaptive drug
resistance. Theory and experiments show that GR50 and GRmax are superior
to IC50 and Emax for assessing the effects of drugs in dividing cells. GR
metrics promise to improve our ability to score drug sensitivity in
specific-derived tumor cells, improves data reproducibility, and increase
the translational potential of pharmacogenomics data.

In patients, combination therapy improves tumor control compared to
monotherapy and the development of combinations is motivated in most
cases by pre-clinical data on synergism in cell lines. However I will
describe a different way in which combinations can provide clinical
benefit. Based on analysis of between-patient variability in existing
trial data and a large set patient derived tumor xenograft (PDX) mice
published by Gao H, Korn JM, Ferretti S, et al. (Nature medicine
2015;21:1318-25), I will argue for a simple principle: in nearly
two-thirds of cases analyzed, efficacious combinations work simply by
improving the likelihood that a tumor will experience an outlier response
to a single drug. Thus, even in the absence of additive or synergistic
tumor inhibition, combinations are generally superior to monotherapies.
Superiority by “independent action” provides a principle on which to
design new combinations and a scientific rationale for the use of
combination therapies in poorly understood cancers whenever toxicity is
acceptable.

These studies, at two different points of the drug discovery pipeline,
illustrate the value of combining new first-principles theories about
drug mechanism of action with “big data” that is increasingly
available on pre-clinical and clinical drug response. Conversely, in the
absence of conceptual innovation, we miss important mechanistic insights
hidden in existing data. The purpose of such insights, when obtained, is
drive new laboratory and real-world experiments. I will discuss how the
process of coupling computation and experimentation works in practice.


