Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The activity of the FGFR selective inhibitor Debio 1347 is
correlated with high mRNA expression.


Dysregulation of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) signaling
pathway due to receptor overexpression, gene amplification, point
mutations or fusions/chromosomal translocations is associated with cancer
development and progression.

Debio 1347 (CH5183284) is an oral selective FGFR inhibitor (FGFR1, 2 and
3) currently in clinical development. The aim of this study was to
investigate Debio 1347 activity in patient derived xenograft (PDX) mouse
models harboring diverse FGFR alterations in multiple indications.

The trial was conducted in 66 PDX models of diverse histotypes selected
according to their FGFR1, 2 and 3 alteration status. Debio 1347 was
administered orally once daily at 40 up to 80 mg/kg for 10 to 22
consecutive days (N=3/group). Tumor volume was compared to the vehicle
control group and measured by caliper twice weekly. Treatment response
was determined by relative treatment-to-control ratios (ΔT/ΔC) of which
a responding model was defined as ΔΤ/ΔC The trial was conducted in 66
PDX models of diverse histotypes selected according to their FGFR1, 2 and
3 alteration status. Debio 1347 was administered orally once daily at 40
up to 80 mg/kg for 10 to 22 consecutive days (N=3/group). Tumor volume
was compared to the vehicle control group and measured by caliper twice
weekly. Treatment response was determined by relative
treatment-to-control ratios (ΔT/ΔC) of which a responding model was
defined as ΔΤ/ΔC <0. PDX tumors were collected at the end of the
treatment period and extensively characterized using FISH, nCounter Gene
Expression and immunohistochemistry (IHC). Effect on downstream Dual
Specificity Phosphatase 6 (DUSP6) signaling was also investigated by qPCR
and RNA in situ hybridization (ISH).

Debio 1347 induced tumor regression in 33% of PDX models that exhibited a
gene copy number gain and/or the presence of a FGFR fusion gene and/or an
FGFR mutation. In addition, Debio 1347 treatment led to tumor regression
in 29% of models that did not harbor any FGFR genetic alteration. In
contrast, all models that responded to Debio 1347 were shown to display a
high expression level (mRNA) of at least one FGFR gene. These findings
suggest that high expression of at least one FGFR might be a better
predictor of sensitivity to Debio 1347 than genetic alteration.
Furthermore, response to Debio 1347 was associated with a decrease in
DUSP6 mRNA levels, suggesting that it could be a reliable pharmacodynamic
biomarker in clinical trials.

These results provide new mechanistic insights into the predictive
sensitivity to Debio 1347 and will help refine patient selection for
FGFR-targeted therapy.


