Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accumulation of a liver- and microbiome-derived metabolite in
human breast tumors is associated with patient survival.


Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women in the United States.
Gene expression profiling studies of breast tumors led to the discovery
of disease subtypes with different biologies. These studies also
described novel biomarkers for therapy response and disease survival.
However, it remains a challenge to define breast cancer biology solely
based on gene expression. Recently, metabolomics emerged as a new
discovery tool with the promise of identifying prognostic biomarkers and
targetable metabolic dependencies of cancer cells. We previously measured
the abundance of 536 metabolites in 67 breast tumor and their tumor
adjacent noncancerous tissue by untargeted mass spectrometry. In the
current study, we explored the prognostic power of the metabolome and
conducted an integrated analysis comprising of the metabolome,
transcriptome, and proteome to explore the association of metabolites
with cell systems, tumor biology, and disease outcome. We built a
predictive model based on multivariable Cox proportional hazards using
the L1 penalized log partial likelihood (LASSO) method after
pre-selecting prognostic metabolites following cross-validation with 1000
iterations. The median C-index was 0.73, indicating a certain robustness
of metabolites as classifiers of breast cancer outcome. The models
identified five metabolites including a bile acid-related metabolite,
glycochenodeoxycholate (GCDC), as the most frequently selected features
and outcome markers among these metabolites. An increased GCDC tumor
content was associated with improved patient survival. We corroborated
the presence of GCDC and three other bile acids in the human breast
tissues using absolute measurements and confirmed their occurrence in
breast tumors. Because additional large-scale transcriptome and proteome
data were available for the same tissue samples, we further characterized
the tumors based on their GCDC abundance, which showed that cell
cycle-related pathways were enriched for differently expressed genes and
tumors with a high GCDC content tended to have a low cell proliferation
score, indicating that accumulation of GCDC leads to growth inhibition.
We also conducted a correlation analysis for the relationship between
GCDC abundance with other metabolites and identified 51 metabolites that
were significantly correlated with GCDC. In this analysis, metabolite
abundance in the sterol/steroid pathway associated most strongly with the
GCDC tissue content. Lastly, we evaluated the effect of bile acids on
breast cancer cell lines. The data showed a strong reduction of cancer
cell proliferation under bile acid treatment, consistent with the tumor
data, and distinct changes in gene expression. In conclusion, we propose
that integrated metabolomics can provide powerful prognostic information
with GCDC being a novel prognostic marker in breast cancer because
accumulation of GCDC reduces cancer cell proliferation.


