Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of tumor suppressor function of RUNX3 by miR-301a
facilitates the progression of castration resistant prostate cancer.


Treatment of prostate cancer is still clinically challenging due to lack
of reliable markers for diagnosis and prognosis. Serum prostate specific
antigen (PSA) is of limited clinical utility due to poor sensitivity and
specificity. A large number of false positives (50%) with traditional PSA
testing lead many patients to undergoing unnecessary prostate biopsy and
exposure to unnecessary risk of complications. So the goal of this study
is to identify a reliable, non-invasive biomarker that can distinguish
patients with benign, indolent and aggressive prostate cancer in various
clinical settings. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding (18 to 28
nucleotides) RNA molecules that are present in all human cells, and their
expression patterns are correlated with many cancer types, including CaP.
In our results, we found a significant differential expression (p=0.013)
of miR-301a in both tumor tissues (Gleason-6 and -7) and serum samples in
comparison to benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) or adjacent benign
samples. We observed a negative correlation between miR-301a and RUNX3
expression in human CaP samples suggesting tumor suppressive role RUNX3
might be compromised in CaP. To determine MiR-301a regulation on RUNX3,
we evaluated miR-301a and RUNX3 protein in panel of prostate cancer cell
lines, normal prostate epithelial cells and Benign Prostate Hyperplasia
(BPH). Similar results such as inverse correlation between miR-301a and
RUNX were found in cell culture models. Also, over expression of miR-301a
down regulates RUNX3 activation in prostate cancer cell lines and
silencing miR-301a expression reverts RUNX3 activation in BPH cells.
While evaluating the reporter activity of RUNX3 either by co-transfecting
with mimic or inhibitor of miR-301a in BPH and prostate cancer cells:
over expression of miR-301a down regulated RUNX3 reporter activity which
corresponded with RUNX3 protein expression. Similarly, silencing miR-301a
reverted RUNX3 promoter activity and protein expression suggesting RUNX3
is a direct target of miR-301a in CaP cells. Silencing miR-301a reverted
the pro-apoptotic function of RUNX3, results in reduced colony formation,
adhesion, invasion and migration of CaP cells. Investigating the
mechanistic link miR-301a and RUNX3 may explore whether it could
facilitate clinical decision making such as the decision to proceed with
early surgery rather than active surveillance for intermediate risk
prostate cancer patients deemed to be at high risk of progression.


