Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of common genetic variants with TMPRSS2 ERG fusion
status in prostate cancer.


Introduction and Objectives: Oncogenic activation of ERG resulting from
prevalent gene fusions is present in two thirds of prostate cancer (CaP)
patients of European Ancestry including Caucasian Americans (CA). Our
laboratory and others have recently reported that major cancer driver
genes, including ERG, show significant racial/ethnic differences in CaP
with lower frequencies in African Americans (AA), Africans and Asians.
Racial differences of CaP associated SNPs have also been extensively
described. However, there is limited data on germline association with
ERG fusion status. The goal of this study is to identify germline
molecular determinants associating with ERG status of CaP.

Methods: Blood derived genomic DNA samples were prepared from 270 AA men
and 129 CA men treated by radical prostatectomy at Walter Reed National
Military Medical Center (WRNMMC). ERG status was determined in whole
mounted prostate specimens by immuno-histochemistry (IHC) for ERG protein
expression as a surrogate for the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion. Blinded blood
samples were genotyped for SNPs on the Illumina Golden Gate platform
using Infinium Oncoarray, a 500K genome wide BeadChip kit from Illumina.
Data analysis approaches included association analyses based on logistic
regression, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Efficient Mixed-Model
Association eXpedited (EMMAX) analysis. Genotype imputation analysis is
being performed by IMPUTE2 program.

Results: After applying rigorous sample and SNP QC steps on the datasets,
SNP genotyping analysis was performed in 321 patients with 478,299 SNPs.
Logistic regression, principal component analysis by EIGENSTRAT and a
variance component approach, EMMAX analysis were performed to account for
population structure. By EMMAX we identified SNPs associated with ERG
status. The SNPs most significantly (Results: After applying rigorous
sample and SNP QC steps on the datasets, SNP genotyping analysis was
performed in 321 patients with 478,299 SNPs. Logistic regression,
principal component analysis by EIGENSTRAT and a variance component
approach, EMMAX analysis were performed to account for population
structure. By EMMAX we identified SNPs associated with ERG status. The
SNPs most significantly (<10-5) associated with ERG fusion status
included rs6698333, an intron variant of Kruppel-like factor 17 (KLF17)
and two SNPs (rs1889877, rs3798999) in the intron of adhesion G
protein-coupled receptor B3 (ADGRB3). Fine-mapping of SNPs is underway by
genotype imputation analysis (IMPUTE2) using the 1000 Genomes reference
dataset, followed by independent validation.

Conclusions: This study identified SNPs differentially associated with
ERG status of CaP, a major driver oncogene in CaP. Although the
biological significance as it relates to ERG status of CaP still needs to
be determined, these SNPs, with independent validation, may help as
markers in stratifying patients early (even before CaP is detected) for
targeted prevention and treatment options.


