Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer causation: rethinking the role of analogy.


Introduction. Fifty years has passed since the publication of Austin
Bradford Hill’s classic paper on causal inference. Much has changed in
the biomedical and public health sciences regarding cancer causation
during that half century, but Hill’s considerations (often called
“criteria”) remain durable. That said, there is a curious phenomenon
involving Hill’s seminal work that has escaped the attention of the
scientific community. His consideration of analogy—the last on his list
just after experimentation—has all but disappeared. The purpose of this
paper is to rethink and resurrect analogy as an important consideration
in causal inference in environmental epidemiology.

Methods. Given that this is a conceptual—non-quantitative—project,
the methods used are the informal logic of scientific thinking, methods
of systematic reviews, and judgment.

Results. In contemporary epidemiology, analogy is either completely
ignored (e.g. in many textbooks), equated with biologic plausibility or
coherence, or aligned with the scientist’s imagination. None of these
examples, however, capture Hill’s description of analogy which
emphasizes the contrast of two bodies of evidence. Coupled with
developments in the methods of systematic assessments of
evidence—including but not limited to meta-analysis—analogy can be
restructured as a key component of causal inference. For theoretical
support see similar methods in biomedical ethics and artificial
intelligence. Practical examples will be discussed.

Conclusions. Analogical reasoning—an updated version of analogy—can
emerge assuming the following developments: (1) a collection—a
library—of known cases of causal inference (i.e. bodies of evidence
involving established causal relationships), including, for example, the
assessments of the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) and
the National Toxicology Program (NTP), (2) a systematic process for
describing the key features of a causal relationship creating paradigm
cases, and (3) an objective comparison of a “new” body of evidence
for a putative causal relationship with a relevant paradigm case.


