Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heterogeneity of immune checkpoint expression in lung cancer
identified through rapid tissue donation.


Background: Translational research in advanced lung cancer is hindered by
the limited availability of specimens for advanced molecular techniques.
Although helpful, the standard practice to biopsy a small amount of
tissue from a single site of cancer provides limited information. We
launched a thoracic rapid tissue donation (RTD) program to enable lung
cancer research with collection of tissue at multiple tumor sites within
hours after death. Many patients chose to enroll in the RTD program as an
opportunity to contribute to cancer research. RTD tissue will support
multiple research projects, such as studying differential expression of
immune checkpoint proteins in immune oncology or understanding resistance
to targeted agents.

Methods: The RTD program for patients with stage IV lung cancer was
approved in June 2015 by the Moffitt Cancer Center institutional review
board. Tissue specimens from multiple tumor sites from consented donors
are collected rapidly (aim Methods: The RTD program for patients with
stage IV lung cancer was approved in June 2015 by the Moffitt Cancer
Center institutional review board. Tissue specimens from multiple tumor
sites from consented donors are collected rapidly (aim < 24 hours) after
death and are frozen and/or preserved in formalin. Hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) staining is performed with evaluation of the histopathology and
quality of the specimens. Immunohistochemistry is performed to evaluate
expression of immune checkpoint biomarkers (PD-L1, CTLA4, LAG3, TIM3,
BTLA, A2aR and iNOS).

Results: Between June 26, 2015 and November 16, 2016, 18 patients with
stage IV lung cancer consented to the RTD program. Post-mortem tissue has
been collected from multiple tumor sites for three cases. H&E staining of
25 tissue blocks from the first case showed minimal evidence of
post-mortem tissue damage by autolysis, confirming high RTD tissue
quality. Biomarker studies, such as immunohistochemistry for immune
checkpoints, such as PD-L1, CTLA4, LAG3, TIM3, BTLA, A2aR and iNOS are
ongoing. Preliminary analysis of PD-L1 expression in the first patient
revealed heterogeneous PD-L1 expression within and between eight tumor
sites (both lungs, liver, both kidneys, left adrenal gland, mediastinal
and retroperitoneal lymph nodes).

Conclusions: Rapid tissue donation with collection of ample post-mortem
tumor tissue is feasible and valuable for cancer research. A
heterogeneous pattern of PD-L1 immune checkpoint expression was observed
between multiple sites of tumor. Post-mortem tissue collection from
multiple tumor sites facilitates understanding changes in tumor behavior
and biomarker expression at metastatic sites, especially in the context
of treatment failures.

Acknowledgements: NIH Sponsor #R21 CA194932-01 and Tissue Core Facility
at the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute (P30-CA076292).


