Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of non-metastatic HCC patient tumors revealed the
significance of cell cycle regulation and tumor immunity in association
with overall survival and identified clinically relevant druggable
targets.


The lack of efficacious therapies have hindered the progress in improving
the survival of HCC patients worldwide. As a disease that associates with
the underlying liver injuries caused by various etiologies and remains
asymptomatic during most of its decades long progression, HCC presents
challenges to accurately depict its biological landscape and determine
suitable therapeutic intervention. An approach to tackle this issue is to
define significant biological variants that impact patient survival in
each disease stage, then attempt to chart paths of potential therapies.

To identify significant biological determinants associated with the
overall survival (OS) of early stage, non-metastatic HCC patients, we
constructed focused Nanostring panels that are represented by 1,164 genes
of validated components and transcriptional outputs of multiple signaling
pathways, cellular machineries, and tumor immunity. An unbiased analysis
of patient survival and gene transcript levels revealed four distinct
groups of genes that are significantly prognostic. The first two (Group 1
& 2) are associated with poorer prognosis when expression is high (hazard
ratio > 2), whereas the remaining two (Group 3 & 4) correspond to
significantly better OS with elevated transcript levels (hazard ratioTo
identify significant biological determinants associated with the overall
survival (OS) of early stage, non-metastatic HCC patients, we constructed
focused Nanostring panels that are represented by 1,164 genes of
validated components and transcriptional outputs of multiple signaling
pathways, cellular machineries, and tumor immunity. An unbiased analysis
of patient survival and gene transcript levels revealed four distinct
groups of genes that are significantly prognostic. The first two (Group 1
& 2) are associated with poorer prognosis when expression is high (hazard
ratio > 2), whereas the remaining two (Group 3 & 4) correspond to
significantly better OS with elevated transcript levels (hazard
ratio<0.5). Of note, Gene Set Enrichment Analyses (GSEA) clearly
indicated that while Group 2 was substantially enriched in genes
positively regulating cell cycle and cell division machinery, Group 4 was
overrepresented by genes participating in the positive modulation and
feedback mechanisms of adaptive immune response, implicating the survival
benefit of acquiring higher immunogenic tumor environment in early stage
HCC.

Searching for druggable targets associated with poorer prognosis, we
identified both EZH2 and CHEK1 as candidates from Group 2. In vitro
treatment of three HCC cell lines with EPZ-6438 (EZH2 inhibitor) or
GDC-0425 (CHEK1 inhibitor) resulted in significant modulation of H3K27me3
or pCHEK1 levels (s345) respectively. The growth of these cell lines was
also dose-dependently suppressed by each inhibitor in colony formation
assays . Furthermore, the combination of both inhibitors was able to
achieve substantial cell growth inhibition at lower concentrations,
suggesting a combinatorial effect of targeting both EZH2 and CHEK1 in HCC
cell lines. Xenograft studies are ongoing to assess in vivo efficacy of
this combination.

In conclusion, utilizing well constructed Nanostring gene panels, we
identified significant association of cell cycle machinery and adaptive
tumor immunity with HCC patient survival. Our findings not only provided
potential rationale for expand testing of cancer immunotherapies to
non-metastatic, early stage HCC, but also revealed the potential utility
of combining EZH2 and CHEK1 inhibitors to treat HCC.


