Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IDH1 mutation-inspired α-ketoglutaric acid mimics for epigenetic
therapy of higher grade gliomas.


Mutations at the active site of isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 gene (IDH1;
R132H) occur at a high frequency (>70%) early in the oncogenesis of lower
grade malignant gliomas, and result in a dramatic accumulation of the
oncometabolite D-2 hydroxyglutarate ( D-2HG), that effectively replaces
the normal metabolite α-ketoglutarate (α-KG) in cell physiology.
Surprisingly, IDH1 mutations bestow superior therapeutic responses to
alkylating agents and better patient survival. D-2HG, effectively
competes with α-KG and potently inhibits various dioxygenase reactions,
including the TET1, TET2 DNA -demethylases and histone demethylases
(5m-cytosine to 5-OH cytosine, H3-K-meX to H3-K-meX-1) thereby,
re-shaping and reprogramming the epigenetic landscape, and consequent
transcriptional silencing; the DNA repair protein O6-methlguanine DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT), which confers drug resistance is one major
target for such repression. As a novel and innovative strategy of turning
the tide against GBMs by exploiting the mechanistic aspects of the
oncometabolite, we hypothesized that D-2HG and α-KG derivatives that can
replace the natural metabolite in epigenomic dioxygenase reactions will
serve as potent anti-glioma drugs either by themselves or in combination
with the alkylating agents. To this end, we first synthesized a D-2HG
diethyl ester to enhance its cellular uptake and tested its effects on
four human brain tumor cell lines (DAOY, T98G, SF188 and UW18). This
compound, at 5-10 mM and 24 h treatments, moderately inhibited the DNA
repair activity of MGMT, increased temozolomide cytotoxicity by 1.5 to
3-fold, and induced histone H3-methylations as determined by western blot
analyses. To increase the potency and design better compounds mimicking
the oncometabolite and validate its impact on epigenesis, we synthesized
a 2,4-dimethyleneglutaric acid (DMG), a α-KG mimic with methylene groups
inserted at the C2 and C4 positions. The hydrophobic DMG ester, by
itself, was cytotoxic with IC50 values up to 500 µM against brain tumor
cell lines, however, when combined at 100 µM with TMZ resulted in a
great synergistic cell killing (generally-9 fold, but 28-fold with UW-18
GBM cells). 0.25 mM DMG inhibited the cellular MGMT activity by >80%,
induced degradation of TET1 protein and highly increased the methylation
levels of histones (H1K25me1, me2 and H2BK25me2). Currently, experiments
to determine the BBB-penetrance of DMG, its ability to induce genomic and
MGMT-specific methylations in glioma cells and GBM regression in
intracranial xenograft models developed in nude mice are underway.
Collectively, these data reveal that acute treatments of α-KG analogs
can alter the cellular epigenetic makeup in a manner ascribed to D-2HG,
and open up the much-needed novel and exciting avenues of oncometabolite
therapy for brain tumors (supported by CPRIT grants RP130266 & RP170207
to KSS).


