Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Importance of tumor microenvironment in the preclinical estrogen
receptor positive breast cancer- Primary tumor and bone metastasis models.


Estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer has ability to metastasize
to bone in high frequency. Bone is known to be fertile soil for
metastasized cancer cells to survive and in turn, metastasized tumor
cells alter normally balanced bone environment. Prevention and treatment
of bone metastasis is challenging and better understanding why bone
metastasis are resistant to current therapies is needed. Aim of the
present study was to explore the role of tumor microenvironment and
estrogen supplementation on growth of primary breast cancer tumor and
bone metastasis to establish predictive ER+ breast cancer models for drug
development.

ER+ human breast cancer MCF-7 cells were inoculated into mammary fat pad
and in the tibia of female athymic nude mice. Mice received either
hormonal supplementation (17-beta estradiol pellet, E2) or placebo. Tumor
growth was followed for 5 and 9 weeks. From one group, E2 supplementation
was removed on study week 5 and tumor growth was followed for 4 weeks.
During the study, blood samples were collected for serum steroid
concentration measurements and at the end, histopathological evaluation
and immunohistochemical (IHC) stainings were performed to examine tumor
steroid hormone receptor expression.

Orthotopic MCF-7 tumor growth was clearly hormone dependent. E2
supplementation, that increased serum estradiol for app. 3-fold,
supported tumor growth and when E2 was removed, tumor size decreased and
no tumor growth was observed thereafter. In the full absence of E2
supplement, no orthotopic tumor growth was observed. In contrast, when
MCF-7 cells were inoculated into tibia, tumor growth was observed both
with and without E2 supplement. IHC stainings confirmed orthotopic tumor
to express ER, PR and AR when animals received E2. After E2 removal,
orthotopic tumors expressed still ER and AR but no longer PR. Also
intratibial tumors expressed ER and PR in the presence of E2, but no PR
in the absence of E2 supplement. E2 is needed to support MCF-7 tumor
growth when cancer cells are inoculated orthotopically into mammary fat
pad. No orthotopic tumor growth is observed in the absence of E2
supplement. In contrast, in the bone microenvironment, MCF-7 cells form
tumor even in the absence of E2 supplement.

Results highlight importance of tumor microenvironment in the breast
cancer progression and also refer why tumor in the different sites may be
resistant to therapy. Taking together, when developing new therapies
against breast cancer, focus should be addressed not only on primary
tumor growth but also on bone metastasis where cancer cells are under
influence of bone environment.


