Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Src-met signaling confers apoptosis resistance to the combination
of BKM120 and erlotinib in head and neck cancer.


Purpose: Molecularly targeted agents will play a major role in the next
generation of personalized cancer therapies. However, intrinsic and
acquired resistance to targeted agents poses challenges to the success of
such treatments. The purpose of the current study was to investigate the
intrinsic resistance of head and neck cancer (HNC) cell lines to
apoptosis induced by the combination of EGFR inhibitor erlotinib and PI3K
inhibitor BKM120.

Methods: In a panel of 10 malignant and 1 premalignant HN cell lines, we
evaluated cell growth inhibition (by SRB assay), IC50, combination index,
dose reduction index (by CalcuSyn Software), and apoptosis (by Annexin-V
staining). Protein expression levels were measured by Western blotting.
Small molecule chemical inhibitors and siRNA-mediated knockdown
strategies were used to inactivate and shut down the expression of the
relevant proteins, respectively.

Results: Single targeting of EGFR with erlotinib or PI3K with BKM120
(pan-PI3K inhibitor) suppressed cellular growth without inducing
significant apoptosis. Co-targeting EGFR and PI3K demonstrated in vitro
synergy in all except one cell line (based on combination index and dose
reduction index) and more effectively inhibited HNC xenograft growth in
vivo. The combination of erlotinib and BKM120 induced variable apoptosis:
some cell lines were very sensitive (Tu686, 686LN, 93-VU-147T), some
moderately (Fadu, SqCCy1, 1483, UMSSC90) and others were resistant
(UD-SCC2, MSK-LEUK1, JHU022) to apoptosis induction. JHU022 and 1483 cell
lines expressed very high levels of p-cMet. Targeting cMet with the small
molecule inhibitor crizotinib or siRNA rendered these cell lines highly
sensitive to erlotinib and BKM120 induced apoptosis. Moreover, inhibition
of Src family kinases with the small molecule inhibitor dasatinib or with
c-Src-specific siRNA inhibited p-cMet. In addition, inhibition of SFK in
these cell lines conferred sensitivity to erlotinib and BKM120 induced
apoptosis.

Conclusions: Our results strongly suggest that co-targeting of EGFR and
PI3K has synergistic activity, is effective in vivo, and induces
apoptosis of some HNC cell lines. Two of the resistant cell lines express
a high level of p-cMet as a downstream target of SFK, which confers
resistance of these cells to the combination of erlotinib and BKM120.


