Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant tumor metabolism enables GR takeover in
enzalutamide-resistant prostate cancer.


It is well known that castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is
still driven by the androgen axis. Therefore, the advent of new
AR-targeting drugs, such as Enzalutamide (ENZ), has been beneficial for
many patients with CRPC. ENZ is a potent FDA-approved AR antagonist which
prolongs survival for patients with CRPC, even after docetaxel
chemotherapy. Unfortunately, although ENZ has proven effective
clinically, treatment resistance eventually arises in nearly all patients
with CRPC. Emerging data suggest that the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is
upregulated in this context, stimulating expression of AR-target genes
that permit continued growth despite AR blockade. Hence, we hypothesize
that similar to metabolic mechanisms that elicit dihydrotestosterone
(DHT) synthesis, which in turn stimulate AR in CRPC, a role for GR in ENZ
resistance would be accompanied by a tumor metabolic switch that provides
sustained tissue cortisol concentrations which enable GR activation.
Here, we found that long-term ENZ treatment sustains tumor cortisol
concentrations in models of prostate cancer and patient tissues by using
[3H]-cortisol and high performance liquid chromatography. Further
investigations with immunoblot, co-immunoprecipitation as well as in
vitro ubiquitination assays in ENZ resistant prostate cancer models
demonstrated that autocrine motility factor receptor (AMFR), an ubiquitin
E3-ligase, and one of its adaptors, Erlin-2, mediate loss of
11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-2 (11β-HSD2), which sustains tumor
cortisol concentrations, resulting in the continuous stimulation of GR
and ENZ resistance. Remarkably, reinstatement of 11β-HSD2 expression, or
AMFR loss, reverses ENZ resistance in mouse xenograft tumors.

Together, these findings reveal a surprising metabolic mechanism of ENZ
resistance that may be targeted with a strategy that circumvents a
requirement for systemic GR ablation.


