Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of autophagy as a mechanism of therapeutic resistance in
head and neck cancer.


Background: In the curative setting for head and neck cancer (HNC) a
commonly used treatment is radiation combined with the anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibody cetuximab (CTX). However, despite decades of research
into improved treatments, therapeutic resistance remains a major
challenge for this malignancy with roughly 40% of patients developing
recurrent disease. We are studying the molecular mechanisms by which
radiation and cetuximab induce autophagy and how this process can be
modulated to improve the efficacy of therapy.

Methods: We evaluated a panel of both human papillomavirus (HPV) positive
and negative HNC cell lines for autophagic response to both CTX treatment
and ionizing radiation (XRT). Induction of autophagy was detected by
immunoblot flux assays for LC3 and p62 and by immunofluorescent staining
of autophagic vesicles. siRNA knockdown of EGFR, LAMPT4B, ULK1, Beclin1
and others was used to probe the involvement of different signaling
molecules. The addition of specific autophagy inhibitors, such as the
ULK1 inhibitor SBI-0206965, to CTX or XRT treatment was tested to
determine whether the reduction of autophagic response reduced cell
survival in a clonogenic survival assay. Induction of apoptosis was
analyzed by immunoblot against cleaved Caspase and PARP and AnnexinV
staining.

Results: Flux assays revealed that both CTX and XRT induced autophagy in
a time and dose dependent manner. Immunofluorescent staining of LC3 to
identify autophagic vesicles showed that a relatively small fraction of
the total cell population is able to induce this response. Specific siRNA
knockdown of EGFR and LAMPT4B was able to abrogate the induction of
autophagy in response to both CTX and XRT. Involvement of alternative
downstream pathways involving either ULK1 and Beclin1 or p53 in response
to either treatment is under investigation. To determine whether blockade
of cytoprotective autophagy can help overcome therapeutic resistance, we
tested specific autophagy inhibitors in combination with either CTX or
XRT treatment. The addition of the ULK1 inhibitor to CTX or XRT induced
apoptosis as shown by caspase activity, AnnexinV staining, and reduced
cell survival in clonogenic assays.

Conclusions: Autophagy may play a critical and protective role in how
head and neck cancers respond to therapeutic stress. The addition of
specific autophagy inhibitors to standard treatments may provide a way to
overcome resistance to therapy.


