Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PPMX-T003, a fully human anti-TfR1 antibody with potent efficacy
against hematologic malignancies.


Transferrin receptor1 (TfR1) is a type II transmembrane glycoprotein that
involves intracellular uptake of iron. TfR1 is ubiquitously expressed at
low levels in normal cells except erythroblasts and placental
trophoblasts, which express high levels of TfR1 due to the need of up
taking a large amount of iron. Accumulating studies have shown elevated
levels of TfR1 in both solid tumor cells, as well as hematologic
malignant cells when compared to their normal counterparts. Since TfR1 is
implicated in growth and survival in various cancer cells, targeting TfR1
could be attractive strategy for cancer therapeutics. To this end, we
have developed a fully human antibody against TfR1, PPMX-T003, which
displayed potent anti-tumor activity in vitro and in vivo. PPMX-T003
induced apoptosis or cell cycle arrest with EC50s of 3~200ng/ml in
various tumor cell lines. Mechanistically, PPMX-T003 triggers apoptosis
or cell growth arrest by inhibiting binding of TfR1 to its ligand
transferrin and blocking iron uptake. In addition, PPMX-T003 elicits
antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) activity in cancer cells.
Importantly, PPMX-T003 showed potent efficacy against several blood
cancer xenograft models. PPMX-T003 completely eradicated established
subcutaneous tumors in two acute myeloid leukemia (AML) models generated
by Kasumi-1 and HL-60, at a dose of 10 mg/kg when administrated (I.V.)
once a week for 4 weeks. Moreover, PPMX-T003 completely eradicated
established tumors in a lymphoma xenograft model (SU-DHL-2) at a dose of
3 mg/kg. Furthermore, PPMX-T003 greatly prolonged mice survival in a
disseminated leukemia model (CCRF-CEM: acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell
line). The control mice engrafted with CCRF-CEM cells (n=10) developed
leukemia and died within 42 days, whereas 8 of the 10 mice treated with
PPMX-T003 survived 179 days until the experiment was terminated. A
preliminary toxicology study in Cynomolgus monkeys with multiple doses
was also carried out. Although moderate anemia was observed at the dose
of 30 mg/kg, no other abnormalities were observed, indicating a tolerable
safety profile. Taken together, these results indicate that PPMX-T003
could be a potent therapeutic antibody for the treatment of hematologic
malignancies.


