Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanotherapeutics for combination drug and gene therapy in treating
glioblastoma multiforme.


Gliomas represent approximately 80% of all malignant brain tumors, and
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most aggressive type, accounts for
nearly half of all gliomas. Despite treatment strategies including
surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy, the 5-year survival rate for brain
cancer is only 35%. New therapeutic strategies are necessary to improve
the outcomes of this disease. Chemotherapy with DNA alkylating agents is
commonly used in treatment for GBM. Research has shown that better
therapeutic response of GBM tumors to alkylating agents and increased
survival rate is indicative in patients with epigenetic silencing of
O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT), a gene responsible for DNA
repair. Therefore, we propose a treatment strategy combining drug and
gene therapy to target and silence MGMT to sensitize cells to treatment
with temozolomide (TMZ) or lomustine (CCNU), both DNA alkylating agents.
We previously developed cationic, amphiphilic copolymer
poly(lactide-co-glycolide)-g-polyethylenimine (PgP) and demonstrated its
utility for nucleic acid delivery. Here, we examine the ability of PgP as
a drug and siRNA delivery carrier to overcome drug resistance and improve
anticancer activity through combination drug and gene therapy for GBM
treatment. PgP micelles were designed and synthesized for delivery of
hydrophobic drugs in the PLGA core and negatively charged nucleic acids
in the positively charged PEI shell through electrostatic interactions.
RNA binding and polyplex stability assays were performed using agarose
gel electrophoresis. Cytotoxicity of TMZ, CCNU, and/or PgP/siMGMT
polyplexes was determined by MTT assay. Silencing of MGMT on the protein
and mRNA level was determined using western blotting and qPCR,
respectively. Our results demonstrated that PgP effectively forms stable
complexes with siRNA and protects siRNAs from serum- and
ribonuclease-mediated degradation, confirming the potential of the
polyplex for in vivo delivery. We demonstrated that PgP/siMGMT polyplexes
mediate knockdown of MGMT protein as well as a significant ~56% and ~68%
knockdown of MGMT mRNA in T98G GBM cells compared to cells treated with
PgP complexed with non-targeting siRNA (siNT) at a 60:1 and 80:1
nitrogen:phosphate (N:P) ratio, respectively. Further, co-treatment of
PgP/siMGMT polyplexes with TMZ or CCNU enhanced anticancer activity in
T98G GBM cells compared to treatment with the PgP/siMGMT polyplex, TMZ,
or CCNU alone. Future studies will determine efficacy of drug-loaded and
siRNA-complexed PgP for combination therapy in vitro as well as using a
xenograft GBM model for local delivery. Successful combinatorial drug and
gene therapy using PgP may overcome drug resistance and improve
therapeutic outcomes for patients with glioblastoma.


