Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct cellular mechanisms mediate anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1
checkpoint blockade.


Checkpoint blockade is able to achieve durable responses in a subset of
patients, however the biological variables that distinguish responders
from non-responders are not well understood. Furthermore, we lack a
satisfying comprehension of the underlying mechanisms of anti-CTLA-4 and
anti-PD-1 induced tumor rejection. Given that PD-1 and CTLA-4 attenuate T
cell activity through distinct mechanisms that are separated spatially
and temporally, we hypothesized that responses to anti-CTLA-4 and
anti-PD-1 are driven by distinct mechanisms. To address this hypothesis
we utilized mass cytometry to comprehensively profile the effect of
checkpoint blockade on tumor immune infiltrates in murine tumor models.
This approach allows for the interrogation of greater than 40 analytes at
single cell resolution. We demonstrate that high dimensional mass
cytometry analysis enables unsupervised identification of biologically
relevant tumor infiltrating immune populations with high sensitivity and
specificity.

Using this approach we analyzed immune infiltrates of MC38 and B16BL6
murine tumors in mice treated with anti-CTLA-4, anti-PD-1, or control
antibodies. In both tumor models we identify 15 distinct T cell
populations with 0.5% or greater frequency. The T cell populations
identified in MC38 and B16BL6 tumors were highly congruent. Notably, some
but not all of these T cell populations were responsive to checkpoint
blockade. A subset of tumor infiltrating CD8 T cell populations expanded
following both anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1. Conversely, a subset of
regulatory T cell populations contracted following both anti-CTLA-4 and
anti-PD-1. Interestingly, we observed expansion of a Th1-like CD4
effector T cell population only in response to anti-CTLA-4 treatment.
Thus, we find that anti-PD-1 predominantly engages subsets of tumor
infiltrating CD8 T cells whereas anti-CTLA-4 engages both the CD4 and CD8
effector compartments.

Our findings indicate that anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1 utilize distinct
cellular mechanisms to induce tumor rejection. These findings highlight
the importance of expanding our mechanistic understanding of
immunotherapeutic approaches for the rational design of combinatorial
therapeutic approaches. Furthermore, these results demonstrate that mass
cytometry analysis can be utilized to identify biologically relevant
tumor infiltrating T cell populations.

We acknowledge the MDACC core facility NCI Support Grant P30CA16672.


