Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: OPeN: the oncology precision network data sharing consortium.


Background: The advent of Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS), and other
molecular diagnostic technologies, has enabled the use of genomic
information to guide targeted treatment in cancer patients. While this
precision oncology approach can yield exciting clinical outcomes, the
innumerable genomic variants identified in individual tumors effectively
establishes each case as a unique N=1 clinical presentation. This
scenario is contrary to a basic dogma of medical practice where
historical cases and treatment outcomes guide future management and
therapeutic decisions. Aggregation of large data sets, on a
multi-institutional basis, has the potential to overcome the N=1 paradox
and yield management insights in the implementation of precision oncology.

Methods: We have formed the Oncology Precision Network (OPeN), an
oncology data sharing consortium, to aggregate big data sets consisting
of clinical, genomic, pharmacological, and treatment response data from
diverse patient cases. Data from Intermountain Healthcare, Stanford
University, and Swedish Cancer Institute-Providence St. Joseph Health, as
well as other institutions, comprises the database and is derived from 79
hospitals, over 800 physician clinics and more than 50,000 annual cases.

Results: The OPeN database can be interrogated by variant type, specific
therapeutics, clinical outcomes, and by grouped variables, in a
structured data format. The overarching IT platform is a cloud based,
open source, triple store precision oncology solution, Syapse. These data
are yielding valuable insights, including tumor mutational burden (TMB)
scores and their correlation to immunotherapy response, clinical response
in various drug-gene combinations, and therapy-specific adverse events.

Conclusions: We anticipate this resource will be used by the Molecular
Tumor Boards of contributing institutions for clinical interpretation,
and by treating providers to overcome the N=1 challenge associated with
precision oncology.


