Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GANT61-mediated constraint of Fibulin-5/prorenin receptor/BMI1
signaling impacts nasopharyngeal carcinoma stemness and metastasis.


Background: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) of NPC exhibit higher tumorigenesis
and metastatic potential. Novel therapies based on molecular targets of
CSCs have become the focus to cure NPC. GANT61, a GLI1 inhibitor, has
been reported to exhibit potent anticancer effect on many cancers; here,
we evaluated whether GANT61 has inhibitory effects on NPC-CSCs and
further explored the possible mechanism.

Methods: Condition medium was used to enrich NPC stem-like cells. The NPC
stem-like cells characteristics were examined by Q-RT-PCR, Western
blotting, MTT, BudU, colony formation, sphere formation, and subcutaneous
and metastatic xenograft models. Genetic, pharmacological and biochemical
approaches were applied in NPC stem-like cells to investigate molecular
signals, to assess the efficacies under the inhibitors treatment, and to
examine the correlation among the molecules in vitro, in vivo and NPC
specimens.

Results: In the present study, we had demonstrated that NPC tumorsphere
cells (NPC-TCs) possess CSC properties. The proliferation, colony
formation, spheroid formation, migration, and invasion of NPC-TCs were
dramatic prevented in the presence of GANT61 in vitro and in vivo. ChIP
reveals that Gli1 preferentially binds to the Fibulin-5 promoter, and
Fibulin-5 transcriptional/post-transcriptional levels in NPC-TCs were
regulated upon GANT61 treatment. However, ectopic expression of Fibulin-5
in NPC-TCs not only enhanced self-renewal and ALDH1 expression, but also
reduced the effects of GANT61-eilicted anti-tumor in vitro and in vivo.
We further identified that a novel signaling, prorenin receptor/BMI1
pathway was modulated by Fibulin-5 and involved in Fibulin-5-raised
self-renewal capacity of NPC-TCs in vitro and in vivo. Notably, GANT61
inhibited NPC-TCs phenotypes was associated with suppression of
Fibulin-5/prorenin receptor/BMI1 signaling. Finally, a significant
correlation was observed among GLI1, Fibulin-5, AT1R and BMI1 in the
specimens of NPC.

Conclusions: Our data highlight that Fibulin-5/prorenin receptor/BMI1
signaling has critical role in maintaining stem-like properties of
NPC-CSCs and can be efficiently targeted by GANT61 representing a
preclinical therapeutic strategy to repress NPC-CSCs.


