Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel tumor vaccine platform: direct conjugation of antigens to
the β glucan PAMP Imprime PGG enhances antigen presentation and T cell
priming.


Significant clinical and pre-clinical research has shown that PAMPs-
Pathogen Associated Molecular Patterns- can trigger an integrated
anti-cancer immune response involving both innate and adaptive immunity.
Imprime PGG is a soluble yeast β-1,3/1,6 glucan currently in multiple
phase 2 clinical studies in combination with the immune checkpoint
inhibitor (CPI), pembrolizumab. Preclinical mechanistic research has
shown that Imprime PGG can re-polarize immunosuppressive myeloid cells in
the tumor microenvironment and activate antigen presenting cells to prime
antigen-specific CD8 T cells thereby boosting effector T cell function
and expansion. Based on this ability to activate dendritic cells and
induce type I interferon, we sought to explore the use of Imprime as an
immune activating/antigen-directing scaffold onto which we could attach
tumor antigen to drive an antigen-specific T cell based immune response.
Imprime PGG has been safely administered intravenously to more than 400
human subjects and thus represents a safe starting point for the
development of a cancer vaccine. Imprime’s 1,3/1,6 β-glucan polymeric
structure allows for the straightforward attachment of peptides and
proteins via three different conjugation routes. To explore this function
we covalently linked the chicken ovalbumin (OVA) protein to Imprime to
generate a β-glucan-protein conjugate (Imprime-OVA). Using T cell
receptor transgenic OT-I CD8 and OT-II CD4 T cells to track responses to
OVA, we treated mice with Imprime-OVA intravenously and examined the
expansion and functional quality of the T cell response 7 days later at
the peak of expansion. Following Imprime-OVA treatment, both OVA-specific
CD8 and CD4 T cells underwent vigorous expansion. OT-I CD8 T cells
upregulated the transcription factor Tbet, which is central to developing
effector functions, and were highly multifunctional in their ability to
produce IFN-γ, TNF-α and IL-2. OT-I T cells responded similarly to
vaccination with the minimal H-2Kb/OVA257-264 peptide covalently attached
to Imprime. By comparison, vaccination with unconjugated OVA (protein or
peptide) and Imprime was much less effective in driving T cell expansion
and differentiation. The CD8 T cell response required Batf3-dependent
cross-presenting DCs whereas the CD4 T cell response did not, and both
CD4 and CD8 responses required the C-type lectin receptor Dectin-1. These
data show that an Imprime PGG-protein conjugate can effectively elicit
the expansion and functional activation of cytotoxic T cells and may have
utility as a potential cancer vaccine platform. These data provide
evidence that Imprime PGG not only serves as a combination therapy for
CPIs, anti-angiogenics, and tumor targeting antibodies but may also be a
robust platform for multiple tumor vaccine strategies.


