Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune checkpoint protein VISTA is a critical regulator of the
IL-23/IL-17 inflammatory axis.


V-domain Immunoglobulin Suppressor of T cell Activation (VISTA) is an
inhibitory immune-checkpoint molecule that suppresses CD4+ and CD8+ T
cell activation when expressed on antigen-presenting cells. Vsir-/- mice
developed loss of peripheral tolerance and multi-organ chronic
inflammatory phenotypes. Vsir-/- CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were
hyper-responsive towards self- and foreign antigens. Whether or not VISTA
regulates innate immunity has not been demonstrated. Our current study
shows that VISTA-blocking monoclonal antibody (mAb) enhanced anti-tumor T
cell response, and synergized with a peptide vaccine and TLR7 agonist
imiquimod as adjuvant to suppress tumor growth in the B16 melanoma model.
Surprisingly, the therapeutic effect of this combination therapy was
abolished in the IL17R knockout hosts, indicating that the IL-17-mediated
inflammation is regulated by VISTA and is required for anti-tumor
immunity in the context of VISTA blockade. To better define the
regulatory role of VISTA in inflammation, we employed a murine model of
psoriasis induced by topical treatment of IMQ. Our data show that VISTA
deficiency exacerbated the psoriasiform inflammation. Enhanced TLR7
signaling in Vsir-/- dendritic cells (DCs) led to the hyper-activation of
Erk1/2 signaling and augmented the production of IL-23. IL-23, in turn,
promoted the expression of IL-17A in both TCRgd+ T cells and CD4+ Th17
cells. Furthermore, VISTA regulates the peripheral homeostasis of CD27-
gd T cells, and their activation upon TCR-mediated or cytokine-mediated
stimulation. IL-17A-producing CD27- gd T cells were expanded in the
Vsir-/- mice and amplified the inflammatory cascade. Together, these
results indicate that VISTA is a critical regulator of the
IL-23/IL-17-mediated inflammatory axis. Ongoing studies will define how
IL-17 regulates tumor-reactive immunity in the context of VISTA blockade
and TLR vaccine adjuvant.


