Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Requirement of TET2 in MLL-AF9 mediated leukemogenesis.


TET methylcytosine dioxygenase 2 (TET2) catalyzes the conversion of
5-methylcytosine to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine resulting in DNA
demethylation. Loss-of-function mutations or deletions of TET2 have been
found in several myeloid malignancies including myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS), myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia (CMML) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Moreover, deletion of
TET2 leads to myeloid malignancies in mice. Therefore, TET2 has been
suggested to play a tumor suppressor role in myeloid malignancies. In
this study, unexpectedly, we have uncovered a tumor promoter function for
TET2 in MLL rearranged leukemia.

Chromosomal rearrangements of the Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL) gene have
been found in ~10% of acute leukemia and are associated with poor
prognosis. We observed that depletion of TET2 significantly inhibited the
proliferation of MLL-AF9 positive MOLM14 leukemia cells. Similarly,
knockdown of TET2 markedly reduced proliferation in murine Ba/F3 cells
stably expressing MLL-AF9. Conversely, overexpression of TET2
significantly increased proliferation in MLL-AF9 expressing MOLM14 and
Ba/F3 cells. In addition, deletion of TET2 significantly inhibited
MLL-AF9 mediated myeloid colony formation in the bone marrow (BM) cells
ex vivo.

Next, we assessed the in vivo effects of TET2 deletion in
MLL-AF9-mediated leukemogenesis using retroviral bone marrow transduction
and transplantation assays. Whereas recipients of MLL-AF9-transduced wild
type BM exhibited marked increase in white blood cells (WBC) and
neutrophils in their peripheral blood and significant increase in the
spleen size, recipients of MLL-AF9-transduced TET2-deficient BM showed
significantly reduced WBC and neutrophil counts and reduced spleen size.
Flow cytometric analysis showed significantly increased myeloid
precursors (Gr-1+/Mac1+) and granulocyte macrophage progenitors (GMP) in
the BM of transplanted animals receiving MLL-AF9 expressing wild type BM
compared with recipients of MLL-AF9 expressing TET2-deficient BM.
Furthermore, transplanted animals receiving MLL-AF9-transduced wild type
BM showed marked increase in hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (LSK;
Lin-Sca-1+c-kit+), which was significantly reduced upon TET2 deletion.
Deficiency of TET2 also significantly reduced MLL-AF9-mediated increase
in hematopoietic progenitor colony formation in the BM. In addition,
deletion of TET2 resulted in increased overall survival in mice
expressing MLL-AF9. Together, these data indicate that TET2 is required
for leukemic transformation mediated by MLL-AF9. Our results suggest a
novel tumor promoter function for TET2 in MLL rearranged leukemia.


