Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting a novel G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) for
elimination of leukemia stem cells (LSC).


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a lethal blood cancer. Clinical evidence
has highlighted the critical role for leukemic stem cells (LSCs) in the
high relapse rate of AML patients. Understanding the signaling pathways
critical for LSC function will facilitate the development of new
therapies to target LSCs. G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the
most successful drug targets with approximately 36% of currently marketed
drugs targeting human GPCRs (Rask-Andersen et al., Nat Rev Drug Discov
2011). Aberrant expression of GPCRs has been observed in various cancers
and the importance of GPCRs in cancer stem cells has begun to be
appreciated.

In this study, our gene expression profiling analysis identified a novel
GPCR (hereafter named NG), which was suppressed in LSCs compared to
normal hematopoietic stem cells. Overexpression of NG in pre-LSCs
severely impaired leukemia initiation and progression in mice, whereas
knockdown of NG significantly accelerated the disease onset. Our data
also showed that NG overexpression substantially downregulated several
well-known Wnt/β-catenin targets (e.g., Tcf7l2, c-Fos and Ccnd1). These
data support a tumor suppressive role for NG in inhibiting leukemogenesis
via downregulation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling.

Consistent with these observations, treatment with an agonist that
specifically activates the NG signaling pathway induced a marked decrease
in cell viability and growth in murine LSCs and in human AML THP-1 cells,
but had no effects on human AML MOLM-13 cells. This agrees with our
finding that NG specifically targets the Wnt/β-catenin signaling, and
the inhibitory effect of the agonist might largely depend on β-catenin
expression levels in human AML cells, wherein THP-1 has been reported to
express endogenous β-catenin but MOLM-13 exhibits no detectable
β-catenin expression (Man CH. et al. Blood 2015).

In summary, our data support a tumour suppressor role for NG in
leukemogenesis and the forced expression of NG may provide a means to
eradicate LSCs. Thus, restoring NG by the agonist treatment represents a
promising therapeutic strategy for AML treatment.


