Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of long term treatment with BRACO 19 on HeLa proliferation
and senescence.


Telomerase, the enzyme responsible for the length maintenance of
telomeres is expressed in about 85% of cancer cells, being a key to
tumorigenesis. Telomerase inhibitor drugs have been studied as a
promising cancer therapy due to its specificity, with less side effects
than conventional approach. However, the effects expected from these
therapy require many cell divisions, and the consequences of these
long-term therapies are poorly understood. This work evaluated the
effects of a long term treatment in cancer cells (HeLa) using BRACO-19, a
G-quadruplex-interactive molecule, evaluating the consequences of its use
in cell viability and its potential to induce senescence. Telomerase
positive HeLa cells were grown in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum at pattern conditions. Culture medium was changed every 2
days. For preliminary citotoxicity assay, cells were seeded in 96 wells
plate at 3.2x104 cells/cm2, incubated for 24 hours and treated for 24
hours with increasing concentrarions of BRACO-19 and vehicle (0.1% H2O).
Cell viability was measured by MTT assay. For the long-term treatment, a
subtoxic concentration was chosen. The cells (5.5x102 cells/cm2) were
grown under continuous presence of the drug or 0.02% H2O for 11 weeks.
During the long-term exposure to BRACO-19, the cells were splitted every
7 - 20 days, depending on its proliferation rate, viable and unviable
cells were counted at these points through trypan blue dye exclusion
assay. β-Galactosidase (β-gal) activity was used as cell senescence
marker to evaluate the senescence after 24 hours treatment and after a
long exposure to the telomerase inhibitor. Changes in cell morphology
were accessed by phase contrast microscopy. The short-term (24h)
treatment with BRACO-19 showed a dose-dependent effect on cell viability.
The IC50% for HeLa was 5.25 µM. The subtoxic concentration of 1µM was
used for long-term treatment, showing effect on cell proliferation in a
way that HeLa cells exposed to the drug showed their proliferative
profile decreased when compared to control. Furthemore, no senescent
cells were found in control group, even after many passages; on the other
hand, 24 hours and long-term exposure to BRACO-19 led to senescence.
Long-term treatment was also associated with visual changes on cell
morphology. The telomerase inhibitor BRACO-19 showed an expected
dose-dependent effect on HeLa cells at short-term exposition, since
cytotoxic effect of this compound has been demonstrated in several cell
lines, but the impact of the long-term treatment on cell proliferation
pattern points BRACO-19 as a potential prototype of a new telomere
related drug for cancer therapy. Also, it was demonstrated the senescence
inducing action of this drug, perhaps due to erosion of HeLa telomeres.
These results show that HeLa is sensitive do BRACO-19 even under subtoxic
concentrations. Its effectiveness against other cell lines and tumors is
under investigation.


