Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Syndecan-1 mediates breast cancer metastasis to the brain through
IL-8 and PECAM-1 signaling.


Brain metastasis is a devastating, late-stage event affecting
approximately 10-30% of breast cancer patients. However, it is not well
understood how breast cancer cells migrate across the blood-brain barrier
(BBB) and invade into the brain. Syndecans (Sdcs) are cell surface
heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) that have previously been linked to
breast cancer progression and metastasis. Preliminary findings from our
lab indicate that Sdc1 may be involved in breast cancer metastasis to the
brain. In clinical samples from breast cancer patients with brain
metastases, 67% of the brain metastasis samples stained positive for Sdc1
expression. In an experimental mouse model of metastasis, we found that
silencing expression of Sdc1 in MDA-231 breast cancer cells greatly
reduced metastasis specifically to the brain, with no difference in lung
or bone metastases. Additionally, silencing expression of Sdc1 in MDA-231
cells resulted in a reduction in cancer cell migration across an in vitro
BBB transwell model system. These findings prompted us to investigate the
mechanism through which Sdc1 facilitates breast cancer cell migration
across the BBB. Since BBB endothelial cell junctions have been reported
to be disrupted in metastasis to the brain, immunofluorescence was
performed to examine localization of junction proteins in our BBB model
following addition of conditioned medium (CM) from MDA-231 non-silenced
(NS1) control and Sdc1KD cells. We observed disruption in PECAM-1
localization at BBB endothelial cell junctions upon addition of CM from
MDA-231 NS1 cells with markedly less disruption occurring upon treatment
with CM from Sdc1KD cells. These results suggest that paracrine factors
secreted from MDA-231 cells may facilitate breast cancer cell migration
across the BBB by affecting PECAM-1 localization on BBB endothelial
cells. By performing a cytokine array using CM from MDA-231 cells, we
determined that Sdc1KD CM contained lower levels of IL-8 than MDA-231 NS1
cell CM. These findings were confirmed by ELISA, qRT-PCR, and multiplex
analysis. We then went on to treat endothelial cells in the xCELLigence
in vitro BBB model system with IL-8 and observed a sufficient decrease in
cell index readings, suggesting that IL-8 affects BBB barrier
permeability. Taken together, our results suggest that Sdc1 supports
breast cancer cell migration across the BBB through a signaling mechanism
involving IL-8 and PECAM-1. Elucidating this mechanism will allow for the
development of therapeutic strategies to combat breast cancer cell
metastasis to the brain.

[S.M.W. and M.S. contributed equally to this work.]


