Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-canonical activation of AR signaling by histone deacetylase
SIRT1.


SIRT1, a nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)-dependent deacetylase,
is a member of multigene family of Sirtuins. Traditionally SIRT1 is a
known player in enhancing longevity. SIRT1 can target both histone and
non-histone proteins to regulate diverse activities including cellular
stress resistance, genomic stability, energy metabolism and
tumorigenesis. Disruption of SIRT1 in the prostate results in the
formation of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) lesions,
suggesting a role for SIRT1 in the development of PIN, a precursor lesion
for prostate cancer (PCA). Paradoxically, an oncogenic role for SIRT1 was
reported as evidenced by development of micro-invasive prostate
carcinomas in Pten+/-/Sirt1tg mice. Therefore, SIRT1 may possess both
oncogenic and tumor suppressor activities in a context-dependent manner
and its role in human cancer remains controversial. To address these
paradoxical findings, we examined the role of SIRT1 in prostate
pathogenesis using stably silenced for SIRT1 prostate cancer cell lines.
Silencing SIRT1 in androgen responsive LNCaP cells resulted in (i)
morphological changes indicative of clustering and epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT); (ii) significant reduction in their ability to form
colonies on soft agar; and (iii) increased autophagic flux. Similarly,
silencing SIRT1 resulted in reduced proliferative, colony forming and
migratory ability of androgen independent PC-3 cells. Furthermore,
notably, genes involved in nuclear receptor (PXR/RXR/FXR/PPAR) and kinase
(AMPK, MSP-RON, and RhoA) signaling are significantly altered as
evidenced by RNA-seq analysis in these cells. Remarkably, SIRT1 KD cells
showed decreased expression of AR and its target genes including PSA,
TMPRSS-2, FKBP-5 and PMEPA1. Interestingly, SIRT1 KD reduced
PSA-luciferase activity under both normal physiological and androgen
deprivation growth conditions with no significant effect on nuclear or
cytosolic levels of AR. More importantly, SIRT1 KD cells showed increased
sensitivity to growth under androgen deprivation conditions. Intervention
with resveratrol (RES, known SIRT1 activator) reduced incidence of HGPIN
in prostate specific PTEN KO mouse model with no significant differences
in the expression of AR or SIRT1. Consistent with these in vivo
observations, SIRT1 had no significant impact on RES-induced growth
inhibition. Taken together, these data indicate that SIRT1 could
potentially contribute to androgen independence, independent of classical
AR signaling. Our study demonstrates that SIRT1 may not play an essential
role in mediating RES-induced tumor growth inhibition and that SIRT1 may
confer resistance to androgen deprivation therapy and sustains cell
survival, suggesting that combination of SIRT1 inhibitors and ADT might
be a potential strategy for advanced PCA treatment. Supported by CPRIT RP
150166 and NCI CA 137518 (APK).


