Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular characterization of the immune subclass of
hepatocellualr carcinoma.


Background: Immune checkpoint inhibitors have emerged as a promising
therapeutic approach in different solid tumors, including hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Nonetheless, little is known about the immune-component
of HCC or potential biomarkers of response to these therapies.

Aims: To perform comprehensive characterization of the HCC immunological
profile and to identify biomarkers to select immunotherapy candidates.

Methods: We performed gene expression array deconvolution through
non-negative matrix factorization in 228 resected HCCs. Characterization
of the transcriptional landscape was conducted using >1,000 signatures
representing distinct immune cells by gene set enrichment and nearest
template prediction analyses. Presence of immune infiltration, tertiary
lymphoid structure (TLS), PD-1 and PD-L1 immunostainings was investigated
using immunohistochemistry. DNA methylation profile of 450K CpG sites was
analyzed to identify those with significant differences for each group.
Extensive validation of the immune classifier was performed in 728
independent HCC samples.

Results: Overall, an immune-related subclass of HCC was identified in
~27% of patients. The immune subclass was characterized by gene
signatures identifying immune cells (i.e. T cells, TLS, cytotox,
pResults: Overall, an immune-related subclass of HCC was identified in
~27% of patients. The immune subclass was characterized by gene
signatures identifying immune cells (i.e. T cells, TLS, cytotox,
p<0.001), signatures of response to immune checkpoint therapy (pResults:
Overall, an immune-related subclass of HCC was identified in ~27% of
patients. The immune subclass was characterized by gene signatures
identifying immune cells (i.e. T cells, TLS, cytotox, p<0.001),
signatures of response to immune checkpoint therapy (p<0.001), presence
of high immune infiltration (p=0.01), TLS (≥5 foci, 19/51 vs 33/168,
p=0.01) and PD-1 and PD-L1 protein expression (pResults: Overall, an
immune-related subclass of HCC was identified in ~27% of patients. The
immune subclass was characterized by gene signatures identifying immune
cells (i.e. T cells, TLS, cytotox, p<0.001), signatures of response to
immune checkpoint therapy (p<0.001), presence of high immune infiltration
(p=0.01), TLS (≥5 foci, 19/51 vs 33/168, p=0.01) and PD-1 and PD-L1
protein expression (p<0.05). The methylation levels of 363 CpG sites in
192 immune response gene promoters were able to capture the Immune class
(ANOVA, p0.2 Tukey test). Integration with HCC molecular classifications
revealed significant enrichment of the Immune subclass with IFN and S1
(p0.2 Tukey test). Integration with HCC molecular classifications
revealed significant enrichment of the Immune subclass with IFN and S1
(p<0.001) and exclusion of the CTNNB1 and S2 (p0.2 Tukey test).
Integration with HCC molecular classifications revealed significant
enrichment of the Immune subclass with IFN and S1 (p<0.001) and exclusion
of the CTNNB1 and S2 (p<0.001) subclasses. The immune class contains two
distinct microenvironment-based types: A) Exhausted immune response type
(~35%) characterized by stromal activation, T cell exhaustion signatures,
and presence of immunosuppressive components such as TGFB, LGALS1, M2
macrophages and pathways able to recruit myeloid-derived-suppressor cells
(FDR0.2 Tukey test). Integration with HCC molecular classifications
revealed significant enrichment of the Immune subclass with IFN and S1
(p<0.001) and exclusion of the CTNNB1 and S2 (p<0.001) subclasses. The
immune class contains two distinct microenvironment-based types: A)
Exhausted immune response type (~35%) characterized by stromal
activation, T cell exhaustion signatures, and presence of
immunosuppressive components such as TGFB, LGALS1, M2 macrophages and
pathways able to recruit myeloid-derived-suppressor cells (FDR<0.01); and
B) Active immune response type (~65%) characterized by overexpression of
adaptive immune response genes and IFN signaling (p0.2 Tukey test).
Integration with HCC molecular classifications revealed significant
enrichment of the Immune subclass with IFN and S1 (p<0.001) and exclusion
of the CTNNB1 and S2 (p<0.001) subclasses. The immune class contains two
distinct microenvironment-based types: A) Exhausted immune response type
(~35%) characterized by stromal activation, T cell exhaustion signatures,
and presence of immunosuppressive components such as TGFB, LGALS1, M2
macrophages and pathways able to recruit myeloid-derived-suppressor cells
(FDR<0.01); and B) Active immune response type (~65%) characterized by
overexpression of adaptive immune response genes and IFN signaling
(p<0.001). Tumors within the active immune response type showed a trend
towards better survival vs rest (p=0.07).

Conclusions: Around 27% of HCC patients belong to the Immune class,
characterized by activation of immune cells and signatures of response to
immunotherapies. Within this subclass, two distinct types have been
characterized by presenting active or exhausted immune responses, a
feature that provides the rationale for precision medicine-based
therapies.


