Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analyses of gene expression, DNA methylation, genotype
and copy number alterations characterize X-chromosome inactivation in
ovarian cancer.


Introduction: In females, X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) epigenetically
silences transcription of one copy of the X chromosome. Which chromosome
is silenced is randomly selected, and is tissue- and cell-specific. While
some genes are known to escape XCI under normal conditions, aberrant XCI
patterns are thought to occur in female-specific cancers, although the
role of XCI in ovarian tumorigenesis and progression is largely unknown.
The process of XCI is complex, and integration of gene expression, DNA
methylation, and copy number data can inform the XCI status of individual
genes and chromosome-wide XCI patterns for individual patients.

Methods: We evaluated gene- and chromosome-level patterns of XCI by
integrating RNA sequence, copy number alteration, genotype, and DNA
methylation data to study XCI escape patterns in tumor samples from 99
ovarian cancer patients. We measured allele-specific expression (ASE) for
397 X-linked genes to identify the active alleles for each tumor.
Combining ASE data with knowledge of copy number status, we used a
Bayesian beta-binomial mixture model to estimate which genes escaped XCI
for each patient, and validated our findings using DNA methylation data.
To assess global XCI patterns, we performed cluster analyses on the ASE
and methylation data, after adjusting for loss of heterozygosity. We
examined the relationship between the clusters and clinical factors,
including overall survival and time to recurrence.

Results: DNA promoter methylation demonstrated inverse regional
correlations with ASE. Cluster analyses using ASE and methylation data
demonstrated evidence of two tumor clusters, representing normal XCI and
global XCI dysregulation. The dysregulated XCI cluster (N=52) was
associated with lower X-inactive specific transcript expression as
expected (pResults: DNA promoter methylation demonstrated inverse
regional correlations with ASE. Cluster analyses using ASE and
methylation data demonstrated evidence of two tumor clusters,
representing normal XCI and global XCI dysregulation. The dysregulated
XCI cluster (N=52) was associated with lower X-inactive specific
transcript expression as expected (p<0.01). Patients with XCI
dysregulated tumors were higher grade, stage, serous histology and were
sub-optimally debulked (pResults: DNA promoter methylation demonstrated
inverse regional correlations with ASE. Cluster analyses using ASE and
methylation data demonstrated evidence of two tumor clusters,
representing normal XCI and global XCI dysregulation. The dysregulated
XCI cluster (N=52) was associated with lower X-inactive specific
transcript expression as expected (p<0.01). Patients with XCI
dysregulated tumors were higher grade, stage, serous histology and were
sub-optimally debulked (p<0.05). These patients also had shorter overall
survival time (HR=1.87, p=0.02) and time to recurrence (HR=2.34,
pResults: DNA promoter methylation demonstrated inverse regional
correlations with ASE. Cluster analyses using ASE and methylation data
demonstrated evidence of two tumor clusters, representing normal XCI and
global XCI dysregulation. The dysregulated XCI cluster (N=52) was
associated with lower X-inactive specific transcript expression as
expected (p<0.01). Patients with XCI dysregulated tumors were higher
grade, stage, serous histology and were sub-optimally debulked (p<0.05).
These patients also had shorter overall survival time (HR=1.87, p=0.02)
and time to recurrence (HR=2.34, p<0.01), although associations were
attenuated after covariate adjustment. In 45 tumor samples with
sufficient data, we observed escape patterns largely consistent with
previous reports of multiple tissue types. When comparing tumor to normal
ovarian tissue, eight genes (CXorf23, CXorf36, BRWD3, ELF4, SLITRK4,
GABRE, CLCN4, SH3BGRL) showed putative escape in the tumor and two genes
(RBBP7, OFD1) showed discrepant tumor inactivation.

Conclusions: We identified discrepant gene-level XCI tumor
classifications compared to normal tissue and identified a group of
patients with chromosome-wide XCI dysregulation associated with worse
clinical prognosis. This provides evidence of the role of XCI in ovarian
cancer and highlights the need to integrate multiple genomic data types
to study XCI.


