Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Irinotecan resistance in type 2 interleukin-1 receptor
overexpressed colorectal cancer cells is overcome by inhibitor of MEK.


We have previously demonstrated that the expression of interleukin-1
receptor type II (IL1R2) is closely associated with the advanced staging
and distant metastasis in patients with CRC. We also found that enhanced
expression of IL1R2 played certain roles to resist the targeted
therapeutics, regorafenib, in CRC cells. Whether IL1R2 expression is
associated with the resistance to chemotherapeutics is unclear.
Irinotecan, a water-soluble and semisynthetic derivative of camptothecin,
is one of widely used first- and second-line chemotherapeutics for
treatment of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC). Herein, we
first demonstrated that enhanced expression of IL1R2 resulted in
increased resistance of CRC cells to irinotecan using IL1R2 ectopically
expressed HCT116 and DLD-1 cells, which were IL1R2 low expressing CRC
cells, and IL1R2 silenced HT29 cells, which were IL1R2 high expressing
CRC cells. Since we have shown that IL1R2 may activate MEK/ERK signaling
by inhibition of PP2A, we further revealed that a specific inhibitor of
MEK, CI-1040, could overcome the irinotecan resistance in
IL1R2-overexpressing DLD-1 and HT29 cells. Our result showed that the
combination of irinotecan and CI-1040 synergistically suppressed the cell
growth in high IL1R2 expressing CRC cells but less significant in low
IL1R2 expressing cells. We also confirmed that treatment of
IL1R2-overexpressing CRC cells with CI-1040 significantly suppressed the
pERK, a downstream target of MEK. These results support that IL1R2
mediates through activation of MEK/ERK signaling to cause irinotecan
resistance in human CRC cells. The investigation how IL1R2 induces
irinotecan resistance is ongoing. Accordingly, we may suggest that
combined treatment of irinotecan and MEK-ERK inhibitor is a potential
therapeutic strategy against IL1R2 overexpression related irinotecan
resistant CRC.


