Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploiting replicative vulnerabilities to counter incomplete
responses to PI3K/Akt/mTOR inhibition.


While a broad range of cancers harbor mutations that dysregulate
PI3K-Akt-mTOR signaling, most small molecule drugs targeting this pathway
have failed to demonstrate efficacy for the treatment of solid tumors. In
this study, we investigated the mechanisms that account for drug efficacy
and failure in PI3K-pathway dysregulated triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC) cell lines using a diverse collection of 25 PI3K-Akt-mTOR
inhibitors. Drug response phenotypes and changes in signaling were
quantified using time-lapse imaging and quantitative single cell
immunofluorescence microscopy, respectively. We identified GSK2126458 and
Torin2 as having superior potency and efficacy in PI3K-pathway
dysregulated TNBC. Unlike other PI3K pathway inhibitors, whose
ineffectiveness arises from insufficient induction of apoptosis and
variable inhibition of cell cycle progression at G1/S, GSK2126458 and
Torin2 each rapidly induce caspase 3/7 activity and durably inhibit the
proliferation of surviving cells. While the effectiveness of GSK2126458
in vitro appears to arise from near-complete suppression of PI3K-Akt-mTOR
signaling, this approach has already proved unachievable in clinical
trials. An alternative therapeutic strategy was identified by
characterizing the mechanism of action of Torin2, a tool compound that
inhibits both mTOR kinase and the DNA damage response kinases ATR, ATM,
and DNA-PK. Unlike all other PI3K-Akt-mTOR inhibitors studied, Torin2
counters incomplete drug block at G1/S by concomitant induction of
intolerable replication stress in S phase cells. The unique cell cycle
pharmacology of Torin2 is recreated by combining inhibitors of mTOR and
ATR/Chk1 kinases presently undergoing evaluation in clinical trials. In
the context of combination therapy, where cytotoxicity arises from
targeting S phase vulnerabilities rather than from PI3K-Akt-mTOR
inhibition in G1, submaximal doses of mTOR kinase inhibitors are
sufficient and confer benefit by preventing the outgrowth of cells that
survive fractional killing from ATR/Chk1 inhibition. These findings
suggest a novel strategy for mitigating the failure of precision
monotherapy and have implications for the treatment of tumors where
genetic lesions in the PI3K pathway co-occur with replicative
vulnerabilities.


