Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancement of anti-cancer immunity by OMX, a novel oxygen carrier
immunotherapeutic that ameliorates the hypoxic tumor microenvironment.


Hypoxia is a hallmark of cancer and a driver of tumor progression and
poor patient outcomes. By generating an immunosuppressive tumor
microenvironment that limits cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) infiltration
and activation, hypoxia limits the effectiveness of cancer immunotherapy
and thus promotes tumor cell evasion of the host immune response. Omniox
has developed a first-in-class anti-cancer immunotherapeutic, OMX,
specifically designed to reverse tumor hypoxia to enhance cancer
immunotherapy efficacy. In preclinical models, we have demonstrated that
OMX accumulates in rodent subcutaneous and orthotopic tumors, as well as
spontaneous canine melanomas and brain tumors, resulting in significant
tumor hypoxia reduction.Here, using multiple subcutaneous syngeneic mouse
tumor models (MC38, CT26, 4T1), we assessed OMX effects on intratumoral
CTLs and immunosuppressive regulatory T cells (Treg), as well as the
anti-tumor potential of OMX as a single agent and in combination with
established immunotherapies. Using quantitative immunohistochemistry, we
confirmed reports that hypoxic tumor areas are devoid of CTLs.
Accordingly, by flow cytometry we observed a negative correlation between
tumor hypoxia and CTL infiltration. While OMX single agent treatment did
not affect the overall CD45-positive leukocyte population, Treg cells
were selectively depleted and the CTL:Treg ratio was substantially
increased, suggesting that OMX induced a shift towards
immunosensitization. Consistent with this finding, we observed OMX single
agent anti-tumor efficacy in MC38 colon tumors. Impressively, anti-tumor
effects of OMX single agent were equivalent to that of a single treatment
of the checkpoint inhibitor anti-CTLA4. We next assessed whether OMX
would enhance the efficacy of checkpoint inhibitors when used in
combination. In CT26 colon tumors, OMX exhibited combination anti-tumor
activity with anti-CTLA4, giving rise to faster cures and a greater
number of complete and durable responders compared to anti-CTLA4 alone.
Of note, this enhanced response was observed for both early-stage and
late-stage CT26 tumors. In 4T1 breast tumors, known to be insensitive to
checkpoint inhibitors, treatment of early-stage (~60mm3) tumors with
combination OMX and anti-PD1 resulted in a 27% response rate, compared to
a 0% response rate to anti-PD1 alone. Taken together, our data suggest
that OMX, by delivering oxygen to hypoxic tumor areas, induces a
microenvironmental change from an immunosuppressive to an
immunopermissive state. Given that OMX is well-tolerated in both small
and large animals, and that its mechanism of action is upstream of
numerous major immunosuppressive pathways, OMX holds great clinical
potential to synergize with multiple immunotherapeutic agents to enhance
tumor control by restoring anti-cancer immune responses in cancer
patients.


