Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive analysis of telomere length and telomere maintenance
mechanisms across 31 human cancer types.


Telomeres cap chromosome ends and prevent chromosomal fusions. In the
majority of somatic cells telomere shortens with each cell division.
Cancer cells, on the other hand, maintain telomere length (TL) through
reactivation of telomerase or alternative lengthening of telomere (ALT).
Though closely related to cancer hallmarks such as chromosomal
instability, telomere length has not been systematically analyzed in
cancer.

We used DNA sequencing to infer TL in 18,430 samples across 31 cancer
types. Tumor TL was shorter compared to normal TL but tended to be longer
in testicular germ cell tumors, sarcomas and gliomas. TL in
non-neoplastic leukocyte and solid tissue samples was negatively
correlated with patient age and varied between lineages, with kidney
samples showing the longest TL and leukocytes the shortest. Amongst
tumors, 73% expressed telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT), which was
associated with mutations of the TERT promoter (23%), focal
amplifications (6%), gene fusions (1%) and structural variants of the
promoter (4%) and gene body (3%). Isoform analysis revealed that the
full-length TERT transcript was dominantly expressed compared to the
enzymatically inactive minus beta variant in all cancer types. TERT
expression was positively associated with predicted telomerase activity,
inferred from comparison of known ALT and non-ALT tumor samples. Distal
breakpoint positions involved in TERT promoter structural variants
demonstrated increased levels of H3K27ac and H3K4me1, suggesting
displaced enhancer elements. We additionally detected hypermethylation of
the TERT promoter in 69%, and found an unexpected association with TERT
expression. Combined, 95% of TERT expressing tumors was found positive
for at least one potential genomic or epigenetic regulatory event. Six
percent of tumors did not express TERT and harbored somatic mutations,
deletions, gene fusions or structural variants in ATRX or DAXX, both of
which have been shown to be tightly associated with ALT. These tumors
demonstrated decreased of ATRX expression in combination with
significantly longer TL and expression of telomeric repeat containing RNA
(TERRA). Interestingly, 21% of the cohort did not express TERT and was
ATRX wild-type. In this double wild-type group, unsupervised analysis
identified positive correlations between telomere length, TP53 and RB1
alterations. Predicted telomerase activity in the double wild type and
ATRX or DAXX altered groups was significantly lower compared to TERT
expressing tumors. Gene expression was found to be TL dependent, with
genes nearby telomeres showing a negative correlation (increased
expression with shorter TL) whereas genes far away from telomeres showed
a positive correlation and (increased expression with longer TL).

Our analysis provides insights into the various modalities associated
with TERT expression and provides a landscape of determinants of telomere
length in cancer.


