Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of checkpoint inhibitors on tumour infiltrating immune
cells in the orthotopic and metastatic tumour microenvironment using
bioluminescent syngeneic cell line models.


Background: Subcutaneous syngeneic models are widely used to evaluate the
impact of immunotherapy on tumor growth and tumor invading leucocytes
(TILs). However, the tumor microenvironment of orthotopic models is more
comparable to the patient as they form an organ-specific tumour,
facilitate metastatic spread and, in the case of syngeneic models,
support immune and stromal component interactions. Bioluminescent imaging
(BLI) enables non-invasive longitudinal monitoring of
orthotopic/metastatic tumor burden, allowing for optimal randomisation,
reduction of false positives and continuous feedback on treatment
mid-study. Here we describe the generation of several bioluminescent
variants of syngeneic cell lines and assess the impact of orthotopic
growth on response to immune checkpoint therapy.

Methods: Bioluminescent variants of syngeneic cell lines were established
by lentiviral transduction for: 4T1/EMT6 (breast), B16-F10 (skin
melanoma), H22 (liver) and Pan02 (Pancreas) murine cancer cell lines.
Subcutaneous growth of wild-type and bioluminescent variants was compared
to assess any impact of luciferase expression on tumor growth,
inflammation and TILs. Orthotopic models were established for most cell
lines, and a metastatic model for B16-F10 was developed. BLI was carried
out to assess real-time tumor burden and at end stage (Spectrum CT;
PerkinElmer). Response to immune checkpoint therapy was evaluated and TIL
infiltration was assessed by FACs analysis and IHC.

Results: No significant differences in growth profiles were exhibited
when the bioluminescent variants of B16-F10 and Pan02 (subcutaneous) or
EMT6 (mammary fat pad) were compared with the wild-type equivalents.
Bioluminescent 4T1 cells readily metastasised to the lungs from both the
orthotopic and subcutaneous sites and B16-F10 cells formed metastases.
Response to immunotherapy, such as anti-CTLA-4, in the subcutaneous
setting between the bioluminescent and WT models was similar. Anti-CTLA-4
therapy resulted in a statistically significant impact on orthotopic
Pan02 tumor growth (BLI) and final tumor weight; however, further
characterization by IHC and refinement of implantation conditions is
required as the tumors exhibited low basal TIL levels, poor stromal and
blood capillary infiltration.

Conclusions: The growth and response to immunotherapy does not appear to
be significantly impacted in the bioluminescent cell line models tested;
as such they are a useful tool for further assessing the impact of
complex orthotopic, spontaneous and experimental metastasis modelling in
immunocompetent mice. However, the orthotopic growth and TIL infiltration
does vary between subcutaneous and orthotopic/metastatic settings and
requires characterisation and validation with immunotherapeutics in order
to understand the relevance and utilisation of such models.


