Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGF2 regulates mitochondrial cell energy phenotype and biogenesis
in TNBC cells.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is very aggressive, resistant to
chemotherapy and more likely to relapse, causing the worst prognosis.
African American (AA) women suffer higher incidence and mortality of TNBC
due to the expression of high levels of Insulin Growth Factor 2 (IGF2)
which promotes tumor progression, metastasis, and chemoresistance. Also,
it has been established that functional mitochondria and mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA) are essential for cancer cell growth. Mutations and/or
reductions in mtDNA copy number that alter the Oxidative Phosphorylation
(OXPHOS) physiology are common features of TNBC. We have demonstrated
that mtDNA content is lower in CRL-2335 AA TNBC cell line when compared
to the CRL-2335 IGF2 knockout cell line. Thus, we propose that IGF2
regulates the mtDNA content. This study was designed to demonstrate if
IGF2 regulates mitochondrial genes to determine the cell energy
phenotype. An XFp analyzer was used to study the mitochondrial function
in terms of OCR (Oxygen Consumption Rate/Mitochondrial Respiration) and
ECAR (Extracellular Acidification Rate/ Glycolysis) in the wild type and
IGF2 stable knockout of CRL-2335 AA TNBC cells. Real Time PCR was
performed to study the gene expression pattern of IGF2, PGC1α and
PGC1β. PGC1α and PGC1β are critical genes in the regulation of the
mitochondrial biogenesis, thus, they are important in the cellular
metabolic phenotype. Utilizing the Seahorse metabolic system we assessed
cell energy phenotype and alterations in terms of mitochondrial
respiration rate (OCR) % and Glycolysis (ECAR) %. Our preliminary results
showed that the overall OCR and ECAR of the stressed CRL-2335 AA TNBC
cells was altered according to the levels of IGF-II expressed.
Furthermore, the results demonstrated that there was a metabolic shift in
the CRL-2335 AA TNBC cells towards the glycolytic pathway when IGF2 was
knockout in comparison to the wild type CRL-2335 cells. Also, IGF2
knockout cells showed higher gene expression rate of PGC1β as compared
to the wild type. The above data confirms that IGF2 plays a critical role
in determining the cell energy phenotype.


