Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNF43 somatic mutations in endometrioid ovarian cancers occur in
the setting of synchronous endometrioid endometrial cancers.


Introduction: Somatic frameshift mutations in RNF43 have previously been
filtered out in cancer genome sequencing projects given that they occur
in homopolymer tracts and resemble polymerase slippage errors. Two RNF43
hotspot mutations have been identified and validated in endometrioid
endometrial cancer (EEC) and appear to negatively regulate Wnt signaling.
These frameshift mutations occur at codons R117 and G659. Due to shared
clinical and morphologic features of EEC and endometrioid ovarian cancer
(EmOC), we determined the frequency of RNF43 somatic mutations in EmOC.

Methods: We reviewed the clinical and pathologic features of EmOC samples
diagnosed from 2006 to 2015, retrieved from laboratory databases and
institutional archives. DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tumor samples using standard protocols. Sanger and
next-generation sequencing (NGS) were used to screen for hotspot
mutations at codons R117 and G659 with custom designed primers. NGS at
each hotspot was covered with a minimum sequencing depth of 400X.

Results: Forty-seven EmOC patients with available tumor specimens were
identified and included in the analysis. The median age at diagnosis was
55 years old (range 34-84). The majority of patients had FIGO stage I or
stage II disease (n=38, 81%). Thirteen (28%) patients had synchronous
endometrial endometrioid or mixed histology tumors. Two (4.3%) RNF43
somatic mutations at codon G659 were identified in both Sanger and NGS
from the EmOC tumor specimens. No mutations at codon R117 were
identified. The allele fractions of the G659 mutations were 4.3% and 2.8%
seen in 33 and 18 reads with a coverage of 775X and 646X, respectively. A
review of pathology reports indicated that both mutated samples had
synchronous EECs. These two mutated samples represent 15.4% of cases
diagnosed with synchronous EmOC and EEC in this cohort.

Conclusions: RNF43 somatic mutations are uncommon in EmOCs and associated
with synchronous EECs. Recent massively parallel sequencing data suggests
that EmOCs in the setting of synchronous EECs are clonally related and
disseminated cells are related to nearby anatomic structures. Our data
supports that RNF43 somatic mutations in EmOC are clonally expanded from
EECs likely through trans-tubal migration.


