Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor treatment fields downregulate the BRCA1/FA pathway genes
leading to reduced DNA repair capacity, the inhibition of mitophagy and
enhanced cell death.


The application of new physical cancer treatment modality utilizing
alternating electric fields termed tumor treatment fields (TTFields) has
revolutionized the treatment of recurrent and newly diagnosed
glioblastoma. This non-invasive exposure to low-intensity, intermediate
frequency, alternating electric fields to the region of the tumor has
resulted in a significant increase in overall survival when compared to
standard therapy with very minimal side effects. Clinical trials are
recruiting or ongoing at additional tumor sites including lung,
pancreatic, and ovarian cancer. The primary mechanism of TTField cell
killing is thought to be the disruption of mitosis; however, other
potential mechanisms are under investigation. Using a panel of five NSCLC
cell lines we found that TTFields treatment alone inhibits cell
proliferation, and decreases survival, though the degree of inhibition
varies between cell lines. To understand the molecular mechanisms
underlying the biological effects of TTField exposure we studied temporal
gene expression changes in the NSCLC cell lines after TTField treatment.
We observed that most differentially expressed genes are part of cell
cycle and proliferation pathways which is in agreement with earlier
findings. Interestingly we found that the expression of BRCA1 DNA damage
repair pathway genes were significantly downregulated (P The application
of new physical cancer treatment modality utilizing alternating electric
fields termed tumor treatment fields (TTFields) has revolutionized the
treatment of recurrent and newly diagnosed glioblastoma. This
non-invasive exposure to low-intensity, intermediate frequency,
alternating electric fields to the region of the tumor has resulted in a
significant increase in overall survival when compared to standard
therapy with very minimal side effects. Clinical trials are recruiting or
ongoing at additional tumor sites including lung, pancreatic, and ovarian
cancer. The primary mechanism of TTField cell killing is thought to be
the disruption of mitosis; however, other potential mechanisms are under
investigation. Using a panel of five NSCLC cell lines we found that
TTFields treatment alone inhibits cell proliferation, and decreases
survival, though the degree of inhibition varies between cell lines. To
understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the biological effects of
TTField exposure we studied temporal gene expression changes in the NSCLC
cell lines after TTField treatment. We observed that most differentially
expressed genes are part of cell cycle and proliferation pathways which
is in agreement with earlier findings. Interestingly we found that the
expression of BRCA1 DNA damage repair pathway genes were significantly
downregulated (P < 0.05) upon TTField treatment. We confirmed the
downregulation of BRCA1/FA pathway proteins by western blot. When
examining the nuclear role of the BRCA1/FA pathway genes we found that
TTField treatment slowed the repair of ionizing radiation-induced DNA
damage compared to radiation alone which is evident by an increased
number of DNA double strand break repair foci at any given time.
Moreover, we found that TTField treatment increased the incidence of
chromatid aberrations. We also examined the newly identified BRCA1/FA
pathway genes cytosolic role in mitophagy where we observed alterations
in mitophagy related gene (PINK1, OSCP1, ATP5 and DAPIT) expression and
confirmed the same at the protein level by western blot. We hypothesized
that TTFields disrupt the clearance of damaged mitochondria due to the
downregulation of BRCA1/FA pathway players, causing an imbalance in
oxygen metabolism leading to the production of high levels of radical
oxygen species (ROS) and as a result, cell death. Using CellROX dye we
found that TTField treatment did result in increased ROS production
suggesting a new mechanism of action for TTField exposure. Novel
chemotherapy agents, particularly PARP inhibitors, in combination with
DNA damaging agents like radiation and TTFields may be advantageous
through the conditional vulnerability of down-regulated BRCA1.


