Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and validation of a screening platform for the
identification of novel immuno-oncology targets.


Although immune therapy of cancer, including immune-checkpoint blockade
have demonstrated therapeutic benefit in patients with various advanced
cancers, further understanding of human immune pathology triggered by the
tumor microenvironment, is essential to improve these therapeutic
approaches.

In order to shed light on novel immune suppressive mechanisms in tumor,
iTeos Therapeutics developed a target discovery and drug repurposing
platform based on phenotypic screening assays. We established a
co-culture assay combining tumor immune suppressive cells and T-cells.
This assay is flexible to allow the screening of chemicogenomics, shRNA
and cDNA libraries. Multi-parameter readouts are combined to assess both
T cell activation and proliferation, through high content imaging of T
cell clusters formation, complemented with detection of IFNγ secretion
and tumor cell death, as assessed using a cytotoxicity assay. The 96-well
format of the assay allows medium-throughput testing of up to 3000
samples/screen. From the technical point of view we were able to adapt
the assay to low level of automation, making it affordable to the biotech
start-ups and academic laboratories.

As a proof-of-concept we evaluated the assay for its ability to detect
metabolic immune-oncology targets in A549 cells, a lung cancer immune
suppressive cell line. A549 express indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1),
an enzyme expressed in many cancers that mediates local T-cell
suppression through depleting the essential amino acid tryptophan. The
assay conditions were validated with an IDO1 inhibitor as positive
control and subsequently scaled up for automation. A commercially
available small molecule library of 1900 compounds, with a high
percentage of clinically tested drugs was screened. The library was
tested at two different concentrations (0.3μM and 3μM), with two
independent T-cell donors and spiked with IDO1 inhibitor as control.
Combined analysis of T-cell activity and tumor killing led to the
identification of 42 compounds with activity on multiple, potential
immune suppressive pathways, including metabolism, epigenetics,
autophagy, TGFβ, Wnt/β-catenin and TNFα/NF-κB signaling.


