Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HMGB1 governs p53 to autophagic degradation via its
nucleus-to-cytoplasm transport.


P53 is under exquisitely fine regulation and acts as a transcription
factor that regulates the expression of thousands of genes that control
apoptosis, necroptosis, ferrotosis, cell cycle arrest, senescence,
metabolism and fertility. Regulation of p53 turnover is essential not
only for the response to chemotherapeutic drugs or radiation in cancer
cell but also to keep p53 activity under control in a normal cell.
Moreover, .p53 is found to be overactivated in various diseases including
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), alcoholic liver disease (ALD) and
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Promoting hyperactivated-p53
degradation can combat these diseases. However, the strategies that based
on known proteasome-dependent degradation only can stabilize the
expression level of p53 such as nutlins (inhibit the interaction between
mdm2 and tumor suppressor p53). Autophagy-lysosomal degradation is the
other pathway for controlling cellular protein stability. More and more
researches have established that numerous proteins can be degraded
through both proteasome and autophagy-lysosome pathways. However, very
little is known to date about p53 turnover through autophagy-lysosome
pathway. Here we discover that the activation of p53 autophagic
degradation during an oral small molecule receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor sunitinib in p53 wt cancer cells and normal cells.
Mechanistically, the nucleus-to-cytoplasm shift is essential for the
autophagic degradation of p53 induced by sunitinib, however, does not
require p53 nuclear export signals. Indeed, p53 degradation is achieved
by the nucleus-to-cytoplasm transport of its nuclear binding target
HMGB1, shifting the distribution of p53 from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm. Then cytoplasmic p53 directly interacts with the autophagy
cargo receptor p62 to promote degradation. Importantly, inhibition of
HMGB1 sensitizes cancer cell to sunitinib. Taken together, our study
identified an alternative p53 protein turnover mechanism induced by
sunitinib, thus not only elucidating the underlying mechanisms that limit
sunitinib efficacy in cancer therapy but also opening an avenue for
expanding the clinical indications of sunitinib.


