Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of resistance to type I and type II MET inhibitors in
non-small cell lung cancer.


Background: MET targeted therapies are clinically effective in MET
amplified and MET exon 14 deletion mutant non-small cell lung cancers
(NSCLC). At least 8 MET tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), including both
type I and II, have been developed and are under clinical evaluation. We
recently described a resistance mechanism in a patient with a unique MET
secondary mutation, D1228V, refractory to all type I but sensitive to
type II MET TKIs (Bahcall et al. Cancer Discovery 2016). We examined
whether the sensitivity and resistance of other MET secondary mutations
were similarly dependent on the mode of inhibitor binding, and sought to
determine the optimal sequence of MET inhibitor use, so as to achieve the
longest combined latency before the emergence of resistance.

Methods: TPR-MET Ba/F3 cells were mutagenized with ENU and treated with
each of the type I TKIs - crizotinib; savolitinib; capmatinib, or type II
TKIs - cabozantinib; glesatinib; merestinib, until resistant clones
emerged. Resistant mutations were identified by sequencing, constructed
in the TPR-MET background, and expressed in Ba/F3 and NIH-3T3 cells.
Cross-resistance to the 6 MET TKIs was evaluated. Next, low frequency
(0.1%) of mutant Ba/F3 cells was spiked into parental TPR-MET Ba/F3 cells
and sequentially exposed to different MET TKIs to identify the sequence
associated with the longest combined time to resistance. Clonal evolution
was assessed by droplet digital PCR (ddPCR).

Results: Of 300 plated wells per drug used at either 0.1μM or 0.5μM,
crizotinib yielded 210 and 2 clones; savolitinib 51 and 1 clone;
capmatinib 9 and 3 clones; cabozantinib 38 and 3 clones; glesatinib 300
and 300 clones; merestinib 18 and 3 clones, respectively. Of the
mutations, those at Y1230 were common to all 3 type I TKIs and the most
frequently seen with savolitinib and capmatinib; D1228 was shared by
savolitinib and capmatinib; V1155L, the most common mutation with
crizotinib, was shared with savolitinib; M1211L emerged with capmatinib.
Mutated F1200 residue was shared by and exclusive to all type II TKIs and
was the single identified mutation for both glesatinib and merestinib.
Cabozantinib gave rise to a broader array of unique mutants - with F1200
mutations being the most common - and shared G1163R with crizotinib. We
show D1228 and Y1230 mutations being moderately resistant to crizotinib
and strongly resistant to both savolitinib and capmatinib, while
retaining sensitivity to all type II TKIs. G1163R and L1195V were
slightly to moderately resistant to crizotinib, cabozantinib and
glesatinib, but strongly sensitive to savolitinib and capmatinib. In this
assay, merestinib had the broadest, while crizotinib most narrow activity
against the tested mutants.

Conclusions: Here we highlight key differences between and within the 2
types of MET inhibitors that define their activity against MET secondary
mutants likely to emerge in patients, providing rationale for the
specific use of these inhibitors in the clinic.


