Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recombinant protein MBP-NAP restricts tumor progression by
triggering T-cell immunity in mouse metastatic melanoma model.


The pro-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties of Helicobacter
pylori neutrophil activating protein (Hp-NAP) not only make it play an
important role in disease pathogenesis, but also make it a potential
candidate for applications, including vaccine and drug development. Our
previous work demonstrated that the recombinant Hp-NAP fused with the
maltose-binding protein of Escherichia coli (rMBP-NAP) exert an important
role in regulating the differentiation of Th1 cells. As a potential TLR2
ligand, it was reported to possess the ability to induce systemic
antitumor immunity in murine hepatoma H22 and sarcoma S180 tumor models.
To further understand the antitumor and immunomodulatory effect of
rMBP-NAP, we elucidate the effect and mechanism of rMBP-NAP at the local
immune response modulation in established mouse B16-F10 melanoma
pulmonary metastasis model. Our results demonstrated that metastatic lung
tumor growth was significantly arrested after rMBP-NAP treatment, along
with marked reduction in the number of lung nodules and significant
increase in survival. Flow cytometry immunophenotyping and Quantitative
RT-PCR analyses demonstrated that rMBP-NAP could induce both local and
systemic immune responses, which associated with higher influx of
CD3+CD4+T cells, CD3+CD8+T cells and higher secretion of interferon
(IFN)-γ and interleukin (IL)-27 cytokines. The intraperitoneal
administration of rMBP-NAP in mice promoted infiltration of lymphocyte in
the lungs and reduced the production of several proinflammatory
cytokines, such as IL-6 and transforming growth factor beta (TGF) -β,
indicating an anti-inflammatory effect in local area. By comparing with
control mice, mRNA expression of chemokines also revealed that rMBP-NAP
treatment substantially decreased the expression of CCL2 and CCL20 in
tumor tissues, which are central to recruit myeloid-derived suppressor
cell (MDSC) and regulatory T cells (Treg) to tumor microenviroment and
form immunosuppression. Moreover, we assess the expression of vascular
marker CD34 in pulmonary section using immunohistochemical method, the
results showed the vascularization was apparently inhibited in rMBP-NAP
treated tumor bearing mouse. In conclusion, rMBP-NAP could induce the
activation of effective Th1/Tc1 cells and the production of relevant
inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, which are responsible for
enhencing T cell immunity and reversing immunosuppression against
metastatic cancer progression. Our findings strongly indicate that
rMBP-NAP treatment might be a novel therapeutic approach against
metastatic melanoma, and rMBP-NAP might be a potential template for the
development of agents that could be used as immunomodulatory adjuvant in
the therapy against melanoma.


