Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lymph node metastasis evolution drives immune evasion and targeted
therapy resistance in gastro-esophageal adenocarcinomas (GEAs).


GEAs are aggressive tumors in which several targeted therapy trials have
failed. We assessed intratumor heterogeneity (ITH) and its impact on
progression and therapy failure by applying an 81-gene NGS panel and SNP
array copy number aberration (CNA) analysis to multiple primary tumor (T)
regions and lymph node (LN) metastases from 9 GEAs.

Analysis of 39 samples found ITH in all cases. 8 chromosomally instable
(CIN) GEAs predominantly evolved through CNAs, with 17-76% of the genome
affected by heterogeneous CNAs. A microsatellite instable GEA showed
parallel evolution and diversified exclusively through point mutations
(58% ITH). This demonstrates ongoing genomic instability rather than
punctuated evolution and that specific instability mechanisms impact
evolutionary trajectories.

LN metastases contributed more to ITH (pLN metastases contributed more to
ITH (p<0.01) than any anatomic location within T. Further, subclonal
aberrations that activate the Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase-pathway
(MAPK-pw), including ERBB3, ERK2, KRAS and NRAS amplifications (amp) and
NRAS mutations, were detected in LN metastases from 4/8 CIN GEAs.
Subclonal MAPK-activating amp were enriched in LN (p=0.019) compared to T
regions that only exhibited a single subclonal MET amp. Convergent
evolution of LN subclones across several GEAs suggests that selection
pressures differ systematically between LN and T ecosystems.

To assess the phenotypes established by MAPK-activating amp evolution, we
analyzed 135 published primary CIN subtype GEAs. Cytolytic activity
(CYT), estimating tumor immune recognition from RNA expression data,
correlated with the mutation load in GEAs with EGFR, ERBB2 or MET amp
(p=0.04). In contrast, CYT did not correlate with mutation load in GEAs
with KRAS or ERBB3 amp (p=0.22, NRAS/ERK2: insufficient data), indicating
that these specific alterations, that also recurrently evolved in LN, may
enable immune evasion. Downregulation of TAP and Class I MHC genes (pTo
assess the phenotypes established by MAPK-activating amp evolution, we
analyzed 135 published primary CIN subtype GEAs. Cytolytic activity
(CYT), estimating tumor immune recognition from RNA expression data,
correlated with the mutation load in GEAs with EGFR, ERBB2 or MET amp
(p=0.04). In contrast, CYT did not correlate with mutation load in GEAs
with KRAS or ERBB3 amp (p=0.22, NRAS/ERK2: insufficient data), indicating
that these specific alterations, that also recurrently evolved in LN, may
enable immune evasion. Downregulation of TAP and Class I MHC genes
(p<0.05) in KRAS or ERBB3 amp GEAs suggested impaired antigen processing
and presentation as the mechanisms driving T cell immune evasion.

Moreover, ITH of MAPK-activating amp is likely to confer resistance to
upstream tyrosine kinase inhibition. We used GEA cell lines with various
MAPK-activating amp (ERBB2, MET, NRAS) to investigate downstream MAPK-pw
inhibition as a novel strategy to broadly target heterogeneous subclones.
Growth control was incomplete with ERK- and MEK-inhibitors but the
panRAF/SRC inhibitor CCT196969 was effective in all lines, suggesting
that it can effectively intercept subclonal heterogeneity in GEAs.

In conclusion, we identified ITH with parallel and convergent evolution
in 9/9 metastatic GEAs. Distinct selection pressures in LN foster the
evolution of subclonal MAPK-activating amp that decrease immunogenicity
and drive evolutionary pre-adaptation to future targeted drugs that can
be intercepted by panRAF/SRC inhibitors.


