Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TonEBP promotes hepatocellular carcinoma and is associated with
poor prognosis.


Carcinogenesis is initiated by genetic changes due to aberrant processing
of genetic information. Tumor microenvironment, however, should not be
overlooked as cancer risk because they influence the development and
progression. Indeed, the role of inflammation has received a lot of
attention lately. Specifically, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has been
considered as an inflammation-associated tumor like colorectal cancer and
lung cancer. In addition, high rate of recurrence is the major feature of
HCC, and there is a need to identify novel biomarkers for post-operative
prognosis of HCC patients Tonicity-responsive enhancer binding protein
(TonEBP), also known as nuclear factor of activated T cell 5 (NFAT5), is
a key transcriptional cofactor for the expression of pro-inflammatory
genes such as TNF-α, IL-1β, and cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2). Since chronic
hepatic inflammation is essential for hepatocellular carcinogenesis, we
asked whether TonEBP plays a role in HCC. To investigate the relevance of
TonEBP in HCC development, TonEBP expression in hepatic tumors and their
adjacent normal tissues were analyzed from of HCC patients. TonEBP
expression was higher in tumors than adjacent normal hepatic tissues in
94% of HCC patients (n = 104). In a mouse model of diethylnitrosamine
(DEN)-induced HCC, TonEBP expression was also higher in 100% of the
tumors. Downregulation of miR-223 was responsible for the elevated TonEBP
expression. miR-223 targeted the 3’-UTR of TonEBP gene and suppressed
TonEBP translation. Interestingly, univariate analyses revealed that
TonEBP expression in normal tissues adjacent to HCC was significantly
associated with tumor size, tumor grade, vascular invasion, viral DNA
replication, α-fetoprotein, PIVKA-II, recurrence, metastasis, and death.
In addition, Kaplan-Meier estimation and multivariate analyses showed
that the TonEBP expression was an independent prognostic marker for
recurrence and death in HCC patients. In mice, TonEBP haplo-deficiency
reduced both DEN- and DEN/high-fat diet (HFD)-induced HCC in association
with lower COX-2 transcription and milder hepatic inflammation. Acute
hepatic inflammation induced by DEN or lipopolysaccharide was also
reduced in hepatocyte- or myeloid-specific TonEBP knockout mice.
TonEBP-mediated activation of hepatic COX-2 promoter was dependent on the
transcription factor Yin Yang 1 (YY1). TonEBP interacted with YY1 through
the Rel-homology domain of TonEBP and spacer domain of YY1. In aggregate,
our data demonstrate that TonEBP-mediated hepatic inflammation is a
critical regulator of hepatocarcinogenesis. The miR-223-YY1/TonEBP-COX-2
pathway drives hepatic inflammation and commits the stressed hepatocytes
to malignant fate. Thus, TonEBP promotes HCC via COX-2 expression and is
a strong post-operative prognosticator of poor outcome in HCC patients.


