Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of synthetic lethality of PARP and NAMPT dual
inhibition in a small cell lung cancer PDX model.


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a highly malignant cancer type with a
5-year survival rate of less than 10%. Different from non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC), no effective target therapies have been approved to treat
SCLC. Poly (ADP) ribose polymerase (PARP) overexpression in SCLC has
prompted great efforts to evaluate the role of PARP inhibitors in clinic.
To maximize their therapeutic value it is urgent in need to explore the
best combination strategies between PARP inhibitors and other pathway
modulators. In this study we identified a SCLC patient-derived xenograft
(PDX) model with high PARP level and low nicotinamide
phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) level. Furthermore, synergistic effect
of PARP and NAMPT dual inhibition was demonstrated, supporting
translational research of PARP inhibitors and NAMPT inhibitors in this
model.

The mRNA expression of PARP as well as its 30 most-studied synthetic
lethality genes was compared between SCLC and NSCLC in both PDXs and
cancer cell lines. We found that NAMPT levels decreased most
significantly in SCLC compared with NSCLC across the 30 synthetic
lethality genes of PARP. As NAMPT is the rate-limiting enzyme for the
synthesis of the PARP substrate β-NAD+, we hypothesized that low β-NAD+
level due to low NAMPT level might render SCLC sensitive to PARP
inhibition. LU-01-0547, a SCLC PDX model with high PARP and low NAMPT
expression, was identified here. To test our hypothesis, we investigated
the preclinical efficacy of ABT888, a PARP inhibitor, with or without
FK866, a NAMPT inhibitor, in this subcutaneous xenograft model. The
single-agent efficacy of ABT888 was demonstrated (TGI=96%@100 mg/kg,
BID). At a sub-optimal dose (50 mg/kg, BID), treatment of ABT888 alone
produced little activity in the same model, while its combination with a
NAMPT inhibitor, FK866, significantly boosted the antitumor response
indicating the synergistic effect (TGI=117%, ORR=6/6, CR=4/6). When
nicotinic acid (NA) was administered to promote β-NAD+ biosynthesis via
the de novo pathway other than the NAMPT-mediated transformation, the
PARP inhibitor’s effectiveness was greatly antagonized (TGI=70% vs.
13%), suggesting β-NAD+ level might correlate with PARP inhibitor
sensitivity.

In conclusion, this study identified a SCLC PDX model with high PARP and
low NAMPT expression. Synergistic inhibition of PARP and NAMPT in this
model was demonstrated superior to either treatment alone in efficacy,
which warranted its future application in drug discovery. To our
knowledge, this was the first in vivo evidence of synthetic lethality in
SCLC PDX, supporting future clinical test of combination of PARP and
NAMPT inhibitors in SCLC patients.


