Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hedgehog signaling augments PDL-1 expression in cancer cells under
hypoxic condition to inhibit antitumor effects by activated lymphocytes.


[Background] Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is activated under hypoxic condition
in cancerous tissue. This is thought to be one of the mechanisms of the
induction of malignant phenotype of cancers. We have shown that Hh
inhibitor decreases proliferation, invasiveness, and tumorigenesis. We
have also revealed that Hh signaling plays pivotal roles for the
maintenance of function in activated lymphocytes and dendritic cells
under hypoxia. Recently, immune checkpoint inhibitor takes much
attention, however, response rate is still limited. The mechanisms
regulating PDL-1 expression also remains unclear. In this study, to
increase reponse rate of immune checkpoint inhibitor, we investigated
whether hypoxia-induced activation of Hh signaling contributes to PDL-1
expression in cancer and whether it affects the antitumor function of
activated lymphocytes.

[Materials and Methods] Pancreatic cancer cell line, Panc-1, gallbladder
cancer cell line, NOZ and GBd, and lung small cell cancer cell line,
SBC-5 were used as target cancer cells. Human lymphocytes derived from
PBMC were activated by using anti CD3 mAb and IL-2, and were used as
effector cells. For normoxic conditions, cells were cultured in 5% CO2
and 95% air. For hypoxic conditions, cells were cultured in 1% O2, 5%
CO2, and 94% N2 using a multigas incubator. For Hh signaling inhibition,
cyclopamine, polysaccharide-K (PSK), and small interfering RNA targeting
Gli1, Smo, MAML3, and RBPJ were used. Cell numbers were counted by light
microscope. Expression of cell surface molecules was estimated by FACS.

[Results] 1) Hypoxia augmented PDL-1 expression in all 4 cancer cell
lines. 2) Inhibition of Hh signaling using MAML3 siRNA, cyclopamine and
PSK reduced PDL-1 expression under hypoxia in all 4 cancer cell lines. 3)
When activated lymphocytes were cocultured with cancers treated with a Hh
inhibitor, activated lymphocyte cell numbers significantly increased
under hypoxia. 4) In contrast, this increase was abrogated when cancer
cells were treated with a PDL-1 neutralizing antibody. 5) When activated
lymphocytes were cocultured with cancers treated with a Hh inhibitor
and/or anti-PDL-1 Ab, the percent of CD8+ lymphocytes decreased in both
the cyclopamine- and anti-PDL-1-treated groups under hypoxic conditions,
while there was no significant change in CD3 expression. 6) NKG2D
expression increased on activated lymphocytes in anti PDL-1Ab-treated
group.

[Conclusion] These results suggest that Hh signaling is one of regulatory
pathways of PDL-1 expression under hypoxia and that inhibiting Hh
signaling may induce lymphocyte antitumor activity. Therefore, Hh
inhibition could be a promising drug target, not only as a direct tumor
suppressor agent, but also as a PDL-1 inhibitor.


