Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of novel therapeutic splice-switching oligonucleotides
targeting oncogenic RNA isoforms driving race-related aggressive prostate
cancer.


Background: Age-adjusted incidence and mortality rates for prostate
cancer (PCa) among African American (AA) men are 1.6- and 2.4-fold
greater, respectively, than among white men. More aggressive
characteristics of AA PCa account for a significant component of the PCa
disparity, in addition to social determinants of health. Previous work
from our laboratory and others have identified deregulation of the
androgen receptor (AR) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
pathways in AA versus white PCa. Thus, there is an urgent need to develop
a novel therapeutic strategy capable of inhibiting oncogenic AR and EGFR
RNA isoforms enriched for in AA PCa.

Methods: We have designed and synthesized novel chemically modified
splice switching oligonucleotides (SSOs) to: 1) correct aberrant splicing
leading to production of AR-V7 (AR-V7 SSO), an AR variant that lacks the
ligand binding domain, is constitutively active and associates with
castration-resistant PCa, poorer clinical outcomes and resistance to
androgen ablation/AR inhibition therapies, 2) drive production of AR45
(AR45 SSO), an AR variant that has a unique, non-functional
transactivation domain and acts in a dominant-negative manner and 3)
drive production of inhibitory or dominant-negative EGFR isoforms
(EGFR-TM or EGFR-TK SSOs), lacking the transmembrane or tyrosine kinase
domain, respectively.

Results: Transfection of a panel of PCa cell lines derived from AA and
white patients with AR-V7 SSO decreases AR-V7 RNA and protein in a
dose-dependent manner. Preliminary data suggests this biochemical
response correlates with a biologically significant phenotype, as AR-V7
SSO also decreases proliferation, proliferation in the presence of
enzalutamide and colony forming ability of PCa cells. Following
transfection of PCa cell lines with AR45 SSO, an increase in AR45 RNA is
seen and simultaneous decreases in wild type AR RNA and AR-V7 RNA are
seen. In addition, modulation of AR signaling is detected, with decreases
in RNAs corresponding to AR-induced target genes and increases in RNAs
corresponding to AR-repressed target genes. Transfection of PCa cell
lines with EGFR-TM or EGFR-TK SSOs increase RNA corresponding to these
isoforms in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, a decrease in
phosphorylated EGFR protein is detected. Further studies to examine the
effects of these SSOs on transactivation activity, signaling and PCa cell
biology and the therapeutic efficacy of these SSOs in AA and white PCa
patient-derived explants are underway.

Conclusions: These studies suggest that SSOs can be developed to modulate
AR and EGFR signaling. Such SSOs could represent a novel therapeutic
strategy with the potential to reduce PCa disparities for AA men and
improve outcomes for men of all races with aggressive disease driven by
these mechanisms.


