Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nivolumab treatment of metastatic renal cancer patients impairs
Tregs and potentiates NK function: The role of CXCR4 inhibition
(“REVOLUTION Trial”).


Despite encouraging results, Nivolumab response is not as wide as
expected in renal cancer ( RCC). Among mechanisms of immunoresistance
T-regulatory cells(Tregs) activity plays a central role. We previously
showed that tumoral Tregs in RCC patients are more suppressive than
healthy donors Tregs. Since tumoral Tregs express high level of CXCR4,
the receptor antagonism was evaluated on patients Tregs revealing that
CXCR4 antagonism reverted Treg suppressive activity( Santagata et al,
submitted manuscript). To identify biomarkers informative and predictive
of nivolumab efficacy Treg function, tumoral access and NK interactions
was determined in nivolumab treated mRCC patients (“ Revolution”
trial). At today eleven patients were analyzed for Tregs and NKs function
at time 0-2-4 weeks-3-6 months of treatment. 2 patients died for
unrelated causes, 5 Patients showed PR, 4 SD and 1 PD at six months. At
time 0 Tregs function, evaluated as inhibition of T-effector (Teff)
proliferation, varied among patients; two patients showed anergy reversed
by Nivolumab treatment. Overall, increase in Teff proliferation,
compatible with a decreased Tregs activity, was revealed during nivolumab
treatment and, while the total peripheral Tregs was unaffected, a
decrease in CD4+CD25+127lowFOXp3 highCD45RA - (suppressive Tregs) was
detected. NK activity, evaluated as CD107a exposure, increased with
nivolumab treatment with a concomitant reduction in the inhibitory
receptors CD158a, PD-1 and CXCR4. Moreover patients Tregs and NKs were
evaluated in vitro for the efficacy of CXCR4 inhibition in affecting cell
function. CXCR4 antagonists suppressed the Treg mediated inhibition of
Teff proliferation. In conclusion the evaluation of 11 patients enrolled
in the REVOLUTION study revealed detectable variations on Tregs and NKs
function relatively to Nivolumab treatment to be correlated with clinical
outcome. Tregs suppressive function was impaired by inhibition of CXCR4
receptor.


