Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ICOS agonism induces potent immune activation and anti-tumor
response in non-clinical models.


Inducible T-cell costimulator (ICOS) is a costimulatory receptor that is
upregulated on activated CD4 and CD8 T cells and plays an important role
in T cell survival, differentiation, regulation of memory and regulatory
T cell pools and humoral responses. Preclinically, augmenting signaling
through the ICOS pathway has been reported to induce anti-tumor activity
and enhance responses to CTLA4 blockade.

Here we present non-clinical data evaluating ICOS agonist antibody
activity in human and mouse model systems using a different antibody for
each species. GSK3359609 is a novel, selective anti-human ICOS agonist.
GSK3359609 induces ICOS signaling through phosphorylation of
intermediates in the Pi3K pathway leading to lymphocyte activation,
proliferation and pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion in human PBMC
in-vitro. A robust increase in CD4 effector T cell proliferation and
Granzyme B secreting CD8 T cells was observed with GSK3359609 treatment
in in-vitro assays utilizing PBMC from healthy donors, cancer patients or
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL). Modest induction of regulatory T
cell proliferation and IL-10 secretion were also observed. Significant
increase in IFNγ (pHere we present non-clinical data evaluating ICOS
agonist antibody activity in human and mouse model systems using a
different antibody for each species. GSK3359609 is a novel, selective
anti-human ICOS agonist. GSK3359609 induces ICOS signaling through
phosphorylation of intermediates in the Pi3K pathway leading to
lymphocyte activation, proliferation and pro-inflammatory cytokine
secretion in human PBMC in-vitro. A robust increase in CD4 effector T
cell proliferation and Granzyme B secreting CD8 T cells was observed with
GSK3359609 treatment in in-vitro assays utilizing PBMC from healthy
donors, cancer patients or tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL). Modest
induction of regulatory T cell proliferation and IL-10 secretion were
also observed. Significant increase in IFNγ (p<0.05) and TNFα secretion
was observed in both primary PBMC and TIL based assays. Gene expression
analysis of GSK3359609 treated human T cells confirmed changes in genes
associated with T and B cell activation. In mice, an ICOS surrogate
antibody was utilized in immune competent mouse tumor models. Tumor
regressions were observed in 10-40% of mice and were associated with a
robust increase in effector memory T cells in periphery as well as
increases in T cell activation and proliferation in lymphoid tissues and
tumor. Robust increases in PD1, PD-L1 and PD-L2 gene expression were
observed in the tumors from ICOS antibody treated mice along with an
increase in cytotoxic T cell signature and induction of an IFNγ gene
signature. Changes in regulatory T cell proliferation were also observed
in the blood and tumor of mice treated with the mouse ICOS agonist
however changes were consistently less in magnitude than corresponding
functional changes in cytotoxic CD8+ and effector CD4 cells.

We further explored treatment settings where a combination therapy may
condition the tumor immune microenvironment to a more favorable context
for ICOS agonist therapy. Treatment with an anti-PD1 antibody resulted in
strong upregulation of ICOS expression on tumor infiltrating CD8, CD4
effector and regulatory T cells while decreasing ICOS+ Tregs relative to
CD8 and CD4 effectors in the tumor microenvironment. Synergistic
anti-tumor activity was observed for the combination of PD-1 with ICOS
agonist antibodies in preclinical studies. These studies provide a strong
rationale for the ongoing FTIH Phase I study of GSK3359609 administered
alone and in combination with pembrolizumab to patients with selected
advanced solid tumors.


