Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disulfiram equivalent to doxorubicin in reducing quantitative
osteosarcoma metastatic tumor burden in a validated orthotopic mouse
model.


Introduction: The five-year survival of patients with osteosarcoma (OS)
with lung metastases is as low as 15%. Our group has shown that
disulfiram, a FDA-approved aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitor, inhibit
osteosarcoma proliferation and metastasis in vitro. Here we compare the
quantitative effects of disulfiram and doxorubicin on metastatic OS
burden in a orthotopic mouse model using near-infrared indocyanine green
(ICG) angiography.

Methodology: In an IACUC-approved protocol, 60 immunocompetent balb/c
mice were given tibial trans-physeal injections of 500K K7M2 mouse OS
cells into their left hindlimbs. Legs were amputated 4 weeks after OS
injection, and mice were euthanized with ex vivo lung retrieval 10 weeks
after OS injection. Animals in the doxorubicin group (n=20) were
administered 2 mg/kg retro-orbitally each week, starting 2 weeks after OS
injection to simulate the start of therapy only after a clinical tumor
was palpable. Disulfiram (n=20) 50 mg/kg was administered retro-orbitally
daily, also starting 2 weeks after OS injection. Controls (n=20) received
no therapy. Quantitative near-infrared imaging of the hindlimb and lungs
was performed by injecting 20 uL of 25 mg/cc ICG retro-orbitally 24 hours
prior to amputation and lung salvage, respectively. ICG reliably
extravasates specifically into tumor mass when injected 24 hours prior to
fluorescence measurements. Fluorescence analysis was performed using
Novadaq SPY (Novadaq, Bonita Springs, FL) and NIH ImageJ (Bethesda, MD).
Statistical analysis was performed using Prism 6.0 (GraphPad, LaJolla CA)
using Fisher's Exact Test and a one-way analysis of variance with Tukey's
post-test as indicated. Significance was defined as p Methodology: In an
IACUC-approved protocol, 60 immunocompetent balb/c mice were given tibial
trans-physeal injections of 500K K7M2 mouse OS cells into their left
hindlimbs. Legs were amputated 4 weeks after OS injection, and mice were
euthanized with ex vivo lung retrieval 10 weeks after OS injection.
Animals in the doxorubicin group (n=20) were administered 2 mg/kg
retro-orbitally each week, starting 2 weeks after OS injection to
simulate the start of therapy only after a clinical tumor was palpable.
Disulfiram (n=20) 50 mg/kg was administered retro-orbitally daily, also
starting 2 weeks after OS injection. Controls (n=20) received no therapy.
Quantitative near-infrared imaging of the hindlimb and lungs was
performed by injecting 20 uL of 25 mg/cc ICG retro-orbitally 24 hours
prior to amputation and lung salvage, respectively. ICG reliably
extravasates specifically into tumor mass when injected 24 hours prior to
fluorescence measurements. Fluorescence analysis was performed using
Novadaq SPY (Novadaq, Bonita Springs, FL) and NIH ImageJ (Bethesda, MD).
Statistical analysis was performed using Prism 6.0 (GraphPad, LaJolla CA)
using Fisher's Exact Test and a one-way analysis of variance with Tukey's
post-test as indicated. Significance was defined as p < .05. All numbers
are represented as mean ± standard deviation, and are described in
arbitrary perfusion units (APU).

Results: Both disulfiram (2.4 ± 1.7 APU) and doxorubicin (0.8 ± 1.7
APU)-treated animals demonstrated a significantly decreased metastatic
tumor burden compared to untreated controls (6.4 ± 3.4 APU, p .05). No
significant differences were noted between the doxorubicin and disulfiram
groups using Tukey's post-test (p = .76). Nineteen of 20 control animals
developed metastatic disease, compared to nine of 19 surviving
disulfiram-treated and two of 12 surviving doxorubicin-treated (both p
.05). No significant differences were noted between the doxorubicin and
disulfiram groups using Tukey's post-test (p = .76). Nineteen of 20
control animals developed metastatic disease, compared to nine of 19
surviving disulfiram-treated and two of 12 surviving doxorubicin-treated
(both p < .01) animals. No animals died prematurely in the control group,
while one animal died in the disulfiram group (5% mortality) and eight
animals died in the doxorubicin group (40% mortality, p .05). No
significant differences were noted between the doxorubicin and disulfiram
groups using Tukey's post-test (p = .76). Nineteen of 20 control animals
developed metastatic disease, compared to nine of 19 surviving
disulfiram-treated and two of 12 surviving doxorubicin-treated (both p <
.01) animals. No animals died prematurely in the control group, while one
animal died in the disulfiram group (5% mortality) and eight animals died
in the doxorubicin group (40% mortality, p < .05 compared to controls).

Conclusion: In our model of metastatic OS, disulfiram appears to have
potent anti-metastatic properties. It may also be better tolerated by
hosts. Molecular analysis of disulfiram and doxorubicin-treated primary
and metastatic tumors is ongoing, which can help us understand the
mechanism behind disulfiram's anti-tumor effect.


