Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-invasive imaging of colitis using multispectral optoacoustic
tomography.


Background: Currently, several non-invasive modalities, including MRI and
PET, are being investigated to identify early intestinal inflammation,
longitudinally monitor disease status, or detect dysplastic changes in
patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Currently, multispectral
optoacoustic tomography (MSOT; often in combination with ultrasound) has
been used to effectively image tumor xenografts as well as several
orthotopic tumor models, including pancreatic adenocarcinoma, but not to
specifically assess inflammatory or dysplastic changes in the bowel in
murine models. Here, we assess the applicability and utility of (MSOT) in
evaluating the presence and severity of colitis.

Methods: Nine 6-7 week old C57B/6 mice underwent antibiotic depletion of
gastrointestinal flora before inoculation with enterotoxic Bacteroides
fragilis to induce colitis. Mice were then anesthetized, depilated,
imaged from their superior thorax to inferior pelvis using MSOT. Mice
were evaluated prior to bacterial inoculation, 2 days after inoculation,
and 7 days after inoculation. MSOT values for oxygenated and deoxygenated
hemoglobin were determined using MSOT imaging software and compared using
linear regression. At each timepoint, three mice underwent colonoscopy
prior to euthanasia and colon processing for histology.

Results: Mice with bacterially-induced colitis demonstrated a
temporally-associated increase in mesenteric and colonic vascularity,
with an increase in mean signal intensity of oxygenated hemoglobin (1.150
vs. 2.716 MSOT a.u. compared to controls; p=0.004) by MSOT two days after
inoculation. These findings were significantly more prominent 7 days
after inoculation, with increased mean signal intensity of oxygenated
hemoglobin (1.150 vs. 2.716 vs. 3.422 MSOT a.u. for controls vs. 2 days
post-ETBF vs. 7 days post-ETBF, p=0.0002) and the development of punctate
vascular lesions on the colonic surface. Compared to untreated controls,
mice at 2 days and 7 days post ETBF inoculation demonstrated an increased
colitis score on colonoscopy (1.5 vs. 2.5 vs. 5.5), which correlated well
with MSOT findings of mean oxygenated hemoglobin signal intensity
(r=0.82, p=0.013). These findings were also associated with inflammatory
changes observed on histologic analysis.

Conclusions: MSOT represents a non-invasive diagnostic modality that
effectively identifies colitis in a murine model. With improvements in
depth of tissue penetration, MSOT may hold potential as a sensitive,
accurate, non-invasive imaging tool in evaluation of both disease status
and early detection of malignancy in patients with IBD.


