Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of membrane-type matrix metalloproteinases (MT-MMPS) in
head and neck squamous cell carcinomas, a target for prodrug development.


Introduction: Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinomas (HNSCC), a group of
highly aggressive heterogeneous epithelial malignancies, are considered
the fifth most common cancer with the seventh highest cancer mortality.
Despite advances in treatment, low five-year survival rates of around 30%
still remain. Several studies have implicated the actions of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) in HNSCC progression. Their role in mediating
extracellular matrix remodeling is paramount to tumour progression, as
they facilitate invasion, angiogenesis and metastasis. In contrast,
expression of active MMPs in normal tissues is largely absent. MT1-MMP
(MMP14) expression is known to correlate with poor clinical response in
several tumour types, but little is known about the expression of other
MT-MMPs in HNSCC. We have assessed the protein expression of the entire
MT-MMP complement in matched tumour and normal tissues of clinical HNSCC
cases by immunohistochemistry, supported by Western Blot and gene
expression data and will ultimately demonstrate translation of protein
expression into MT-MMP-specific proteolytic activity. Differential
expression would support the development of prodrugs specifically
activated in the tumour by MMPs.

Methods: 32 clinical cases (matched normal & tumour tissues) were assayed
for gene expression of the 6 members of the MT-MMP family
(MMP14,15,16,17,24,25). Expression profiling was carried out using
quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR analysis. Analysis of
protein expression used IHC on fixed sections used with monoclonal
antibodies specific for MT1 to MT6 MMP and Western blot analysis with
monoclonal antibodies optimized for western blotting.

Results: The protein expression of all six MT-MMPs has been characterised
in clinical HNSCC samples and related to matched normal tissue controls.
A differential in gene and protein expression levels exists between the
MT-MMP profiles across the normal and cancer tissues examined. MT1-, MT3-
and MT6-MMP in particular were shown to be highly overexpressed at both
gene and protein level in the majority of tumours. MT2, MT4 and MT5-MMP
expression was low or undetectable in all normal tissue and low in tumour
tissue

Conclusion: The existence and demonstration of differential MT-MMP
protein expression in HNSCC relative to normal tissues is a valuable tool
for prodrug development. MT1-, MT3- and MT6-MMP are highly expressed in
the majority of tumour samples compared to matched normal control tissue.
However, further work to elucidate the proteolytic activity of the
expressed proteins and therefore the proteolytic capacity of tumours is
needed to determine the suitability of HNSCC for prodrug therapy.


