Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical efficacy model to promote immunotherapy development
for prostate cancer.


Immunotherapy for prostate cancer has recently emerged as an attractive
treatment strategy. Yet, preclinical models where relationship between
inflammation, stroma, tumor cells and prostate cancer progression can be
studied are limited. GEMM models of prostate cancer are scarce and in
xenograft models, even when in humanized mice, the role of immune system
in the initiation and in progress of the malignancy cannot be studied. As
the requirement to test novel immunotherapies and especially combination
treatments is increasing, a preclinical model that takes into account
tumor microenvironment and immune system would be highly useful to
promote development of novel therapies to combat against prostate cancer.
Aim of the present study was to reveal if there is role between the
immune system and development of prostate cancer, and secondly, to
validate a model to be utilized later in immunotherapy development.

Intact 10-12 weeks old male Noble rats were s.c. implanted with
slow-releasing estradiol and testosterone pellets for 6, 13 and 18 weeks.
Daily release for testosterone was 0.8 mg and for estradiol 0.08 mg.
Control group animals received placebo hormone pellets without hormones.
Serum samples were collected during the study to monitor hormone levels,
and prostates were removed and processed for histopathological evaluation
at the end of the study. Hormonal treatment caused an increase in
estradiol to testosterone ratio, and the prostates were enlarged.
Imbalance in hormone-milieu induced inflammation in the prostate,
followed by formation of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN)-like
lesions and finally adenocarcinomas in the periurethral region.
Inflammatory cells, mainly T-cells were noticed in the vicinity of
PIN-like lesions. During the progression of prostate cancer, inflammatory
cells disappeared from the adenocarcinoma sites. In the prostate,
inflammation consisting of perivascular, stromal and periglandular
T-lymphocytes and intraluminal neutrophils remained.

Results of this study indicate significance of hormonal milieu,
especially estrogens and androgens, in the development of inflammation
and progression of prostate cancer, with a key role for tumor
microenvironment. Presence of lymphocytes in the proximity of PIN-like
lesions during the early phases of prostate cancer, and their
disappearance later in the adenocarcinomas, indicate interaction between
innate and adaptive immune system and cancer. Therefore, this preclinical
prostate cancer model that combines immune system and cancer can be
utilized when new immunotherapies, combination treatments and prevention
possibilities against prostate cancer progression are developed.


