Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of immune tolerance to recombinant immunotoxin LMB-100
using synthetic vaccine particles encapsulating rapamycin.


Recombinant Immunotoxins (RITs) are genetically engineered proteins
designed for cancer therapy. LMB-100 is a second generation RIT that is
composed of a humanized Fab targeting mesothelin and a de-immunized
fragment of Pseudomonas Exotoxin A. Due to the bacterial origin of the
toxin, LMB-100 is immunogenic, although less immunogenic than first
generation immunotoxins. Almost all patients treated with LMB-100 made
anti-drug antibodies (ADAs) after two or more cycles of treatment that
neutralized the RIT and greatly lowered efficacy. Kishimoto et al.
demonstrated that Synthetic Vaccine Particles containing Rapamycin
(SVP-R) inhibited the formation of ADAs, when administered with a foreign
protein such as KLH or Pegsiticase. The SVP-R are taken up by macrophages
and dendritic cells and increase the number of regulatory T cells in
treated mice. Here we evaluated the efficacy of combination therapy of
LMB-100 and SVP-R to eradicate mesothelin expressing tumors while
preventing ADA formation. To evaluate if SVP-R can prevent ADAs against
LMB-100, we immunized immune-competent mice with a combination of SVP-R
and RIT and measured ADAs titers by ELISA and by a functional
neutralization assay. We found that the treatment reduced ADA titers by
more than 99%. To determine if the mice were tolerized to LMB-100, we
treated the mice with two doses of SVP-R and six doses of LMB-100 to
induce tolerance; and followed by nine challenges of LMB-100 given over 6
weeks. We found that the ADAs were reduced by 98%, indicating development
of immunological tolerance to LMB-100. To show that the tolerance is
transferable, we tolerized the mice with six doses of SVP-R and LMB-100
and adoptively transferred their splenocytes to naïve recipient mice.
The recipient mice were challenged with six doses of LMB-100 and ADA
titers were measured. We found that splenocytes from tolerized mice
induced a 66% decrease in ADA formation in the recipient mice indicating
that the tolerance was mediated by cells of the immune system. To
demonstrate that immune suppression is useful in treating tumors, we
implanted mouse breast cancer cells expressing human mesothelin into
Balb/c mice with a normal immune system and treated them with LMB-100.
LMB-100 produced tumor regressions when given before ADAs developed, but
was inactive in mice with pre-existing ADAs. However, when mice with
preexisting ADAs were treated with LMB-100 and SVP-R, anti-tumor activity
was restored and ADAs suppressed (P≤0.0001). SVP-R are being evaluated
in humans to prevent ADA to Pegsiticase, an enzyme for refractory gout
treatment. Our data indicates that combining SVP-R with LMB-100 should be
useful in treating cancer by allowing more treatment cycles and better
efficacy. This approach can be used to increase the efficacy of other
immunogenic agents such as CAR-T cells, antibody drug conjugates and
viral gene therapy vectors


