Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anandamide reduces cell migration, invasion, and induces apoptosis
in an in vitro model of prostate cancer.


Introduction and Objective: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most commonly
diagnosed cancer in men and the second leading cause of cancer related
death in Canada. A large body of evidence supports a possible role for
cannabinoids in certain aspects of human health and disease, acting as
palliative agents as well as inhibitors of cancer cell proliferation,
migration, invasion, and the angiogenesis of tumours. Anandamide (AEA) is
a highly potent endogenously produced compound that acts as an agonist of
the cannabinoid receptors (CB1 and CB2) as well as the transient receptor
potential vanilloid receptor 1. AEA is mainly metabolized by fatty acid
amide hydrolase (FAAH) and overexpression of the enzyme in PCa tissues is
correlated with greater invasivity, malignancy and increasing Gleason
score. Majority of studies have focused on the effect of AEA treatment on
cell proliferation, without much focus on prostate cancer biology. This
study aims to determine the anti-cancer effect of AEA on PCa cells. We
hypothesize that anandamide will reduce migration, invasion, and induce
apoptosis in PCa cells.

Methodology: Human PCa cells (DU145, LNCaP, and PC3) were treated with
AEA at concentrations ranging from 1μM to 40μM and growth of cells
(using the MTS assay) was assessed at various times. Wound-healing assays
were conducted to investigate the migratory potential of cells following
24hr exposure to treatment, and trans-well invasion assays were performed
to explore the influence of AEA on cell invasion. Flow cytometry, using
the FITC Annexin V dead cell apoptosis kit, was used to detect the
proportion of apoptotic versus proliferating cells following anandamide
treatment.

Results: There was a significant reduction in the proliferation of DU145
cells at concentrations of 20μM and 40μM AEA compared to controls
(p=0.02, 0.005). LNCaP cells on the other hand required a higher
concentration of AEA to achieve this effect (p=0.05). Cell migration and
invasion studies on DU145 cells revealed a significant reduction in cell
motility at 20μM and 40μM AEA (p=0.006, 0.0005) as well as a
significant reduction in cell invasion at 20μM and 40μM ((p=0.0002,
0.0001). Flow cytometry results indicate a significant increase in the
proportion of apoptotic cells compared to control (3 fold change) when
treated with 20μM and 40μM in DU145 and LNCaP cells.

Conclusion: We have shown that AEA has greatest significant influence on
cell migration, invasion, and apoptosis. Further analysis on the role of
AEA in these pathways is underway exploring alterations in expression
levels of key proteins implicated in cell migration and apoptosis.

Funding/ Conflicts of Interest: None


