Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of oncogenic activity of interferon-induced
protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 and 3 in human oral squamous
cell carcinoma progression.


Interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats (IFITs) family
has multiple tetratricopeptide repeats with helix-turn-helix structural
motifs that mediate a variety of protein-protein interactions. There are
four IFIT genes that have been identified namely, ISG56/IFIT1,
ISG54/IFIT2, ISG60/IFIT3, and ISG58/IFIT5. IFIT proteins have been
documented to involve in a variety of cellular functions, such as cell
proliferation, migration, virus-induced translation initiation,
replication and double-stranded RNA signaling. Our previous study has
demonstrated that IFIT2 inhibits oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)
metastasis. However, little is known about IFIT1 and IFIT3 in the
progression of OSCC.

In the present study, we are investigating the functional role of IFIT1
and IFIT3 genes in OSCC tumor progression. Immunohistochemical analysis
of 147 patients derived tumor specimens with OSCC revealed a strong
correlation between IFIT1 and IFIT3 proteins (pIn the present study, we
are investigating the functional role of IFIT1 and IFIT3 genes in OSCC
tumor progression. Immunohistochemical analysis of 147 patients derived
tumor specimens with OSCC revealed a strong correlation between IFIT1 and
IFIT3 proteins (p<0.001). Clinicoplathological characteristics
correlation of IFIT1 and IFIT3 expression levels were positively
associated with regional lymph node invasion and nerve invasion. IFIT1
was also associated with venous invasion. Ectopic expression of IFIT1 and
IFIT3 proteins in Ca9-22 and SAS cells inducing PKC, EGFR, and AKT
activation, resulting in OSCC cells resistance to cisplatin but highly
susceptible to tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib, whereas IFIT1 and
IFIT3 knockdown SCC25 cells have shown opposite effect. Interestingly,
IFIT1 and IFIT3 expression is associated with enhanced cell invasion
activity and altered expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
markers. These data suggested that IFIT1 and IFIT3 may serve as potential
biomarkers for the OSCC treatment. The study on how IFIT1 and IFIT3 cause
PKC, EGFR, and AKT activation and resistance to DNA damaging agents is
ongoing. Our further investigations may explain the molecular signaling
mechanism of IFIT1 and IFIT3 in OSCC tumor progression.


