Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A database for evaluating methylation biomarkers in bladder cancer.


Bladder cancer is the fourth-most common cancer in men, one of the most
expensive types of cancer to treat, and recurs frequently. While the
genomic pathways associated with high-grade, muscle invasive (MI) tumors
and low-grade, non-muscle invasive (NMI) tumors are well-established,
recent studies have also found that MI and NMI tumors have unique
methylation patterns, and that methylation may play a role in the
development of early-stage bladder cancer. Interestingly, bladder cancer
patients have frequent mutations in chromatin remodeling genes that alter
known histone markers of DNA methylation. Since methylation marks are
pharmacologically reversible, the identification of methylation
biomarkers is a promising avenue for therapeutic treatment. Indeed,
several candidate prognostic methylation biomarkers have been identified,
but await prospective evaluation.

The Bladder Cancer Biomarker Evaluation Tool (BC-BET) is a web-based
resource for rapidly evaluating biomarkers in publicly available genomic
datasets. Initially developed for gene expression biomarkers, BC-BET
includes 1451 patients across 13 cohorts, and 40 bladder cancer cell
lines, with gene expression profiles. In this work, we describe the
addition of methylation data to BC-BET, so that candidate methylation
biomarkers can be rapidly evaluated across multiple patient cohorts.

BC-BET now contains methylation profiles from four patient cohorts (250
patients) and includes the available bladder cancer data from the Gene
Expression Omnibus and The Cancer Genome Atlas. In "evaluation" mode, a
user selects a gene of interest, and BC-BET evaluates whether the
selected gene is differentially methylated between tumor vs. normal
samples, NMI vs. MI tumors, and low- vs. high-grade tumors.
Alternatively, the “biomarker discovery” mode allows a user to
identify all differentially methylated genes at a desired false discovery
rate (FDR). In both cases, graphical summaries of the results are
displayed and statistical results can be downloaded to an Excel
spreadsheet. The methylation module of BC-BET is implemented using shiny,
a web application framework for R for developing interactive web pages.

The addition of methylation data to BC-BET makes it a valuable resource
for evaluating methylation biomarkers in bladder cancer. BC-BET is
available from the following link:
https://gdancik.github.io/bioinformatics/BCBET


