Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A cellular platform enables targeted brain delivery of T cells to
glioblastoma.


BACKGROUND: Cancer renders the endothelium anergic, abrogating T cell
homing and hindering cell therapy for central nervous system (CNS)
malignancies. Activated Leukocyte Cell Adhesion Molecule (ALCAM) is a
pathological adhesion molecule upregulated in the endothelium of
Infiltrative CNS diseases. ALCAM in these conditions leads to
overexpression of Intercellular Adhesion Molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and vascular
CAM-1 (VCAM-1); mediating firm leukocyte anchorage . Antibodies blocking
ALCAM decrease leukocyte BBB access and are currently in a clinical trial
for Multiple Sclerosis (MS).

METHODS/RESULTS: We studied the difference in the dynamic signature of
adhesion molecules GBM tumor endothelium. ALCAM is expressed on primary
glioblastoma (GBM) endothelium, while ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 are paradoxically
downregulated. We saw induction of vascular ALCAM alone under tumor
condition. Thus, GBM endothelium fails to launch the second wave of
adhesion molecules necessary for BBB transmigration. Then, we mapped the
ALCAM minimal binding region and created an artificial molecule with the
intent of creating a novel cellular platform to reverse endothelial
anergy, through ALCAM specific anchorage. The exodomain is composed of
domain 3 (D3) of CD6 , a stalk and a CD6 endodomain. D3 on T cells
crosslinked to ALCAM in proximity ligation assay (PLA; METHODS/RESULTS:
We studied the difference in the dynamic signature of adhesion molecules
GBM tumor endothelium. ALCAM is expressed on primary glioblastoma (GBM)
endothelium, while ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 are paradoxically downregulated. We
saw induction of vascular ALCAM alone under tumor condition. Thus, GBM
endothelium fails to launch the second wave of adhesion molecules
necessary for BBB transmigration. Then, we mapped the ALCAM minimal
binding region and created an artificial molecule with the intent of
creating a novel cellular platform to reverse endothelial anergy, through
ALCAM specific anchorage. The exodomain is composed of domain 3 (D3) of
CD6 , a stalk and a CD6 endodomain. D3 on T cells crosslinked to ALCAM in
proximity ligation assay (PLA; <40nm) during TEM. Under shear stress, D3
T cells showed a global improved trafficking kinetics: higher capture,
more rolling with slower velocity, arrest and eventually better TEM. This
was not seen on ALCAM (-) normal endothelium or with non-transduced (NT)
control T cells. In an ex vivo model of BBB, D3 T cells exhibited higher
transmigratory ability over NT T cells. Signaling through the D3
endodomain phosphorylated ZAP70 recruiting Talin that enables LFA-1 open
confirmation, mediating TEM. D3 T cells had higher F-actin/FAK
colocalization using TIRF microscopy at its interface with ALCAM. In an
orthotopic model of GBM, D3 T cells homed significantly more and
accumulated at the tumor site. This was confirmed by the detection of D3
T cells in brain explants.

CONCLUSION: We created a cellular platform that enables targeted brain
delivery of T cells. This platform serves as a gateway to the effective
cellular therapeutics for brain malignancies but potentially as a
delivery system for complex biologics.


