Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex
2-associated interactome involved in brain cancer cell motility by
affinity purification-mass spectrometry.


The Mechanistic Target of Rapamycin Complex 2 (mTORC2), a multiprotein
complex with serine-threonine kinase activity, drives several cellular
processes of normal cells to promote proper metabolic activity, survival,
proliferation, differentiation and movement. On the other hand, mTORC2
has been implicated as a critical player in tumorigenesis, stimulation of
cell growth, cancer metabolic reprogramming, and development of highly
migratory and invasive capabilities of cancers. Therefore,
characterization of mTORC2 is necessary not only for better
understandings of known mTORC2-mediated functions, but also for the
discovery of new roles and more interacting partners of mTORC2 signaling
network in cancers, particularly ones with hyperactivated mTORC2 such as
glioblastoma. However, until now mTORC2 is still partially characterized.
Previously, mTORC2 was reported to be associated with Filamin A and
Myosin-9 which have been known to play important roles in cellular
activities requiring locomotion, including cancer migration and invasion.
The complex participates in regulating glioblastoma migration and
invasion, and Filamin A acts as a physiological downstream target of
mTORC2. Currently, proteomics has emerged as a powerful tool to identify,
quantify, and examine a large number of proteins. Therefore, in order to
extensively unravel mTORC2 signaling pathway, the use of proteomics is
necessary.

We characterized mTORC2 by proteomic analysis based on affinity
purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS) using antibodies
against RICTOR, a specific component of mTORC2. The protein-protein
interactions between RICTOR and other associated proteins were assessed.
In addition to canonical components of mTORC2, the study has revealed
more insights into a number of mTORC2 interacting partners which can be
categorized and related to the main functions previously identified such
as actin cytoskeleton reorganization, fatty acid metabolism, protein
translation. Interestingly, we also found other types of cytoskeletal
proteins, nucleotide metabolism, less-characterized and low abundance
proteins associated with mTORC2 such as Hornerin and Desmoplakin. In
addition, we have carried out the identification of condition-specific
interactions for a dynamic view of mTORC2 interactome and found changes
in the mTORC2-associated proteins from different conditions. Furthermore,
proteomic approaches can also be relevant to investigation and prediction
of mTORC2 upstream regulators, downstream targets, and complex
localization. Ultimately, this project will uncover some unknown
molecular mechanisms, and result in a significant impact on the field of
signal transduction machinery in cancers.


