Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequency of imaging findings suspicious for and suggestive of
cancer between three different hospitals within a single health system.


Outpatient imaging rates have risen over the past two decades. Imaging
findings representing possible cancer are commonly detected on these
exams and require follow-up. Our health system utilizes a standardized
coding scheme, similar to the breast imaging and reporting data system
(BI-RADS), to classify the malignant potential of masses on all abdominal
and pelvic imaging exams; two of these categories are suspicious (for
masses that clearly represent malignancy) and suggestive (for masses that
may represent malignancy). These codes are used at three hospitals in a
single health system: a university hospital, a community hospital, and a
Level 1 trauma center. Our objective was to evaluate the frequency of
imaging findings suspicious for or suggestive of malignancy in the liver,
kidneys, pancreas, and adrenals between outpatients and inpatients at
these three hospitals. Over 1600 suspicious and suggestive masses were
discovered in one year: 843 in the liver, 499 in the kidneys, 152 in the
pancreas, and 137 in the adrenal glands. Masses suspicious for cancer
were unevenly distributed by patient location. In the liver and kidneys,
suspicious masses were more common in outpatients at all three hospitals;
in the pancreas and adrenal glands, suspicious masses were more common in
inpatients. Suspicious masses were unevenly distributed by modality. The
proportion of MRI exams where at least one organ was coded as suspicious
was higher than the proportion of CT exams. Masses suspicious for cancer
were unevenly distributed across the three hospitals. Liver masses
suspicious for cancer were twice as likely to be discovered at the
university hospital compared to the community hospital and the Level 1
trauma center (present in 2% vs. 0.7% vs. 0.6% of all livers evaluated,
respectively). Adrenal masses suspicious for cancer were also more
commonly detected at the university hospital (present in 0.3% vs. 0.1%
vs. 0.1% of adrenal glands evaluated, respectively). A similar trend was
observed for renal and pancreatic lesions. Masses coded as suggestive of
malignancy (rather than clearly suspicious for malignancy) were more
frequently detected at the university hospital. This was particularly
evident in adrenal lesions where 0.3% of adrenal glands evaluated at the
university hospital were suggestive of malignancy compared to 0.06% at
the community hospital and 0.03% at the Level 1 trauma center. A similar
trend was observed for pancreatic lesions. In conclusion, this novel
database of standardized codes for abdominal masses provides insight into
how masses suspicious for and suggestive of cancer are coded variably by
organ, patient location, and modality between three different hospitals
within the same urban academic health system. Further investigation will
be needed to determine the influence of patient case mix, referral
patterns, and radiologist characteristics that contribute to these
observed differences.


