Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGFR inhibitors enhance gemcitabine sensitivity in pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma.


Pancreatic cancer (PaCA) is highly refractory to treatment, with a median
survival of 6 months. Currently, gemcitabine (Gem), a difluoro analog of
deoxycytidine, is the standard care for PaCA, but it renders only a
modest survival benefit. Combination therapy, integrating novel agents
into standard-of-care regimens, may maximize efficacy of Gem-based
therapy. Fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) function is aberrant in
pancreatic cancer, and suppression of FGFRs inhibits pancreatic cancer
growth and invasion. However, the mechanisms of FGFR action and their
therapeutic utility in pancreatic cancer remain to be elucidated. Here we
tested the hypothesis that FGFRs can impact Gem sensitivity of PaCA cells
by employing pan-FGFR inhibitors and shRNAs against FGFRs. NVP-BGJ398 and
AZD4547 are novel FGFR inhibitors (FGFRIs) specific to FGFR1, FGFR2 and
FGFR3, and are in various stages of clinical trial. The FGFRIs modestly
but significantly inhibited proliferation, migration, and invasion of
PANC-1, MIAPaCa-2 cells in wound-healing and trans-well assays. Treatment
with low-concentration Gem (7.5nM) enhanced MIAPaCa-2 cell migration at
24hrs, but migration was reduced subsequently, suggesting a sequence of
delayed effects of Gem upon cell migration. After 72hrs of exposure, Gem
combined with FGFRIs reduced MIAPaCa-2 cell proliferation significantly
compared to controls or Gem- and FGFRI alone. Pharmacodynamic modeling
was employed to evaluate drug interaction, and the interaction
coefficient Psi was estimated by simultaneous modeling of 16 different
drug combinations over a period of 0-96 hrs. The analysis estimated
Psi=0.78, which indicates synergism. Compared to BGJ398 or Gem alone, the
combination also increased the percentage of cells arrested at S phase
for a longer period of time. Western blots revealed significant
downregulation of ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase large subunit
(RRM1), DNA excision repair protein (ERCC1), and
Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal transition biomarkers (vimentin and snail) with
FGFRI/Gem treatment compared to Gem-treated cells, indicating that FGFRIs
inhibit numerous factors that may contribute to Gem resistance.
Loss-of-function by shRNA-mediated knockdown of FGFR1 in MIAPaCa-2 cells
showed decreased expression of RRM1, whereas knockdown of FGFR2 and FGFR3
mediated an increase in RRM1 expression, implicating FGFR1 suppression in
improving Gem-sensitivity. These results suggest that inhibition of FGFR1
could potentially enhance sensitivity of PaCA to Gem therapy, and that
combining FGFRs with gemcitabine is a promising treatment strategy in
pancreatic cancer.


