Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of ceramide in the dual cytotoxic and metabolic
stimulative effects of sigma-2 receptors.


Sigma-2 receptors are highly overexpressed in cancer cells compared to
normal cells, as well as in proliferative versus quiescent cells. Sigma-2
receptors have been of interest as an antineoplastic target, as sigma-2
agonists cause cell death via a variety of pathways. Recently, a new
class of sigma-2 agonists has been discovered, with ligands such as
CM764, that do not induce cell death but that affect cellular metabolism,
as shown by increased MTT reduction, increased ATP level, and HIF-1α
stabilization. Previously, our lab has shown that treatment of breast
tumor cells with sigma-2 receptor agonists CB-184 and BD737 caused dose
dependent increases in ceramide and simultaneous decreases in
sphingomyelin, suggesting that sigma-2 receptors modulate the
sphingolipid pathway. The ceramide pathway has been shown to play both
prosurvival and pro-apoptotic roles in cancer cells. Here, we examine the
role of ceramide in sigma-2 receptor mediated pathways in human SK-N-SH
neuroblastoma cells. A 24 h treatment of SK-N-SH neuroblastoma cells with
20 μM exogenous C6-ceramide caused less than 20% cell death.
Interestingly, this compared to over 50% cell death in MCF-7 breast
adenocarcinoma cells and PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells, indicating a
differential role of ceramide in cell death pathways across cell lines.
SK-N-SH cells were treated with 10 μM of either CM572, a classic sigma-2
agonist that causes cell death, or CM764, a sigma-2 agonist that
stimulates metabolism. Fumonisin B1 is a potent inhibitor of ceramide
synthase. Treatment of cells with fumonisin B1 (10 μM) did not
significantly alter CM572-induced cytotoxicity. Conversely, treatment
with fumonisin B1 did significantly inhibit the MTT reduction caused by
CM764. Taken together, these results suggest that ceramide formation may
play more of a role in the metabolic stimulative effect of sigma-2
receptors, as opposed to the cytotoxic effect. Decreased levels of
ceramide have been shown to increase cellular resistance to apoptosis.
Therefore, it has been of interest to increase intracellular ceramide
levels in drug resistant cancer cells in order to sensitize the resistant
cells to chemotherapeutics. Multidrug resistance (MDR) in cancer cells is
often attributed to the overexpression of particular ABC transporters
that effectively pump drugs out of the cells. One such protein is the
multidrug resistance-associated protein 1 (MRP1). It has been shown that
increased expression of drug efflux pumps also decreases cell sensitivity
to ceramide. Treatment with CM572 caused a dose-dependent decrease in
MRP1 protein levels, while treatment with CM764 had little effect on
MRP1. We will examine how this modulation of MRP1 affects sensitivity to
C6-ceramide. We will also examine whether combination of C6-ceramide with
sigma-2 receptor ligands augments the cytotoxic and/or metabolic
stimulative effects of sigma-2 receptors.


