Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An in vitro biological assay to identify small molecule
upregulators of let-7 miRNA in LIN28- positive ovarian cancer cells.


Onco-fetal LIN28, present in two isoforms A and B and expressed in cancer
cells, promotes tumorigenesis by suppressing the biogenesis of the tumor
suppressor microRNA, let-7, thereby activating an array of oncogenes
including RAS, MYC, HMGA2 and Cyclin D1. Studies have demonstrated a
positive correlation between LIN28 A/B expression and advanced epithelial
ovarian cancers (Histological grade 2 or 3). Correlation of LIN28
expression to a poor progression-free survival and resistance to
platinum-based therapies makes LIN28-let-7 pathway an attractive target
for ovarian cancer chemotherapy. The overall goal of this study was to
identify small molecules that upregulate let-7 levels in LIN28A or LIN28B
positive ovarian cancer cells. We hypothesize that induction of let-7
levels would potentially improve prognosis for ovarian cancer patients
bearing LIN28 positive tumors. To test this hypothesis, we developed a
dual luciferase let-7 reporter assay in which let-7 binding sites found
in the 3’ UTR of the HMGA2 gene were cloned downstream of the
nanoluciferase reporter gene. In this assay, elevated let-7 levels would
result in repression of the nanoluciferase signal. Data obtained was
normalized to Firefly luciferase activity. We tested efficacy of the
assay system using let-7 mimics and inhibitors in LIN28A (OVK-18) and
LIN28B (TOV-112D) positive ovarian cancer cell lines stably expressing
the reporter cassette that were generated in house. Transfection of the
let-7 mimic resulted in a 0.5 fold decrease in both cell lines relative
to the negative controls, whereas transfection of the let-7 inhibitor
resulted in a two-fold increase in relative luminescence. We miniaturized
the assay to 384-well format for small molecule screening. The Z prime
(Z’) scores for both cell lines was 0.58 and 0.84 respectively,
indicating that the assay was robust to carry out the screens. We
performed a primary screen using the Prestwick and LOPAC1280 libraries
for each cell line in duplicate as well as a counter screen using a
reporter cassette that lacked let-7 binding sites. A compound was
identified as a hit if it ranked within the top 100 compounds in the
primary screen and outside the top 250 compounds in the counter screen.
The hit rate for LIN28A positive cell line was 80 % for the Prestwick and
74 % for the LOPAC1280 libraries. For the LIN28 B positive cell line, the
hit rate was 73 % and 53 % for the Prestwick and LOPAC libraries. The
hits were validated by assaying for let-7 levels using qRTPCR. The hits
identified included compounds that inhibited PI3K-mTOR, nFkB, c-MYC,
Cyclin D1, BET1 as well as aurora kinase. These targets have been
reported in the literature to downregulate let-7 levels. In conclusion,
our assay-system is the first to utilize a biological assay of let-7
levels for small molecule library screening thus serving as a valuable
tool for cancer drug discovery.


