Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developmental pluripotency associated 4: A novel putative
predictor for prognosis of aggressive prolactin secreting tumors in the
pituitary.


Prolactin-secreting pituitary tumors (prolactinomas) are the most common
pituitary tumors in humans. Majority of prolactinomas are adenomas and
benign and slow growing, but in some cases, they are locally aggressive
and invasive. In a rat animal model we found that fetal alcohol exposed
female rats develop aggressive prolactinomas following estrogen
administration. Several recent evidence suggest that human cancer is a
stem cells disease because many embryonic stem cell markers such as OCT4,
SOX2, Nanog, and Klf4 are reexpressed in malignant tumor. The
developmental pluripotency associated 4 (DPPA4) gene has an important
role in self-renewal and pluripotency in embryonic stem cells. It is
re-expressed in several malignant tumors and is identified as a new
pluripotency-related oncogene. We studied wither DPPA4 expresses and
function in aggressive prolactinomas induced by fetal alcohol exposures.
Pregnant Fischer 344 rats were fed between gestational days 7 and 21 with
a liquid diet containing alcohol, pair-fed with isocaloric liquid diet,
or fed ad libitum with rat chow. At 60 days of age, female offspring rats
were ovarictomized and received a subcutaneous estradiol implant. These
rats were sacrificed at 3 months after the estradiol implants. Pituitary
tumors were collected and pituitary tumorspheres were prepared and
maintained in cultures. Alcohol-fed pituitary tumorspheres, but not
control-fed pituitary tumorspheres, expressed DPPA4 and a panel of genes
related to multipotency (OCT4, NANOG, KLF4, and CD133) and showed
increased invasiveness and marked growth in cultures and in mice
xenografts. The RNA sequence analyses identified selective expression of
DPPA4 in the pituitary of fetal alcohol-exposed rats but not in control
rats. Ingenuity pathway analysis of the RNA sequence data showed
interrelationship of DPPA4 expression with the overexpression of
pluropotent factors SOX2 and NANOG and several growth promoting molecules
such as Wnt5a, TWIST1 and CTNNB1 and ESR1. Real-time PCR and western blot
analysis confirmed overexpression of DPPA4 and its network growth
promoting factors in pituitary tumors and in pituitary tumorspheres of
fetal alcohol exposed rats. Deletion of DPPA4 gene from pituitary
tumorspheres using a CRIPR Cas9 technique reduced the tumor cell ability
to proliferate, migrate and form colony in soft agar. These data suggest
that DPP4 is selectively expressed in aggressive prolactin-secreting
tumors in the pituitary and controls the growth and migration of these
tumors. (This work is supported by a National Institute of Health grant
R01 AA11591).


