Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variable drug responses characterize the functional heterogeneity
of Nf1 null tumors.


Introduction: Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a autosomal dominant
disease with a predisposition to cancer. Biallelic inactivation of the
NF1 gene increases risk of developing brain tumors, leukemia,
neurofibromas and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs).
Somatic mutations in the NF1 gene are also associated with sporadic
malignancies including glioblastoma, neuroblastoma, and melanoma. The NF1
tumor suppressor gene encodes the RAS GTPase-activating protein (GAP)
neurofibromin. Loss of NF1 results hyperactivation of Ras, MAPK and PI3K
signaling pathways components, representing potential therapeutic
targets. However, the variable response of NF1 mutant tumors to MAPK and
mTOR inhibitors suggests the intrinsic heterogeneity of NF1 mutant
tumors. We hypothesized that defining alternative mechanisms and
functional sub-classes of Nf1-mutant tumors on the basis of their
variable drug sensitivity will produce pre-clinical therapeutics data
that will inform clinical trials.

Methods: We previously generated mouse models in which we mutagenized Nf1
heterozygous mice with radiation, recapitulating the susceptibility of
patients with NF1 to radiation-induced cancers. These models produced
solid tumors such as mammary carcinomas, squamous cell carcinomas, and
soft tissue sarcomas, which we determined to be Nf1 null. Cell lines
established from these tumors were characterized by a drug sensitivity
screen using a custom 94 compound drug library. Drug responses indicate
that Nf1 mutant tumor cell lines organize into functional groups sharing
similar drug sensitivities. Six candidate drugs each targeting distinct
components of MAPK and PI3K signaling pathways were selected from the
drug library. After 24 hours of exposure to each inhibitor or control,
cells were analyzed for cell proliferation, cell cycle changes, and cell
death. Western blotting were performed to determine whether drug
exposures produce alterations in their predicted biochemical pathways
such as PI3K/Akt, and MAPK pathways.

Results: Nf1 loss did not predict uniform sensitivity of cell lines to
treatment with MAPK and mTOR inhibitors. Each compound induced
differential effects on viability of Nf1 null tumors cell lines. High
variability and cell line-dependent cytotoxic and cytostatic effects were
also observed. Although phosphorylated Akt(S473), S6, and p44/42 MAPK
varied widely among all untreated Nf1 null cell lines, this did not
predict their drug sensitivity. In vitro drug sensitivity data indicates
heterogeneous differential sensitivities of Nf1 mutant tumor cells to
different drug classes, independent of tumor histology, permitting
segregation into functional groups.

Conclusion: Tumor cell lines driven by Nf1 loss demonstrate heterogeneous
responses to Ras pathway inhibition, which may be explained by mechanisms
of tumor formation after Nf1 loss involve multiple alternative pathways.


