Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidation of the signaling pathways that mediate
berberine-induced effects in cancer cells.


Resistance towards standard therapeutic regimens and evasion of apoptosis
are some of the hallmarks of advanced forms of cancer, which include
Sorafenib-resistance in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC),
castration-resistance in prostate cancer. Development of effective
therapeutic strategies that can target these resistant forms is
critically needed. In an effort to understand the molecular mechanism
mediating resistance in cancer, in previous studies utilizing Tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)-resistant
cancer cells we showed that combination of TRAIL along with the PPARγ
ligand Troglitazone (TZD) can sensitize them towards apoptosis. Using
more molecular approaches these studies identified the serine/threonine
protein kinase, AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) as a mediator of
TRAIL-TZD-induced apoptosis. Since AMPK seemed to be a major mediator of
this apoptosis, in the current studies we utilized the natural compound
Berberine (BBR), a known activator of AMPK in combination with TRAIL.
These demonstrated a significant reduction of cell viability (MTT assay)
and induction of apoptosis (caspase activation) when treated with a
combination of TRAIL and BBR. This apoptosis is attenuated in cells
overexpressing AMPKα-dominant negative (DN), suggesting an involvement
of AMPK in mediating this. To understand the downstream targets and the
mechanism involved, an apoptosis PCR array analysis was performed, which
suggested induction of TNFRSF10B (DR5) gene expression by BBR. In
addition, knockdown of DR5 expression attenuated TRAIL-BBR-induced
apoptosis, suggesting DR5 to be a potential target of BBR in this
apoptotic cascade. Future studies will include determining any crosstalk
of AMPK in BBR signaling to modulate DR5 pathway. Our earlier studies
also demonstrated an involvement of β-catenin in mediating cancer cell
resistance. Stabilizing mutations and overexpression of β-catenin has
been reported in many cancers, most profoundly in HCC leading to an
activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling. To understand any role of
β-catenin in TRAIL-BBR-induced apoptosis, we determined the effect of
BBR on β-catenin pathway. These revealed a significant attenuation of
β-catenin protein expression by BBR in various HCC cells in a time and
dose-dependent manner. BBR treatment also attenuated
β-catenin/TCF-induced transcriptional activity, indicating antagonism of
β-catenin pathway. Our studies indicate that combination of TRAIL and
AMPK activator BBR might be an effective means of antagonizing β-catenin
pathway and ameliorating TRAIL resistance via DR5 in advanced forms of
cancer.


