Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Germline genetic, molecular and environmental factors modulate
APOBEC mutagenesis in human tumors.


Background: Activity of APOBEC3 enzymes has been identified as a main
source of somatic mutations of a specific type (C to T or G substitutions
in the TCA or TCT motifs). This mutation pattern, known as the APOBEC
signature, has been described in 16 of 30 tumor types explored by TCGA,
with bladder cancer being one of top cancers enriched with
APOBEC-signature mutations. Recently, we demonstrated that a risk allele
of a bladder cancer GWAS SNP rs1014971 was significantly associated with
increased APOBEC3B (A3B) mRNA expression and APOBEC mutagenesis in
bladder tumors. Here, we aimed to further explore factors that can
modulate APOBEC mutagenesis in human tumors.

Methods: Isoform-specific expression analysis of all APOBEC3 genes (A3A,
A3B, A3C, A3D, A3G, A3F, and A3H) was performed in TCGA datasets for
seven tumor types enriched for APOBEC mutations (> 25% of the samples) -
bladder urothelial carcinoma (BLCA), breast invasive carcinoma (BRCA),
cervical and endocervical cancers (CESC), head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSC), lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD), lung squamous cell
carcinoma (LUSC), and ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma (OV). Expression
and APOBEC mutagenesis pattern were analyzed by multivariate linear
regression in relation to rs1014971 genotypes and adjusting for age, sex,
race, DNA CpG methylation, copy number alterations (CNA), and human
papilloma virus (HPV) infection status (where relevant). Survival
analysis was performed using multivariate Cox regression models that
included age, sex, tumor stage, rs1014971, and load of APOBEC mutations
or mRNA expression of APOBEC3 splicing forms.

Results: Analysis of APOBEC mutagenesis identified significant interplay
between SNP rs1014971, expression of specific APOBEC3 splicing isoforms,
and environmental factors (such as HPV infection). For example, SNP was
important in BLCA and sub-types of HNSC, while HPV infection status was
the main factor associated with APOBEC mutagenesis in CESC and HNSC.
Importantly, variable contribution of mutagenic and non-mutagenic
isoforms of A3A and A3B, which are generated by alternative splicing,
emerged as significant factors contributing to APOBEC mutagenesis across
human tumors. Survival of the cancer patients was also differentially
influenced by these factors.

Conclusions: These findings suggest that APOBEC mutagenesis pattern is
tissue-specifically affected by germline genetic, molecular and
environmental factors. Deeper understanding of these factors and their
interplay may pave the way for preventive and treatment measures of human
cancers towards precision medicine.


