Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exposure of tumor-associated macrophages to apoptotic pancreatic
cancer cells promotes cancer stem cell chemoresistance.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading cause of
cancer related deaths worldwide. This is largely due to the existence of
a subpopulation of stem-like cells present within the tumor, known as
cancer stem cells (CSCs) that drive metastasis and chemoresistance. In
addition, we have now come to realize that the tumor-associated
microenvironment not only provides structural support for tumor
development, but more importantly the microenvironment provides cues to
CSCs that regulate their biological properties. Chemotherapy often leads
to apoptosis of cancer cells, and in previous studies we have shown that
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) exponentially increase following
chemotherapy. We hypothesized that TAMs, in response to
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis, secrete factors that potentiate PDAC
chemoresistance. In line with this hypothesis, we show that
monocyte-derived macrophages cultured in the presence of apoptotic PDAC
cells polarize towards an M2 pro-tumor phenotype and secrete factors that
render naïve PDAC cells, specifically CSCs, resistant to Gemcitabine- or
Abraxane-induced apoptosis, irrespective of mutations in p53.
Importantly, chemoresistant cells showed increased sphere formation
capacity and increased tumorigenesis as measured in an extreme limiting
dilution assay in nude mice, confirming an enrichment in CSCs. Moreover,
using a syngeneic orthotropic in vivo model of PDAC, we were able to
significantly augment the anti-tumor potential of Gemcitabine by
pharmacologically eliminating TAMs using clodronate liposomes. To
determine the mechanism by which TAMs promote PDAC chemoresistance, we
performed proteomic analyses on macrophage conditioned media and
identified several proteins specifically induced and secreted when
macrophages were co-cultured with apoptotic PDAC cells, including 14-3-3
protein zeta/delta (14-3-3ζ), a major regulator of apoptotic cellular
pathways. We present additional data to show that TAM-seceretd 14-3-3ζ
promotes CSC chemoresistance. Taken together, the sum of these data
highlight a unique regulatory mechanism by which chemotherapy-induced
apoptosis acts as a switch to initiate a pro-tumor/anti-apoptotic
mechanism in PDAC, challenging the idea that apoptosis of tumor cell is
therapeutically beneficial, at least when immune sensor cells, such as
macropahges, are present.


