Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR/CD16A TandAbs are efficacious NK-cell engagers with favorable
biological properties which potently kill EGFR+ tumors with and without
Ras mutation.


Constitutive EGFR activation plays an important role in the
pathophysiology of various solid cancers, such as colorectal cancer,
non-small cell lung cancer or squamous cell carcinomas of the head and
neck. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) and monoclonal antibodies (mAbs),
which interfere with signal transduction and activation of EGFR, are
approved for treatment of such cancers. However, intrinsic or acquired
resistance to these treatments has been described for many patients.
Natural killer cells (NK-cells) are important effectors of innate
immunity and NK-cell engagers have shown evidence of improved safety in
patients compared to T-cell engagers. To specifically utilize the
cytotoxic potential of NK-cells to eliminate EGFR-expressing tumors, we
developed tetravalent bispecific EGFR/CD16A TandAbs comprising fully
human Fv domains recognizing human and cynomolgus EGFR and CD16A. TandAbs
recognizing epitopes in the extracellular domain of EGFR differing from
epitopes targeted by other mAbs were characterized. Lead candidate AFM24
shows superior cytotoxicity in terms of ADCC (main mode of action) and
reduced inhibition of EGFR-mediated phosphorylation compared to
cetuximab. Importantly, inhibition of EGFR-signaling is believed to
contribute to skin toxicity caused by therapeutic mAbs and TKI’s.
AFM24’s cytotoxic activity was tested against EGFR+ tumor cell lines
including some carrying a Ras mutation, which is a negative prognostic
biomarker and renders cells less susceptible to cetuximab or panitumumab.
The cetuximab-resistant CRC cell line HCT-116 or the NSCLC cell line A549
(both with Ras mutations) were efficiently killed with EGFR/CD16A TandAbs
in vitro. In vivo data in the HCT-116 model indicate anti-tumor efficacy
of AFM24, while no efficacy of cetuximab was seen. Importantly, AFM24
does not activate NK-cells without target cell binding and does not bind
to any other members of the EGFR family. While binding and cytotoxic
efficacy of many therapeutic mAbs are impaired by serum IgG, no
substantial change in AFM24’s binding affinity to NK-cells was observed
in the presence of high concentrations of human IgG. In calcein-release
cytotoxicity assays with NK-cells as effectors, we showed that the
presence of IgG had only little inhibitory effect on AFM24 efficacy
compared to cetuximab. In addition, competition of an anti-CD16 mAb with
AFM24 in cytotoxicity assays was substantially lower than with cetuximab.
Taken together our data demonstrate that AFM24 is a highly potent human
antibody displaying favorable biological properties over existing mAbs.
This human/cynomolgus cross-reactive agent is currently in preclinical
development to treat EGFR+ malignancies and has the potential to exhibit
a favorable side effect profile and reduced toxicity and to overcome
resistance to other targeted anti-EGFR therapeutic agents.


