Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal platelet derived growth factor receptor-beta (PDGFRbeta)
promotes breast brain metastasis.


The platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) pathway is a prime example of
tumor-stroma signaling in a number of cancer types. Others have shown
that PDGF receptors are expressed in breast fibroblasts and pericytes
while PDGF ligands are often expressed in breast cancer cells and
tumor-associated endothelium; however, how PDGF signaling mediates breast
cancer initiation, progression and metastasis remains unclear.
Importantly, our evaluation of publicly available datasets revealed that
PDGFB expression correlates with breast cancer patient metastatic
recurrence leading to the hypothesis that PDGF-B to PDGFR signaling
promotes metastatic progression of breast cancer. Given that PDGF-B
preferentially activates PDGFRβ, we established an in vivo system to
investigate this pathway during breast cancer progression. We utilized a
mesenchymal-specific promoter to drive Cre recombinase and conditionally
activate PDGFRβ by way of the endogenous Pdgfrb promoter (hereafter
“PDGFRβ mutant”). A murine mammary tumor cell line which expresses
high levels of PDGF-B was injected either by tail vein or intracranially
to evaluate metastatic seeding and distant tumor growth. Following tail
vein injection of tumor cells, we observed 50% incidence of brain
metastases in the PDGFRβ mutant mice while no brain lesions were seen in
the controls. There was no difference in incidence of lung, liver or bone
metastases (other common sites of breast cancer metastasis). Not
surprisingly, larger tumors formed in the brains of PDGFRβ mutant mice
when cells were injected intracranially. Brains were stained for
phospho-PLCγ as a way to confirm activation of PDGFRβ. To our
knowledge, this is the first example where genetic manipulation of the
stroma leads to an increased incidence of breast brain metastases.
Furthermore, this study highlights a role for stromal activation of
PDGFRβ in the brain microenvironment and during metastatic progression.
For the 20-30% of patients that develop breast cancer brain metastases,
the one-year survival rate is sadly less than 20%, and how the brain
microenvironment contributes to metastatic seeding and subsequent growth
of tumor cells remains poorly understood. To confirm translational
relevance, we analyzed a small cohort of matched primary breast tumors
and brain metastases for PDGFRβ expression observing strong stromal
staining in fibroblasts and pericytes within and around all of the
primary tumors similar to previous studies. Importantly, high PDGFRβ
expression was found in the perivasculature of all associated brain
metastases suggesting a functional role in the establishment or growth at
this site. Combined, our findings strongly suggest that high primary
tumor expression of PDGF-B/PDGFRβ might define a subset of breast cancer
patients predisposed to brain metastases. These patients may benefit from
therapeutic targeting of PDGFR signaling as a means to thwart metastatic
seeding in the brain.


