Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rosehip (Rosa canina) extracts prevent AKT-mediated cell
proliferation and migration in triple negative breast cancer cells.


Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive form of breast
cancer, characterized by its lack of the human epidermal growth factor
receptor-2, the estrogen receptor, and the progesterone receptor. AKT has
been shown to promote cell proliferation and migration in triple negative
breast cancer. Currently, the existing targeted therapy is of minimal
benefit in TNBCs. Furthermore, adverse side effects and the emergence of
drug-resistant cancer cells are of great concern. Natural products have
received growing interest in recent years as an alternative medicine with
potential anti-oncogenic properties. Rosehip extracts have been used as
dietary supplements to relieve symptoms associated with gastrointestinal
disorders and arthritis, and in our laboratory it has been shown to
prevent cell proliferation in glioblastomas. This study investigated the
efficacy of rosehip extracts in preventing proliferation and migration of
a triple negative breast cancer cell line (HCC1395). HCC1395 cells
treated with rosehip extracts (1mg/mL -25ng/mL) demonstrated a
significant decrease in cell proliferation. The observed decrease in cell
proliferation was equal to or better than the decrease of cell
proliferation observed when inhibitor of the AKT (LY294002, 20 μM)
signaling pathway was utilized. Rosehip extracts also demonstrate
anti-migratory potential. Additionally, pretreatment of this cell line
with rosehip extracts selectively decreased AKT, p70S6K, and S6K
phosphorylation suggesting these extracts prevent TNBC cell proliferation
and migration by blocking the AKT signaling mechanism. Western blot
analysis and apoptosis studies demonstrate that rosehip extracts inhibit
cell proliferation without promoting apoptosis, but induce cell cycle
arrest.

To investigate the potential clinical application of rosehip extracts we
examined whether rosehip extracts could enhance the chemotherapeutic
properties of Doxorubicin (20µM), a chemotherapeutic agent used to treat
breast cancer. Rosehip extracts demonstrated a greater anti-proliferative
effect than Doxorubicin alone and is equally effective in combination
with Doxorubicin. These data suggest that rosehip extracts are capable of
decreasing cell proliferation and migration in a triple negative breast
cancer cell line by blocking the AKT signaling pathway and by regulating
the cell cycle. Moreover, rosehip extracts demonstrate a greater
inhibition of cell proliferation, when given alone and combination with
Doxorubicin. This investigation demonstrates that rosehip extracts may
serve as either an alternative or complimentary treatment to current
chemotherapeutic regimens for triple negative breast cancer.


