Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interferon Beta (IFN-B) re-activates canonical type I IFN
signaling to differentiate breast cancer stem cells (CSCs) and suppress
mesenchymal/CSC driven tumor recurrence.


Tumor recurrence remains a major therapeutic obstacle to curing breast
cancer. Cytokines within the breast tumor microenvironment (TME)
influence recurrence following chemotherapy by altering the balance
between mesenchymal CSC (MES/CSC) and epithelial non-CSC (EP/non-CSC).
Here, we find that transformed breast MES/CSC express elevated levels of
Un-phosphorylated Interferon Stimulated Gene Factor 3 (U-ISGF3), which is
composed of STAT1 and STAT2 lacking phosphorylation of their tyrosine
residues, and IRF9. Elevated expression of the U-ISGF3 proteins in breast
cancer has previously been linked with resistance to ionizing radiation,
thus we hypothesized that the U-ISGF3 complex is important for
maintaining MES/CSC properties. However, knockdown of IRF9, the critical
DNA binding component of this complex, or STAT1 did not alter the MES/CSC
phenotype. Moreover, ISGF3 transcriptional targets were actually
repressed in MES/CSC relative to EP/non-CSC, suggesting that elevated
U-ISGF3 may act as a repressor in MES/CSC. Interestingly, we found that
an MES/CSC program independent of IFN-B, was responsible for mediating
U-ISGF3 expression. We therefore hypothesized that stimulating MES/CSC
with IFN-B would phosphorylate the ISGF3 proteins and engage canonical
IFN-B mediated inhibition of MES/CSC properties. Acute exposure to IFN-B
led to the phosphorylation of ISGF3 in MES/CSC and induced the
transcription of IFN-B responsive genes. Continuous exposure to IFN-B
maintained Phosphorylated ISGF3 (P-ISGF3) which partially reverted the
MES/CSC phenotype, resulting in the repression of mesenchymal markers
(Vimentin and Slug), re-expression of Ep/non-CSC markers (CD24) and
functionally inhibited colony formation in soft agar and migratory
capability. In line with these observations, data from triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC) patients confirmed that increased expression of
IFN-B responsive genes correlates with decreased expression of a CSC gene
signature, and correlates with improved recurrence-free survival. Taken
together, our findings demonstrate that IFN-B mediated signaling promotes
the differentiation of MES/CSC by phosphorylating U-ISGF3, resulting in
the suppression of MES/CSC-driven tumor recurrence. Future studies will
examine the mechanism by which IFN-B mediated P-ISGF3 suppresses MES/CSC
properties and whether elevation of U-ISGF3 can predict which patients
would be candidates for an IFN-B therapy to phosphorylate STAT1 and
STAT2, thus suppressing MES/CSC tumor recurrence.


