Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delta tocopherol inhibits urothelial tumorigenesis in the UPII
mutant Ha-ras transgenic mouse model and induces apoptosis via activation
of the ATF4/CHOP-DR5 pathway.


Epidemiological studies have reported that Vitamin E intake was inversely
related to the risk of multiple cancers including human urinary bladder
cancer. Tocopherols (T) are the major forms of vitamin E in the U.S.
diet, exist as α-T, β-T, γ-T and δ-T. Compared to α-T, the
anti-cancer effect of other Ts and their mechanisms of action remain
largely unknown. We have shown that δ-T is the most effective one among
the Ts in reducing the viabilities of bladder cancer cell lines with
IC50s of under 10 μM, whereas there is no or minimal effect of α-T at a
concentration of up to 50 μM on the viability of bladder cancer cell
lines. δ-T treatment of bladder cancer cell lines, RT4 and UMUC-3,
resulted in apoptosis via marked induction of death receptor-5 (DR5)
expression and then activation of caspase 3, 8, and 9 leading to PARP
cleavage and apoptotic morphology. siRNA knockdown of DR5 expression
significantly attenuated the apoptotic effects of δ-T in bladder cancer
cells. Consistent with the above results, δ-T treatment significantly
upregulated the expression of ER stress sensors PERK and IRE1α, as well
as downstream components GRP78, ATF4, and CHOP. These results suggested
that δ-T can induce endoplasmic reticulum stress and the Unfolded
Protein Response, triggering its apoptotic effect. Furthermore,
homozygous male UPII mutant Ha-ras transgenic mice that mimic the
development and progression of human urothelial cell carcinoma (UCC) with
H-ras activation were fed with vehicle control diet (n=20) or diet
supplemented with δ-T (0.2% in diet) for 150 days (n=18). The δ-T diet
significantly decreased the mean bladder weights (serves as a surrogate
of tumor weight) of survived Ha-ras mutant mice by 56% (control vs δ-T,
0.259 ± 0.015 gram vs. 0.114 ± 0.012 gram, PEpidemiological studies
have reported that Vitamin E intake was inversely related to the risk of
multiple cancers including human urinary bladder cancer. Tocopherols (T)
are the major forms of vitamin E in the U.S. diet, exist as α-T, β-T,
γ-T and δ-T. Compared to α-T, the anti-cancer effect of other Ts and
their mechanisms of action remain largely unknown. We have shown that
δ-T is the most effective one among the Ts in reducing the viabilities
of bladder cancer cell lines with IC50s of under 10 μM, whereas there is
no or minimal effect of α-T at a concentration of up to 50 μM on the
viability of bladder cancer cell lines. δ-T treatment of bladder cancer
cell lines, RT4 and UMUC-3, resulted in apoptosis via marked induction of
death receptor-5 (DR5) expression and then activation of caspase 3, 8,
and 9 leading to PARP cleavage and apoptotic morphology. siRNA knockdown
of DR5 expression significantly attenuated the apoptotic effects of δ-T
in bladder cancer cells. Consistent with the above results, δ-T
treatment significantly upregulated the expression of ER stress sensors
PERK and IRE1α, as well as downstream components GRP78, ATF4, and CHOP.
These results suggested that δ-T can induce endoplasmic reticulum stress
and the Unfolded Protein Response, triggering its apoptotic effect.
Furthermore, homozygous male UPII mutant Ha-ras transgenic mice that
mimic the development and progression of human urothelial cell carcinoma
(UCC) with H-ras activation were fed with vehicle control diet (n=20) or
diet supplemented with δ-T (0.2% in diet) for 150 days (n=18). The δ-T
diet significantly decreased the mean bladder weights (serves as a
surrogate of tumor weight) of survived Ha-ras mutant mice by 56% (control
vs δ-T, 0.259 ± 0.015 gram vs. 0.114 ± 0.012 gram, P<0.0001) with no
significant difference in overall body mass and no detectable indication
of toxicity. Our results suggest that δ-T is a potent anti-cancer agent
and deserves further investigation in preventing the recurrence and
progression of non-muscle-invasive UCC.


