Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of drug sensitivity and resistance testing to identify
novel therapeutic agents for Down syndrome patients with AML.


Patients with Down’s syndrome who develop acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
are at increased risk of toxicity secondary to chemotherapy regimens.
These patients are harder to treat with conventional therapies at
relapse. Overall, the use of targeted drug therapy is rising in the
pediatric oncology field. Development of drug sensitivity and resistance
test allows identification of specific targeted therapies for patient’s
with difficult to treat leukemia. Our laboratory is working on the
development of a drug sensitivity and resistance screening assay that
would provide functionally relevant drug response data of the patient’s
leukemia cells. Development of this assay included the preparation of
pre-dosed drug library plates allowing for rapid initiation of the assay.
AML cells are then added to the plate and treated for 72 hours after
which cell viability was determined. Previous work in our laboratory
tested a library of 56 anti-cancer and targeted agents on a panel of 16
AML cell lines that included two Down’s syndrome AML cell lines CMK and
CMY. Drug dose response data including IC50 values and Area Under the
Curve (AUC) were calculated for each cell line. Hierarchical clustering
was performed to determine similar responses between cell lines. Down’s
syndrome cell lines, CMK and CMY were found to be resistant to most
conventional chemotherapeutic agents, but susceptible to targeted
therapies such as Navitoclax and 17-AAG. We further tested several cell
lines with the drug sensitivity and resistance assay under hypoxic
conditions. Our screening results showed improved sensitivity of the CMK
and CMY cells to Navitoclax and 17-AAG under normoxic and hypoxic
conditions. Validation of the screening results was done using a
10-concentration drug dose response assay. Future studies will explore
the mechanism by which the Down’s syndrome AML cells have increased
sensitivity to these targeted agents under both normoxic and hypoxic
conditions. Furthermore, we will investigate the activity of combinations
of these targeted therapies with conventional therapies. The results from
these studies could lead to the establishment of improved therapeutic
regimens for Down’s syndrome patients with AML.


