Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving pre-clinical cancer pharmacogenomics with novel drug
sensitivity metrics based on growth rate inhibition.


Drug sensitivity in growing cells is conventionally quantified by IC50,
AUC, or Emax values, but these metrics suffer from a fundamental flaw:
they highly depend on the division rate of cell lines. This dependency
creates artefactual correlations between genetic alterations and drug
sensitivity which impede biomarker discovery. To address this issue, we
recently developed novel drug response metrics insensitive to the number
of divisions occurring during the assay. These are based on estimating
growth rate inhibition (GR) under treatment using fixed assays.

Here, we illustrate the flaws of using IC50 values for pharmacogenomic
studies by reanalyzing a recently published large dataset of drug
sensitivity and showing cases in which differences in division rates
drive associations between IC50 values and tissue type or genetic
alterations. Using GR50 values prevents these artificial correlations and
restores known associations between drug resistance and genomic markers
such as PTEN loss driving lapatinib resistance in breast cancer cell
lines. We also show how use of GRmax values, a measure of drug efficacy,
allows quantifying differences in the phenotypes and distinguishing
cytostatic from cytotoxic response. For drugs that have a narrow range of
GR50 values like taxanes, efficacy is the most relevant metric: in many
ovarian BCL2-deleted cell lines, docetaxel induces a cytotoxic response
(negative GRmax values), whereas wild-type lines elicit a cytostatic
response (positive GRmax values). Because efficacy (GRmax) varies
independently of potency (GR50), we conclude that both metrics are
complementary for pharmacogenomics and should be studied jointly.

Adopting GR metrics requires only modest changes in experimental
protocols and analysis is facilitated by our interactive website:
GRcalculator.org. We expect GR metrics to improve the identification of
reliable drug response biomarkers and enhance the reproducibility of
large-scale sensitivity studies.


