Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A soft microenvironment protects from failure of midbody
abscission and multinucleation downstream of EMT initiators.


This study investigates how increased stiffness of the tumor
microenvironment can induce cellular multinucleation, an easily
observable marker of polyploidy. Up to 37% percent of tumors exhibit
whole-genome doubling, which typically precedes other somatic copy number
alterations. Additionally, induction of tetraploidy in human cells
promotes increased tolerance for mutation, resistance to chemotherapeutic
drugs, and transformation in culture.

Tumors are inherently stiffer than normal tissue, and this property has
been shown to affect cell growth and proliferation. Similarly, cell cycle
errors have long been linked to chromosomal abnormalities. Here, we used
engineered two-dimensional substrata that mimic the stiffness of tumor
and normal microenvironments to investigate how matrix stiffness
regulates multinucleation in mammary epithelial cells. Multinucleation
was quantified by staining with Hoescht to visualize the nuclei.
Timelapse microscopy enabled visualization of the process by which cells
become multinucleated. Changes in gene expression were determined by
quantitative RT-PCR.

Cells cultured on “stiff” substrata, representing tumor tissue,
showed a nearly 14-fold increase in multinucleation compared to cells
cultured on “soft” substrata, representing normal tissue. We found
that multinucleation was regulated in part by signaling downstream of
matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP3), which is commonly upregulated in
cancer and known to induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). This
signaling depended on expression of the Rac1 splice variant, Rac1b,
production of ROS, and expression of Snail. Under all conditions, cells
cultured on soft substrata maintained a low frequency of multinucleation.

Multinucleation on stiff substrata primarily resulted from midbody
abscission failure. A soft microenvironment protected the stability of
the genome in epithelial cells by preventing midbody stability, which
depended on septin 4, a novel target of Snail.

Importantly, we found that transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ), another
EMT-inducer, also caused multinucleation downstream of Snail, which was
prevented by culture on soft substrata.

Our data thus suggest that tissue stiffening during tumorigenesis
synergizes with oncogenic signaling to promote genomic abnormalities that
drive cancer progression. Further, our results suggest that EMT-related
signaling pathways are associated with disease progression not
necessarily because they induce metastasis, but because they induce
genomic instability.


