Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cell vaccine significantly reduces local tumor relapse
and prolongs survival in the adjuvant setting.


Although surgical resection has been a standard treatment for solid
malignancies, therapeutic efficacy is limited by both local and distant
recurrence. Effectively preventing local tumor recurrence remains a
significant challenge. The existence of micro metastasis at the time of
tumor resection represents an even greater therapeutic challenge, since
90% of tumor deaths are due to tumor metastasis. There is increasing
evidence that many cancers are driven and maintained by a subpopulation
of cells that display stem cell properties. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) can
self-renew, mediate tumor growth and contribute to tumor recurrence and
metastasis. Targeting CSCs may thus increase the therapeutic efficacy of
current cancer treatment. We previously described a strategy to target
CSCs using CSC-dendritic cell (DC) vaccination. However, the efficacy of
CSC targeted therapeutics may be greatest when they are deployed in the
adjuvant setting. In this study, two mouse models were utilized: SCC7
subcutaneous (s.c.) tumors, and a D5 melanoma model. Established s.c.
SCC7 tumors were surgically removed from mice followed by treatment using
ALDHhigh SCC7 CSC-DC vaccine, which significantly reduced local tumor
relapse and prolonged animal survival. This effect was significantly
augmented by simultaneous administration of anti-PD-L1 mAb. In the
minimal disease setting of D5, ALDHhigh CSC-DC vaccination significantly
inhibited tumor growth, reduced spontaneous lung metastases resulting in
increased survival. CCR10 and its ligands were down-regulated on ALDHhigh
D5 CSCs and in lung tissues respectively in animals subjected to ALDHhigh
D5 CSC-DC vaccination. Down-regulation of CCR10 by siRNA significantly
blocked tumor cell migration in vitro and metastasis in vivo. T cells
harvested from ALDHhigh D5 CSC-DC vaccinated animals selectively killed
the ALDHhigh D5 CSCs. There was also evidence of humoral immunological
targeting of CSCs. As a result, CSC-DC vaccination significantly
decreased the percentage of ALDHhigh cells in residual tumors. These data
indicate that, when used in an adjuvant setting, ALDHhigh CSC-DC vaccines
effectively inhibit local tumor recurrence, reduce spontaneous lung
metastasis, and prolong animal survival; compared with traditional DC
vaccines and that simultaneous PD-L1 blockade can significantly enhance
this effect.


