Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PID, a novel immunofluorescence nanotechnology, as a
histopathology-based EGFR biomarker assay enhances predictive power for
the Erbitux response in subsets of PDXs.


Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is the most common used assay for
detecting/quantifying defined protein biomarkers in specific tissue
location in clinical/preclinical settings as prognostic/drug-predictive
biomarker assays. However, IHC suffers from several key drawbacks,
limiting its applications, including semi-quantitative nature,
inconsistence, low sensitivity, narrow dynamic detection range and
inadequacy for multi-target analysis, etc. An alternative method is
immunofluorescence (IF), but with even lower usage for its
disadvantageous photo-instability. A sensitive, quantitative and robust
assay is thus an urgent/unmet need. We have recently developed a novel
fluorescence nanoparticle (PID, phosphor integrated dye) with highly
compact phosphor inside. PID has several key advanced features: 1)
enhanced fluorescence (30,000x brighter over the conventional
fluorescence and significantly above tissue auto-fluorescence), 2)
enhanced photo-stability (stained slide is stable for >2 years); 3)
highly quantitative by broadened detection dynamic range through
enumeration of the bright fluorescent dots (nanoparticles) instead of
signal amplification as in IHC (digital vs. analog); 4) fine subcellular
imaging; 5) potentials for multi-color and H&E/bright light imaging. PDX
is a well-accepted experimental cancer model mimicking original patients
in histo- & molecular pathology(1), as well as drug response. We
previously conducted a series of mouse clinical trial (MCT) of Erbitux on
PDX cohorts of NSCLC, CRC, gastric and esophageal cancers (2,3), showing
specific subsets of high-EGRF-expressing PDXs responded to the drug,
where EGFR expression was measured by either RNAseq (mRNA) or IHC
(protein). To assess PID-EGFR as a new biomarker assay platform, we
analysed and compared its quantification to RNAseq and IHC, particularly
in terms of the correlation to the drug efficacy. Our data demonstrates a
greatly enhanced correlation of PID scores to mRNA levels in all cancer
types, and to the tumor growth inhibition of gastric (3) and esophageal
(4) carcinoma, but not in CRC (2) and NSCLC (Li et al., unpublished) as
anticipated. The results demonstrated that PID-EGFR is a significantly
improved histopathology based EGFR protein quantification assay over
IHC-EGFR assay, warranting further clinical confirmation.

References

1. Guo S, et al. Cancer research 2016;76(16):4619.

2. Chen D, et al. Oncotarget 2015;6(38):40815

3. Zhang L, et al. Sci Rep 2013;3:2992. 4. Zhu et al. 2016.


