Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of newly established WM-1-SNU cell line harboring
negative for MYD88 L265P derived from Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia
patient's peripheral blood using xenograft model.


Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia (WM) is a rare hematologic malignancy that
is a lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma a type of B-cell disease. The common
characteristics of WM cells are expression of B cell markers, CD19 and
CD20 and secretion of monoclonal immunoglobulin (Ig) M. The other
critical feature of WM is MYD88 L265P that is found almost 90% patients.
MYD88 gene is related with immune response and inflammatory signaling.
Many researches are underway about MYD88 L265P role in WM. However, there
is a lack of functional studies in the negative for MYD88 L265P in WM due
to the absence of the MYD88 L265P negative cell line. Each cell lines
represent the heterogeneity and molecular diversity by genetic features,
it is important to establish the MYD88 L265P negative WM cell line for
elucidating the biological characteristics of WM. Mononuclear cells
obtained from patient’s peripheral blood by ficoll separation and were
injected to NRG (JAX, USA) mouse via tail vein. After 24 days, mouse
sacrificed and extracted bone marrow (BM) cells from mouse tibia by
syringe flushing. Mouse BM cells were cultured in Iscove's Modified
Dulbecco's Medium (IMDM) supplemented with 20% heat-inactivated FBS,
Penicillin-Streptomycin (10,000 U/mL) (Gibco, USA). G-banding was used to
confirm the human chromosomes. Sanger sequencing conducted for detecting
the MYD88 L265P mutation. Flow cytometry was used for screening cell
surface markers and ELISA was used for the detection of immunoglobulin
level. For confirm the tumorigenicity of the cell line, we re-injected
the cell line to NSG (JAX, USA) mouse by subcutaneously. After 3 weeks,
tumor mass and metastatic tissues were cultured in conditioned medium.
Tumor cells have had adherent phenotype and human chromosomes were
identified by G-banding. MYD88 L265P mutation that genetic signature of
WM was not detected both patient’s peripheral blood and established
cell line. CD19 and CD20 expressions were not detected, but CD138 highly
expression was confirmed about 90%. Lambda and Kappa secretion were not
detected in cell culture supernatant. We confirmed the tumorigenicity
through re-injection the cell line by subcutaneously. Tumor mass was
formed with a 100% probability and metastasis to lung and bone marrow
occurred in about 66%. Tumor mass and metastatic tissues were cultured in
in vitro and confirmed the reproducibility. In this study, we describe
the newly established human WM cell line derived from peripheral blood of
the WM patient who negative for MYD88 L265P using xenograft model having
unique biological characteristics comparing to MYD88 L265P positive cells
that high tumor formation ability and high expression of CD138 and does
not secrete IgM.


