Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gremlin-1 is an important regulator of invasiveness in malignant
mesothelioma.


The purpose of this study was to clarify the role of BMP inhibitor
gremlin 1 in invasion and migration in mesothelioma.

Primary mesothelioma cells isolated from patient pleural fluid as well as
mesothelioma cell lines were used for in vitro studies. Cells were
transfected with siRNAs or transduced with lentiviral expression vectors.
Invasive growth was analyzed in 3D Matrigel or collagen I matrices. mRNA
expressions were analyzed using a commercial PCR array and quantitative
RT-PCR. Migration assays were performed using scratch wound assay or
transwell migration assay with fibronectin or collagen coating. TGF-β
and BMP signaling activity was measured with luciferase reporter assays.
For in vivo mouse xenograft experiment cells were additionally transduced
to express a luciferase marker. Subcutaneous cell injection with Matrigel
matrix was performed in the flank of nude mice.

Malignant mesothelioma is an aggressive cancer that develops from
mesothelial cells, most often in the pleural lining of the lung. We have
previously shown that the BMP inhibitor protein gremlin 1 is highly
expressed in mesothelioma and induces a mesenchymal and chemoresistant
phenotype in mesothelioma cells. Since mesothelioma tumors are locally
very invasive and has poor prognosis, we analyzed the role of gremlin 1
in mesothelioma cell migration and invasive growth.

We found that mesothelioma cells expressing gremlin 1 showed invasive
sprouting when tumor cell spheroids were imbedded into 3D collagen
matrix. Silencing of gremlin 1 expression significantly reduced invasive
growth. In addition, cells overexpressing gremlin 1 gained more invasive
phenotype. This was associated with increased mRNA expression levels of
Slug and matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) as well as reduced expression of
E-cadherin. The cells were more migratory and exhibited increased
expression of certain integrins, especially the αv subunit. Gremlin 1
induced invasive growth was dependent on MMP activity and associated with
increased TGF-β activity. Intrapleural injection of mesothelioma cells
overexpressing gremlin 1 isolated from a patient with epithelioid
mesothelioma, produced tumors in 2/4 mice over 5 months after injection.
Mice with cells transduced with vector only did not develop tumors (0/4).
When cells were injected subcutaneously together with Matrigel gremlin 1
overexpressing tumors appeared more slowly, but exhibited comparable
luciferase signal 2.5 months after injection. However, gremlin 1 tumors
showed more vascularization and in contrast to control tumors some also
developed metastases (2/6 mice).

As conclusion, we identified gremlin 1 as an important regulator of
mesothelioma invasive growth and chemoresistance. Blocking gremlin 1
function may overcome drug resistance and reduce invasive behavior of
mesothelioma.


