Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of circulating tumor exosomes: their ability to serve as
a biomarker for recurrence in lung cancer.


Objectives: Exosomes (Exos) are 30-150 nm wide nanovesicles originating
from the endosomal network and are found in most body fluids. Production
of Exos increases in cancer, making Exos potential biomarkers. Exos are a
fundamental driver of intercellular communication by transferring
proteins, lipids and miRNA. Analysis of Exos and their interaction with
the microenvironment may uncover cellular pathways involved with disease
progression. We hypothesized that Exos may serve as a liquid biopsy for
tumor recurrence.

Materials and Methods: Six lung cancer patients (LCPs) were prospectively
enrolled on an IRB approved study. Exos were precipitated and purified
with a Norgen kit from 0.7 ml of blood samples collected prior to, during
and 6 months after radiation therapy (RT). Exos numbers were quantified
by Exocet Exosome Quantitation Kit (System Biosciences). Total exosomal
RNA was isolated by the Norgen RNA/DNA/Protein Purification kit. For the
miRNAs expression profiling we used the miRCURY LNA™ Universal RT
microRNA PCR assay (Exiqon) and ExiLENT SYBR® Green Maser Mix (Exiqon).
Expressions of 10 different miRNAs (let-7a-5p, miR-20a-5p, miR-21-5p,
miR-30b-5p, miR-106a-5p, miR-146a-5p, miR-155-5p, miR-200b-5p, miR-203a,
miR-208a) for all samples were determined. Human lung fibroblasts
(MRC-5s) in serum-free medium for 24 hrs were treated with Exos, TGF-β
(positive control) or PBS (negative control) to determine their relative
effects on MRC-5 proliferation.

Results: Of the 6 LCPs, 2 had limited stage small cell and 4 had
non-small cell at diagnosis. Three patients were diagnosed with
recurrence at the time of their post-RT blood draw. Six miRNAs
demonstrated significantly different expressions between recurrent and
non-recurrent groups of LCPs: let-7a-5p, miR-20a-5p, miR-21-5p,
miR-106a-5p, miR-155-5p, and miR-203a. MRC-5 proliferation increases
2-fold when treated with Exos from blood collected prior to RT compared
to PBS (p = 0.01). There is Results: Of the 6 LCPs, 2 had limited stage
small cell and 4 had non-small cell at diagnosis. Three patients were
diagnosed with recurrence at the time of their post-RT blood draw. Six
miRNAs demonstrated significantly different expressions between recurrent
and non-recurrent groups of LCPs: let-7a-5p, miR-20a-5p, miR-21-5p,
miR-106a-5p, miR-155-5p, and miR-203a. MRC-5 proliferation increases
2-fold when treated with Exos from blood collected prior to RT compared
to PBS (p = 0.01). There is <2-fold increase compared to TGF-β (p =
0.03). Plasma Exos levels decrease during RT as do their relative effects
on MRC-5 proliferation when compared at equivalent numbers. Exos
collected at 6 months from patients with recurrence significantly
stimulated MRC-5 proliferation (p = 0.03), whereas Exos from patients
without recurrence do not. Western blot analyses of MRC-5 cells
stimulated with Exos revealed decreased PTEN but enhanced CDC25A
expression and increased AKT and SMAD phosphorylation, regardless of when
the Exos were collected.

Conclusions: Recurrent and non-recurrent groups of LCPs demonstrated
significant differences in exosomal miR profile before and after RT. Exos
from untreated LCPs, and recurrent LCPs after RT, stimulate MRC-5
proliferation and possible conversion to CAFs. Our results suggest that
Exos could serve as a “liquid biopsy” to assess the potential for
recurrence when imaging modalities are equivocal.


