Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combination of metformin and valproic acid induces synergistic
apoptosis of prostate cancer cells via p53 activation and the intrinsic
pathway.


The anti-diabetic drug metformin (MET) and the anti-epileptic drug
valproic acid (VPA), when used alone, have demonstrated anti-cancer
effects in prostate cancer (PCa). We have demonstrated that the
combination of MET and VPA (MET+VPA) can induce synergistic apoptosis in
the human prostate cancer cell line LNCaP (p53+) but not in PC3 (p53-),
and that the response is dependent on functional p53. Here, we aimed to
(1) investigate the mechanism of synergistic apoptosis induced by MET+VPA
in LNCaP and (2) propose patient subsets for clinical applications of
MET+VPA based on the mechanism involved.

LNCaP and PC3 cells were treated with vehicle, 2.5 mM MET, 2.5 mM VAL, or
2.5 mM MET+VAL and proteins extracted from cell fractions. Western blots
were used to confirm cytoplasmic and mitochondrial fractions by measuring
the presence of β-actin, pyruvate dehydrogenase subunit E1-α, and ATP
synthase subunit-α protein, as well as the release of cytochrome c from
mitochondria to the cytoplasm. The mechanism of apoptosis via p53
activation is proposed based on our findings and current understanding
from literature.

The release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria to the cytoplasm was
significantly increased up to 12-fold (pThe release of cytochrome c from
the mitochondria to the cytoplasm was significantly increased up to
12-fold (p<0.05) in LNCaP, but not in PC3, in response to MET+VPA
compared to vehicle, MET alone, and VPA alone. This finding suggests that
both MET and VPA are required to induce an intrinsic apoptosis response
in LNCaP via p53. The mechanism proposed is that MET can inhibit the
activity of mitochondrial complex 1 which alters the AMP/ATP ratio. This
change can activate adenosine monophosphate protein kinase which
phosphorylates p53 at Ser15 and leads to p53-dependent cell death. As a
non-specific histone deacetylation inhibitor, VPA causes protein
acetylation including p53 at lysine residues 373 and 382. By combining
metformin and VPA, increased p53 protein activation can occur through
phosphorylation of p53 at different sites driving p53-dependent cell
apoptosis via the intrinsic pathway, as evidenced by release of
cytochrome c into the cytoplasm.

Our results suggest that MET+VPA provides a useful treatment for PCa at a
clinically localized stage where p53 is present in most patients or
advanced stage where p53 has not been mutated. Additionally, MET+VPA is
potentially an alternative to androgen deprivation therapy, particularly
in tumors with functional p53. A phase I neo-adjuvant clinical trial will
start in early 2017 to evaluate the response of high risk localized PCa
to MET+VPA (ANZCTR trial ID: ACTRN12616001021460).


