Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating the effect of PARP inhibitors in combination with
nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase inhibitors in Ewing sarcoma.


Previous research has shown that Ewing sarcoma cells are sensitive to
PARP inhibition, but in vivo studies and early phase clinical trials have
failed to demonstrate meaningful responses to PARP inhibitors when used
as single agents. For this reason, studies combining PARP inhibitors with
other agents to enhance their effects in Ewing sarcoma are of particular
interest. PARP, an enzyme involved in DNA damage repair, relies on NAD to
function. In tumor cells, NAD production occurs primarily through the
salvage pathway, in which nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT)
is the rate-limiting enzyme. Hence, the combination of PARP and NAMPT
inhibition would be expected to enhance the activity of PARP inhibition
through depletion of cellular NAD. The aim of this study was to assess
the synergistic potential of PARP inhibition in combination with NAMPT
inhibition in Ewing sarcoma cell lines and xenograft models. Synergistic
drug combinations in Ewing sarcoma cells were initially identified using
a high-throughput matrix drug screen. In vitro activity was further
assessed using proliferation assays of multiple Ewing sarcoma cell lines
treated with the PARP inhibitor niraparib and the NAMPT inhibitor
GNE-618. In vitro measurement of PAR activity was performed to further
understand the mechanism of action of the combination. For in vivo
studies, female SCID-biege mice were orthotopically injected with Ewing
sarcoma cells and randomized into treatment groups of vehicle, niraparib,
GNE-618, or the combination. The initial screen revealed synergy between
NAMPT inhibitors and PARP inhibitors using multiple combinations of
different agents in each drug class. In vitro assays of the combination
of niraparib with GNE-618 confirmed the results of the screen. Assays
measuring PAR activity yielded results supporting the hypothesis that
dual inhibition of NAMPT and PARP depletes PARP more than PARP inhibitors
alone. In vivo studies with short term (5 day) dosing showed no activity
of single agent nirapirib and only temporary disease stabilization with
single agent GNE-618. However, mice treated with the combination
underwent tumor regressions resulting in prolonged survival. When
treatments were extended to 2 cycles (5 days each), the effect persisted
for longer. Mice tolerated the agents well, with no signs of toxicity.
Preclinical data suggest that PARP inhibition in combination with NAMPT
inhibition may be a promising therapeutic strategy for Ewing sarcoma
patients.


