Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacogenomic interactions in glioblastoma cell line models.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and malignant brain tumor. These
tumors display a uniform and very short survival time even with
treatment, but are highly heterogeneous at the histological and genomic
level. To identify effective treatments and dependencies, we profiled the
sensitivity of a panel of cancer cell lines to a small molecules and
integrated this with systematic analysis of genetic and non-genetic
determinants associated with chemical response.

Methods. We profiled 381 drugs described in the Cancer Therapeutics
Response Portal (CTRP) at 16 different duplicated concentrations across
78 GBM cell lines belonging to two different models: Patient-Derived GBM
Cell Lines (PDGCL) and Long-Term GBM Cell Lines (LTGCL) previously
included in the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE). Cell lines were
deeply characterized as to genotype and phenotype. As non-genomic
determinants we considered: model, growth rate, behavior, stem cell and
differentiation markers. Genomic determinants included mutations and
somatic copy number alterations (SCNA) computed from whole exome
sequencing. Each of these were integrated to determine oncogene and tumor
suppressor gene pathway disruption (p53, RB and RTK signaling). At
transcriptomic level we considered expression of 20.647 genes and patters
described in GBMs (proneural, neural, classical, mesenchymal). Overall we
correlated 10,859,643 pharmacogenomic features to discover associations
with drug sensitivity.

Summary. We developed a brain tumor living tissue bank as platform for
preclinical pharmacogenomics analysis. Large-scale phenotypic
characterization of GBM models showed increased cellular and molecular
heterogeneity among PDGCLs compared to LTGCLs. PDGCLs better
recapitulated patient GBM copy-number profiles. GBM cell lines exhibited
all major driver mutations in human GBMs, except IDH1. PDGCLs and LTGCLs
enriched for proneural and mesenchymal phenotypes, respectively. We
identified NAMPT inhibitors as among the compounds with highest activity
across cell lines. Integrative pharmacogenomic analyses showed MDM2/4
inhibitors were able to effectively suppress TP53 wild type GBM models,
being CDKN1A (p21) expression a robust predictor of drug response in
vitro and in vivo. Overall drug resistance across the screen in lines was
highly associated with TP53 mutation, however a specific subset of TP53
mutant cell lines bearing simultaneous CDKN2A/B deletions were sensitive
to CHK1/2 inhibitors, revealing a potential synthetic lethal interaction
of clinical significance in these highly refractory cells.

Analysis identified genetic alterations associated with vulnerabilities
targeted by small molecules. About 85% of GBM patients display p53
pathway disruption, our results suggest independent pharmacological
strategies for two genetic subtypes of GBM determined by TP53 and CDKN1A
status. Our analyses provide molecular insights to drive targeted
therapies in the new era of precision medicine.


