Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interplay between the transcription factors PRRX1 and FOXM1 in
pancreatic cancer.


Introduction: We have identified previously the Paired Related Homeobox 1
gene (Prrx1) as a key regulator of embryonic ductal development,
acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM) and pre-cancerous lesion
(PanIN)/pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) progression (Reichert M.
et al Genes & Dev 2013). We discovered an isoform switch between PRRX1A
and PRRX1B occurring in EMT-MET plasticity in pancreatic tumorigenesis
(EMT) and metastatic colonization of the liver (MET) (Takano S. et al
Genes & Dev 2016). The transcription factor FOXM1 is also implicated in
EMT of pancreatic cancer cells. Interestingly, both transcription
factors, FOXM1 and PRRX1, are overexpressed in PDAC. The aim of this
study was to investigate if PRRX1, specifically its isoforms, might
interact with FOXM1, to regulate gene transcription in pancreatic cancer.

Methods: Experiments were performed in human pancreatic cancer cells
(PANC1, MIA PaCa2 and BxPC3), and HEK293T cells. Epitope-tagged PRRX1 and
FOXM1 proteins (wild type or deletion mutants) were either transiently or
stably expressed in these cells. Immunoprecipitation and western blot
were performed to evaluate potential interaction between PRRX1 and FOXM1.
As a functional readout, the TnC and 6xFOXM1 luciferase reporters were
used to measure Tenascin C and FOXM1 transcriptional activities.

Results: Immunoprecipitation of tagged-PRRX1 or endogenous FOXM1 showed
co-binding of both PRRX1 isoforms (A and B) with FOXM1 in pancreatic
cancer cells. We further characterized this interaction using deletion
mutants of PRRX1 C-terminal region, FOXM1 binds to the 200-222 amino acid
region of PRRX1. Similarly, using deletion mutants of the FOXM1
N-terminal region we mapped PRRX1 binding to the winged helix DNA binding
domain of FOXM1. Interestingly, we also observed co-binding of HA-tagged
PRRX1A with either Flag-tagged PRRX1A or PRRX1B suggesting homo and
heterodimerization of the PRRX1 isoforms. Next, we found that
co-expression of PRRX1 and FOXM1 cooperatively induced transcriptional
activity of a known PRRX1 target gene, Tenascin C. Furthermore,
co-expression of PRRX1A and FOXM1 cooperatively induced FOXM1
transcriptionnal activity. FOXM1 has been reported to regulate Wnt
signaling in glioblastomas (Zhang N. et al. Cancer Cell 2011). Given the
importance of Wnt signaling in early pancreatic carcinogenesis, we
observed co-binding of PRRX1 and FOXM1 with beta-catenin.

Conclusion: Our results provides new insights in the interaction of PRRX1
and FOXM1 with functional activation of FOXM1 mediated transcriptional
activity, and potential regulation of the Wnt pathway.


