Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Renewable and genetically engineered natural killer cells for
off-the-shelf adoptive cellular immunotherapy.


The unique attributes of a combinatorial tumor recognition system,
diminished off-tumor cytotoxicity, and multifaceted effector function
make natural killer (NK) cells a prime candidate for a universal approach
to cancer immunotherapy. In addition, NK cells are the principal mediator
of antibody-directed cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC). However, NK cell
function is often impaired in the setting of cancer, reducing the
effectiveness of the endogenous immune system and the therapeutic
efficacy of monoclonal antibodies. To address the need for advanced and
combinatorial cancer therapies, we developed a unique and effective
strategy to create a renewable source of engineered “off-the-shelf”
NK cells with augmented function, including enhanced ADCC and
persistence. Key challenges associated with genetic editing, limited
expansion, persistence and variability of peripheral blood (PB)-derived
NK cells were overcome by utilizing our induced pluripotent stem cell
(iPSC) technology as the unlimited starting material for the reproducible
and consistent derivation of engineered NK cells. Through targeted
transgene integration, we produced a clonal iPSC master cell line to
continuously produce NK cells engineered to uniformly express a high
affinity, non-cleavable version of CD16 (hnCD16-NK). In directed
differentiation, the hnCD16-NK cells displayed homogeneous expression of
CD16 (>95%) and a mature CD56+ NK cell phenotype, as exhibited by
expression of KIR, NCRs, DNAM-1, and NKG2D. In contrast to endogenous
CD16 expression, the engineered hnCD16 molecule was shown to be cleavage
resistant upon NK cell activation (>95% CD16+ hnCD16-NK vs. The unique
attributes of a combinatorial tumor recognition system, diminished
off-tumor cytotoxicity, and multifaceted effector function make natural
killer (NK) cells a prime candidate for a universal approach to cancer
immunotherapy. In addition, NK cells are the principal mediator of
antibody-directed cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC). However, NK cell function
is often impaired in the setting of cancer, reducing the effectiveness of
the endogenous immune system and the therapeutic efficacy of monoclonal
antibodies. To address the need for advanced and combinatorial cancer
therapies, we developed a unique and effective strategy to create a
renewable source of engineered “off-the-shelf” NK cells with
augmented function, including enhanced ADCC and persistence. Key
challenges associated with genetic editing, limited expansion,
persistence and variability of peripheral blood (PB)-derived NK cells
were overcome by utilizing our induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)
technology as the unlimited starting material for the reproducible and
consistent derivation of engineered NK cells. Through targeted transgene
integration, we produced a clonal iPSC master cell line to continuously
produce NK cells engineered to uniformly express a high affinity,
non-cleavable version of CD16 (hnCD16-NK). In directed differentiation,
the hnCD16-NK cells displayed homogeneous expression of CD16 (>95%) and a
mature CD56+ NK cell phenotype, as exhibited by expression of KIR, NCRs,
DNAM-1, and NKG2D. In contrast to endogenous CD16 expression, the
engineered hnCD16 molecule was shown to be cleavage resistant upon NK
cell activation (>95% CD16+ hnCD16-NK vs. <10% CD16+ PB-derived NK cell,
upon target cell-mediated activation), and demonstrated enhanced antibody
binding compared to PB-derived NK cells expressing the low-affinity
variant. In addition to increased expression of the cytolytic molecules
perforin and granzyme B and enhanced direct cytotoxicity against tumor
targets, hnCD16-NK cells displayed superior ADCC capacity and cytokine
production in response to CD16 stimulation. Importantly, manufacture of
hnCD16-NK cells was proven to be highly scalable, delivering up to 107
fold expansion over a 35 day period. The maintained proliferative
capacity can be in part associated with longer telomere length seen in
hnCD16-NK cells. Furthermore, deletion of classical human leukocyte
antigen molecules and ectopic expression of immunosuppressive proteins
engineered at the iPSC level provided the ability of hnCD16-NK cells to
potentially overcome the host histocompatibility barrier and to improve
persistence in the allogeneic setting. In conclusion, the preclinical
data presented herein highlight the therapeutic value of hnCD16-iNK cells
as an ideal ADCC-mediated “off-the-shelf” NK cell-based
immunotherapeutic product with augmented persistence, anti-tumor
capacity, manufacturing reliability and preclinical efficacy.


