Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of MT-3724 with sirolimus reduces anti-drug antibody
response and prolongs drug exposure.


Molecular Templates is developing engineered toxin bodies (ETBs), potent
recombinant immunotoxins that combine the specificity of an antibody
fragment with the powerful direct cytotoxicity of the Shiga-like toxin A
subunit. ETBs can induce their own internalization, route through the
cell in a predictable manner, enzymatically and irreversibly destroy
ribosomes to shutdown protein synthesis and induce apoptosis of tumor
cells. This mechanism of action is distinct from that of other
therapeutics, making ETBs an attractive treatment for patients who have
become resistant to chemotherapy and other treatment modalities.

MT-3724 is Molecular Templates’ first-generation ETB targeting CD20, a
surface receptor that is highly expressed on malignant B cells in
hematological malignancies. Pre-clinical and clinical studies have shown
promising results for non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma cell lines and patients;
however anti-drug antibodies are formed in experimental animals and
patients after repeat dosing. Sirolimus (rapamycin) is a macrolide
compound approved to prevent organ rejection and in LAM, and has been
used in tolerization protocols with replacement enzymes. In pre-clinical
studies, we have co-administered sirolimus in combination with MT-3724 in
rodents as well as in a non-human primate model in order to reduce the
anti-drug antibody response to MT-3724. These studies demonstrated that
the combination of sirolimus with MT-3724 decreased anti-drug antibody
response, prolonged serum exposure of MT-3724, and improved B-cell
depletion as compared to MT-3724 alone.

Molecular Template’s ETB technology has resulted in potent and targeted
therapeutic agents that have a unique mechanism of action in the field of
oncology. Our first-generation, CD20-targeted therapeutic, MT-3724, has
promising clinical results in the refractory setting for non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma. The combination of sirolimus with MT-3724 is an attractive and
feasible regimen which will be further explored in clinical studies.


