Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cdc42 is crucial for intestinal stem cells survival by regulating
Wnt and YAP signaling.


Strictly defined architecture of intestinal epithelial cells and the
gradient of signaling cues along the villus-crypt axis ensure the
maintenance of adult intestinal stem cells, as well as proper
regeneration and differentiation of all intestinal epithelial cell types.
The Rho family small GTPase Cdc42 controls the polarized division of
intestinal stem cells, and affects subsequent fate-determination of the
progenitor cells. As we previously described in Cdc42 Villin-Cre knockout
mice, loss of Paneth cells from crypt bottom and emergence of Goblet
cell-like intermediate cells at the villus indicate possible compromise
of the canonical Wnt signaling during Paneth cell differentiation. Here
we further characterized the underlying molecular mechanism of Cdc42
regulating intestinal stem cell survival, proliferation, and
differentiation. IHC of the intestinal tissue in Cdc42 Villin-Cre
knockout mice suggests greatly reduced Olfm4 level in the stem cells,
which are abnormally positioned in the crypts, along with a reduction of
both transcription co-factors beta-Catenin and YAP. However, the Notch
signaling, which is required for stem cells and the differentiation of
absorptive linage, seems intact. The autonomous regulation of Cdc42 on
Yap signaling is probably through its specific role in stabilizing
cell-cell junction and actin filaments in the epithelium, both of which
are known regulatory inputs of the Hippo-YAP pathway. Both
Wnt/beta-Catenin and Yap signaling are required for the initiation and
progression of colorectal cancer, and the regeneration of stem cells post
radiation. Given that Cdc42 is overexpressed in multiple types of
cancers, especially colorectal cancer, our finding that Cdc42 regulates
both Wnt and YAP pathways in the homeostasis of adult intestinal tissue
sheds new light on the molecular mechanism of its pathological
involvement, and potential therapeutic target.


