Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the metastatic cell populations in a spontaneous
mouse model of melanoma.


Melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer due to its high propensity
to metastasize and resistance to current therapies. We have created a
spontaneous mouse model of metastatic melanoma (Dct-Grm1/K5-Edn3) where
metastasis to the lungs is 80% penetrant. The primary tumors of these
mice present cellular heterogeneity with cells at varying levels of
differentiation. The main goal of this study is to determine the
metastatic potential of the primary tumor resident Tyrosinase positive
cells and evaluate the dynamic pattern of gene expression as those cells
move from the primary tumors to the sites of metastasis. To accomplish
this aim we crossed the Dct-Grm1/K5-Edn3 mice to CreERT2/ ROSAmT/mG mice
to indelibly label Tyrosinase cell populations within the primary tumor
by topical application of 4-hydroxytamoxifen at the tumor site. In vivo
lineage tracing and characterization of those labeled cells was performed
in the metastatic lesions. We found that Tyrosinase positive cells enter
the circulation before the appearance of any noticeable tumor or nevus
and establish close interactions with the vasculature as single cells.
Metastatic cells in close association with the inner wall of the
vasculature lose pigmentation and do not express melanocytic markers.
Interestingly, those intravascular cells mimic endothelial cell
properties with the expression of platelet endothelial cell adhesion
molecule (PECAM-1, also known as CD31). In the lung tissue, the primary
tumor derived Tyrosinase positive cells or their progeny can survive and
establish successful metastases with pigmentation. This in vivo lineage
tracing system in mouse will be a powerful model to evaluate and help us
understand the etiology and pathogenesis of melanoma metastasis. Further
characterization of those more aggressive cells in melanoma will allow
for the development of new prognostic tests and novel therapeutic
strategies to eliminate metastasis.


