Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proof of principle studies for detection of circulating renal
cancer cells from blood samples using diverse technologies.


Background: During the past years, much progress has been made in
detection and analysis of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in several tumor
entities, including prostate cancer, breast cancer or lung cancer.
However, little is known about circulating tumor cells in patients
suffering from clear cell renal cell carcinomas. The majority of
technologies detecting CTCs is based on expression of epithelial markers
on the surface of these cells, e.g. EpCAM. Additionally, biophysical
approaches have been invented to detect CTCs based on size, invasive
capacity or density. In order to be able to detect CTCs in patient
samples, in vitro establishment of the most accurate isolation procedure
followed by precise detection techniques has to be performed. Aim of our
studies was to build a stable in vitro fundament of isolation and
subsequent detection of CTCs in ccRCC patients. Methods: We made use of 4
different technologies, all of which have been approved for detection of
CTCs in distinctive tumor entities. We used EpCAM based positive
enrichment of CTCs, Ficoll densitiy centrifugation followed by
CD45-positive cell depletion, rosette formation followed by CD45 positive
cell depletion as well as size and deformability based enrichment
technologies by using the Parsortix system. Furthermore, by using 4
phenotypically distinct ccRCC cell lines, we tried to detect markers
unique for tumor cells in demarcation to blood cells. Results: By
performing spiking experiments of renal cancer cells, we found the
highest recovery rates by using the size based Parsortix system.
Interestingly, the most established technique of EpCAM based isolation
failed in three out of four cell lines to recover more than 40%.
Expression of well-established markers for ccRCC, like carboanhydrase
(CA)-9, could be detected in renal cancer cell lines. However, expression
was also found in blood samples of healthy donors. Another marker used
for immunohistochemical diagnosis of ccRCC, PAX8, showed weak to absent
expression in established renal cancer cell lines. The highest
specificity to detect renal cancer cells in blood samples was found when
analyzing KRT8 or KRT 19 expression. Conclusion: Our results demonstrate
that firstly, using the EpCAM based CTC enrichment, which is the basis of
the CellSearch system, which up to now is the only methodology approved
by the FDA, the majority of renal cancer cells will presumably not be
detected in blood samples. This seems largely due to low or absent
expression of EpCAM on renal cancer cells. The usage of the size based
Parsortix system showed the highest recovery rates and should therefore
be analyzed in more detail on samples of ccRCC patients. Secondly, an
exclusive marker for defining a renal CTC is still missing. Some
well-established ccRCC markers, like CA-9, failed to specifically detect
renal cancer cells in blood samples, as they were either present also in
healthy blood samples or absent in renal cancer cell lines.


