Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel non-diuretic brain-penetrating ethacrynic
acid analog and demonstration of its potent efficacy in orthotopic
glioblastoma (GBM) models.


The incidence of pediatric and adult brain tumors has continued to rise
and temozolomide (TMZ) has remained the sole choice for chemotherapy of
these cancers. A number of factors including the inefficient drug entry
through the BBB, intratumoral heterogeneity, overexpression of MGMT
repair protein and bone marrow toxicity due to alkylating regimens have
impeded successful therapy of these cancers. There is, therefore, an
urgent need to design new, more effective brain-penetrating drugs that
can effectively eliminate brain tumors. We are highly interested in
exploiting the elevated oxidative stress present in gliomas and have
synthesized a hydrophobic, non-diuretic analog of ethacrynic acid (EA)
called KSS72 [1-(2,3-dichloro-4-methoxyphenyl)-2-methylenebutan-1-one] by
removing the carboxylate side chain. KSS72 was selectively cytotoxic to
cancer cells including gliomas. Compared to EA which does not cross the
BBB, Pharmacokinetics following intravenous or oral administrations in
mice showed its excellent penetrance through the blood brain-barrier,
KSS72 accumulating at levels equivalent to TMZ (25% of plasma levels) in
the brain In vitro assays measuring protein carbonyl content, GSH
content, ROS generation, GSTpi enzyme activity and others showed that
KSS72 triggers a redox imbalance by inhibiting GSTpi and by lowering the
antioxidant (GSH) and reducing equivalent (NADPH) levels, leading to a
significant elevation of ROS levels. We also showed the upregulation of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-responsive proteins, activation of
MAPK, autophagy and apoptotic pathways by KSS72 in several cell lines.
KSS72-induced autophagy was a post event of redox perturbation that
displayed a wide array of characteristic features including double
membranous vacuoles with entrapped organelles, acidic vesicular
organelles, and increased expression of LC3-II and beclin-1. In view of
its excellent brain penetrance and multiple cytocidal events mediated by
ROS and autophagy, we tested the antitumor efficacy of KSS72 in human GBM
cell lines and intracranial GBM xenografts. SF-188 human GBM cells
expressing firefly luciferase were injected into the brain just left of
bregma for the development of orthotopic GBM in nude mice. These mice
were given 25 mg/kg/day of KSS72 intraperitoneally for 2 weeks. The
animals when imaged by IVIS after luciferin injections showed a complete
lack of intracranial tumors in all KSS72 administered animals. H&E
staining of mouse brain sections confirmed the total elimination of GBM
by KSS72. KSS72 did not exert any toxicity on host tissues and serum ALT
and AST levels were not altered. In summary, we conclude that KSS72
acting through multiple pathways of oxidative stress is a hugely
promising non-toxic anti-glioma drug with potential to enter clinical
trials (supported by CPRIT grants RP130266 and RP170207 to KSS).


