Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enrichment of putative cancer stem cells during anti-angiogenic
therapies promotes relapse formation in hepatocellular carcinoma.


Background and Aims: Activation of neo-angiogenic processes in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) during disease progression is frequently
associated with poor clinical outcome. Consequently, inhibition of
neo-angiogenesis is an effective treatment strategy for advanced HCC.
However, development of chemoresistance is observed in the majority of
patients. Compelling evidence suggest that cancer stem cells (CSCs) may
contribute to the acquisition of resistant properties in many solid
tumors, but their exact role in this process for HCC remains to be
defined. Here, we evaluate the importance of CSCs in the development of
resistance and relapse formation after exposure to different
anti-angiogenic therapies in HCC and define the concomitant adaptive
molecular changes.

Methods: Five HCC cell lines and one primary HCC isolate were exposed to
sorafenib and sunitinib for a total of 14 days. The treatment effects on
CSCs were estimated by sphere forming capacity in vitro as well as the
side-population (SP) approach. Expression levels of key oncogenic and CSC
markers, such as EpCAM, CD133 and ABCG2 transporter, were assessed by
qRT-PCR and flow cytometry. Furthermore, whole transcriptome analyses
were performed at different time points.

Results: Both treatment regimens effectively reduced oncogenic properties
in all investigated HCC cells. However, sustained anti-proliferative
effect after treatments was observed in only one cell line. In three
other hepatoma lines an initial treatment effect was subsequently
followed by rapid re-growth thereby mimicking the responses observed in
patients. Interestingly, two cell lines showed differential response to
applied drugs, showing anti-proliferative effects to sorafenib, while
relapse formation occurred after sunitinib treatments. While
anti-oncogenic effects in sensitive cell lines were associated with
significant reduction in sphere forming capacity, CSC marker EpCAM as
well as SP cells, resistant cell line showed a transient increased in CSC
properties. Importantly, acquired resistance to both drugs uniformly
developed in the cell lines suggesting that common molecular mechanisms
might be operative. These adaptive molecular changes involved signaling
pathways known to be associated to cell survival and proliferation (RAS,
AKT, MYC), as well as angiogenesis (VEGFR, PDGFR, HIF1a). Furthermore,
the resistant cell lines showed compensatory upregulation of key
oncogenic molecules such as EGFR as well as multidrug resistance ABC
transporters.

Conclusions: Our in vitro model recapitulates features of drug resistance
observed in human HCC patients. Resistance to anti-angiogenic therapies
might be fueled by transient expansion of CSCs. Therefore, specific
targeting of CSCs as well as pro-oncogenic compensatory signaling
pathways might be an effective therapeutic strategy to overcome
resistance in HCC.


