Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endothelin-1 receptor/β-arrestin1 is an actionable node that
regulates YAP/TAZ signaling and chemoresistance in high-grade ovarian
cancer.


The widespread activation of YAP and TAZ transcriptional regulators has
been shown to promote tumor progression and resistance to anti-cancer
therapies. Extensive studies have identified different upstream
regulators of YAP/TAZ, including G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR).
However how GPCR signals regulate YAP/TAZ puzzles have remained elusive.
Among the GPCR, we reveal that the endothelin-1 (ET-1) receptor activates
YAP/TAZ pathway in high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HG-SOC) sensitive
and resistant cell lines and primary cultures. In HG-SOC cells, the
aberrant activation of ET-1 receptor (ET-1R), promotes an enhanced
nuclear shuttling of dephosphorylated YAP and TAZ in a time-dependent
manner, through the scaffold protein β-arrestin1 (β-arr1).
Interestingly, ET-1-induced YAP/TAZ nuclear accumulation is further
improved in platinum-resistant cells and is prevented by expressing a
mutant β-arr1 incapable of nuclear distribution. Moreover, the ET-1/ETAR
axis activation induces the co-localization of β-arr1, YAP and TAZ in
the nucleus. Mechanistically, in sensitive and to a greater extent in
resistant cells, ET-1 induces the formation of a complex β-arr1/Trio, a
Rho-Guanine nucleotide exchange factor family member, which
dephosphorylates YAP, inducing its nuclear accumulation and the
transcription of YAP/TAZ target genes. β-arr1, RhoA or Trio depletion,
as well as the treatment with the dual ETAR/ETBR antagonist macitentan,
significantly reduces RhoA GTPase activity and YAP nuclear translocation,
suggesting that ET-1/ETAR axis regulates YAP/TAZ activity by driving
β-arr1/Trio/RhoA pathway. According with these results, the ET-1-induced
upregulation of YAP/TEAD target genes, such as CYR61, CTGF, ANKRD1 and
EDN1, as well as TEAD transcriptional activity and cell invasion, are
inhibited upon β-arr1, Trio, or YAP silencing, or macitentan treatment,
demonstrating that β-arr1-mediated intersections are required for
ET-1-induced YAP signaling. At the chromatin level, the activation of
ET-1 axis promotes the recruitment of YAP, TEAD and β-arr1 on TEAD
binding sites of CTGF, ANKRD1 and EDN1 promoters, an effect inhibited by
macitentan treatment. These results indicate that β-arr1 can act as a
transcription co-activator that bind TEAD thereby activating
transcription of EDN1, which in turn, can sustain persistent YAP/TAZ
activity through an autocrine loop. In murine orthotopic model of
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) of HG-SOC, ET-1R blockade by macitentan,
inhibits tumor growth, enhances the sensitivity to chemotherapy and
reduces YAP and TEAD transcriptional activity. Altogether our results
establish for the first time YAP/TAZ as critical downstream effectors of
ET-1R/β-arr1 signaling, providing mechanistic insights that targeting
ET-1R signaling overcomes YAP/TAZ driven platinum-based therapy failure
in HG-SOC.


