Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-mediated modulation of radioresistance of glioma stem
cells.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common primary tumor of the central
nervous system, with its deadly nature owing to a high rate of invasion
and angiogenesis. A key player in the GBM pathogenesis is a distinct
subpopulation of tumor cells which are capable of self-renewal, highly
angiogenic and possess the potential for extensive proliferation and
multi-lineage differentiation. This cell population termed Glioma Stem
Cells (GSCs) is highly resistant to the chemo- and radiotherapies and
plays an important role in tumor initiation, progression, and recurrence.
In response to radiation therapy, GSCs are capable of triggering the
activation of multiple signaling pathways including Wnt, Notch, and
Hedgehog, and their DNA damage repair system is proactive. Taken
together, the efforts to foster therapeutic interventions will prove
futile, without first targeting the GSC population. The miRNA network
adds a dimension of regulatory control, which serves to maintain
pluripotency and reprograms multiple stemness and radioresistance
promoting pathways. However, not much information is available that could
provide mechanistic insights regarding how specific miRNAs modulate
radioresistance pathways. Our initial efforts involving a global
screening of microRNA profiles in different GSCs after radiation
treatment resulted in identification of multiple microRNAs that were
significantly altered in response to radiation. Based on our preliminary
data, we selected 7 microRNAs as potential candidates, with each having
several targets in Notch, Wnt, PI3K/Akt, and Hedgehog signaling pathways.
In order to unfold the role of each of identified microRNAs, we used
specific lentiviral constructs to create overexpression/knockdown of each
microRNA in GSCs. Using these stable GSC clones, we carried out multiple
in vitro studies to analyze the effects of the respective alteration in
relation to radioresistance and stemness phenotypes. Other phenotypic
studies included growth kinetics, cell proliferation, invasiveness,
apoptosis and cell cycle. We also carried out an extensive in silico
analysis to identify the potential targets of these microRNAs. This was
followed by analyzing various downstream components of the target genes.
Additionally, we carried out a context-based assessment of the overall
effects to probe if there is an integration of one or more pathways that
could lead to radiation sensitivity. Our in vitro findings also revealed
their roles in regulating stemness and metastatic ability in vivo.
Lastly, our study provides a basis for understanding the role of miRNAs
in radioresistance phenotype and furthermore, it may lead towards another
tool to inhibit GSC proliferation and/or survival.

Funding: R01CA108633, R01CA169368, RC2CA148190, U10CA180850-01 (NCI),
Brain Tumor Funders Collaborative Grant, and The Ohio State University
CCC (all to AC).


