Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic analysis of multi-site fresh prostate samples.


Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in males in the UK with >40,000
cases diagnosed every year and >10,000 deaths. Recent multi-platform
genomic studies have revealed a very complex picture of the disease, with
no clear subcategories linking to the histopathological markers currently
used in clinical practice. The multifocal and heterogeneous nature of the
disease suggests that single biopsy sites may be missing valuable
subclones which contribute to the etiology of the disease.

To address this, we obtained fresh core biopsies from multiple sites
(4-8) in the prostate from eight high-risk patients undergoing
prostatectomies at the Christie NHS Foundation Trust. The tissues were
immediately processed by the pathology department and each core divided
in two, one for genomic analysis and one for parallel disease modeling
(patient derived xenografts (PDXs), patient-derived cell lines and
organoids). The cores were cryo-sectioned and H&E analysis performed at
the top, middle and bottom of each core. These were reviewed by a
pathologist and tissue was micro dissected prior to simultaneous DNA and
RNA extraction of normal and tumor tissue. Blood for germline DNA and
plasma for circulating free DNA (cfDNA) was also obtained.

Our study comprises eight patients with two or more tumor sites (2-4),
some bifocal, which were analyzed using whole exome sequencing (WES),
copy number aberration (CNA) profiling, transcriptomic analysis and
methylation profiling. The most frequent aberration identified was loss
of 8p (NKX3-1) in 6/8 patients (12/24 tumor cores). Loss of 13q (RB1) was
observed in 5/8 patients (8/24 tumor cores), but never in all cores from
a single patient, suggesting a late event. Loss of 5q (CHD1) was
identified in 4/8 patients (11/24 tumor cores). Loss of 6q (MAP3K7), 10q
(PTEN), amplification of 8q (MYC) and TMPRSS2-ERG fusion were identified
in 3/8 patients. Some copy number events were only observed in either one
patient or one tumor core demonstrating extensive inter and intra-patient
heterogeneity. SPOP was the only gene affected by recurrent mutations
across patients, but different amino acids were affected within and
between patients. Mutations in PTEN, TP53, APC, BRAF and ERCC3, were also
identified, among many others. The most significantly overexpressed gene
was ERG, seen in patients with the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion. Changes in gene
expression differed between cores from the same patients, reflecting the
heterogeneity at the DNA level. These data will be analyzed in
conjunction with the results from disease modeling to investigate the
functional impact of these changes and cfDNA analysis is underway to
understand which tumor clones are entering the bloodstream.

The multifocal and genomically heterogeneous nature of prostate cancer is
highlighted by this data and is likely to impact on precision medicine
approaches for this disease. We will correlate the molecular profiling of
our patient tumors with their clinical data in order to identify targets
for further validation.


