Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Precision-designed, rapid and low-cost single molecule detection
of mutations from circulating tumor DNA.


Detecting and quantifying mutations from circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) is
a new approach for longitudinally monitoring cancer patients throughout
the course of treatment. However, general limitations to the clinical
utility of ctDNA include sample concentration, overall assay cost, and
result turnaround time. We have developed a novel molecular assay that
utilize single color digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) to both genotype and
quantify the number of tumor derived DNA molecules in a given sample. Our
assay routinely detects as few as three mutant DNA molecules per a
reaction volume, can be tested efficiently for fewer than ten dollars per
reaction, and generates useable mutation information within four hours.
Additionally, the assay can be rapidly configured to detect different
mutations specifically identified in any cancer patient. To demonstrate
the single molecule sensitivity and specificity for clinically relevant
hotspot mutations, we have validated the assay using multiple input
sources including high quality cell line DNA, formalin-fixed paraffin
embedded tissue (FFPET) DNA, and ctDNA. Our ddPCR assay utilizes a novel
primer design that is not rely on fluorescent probes. The overall
simplicity of assay design enables one to detect nearly any coding
mutation; practically, this means that any cancer or DNA sample can be
tested efficiently. We have created customized precision mutation assays
for two individual cancer patients. After extracting ctDNA from 500µL of
plasma we prepare a controlled mixed wild type and mutant standard curves
which contain between 150-3 detectable mutant molecules of interest per
reaction. We then assay the patient ctDNA sample in parallel to the
controlled standard curve and generate clustering confidence intervals.
We have designed precision mutation assays targeting KRAS A146V, AKT1
E17K, and TP53 R175H for Patient A as well as KRAS G12V and PIK3CA H1047R
for Patient B. The results of our single-color precision mutation
quantification assays support the original mutation findings from the
primary tumors. In one case, from 1µL of un-amplified ctDNA equivalent
to less than 0.5ng of DNA, we identified 4 mutant molecules per ddPCR
reaction volume. We have verified the presence of hotspot mutations from
un-amplified patient derived ctDNA and quantified the number of mutant
molecules present in each ctDNA sample. This assay has many features that
make it amenable to automation. We are currently developing a massively
high throughput process to design assays for tens of thousands of
mutations in a matter of weeks. Overall this is an extremely low cost,
highly sensitive and scalable diagnostic technology. We anticipate that
this technology will be a valuable tool for rapidly monitoring ctDNA
longitudinally in cancer patients.


