Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unbiased discovery of exosome-associated biomarkers using
xenograft models.


We developed a novel, genome-wide method for biomarker discovery that is
able to separate intrinsic markers of disease from markers of host
response. Specifically, we implanted cell lines derived from two primary
canine osteosarcoma tumors with different biological behavior into the
tibiae of athymic nude mice. Both cell lines formed orthotopic tumors,
and each recapitulated the biological behavior of the original primary
tumor in terms of growth rate and metastatic potential (1,2). We also
developed a cross-species hybrid genome that allowed us to identify
separate canine and mouse transcripts in tumor xenografts (2). In other
words, we were able to determine the contribution of canine mRNA
sequences (derived from the implanted tumor cells) and mouse mRNA
sequences (derived from infiltrating stroma) to define tumor-intrinsic
features and host-specific features that contribute to osteosarcoma
progression. When we applied this analysis method to exosome-derived
mRNAs, we found canine-derived transcripts that were only present in
exosomes of tumor-bearing mice that were associated with functions such
as protein kinase A (PKA) and actin cytoskeleton signaling, and with
upstream transcriptional regulators such as FOXF1, ESR1, and TP53. We
also found tumor-specific, canine-derived transcripts that were
associated with functions such as caveolae-derived endocytosis, energy
utilization and metabolism, immune interactions, and G-coupled receptor
signaling, and with upstream transcriptional regulators such as HNF1A,
ESR1, NIPR1, and HNF4A. This method has the potential to reduce the
statistical uncertainty that arises from the use of pre-selected
molecules among the background of thousands of genomic features in
patient samples. Using genome-wide analyses, we are able to combine
multiple, highly correlated genes to manage this problem, increase
markers' robustness, and avoid random correlations. In conclusion, this
technology is useful to identify nucleic acids that serve as cancer
biomarkers with high precision, and inter-species sequence conservation
can be used to further improve its predictions.

References

1. Scott MC, Sarver AL, Tomiyasu H, Cornax I, Van Etten J, Varshney J, et
al. Aberrant Retinoblastoma (RB)-E2F Transcriptional Regulation Defines
Molecular Phenotypes of Osteosarcoma. J Biol Chem 2015;290(47):28070-83.

2. Scott MC, Tomiyasu H, Garbe JR, Cornax I, Amaya C, O'Sullivan MG, et
al. Heterotypic models of osteosarcoma recapitulate tumor heterogeneity
and biological behavior. Disease Models & Mechanisms 2016, doi:
10.1242/dmm.026849.


