Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trilaciclib (G1T28), a CDK4/6 inhibitor, enhances the efficacy of
combination chemotherapy and immune checkpoint inhibitor treatment in
preclinical models.


While immune checkpoint inhibitors are efficacious and lead to durable
responses in patients with various cancers, only a minority of patients
respond. An approach to increase the response rate of immune checkpoint
inhibitors is to combine them with chemotherapy in order to enhance
immunogenic cell death and “prime” the immune system. However,
chemotherapy itself can cause damage to various cell types of the immune
system, potentially diminishing the activity of the
chemotherapy/checkpoint inhibitor combination. Therefore, a targeted
approach to preserve immune system function during chemotherapy would
allow optimal activity of the checkpoint inhibitor therapy.

Trilaciclib (G1T28), a potent and selective IV CDK4/6 inhibitor,
preserves hematopoietic stem cells and enhances immune system function
during chemotherapy. We and others have previously shown T lymphocytes
are extremely sensitive to CDK4/6 inhibition causing a transient arrest
of proliferation and protection from damage by chemotherapy. Post
treatment with trilaciclib and chemotherapy, T lymphocytes are released
from the transient arrest in the presence of chemotherapy-induced
immunogenic cell death allowing better priming of an anti-tumor immune
response. To evaluate the effect of trilaciclib combination treatments,
MC38 tumor bearing mice were treated with trilaciclib, oxaliplatin, or
anti-PD-L1 alone or in combination, and tumor size was measured during
and post treatment for 100 days.

Our results demonstrate that the addition of trilaciclib to an
oxaliplatin/anti-PD-L1 combination (TOP) treatment significantly improves
anti-tumor activity. Specifically, twice as many mice treated with TOP
for 15 days had a complete response (CRs) when compared to
oxaliplatin/anti-PD-L1 (OP); 6/10 CRs vs 3/10 CRs, respectively. In
addition, the CRs were durable and without any evidence of recurrence at
100 days. Furthermore, TOP treatment caused a 60% increase in overall
survival (OS) compared to mice treated with OP; median OS for TOP was 98
days compared to 61 days (HR, 0.53) for the OP treatment group.
Assessment of ex-vivo stimulation of cytokine release from harvested
splenocytes to measure T-cell activation, and evaluation of immune
infiltrates and T-cell receptor repertoire within the tumors are ongoing.
Taken together, we demonstrate that the short-acting IV CDK4/6 inhibitor,
trilaciclib, which has been shown to preserve immune function during
chemotherapy, enhances the anti-tumor activity of chemotherapy/anti-PD-L1
combination therapy.


