Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Basic mechanisms of Vernonia amygdalina exert antitumor activities
in breast cancer cells.


Breast cancer continues to represent the largest cause of mortality in
the world especially among women. It is estimated that cancer kills more
women in the USA than any other illness and it is also the leading cause
of death among all Americans. Traditional medicine represents the
first-choice of healthcare treatment for at least 80% of people living in
developing countries. Preliminary studies from our laboratory have shown
that a novel natural product, extracts of Vernonia amygdalina (VA) leaf
exerts DNA-damaging anticancer activities against breast cancer. There is
a need to develop targeted approaches for the treatment of human breast
cancer. Therefore, the goal of this research was to determine the
therapeutic mechanisms of V. amygdalina leaf extracts as anti-cancer
agent in the management of breast cancer. To achieve our goal, cell
viability, live and death cells were determined by trypan blue exclusion
test. The extent of oxidative cell/tissue damage was determined by
measuring malondialdehydes (MDA) levels. Expression of p53 tumor
suppressor gene was assessed both by immunofluorescent and western blot
analyses. Cell apoptosis was measured both by flow cytometry analysis and
DNA laddering assay. Data obtained from the Trypan blue indicated that V.
amygdalina significantly reduced the viability of MCF-7 cells in a
dose-dependent response, showing gradual increase in the loss of
viability in V. amygdalina-treated cells due to membrane damage. We
observed an up-regulation of p53 tumor suppressor gene in V.
amygdalina-treated cells compared to the control. Flow cytometry data
showed a strong dose-response relationship between V. amygdalina exposure
and caspase-3 positive cells. These results were confirmed by data of DNA
laddering assay showing a clear evidence of nucleosomal DNA fragmentation
in V. amygdalina-treated cells. Collectively, data generated from the
present study demonstrated that V. amygdalina destroys breast cancer
cells by reducing the percentage of cell viability and inducing apoptosis
through up-regulation of p53 tumor suppressor gene, activation of
caspase-3, and induction of nucleosomal DNA fragmentation associated with
the formation of MDA, a by-product of lipid peroxidation and biomarker of
oxidative stress. This result suggests that V. amygdalina treatment may
be a good anti-cancer candidate for the treatment of breast cancer.
Research supported by NIH Grant No. NIMHDG12MD007581)


