Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of BT1718, a novel Bicycle Drug Conjugate for the
treatment of lung cancer.


BT1718 is a Bicycle Drug Conjugate (BDC®) comprising a constrained
bicyclic peptide (Bicycle®) that binds with high affinity and
specificity to membrane type 1-matrix metalloprotease (MT1-MMP; MMP14)
covalently linked through a hindered disulfide linker to the potent
anti-tubulin agent DM1. MT1-MMP is involved in normal tissue remodeling
and is also expressed in tumor associated stromal cells. However,
overexpression is linked to increased tumor aggression and metastasis.
Specifically, over-expression of MT1-MMP is also associated with poor
clinical prognosis and shorter survival times in patients with NSCLC and
a range of other solid tumors. The Bicycle MT1-MMP binding element within
BT1718 was identified using a proprietary phage display peptide
technology consisting of highly diverse phage libraries of linear amino
acid sequences constrained into two loops by a central tri-functional
chemical scaffold. These MT1-MMP binding Bicycles exhibit a profound
affinity and specificity, more often associated with monoclonal
antibodies, whilst their low molecular weight (1.5-3 kDa), akin to that
of a small molecule, aids in rapid extravasation and tumor penetration.
Together these attributes make Bicycles an ideal format for the targeted
delivery of cytotoxic payloads. We evaluated the ability of BT1718 to
bind to and kill tumor cells in vitro and in vivo in a panel of tumor
cells. BT1718 demonstrated MT1-MMP target-specific binding and
MT1-MMP-dependent cell killing of lung tumor cells in vitro as well as
efficacy across a panel of lung tumor xenograft mouse models. For
example, in the Met-amplified squamous NSCLC lung EBC-1 model, complete
regressions were observed in all mice at doses as low as 5 mg/kg (iv)
twice weekly and across a range of other dosing schedules, from daily to
weekly. MT1-MMP-dependent activity was demonstrated by blocking target
specific interactions through co-administration of an excess of
unconjugated Bicycle binder, which inhibited tumour regression, or a
non-binding Bicycle, which had no effect. Further evaluation in
patient-derived lung xenograft (PDX) models indicates a similar activity
to that seen in cell-line derived xenografts, with efficacy seen from
3mg/kg twice weekly and rapid full regression of tumors at higher doses.
The molecular attributes of these Bicycles: rapid tumor penetration and
specific binding, makes them ideal therapeutics for targeted delivery of
toxins as Bicycle drug conjugates (BDCs). The small size of the BDC may
offer a significant advantage to other targeted cytotoxic approaches such
as antibody-drug conjugates due to rapid extravasation and improved tumor
penetration. BT1718, a Bicycle Drug Conjugate, shows potent anti-tumor
activity in human lung tumor xenograft models and IND-enabling studies
are underway.


