Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting nucleolin with doxorubicin-containing nanoparticle
induces a significant tumor growth inhibition in an orthotopic animal
model of standard of care-resistant mesothelioma.


Mesothelioma is a malignant tumor of the mesothelium, the thin lining of
the surface of the body cavities and the organs within, and is often
associated with asbestos exposure. It has a poor prognosis, with a mean
overall survival of 8.8 months. Chemotherapy has been used for malignant
pleural mesothelioma as an adjuvant treatment after surgical resection
(often palliative) or in patients who have inoperable disease. A
combination of cisplatin and pemetrexed remains as the current standard
of care, with only a 9% 5-year survival rate. Herein, a novel targeted
treatment for mesothelioma, based on a doxorubicin (DXR)-containing
nanoparticle functionalized with the nucleolin-binding F3 peptide (named
PEGASEMP), is proposed. It relies on nucleolin deregulated overexpression
in cancer cells and the tumor microenvironment (endothelial cells from
tumor blood vessels). Studies were performed in an orthotopic model of
human mesothelioma. Mesothelioma cells harvested from a patient with
disease progression who undergone chemotherapy, were stably transduced
with luciferase-reporter gene, and orthotopically injected intrapleurally
into female immunocompromised mice. Animals were randomly allocated to
different treatment groups: vehicle, peptide-targeted DXR-containing
nanoparticle (PEGASEMP) at 5.6 or 7 mg of DXR/kg alone (q7dx5w);
cisplatin at 4.0 mg/kg alone or combined with PEGASEMP at 5.6 mg of
DXR/kg (q7dx5w). A control group administered with the standard of care,
a combination of cisplatin at 4.0 mg/kg (q7dx5w) plus pemetrexed at 100.0
mg/kg (q2dx3x5w) was also included. Bioluminescence was monitored weekly
with live imaging using IVIS Spectrum In Vivo Imaging system.
Peptide-targeted DXR-containing nanoparticle at 7.0 mg/kg enabled a tumor
growth inhibition, by the end of the treatment, that was 183-fold higher
than the standard of care. Moreover, treatment with DXR-containing
nanoparticle targeting nucleolin, either at 5.6 or 7.0 mg/kg, enabled a
10- or 66-fold reduction of tumor burden, respectively, relative to
non-treated mice. Conversely, treatment with the standard of care did not
show any effect on tumor growth inhibition (being similar to the group
injected with vehicle) nor on tumor burden. Importantly, DXR-containing
nanoparticle targeting nucleolin, at the highest tested dose, enabled a
marked decreased of the incidence of tumor infiltration into the chest
cavity, as well as of the presence of severe lung lesions, as compared
with the standard of care (57.1% versus 100% and 14.3% versus 50%,
respectively). Overall, the novel mechanism of action associated with
DXR-containing nanoparticle targeting nucleolin, enables a significant
benefit in terms of efficacy (and safety) in the treatment of
mesothelioma, as compared with the current standard of care, thus
supporting future clinical evaluation.


