Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COnsortium for METabolomics Studies (COMETS): leveraging resources
to accelerate scientific discovery.


Metabolomics is a systems approach to the biology of health and disease
and an ‘-omics’ discipline that measures small metabolites
representing end products of a variety of metabolic and cellular
processes as reflected in available biological specimens (e.g. blood,
urine, saliva, feces and tissue). As an increasingly more common approach
used for epidemiologic and clinical studies, metabolomics has the
potential to improve disease risk assessment, screening, diagnosis,
prognosis and predictive response to therapy, as well as provide disease
mechanistic insight and help to establish criteria for causation. It is
timely to establish mechanisms for leveraging existing resources and data
for novel biomarker discovery using metabolomics approaches. To this end,
the National Institutes of Health COnsortium of METabolomics Studies
(COMETS) was established in 2014 (http://epi.grants.cancer.gov/comets/),
and currently includes 34 prospective cohorts and 2 consortia from the
United States, Europe, Asia and South America. The COMETS mission is to
promote collaborations among prospective cohort studies that follow
participants for a range of outcomes and perform metabolomic profiling of
individuals. COMETS aims to facilitate an open exchange of ideas,
knowledge, and results to accelerate a shared goal of identifying
metabolomic profiles associated with chronic disease phenotypes (e.g.
heart disease, diabetes, cancer). The structure of COMETS includes a
steering committee with one representative from each participating
cohort/consortium and a number of working groups, including age analysis,
data harmonization, statistics, and trainee. In November 2016, COMETS
held their inaugural scientific meeting. As a result of this meeting,
more working groups are currently being established to support additional
interests/projects among the consortium members. Here we further describe
the COMETS structure, including preliminary descriptive data, which aims
to advance the use and impact of metabolite profiling in population-based
research.


