Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting DCN1-mediated neddylation in lung SCC with novel
small-molecule inhibitors.


Due to the anti-neoplastic properties and clinical successes of the
proteasome inhibitors Bortezomib and Carfilzomib, the
ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) has become a new target of interest in
oncology research. The clinical toxicity induced by these inhibitors,
likely caused by complete inhibition of the UPS, has resulted in a need
for the development of more selective UPS regulators. A more in depth
understanding of the intrinsic molecular mechanisms that are associated
with the UPS has unmasked the potential for improved therapies via more
specific targets such as the process of neddylation, which is thought to
control 15 - 20% of the UPS (5). During neddylation, an enzyme known as
DCN1 for “defective in cullin neddylation 1” functions as a co-E3 to
help steer a ubiquitin-like protein (UBL), NEDD8, from an E2 enzyme,
UBC12, to a cullin (CUL) neddylation site (6 - 7, 9 - 11). Because DCN1
has been found to be amplified in certain squamous cell carcinomas (9)
(SCCs; e.g. lung, esophagus, and head and neck), this in vitro,
pre-clinical study demonstrates the potential of the DCN1-UBC12
interaction as a therapeutic site in lung SCCs through the use of novel
small-molecule inhibitors from the St. Jude (SJ) library. After
optimizing dosing regimens, it has been determined that re-administering
the SJ compounds (i.e. SJ690, SJ447, SJ446, and SJ323) every 24-hours to
address the issue of protein turn-over, produces more efficacious
treatment. The most biochemically-potent antagonists in the compound
series were also shown in these primary cell lines to potentiate other
therapeutic agents such as Cisplatin; however, these compounds alone do
not induce DNA damage, nor do they elicit caspase 3/7 activity.
Nonetheless, combination treatment of the SJ compounds with Staurosporine
in SCC cell lines, potentiated caspase 3/7 activity at varying degrees.
Collectively, this data enhances our understanding of the mechanism by
which the inhibition of DCN1 affects cancer cells, informing pre-clinical
development of the SJ DCN1 antagonists.


