Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A branching evolution model at relapse characterizes multiple
myeloma patients who responded to upfront combination therapy including
new drugs.


Intro: Multiple Myeloma (MM) is a biologically complex disease, whose
genetic plasticity favors the coexistence of genetically heterogeneous
subclones, selected in a Darwinian fashion throughout the disease course.
Therapy might represent a major selective pressure over the different
subclones, thus supporting an evolutionary model of the disease.

Aim: To explore the existence of different clonal evolution patterns in
MM, eventually driven by therapeutic selective pressure.

P&M The study included 33 pts with symptomatic MM, up-front treated
either with combination regimens including a proteasome inhibitor (28),
or with cyclophosphamide. For each pts, paired BM samples were collected
both at diagnosis and at relapse. SNPs array analyses were performed on
the CD138+ enriched cell fractions.

Results: Two approaches were applied: a) monitoring the variations of
macro CNAs; b) focusing on changes of CNAs frequencies, as observed in 27
genes of interest. Both approaches were consistent in highlighting three
major evolution patterns: in 7/33 (21%) pts, the genomic background at
relapse was almost identical to that of diagnosis. In 13/33 (39%) pts, an
overall increase in the frequencies of the same CNAs as observed at
diagnosis was detected at relapse. Finally, in 13/33 (39%) pts, either
increased or decreased frequencies of several CNAs, as well as several
differences in the CNAs type’s prevalence were observed at relapse, as
compared to diagnosis. Of interest, even if an overall CNAs median number
increase was observed from diagnosis to relapse (226 vs 507,
respectively) - supported by acquisition of CNAs either commonly
described as secondary genomic events (i.e. del17p13, amp1q21, del1p23),
or associated to the resistance to bortezomib (i.e. del8p21) - any
peculiar CNAs resulted significantly prevalent in the 3 identified
subgroups of pts.

A high rate (92%) of achievement of VGPR or better quality of response to
upfront therapy characterized the third subgroup of pts, whereas the rate
of VGPR in the remaining pts was only 20% and PR or SD were observed in 9
and 7 pts, respectively. Finally, the median time to first progression of
this subgroup of pts was significantly shorter as compared to that of pts
with branching evolution (24 vs 35 months, range 4-41 and 7-123 months,
respectively, p=0,01).

Conclusion: The genomic architecture of a subgroup of relapsed MM pts,
up-front responsive to new drugs-based combination therapies, resulted
overall different from that of diagnosis, suggesting a branching
evolution of the disease, sustained by the shrinking of the most
prevalent clone (therapy-sensitive), as well as by the expansion of
subclones (therapy-resistant) not already evident at diagnosis. This
observation raises the question whether re-treatment of relapsed pts
should be appropriate in the case of branching evolution.

Acknowledgements: AIRC (MC), Fondazione Berlucchi (CT), FUV (EB).


