Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adaptive dynamic artificial polyligand targeting (ADAPT): a method
to identify exosomal proteins from a prostate cancer cell line.


In the recent years it was demonstrated that a multitude of body fluids
contains substantial amounts of exosomes, extracellular vesicles with
sizes ranging between 40 and 100 nm. Those vesicles have protein profiles
characteristic of their cells of origin. It was shown that exosomes play
a role in cell-to-cell communication making them attractive targets to
identify early disease stage biomarkers. Cancer heterogeneity is known
for a long time to be an important clinical determinant of patient
outcome. We developed the highly multiplexed ADAPT platform to capture
systems-based biological signatures that may reflect the molecular
heterogeneity of various cancer types and help to improve diagnosis of
the disease. Exosomes from two prostate cancer cell lines, VCaP and
LNCaP, were used to train ssDNA libraries to discriminate them. A highly
diverse library of 1012 oligonucleotides (ODNs) was subjected to five
rounds of positive and negative selection against exosomes from VCaP and
LNCaP prostate cancer cell lines. Individual ODNs that bound preferably
to exosomes from VCaP cells were identified by NGS, resynthesized and
binding of co-precipitated ODNs to VCaP exosomes was verified by qPCR.
LC-MS/MS was used to identify binding partners of ODNs bound to VCaP
exosomes. Several of those binding partners (CHMP1b/2a/4b, VPS28,
Syntenin-1) were found to be part of the ESCRT machinery, which
participates in exosomes biogenesis. It was found that those proteins are
overexpressed in human cancers. In addition, we identified the chemokine
I-TAC, which is overexpressed in blood and tissue of men with advanced
prostate adenocarcinomas. Finally, we found hnRNP-1, a cancer associated
splicing factor, and the cold shock proteins RNPL and A18 hnRNP.
Knock-down of these cold shock proteins has been shown to enhance
chemotherapeutic cell killing of prostate cells. ADAPT is an unbiased
profiling platform that identifies cancer associated proteins expressed
on exosomes. This platform can be deployed against multiple cancer types
and offers broad potential applications in biomarker discovery.


