Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exposure burden for patients during an experimental study using a
dual-energy contrast-enhanced spectral mammography.


Mammography provides early micro-calcification recognition, that is
important for further breast cancer (BC) diagnosis. Imaging choice for BC
detection is X-ray mammography (MG) with the use of high-resolution
digital modality combined with iodinated contrast agents. However, a
conventional MG has some sensitivity limitations, especially in patients
with densely treated breasts. Moreover, MG contributes radiation risk for
BC that is correlated with an exposure to ionizing radiation. Patients,
for whom MG study does not give a clear interpretation are often further
diagnosed by contrast-enhanced breast MRI, the most sensitive BC
detection technique. Alternatively, it is limited by higher costs, lower
availability and increased false positives. Dual-energy contrast-enhanced
spectral mammography (CESM) is a new method applied in BC that enables
accurate detection of malignant breast lesions similar to breast MRI. The
aim of this study was to compare the usefulness of CESM versus MG in BC
detection. Additionally, doses given to the BC patients during imaging
were compared. In this study, 250 consecutive women (144 MG vs. 105
CESM), that were screened using mammography between 2011 and 2014 were
retrospectively enrolled in the study. The comparison of entrance surface
air kerma and mean glandular dose values for both options were recorded,
respectively and analyzed using different statistical and retrospective
approach. Results of presented study showed that CESM might be a new
diagnostic tool allowing an accurate detection of BC lesions, giving
results similar to those received from magnetic resonance imaging. A good
agreement found between sensitivity of the method and tumour diameters
measurements based on CESM, supports this tool as a potential replacement
for breast MRI in the preoperative evaluation of BC patients. However, a
radiation burden for patients might be significantly higher than that for
a standard full-field digital mammography procedure. In summary, each
method has its own benefits with respect to specific applications that
are further discussed in the study.


