Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prohibitin is a prognostic marker of treatment failure and
therapeutic target to block chemotherapy resistance in Wilms tumor.


Wilms tumor (WT) is the most common kidney tumor of children. Over the
last three decades, clinical trials employing multi-modality therapies
have resulted in overall survival of greater than 90% for patients with
low-risk disease. In spite of these advances, treatment of patients with
advanced, anaplastic, and relapsed Wilms tumors remains challenging, with
substantial rates of treatment failure and death. To improve risk
stratification and identify novel therapeutic targets, we used
high-accuracy mass spectrometry urine proteomics to identify urine tumors
markers associated with relapsed WT and non-WT renal tumors. We measured
urine proteomes at diagnosis of 54 patients with renal WT, clear cell
sarcoma, rhabdoid tumor, and age-matched controls, leading to the
quantitation of 6,519 urine proteins. In particular, we identified
specific urine WT markers, including those that were enriched in patients
with relapsed WT, such as mitochondrial regulators prohibitin and DAD1,
β-catenin antagonist DACT2, and DNA repair factor SUN1. Using a specific
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) developed to measure urine
prohibitin in an independent cohort of 139 WT and control samples, we
found that urine prohibitin concentrations over 1000 ng/mL were
significantly associated with the risk of disease relapse, with an odds
ratio of relapse of 153 and receiver operating characteristic area under
the curve of 0.77 (95% confidence interval of 0.64-0.99).
Immunohistochemical tumor analysis revealed that prohibitin was highly
expressed in primary Wilms tumor specimens. Importantly, using loss- and
gain-of-function genetic experiments, we found that prohibitin was
required for the growth and survival of Wilms tumor cells, and its
overexpression conferred concomitant resistance to vincristine,
doxorubicin and actinomycin D. Consistent with prohibitin’s functions
in mitochondria, we are using BH3 profiling to elucidate specific
intrinsic apoptotic dependencies in distinct subsets of refractory Wilms
tumors, as a prelude to rational combination blockade of chemotherapy
resistance, such as blockade of BCL2 dependence using venetoclax. In all,
the use of urine prohibitin measurements may improve initial therapy
stratification, and enable monitoring of response to therapy and early
detection of relapse. In addition, therapeutic targeting of chemotherapy
resistance induced by prohibitin overexpression may offer improved
therapies for patients with relapsed or refractory Wilms tumors.


