Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of invasion by lysine demethylase 5B in non-small cell
lung cancer cells.


Histone modifying enzymes are often dysregulated during carcinogenesis
and are major contributors to the development of oncogenic features,
including proliferation, drug resistance, and metastasis. Given these
roles, histone modifiers are promising new targets for oncological
therapeutics. One of the enzyme families at the center of this area of
research is the lysine demethylase family KDM5, for which several
inhibitors are in development. KDM5A and KDM5B are frequently
overexpressed or mutated in human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In
overexpression studies, KDM5B promotes invasion and migration of NSCLC
cells, whereas invasion and migration of NSCLC cells were decreased
following knockdown of KDM5B. Furthermore, in patients with NSCLC, KDM5B
is expressed at higher levels in brain metastasis sites when compared to
both normal tissues and primary tumors. These findings suggest a role for
KDM5B in lung cancer and metastatic spread. However, the precise role of
KDM5 family members in lung cancer invasion and metastasis is not known.
Recently, we discovered that KDM5B is differentially expressed in cell
subtypes within a 3D model of NSCLC collective cell invasion. In this
model isolated single cells at the forefront of invasive branches (leader
cells) express more 2-4 fold more KDM5B protein than the cells following
(follower cells), while KDM5A and KDM5C are evenly expressed across both
cell types. KDM5B mRNA expression is similar across cell types suggesting
that the differential protein expression is mediated at the
posttranscriptional level. Interestingly, global H3K4me3 levels are
decreased in leader cells as compared to follower cells, supporting the
idea that the lysine demethylases targeting this residue may be expressed
at higher levels in leader cells. Collectively, these data suggest that
KDM5B could be contributing to initiation of invasion at the primary site
and thus, promoting metastasis. Given the rising prominence of
therapeutic inhibitors of KDM5 family members, a better understanding how
KDM5B contributes to cell invasion may lead to a new approach to the
prevention of metastasis.


