Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Rad6B suppresses melanomagenesis.


Active β-catenin signaling in melanoma is associated with aggressive
disease. We have previously shown that Rad6B, an ubiquitin conjugating
enzyme, is a positive regulator of β-catenin stability and
transcriptional activity, and is itself a transcriptional target of
β-catenin. This stabilization is mediated by Rad6B-induced K63-linked
polyubiquitination of β-catenin that renders it insensitive to 26S
proteasomal degradation. Immunohistochemical analysis of human cutaneous
melanoma samples showed the first detectable expression of Rad6B in
melanocyte hyperplasia and continued Rad6B and β-catenin overexpression
in primary and metastatic melanomas. These data implicate a critical role
for Rad6B in melanocyte transformation and a continuing role in melanoma
progression. To analyze the role of Rad6B in melanomagenesis, we targeted
Rad6B expression/activity in human M14 metastatic melanoma cells by using
a Rad6-selective small molecule inhibitor SMI#9 and the CrispR/Cas9 gene
editing system. Immunoblot analysis showed that compared to controls, M14
cells treated with SMI#9 showed decreased levels of β-catenin, and
β-catenin driven transcriptional targets Rad6, vimentin, Mitf-M, and
Melan A. Although Snail levels were not altered, SMI#9 treated cells
showed increase in phosphorylated Snail. Immunocytochemical staining
verified the western blot data and showed cytoplasmic relocalization of
PCNA and Snail in SMI#9 treated cells which is consistent with increase
in phosphorylated Snail. Concordant with the decrease in vimentin and
unphosphorylated Snail levels, Rad6B-inhibited cells display poor
capacity to migrate as compared to controls. Whereas Rad6B knockout cells
were severely growth impaired, Rad6B edited clones showing partial
expression (potentially from only one allele) similarly showed decreased
levels of β-catenin, vimentin, and Mitf-M. Similar to Rad6B-inhibited
cells, Rad6B edited cells were migration- and invasion-impaired. Whereas
control cells produced robust tumors and overt lung metastases, the Rad6B
gene edited cells were poorly tumorigenic. Rad6B gene edited clones
showed complete loss of Melan A. Since Mitf-M is a transcriptional
regulator of Melan A and a key player in melanocyte lineage
specification, our data suggest that targeting Rad6B could potentially
inhibit melanomagenesis by reprogramming melanoma cells. Supported by NIH
CA178117 and 3Balls Racing.


