Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of homogeneous dual-drug ADCs: Application to the
co-delivery of auristatin payloads with complementary antitumor
activities.


A common theme in treating cancer is the use of combination chemotherapy,
where multiple drugs with different mechanisms of action are combined to
elicit synergistic activity or overcome differential drug sensitivities.
Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) have emerged as a powerful approach for
treating cancer, combining the tumor targeting specificity of monoclonal
antibodies with the potent cell-killing activity of cytotoxic drugs. Like
other therapies, these agents are increasingly being tested in
combination with unconjugated, clinically approved anticancer agents. In
addition, emerging data demonstrates that insensitivity to a particular
ADC can be overcome through delivery of a different payload using the
same antibody. For these reasons, the development of ADCs that can
deliver two complementary payloads to a tumor would likely be a
significant advancement in ADC technology. To enable dual-drug
conjugation, we utilized a multiplexing drug carrier that contains
cysteine residues with orthogonal protecting groups and identified novel
conditions for utilization of these protecting groups on a folded
protein. Sequential cysteine unmasking enables discrimination between
conjugation sites to allow for site-specific drug conjugation. This
strategy provides homogeneous ADCs bearing 16 total drugs per antibody,
split evenly between the two drug linkers. Importantly, this strategy is
flexible, as it does not require engineered antibodies or custom enzymes
for drug-linker conjugation. To demonstrate the potential benefits of ADC
dual drug delivery, this strategy was applied to the construction of ADCs
bearing two classes of auristatin drug linkers that have different
physiochemical properties and complementary anti-cancer activities.
Dual-auristatin ADCs were tested in cell line and xenograft models that
have differential sensitivities to the individual auristatin components,
including those with heterogeneous antigen expression or high levels of
drug efflux transporters. The data from these studies demonstrate that
the dual-auristatin ADCs were active on cells and tumors that are
refractory to treatment with either of the individual component drugs.
This work highlights the potential for delivering two synergistic or
complementary payloads on a single ADC and presents a flexible method for
constructing dual-drug ADCs with site-specific and homogeneous drug
loading.


