Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral delivery of TTI-621 (SIRPαFc), a CD47-blocking
immunotherapeutic, inhibits tumor growth and prolongs animal survival in
a subcutaneous B cell lymphoma model.


Tumor cells often evade macrophage-mediated destruction by increasing
cell surface expression of CD47, which delivers an anti-phagocytic
(“do-not-eat”) signal by binding the inhibitory signal-regulatory
protein α (SIRPα) receptor on macrophages. We have previously shown
that blockade of the CD47-SIRPα pathway using TTI-621, a soluble
SIRPα-IgG1 Fc fusion protein, triggers macrophage phagocytosis of tumor
cells in vitro as well as inhibits tumor growth in vivo when delivered
systemically. In the current study, the efficacy of intratumoral delivery
of TTI-621 was evaluated in a subcutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(Toledo) xenograft model.

Tumor bearing mice were randomized into treatment groups when tumor
volumes reached approximately 120 mm3. Weekly intratumoral administration
of TTI-621 at 10, 1 and 0.1 mg/kg dose levels resulted in statistically
significant decreases in tumor growth and improved survival relative to
vehicle control treatment. Notably, at day 50 post-tumor implantation
100% survival was achieved at the highest dose level (vs. 0% survival
with vehicle control treatment). Moreover, weekly intratumoral
administration of TTI-621 was efficacious even at a high tumor load
setting in which the pre-dose volumes were approximately 300 mm3. Flow
cytometry analysis of the dissociated tumor samples demonstrated no
significant change in the numbers of M1 and M2 tumor-associated
macrophages (TAMs) following intratumoral administration of TTI-621.
Nevertheless, TTI-621 dramatically increased the phagocytosis of Toledo
cells by both M1 and M2 TAMs to a similar extent ex vivo, suggesting that
TTI-621 is efficacious in increasing the phagocytosis of tumor cells by a
heterogeneous population of TAMs.

Collectively, these results demonstrate that TTI-621 is efficacious when
delivered intratumorally and can increase the phagocytosis of tumor cells
by both M1 and M2 TAM populations. These data support the evaluation of
intratumoral administration of TTI-621 in cancer patients, and a Phase I
study of intratumorally delivered TTI-621 in patients with percutaneously
accessible solid tumors and mycosis fungoides is ongoing (NCT02890368).


