Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR2 acts as a checkpoint regulator of the pancreatic stellate
cells activity within pancreatic cancer tumor microenvironment.


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a grotesque disease featured by an inflamed
complex tumor microenvironment (TME) that contribute to advancing tumor
progressing. Oncogenic K-ras, the most common mutation in PC, amplifies
inflammation within TME through overexpression of multiple immune factors
such as CXCR2 and its ligands. K-ras induced overexpression of CXCR2
axis, made CXCR2 seem intuitively a good target for PC treatment. In KC,
a spontaneous PC mouse model with oncogenic K-ras, genetic ablation of
CXCR2 caused anti-tumor events such as increased apoptosis and decreased
angiogenesis; and also presented pro-tumorigenic events; most notably was
the increased fibrosis and metastasis to the liver. These observations
have shed light on the possible role the CXCR2 on the other TME component
especially pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs). The aim of this study is to
determine the differential effect of K-ras status and CXCR2 chemokines
expression in the PC cells on their interaction with PSCs. Unidirectional
segregated co-culture studies were conducted using conditioned media
(CM). CM collected from PSCs were used to grow multiple PC cell lines,
and CM obtained from different PC cell lines were used to culture PSCs.
Cellular proliferation and gene expression were analyzed. Furthermore,
PSCs proliferation potentials were assessed as those cells treated with
exogenous CXCL1 and CXCL8, or PC cell lines derived-CM in the presence or
absence of CXCR2 antagonists. Co-culture studies revealed that
PSC-derived CM had increased proliferation of PC cell lines positive to
oncogenic K-ras as well as increasing their expression of multiple
chemokines such as CXCL1, CXCL5, and CCL2. On the other hand, PC cell
lines with a wildtype K-ras were inhibited by PSC-derived CM treatment.
PSCs proliferation potentials were decreased with CM derived from
oncogenic K-ras positive PC cell lines and increased with CM derived from
PC cell lines with wildtype K-ras. Furthermore, CM from oncogenic K-ras
PC cell lines has increased the expression of multiple pro-tumorigenic
genes in the PSCs including cytokines such as IL-10, IL-4 and IL-13, and
chemokines such as CXCL2 and CXCL7. Also, treating PSCs with exogenous
CXCL1 and CXCL8 exhibited a similar proliferation inhibition to that
observed with oncogenic K-ras PC derived CM treatment. CXCR2 antagonists
have shown rescued inhibition or enhanced proliferation of PSCs when
incorporated with CXCR2 chemokine or PC cell line derived CM treatment.
These observations suggest that K-ras status of PC dictates their
interaction with PSCs within the TME. We have demonstrated that oncogenic
K-ras through increased production of CXCR2 chemokine would dampen PSCs
proliferation and further orient them to support tumor progression by
increased expression of pro-tumorigenic genes. Besides, we observed that
CXCR2 inhibition in PSCs would increase their proliferation which may
further their fibrogenic activity.


