Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ibrutinib regulates tumor microenvironment and enhances response
to everolimus in renal cell carcinoma mouse models.


Introduction: Ibrutinib (ibr), a first-in-class, once-daily, oral
inhibitor of Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK), is indicated for the
treatment of patients with CLL/SLL, MCL and WM. Ibr also inhibits
EGFR/HER2 and has demonstrated efficacy against EGFR+ NSCLC and HER2+
breast cancer in vitro and in xenograft models (Gao 2014; Chen 2016).
Further, ibr modulated host immunity and enhanced anti-PD-L1 activity in
solid tumor models otherwise insensitive to BTK or HER kinase inhibition
(Sagiv-Barfi 2015), suggesting that ibr may be active in renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) via multiple mechanisms. Here we determined the impact of
ibr alone and in combination with everolimus (eve) on tumor growth and
the tumor microenvironment in syngeneic and xenograft RCC mouse models.

Methods: Cell proliferation was determined with CellTiter-Glo using a
3-day treatment regimen. Subcutaneous implantation of 786-0 and Renca
cells established xenograft and syngeneic models in nude and
immune-competent mice. Treatment started when tumor volume reached 150
mm3 (786-0) or 55 mm3 (Renca) and was measured twice weekly.
Immunophenotying of tumor infiltrates was determined by flow cytometry.
For Treg differentiation, magnetically-sorted CD4+CD25- mouse splenic T
cells were stimulated with anti-CD3/CD28 antibodies and TGF-β1 for 5
days.

Results: Ibr significantly inhibited the growth of syngeneic Renca tumors
(TGI%=32.4 at Day 19, p≤0.05) in Balb/c mice and enhanced the efficacy
of eve, although Renca cells were not sensitive to ibr in vitro. The
combination significantly reduced the numbers of splenic and tumor Tregs
in addition to reducing PD-1 expression on tumor CD8+ T cells.
Consistently, in vitro Treg differentiation assays revealed that, while
the combination of ibr and eve significantly reduced Treg
differentiation, either drug alone showed little effect. In 786-0
xenograft model, ibr alone slowed tumor growth in a subgroup of mice and
significantly enhanced the effect of eve (p≤0.05 or 0.01). To identify
whether BTK or EGFR/HER2 is the target, CGI-1746, a BTK inhibitor, and
lapatinib, an EGFR/HER2 inhibitor, were tested. Surprisingly, both
CGI-1746 and lapatinib were active in inhibiting tumor growth (TGI%=26.7
or 37.6 respectively, p≤0.05 or 0.01), and slightly potentiated the
efficacy of eve. However, consistent with ibr results, neither CGI-1746
nor lapatinib showed any effect on the cell growth of 786-0 cells.

Conclusion: This study suggests that ibr has antitumor activity against
RCC alone and when combined with eve in animal models. This effect may be
mediated by modulation of the tumor microenvironment, such as inhibiting
Treg differentiation and suppressing PD-1 expression on CD8+ T cells, and
both BTK and EGFR/HER2 are involved. Further investigation is needed to
clarify the mechanism of action, but the results here provide a rationale
for ibr as a novel agent for RCC in combination with mTOR inhibitors.


