Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fusogenic targeted liposomes: novel nanotherapy for specific
treatment of prostate cancer.


Metastatic or castrate-resistant prostate cancer is the second-leading
cause of cancer mortality in males. In the past 3 years, chemotherapies
have extended survival, but efficacy is limited by dose-limiting
toxicities due to suboptimal biodistribution. Here, we have addressed the
lack of specificity and accumulation in Castrate Resistant Prostate
Cancer (CRPC) by developing a unique nano-carrier for drug delivery:
molecular targeted fusogenic liposomes. Previously, we have developed a
platform whereby lipid nanoparticles are formulated with fusion
associated small transmembrane (FAST) protein p14. The p14 protein
catalyzes mixing of the nanoparticle lipids with target plasma membrane
to deliver the cargo directly into the cytoplasm. In this study, we have
engineered the p14 protein to incorporate the prostate cancer targeting
ligand bombesin, which binds specifically to the Gastrin-releasing
Peptide (GRPR) that is overexpressed in prostate cancer. We hypothesized
that this novel targeted fusogenic liposome formulation would
significantly improve the biodistribution and efficacy of chemotherapy. A
clinical liposomal doxorubicin formulation (DOXIL) was modified to
incorporate targeted fusogenic p14 protein, and the efficacy and
biodistribution of these new formulations was evaluated using in vitro
and in vivo models of CRPC. In PC3 cells, compared to conventional
liposomes, intracellular levels of doxorubicin are increased by 15 and 25
times when p14 or p14-bombesin liposomes are used. Additionally, the IC50
is reduced from 85mM to 2mM. In mice bearing PC3 tumors treated with
targeted fusogenic liposomal doxorubicin, we observed improved tumor
growth inhibition by 57% (vs control) and 1.5 fold increased accumulation
in tumors within 24h after administration. These proof of concept
experiments indicate that molecular targeted fusogenic nanomedicines can
improve both the intracellular delivery and tumor accumulation of
chemotherapy, improving outcomes in this preclinical model. This
highlights the potential for improved outcomes in patients with CRPC
through the enhancement of approved drugs.


