Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of anti-IL-17B antibodies neutralizing IL-17B-mediated
alterations of the immune microenvironment, promotion of tumor cell
initiating capacity and chemoresistance.


Interleukin 17B (IL-17B) is a pro-inflammatory cytokine that belongs to a
family encompassing 6 interleukins (IL-17A to F) and binds to the IL-17
receptor B (IL-17RB). Recently, amplified IL-17B/IL-17RB signaling was
found critical for breast and pancreatic tumorigenesis and elevated
expression of IL-17RB has been associated with the shortest survival
rates in patients with breast or pancreatic cancer. Using IL-17B
knock-out (IL-17B KO) mice we demonstrate here that melanoma,
fibrosarcoma and breast cancer cell tumorigenicity is strongly impaired
in immunocompetent IL-17B KO mice compared to WT littermates, including a
large number of tumor free mice. Reduced tumor incidence in IL-17B KO
mice is associated with alterations of the immune tumor microenvironment
especially within innate lymphocyte and myeloid sub-populations. We
further demonstrate that IL-17B is a key cytokine shaping the tumor
initiating cancer cell niche. Indeed, MDA-MB-468 human breast cancer
cells overexpressing IL-17B exhibit 10 times higher frequency of tumor
initiating cells when xenografted at a serial limiting dilution in nude
mice. Tumor progression is, again, associated with alterations of NK
cells within the tumor microenvironment and with increased percentages of
CD44hi/CD24lo tumor cells, a phenotype associated with breast cancer stem
cells (CSC). This is associated with resistance to conventional
chemotherapeutic agents such as taxol, an effect that is totally
abrogated by disrupting IL-17B-IL-17RB signaling with a neutralizing
antibody. Altogether our results point out the key role of IL-17B in
regulating the immune microenvironment as well as cardinal features of
CSC, one of the alleged causes of resistance to therapy and tumor
relapse. Thereby, IL-17B and its receptor appear as potential therapeutic
targets for cancer immunotherapy. Collectively, these data support the
ongoing development of IL-17B neutralizing antibodies.


