Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53-independent Noxa induction by cisplatin is regulated by
ATF3/ATF4 in HNSCC cells.


Head and neck cancer is the sixth leading cancer worldwide and head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) accounts for more than 90% of
incident cases. The long-term prognosis of patients with advanced HNSCC
has shown little improvement over the last three decades. Induction
chemotherapy with platinum-based compounds, taxanes, and 5-fluorouracil
is beneficial for head and neck cancer patients, but the prolonged use of
chemotherapeutic drugs is limited by their toxicity and by the
development of resistance. Tumor cell death induced by both conventional
and targeted chemotherapy is often mediated by the BCL-2 family-dependent
mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. However, initiators of this apoptotic
pathway, such as p53, are frequently mutated or deleted in HNSCC
rendering it refractory to treatment. To counter such resistance, direct
therapeutic targeting of the BCL-2 family is conceptually appealing. We
have investigated the cytotoxic effects of a DNA damaging agent,
cisplatin that is used for a standard therapy for locally advanced HNSCC.
Cisplatin produces anticancer effects mainly by generating DNA lesions
and activating DNA damage response followed by inducing BCL-2
family-dependent mitochondrial apoptosis. Cisplatin induces the
expression of a pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein, Noxa that binds to the
pro-survival BCL-2 family protein, MCL-1 to inactivate its function and
induces cell death. To examine the contribution of Noxa in
cisplatin-induced apoptosis, shRNA for Noxa was introduced in p53-null
HNSCC cells, since p53 is mutated or deleted in more than 50% of HNSCC.
We found that the up-regulation of Noxa is critical for cisplatin-induced
apoptosis in p53-independent HNSCC cells. This Noxa induction is
regulated at the transcriptional level. Thus, we examined the regulation
of the Noxa promoter with a series of luciferase reporter assays. We
found that the CRE (cAMP responsive element located at -66~-59 from the
transcription start site) on the promoter plays a critical role in Noxa
induction. The CRE is known to be regulated by ATF/CREB transcription
factors. Downregulation of ATF3 or ATF4 by shRNAs clearly reduced Noxa
induction. Furthermore, the binding of these transcription factors to the
CRE on the Noxa promoter was increased by cisplatin treatment, determined
by chromatin-immunoprecipitation assays. In conclusion, ATF3 and ATF4 are
important regulators for cisplatin-induced Noxa in a p53-independent
pathway. The results suggest that modulation of the signaling pathways
that activate ATF3/ATF4 could be an alternative approach to induce Noxa
followed by apoptosis in HNSCC.


