Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple imaging reporter labeled acid-degradable dextran
nanopolymer as a COX-2 siRNA carrier for COX-2 specific downregulation.


Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) as a target has attracted interest for multiple
degenerative diseases and cancers. COX-2 siRNA provides specific and
effective down-regulation of COX-2. However, because artificial cationic
polymers can induce proinflammatory signals that increase COX-2
expression, there are few if any reports about the use of artificial
cationic polymers as siRNA carrier to downregulate COX-2 in cancer cells.
Here we developed a method to efficiently synthesize a multiple imaging
reporter labeled biodegradable dextran to use as an efficient cationic
polymer carrier for COX-2 siRNA delivery. Amine function groups were
conjugated to the dextran platform through acetal bonds. Acetal bonds
were broken at acidic conditions that occur in cancer and endocytosis
compartments. Rhodamine was labeled to the amine groups to detect
degradation and removal of these groups from the cell, while the dextran
scaffold was labeled with Cy5.5. The rapid cleavage and release of amine
groups minimized the proinflammatory side effects of the positively
charged amine groups.Colorimetric assay of Cy5.5 and rhodamine in
different pH buffer indicated that the amine group was cleaved at pH 5.5
buffer but was stable in pH 7.4 buffer. Fluorescence imaging showed that
the dextran siRNA nanoplex entered the cells through endocytosis that
provided acidic conditions for the breaking of the amine group. For the
first time, the intracellular breaking of acetal bonds was clearly
visualized by multiple imaging reporters. Because the rapid cleavage and
release of amine groups minimized the proinflammatory side-effects,
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
assay indicated that this dextran COX-2 siRNA nanoplex could downregulate
COX-2 expression efficiently. Prostaglandin E2 level decreased
significantly with COX-2 siRNA/dextran treatment. In vivo imaging
demonstrated that the COX-2 siRNA/dextran nanoplex accumulated in
MDA-MB-231 tumors. QRT-PCR and western blot assays of COX-2 levels in
tumor tissue demonstrated that this nanoplex significantly downregulated
COX-2 expression in vivo efficiently and within 24h. This dextran
nanopolymer can be used as a safe, reproducible, and biocompatible siRNA
carrier to effectively reduce COX-2 expression in cancer cells and tumors.


