Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and development of novel highly potent and selective
inhibitors of USP19 using UbiPlex™.


Over the past decade, protein ubiquitination has emerged as an important
post-translational modification with regulatory functions in all
important cellular processes. Deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) including
ubiquitin specific proteases (USPs) are cysteine proteases that catalyse
the de-ubiquitination of protein substrates including tumor suppressors
and oncogenes, hence regulating their levels and/or function. As a result
of their increasing implications in the etiology of numerous pathological
conditions including cancer, DUBs are emerging as an attractive and
promising target class for the development of 1st in class medicines with
high therapeutic impact. However, despite 15 years of intense research
DUBs have proved largely refractory to drug discovery efforts.

Herein, we further describe the application of Ubi-Plex™, our drug
discovery platform for the identification and optimisation of DUB
inhibitors. In particular, we will highlight the versatility and
robustness of Ubi-Plex™ by describing the outcome of our focussed
library screening, hit identification, hit validation and elaboration
activities on USP19.

A series of novel, highly potent (e.g. IC50 A series of novel, highly
potent (e.g. IC50 < 10 nM) and reversible USP19 inhibitors have been
identified. Further profiling has also demonstrated excellent selectivity
against a large panel of DUBs and other non-related enzymes (e.g.
kinases, proteases). These inhibitors are cell-permeable and exhibit
potent target engagement in cells with EC50 values A series of novel,
highly potent (e.g. IC50 < 10 nM) and reversible USP19 inhibitors have
been identified. Further profiling has also demonstrated excellent
selectivity against a large panel of DUBs and other non-related enzymes
(e.g. kinases, proteases). These inhibitors are cell-permeable and
exhibit potent target engagement in cells with EC50 values < 30 nM.
Finally, we will describe our progress towards the development of lead
molecules with drug-like properties with the aim to rapidly establish in
vivo proof-of-concept studies.

In summary, this work further exemplifies the tractability of the DUB
target family and reports the discovery and detailed profiling of the
first highly potent and selective inhibitors of USP19. These molecules
may provide opportunities for the development of new anticancer
therapeutics as well as for the treatment of muscle wasting disorders
including cachexia.


