Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Age-associated neoplastic transformation of mammary stem cells.


Incidence rate of breast cancer increases significantly with age.
However, the mechanism of age-associated mammary tumorigenesis is
unknown. Although mammary stem/progenitor cells have been proposed as the
cells of origin for breast cancer, the mechanism remains largely elusive.
Previously we discovered that in the old (28 to 30 month-old) mouse
mammary gland, the luminal cells in the hyperplastic lesions elevated
expression of CD49f, which is a basal cell marker. This led to an
increased percentage of mammary stem cells (MaSCs) marked by CD49fhi in
the old in comparison to the young (3 to 6 month-old). Similarly, old
(>60 yr) human mammary ducts in the adjacent normal tissues from patients
with breast cancer showed more hyperplastic lesions and CD49fhi luminal
cells than young (Incidence rate of breast cancer increases significantly
with age. However, the mechanism of age-associated mammary tumorigenesis
is unknown. Although mammary stem/progenitor cells have been proposed as
the cells of origin for breast cancer, the mechanism remains largely
elusive. Previously we discovered that in the old (28 to 30 month-old)
mouse mammary gland, the luminal cells in the hyperplastic lesions
elevated expression of CD49f, which is a basal cell marker. This led to
an increased percentage of mammary stem cells (MaSCs) marked by CD49fhi
in the old in comparison to the young (3 to 6 month-old). Similarly, old
(>60 yr) human mammary ducts in the adjacent normal tissues from patients
with breast cancer showed more hyperplastic lesions and CD49fhi luminal
cells than young (<40 yr) tissues. Regenerated mammary glands by the old
CD49fhi MaSCs through in vivo transplantation in cleared mammary fat pads
showed more hyperplastic and dysplastic lesions than those regenerated by
the young CD49fhi MaSCs, suggesting the old CD49fhi MaSCs contain
transformed MaSCs. Moreover, gene set enrichment analysis of whole genome
transcriptome data showed that they also have elevated expression of
luminal cell specific genes and reduced expression of basal cell specific
genes. Through large scale screening with flow cytometry guided by
bioinformatics analysis, we found that Lin- CD24med CD49fhi CD13+ CD73-
mammary epithelial cells had increased number of MaSCs. By comparing
young (3 to 6 months old) and old Balb/C mice, we found that the
frequency of this specific MaSCs was significantly increased by four
folds in old mammary epithelial cells (young: 4%, old: 16%). In contrast,
relative percentage of Lin- CD24med CD49fhi CD13- CD73+ cells
significantly decreased (young: 46%, old: 16%) during aging while the
CD13 and CD73 double positive or double negative subpopulations remained
unchanged. CD13+ CD73- cells generated significantly many more
mammospheres (around 40 spheres per 1,000 cells) in suspension culture
than other three types of cells (around 2 spheres per 1,000 cells).
However, there was no significant difference between the young and old in
terms of sphere formation efficiency for any of the four subpopulations
marked by CD13 and CD73. We are studying whether anyone of these four
subpopulation from CD49fhi old cells will generate more hyperplastic and
dysplastic lesions in regenerated glands than the other subpopulations as
well as than the corresponding young subpopulation. Our study show that
CD13 and CD73 may be the markers for the identification of
tumor-initiating MaSCs.


