Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GRK5 promotes a mesenchymal transition in prostate cancer.


Locally advanced and metastatic prostate cancer is incurable, despite
decades of research targeting the activity of the androgen receptor (AR).
Our lab previously identified G protein-coupled receptor 5 (GRK5) for its
ability to regulate PCa progression, independent of AR activity. GRK5
partially partitions to the nucleus, wherein it has been shown to
regulate the transcriptome in non-PCa models. To globally elucidate the
mechanistic impact of GRK5 on PCa progression, we are investigating the
impact of GRK5 on the PCa transcriptome. We hypothesize that GRK5’s
regulation of the PCa transcriptome promotes tumor progression. To assay
the effect of GRK5 on the PCa transcriptome, RNA sequencing was performed
in two cell lines: PC3 Control (PC3 shGFP) and PC3 GRK5 Knockdown (PC3
shGRK5). Ontologic analysis identified the epithelial–mesenchymal
transition (EMT) as being affected when GRK5 is depleted. The
epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) is highly associated with
promoting PCa progression and chemoresistance, thus we selected this
pathway for further investigation. Confirmatory western blot analysis and
quantitative PCR (qPCR) validated that depleting GRK5 suppresses the
expression of the mesenchymal markers Vimentin and N-Cadherin. Similarly,
overexpression of GRK5 increases the expression of these mesenchymal
markers. Stable overexpression of GRK5 promotes cells to develop a
spindle-like morphology, indicative of a mesenchymal state. GRK5 mediates
this mesenchymal transition through increasing the expression of the EMT
transcription factor, Twist1. Further analysis identifies that GRK5
activity promotes in vitro invasion. Cell lines overexpressing GRK5
demonstrate an increase in resistance to docetaxel, the mainstay
chemotherapy for advanced PCa. Overexpression of mutated forms of GRK5
that are relegated to the nucleus are able recapitulated all aforesaid
changes, arguing that the nuclear activity of GRK5 mediates this effect.
Collectively, this data presents a novel mechanism promoting PCa
progression, independent of AR activity. Future work seeks to assay the
ability of GRK5 to promote metastasis in vivo in mouse models.


