Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel RNA-based assay for the detection and monitoring of
circulating tumor cell signatures in breast cancer.


Examination of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) holds the potential of
offering a real-time non-invasive window into tumor biology. Information
gleaned from CTC detection and characterization can be used for early
cancer detection, choice of therapy decisions and long-term monitoring
for disease recurrence and the emergence of drug resistance mechanisms.
However, technical difficulties with CTC isolation and the inherent
limitations of imaging-based analysis have hindered the broad clinical
use of CTCs as biomarkers. To overcome these concerns, we have combined
our unbiased microfluidic CTC enrichment technology, the iChip, with a
highly sensitive and specific multi-gene RNA-based biomarker panel to
develop an assay that detects CTC signatures in patient blood samples in
a high throughput and quantitative fashion.

This assay was applied to a cohort of breast cancer patients, including
women with both localized and metastatic disease. It successfully
identified CTC signal in 50-70% of metastatic and 20-40% of localized
pretreatment patient samples. Patient CTC scores, assigned based on a
multi-marker prediction algorithm, correlated with cancer stage and
grade, but not with hormone receptor status, suggesting the applicability
of the assay to a wide range of breast cancer subtypes. To determine if
CTC scoring was useful for disease monitoring, we performed monthly blood
collection from metastatic patients starting a new line of treatment. CTC
score as early as one month after initiation of therapy, but not at
pretreatment, was predictive of progression-free survival and treatment
outcome, suggesting that real-time kinetic changes in CTC signatures are
more clinically informative that one-time static evaluation of their
presence in a given sample. In addition, a subset of high-risk genes
showed expression patterns over the course of treatment that highly
correlated with disease recurrence. This observation indicates that a
multi-marker panel can parse out dynamic changes in cancer gene
expression programs and provide a molecular insight into treatment
responses that are not achievable by assays built around one or few
markers.

In conclusion, our novel RNA-based method of identifying CTC signatures
in liquid biopsies provides a sensitive platform for breast cancer
detection and monitoring that goes beyond CTC enumeration. It offers a
non-invasive quantitative molecular characterization of tumor gene
expression that can be used to guide informed clinical decisions in both
standard course of care and clinical trial settings.


