Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of fructose in prostate cancer.


The elevated level of glucose uptake and metabolism in cancers is the
basis for the clinical localization of primary cancers and sites of
metastasis by positron emission tomography (PET scanning), based on the
enhanced cellular uptake of 2-deoxy-2-[18F]-fluoro-D-glucose (FDG). In
prostate cancer (CaP), however, FDG-PET imaging has shown limited
clinical applicability. This striking difference suggests that CaP cells
utilize hexoses other than glucose, such as fructose, as the principal
energy source. The purpose of this study was to determine whether or not
fructose is a/the principal source of energy for CaP cells. mRNA and
protein expression for the glucose transporter Glut-1 and fructose
transporters Glut-2, Glut-5, Glut-7, Glut-9 and Glut-11 was analyzed in
benign (PWR-1E, RWPE-1) and malignant (LNCaP, vCaP, LNCaP-C4-2, DU-145,
and PC-3) human prostate cell lines using qRT-PCR and western blot,
respectively. In addition, Glut(s) protein expression was analyzed on a
tissue microarray containing 200 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded benign
and malignant human prostate tissues using immunohistochemistry. Fructose
and glucose uptake was measured in vitro in benign and malignant human
prostate cell lines using radiolabelled D-[U-14C]-fructose or
2-[1,2-3H]-deoxy-D-[3H]-glucose, respectively. Lastly, the effect of
fructose or glucose on the levels of ATP, mitochondrial metabolism, and
expression of the enzymes hexokinase-2 (HK2), type-C fructokinase
(KHK-C), pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) and type-A lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH-A) was analyzed in benign and malignant human prostate cell lines
using chemiluminescence, seahorse, and qRT-PCR analyses, respectively.
Our results indicated that expression of the fructose transporters,
Glut-5 and Glut-9, was increased in CaP cell lines and in human CaP
tissues compared to benign cell lines and benign prostate tissues,
respectively. Glut-1 expression, however, did not differ between benign
and malignant human prostate cells. Transport assays demonstrated that
CaP cell lines have a higher capacity to transport fructose compared to
benign cell lines. However, glucose uptake was not altered between benign
and malignant human prostate cell lines. ATP levels in CaP cells were
similar in the presence of fructose or glucose. Fructose, but not
glucose, significantly altered mRNA expression of HK2, KHK-C, PKM2, and
LDH-A in malignant human prostate cells. Taken together, our results
suggest that fructose may represent an alternative energy source and may
reprogram hexose metabolism in CaP cells.


