Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effects of dual inhibition of YAP1 and TAZ in
non-small cell lung cancer cells.


Background: The Hippo signaling pathway is associated with regulation of
cell growth and apoptosis. Downstream effectors of this pathway, YAP and
its paralog, TAZ, interact with TEA domain (TEAD) transcription factors
leading to cell proliferation and anti-apoptosis. As a result, YAP and
TAZ have emerged as attractive anti-cancer therapeutic targets. Several
studies, including our previous report, have noted the individual effects
of YAP or TAZ ablation; however, consequences of dual inhibition have not
yet been investigated in lung cancer. We hypothesize that dual inhibition
of YAP and TAZ will lead to more pronounced cytotoxicity than each
knockdown alone as a result of diminished compensatory mechanism by the
remaining family member.

Methods: NSCLC cell lines, such as PC9 and A549, were transfected with
individual YAP1, TAZ siRNA or a combination of both siRNAs. Western
blotting was performed to determine the levels of YAP1 and TAZ proteins
following knockdown. Quantitative RT-PCR was also performed to confirm
effective YAP1 and TAZ knockdown. In addition, gene and protein
expression of downstream targets, such as CTGF and Cyr61, were assessed.
Clonogenic assays were performed to determine cell survival.

Results: Successful siRNA-mediated YAP and TAZ ablation were confirmed
with Western blot and qRT-PCR. The expression of the Hippo-YAP/TAZ
downstream targets, CTGF, Cyr61 and AXL, were also reduced accordingly.
Moreover, dual knockdown of YAP and TAZ led to a more pronounced
inhibition of cell survival/proliferation than ablation of individual
genes alone. In addition, dual inhibition of YAP/TAZ exhibited
significantly diminished levels of the mesenchymal markers, vimentin and
N-cadherin, and increased levels of the epithelial marker, E-cadherin.
EMT has been recognized as an essential process during lung cancer tumor
migration and metastasis.

Conclusion: Our findings show that dual inhibition of YAP1 and TAZ are
synergistic in blocking NSCLC cell survival signaling. Thus, dual
inhibition may serve as a better therapeutic strategy in targeting the
Hippo pathway than sole YAP1 blockade in the management of NSCLC.


