Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel oral small molecule CXCR4 inhibitor improves activity of
immune checkpoint blockade in ovarian cancer mouse model.


Ovarian cancer continues to be the most lethal gynecologic malignancy
with no real cure for patients presenting with advanced stage disease.
Immune check point blockade showed modest clinical response in patient
with recurrent ovarian cancer, thus additional therapeutic strategies for
combination therapy are needed. As chemokines and their receptors drive
both immune cell migration and tumor growth, angiogenesis and metastasis
formation, they are an attractive target for combinatorial cancer therapy.

CXCR4 is the most highly expressed chemokine receptor in advanced stage
high grade serous ovarian cancer, thus the objective of this study was to
evaluate the efficacy of a novel oral small molecule CXCR4 inhibitor
(X4-136) alone and in combination with immune checkpoint inhibition and
the anti-angiogenic agent bevacizumab, and characterize the changes in
circulating immune cells during treatment in murine ovarian cancer model.
The ID8 cell line was used in C57BL/6J mice to establish an immune
competent murine model and to compare single agent and combination
therapy with oral X4-136 CXCR4 inhibitor, bevacizumab, and anti-PD1.
During treatment blood sampling was performed and immune cells were
analyzed by flow cytometry.

Our results demonstrated that single agent therapies alone with either
drug had no significant effect on tumor progression or survival.
Combination therapy with the CXCR4 inhibitor and anti-PD1 improved
survival compared to control animals and the other combination therapy
groups. The addition of bevacizumab to the dual combination did not
further prolong survival. Analysis of circulating immune cells revealed
elevations in CD11b+Ly6C+ and the ratio of CD11b+Ly6C+ to CD11b+Ly6G+ in
groups treated with the CXCR4 inhibitor, indicating an increase in
circulating myeloid cells. Bevacizumab had no activity in this mouse
model as a single agent, and did not have synergistic effect in
combination therapy.

For the first time we demonstrated that novel CXCR4 inhibitor X4-136 in
combination therapy with anti-PD1 showed improved survival in murine
ovarian cancer model. CXCR4 blockade increased the proportion of
circulating myeloid cells during active treatment, thus further
investigation into this novel therapeutic approach is warranted.


