Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PRN1371, an irreversible, covalent inhibitor of FGFR1-4 exhibits
sustained pathway inhibition in cancer cell lines.


Introduction: Multiple human cancers harbor alterations in FGFRs that
drive tumor growth, including mutations, translocations and
amplifications. PRN1371 is an irreversible, covalent FGFR1-4 inhibitor
that exhibits highly selective and sustained inhibition of FGFR which
extends well beyond circulating drug concentrations in preclinical
models. The duration of inhibition of the FGFR signaling pathway is
dependent on protein turnover of FGFR, which may vary depending on the
type of FGFR alteration. Thus, we set out to investigate whether the
duration of target inhibition differs across cancer cell lines of various
lineages harboring different FGFR alterations, including fusions and
mutations. Furthermore, as FGFR inhibitors exhibit hyperphosphatemia via
on-target pharmacology, we also investigated the duration of target
inhibition in primary renal epithelial cells which are wild-type for FGFR.

Materials and Methods: Cancer cell lines from several lineages harboring
different FGFR alterations were treated with increasing concentrations of
PRN1371 in vitro for 1 hour, before washing out the compound. Cells were
harvested at various time-points post-washout, protein lysates were
generated and assessed for modulation of the downstream signaling pathway
by western blot analysis.

Results: Dose-dependent inhibition of phospho-ERK was observed in the
cancer cell lines tested in response to compound treatment for 1 hour in
vitro. Dose dependent partial or full rebound of phospho-ERK back to
baseline levels were detected in cancer cell lines after a prolonged
period post-washout. In contrast, full rebound of phospho-ERK was
observed at 1 hour post washout in response to a non-covalent inhibitor.
Studies are on-going to assess duration of pathway inhibition in the
primary renal proximal epithelial cells.

Conclusions: PRN1371 is a potent, highly selective irreversible inhibitor
exhibiting sustained inhibition of FGFR signaling across cancer cell
lines harboring different FGFR alterations. The duration of inhibition of
the downstream signaling was comparable across cancer cell lines
harboring different FGFR alterations, including mutations, fusions and
amplification of FGFR and was prolonged when compared to a non-covalent
inhibitor. A Phase 1 clinical trial of PRN1371 for the treatment of solid
tumors harboring FGFR alterations is ongoing (NCT02608125).


