Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOX11 acts as part of the MYCN-WEE1 regulatory protein complex
implicated in neuroblastoma.


Neuroblastoma (NB) is an aggressive lethal pediatric cancer of the
developing sympatho-adrenergic nervous system and characterised by a low
mutation burden while exhibiting recurrent DNA copy number alterations
including chromosome 2p gain and MYCN amplification. Rare amplifications
have previously allowed to identify additional oncogenes implicated in NB
such as ALK and LIN28B.

Here we report on three NB tumours and two NB cell lines with high level
focal gain containing the SRY-related HMG-box transcription factor 11
(SOX11) as only protein-coding gene in the smallest region of overlap.
The high expression levels of SOX11 in NB and the developing sympathetic
nervous system, and high correlation of SOX11 mRNA and protein levels
with survival outcome, suggested a role for SOX11 as oncogene and
prompted us to further investigate its role in MYCN driven NB formation.
SOX11 knock down in NB cell lines showed reduced colony formation
capacity and G1-S cell cycle arrest. We observed increased SOX11 levels
upon MYCN induction in NB cell lines, in MYCN overexpressing mouse
neuroblastomas compared to normal ganglia as well as a high correlation
of SOX11 and MYCN mRNA and protein levels in cell lines and tumors. As
these data could indicate direct MYCN regulation of SOX11, we performed
MYCN ChIPseq and indeed confirmed binding of MYCN to the SOX11 promotor.
Next, we demonstrated MYCN and SOX11 cooperative binding to common
targets using SOX11 and H3K27ac ChIP-sequencing. First, we showed
localisation of more than half (62%) of the SOX11 binding sites at
enhancers. Moreover, 19% of SOX11 targets contained an E-Box motif,
typically known to be targeted by MYCN, and we showed overlap of 30% of
SOX11 and MYCN binding targets. In a further step to unravel SOX11
function in NB cells, we analysed SOX11 binding partners using IP-MS and
identified 9 robust interaction partners in multiple NB cell lines. These
included MYCN which was confirmed by reciprocal co-IP, as well as WEE1, a
tyrosine kinase critically implicated in G2-M checkpoint control for
which multiple potent and specific small molecule inhibitors are
available. Remarkably, upon testing of the AZD-1775 WEE1 inhibitor in 10
NB cell lines, we observed the strongest effects in cells with the
highest SOX11 protein levels indicating that SOX11 expression levels can
serve as predictive biomarker for AZD-1775 treatment response.

In conclusion we identified high-level focal gain of SOX11 in NB tumors
and cell lines and demonstrated the oncogenic role of SOX11 in MYCN
driven neuroblastoma with therapeutic opportunities through interaction
with WEE1.


