Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unexpected activity of multiple targeted cancer drugs in
regulating ciliary dynamics.


The primary cilium is an antenna-like structure protruding from the cell
surface, which provides a platform for receptors for signaling systems
including PDGF-alpha, Hedgehog, Wnt, and others that influence cell
differentiation and proliferation decisions. Under normal physiological
growth conditions, the cilium forms after mitosis and in quiescent cells,
extending from a basal body centered at a centriole, with timed
resorption in G0 or early G1. Cancer cells have altered ciliary dynamics,
with some (medulloblastomas and basal cell carcinomas) often dependent on
cilia, and other tumor types downregulating them. In prior work, we
defined Aurora-A, an oncogenic kinase typically thought of as a mitotic
regulator, as transiently activated at the basal body, and absolutely
required for resorption of cilia at the G0/G1 boundary, and we showed the
targeted Aurora-A inhibitor entirely blocked ciliary resorption. In
subsequent work, we found that a second drug, the EGFR inhibitor
erlotinib, also affected ciliary resorption, positioning erlotinib and
alisertib to influence cilia-dependent signaling. In this study, we
broadly assessed the activity of a panel of targeted preclinical and
clinical agents of known specificity for action in controlling ciliary
dynamics. For this, we developed stable hTERT-RPE1 cell line models with
integrated Arl13b-GFP reporters to visualize cilia, and performed a
mid-throughput screen of 180 drugs for activity in 1) independently
inducing ciliary resorption in quiescent G0 cells, or 2) blocking ciliary
resorption in cells induced to cycle by serum treatment. With a ~5% hit
rate overall, we identified 9 compounds inducing, and 7 compounds
blocking resorption. This included some agents commonly used in the
clinic, such as sunitinib, which had never previously been linked to
control of the ciliary protrusion/resorption cycle. Mechanistic analysis
confirmed these compounds controlled activation of Aurora-A at the basal
body; in vivo testing demonstrated sunitinib resulted in loss of cilia
not only in vitro, but also in normal kidney, kidney tumors, and in renal
cysts associated with polycystic kidney disease (PKD), a disease
dependent on defective signaling from intact cilia. Further, sunitinib
was successful in controlling PKD-dependent cyst development, as
predicted by current models for this ciliopathy. These data for the first
time suggest new mechanisms for activity of sunitinib and other drugs, in
which they can influence activity of lateral signaling pathways such as
Wnt and PDGFa by regulating the availability of receptors on a ciliary
signaling platform.


