Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing estrogen receptor beta mediated tumor suppression by
lysine specific demethylase 1A inhibitor for the treatment of ovarian
cancer.


Ovarian cancer (OCa) is the deadliest of all gynecologic cancers in the
United States. Although patients with OCa respond initially to standard
combinations of surgical and cytotoxic therapy, nearly 90% will develop
recurrence and inevitably succumb to chemotherapy-resistant disease.
Estrogen mediates its effects through the estrogen receptor α (ESR1) and
estrogen receptor β (ESR2). Recent studies suggest that OCa cells and
OCa stem cells express ESR2, which functions as a tumor suppressor and
identified synthetic compound LY500307 as a potent ESR2 specific agonist.
However, ESR2 expression decreases during tumor progression and under the
selection pressure of chemotherapy; this decrease occurs via epigenetic
mechanisms. The lysine-specific histone demethylase 1A (KDM1A/LSD1) is
overexpressed in OCa and plays a vital role in metastasis and cancer
stemness. Our group recently developed a novel KDM1A-specific inhibitor
(NCD-38) based on an innovative concept of direct delivery of
phenylcyclopropylamine to the KDM1A active site. We reason that agents
that restore the expression and functions of ESR2 by increasing active
histone marks may provide a novel therapeutic opportunity to reactivate
ESR2 for suppression of OCa. The objective of this study is to test
whether KDM1A inhibitor could enhance the expression and tumor
suppressive functions of ESR2 and to test the combination of KDM1A
inhibitor along with ESR2 agonist using in vitro and in vivo preclinical
models. Our results demonstrated that combination of ESR2 agonist and
KDM1A inhibitor reduces the cell viability of OCa cells synergistically.
Further caspase-3/7 activity and Annexin V assays showed synergistic
induction of apoptosis upon combination therapy. Matrigel invasion assays
revealed reduction in cell invasion of OCa cell lines following ESR2
agonist and KDM1A inhibitor treatment. RT-qPCR analysis demonstrated that
KDM1A inhibitor treatment significantly increases the expression of ESR2
and its target genes leading to increased tumor suppression. Further,
co-immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that KDM1A interacts with ESR2
and Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that KDM1A
inhibition increases the recruitment of active histone methylation mark
H3K4-me2 at ESR2 0N promoter. RNA-sequencing analysis demonstrated that
ESR2 agonist treatment modulates the several pathways related to cell
cycle, apoptosis and DNA damage check point regulation. Finally, ESR2
agonist and KDM1A inhibitor treatment significantly reduced the in vivo
tumor growth in orthotopic models. Since ESR2 agonists and KDM1A
inhibitors are currently in clinical trials for other clinical
indications and are well tolerated, identification of KDM1A inhibitor and
ESR2 agonist combination therapy as a novel therapeutic can be readily
transferred to clinical use for enhancing survival in OCa patients.


