Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using affinity probes to explore the nephrotoxicity of
aristolochic acid.


Aristolochic acid, AA, is a natural compound found in Aristolochia plants
used in Chinese Traditional Medicine and is a component of many herbal
remedies used worldwide. In humans, exposure to AA is associated with
kidney toxicity and otherwise rare upper urinary tract cancer (UTUC). AA
undergoes bioactivation creating reactive species of AA that bind
covalently to proteins and DNA. Formation of mutagenic AA-DNA adducts
leads to AA-induced cancers. We identified the mutational signature
associated with AA exposure in patients with UTUC in Taiwan, as well as
in AA-initiated cancers in liver, bladder and kidneys. Meanwhile, the
mechanism of AA nephrotoxicity remained a mystery, with covalent and
non-covalent binding of AA or its metabolites to proteins hypothesized to
be involved in its nephrotoxic effects. As millions of people in Asia
have ingested AA and no effective therapies are known, establishing the
molecular mechanism(s) of AA nephrotoxicity is a topic of major
importance. A series of AA analogs were used to design affinity probes
for target identification. Structure activity relationship studies in
human cells aided in identifying a position in AA suitable for
introducing biotinylated, aminopropyl and alkyne linkers. In addition, we
have developed and validated monoclonal antibodies against AA-bovine
serum albumin and/or AA-DNA covalent adducts. Combined with proteomics
techniques, AA-affinity probes and monoclonal antibodies provide powerful
tools for defining AA targets in human kidneys. We attached the
aminopropyloxy derivative of AA to magnetic beads coated with
N-hydroxysuccinimido acyl linkers. These probes, in parallel with
unmodified, “control” beads were incubated with renal cortex lysates
obtained from C3H mice selected for their sensitivity to the effects of
AA. Bound proteins were digested "on bead", then identified by mass
spectroscopic peptide analysis, with a total of 316 bound proteins
detected. Spectral counts for 128 proteins bound to AA-beads were higher
than those for control beads. After correction for nonspecific binding,
18 of these proteins had spectral counts of 10 or higher. These proteins
are localized to various organelles, indicating high coverage of the
major subcellular compartments. Among these proteins, Cryzl2, quinone
oxidoreductase-like 2, was the leading candidate. Based on homology,
Cryzl2 belongs to the family of the quinone oxidoreductase-like protein
and bears a mitochondrial localization sequence. This protein retains
conserved domains for both quinone oxidoreductase activity and NAD(P)
binding sites, which is of particular interest since other
oxidoreductases, such as NQO1, are known to catalyze nitroreduction, the
initial step in the bioactivation of AA. In summary, our studies provide
guidelines for design of AA-affinity probes and reveal an enzyme that may
be responsible for AA activation in mitochondria, by generating active
intermediates and inducing mitochondrial damage in renal tissue.


