Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of a 3D ex-vivo assay as a preclinical drug testing
platform for personalized cancer therapy.


In vitro cell based drug testing tools have been widely used in drug
discovery and early development to evaluate novel drug entities for
further evaluation in preclinical in vivo models. However, a poor
correspondence with in vivo models has compelled oncologists to pursue
complementary in vitro strategies with better outcomes. Within this
realm, a 3D ex vivo platform is being extensively used to evaluate the
activity of cytotoxic drugs, targeted molecules, and antibodies. To
increase the translational value of this model, maintenance of the tumor
microenvironment (immune and other stromal cells) is highly pertinent. We
have established a 3D ex vivo assay as a patient drug testing platform
for personalized medicine therapies in collaboration with our clinical
partners.

In this study we setup the protocols for obtaining single cell
suspensions from biopsy and/or tumor resection samples from patients
presenting with Urothelial cancers, Renal cell carcinoma, Pancreatic,
NSCLC, Ovarian, and Melanomas to generate 3D microtumors in 96 well
format cultured over a period of 7-15 days. The microtumors were
monitored for growth characteristics, biomarker phenotype and drug
activity profile. As expected the growth characteristics for each tumor
varied, corresponding very well with clinical disease progression.
Subsequently, these microtumors were assessed using a standard clinical
immunohistochemistry diagnostics approach to evaluate disease specific
biomarkers and were compared to the clinical diagnostics profile of the
patients. The biomarker profile from 3D derived tumor samples showed
concordance with the patient diagnostics profile. In the instances were
clinical information and treatment regimens were available, the
microtumors were tested and followed with single and pairwise drug
treatments. The ex vivo 3D treatment outcome clearly reflected the
clinical outcome. Currently, this platform is being used to develop 3D ex
vivo immune-competent models to study immunomodulatory therapies. Based
on the overall data we conclude that the 3D ex vivo assay system offers a
highly pertinent platform to perform chemosensitivity testing providing
predictive information on the clinical outcome, which enables oncologists
to redefine individualized chemo/targeted treatments.


