Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of a novel Senataxin-associated nuclease in DNA repair.


Yeast two-hybrid analysis has identified a novel, uncharacterized
Senataxin-interacting protein with 5’ exonuclease activity, and
homology to the FEN1 nuclease domain. Senataxin is an RNA/DNA helicase
that functions in resolving R loop structures which occur as a result of
normal replication and transcription but can also persist resulting in
genomic instability. We found that SAN1 (Senataxin-Associated Nuclease 1)
is unable to cut dsDNA or bubbles, but is active against 5’ overhangs
and against ssDNAs of greater than 15 nucleotides. SAN1 cleaves 3 or 8 nt
fragments from the 5’ end of ssDNA and utilizes magnesium as a
cofactor. As the definitive 5’ nuclease responsible for unhooking ICLs
has yet to be identified we speculate that SAN1 might function in
excising crosslinked nucleotides that result from interstrand crosslink
(ICL) damage. We generated a SAN1 -/- HeLa cell line through CRISPR/Cas
gene editing and found that SAN1 -/- cells are sensitized to ICL agents
mitomycin-c and cisplatin. Interestingly, colony survival assays have
shown that SAN1 does not appear to be epistatic of FANCD2, a key
component of the classical pathway for resolving ICLs, the Fanconi Anemia
pathway. Additionally, although the nuclease domain of SAN1 is homologous
to the FEN1 family of structure-specific nucleases, SAN1 also possesses a
unique and conserved C terminus of unknown function. Our goal is to
understand the relationship between the structure and nuclease activity
of SAN1 in DNA repair and how SAN1 relates to other known ICL-repair
pathways. Understanding the components that regulate genome stability is
crucial in understanding how cancer occurs and what protein targets will
be the most advantageous to pursue in developing potential therapeutics.
This study may also provide a better understanding of a novel factor in
resistance to ICL-inducing chemotherapeutics such as cisplatin and MMC
which are still widely used in the treatment of breast and ovarian
cancers.


