Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibiting cancer growth by targeting the TNFR2 oncogene with
TNFR2 antagonistic antibodies.


Background: Although antibody targeting of the HER2 oncogene represents
an outstanding clinical treatment and a success story showing direct
cancer killing with antibodies, many oncogenes are intracellular and are
not expressed broadly, whether on a single or multiple tumor types. The
recently discovered TNFR2 oncogene is broadly expressed on many human
tumors. Colon cancer cells, multiple myeloma cells, renal cell carcinoma
cells, Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells, ovarian cancer epithelial cells and
cutaneous non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells can aberrantly express the TNFR2
receptor as an oncogene for growth. For non-cutaneous T cell lymphomas,
the genetic basis of the TNFR2 deregulation has recently been tied to
constitutive overexpression of TNFR2 from frequent gene duplications or
cytoplasmic TNFR2 mutations that confer constitutive agonism, i.e. tumor
expansion. These features make TNFR2 an advantageous molecular target for
direct tumor targeting.

Methods: We designed monoclonal antibodies to target the TNFR2 oncogene
and directly kill human tumor cells. TNFR2-directed antibodies were
screened for their ability to induce the death of rapidly growing tumor
cells, such as ovarian cancer cells (i.e., OVCAR3).

Results: Novel dominant anti-TNFR2 antibody candidates (TNFR2
antagonistic antibodies) did not require Fc binding for activity,
expressed dominance over TNF-mediated agonism, and hampered intracellular
NF-ĸB activation and phosphorylation obligatory for TNFR2 signaling and
cell growth of tumor cells. Even low doses of TNFR2 antagonists rapidly
and directly killed TNFR2 oncogene-expressing ovarian cancer cells.
Examination of the structural biology of these dominant TNFR2 antagonist
antibodies uncovered a unique and stabilizing TNFR2 receptor formation,
anti-parallel dimeric TNFR2, which inhibits intracellular signaling,
cannot bind TNF, cannot be cleaved to create soluble TNFR2 and is
exponentially more active on the dividing cells of cancer.

Conclusions: TNFR2 is a unique and broadly expressed human oncogene that
can potentially be targeted to directly stop the growth of cancer cells
(including ovarian cancer cells) by antibody-induced cell death. The
creation of dominant TNFR2 antagonism provides a unique, non-signaling
complex that has implications for the therapeutic targeting of TNF
superfamily receptors, especially TNFR2.


