Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deciphering inosinome in glioblastoma versus normal cortex.


Cancer is driven by alterations of the genomic information, which carries
mutations in key genes providing selective advantage for clonal
multiplication of cancer cells. However, mutations within DNA are not the
only source for cell alteration. RNA molecules are targets of a series of
post-transcriptional modifications, such as splicing and RNA editing,
that can affect sequence, structure and stability. The most common type
of RNA editing in humans converts Adenosine in RNA targets into Inosine
(A-to-I) and is catalyzed by two adenosine deaminases that act on dsRNA
(ADARs) family of enzymes (ADAR and ADARB1). Inosines are subsequently
interpreted as guanosines by several cellular proteins and could
ultimately lead to a genomic mutations (A-to-I/G).

At present, it has been estimated that over 4 millions editing sites
exist in our transcriptome involving coding and non-coding RNAs. These
huge amounts of Inosine at RNA level are necessary for our survival and
their levels is highly regulated in different tissues and during
development. Considering the importance of ADAR activity in our cells we
believe that if ADAR are not well regulated they may contribute to cancer
on set and/or progression.

The advent of high-throughput RNA sequencing has enabled identification
of RNA editing sites and global analyses of cancer transcriptomes
demonstrate that ADAR-mediated RNA editing dynamically contributes to
genetic alterations in cancer, including high-grade gliomas.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is one of the most common and aggressive primary brain
tumor in humans and despite advances in understanding the molecular
mechanisms underlying these tumors, current treatments are ineffective.

In order to elucidate the glioma-specific RNA editing signature, we
analyzed 146 RNA-Seq of primary glioblastomas from the TCGA dataset
compared to 132 normal brain cortex RNA-Seq from the GTEx database and
purified pools of normal cortex astrocytes. A-to-I editing events has
been detected using a collection of more than 4 million annotated edited
substrates and the REDItools suite of python scripts with stringent
filters. By means of the Cuffquant/Cuffdiff tools, we have also compared
global transcriptome profiles and ADAR genes expression patterns at gene
level isoform level and using IHC at protein level.

We found that a general down regulation of editing events at both
recoding and non -recoding (Alus) sites that correlate with a down
expression of ADARB1 enzyme. No differences were observed with ADAR
expression. Overall, we observed a strong editing landscape perturbation
in glioblastoma that could be important for identifying the most
effective target genes for possible therapeutic intervention.


