Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The class I HDAC inhibitor mocetinostat augments checkpoint
inhibitor therapy via direct up regulation of antigen presentation
transcriptional programs in tumor cells and increased T-cell clonality in
tumors.


Mocetinostat is a spectrum-selective class I/IV histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitor that augments checkpoint inhibitor therapy through
enhanced antigen presentation capacity and a pro-immunogenic shift in the
tumor microenvironment (TME). Mocetinostat up-regulated tumor antigen
presentation machinery (i.e. major histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes
and co-presentation molecules) and programmed cell death-ligand 1 (PD-L1)
expression in a panel of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines.
Surprisingly, some of the most highly up regulated genes following
mocetinostat treatment were MHC class II genes (~20 fold), which are
normally expressed by antigen-presenting cells, but are silenced in most
epithelial tissues and solid tumors. To elucidate the molecular
mechanisms whereby mocetinostat regulates MHC class I and class II
transcriptional programs in tumor cells, we performed chromatin
immunoprecipitation DNA sequencing (ChIP-Seq). HDAC2 was detected at the
promoters of many mocetinostat-regulated immune pathway genes. Further,
mocetinostat treatment increased histone 3 lysine 27 acetylation and
histone 3 lysine 4 trimethylation indicating an induction of active
transcription at these loci. Class II transactivator (CIITA) is an
interferon gamma (IFNγ)-sensitive regulator of MHC class II gene
expression and was one of the top HDAC2/mocetinostat target genes based
on ChIP-Seq data. In addition, CIITA and a representative MHC class II
gene, HLA-DRA, were synergistically up regulated following mocetinostat
and IFNγ treatment. To investigate the impact of Class I HDAC inhibition
on the TME, syngeneic mouse tumor models were utilized. Mocetinostat
treatment decreased intratumoral immune suppressive T regulatory cells
(Tregs) and increased intratumoral CD8+ T cells. To gain additional
insight into the functional effects of mocetinostat in the TME, we
performed deep sequencing of the T-cell receptor in vehicle,
mocetinostat, PD-L1 or combination-treated tumors. Mocetinostat-treated
tumor cohorts exhibited increased T-cell clonality which likely reflects
expansion of a subset of activated, antigen-specific T cells. Together,
these data provide molecular insight into the mechanism whereby
mocetinostat augments checkpoint inhibitor therapy by directly regulating
tumor antigen presentation and through functional effects on the T cell
repertoire.


