Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Donor-specific primary monocyte-derived dendritic cell maturation
model for high-throughput screening of immunostimulatory adjuvants.


Dendritic cell (DC) based immunotherapy is a promising treatment
alternative for various solid tumor and hematological malignancies. DCs
are capable of initiating and propagating antigen-specific adaptive
immune responses through their intrinsic maturation process. Identifying
novel, effective adjuvant drug candidates that can stimulate DC
maturation while understanding and accounting for the variability of
patient-specific DC cell responses to the immunostimulatory adjuvants is
essential for development of such immunotherapies. Reliable, high
throughput assay platforms that characterize patient-specific modulatory
effects during the DC maturation process in vivo and in vitro are also
highly desirable. In this study, we present a high throughput in vitro
primary cell assay to evaluate dose-dependent DC maturation in a panel of
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typed individual donors. CD14+ monocytes
from four healthy donors were isolated from leukapheresis derived
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and cultured for seven days
with GM-CSF and IL-4 to achieve differentiation to DC. Cells were then
stimulated for 24 hours with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), CpG
oligonucleotides, or nine different novel toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)
ligands at three concentrations. To quantify the differentiation of
monocytes into DC and subsequent maturation, flow cytometry was used to
measure the expression of biomarkers, MHC-II, CD40, CD80, CD83, and CD86.
Greater than 99% MHC-II expression was observed across all donors and
confirmed successful differentiation to DC. The TLR4 ligands showed
reduced biomarker expression, as compared to pathogenic E. coli LPS but
similar to PHAD, a synthetic TLR4 agonist currently used in adjuvants.
While monocytes from all donors responded to the ligands tested, the
intensity of activation marker expression varied among donors with
LPS/TLR4 ligand induced maturation process showing 43-91% CD40 and 27-82%
CD83 expression, highlighting the necessity of multi-donor screening for
drug development. In conclusion, a high throughput in vitro primary
monocyte derived DC differentiation assay has been developed and is
commercially available to assist researchers in characterizing
donor-specific DC responses to immunostimulatory adjuvants.


