Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KITENIN works as a fine regulator of ErbB4 expression in
colorectal cancer tissues in addition to E3-ubiquitin ligase Nrdp1.


Purpose: Understanding the complex biological functions of E3-ubiquitin
ligases may facilitate the modulation of E3-ubiquitin ligases as a
promising approach for the development of novel anticancer drugs. We
recently identified that the KITENIN/ErbB4-Dvl2-c-Jun axis works as a
novel unconventional downstream signal of epidermal growth factor in
colorectal cancer (CRC) tissues and that the immunohistochemical
expression of KITENIN/ErbB4 was highly expressed in tumor tissues from
advanced CRC stage. However, the detailed mechanisms that explain the
higher levels of ErbB4 in colon cancer tissues are largely unknown. Here
we investigated whether E3-ubiquitin ligases participate in the operation
of the KITENIN/ErbB4-Dvl2-c-Jun axis and in the maintenance of elevated
KITENIN/ErbB4 complex in CRC.

Results & Discussion: We found that Nrdp1, an E3-ligase for ErbB3/ErbB4,
interacted with KITENIN (KAI1 C-terminal interacting tetraspanin) to form
a functional KITENIN/ErbB4/Nrdp1 complex and is responsible for
down-regulating Dvl2 within this complex. Interestingly, ErbB4 was
resistant to degradation by Nrdp1 in KITENIN/Nrdp1-co-transfected CRC
cells, and KITENIN bound to the C-terminal coiled-coil domain of Nrdp1.
Chemical blockade of ErbB kinase did not block the action of EGF to
increase in total/phospho-ErbB4 and phospho-ERK in
KITENIN/ErbB4-cotransfected cells, whereas it blocked the action of EGF
in ErbB4 alone-transfected CRC cells. In human CRC tissues, higher
expressions of ErbB4 and KITENIN and lower expression of Dvl2 was
observed in stage IV samples than in stage I, but a low level of Nrdp1
was expressed in both stages and it did not differ significantly by
stage. These results indicated that Nrdp1 is necessary for the reduction
in Dvl2 to generate c-Jun in the EGF-KITENIN/ErbB4-c-Jun axis, but more
importantly, elevated KITENIN protects KITENIN-bound ErbB4 from
Nrdp1-mediated degradation via physical collaboration between the
KITENIN/ErbB4 complex and Nrdp1, but not via modulation of ErbB kinase
activity. Thus, KITENIN functions in the maintenance of a higher
expression level of ErbB4 in advanced CRC tissues, independent of
ubiquitin-mediated degradation via Nrdp1.

Conclusion: Our present findings add a new component to our understanding
of the molecular events underlying the regulation of ErbB4 expression
level in CRC tissues: KITENIN is also a fine regulator of ErbB4
expression in addition to E3-ubiquitin ligase Nrdp1.


