Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PLAG prevents the loss of circulating neutrophils in the
chemotherapy induced neutropenia model.


Chemotherapy-induced neutropenia (CIN) is a common dose-limiting toxicity
in cancer patients undergoing cytotoxic chemotherapy. It is generally
understood that myelosuppression is the major mechanism resulting in CIN.
However, an excessive extravasation (diapedesis) of neutrophils in
response to tissue damage-caused by anti-cancer agents is also a possible
mechanism. In this study, we have investigated the effects of
1-palmitoyl-2-linoleoyl-3-acetyl-rac-glycerol (PLAG) for the maintenance
of circulating neutrophil in the gemcitabine induced neutropenia. In CIN
mouse model using anticancer drugs, PLAG effectively protected the loss
of circulating neutrophils as similar to CXCR2 antagonist, reparixin. And
succeeded in vitro neutrophil migration assay also revealed that
chemo-attractive activity of neutrophil induced by treatment of
anticancer drugs was completely interrupted by PLAG addition. Chemokine
(C-X-C motif) ligand 2 (CXCL2) and CXCL8 were effectively induced by
treatment of gemcitabine with dose dependent manner in monocyte cell
lines and mainly mediated via the signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling pathway. PLAG effectively attenuated
gemcitabine induced CXCL2 and CXCL8 expression via interrupting STAT3
activity and also regulated gemcitabine induced macrophage 1 antigen
(MAC-1) and L-selectin expression, which means that PLAG interrupted the
acceleration of neutrophil extravasation under CIN. Also we have verified
that PLAG analogues and metabolites were not affected on neutrophil
migration unlike PLAG, suggesting that acetylated diacylglycerol has a
key role to regulate on neutrophil migration. Collectively, modulating
effect of PLAG on excessive neutrophil extravasation by chemotherapy via
attenuating STAT3/CXCL2(8) pathway could be used as very powerful regimen
for preventing of neutropenia during diverse chemotherapy.


