Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential effects of folate depletion on metabolic
reprogramming and oxidative stress in nonmetastatic and metastatic
claudin-low breast cancer cells.


Folate coenzymes play an important role in biosynthesis and methylation
reactions. Aberrant folate metabolism has been implicated in the
development of several cancer types, though mechanisms underlying folate
metabolism and cancer development remain unclear. We previously showed
that a folate-restricted diet can exert differential effects on
metastatic versus nonmetastatic murine claudin-low breast cancer cells in
vivo. Specifically, folate restriction increased growth and invasion of
orthotopically transplanted M-Wnt (nonmetastatic) tumor cells, but
decreased growth and lung metastases of transplanted metM-Wnt cells, a
metastatic subclone of M-Wnt cells. The current study set out to explore
the underlying mechanism. To examine the effect of long-term folate
depletion (LFD) on M-Wnt and metM-Wnt cell metabolism, oxidative stress
and autophagic flux in vitro, the two cell lines were grown in standard
and folate-depleted media for 14 days. metM-Wnt cells showed higher
oxidative stress, as measured by ROS staining and Nrf2 expression, and
phosphorylation of the key nutrient sensor, AMPK, compared to M-Wnt cells
when grown in standard growth medium. LFD M-Wnt cells showed an increased
dependence on glycolysis compared to those cultured in standard medium.
Both M-Wnt and metM-Wnt cells displayed a high autophagy level in LFD,
measured by LC3B cleavage, and AMPK phosphorylation. However, LFD
metM-Wnt cells showed low viability, increased apoptosis and loss of
redox defense, as measured by cleaved-caspase 3 and Nrf2 expressions.
These results suggest that non-metastatic M-Wnt cells undergo metabolic
reprogramming, including a shift from oxidative phosphorylation to
glycolysis that may fuel cell growth and proliferation. Further, an
elevated autophagic flux may mitigate nutrient stress induced by folate
depletion, which allows them to withstand LFD and which may contribute to
a more invasive primary tumor in response to folate restriction. In
contrast, metM-Wnt cells are unable to undergo this metabolic adaptation,
and display increased oxidative stress and cell death in response to LFD,
preventing the development of metastatic lesions in vitro. This study
highlights different responses of primary and metastatic breast cancer
cells to folate depletion. The results provide additional rationale for
targeting folate metabolism as a potential strategy for treating
metastatic breast cancer.


