Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYC inhibition in human malignancy by BET-Bromodomain inhibitor
JQ1, using a 3-D human tumor primary culture micro-spheroid platform to
explore clinically relevant observations.


The transcription factor MYC is associated with the regulation of over
15% of human gene expression. Deregulation of MYC is found in up to 70%
of human cancers. As MYC is responsible for the reprogramming of cell
metabolism, growth and survival, it is an attractive therapeutic target,
yet effective drug development has been slow. As the Bromodomain/BET
proteins epigenetically regulate MYC, BET inhibitors like JQ1 have been
developed as MYC therapeutics. We used the Ex Vivo Analysis of Programmed
Cell Death (EVA/PCD) previously shown to correlate with response, time to
progression and survival, to examine JQ1 activity in 46 human tumor
specimens isolated from surgical biopsies.

Methods: Surgical biopsies were mechanically and enzymatically
disaggregated, with micro spheroids of desired size isolated by density
centrifugation. Five-Point dose response curves were interpolated to
provide LC50 values for comparison by Z-score. Synergy was conducted by
median-effect.

Results: JQ1 revealed activity in hematologic, breast, glial &
gastrointestinal (GI) tumors. By rank order, JQ1 activity favored
hematologic (AML & NHL) & breast tumors over Lung, Ovary and GI with
inter-patient differences observed within tumor types. MYC association
with histone acetylation and aurora kinase (AURK) activity, led to an
exploration of JQ1 synergy with SAHA (HDACi), MLN 8054 & Tozasertib (both
AURKi). JQ1 synergy analysis revealed SAHA > Tozasertib > MLN 8054.

Conclusions: Based upon JQ1 activity, several tumor types appear to be
candidates for agents that target MYC-mediated cell survival, offering
potential treatment options for patients with advanced malignancies. JQ1
synergy with HDACi & AURKi suggests novel drug combinations for future
development. As MYC signaling influences thousands of gene targets,
phenotypic analyses like the EVA/PCD platform can offer insights into
cellular cell death events that serve as surrogate markers for clinical
response to MYC inhibition. Supported in part by the Vanguard Cancer
Foundation, the Nagourney Institute and the Malcolm C. Todd Cancer
Institute.


