Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E2F4/p107 complex regulates chemotherapy resistance in human
colorectal cancer stem cells.


Most cancer patients experience disease progression despite one or
multiple lines of treatment with cytotoxic chemotherapy. Evidence from
human trials and in vivo experiments on patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
tumor lines indicates that cancer stem cells (CSCs) can survive
chemotherapy treatment. However, the mechanism of chemotherapy resistance
in CSCs is not fully elucidated. To identify new mechanisms of the
drug-resistance in colorectal cancer, we used gene-expression microarrays
to examine the gene expression profile of CSCs and non-CSCs in four human
PDX models of colorectal cancer, both before-and-after treatment with
cytotoxic chemotherapy. The gene-expression data were analyzed using
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) followed by Transcription Factor
Target Genes (TFTG) enrichment analysis, which identified the
transcription factor E2F4 as a candidate regulator of chemotherapy
resistance in colorectal CSCs. E2F4 was predominantly expressed in the
CSC-enriched cell population (CD44+/CD166+ human colorectal cancer
cells). E2F4 knock-down sensitizes cancer cells to chemotherapy in three
different PDX tumors as well as HT29 cells. Co-immunoprecipitation
experiments showed that E2F4 forms a complex with p107 and DP-1, which
also contributed to the chemotherapy resistance. Simultaneous knock-down
of both E2F4 and p107 enhanced chemotherapy sensitivity more than E2F4
knock-down alone. In normal intestinal crypt cells E2F4 was dispensable
for chemotherapy resistance. ChIP-seq and RNA-seq experiments revealed
that LDHA is a key downstream target of E2F4. LDHA knock-down sensitizes
cancer cells to chemotherapy. High LDHA expression in tumor tissues was
an independent poor prognostic factor in colorectal cancer patients
(n=466), as well as in non-small cell lung cancer (n=1,926) and breast
cancer (n=3,554). Thus, the E2F4/p107-LDHA pathway represents a novel
therapeutic target to overcome chemotherapy resistance in CSCs.


