Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The chemokine CCL2/CCR2 signaling mediated fibroblasts-cancer
cells crosstalk promotes basal like breast cancer progression.


Cancer associated fibroblasts are the most abundant stromal cells in
breast cancer, but their function in cancer progression has not been
fully understood. We previously identified that the chemokine CCL2 was
highly expressed in breast cancer associated fibroblasts, and high
stromal CCl2 expression predicted poor outcome in basal like breast
cancer. CCL2 is known to recruit monocyte/macrophage and promotes cancer
progression. We previously found that recombinant CCL2 can directly
signal to breast cancer cells and promote cell survival and invasion in
vitro. In this study, we aimed to determine the functional importance of
CCL2 signaling mediated fibroblast-cancer cell interactions in breast
cancer progression. We used a fibroblast and cancer cell co-graft mouse
model as the main functional assay. We generated primary fibroblasts from
mouse mammary tumor and human breast cancer, and confirmed most of they
expressed high level of CCL2. When co-grafted with the human basal breast
cancer cell line MCF10A-CA1D into nude mice, fibroblasts enhanced
xenograft growth. Stable knockdown of CCL2 expression from fibroblasts
significantly reduced its ability in tumor growth promotion, while
knockdown CCL2 from cancer cells did not. Decreased CCL2 production from
fibroblasts resulted in increased apoptosis and autophagy in tumor
samples. To determine the importance of direct CCL2 signaling to cancer
cell, we generated the CCL2 receptor CCR2 mutant CA1D cancer cell lines
by CRISPR-Cas9 targeting technology. Mutation of CCR2 in cancer cell
significantly reduced tumor growth when co-grafted with CCL2 secreting
fibroblasts. Lastly, we tested continuous delivery of CCL2 neutralizing
antibody in the co-graft tumor model, but observed minimal therapeutic
effect. Further examination of blood CCL2 level revealed an increased
production of CCL2 from fibroblasts and mouse host after antibody
treatment, which may contribute to the lack of therapeutic effect. In
summary, our studies demonstrated the importance of CCL2/CCR2 signaling
mediated fibroblasts-cancer cell interaction in basal like breast cancer
progression. The CCL2 signaling pathway can be potentially served as
therapeutic target, but requires development of efficient targeting
strategy.


