Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of androgen receptor in invasive lobular breast carcinoma.


The leading problem for women with estrogen receptor α (ER) breast
cancer – approximately 70% of all breast cancers – is that while the
majority of tumors initially respond to anti-estrogen treatment including
Tamoxifen and aromatase inhibitors, they will develop endocrine
resistance. A histological subset of breast cancer called invasive
lobular carcinoma (ILC) accounts for 15% of all breast cancer cases and
approximately 90% of ILC are ER-positive. Despite clinical markers
suggesting a better prognosis for ILC compared to the more common
invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC), recent data suggests women with ILC
develop Tamoxifen resistance at a higher rate than IDC. New strategies
for treating hormone refractory tumors are needed that not only overcome
anti-estrogen resistance, but also present a more tolerable side effect
profile and have fewer dose-limiting toxicities than adjuvant
chemotherapy. The majority of ER-positive breast cancers also express
androgen receptor (AR) and while AR presence in breast cancer is
controversial, increased expression of AR leads to Tamoxifen resistance
in IDC cell lines. Since ILC has more AR expression than IDC, the role of
AR in ILC was studied by treating cells with the non-aromatizable
androgen dihydrotestosterone (DHT) and the synthetic androgen R1881 as
well as the anti-androgen Enzalutamide. We have previously begun to
characterize a Tamoxifen resistant variant of the ILC cell line Sum44PE
termed LCCTam cells. In both Sum44PE and LCCTam cells, AR protein
expression increases in response to androgens, an action that is blocked
by Enzalutamide. Interestingly, androgens do not promote growth in ILC
cells, but Enzalutamide is still able to inhibit growth. These results
suggest Enzalutamide may be an effective alternative therapy for women
with ILC. Future studies will focus on whether regulation of nuclear
receptor co-factors influences differences in AR signaling in ILC.


