Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CRM1 expression in pancreatic adenocarcinoma correlates with
survivin expression and the proliferative activity.


Introduction: CRM1 is a nuclear export chaperone that mediates the export
of proteins essential to growth regulation and tumor suppression. Its
overexpression in tumors was found to be associated with poor prognosis.
Selective inhibitors of nuclear export are in phase I and II clinical
trials for several tumor types. The expression of CRM1 in human
pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC) and its relation to survivin expression
and tumor proliferative activity is largely unknown.

Experimental procedures: Sections of tissue microarray containing 77
formalin fixed and paraffin embedded PAC were stained by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) for CRM1, survivin, and Cyclin A. Expression
levels of CRM1 and survivin in tumor cells was determined using a
quantitative digital image analysis solution (OTMIAS). The tumor
proliferative activity was determined by measuring the S-phase fraction
(SPF) in sections stained for Cyclin A, also using OTMIAS.

Summary: Sixty-six of the 77 (86%) PAC showed at least some positive
staining for CRM1, and 11 (14%) were completely negative. The mean CRM1
expression levels ranged from 0.3 to 53 units and the median from 0.3 to
45 units. There was significant positive correlation between the mean and
median expression levels of CRM1 in tumor cells with the mean and median
levels of survivin (pSummary: Sixty-six of the 77 (86%) PAC showed at
least some positive staining for CRM1, and 11 (14%) were completely
negative. The mean CRM1 expression levels ranged from 0.3 to 53 units and
the median from 0.3 to 45 units. There was significant positive
correlation between the mean and median expression levels of CRM1 in
tumor cells with the mean and median levels of survivin (p<0.001).
Moreover, there was positive correlation between the mean and median CRM1
levels in tumor cells the SPF (p=0.005).

Conclusions: CRM1 is expressed in a significant proportion of PAC, and
increased CRM1 expression correlates with increased survivin expression
and increased proliferative activity, suggesting that selective
inhibitors of nuclear export may be effective against PAC.


