Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic approach to methylation biomarker development in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia, breast and lung cancers.


There is no doubt that testing for disease specific methylation changes
can guide disease risk assessment, facilitate detection of the disease,
support prognostication and personalization of treatment as well as guide
post treatment patient care (1). Nevertheless, the use of methylation
biomarkers in standard patient care is still marginal. Difficulties in
implementation of methylation biomarker testing in standard in-vitro
diagnostics are mainly attributed to challenges in establishment of the
systematic approach allowing for efficient discovery and subsequent
validation of clinical utility of potential disease specific methylation
biomarkers. We have combined state-of-the-art genome wide methylation
screening technologies (including: newest Illumina MethylationEPIC 850k
BeadChip) enabling methylation biomarker discovery with the cost and time
efficient locus specific technologies to streamline the development,
validation and implementation of methylation biomarkers for clinical
disease management. With the use of technologies that in an affordable
fashion enable screening for genome wide methylation changes in a
substantial number of clinical samples, we were able to discover
clinically relevant disease specific methylation signatures e.g. in CLL.
The high technical complexity of the genome wide screen technologies
prevents them for being straightforward applicable in diagnostic
settings. Thus we used techniques such as Methylation-Sensitive High
Resolution Melting (MS-HRM) (2) to develop assays fulfilling the
requirements for diagnostic applications. Subsequently, we evaluated the
clinical relevance of the most promising biomarker candidates in chronic
lymphocytic leukaemia, breast and lung cancers, using these assays (3,
4). Overall, our workflow allows fast and efficient validation of not
only already existing biomarker candidates but also discovery of new
disease specific methylation changes that show promise for clinical
implementation.

References:

(1) Wojdacz TK. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2012 Jan;12(1):39-47 (2) for
BLUEPRINT consortium, Nature Biotechnology, Vol. 34, Nr. 7, s. 726-737.
(3) Daugaard I et al., Sci Rep. 2016 Oct 26;6:35807. (4) Wojdacz TK et
al.. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Feb 3;16(1):R17


