Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of circulating tumor cells in osteosarcoma: A validation
study using a translational model.


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary bone cancer in humans, and
most frequently seen in pediatric patients. Metastasis to distant organs
via hematogenous route is the leading cause of mortality in OS. Current
methods to detect metastasis and to monitor response to treatment largely
depend on imaging systems with low sensitivity to micrometastases. The
value of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) as prognostic marker has been
demonstrated in several types of malignancies, including cancer of
breast, prostate and colorectal. The objective of this study was to
establish a protocol to quantify CTC in patients with OS, as a biomarker
for the presence of micrometastases and early detection of tumor relapse.
We used dogs with spontaneous OS as a unique translational model. OS
occurs in dogs with a 15-fold higher incidence than in humans. Our
experimental method consisted of the isolation of CTCs using the
microfiltration system CellSieve™, and further enumeration of tumor
cells by immunostaining. Normal blood cells were spiked with cultured OS
cells and processed using the CellSieve™ system where the CTCs are
captured on a microfilter and then incubated with an antibody mixture
consisting of fluorescent dye-conjugated antibodies against Osteocalcin,
Vimentin, and CD45R. We demonstrated that osteosarcoma tumor cells could
be recovered from the blood and characterized by 4-channel
immunofluorescence assay as Osteocalcin+ / Vimentin+ / DAPI + and CD45R-,
where CD45 serves as a differential marker of normal blood cells. In
addition, we were able to demonstrate that the system has a 98% yield of
recovery of spiked tumor cells. When this protocol was applied to 7.5 ml
of blood sample from a naïve large breed dog diagnosed with OS, we were
able to detect one CTC with the predicted staining pattern. Ongoing
studies evaluating CTC throughout the clinical course of dogs with OS
will determine the value for prognosis as well as for evaluating response
to therapy. In conclusion, the CellSieve™ microfiltration platform
applied with a set of 4 immunofluorescent antibodies is an effective
method for detection of CTCs in canine OS.


