Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel algorithm to identify TCR-binding somatic mutations from
human cancers.


A large number of pre-clinical and clinical studies have strongly
implicated that combining cancer-derived neo-antigen vaccines with
checkpoint control inhibitors will enhance priming and expansion of
tumor-specific naïve and memory T-cells resulting in superior efficacy
and durability of response. The neo-antigens, derived from somatic
mutations are prime candidates for cancer vaccines, not subjected to
host’s central and peripheral tolerance. Identifying potential T-cell
engaging neo-epitopes among a large number of somatic mutations is like
finding a specific needle in a stack of needles. Currently, the available
T-cell neo-epitope prioritization pipelines rely primarily on two
attributes - the class-I HLA-binding affinity of the mutant peptide
compared to the wild-type counterpart, and the level of expression of the
mutated gene in tumor cells. The higher the binding differential, and
higher the expression level of the mutant allele, the greater is the
likelihood for the peptide to be presented on antigen-presenting cells.
These approaches however fall short of predicting whether the HLA-bound
peptide will engage T-cells by binding to T-cell receptors (TCRs). We
have developed a novel algorithm to predict the binding of HLA-peptide
complexes to TCRs by analyzing the physico-chemical composition of the
amino acids and their positional biases in the 9-mers from crystal
structures of HLA-peptide-TCR complex. We applied machine learning
approach to build a classification model that can predict whether a given
9-mer peptide is a TCR-binder or not by identifying whether an amino acid
at a given position carries key features that will facilitate interaction
with the TCR. We applied this approach to positive and negative TCR
interactions selected from Immune Epitope data base (IEDB). We tested
multiple classification approaches and found that Random Forest and
ClassificationviaRegression methods provided the best performance. We
achieved more than 99% accuracy at 10-fold cross validation on both
training and unseen test datasets. We further validated our model using
positive and negative peptides curated from published papers reporting
clinical trial results of checkpoint control inhibitors. The performance
of the two classification models was evaluated on two different
TCR-binding assays - dextramer binding and IFN-γ release. The
ClassificationviaRegression method showed a higher positive predictive
value for the dextramer-binding assay, whereas the Random Forest method
showed a higher positive predictive value for the IFN-γ ELISPOT assay,
suggesting subtle differences between the two classification methods. The
inclusion of the TCR binding step to our T-cell neo-epitope
prioritization pipeline increased accuracy of prediction, reduced false
positives and selected potential neo-epitopes to a manageable number for
testing in cell-based assays.


