Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Common germline risk loci and the tumor anticancer immune response
in breast cancer.


The relationship between common germline SNPs that predispose to cancer
and the anticancer immune response as measured in tumors is
uncharacterized. We investigated this relationship in breast cancer,
leveraging availability of four large-scale resources for this cancer
type: (1) 159 independent SNP loci associated with overall breast cancer
risk at P The relationship between common germline SNPs that predispose
to cancer and the anticancer immune response as measured in tumors is
uncharacterized. We investigated this relationship in breast cancer,
leveraging availability of four large-scale resources for this cancer
type: (1) 159 independent SNP loci associated with overall breast cancer
risk at P < 5 x 10-8, including 65 unpublished SNPs, identified by a
recent meta-analysis of over 220,000 individuals of European ancestry
(EUR) from existing GWAS and new studies from the OncoArray Network (2)
Matched germline genotype and tumor transcriptomic profiles from 701
(EUR) breast cancer cases from TCGA (3) a general measure of anticancer
immunity - fraction of total immune cells in these TCGA tumors inferred
from gene expression signatures by ESTIMATE scoring (Yoshihara et al, Nat
Commun 2013) (4) specific measures of anticancer immunity - levels of 15
immune cell types and functions in these TCGA tumors inferred from gene
expression signatures by ssGSEA (Rooney et al, Cell 2015). Linear
regression with and without adjustment for covariates (age at diagnosis,
stage, tumor neoantigen load, tumor ESR1 expression) was used to test
association between germline SNP genotype and the tumor anticancer immune
response measures. SNPs were evaluated individually and collectively as a
polygenic risk score (PRS) weighted by the per-allele log OR derived from
the OncoArray analysis. The breast cancer risk-conferring allele for 9 of
the 159 SNPs was associated with reduced tumor general immune
infiltration (ESTIMATE score) at P The relationship between common
germline SNPs that predispose to cancer and the anticancer immune
response as measured in tumors is uncharacterized. We investigated this
relationship in breast cancer, leveraging availability of four
large-scale resources for this cancer type: (1) 159 independent SNP loci
associated with overall breast cancer risk at P < 5 x 10-8, including 65
unpublished SNPs, identified by a recent meta-analysis of over 220,000
individuals of European ancestry (EUR) from existing GWAS and new studies
from the OncoArray Network (2) Matched germline genotype and tumor
transcriptomic profiles from 701 (EUR) breast cancer cases from TCGA (3)
a general measure of anticancer immunity - fraction of total immune cells
in these TCGA tumors inferred from gene expression signatures by ESTIMATE
scoring (Yoshihara et al, Nat Commun 2013) (4) specific measures of
anticancer immunity - levels of 15 immune cell types and functions in
these TCGA tumors inferred from gene expression signatures by ssGSEA
(Rooney et al, Cell 2015). Linear regression with and without adjustment
for covariates (age at diagnosis, stage, tumor neoantigen load, tumor
ESR1 expression) was used to test association between germline SNP
genotype and the tumor anticancer immune response measures. SNPs were
evaluated individually and collectively as a polygenic risk score (PRS)
weighted by the per-allele log OR derived from the OncoArray analysis.
The breast cancer risk-conferring allele for 9 of the 159 SNPs was
associated with reduced tumor general immune infiltration (ESTIMATE
score) at P < 0.05 both before and after adjustment for covariates. The
most significant of these associations with ESTIMATE score (Punadjusted =
0.0003; Padjusted = 0.001) was for rs71801447, the lead SNP at 2q13, a
breast cancer risk locus identified by the OncoArray. This SNP was
associated at P 0.98) with rs71801447 overlapped enhancers in CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells and in HMEC and MCF7 breast cells that were predicted to
interact with the promoter of BCL2L11 in each of these cell types.
Finally, as a PRS, breast cancer risk was significantly associated with
reduced tumor type I interferon activity (Punadj = 0.006; Padj = 0.02).
Our findings implicate BCL2L11, a well-known regulator of T and breast
cancer cell apoptosis, as a potential link between germline risk SNPs and
immune response to tumors in breast cancer and suggest that modulating
antitumor immunity may be a mechanism of action for some established risk
loci.


