Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PIGN gene expression aberration weakens chromosomal stability via
altering its interaction with the spindle assembly checkpoint protein
complex during leukemogenesis.


Previous studies have linked increased frequency of
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchor protein (GPI-AP) deficiency with
genomic instability and the risk of carcinogenesis. Recently,
Phosphatidylinositol Glycan Anchor Biosynthesis; Class N (PIGN), a gene
participating in GPI-AP synthesis, was suggested as a cancer chromosomal
instability suppressor in a colon cancer model. We investigated the
association of PIGN with genomic instability and leukemogenesis. A Random
Forest analysis of the gene expression array data from 55 MDS patients
(GSE4619) demonstrated a significant (p = 0.0007) correlation (Pearson r
=-0.4068) between GPI-anchor biosynthesis gene expression and genomic
instability, in which PIGN was ranked as the third most important in
predicting risk of MDS progression. We observed that PIGN gene expression
aberrations (increased transcriptional activity but diminished to no
protein production) were associated with increased frequency of GPI-AP
deficiency in leukemic cells during leukemic transformation/progression.
The PIGN gene expression aberrations were attributed to partial intron
retentions between exons 14 and 15 resulting in frameshifts and premature
termination which were confirmed by examining the RNA-seq data from a
group of AML patients (phs001027.v1.p1). PIGN gene expression aberration
correlated with the elevation of genomic instability marker expression
that was independent of the TP53 regulatory pathway. PIGN protein
expression suppression/elimination caused a similar pattern of genomic
instability that was rescued by PIGN restoration. Furthermore, PIGN bound
to the spindle assembly checkpoint proteins and regulated their
expression during the cell cycle. In conclusion, PIGN gene is crucial in
the regulation of mitotic integrity to maintain chromosomal stability and
prevents leukemic transformation/progression.


