Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of small-molecule STAT3 transcription factor
inhibitors.


Oncogenic transcription factors are an increasingly important target for
anticancer therapies, as their inhibition could allow the
“reprogramming” of tumour cells, leading to apoptosis or
differentiation from the malignant phenotype. STAT3 induces the
transcription of genes that control differentiation, inflammation,
proliferation, and tumour cell invasion, and its over-expression has been
implicated in many tumour types. Although cancer cells are often
dependent upon activation of STAT3, non-tumour cells are fairly tolerant
of loss of its function, most likely reflecting redundancies in normal
signal transduction. Thus, STAT3 inhibitors have a high therapeutic
potential. A combination of in silico design and pharmacophore-based
approaches have been used to design a novel series of inhibitors capable
of disrupting STAT3 dimerisation by interacting with the hexapeptide
pocket of the SH2 domain of the STAT3 protein. Members of the initial
medicinal chemistry optimised mature ligand library had significant
STAT3-dimerization inhibition activity with potencies ranging from 33% to
59% inhibition. They also had sub-micromolar to low micromolar
cytotoxicity (IC50 0.6 µM to 2.6 µM) in the STAT3-dependent cell line
MDA MB 231, with good selectivity ratios compared to STAT3-null cell
lines. Three of the most potent library members were selected for
molecular dynamics simulation studies of their interaction with the STAT3
protein, and for their ability to down-regulate STAT3-dependent genes in
cell lines using RT-PCR. In the molecular dynamics studies it was shown
that the compounds interact with eight key amino acid residues (i.e.,
Ala703, Pro704, Arg1317, Asn1442, Gln1355, Gln1357, Thr1354 and Thr1443)
within the SH2 domain, and in the RT-PCR experiments they were found to
down-regulate the STAT3-dependent genes survivin, cyclin D1, fascin and
BCL-2 in comparison to the housekeeping gene GAPDH in the STAT3-dependent
cell line MDA MB 231. The most active compound was also evaluated in a
preliminary human tumour xenograft assay in immune-compromised mice
bearing MDA MB 231 tumours, and was found to have significant tumour
growth inhibition properties (at 0.5 mg/kg, two doses on day 1 and day
3). Although further work is required to confirm the proposed mechanism
of action, it may be possible to further develop this novel series of
molecules toward clinical evaluation in man.


