Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Universal consent for biospecimens: A novel electronic/video
consent.


Background: Developing innovative, efficient and institutionally scalable
bio-specimen consent for remnant tissue that meets the NIH consent
guidelines for genomic and molecular analysis is essential for precision
medicine efforts in cancer. Solutions in this arena need to satisfy the
needs of patients, researchers, ethicists, IRB and compliance leadership,
while fitting as seamlessly as possible into existing clinical workflows.

Methods: UCLA developed a video-application kiosk-based approach for
providing universal consent to repurpose clinical remnant bio-specimen
for research. The process was designed to be self-service, comprehensive
yet fast (mean shorter than 5 minute for completion). The consent
additionally asked the patient if they were willing to be contacted
directly for future research projects. This approach was piloted with 474
patients who were coming in for routine services in laboratory medicine,
radiology, oncology, and hospital admissions. Of the pilot population,
175 individuals had targeted surveys to evaluate drivers for opting-in or
opting-out of the consent for allowing the collection and use of their
remnant tissue for research. The cognitive survey was online and
presented immediately after the consent process was completed.

Results: The opt-in rate for the pilot was 90.7%, and 56% agreed to
direct contact for future research. Only 7% needed help navigating the
online consent process. Of the subgroup of pilot population who completed
the targeted survey, there was no difference between individuals who
opted in and out regarding ease of use, of the consent application with
about 75% stating it provided mostly or very useful information, 90%
stating it was mostly or very easy to understand, and 85% stating they
trusted the information. However, there were significant differences
between those that opted-in and opted-out in their beliefs concerning
usefulness of tissue, trusting researchers, importance of contributing to
science and privacy risk with those opting in strongly supporting these
beliefs (>90%) compared to those that opted out (Results: The opt-in rate
for the pilot was 90.7%, and 56% agreed to direct contact for future
research. Only 7% needed help navigating the online consent process. Of
the subgroup of pilot population who completed the targeted survey, there
was no difference between individuals who opted in and out regarding ease
of use, of the consent application with about 75% stating it provided
mostly or very useful information, 90% stating it was mostly or very easy
to understand, and 85% stating they trusted the information. However,
there were significant differences between those that opted-in and
opted-out in their beliefs concerning usefulness of tissue, trusting
researchers, importance of contributing to science and privacy risk with
those opting in strongly supporting these beliefs (>90%) compared to
those that opted out (<40%), pResults: The opt-in rate for the pilot was
90.7%, and 56% agreed to direct contact for future research. Only 7%
needed help navigating the online consent process. Of the subgroup of
pilot population who completed the targeted survey, there was no
difference between individuals who opted in and out regarding ease of
use, of the consent application with about 75% stating it provided mostly
or very useful information, 90% stating it was mostly or very easy to
understand, and 85% stating they trusted the information. However, there
were significant differences between those that opted-in and opted-out in
their beliefs concerning usefulness of tissue, trusting researchers,
importance of contributing to science and privacy risk with those opting
in strongly supporting these beliefs (>90%) compared to those that opted
out (<40%), p<0.001.

Conclusions: Video-application approach for allowing individuals to
consent for remnant specimens to be collected and used for research,
including cancer research, can be efficient, patient-centric and meet the
NIH requirements. This method could increase the availability of blood
and tissue for cancer research and should be tested for scalability as an
enterprise solution.


