Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome and whole-genome sequencing analysis of a novel
murine model of chronic lymphocytic leukemia.


Large-scale cancer sequencing of primary chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL) has identified SF3B1, an RNA splicing factor, as one of the most
frequently mutated CLL genes. SF3B1 mutations localize to a hotspot (>50%
at K700E site) and highly co-occur with mutations in ATM or deletion of
chromosome 11q (minimally deleted region contains ATM). How this splicing
factor mutation alone or in cooperation with ATM deletion contributes to
CLL remains elusive. Genetically engineered mice are powerful tools in
understanding genetic lesions and cancer phenotypes. We therefore
generated a mouse line that conditionally expresses heterozygous
Sf3b1-K700E mutation. We modeled the effects of the combined alterations
by crossing mice with conditional knockout of Atm and mice with
Sf3b1-K700E. By breeding these mice with homozygous CD19-Cre transgenic
mice, we achieved B cell-restricted expression of heterozygous Sf3b1
mutation and Atm deletion. B cell co-expression of these two mutations in
vivo led to clonal expansion of CD19+CD5+ B cells in blood, marrow and
spleen in aged mice (18 to 24-month old) at low penetrance. No leukemia
cells were found in the Sf3b1-K700E mice (up to 24-month old). The CLL
cells from the double mutant mice could be engrafted in both
immunocompetent and immunodeficient mice, with detectable disease within
2-4 weeks following transfer, thus making this mouse line amenable to
drug discovery and biologic investigations. To investigate how Sf3b1
mutation and Atm deletion synergistically contribute to CLL, we asked if
there are RNA and DNA level changes in the double mutant mice with CLL.
First, we performed transcriptome sequencing of splenic B cell RNA
collected from age-matched mice that either express wild-type, singly
mutant alleles of Sf3b1 or Atm, or doubly mutant alleles with or without
CLL-like disease. Using the tool JuncBASE, we classified and quantified
splice variants associated with the different genetic alterations.
Consistent with prior findings in human CLL, we observed that splice
variants in Sf3b1-mutant mice alone were highly enriched at 3' splice
sites. Sf3b1 and Atm doubly mutant B cells displayed a splicing pattern
similar to that in Sf3b1 singly mutant cells. Moreover, we identified
unique CLL splice variants in genes (Setdb2, Phf11c) previously shown to
be associated with CLL. Next, we examined the mutation rate in DNA
derived from splenic B cells collected from mice with a singly mutated
allele of Sf3b1 or Atm, or with doubly mutated alleles with and without
CLL-like disease through comparison against matched germline DNA from
kidney by whole-genome sequencing. We have observed that co-expression of
Sf3b1 mutation and deletion of Atm results in a higher mutation rate
compared to singly mutant cells. Our analysis has revealed that altered
RNA splicing and genomic instability all contribute to CLL
leukemogenesis. We will further dissect how the two lesions contribute to
CLL functionally using this model.


