Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urine microRNA profiling in bladder cancer by next-generation
sequencing.


Bladder cancer (BC) is one of the leading causes of cancer-related death
worldwide. BC is among the most expensive cancer per patient because it
requires frequent surveillance and repeated treatments over many years.
The identification of new biomarkers for early BC detection,
recurrence/progression is urgently needed to both improve patient
outcomes and decrease health care costs. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are
aberrantly expressed in many cancers, including BC, and may be isolated
from various biological specimens, including urine. To investigate miRNA
signatures in surrogate tissues may be a useful alternative to reduce
invasiveness of biopsies, allowing repetitive samplings during follow-up
and reducing health care costs for detection, monitoring of progression
and treatment. We aim to identify specific miRNA signatures in urine
samples from 66 BC male patients (10 muscle invasive BC (MIBC) and 56
non-muscle invasive BC (NMIBC)) and 48 healthy controls using a Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) approach able to accurately distinguish BC
patients and predict disease outcome. The measurement of miRNA levels in
urine could allow to measure the levels of promising biomarkers in one of
the best and closest surrogate tissue for BC, since it is in direct
contact with the tissue of tumor origin. A specific miRNA signatures that
could distinguish the different types of BC patients from healthy
controls was found in urine. For MIBC, a 18-miRNAs signature had over 80%
predictive power (PP) to recognize patients from controls (data are under
validation). For NMIBC we were able to stratify cases according to grade.
In particular, 23 miRNAs resulted differentially expressed among G1-G2
cases and controls (5 of them had PP>0.70), while several miRNAs resulted
differentially expressed among G3 patients and controls (a 10-miRNAs
signature with PP>0.97). Interestingly, we found several differentially
expressed miRNAs in common among cases and some miRNAs that were
differentially expressed only in specific subcategories of BC cases. NGS
data were also used to search for the most constant miRNAs in the set of
samples to be used as reference genes in a validation step. Twenty-three
miRNAs (21 target and 2 reference miRNAs) were validated by qPCR on 177
urine samples from 113 BC case and 64 controls . Interestingly, miRNAs
differentially expressed among cases and controls were able to
discriminate not only BC cases from controls, but also its subcategories.
This data provide evidences of the possibility to use miRNAs specifically
within the urine of patients with BC as diagnostic, prognostic and
predictive biomarkers. Acknowledgements Work supported by Fondazione
Umberto Veronesi (FUV) “Post-doctoral fellowship Year 2014, 2015 and
2016” (B.P. recipient), a FUV Grant 2013 (G.M. recipient), and by a
HuGeF grant.


