Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dominant role of receptor tyrosine kinase in the activation of
MAPK signaling in BRAF non-V600 mutant cancers.


BRAF mutations are found in ~8% of all cancers. In addition to the
commonest mutation in kinase domain at the V600, a wide range of other
missense mutations (non-V600) have been reported. Non-V600 mutant BRAF
protein was also shown to enhance MAPK signaling, suggesting the
effectiveness of MEK inhibitors. However, the existence of feedback
mechanism in MAPK singling and the roles of receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTKs) in these cells are not fully understood. To interrogate this, BRAF
non-V600 cell lines with intermediate/impaired kinase activity were
treated with MEK inhibitor. RTKs involved in the upregulation of P-MEK
following MEK inhibition in BRAF non-V600E mutant cell lines were
determined by phosphor-RTK arrays. The effect of combinatorial inhibition
of RTKs and MEK in BRAF non-V600 cancer was assessed in vitro and in
vivo. By analyzing drug screen data, we first found cells with BRAF
non-V600E mutation were less sensitive to MEK inhibition compared with
BRAF V600E mutant cell lines and almost comparable to RAS/RAF wild-type
cell lines. MEK inhibition did not induce P-MEK suppression and it
resulted in significant upregulation of p-MEK compared to BRAF V600E
mutant cell lines. Phospho-RTK arrays in the presence or absence of
trametinib displayed basal phosphorylation of RTKs including EGFR, MET,
and IGF1R, although the phosphorylation level was not consistently
changed following MEK inhibition. Among these RTKs, treatment with the
EGFR inhibitor erlotinib led to more complete suppression of P-ERK upon
trametinib treatment. Furthermore, we found that erlotinib monotherapy
downregulated P-ERK in BRAF non-V600 mutant cell lines in contrast that
inhibition of RTKs had no effect on MAPK signaling in BRAF V600 mutant
cells. While erlotinib treatment led to MAPK inhibition both in
intermediate active and impaired kinase active BRAF mutant cells, p-MEK
and p-ERK were more strongly suppressed in impaired type BRAF non-V600
mutant cells. The combination of EGFR inhibitor and MEK inhibitor
suppressed cell growth and achieved tumor shrinkage in mice xenograft.
These results suggest that RTKs, especially EGFR, are dominantly involved
in the regulation of MAPK signaling in BRAF non-V600 cancer cells.


