Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting IRE1a-XBP1 signaling in lung cancer.


Every year 1.5 million people die from lung cancer worldwide.
Approximately ~15-30% of non small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) are driven
by KRAS mutations and currently possess no viable therapeutic options. As
such the discovery of effective therapeutic alternatives for the
treatment of KRAS driven NSCLC are sorely needed. One prospect being
explored in other solid tumors, but currently unexplored in NSCLC, is
targeting the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response. Adverse
conditions in tumors such as hypoxia, nutrient starvation and reactive
oxygen species disrupt protein folding, and induce ER stress. The most
evolutionarily conserved pathway by which this insult is alleviated is
the IRE1α-XBP1 axis, which responds by increasing the expression of a
broad range of protein folding and quality control genes. Previous work
has demonstrated that several cancers utilize this pathway to promote
tumorigenesis, progression, epithelial to mesenchymal transition and
metastasis. A preliminary analysis of a tissue microarray containing 304
human NSCLC samples, 254 demonstrated at least some positivity and >50%
were strongly positive for the active isoform of XBP1. Given these
preliminary findings we investigated the status of IRE1a-XB1 in our
murine orthotopic model and confirmed the activation of IRE1a-XBP1
signaling in tumor cells in the context of the tumor microenvironment.
Furthermore, in both cell types we can see the activation of canonical
downstream targets of XBP1. Utilizing the CRISPR-CAS9 system, we knocked
out IRE1a in the orthotopic tumor cell line. IRE1a abrogation was
confirmed by western blot, evaluating the fraction of active XBP1 after
induced ER stress in vitro, and qPCR of canonical downstream targets.
Additionally, this knockout did not alter proliferation or morphology in
vitro. However, when tumors were grown orthotopically, Cas9-IRE1a
knockouts failed to grow past 10 days, whereas Cas9-Scramble controls and
the parental tumor line grew comparably until end stage. Given these
preliminary findings and data from prior studies, we hypothesize that the
abnormal activation of the IRE1α-XBP1 axis may influence KRAS NSCLC
progression and aggressiveness and serve as a potential novel avenue for
the treatment of NSCLC. After probing the impact of the underlying
mechanism on tumor growth we will finally evaluate the translational
utility of targeting the ER stress pathway with a small molecule
inhibitor against IRE1a.


