Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and application of an immunohistochemistry-based assay
for evaluating functional and accessible folate receptor expression in
vivo.


With the development of molecularly-targeted therapeutics, it is critical
to have a reliable method for predicting response to therapy of patients
with target-expressing diseases. Folate receptor (FR) is overexpressed in
a number of disease states while it is low in most healthy individuals
with the exception of the kidney. FR-targeted small molecule drug
conjugates (SMDCs) are currently under development and have shown
promising pre-clinical and clinical results. Two premises that a patient
would respond to the folate-drug conjugates are: 1). FR protein expressed
in diseased tissues is functionally competent for folate binding and 2).
functional FR is accessible to intravenously-infused SMDCs. Although
anti-FR antibody-based immunohistochemical (IHC) assays are being
developed as companion diagnostic strategies for antibody-drug conjugate
(ADC) therapies, it fails to address the functionality and accessibility
of FR in an in vivo context.

To circumvent these limitations, we have developed an FR-targeted,
crosslinkable small molecule reporter conjugate (SMRC), FRRC, which
contains three modules: 1. a high-affinity folate ligand that binds with
FR on diseased cells; 2. a small hapten, FITC, which can be detected by
anti-FITC antibodies; and 3. an amino acid spacer in between these two
modules that can crosslink FRRC to FR in-situ during formalin fixation.
After intravenous (i.v.) injection, FRRC would dock to the accessible and
functional receptors in vivo. By processing biopsied tissues and
performing anti-FITC IHC staining, we can evaluate the cellular
localization and relative abundance of functional FR in heterogeneous
tissues.

To evaluate our design, we synthesized a compound we refer to as FRRC and
examined its properties both in vitro and in vivo. By testing FRRC in
cell lines, we found that it can bind to FR and is detected in
formalin-fixed cells by anti-FITC immunostaining. To validate this assay
in vivo, FRRC was injected via the tail vein into mice bearing
FR-positive KB tumor xenografts and its specific accumulation and
kinetics in tumor and other tissues were evaluated by performing
anti-FITC IHC staining on formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissues. Our
results were shown to be in agreement with previous folate-based
functional FR imaging and bio-distribution studies. In contrast, EC17,
which lacks the crosslinkable spacer module, showed significantly reduced
binding in in vitro and in vivo assays. Owing to its modular design,
additional SMRCs with different ligands and small haptens (rhodamine,
DNP) have also been designed to assess the functional binding of other
receptor and membrane-expressed proteins.

In conclusion, our assay is an effective tool for evaluating functional
and accessible receptor expression in vitro and in vivo, and has the
potential to be useful in patient or disease selection for our SMDC
therapeutics.


