Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel BH3 mimetic based therapeutic strategies for the treatment
of breast cancer.


Bcl-2 homology domain 3 (BH3) mimetics are a new class of targeted
anti-cancer compounds that function by inducing cancer cell apoptosis.
Testing in a variety of pre-clinical tumor models has shown that BH3
mimetics are capable of inducing remarkable tumor regressions. Recently,
a clinical trial of the BH3 mimetic venetoclax in Chronic Lymphocytic
Leukemia (CLL) resulted in an impressive response rate of 80% leading to
FDA approval. Using unbiased genomic and functional genomic approaches,
we identified gene amplification of the BCL2L1 gene, which encodes the
anti-apoptotic protein BCL-XL, as a novel driver event in breast cancer.
We identified focal amplification of the BCL2L1 gene in the SUM-185
breast cancer cell line and a genome-wide RNAi-based screen identified
BCL2L1 as one of the top genes necessary for viability of this cell line
(ranked 5th out of 15,256 genes). Treatment of SUM-185 cells with
navitoclax showed that these cells are intrinsically sensitive to this
drug (IC50 = 100nM). This sensitivity was 1-2 logs greater than what was
observed for breast cancer cell lines that do not harbor BCL2L1 gene
amplification. To expand the relevance of these findings beyond the
SUM-185 cell line, we used the cancer cell line encyclopedia (CCLE)
database to identify an additional breast cancer cell line, HCC38, that
also harbors a focal BCL2L1 gene amplification. Treatment of HCC38 cells
with navitoclax revealed a high level of sensitivity that was equivalent
to that of SUM-185 cells. These findings demonstrated that a subset of
breast cancers that harbor BCL2L1 gene amplification are highly sensitive
to a BH3 mimetic that targets BCL2L1 suggesting that BH3 mimetics could
be used as a single agent to effectively treat these breast cancers. We
also examined the effectiveness of BH3 mimetics when used as part of a
combination therapy approach. In addition to a focal amplification of the
BCL2L1 gene, the SUM-185 breast cancer cell line also harbors a focal
amplification of the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene as
well as an activating mutation in the
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit alpha
(PIK3CA) gene. Treatment of SUM-185 cells with low doses of navitoclax, a
FGFR inhibitor, or a PIK3CA inhibitor had little effect on colony forming
efficiency. At these same low doses, combined treatment with navitoclax
and the FGFR inhibitor or the PIK3CA inhibitor resulted in a strikingly
synergistic effect with near complete loss of colony forming ability
(less than 10% of controls). We further showed that this loss of
clonogenicity was the result of a rapid induction of apoptosis by the
combination therapies. These results suggest that combining BH3 mimetics
with inhibitors of PIK3CA or FGFR is a promising novel therapeutic
strategy for a subset of breast cancer patients.


