Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Erufosine, a third-generation alkylphosphocholine with cytotoxic
and cytostatic effects in breast and colorectal cancer cells.


Introduction Breast and colorectal cancers are highly malignant diseases
with low 5-year survival rate (Introduction Breast and colorectal cancers
are highly malignant diseases with low 5-year survival rate (<21%) in
advanced stages, which highlights the need of finding new therapeutic
options. Considering this, we are interested in exploring the anticancer
potential of erufosine, a membrane targeting synthetic lipid analogue
belonging to a class of antineoplastic agents known as
alkylphosphocholines (APCs). Properties such as intravenous
administration and significantly reduced hemolytic activity as compared
to previous APC generations, and efficient cytotoxic effects against
malignant cells make it an attractive anticancer compound.

Materials and Methods In the present experiments, we studied the effects
of erufosine against breast (MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7) and colorectal (SW480
and SW620) cancer cell lines. Following exposure to erufosine
(0.78-100µM) for 24, 48 and 72h, cytotoxic effects were measured by MTT
dye reduction assay and inhibitory concentrations (IC) were identified by
GraphPad Prism software 6. Erufosine mediated cytostatic effects were
highlighted by means of propidium iodide (PI) based labeling of the DNA
followed by flow cytometry analysis. Furthermore, the cells were exposed
to increasing concentrations of erufosine (IC25, 50, 75) and alterations
in cell cycle relevant genes (CCNA1, CCND1, CCNE1, CCNE2, CDK1, CDK4)
were investigated by qRT-PCR methodology.

Results Erufosine was highly active against the selected cell lines (IC50
Results Erufosine was highly active against the selected cell lines (IC50
< 10µM, 24h) and induced significant arrest in the G2/M phase of the
cell cycle. The cytostatic effects were more pronounced in the two
metastatic cell lines of breast (MDA-MB-231) and colorectal (SW620)
cancers. At molecular levels, erufosine induced expression of CCNA1 (≥
2fold) in SW480, SW620, and MCF-7 cells, while the expression was
inhibited in MDA-MB-231 cells at high concentrations (IC50, IC75). There
were no significant alterations (≤ 2fold) in the expression levels of
CCND1, CCNE1 and CDK4 in the four cell lines. CCNE2 was significantly
downregulated in breast cancer cell lines only. Noteworthy, alterations
in CDK1 were associated with cell lines from primary cancers, where the
expression was upregulated in SW480 cells and downregulated in MCF-7
cells.

Conclusion Antineoplastic effects of erufosine contribute to decreased
proliferation of breast and colorectal cancer cell lines. This synthetic
lipid induces arrest in G2/M phase and alterations in cell cycle relevant
genes in the selected panel of breast and colorectal cancer cells.
Characteristics like in vivo stability, minimal hemolytic activity, no
toxicity to bone marrow and antineoplastic effects (cytotoxic/cytostatic)
against cancer cells make it an attractive therapeutic compound. Further
understanding at molecular levels supported by in vivo experimentation
will pave the way to validate its therapeutic potential against cancers.


