Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the functional significance of novel, recurrent
noncoding mutations of TBC1D12 in bladder cancer.


Somatic noncoding mutations remain widely unexplored despite examples of
critical importance such as driver mutations in the promoter of the TERT
gene. We recently identified novel somatic mutations in the regulatory
Kozak sequence (just upstream of the translation start site) of TBC1D12
in ~15% of bladder cancer patients, making it one of the most frequently
mutated noncoding regions in any cancer (Araya et. al 2016). TBC1D12 was
not previously implicated in cancer, and little is currently known about
its function. It is a member of the TBC1 superfamily, suggesting a role
in intracellular trafficking as a RAB-specific GTPase-activating protein
(GAP). To investigate the functional implications of TBC1D12 mutations in
bladder cancer, we undertook a combined computational and experimental
approach. We analyzed clinical correlates, identified downstream effector
candidates, and assessed the impact of these mutations on gene expression.

To determine the clinical relevance of the TBC1D12 mutation, we did
correlation and survival analyses of clinical data of bladder cancer
patients from TCGA. We found that TBC1D12 mutations confer slightly worse
survival but were not linked to other clinical correlates. To identify
potential downstream effectors, we used reverse phase protein array
(RPPA) data from 127 patients to search for proteins that were
differentially expressed or phosphorylated between patients with or
without TBC1D12 mutations. We found differential expression of GSK3 and
differential phosphorylation of p90RSK and c-Jun, suggesting three
potential downstream effector candidates. Hierarchical clustering of RPPA
data for these three proteins revealed 4 subgroups with distinct
molecular phenotypes. Furthermore, most of the TBC1D12 mutants were
clustered within one molecular subtype. To experimentally test these
downstream effector candidates and identify new ones, we modulated the
levels of TBC1D12 in bladder cancer cell line Ku-19-19 using
overexpression plasmids or siRNAs. After validating that these
transfections were effective in changing TBC1D12 expression, we performed
RNA-Seq experiments. Results from this study are expected to be presented
at the meeting.

In summary, these studies suggest that the novel and recurrent noncoding
mutations in TBC1D12 may affect patient survival and alter the expression
or post-translational modification of downstream targets. Potential
molecular mechanisms associated with the presence of TBC1D12 mutations
will be discussed, and a series of follow-up studies are underway. These
studies also demonstrate that applying both computational and
experimental approaches can help develop and test evidence-based
hypotheses, contributing to an understanding of the clinical and
functional impact of TBC1D12.


