Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The clonal evolution of glioblastoma.


Background: Glioblastoma (GBM) is an aggressive cancer that often recurs
despite multimodal therapy. Median survival is 12-15 months. Genomic
profiling studies have shown marked tumor heterogeneity with distinct
mutations among treated and untreated samples. The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA), revealed that mutations in TP53, CDKN2A, PTEN, EGFR and NF1 are
predominant in untreated tumors. Of 19 patients who progressed on
therapy, seven samples were hypermutated with mutations in mismatch
repair proteins, mainly MSH6. We proposed to use the Cellecta
Lentiviral-based tagging library, a novel model system to assess the role
of intratumor heterogeneity (ITH) in the presumptive tumor-initiating
fraction of primary GBM and in the development of resistance to
temozolomide (TMZ). From a pool of 30,000,000 barcodes, the system
enables the genetic integration of a unique barcode sequence into each
cell. Each barcode can be quantitatively tracked via next-generation
sequencing, allowing for dynamic monitoring of the subclonal architecture.

Methods: GSC 272 and 627 (sensitive and resistant to TMZ) were derived
from core biopsies of GBM patients. Cells were transduced with a
lentiviral vector containing luciferase. Cells were expanded and infected
with the Cellecta Lentiviral library. Multiplicity of infection was
determined. Transduced cells were injected into B6.Cg-Foxn1nu/J mice
brains using a guide screw system. Half of the mice were treated with TMZ
via gavage at two weeks. Brain tumors were removed and total DNA was
extracted. Barcode inserts were amplified and the Illumina Sequencing
platform was used for barcode quantification. Additionally, whole exome
sequencing was performed to assess mutation status.

Results: Confirmation of luciferase signal has been performed using a
Luciferase Reporter Assay. Multiplicity of infection was found to be 0.15
and 1 for GSC 6-27 and 272 respectively. Initial methylation studies
showed GSC 272 to have methylation of MGMT while GSC 627 did not. There
was no difference in OS in the TMZ Resistant (GSC 627) untreated vs.
treated cohort (with a median OS of 55 days in both groups (N= 23 vs 25
respectively, P= 0.563). TMZ Sensitive (GSC 272) untreated mice did not
survive as long as the treated cohort (N= 24 vs. 25, Median OS 43 vs. 206
days, P= 4.61e-09). Barcode and whole exome sequencing results is
currently being analyzed.

Conclusions: The Cellecta lentiviral tagging system is an innovative way
to track ITH and clonal evolution in glioblastoma orthotopic models. We
hope to discover novel insights into TMZ treatment response and
resistance.


