Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of PRMT6 promotes the Warburg effect in
hepatocellular carcinoma via PKM2.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the top ranked causes of cancer
death in the world, accounting for more than 740,000 deaths in 2012.
Treatment of HCC is hindered by recurrence and resistance to
chemotherapy. Altered metabolism in cancer has been linked to increased
tumorigenicity and resistance to chemotherapeutics. One of the main
features of altered metabolism is the Warburg effect, which is widely
observed in solid tumor including HCC. Recently, our group have
identified protein arginine methyltransferase 6 (PRMT6) as a tumor
suppressor protein in HCC. Protein arginine methylation is a
post-translational modification implicated in a variety of cellular
functions including signaling and regulation of gene
expression.Downregulation of PRMT6 expression was observed in HCC
patients and knockdown of PRMT6 in HCC cell lines increased the
tumorigenicity and sensitivity to both chemo- and molecular-targeted
therapies. Other members of the Type 1 PRMT protein has previously been
reported to be involved in glucose metabolism. Microarray profiling of
HCC cells stably knockdown and overexpressed of PRMT6 showed enrichment
of genes in glycolysis. We therefore hypothesize that reduced expression
of PRMT6 in HCC drives the Warburg effect to support cancer progression.
Metabolome profiling of HCC cells stably knockdown and overexpressed of
PRMT6 showed enrichment of metabolites in glycolysis. Using Seahorse
Extracellular Flux Analyzer, we show that stable knockdown of PRMT6 in
HCC cell line drives glycolysis. This enhanced glycolysis rate is coupled
with increased uptake of glucose, lactate production and pyruvate kinase
activity. mRNA expression level of several glycolysis-related genes was
screened by real-time quantitative PCR and we identified PKM2, a
well-known regulator of the Warburg effect, as a potential link between
PRMT6 and enhanced glycolysis. Knockdown of PRMT6 leads to an increase in
mRNA and protein expression level of PKM2, but not PKM1 and PKLR,
suggesting that PKM2 is the sole contributor for enhanced pyruvate kinase
activity. In addition, by immunofluorescence staining, PKM2 is shown to
accumulate in the nucleus following PRMT6 knockdown, where it has been
shown to drive the expression of other glycolysis-related genes. In
conclusion, PRMT6 regulates the expression level PKM2 and glycolysis of
HCC cell. Ongoing studies are in progress to delineate the underlying
mechanisms by which PRMT6 regulates PKM2 to drive Warburg effect.


