Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Directionality of T-cell-mediated cross-protection against the
same tumor in lungs versus skin.


Immunotherapy is a new pillar of cancer therapy. One theoretical
advantage of immunotherapy of cancer is that effector cells induced at
one site should be able to kill metastatic cancer cells in other sites or
tissues. On the other hand, it has been recognized that each tissue has
unique immune components that play critical roles in protection against
pathogens. However, very little is known whether effector T cells induced
against tumors in one tissue can work against the same tumors in other
tissues. To address this question, we compared the effect of effector
cells induced against the same tumor cells growing in either the skin or
the lung by using CT26 murine tumor models. Rejection of s.c. CT26 tumors
was achieved by pretreatment with anti-CD25, which blocks the function of
Treg cells. Both CD4 and CD8 T cells were necessary for the protection.
When anti-CD25-pretreated mice challenged with s.c. CT26 were
simultaneously inoculated i.v. with CT26, they also rejected tumors in
the lung, while anti-CD25-pretreated mice without s.c. CT26 did not. This
observation suggested that T cell mediated anti-tumor protective immunity
induced against s.c. tumors can also protect against lung metastases of
the same tumors. In contrast to Treg depletion which allowed for the
induction of protective immunity in the s.c. tumor model, NKT
cell-deficiency in CD1d KO mice induced significant CD8 T cell-mediated
protection against lung metastasis of CT26 but had no effect on the
growth of s.c. CT26 tumors. When CD1d KO mice rejecting i.v. CT26 were
simultaneously challenged with s.c. CT26, the development of s.c. tumors
was not affected, indicating that tumor rejection induced against the
CT26 in the lung did not confer protection for the same tumor cells in
the skin. Since the protection against CT26 in the lung in CD1d KO mice
is mediated by CD8 T cells, we transferred T cells from CD1d KO mice
inoculated i.v. with CT26 into RAG1 KO recipients, and challenged the
recipient mice with the CT26 tumor cells. The recipient RAG1 KO mice were
highly resistant to CT26 inoculated i.v. but not s.c. confirming that the
CD8 T cells protective in the lung are not protective in the skin. These
data

indicate the effector cells against the same tumor do not work in all
tissues, and the induction site of the effector T cells is critical to
control metastasis.


