Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted nanoparticle therapy for poor prognosis Ewing’s sarcoma.


Targeted nanoparticles have shown the potential to deliver anticancer
drugs to cancer cells selectively and thus to overcome unexpected
cytotoxicity and limited efficacy of chemotherapy caused by non-selective
delivery to normal cells. However, the optimal formulation of targeted
nanoparticles for actual translational applications has not been
established. By refining early formulations and after extensive testing,
we have created an optimized targeted delivery system, HPLNs (Hybrid
Polymerized Liposomal Nanoparticles) and demonstrated that this new,
targeted nanoparticle technology overcomes many of these deficiencies.
This technology has tremendous potential for treating virtually any type
of cancer. The goal of our present study was to determine the efficacy
and toxicity of this novel targeted nanoparticle in the treatment of
Ewing’s Sarcoma, a rare and highly lethal cancer of children and young
adults. The efficacy of this targeted delivery system was compared to 1)
administration of the free drug and 2) the drug in untargeted
nanoparticle form. Our studies have shown that HPLN-Dox targeted with
human antiCD99 antibodies can successfully inhibit the growth of
Ewing’s Sarcoma in murine models without any detectable off-target
toxicity. The deliverable for our study was to demonstrate that the
effectiveness of doxorubicin in the treatment of recurrent Ewing’s
sarcoma could be dramatically improved when encapsulated in human
antiCD99 antibody targeted HPLNs. At the same time, toxic side effects
normally seen with free drug was not detectable. Success with human
anti-CD99 antibodies targeted HPLNs containing Doxorubicin was then
easily adapted to other tumor types (Leukemia, Prostate or Pancreatic
cancers) and other payloads such as irinotecan, EWS-FLI1 specific ASOs,
siRNA and CRISPR/Cas9 targeting the ETS domain of the chimeric EWS-ets
gene found in all Ewing sarcoma. In conclusion, our study showed a
potential of targeted HPLN as a selective delivery vehicle of cytotoxic
payloads to cancers and this technology is then easily adapted to other
tumor types and virtually any small molecule therapeutic.


