Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AKT inhibition induces neuroendocrine phenotype in prostate cancer
cells.


Androgen receptor (AR) signaling pathway inhibition (ARPI) is the primary
treatment for locally advanced, recurrent, or metastatic prostate cancer.
While ARPI is effective in short term, a fatal relapse is inevitable. The
AKT signaling pathway inhibition has been investigated under multiple
ongoing clinical trials as a co-therapeutic target with ARPI. The AKT
signaling pathway is targeted due to its role in tumorigenesis, prevalent
over-activation, and reciprocal activation upon ARPI in prostate cancer.
However, this novel combination therapy may in fact facilitate PCa to
progress into one of the most lethal subtypes called neuroendocrine (NE)
prostate cancer (NEPC). Specifically, evidence has shown that ARPI
contributes to NEPC progression at least in part by down-regulating the
expression of RE-1 Silencing Transcription Factor (REST). Loss of REST is
a hallmark of NEPC progression because REST functions as a negative
master regulator in neurogenesis by suppressing genes required for neural
differentiation. Similar to ARPI, our studies found that AKT inhibition
reduced REST protein expression and increased NEPC markers in multiple
prostate cancer cell lines. We also showed that the loss of REST upon AKT
inhibition was through protein degradation mediated by an E3-ubiquitin
ligase TRCP, which recognizes a phosphorylated REST degron region to
recruit ubiquitins. In vivo ubiquitination assays confirmed the elevated
REST ubiquitination after the treatment of PI3K inhibitors. Furthermore,
mutations within the REST degron region reversed the TRCP-mediated REST
ubiquitination and degradation. Finally, co-treatment of AKT pathway
inhibition and ARPI showed aggravated REST depletion and increased NE
markers in the prostate cancer cell line LNCaP. Collectively, these
findings indicate that AKT pathway inhibition can induce NE phenotype in
prostate cancer cells via REST protein degradation. This study may
provide a caution to the ARPI/AKT co-target strategy as this strategy can
potentially facilitate NEPC development.


