Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nicotinamide N-methyltransferase inhibits Protein Phosphatase 2A
activity by promoting Y307 phosphorylation.


Recent evidence indicates that suppression of protein phosphatase 2A
(PP2A) activity plays an essential role in malignant transformation and
cancer cell maintenance. Despite the importance of PP2A as a tumor
suppressor in cancer, the mechanisms by which other enzymes regulate PP2A
remain largely unknown. We recently identified Nicotinamide
N-methyltransferase (NNMT) as a novel regulator of PP2A activity in
glioblastoma (GBM). NNMT is a cytosolic N-methyl transferase which
utilizes methyl groups from S-Adenosyl methionine (SAM), forming the
by-product S-Adenosyl Homocysteine (SAH). PP2A becomes activated
following the trimer formation of the three PP2A subunits, which requires
the methylation of the catalytic subunit of PP2A (PP2A C) at L309.In
cancer, NNMT has been reported to decrease the cellular methylation
potential (SAM:SAH) and correspond with decreased PP2A activity. It was
hypothesized that the decrease in methylation potential accounts for the
decrease in PP2A activity by kinetically disfavoring the methylation of
PP2A C. Interestingly, when we overexpressed NNMT in GBM cell lines and
used LC-MS/MS (LC-MS Quadrupole Time-of-Flight and LC-MS Triple Quad) to
monitor the methylation potential, we discovered that overexpression of
NNMT increased methylation potential, however, still lead to a decrease
in PP2A activity. As a result, we hypothesized that NNMT suppresses PP2A
activity in a methylation-independent manner. In an effort to identify an
alternative mechanism by which NNMT decreases PP2A activity, we found
that NNMT expression was required for the phosphorylation of PP2A C at
residue T307, which inhibits PP2A trimer formation and activation.
Further, we found that NNMT expression leads to the constitutive
activation of the PP2A target serine/threonine kinases (STKs): Akt, MAPK,
and SAPK/JNK. NNMT silencing resulted in the deactivation of these STKs
and radiation-induced cellular stress was not sufficient to rescue their
activation. This suggests that NNMT-induced PP2A suppression is essential
for the activation of these kinases. Overall, this study demonstrates a
novel mechanism independent of methylation by which NNMT represses the
activity of tumor suppressor PP2A.


