Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analysis of transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic
data of Pten-knockout carcinogenic mouse prostate.


The prostate-specific Pten-knockout (KO) mouse carcinogenesis model is
highly desirable for prostate cancer chemoprevention studies due to its
close resemblance of many histopathological features of human prostate
cancer including disease progression from prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (PIN) to invasive adenocarcinomas. Here, we profiled the
prostate proteome, transcriptome and aqueous metabolome of Pten-KO mice
to identify reference molecular signatures that can be used for designing
chemopreventive and/or therapeutic intervention and for selection of
molecular biomarkers of responses to intervention. For proteomics, 4
pairs of whole prostates from Pten-KO mice (12-15 weeks of age,
corresponding to high grade PIN) and their wild type littermate housed in
same cages were obtained from the NCI Mouse Model Repository and analyzed
by 8-plex iTRAQTM. For transcriptomic/microarray and metabolomic
analyses, 3 additional matched pairs of prostate/tumor specimens at older
age (22-20 weeks) were used. Proteomic and transcriptomic analyses using
manual annotation methods with references from PubMed revealed top
signatures that were up- and down-regulated by Pten deletion,
particularly those implicated in immune function, inflammatory response,
cancer, drug metabolism, cellular functions, prostate functions, and
endoplasmic stress regulation. Similar to the manual annotation approach,
each network analysis of 203 genes and 22 proteins (≥ 2- fold changes)
by a bioinformatics software, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) showed
that inflammatory response, cellular movement, immune cell trafficking,
immunological disease, and cancer were top 5 disease and biological
functions in Pten-KO mice. Using references from PubMed, we manually
assigned the unmapped prostate metabolites to functional categories,
which included altered methionine-cysteine cycle fluxes and purine
metabolites, increased nucleotide pools, cholesterol and polyamine
synthesis and suppressed pools of sugar and choline derivatives,
glycolysis intermediates, and purine bases. IPA network analysis of 25
metabolites (≥ 2- fold changes) revealed the biological functions
related to molecular transport, amino acid metabolism, and small molecule
biochemistry. In addition, we integrated transcriptomic, proteomic, and
metabolomic data sets to identify latent biological relationships and to
gain a comprehensive understanding of Pten-deficient prostate
carcinogenesis. The integrative analysis predicted activation of
inflammatory response and several central signaling nodes, such as IRF7,
NF-κB, and IL-6. Collectively, the integrative analyses identify both
active and latent reference molecular signatures and provide more insight
into Pten-deficient prostate cancer than single omic approaches.


