Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultrasensitive quantification of promoter methylation in cell-free
circulating DNA for early detection of lung cancer.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide.
Early detection of lung cancer using Low Dose Computed Tomography (LDCT)
screening has been shown to decrease the mortality rate. However, most
nodules found are deemed to be benign upon further invasive testing.
Thus, complementary minimally-invasive tests are being sought that will
help discriminate malignant from benign nodules. Molecular biomarkers are
increasingly becoming part of routine clinical practice for the
diagnosis, prognosis or prediction of treatment response, with improved
disease management and survival outcome. Cell-free circulating DNA
(cfDNA) in body fluids, including serum, plasma and urine, has recently
emerged as a surrogate for tumor DNA. In addition to providing a
minimally-invasive source of tumor DNA, cfDNA reflects molecular
alterations and tumor heterogeneity. Epigenetic changes, including DNA
methylation, occur early in carcinogenesis. Cancer cells are
characterized both by global hypomethylation and hypermethylation of CpG
islands in gene promoter regions. Analysis of tumor-specific DNA
methylation in cfDNA is a promising strategy for applying epigenetic
biomarkers to the detection of cancers at an early-stage. In a prior
genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation, we identified a locus methylated
de novo in fresh frozen tumor tissues resected from stage I lung cancer
patients, that had high discriminatory power to distinguish tumor from
non-tumor tissues in multiple patient cohorts. High promoter methylation
was also associated with shorter cancer-specific survival. The present
study aims at evaluating the diagnostic significance of promoter
methylation in cfDNA, and the prognostic value in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues. We developed a methylation-specific
droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) assay to quantify rare methylation events.
DNA was subjected to bisulfite treatment to convert unmethylated cytosine
residues to uracil. We designed specific primers and probe containing 7
CpGs to only amplify the methylated promoter. Experimental conditions
were first optimized using fully methylated and unmethylated control
DNAs, DNA extracted from lung cancer cell lines, germline cells and lung
tissues (paired tumor and non-tumor). The ddPCR assay has a limit of
detection of 30 haploid genomes equivalent of methylated promoter DNA,
and a limit of quantification of a single methylated allele present at
0.2% (i.e., 1 methylated copy among 500 unmethylated copies). We
demonstrated the assay linearity, reproducibility and specificity for the
methylated locus. Differences in methylation levels between tumors and
adjacent tissues were also observed. We have thus established a robust
and ultrasensitive method for standardized determination of promoter
methylation status in cfDNA. We are currently evaluating its potential
value for noninvasive diagnosis and prognosis of lung cancer patients.


