Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Solid stress and elastic energy as measures of tumor
mechanopathology.


Introduction: Increased tissue stiffness is a widely accepted and
actively studied biomechanical property of desmoplastic tumors, and has
been linked to several hallmarks of cancer, such as growth, invasion and
metastasis. The abnormal mechanics of tumors, however, are not limited to
tissue stiffening. We recently demonstrated that solid stress represents
a new mechanopathology that is consistently elevated in mouse and human
tumors. The solid stress, transmitted by solid elements of the
extracellular matrix, is distinct from interstitial fluid pressure.
Therefore, tumors are not only more rigid than many normal tissues, but
cancer cells also produce and are exposed to these physical forces.
Composed of a combination of tension and compression, these forces are
significant in tumors, but negligible in most normal tissues.

Methods and Results: We developed the experimental and mathematical
frameworks to provide (i) two-dimensional spatial map of solid stress in
tumors (planar cut method), (ii) sensitive estimation of solid stress in
small tumors with small magnitudes of solid stress, e.g., metastatic
lesions (slicing method), and (iii) in situ quantification of solid
stress in tumors, which retains the effects of the normal surrounding
tissues (needle biopsy method). All three methods are based on the
physical concept of releasing the solid stress in a controlled way with
defined geometry, and then quantifying the stress-induced deformation by
high-resolution ultrasonography or optical microscopy. Given the specific
topography of the stress relaxation and the geometric and material
properties of the tumour, the solid stress and discharged elastic energy
is estimated using mathematical modeling. Applying these novel methods to
multiple mouse cancer models in primary and metastatic settings has led
to the following novel findings: (i) solid stress and elastic energy may
be different between primary vs. metastatic settings, as they depend on
both cancer cells and their microenvironment; (ii) tumor with higher
elastic energy are not necessarily stiffer, and the stiffer tumors do not
necessarily have higher elastic energy; (iii) solid stress increases with
tumour size; and (iv) the normal tissue surrounding a tumour
significantly contributes to the intratumoral solid stress.

Conclusions: We developed three distinct methods to perform in situ and
sensitive measurement of solid stress and obtain 2-D spatial map of solid
stress in human and mouse tumors. Application of these methods in models
of primary tumors and metastasis revealed that: (i) solid stress depends
on both cancer cells and their microenvironment; it increases with tumour
size; and mechanical confinement by the surrounding tissue substantially
contributes to intratumoral solid stress. Further study of the genesis
and consequences of solid stress, facilitated by the engineering
principles presented here, may lead to significant discoveries and new
therapies.


