Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDGF-A overexpression and p53 depletion in rat neural precursor
cells induces large brain tumors that resemble human glioblastoma.


One of the major obstacles in developing new therapeutics for
glioblastoma is testing these agents in reliable models that recapitulate
the tumor biology of human disease. The RCAS/tv-a system enables spatial,
temporal, and cell-type specific control of oncogenic transformations in
the brain. In this study, we sought to develop a rat RCAS-TVA model of
glioblastoma to eventually facilitate translational studies using
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), targeted radiation, focused ultrasound,
and local drug delivery strategies. We developed a high copy number
nestin-promoter driven tv-a (Ntv-a) transgenic Sprague-Dawley rat line.
To initiate tumors, RCAS PDGF-A and p53 shRNA constructs were injected
intracranially. The tumors were followed over time using MRI and MR
proton spectroscopy. Animal survival was monitored and histopathology and
gene expression analyses were performed. All animals (n=8) developed
tumors that could be visualized with MRI throughout the tumor formation
process. Early stage tumors showed relatively homogenous characteristics
with minimal mass effect. Later stage tumors demonstrated large
heterogeneous lesions with evidence of necrosis, increased vascularity,
and significant mass effect. MR proton spectroscopy revealed increases in
choline to creatinine ratio (Cho/Cr) and decreases in NAA, consistent
with aggressive tumor progression. Immunohistochemistry revealed
pseudopallisading necrosis, brain invasion, and vascular proliferation,
all key features of human GBM. Immunohistochemistry confirmed a high
proliferative index within the tumor core as well as neovascularization
as evidenced by positive Ki67 and Smooth Muscle Actin (SMA) respectively.
Gene expression analysis revealed approximately 1000 differentially
expressed transcripts between the normal and tumor tissue. In addition to
typical markers such as Ki67 and PDGFR-A overexpression, SPP1 and POSTN
both of which are linked to glioma and tumor-associated macrophages, were
found to be differentially expressed in the tumor. Comparisons between
the rat gene expression profile and published human TCGA data indicated
that the RCAS/tv-a tumors appear to align with the proneural GBM subtype.
In summary, transgenic Ntv-a rats generate reproducible brain tumors
following combined PDGF-A and p53 genetic alterations. The tumor
progression process from low-grade tumor to high grade malignancy can be
visualized with MRI. Histopathological features strongly resemble human
GBM, and gene expression analysis suggests these tumors correspond to the
proneural subtype.


