Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of polyspecificity of P-glycoprotein: Substitution of
fifteen residues in the drug-binding pocket with tyrosine reveals a
negative correlation between substrate size and transport.


P-glycoprotein (P-gp) belongs to the superfamily of ATP-binding cassette
(ABC) transporters. This energy-dependent cell surface transporter can
pump various chemically dissimilar amphipathic or hydrophobic compounds
out of cells. In cancer cells, the expression of P-gp is often linked to
the development of multidrug resistance (MDR). Several studies have
demonstrated that P-gp can recognize and transport various
chemotherapeutic drugs and limit their bioavailability and effectiveness.
The drug-substrate binding sites, translocation mechanism, and the signal
transduction between drug-binding sites and ATP-hydrolysis at
nucleotide-binding domains of this clinically important transporter are
not yet well defined. Utilizing molecular modeling and mutagenesis, we
previously identified key amino acid residues that interact with the most
potent inhibitors of P-gp (zosuquidar, tariquidar, and elacridar). We
found that replacing key interacting amino acids (Y307, Y953, and Q725)
with alanine in the drug-binding pocket switches inhibition by these
modulators of ATPase activity to stimulation. The data demonstrated that
hydrogen bond interactions are critical for inhibition of ATP hydrolysis
of P-gp by modulators. As tyrosine and glutamine residues can function as
both hydrogen bond donors and acceptors, we hypothesized that increasing
the potential for hydrogen bond interactions by introducing more tyrosine
residues into the drug-binding pocket would increase the affinity of
substrates for P-gp. To investigate this, we first identified residues in
the transmembrane domains that interact with a number of substrates by
employing a molecular modeling technique. Then we substituted fifteen
conserved residues (11 Phe, 2 Leu, 2 Ilu and 1 Met) with tyrosine,
creating a mutant we named 15Y. Compared to WT, for the majority of
tested substrates, we observed normal transport of thirteen fluorescent
substrates by the 15Y P-gp mutant demonstrating that fifteen mutations in
the transmembrane domains is well tolerated in P-gp. Additionally, these
changes have no effect on the cell surface expression or total level of
the mutant protein and normal conformational changes occur during
transport, further confirming flexible nature of transmembrane domains of
P-gp. Interestingly, transport of three large-size substrates was
significantly decreased. Physiochemical characterization of the
substrates revealed a negative correlation between drug transport and
molecular size for the tyrosine-enriched P-gp mutant, possibly due to
increased hydrogen bond interactions. These data also demonstrate that
hydrogen bond interactions are substrate- or modulator-specific.


