Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 2'-O-ribose tRNA methylation in S. cerevisiae and implications for
ovarian cancer.


tRNAs are among the most chemically modified molecules of the cell, yet
our understanding of how these modifications influence cell behavior
remains poor. Much of the research to date has been focused on
identifying specific modification events, particularly those that
increase or decrease in response to oxidative stress. Less attention has
been given to understanding how tRNA modifications, and their modifying
enzymes (tRNA methyltransferases, or TRMs), regulate the cell's response
to reactive oxygens, molecules that are known to influence cancer
initiation, survival and malignant progression. Our overall idea is that
tRNA modifying enzymes respond to oxidative stress by catalyzing the
modification of target tRNAs, and that this in turn influences the
translation of transcripts that encode proteins that limit the
potentially harmful effects of reactive oxygens. Here we used S.
cerevisiae as a model eukaryote system to test the hypothesis that
2'-O-ribose tRNA methylation protects cells against the cytotoxic effects
of reactive oxygens. 2'-O-ribose TRM deletion mutants (TRMs 3Δ, 7Δ,
13Δ and 44Δ) were exposed to H2O2, rotenone and acetic acid in order to
produce intracellular reactive oxygens. In growth and colony forming
assays, each deletion strain was more sensitive to the killing effects of
these toxicants when compared to the wild-type strain (BY4741), and the
most pronounced effect was observed for the TRM3Δ mutant. We next
performed a quantitative analysis of global changes in tRNA modifications
in response to H2O2 using mass spectrometry. We found that several
methyl-based modifications (i.e. 2'-O-methyl -adenosine, -guanosine, and
-cytidine) were significantly decreased in TRM3Δ and 7Δ mutants,
providing a direct link between oxidative stress and 2'-O-ribose tRNA
methylation. These results support that 2'-O-ribose methyltransferase
activity plays a cytoprotective role against oxidative stress in S.
cerevisiae. Given the connections between reactive oxygens and cancer, we
used cBioPortal to search for gene alterations of the human homolog of
TRM3, TARBP1, in the genome datasets of The Cancer Genome Atlas.
Interestingly, TARBP1 was found to be amplified in a significant
proportion of breast, ovarian and liver cancers. From these observations,
a new hypothesis emerged: increased 2'-O-ribose methyltransferase
activity contributes to a cancer phenotype by enabling cancer cells to
maintain reactive oxygens at sub-lethal levels that promote survival and
malignant progression. Thus far, preliminary results show that cultured
ovarian cancer cells have elevated levels of TARBP1 relative to normal
ovarian cancer epithelial cells, providing a useful model system to test
this hypothesis in future studies.


