Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vascular mimicry mediated mechanisms drive therapy resistance in
glioblastoma.


Therapy resistance in solid tumors is of growing concern due to the
failure of multiple therapeutic approaches. Targeting tumor cells alone
with chemotherapy, tumor vasculature with antiangiogenic therapies (AAT)
and tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells with CSF1R inhibitor have all lead
to the development of refractory tumors with greater relapse rates. There
is an urgent need to understand molecular mechanisms of therapy
resistance in cancer. There could be tumor cell extrinsic and intrinsic
mechanisms in the tumor microenvironment. We focused our study to
investigate tumor cell intrinsic pathways using glioblastoma (GBM) as a
model tumor and AAT (antiVEGF-VEGFR) as a model therapy. The benefits of
AAT are transient with increased relapse owing to adaptive responses by
the GBM. Our preclinical study and in vitro data, for the very first
time, identified that AAT induces transdifferentiation of tumor cells
into endothelial-like cells, capable of forming functional blood vessels
in the growing tumors, termed as vasculogenic mimicry (VM). We observed
that anti-VEGFR2 (Vatalanib) induced VM vessels are positive for periodic
acid-Schiff (PAS) matrix but devoid of any endothelium on the inner side
and lined by tumor cells on the outer-side. The PAS+ matrix is positive
for basal laminae (laminin) indicating vascular structures. Vatalanib
treated GBM displayed various stages of VM such as initiation (mosaic),
sustenance, and full-blown VM. In addition to this, vatalanib treated
tumors show significantly increased Laminin positive loops characteristic
of VM in tumor center as well as at the periphery. A positive correlation
was observed between the VM-like structures and the tumor size. We also
performed in vitro tube formation assays with AAT treated GBM cells alone
and HUVEC cells (co-culture) to confirm the role of GBM cells in the
formation of mosaic vessels in normoxic conditions. Interestingly, tumor
cells are incorporated into the tubes formed by HUVEC cells. We found a
higher number of complete tube like structures with AAT treated tumor
cells as compared to control. Cytokine array with the condition media
from tumor cells treated with AAT showed a significant upregulation in
the levels of IL8. We observed a significant increase in the CXCR1+ and
CXCR2+ endothelial-like GBM cells following treatment with AAT. Ongoing
investigations are focused on study of IL8-CXCR1/2 pathway in VM
regulation using loss or gain of function approaches. The study will
identify critical mediators of VM in GBM. In clinics, discovering novel
targets causing VM associated therapy resistance is essential for
identifying subset of patients that could be treated with alternate
regimens.


