Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delta-tocotrienol chemosensitizes human pancreatic tumor
metastasis to gemcitabine targeting cancer stem cells.


Background: Pancreatic cancer, a lethal malignancy is the fourth leading
cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States. The standard
chemotherapy with gemcitabine is ineffective in patients with metastatic
tumors. Pancreatic cancer stem cells (CSCs) have been implicated in the
development of pancreatic cancer metastasis, resistance to chemotherapy
and its recurrence following surgical extirpation. We have shown that
natural vitamin E δ-tocotrienol is the most bioactive tocotrienols
against pancreatic cancer in vitro as well as in vivo models. The purpose
of this study was to evaluate the chemosensitization of pancreatic tumor
metastasis by δ-tocotrienol to gemcitabine in vitro as well as in vivo.

Methods: In vitro human metastatic pancreatic cancer cells L3.6pl and
pancreatic cancer stem cells (PCSC) were treated with gemcitabine (5 μM)
and δ-tocotrienol (50 μM) alone and in combination. Treated cells used
for epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), migration/invasion,
microsphere/spheroid, and signaling markers assays. PCSC expressing
luciferase was orthotopically implanted into pancreas of Athymic nude
mice (n = 20) and after one week they were randomized into four groups:
1) vehicle control (ethanol extracted olive oil), 2) gemcitabine (100
mg/kg, IP, twice a week), 3) δ-tocotrienol (200 mg/kg, orally twice a
day) and 4) gemcitabine + δ-tocotrienol. The treatment was continued for
4 weeks. The tumor volume, tumor weight, metastasis were recorded.

Results: Gemcitabine slightly inhibited the growth, migration/invasion of
L3.6pl and PCSC in vitro and PCSC tumor growth (tumor volume and weight)
in vivo. δ-tocotrienol significantly inhibited the growth,
microsphere/spheroid, migration/invasion, EMT(E-cadherin to vimentin),
angiogenesis (VEGF), PCSC transcription factors (Nanog, Oct4, and Sox2),
tumor growth and liver/lung metastasis compared to control. The
combination of both drugs synergistically inhibited the cancer and stem
cell growth, EMT, migration/invasion, microsphere/spheroid, metastasis,
angiogenesis, and PCSC transcription factors in vitro as well as in vivo.

Conclusion: Vitamin E δ-tocotrienol chemosensitizes human pancreatic
tumor metastasis to gemcitabine through inhibition of EMT, migration,
invasion, angiogenesis, cancer stem cell self-renewal, tumor growth and
metastasis.


