Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-34a epigenetically silences epithelial-mesenchymal
transitions (EMT)-TFs in metastatic breast cancer cells.


MicroRNA-34a (miR-34a) as key regulator of tumor suppression gene
potentially plays a profound role in the tumorigenesis and progression of
several cancers including breast cancer. In the present study, we
invstigated the expression, targets and functional effects of miR-34a and
its correlation with tumour characteristics and clinical outcome in the
epithelial to mesenchymal transitions (EMT) stage of metastatic breast
cancer (MBC). We focused to analyze EMT-inducing transcription factors
(EMT-TFs)‎‎/miR-34a feedback loop, like TWIST1, SLUG, ZEB1/2, NOTCH1,
on promotes MBC migration, invasion and ‎metastasis. We found that
miR-34a potently inhibits NOTCH1, ZEB1 protein expression activity in
breast cancer cells. Importantly, the miR-34a do not have any inhibitory
effects upon the SLUG and ZEB2. Using quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR and western blot analysis, we showed that average
pre-miR-34a expression is down regulated in human metastatic breast
tissues as compared to normal human breast and negatively correlates with
clinicopathological features of MBC patients. Ectopic expression of
miR-34a in metastatic breast cancer cell-line BT-549 significantly
inhibited cell proliferation, migrations, survival and cell invasion‎,
but no clear effect on cancer cell growth. We provide indication that
these regulatory pathways may stabilize epithelial and ‎mesenchymal
states, individually. ‎We have consequently revealed that miR-34a is
downregulated in MBC tissues and that it suppresses tumor growth by
affecting several malignancy endpoints via downregulation of multiple
EMT-TFs. Mutational or epigenetic inactivation of the EMT-TFs/miR-34a
pathway probably alterations the equilibrium of these regulations toward
EMT and the mesenchymal state and thereby contributes to metastasis. The
results also suggest that miR-34a could serve as a potential therapeutic
agent for MBC. Funding support: This work was supported by the NSFC
(81172049, 81672887), Corresponding author
email:fujunjiang@hotmail.com;fujunjiang@swmu.edu.cn


