Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-treatment with a C1B5 domain peptide of protein kinase Cγ and
a low dose of gemcitabine effectively inhibited pancreatic cancer growth
in mouse peritoneal cavity.


Although the gemcitabine is an effective chemotherapeutic agent for
pancreatic cancer, unacceptable side effects often accompany. Since we
have previously discovered that PKCγ C1B domain peptides effectively
control tumor growth without any side effect (Kawabata et. al, Cancer
Biol Ther, 2012), we sought to examine the efficacy of co-treatment with
this peptide and a low dose of gemcitabine on the growth of pancreatic
cancer. Although individual and co-treatment with C1B5 peptide (1µM) and
gemcitabine (20 nM) weakly inhibited growth of PAN02 murine pancreatic
acinar cell carcinoma in 2D culture, either treatment effectively
attenuated spheroid growth on PAN02 cells in 3D culture with 48.2% and
35.8% inhibition, respectively. Combination treatment with the C1B5
peptide and gemcitabine further attenuated the growth of PAN02 cells
(69.5% inhibition). In mice bearing peritoneal allograft tumors of PAN02
cells (2.5 x 105 cells/mouse), combination treatment with C1B5 peptide at
20 mg/kg (every other day) and gemcitabine 15 mg/kg (every three days)
markedly inhibited tumor growth of PAN02 allografts (94% inhibition) more
than individual treatment with gemcitabine (76% inhibition) or C1B5
peptide (39% inhibition). The tumor growth inhibition by the combination
treatment was similar to the higher dose (50 mg/kg) of gemcitabine alone
treatment. Peritoneal cavity infiltrated neutrophils and granzime B+
lymphocyte numbers were significantly higher in combination treatment
group than in control group. In cell culture study, the treatment with
C1B5 peptide alone (1µM) significantly increased INF-γ, IL-2, and
TNF-α mRNA levels, suggesting that C1B5 peptide directly stimulated
Jurkat cell activation. These studies suggest that stimulation of
leucocyte migration toward cancer tissues and activation of cytotoxic T
cells may play important roles in tumor growth attenuation by the
combination treatment of C1B5 peptide and gemcitabine. Taken together,
the current study suggests that C1B5 peptide offers an effective
combination treatment strategy to reduce side effects associated with
gemcitabine without losing tumoricidal effect of this agent. This work is
supported in part by Kansas State University Johnson Cancer Research
Center, NIH grants P20 GM103418, and Kansas State Bioscience Authority
Collaborative Cancer Research grant.


