Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Scutellaria baicalensis targets the hypoxia-inducible factor-1α
and attenuates ovarian cancer growth.


Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1α), a transcription factor
important for maintaining cellular oxygen homeostasis, is aberrantly
upregulated in many tumors and implicated in angiogenesis, metastasis and
drug resistance. Therefore, developing treatments that target HIF-1α may
be a viable therapeutic approach. For centuries, traditional Chinese
medicine has used herbs, such as Scutellaria baicalensis (SB), as a
natural remedy for tumors. However, the mechanisms by which SB inhibits
tumor growth are not known. We have previously reported that SB inhibits
cancer cell proliferation and targets NF-κB in endometrial and ovarian
cancers and TGF-β in endometrial cancers. In this study, we examined the
effects of SB on HIF-1α protein levels in three ovarian cancer cell
lines, SKOV3, OVCA 429, and OVCA 420, grown under normoxic and hypoxic
conditions. When treated daily with SB, cancer cells showed a decrease in
HIF-1α expression after 48 hours. Investigation into the molecular
mechanisms of SB-induced inhibition revealed a significant reduction of
HIF-1α accumulation in cells treated with cycloheximide, a protein
synthesis inhibitor. Further decrease of HIF-1α accumulation was seen
when cycloheximide was combined with SB. Additionally, SB- induced
HIF-1α proteasomal degradation was prevented by treatment of cells with
proteasomal inhibitor MG132 and chloroquine, lysosome inhibitor,
abrogated SB-induced inhibition of HIF-1α. Activation of PI3K/AKT and
MAPK/ERK is shown in cancers. SB reduced levels of phospho-AKT and
phospho-extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) in ovarian cancer
cells. Furthermore, pretreatment of cells with LY294002 (phosphoinositide
3-kinase inhibitor) and PD98059 (mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase
inhibitor) reduced HIF-1α expression comparable to SB-treated cells.
Hypoxia-induced cisplatin resistance is a major challenge in therapy of
ovarian tumors. SB reduces the proliferation and reverses cisplatin
resistance in ovarian cancer cells by attenuating the expression of
HIF-1α. Taken together, the findings suggest that targeting HIF-1α with
SB could be an effective treatment strategy for ovarian cancer and that
SB can improve the sensitivity of cells to cisplatin.


