Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cell targeted exosomes for the treatment of metastatic
breast cancer.


Introduction: Therapy resistance and metastasis remain the two biggest
challenges of breast cancer that result in a majority of cancer deaths.
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a subpopulation of cancer cells that can
initiate new tumors, remain refractory to conventional therapies, and
spread throughout the body. In order to effectively block metastasis, the
present study aims to develop novel therapeutics that specifically target
breast CSCs and spare normal cells. While nanomedicine represents one of
the promising future directions, it is necessary to overcome the
shortcomings of synthetic nanoparticles, including bio-instability and
off-target toxicity. Here, we aim to bio-engineer the naturally produced
cell-secreted small vesicles, exosomes (~100 nm diameter), for a novel
therapeutic delivery system.

Methods: Exosomes from the human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) were
isolated by differential ultracentrifugation, and characterized by
multiple approaches including transmission EM, Immunoblotting and
immunofluorescence assays to confirm the size, shape and presence of
exosomal markers CD63, CD81 and LAMP2B. Exosomes were engineered to
express a peptide ligand on its surface to specifically recognize and
target CSCs, and the presence of the ligand was confirmed by western
blot, flow cytometry (FCM) and a super resolution confocal laser scanning
microscopy (CLSM, Leica SP8). The CSC targeting efficiency of the
exosomes was evaluated in vitro by FCM and CLSM. Further, the exosomes
were loaded with microRNAs (miR-200, miR-30c), as one of the key factors
that regulate breast CSC functions, by following a novel transfection
technology.

Results: The bio-engineered exosomes specifically target and internalize
into the CSCs compared to normal cells with absent expression of the
ligand-binding protein. The developed exosomes can effectively deliver
candidate miRNAs into the recipient cells and knock down the genes
important for functional CSCs. The in vivo targeting of CSCs and
therapeutic applications of the exosomes using patient-derived
human-in-mouse breast tumor xenograft models are underway.

Conclusion: It is expected that exosome-based miRNA therapeutics will
have high biocompatibility, low toxicity, high specificity, and promising
efficiency in preclinical and clinical applications to reduce breast
cancer metastasis and improve patient survival.


