Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of progesterone receptor through epigenetic regulation is
associated with poor prognosis in multiple solid tumors.


Introduction: As a tumor suppressor in the endometrium, progesterone and
its synthesized analogue progestin have a long history as a treatment for
endometrial cancer. Loss of progesterone receptor (PR) in endometrial
cancer leads to therapeutic failure, and our group has identified several
mechanisms underlying PR loss, most notably epigenetic silencing of PR
transcription. Recently, a Finnish group demonstrated that progestin
therapy in premenopausal women is associated with a lower incidence of
not only endometrial cancer, but also ovarian, pancreatic and lung
cancers. This unexpected protective function of progestin in organs
outside of the reproductive system led us to hypothesize that tumor
progression effects in endometrial, ovarian, pancreatic and lung cancer
is occurs due to the loss of progesterone’s protective effects.

Methods and results: Supporting a potential protective role of
progesterone, we discovered that PR is downregulated in multiple tumors,
including breast, endometrial, ovarian, cervical, pancreatic and lung
cancers, and loss of PR was consistently associated with a poor prognosis
based on analysis of the Oncomine database. Similarly, PR expression was
low in multiple ovarian, pancreatic and lung cancer cells. Mechanistic
studies revealed that PR downregulation was mediated by the
polycomb-repressor complex and DNA methylation, though the precise
mechanism differed among cell lines and cancer types. Treatment with
epigenetic modulators, which are FDA-approved for multiple myeloma,
restored functional PR expression at both the mRNA and protein level and
promoted marked cell death through induction of apoptosis. . Moreover,
overexpression of PR or treatment with epigenetic modulators in
combination with progesterone enhanced this effect, indicating a key
protective role for progesterone signaling through PR.

Conclusion: These data suggest loss of PR may be a general theme for
tumorigenesis or disease progression in multiple tumor types beyond the
classically studied endometrial cancer. In addition, the epigenetic
mechanisms contributing to PR downregulation in endometrial tumors were
recapitulated in other tumor types, including ovarian, pancreatic and
lung tumors. These studies collectively set the stage for use of
progestin therapy in combination with epigenetic modulators, a concept we
term “molecularly enhanced progestin therapy,” as a novel therapeutic
approach for many cancers. This combinatorial strategy has the power to
revitalize the use of epigenetic modulators, which have proved
disappointing in solid tumors, as an approach to resensitize cancer cells
to a tumor suppressor.


