Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumoral synergy of iron chelators and chemotherapies in
triple-negative breast cancer cell lines and patient-derived xenograft.


Introduction: Tumor cells present an iron metabolic disorder with high
proliferation rate, increased iron storage (ferritin and Labile Iron Pool
- LIP) and high sensibility to iron deprivation, which could be a
therapeutic target. Anticancer effect of iron chelators deferoxamine
(DFO) and deferasirox (DFX) has been revealed in several types of
cancers. In breast cancer (BC), the development of new therapeutic
approaches is urgently needed for triple negative (TN) subtype which
presents poor prognosis and lacks targeting therapy. We investigated the
therapeutic potential of iron chelators combined with chemotherapeutic
agents in TNBC cell lines and patient-derived xenografts (PDX).

Methods: Anticancer effects of iron chelators combined with
chemotherapeutic agents (doxorubicin, cisplatin or carboplatin) were
evaluated in vitro in 4 TNBC cell lines by MTT assay, annexin V/PI
staining and assessment of caspase 3/7 activity. Assessment of LIP,
transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1) expression level, Reactive Oxygen Species
(ROS) production and mitochondrial membrane potential variations were
performed by flow cytometry, and ELISA assay for ferritin level. The
activity of DFX alone or combined with doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide (AC)
was tested in the HBCx-10 TNBC PDX selected because of its relapse to AC.
Iron homeostasis, hypoxia and PI3K pathway were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Western-blot in both cell lines and PDX
tumors. In DFX+/-AC treated and untreated tumors, induction of apoptosis
was performed by TUNEL assay and a transcriptome analysis is ongoing.

Results: Iron chelators acted in synergy effect with three chemotherapies
in all cell lines which were tested to inhibit cell proliferation and
induce apoptosis. Chelators increased cytotoxicity until 60% compared to
chemotherapies alone. In all cell lines, chelators treatment increased
TfR1 expression level and decreased LIP and ferritin. Furthermore,
down-regulation of PI3K pathway, hypoxia, mitochondrial membrane
potential, and the production increasing of ROS were observed. In HBCx-10
PDX, a trend for antitumoral activity of DFX alone was observed (p=0.09)
at the end of the experiment (day 81). A significant difference of
Relative Tumor Volume (RTV) was observed since day 18 between the AC
group and the DFX+AC group (tumor growth inhibition: 37 to 61%, tumor
growth delay: 10 to 14 days, 0.005Results: Iron chelators acted in
synergy effect with three chemotherapies in all cell lines which were
tested to inhibit cell proliferation and induce apoptosis. Chelators
increased cytotoxicity until 60% compared to chemotherapies alone. In all
cell lines, chelators treatment increased TfR1 expression level and
decreased LIP and ferritin. Furthermore, down-regulation of PI3K pathway,
hypoxia, mitochondrial membrane potential, and the production increasing
of ROS were observed. In HBCx-10 PDX, a trend for antitumoral activity of
DFX alone was observed (p=0.09) at the end of the experiment (day 81). A
significant difference of Relative Tumor Volume (RTV) was observed since
day 18 between the AC group and the DFX+AC group (tumor growth
inhibition: 37 to 61%, tumor growth delay: 10 to 14 days, 0.005<pResults:
Iron chelators acted in synergy effect with three chemotherapies in all
cell lines which were tested to inhibit cell proliferation and induce
apoptosis. Chelators increased cytotoxicity until 60% compared to
chemotherapies alone. In all cell lines, chelators treatment increased
TfR1 expression level and decreased LIP and ferritin. Furthermore,
down-regulation of PI3K pathway, hypoxia, mitochondrial membrane
potential, and the production increasing of ROS were observed. In HBCx-10
PDX, a trend for antitumoral activity of DFX alone was observed (p=0.09)
at the end of the experiment (day 81). A significant difference of
Relative Tumor Volume (RTV) was observed since day 18 between the AC
group and the DFX+AC group (tumor growth inhibition: 37 to 61%, tumor
growth delay: 10 to 14 days, 0.005<p<0.04). Same as the observing in
vitro, modulations of PI3K pathway and hypoxia are involved in this
antitumoral synergy. Except neutropenia (due to chemotherapy), no other
hematologic toxicity was observed in both AC and DFX+AC groups.

Conclusions: Iron chelators may increase the effectiveness of
conventional chemotherapies for TNBC treatments. This antitumoral synergy
involves PI3K pathway downregulation, ROS production and decrease
mitochondrial membrane potential.


