Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of TpeL, a RAS specific clostridial toxin.


Clostridium perfringes lethal toxin (TpeL) belongs to the family of large
clostridial glycosylating cytotoxins. Clostridial toxins are
glycosyltransferases that modify and deactivate small GTPases of the RHO
and RAS subfamily. TpeL mono-glycosylates in the switch I domain (Thr35)
of RAC and RAS small GTPases. Glycosylation of RAS at Thr35 prevents
binding to the primary effector, RAF kinase and results in a blockade RAS
signal transduction. RAS family proteins function as key regulators of
cell proliferation, differentiation, survival and gene expression.
Moreover, mutations in RAS proteins are highly prevalent in human
cancers. Considering the specificity of TpeL for RAS, we decided to
investigate the biochemical interaction between TpeL and RAS, and
potentially develop tools to disrupt the RAS signaling pathway. In order
to assess the effect of TpeL in vivo, we use RAS-dependent MEFs
expressing different KRAS mutations and BRAF V600E. We expect that
proliferation should be inhibited in MEF cells expressing RAS isoforms,
but MEF cells expressing BRAF V600E should not be affected by any toxin.
We found that TpeL treatment did not affect the viability of the BRAF
V600E cells and only induced toxicity in RAS expressing cells. Consistent
with this result, TpeL treatment inhibited MAPK signal transduction in
the RAS expressing cells, but not in the BRAF V600E cells. Surprisingly,
both cell viability as well as pERK levels remained unaffected in the
KRAS Q61R MEF cells treated with TpeL, suggesting that KRAS Q61R is
resistant to glycosylation. This may be due in part to the relatively
slow intrinsic rate of GTP hydrolysis and very high levels of KRAS-GTP in
KRAS Q61R cells. We also developed and adapted biochemical assays to
study TpeL-KRAS interaction in vitro. Based on Alpha Assay and UDP Glow,
TpeL activity does not appear to be nucleotide specific, in contrast to
previously reported findings. We are currently testing if TpeL RAS
glycosylation is competitive with or is inhibited by other molecules that
bind to switch I, such as the RBD domain of RAF1 or GEF/GAP proteins.
These data may indicate that the lack of activity in KRAS Q61R expressing
MEF cells is due not to the high levels of RAS-GTP, but to the
constitutive binding to effector molecules, which prevent TpeL from
accessing KRAS. We also hope to identify the critical residues required
for TpeL binding and catalysis. By elucidating the mechanism of substrate
binding and substrate specificity we may gain insight into novel binding
pockets that could be exploited therapeutically.


