Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potency of Gp96-Ig/Fc-OX40L cell-based combination vaccine in
cancer immunotherapy.


The breakthrough discoveries of checkpoint inhibitors in the field of
tumor immunology have driven the clinical success of immunotherapies for
cancer, despite their beneficial efficacy in only a small portion of
patients. This is due in part to immuno-evasive mechanisms and the
inability of the immune system to recognize tumor antigens as foreign.

As a therapeutic approach to effectively present these tumor antigens in
order to elicit an anti-tumor immune response, we previously designed and
characterized an allogenic, gp96-Ig secreting, cell-based vaccine
(ImPACT); currently being assessed in a phase II study in non-muscle
invasive bladder cancer and a phase Ib study in non-small cell lung
cancer – the latter, in combination with the PD-1 antagonist Nivolumab.

We recently characterized a ‘next-generation’ vaccine (ComPACT) that
combines the tumor antigen chaperone Gp96-Ig along with the T cell
costimulator Fc-OX40L, which are both secreted from the same cell (Fromm
et. al. Cancer Immunology Research. 2016). In preclinical assays, ComPACT
is effective at stimulating CD4+ and CD8+ antigen-specific T cell
expansion, the programing of a durable memory T cell phenotype, and the
elimination of melanoma and colon tumors. This anti-tumor efficacy is
enhanced when ComPACT is combined with checkpoint inhibition (anti-PD1 or
anti-PDL1).

To support manufacturing and clinical efforts of both ImPACT and ComPACT,
in anticipation of phase III expansion and/or new trial initiation, we
have developed novel potency assays to quantify the biologically active
form of Gp96-Ig and the in vitro activity of Fc-OX40L on T cell
costimulation.

It has been shown that gp96 can interact with toll-like receptors (TLR)
and that this interaction results in the activation of the NF-κB
pathway. Since THP1 cells express abundant TLR2/4, we engineered a THP1
cell line to express luciferase that is regulated by NF-κB response
elements. Furthermore, we utilized the human T cell line; Jurkat, as host
cells in which we also express NF-κB-luciferase, to quantify Fc-OX40L
costimulation. Jurkat/NF-κB-luciferase cells primed with either CD3/CD28
or TNFα, and subsequently cultured with ComPACT-secreted Fc-OX40L,
results in a dose dependent increase in NF-κB (luciferase) expression.

Our current data in both assays shows a linear correlation with the input
of Gp96-Ig and Fc-OX40L, and may serve as an effective potency assay to
facilitate the manufacturing of our vaccine product as it transitions
into more advanced cancer immunotherapy clinical studies.


