Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of HER3 signaling mediated PD-L1 regulation in triple
negative breast cancer.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is still difficult to treat partly
because of lacking specific target. Although 50-70% of TNBC expresses
EGFR, it is less sensitive to the treatment of EGFR inhibition for TNBC
as compared to the efficacy of HER2 inhibition for HER2-positive breast
cancer. Several phase II study on EGFR blockade treatment has been
reported, however it has not applied in a clinical setting yet. It was
reported that residual tumors after treatment with EGFR-targeted
antibodies showed increased HER3 abundance leading to EGFR/HER3 receptor
dimerization. The signals of HER3/EGFR dimerization to PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathways are thought to be involved in cancer survival, proliferation and
also up-regulation of PD-L1 expression. Thus, we hypothesized that
up-regulation of HER3 signal caused by anti-cancer treatment might induce
PD-L1 expression and inhibit host anti-tumor immunity. In this study, we
tested the relationships between HER3 signal and PD-L1 expression by
using three basal-like breast cancer cell line; MDA-MB-231, HCC70, and
MDA-MB-468. MDA-MB-231 is HER3-negative, and HCC70 and MDA-MB-468 are
HER3-positive cell lines. We added neureglin 1 (NRG1: HER3 ligand) to
those three cell lines and analyzed PD-L1 expression of protein by
flowcytometry and mRNA by qRT-PCR. Both protein and mRNA level of PD-L1
on HCC70 and MDA-MB-468 treated with NRG1 are increased as compared with
those without NRG1 while there was no change of PD-L1 expression of
MDA-MB-231 either with or without NRG1. In order to confirm the
significance of potential treatment target of HER3, we evaluated HER3
expression in biopsy samples by immunohistochemistry before neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (NAC) including all phenotypes. Thirteen pathological
complete response (pCR) cases after NAC and 6 non pCR cases were
included. We scored the HER3 stainability from 0 to 3 and found that non
pCR cases showed significantly higher HER3 score than pCR cases (84.6%
and 33% respectively, p=0.0149).

Although further study is needed, these results suggest that HER3 signal
possibly regulates PD-L1 expression in HER3-positive basal-like breast
cancer and treatment with anti-HER3 targeting therapy combination with an
immune checkpoint inhibition therapy for HER3 positive NAC resistant
patients might be warranted.


