Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blocking FSTL1 ameliorates immunity against osteosarcoma.


Purposes: Osteosarcoma is a rare malignant tumor of bone in children and
young adults, and it is very hard to successfully control the systemic
metastases and life-threatening health problems more than a decade after
the completion of the care due to the intensiveness of the conventional
treatments including surgical resection of the primary tumor and
chemotherapy. Therefore, non/low-toxic but advanced treatments have been
expected for a long while. We recently found that a BMP family FSTL1 is
highly and functionally expressed in murine and human osteosarcoma cell
lines, and systemically expands pluripotent mesenchymal stem/stromal
cells (MSCs), which play a central role in amplification of tumor
heterogeneity that is consequence of reciprocal evolution together with
the tumor microenvironment, including induction of immune suppression and
dysfunction, desmoplasia, and angiogenesis. FSTL1 and its induced MSCs
also directly confer higher invasive and metastatic properties on tumor
cells leading to further cancer progression. In this study, we evaluated
antitumor efficacy induced by anti-FSTL1 mAb on murine osteosarcoma
models, and also compared the therapeutic efficacy with those induced by
immune checkpoint inhibitory mAbs (ICIs).

Results: We used two syngeneic tumor models that were subcutaneously
implanted with murine osteosarcoma NHOS cells in BALB/c mice, or LM3
cells in C3H mice. These mice were intraperitoneally injected with
anti-FSTL1 mAbs (10mg/kg) twice on day 5 and day 8 after tumor
implantation, and were sacrificed for immunological analysis of
tumor-infiltrating cells, spleen cells and bone marrow cells on day 15.
In both osteosarcoma models, CD45- MSCs as well as other
immunosuppressive CD4+Foxp3+ Tregs and CD11b+Gr1+ MDSCs systemically
increased, indicating impairment of antitumor immunity in the mice.
Treatment with the anti-FSTL1 mAb significantly induced potent
tumor-specific CTLs through reduction of MSCs, resulting in tumor-free in
some of the treated mice. Although the antitumor efficacy was similar to
those induced by ICIs, the mode of action was totally distinct because
MSCs and the MSC-inducible exhausted CD8+PD1+Tim3+ T cells were reduced
only in the anti-FSTL1-treated mice, but not in the ICI-treated mice.

Conclusions: These results suggest that blocking FSTL1 properly
reprograms immunity toward elimination of osteosarcoma by reducing the
tumor-supportive MSCs. Anti-FSTL1 mAb may be a promising drug for
treating osteosarcoma more moderately but effectively in clinical
settings.


