Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell lineage-oriented clinical sequencing unveils distinct clonal
ontogeny of acute myeloid leukemia with myelodysplasia-related changes.


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is characterized by unregulated clonal
expansion and maturation arrest of myeloid committed progenitors (MP).
AML generally represents de novo onset or evolves from preceding
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), which is defined by refractory
cytopenias, clonal hematopoiesis, and/or multi-lineage dysplasia. The WHO
classification 2008 includes this entity as “AML with
myelodysplasia-related changes (AML-MRC)”, and currently, diagnosis of
AML-MRC is based on either previous history of MDS, multi-lineage
dysplasia, or MDS-related cytogenetic abnormality. However, AML-MRC often
represents de novo onset without these MDS-compatible clinical features.
Considering that AML-MRC exhibits rather poor prognosis with
refractoriness to conventional chemotherapy against AML, more accurate
and objective diagnostic approach is requisite to unveil hidden “MDS
signatures” in patients with apparently de novo AML. A certain set of
gene mutations is specific and recurrent in MDS. Given the pre-existing
“MDS signatures”, the founder gene mutations might be detected in not
only blast cells but also neutrophils and/or T cells in AML-MRC. To test
this hypothesis, we performed FACS sorting of neutrophils, T cells, and
blasts fractions, respectively, followed by mutation screening using
targeted deep sequencing, namely, cell lineage-oriented sequencing (CLS).
Genomic DNA both from each cell fraction and buccal swab was subjected to
screening mutations in 54 genes which are tightly involved in MDS and
AML. Pair-end deep sequencing was performed on an Illumina MiSeq, using
library prepared by TruSight Myeloid Panel (Illumina, San Diego, CA).
Bioinformatic analysis was performed by in-house pipeline. We performed
CLS of clinically diagnosed AML-MRC (n=7), suspected AML-MRC (n=2), de
novo AML (AML with t(15;17) or AML with inv16, n=4), MDS (RAEB-1 and
RAEB-II, n=3), and familial MDS (n=1). As expected, in a familial MDS
case, overlapping germline RUNX1 driver mutation was demonstrated in
granulocytes, blast cells and T cells, supporting that it would be
originated from a hematopoietic stem cell. Notably, in MDS, AML-MRC, and
suspected AML-MRC cases with no germ-line mutations, the founder
mutations present in neutrophils were also retained in the AML blast
cells, irrespective of a history of MDS, suggesting that these are
derived from a myeloid progenitor cell. In marked contrast, there were no
overlapping driver mutations between blast cell and neutrophil fractions
in de novo AML characterized by recurrent chromosomal abnormalities. In
summary, CLS revealed that founder mutations are shared by neutrophils
and AML blast cells in AML-MRC, but not in de novo AML. Although our data
should be validated in a larger cohort of AML cases, CLS is a promising
approach to molecular diagnosis of latent AML-MRC which require distinct
therapeutic options from de novo AML.


