Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Allogeneic EGFRvIII chimeric antigen receptor T cells for
treatment of glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a highly aggressive form of brain tumors
with a 5-year survival rate of less than 10%. Standard-of-care combining
radiation therapy with temozolomide only yields a median survival of 14.6
months and more effective therapeutic options to extend patient lives are
urgently needed. EGFR variant III (EGFRvIII) is a tumor specific mutant
of EGFR found in 25-30% of GBM but not expressed in healthy tissues.
EGFRvIII is formed by an in-frame deletion of exons 2-7 of the wild-type
EGFR which leads to removal of 267 amino acids in the extracellular
domain of the receptor. The truncated receptor loses its ability to bind
ligands but acquires constitutive kinase activity. The lack of normal
tissue expression makes EGFRvIII an ideal target for developing CAR T
therapy. Most CAR T therapies in clinical development use the patients’
own T cells for CAR T manufacturing. Our approach is to develop an
“off-the-shelf” CAR-T treatment for GBM using healthy donor T cells
with the TCR (T-cell receptor) disrupted to prevent graft-versus-host
disease. This allogeneic approach could circumvent challenges faced by
some patients due to limited availability and quality of their own T
cells and rapid progress of their diseases, and has the potential to
reduce the high cost associated with autologous CART therapy. Using phage
panning and hybridoma approaches, we generated a series of humanized and
fully human EGFRvIII antibodies with a wide range of affinities.
Recombinant EGFRvIII protein binding by Biacore and FACS assays using
EGFRvIII and EGFR wild-type expressing cells demonstrated that these
antibodies are highly specific for EGFRvIII. The antibodies were
converted to ScFvs and cloned into a CAR vector. Subsequently, EGFRvIII
CARs were transduced into primary human T cells for functional studies.
We developed a series of assays to evaluate CAR expression, degranulation
activity and target dependent cytotoxicity. Our goal is to select CAR
candidate that is safe, persistent and has potent target dependent
cytotoxicity.


