Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel orally available sub-nanomolar potent and selective
checkpoint kinase 1 inhibitor CASC-578 is highly active in mantle cell
lymphoma as a single agent and in combination with Wee1 inhibition.


Background: Checkpoint kinase 1 (Chk1) is a serine/threonine protein
kinase that regulates cell division by arresting progression in the S &
G2 phases of the cell cycle in response to genotoxic stress.
Pharmacological inhibition of Chk1 uncouples the completion of DNA
replication from G2/M phase transition in tumor cells that have impaired
DNA damage response networks, resulting in DNA damage induction, mitotic
catastrophe and cell death. These properties make Chk1 inhibition an
attractive therapeutic approach as a single agent, or to enhance the
efficacy of other cancer drugs that target DNA damage response pathways.

Methods and Results: This report highlights the activity of the orally
bioavailable, selective, small molecule Chk1 inhibitor, CASC-578, in
multiple mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) models in vitro and in tumor mouse
xenograft studies. MCL have the common genetic biomarker
t(11;14)(q13;q32), a chromosomal translocation leading to the
constitutive expression of the oncogene CCND1 which encodes cyclin D1, a
cell cycle-regulating protein. This genotypic characteristic has been
observed in the clear majority of patients with MCL in the clinic and may
provide a rationale for sensitivity to Chk1 inhibition. Consistent with
this idea, CASC-578 demonstrated remarkable potency as a single agent in
blocking the proliferation of MCL cell lines in vitro, with an average
IC50 of 61 nM. Treatment with CASC-575 as a single agent resulted in the
induction of DNA damage, as measured by phosphorylated histone H2AX and
activation of apoptosis, as measured by cleaved caspase. In a JEKO-1
xenograft tumor study, CASC-578 as a single agent completely regressed
subcutaneously implanted tumors in the majority of mice after oral drug
administration using 20 mg/kg daily or when dosed on an intermittent
schedule at 25 mg/kg, with minimal effects on body weight. In addition to
the observed single agent activity of CASC-578, the combination of
CASC-578, and the Wee1 inhibitor AZD-1775, was highly synergistic in MCL
cell lines including JEKO-1, REC-1, Z-138 and MAVER-1 in vitro. CASC-578
was also highly potent as a single agent, and in combination with
AZD-1775, in blocking the proliferation of a variety of leukemia derived
cell lines in vitro. Taken together, these data support the advancement
of CASC-578 into clinical development as a potential therapeutic agent
for the treatment of MCL, as well as other hematological malignancies.


