Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Netropsin blocks EMT of murine BRAF mutated melanoma cells.


Melanoma is the most aggressive and deadliest type of skin cancer due to
its high propensity to metastasize. Despite current progress in the
identification of promising drugs for treating melanoma, drug resistance
has emerged as a serious issue indicating that novel therapeutic
strategies may be required. It is well documented that the process of
converting the epithelial tumorigenic cell to a mesenchymal phenotype,
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), is responsible for
conferring an invasive phenotype to cancer cells. An EMT-like process has
been shown to occur during melanoma progression. High-mobility-protein
AT-hook 2 (HMGA2) is a multi-function transcription factor linked to
oncogenesis and EMT in a variety of cancers. HMGA2 is a small DNA-binding
protein with three “AT-hook” DNA-binding motifs that specifically
recognize the minor groove of AT-rich DNA sequences. HMGA2 is
significantly upregulated in human primary melanoma and metastases,
including those with BRAF mutations. We accessed the potential
application of netropsin, a potent inhibitor of HMGA2-DNA interactions,
as an EMT blocking agent of BRAF mutated melanoma cells. Three murine
melanoma cells lines that carry mutations in the BRAF gene and show
resistance to vemurafenib (D4M, YUMM1.1, and YUMM1.7) were used. Cells
were treated with EMT Inducing Media Supplement along with Netropsin and
the expression of E-cadherin as well as their migratory behavior were
evaluated. Netropsin treatment of EMT induced cells was not cytotoxic,
prevented changes in cell morphology, maintained high levels of
E-cadherin expression and decreased migratory behavior. All three cell
lines express HMGA2 which continues to be expressed in the tumors
resulting from subcutaneous injections in mice. YUMM1.1 cells showed the
highest levels of expression of HMGA2 amongst the three cell lines.
Interestingly, in our preliminary study only YUMM1.1-derived tumors
generated overt metastasis in the lung 30 days after the injections.
Altogether our data showed that Netropsin is capable of blocking EMT of
murine BRAF mutated melanoma cells. The results of this study will
contribute to the development of strategies to prevent EMT that may
result in the implementation of more effective therapies to treat
melanoma.


