Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediagnostic peripheral blood DNA methylation and lung cancer
survival.


Epigenetic regulation plays a critical role in cell and tissue
development and differentiation, is a known mechanism of carcinogenesis,
and is altered by various exposures including cigarette smoking and age.
Peripheral blood methylation represents a combination of these factors as
well as blood cell type distributions that reflect underlying
immunophenotypes. Hematopoiesis is programmed through epigenetic changes,
and blood cell type-specific methylation markers can be leveraged to
“fingerprint” cell type distributions. We examined associations
between pre-diagnostic methylation markers in peripheral blood with
overall lung cancer survival in very heavy smokers from the Beta Carotene
and Retinol Efficacy Trial (CARET). CARET was a randomized,
double-blinded, placebo-controlled chemoprevention trial of daily
β-carotene and retinyl palmitate in smokers with ≥20 pack-years, and
smokers who were occupationally exposed to asbestos. Methylation was
successfully measured using the Illumina 850K EPIC BeadArray on average 5
years prior to diagnosis for 331 lung cancer cases, of whom 253 died
during follow up (median survival 329 days). Cox proportional hazards
regression models were used to examine the relationship between
CpG-specific methylation and survival. Models were adjusted for age at
blood draw, sex, race, enrollment year, placebo/active intervention,
asbestos exposure, current/former smoking and time since quit, pack
years, average number of cigarettes per day and histologic type, and were
fit separately depending on the time between blood draw and lung cancer
diagnosis: 0-3 years (n = 107), 3-5 years (n = 77), and 5+ years (n =
147). After adjusting for multiple comparisons by computing the false
discovery rate (FDR) q-value, there were 1,028, 296, and 4 CpGs that were
statistically significantly associated with survival (q ≤0.010) for
samples collected 0-3 years, 3-5 years, and 5+ years before diagnosis,
respectively. After controlling for blood cell type distributions, much
larger numbers of CpGs were statistically significantly associated with
survival: 10,481, 456, and 257, respectively. The top canonical pathways
of CpGs identified in samples drawn 0-3 years prior to diagnosis included
PTEN signaling (p = 1.1E-5) and PI3K signaling in B lymphoctyes (p =
3.7E-5). We observed that the number of methylated CpGs in peripheral
blood that are associated with subsequent survival increases dramatically
when measured closer to lung cancer diagnosis. As well, we observed that
the number of methylated markers is increased by controlling for
immunophenotype. Our study provides evidence that peripheral blood
methylation markers measured many years prior to diagnosis may be
associated with poor lung cancer survival, and that increasing changes in
methylation over time may also be associated. This points to the critical
role of the immune system, even prior to diagnosis, in influencing cancer
outcomes.


