Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Wnt signature of melanoma cells predicts their invasiveness,
autophagy activity, and their response to pharmacologically mediated
autophagy inhibition.


Melanoma is the most aggressive type of skin cancer and the leading cause
of death from skin cancer. As the incidence of melanoma continues to
increase, it is crucial to investigate the cellular and molecular
mechanisms that lead to invasion and metastasis. High autophagy has been
shown to correlate with melanoma tumor aggressiveness and poor survival
in patients, and is a common mechanism of resistance to therapy.
Autophagy inhibition leads to reduced levels in Wnt5A in a breast cancer
model, suggesting a cross-talk between Wnt5A and autophagy in cancer. Our
laboratory showed that Wnt5A is a driver of invasion and metastasis in
melanoma. β catenin, a canonical Wnt mediator, has been shown to
negatively regulate autophagy in a colorectal cancer model. Given that
Wnt5A downregulates β catenin, we hypothesized that autophagy promotes
melanoma tumor aggressiveness through the regulation of Wnt signaling and
that in turn the Wnt signaling status of melanoma cells affects their
autophagy activity. Our results demonstrate that melanoma cells with high
Wnt5A and low β catenin have higher autophagy levels compared to less
aggressive melanoma cells that have low Wnt5A and high β catenin. To
determine whether there is a feedback loop between Wnt signaling and
autophagy, we inhibited autophagy in invasive melanoma cells using
lentivirus-mediated shATG5 knockdown and evaluated the effects of
autophagy inhibition on Wnt5A and β catenin expression. We found that
the inhibition of autophagy results in a decrease in Wnt5A and an
increase in β catenin. Our data also demonstrate that the Wnt signature
of melanoma cells greatly affects their response to Lys05-mediated
autophagy inhibition both in vitro and in vivo. Wnt5A decreased
sensitivity to autophagy inhibition while β catenin increased
sensitivity to Lys05 both in vitro and in vivo. Pre-clinical models and
clinical trials demonstrate a potential of autophagy inhibition for
melanoma therapy; however, the clinical effects are not consistent and do
not yield significant anti-tumor effects. This study will provide a
rationale for the development of therapeutic strategies that more
efficiently target autophagy in aggressive melanoma by taking into
account the Wnt signaling status of melanoma cells.


