Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cdyl2 is a chromodomain protein involved in the maintenance of
pluripotency of stem cells.


Reader proteins of histone modifications are required to translate the
information of histone marks into the cellular phenotypes, including
pluripotency and malignancy. For example, a reader protein BRD4 has its
target specificity and becomes a target of cancer therapy. Here, we aimed
to identify reader proteins involved in the pluripotency of stem cells.
Using the UCSC database, 11 genes coding chromo- or PHD-domain proteins
were isolated as actively transcribed in mouse ES cells (ESCs). Among the
11 genes, Cdyl2, chromodomain protein Y-like2, was found to be
down-regulated upon ESC differentiation using RT-qPCR. Immunofluorescence
and ChIP assay revealed that Cdyl2 recognized H3K27me3 of the specific
regions, including differentiation-associated genes. Cdyl2-knock-out ESCs
could not survive after differentiation induced by LIF removal or
retinoic acid because of the induction of apoptosis, indicating that
Cdyl2 is important for normal differentiation of ESCs. ESC expressing
exogenous Cdyl2 showed incomplete down-regulation of Oct-4 and Nanog by
retinoic acid, and generated teratomas with an abnormal composition of
three germ layers, showing perturbation of differentiation ability.
Pathologically, aberrant expression of human CDYL2 was observed in breast
cancer cell lines and primary breast cancers. Two breast cancer cell
lines (MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468) expressing exogenous CDYL2 showed
enhanced attachment ability along with the up-regulation of integrin
alpha-6 and integrin beta-1. The population of cancer stem cells, defined
as ALDH positive cells, were increased in CDYL2-expressing MDA-MB-468
cells, showing that human CDYL2 is involved in proliferation of cancer
stem cells. From these data, we conclude that, between self-renewal and
differentiation of stem cells, mouse and human Cdyl2/CDYL2 is necessary
for the implementation of the initial step of differentiation.


