Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BAY 1816032, a novel BUB1 kinase inhibitor with potent antitumor
activity.


The spindle assembly checkpoint represents a highly conserved
surveillance mechanism which safeguards correct chromosome segregation by
delaying anaphase onset until all chromosomes are properly bi-oriented on
the spindle apparatus. Non-catalytic functions of the mitotic kinase BUB1
(budding uninhibited by benzimidazoles 1) were reported to be essential
for spindle assembly checkpoint activation. In contrast, the catalytic
function of BUB1 plays a minor role in spindle assembly checkpoint
activation but is required for chromosome arm resolution and positioning
of the chromosomal passenger complex for resolution of spindle attachment
errors. Here, we disclose for the first time the structure and functional
characterization of a novel, first-in-class Bub1 kinase inhibitor.
Medicinal chemistry efforts resulted in BAY 1816032 featuring high
potency, long target residence time and good oral bioavailablity. It
inhibits BUB1 enzymatic activity with an IC50 of 7 nanomol/L, shows slow
dissociation kinetics resulting in a long target residence time of 87
min, and an excellent selectivity on a panel of 395 kinases.
Mechanistically BAY 1816032 abrogated nocodazole-induced Thr-120
phosphorylation of the major BUB1 target protein histone H2A in HeLa
cells with an IC50 of 29 nanomol/L, induced lagging chromosomes and
mitotic delay. Persistent lagging chromosomes and missegregation were
observed upon combination with low concentrations of paclitaxel. Single
agent BAY 1816032 inhibited proliferation of various tumor cell lines
with a median IC50 of 1.4 micromol/L and demonstrated synergy or
additivity with paclitaxel or docetaxel in almost all cell lines
evaluated (minimal combination index 0.3). In tumor xenograft studies BAY
1816032 only marginally inhibited tumor growth as single agent upon oral
administration, however, upon combination with paclitaxel or docetaxel a
strong and statistically significant reduction of tumor size as compared
to the respective monotherapy was observed. Intratumoral levels of
phospho-Thr120 H2A were found to be strongly reduced, and no hints on
drug-drug interactions were found. In line with the good tolerability in
xenograft studies, no relevant findings from non-GLP 2 weeks
toxicological studies in rat and dog were reported. Our findings validate
the innovative concept of interference with mitotic checkpoints and
justify clinical proof of concept studies evaluating BUB1 inhibitor BAY
1816032 in combination with taxanes in order to enhance their efficacy
and potentially overcome resistance.


