Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunodeficient mice differentially sensitize to estrogen and
exhibit severe estrogen-related adverse effects in orthotopic breast
cancer model.


Estrogen-induced growth induction and stimulation of hormone receptor
positive breast cancer is commonly acknowledged and thus external
estrogen stimulus is used in animal models to support and accelerate
growth of the tumors. However, estrogen is known to have adverse effects
in the animals and the experiments may have to be preliminary terminated
due to animal welfare issues. The aim of the study was to characterize
and to compare estrogen caused adverse effects in athymic nude and NOG
mice in orthotopic breast cancer model.

Athymic nude (Hsd:Athymic Nude-Foxn 1nu) and CIEA NOG (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid
Il2rgtm1Sug/JicTac, provided by Taconic Biosciences) were implanted with
estrogen (17β-estradiol, E2) releasing hormone rods (5 µg/day) prior to
cancer cell inoculation. 5x106 BT-474 (ER, PR and HER+) human breast
cancer cells were inoculated to left inguinal mammary fat pad of the mice
and the tumor growth was monitored by measuring the tumor volumes twice a
week by caliber. The clinical condition and weight development of the
mice was carefully monitored with special attention to E2-caused adverse
effects. If the mice met the termination criteria (i.e. significant
weight loss or general worsening of the overall health) they were
sacrificed individually before the intended end of the study.

Nude mice exhibited severe estrogen-caused adverse effects as no adverse
effect were observed in NOG mice. Most common adverse effect was redness
and skin lesions in the urogenital area observed in 63% of the animals.
More severe effects were observed in the lower urinary track including
urinary stones and bladder obstruction in 67% of the mice. Also internal
effects were observed including appearance change in kidneys and spleen
in size and color. Due to severity of these effects 50% of the mice had
to preliminary sacrificed. Tumor take (100% vs 85%) and final tumor
volumes in average (110 mm2 vs 120 mm2) were comparable between nude and
NOG mice.

A clear mouse strain specific impact was observed in the study. Nude mice
sensitize to estrogen and exhibit severe estrogen-related adverse effects
as no effects were observed in NOG mice. In breast cancer studies where
E2 supplementation is needed for sufficient tumor growth, the choice of
mouse strain should be carefully considered. Special attention should be
paid to possible adverse effects keeping in mind the animal welfare
issues.


