Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased sensitivity for detection of oncogenic mutations present
in circulating cell-free tumor DNA.


Molecular pathways involved in tumor survival and progression are often
activated by genetic alterations, and anticancer agents specifically
targeting many oncogenic pathways have entered clinical trials. Precision
cancer medicine takes advantage of genomic technologies (e.g., massively
parallel sequencing, MPS) to perform robust tumor genomic profiling in
the clinic, enabling identification of “druggable” mutations. To
date, the vast majority of genomic profiling has been performed on DNA
extracted from solid tumor biopsies. However, liquid biopsies offer
advantages over solid tumor biopsies; chief among them are their
non-invasive nature and quick turn-around time when assessed using MPS.
Furthermore, liquid biopsies allow for sequential analysis throughout a
course of therapy permitting real-time monitoring of treatment effects on
tumor expression and subsequent surveillance for development of new
oncogenic alterations.

Circulating cell-free tumor DNA (cfDNA) derived from plasma represents a
convenient assay material that has been effectively analyzed for
oncogenic mutations in specific forms of cancer such as non-small cell
lung cancer. However, introduction cfDNA for clinical genotyping is
limited by sensitivity requirements. cfDNA is typically present at 20-100
ng/mL of plasma, of which the cancer fraction can be below 1%. Error
rates associated with PCR amplification and base calling (Illumina HiSeq
platform) are approximately 2%, preventing confidence in rare variants
with allele fractions (AF) at or below that percentage. We conducted an
evaluation of commercially available kits to determine 1) kit sensitivity
and if necessary 2) modify the protocol to achieve sensitivity of
Circulating cell-free tumor DNA (cfDNA) derived from plasma represents a
convenient assay material that has been effectively analyzed for
oncogenic mutations in specific forms of cancer such as non-small cell
lung cancer. However, introduction cfDNA for clinical genotyping is
limited by sensitivity requirements. cfDNA is typically present at 20-100
ng/mL of plasma, of which the cancer fraction can be below 1%. Error
rates associated with PCR amplification and base calling (Illumina HiSeq
platform) are approximately 2%, preventing confidence in rare variants
with allele fractions (AF) at or below that percentage. We conducted an
evaluation of commercially available kits to determine 1) kit sensitivity
and if necessary 2) modify the protocol to achieve sensitivity of <= 1%
AF.

To evaluate kit sensitivity gDNA from a translocation positive cell line
was mixed at 5% and 20% with normal cell line gDNA. Libraries were
prepared for each percent mix using 10 ng of input. Raw mean target
coverage (MTC) was similar for evaluated kits (MTC, 250-300X); Percent
Duplication, ~34%. Comparison of 20% and 100% translocation samples
showed similar levels of unique single nucleotide variant (SNV)
detection. However, 5% mixtures showed a ~10 fold reduction in SNV
detection compared to both 20% and 100% translocation samples.
Furthermore, translocation rearrangement was only detectable in one third
of the 5% translocation samples. Increased sensitivity requires unique
molecular barcodes coupled with refinements in bioinformatics analysis
for clinical implementation of these assays.


