Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophages in secondary lymphoid organs regulate t cell tolerance
and immunosurveillance in pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a deadly disease that shows
striking resistance to standard therapies. Immunotherapy is an exciting
new treatment strategy for PDAC, but has yet to reproducibly demonstrate
clinical efficacy. This finding may reflect poor effector T cell
infiltration into PDAC or mechanisms of peripheral T cell tolerance. We
hypothesize that successful immunotherapy in PDAC will require strategies
that reverse elements of innate immunity that regulate T cell tolerance.
This hypothesis is based on our prior studies in the
KrasG12D/+;Trp53R172H/+;Pdx-1-Cre (KPC) mouse model of PDAC where
macrophages residing outside of the tumor microenvironment were found to
regulate the efficacy of a vaccine strategy involving the combination of
chemotherapy and a CD40 agonist (FGK45). Specifically, we found that
depletion of peripheral phagocytes using clodronate-encapsulated
liposomes (CEL) was necessary for gemcitabine chemotherapy and a CD40
agonist to induce productive anti-tumor T cell immunity against
spontaneously arising PDAC tumors in the KPC model.

We now investigate the mechanism by which CEL-depleted phagocytes
regulate T cell tolerance in PDAC using the KPC mouse model and an
orthotopic implantation model. We found that CEL depletes macrophages in
the spleen and abdominal lymph nodes, thereby reversing the pathologic
accumulation of macrophages in these secondary lymphoid organs that is
induced by PDAC tumors. CEL targeted two macrophage subsets in the lymph
node, CD11b+CD169+F4/80neg subcapsular sinus macrophages (SSM) and
CD11b+CD169+F4/80+ medullary sinus macrophages (MSM). These macrophage
populations may be exposed to tumor-derived antigens and apoptotic cell
vesicles entering the lymph node, and have been previously identified as
central orchestrators of tolerance in autoimmune models. We found that
both fluorescently-labeled liposomes and OVA-FITC peptide injected into
the peritoneal cavity were specifically targeted to SSM and MSM with
little uptake by dendritic cells (DC). In contrast, depletion of these
first-line phagocytes by CEL shifted the cellular uptake of these model
antigens increasing uptake by CD11b+CD11c+ DC which are more efficient in
antigen presentation and show increased expression of co-stimulatory
molecules after FGK45 treatment. Using an orthotopic model of PDAC, we
then determined that CEL can enhance the T cell stimulatory capacity of
gemcitabine chemotherapy in combination with FGK45 as seen by a
significant increase in CD38, CD44, CD69 and PD-1 expression on CD4 and
CD8 T cells in secondary lymphoid organs.

Together, our findings suggest that tumor-derived antigens may be
sequestered by tolerogenic macrophages in peritumoral lymph nodes that
act to impair optimal induction of T cell responses. Thus, strategies
aimed at disrupting the tolerogenic functions of these macrophages may
offer a novel approach for improving immunotherapy in PDAC.


