Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical activity of novel antibody-drug conjugates with
pyrrole-based kinesin spindle protein inhibitors targeting different
tumor antigens.


Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) are promising agents that are developed
for targeted delivery of cytotoxic payloads to tumor cells. ADCs share a
common design of antibody, linker, and cytotoxic payload. Despite
significant efforts, the number of available payload classes with a
differentiated mode-of-action that can successfully be employed to
generate antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) is still rather limited. So far,
only ADCs with microtubule depolymerizing or DNA binding payloads have
been approved. The identification of ADC payload classes with a novel
mode-of-action will increase therapeutic options and potentially help to
overcome resistance. Inhibitors of the kinesin spindle protein
(KSP/Eg5/KIF11) have generated interest due to their high anti-tumor
activity. However, the transfer of the potency of small molecule KSP
inhibitors (KSPis) to highly efficient clinical regimens with a
sufficient therapeutic window remains challenging. Through the
conjugation of a novel pyrrole subclass of KSPis to antibodies targeting
different cancer antigens, we generated a panel of ADCs and characterized
them both in vitro and in vivo. ADCs targeting either EGFR or TWEAKR/Fn14
showed strong and specific internalization and displayed specific and
potent anti-proliferative efficacy in vitro. In cytotoxicity assays,
these ADCs exhibited sub-nanomolar potency in antigen-positive cancer
cell lines (EGFR/TWEAKR-pos. NCI-H292; TWEAKR-pos. BxPC3, LoVo) and more
than 100-fold selectivity versus non-targeted control-ADC containing the
same linker and the same payload. Furthermore, selective anti-tumor
efficacy of EGFR- and TWEAKR-KSPi-ADCs was demonstrated in vivo using
both cancer cell line-derived models of NSCLC (NCI-H292), urothelial cell
carcinoma (UCC) (KU-19-19), and renal cell carcinoma (A498), as well as
in the TWEAKR-positive patient-derived xenograft UCC model BFX469. At
doses of 5-10 mg/kg qw or bw potent anti-tumor efficacy with
treated-to-control ratios (T/C) between 0.16 to 0.28 as well as complete
regressions were observed. In summary, KSP inhibitors have been
established as a promising new payload class allowing the generation of
highly potent and selective ADCs for the treatment of solid tumors.


