Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intraoperative assessment of breast tumor margins using multimodal
photoacoustic tomography (MarginPAT).


Radical mastectomies are progressively becoming a surgery of the past.
Women today are increasingly opting for lumpectomies, a less invasive
treatment option. Clinical data has shown no difference in survival or
clinical outcomes between the two surgical groups in early stages of
breast cancer. There is, however, an undesired outcome yet to be
adequately addressed. Lumpectomies have, in some cases, failed to remove
marginal malignant tumor cells left as a product from surgery.

Following surgery, tumor biopsies are analyzed for marginal tumor cells.
Biopsies are cut in, fixed, processed in a tissue processor, embedded
into a paraffin block, and stained with H&E. After processing, presence
of marginal cancerous tissue is determined by a pathologist. This process
takes 3-5 days, ultimately requiring the patient to undergo reoperation
if a positive margin is discovered. Presently, the reoperation rate is
20-30%.

A device capable of imaging removed tissue to determine remaining
marginal tumor during surgery would greatly reduce the reoperation rate.
Multiple intraoperative imaging tools existing or are emerging for breast
tumor margin assessment. Current devices fail to meet acceptable clinical
specifications due to either long procedure time (15 mins+), or low
sensitivity (~70%), and low specificity (~68%). An unmet need exists in
developing an intraoperative margin assessment device that is rapid,
sensitive, capable of measuring the entire tissue surface, and images a
depth of 2mm+.

The MarginPAT device presents a multi-modal photoacoustic/ultrasound
imaging system for rapid and highly sensitive breast cancer margin
assessment. After surgical removal of tumor, tissue is inserted, via
cartridge, into MarginPAT for imaging. An automatic scan (The MarginPAT
device presents a multi-modal photoacoustic/ultrasound imaging system for
rapid and highly sensitive breast cancer margin assessment. After
surgical removal of tumor, tissue is inserted, via cartridge, into
MarginPAT for imaging. An automatic scan (<3 mins) provides 3D images of
the excised tissue, providing margin status. Such immediate feedback
allows the surgeon to re-operate immediately or allow the patient to
return home based on the marginal results from MarginPAT.

Our preliminary study on 40 patient samples, showed 93% sensitivity and
90% specificity in margin assessment by precise localization of adipose
tissue using PA imaging and further RF spectrum analysis of ultrasound
signaling. Other than the superior sensitivity and specificity, the
unique features of MarginPAT include deep tissue sensing (>3 mm) and high
surface scanning speed (20 cm2/per min).

These achieved specifications meet the needs of intraoperative margin
assessment, which are expected to surpass similar platforms. More
importantly, MarginPAT supports conventional ultrasound imaging, allowing
for use in ultrasound-guided wire localization. These multimodality
functions allow MarginPAT to be utilized in multiple fields of breast
cancer diseases, another advantage over other platforms. In conclusion,
current clinical results show through both verification and validation
that MarginPAT competently performs in the operating room.


