Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating the efficacy of transferrin-targeted,
resveratrol-loaded liposomes in treating glioblastoma.


Purpose: This study evaluated the efficacy of a natural polyphenol
resveratrol (RES) loaded into liposomes (RES-L) which are modified with
transferrin (Tf) (Tf-RES-L), to specifically direct it to glioblastoma
(GBM) cells. RES is known to act on both the bulk tumor cells (BTCs) as
well as the highly resistant tumor-initiating cell (TIC) population
within GBMs. However, low aqueous solubility, chemical instability, poor
pharmacokinetics and low bioavailability severely limit its use as a free
drug. We developed RES-L with an aim to counter these drawbacks and to
eradicate the BTC and TIC populations in GBMs. Since both these
sub-populations also over-express Tf receptors, we exploited this feature
for the target-specific delivery of Tf-RES-L in GBM. We hypothesize that
Tf-RES-L will show an improved efficacy versus the free drug or
non-targeted liposomes and will act as an efficacious platform for
delivery of RES.

Methods: The neurosphere (NS) assay was used to develop TIC models using
GBM cell lines. The NS were characterized using in vitro limiting
dilution assays (LDA) and expression of the surface marker CD133. RES-Ls
were prepared by thin-film rehydration method and Tf was attached to the
liposomes using an in-house conjugation protocol. Liposomes were
characterized for their size, charge, morphology and drug-loading
efficacy. Rhodamine labeled, Tf-targeted formulations were tested for
their association with and internalization into cells using flow
cytometry and confocal microscopy, respectively. Cytotoxicity assays,
oxidative stress measurements, apoptosis assays and cell-cycle analyses
were carried out for the GBM monolayers and NS cultures. In vivo
tumor-inhibition studies were carried out using a mouse model of GBM.

Results: NS cultures showed the presence of TICs as determined from LDAs
and CD-133 expression. RES inhibited the anchorage-independent growth of
GBM NS. All RES formulations induced a time and dose-dependent
cytotoxicity in cells. At low concentrations, Tf-RES-Ls were
significantly more cytotoxic compared to free RES or RES-L. RES
formulations arrested GBM cells in the S-phase of the cell-cycle at low
concentrations and exhibited a pro-oxidant effect at higher
concentrations inducing significant oxidative stress only in GBM cells
but not in primary human astrocytes. Tf-RES-L induced significantly
higher levels of apoptosis accompanied by activation of caspases 3/7 in
GBM cells compared to the free drug and non-targeted RES-L. The Tf-
targeted formulations also associated with and internalized into GBM
cells significantly better than the non-targeted counterparts.

Conclusions: RES effectively eliminates both, the BTCs and TICs in
glioblastoma, and its encapsulation in Tf-modified liposomes still
further improves its efficacy compared to the free drug or drug in
non-targeted liposomes. Tf-RES-Ls thus seem like a very promising
nanomedicine candidate for further development to treat GBM.


