Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of histone deacetylase inhibitors on differentiation
markers and growth of colon and bladder cancer cells.


Alkaline phosphatase and dipeptidyl peptidase are markers of
differentiation in colon cancer cells. In colon cancer cells
differentiation can often be induced by treatment with inhibitors of
histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity. In some colon cancer cells butyrate
causes a several-fold induction of alkaline phosphatase but only modest
effects on dipeptidyl peptidase. There is relatively little information
on changes in activity of cell surface hydrolases in bladder cancer.
However, there is some evidence for decreased alkaline phosphatase
activity in bladder cancer. We tested the hypothesis that there may be
retention of activity in more slowly growing cancer cells and the
activity will be regulated by HDAC inhibitors in a manner similar to that
in colon cancer. In our initial studies we screened seven human bladder
cancer cell lines for alkaline phosphatase activity. We identified three
cell lines (5637, HT1197 and HT1376) with activity comparable to that in
more differentiated colon cancer cell lines. The response to incubation
with the HDAC inhibitors butyrate and valproate was compared with effects
in three colon cancer cell lines Caco-2, HT29 and SW1116. In all six cell
lines there were growth inhibitory effects that tended to be a little
greater with butyrate than with valproate. Induction of alkaline
phosphatase activity was generally greater with butyrate than with
valproate and was apparent even without normalizing the activity on a
protein basis. After determining the activity per unit protein there were
increases in dipeptidyl peptidase activity after treatment with the HDAC
inhibitors that were smaller than for alkaline phosphatase. Growth
inhibition was observed with all the HDAC inhibitors examined including
LMK235, nicotinamide, RGFP966, romidepsin and tubacin but increased
activity of alkaline phosphatase was not always seen. Activities of the
enzymes were very low in CRL1790 human colonocytes of fetal origin and
there was little or no induction with HDAC inhibitors. Although pyruvate
and carnitine have been reported to be HDAC inhibitors, incubation with
colon and bladder cancer cells did not cause induction of alkaline
phosphatase activity. It was concluded that regulation of alkaline
phosphatase and dipeptidyl peptidase by HDAC inhibitors can be similar in
bladder and colon cancer cells.


