Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of human hypoxia related miRNAs in MDM2 transfected
prostate cancer cells.


Recent studies have shown the crucial role of miRNAs in regulating cancer
initiation, progression and metastatic process via influencing gene
expression patterns. However, the distinct mechanism by which miRNA
regulates tumorigenesis remains as an area requiring detailed research
investigations. In our earlier studies, we have demonstrated a positive
correlation between MDM2 expression and hypoxia inducible factor -1alpha
(HIF-1α) levels in both normoxic and hypoxic conditions using prostate
cancer cell lines. Subsequently, we postulated that the upregulation of
HIF-1α is most likely regulated by MDM2 in cancers cells that are
positive for this gene expression. Hence, to confirm our hypothesis, we
utilized miScript miRNA PCR Array analysis (Qiagen, USA) and compared the
gene expression profile of the hypoxia signaling pathway in LNCaP
(prostate cancer cells) and LNCaP-MST

(MDM2 transfected prostate cancer cells) under normoxic conditions. This
study was expected to outline how MDM2 impacts the differential
expression of miRNAs and leading to enhancement of tumor angiogenesis via
increase in HIF-1α or other genes of the hypoxia signaling pathway. Our
preliminary data indicate that hsamiR99a5p, hsamiR125b5p, hsamiR1385p,
hsamiR199b5p and hsalet7c5p are significantly upregulated in LNCaP-MST
cells compared to LNCaP. In addition, some of the miRNAs such as
hsalet7d5p, hsalet7e5p, hsalet7f5p, hsalet7g5p and hsalet7i5p are
significantly downregulated in the same cells. Among the upregulated
miRNAs, hsamiR125b5p emerged as an important gene that is known to
downregulate the protein levels of hypoxia inducible factor 1alpha
inhibitor (HIF1AN or FIH), which can normally inhibit the transcriptional
activity of HIF-1α in both normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Therefore,
overexpression of hsamiR125b5p seems to be associated with the increase
in HIF-1α level. From the aforementioned findings, it is confirmed that
the MDM2 overexpression is impacting miRNA levels such as hsamiR125b5p
that are involved in hypoxia related signaling pathway. Thus, our results
offer a convincing evidence that MDM2 can promote angiogenesis and
increase metastatic potential of cancers through altering the miRNA
expression levels. (The financial support from the Royal Dames of Cancer
Research Inc., Ft. Lauderdale, Florida is gratefully acknowledged).


