Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell gene expression profiling in breast cancer cells with
the Her2/neu gene knockout by CRISPR-Cas9.


The Her2/neu gene is amplified and overexpressed in 15%-30% of breast
cancers. The overexpression of this oncogene is strongly correlated with
decreased survival, increased cancer relapse, and poor prognosis.
Although therapy has been successfully developed to target this oncogene,
a better understanding of this oncogene will provide further insight for
breast cancer biology and future drug development. In recent years, the
CRISPR-Cas9 system has emerged as an efficient method for genetic
engineering, enabling targeted gene knockout with minimal off-target
effects.

In this study, we employed a plasmid-based CRISPR-Cas9 system to knock
out the Her2/neu gene in breast cancer cells. Puromycin selected,
GFP-positive (two indicators of the incorporation of the CRISPR-Cas9
system), Her2-negative individual cells were index-sorted using a BD
FACSMelody™ system into individual wells of a 96-well BD™ Precise
plate with sample barcoding and molecular indexing. A whole transcriptome
amplification (WTA) assay was performed to obtain a gene expression
profile for each of the Her2/neu knockout cells. Her2 gene knockout was
performed on two cell lines: T47D, a ductal carcinoma-derived breast
cancer cell line with no Her2 amplification that shows low to
intermediate Her2/neu expression; and SKBR3, an adenocarcinoma-derived
breast cancer cell line known for Her2/neu gene amplification and
overexpression. For comparison, WTA assays were also carried out on
parental cells without gene editing. Comparison of the gene expression
profiles reveals downstream changes in gene expression correlated to the
Her2 knockout.

The profiling of gene expression in Her2/neu CRISPR-Cas9 knockout cells
on a single cell level promises to provide insight into the mechanisms in
these aggressive cancers that could help future drug discovery.

For Research Use Only. Not for use in diagnostic or therapeutic
procedures.

23-19341-00


