Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEDI1873, a GITR ligand fusion protein (GITRL FP), induces
effector T-cell proliferation, modulates T-regulatory cell function and
has the potential to combine with checkpoint inhibitors.


Glucocorticoid-induced tumor necrosis factor receptor-related protein
(GITR) is part of a system of signals involved in controlling T-cell
activation. MEDI1873 is a novel hexameric human GITR agonist comprising
an IgG1 Fc domain, a coronin 1A trimerisation domain and the human GITRL
extracellular domain (ECD) that is currently being assessed in a Phase 1
clinical study (NCT02583165) in patients with solid tumors. MEDI1873
exhibits in vitro superiority to an anti-GITR antibody with respect to
evoking robust GITR agonism, T-cell activation and clustering of Fc gamma
receptors. Using in vitro assay systems, MEDI1873 recapitulates aspects
of GITR targeting previously described in mice, including modulation of
regulatory T-cell (Treg) suppression and the ability to increase the
CD8:CD4 T-cell ratio via antibody-dependent T-cell cytotoxicity.
Pharmacodynamic assessment of an agonistic mouse GITRL FP (mGITRL FP) in
the CT26 model of colorectal cancer demonstrated activation and
proliferation of peripheral CD4+ and CD8+ T cells coincident with an
increased depletion of intratumoral Tregs, likely through Fc mediated
effector functions. Furthermore, CT26 tumor growth studies indicated the
mGITRL FP could result in significant antitumor activity. These data
provide evidence that MEDI1873 is a novel, potent GITR agonist with the
potential to modulate T-cell responses and enhance anti-tumor immunity.
Combinations of immunotherapies are generating exciting results in the
clinic, therefore, we sought to assess the potential for GITRL FPs to
combine with antibodies targeting either anti-PD-L1 (durvalumab) or
anti-CTLA-4 (tremelimumab) using both in vitro and in vivo systems. In
vitro studies where MEDI1873 was combined with either durvalumab or
tremelimumab showed that both combinations have the potential to enhance
interleukin-2 release in a superantigen-stimulation of human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) compared to checkpoint blockade alone.
Further evidence to support the potential for combinatorial antitumor
activity was generated in the CT26 model where either 0.2mg/kg mGITRL
combined with 10mg/kg anti-mouse PD-L1 or 0.1mg/kg mGITRL combined with
5mg/kg anti-mouse CTLA-4 antibodies resulted in enhanced antitumor
activity versus monotherapies alone. Overall, our data suggest that
therapeutically targeting GITR with a multimeric fusion protein, GITRL
FP, may provide increased agonistic potential versus an antibody, and
have the ability to both activate effector T-cells and modulate Tregs
through suppression and/or depletion. Finally, combination studies
provide preclinical evidence to support the rationale for combination of
MEDI1873 with anti-PD-L1 or anti-CTLA-4 antibodies further reinforcing
the potential of targeting the GITR pathway as a therapeutic approach to
treating patients with cancer.


