Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Theranostical nanoscale metal-organic frameworks-mediated rapid
multiplexed microRNA detection and highly therapeutic efficacy in living
oral cancer cells.


Oral cancer represents the sixth most frequent cancer in the world,
characterized by high poor prognosis and low survival rate due to local
relapse and metastasis. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been discovered as
diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets for oral cancer. However,
one of the major challenges of miRNAs-based theranostical approach is to
achieve efficient and safe delivery. Thus, a reliable sensing strategy
that can detect miRNAs expression levels in living cancer cells is
urgently needed. Herein, a novel sensing platform based on nanoscale
metal-organic framework (NMOF) conjugated with the fluorophores-labeled
single-stranded DNA probe (p-DNA) was fabricated to monitor and inhibit
multiplexed miRNAs expression in living oral cancer cells. The flow
cytometry and confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) were carried out
to evaluate the expression levels of miRNAs in oral cancer cells. The
miRNA inhibition efficiency was examined by RT-PCR. The effects of the
complexes on tumor cell invasion and migration were assessed by transwell
assay and wound healing. The flow cytometry, colony formation assay and
CCK8 were used to assess cell apoptosis and proliferation. The results
showed that NMOF works as fluorescence quencher of the labeled p-DNA. In
presence of the target miRNA (including miR-7, miR-21, and miR-155),
p-DNA was able to rapidly hybridize and release from the NMOF leading to
the recovery of fluorescence in living cells, which can be detected in
real-time. Moreover, RT-PCR results demonstrated that the multiplexed
miRNAs could be effectively downregulated after treatment of p-DNA@NMOF,
resulting in the simultaneous suppression of oral cancer cell
proliferation, anti-apoptosis, migration and invasion in vitro. In
summary, our study suggests that p-DNA@NMOF possess great potential for
combining early diagnosis and gene therapy of oral cancer.


