Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming intrinsic and acquired cetuximab resistance: an in
vitro study on the potential of afatinib in HNSCC cell lines.


Aberrant signalling of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) plays
an integral role in the tumorigenesis of many cancer types, including
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), making it a compelling
drug target. After the initial promising results of EGFR-targeted
therapies, the problem of therapeutic resistance is emerging and new
treatment options are necessary. In contrast to the first generation EGFR
inhibitors, afatinib is an irreversible ErbB family blocker that inhibits
EGFR as well as HER2 and HER4. The objective of this study was to
investigate whether afatinib is able to overcome intrinsic and acquired
cetuximab resistance in human papillomavirus (HPV) positive and negative
HNSCC cell lines under normal and reduced oxygen conditions and to
identify the molecular mechanisms underlying afatinib’s cytotoxic
effect.

Sensitivity to cetuximab treatment was investigated in a panel of HPV
positive and negative HNSCC cell lines using the colorimetric
sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay (168h, 0-2μM). Cetuximab sensitive and
intrinsically resistant cell lines were identified. Acquired cetuximab
resistant cell lines were generated by chronically exposing initially
sensitive cell lines to cetuximab. In parallel, control cell lines were
established by exposing these cells to the vehicle control (PBS).
Cytotoxicity of afatinib (72h, 0 - 5μM) was assessed under normoxic and
hypoxic (1% O2) conditions. Cell cycle distribution and induction of
apoptotic cell death were assessed flow cytometrically using the Vindelov
method and Annexin V-FITC/PI assay, respectively. Data analysis was
performed using WinNonlin and FlowJo software.

We identified intrinsic cetuximab resistance in 5 out of 7 HNSCC cell
lines (i.e. LICR-HN1, Cal-27, SQD9, 93-VU-147T and UM-SCC104) and
generated acquired cetuximab resistant cell lines (i.e. SCC22b-R and
SC263-R). Afatinib showed a clear concentration-dependent cytotoxic
effect in both cetuximab sensitive and resistant cell lines with IC50
values ranging between 0.019 and 4.04 μM. Furthermore, afatinib
maintained its cytotoxic effect under hypoxic conditions. Treatment with
afatinib led to an increase of the proportion of cells in the G0/G1 phase
of the cell cycle. Afatinib also induced an increase in the percentage of
AnnV+/PI- and AnnV+/PI+ cells with a corresponding decrease of the
percentage viable (AnnV-/PI-) cells.

In conclusion, our results suggest that afatinib has the potential to
overcome cetuximab resistance, as it was able to establish cytotoxicity
in HPV positive and negative HNSCC cell lines that were intrinsically and
acquired resistant to cetuximab. Furthermore, treatment with afatinib
caused a G0/G1 cell cycle arrest and induced apoptotic cell death. These
data support the hypothesis that afatinib might be a promising novel
therapeutic strategy to treat HNSCC patients experiencing intrinsic or
acquired cetuximab resistance.


