Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mobile genome of colorectal cancer: Characterization of
retrotransposon insertions in 202 colorectal cancer whole genomes.


The aim of this study is to characterize the landscape of retrotransposon
insertions in 202 colorectal cancer (CRC) patients to elucidate their
role in colorectal tumorigenesis. Retrotransposons are genetic sequences
that can copy themselves into an mRNA intermediate and insert elsewhere
in the genome. Germline retrotranspositions can contribute to genetic
variation however, high retrotransposon activity can also lead to genetic
instability. Albeit retrotransposons are usually repressed in normal
adult tissues, they become highly active in several cancer types, being
most active in epithelial cancers such as CRC. Moreover, retrotransposon
insertions have been difficult to detect with previous methodological
approaches, which has resulted in very few genome-wide studies.

Whole genome sequencing (WGS) was performed in 202 tumors and their
corresponding normal tissue on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform; with 100
base-pairs paired-end reads. Each sample was sequenced to a minimum of
40x median coverage. To detect retrotransposon insertions we utilized
TraFiC (Transposome Finder in Cancer). To identify
retrotransposon-mediated transductions that were not identifiable using
TraFiC, we utilized DELLY and the European database of L1-HS
retrotransposon insertions in humans (euL1db). To characterize somatic
insertions and decrease the rate of false positives, all insertions
present in any of the normal genomes were filtered. After careful visual
inspection of the paired-end read data, we estimated 80% of true somatic
calls.

We detected high retrotransposon activity in CRC with remarkable
variation among patients. The mean number of insertions per tumor was 25,
ranging from 0 to 197 insertions. In addition, we were able to identify
few highly active retrotransposons that accounted for 70% of the
retrotransposon-mediated transductions. We identified a total of 5065
somatic insertions, 2% of these insertions were located in exons, whereas
45% were in introns. We identified several genes with recurrent
insertions, some of these loci being known fragile sites. However, we
identified 13 known cancer genes with two or more insertions.
Furthermore, we identified two patients with insertions in exon 16 of
APC, suggesting that these insertions could be initiating tumorigenic
events. To conclude, we found retrotransposon insertions to be a common
phenomenon in CRC, contributing to genome instability and colorectal
tumorigenesis.


