Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization and evaluation of SMART-Seq v4 kit for low input RNA
sequencing.


Recent advances in library preparation methodology from limiting amounts
of total RNA have facilitated the characterization of rare cell-types in
various biological systems. The SMART-Seq v4 Ultra Low Input RNA Kit
incorporates a number of workflow improvements, including fewer
purifications to increase yield, a locked nucleic acid (LNA)
template-switching oligo to enhance stability, and an improved polymerase
designed to reduce amplification bias of GC-rich regions. Certain
workflow challenges remain however, including variability in library
insert size, which can lead to less predictable sequencing results. We
have modified the SMART-Seq v4 method to incorporate library size
selection between 250-650 bp, and have characterized analytical
performance of the modified procedure. A total of 63 libraries were
generated using 10 pg - 10 ng of Universal Human Reference RNA (UHRR),
Human Brain Reference RNA (HBRR), and total RNA isolated from multiple
human tissues, including lung, colon, spleen, adrenal tumor, heart, and
lung tumor. To facilitate the comparison between libraries, we normalized
library read counts by down-sampling to 24 million reads prior to further
processing with an internally-developed sequence analysis pipeline
(RNAv9_rsem). The values for ERCC Limit of Detection ranged between 3-50
copies with a mean of 22 copies, which confirmed the high absolute
sensitivity of SMART-seq v4 workflow. The total number of genes detected
(RPKM, or reads per kilobase per million mapped >=3) varied as a function
of the amount of input RNA, with as many as 19,500 genes detected. Gene
detection was highly consistent across replicates utilizing 100 pg-10 ng
input RNA, with a precipitous decline in genes detected using 10 pg of
RNA input. This is due to less reliable detection of low abundance genes,
which in turn leads to increased discordance in detected genes between
replicates, possibly due to increased sampling error. Nonetheless, when
genes are commonly detected, their normalized read counts are highly
correlated at any given RNA input, with correlation coefficients (r)
ranging from 0.977 to 0.993. Compared to previous versions of the SMARTer
method, the modified SMART-Seq v4 procedure implemented at Q2 Solutions -
EA Genomics significantly improved the percentage of reads aligned to the
transcriptome, as well as the total number of genes detected, all with
reduced technical variability. Our study demonstrates an improved
strategy for expression profiling via RNA sequencing from limiting
amounts of RNA.


