Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A targeted re-sequencing assay for molecular profiling of somatic
mutations from plasma cell-free dna (cfdna) for bladder cancers.


Bladder cancer (BC) is the 5th most common cancer in Western societies
with a rising global incidence. The major challenge to improving patient
outcomes is to better identify patients at risk for recurrence,
progression, and metastasis, and to monitor treatment response. A
non-invasive monitoring assay is needed in order to interrogate the
molecular features and clinical tumor heterogeneity of bladder cancers,
which will potentially lead to better stratified patient management.

We developed a targeted amplicon-based re-sequencing workflow for
detecting and tracking genomic mutations in cfDNA using dual molecular
indexed primers for specific amplification of a panel of 20 of known
(TERT, FGFR3, PIK3CA, HRAS) and novel BC mutations. Only 3hr time is
needed for the total workflow for the library generation and followed by
next generation sequencing (NGS) performed on Illumina MiSeq sequencing
platform. Data analysis and variants calling was performed.

After a thorough test, optimization, and validation of the targeted panel
and the workflow on selected samples of matched bladder tumor-blood pairs
and controls, 45 samples were included for testing the workflow, which
includes samples of 16 matched bladder tumor-blood pairs, technical
duplicates of cfDNA DNA Reference Standards (Horizon Discovery) with
mutations at known allelic frequencies. Technical duplicates of cfDNA
extracted from blood from patients with metastatic BC (pre and post
chemotherapy) were also included in this study. Somatic variants from
matched tumor-blood pairs were detected. We showed that detection
sensitivity at 1.0% allelic frequency was achieved. Our preliminary
results demonstrated that we were able to detect mutation burden from
cfDNA samples and track mutation burden change in response to
chemotherapy for patients with metastatic BC.

Here we developed a sensitive, non-invasive targeted NGS workflow to
detect somatic mutations for bladder cancers from both tumor DNA and
cfDNA samples. Our early results demonstrated that we can detect and
track mutational changes from patients with metastatic BC.


