Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of cellular morphology-based separation system for
three-dimensional culture.


The present study includes proof concept of morphology-based cell
separation and development of automatic cell separation system. 3D
culture environment with a specific extracellular matrix regulates
cellular function and phenotype. In addition, cancer cell morphology
changes depending on its malignancy in 3D culture environment. The cell
separation system in 3D culture environment should need to obtain the
cells according to its morphology, which includes cell phenotypes.
Recently, we developed gelatin-based photodegradable hydrogels, and
applied this hydrogels to optical cell separation. The target cells in
the photodegradable hydrogels were successfully separated by the optical
cell separation, the separated cells was growth on another dish. On the
other hand, we recently developed the predication model of stem cell
differentiation by image analysis. The image analysis technique and the
photodegradable gelatin hydrogels are included in the automated
morphology-based cell separation system in the 3D culture environment.

For forming cell encapsulated-photodegradable hydrogels, suspension of
cells including heterogeneous population is mixed with pregel solutions
and cells are encapsulated in the gelatin-based photodegradable
hydrogels. After the culture in 3D environment, microscopic images of the
cells are captured. The captured images are analyzed to distinguish the
target cells from the other cells by using the image analysis algorithm,
which we previously developed for analyzing stem cells. The hydrogels
around the target area is irradiated with light (365nm). The cells in the
irradiated area are collected by automated pipetting system. We developed
automated system for this optical cell separation procedure, including
cultivation, image acquisition, image analysis, light irradiation, and
pipetting for cell collection.

We demonstrated automated optical cell separation using the model culture
system. Normal gastric mucosal cells were cultured in the photodegradable
hydrogels. After cultivation for 1 week, the cells were irradiated the
light for 5 to 20 min. The cells in the irradiated area were collected by
automated pipetting and transferred into a collection dish. The collected
cells were viable and attached in the collection dish after collection.

We are currently developing an automated image analysis algorithm to
distinguish cancer cells from normal cells under 3D environment. The
automated optical cell separation system with image analysis algorithm
will be applied to the establishment of novel cancer-cell lines from
clinical samples such as biopsy tissue.


