Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A SRM/MRM based targeted proteomics strategy for absolute
quantification of potential biomarkers of TKI sensitivity in EGFR mutated
lung adenocarcinoma.


Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide.
Epidermal growth factor receptor(EGFR) is the primary driver oncogene in
10-30% lung adenocarcinoma. Kinase domain mutations in EGFR (L858R and
E746-A750 deletion) provide sensitivity to EGFR-specific tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs). Despite good tumor inhibitory effects, after
approximately a year, patients acquire resistance to EGFR TKIs. We have
carried out a stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture
(SILAC)-based quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) on a Thermo Orbitrap
Elite to identify and characterize the dynamics of tyrosine
phosphorylation upon TKI treatment of human lung adenocarcinoma cell
lines. The degree of inhibition of phosphorylation of several
phospho-sites correlated with the extent of TKI-sensitivity. Several
kinases and adaptor proteins that were significantly differentially
phosphorylated include AHNAK-Y160, -Y715, STAT5A-Y694, DAPP1-Y139,
ERRFI1-Y394, NEDD9-Y164, NF1-Y2579, INNPL1-Y1135, suggesting that these
are a subset of potential biomarkers of TKI response. To corroborate our
results, the next logical step is to carry out clinical validation of
these phospho-sites in human lung adenocarcinoma patients, however no
absolute quantification assay is currently available for these tyrosine
phosphorylated peptides in human samples. The MS method most often used
to complement shotgun methods is selected/multiple reaction monitoring
(SRM/MRM) because of its high sensitivity, speed and dynamic range. We
have performed SRM/MRM-MS using a nano-flow high performance liquid
chromatography instrument coupled to a nano-electrospray ionization
source attached to a Triple Quadrupole MS (Agilent 6495). In this method,
digested proteins are chromatographically separated and ionized. The
resulting precursor ions are m/z filtered in the first quadrupole(Q1) and
collision induced dissociation is carried out in Q2 and the resultant
product ions are m/z filtered in Q3. Each precursor-product pair is
termed as a transition. For absolute quantification, heavy isotope
labelled versions of the target peptides are spiked in biological samples
to build a calibration curve. For the robust assay development, we have
carried out the initial empirical refinement process using the heavy
labelled versions of the target peptides, including selection of optimal
transitions, normalizing retention times of peptides, running peptide
stability assays and digestion time course experiments. We are currently
validating these assays in human lung adenocarcinoma cell lines with
known EGFR mutations with or without treatment with 1st and 3rd
generation EGFR TKIs. The overall goal of these targeted studies is to
develop absolute quantitation assays to precisely and accurately quantify
these potential biomarkers in clinical samples.


