Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profiling the immune tumor microenvironment in primary and
recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer.


Clinical trials targeting the immune tumor microenvironment (TME) in
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) typically have included patients with
heavily pre-treated advanced disease and demonstrated only marginal
efficacy. A better understanding of how the EOC TME evolves with
progression from primary to recurrent disease may inform future
immunotherapy trials. Here, we evaluate the immune TME in primary and
recurrent EOC using tissue microarrays. Our cohort included matched
primary and recurrent tumors from 17 patients, and additional non-matched
primary tumors from 20 patients and recurrent tumors from 15 patients. We
stained for CD8, FOXP3 (regulatory T cells (Tregs)), CD68 (tumor
associated macrophages (TAMs)), programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1)
and programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) by immunohistochemistry to
interrogate the immune composition of the TME. Tregs increased in
recurrent tumors compared to primary tumors (8.0 vs 14.2/HPF, p=0.0210).
Higher TAM density was associated with higher levels of Treg and CD8+ T
cell infiltrates in recurrent tumors (p=0.001 and pClinical trials
targeting the immune tumor microenvironment (TME) in epithelial ovarian
cancer (EOC) typically have included patients with heavily pre-treated
advanced disease and demonstrated only marginal efficacy. A better
understanding of how the EOC TME evolves with progression from primary to
recurrent disease may inform future immunotherapy trials. Here, we
evaluate the immune TME in primary and recurrent EOC using tissue
microarrays. Our cohort included matched primary and recurrent tumors
from 17 patients, and additional non-matched primary tumors from 20
patients and recurrent tumors from 15 patients. We stained for CD8, FOXP3
(regulatory T cells (Tregs)), CD68 (tumor associated macrophages (TAMs)),
programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) and programmed death ligand 1
(PD-L1) by immunohistochemistry to interrogate the immune composition of
the TME. Tregs increased in recurrent tumors compared to primary tumors
(8.0 vs 14.2/HPF, p=0.0210). Higher TAM density was associated with
higher levels of Treg and CD8+ T cell infiltrates in recurrent tumors
(p=0.001 and p<0.001, respectively), and with higher Treg but not CD8+ T
cell infiltrates in primary tumors (p=0.027 and p=0.200). TAM-dense
recurrent tumors had increased PD-L1 on tumor cells and immune cells,
whereas TAM-dense primary tumors had increased PD-L1 only on immune
cells. Increased Tregs in primary tumors correlated with decreased time
to first recurrence (17.0 vs 28.5 months, p=0.022). Conversely, increased
Tregs in recurrent tumors correlated with longer overall survival (OS)
from recurrence (median not met vs 20.0m, p=0.022). Although TAM density
did not affect patient survival, analysis of matched primary and
recurrent tumors revealed that patients with increased TAMs at recurrence
(n=5) had a longer median OS from recurrence than patients without
increased TAMs at recurrence (n=12). Tregs increased at recurrence in the
majority of matched tumor pairs (n=12), but there was no correlation with
survival. In conclusion, the TME of EOC is immunologically active.
TAM-dense recurrent disease had higher CD8+ T cell and Treg infiltrates
and PD-L1 expression. In this study, patients with increased cellular
recruitment to the TME at recurrence had improved survival. Larger, more
detailed studies characterizing the evolution of the TME with progression
from primary EOC to recurrence are warranted.


