Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Strategies to overcome the heterogeneity of tumor cells in breast
cancer therapy.


Breast carcinogenesis is a multistage process that involves mutations and
alterations attributed to exposure to exogenous environmental substances
and endogenous agents as female hormones. To overcome the heterogeneity
of tumor cells in breast cancer therapy several strategies must be
considered from the bench to clinical settings. It is proposed four
strategies: Analysis to determine 1) Apoptosis, 2) Epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), 3) CD44/CD24 gene and protein expression in cells
derived from mammospheres and 4) MicroRNAs as miR34a and others by the
effects of chemotherapeutic drugs (as pamidronate (Pam), 5-Fluorouracil
(5-FU) and antioxidants as Curcumin (Cur) (diferuloylmethane) derived
from Curcuma longa. Pam, a bisphosphonate is used in the treatment of
breast cancer. 5-FU is a chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment of a
variety of solid cancers that arrest cell cycle and induce apoptosis in
cancer cells. We evaluated genes and proteins targeted by these drugs and
antioxidants in a triple positive cell line, as MCF7 and a negative,
MDA-MB-231 for hormonal receptors, respectively and in an in vitro breast
cancer model induced by radiation and estrogen that was developed with a
normal immortalized breast epithelial cell line, MCF-10F exposed to low
doses of high LET (linear energy transfer) alpha particles (150 keV/μm)
of radiation, and cultured in presence of 17β-estradiol. We used: i)
MCF-10F, ii) Alpha3, a malignant non-tumorigenic, iii) Alpha5, a
tumorigenic one and iv) Tumor2 cell line derived from Alpha5 injected
into the nude mice. Previous results showed increased cell proliferation,
anchorage independency, invasive capabilities and tumor formation in nude
mice, microsatellite instability and loss of heterozygosity in
chromosomes 6, 8, 11 and 17 and mutations of c-Ha-ras and Rho-A in Alpha5
and Tumor2 compared to the control MCF-10F and their counterparts. Pam,
5-FU and Cur inhibited migration and invasion in both cell lines, and
also decreased c-Ha-ras, Rho-A, p53, and Cav-1 gene expression by
RT-qPCR. These compounds also induced 1) apoptotic effect on Bcl-xL and
Bax gene and protein expression and by flow cytometry; 2) changes in EMT
markers such as Snail, Slug, Axl, 3) CD44/CD24 alterations and 4) target
MicroRNAs as miR34a on different process. It can be concluded that
strategies to overcome the heterogeneity of tumor cells can be used to
interfere with genes involved in critical steps in breast carcinogenesis.
Grant: Tarapacá University, Arica, Chile (GMC).

Short tittle: Strategies in breast cancer therapy


