Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Komen Tissue Bank donors: Genetically determined ethnicity and
race.


Background: Several evidences indicate that different racial and ethnic
backgrounds affect the incidence and severity of diseases such as breast
cancer and diabetes, and the response to therapy. For example White and
African American women are more likely to develop breast cancer than
Hispanic and Asian women. Moreover, African American women are more
likely to develop more aggressive (Triple Negative Breast Cancer), more
advanced-stage breast cancer at a young age. Therefore, given the health
disparity and with the advance of personalized medicine, it is becoming
critical to address population stratification. The Komen Tissue Bank at
IU Simon Cancer Center (KTB), the only biobank of normal breast tissue
from healthy women, is employing a more accurate approach to detect
population stratification through the use of Ancestry Informative Markers
(AIMs).

Methodology: A total of 2,973 DNA samples were obtained from the KTB.
Genotyping was performed using the KASP technology (LGC Genomics) and a
41-SNP panel (labeled 41-AIM panel) selected from Nievergelt et al, 2013.
Genotype analysis using the 41-AIM panel along with a Bayesian clustering
method (STRUCTURE) was able to discern continental origins including
European/ Middle East (Caucasian), East Asia, Central/South Asia, Africa,
Americas, and Oceania. A reference set was obtained from the HeatMap. The
results were compared with the self-reported data.

Results/Conclusion: Our genetic ancestry analysis indicates that out of
2,973 KTB tissue donors, 2,132 are primarily Caucasian, 532 African, 234
of Asian, 72 Latino, 3 Oceanic origins. High mixture of racial markers
was observed in several samples. Moreover, when we compare these findings
with the self-reported data we find a 10.9% of discrepancies indicating
the imprecision of the self-reported information. The implementation of
the genetic ancestry data into the KTB creates the potential for a more
accurate study of health disparities.


