Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of circadian clockwork in in vivo reprogramming induced
mouse kidney cancer and human Wilms tumor.


Most organisms have evolved intrinsic circadian clock to optimize their
behavior and physiology for diurnal environmental changes. The circadian
clock exists not only in the organismal level but also in the peripheral
organs and cellular levels, and regulates the various physiological
aspects. Among these regulation systems, the relationship between
circadian clock and cancer has been enthusiastically investigated in this
decade. However, the mechanistic link connecting circadian clock and
cancer has not been fully understood. Recently, we have clarified that
circadian clock is tightly connected with cellular differentiation using
the in vitro mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) differentiation model, and
in addition, misregulation of differentiation leads to the circadian
clock disruption via highly expression of KPNA2 and suppression of CLOCK
protein. On the other hand, it was revealed that altered
dedifferentiation leads to cancer development using in vivo reprogramming
mouse model. So we considered that the viewpoint of dysdifferentiation
can help to provide significant pathophysiological implications for the
relationship of circadian clock and cancer. Firstly, we established
Rosa26:M2-rtTA TetO:OSKM ES cells carrying circadian rhythm reporter
mPer2:luc, and generated chimeric mice. The chimeric mice were treated
with doxycycline (Dox) for transient in vivo reprogramming. The Dox
treatment induced Wilms tumor-like kidney tumors and we sectioned the
kidney tumor for monitoring real time bioluminescence signals, and
examined the RNA and protein expression profiles. Here, we showed that
the circadian clock was disrupted in the Wilms tumor-like mouse kidney
tumor tissues, while the control mouse kidney exhibited the obvious
circadian bioluminescence oscillation. And the gene expression signature
of the circadian clock development correlated gene set in the tumor was
similar to the dysdifferentiation-mediated circadian clock disrupted
cells. Moreover, the highly expressed KPNA2 and suppression of CLOCK
protein were also observed in the mouse tumor cells. Next, we examined
human Wilms tumor gene and protein expression profiles. Astonishingly,
the transcriptional signature of the circadian clock development
correlated genes was similar to the mouse kidney tumor induced by
dedifferentiation. Furthermore, the protein expression patterns of KPNA2
and CLOCK coincided with them. These findings suggest that the severely
dedifferentiated cancers may lose their circadian clocks and the
mechanism is common with the suppression mechanism during differentiation
coupled circadian clock development. Moreover, circadian clock
functionality may reflect the etiology of cancer development including
dedifferentiation. In future prospects, a new view point of the circadian
clock may help to evaluate the type of cancer cells, and it leads to more
improved therapeutic strategy.


