Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutralization of IL-10 enhances antitumor efficacy of dendritic
cell-targeting MIP-3α-gp100 vaccine by way of type-I interferons in
B16F10 mouse melanoma model.


The chemokine MIP-3α (CCL20) binds to CCR6 found on immature dendritic
cells. Vaccines fusing MIP-3α to gp100 have been shown to be effective
in therapeutically alleviating melanoma in mouse models. Other studies
have provided evidence that IL-10 neutralizing antibodies enhance
immunological melanoma therapies by modulating the tolerogenic tumor
microenvironment. Here, we report that neutralizing IL-10 enhances the
therapeutic anti-melanoma efficacy of a MIP-3α-gp100 DNA vaccine. The
current studies utilize the B16F10 syngeneic mouse melanoma model system.
The MIP-3α-gp100 DNA vaccine is administered intramuscularly (i.m.) into
the tibialis muscle, followed immediately by i.m. electroporation. The
standard therapeutic protocol was the following: challenge with lethal
dose of B16F10 cells (5x104) on day 0; vaccinate with 50μg vaccine
plasmid on days 3, 10, and 17; and administer 150μg of αIL10 antibody
intra-tumorally beginning on day 5, once every three days for up to six
doses. Tumor sizes, growth, and survival were all assessed. Treatment
responses were characterized by flow cytometric analysis of tumor
infiltrate. Vaccine-specific T-cells were delineated by gp10025-33
stimulation followed by intracellular cytokine staining for IFN-γ and
assessment by flow cytometry. The mechanism of αIL-10 efficacy was
explored by RT-PCR and confirmed with a knockout mouse model. With this
therapeutic protocol, we demonstrate for the first time that a therapy
neutralizing IL-10 additively enhances the anti-tumor efficacy of a
MIP-3α-gp100 vaccine, leading to significantly smaller tumors, slower
growing tumors, and overall increases in mouse survival. Surprisingly,
the additive effects of αIL-10 were not shown to be directly mediated by
any T-cell parameter tested, including vaccine-specific tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), total TILs of either CD4+ or CD8+
subset, regulatory T-cells, granzyme positive T-cells, and others. We
discovered, however, that IFNα-4 transcripts in the tumor were
significantly upregulated in mice given vaccine and αIL-10 compared to
vaccine alone. Furthermore, infiltration into the tumor of plasmacytoid
dendritic cells, known to be professional IFNα-producing cells, were
enhanced with the combination therapy. A mouse model with IFNαR1 knocked
out eliminated the protection provided by αIL-10, demonstrating that the
additional therapeutic value of αIL-10 is primarily mediated by type-I
interferons. In conclusion, efficient targeting of antigen to immature
dendritic cells with a chemokine fusion vaccine offers a potential
alternative approach to the ex vivo dendritic cell antigen loading
protocols currently undergoing clinical investigation. Combining this
approach with an IL-10 neutralizing antibody therapy that modulates the
tolerogenic tumor microenvironment offers promise as a novel melanoma
therapy.


