Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved understanding of the etiology of breast cancer in young
women through evaluation of the genomic landscape.


Background Breast cancer is a disease where biological age and age at
menopause are established risk factors, thus diagnosis of breast cancer
in young women (Background Breast cancer is a disease where biological
age and age at menopause are established risk factors, thus diagnosis of
breast cancer in young women (<40 years, YW) is not common, representing
~6% of breast cancer diagnoses annually. Germline mutations in cancer
predisposition genes accounts for ~20% of breast cancer diagnoses in YW,
thus the etiology of breast tumors for the majority of YW is unknown.

Methods Frozen tumor specimens and matched genomic DNA samples from 31
women diagnosed Methods Frozen tumor specimens and matched genomic DNA
samples from 31 women diagnosed <40 years were available. Whole genome
sequencing (WGS) was performed by generating sequencing libraries from 1
mg input using the TruSeq PCR-free library preparation workflow and
sequencing on the HiSeq X Ten at triple lane depth with 150bp paired-end
reads. WGS was analyzed using the Hiseq Analysis Software Tumor Normal
Workflow, Bioconductor: deconstructSigs and ad hoc integrated analysis
and hypothesis testing.

Results Luminal A tumors from YW had significantly lower somatic
mutational loads, copy number alterations and structural variants than
other subtypes and structural variants on chromosome 17 were enriched in
patients with the HER2-enriched subtype and HER2 status = 3+. Aging was
the most common signature (28/31) followed by APOBEC activation (14/31).
Signatures associated with defects in mismatch repair (9/31) and
polymerase ε (10/31) were also detected in >25% of patient tumors. Of
the six patients with BRCA defect signatures, three had germline
mutations in BRCA2 and one had a CHEK2 mutation. Mutational signatures
could cluster patients into two groups, with the youngest patients
(Results Luminal A tumors from YW had significantly lower somatic
mutational loads, copy number alterations and structural variants than
other subtypes and structural variants on chromosome 17 were enriched in
patients with the HER2-enriched subtype and HER2 status = 3+. Aging was
the most common signature (28/31) followed by APOBEC activation (14/31).
Signatures associated with defects in mismatch repair (9/31) and
polymerase ε (10/31) were also detected in >25% of patient tumors. Of
the six patients with BRCA defect signatures, three had germline
mutations in BRCA2 and one had a CHEK2 mutation. Mutational signatures
could cluster patients into two groups, with the youngest patients (<35
years) less likely to have signatures associated with aging but an
enrichment in signatures of APOBEC, BRCA mutations and smoking; tumors
within this group were more likely to be non-luminal A.

Conclusions Profiling the genome of tumors from YW supports the idea that
most tumors are not characterized by profiles associated with genetic
predisposition but rather processes such aging, APOBEC activation,
mismatch repair, and defects in DNA replication. Of note, breast tumors
in the youngest patients (Conclusions Profiling the genome of tumors from
YW supports the idea that most tumors are not characterized by profiles
associated with genetic predisposition but rather processes such aging,
APOBEC activation, mismatch repair, and defects in DNA replication. Of
note, breast tumors in the youngest patients (<35) have a different
pattern of mutational signatures suggesting that even within YW, etiology
differs by age.


