Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variant reclassifications in hereditary cancer genetics and their
implications for clinical care.


BACKGROUND: Clinicians who provide genetic cancer risk assessment (GCRA)
are dependent on laboratory reporting of germline results to inform
cancer screening and treatment recommendations. Efforts to enhance
variant classification and harmonization, such as ClinVar, will lead to
an increase in the number of variants being reclassified. Given that the
impact of variant reclassification on care is unknown, we evaluated the
frequency and clinical impact of variant reclassification on individuals
seen for GCRA.

METHODS: We retrospectively evaluated data on 7,356 participants enrolled
through the Clinical Cancer Genomics Community Research Network (CCGCRN)
at City of Hope and Olive View Medical Center from September 1996-
October 2016.

RESULTS: 4,969 commercial genetic tests yielded a total of 1,610 variants
of any category, of which 181 unique variants in 20 genes were
reclassified. BRCA1 and BRCA2 (BRCA) and mismatch repair genes comprised
73.5% and 5.5% of the genes reclassified,

respectively. Reclassification impacted 225 individuals (97% women) from
217 families; 89% of these individuals (n=201) had a personal history of
cancer. The interval between initial report and variant reclassification
averaged 3 years (17 days- 13 years). Minorities had higher
reclassification rates as compared to non-Hispanic white participants (P
= 0.0149). Of the 181 unique reclassifications, 164 (90.6%) of variants
were downgraded. Sixteen reclassifications led to changes in clinical
care. Thirteen variants carried by 15 individuals were upgraded from a
variant of uncertain significance (VUS) to likely pathogenic or
pathogenic (10 BRCA, 3 MLH1 or MSH2). These reclassifications prompted
additional prophylactic surgical interventions (i.e., bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy), specialist referrals, and surveillance
recommendations for at risk patients and family members. Three variants
(NBN p.Arg215Trp, PTEN p.Ala79Thr, and MET c.1200+2T>C) were downgraded
from likely pathogenic or pathogenic to VUS. Prior to downgrade to VUS, 2
cases had unnecessary surveillance procedures.

CONCLUSIONS: Since many genomic variants will be reclassified over time,
it is critical that laboratories deliver prompt notification of
reclassifications, and that providers involved in GCRA discuss the
possibility of variant reclassification with patients and family members
and collect patient/proxy information during informed consent so that
re-contact is possible. Given the non-trivial effort required for variant
reclassification and patient/participant re-contact, system-level
interventions are needed to facilitate genomic reinterpretation and the
return of results to individuals over time.


