Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44-specific supramolecular hydrogels for fluorescence molecular
imaging of EMT induced BRAF mutant thyroid cancer cells.


Previously, the authors have identified that the acquired drug resistance
to BRAF inhibitor, PLX4032 in BRAF (V600E) mutant anaplastic thyroid
cancer promotes not only tumor progression and proliferation, but also
migration and invasion of cancer through upregulated
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The underlying mechanism to
the acquired resistance to BRAF inhibition involves c-Met-mediated
reactivation of PI3K/AKT pathway. Therefore combinatorial dual targeted
therapy of BRAF and c-Met inhibition has shown to reverse EMT and show
maximal antitumor effect. Previously, the authors have developed a novel
in vivo imaging strategy using CD44-targetable near-infrared
(NIR)-sensitive supramolecular hydrogels (NIRSHs) for the recognition of
CD44-expressing cancer cells. In the present study, we applied this
NIR-sensitive molecular imaging probe in detecting the upregulated EMT
changes in PLX4032-treated 8505C cells. The CD44-targetable NIRSHs were
fabricated by polyplexing Cy5.5-conjugated polyethyleimine and hyaluronic
acid in an aqueous medium. Ectopic xenograft mouse models were prepared
by injecting 8505C cells at the flank of male athymic nude BALB/c mice,
aged 6 weeks. After confirming tumor formation at 3 weeks post-injection,
the mice were randomly divided into four groups and were each treated
under different conditions; DMSO, PLX4032, PHA665752, PLX4032 and
PHA665752. After 3 weeks, the pre-established NIRSH probes were injected
and confirmed by IVIS imaging. The injected NIRSH probes showed highest
uptake in the PLX4032 single treatment group and lowest uptake in the
PLX4032 and PHA665752 combination group. Sizes of tumor were verified by
MRI which showed correlations with the NIRSH fluorescence imagings. The
results suggest that CD44-targetable NIRSHs imaging shows potential as a
non-invasive in vivo imaging tool in detecting the increased invasion
potential of cancer cells and monitoring appropriate therapeutic effects.


