Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing the therapeutic effects of PARP inhibitors in
combination DNA methyl transferase inhibitors, using low doses of
ionizing radiation in non small cell lung cancers.


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in the US. Treatment most commonly relies on ionizing radiation
(IR) and platinum-based DNA damaging agents, but long-term survival is
poor and patients tend to suffer chronic side-effects due to the high
radiation dose to the surrounding normal tissues. Therefore, new
treatments are needed that can be used in combination lower radiation
doses.

We have recently reported that low, non-cytotoxic doses Poly ADP ribose
polymerase inhibitors (PARPi) Talazoparib in combination with DNA
methyltransferase inhibitors (DNMTi) Decitabine (DAC) or azacytidine
(AZA) significantly increase cytotoxicity in acute myeloid leukemia and
breast cancer models in vitro and anti-tumor effects in vivo.
Simultaneous administration of both inhibitors result in increased PARP
binding in DNA, leading to higher levels of DNA double strand breaks
(DSBs), yielding increased cytotoxicity, compared with each agent
treatment alone.

We first studied the efficacy of Talazoparib and AZA combination therapy
in multiple NSCLC cell lines (A549, H358 and H838) in vitro through
colony forming assays. Results showed, compared to single agent
treatments, combination drug treatment significantly decreased colony
formation. Cell viability was also significantly decreased with the drug
combination in MTS assays (PWe first studied the efficacy of Talazoparib
and AZA combination therapy in multiple NSCLC cell lines (A549, H358 and
H838) in vitro through colony forming assays. Results showed, compared to
single agent treatments, combination drug treatment significantly
decreased colony formation. Cell viability was also significantly
decreased with the drug combination in MTS assays (P<0.05). These results
also showed synergistic activity between the two drugs, with a
combination index of less than 1 for all tested NSCLC cell lines.
Importantly, the drug combination increased PARP trapping in chromatin
and DSB formation, as measured by immunofluorescent staining for γH2AX.
We next determined whether AZA/Talazoparib in combination with a single
dose of radiation (2Gy) had an increased anti-cancer effect compared to
each modality alone in in vivo mouse xenografts of NSCLC A549. While the
combination of PARPi+DNMTi with radiation treatment decreased tumor
growth, compared to PARPi/DNMTi alone or RT alone, no significant
enhancement with radiation was observed. We next determined whether low
doses of fractionated IR (2Gy 3 fractions) would improve the efficacy of
DNTMi and PARPi combination treatment. In vitro studies with colony
forming assays of NSCLC cell line A549 show that IR doses in combination
with PARPi and DNMTi decrease clonogenicity, compared with non-IR
controls. Furthermore, A549 xenografts were treated with the drug
combination and then irradiated 1 week later with 2Gy daily for 3
consecutive days. Mice treated with the drug combination followed by IR
had significant decreases in tumor volume and survival (PWe first studied
the efficacy of Talazoparib and AZA combination therapy in multiple NSCLC
cell lines (A549, H358 and H838) in vitro through colony forming assays.
Results showed, compared to single agent treatments, combination drug
treatment significantly decreased colony formation. Cell viability was
also significantly decreased with the drug combination in MTS assays
(P<0.05). These results also showed synergistic activity between the two
drugs, with a combination index of less than 1 for all tested NSCLC cell
lines. Importantly, the drug combination increased PARP trapping in
chromatin and DSB formation, as measured by immunofluorescent staining
for γH2AX. We next determined whether AZA/Talazoparib in combination
with a single dose of radiation (2Gy) had an increased anti-cancer effect
compared to each modality alone in in vivo mouse xenografts of NSCLC
A549. While the combination of PARPi+DNMTi with radiation treatment
decreased tumor growth, compared to PARPi/DNMTi alone or RT alone, no
significant enhancement with radiation was observed. We next determined
whether low doses of fractionated IR (2Gy 3 fractions) would improve the
efficacy of DNTMi and PARPi combination treatment. In vitro studies with
colony forming assays of NSCLC cell line A549 show that IR doses in
combination with PARPi and DNMTi decrease clonogenicity, compared with
non-IR controls. Furthermore, A549 xenografts were treated with the drug
combination and then irradiated 1 week later with 2Gy daily for 3
consecutive days. Mice treated with the drug combination followed by IR
had significant decreases in tumor volume and survival (P<0.05). This
suggests that low doses of PARPi and DNMTi therapy in combination with
low dose IR can potentially target NSCLC tumors. This represents a novel
treatment approach for NSCLC patients that may reduce chronic
side-effects of high dose IR.


