Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: XenoSarc: Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of soft tissue
sarcoma (STS), an update on a preclinical platform for early drug testing.


Background: STS constitutes a rare and very heterogeneous family of
mesenchymal tumors. The limited treatment options available for advanced
STS underline the need for reliable preclinical models to test novel
therapeutic strategies.

Methods: A panel of patient-derived xenografts (PDX) was established by
subcutaneous implantation of fresh, surgically resected or biopsied tumor
specimens in immunodeficient, athymic nude NMRI mice. Once tumor growth
was observed, pieces of tumor were re-transplanted to next generations of
mice. At each passage tumor fragments were collected for
histopathological and molecular characterization. A model was considered
established after observing stable histological and molecular features
for at least two passages.

Results: Until now 171 STS samples from consenting patients treated at
the University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium, have been transplanted.
Twenty-eight well-characterized, stable PDX models of STS have been
established, maintaining the histopathological and molecular features of
the original tumor. The detailed clinical information about a donor
patient, including sensitivity to standard and experimental drugs, is
linked to every model. At this point the XenoSarc platform includes
models of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (6 models), myxofibrosarcoma
(6), dedifferentiated liposarcoma (3), malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor (3), synovial sarcoma (1), leiomyosarcoma (4), epithelioid
haemangioendothelioma (1), mesenchymal chondrosarcoma (1), pleomorphic
rhabdomyosarcoma (1) and high-grade undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma
(2). From these models we have also available tissue microarray (TMA) as
well as data on genomic and/or expression profile including mutations (by
RNA-Seq). Some of these models have already been successfully used for in
vivo testing of novel agents, including both targeted and cytotoxic
(pro-)drugs, and results served as a rationale for several prospective
clinical trials. In addition, 24 other xenografts are still in early
stages of engraftment, not yet fulfilling our criteria of an
“established model”.

Conclusion: Our XenoSarc platform contains a number of well-annotated
models, characterized by stable histological and molecular features. This
platform is a reliable tool for the evaluation of new anticancer
treatments for STS and for studying the biology of these rare diseases.
The platform is made available to collaborators from academia and
industry.


