Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KITENIN leads to resistance against temozolomide through
enhancement of cancer stemness factors in mouse glioma model.


Background: Recently, a new research spotlighted the role of KITENIN
(KAI1 COOH-terminal interacting tetraspanin) on glioma invasiveness and
progression, associated with the up-regulation of EMT
(epithelial-mesenchymal transition) and cancer stemness markers. In this
study, furthermore, it is investigated whether KITENIN leads to
resistance against TMZ through enhancement of cancer stemness factors
using mouse glioma model.

Materials and Methods: TMZ-resistant T98G cell line (T98G/TR) was
developed. EMT and cancer stemness markers and KITENIN expression were
assessed by Western blotting and qRT-PCR. With KITENIN modulated U251
(knockdown) and GL261 (overexpression) cells, cell viability and
apoptotic cell death factors after TMZ treatment were evaluated.
Biological role of KITENIN on TMZ-resistance was investigated using
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and immunofluorescence analysis for
tumor sections of orthotopic glioma model. Using human glioma samples and
primary cells, the mechanistic link between KITENIN and cancer stemness
factors was confirmed.

Results: T98G/TR cells showed increased expression of the KITENIN and EMT
and cancer stemness factors. Also, In vitro assays revealed that KITENIN
knockdown inhibited cell viability against TMZ treatment, whereas KITENIN
overexpression promoted their viability, via apoptotic cell death
pathway. In orthotopic glioma models, mice implanted with
KITENIN-overexpressed cells showed resistance to TMZ on MRI and
histopathological examination. The expression of KITENIN/ALDH1 or
KITENIN/CD44 were co-localized and significantly higher in tumor sections
of mouse transplanted with KITENIN-overexpressed cells than in tumor
sections of mouse transplanted with control cells. Genetic
down-regulation of KITENIN for KITENIN-overexpressed cell line and
primary glioma cells led decreased expression of ALDH1 and CD44. In human
glioma samples, high expression of KITENIN was closely related with high
expression of ALDH1.

Conclusion: KITENIN affects TMZ-resistance in malignant gliomas through
induction of ALDH1 and CD44. Therefore, it could be suggested that
KITENIN is therapeutic target to overcome TMZ-resistance of malignant
gliomas.


