Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining droplet tagged short read sequencing with optical DNA
mapping technology for improved assembly of cancer genomes.


Kataegis, chromothripsis, chromoplexy and forms of structural
hyper-mutation generically described as chromoanagenesis are found in
many cancer types. Structural rearrangements can result in deletions,
translocations, inversions and insertions, and gene amplification with
important functional consequenes as cancer drivers and clonal diversity.
Whole genome sequencing is increasingly used to sensitively detect
strucutural rearrangements. Yet, it remains difficult to detect these
events reliably without an excessive number of false positives. This is
largely a consequence of the still relatively short read-length of
commonly used sequencing platforms. As a result, in larger cohorts, PCR
based methods are generally not feasible for validating all predicted
structural rearrangements. Accordingly, new approaches for robust mapping
of both simple and complex rearrangements are needed. Here we used a
hybrid of two technologies, 10X genomics droplet tagged Illumina
sequencing (10X Genomics ) and DNA fiber molecular imaging (BioNano Irys)
for high throughput validation. First, utilizing a sequencing-assisted
synthetic genome: for each rearrangement predicted by NGS, we build a
“pseudo-chromosome” offering this structure as one alternative to the
BioNano aligner. This combination compensates for the weaknesses of each
platform resulting in a more robust result. In this way, even short reads
can validate structural rearrangements, as the requirement for split
reads is obviated. Provided that sufficient coverage is achieved,
statistical analysis can be used to confidently recognize NGS false
positive predictions. This allows the cataloging of complex repetitive
regions and large-scale rearrangements. In our study we have evaluated
this combined approach to large scale genome mapping to identify hallmark
fusions and other rearrangements from the highly complex genomes of
osteosarcoma cancer cell lines.


