Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of plasmonic photothermal therapy with surgery applied
to naturally occurring mammary tumors in canines and felines: clinical
outcomes and molecular studies.


Plasmonic Photothermal Therapy (PPTT) is a cancer therapy where gold
nanorods (AuNRs) are injected at the tumor site and near-infrared light
(safe to bio-system) is applied to generate localized heat causing cancer
cell death. PPTT is a potentially good alternative to replace traditional
surgery for localized tumors. However, for large tumors (volume ≥10
cm3), PPTT could be ineffective due to an uneven distribution of injected
AuNRs causing possible inhomogeneity of heat. Surgery is frequently
recommended in those cases. However, it carries a high risk of cancer
recurrence. For effective treatment of large tumors, we combined both
PPTT and surgical resection and applied it to naturally occurring tumors
in mammary glands of dogs and cats, which could realistically represent
their human equivalents at the molecular level. For the experimental
design, we divided the animals into three different groups. 20 cases (7
cats and 13 dogs) were all diagnosed with adenocarcinoma; the animals
were monitored for 1-2 years after treatments. Group (I): three cases
were solely treated by mastectomy (control group); all of them died
within a few weeks. Group (II): five cases were treated with mastectomy
first. Then, each tumor wound was divided into two halves, and only one
half was exposed to PPTT. After treatment, two cases in this group
rendered complete remission. In the other three cases, the half wound
that was not exposed to PPTT had tumor recurrence causing animal death
within one year. Group (III): 12 cases were treated with surgery followed
by PPTT treatment. This regime showed complete remission without any
recurrence for eight cases. However, four cases died 4-12 months after
therapy for reasons such as pneumonia (no tumor found, based on X ray).
Histopathology results showed a decrease of cancer grades before (variant
grades from 1-4) and after two weeks of treatment via PPTT and surgery
(grade 0). Blood tests (conducted 1 year after therapy) showed no obvious
change in liver and kidney functions in groups II and III. In addition,
X-ray diffraction showed no metastasis 1- 2 years after treatment. We
have performed quantitative, real time-PCR analysis two weeks before and
after treatment to study the expression levels of several important
genes. The genes that are responsible for repairing cancer cells such as
BRCA1, BRCA2, and CD163-IL-10 were significantly diminished two weeks
after treatment (group III). Furthermore, tumor microenvironment cells
such as tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) were greatly altered after
treatment. TAM 1, which retards tumor growth, augmented, and TAM 2, which
promotes tumorigenesis, was diminished, which explains the animals’
increased survival rate. In conclusion, our study demonstrates the
feasibility of applying PPTT after surgery for large tumors in dogs and
cats.


