Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of daily exercise on tumor perfusion.


Aberrant blood vessel networks in solid tumors lead to impaired tissue
perfusion and areas of hypoxia (pO2 Aberrant blood vessel networks in
solid tumors lead to impaired tissue perfusion and areas of hypoxia (pO2
< 10 mmHg). Tumor hypoxia is associated with aggressive progression,
dissemination, and therapeutic resistance. It is found in 40% of breast
cancers, and can constitute a major obstacle to anticancer therapy.
Exercise is associated with improvements in cardiovascular and
respiratory function, aerobic capacity and overall health. In cancer
patients undergoing therapy, exercise has been shown to decrease
treatment related side effects and general fatigue. The goal of the
present investigation was to determine whether aerobic exercise could be
applied to improve tumor perfusion and oxygenation in a breast cancer
model. Such modulation of the tumor physiology and host environment would
be expected to lead to enhanced antitumor efficacy when combined with
radiotherapy or chemotherapy. The effects of a single and daily bouts of
moderate intensity treadmill running were studied in mice bearing the
syngeneic murine mammary carcinoma 4T1. The exercise intensity was
determined by measuring the anaerobic threshold, which was assessed by
measuring the steady rise in blood lactate during exercise. Initial
studies examined the effect of a single moderate bout of exercise (18
m/min) in mice bearing ~500 mm3 orthotopic tumors. In subsequent
experiments mice were exercised at 18 m/min, 5 days a week, for 8 weeks
prior to orthotopic injection of tumor cells and continued exercise (5
days a week) for 2 weeks during tumor growth. Controls for each treatment
consisted of sedentary mice exposed to a stationary treadmill for the
equivalent amount of time. At the end of each of the exercise regimen,
tumors were harvested, sectioned, stained, and tile mapped to assess
physiological changes by immunofluorescence. The detection of open blood
vessels (Hoechst-33342) was used as an indirect indicator of perfusion.
Tumor hypoxia was determined using the 2-nitroimidazole (EF5). Blood
vessels were stained using the endothelial cell marker CD-31. All markers
were quantified using Photoshop and ImageJ NIH software. Our results
indicate that in the 4T1 breast cancer model moderate intensity exercise
did not significantly alter tumor growth, oxygenation or blood vessel
number. However, daily bouts of exercise did significantly increase the
number of open tumor vessels indicating improved tumor perfusion. These
results suggest that a daily exercise regimen may have the potential to
improve drug delivery to mammary tumors


