Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipid-lowering drug use and risk of fatal prostate cancer in the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study.


Background: Studies show that lipid-lowering medications, particularly
statins, may be protective for more aggressive prostate cancer. Lethal
prostate cancer is often considered an optimal outcome in epidemiologic
studies when the aim is to identify modifiable risk factors with the
potential to reduce morbidity and mortality from this disease, yet this
outcome remains understudied. Further, lipid drug use and prostate cancer
risk is understudied in black men, whose risk of fatal prostate cancer is
2-3 times higher than that of white men. Thus, we studied lipid
medication use and fatal prostate cancer risk in the ARIC Study, which
includes ~25% black participants.

Methods: The ARIC Study is a prospective cohort that included 15,792
participants (7,082 men) recruited from four US communities. We conducted
a prospective cohort analysis of 6,547 men who attended visit 2
(1990-1992, the start of the statin era) and were followed for cancer
death through 12/31/2012. Death from prostate cancer (n=90) as the
underlying cause was obtained from death certificates supplemented with
medical records. Updated information on medication use was collected
throughout the study follow-up during study visits and annual telephone
calls. Lipid medication use was modeled as a time-dependent variable in
two ways: 1) current use (yes/no), and 2) duration of use (Methods: The
ARIC Study is a prospective cohort that included 15,792 participants
(7,082 men) recruited from four US communities. We conducted a
prospective cohort analysis of 6,547 men who attended visit 2 (1990-1992,
the start of the statin era) and were followed for cancer death through
12/31/2012. Death from prostate cancer (n=90) as the underlying cause was
obtained from death certificates supplemented with medical records.
Updated information on medication use was collected throughout the study
follow-up during study visits and annual telephone calls. Lipid
medication use was modeled as a time-dependent variable in two ways: 1)
current use (yes/no), and 2) duration of use (<10, ≥10 years). Cox
proportional hazards regression was used to estimate the hazard ratio
(HR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) of prostate cancer death overall
and by race. All models were adjusted for age (years), race, and study
center. Additional models were further adjusted for height, BMI, smoking,
diabetes, and education.

Results: The prevalence of lipid medication use was 17% by visit 4,
partway into the statin drug era, and 76% of those medications were
statins. After adjustment for age, race, and study center, men who used
lipid medications were statistically significantly less likely to die
from prostate cancer than men who did not use lipid medications (HR=0.56,
95% CI=0.33-0.95). This finding was slightly attenuated after further
mutlivariable adjustment (HR=0.62, 0.36-1.08). The statistically
significant inverse association appeared to be restricted to men who used
lipid medications for ≥10 years (vs. never use: HR=0.39, 95%
CI=0.19-0.82, p-trend=0.02). Lipid medication use was inversely
associated with a reduced risk of prostate cancer death in both white and
black men. Conclusions: Use of lipid medications was associated with a
lower risk of fatal prostate cancer in both black and white men. Whether
the fact that black men are less likely to receive/take lipid medications
could partly explain the black-white disparity in prostate cancer in the
US requires further study.

Support: NHLBI contracts, NCI grant, NPCR


