Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the viromes in pediatric cancers through whole
genome sequencing.


Viral infections have been associated with the development of adult
cancers such as cervical carcinomas and head/neck cancers. However, there
is lack of clear understanding of the composition of virome in pediatric
cancers. Here, we made the first attempt to identify differentially
enriched viral communities in biological material from pediatric cancer
patients, and to predict virus integration sites that may be associated
with etiology or tumor progression of pediatric cancers.

The Pediatric Cancer Genome project (PCGP) has previously generated
whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data of matched cancer-normal samples for
over 600 pediatric patients from three classes of cancers: leukemia,
solid tumors, and central nervous system (CNS) cancers. We re-constructed
the virome composition profiles in each sample based on the unmapped and
partially mapped Illumina reads extracted from the PCGP WGS data.
Taxonomic assignments of the extracted read data were conducted using the
Kraken metagenomic pipeline and virus integration sites were predicted by
the VyPER pipeline. Custom scripts were used for downstream comparative
analyses.

A comparison of the alpha diversity of each virome indicated that the
tumor samples in general have a lower diversity compared to the normal
samples across all tumor types. This trend holds true in leukemia, where
both tumor and normal samples were blood derived, suggesting that this is
not due to different origins of the tumor samples.

Ordination analyses based on the viral composition identified distinct
clusters in the three classes of cancers. These clusters were formed
mainly by samples of medulloblastoma for CNS, T-ALL and hypodiploid B-ALL
for leukemia, retinoblastoma and rhabdomyosarcoma for solid tumors.
Viruses, such as phages, herpesviraidae and several sarcoma viruses, were
differentially enriched in these clusters.

Potential integration with retroviruses or herpesviruses was predicted at
a high frequency. Less frequent integration events were also detected
with known oncogenic viruses, such as simian virus 40 and human
adenovirus C, which were under deep sequencing validation.

In summary, our comprehensive characterization of the virome in a wide
spectrum of pediatric cancers revealed a potential connection between
specific viral communities and integration sites in certain distinct
types of pediatric cancers. Our findings highlight a possible mechanism
underlying the tumor progression in pediatric patients.


