Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment, characterization and drug response of primary and
metastatic prostate organoids.


Introduction & objectives: Prostate cancer (PCa)-associated mortality
results from metastasis to bone and resistance to androgen deprivation or
cytotoxic therapy. Despite early detection of primary PCa, advanced
castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) and bone metastases (BM) are
detected in 10% of patients already at the time of initial diagnosis. The
majority of recurrences might be due to cancer cells with stem cell-like
properties (cancer stem cell-like, CSC-like). These could be
therapy-resistant in a dormant state at the primary site or have
metastasize prior to diagnosis of the primary tumor. CSC-like cells are
the most tumorigenic and metastatic, however, current treatments target
the differentiated tumor bulk cells. Understanding the mechanisms of PCa
tumor initiation and metastasis by CSC-like cells is crucial for proper
prognosis of high risk patient groups.

Materials & methods: To model CSC-like cells we generated organoids from
patient-derived tissues (here termed as “canceroids”) and established
patient-derived xenografts (PDXs). Canceroids were derived from bulk
tumor tissues; primary PCa, bone metastasis from PCa tissue (BM-PCa),
established PDX models LAPC9 and BM18 and lymph node (LN) metastasis from
PCa (LAPC4) PDX models. Cytotoxic compounds and androgen inhibitors are
tested on the canceroids from different BM or LN tissues using viability
assays (CellTiter Glo assay) and 3D imaging by confocal and light sheet
microscopy.

Results: We have generated several canceroid lines from human primary PCa
and from established PDX models that maintain key features of the
CSC-like cells, previously characterized on the tumor itself (AR, PSA,
Cytokeratins). The luminal phenotype of BM18 is evidently maintained in
the BM18 canceroids, based on positive cytokeratin (CK)18 and absent CK5
expression. LAPC4 organoids contain CK5 and CK18 cells, in line with the
mixed basal and luminal phenotype. Imaging of PSA and cytokeratin
distribution confirms the luminal phenotype of the canceroids. BM18 and
LAPC9 canceroids are maintained both in presence and absence of
dihydrotestosterone indicating that androgen independent growth
properties of the tumor are conserved in the canceroids. Viability assays
indicate that canceroids respond to chemotherapeutics (cabacitaxel,
docetaxel) and partially to hormone inhibitors (abiraterone,
enzalutamide).

Conclusions: Identification of the oncogenic properties of metastatic
CSC-like (sub)populations has both prognostic and therapeutic
applications. Establishment of CSC-derived organoids is the first step
towards routine derivation from metastasis or primary PCa tissues as a
potential platform for personalized drug compound evaluation.


