Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of CTGF in hyperthermia resistance in ovarian and uterine
cancers.


Objective. Even though hyperthermia is a promising treatment for cancer,
multiple obstacles remain to be cleared. Among these, the tumor
temperatures that must be reached for obtaining clinical efficacy are
undefined. The purpose of our study was to identify the molecular
predictors of response to hyperthermia in ovarian and uterine cancers.

Methods. The temperature transition in tumors during hyperthermic
intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) in ovarian cancer patients was
examined. To evaluate sensitivity to hyperthermia, 10 ovarian and uterine
cancer cells were treated with hyperthermia and determined median lethal
temperature 50 (LT50). An integrative analysis was performed to identify
molecules associated with hyperthermia resistance by comparison with gene
and protein expression between hyperthermia-resistant (HTR) and
-sensitive (HTS) cells. The effect of identified gene silencing on
sensitization to hyperthermia and tumor growth in orthotopic models of
ovarian cancers by using liposomal siRNA and local hyperthermia by NIR
and CuS nanoparticles.

Results. The temperature during HIPEC in human tumors was Results. The
temperature during HIPEC in human tumors was < 40°C even though the
perfusion temperature at the entrance was maintained at 42.5°C. Based on
LT50, we identified 5 cell lines as HTR (SKOV3, HeyA8, KLE, PEO4, and
ES2; LT50 47.5 ± 0.3°C) and 5 as HTS (A2780, A2780CP20, Hec-1A,
SKKUT-2, and ISHIKAWA; LT50 45.5 ± 0.2°C). Gene expression studies
identified 15 genes that were highly upregulated in HTR compared with HTS
cells. Proteomic analyses showed that glucose metabolism-related proteins
were down-regulated in SKOV3 cells after hyperthermia. Pathway analysis
indicated that FN1, SGK1, and CTGF among the 15 genes were potentially
connected with glucose metabolism-related proteins. CTGF siRNA sensitized
HTR cells to hyperthermia. The combination of CTGF silencing and local
hyperthermia significantly inhibited tumor growth and metastasis in HeyA8
and SKOV3 orthotopic models.

Conclusion. Collectively, we identified CTGF as a key target for
enhancing response to hyperthermia in ovarian and uterine cancers.


