Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromatin unfolding small molecules as a novel type of anticancer
agents.


Although targeted therapy was the major focus of anti-cancer drug
development, recently revealed enormous heterogeneity of tumors planted a
seed of doubt in it as a potential cure for cancer. Very few universal
cancer targets are known and they lack cancer specificity. DNA is one of
this sort, but activity of drugs targeting DNA was traditionally
attributed to their ability to block DNA replication and cause DNA damage
with a plethora of harmful long lasting effects in normal cells. We have
found that reversible binding of DNA by non-DNA damaging small molecules,
curaxins, has strong anticancer effect in different preclinical models
without deleterious consequences associated with DNA damage (REF). In
this study we explained the mechanism of activity of curaxin clinical
lead, CBL0137, through alteration of chromatin organization in tumor
cells. Intercalation of the curaxin carbazole moiety between base pairs
and DNA major and minor groove binding with curaxin side chains cause an
increase in inter base pair distance and untwisting of the double helix
(~18o). Such alteration of DNA helical shape leads to decreased
nucleosome stability and chromatin opening, creating sites for the high
affinity binding of histone chaperone complex FACT. We named this
phenomenon “chromatin trapping of FACT” or c-trapping. Consequences
of C-trapping are much more deleterious for tumor, than for normal cells.
First, c-trapping is an equivalent of functional inactivation of FACT.
FACT is critical for oncogenic transformation and tumor, but not normal
cell, viability and growth (REF). FACT is essential for the activity of
several transcription factors, such as NF-kappaB, HSF1, MYC etc., with
important roles in tumor cell proliferation and survival (REF). Further,
deregulation of transcription caused by curaxin-dependent chromatin
decondensation leads to upregulation of transcription from
heterochromatin. This leads to the formation of double stranded RNAs from
centromeric and pericentromeric repetitive elements, which mimics a viral
infection and induces an IFN response, a powerful inhibitor of tumor cell
growth. Additionally, c-trapping of FACT leads to casein kinase 2
mediated phosphorylation and activation of wild type p53 leading to
p53-dependent death of cells. Thus non-DNA damaging DNA binding small
molecules compromise cancer cell viability via alteration of nucleosome
stability and chromatin organization. This is a novel mechanism of
anti-cancer activity of small molecules with broad applicability to
different types of cancer while lacking the harmful effects of DNA
damaging chemotherapy.


