Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LncRNA HAND2-AS1 inactivates neuromedin U (NMU) and inhibits tumor
invasion and metastasis in endometrioid endometrial carcinoma.


Background

Endometrioid endometrial carcinoma (EEC) is one of the common cause of
cancer-related mortality in women. Despite progress in diagnostics and
treatment of EEC, its prognosis remains poor. Mounting evidence suggest
that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) function in mutiple human cancers.
Aberrant lncRNA expression may predict tumor outcome of patients and have
served as diagnostic or prognostic markers. In this study, we
investigated the expression levels and functions of lncRNAs in EEC.

Methods

Differentially expressed lncRNAs involved in EEC were identified by using
publically available RNA-Seq data. The expression of 18 dysregulated
lncRNA candidates was verified in 5 NE tissues, 5 EEC tissues and 5 EEC
cell lines (HEC1-A, HEC1-B, AN3CA, KLE and RL95-2) by real-time
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Further, we selected the most
misexpressed lncRNA and confirmed the expression level of the lncRNA in
59 EEC tissues and 24 NE tissues by real-time PCR and correlated the
lncRNA expression levels with the clinical pathological characteristics.
The promoter methylation assay was used to analyze the methylation level
of the lncRNA in EEC. The lncRNA methylation status was confirmed by
bisulfite genomic sequencing. Cell proliferation assays, wound healing
assays, and invasion and migration assays were performed to determine the
biological functions of the lncRNA in EEC cells. To discover the direct
targets of the lncRNA in EEC, we performed RNA-sequence analysis in EEC
cells overexpressed with the lncRNA and target genes were further studied
by functional studies in vitro (knockdown assay and overexpression rescue
assay).

Results

We discovered that HAND2-AS1, a lncRNA transcribed antisense adjacent to
Heart and Neural Crest Derivatives Expressed 2 (HAND2), was significantly
downregulated lncRNA in EEC. HAND2-AS1 and HAND2 was frequently
downregulated in EEC tissues, especially in poor differentiated tumor
tissues. Downregulation of HAND2-AS1 and HAND2 was correlated with tumor
grade, lymph node metastasis and recurrence of EEC patients. HAND2-AS1
and HAND2 was co-downregulated by promoter hypermethylation in EEC.
HAND2-AS1 suppressed EEC cell migration and invasion but not cell growth.
Similarly, HAND2 also inhibited EEC cell migration and invasion
indicating that HAND2-AS1 and HAND2 have a concordant role in the
progression of EEC. Moreover, the anti-tumorigenic effect of HAND2-AS1
was mediated by downregulating NMU, which had an oncogenic role in EEC.

Conclusions

Our findings provide the first evidence that HAND2-AS1 is a critical
tumor suppressor in EEC and may constitute a prognostic biomarker in EEC.


