Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying novel potential epigenetic anti-cancer drugs from
natural compounds using a phenotypic-based screening.


Epigenetic aberrations such as DNA hypermethylation and repressive
chromatin are validated targets for cancer chemotherapy. Since epigenetic
modifications are reversible, the goal of epigenetic therapy is to
reverse the abnormal alternations in cancer cells and induce tumor
suppressor gene reactivation, leading to cancer cell differentiation and
cell death. Many known anti-cancer drugs are derived from natural
compounds and there have been reports of natural compounds modulating
epigenetic activity. To explore this idea, our lab developed a
phenotypic-based system (YB5) by stably transfecting SW48 cells with a
vector containing GFP driven by a methylated and silenced CMV promoter.
GFP re-expression can be achieved by known epigenetic drugs that lead to
demethylation or induce active chromatin marks in the CMV promoter. By
screening an NDL-3040 natural compounds library and grouping the
compounds based on chemical structures, we identified two main drug
classes. We then synthesized 77 new analogs based on class #1’s
lead’s structure and 23 were positive in the YB5 system. The most
potent analog (HH2) can induce ~60% GFP+ cells upon 500nM treatment after
96hr. All the positive hits can also be validated in two other cancer
cell lines (MCF7 and HCT116). Consistent with GFP reactivation,
endogenous hypermethylated genes (MGMT, RARβ, etc) can also be
re-expressed upon drug treatment. We then performed RNA-seq analysis to
identify global gene expression changes following drug treatment. We
observed that most genes (2964 genes) were upregulated upon HH1 treatment
(10uM) and that many of the upregulated genes were expressed in normal
tissues but repressed in cancer, indicating that they might be potential
tumor suppressor genes (TSGs). Consistent with this, 94 TSGs could be
reactivated upon 10uM drug treatment. These drug target upregulated genes
were also enriched for hypermethylation. By performing connectivity
mapping using RNA-seq, we identified X as the class #1 drug target. The
on-target effect could be further validated by using other selective X
inhibitors as well as a dominant negative X construct. Consistent with
drug inhibition, dominant-negative X can also reactivate drug targeted
hypermethylated genes. Additionally, when we overexpressed wild-type X,
we saw that GFP induction as well as endogenous gene reactivations can be
inhibited. Strikingly, by using GFP induction as readout to optimize
drugs, we found that the in vitro IC50 against X for our top lead
compound (HH2) is only 5nM and it is at least 22-fold selective for X
over other X family members. Thus, a novel epigenetic drug class derived
from natural compounds was identified and can be developed by targeting
silenced gene expression.


