Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic interconversion of cancer cells: single-cell analysis of
population-based equilibrium.


Background Multiple subpopulations of cells with different phenotypes and
genotypes coexist within malignant tumours. Different subpopulations seem
to maintain themselves in an equilibrium position via stochastic
interconversion. Such plasticity plays an important role in cancer
progression, such as transition from epithelial states to mesenchymal
state during metastasis, dedifferentiation of non-CSCs to CSCs and rapid
transition to MDR cells during drug exposure. We attempt to explore this
interconversion plasticity at both population and single cell levels to
better understand the dynamics of phenotypic transition.

Methods: We isolated CD90+ and CD90- cells from A549 lung adenocarcinoma
cell line by flow cytometry and then characterized their phenotypic
behaviors and interconversion dynamics at both population and single
cells level. Single cells were cultured in 96 well plate for 13 days.
Viable cells were then transferred into 6 well plate for further
expansion until enough cells were collected for measurement of CD90
expression in flow cytometry.

Results: A549 maintains a stable expression of CD90 (~50%) which is
bimodal distributed. The sorted subpopulations eventually achieved a new
equilibrium (CD90+ à 60% , CD90 - à 30%) and did not converge during
the bulk cell interconversion. Individual single cell clones showed large
variation of CD90 expression. The distribution of CD90 expression was
significantly different between CD90+ and CD90- single cell clones, while
both groups of clones achieved a similar average equilibrium as compared
with the bulk cells. We noted two types of clones defined as transition
clones and committed clones with differential interconversion capacities.
The later one showed no sign of interconversion and was committed to the
original CD90+/- expression level. Further experiments showed that the
committed CD90+ cells were more mesenchymal with higher migration
ability, while the committed CD90- cells were more epithelial and
tumorigenic.

Conclusions: Interconversion plasticity varied from cell to cell and the
committed cells prohibited the return of sorted cell subpopulations
returned back to the original equilibrium. Phenotypic studies of CD90+
and CD90- revealed that the interconversion between them was EMT related.


