Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Side effects of BRAF inhibitors mimic RASopathies.


Recent advances in targeted anticancer therapies have substantially
improved the prognosis of several cancers but they are not free of side
effects. These side effects are, however, clearly distinct from those
induced by classical cytotoxic chemotherapies, likely because targeted
therapies are designed to interfere with specific oncogenic signaling
pathways and not to inhibit cell proliferation in general. We, therefore,
evaluated whether specific side effects of BRAF inhibitor therapies would
resemble symptoms seen in patients with RASopathies, in which the MAPK
pathway is affected and which includes Costello, Noonan and
Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous syndromes. To this end, we collected a cohort of
18 patients with genetically confirmed RASopathies that were followed
between 2012 and 2016 at the University Hospital of Rennes, France and
that were evaluated based on their personal medical history and a
clinical examination. Strikingly, RASopathy patients, particularly those
with Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous syndrome, showed symptoms resembling those
that we and others have previously seen in genetically characterized
patients undergoing BRAF inhibitor treatment. These symptoms included
keratosis pilaris, wavy hair, sparse eyelashes/eyebrows, poor hair
growth, palmo-plantar hyperkeratosis in areas of pressure, verrucous
papillomas, nevi efflorescence, and increased cancer risk. Nevertheless,
BRAF-inhibitor treatment can also lead to side effects not typically
found in patients with RASopathies, including acneiform dermatitis and
vemurafenib-specific phototoxicity, which may even increase under a
combined BRAF/MEK inhibition. These results suggest that the side effects
of BRAF inhibition that are similar to symptoms in patients with
RASopathies are due to direct targeting of the MAPK pathway in
BRAF-non-mutated (wild type) cells while those that are dissimilar
represent off-target effects that do not affect the MAPK pathway. We hope
that this type of comparative analysis may lead to a better understanding
of the multiple effects of targeted therapies and perhaps prompt
modifications in the targeted therapy approach to minimize these side
effects.


