Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An evaluation of DNA and RNA based blood biomarkers in prostate
cancer.


Background: Prostate cancer (CaP) is the second-leading cause of male
cancer-related mortality in Western societies. Localised prostate cancer
(Loc-CaP) can be classified into low-, intermediate-, or high-risk
groups. Active surveillance is recommended for low-risk patients, whereas
radiotherapy or surgery is often indicated in intermediate- and high-risk
patients, with possible intensification using hormone therapy treatment.
Despite advances in radiation delivery and surgery, ~20% of patients will
not be cured with local treatment and require androgen deprivation
therapy (ADT). The majority will develop resistance to ADT resulting in
castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) with poor prognosis and
increased risk of metastatic disease (mCRPC). Biomarkers are being
developed based on tumour biopsies which may help stratify patients and
allow more effective treatment. However tumour biopsies are invasive,
demanding for patients and surgeons as well as challenging for
longitudinal sampling. Here we evaluate a range of blood biomarkers
suitable for longitudinal sampling including circulating tumour cells
(CTCs), circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) and Tumour educated platelet mRNA
(TEP-RNA).

Methods: A blood sampling, processing and banking pipeline has been
established for CaP patients providing ctDNA, enriched and single CTCs as
well as TEP-RNA. Following ctDNA isolation, next generation sequencing
(NGS) libraries are prepared to generate copy number alteration (CNA)
data and mutation profiles. CTCs are enriched using both the epitope
independent Parsortix (P-CTC) (Chudziak J. et al, 2016) and the epitope
dependent (EPCAM and KRT19) CellSearch (CS-CTC) platforms. Genomic
analysis of CTCs is carried out by NGS of whole genome amplified (WGA)
single and pooled CTCs. CTC and TEP-RNA mRNA profiles are established
using both the Fluidigm RT qPCR (Fluidigm Biomark™ HD system) and
RNA-Seq.

Results: Over 160 Loc-CaP and 100 mCRPC blood samples have been
collected, processed and banked. In keeping with published data 53% of
the 100 mCRPC patients have &gt5 CS-CTCs (a poor prognostic indicator)
compared to 100% of Loc-CaP having 1000 fold enrichment of epithelial
mRNAs post Parsortix CTC enrichment indicate an equivalent enrichment of
the “spiked in” cells. Similar epithelial mRNA enrichment was seen in
3/5 mCRPC clinical samples tested. Tumour associated CNA changes were
clearly detected in at least 15 of the 1st 22 mCRPC ctDNA samples. Sample
processing and statistical analysis is ongoing to evaluate if these blood
biomarkers, either alone or in combination, can be linked to clinical
status or outcome.


