Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Demonstrated improvements in tumor profiling with enzymatic
ribosomal RNA depletion and streamlined RNA-sequencing library
preparation.


High resolution RNA analysis using next-generation sequencing (RNA-seq)
is a rapidly growing application in cancer research. Formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue is a ubiquitous resource for clinical
studies. However, the ability to generate high quality libraries is
confounded by the low quality and yield of RNA extracted from FFPE
specimen. To enable optimal interrogation of such a clinically-relevant
tissue resource, it is critical to identify RNA-seq library construction
workflows that improve performance using challenging and degraded sample
types. In this study, the effects of RNA type, quality, and quantity on
RNA-seq library construction are assessed, and expectations regarding
sequencing data quality are addressed. Included are recommendations for
quality control measures and input-specific modifications that may
improve performance Three workflows employing either bead-based or
enzymatic strategies for the removal of ribosomal RNA content were used
to prepare RNA-seq libraries from degraded paired breast normal and tumor
samples. Enzymatic depletion followed by library preparation using the
KAPA RNA HyperPrep1 workflow identified the highest number of transcripts
for each sample, translating to a 4.9-fold increase in number of
differentially expressed transcripts detected between normal and tumor
samples. Of the transcripts identified as differentially expressed
exclusively by Kapa, 174 are protein-coding RNAs, many of which are
frequently dysregulated in breast cancer. In contrast, only two
protein-coding RNAs were identified exclusively by the alternative
workflows. RealTime Ready Custom panels were used for independent
quantitative rt-PCR assessment. Of a subset of 71 transcripts identified
exclusively by Kapa, up to 69 (97%) were validated as differentially
expressed. Additional performance improvements of the KAPA RNA HyperPrep
workflow include coverage balance across transcripts, lower duplication
rate, technical replicate reproducibility, agreement across input
quantities, and gene expression concordance between paired fresh frozen
and FFPE samples. 1For Research Use Only. Not for use in diagnostic
procedures.


