Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNA expression reflects site specificity of metastatic
colorectal cancer.


Colorectal Cancer (CRC) is one of the leading causes of cancer related
deaths in the western world, and metastatic progression is the dominating
cause of mortality. The primary site of CRC metastasis is the liver,
followed by the lungs and peritoneal cavity, and prognosis for patients
with metastatic CRC (mCRC) is poor, with only 10 % five-year survival.
Although much is known about progression and metastasis of CRC; how
primary CRC (pCRC) differs from mCRC on the molecular level and potential
differences between metastases located in different organs are
incompletely understood. This is important for our understanding of the
disease, but also could have significant implications with respect to
treatment. MicroRNAs have been shown to be key elements in cancer
progression, but recent reports on CRC failed to consistently identify
microRNA signatures of metastatic progression. We have addressed this
using a smallRNA sequencing approach to analyze primary tumors and a set
of liver, lung and peritoneal metastases, including corresponding
adjacent tissue (colon, liver, lung, peritoneum). Further, we use the
highly curated and updated microRNA reference MirGeneDB.org, the novel
pipeline MirAthon - including a correction-algorithm of benign tissue
microRNA signatures for tumor or metastatic samples, and we compare pCRC
and site specific metastases separately. We are able to show that
microRNA profiles of mCRC are distinct to pCRC in a site-specific manner.
We identify a small panel of differentially expressed microRNAs including
isoforms (isomiRs) hidden under a layer of benign signatures that we
confirmed in other available datasets, too. Our findings will help better
understand metastatic progression and site-specificity in CRC and could
be potential biomarkers for mCRC.

Our work identifies microRNA signatures of mCRC and suggest that microRNA
signatures reflect mCRC site specificity. Furthermore, the results
underline the importance of using a curated reference for microRNA
studies, and to differentiate metastases based on their localization ab
initio.


