Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of sox2 and oct4 in human oral squamous cell carcinoma
and its relationship with clinical factors.


Background: A cancer stem cell (cancer initiating cell, CSC) is
considered capable of self -replication, self-differentiation, drug
resistance, and immune evasion. Recently, CSC has become increasingly
important in the treatment of malignant tumors. Cancer stem cells express
specific molecules termed CSC marker, including sex determining region
Y-box2 (SOX2), and octamer-binding transcription factor 4 (Oct4), and
their expression has been reported to be the potential prognostic values.
However, the prognostic values of SOX2 and Oct4 expression in patients
with oral cancer are less understood. [Purpose]The aims of present study
were to evaluate the expression of SOX2 and Oct4 in oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) and to elucidate the relationships among the CSC marker
expression, clinical stages, histological differentiation, the
classification of invasion mode, cerebral lymph node metastasis, distant
metastasis, and disease-free survival rate.

Materials and Methods: Tissue specimens were obtains from 108 patients
with OSCC after surgery or biopsy. Immunohistochemistry was used to
assess SOX2 and Oct4 protein using at least 10% staining-positive cells
as the definition of positive staining. Results: Immunohistochemical
analysis of 108 cases showed that 42 cases (39%) expressed SOX2. There
was no significant association between SOX2 expression and tumor size,
invasion mode or histological differentiation. However, there was
significant association between SOX2 expression and distant metastasis or
disease-free survival rate at stage 1 and 2 patients (73 cases).
Otherwise, seventy cases (65%) cases of 108 OSCC patients expressed Oct4.
There was significant association between Oct4 expression and
histological differentiation. There was no significant association
between Oct4 expression and tumor size, invasion mode, metastasis, or
disease-free survival rate.

Conclusions: These findings suggested that the expression of SOX2 may be
good marker indicating survival in patients with OSCC.


