Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic inflammation contributes to neoplastic progression in
prostate tissue: a needle biopsy study.


The relationship between inflammation and prostate cancer has not been
established, although chronic inflammation has frequently been identified
in prostate biopsies, radical prostatectomy and benign prostatic
hyperplasia specimens. In the peripheral zone of the prostate, sometimes
adjacent to foci of high-grade PIN and cancer, certain morphologic
changes are often identified, which may represent active and terminal
phases of chronic inflammation. These changes are designated as
proliferative inflammatory atrophy (PIA) and post atrophic hyperplasia
(PAH), and their morphology is well documented. In our previous studies,
we have identified chronic inflammation as a putative contributor to
neoplastic progression in prostate epithelial cells, and hypothesized
that its adverse effects were related to an increase in Bcl2, a survival
protein involved in cell survival and carcinogenesis. We hypothesize that
changes in the stromal microenvironment, characterized by infiltration of
immune cells, with generation of reactive oxygen species, can induce
oxidative stress in the surrounding proliferating epithelium and cause
permanent genomic alterations. In the present study, we focused on
several key proteins involved in the inflammatory process, COX2 and iNOS;
cell survival, Bcl2 and GSTPπ; and evaluated immunohistochemical
expression of alpha-methylacyl coenzyme A racemase (AMACR) and basal
cell-specific markers 34βE12 and/or p63 to evaluate possible neoplastic
alterations in epithelial cells in an inflammatory environment. We
evaluated 16 prostate core needle biopsy specimens that exhibited the
presence of chronic inflammation as well as PIA and PAH lesions along
with immunohistochemical staining for various markers was performed in
each set of biopsies. The integrity of the basal layer was maintained in
the area of chronic inflammation with high expression of p63 in 72% of
these cells. Approximately 68% of luminal cells expressed high to
moderate levels of iNOS and COX-2, whereas 55% of these cells express
modest levels of GSTP1 and Bcl2. Interestingly, prostatic glands near the
areas of chronic inflammation in the PIA lesions exhibit high AMACR
expression in luminal cells and weak to patchy p63 expression in basal
cells, which was associated with increased expression of the inflammatory
markers COX2 and iNOS, as well as loss in pro-survival signal GSTP1 and
Bcl2 in the adjacent luminal cells. These neoplastic alterations were
observed in 6/16 (38%) of the needle biopsy specimens. Our findings
suggest that basal cells undergo alterations in a setting of chronic
inflammation. This is important because basal cells are considered to be
progenitor cells capable of differentiating into secretory luminal cells,
but under the influence of chronic inflammation, they may instead
transform into the neoplastic cells that characterize high grade
prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and prostatic adenocarcinoma.


