Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological downregulation of BFL-1 by the BET bromodomain
inhibitor CPI203 overcomes ABT-199 resistance in MYC+/BCL2+ double hit
lymphoma.


Double-hit lymphoma (DHL) is a rare subtype of B-cell lymphoma
characterized by MYC and either BCL2 or BCL6 chromosomal rearrangements.
DHL cases may have different morphology and are included in the updated
2016 WHO classification as a new category of high grade B-cell lymphoma
with rearrangements. DHL patients usually undergo a rapidly progressing
clinical course and are poorly responsive to standard
chemo-immunotherapy. As a consequence, the prognosis of this entity is
particularly poor with a median overall survival of approximately one
year.

ABT-199 (venetoclax) is a potent and selective small-molecule antagonist
of BCL-2 recently approved for the treatment of some lymphoid
malignancies. In this study, we demonstrate that single-agent ABT-199
efficiently displaces pro-apoptotic BAX from BCL-2 complexes but fails to
maintain a significant antitumor activity over time in most MYC+/BCL2+
DHL cell lines and primary cultures, as well as in a xenograft mouse
model of DHL. We further identify the accumulation of the BCL2-like
protein, BFL-1, to be a major mechanism involved in acquired resistance
to ABT-199. We show this phenomenon to be manageable by the BET
bromodomain inhibitor CPI203, since gene expression profiling identifies
BCL2A1 as one of the top apoptosis-related gene modulated by the
compound. Upon CPI203 treatment, simultaneous downregulation of MYC and
BFL-1 at both mRNA and protein levels further overcomes resistance to
ABT-199 both in vitro and in vivo, allowing DHL cultures and tumor
xenografts to undergo synergistic caspase-mediated apoptosis.

Together, these findings highlight the relevance of BFL-1 in
DHL-associated drug resistance and support the combined use of BCL-2
antagonist and BET inhibitor as a promising therapeutic strategy in
patients with aggressive DHL.


