Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of estrogen signaling in colon microenvironment during
obesity.


Recent epidemiological studies highlight the strong association between
high body mass index (BMI) and enhanced risk of colon cancer. This
association appears stronger in men than in women, indicating a possible
protective role of estrogens in this context. The biological action of
the estrogens is mediated by specific transcription factors, the estrogen
receptors (ERs). ERβ is the main ER in the intestine; and it is
expressed in both epithelial cells and immune cells. Anti-inflammatory
and anti-tumorigenic effects of ERβ in colitis-associated neoplasia have
been demonstrated. Several rodent models for obesity show an impaired
intestinal epithelial barrier function and an increase of
pro-inflammatory markers in the colon. Moreover, in murine colitis
models, high fat diet (HFD) exacerbates colonic inflammation. However,
the specific molecular mechanisms linking obesity to increased colon
cancer development, where estrogen signaling may be involved, is not
clear.

We hypothesize that ERβ-selective agonists can oppose the HFD-mediated
inflammatory pro-tumorigenic colonic signalling in a gender-specific
manner during obesity, and thereby protect against colorectal cancer. Our
study is focused on the initiation of colon inflammation during obesity
and aims to investigate the impact of ERβ activation in this context. To
address this question, male and female mice were fed a HFD for 26 weeks
and treated with a ERβ-selective agonist for 3 weeks prior sacrifice.
Stool pellets were regularly collected. Animals were sacrificed; colon
samples and caecal contents were collected for further analysis. We show
that the expression pattern of inflammatory genes in colon is modified by
the ERβ-selective agonist in HFD fed mice. Moreover the ERβ-selective
agonist appears to induce gender-specific changes of the microbiota of
HFD-fed mice. Our results show that an ERβ-selective agonist can
modulate the colon microenvironment during obesity in mice and will
provide a better comprehension of the molecular mechanisms leading to
obesity-associated colonic inflammation.


