Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CellMinerCDB: Enabling cross-database exploration of molecular
pharmacology data and response determinant discovery in cancer cell lines.


Cancer cell line panels are widely used for evaluating drug response
across diverse tissue types. A growing set of molecular profiling data
complements measurements of chemosensitivity, providing novel avenues for
response determinant discovery and clinical translation. Accessing and
inter-relating data from different sources is essential for evaluating
such determinants, but remains challenging. To enable wider access to
cell line pharmacogenomic data, we have developed CellMinerCDB (CellMiner
Cross-Database, discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminercdb), a web application
integrating data from several widely studied cancer cell line panels,
including the NCI-60 (NIH), GDSC (Sanger/MGH), and CCLE/CTRP (Broad). All
together, our database spans over 1300 distinct cell lines, 400
clinically relevant cancer drugs, 20,000 experimental compounds, and
molecular profiling data, such as gene/protein expression, DNA copy,
methylation, and mutational status. Cell line and tested drug overlaps
allow cross-database validation of genomic and drug data, and
CellMinerCDB simplifies this by transparently matching differently named
entities between sources. Data exploration can be additionally restricted
to particular tissue types, with individual cell lines annotated to the
OncoTree ontology for consistent treatment across sources.

A range of analysis tools support interactive data exploration, from 2D
plots of drug response and molecular profiling features to exhaustive
correlation analyses and multivariate predictive models. We illustrate
the power and utility of CellMinerCDB with examples of response
determinant discovery and predictive modeling for Top1 and PARP
inhibitors. Beginning with established individual determinants, such as
SLFN11 mRNA expression, we show how both unbiased and biological
knowledge network-based feature selection methods enable iterative
refinement of a multivariate genomic signature of drug response. For Top
1 inhibitors, additional predictive features include expression of
chromatin remodeling factors and genes modulating apoptosis capacity,
while complementary PARP inhibitor response determinants include PARP1
and drug efflux pump expression. Pathway and process-based gene
annotations allow biological interpretation of response predictive
features. CellMinerCDB also includes ongoing algorithmic work to improve
the construction of multivariate predictive models using constraints from
biological networks. These approaches bridge a limiting gap in existing
methods, which either ignore biological knowledge altogether or are
limited to exploration within known pathways and processes.


