Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting hepatocellular carcinoma through TGF-β pathway E3
ligases.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the 3rd leading cause of cancer deaths
worldwide, and rising in the United States at an alarming rate. Multiple
E3 ubiquitin ligases such as the SMURFs and RINGH2 proteins have been
identified as negative regulators of the TGF-β pathway. However, to our
knowledge, there remains a gap in the integration between genomics,
underlying mechanisms and the development of targeted therapeutics
harnessing these TGF-β-associated E3 ligases for HCC. The aim of this
study is to elucidate the role of E3 ligases in HCC, through TCGA
analyses and provide mechanistic insight into these as therapeutic
targets for HCC. We first analyzed the 488 hepatocellular cancers and
screened for alterations in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).
Immunohistochemistry (IHC), Q-PCR, Western blot analysis were used to
validate the expression levels of two of the most highly altered E3
ligases, PRAJA and Keap1 in hepatocellular cancer tissues and cell lines
in human and in TGF-β-deficient β2SP+/- mouse models. Inhibition
studies of PRAJA and Keap1 were performed by lentivirus shRNA in HCC cell
lines, and xenograft studies. From the TCGA data, we observe two
different signatures (activated and inactivated) for 18 TGF-β pathway
genes. While increased levels of TGF-β-related transcripts were
associated with activation of hepatic fibrosis/immune microenvironment
pathways, decreased levels of TGF-β members were associated with loss of
TGF-β tumor suppressor function. HCCs characterized by the
“inactivated” TGF-β signature were associated with a significantly
poorer survival, compared to HCCs with the “activated” TGF-β
signature (p=0.0027). We next analyzed 29 TGF-β-related E3 ligases, and
observed raised expression of the following: PRAJA1 (12.7% of HCCs),
KEAP1 (6.4%), UCHL5 (16.4%), WWP2 (11.8%), WWP1 (10%), Smurf2 (9.1%),
Skp2 (9.1%), and Smurf1 (8.2%). Interestingly, expression patterns
corresponded with a few TGF-β signaling members regulated by some of
these E3 ligases, namely Smad3 (altered in 54%) and β2SP (27%). We
identified that PRAJA1 targets Smad3 and β2SP for ubiquitination and
degradation. We further observe raised levels of PRAJA (25%) and KEAP1
(70%) in 176 human liver cancers, by IHC, compared to normal controls.
Depletion of PRAJA and KEAP1 with either shRNAs or E3 ligase inhibitors,
substantially inhibited growth and induced apoptosis through
PRAJA/Smad3/β2SP and KEAP1/Nrf signaling in HCC cell lines and
xenografts. These results suggest that E3 ligases such as PRAJA1 and
KEAP1 may be valuable therapeutic targets for liver cancer in the context
of TGF-β signaling, an important approach given that few effective
targeted therapeutics are available for this cancer with poor prognosis.


