Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ASN004, a novel 5T4-targeted Dolaflexin ADC, achieves complete
regressions and tumor-free survivors in a broad variety of solid tumor
models.


ASN004 is an Antibody Drug Conjugate (ADC) that targets the 5T4 oncofetal
antigen (trophoblast glycoprotein). High expression of 5T4 is observed in
a wide range of malignant tumors, while very limited expression is found
in normal tissues. ASN004 incorporates a novel single-chain homo-dimer
antibody, Fleximer® linker technology (Mersana Therapeutics), and
several cytotoxic dolastatin (auristatin) analog warheads per ADC
molecule with a drug/antibody ratio of ~15:1. ASN004 shows high affinity
for the 5T4 antigen (Kd ASN004 is an Antibody Drug Conjugate (ADC) that
targets the 5T4 oncofetal antigen (trophoblast glycoprotein). High
expression of 5T4 is observed in a wide range of malignant tumors, while
very limited expression is found in normal tissues. ASN004 incorporates a
novel single-chain homo-dimer antibody, Fleximer® linker technology
(Mersana Therapeutics), and several cytotoxic dolastatin (auristatin)
analog warheads per ADC molecule with a drug/antibody ratio of ~15:1.
ASN004 shows high affinity for the 5T4 antigen (Kd < 30 pM) and
5T4-expressing tumor cells; rapid cellular internalization; and potent,
selective cytotoxicity. ASN004 provides complete tumor regressions and
tumor-free survivors in multiple tumor xenograft models, derived from
human tumor cell lines having both high and low 5T4 expression levels.
Tumor-free survivors were achieved at doses that are well-tolerated,
based on xenograft body weight measures and exploratory toxicology
studies in pharmacologically-relevant non-human primates. As well,
tumor-free survivors were achieved in xenograft tumor models following
administration of a single dose of ASN004, as low as 1 mg/kg iv. The
broad activity of ASN004 has been demonstrated by its superior efficacy
in a head-to-head study against trastuzumab-DM1, in a low-5T4, high-HER2
expressing tumor xenograft model. Finally, tumor xenografts that
initially responded to ASN004 and later showed tumor regrowth, had not
developed resistance and responded well to subsequent treatment with
ASN004. Overall, ASN004 is demonstrated to be an ADC with high
therapeutic potential in multiple tumor types, encompassing a wide range
of 5T4-expression levels. IND-enabling toxicology studies are ongoing, in
preparation for advancement to clinical studies in patients with solid
tumors.


