Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of KEAP1/NRF2 and TP53 mutations in lung squamous cell
carcinoma development and radiation resistance.


Although lung squamous cell carcinomas (LSCC) comprise a large fraction
of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs), their pathogenesis and cell of
origin remain incompletely understood and biomarkers that predict
therapeutic responses are lacking. Here we describe novel, clinically
relevant murine LSCC models driven by inactivation of Trp53 with or
without Keap1, both of which are frequently mutated in human LSCCs.
Homozygous inactivation of Keap1 or Trp53 promoted airway basal stem cell
(ABSC) self-renewal both in vitro and in in vivo, suggesting that Trp53
or Keap1 mutations lead to expansion of mutant stem cell clones. Deletion
of Trp53 with or without Keap1 in ABSCs, but not more differentiated
tracheal cells, produced tumors recapitulating histologic and molecular
features of human LSCCs. However, deletion of Trp53 with or without Keap1
in type II pneumocytes (ATIIs) or bronchioalveolar stem cells (BASCs)
produced tumors with the features of adenocarcinoma, indicating that
ABSCs represent the likely cell of origin for LSCC in this model.
Deletion of Keap1 promoted tumor growth, metastasis and resistance to
oxidative stress. N-acetylcysteine (NAC) treatment enhanced tumorsphere
formation and metastasis in Keap1WT LSCCs, but not in Keap1-/- LSCCs,
suggesting that NRF2-ROS pathway activation is the main mediator of Keap1
loss. Finally, Keap1 deletion induced radioresistance in vitro and in
vivo in both LSCCs and lung adenocarcinomas (LUADs). Congruous with these
findings, KEAP1/NRF2 mutation status strongly predicted risk of local
recurrence in NSCLC patients treated with RT and these mutations could be
non-invasively identified in circulating tumor DNA. These data suggest
that Trp53 and Keap1 mutations in ABSCs play important roles in LSCC
initiation and progression and identify KEAP1/NRF2 mutations as
predictive biomarkers that could be used for personalization of
therapeutic strategies for NSCLCs, and likely other cancers in which they
are recurrently mutated.


