Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A Rb phosphorylation code associated with lung cancer metastasis.


Lung cancer is characterized by its poor prognosis, aggressiveness, and
proclivity for early metastasis. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
it’s the most common type of lung cancer with a five-year survival rate
of 18%. Most predictors of metastasis and recurrence of NSCLC rely on
post-resection evaluation of tumor histology, which is a severe
limitation since only 15% of the patients are diagnosed with resectable
disease. Hence, there is a need to characterize biomarkers with
metastasis-predicting value in pre-resection small biopsy specimens. In
addition to the proclivity for metastasis, another feature of lung
cancers is the inactivation of the retinoblastoma protein (Rb). The
retinoblastoma protein (Rb) is a tumor suppressor inactivated due to
hyper-phosphorylation in most human cancers, including NSCLC. Our
preliminary data relates the Rb S249/T821 phosphorylation signature to an
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a trait strongly associated
to metastasis. We found that cells that have hyperphosphorylated Rb in
residues S249/T821 express EMT markers such as decreased expression of
E-cadherin and integrin α5 as well as increased expression of
N-cadherin, Vimentin, and p-FAK. We propose to focus on the cell adhesion
and migration-related kinase Cdk5 with its activator p39 as the kinase
responsible for engendering the Rb S249/T821 phosphorylation signature.
Our hypothesis is that Rb phosphorylation in S249 and T821 due to CDK5
activity can have prognostic value by being associated with a metastatic
phenotype and EMT. Studies performed in a tissue microarray in a
population of NSCLC adenocarcinoma that had undergone EMT found an
up-regulation in p39 and that its expression is correlated with
metastasis. Knockdown of CDK5 induced a decrease in phosphorylation of Rb
S249/T821 with a decrease in E-cadherin expression. These data suggest
that CDK5-dependent phosphorylation of Rb can affect cell adhesion by
regulating E-cadherin. Introducing p39 into Rb hypo-phosphorylated cell
line induced an increase in phosphorylation of Rb residues. Furthermore,
the CDK5-p39-Rb axis might point to the explanation and prediction of the
metastatic phenotype in lung cancer.


