Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncovirus detection and integration analysis from human tumor
samples using targeted massively parallel sequencing.


Viruses are a major contributor to oncogenesis, causing 10-15% of human
cancers. Molecular pathways involved in malignant transformation are
frequently activated by genetic alterations, including but not limited
to, somatic mutations, copy number aberrations, structural variants, and
oncoviruses. Precision cancer medicine aims to classify tumors by site,
histology, and molecular tests to determine an “individualized”
profile of cancer alterations. However, clinical tests for these various
alterations are sequential, time consuming, and use a lot of material,
which is often quite limited (e.g., biopsies). Moreover, tests for the
presence of viral sequence are generally performed separately to tests
(such as massively parallel sequencing) to detect human genomic
alterations. Here we present a hybrid capture and massively parallel
sequencing approach to detect viral infection concurrently with targeted
genomic analysis, which may decrease assay costs, increase sensitivity
and scalability, and detect many types of alterations, thereby providing
a more complete tumor genetic profile all from a single sample.

We have created a custom hybrid capture probeset for targeted Illumina
sequencing to determine whether oncoviruses are present in tissue samples
and also determine if the virus has integrated into the host’s genome.
We have created both ‘detection’ and ‘integration’ baits for
several oncoviruses, including polyomaviruses, human papilloma viruses,
Epstein-Barr virus, human cytomegalovirus, Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus,
human T-lymphotropic virus, and hepatitis B virus. To distinguish between
different strains of a single virus, strain-specific detection baits were
created to bind to variable regions of viral genomes. The integration
bait was designed to bind to regions of the viral genomes that are
commonly integrated into the human genome. This baitset can also be
combined with other capture panels targeting oncogenes to simultaneously
determine infection and integration statuses, as well as somatic
mutations, copy number and structural variants.

To detect virus presence, reads were aligned to a hybrid reference of
both the human, and targeted virus genomes. Viral integration status and
integration loci were determined by leveraging discordant read pairs that
aligned to both the human genome and a viral genome. We have tested our
techniques on tissue samples that were infected with either Merkel Cell
Polyomavirus or Epstein-Barr virus, as determined using quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) or immunohistochemistry (IHC)
techniques, and have successfully detected these viruses and identified
viral integration loci. Overall, this viral hybrid capture probeset
provides the ability to simultaneously determine a tissue sample’s
infection and viral integration status alongside other somatic genomic
analyses, saving both time and sample material.


