Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A colorectal cancer organoid library provides a promising
screening tool for assessment of chemosensitivity.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a leading cause of cancer mortality and the
third most common cancer worldwide. Annually, there are more than 900,000
cases occur worldwide, nearly 500,000 of which are fatal. CRC have
accumulated defects in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Many CRCs
likely arise through clonal outgrowth and evolution of an epithelial cell
or cells in an adenomatous precursor lesion via so-called
adenoma-carcinoma sequence. Intensive studies have uncovered that the
spectra of these genetic modifications are highly variable across the
tumors. While genetic changes in tumors of individual patients can be
assessed in several stratified methods, these data still need to be
properly interpreted for necessitating model systems for analysis of
chemosensitivity of CRC patients, which could enable us to organically
coordinate among genotype-to-phenotype correlations, clinicopathological
features and clinical outcomes.

One of the most plausible models for implementing this magnificent scheme
is most likely to be “organoid”, which is a novel 3D intestinal stem
cell culture system and has successfully reconstitute normal and
cancerous colonic crypts in in vitro through using the specific niche
factors in a dish, such as EGF, Wnt3a, Rspondin-1 and Noggin, together
with a TGF-b inhibitor and a p38 inhibitor. Two groups, Van der Wetering
et.al and Fujii et.al, have previously reported the establishment of
organoid biobank of colorectal cancer patients, and both of them proved
the usefulness of this platform for underpinning the significance of
genotype-phenotype analysis in every single patient and providing
insights into tailor-made therapy in CRC.

In this present study, we generated a pairs of cancerous and normal
adjacent organoids from a number of CRC patients and aimed to figure out
sustainability and reproducibility of CRC organoids especially in terms
of phenotypic and genotypic features even after several times of passage.
We compared growth activity and histopathological features of the CRC
organoids among several time points after the passage by evaluating ki-67
labeling index and morphology of the organoids. In order to confirm the
stability of genetic status of representative cancer-related genes, we
focused on TP53, KRAS, BRAF, and MSI status. We then tried to elucidate
the difference of chemosensitivity between MSI-high and MSI-low/MSS CRC
cases with similar genetic background in most of the representative
cancer-related genes.

Although further in-depth studies on CRC organoids are needed, our
approach would be instrumental in accurately predicting the drug
sensitivity of CRC patients, which could possibly lead to the
establishment of personalized medicine in CRC.


