Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-genome pooled CRISPR/Cas library screens to identify new
hepatocellular carcinoma drivers and drug targets in combination with
sorafenib.


Backgrounds and Aims: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a deadly cancer
and its mortality rate ranks third among all cancer types worldwide. To
comprehensively understand its genetic drivers, over 500 HCC genomes have
been sequenced but they reveal the existence of thousands of infrequently
mutated genes. This intra- and inter-tumor heterogeneity, combined with
large number of passenger mutations, has made it difficult to identify
the true drivers of HCC. In addition, sorafenib is the currently only
FDA-approved molecular target drug in HCC but its anti-tumor effect is
very limited. To overcome these problems, we performed two forward
genetic screens using recently innovated whole-genome pooled CRISPR/Cas
library. Methods: Two human liver cancer cell lines, Huh-7 and SNU-398,
were lentivirally transduced with Geckov2 library and transduced cells
were selected with puromycin. First, transduced cells were orthotopically
injected into the liver of the Nude mice and monitored for tumor
formation. To identify potential tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) in the
liver, gRNAs enriched in the orthotopic liver tumors were determined by
sequencing of gDNA in these tumors. Next, transduced cells were treated
with vehicle or sorafenib in vitro for 14 days. To identify potential
targets which inhibition show synergistic anti-tumor effect with
sorafenib, we determined gRNAs depleted in cells with sorafenib treatment
compared to cells with vehicle treatment. Results: In the first in vivo
screening, we identified 62 genes targeted by 2 or more highly enriched
gRNAs in Huh-7 cells-derived tumors and 47 genes in SNU-398 cells-derived
tumors. Twenty-nine genes were common including 4 miRNAs. TCGA analysis
revealed that HCC patients with mutation or copy number alteration in any
of these genes showed worse overall survival and disease free survival
compared to HCC patients without them. In addition, gene expression
levels of 3 candidate TSGs, BPHL, CTSZ and PLCG2 were significantly
negatively correlated with poor survival of HCC patients. In the second
in vitro screening, CYP7B1, HS3ST5, NLRC4, and Mir-1237 were identified
as potential drug targets in combination with sorafenib in HCC.
Conclusion: Whole-genome pooled CRISPR/Cas library screens discovered
potential new hepatocellular carcinoma drivers and drug targets in
combination with sorafenib.


