Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Allosteric inhibition of the Receptor Tyrosine Kinases c-MET, RON
and VEGFR-2 via the co-receptor CD44v6 by the novel compound AMC303.


Introduction: The receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) c-MET and RON and more
importantly their crosstalk, play a crucial role in mediating local
invasion, systemic dissemination and resistance in different types of
cancer. Both RTKs are activated by the ligands HGF and MSP respectively
and homo- or heterodimerize with each other. The RTK VEGFR-2 is the most
important receptor for angiogenesis in solid epithelial tumors. CD44v6, a
member of the CD44 family of transmembrane glycoproteins, was identified
as an essential co-receptor for activation of c-MET, RON and VEGFR-2.
AMC303, a peptide based allosteric and selective inhibitor of CD44v6, was
investigated for its inhibitory effects on c-MET, RON and VEGFR-2
pathways in vitro and its effect on tumor growth and metastases in vivo.

Methods: Affinity was determined using Microscale Thermophoresis. For in
vitro blocking assays AMC303 was added 30 min prior to induction with the
ligands. Analysis of RTK activation was carried out by western blot.
Analysis of cell migration and invasion was performed with Boyden Chamber
assays. VEGF-A induced tube formation was microscopically analyzed. For
in vivo studies nude mice were orthotopically implanted with human tumor
cells (L3.6pl). Animals were treated with AMC303 i.v. at 0.1, 1, 10 mg/kg
QOD or QWK for 3 weeks. Regression of metastases was investigated at 1
mg/kg QOD. HPLC was used to detect the amount of AMC303 in the primary
tumor lysates.

Results: AMC303 binds to the ectodomain of CD44v6 with high affinity. In
various pancreatic, breast, colon, lung and HNSCC tumor cell lines
activation of c-MET and RON by their ligands was inhibited by AMC303 in
vitro and consequently ligand induced cell scattering, migration and
invasion was significantly reduced. In endothelial cells, activation of
VEGFR-2 and VEGF-A induced formation of a tubular network was blocked by
AMC303 treatment. In vivo treatment with AMC303 inhibited tumor growth in
a dose dependent manner. The metastatic spreading of the primary tumor
was prevented when animals were treated at early disease stage. Most
strikingly, a marked regression of established liver metastases was
observed at progressed disease state when animals were treated with
AMC303 at 1 mg/kg QOD for 3 weeks.

Conclusions: AMC303 inhibits activation of the RTKs c-MET and RON
allosterically in different epithelial tumor cells and VEGFR-2 in
endothelial cells by extracellular binding to CD44v6. This unique and
novel mode of action results in a strong anti-tumor and anti-metastatic
effect in vivo which together with its wide safety and tolerability
window in preclinical toxicity studies is strongly supporting the
clinical investigation. AMC303 is currently tested in a Phase I study in
patients with solid epithelial tumors.


