Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2 protein quantification in multiple cancer indications
identifies candidates for HER2 targeted therapies.


Background: Anti-HER2 therapy in cancer indications other than breast and
gastric cancers is the subject of ongoing clinical trials. We previously
used mass spectrometry to identify HER2 protein expression level cutoffs
that correlate with standard measures of HER2 positivity (740 and 750
amol/µg in breast and gastric cancers, respectively). These studies also
demonstrated that trastuzumab-treated patients whose tumors express high
levels of HER2 (≥ 2200 and ≥ 1825 amol/µg in breast and gastric
cancers, respectively) survived much longer than patients with lower HER2
levels. We hypothesized that targeted proteomics would reveal high HER2
levels in indications other than breast and gastric cancers, thus
identifying patients likely to benefit from anti-HER2 therapy.

Methods: We summarized results from samples processed in our
CAP/CLIA-certified laboratory. Tumor areas from FFPE tissue blocks
(N=3828) representing multiple cancer indications were marked by a
pathologist, microdissected, and solubilized to tryptic peptides. In each
liquefied tumor sample, HER2 and other protein targets were quantified
with mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis.

Results: HER2 superexpression (> 2200 amol/µg) was found in 0.64%
(12/1891) of patients with non-breast, non-gastroesophageal cancers.
Among indications with > 50 patients tested, the highest rates of HER2
superexpression were in gynecological cancers (3/124; 2.4%) and bladder
cancer (1/51; 2.0%). Treatment and outcome data are largely unavailable,
but we are aware of 3 anecdotes: In a 74-year-old male with invasive
adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder who had disease progression on
gemcitabine + cisplatin, proteomic testing found high HER2 protein
expression (3105 amol/µg). The patient responded to trastuzumab +
FOLFIRI for 5 months. In a uterine cancer patient whose HER2 status was
equivocal by genomic analysis, proteomics found high HER2 expression
(4995 amol/µg). Proteomics also revealed the absence of a resistance
marker for taxane (TUBB3) and high levels of the response marker for
antifolate agents (FRalpha = 10500 amol/µg). The patient responded to
trastuzumab + taxol for 9 months before developing resistance and
responding to trastuzumab + antifolate. Lastly, a cervical cancer patient
whose disease had progressed on chemotherapy showed HER2 superexpression
(11322 amol/µg). She was treated with anti-HER2 combinations for > 12
months.

Conclusions: Patients with high HER2 protein expression as measured by
targeted mass spectrometry in multiple cancer types have benefitted from
anti-HER2 therapy. Only small numbers of patients with non-breast,
non-gastric tumors have HER2 protein levels indicative of survival
benefit from anti-HER2 therapy. However, multiplexed targeted proteomics
offers simultaneous, precise quantification of other biomarkers (eg,
ERCC1, TUBB3, FRalpha) to guide therapy selection for multiple cancer
types.


