Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune regulation of disseminated tumor cell clearance versus
metastatic growth.


Metastatic disease is the end stage of extremely inefficient processes
that entail overcoming multiple barriers including anti-tumor immunity.
Although evidences from preclinical and clinical settings suggest that
dissemination of malignant cells is an early process, majority of
disseminated cells either eliminated or remain dormant in distant organs,
while very few cells eventually develop successful metastasis. Therefore,
it is widely accepted that dynamic and reversible tumor cell plasticity
is required for metastasis, however, in vivo steps and molecular
mechanisms are poorly elucidated.

We provide evidence that monocytic and granulocytic subsets of myeloid
derived suppressor cells (m-MDS, g-MDSC) infiltrated in primary 4T1 tumor
and distant organs with different time kinetics regulate spatiotemporal
tumor plasticity. Using co-culture experiments and syngeneic mouse models
of murine 4T1 (metastatic) tumor, we demonstrated that tumor infiltrated
m-MDSCs facilitate tumor cell dissemination from the primary site by
inducing the EMT/CSC phenotype. In contrast, g-MDSCs infiltrated in the
lungs support metastatic growth by reverting the EMT/CSC phenotype and
thus promoting tumor cell proliferation. In contrast, less invasive EMT6
tumors fail to induce efficient pulmonary infiltration of g-MDSCs and
results in clearance of disseminated tumor cells in the lungs. Gene
expression analyses of tumors and MDCS subsets in primary tumor site and
distant organs at different time points reveal mechanistic temporal
regulation of in vivo tumor plasticity by m-MDSC and g-MDSC subsets in
4T1 tumor-bearing mice. However, the lung microenvironment of EMT6
tumor-bearing mice display a gene expression signature of anti-tumor
immunity which predict better survival in breast cancer patients. In our
functional studies, we demonstrate that EMT6 tumor-bearing animals
efficiently eliminate disseminated tumor cells in the lungs. Furthermore,
g-MDSCs isolated from 4T1-tumor bearing animals significantly enhance
metastatic growth of already disseminated tumor cells.

Consistent with the “seed and soil” hypothesis, our studies provide a
molecular mechanism by which the immune system regulate spatiotemporal
tumor plasticity and generation of permissive or anti-tumorigenic
microenvironment in distant organs determining the fate of disseminated
tumor cells.


