Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Promoting caspase-8-dependent apoptosis signaling using
17-beta-hydroxywithanolides.


We have previously reported that withanolide E (WE), a steroidal lactone
from Physalis peruviana, was highly active in sensitizing various human
carcinoma cell lines to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis. Therefore, over 100
natural and semi-synthetic withanolides were evaluated for their ability
to promote caspase-8-dependent cancer cell death. Our studies identified
several withanolides that were 4-8 fold more potent than WE in
sensitizing the renal carcinoma cells and melanoma cells to
caspase-8-dependent apoptosis in response to either TRAIL or the TLR3
ligand poly (I:C). All active withanolides were
17-beta-hydroxywithanolides (17-BHW). The highly active 17-BHWs were more
efficient than withanolide E at reducing cellular levels of both cFLIPL
and cFLIPS and enhancing caspase-8 activation. Furthermore,
immunoprecipitation of the TRAIL death-inducing signaling complex (DISC),
or the related ripoptosome, demonstrated enhanced levels of both FADD and
RIP1 in these macromolecular apoptosis signaling complexes following
treatment with active 17-BHWs. The 17-BHWs used in this work were
obtained by the application of an efficient method of plant biomass
production involving our innovative and patented soil-less aeroponic
cultivation of P. crassifolia and P. peruviana and by chemical
modification of natural withanolides produced by these plants.
Preliminary structure activity relationship (SAR) studies suggested that
the enone moiety in ring A was essential for activity. In addition,
acetoxylation at C-18, an alpha orientation of the side-chain lactone
group and the double bond at C-24(25) of the lactone ring played
important roles in determining the activity of 17-BHWs as apoptosis
sensitizers. This suggests that the 17-BHW scaffold is amenable to
optimization by a medicinal chemistry approach, which could lead to the
identification of highly active natural product-based sensitizers of
cancer cells to caspase-8-dependent apoptosis. The cellular molecular
target(s) of active 17-BHWs are currently under further investigation.
Funded by FNLCR Contract HHSN261200800001E.


