Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of CTCs in thoracic malignant tumors with "universal"
CTC-chip.


Background: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are tumor cells shed from
primary tumor and circulate in the peripheral blood. CTCs, as a surrogate
of distant metastasis, can be potentially useful in diagnosis and
monitoring therapeutic effects in malignant tumors. Among a variety of
systems for detection of CTCs, the “Cellsearch” is the only approved
system for clinical use. However, EpCAM-negative tumor cells, such as
those originating from non-epithelial cells and those undergoing
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) cannot be captured with the
“CellSearch” that is an EpCAM-based isolation system. Therefore, we
have developed a novel polymeric microfluidic device (“Universal”
CTC-chip) that can capture CTCs with or without EpCAM expression (AACR
2015). In the present study, we examined CTCs-detection performance of
the CTC-chip in patients with thoracic malignant tumors (lung cancer [LC]
as an “EpCAM-positive” tumor and malignant pleural mesothelioma [MPM]
as an “EpCAM-negative” tumor) in comparison with that of the
CellSearch.

Methods: Peripheral blood sampled from each patient was divided and
subjected to quantitative evaluation of CTCs with the CTC-chip as well as
with the “CellSearch”. The CTC-chip, coated with an anti-EpCAM
antibody, was used to capture CTCs in the blood samples (n=19) from lung
cancer patients. To capture CTCs in the samples (n=11) from MPM patients,
the CTC-chip was coated with an antibody against podoplanin that is
expressed on the mesothelioma. After immuno-staining for cytokeratin and
CD45 on the chip, a captured cell containing Hoechst-positive nucleus and
cytokeratin-positive/ CD45-negative cytoplasm was judged as a CTC. The
CTC-count for each sample was represented as the number per 7.5mL of the
blood.

Results: The median CTC-count detected with the CTC-chip in LC was 50
(range, 0-270), which was significantly higher than that (the median
CTC-count, 0; range, 0-47) with the CellSearch (pResults: The median
CTC-count detected with the CTC-chip in LC was 50 (range, 0-270), which
was significantly higher than that (the median CTC-count, 0; range, 0-47)
with the CellSearch (p<0.01). In the peripheral blood sampled from MPM
patients, CTC was detected in only one patient using the CellSearch, but
was detected in all 11 patients with the median CTC-count of 144 (range
0-470).

Conclusion: The “universal” CTC-chip achieved higher performance in
detection of CTCs of thoracic malignant tumors as compared with the
CellSearch. The updated data will be presented at the AACR annual meeting
2017.


