Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitive and specific DNA and RNA sequencing techniques for
detecting minimal residual disease.


The goal of this study was to assess the clinical applicability of
molecular genetic techniques in the study of minimal residual disease
(MRD) in pediatric acute myeloid leukemia (AML) via DNA and RNA-based
methods. Currently, multi-parametric flow cytometry (MPFC) for surface
immunophenotypes is the gold standard for MRD with a limit of detection
between 0.001-0.002. However, approximately one-third of children with no
detectable MRD by MPFC after first induction still relapse and suffer
inferior outcomes. One potential reason is that a majority of refractory
or recurrent AML clones will present with altered immunophenotypes
compared to diagnostic specimens. In contrast, DNA mutations present at
diagnosis will remain in refractory disease and therefore, a gene-based
MRD platform surveying many genes could enable targeted, gene-specific
therapy.

Recently, the heterogeneous and unique genomic landscape of pediatric AML
was characterized in the TARGET project and highlights the potential for
leveraging companion molecular screens in the analysis of AML MRD.
Contrary to adult AML, pediatric AML is not primarily characterized by
single nucleotide variants (SNVs), but rather by complex structural
variants (SV) that are difficult to detect using standard next generation
sequencing techniques and analysis pipelines. The need to detect these
complex SV and SNVs, all of which are at low allelic ratios (AR) at the
remission state, demands assays that are capable of analyzing both DNA
and RNA molecules at levels of detection comparable to MPFC.

As proof of principal, we leveraged a unique capture technique (ArcherDx;
CoreAML) to detect an important SV in pediatric AML, the internal tandem
duplication in Fms related tyrosine Kinase (FLT3-ITD). Via a serial
dilution of cells with known FLT3-ITD allelic ratio (MV4-11 cells), to
determine a limit of detection, we were able to detect the mutation as
low as 0.001. Next, we bench-marked the technique using diagnostic and
relapse samples, and successfully detected FLT3-ITD at AR As proof of
principal, we leveraged a unique capture technique (ArcherDx; CoreAML) to
detect an important SV in pediatric AML, the internal tandem duplication
in Fms related tyrosine Kinase (FLT3-ITD). Via a serial dilution of cells
with known FLT3-ITD allelic ratio (MV4-11 cells), to determine a limit of
detection, we were able to detect the mutation as low as 0.001. Next, we
bench-marked the technique using diagnostic and relapse samples, and
successfully detected FLT3-ITD at AR <0.01.

To complement the DNA-based approach, we compared two error-corrected
(EC) RNA assays (a Druley lab developed protocol and the ArcherDx; HemeV2
panel) to further assay SVs that cause novel gene fusions and aberrant
exon usage, which are not detectable via DNA assays. Compared to existing
cytogenetic and RNA-seq data, this new platform was capable of detecting
known and novel cryptic translocations.

Finally, we integrated the results from the FLT3-ITD assay and the RNA
assay with our custom error-corrected sequencing data to create a novel
bioinformatics workflow for assessing the biological implications of MRD
clones detected. Collectively, our data support that EC sequencing, at
both the DNA and RNA level, enable accurate detection of low allelic
variants that could be used for improved clinical MRD diagnostics,
prognostication and therapeutic selection.


