Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective isolation of epithelial to mesenchymal transitioned
circulating tumor cells in NSCLC using novel magnetic nanocubes.


The 5-year survival rate for early to advanced NSCLC patients is 10-5%.
Once the tumor metastasizes, the survival rate often drops below 1%. One
of the major challenges is to select the patient for appropriate therapy,
and the selection process involves invasive biopsy that is difficult to
recurrently perform during treatment. Recent studies have shown that
liquid biopsy is an attractive alternative. Liquid biopsy involves
analysis of either CTCs or ctDNA to understand the tumor therapy.
Isolating entire tumor cells provide an opportunity to perform whole
genome sequencing for in depth understanding of the tumor. However,
frequent changes in cancer signaling and acquired mutations during
treatment lead to drug resistance that cannot be diagnosed using current
CTC techniques. These oncogenic biochemical modifications that are often
associated with metastasis involve upregulation of epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) pathway that change the elasticity of tumor
cells for easy shedding into the blood stream. Consequently, EMT
transition leads to depletion in epithelial markers such as EpCAM and
cytokeratin that are to be targeted. This effect largely limits the use
of present technologies utilizing EpCAM as a marker to isolate the CTCs.
We hypothesized that these cells can be captured by targeting surface
markers that are overexpressed in EM transitioned CTCs. For example,
markers such as EGFR and HER2 have been shown to be overexpressed pre and
post EMT tumors and therefore can present as a new strategy for
non-invasive diagnosis before and during treatment. In this study we have
shown that EGFR and HER2 receptors are overexpressed in EGFR and KRAS
mutated NSCLC cells. We artificially activated EMT in NSCLC cells and
compared the surface biomarker concentrations. Furthermore, we used
protein analysis data using western blotting to identify our targets
after EMT. Based on the biomarker concentrations, we designed and
developed magnetic nanocubes (MNC) surface attached with antibodies to
target the selected biomarkers to capture EMT CTCs. The capture
efficiency of these magnetic nanocubes was compared in multiple cell
lines (HCC827 and A549). Overall we could achieve capture as low as 10
spiked cells in our study. In conclusion, cancer markers such as EGFR and
HER-2 that are highly expressed in tumors, once shed as CTCs can be
targeted for diagnosis. Therefore, we have developed a novel method to
capture EMT CTCs with high selectivity and this method presents a
minimally-invasive method for real-time monitoring of patients during
drug treatment.


