Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation and characterization of mouse model of Pmepa1
conditional knockout in prostate epithelia.


Introduction and Objectives: Prostate cancer (CaP) is the most common
non-skin malignancy diagnosed in American men and desfunctions of
androgen receptor (AR) plays an essential role in prostate tumorigenesis.
PMEPA1 is an androgen and TGF-β -induced gene abundant in prostate,
which was identified to degrade AR protein via NEDD4 E3 ligase mediated
pathway. Reduced or loss of PMEPA1 expression, commonly detected in
prostate tumors, led to increased AR protein and activated AR signaling.
PMEPA1 inhibited TGF-β receptor 1 meditated signaling by a negative
feedback loop. It was reported that loss of PMEPA1 facilitates bone
metastasis of CaP through blocking TGF-β signaling. To further
investigating the biological function of PMEP1 gene in CaP tumorigenesis,
particularly via AR and TGF-β, we generated Pmepa1 prostate conditional
knockout mouse model.

Methods: C57BL/6 mice were utilized for generation of Pmepa1 conditional
knockout model. Pmepa1 gene was conditionally deleted in mouse prostate
epithelium by ARR2PB-Cre-Lox system. Male mice of genotypes of wild-type,
Pmepa1 flox/wild-type-ARR2PB-Cre, Pmepa1 flox/flox-ARR2PB-Cre were
euthanized at the age of 3 months for analysis. The prostate tissue was
collected for frozen and formalin fixation for histology analysis, and
other major organs including heart, lung, liver, spleen, bladder and
testis were also collected for control. The tissue were sectioned and
stained with Hematoxylin & Erosin (H&E). Total RNA and protein were
harvested by homogenizing tissue. The protein levels of Pmepa1, Ar and
Nkx3.1 were analyzed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and immunoblotting,
and the transcript levels of these genes were evaluated by in situ
hybridization (ISH) and quantitative-PCR (Q-PCR).

Results: The expression of Pmepa1 protein was found to focus on lateral
lobe, consistent with Ar protein expression pattern. The data of Q-PCR
and ISH showed that transcript level of Pmepa1 was dramatically
suppressed in Pmepa1 flox/flox and flox/wild-type ARR2PB-Cre mice.
Compared to wild-type ones, Pmepa1 protein was shown significantly
decreased in heterozygous and homozygous knockout mice by immunoblotting
and IHC staining. And the protein level of Ar was stronger in Pmepa1
conditional deleted mouse. There was no dramatic morphology change in
mouse prostate gland by H&E staining.

Conclusions: Conditional deletion of Pmepa1 gene in mouse prostate
epithelium led to enhanced Ar protein and activating Ar signaling. The
effects of Pmepa1 gene loss in mouse prostate gland on other signaling
such as TGF-β and prostate tumorigenesis are needed to be further
evaluated.

Funding: This study was supported by CPDR, USUHS, HU0001-10-2-0002 to DGM.


