Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intragenic DNA methylation and increased gene expression: New
directions from pan-cancer analysis.


Purpose: While the impact of DNA methylation at the promoter region as a
repressive influence is well-known, the vast majority of DNA methylation
actually occurs outside of the promoter region. The function of
intragenic DNA methylation remains incompletely understood. Here, we
investigate how intragenic DNA methylation impacts gene expression, and
how these modifications differ between normal and corresponding cancer
tissues.

Methods: A pan-cancer analysis of gene expression array data was
integrated with Illumina 450k methylation array data across ten tumor
types to produce correlation values between DNA methylation and gene
expression at distinct loci on a genome-wide basis. The probes exhibiting
a significant correlation between gene expression and DNA methylation
were selected for further analysis.

Results: We uncovered robust positive correlations between gene
expression and 3’ methylation in 3,200 genes, with 590 genes in bladder
cancer, and 256 genes in squamous cell lung carcinoma displaying a
correlation coefficient of >0.5. Furthermore, we observed 44 genes with a
correlation coefficient of >0.7 in at least two tissue types. The
majority of genes with the strongest correlations are transcription
factors known to play roles in differentiation and development, with an
enrichment of zinc finger and homeobox-containing genes. Further analysis
of these genes exhibit divergent 3’

methylation when comparing normal and tumor tissues. Importantly, the
extent of 3’ methylation of these genes is associated with patient
overall survival in 5 of the 10 tumor types analyzed, strongly suggesting
that this process plays a role in cancer pathogenesis.

Conclusion: DNA methylation of the 3’ region is a functionally and
clinically relevant epigenetic modification, and may serve as a novel
target for inhibiting tumorigenesis and tumor progression.


