Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming acquired drug resistance by TPX-0005, an ALK, ROS1 and
pan-TRK inhibitor.


The inevitable development of clinical drug resistance presents a common
challenge for targeted cancer therapy. In non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients with ALK and ROS1 rearrangements, the emergence of
mutations in the targeted oncogenes was identified as one of the
mechanisms that confer drug resistance. In particular, a group of
mutations known as solvent front mutations, such as ALKG1202R and
ROS1G2032R, render common resistance to ALK and ROS1 inhibitors. Similar
solvent front mutations, such as TRKAG595R and TRKCG623R, have also been
identified in cancer patients with rearrangement of NTRK family genes who
developed resistance to TRK-targeted therapies. TPX-0005, a compact
three-dimensional macrocyclic molecule, was designed to completely locate
at the adenine binding site of ATP in order to efficiently target the
active kinase conformation and systematically circumvent the steric
interference from various clinical resistant mutations, especially the
solvent front mutations. TPX-0005 is an orally available and potent
ATP-competitive inhibitor against ALK, ROS1, TRKA, TRKB and TRKC
recombinant kinases and their corresponding clinical resistant mutants.
TPX-0005 demonstrated potent anti-proliferative activity in the range of
sub-nanomolar to low nanomolar in a number of human cancer cell lines and
engineered stable cell lines expressing the targeted oncogenes or their
solvent front mutants, accompanied by inhibition of target
phosphorylation and concomitant inactivation of downstream effectors such
as ERK, AKT and STAT3. In patient derived xenograft tumor models,
TPX-0005 treatment resulted in significant regression of tumors harboring
the oncogenic ALK, ROS1 and TRKC fusions. Moreover, in a series of mouse
xenograft tumor models, TPX-0005 exhibited marked anti-tumor activity not
only in tumors harboring the wildtype oncogenic targets but also in
tumors harboring the oncogenes with the solvent front mutations via
inhibition of the target phosphorylation. Taken together, these
pre-clinical studies have demonstrated the potent activities of TPX-0005
against not only wild type oncogenic ALK, ROS1, TRK fusions but also
their corresponding solvent front mutations, which will bring in a new
therapy for cancer patients resistant to currently available ALK, ROS1,
and TRK inhibitors in clinic.


