Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of epigenetic regulation via LSD1 inhibition with
signal transduction inhibitors significantly enhances anti-tumor activity
in models of hematologic malignancies.


Combinatorial therapeutic strategies have achieved improved response
rates and durability of responses in several malignancies either by
selectively targeting distinct and non-overlapping oncogenic signaling
pathways (e.g. PARP and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibition in
subsets of breast and ovarian cancers), or alternatively, inhibiting
distinct nodal points of regulation in common oncogenic signaling
pathways (e.g BRaf and MEK inhibition in subsets of melanoma). Recent
data suggest that deregulated epigenetic modifications may be just as
significant as genetic mutations in driving cancer development and growth
by inhibition of tumor suppressor activity and activation of oncogenic
pathways. We therefore hypothesized that an epigenetic regulator could
potentiate the efficacy of a protein kinase inhibitor to result in robust
tumor growth inhibition. We previously reported that the potent and
selective LSD1 inhibitor INCB059872 potently inhibited tumor growth in
multiple tumor xenograft models of AML and SCLC as a single agent and in
a combination with standard of care of agents. In this study, we explored
the anti-tumor effect of combining INCB059872 and various signal
transduction pathway inhibitors, including the PIM kinase inhibitor
INCB053914, the JAK1/2 inhibitor ruxolitinib, or the PI3K delta-selective
inhibitor INCB050465 in models of human hematologic malignancies. Each of
these therapeutic combinations significantly inhibited tumor growth in
the Molm-16 human AML xenograft model. Mechanistic studies suggested that
MYC expression levels were downregulated by these combinations both in
vitro and in vivo. Treatment with INCB059872 alone or in combination with
signal transduction kinase inhibitors significantly downregulated
cytokines levels, particularly IL-10, sCD40L, and MCP-1 in Molm-16
tumors. These data suggest that the combination of an LSD1 inhibitor and
signal transduction inhibitor can co-regulate key tumor intrinsic and
extrinsic pathways involved in paracrine or autocrine signaling in AML.
In addition to the improved efficacy observed in AML models, the
combination of INCB059872 with the PI3Kdelta inhibitor INCB050465
enhanced tumor growth inhibition in the Will-2 xenograft model (GCB
subtype, double hit lymphoma), whereas the activity of these single
agents were modest in this particular subtype of lymphoma. Additional
mechanistic studies are ongoing to further understand the molecular bases
of these observations. Taken together, these data suggest that targeting
distinct epigenetic and oncogenic signaling pathways may potentiate
anti-tumor efficacy and overcome intrinsic resistance mechanisms in
specific hematologic malignancies.


