Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of APOBEC3A and APOBEC3B mutational signatures using
next-generation sequencing data from cancer cell lines.


The APOBEC (apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme, catalytic
polypeptide-like) gene family of cytidine deaminases includes
evolutionarily conserved genes that play important roles in DNA repair
and mRNA editing. Activity of at least two APOBEC family members,
APOBEC3A and APOBEC3B, can lead to kataegis, a mutagenic process in
cancer cells that generates clusters of closely spaced, single strand
specific C->T DNA substitutions. APOBEC mutagenesis has a characteristic
signature, most commonly represented by the 5’-Tp(C->T)pW-3’ sequence
motif, with additional substitutions also reported. This hypermutation
signature and high mRNA expression of APOBEC3A and APOBEC3B have been
associated with several cancer types. Most previous studies of APOBEC
signatures have examined tumor sequence data from clinical samples, for
which limited or no information about drug response was available. We
investigated the presence of the mutational signature and mRNA expression
patterns of the APOBEC3A and APOBEC3B genes in extensively characterized
cell lines, in order to identify those cell lines that carry mutations
generated by kataegis, with the aim of establishing associations between
the APOBEC mutational signature, individual cancer types, and the
patterns of sensitivity to antitumor agents. For this purpose, we
analyzed whole exome sequencing (WES) data and mRNA expression of the
APOBEC3A and APOBEC3B genes in two resources with extensive drug response
data: the NCI-60 cell line panel, which includes 59 human cancer cell
lines representing 9 cancer types and drug response information for
thousands of anticancer agents, and the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia
(CCLE), which provides WES, whole genome, and RNA-seq sequence
information on hundreds of cancer cell lines and drug response data to
over 200 agents. We analyzed WES data of 325 CCLE cell lines and 59
NCI-60 cell lines, with variants identified using GATK pipeline and
Varscan2 software. The variants in each cell line were filtered to remove
common polymorphisms in dbSNP and 1000 Genome Project databases. We
searched the discovered variants for the presence of APOBEC signatures,
5’-Tp(C->AGT)pN-3’, 5’-Tp(C->AGT)pD-3’, and
5’-Tp(C->AGT)pW-3’ in closely spaced (1000 and 10,000 bp) windows
that appeared on the same DNA strand. We will discuss the use of optimal
filters for detecting APOBEC mutational signatures and will present the
analyses of associations between APOBEC signatures, mutational load of
the tumor cell lines, APOBEC gene expression, and chemosensitivity to
treatment. These results contribute to additional characterization of
available cell lines by providing information about specific mutational
signatures in different categories of cancer. Our findings may assist
with identifying antitumor agents that would be appropriate for treatment
of cancer cells with specific signature patterns generated by APOBEC
mutagenesis.


