Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined targeting of the EWS/ETS transcriptional program by
blocking epigenetic readers and transcription initiation in Ewing sarcoma.


Introduction: Previously, we reported blocking of BET bromodomain binding
proteins (BRDs) by use of an inhibitor (JQ1) and the associated strong
down-regulation of the predominant EWS-ETS protein EWS-FLI1 in Ewing
sarcoma (ES). Here we analyzed in depth the mechanistic effects of this
treatment by EWS-FLI1 interaction studies and the evaluation of possible
combined targeting.

Experimental procedures: Function of BRDs was analysed by application of
specific inhibitors (JQ1, I-BET151), RNA interference (RNAi) with the
generation of stable and inducible knockdowns or knockouts by the
generation of BRD4 CRISPR/Cas9 cell lines. To analyse the resulting
changes Co-IP, ChIP-qPCR, RT-PCR, western blotting, cell cycle analysis,
proliferation and invasion assays, whole transcriptome analysis via
microarrays as well as xenograft mouse models were utilized.

Results: By use of JQ1 or iBET we strikingly observed a strong
down-regulation of the predominant EWS-ETS protein EWS-FLI1 and
subsequent microarray analysis revealed JQ1 treatment to block the
typical ES associated expression program. The effect on this expression
program was partially mimicked by RNAi for BRD3 or BRD4 but not by BRD2.
However, knockout studies of BRD4 by CRISPR/Cas9 as well as knockdowns of
individual BRD2, 3 or 4 did not recapitulate JQ1-mediated proliferation
restrictions and blockade and tumor development in xenograft mice as
observed for JQ1. However, co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed an
DNA independent interaction of BRD4 with EWS/FLI1 and further interaction
with CdK9. Treatment of ES cells with a specific CDK9 inhibitor
demonstrated a rapid down regulation of EWS-FLI1 expression and block of
contact dependent growth. Furthermore, CDK9 inhibition induced apoptosis
in ES as depicted by down regulation of XIAP and CFLAR and consequently
cleavage of Caspase 8, PARP and increased CASP3 activity, similar to JQ1.
Combined treatment of ES with BRD and CdK9 inhibitors was more effective
than individual drug application.

Conclusion: Translocation driven tumors such as ES are very susceptible
to combined treatment with epigenetic inhibitors. Here we demonstrate
that treatment with inhibitors targeting the p-TEFb complex could
interrupt communication between EWS-FLI1, BRD4 and CDK9 further impeding
EWS-ETS transcriptional activity and its associated pathognomonic
expression program.


