Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of CDKN1A loss in bladder cancer and
effects on cisplatin sensitivity.


Introduction

Muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) is most optimally treated with
cisplatin-containing combination chemotherapy, and if clinically
localized, bladder removal. With recent discoveries delineating aberrant
driver genes involved in MIBC, it is now possible to personalize
treatment approaches. Development of a therapeutic rationale for
personalized therapies which is based on mutational landscape or other
characteristic of each tumor may prospectively identify patients prone to
chemoresponse, thus maximizing therapeutic index. Inactivating mutations
in CDKN1A, the gene encoding cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor p21, occur
in about 14% of MIBCs, with a majority of these truncating the peptide.
We hypothesized that after DNA-damaging events, cells deficient in p21
would be unable to halt the cell cycle to repair the damage, and
subsequently proceed down an apoptotic pathway, potentially serving as a
therapeutic vulnerability.

Methods

RT4 and SW780 cell lines were chosen for study based on chemoresistance
to cisplatin and WT status of CDKN1A and TP53. Cell-cycle arrest and
apoptotic pathways were evaluated with Western blot after treatment with
IC50 doses. CRISPR sgRNAs were generated to introduce frameshifts 5’ to
the regions encoding the cyclin binding domain (CDI), within the CDI, and
5’ to the PCNA binding domains. Knock-outs were confirmed by
immunoblot. MTT was used to assess cipslatin response.

Results

p53 increased in both cell lines 24 hours after a 3h pulse of cisplatin
exposure. However, p53 peaked at 24 hours and then diminished in RT4 but
continued to rise in SW780. p21 was basally expressed in both cell lines,
decreased at 24 hours, then increasing at 72 hours. In RT4, peak Rb
phosphorylation (pRb) occurred at 24 hours, indicating cell cycle arrest,
and gradually decreased at 72 hours. In SW780 pRb remained unchanged
during the course of the treatment. In RT4, PARP cleavage was observed at
24 hours and increased at 48 hours indicating apoptosis. RT4 cells
harbored extensive DNA damage as indicated by persistent phosphorylated
γH2AX. In contrast a smaller fraction of SW780 cells underwent PARP
cleavage at 48 and 72 hours and there was less phosphorylated γH2AX.
Single cell CDKN1A knockout clones were generated and confirmed by
immunoblotting. sgRNAs targeting amino acids 12 and 59 completely
abolished p21 detection, and an sgRNA targeting amino acid 109 generated
a truncated peptide, confirming p21’s apparent stability. CDKN1A
disruption at any of the three sites did not reverse chemorensitance to
cisplatin in either cell line.

Conclusion

Cisplatin resistant cell lines use a combination of arrest and repair to
survive an apoptotic insult. Although p21 loss did not reverse cisplatin
resistance, it may

impact sensitivity to other agents. Other mechanisms of chemo- and
radio-sensitization are being explored.


