Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenome-wide association study of metabolic syndrome in
African-Americans.


Background: The epidemic of obesity among US adults has resulted in
significant increases in associated metabolic disorders such as diabetes,
dyslipidemia and high blood pressure. Together, these disorders
constitute metabolic syndrome, a clinically defined condition highly
prevalent among African-Americans. Identifying epigenetic alterations
associated with metabolic syndrome, including DNA methylation changes may
provide information on biological pathways that are dysregulated and may
potentially act as early biomarkers in cancer.

Methods: Data on cardio-metabolic risk factors and DNA methylation was
assessed on 606 African-Americans from the Hypertension Genetic
Epidemiology Network (HyperGEN) study. Metabolic syndrome was defined
using the joint harmonized criteria of at least three of: elevated waist
circumference, high triglycerides, low HDL-cholesterol, high fasting
blood glucose and high blood pressure. DNA methylation was assessed using
the Illumina HumanMethylation 450K Bead Chip assay on DNA extracted from
buffy coat. Linear mixed effects regression models were used to examine
the association between CpG methylation and metabolic syndrome in crude
and adjusted (for age, alcohol, smoking, sex) analyses. Replication using
DNA from 76 African-Americans in the REason for Geographic and Racial
Disparities in Cancer (REGARDS) study, as well as meta-analysis combining
both cohorts was conducted.

Results: Two differentially methylated CpG sites in the IGF2BP1 gene on
chromosome 17 (cg06638433; β =0.01, p-value=3.10x10-7) and the ABCG1
gene on chromosome 21 (cg06500161; β: 0.018, p-value=2.60x10-8) were
identified in models adjusted for age, sex, alcohol and smoking.
Methylation of CpG sites on the TXNIP gene on chr 1 (p=2.83 x 10-9), and
CPT1A gene on chr 11 (p=1.39 x 10-4) were also significantly associated
with metabolic syndrome in unadjusted models. Results for the ABCG1 gene
remained statistically significant in the replication set and
meta-analysis.

Conclusion: Metabolic syndrome was consistently associated with focal DNA
hypermethylation in the ABCG1gene, a region of the chromosome that
encodes proteins in the ATP-binding cassette transporter family, and is
involved intra- and extra- cellular signaling. Alterations in the ABCG1
gene was observed in 40% of invasive breast cancer tumors in the TCGA,
providing a potential epigenetic link between metabolic syndrome and
breast cancer that deserves further study.


