Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactive oxygen species-mediated synergism of fenretinide and
romidepsin in preclinical models of T-cell lymphoid malignancies.


Introduction: T-cell lymphoid malignancies (TCLMs) are in need of novel
and more effective therapies. Romidepsin is a histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor that achieved FDA registration as 2nd line therapy for
peripheral and cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. The cytotoxic retinoid
fenretinide achieved durable complete responses against T-cell lymphomas
in early-phase clinical trials and T-cell lymphoma patients who failed
prior romidepsin treatment responded to fenretinide. Fenretinide is
currently being evaluated in a Phase IIa clinical trial for
relapsed/refractory PTCL patients (NCT02495415). We investigated the
potential for using these two agents in combination in TCLMs. Methods and
Results: Using the DIMSCAN assay, we demonstrated cytotoxic synergy
between romidepsin and fenretinide in fifteen TCLM cell lines at
clinically-achievable concentrations that lacked cytotoxicity for
non-malignant cells (fibroblasts and blood mononuclear cells). In vivo,
romidepsin + fenretinide + ketoconazole (enhances fenretinide exposures
by inhibiting fenretinide metabolism) showed greater activity in
subcutaneous (COG-LL-317m and TX-LY-183x PDX) and disseminated
(COG-LL-317m Luc expressing the luciferase gene) TCLM xenograft models
than single agent romidepsin or fenretinide + ketoconazole. Fenretinide +
romidepsin caused a reactive oxygen species (ROS, measured by DCFDA
dye)-dependent increase in pro-apoptotic proteins (Bim, tBid, Bax and
Bad), apoptosis (via TUNEL assay), and inhibition of HDAC enzymatic
activity, which achieved a synergistic increase in histone acetylation.
The synergistic cytotoxicity, apoptosis, and histone acetylation of
fenretinide + romidepsin was abrogated by antioxidants (vitamins C or E).
Romidepsin + fenretinide activated p38 and JNK via ROS, and shRNA
knockdown of p38 and JNK1 significantly decreased the synergistic
cytotoxicity and apoptosis. Romidepsin + fenretinide also showed
synergistic cytotoxicity for B-lymphoid malignancy cell lines, but did
not increase ROS, acetylation of histones, activation of p38 + JNK, or
cytotoxicity in fibroblasts and blood mononuclear cells. Conclusion:
Romidepsin + fenretinide achieved synergistic activity in preclinical
models of TCLMs, but not in non-malignant cells, via a novel molecular
mechanism. These data support conducting clinical trials of romidepsin +
fenretinide in relapsed and refractory TCLMs.


