Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A human hybrid immuno-oncology construct targeting the TWEAK
receptor Fn14 and containing the serine protease granzyme B.


Targeting immune effector cells to tumors has recently emerged as a
clinically-relevant approach for therapy. The underlying mechanism for
immune effector killing involves T or B-cell-mediated delivery of the
serine protease granzyme B to the target cells. The cell-surface receptor
Fn14 for the TNF-related cytokine TWEAK has emerged as a potentially
valuable target for cancer therapy because its expression is low in most
normal tissues but significantly elevated in a variety of solid tumor
types. The serine protease Granzyme B (GrB) is a highly cytotoxic
component of human immune effector cells and induces multiple, intense
pro-apoptotic signals when delivered to the cytoplasm of target cells.
This protein has been well-studied, operating through multimodal pathways
which are both caspase-dependent and caspase-independent. Our laboratory
has designed series of new Fn14-targeted fusion constructs containing an
engineered GrB payload. The GrB-Fc-IT4 construct is a completely human
homodimer (~200kDa) containing an IgG Fc domain for prolonged serum
half-life. This construct displays high-level protein production in an
HEK293E expression system. It exhibits high affinity and selective
cytotoxicity within the nanomolar range (IC50 ranged from 4 to 284 nM)
when tested against a panel of 25 Fn14-positive human cancer cell lines.
We are currently assessing a panel of 100 annotated NSCLC cell lines to
try to define a molecular fingerprint related to cellular sensitivity or
resistance to the GrB payload. Pharmacokinetic studies in mice revealed
that GrB-Fc-IT4 exhibited a bi-exponential clearance from plasma with a
rapid initial clearance (t ½α = 0.36 hours) followed by a prolonged
terminal-phase plasma half-life (t 1/2β = 35 hours). Mice bearing
MDA-MB-231 orthotopic tumor xenografts were intravenously treated with
saline, or GrB-Fc-IT4 construct (QODX5). On average, tumors from
saline-treated mice grew about 10-fold over 40 days. In contrast, tumors
from mice treated with GrB-FC-IT4 did not grow during this period and
remained the same size as at the onset of treatment. Moreover, 3/5 mice
treated with GrB-Fc-IT4 showed complete tumor regression lasting beyond
day 80 (end of the study). Overall, treatment with GrB-FC-IT4 was
well-tolerated by mice (no loss of body weight) and resulted in
significant anti-tumor efficacy. Toxicology and bio-distribution studies
are ongoing and will be presented. Research conducted, in part, by the
Clayton Foundation for Research.


