Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VEGF-A is increased and correlates with MDSC-driven immune
suppression, systemic inflammation, nutritional impairment and poor
prognosis in patients with cancer.


Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) is a key factor for tumor
progression through induction of angiogenesis and other actions including
immune alteration. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) are a major
type of immune-suppressing cell that appear in cancer or inflammation and
that have been reported to express the VEGF-receptor and to be activated
by VEGF. To study the clinical importance of VEGF and MDSC for cancer,
peripheral blood was collected from patients with gastrointestinal,
ovarian, breast, thyroid and pulmonary cancers. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) were separated using a Ficoll-density gradient
and were used for the detection of MDSC (CD11b+CD14-CD33+) using flow
cytometry and for cytokine-production assays. For these assays, PBMC were
stimulated with PHA and the production of cytokines including IL-12 (Th1
inducer), IL-10, (anti-inflammatory cytokine) and IL-17,
(pro-inflammatory cytokine), were measured over 24 h using ELISAs. Serum
concentrations of IL-10 and VEGF were also measured using ELISAs. The
serum levels of both VEGF and MDSC were significantly increased in almost
all types of cancer tested and significantly correlated with each other.
Their levels also significantly correlated with neutrophil/lymphocyte
ratios (NLR) (inflammation marker) and CRP levels, and were inversely
correlated with the PHA-stimulation index (SI) (cell mediated immune
responses marker) and serum concentrations of rapid-turnover protein
(RTP) (nutrition marker). VEGF levels also correlated with serum
concentrations of IL-10 and VEGF, and production of IL-17, and inversely
correlated with production of IL-12. The prognosis of stage IV colorectal
cancer with high VEGF was significantly worse than that with low VEGF. In
thyroid cancer, the number of MDSC was significantly higher, NLR and CRP
levels were higher, and RTP levels were lower in patients with
undifferentiated carcinoma than in those with differentiated carcinoma
including papillary and follicular carcinomas. Thus VEGF was increased in
cancer and correlated with immune suppression driven by MDSC,
inflammation and malnutrition. Although cancer immunotherapy is currently
in use for a number of cancers, MDSC have been reported to be a major
inhibitor of cancer immunotherapy even in cases in which an immune
checkpoint inhibitor was used. An anti-VEGF treatment strategy has now
been established in combination with chemotherapy for many types of
cancer. Among various types of anti-MDSC trials, anti-VEGF treatment
seems to be an effective adjuvant therapy of cancer immunotherapy.


