Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel androgen receptor inhibitors in triple negative breast
cancer.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), which lacks expression of hormone
receptors and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, has the worst
prognosis of all breast cancer subtypes, due to inherent chemo-resistance
and a lack of therapeutic targets. A subset of TNBC has been shown to
express androgen receptor (AR) but despite promising pre-clinical data,
clinical trials evaluating the use of approved anti-androgens
(bicalutamide, enzalutamide) in AR-positive TNBC has shown modest
efficacy to date. In prostate cancer, bicalutamide binds to AR with low
affinity and in the presence of AR gene amplification or mutation, can
exhibit partial agonist activity leading to resistance. In order to
increase affinity for AR and to avoid AR antagonist to agonist conversion
synthesized 7-substituted umbelliferones (UMB) derivatives with a
distinct scaffold modified from available AR antagonists (Kandil et al
Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry Letters, 2016). These agents exhibited
inhibitory activity in human prostate cancer cells lines at sub-micro
molar level, a 50-fold and 30-fold improvement over bicalutamide and
enzalutamide, respectively. We hypothesized that these novel AR
antagonists would be effective in inhibiting the growth of AR-positive
TNBC cells. Methods: TNBC AR negative mesenchymal MDA-MB-231 (as control)
and AR positive MDA-MB-231 cells were utilized for determination of the
efficacy of the UMB derivatives. For proliferation assays, viability of
the cells was monitored over a period of 72 hours with redox dye Cell
Titer-Blue. Standard Western blotting techniques were used for protein
detection. For apoptosis analysis, standard flow cytometry reagents, FITC
labelled Annexin V and Propidium Iodine(PI) mix were utilized. Results:
UMB derivatives decreased the expression of AR in AR-positive MDA-MB-453
in a dose dependent manner. UMB derivatives, at micro Molar concentration
decreased cell proliferation of AR-positive and interestingly AR-negative
cell lines by 20 to 50%, also in a dose dependent manner. UMB derivatives
induced apoptosis in both cell lines. Interestingly, UMB derivatives
induced a change from a mesenchymal to epithelial phenotype in
AR-negative MDA-MB-231 cells, which was confirmed by decreased expression
of vimentin and other mesenchymal markers. Conclusions: Novel UMB
derivatives inhibit growth and cause apoptosis in TNBC cells and induce
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition in an AR-negative mesenchymal TNBC
cell line. Targeting AR with novel AR antagonists seem to be a promising
therapeutic approach for AR-positive TNBC and further evaluation of AR
antagonists in AR-negative mesenchymal TNBC is warranted.


