Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Matched-pair comparisons of chemotherapy plus bevacizumab versus
chemotherapy alone as third-line treatment or beyond for advanced
non-small cell lung cancer.


Background: The addition of bevacizumab to chemotherapy has proven
efficacy as first-line treatment for advanced NSCLC. Whether this
combination still be efficient as salvage treatment for NSCLC patients
who have not received bevacizumab previously remains unclear. This
retrospective matched-pair study was designed to compare the efficacy and
safety of chemotherapy plus bevacizumab with chemotherapy alone as
third-line treatment or beyond for NSCLC patients.

Methods: Patients with stage IV NSCLC who had received single-agent
chemotherapy plus bevacizumab after failure of at least two prior
regimens were enrolled in this study. Each of them was matched with two
patients who had received chemotherapy alone (1:2) by age (within ±5
years), sex, smoking history, histology, EGFR mutation status and number
of prior regimens. Tumor response rate, survival and toxicity analyses
were performed.

Results: Between January 2011 and June 2016, a total of 40 patients who
had received chemotherapy plus bevacizumab (chemotherapy-bevacizumab
group) were matched with 80 patients who had received chemotherapy alone
(chemotherapy-alone group) as third-line treatment or beyond. Objective
response rate (ORR) and Disease control rate (DCR) were improved for
chemotherapy-bevacizumab compared with chemotherapy alone (ORR, 22.5% v
6.2%, respectively, p= .014; DCR, 62.5% v 40.0%, respectively, p= .032).
Progression-free survival was prolonged for chemotherapy-bevacizumab
compared with chemotherapy alone (median, 3.9 v 2.5 months, respectively;
HR, 0.64; 95%CI, 0.43 to 0.97; p = .032). Incidence of severe (≥ grade
3) adverse events was low and similar across groups.

Conclusion: The combination of chemotherapy and bevacizumab can be an
efficient alternative salvage treatment for NSCLC patients who have not
received bevacizumab previously. But taking this combination as
first-line treatment for advanced NSCLC still should be a priority.


