Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Linking education to action: A program to increase research
participation among African American women.


Addressing underrepresentation of minorities and women as research
participants has largely focused on clinical trials, while little is
known about attitudes and knowledge regarding other types of biomedical
research, e.g., epidemiologic and genetic studies. These types of studies
are essential for advances in cancer research, including development of
targeted therapies for women and minorities. As part of an
academic/community partnership between Mayo Clinic and The Links,
Incorporated, a national volunteer service organization of professional
African American women, this study sought to: (1) examine attitudes
regarding participation in research involving access to the medical
record, genetic studies/biobanking, and clinical trials; and (2) develop
and evaluate a novel, targeted online educational program addressing
these 3 types of biomedical research. Initial qualitative inquiry via 3
focus groups (n=34) found that most women associated health-related
research with clinical trials; few women were familiar with other study
types. Women expressed more concerns about how information is collected,
used, and shared by investigators than with personal mistreatment in
research regardless of study type (genetic research (GEN), chart review
(CR), clinical trial (CT)) or the kind of information (social, health,
genetic) collected. The importance of investigator transparency regarding
the significance of the disease in African Americans, research funding
source, the investigator’s agenda, and commitment to the population
being studied was emphasized. Qualitative results informed development of
the educational program. A total of 244 Links members completed the
program (77% response rate) and answered pre- and post-assessments of
intentions, attitudes and knowledge. The percent of women indicating that
they “definitely” or “probably” intend to participate in research
increased from 9.4% to 19.5% and 27.1% to 49.8%, respectively, after
program completion. Agreement with the statement “research in the U.S.
is ethical” increased from 52.9% to 74.4%. Factual knowledge related to
each of the 3 study types also increased. Prior to completing the program
many women reported “little or no understanding” of the 3 types of
studies (66% GEN, 62.9% CR, 40.7% CT) whereas after program completion,
these numbers decreased to 24.9%, 18.4%, and 15.5%, respectively. While
few women rated their opinion of the study types as “very positive”
prior to beginning the program (14.3% GEN, 15.0% CR, 28.6% CT), upon
completion these proportions increased and equalized (42.8% GEN, 43.0%
CR, 42.5% CT). Two-month follow-up will evaluate longer-term impact
including knowledge dissemination, visiting clinicaltrials.gov, and
enrolling in ResearchMatch. An online education-to-action program
targeting professional African American women improved knowledge,
perceptions of research ethics, and intent to participate in biomedical
research.


