Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacologic interconversion of EMT to MET for prostate cancer.


Introduction and objection: Dysregulation of transforming growth
factor-β (TGF-β) and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) axis has been
linked to reactive stroma dynamics in the tumor microenvironment during
prostate cancer progression. IGFBP3 induction is initiated by stroma
remodeling and represents a potential therapeutic target for advanced
prostate cancer. A lead quinazoline-based Doxazosin® derivative, DZ-50,
generated in our laboratory (US Patent # 8377948), inhibits prostate
tumor growth via inducing anoikis and disrupting focal adhesions.
Molecular profiling revealed that the process of
epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) is targeted by DZ-50. In this
study, we investigated the effect of DZ-50 on EMT landscape, EMT to
mesenchymal-epithelial-transition (MET) conversion, and invasive
properties of prostate cancer cells.

Methods: Human prostate cancer cells LNCaP, LNCaP overexpressing TGF-β
type II receptor (TβRII), and cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs)
derived from human prostate cancer specimens, were used. The antitumor
effect of DZ-50 against prostate cancer epithelial cells and CAFs was
evaluated using cell viability assays. Effect of the drug on EMT key
regulators (including IGFBP3) was determined using RT-PCR and Western
blot analysis. Drug-induced phenotypic conversions of EMT were evaluated
by confocal microscopy. Impact of TGF-β from the stroma microenvironment
or exogenous cytokine, on prostate tumor cell migration and invasion, was
assessed in co-cultures with CAFs. The functional contribution of IGFBP3
to EMT-MET interconversion in response to DZ-50 was assessed using siRNA
approaches.

Results: DZ-50 induced cell death in prostate cancer epithelial cells and
CAFs, in a concentration-dependent manner. DZ-50 downregulated IGFBP3
mRNA and protein expression and promoted EMT-MET conversion in both LNCaP
and LNCaPTβRII cells. IGFBP3 knockdown in LNCaPTβRII cells led to
E-cadherin upregulation and MET induction, implicating IGFBP3 as a
potential target of DZ-50 to reverse EMT to MET. Moreover exposure to
TGF-β reversed DZ-50-induced MET by upregulating IGFBP3 in LNCaPTβRII
cells. Co-cultures of LNCaPTβRII with CAFs promoted prostate cancer cell
invasion via TGF-β and IGFBP3, an effect that was inhibited by the drug.

Conclusions: Treatment of prostate cancer cells with the novel agent
DZ-50 inhibits cell migration and invasion and causes reversal of EMT to
MET by regulating IGFBP3. This study integrates IGFBP3 as new signaling
effector driving the antitumor action of DZ-50 via targeting the EMT-MET
phenotypic landscape in the prostate tumor microenvironment. Ongoing work
in pre-clinical models will establish the therapeutic value of this novel
compound in advanced metastatic prostate cancer.


