Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mre11-CDK2 interaction during the DNA double-strand break response.


The MRN (Mre11/Rad50/NBS1) complex is a group of highly conserved
proteins central to the detection and repair of DNA double-strand breaks
(DSBs). Inherited deficiencies in DNA DSB signaling result in a spectrum
of disorders featuring cancer predisposition, neurodegeneration, and
immunodeficiency. MRN directly binds DNA DSB ends and facilitates
activation of ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase, which initiates
cellular responses including DNA repair, cell cycle checkpoints, and in
some circumstances, apoptosis. Cellular responses to DNA DSBs require
rapid communication between DNA repair complexes and the cell cycle
machinery, but much about this relationship remains unclear. Our lab
recently discovered an interaction between Mre11 and Cyclin-dependent
kinase 2 (CDK2), a key component of the cell cycle machinery (Buis et
al., NSMB, 2012). CDK2, when bound to its regulatory partner Cyclin A,
promotes cell cycle progression through S phase. We demonstrated that the
Mre11-CDK2/Cyclin A interaction is important in regulating the capacity
for DNA repair by homologous recombination in normally dividing cells.
Current work is focused on understanding the role of this interaction
during DNA damage responses. We hypothesize that Mre11 interaction with
CDK2 is a component of a molecular switch between the normal cell cycle
and the DNA damage response. To test our hypothesis, we take advantage of
murine alleles of Mre11 previously generated in the lab. We performed
immunoprecipitation studies to investigate the protein-protein
interaction in the presence of DNA damage. We also utilized kinase
inhibitors to investigate the role of apical kinases in regulating the
interaction. Finally, we are currently optimizing in vitro kinase assays
to further understand a relationship between Mre11 and CDK2 enzymatic
activity.Unpublished findings reveal that the Mre11-CDK2/Cyclin A
interaction is altered upon DNA damage, a process which appears to be
important for cell cycle checkpoint regulation. In conclusion, we
demonstrate that the Mre11-CDK2 interaction plays important roles both in
normally dividing cells and in the DNA damage response. Taken together,
our data suggests that Mre11 may act to bridge the gap between DNA repair
complexes and the cell cycle machinery.


