Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MLN8237 treatment in an orthoxenograft rodent model for malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors.


Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) are soft tissue
sarcomas that arise from peripheral nerves and often occur in the
extremities. MPNSTs arise sporadically or in the neurofibromatosis type
one (NF1). NF1 is an autosomal-dominant disorder characterized by
neurofibromas, cutaneous hyperpigmentation, and intellectual deficits
affecting 1 in 3000 births. The lifetime risk of a person with NF1
developing MPNSTs ranges between 8-13%. MPNSTs have increased expression
of the oncogene Aurora kinase A. This leads to enhanced cell
proliferation, making MPNSTs extremely aggressive, with high potential
for metastasis, and devastating prognosis, with five year survival
estimates ranging from a dismal 15-60%. MPNSTs are currently treated with
surgical resection, sometimes requiring limb amputation, as well as
chemoradiation, all of which demonstrate limited effectiveness, and
highlight the necessity for novel therapies. To evaluate the
effectiveness of new treatments, a translationally accurate, robust, and
cost-effective model is crucial. A major goal of this study was to
produce an orthotopic xenograft murine MPNST model for evaluation of
novel therapies, which we created by intra-neural injection of luciferase
transfected MPNST cells into the mice sciatic nerve. Our model
circumvents drawbacks of previous in vivo models by producing a robust
tumor in the physiologically relevant microenvironment of the nerve that
allows for accurate tumor burden quantification through luciferin
fluorescence. Another goal of this study was to demonstrate the
effectiveness of MLN8237 for MPNST treatment. MLN8237 is an aurora kinase
A inhibitor that we demonstrate to decrease MPNST burden and increase
survival significantly. This study provides a robust and reproducible
MPNST model, allowing for the advancement of MPNST therapy. This study
also demonstrates the effectiveness of MLN8237 for MPNST treatment.
Together, our data has major implications on the future of MPNST research
by providing a robust murine model as well providing evidence that
MLN8237 is an effective treatment for MPNSTs.


