Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-overlapping promoter and super-enhancer-associated
dependencies in multiple myeloma.


The relationship between promoter proximal transcription
factor-associated gene expression and super-enhancer-driven
transcriptional programs are not well-defined. We explored the
transcriptional and functional interrelationship between E2F
transcription factors and BET transcriptional co-activators to identify
their individual contribution to eventual functional effect in multiple
myeloma (MM). To better understand how E2F1 and DP1 drive proliferation,
we mapped the global occupancy of E2F1/DP1 in MM. Integration of E2F1 and
DP1 genomic localization to MM reference epigenome revealed specific
co-occupancy of the factors at promoters of active genes marked by
H3K4me3, with a strong positive correlation between E2F and RNA
Polymerase II (RNA Pol II) binding at transcription start sites. In
contrast, active enhancers, as defined by promoter distal Mediator (MED1)
peaks and marked by H3K27ac and BRD4, showed virtually no E2F binding.
Unbiased hierarchical clustering revealed distinct regulatory axes for
E2F and BETs, with E2F predominantly localized to active gene promoters
of growth/proliferation genes and BETs disproportionately at enhancer-
regulated tissue specific genes confirming that these factors establish
distinct target gene programs. At the extremes, we found less than 10% of
genes were among the top 500 in BRD4 enhancer signal (i.e. SE-regulated)
and top 500 E2F promoter signal. We hypothesized that the presence of
BETs and E2F in distinct regulatory axes divides active genes in MM into
those that can be selectively influenced by BET inhibition or E2F
perturbation, but not both. In line with this we have observed that dual
E2F and BET inhibition is synergistic for MM cell growth, both in vitro
and in vivo. In conclusions, our results highlights the existence of
distinct regulatory axes controlled by promoter and enhancer driven
processes, suggesting a sequestered cellular functional control that may
be perturbed in cancer with potential for development of a promising
therapeutic strategy.


