Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RUNX1 dosage dictates gene signature and in vitro response to
glucocorticoids in acute myeloid leukemia.


Background: Poor prognosis subgroups of Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML),
such as RUNX1-mutated (RUNX1mut) AML, would greatly benefit from more
efficacious therapies that target leukemic stem cells (LSC) and improve
patient outcome. To understand factors that predict sensitivity to drugs,
we used a chemogenomic approach to interrogate primary AML specimens.

Methods: We performed RNA sequencing of 415 primary AML specimens
comprising various cytogenetic subgroups. Using culture conditions that
support LSC activity ex vivo, we carried out a viability screen including
20 primary AML specimens and ~5,100 low molecular weight compounds.
RUNX1mut specimens showed increased sensitivity to glucocorticoid
compounds (GCs). Validation screens were done in 248 primary AML samples
and 32 AML cell lines treated with selected GCs in a dose-response
manner. The effect of RUNX1 dosage in the in vitro response to drugs was
assessed by shRNA gene knockdown. GCs target, the glucocorticoid receptor
(GR), was validated by chemical blockage and shRNA silencing.

Results: RUNX1mut specimens were associated with older age,
French-American-British (FAB) M0 morphology, intermediate-risk
cytogenetics with abnormal karyotype and poor patient survival. RUNX1mut
gene expression signature showed the overexpression of previously
described genes such as DNTT, BAALC and CD34, as well as novel genes such
as PROM1 and EGFEM1P. Most interestingly, the expression levels of these
genes was influenced by the nature of the RUNX1 mutations, with levels
progressively increasing with mutations corresponding to decreased levels
of functional RUNX1. Chemical screens comprising 33 RUNX1mut specimens
confirmed that RUNX1mut are more sensitive to GCs than RUNX1 wild-type
samples. In agreement with the RUNX1mut gene signature, the
anti-proliferative effect of GCs anti-correlated with levels of
functional RUNX1. Specimens harboring loss-of-function and
dominant-negative RUNX1 mutations showed increased sensitivity to GCs
when compared to samples carrying missense mutations expected to have
little impact on RUNX1 function. Mutations in other genes, such as CEBPA
and SRSF2, had an additive effect on GC sensitivity when combined with
RUNX1 mutations. In accordance with our hypothesis, the downregulation of
RUNX1 could reverse GC-resistance in AML cell lines, and the sensitivity
to compounds was proportional to knockdown levels. Treatment of cell
lines with the GR antagonist RU486 blocked the inhibitory response
induced by GCs and GR silencing completely abrogated the
anti-proliferative effects of GCs in GC-sensitive cells, confirming that
GC operate through the GR in AML.

Conclusion: Altogether, these findings highlight the impact of RUNX1
dosage on gene expression and GCs sensitivity in AML cells in vitro.
Further studies should investigate the benefits of repositioning GCs in
the treatment of RUNX1mut AML patients.


