Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF-β is a key mediator of NK cell dysfunction in gliolastoma.


Background: NK cells play a crucial role in the antitumor immune response
and are involved in controlling tumor formation, progression and
metastases. Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most devastating brain tumor,
associated with very poor prognosis. While immunotherapy emerged as a
promising approach for anti cancer therapy, GBM appears immune resistant.
Here, we studied the role of NK cells in targeting glioblastoma and
possible mechanisms of NK immune evasion.

Methods: NK cells were isolated from freshly resected GBM tissue,
matching peripheral blood and the blood of healthy controls. Flow
cytometry was used to characterize the cells and their ability to produce
cytokines, and chromium release assay was perfumed to assess their
cytotoxicity. In vitro assays were performed by co-culturing GBM stem
cells (GSCs) with healthy donor NK cells.

Results: We found that whereas NK cells were abundant in primary GBM
tissue and could efficiently target GBM stem cells (GSCs), GBM
infiltrating NK cells (TiNKs) displayed an abnormal phenotype with
downregulation of many activating receptors including CD16, NKG2D, DNAM,
NKp30, NKp46, 2B4 and NKG2C and upregulation of inhibitory proteins such
as PD-1. This inhibitory phenotype was associated with impaired NK cell
function when compared with NK cells isolated from the peripheral blood
of patients and healthy donors. GSC-NK cell-cell contact resulted in
release of TGF-β by GCSs, which in turn led to NK dysfunction through
constitutive activating of the p-Smad pathway. TGF-β activation, in
turn, is partially mediated by the matrix metalloproteases MMP-2 and
MMP-9, secreted by GSCs upon contact with NK cells and enhanced upon
TGF-β exposure. We demonstrated that inhibition of the TGF-β axis, in
particular by the small molecule inhibitor, galunisertib, can prevent
GSC-induced NK cell dysfunction but is unable to inactivate the p-Smad
pathway, thus, cannot reverse existing dysfunction.

Conclusions: Our results indicate that NK-GBM cross-talk plays an
important role in tumor escape and highlight the importance of developing
future adoptive transfer therapies with the intent of limiting tumor
escape from antitumor immunity.


