Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Destruction of circulating tumor cells by fluid shear stresses
generated in a microfluidic system.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are mainly responsible for the cause of
cancer metastasis. Although most CTCs can be destroyed by the
bloodstream, some of them can still manage to withstand hemodynamic shear
stress in blood stream. To study the effects of fluidic micro-environment
on CTCs, we designed a microfluidic system that can produce various
levels of shear stress which can be generated in human artery under
resting or exercise condition. We also generated three human breast
cancer cell lines with increased ability to form lung metastases in nude
mice (i.e. 213-M1A>231-M1>231-C3). All three cell lines can produce a
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based sensor which can
reveal apoptosis in real-time by changing its color from green to blue.
Besides these, we also investigated the effects of shear stress on
multiple types of cancer cells including lung cancer (A549), ovarian
cancer (2008), breast cancer (UACC-893) and leukemia (K562). For all the
cell lines, except the non-attached K562 cells, cells were cultured on
petri-dishes, detached by trypsinization and re-suspended in a normal
culture medium to a cell density of 2x105 cells/ml. One milliliter of
this cell suspensions was circulated in our microfluidic system under the
shear stresses of 15, 30, 45 and 60 dyne/cm2 for 2-18 h. The effects of
shear stress on morphology and viability of CTCs were determined by FRET
imaging microscopy and MTT assay. And the impact of shear stress on
causing necrosis in CTCs were examined by propidium iodide (PI) staining
and LDH assay. Our findings are summarized below: 1) High shear stress
(SS60, 4 h) is more potent to destroy CTCs than low shear stress (SS15, 4
h). 2) High shear stress can destroy most of the CTCs via necrosis. 3)
This high level of shear stress is theoretically achievable via physical
exercise. 4) Highly metastatic 231-M1A cells are more resistant to high
shear stress compared to less metastatic 231-C3 cells. 5) Leukemia K562
cells representing the white blood cells showed stronger resistance to
high shear stress compared to the cancer cells tested in this study. We
think these findings can help people to understand how metastatic CTCs
resist shear force-induced cell death which are useful for designing more
effective therapies against metastatic CTCs. Additionally, the finding
that high shear stress is more effective to kill CTCs may inspire cancer
patients to consider exercise as a way to increase their hemodynamic
shear stress, consequently destroy CTCs and prevent cancer metastasis.


