Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploiting the pancreatic cancer mutome for immune interception.


This study aims to translate tumor-specific mutations identified by
next-generation sequencing techniques into an effective anti-tumor
vaccine for a classically non-immunogenic tumor, pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA). Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas develop an
average of 63 mutations during tumorigenesis, collectively referred to as
the “mutome.” Of these, approximately 45 are amino acid point
mutations. These mutations are not present in normal cells and provide a
source of tumor-specific neoepitopes for targeted immunotherapy.
Next-generation sequencing technologies allow for rapid identification of
mutations present in patient tumors; however, methods for rapid
identification of immunogenic neoepitopes which can be effectively
targeted for tumor clearance, and optimized vaccination strategies for
targeting them, still need to be developed.

In this study, we are using a transplantable murine PDA model, Panc02, to
develop vaccination strategies for inducing neoepitope-specific T cell
antitumor responses, and to define parameters for selecting appropriate
targets. Exome sequencing identified 878 nonsynonymous mutations in the
Panc02 cell line. Three immunological epitope prediction servers
identified 878 potentially immunogenic peptides in the Panc02 model, 29
of which were strong candidates (scores In this study, we are using a
transplantable murine PDA model, Panc02, to develop vaccination
strategies for inducing neoepitope-specific T cell antitumor responses,
and to define parameters for selecting appropriate targets. Exome
sequencing identified 878 nonsynonymous mutations in the Panc02 cell
line. Three immunological epitope prediction servers identified 878
potentially immunogenic peptides in the Panc02 model, 29 of which were
strong candidates (scores <50) and another 240 candidate epitopes within
the limits of prediction (scores In this study, we are using a
transplantable murine PDA model, Panc02, to develop vaccination
strategies for inducing neoepitope-specific T cell antitumor responses,
and to define parameters for selecting appropriate targets. Exome
sequencing identified 878 nonsynonymous mutations in the Panc02 cell
line. Three immunological epitope prediction servers identified 878
potentially immunogenic peptides in the Panc02 model, 29 of which were
strong candidates (scores <50) and another 240 candidate epitopes within
the limits of prediction (scores <1000). Panc02 neoepitope peptide
vaccinations in mice confirmed 14% of the predicted epitopes to be
immunogenic by IFNγ ELISPOT, which may include both CD8+ and CD4+ T cell
responses. Tumor transplant experiments demonstrate that therapeutic
vaccination against neoepitopes in combination with a human
STING-activating cyclic dinucleotide adjuvant is capable of inducing a
temporary regression of implanted tumors. After tumor escape and
regrowth, flow cytometry reveals a large population of infiltrating
lymphocytes, the majority of which are co-expressing the checkpoint
molecules PD-1, Tim3, and Lag3, indicating that treatment of vaccinated
animals with checkpoint blockade therapy may potentiate infiltrating
lymphocytes and ultimately result in permanent tumor regression. Thus, a
broad and unbiased approach for screening vaccine targets will allow for
the evaluation of predictive algorithms and ultimately the development of
more effective vaccination approaches for targeting the tumor mutome.


