Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small-molecule inhibitors of CD73, CD39 and A2aR: Three
anti-cancer targets in the ATP/adenosine signaling pathway.


INTRODUCTION: In the tumor micro-environment (TME) Adenosine (ADO)
dampens the immune response towards cancer cells by inhibiting the
cytotoxic activity of effector cells and promoting the proliferation of
immunosuppressive cells. Extracellular ADO is generated by the two
ecto-nucleotidases CD39 (ATP→AMP) and CD73 (AMP→ADO). In immune cells
ADO signals primarily through the G-protein coupled receptor A2aR.
Inhibition of ADO generation and signaling have been shown to be
promising therapeutic approaches for the treatment of cancer.

METHODS: Potent and highly selective small molecule inhibitors for A2aR,
CD73 and CD39 have been designed and synthesized by the Medicinal
Chemistry Department at Arcus Biosciences. Enzymatic assays: CD39 and
CD73 activity was assayed by quantitating hydrolysis of ATP or AMP,
respectively. Inorganic phosphate was detected using a colorimetric
(malachite green) protocol. ADO receptor assays: The potency of A2aR
antagonists and selectivity towards related receptors was determined by
measuring cAMP elevation in stably-expressing CHO cells following NECA
(ADO mimic) stimulation. CD8+ T cell assays: Activation, proliferation
and effector function of CD8+ T cells were quantified following compound
treatment in the presence and absence of ATP. Mixed Lymphocyte Reaction
(MLR): Cytokine levels were determined in an MLR assay after compound
treatment in the presence and absence of ATP. Tumor models: CT26 and
B16F10 syngeneic tumor models were used to assess the therapeutic effect
of the inhibitors.

RESULTS: Potent and highly selective small molecules have been generated
to block either ADO generation or ADO signaling. The therapeutic
potential of these molecules was assessed in CD8+ T cell assays, MLR
assays and in various tumor models. CD73 inhibition blocked the
conversion of AMP to ADO. CD39 inhibition blocked the conversion of ATP
to AMP and A2aR inhibition abolished the increases in intracellular cAMP
following ADO stimulation. The compounds are highly selective relative to
related enzymes/receptors, as well as a large panel of unrelated targets.
Inhibition of any one of the three targets robustly reversed
adenosine-mediated inhibition of proliferation, CD25 expression, and
IFN-γ and granzyme B production by human CD8+ T-cells. Robust inhibition
of tumor growth in combination with anti-PD1 antibody was observed for
several of these compounds.

CONCLUSIONS: Highly potent and selective inhibitors of each of the 3
molecular targets involved in the ATP/adenosine pathway have been
identified. Their ability to interfere with the extracellular generation
of ADO and the immune-suppressive effects of ADO, as well as their
effects on experimental tumor biology, have been demonstrated in various
in vitro and in vivo models.


