Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ubiquitin ligases: a new target for RNAi therapy of hepatocellular
carcinoma.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common cancer worldwide
and the third leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the world. HCC is
a very aggressive cancer, resistant to all conventional chemotherapies
and capable of acquiring resistance to Sorafenib, which is the only
approved chemotherapeutic drug for HCC. This highlights the need to look
for new therapeutic options and improve the survival of patients with
advanced HCC. The N-end rule pathway is an emerging player in the field
of cancer biology, because of its capacity to positively regulate many
hallmarks of cancer including angiogenesis, cell proliferation, motility
and survival. Therefore, the N-end rule pathway offers the potential to
be a target for highly effective anti-tumor treatment. The aim of this
study is to investigate the role of the N-end rule pathway in the context
of hepatocellular carcinoma in vivo. We used siRNA-mediated RNA
interference as the main approach for selective downregulation of the
four N-end rule-dependent cognate ubiquitin ligases: UBR1, UBR2, UBR4 and
UBR5. Initial screening of siRNAs was performed in Hepa 1-6 cells,
followed by in vitro phenotyping using proliferation assays, migration
assays, and TUNEL assays. The most potent siRNA against Ubr1, Ubr2, Ubr4
and Ubr5 were formulated into lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) and injected
into mice in order to modulate the function of the N-end rule in vivo. We
have confirmed that Ubr1, Ubr2, Ubr4 and Ubr5 are overexpressed in Hepa
1-6 cells and in mouse liver tumors, in comparison to normal liver. Upon
transfection of siRNAs in Hepa 1-6 cells or injection of LNPs loaded with
the same siRNAs into mice, we obtained successful down regulation of
Ubr1, Ubr2, Ubr4 and Ubr5 both in vitro and in vivo (in the liver and in
tumor tissue). We have also demonstrated that down regulation of these
four Ubr proteins negatively affects cell migration and proliferation,
and renders cells more susceptible to apoptosis. Bi-weekly injections of
the LNPs in mice for a period up to 6 weeks efficiently downregulates the
expression of Ubr1, Ubr2, Ubr4 and Ubr5 without any toxic effects.
Indeed, we found no significant increase of ALT, AST or total bilirubin
in the blood compared to controls. Considering that all four Ubrs are
overexpressed in mouse liver tumors, and that the N-end rule plays a
major role in many key pathways of cancer development, we expect that
even a partial down regulation of this pathway will have prominent
effects on tumor development and progression due to the suppression of
tumor vascularization, cell proliferation and viability.


