Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel anti-Trop-2 monoclonal antibodies with unique binding
specificities show therapeutic synergy against most human cancers.


Trop-2 is an epithelial transmembrane glycoprotein that transduces a
calcium signal and activates a growth-signaling network that converges on
AKT. Trop-2 is overexpressed in the majority of carcinomas, where it
drives tumor cell proliferation, and in its mature,
glycosylated/functionally-competent form associates with worse prognosis.
Trop-2 extracellular domain contains an N-terminal cysteine-rich globular
region followed by a cysteine-less region as a connecting “stem” to
the transmembrane domain. Trop-2 molecules engage in homophylic
interactions between adjacent cells and establish multimeric complexes
with tight junction proteins, which may hinder accessibility by
therapeutic antibodies. Up to now, Trop-2-targeted approaches have
employed anti-Trop-2 monoclonal antibodies (mAb) which essentially
recognize a single immunodominant epitope poised between the globular and
stem regions. Such mAb have limited or no therapeutic efficacy. In order
to untap the potential of anti-Trop-2 immunotherapy we generated novel
anti-Trop-2 mAb with tailored specificity towards the globular versus
stem regions. Hybridoma diversity was maximized by immunization with
soluble human Trop-2 extracellular region produced in different
transformed mammalian cell lines (human 293 and murine L) and in insect
cells/baculovirus expressing system. These were expected to provide
native folding of Trop-2 together with a broad spectrum of differential
glycosylation. Trop-2-binding hybridomas were further selected by
multiple rounds of flow cytometry analysis using live 293 cells
expressing different Trop-2 extracellular portions. Two classes of mAb
were identified, that bound the stem versus the globular region. These
mAb efficiently bound Trop-2 expressing cancer cells and were able to
inhibit cell growth in vitro. In vivo the naked anti-globular OX-G64 and
anti-stem OX-S55 mAb were most effective in inhibiting the growth of
distinct tumors, including colon, ovary and prostate cancers. Notably,
they showed differential efficacy for established tumors versus
isolated-cell models of metastatic dissemination, consistent with our
strategy of maximizing differential accessibility of Trop-2 according to
growth mode. Most remarkably, we demonstrated in vivo synergy of these
anti-Trop-2 mAb, paving the way for game-changing anti-cancer mAb
therapy. The differential efficacy of the OX-G64 and OX-S55 anti-Trop2
mAb against different tumor histotypes and growth stages further allows
to exploit their cancer-killing potential in pathological stage-tailored
therapeutic approaches.


