Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ovarian cancer cells release arginase-1-containing exosomes to
suppress antitumor immune response.


Aim/Background: Depletion of essential (L-tryptophan) or semi-essential
(L-arginine) amino acids has been shown to suppress antitumor immune
responses. Arginase-1 (Arg-1) is a cytosolic enzyme catalyzing
degradation of L-arginine to L-ornithine and urea. Several studies have
shown the presence of abundant Arg-1 in either tumor cells or in
tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells of neutrophilic or monocytic origin.
This in turn, leads to downregulation of CD3-zeta levels in T cells and
correlates with suppressed antitumor immunity. In patients with ovarian
cancer (OvCa), exosomes released by tumor cells (TEX) are detected in
body fluids including plasma or ascites and carry proteins that are
expressed by OvCa cells. Here we report that OvCa cells release Arg-1 in
TEX and investigate the influence of OvCa TEX-derived Arg-1 on the
antitumor effector mechanisms of immune response.

Methods: TEX were isolated by ultracentrifugation or exclusion
chromatography and verified by Western blotting, NanoSight and electron
microscopy. The presence of Arg-1 in TEX was determined by Western
blotting and the Arg-1 activity was assessed using an enzymatic assay
that measured conversion of arginine into urea. Immunohistochemical Arg-1
expression data in primary OvCa lesions were correlated to
clinico-pathological characteristics. Effects of TEX Arg-1 on immune
cells were analyzed by in vitro proliferation assay and flow cytometry.

Results: OvCa ascites contained higher levels of exosomal Arg-1 as
compared with the fluids obtained from benign ovarian cysts.
Enzymatically active Arg-1 was detected in TEX derived from patients’
ascites as well as from ovarian cancer cell lines. High Arg-1 expression
in correlated negatively with intratumoral T-cell infiltrates and
CD3-zeta expression and was associated with shorter time to recurrence
(TTR). In vitro, OvCa-derived Arg-1-positive TEX inhibited CD8+ and CD4+
T-cell proliferation and decreased T-cell receptor expression. We also
observed that co-culture of bone-marrow-derived dendritic cells (DC) with
TEX isolated from OvCa cells results in the transfer of functionally
active Arg-1 that inhibits DCs-primed proliferation of OVA-antigen
specific OT-I T cells. We have used TEX isolated from OvCa cells
transfected with V5-tagged Arg-1 for these experiments to ensure that
this is OvCa-derived, but not endogenous DC-derived arginase that
suppresses T cell proliferation. All these in vitro effects were reversed
by a novel Arg-1 inhibitor (OAT-1746).

Conclusions: Our findings provide the first evidence for the role of
Arg-1 in the formation of an immunosuppressive microenvironment in OvCa.
We identify a novel mechanism of exosomal Arg-1 distribution from the
tumor cells to antigen presenting cells. Inhibition of Arg-1 activity may
be an attractive novel anti-cancer strategy.

Funding: NCN - OPUS 6 Program 2013/11/B/NZ6/02790, NCBIR –
STRATEGMED2/265503/3/NCBIR/15


