Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nexrutine and palmatine mediated effects on the STAT3/EP4/IL-6
axis in pancreatic cancer.


With a 5 year survival of less than 8%, the poor prognosis of pancreatic
cancer (PanCA) underlines the importance of improving therapies for
effective management of this disease. In previous studies, we identified
the tumor cell growth inhibitory activities for Nexrutine® (Nx, a bark
extract from Phellodendron amurense) and palmatine (PMT) which is a
constituent of Nx. These studies revealed an important role for
downregulation of KRAS downstream effectors including GLI, STAT3 and
NF-κB in mediating growth inhibitory effects. Remarkably, both Nx and
PMT exerted synergistic growth inhibitory effects in combination with the
conventional chemotherapeutic agent, Gemcitabine (GEM). Despite such
promising in vitro observations, the in vivo efficacy of Nx or PMT had
not been established. In this investigation, we evaluated the ability of
Nx and PMT to (i) prevent the development of pancreatic tumors; and (ii)
inhibit the growth of patient derived pancreatic cancer tissue in short
term ex vivo cultures. Studies were also conducted to investigate the
underlying molecular mechanism using cell culture models. Our results
show that both Nx and PMT are well tolerated in vivo as evidenced by a
lack of significant changes in the body weights of athymic mice implanted
with Capan-2 cells. Interestingly, both Nx and PMT showed a significant
decrease in the circulating levels of inflammatory molecules including
IL-6 and CXCL1. In this first proof-of-concept study, PMT treated animals
demonstrated a trend towards decreased pancreatic tumor weight with
associated histopathogical changes. Remarkably, both Nx and PMT inhibited
the growth of patient derived pancreatic cancer cells. Mechanistic
investigations identified downregulation of STAT3, TrkA, Src, and RPS6
activities as potential contributors to Nx or PMT-induced synergistic
growth inhibitory effects with GEM. Further investigation of STAT3
signaling revealed the involvement of the prostaglandin receptor, EP4, in
a potential feedback loop with STAT3 and in asserting STAT3-mediated
inhibition of autophagy. Taken together these data support potential
utility for Nx and/or PMT in the management of PanCA and suggest that
these agents use multiple mechanisms to affect growth of pancreatic
tumors. Supported by NCCIH (R01 AT007448; APK) and VA-MERIT Award (I01 BX
000766; APK).


