Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sideroflexin4: A novel regulator of iron metabolism in ovarian
cancer.


The five year survival rate for women with ovarian cancer is 9-34%. This
high mortality is due to late stage diagnosis, marginally effective
treatment and frequent disease recurrence. Alterations in metabolism have
been widely recognized as an important hallmark of cancer. Metabolism of
the micronutrient iron is significantly altered in many cancers,
including ovarian cancers. The expression of genes governing iron
transport (TFR1 and FPN), iron storage (FTL and FTH) and iron regulation
(IRP1 and IRP2) are significantly altered in ovarian cancer compared to
normal ovarian epithelial cells, resulting in higher intratumoral iron
retention. However, specific pathways of intracellular iron utilization
that are altered in cancer cells, and the functional consequences of
disrupting these pathways, remain poorly understood.

To identify pathways of iron utilization that are perturbed in ovarian
cancer, we analyzed the expression of genes involved in iron metabolism
using a publicly available microarray database of ovarian cancer and
normal oviduct (GSE69428). We observed that sideroflexin4 (SFXN4), an
inner mitochondrial membrane protein that is essential for mitochondrial
respiratory homeostasis, was significantly upregulated (p= 0.002) in
ovarian cancer patient samples. We screened several ovarian cancer cell
lines and observed that SFXN4 was similarly up-regulated both at the mRNA
and protein level when compared to normal human ovarian surface
epithelial cells.

To test the role of SFXN4 in ovarian cancer cells we performed knockdown
and overexpression studies. Knockdown of SFXN4 induced S and G2-phase
cell cycle arrest and reduced the ability of MDAH2774 and SKOV3 ovarian
cancer cells to form colonies. Further investigation revealed that
modulation of SFXN4 alters mitochondrial respiration by affecting
iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis. Thus, knock-out cells exhibited impaired
respiratory activity and a phenotype similar to cells with defects in
iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis, including increased IRP-IRE binding and a
decrease in IRP1/ACO1 aconitase activity. Furthermore, SFXN4 knock-out
decreased the activity of iron-sulfur cluster-containing enzymes such as
mitochondrial aconitase and succinate dehydrogenase.

Based on these observations, we postulate that SFXN4 acts as a molecular
mediator that channels the excess iron present in ovarian cancer cells to
iron-sulfur cluster-dependent metabolic pathways that favor growth and
metastasis. SFXN4 may be a potential druggable target in ovarian cancer.


