Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neoantigen frequency as an independent prognostic factor in
patients with clear cell ovarian carcinoma (CCOC).


Aim: Neoantigens derived from tumor-specific somatic mutations are
thought to be targets for antitumor immune responses. It has been
reported that mutation/neoantigen burdens correlate with prognosis of
certain cancers under checkpoint blockade immunotherapy. In clear cell
ovarian carcinoma (CCOC), checkpoint inhibitors provided durable
responses in a subset of patients. To test whether the same may apply in
CCOC patients, who are not on immunomodulatory therapy, we investigated
the number of mutations or neoantigens, and immune signature of CCOC by
integrated molecular analysis.

Methods: We performed exome sequencing and expression array for 74 CCOC
patients. Candidate neoantigens derived from mutations were identified by
MHC class I binding prediction algorism (NetMHCpan v 2.8). Immune
signature was assessed by gene ontology and gene set enrichment analyses
for immune cell lineage or molecule genes. We also analyzed their
relationships with clinical outcomes.

Results: Neither number of missense mutations nor neoantigens correlated
with clinical outcomes in CCOC. However, we found neoantigen frequency
defined here as the number of neoantigens per missense mutation
correlated with clinical outcomes. A cox multivariate regression analysis
demonstrated that high neoantigen frequency correlated with decreased
progression free survival (PFS) and was an independent prognostic factor
(p=0.032). Immune-related genes including those related to effector
memory CD8 T cell were dominantly expressed in tumors with low neoantigen
frequency. This may suggest that CD8 T cell-mediated immunity is
constantly eliminating immunogenic subclones expressing neoantigens
(immunoediting). In contrast, we observed increased ratio of CTLA-4 and
PD-1 to CD8A expression in tumors with high neoantigen frequency. This
may imply that restricted antitumor immunity by immunoinhibitory
mechanism result in the limited immunoediting and poor prognosis

Conclusions: Neoantigen frequency underlying immunoediting in CCOC is an
independent prognostic factor for clinical outcome and may become a
potential candidate biomarker for an immunomodulatory-based treatment.


