Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Ewing sarcoma EWS/FLI1 protein in midzone formation during
mitosis.


Ewing sarcoma remains the second most common form of bone and cartilage
cancer in children. Although EWS/FLI1 fusion protein (derived by
chromosomal translocation) is known to induce aberrant transcription in
the patient cells, why and how this molecule leads to tumorigenesis
specifically in skeletal cell lineage is not understood. We previously
reported a novel role of EWS/FLI1, which interacts with EWS and leads to
mitotic defects through an inhibition of EWS function. We further
demonstrated that EWS interacts with Aurora B and relocates from inner
centromere to the midzone (a midline structure that is consisted spindles
called the central spindle) during anaphase of mitosis. Disruption of
EWS-directed Aurora B-relocation leads to defects in cytokinesis, and to
induction of chromosome instability (CIN).

EWS is an abundant molecule that is localized throughout the entire
cytoplasm of anaphase, but how EWS specifically regulates midzone
formation is not understood. A potential candidate mechanism is
post-translational modification of EWS to modulate its activity in a
spatial-temporal manner. Because previous studies showed that
EWS/FLI1-T79 is a potential modification site of O-GlcNAcylation and
phosphorylation, we hypothesized that the O-GlcNAcylation of EWS/FLI1
contributes to the impairment of Aurora B-relocation. Our study shows
that high cellular O-GlcNAc increases the level of O-GlcNAcylation of
EWS/FLI1 accompanied by the impairment of the Aurora B relocation and of
central spindle formation. Contrary, EWS/FLI1-T79A and EWS/FLI1-T79D
(phospho-mimic mutant) does not impair the mislocation of Aurora B at the
midzone, suggesting that the O-GlcNAcylation of EWS/FLI1 is responsible
for mislocation of Aurora B at the midzone. The O-GlcNAc-dependent
impairment of midzone formation by EWS/FLI1 may lead to the
identification of therapeutic targets for Ewing sarcoma patients.


