Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Longitudinal expression response of glycosylation related genes,
regulators, and targets in cancer cell lines treated with eleven
anti-tumor agents.


Cancer cells have profound alterations in glycosylation processes, which
affects the functioning of malignant cells and their interaction with
surrounding environment. We examined the effects of treatment of cancer
cell lines with eleven antitumor agents (bortezomib, cisplatin,
dasatinib, doxorubicin, erlotinib, gemcitabine, paclitaxel, sirolimus,
sorafenib, sunitinib, and topotecan) on transcriptional changes in 179
candidate genes involved in biochemical glycosylation pathways or
encoding glycosylation targets, regulators of glycosylation processes,
and components of cancer pathways affected by glycosylation. In order to
achieve this goal, we analyzed time course gene expression information
for the NCI-60 cancer cell line panel using the data from the NCI
Transcriptional Pharmacodynamic Workbench (NCI TPW), a resource developed
at the National Cancer Institute. Our analysis identified 145
glycosylation related genes that responded to drug treatment in a
concerted manner. Many of these genes had a concerted response to
multiple agents; however, the direction and the magnitude of concerted
response were specific to individual drugs. Expression of multiple genes
prior to treatment and/or transcriptional changes in response to
treatment were significantly correlated with drug chemosensitivity,
measured as log(GI50). Treatment with dasatinib resulted in the largest
number of significant correlations of chemosensitivity with gene
expression prior to treatment and with gene expression changes in
response to treatment. Significant correlations of transcriptional
changes after treatment and/or of pre-treatment gene expression levels of
glycosylation related genes and glycosylation targets were also observed
for other antitumor agents. Chemosensitivity to kinase inhibitors and DNA
damaging agents was significantly correlated with expression of genes
involved in N- and O-glycosylation, fucosylation, biosynthesis of
poly-N-acetyllactosamine, removal of misfolded proteins, binding to
hyaluronic acid and other glycans, and cell adhesion. In particular,
tumor cell sensitivity or resistance to multiple agents were
significantly correlated with changes in expression of C1GALT1C1 (COSMC),
FUCA1, SDC1, MUC1, members of the MGAT, GALNT, B4GALT, B3GNT, MAN, and
EDEM gene families, and other genes involved in glycosylation processes
or encoding glycosylation targets and signaling regulators. We present a
catalog of dynamic concerted changes in expression of glycosylation
related genes, their ligands, regulators, and targets in response to
chemotherapy, and provide a list of genes that influence the strength of
response of cancer cells to treatment. These glycosylation related genes
may be considered as potential candidates for drug targeting in
combination therapy to enhance the effects of treatment. Funded by NCI
Contract No. HHSN261200800001E.


