Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sphingolipid regulates pro-inflammatory cytokines to subdue the
neoplastic lesions in hepatocellular carcinoma.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), is the most leading cause of
cancer-related death in all over the world (seems to more than 80% of
death cases). It is frequently linked with continuous hepatocytes death,
inflammatory cell infiltration, and compensatory liver regeneration with
higher angiogenic rate. Considering the different signalling process
during this tumorogenesis with the involvement of new ‘lead’
identification of different sources, desire to be less toxic and higher
bioavailability. The use of live, attenuated or genetically compensated
microbes or its cellular component(s) or metabolites has begun to emerge
as a potential new approach in medicinal research to deliver bioactive
entities. Thus, advancing our knowledge of such microbes-mediated therapy
may suggest new avenues for therapeutic intervention in many fatal
diseases. Lipid (LSPL-1) isolated from Leishmania donovani could induce
apoptosis in human HepG2 (Hepatocellular carcinoma cell, human) cells, as
characterized by phosphatydylserine serine exposure, DNA fragmentation,
alteration of BaX/Bcl2 ratio with loss of mitochondrial membrane
potential and cytochrome C release, activation of series of caspases and
cleaved PARP. LSPL-1 also modulates the various transcription factors
like NF-kb65, p53 through regulation of cell proliferation exerted the
death cause. Moreover this study also focused that the LSPL-1 effectively
suppressed diethylnitrosamine (DEN) induced liver inflammation and
hyperplasia in murine also decline in lipid peroxidation and increase in
enzymic antioxidants (SOD, CAT, GPx, GR and GST) status with improvement
of their survival rate. It reduced the elevated level of cytokines
including tumor necrosis factors, interleukins, interferon (alpha and
gamma), and transforming growth factors in hepatocytes from liver
fibrosis bearing mice. As evident from immunochemical analysis, inflamed
hepatocytes and liver tissue may up regulated the various growth factors
including EGF, HGF, endothline-1 regulation with promoting angiogenic
activity via modulation of CD34, VEGF, HIF-1α expression and alteration
of these changes were balanced by LSPL-1. So taken together, these
finding indicated that, LSPL-1 may induce apoptosis and in hyper
proliferating cancer cells via altering cytokines level with tumour
growth regulation in carcinogen exposed rodent system.


