Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel biomarker to predict
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) by the proteome analysis.


Prostate specific antigen (PSA) is useful for screening prostate cancer,
while it has no reliable correlation with pathological malignancy of
prostate cancer and is not a predictor for castration resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC). In order to explore novel biomarkers to predict the
development of CRPC, we performed proteomics from secreted proteins from
human prostate cancer cells and identified the candidates of biomarker
for CRPC.

Materials and Methods: The proteins secreted from 6 prostate cancers in
culture medium were analyzed and compared with 8 other cancer cells
including renal and urothelial cancers using LTQ Orbitrap mass
spectrometer. With the focus on high tissue specificity, the candidate
biomarker proteins were then identified through analysis of gene
expressions in proteins common to human prostate cancers by real time
qPCR. Next, a system to measure the identified mouse monoclonal
antibodies against the focused proteins was established. Finally, serum
levels of these proteins from 33 patients with benign prostate
hyperplasia (BPH), 31 with untreated prostate cancer (PCa) and 35 with
CRPC, were measured.

Results: The proteome analysis identified 12 candidates of secreted cell
membrane proteins as new biomarkers. The proteome analysis indicated that
not only matured GDF15, but pro-peptide as well as fragments (GDPP) are
released from prostate cancer cells. Patients’ serum was analyzed for
matured and pro-peptide GDF15 using ELISA and immunoprecipitation-MRM
mass spectrometry. The results showed that the serum level of GDDP-1, one
of the processing forms of GDPP, was significantly higher in CRPC than
those in BPH and untreated PCa (PResults: The proteome analysis
identified 12 candidates of secreted cell membrane proteins as new
biomarkers. The proteome analysis indicated that not only matured GDF15,
but pro-peptide as well as fragments (GDPP) are released from prostate
cancer cells. Patients’ serum was analyzed for matured and pro-peptide
GDF15 using ELISA and immunoprecipitation-MRM mass spectrometry. The
results showed that the serum level of GDDP-1, one of the processing
forms of GDPP, was significantly higher in CRPC than those in BPH and
untreated PCa (P<0.01). ROC analysis also showed that the AUC of
GDPP-1(0.86) was higher than that of matured GDF15 (0.76). When the
cutoff value of GDPP-1 was set at 4.0 ng/mL, there was a significant
difference of overall survival (OS) in CRPC patients between those with
more than 4.0 ng/mL compared to less than 4.0 ng/mL of GDPP-1, whereas
there was no significant difference of OS measurable by PSA in CRPC
patients. These data suggest that GDPP-1 may be a novel biomarker for
CRPC.

Conclusion: GDPP-1 shows potential as a novel biomarker for CRPC.


