Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing a novel system for studying tumor microenvironment
heterogeneity in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.


Pancreatic cancer (PDA) has a dismal prognosis and responds poorly to all
existing therapies. This is largely attributed to the existence of dense
stroma and lack of T cell infiltration. PDA exhibits heterogeneous tumor
microenvironments that are composed of various stromal cells. Human PDA
has been shown to have various levels of T cell infiltration. The
mechanisms underlying the inter-tumor heterogeneity of immune
microenvironment in PDA and its effects on distinct responses of PDA to
therapies, especially immune-modulating therapies, remain largely
unknown. Our lab has demonstrated that there is no difference in somatic
mutation burden or neo-epitope load between human PDA tumors with high or
low amount of cytolytic T cells. We hypothesize that tumor-cell-intrinsic
determinants, transcriptional and/or epigenetic factors, shape the
heterogenous tumor immune microenvironment, and thereby result in
different responses to therapies. For the reason that tumor cellularity
of PDA is very low, the profiling of bulk tumor samples cannot provide
enough information for understanding tumor-cell-intrinsic molecular
events associated with differential immune microenvironment. Therefore,
we developed a panel of ~60 cell lines (diversity-cell-panel) from PDA
tumors derived from inbred C57BL/6 KPC mouse model, which recapitulates
the major histopathological and molecular features of human PDA. Our
preliminary results have demonstrated that the diversity-cell-panel
recapitulates the immune microenvironments heterogeneity in PDA. Tumor
cells mainly fell into two subgroups: T-cell-high and T-cell-low. Tumors
resulted from T-cell-high tumor cells also possess less amount of
immune-suppressive myeloid cells. To study whether this difference is
caused by various amount of mutations, we performed exome-sequencing for
8 cell lines within this cell-panel, and showed that T cell-high and
T-cell-low tumor cells have similar amount of mutations and neo-epitopes.
To further study the distinct molecular features of T-cell-high and
T-cell-low tumor cells, we will perform RNA-seq and ATAC-seq on tumor
cells sorted from resulting tumors. To understand whether T cell
infiltration affects the response of PDA tumors to immune-modulating
therapies, I have been testing the response of T-cell-high and T-cell-low
tumors to a group of therapies, including chemotherapy, CD40 therapy and
immune checkpoint blockade therapy. Utilizing this novel system, the
cell-panel, this study will delineate in unprecedented detail the novel
molecular determinants of immune heterogeneity in PDA and the implication
of the heterogeneity to therapies. This diversity-cell-panel will also be
useful for understanding other aspects of tumor heterogeneity, including
angiogenesis, drug resistance and metastatic disease.


