Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential mismatch repair-dependent damage responses in
subpopulations of cells from human intestinal organoids.


Hereditary mutations in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes cause the cancer
predisposition syndrome called Lynch syndrome. Patients predominantly
develop colorectal cancer and some extracolonic cancers at a young age.
The MMR pathway repairs mismatches created during DNA replication, but
also can induce apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in response to certain
DNA damaging agents as a protective mechanism to eliminate cells at risk
of accumulating mutations. Our understanding of this MMR-directed DNA
damage response has come primarily from studies in human cancer cell
lines. We wished to examine the role of the MMR-dependent damage response
in a model that may be more relevant to the human intestine. Therefore,
we have created human intestinal organoids (HIOs) in vitro either by
directing the differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) or
through culturing of adult intestinal tissue samples. We have used these
HIOs to specifically study the MMR dependent damage response to DNA
alkylation damage. We have found that whereas hESCs undergo rapid
apoptosis in response to alkylation damage, the differentiated HIOs or
those created from adult tissues undergo not only apoptosis, but also
senescence and accelerated differentiation following damage. Using
CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing in hESCs, we also created MMR-deficient HIOs
that failed to respond to the drug indicating that these responses are
MMR-dependent. We then determined that the cells undergoing apoptosis
following DNA damage are most likely the intestinal stem cells suggesting
that different cell types in the intestine have different MMR-dependent
responses to damage. Together these results suggest that loss of MMR
function in the intestinal crypts may provide a selective advantage
particularly in an environment conducive with DNA damage that promotes
tumorigenesis.


