Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting of tumorigenic EphA2+/EphA3+ brain tumor
initiating cells with bi-specific antibody in human glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma (GBM), the most aggressive primary human brain tumor,
carrier a dismal prognosis and is increasingly characterized by cellular
and genetic intra-tumoral heterogeneity (ITH). Many of the 14 members of
the erythropoietin-producing hepatocellular carcinoma receptor (EphR)
family and their ephrin ligands are expressed in GBM cells and constitute
potential molecular targets for novel therapeutic agents. We hypothesize
that multiple members of the EphR family play a critical role in
orchestrating the clonal evolution of GBM progression. Individual Eph
receptor targeting strategies have shown only modest pre-clinical
success, likely because single agent therapy cannot target the degree of
ITH in GBM. Using a highly specific human Eph receptor monoclonal
antibody (mAb) panel (EphR profiler), we identified five Eph receptors
with dysregulated expression in recurrent GBM as compared to primary GBM.
With our unique chemoradiotherapy-adapted, patient-derived xenograft
model of GBM, we identified EphA2 and EphA3 expression to be upregulated
after therapy. Here we show that EphA2 and EphA3 co-expression marks a
highly tumorigenic cell population in recurrent GBM with higher in vitro
and in vivo self-renewal and proliferation capacity as compared to
EphA2+/EphA3-, EphA2-/EphA3+ or EphA2-/EphA3- cells. Lentiviral mediated
knockdown of EphA2 and EphA3 blocks this self-renewal and proliferation
capacity in recurrent GBM. Through further characterization using mass
cytometry (CyTOF) assay, we find that EphA2 and EphA3 is co-expressed
with multiple brain tumor initiating cell (BTIC) markers (CD133, CD15,
Bmi1, Sox2, Integrin α6 and FoxG1). Considering the important role of
EphA2+/EphA3+ cells in GBM tumorigenesis and recurrence, we generated a
bi-specific antibody (bsIgG) that co-targets EphA2 and EphA3. In vitro
treatment of GBM with bsEphA2/A3 IgG led to pharmacological blockade of
phosphorylated EphA2. We then assessed the in vivo efficacy of the
bsEphA2/A3 IgG to block GBM tumor growth in our PDX model, and found that
treatment with intracranial bsIgG resulted in non-invasive and
significantly smaller lesions. The striking reduction in tumor burden in
recurrent GBM after co-targeting of EphA2 and EphA3 validates the premise
of our therapeutic strategy of targeting multiple EphRs. Discovering the
clonal composition of recurrent GBM will enable us to target cellular
subpopulations, and this ITH, with selective compounds that inhibit BTIC
and Eph receptor activity with minimal off-target effects. Comprehensive
Eph receptor profiling of individual patient-derived GBM will allow us to
develop a therapeutic strategy for each patient’s tumor, employing
polytherapy with mAbs against Eph receptors expressed at recurrence.


