Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A three-pronged attack on cancer cells: Induction of
non-protective autophagy, inhibition of lysosomal acidification and
promotion of energetic impairment.


Background and Aim: Cancer cells undergo cytoprotective autophagy and
evade chemotherapy therefore many clinical trials are investigating the
efficacy of autophagy inhibition in combination with chemotherapy. At the
functional level, autophagic process can be cytoprotective, cytotoxic,
cytostatic or nonprotective. We investigated strategies to convert
cellular autophagic response to non-protective autophagy which does not
interfere with therapeutic regimens exploiting bioactive molecules.

Methods: Utilizing in vivo xenograft models, we established that
Withaferin A (WA), a bioactive molecule from Withania Somnifera inhibits
breast tumorigenesis. Autophagy studies were conducted utilizing
immunoblot, RT-PCR, and immunofluorescence analyses for autophagy
markers, transmission electron microscopy and confocal imaging. The
fusion of autophagosome and lysosome was examined by using
GFP-LC3/LysoTracker-red and GFP-LC3/mCherryRAB7A. Protein degradation
activity of lysosomes and ATP levels were examined by DQ-BSA assay,
Cathepsin activity and quantitative ATP assay.

Results: WA inhibited growth and induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells
resulting in inhibition of breast carcinogenesis in vivo. Although WA
increased tumor suppressor LKB1 which is known to be involved in
autophagy, WA-mediated increased cleavage of Light Chain 3 type II
(LC3-II) and punctated LC3-II staining was LKB1-independent. The
redistribution of EGFP-LC3 from cytosol to autophagosome indicated
increased formation of autophagosomes in WA-treated cells. However,
WA-induced increased autophagosome-formation was not mediated by
increased activation of autophagy by upstream processes but was due to
blockade of lysosomal-degradation as evident by higher level of
sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1/p62) and decreased turnover of LC3. WA was found
to be a potent lysosomal deacidification agent capable of blocking
autophagic flux. Accordingly, inhibiting autophagy by blocking formation
of autophagosomes or elevating lysosomal pH did not interfere with
WA-mediated growth-inhibition. WA blocked autophagic flux decreasing
recycling of cellular fuels leading to reduced energy supply.
Investigating this alternative mechanism, we discovered that indeed, WA
reduced ATP levels and increased phosphorylation of AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK). Modulating substrates for tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle
with methyl pyruvate protected WA-treated cells while 2DG potentiated
WA-induced cell death.

Conclusion: Our results indicate that WA induces a non-protective
autophagy and blocks energy fuels in cancer cells by reducing ATP levels
and inhibiting lysosomal acidification hence offering a three-pronged
approach to facilitate cancer cell death. WA might be a useful strategic
addition to chemotherapy regimens to evade cytoprotective effects of
autophagy.


