Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) variant allele frequencies are
reduced in responders to durvalumab and low baseline variant allele
frequencies are associated with improved overall survival in NSCLC
patients.


Mutations can influence patient responses to treatment in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Monitoring such mutations can be critical to guiding
treatment decisions, however, accessing sufficient biopsy material for
mutation analysis can be challenging. Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in
the plasma offers a robust and highly sensitive approach to identifying
mutations. Further, variant allele frequencies (VAFs) in individual
mutations represent the number of cancer clones harboring a mutation,
thus providing an indicator of tumor burden. Here we evaluated baseline
mutation spectrum in genes implicated in cancer for association with
clinical outcomes to durvalumab, an anti-PDL1 molecule, and examined
changes in VAFs, as a surrogate for tumor burden, after treatment with
durvalumab in NSCLC patients.

CP1108/NCT01693562 was a nonrandomized phase 1/2 trial evaluating
durvalumab in patients with advanced NSCLC or other solid tumors. By
29APR2016, 304 NSCLC pts received 10 mg/kg Q2W of D ≤12 months with
median 18.8 months follow up. A panel of 70 genes was assayed for
nonsynonymous mutations and copy number (CN) variants using the
Guardant360 cancer panel in plasma ctDNA from 115 NSCLC patients
pre-treatment and 28 patients pre and 8 weeks post-treatment with
durvalumab (Q2W). The mean VAF of all mutations harbored by a patient was
correlated with clinical outcomes. Objective response rate (ORR) was
calculated according to RECIST v1.1 and a Cox proportional hazards model
was calculated adjusting for baseline ECOG, gender, age, smoking status,
therapy lines, histology, and number of metastases.

Partial responders (PRs) showed a significant decrease (Δ= -2.7%,
p=0.005) in ctDNA mean VAF post-treatment with durvalumab (i.e. reduction
in tumor burden) compared to an increase in mean VAF (i.e. increase in
tumor burden) in progressive disease (PD) patients (Δ=+1.7%, p=0.17).
This correlation was also observed in total mutation count in PR
(Δ=-5.3, p=0.037) compared to PD patients (Δ=+2.7, p=0.003). In a PD
patient, the VAF of T790M EGFR mutation doubled after 6 weeks of
durvalumab treatment. Patients with VAFs below the median VAF or no CN
gains had longer median overall survival (15.7 months, 95% CI=[11.2,not
reached] ) compared to those with VAFs above the median or CN gains (5.1
months 95% CI=[3.8,9.4]; HR=0.29; p=0.0005), even after adjustment for
clinical covariates.

CtDNA VAFs were consistently reduced in responders but not non-responders
after eight weeks of durvalumab. Below median pre-treatment VAFs or no CN
gains in ctDNA correlated with longer overall survival in patients
treated with durvalumab. Because we examined oncogenes and tumor
suppressors, increased VAF in ctDNA of these genes may help to identify
aggressive, and difficult to control tumors


