Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Concurrent treatment with Pim kinase inhibitor decreases
alternative non-homologous end-joining repair of DNA damage induced by
topoisomerase 2 inhibitors in cells with FLT3-ITD.


Purpose: Internal tandem duplication of fms-like tyrosine kinase 3
(FLT3-ITD) is a common (30%) molecular abnormality in acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), associated with a high relapse rate and short
disease-free survival. The oncogenic kinase Pim-1 is upregulated
downstream of FLT3-ITD and contributes to its proliferative and
anti-apoptotic effects. We recently showed that Pim kinase inhibition
sensitizes AML cells with FLT3-ITD to apoptosis induction by
topoisomerase 2 (TOP-2) inhibitors by increasing DNA double-strand breaks
(DSBs) and oxidative stress. Here, we studied whether altered DSB repair
activity contributes to the increase in DNA damage.

Methods: Ba/F3 cells expressing FLT3-ITD (Ba/F3-ITD) or wild-type FLT3
(Ba/F3-WT) were studied. The pan-Pim kinase inhibitor AZD1208 was
provided by AstraZeneca. TOP-2 inhibitors included daunorubicin (DNR),
mitoxantrone (MXR) and etoposide (VP-16). Nuclear expression of repair
proteins was measured by immunoblotting. Functional changes in DSB repair
activities were measured in cell lines with stable chromosomal
integration of the green fluorescent protein (GFP)-based DSB repair
reporters DR-GFP, EJ5-GFP and EJ2-GFP, measuring homologous recombination
(HR), classical non-homologous end-joining (C-NHEJ) and alternative
(Alt-) NHEJ, respectively.

Results: Nuclear expression of the HR component Rad51 decreased
progressively (to 40%) in Ba/F3-ITD cells after 12 hours of co-treatment
with AZD1208 and DNR, compared to DNR alone. Progressive decrease (to
60%) in nuclear expression of the Alt-NHEJ component DNA ligase 3 and the
C-NHEJ component Ku-70 was also seen with combination treatment.
Functionally, co-treatment with AZD1208 and DNR led to a 50% decrease in
Alt-NHEJ repair activity, compared to DNR alone, but no significant
change in C-NHEJ or HR repair activity. Ba/F3-WT cells did not show a
significant change in Alt-NHEJ, HR or C-NHEJ activity with combination
treatment. Decreased Alt-NHEJ activity was also seen in Ba/F3-ITD, but
not Ba/F3-WT, cells co-treated with AZD1208 and MXR or VP-16.

Conclusions: While nuclear expression of multiple DNA DSB repair proteins
decreased, only Alt-NHEJ repair activity decreased in FLT3-ITD cells
co-treated with Pim kinase and TOP-2 inhibitors. Alt-NHEJ, a highly
error-prone DNA DSB repair pathway, is upregulated in cells with FLT3-ITD
and contributes to genomic instability in these cells. Decreasing
Alt-NHEJ repair activity in cells treated with TOP-2 inhibitors has the
potential to decrease the genomic instability that may contribute to
disease progression in AML patients with FLT3-ITD.


