Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A kinome analysis of the molecular pharmacodynamics of PT-112 in a
human cancer cell line.


Background: To better understand the mechanism of action of PT-112, we
investigated the effects of PT-112 on kinase activity within HCT116 human
colorectal cancer cells. PT-112 is a pyrophosphate-conjugated platinum
(Pt) containing new chemical entity under clinical development in the US
and Taiwan. Designed to reduce certain toxicities associated with Pt
agents and drug resistance from DNA-repair pathway activity, PT-112
differs in significant ways from traditional Pt therapies. PT-112 results
in potent anti-proliferation effects with lower Pt accumulation in whole
cell and DNA extracts. Upregulation of p16 and p21 and, consistently,
inhibition of the cell cycle at the G1/S phase transition is observed
with PT-112 use, a finding not commonly associated with Pt agents.
Further, sensitivity to PT-112 is not significantly affected by the
functionality of DNA repair pathways. Finally, the induction of
immunogenic cell death by PT-112 has been indicated via release of HMGB1,
cell surface localization of calreticulin, and suppression of STAT3.

Methods: A broad analysis of the phosphorylation pattern of kinase
targets was achieved by utilizing the Tyrosine Kinase and Serine /
Threonine Kinase PamChip® Arrays, each spotted with 144 peptides
harboring kinase phosphorylation sites. Data were collected after 1, 6,
and 24hr of exposure to 10 μM PT-112, a concentration achievable in
human patient plasma at sub-toxic doses, and the degree of
phosphorylation of these peptide targets was measured by the PamStation®.

Results: A set of kinase targets was identified as differentially
phosphorylated relative to untreated control samples. In total, 4/15/30
targets were more phosphorylated than controls at the 1/6/24hr time
points, respectively, while 1/0/10 targets were less phosphorylated.
Several of these targets connect to key cancer relevant pathways,
including anti-angiogenesis (VGFR1), apoptosis (BAD), cell cycle
regulation (CDC2, Rb, RBL2), cell growth (EGFR, MK07, RBL2), and cancer
immunology (STAT4, CSF1R).

Conclusions: A narrow set of initial effects on kinase activity from
PT-112 exposure, which broaden over time, was observed. While we cannot
discriminate direct from indirect effects, these data are consistent with
PT-112 having mechanistic targets independent of nuclear DNA. Several
observations were consistent with findings from previous experiments
(e.g. evidence of impacts on apoptotic, cell cycle, and immunological
pathways), while others were novel (e.g. impact on VGFR1, EGFR, MK07). In
conclusion, PT-112 at pharmacologically achievable concentrations leads
to a unique pattern of kinase disruption in vitro. Further work will be
conducted to validate these findings, identify the driver kinases, and
connect these observations into a coherent network of kinases and targets
affected by PT-112 treatment, and to understand the clinical impact of
the unique pharmacodynamic profile of PT-112.


