Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recent ultraviolet radiation exposure and circulating
immunosuppressive T-regulatory cells.


Background: Ultraviolet radiation exposure (UVR) is a risk factor for
several different cancer types. While the mutagenicity of UVR is
well-documented, UVR’s effects on human systemic immune function are
not well understood. Several lines of evidence suggest that UVR may have
immunosuppressive effects, however, no epidemiologic studies have
investigated the association between quantitative measures of UVR and a
biomarker of immune function. Objective: To evaluate the association
between UVR and systemic immune function, we conducted a cross-sectional
analysis of recent UVR and circulating regulatory T- cells (“Tregs”)
among a cohort of skin cancer screening patients. Methods: 350 patients
undergoing regular skin cancer screenings with no prevalent skin cancer
at the time of enrollment were recruited from the University of South
Florida Dermatology clinic. At the baseline visit, blood was obtained,
and a spectrophotometer was used to measure skin pigmentation at a
sun-unexposed site (the axilla) and two sun-exposed sites: the forehead
and the upper forearm. Recent sun exposure was quantified as the
difference in readings between the sun-exposed and sun-unexposed sites.
Using flow cytometry assays, lymphocyte samples were examined for Tregs
(CD4+CD25+ CD127lowFoxp3+), and proportions of Tregs with enhanced
immunosuppressive function (CD27-, CD45RA- Treg) and skin tissue affinity
(CLA+, CCR4high) were determined. Associations between UVR exposure and
Tregs were described using Spearman correlation coefficients. Linear
regression using log-transformed values of UVR and Tregs was used to
adjust for age and sex. Results: Among all 350 participants, UVR was
positively correlated with circulating immunosuppressive CD27-, CD45RA-
Tregs (r=0.127, p=0.020 for UVR measured at the forehead and r=0.197,
p=0.0002 for UVR measured at the forearm). UVR measured at the forearm
was also positively correlated with skin-homing Tregs expressing CLA
(r=0.167, p=0.002) and CCR4 (r=0.19, p=0.0004). When participants were
categorized into light versus dark constitutive pigmentation based on the
median value of spectrophotometer readings for the sun-unexposed axilla,
the correlation between UVR averaged across the forehead and forearm was
more strongly correlated with immunosuppressive Tregs among lighter-skin
participants (r=0.30, pBackground: Ultraviolet radiation exposure (UVR)
is a risk factor for several different cancer types. While the
mutagenicity of UVR is well-documented, UVR’s effects on human systemic
immune function are not well understood. Several lines of evidence
suggest that UVR may have immunosuppressive effects, however, no
epidemiologic studies have investigated the association between
quantitative measures of UVR and a biomarker of immune function.
Objective: To evaluate the association between UVR and systemic immune
function, we conducted a cross-sectional analysis of recent UVR and
circulating regulatory T- cells (“Tregs”) among a cohort of skin
cancer screening patients. Methods: 350 patients undergoing regular skin
cancer screenings with no prevalent skin cancer at the time of enrollment
were recruited from the University of South Florida Dermatology clinic.
At the baseline visit, blood was obtained, and a spectrophotometer was
used to measure skin pigmentation at a sun-unexposed site (the axilla)
and two sun-exposed sites: the forehead and the upper forearm. Recent sun
exposure was quantified as the difference in readings between the
sun-exposed and sun-unexposed sites. Using flow cytometry assays,
lymphocyte samples were examined for Tregs (CD4+CD25+ CD127lowFoxp3+),
and proportions of Tregs with enhanced immunosuppressive function (CD27-,
CD45RA- Treg) and skin tissue affinity (CLA+, CCR4high) were determined.
Associations between UVR exposure and Tregs were described using Spearman
correlation coefficients. Linear regression using log-transformed values
of UVR and Tregs was used to adjust for age and sex. Results: Among all
350 participants, UVR was positively correlated with circulating
immunosuppressive CD27-, CD45RA- Tregs (r=0.127, p=0.020 for UVR measured
at the forehead and r=0.197, p=0.0002 for UVR measured at the forearm).
UVR measured at the forearm was also positively correlated with
skin-homing Tregs expressing CLA (r=0.167, p=0.002) and CCR4 (r=0.19,
p=0.0004). When participants were categorized into light versus dark
constitutive pigmentation based on the median value of spectrophotometer
readings for the sun-unexposed axilla, the correlation between UVR
averaged across the forehead and forearm was more strongly correlated
with immunosuppressive Tregs among lighter-skin participants (r=0.30,
p<0.001) than darker-skin participants (r=0.065, p=0.400). Conclusion:
Recent UVR is positively associated with increased levels of circulating
immunosuppressive Tregs, including Tregs with skin tissue affinity, with
the association being stronger among naturally lighter-skinned
individuals. UVR-associated immunosuppressive effects among otherwise
immunocompetent individuals may play a role in skin cancer carcinogenesis.


