Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying cell of origin for Group 3 medulloblastoma.


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor.
Although surgery, radiation and high-dose chemotherapy have led to
increased survival rates, many patients still die from their disease and
those who survive often suffer severe long-term side effects. Group 3 MB
is the most aggressive subtype of MB, which is often resistant to
therapy, and patients with this tumor have an extremely poor prognosis.
Thus, developing novel and more effective therapeutic approaches is
desperately needed for treating this disease. Improved approaches are
likely to come from a deeper understanding of the molecular and cellular
basis of the disease. Group 3 MB is characterized by large
cell/anaplastic histology with a high proliferative index and is
associated with MYC amplification or overexpression. Our previous studies
suggest that MYC-driven MB can be generated by infecting granule neuron
progenitors (GNPs, Math1+) or neonatal cerebellar stem cells/progenitors
(CD133+) with viruses encoding MYC and dominant negative p53 (DNp53) and
transplanting these cells into the cerebella of immunocompromised mice
(NSG). Although this model resembles Group 3 MB in terms of histology and
gene expression, it most likely does not faithfully recapitulate human MB
because mutation and deletion of p53 are rarely detected in human Group 3
MB at diagnosis. This observation prompted us to ask whether there might
be a cell type in which the MYC oncogene alone is sufficient to induce
MB. Sox2 expression has been found in neural stem cell/progenitor cells
in cerebellum. Moreover, it has been reported that ~70% human Group 3 MB
express Sox2, and that its expression is correlated with poor prognosis.
Thus we hypothesize that Sox2-positive cells with MYC overexpression can
develop tumors. We FACS-sorted Sox2GFP-positive or Sox2GFP-negative cells
from Sox2-GFP mice at P5, infected these cells with MYC virus and
transplanted them into the cerebella of NSG mice. Animals (n=10)
receiving Sox2-positive cells developed highly aggressive tumors and had
to be sacrificed within 3-6 weeks. In contrast, only one of the animals
(n=10) that received Sox2-negative cells developed a tumor at 8 weeks.
These results suggest that the MYC oncogene alone is sufficient to induce
tumorigenesis in Sox2-positive cells, without requiring loss of p53.
Further studies demonstrate that the tumors that were generated from
Sox2-positive cells resemble Group 3 MB at a histological,
immunohistochemical and molecular level, indicating that Group 3 MB may
originate from Sox2-positive cells during cerebellar development. We will
use this model to investigate the mechanisms that make these cells
sensitive to transformation. These studies will pave the way for the
development of novel approaches to treating this devastating tumor.


