Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cross-tissue interactome analyses unravel novel oncogenic roles of
SOX2.


First recognized for its significance in early embryogenesis, SOX2 (sex
determining region Y box 2) more recently received major attention as a
(i) transcriptional master regulator of stemness driving the
re-programming of terminally differentiated somatic cells back into a
pluripotent stem cell state and (ii) powerful oncogene of the cancer stem
cell (CSC) compartment. We and others have shown that SOX2 expression
relies on canonical PI3K/AKT signaling involving direct physical contact
and phospho-modification by AKT. Interestingly, we observed that these
interactions are highly tissue specific which prompted us to perform a
systematic proteomic analysis of co-factors regulating SOX2 biology.

The SOX2 interactome was analyzed in human breast carcinoma and
glioblastoma cell lines by co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) and HPLC/MS
revealing >900 individual and >70 conserved proteinaceous co-factors,
thus underscoring a hitherto underestimated scaffolding function of SOX2.
As expected, a major proportion of binding partners cluster in functional
categories implicated in DNA binding and/or nucleotide modification (e.g.
helicases, transferases, and ligases). However, a near equal share of
SOX2 associated factors fall into functional classes formally unrelated
to transcription modulation such as cell adhesion, cytoskeletal
organization, or metabolic adaptation. Using SOX2 knock-down and
overexpression cells generated by lentiviral technology, we confirm
co-regulation of SOX2 with selected binding partners. Moreover, we
observe co-depletion of SOX2 and protein co-factors in cells of stalled
AKT activity, and a molecular restoration of both upon proteasomal
inhibition.

We conclude that, besides its known significance in DNA activity control,
the SOX2 protein engages in various interactions seemingly unrelated to
transcription modulation. These newly discovered interactions are likely
to synergize with canonical SOX2 functions (i.e. the induction and
maintenance of stemness), but involve regulation at post-translational
level and of extra-nuclear components. Our efforts thus add an exciting
new facet to SOX2 biology and eventually, may open new therapeutic
avenues for targeted anti-CSC therapy.


