Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A multi-parameter assay for the detection of rare malignant cells
in classical Hodgkin lymphoma.


Background: Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma (CHL) ranks among the most
frequently occurring lymphomas and is marked by Hodgkin and
Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells, frequently multi-nucleated neoplastic cells
that are derived from germinal center B cells. The genetic alterations
involved in the pathogenesis of this lymphoma have been difficult to
study because HRS cells are rare and are surrounded by robust,
non-neoplastic infiltrate, therefore they frequently represent less than
0.1% of cells within involved lymph nodes. Consequently, methods that
isolate these rare cells are required to understand pathobiology of this
lymphoma. We used the AccuCyte® - CyteFinder® system (RareCyte) to
develop a method for detection and isolation of HRS cells.

Methods: A 6-parameter immunofluorescence assay was designed to identify
HRS cells that included HRS markers (CD40, CD30, CD15), CD3, combined
CD20/CD14 and a cell membrane permeability viability dye. The assay was
tested using the KMH2 Hodgkin lymphoma cell line spiked into PBMC and
transferred to well slides for imaging by CyteFinder. This instrument
utilizes 6-color scanning microscopy coupled with predefined algorithms
to identify rare cell populations. The assay was then applied to a frozen
fine needle aspirate (FNA) sample taken from the lymph node of a patient
with histologically confirmed CHL. The FNA sample was thawed, prepared
into a suspension, stained and analyzed as above. Cells identified with
HRS phenotype were individually retrieved using the integrated CytePicker
module. PCR of framework regions of the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene
(IGH) was performed on single HRS cells (InvivoScribe) to assess
clonality.

Results: Of ~200 KMH2 cells spiked into blood, the assay identified 180
cells (90%) with the correct HRS phenotype. HRS phenotype cells were
identified in the patient lymph node FNA sample. Two individual cells
analyzed by IGH framework region PCR demonstrated identical size PCR
products, indicating clonality of the B cell receptor rearrangement.

Conclusion: A multi-parameter assay was successfully developed for
identifying rare HRS cells with the CyteFinder system. Cells with HRS
phenotype in a lymph node FNA sample were demonstrated to have clonal IGH
rearrangements, demonstrating that actual HRS cells were identified. This
method may be a useful tool for the diagnosis of CHL by identification of
rare HRS cells from FNA specimens, as well as to investigate the
molecular genomics of CHL.


