Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting critical signaling nodes using multiplexed antibody
based phosphopeptide enrichment with iMRM validation.


Introduction: A challenge for biomedical researchers is to develop assays
to analyze complex systems that interrogate whole cellular signaling
networks. Here we show the results of employing antibody based
immunoaffinity enrichment of phosphopeptides derived from critical
signaling nodes to quantitate changes in phosphorylation upon kinase
inhibitor treatment. Human cancer cell lines, including gastric and
breast adenocarcinomas were treated with kinase inhibitors and cellular
extracts were digested with trypsin and peptides were purified. A pool of
phosphorylation dependent site-specific antibodies was employed to enrich
for known sites of phosphorylation. Following antibody based enrichment
these peptides were identified and quantified using liquid
chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Phosphopeptides were
identified using SEQUEST, and differences in abundance were determined by
employing label-free MS1 based quantification using Progenesis from
Non-Linear Dynamics. We also show validation data for a number of the
antibodies employed using immuno-multiple reaction monitoring, or iMRM.
Employing a QExactive mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) we developed
calibration curves for a number of the targeted tryptic phosphopeptides
using combinations of heavy and light peptides with endogenous cancer
cell line peptides as a background matrix.

Experimental Results: Cell lines were treated with DMSO or inhibitors to
which the cell lines should be sensitive/insensitive. Following peptide
purification, a pool of antibodies were multiplexed and used to enrich
for phosphopeptides derived from signaling proteins across a number of
signaling pathways. The results show significant changes in abundance for
many proteins/sites, including activation loop tyrosine residues of
tyrosine kinases, changes in sites on proteins in the AKT/PI3K pathway,
sites in the MAPK pathway, and other critical regulators of cellular
signaling such as sites on PKC family members. Targeted LC-MS/MS methods
using iMRM were used to confirm these results and show the promise of
using such targeted strategies for quantifying changes in phosphorylation
consistently across many samples.

Conclusion:The strategy of multiplexing antibodies for immuno-enrichment
allows for simultaneous detection and quantification of hundreds to
thousands of known phosphorylation sites that have been shown to be
important nodes of regulation. Targeted LC-MS/MS methods such as iMRM
will allow researchers to confidently profile changes in both total
levels as well as phosphorylation site occupancy for critical signaling
proteins.


