Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The utility of a breast cancer registry for improved cancer
management in developing countries.


Background

Breast cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer related deaths in
the island nation of Jamaica, West Indies. Cancer and other
non-communicable diseases have increased in many developing nations in
the Caribbean as well as Central and South America. The health systems of
these developing countries continue to provide care to patients with
limited resources. The use of a breast cancer registry can assist in care
coordination of these patients and allow targeted screening and treatment
programs in under-resourced environments.

Methods

In collaboration with the Western Regional Health Authority, a breast
cancer registry database was developed in RedCap to provide a
comprehensive analysis of breast cancer in under resourced environment.
53 patients from Atlanta were compared to 78 patients from Jamaica These
patients were entered into the breast cancer registry from June 1, 2014
to March 31, 2015 by the attending physician and de-identified.
Demographics, tumor related factors, treatment, survival and health
behavior information was collected by the attending physician. The
findings were then analyzed using Statistical Analysis System (SAS) and
Data Analysis and Statistical Analysis (STATA): Fisher Exact test,
chi-square and multiple regressions.

Results

The median of patient ages were 61 years old (range 38 - 81 years) for
the U.S. patients and 53 years old (range 26 - 84 years old) for Jamaican
women. For the U.S. patients, 84% were Black, 4% White, and 12.24% were
Latin or Asian. The majority of the patients were diagnosed with stage 1
invasive ductal breast cancer. In contrast, the majority of the Jamaican
patients were diagnosed with late-stage breast cancer. Utilizing the data
from the breast cancer registry, we were able to identify parishes
(counties) with disproportionately high rates of late-staged cancer at
the time of diagnosis.

Conclusion

The use of a disease specific registry can improve care coordination and
identify actionable target areas for enhanced screening and treatment. It
is our hope to frequent review the dashboards associated with the
registry data by providers, medical centers and health systems. This will
optimize care coordination and allow timely improvements in cancer
diagnosis and management in developing countries.


