Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alcohol-induced reprogramming of tumor plasticity is mediated via
suppression of CCN5 signaling in breast cancer cells.


Background and Objective: The epidemiological and experimental studies
suggest that alcohol consumption is associated with increased risk for
breast cancer development and metastasis. However, the mechanisms of
alcohol-induced breast cancer progression and metastasis remain unknown.
In this study, we examined the roles of CCN5, a tumor suppressor gene in
alcohol induced breast cancer cell migration/invasion, epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) and stemness.

Methods: Estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) human breast cancer cell line
MCF-7 and immortalized normal human epithelial breast cell line MCF-12A
were treated with ethanol at various concentrations in the presence and
absence of human recombinant human CCN5 protein (hrCCN5) .
Invasive/migratory ability of treated and untreated cells was measured by
Boyden chamber assays. The mRNA and protein expression level of CCN5 was
determined by real-time qRT-PCR and Western blot. EMT and stemness
markers were evaluated by Western blot. Single-cell suspensions from
pre-treated cells were re-suspended at a density of 500 cells/ml
mammocult media in ultralow attachment dishes. Number as well as the size
of the mammosphere in specified experimental set-up was monitored and
recorded alternate day for 8-10 days.

Results: The studies demonstrated that alcohol promotes significantly the
invasive/migratory ability and EMT phenotypes of breast cancer cells
through the suppression of CCN5. Interestingly, hrCCN5 protein treatment
suppresses the effect of alcohol and reprograms MET (mesenchymal to
epithelial transition). In addition, alcohol-induced mammosphere
formation efficiency is also suppressed by hrCCN5 protein-treatment.

Conclusions: Our findings suggest that the CCN5 signaling plays a
preventive role in alcohol-induced reprogramming of tumor plasticity in
breast cancer cells.


