Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alvocidib potentiates the activity of venetoclax in preclinical
models of multiple myeloma.


The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib is widely used in the treatment of
patients with multiple myeloma (MM). The expression levels of many
proteins increase as a result of bortezomib treatment, including the
pro-apoptotic protein NOXA. NOXA functions to sequester the
anti-apoptotic BCL-2 family member, MCL-1. High levels of MCL-1 and/or
low levels of NOXA have been implicated in bortezomib resistance and
negative patient outcomes, including short duration of treatment
response. The BCL-2-specific BH3 mimetic venetoclax (ABT-199) has also
been explored in multiple hematological malignancies, including the
treatment of MM. Venetoclax induces apoptosis in a BCL-2 specific manner
by directly inhibiting BCL-2 function. However, intrinsic resistance to
venetoclax treatment observed in MM patient samples has been attributed
to a low BCL-2-to-MCL-1 gene expression ratio, suggesting a central role
for MCL-1 in cell survival in this context as well. Increased MCL-1
expression is a known resistance mechanism to venetoclax treatment in a
variety of cell types including chronic lymphocytic leukemia and
lymphomas. Considering the central role of MCL-1 to treatment efficacy in
MM, we investigated the ability of an MCL-1-lowering agent, namely the
CDK9 inhibitor alvocidib, to potentiate the activity of venetoclax in MM.
Alvocidib suppresses MCL-1 expression via CDK9-mediated regulation of RNA
polymerase II. Alvocidib has achieved robust improvements in the clinical
response rates of high-risk, newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
patients as part of the time-sequential ACM regimen (alvocidib +
cytarabine + mitoxantrone). We therefore hypothesized that alvocidib
would potentiate the activity of venetoclax in MM through an
MCL-1-dependent mechanism. In this report, we demonstrate that alvocidib
inhibits the protein expression of MCL-1 in MM cells in a time-dependent
fashion, up to 96 hours. In cell viability assays, the addition of up to
100 nM venetoclax resulted in a 2.8-fold reduction in the IC50 of
alvocidib in the cultured OPM-2 cell line. Conversely, the potentiation
of venetoclax activity with the addition of alvocidib resulted in a more
than 500-fold decrease in IC50 in the relatively venetoclax-resistant
OPM-2 cells. Additional studies are currently underway to investigate the
efficacy of alvocidib and venetoclax in the context of bortezomib
resistance where low NOXA may contribute to enhanced cell survival via
MCL-1. Taken together, our data suggest that the combination of alvocidib
with venetoclax may constitute a novel therapeutic regimen in the
treatment of MM. Further, it suggests that CDK9-mediated targeting of
MCL-1 may offer a clinical route to addressing intrinsic resistance in MM
patients.


