Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel mechanism for regulation of breast cancer metastasis.


Our major goal is to determine the role of
Chromodomain-helicase-DNA-binding protein 7 during breast cancer (BC)
metastasis. This protein is an ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling factor
and is critical for embryonic development in both animal models and human
patients. Our most recent studies provide direct evidence suggesting its
novel role in repressing BC metastasis. We found that this protein, but
not the mRNA, is highly expressed in a low-metastatic breast cancer cell
line (Mcf-7), while its expression is much reduced in metastatic cell
lines (MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-231). Furthermore, this protein is
predominantly localized in the cytoplasm of 468 and 231 cells, in
contrast to its nuclear localization in Mcf-7 cells. In the cytoplasm of
468 and 231 cells, this protein is colocalized with a lysosome marker,
suggesting that in high metastatic BC cells, this protein is exported to
the cytoplasm to be degraded in lysosomes. Blocking the activity of
lysosomes increased expression of this protein in high metastatic BC cell
lines. This result suggests a mechanism accounting for the reduced
expression of this protein in high metastatic BC cell lines. To further
support the potential clinic relevance of our results, this protein is
localized in the nucleus of almost all duct epithelial cells in normal
breast tissues; however, in a large portion of epithelial cells of breast
tumors, this protein is localized in the cytoplasm. Through reporter and
mutagenesis analysis, we identified the nuclear exporting signal (NES)
sequence responsible for exporting this protein into cytoplasm. In the
next set of experiments, we attempted to determine the function of this
gene in BC metastasis. We found that knocking down expression of this
gene in 468 cell significantly increased their migration and invasion. We
next applied the CRISPR genome editing technique to mutate the critical
amino acids within the NES region in the endogenous gene locus and found
that the amount of protein in the nucleus is significantly increased
compared to wild type cells. Migration/invasion of these cells was also
dramatically decreased. At the molecular level, we found that forced
expression of this protein in nucleus reduced expression of epithelial
markers and increased expression of epithelial-mesenchymal-transition
markers. We are now applying ChIP-Seq and RNA-Seq approaches to determine
direct regulatory network of this protein in 231 cells. We will further
test whether this protein acts through modulating the epigenetic status
of the enhancers/promoters to regulate expression of its target genes to
repress BC metastasis. In summary, our data collectively suggest that
Chromodomain-helicase-DNA-binding protein 7 is a novel epigenetic
regulator to repress BC metastasis. To the best of our knowledge, our
study represents the first to address the activity of this protein in BC.


