Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL15/IL15Rα heterodimeric Fc-fusions with extended half-lives.


IL15 and IL2 are similar cytokines that stimulate the proliferation and
differentiation of B cells, T cells, and NK cells. Both cytokines exert
their cell signaling function through binding to a trimeric complex
consisting of two shared receptors, the common gamma chain and IL2Rβ, as
well as an alpha chain receptor unique to each cytokine: IL2Rα or
IL15Rα. IL2Rα is highly expressed on Tregs, and the therapeutic benefit
of IL2 for cancer treatment has been limited for this reason. IL15 is
produced by monocytes and dendritic cells and functions as a stabilized
heterodimeric complex with membrane-bound IL15Rα present on the same
cells. This IL15/IL15Rα complex is presented in trans to NK cells and
CD8+ T cells expressing IL2Rβ and the common gamma chain. It has been
shown that recombinant IL15/IL15Rα heterodimer is highly active.
Currently there are no approved versions of recombinant IL15 although
several clinical trials are ongoing. As potential drugs, cytokines suffer
from a very fast clearance that hinders favorable dosing. Consequently, a
more druggable version of IL15 would consist of the IL15/IL15Rα complex
coupled with slower clearance. We created various IL15/IL15Rα
heterodimeric Fc-fusions in an effort to facilitate production, promote
FcRn-mediated recycling of the complex, and thus prolong half-life.

We engineered IL15/IL15Rα heterodimeric Fc-fusions by either fusing IL15
to one side of a heterodimeric Fc-region, and the sushi domain of IL15Rα
to the other side, or by creating a single-chain IL15/IL15Rα that was
attached to one side of a heterodimeric Fc-region. These Fc-fusions were
tuned for optimal activity by engineering the linker regions between
IL15/IL15Rα and the Fc and/or by engineering substitutions on IL15 at
the IL15/IL2Rβ or IL15/gamma chain interface. In vitro proliferation of
T and NK cells in healthy PBMCs was monitored by counting Ki67+ cells
after incubation with Fc-fusions for 4 days. In vivo activity was
evaluated using a mouse model in which human PBMCs are engrafted into NSG
mice (huPBMC-NSG) and measuring the extent of T cell engraftment by flow
cytometry as well as IFNγ. PK was evaluated in C57BL/6J mice.

IL15/IL15Rα heterodimeric Fc-fusions were successfully produced with
favorable yields. The Fc-fusions enhanced proliferation of T and NK cells
in vitro. Treatment of huPBMC-NSG mice with weekly doses of IL15/IL15Rα
heterodimeric Fc-fusions promoted enhanced T cell engraftment and
elevated levels of IFNγ in a dose dependent manner. Severe graft versus
host disease was observed in treated mice. Little activity was seen with
a comparable weekly dose of recombinant IL15. PK in C57BL/6J mice
indicated half-lives of several days for the IL15/IL15Rα heterodimeric
Fc-fusions, which are significantly longer than the IL15/IL15Rα
heterodimeric Fc-fusions were successfully produced with favorable
yields. The Fc-fusions enhanced proliferation of T and NK cells in vitro.
Treatment of huPBMC-NSG mice with weekly doses of IL15/IL15Rα
heterodimeric Fc-fusions promoted enhanced T cell engraftment and
elevated levels of IFNγ in a dose dependent manner. Severe graft versus
host disease was observed in treated mice. Little activity was seen with
a comparable weekly dose of recombinant IL15. PK in C57BL/6J mice
indicated half-lives of several days for the IL15/IL15Rα heterodimeric
Fc-fusions, which are significantly longer than the <1 hr half-life
reported for IL15.

Together, these data indicate that IL15/IL15Rα heterodimeric Fc-fusions
demonstrate the high activity of IL15 with a more favorable PK profile.


