Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Collaborative analyses for delineating mutation variations among
different ethnic patients of prostate cancer based on genomic data
integration.


Emerging data support the hypothesis that both inherited and somatic
alterations of genomes of African American (AA) prostate cancer (CaP)
patients are significantly different from that of Caucasian American (CA)
men. Recent studies from our and other groups have established that
frequencies of the most common genomic alteration, TMPRSS2-ERG fusion,
which apparently causes the high expression of ERG oncoprotein, is
markedly lower in AA than in CA patients. Some works indicated that the
frequency of CaP ERG fusion is the lowest in Asian patients, but this
frequency changed from 11% to 78% in different Asian cohorts. Further
analysis in Asian men is necessary. In order to systematically and
comprehensively address this and related problems, Uniformed Services
University of the Health Sciences-Center for Prostate Disease Research
(CPDR), the US National Cancer Institute (NCI) and CAS-MPG Partner
Institute for Computational Biology (PICB), Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences (SIBS), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), China,
launched an international collaboration project. The overall goal of the
project is to evaluate difference of driver gene mutations of prostate
cancer in various ethnic groups by integrating genomic and transcriptomic
data from CPDR, TCGA and the Chinese Prostate Cancer Consortium (CPCC),
specially focusing on somatic alterations (ERG and others), microbiome,
mitochondrial sequences and microRNAs. We integrated gene fusion, copy
number, and gene expression data to detect potential driver genes and, as
anticipated ERG alteration was one of the most commonly detected. The
frequency of ERG fusion is the highest for CA, intermediate for AA and
the lowest for Asian men, while its expression is significantly higher in
ERG-fusion tumors than other tumors cross over all of the three ethnic
groups. We did find some genes altered more frequently in Asian patients
than in American patients, subject to further validations. We explored
the methodology for microbiota profiling using prostate cancer WGS
sequencing data. To this date, we have developed an analysis pipeline for
the detection of microbiome from prostate tumor tissues and the
corresponding blood samples with high confidence but inadequate
sensitivity likely due to the low availability of both microbial
sequences and bacterial reference genomes. Our preliminary analyses
highlight the potential of international collaboration. CPDR-PICB-NCI
will work on a seamless approach for data integration, particularly of
the raw data to truly enhance CaP diagnosis and treatment by providing
more informative biomarker and therapy targets relevant to ethnically
diverse patient populations.


