Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of computational approaches for quantification of
immune cell infiltration from gene expression profiles of complex
biological samples.


Anticancer immunotherapies target immune cells to block immune
suppression and/or promote immune activation in order to eliminate cancer
cells. Ipilumumab and Nivolumab, targeting CTLA4 and PD1 respectively,
have demonstrated dramatic responses in melanoma and lung cancer (Hodi et
al. 2010; Risvi et al. 2015). However, poor response rates in other types
of cancer underscore the need to better understand immunomodulatory
mechanisms (Topalian et al. 2012). Examination of immune cell specific
signals, in either the tumor microenvironment or the periphery, has
proven to be a useful tool in developing prognostic biomarkers (Chi et
al. 2014; Gentles et al. 2015), inferring mechanisms of action (Krejcik
et al. 2016), and discerning immune-based predictors of drug response
(Tumeh et al. 2014). In this study we evaluate various gene
expression-based computational approaches for inferring immune cell
identity in complex cellular mixtures in order to rank their relative
utility for illuminating the details of the tumor microenvironment and
potentially revealing new biomarkers for prognosis and response
prediction.

Immune cell identity has been inferred by previous researchers using a
variety of mathematical approaches, including least squares (Abbas et al.
2009), quadratic programming (Gong et al. 2011; Zhong et al. 2013),
maximum likelihood (Qiao et al. 2012; Liebner et al. 2013), machine
learning (Newman et al. 2015), and enrichment type approaches (Angelova
et al. 2015). We used publically-available gene expression microarray
data from blood, normal tissue, and tumor samples to assess the
effectiveness of these methods in sample types relevant to oncology
research. The results from comparisons of these different methods
demonstrate that certain approaches are significantly more robust to
noise, and are therefore more suitable for complex cellular mixtures such
as tumor samples. The discerning use of methods to infer immune cell type
proportions from gene expression profiles may lead to improved prognosis,
predictive biomarkers for immunotherapy to assist in patient
stratification, and new immunoncology targets by indicating
immunosuppressive mechanisms.


