Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of splicing by inhibiting the kinase SRPK1 as a novel
therapeutic strategy in myeloid leukemia.


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive cancer with a poor
prognosis, for which the therapeutic landscape has changed little for
decades. Aberrant mRNA splicing plays a key role in cancer development
and genes coding for several of the major components of the spliceosome
are targeted by somatic mutations in numerous cancers including
myelodysplastic syndromes and AML. Recently, myeloid neoplasms bearing
spliceosome gene mutations were shown to be preferentially susceptible to
pharmacological disruption of the spliceosome. Here we report that
targeting the spliceosome can also be an effective therapeutic strategy
in other types of AML.

Recently, we generated a comprehensive catalogue of genetic
vulnerabilities in AML using CRISPR-Cas9 genome-wide recessive screens
and reported several novel intuitive and non-intuitive therapeutic
candidates. Amongst these we identify SRPK1, the gene coding for a
serine-threonine kinase that phosphorylates the major spliceosome protein
SRSF1. Here, we demonstrate that targeted genetic disruption of SRPK1 in
AML driven by MLL-fusion genes, led to differentiation and apoptosis.
Additionally, mice transplanted with human AML cell lines carrying the
MLL-AF9 fusion gene, namely MOLM-13 and THP-1, presented a significant
prolongation of survival when SRPK1 was genetically disrupted by
CRISPR-Cas9 editing. Similar effects were seen with pharmacological
inhibition of SRPK1 in vitro and in vivo. At the molecular level we show
that genetic or pharmacological inhibition of SRPK1 was associated with
profound changes in the splicing of multiple genes involved in the MLL
leukemogenic program in association with significant changes in enzymatic
modifications of core histone tails.

We proceeded to perform a genome-wide CRISPR drop-out screen for
sensitizers of MOLM13 cells to pharmacological inhibition of SRPK1 and
identified, amongst other genes, BRD4 as a sensitizer. We go on to show
that the BRD inhibitor iBET-151 synergizes with SRPK1 inhibition to kill
MOLM-13 both in vitro and in vivo. Preliminary data indicates that SRPK1
inhibition has overlapping molecular effects to BRD inhibition. We are
currently investigating the molecular bases of this observation.

Our work identifies SRPK1 as a novel therapeutic target in AML that can
be used alone or in conjunctions with drugs targeting epigenetic
modifications to improve their anti-leukemic effects.


