Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NG-348: a novel oncolytic virus designed to mediate anti-tumour
activity via the potent and selective polyclonal activation of
tumor-infiltrating T-cells.


NG-348 is a transgene-modified variant of enadenotucirev, a chimeric
oncolytic group B adenovirus with potent and selective anti-tumor
activity against a range of epithelial cancer cells. Enadenotucirev has a
blood stability profile that enables systemic dosing and has been
administered intravenously to over 90 cancer patients. These studies have
demonstrated that IV dosed enadenotucirev is delivered to tumors and
subsequent virus activity is associated with CD8+ T-cell infiltration in
tumor cell nests, consistent with immune stimulation within the tumor.
NG-348 encodes two immunomodulatory proteins in its genome: full-length
human CD80, and a membrane anchored single chain variable fragment of the
mouse anti-human CD3ε monoclonal antibody OKT3. Together these membrane
proteins provide both T-cell receptor (signal 1) and costimulatory
(signal 2) activation signals required to polyclonally activate
tumor-infiltrating T-cells. When expressed on the surface of NG-348
infected tumor cells the transgenes therefore enhance the potency of the
virus by driving local T-cell immune responses selectively in the tumor
microenvironment.

The expression of both transgenes encoded in the NG-348 virus is
controlled by the endogenous virus major late promoter. This restricts
expression of the proteins to the surface of cells permissive to virus
infection (i.e. tumor cells) and prevents off-target expression in the
cells from healthy tissues. Using co-cultures of human T-cells with human
tumor cell lines, we have shown that NG-348 infected tumor cells potently
activate both CD4 and CD8 T-cells. This was demonstrated by analysis of
activation marker expression (CD25, CD69), intracellular and secreted
cytokines (IL-2, TNF, IFNγ) and induction of T-cell mediated tumor cell
death by apoptosis (prior to oncolytic death by the virus). Treatment of
different human non-tumor cells (e.g. fibroblasts, T-cells, PBMCs) with
NG-348 did not lead to transgene protein expression or activation of
T-cells in co-cultures. NG-348 has also been shown to activate human
T-cells in vivo, using a human tumor xenograft model system in
immunodeficient mice reconstituted with human PBMCs.

Collectively these data indicate that following delivery to tumor tissues
of patients, NG-348 oncolytic virus can selectively replicate and express
it’s payload of T-cell activating ligands. NG-348 should therefore
stimulate potent antigen-independent, polyclonal activation of T-cells
already present in the tumor, as well as those recruited into the tumor
in response to the virus infection, to drive effective anti-tumor
immunity. NG-348 is currently in preclinical development with a first
phase I study planned to initiate in Q4 2017.


