Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variation in platinum-sensitive and platinum-resistant
high-grade serous epithelial ovarian cancer.


Background: We examined the association of platinum resistance with
genetic mutations in high grade serous ovarian cancer (HSOC) patients
undergoing high-throughput genomic tumor sequencing.

Methods: Snap-frozen and fresh frozen paraffin embedded tissue samples
were collected from HSOC patients enrolled on UNCseq (NCT01457196).
UNCSeq is an institutional protocol which uses next generation sequencing
to detect genetic mutations in a wide array of malignancies. Illumina
libraries were prepared separately from tumor and a matched normal sample
from each patient. Relevant targets were enriched by a custom designed
Agilent SureSelect hybrid capture enrichment library using standard
protocols. Samples were sequenced on Illumina HiSeq machines in a variety
of formats. Mutations with a quality score or or < 6 months of disease
free interval following completion of induction therapy, respectively.

Results: Overall 39 HSOC cases met inclusion criteria; 32 tumors met
criteria for platinum sensitive and 7 platinum resistant. 308 mutations
were noted in at least one individual across all patients. The top
observed mutations in platinum sensitive HSOC were TP53 (41%, n= 13),
GucylA2 (19%, n=6), MLL2 (19%, n=6) and MTOR (16%, n=5). The top observed
mutations in platinum resistant tumors were TP53 (71%, n=5), TET1 (43%,
n=3), NF1 (43%, n=3) and MLL3 (43%, n=3). There was a trend toward more
p53 mutations in resistant tumors (71% versus 41%, p=0.21) There was no
difference in the total number of mutations per tumor in platinum
sensitive and resistant patients, (3 vs. 4, p=0.516).

Conclusions: We did not detect a difference in the number of genetic
mutations in HSOC according to platinum sensitivity. Platinum resistant
tumors had a trend toward higher frequency of TP53 mutations than
platinum sensitive HSOCs. Furthermore, we identified 3 frequently mutated
genes in platinum resistant HSOC: TET1, an epigenetic regulator, NF1, a
tumor suppressor gene and MLL3, a histone modifier gene. Ongoing tumor
sequencing of HSOCs on UNCseq will help to confirm these results.


