Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MK2 pathway blockade inhibits inflammatory cytokine production and
colorectal cancer growth and invasion.


Introduction: Colorectal cancer is the third most common malignancy
diagnosed for both men and women in the United States of America. High
levels of inflammatory cytokines in colorectal tumors cause increased
growth and invasion and carry a higher risk of metastasis. Identifying
new targets to control inflammation is important for developing improved
treatment approaches. Mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated protein
kinase 2 (MK2) is a regulator of pro-inflammatory cytokines that may
promote colorectal tumor progression. MK2 signaling is known to induce
IL-1, IL-6, and TNF-α production. These pro-inflammatory cytokines are
associated with CRC development, invasion, and metastasis. We
hypothesized that the MK2 pathway could be an important component of CRC
growth, invasion and tumor regrowth.

Methods: To investigate this pathway, CT26 CRC cells were examined. Cells
were flank-injected into Balb/c mice with and without MK2 inhibitor
treatment. At day 19 after tumor injection, tumors were harvested and
measured using calipers. Cytokines were quantitated by multiplex bead
array in organ culture supernatants and in supernatants from tumor cells
plated in fibronectin coated wells. In culture, tumor cell invasion was
measured in scratch wound assays containing matrigel.

Results: Treating CT26 cells with MK2 inhibitors markedly reduced tumor
growth in mice by a mean of 60% compared to vehicle control treated
cells. Inflammatory cytokines were also dramatically decreased with MK2
inhibition compared to controls by up to 80%. Cytokines affected included
both known MK2 downstream cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, and TNF-α) and also
chemokines such as MIP-1α and MCP-1 in both supernatants from cultured
tumor cells and in organ culture supernatants. MK2 inhibition also
decreased invasion of tumor cells in a cytokine dependent manner.

Conclusions: The MK2 pathway regulates production of multiple
pro-inflammatory cytokines in colorectal tumors, including several
previously unreported chemokines. Inhibition of this pathway markedly
decreases tumor growth and invasion. Thus, MK2 may be a promising tumor
target to prevent colorectal cancer progression.


