Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interactome between vascular endothelial cells and Proneural
glioma stem cells protects seeds for GBM recurrence from radiation
therapy.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive form of intracranial tumors.
Despite multimodal treatment strategies that include surgical resection,
radiation and chemotherapy, most patients survive for less than two
years. GBM cells tend to invade into adjacent normal brain tissues and
therefore, cannot be completely resected by surgery. These remaining
tumor cells are the “seeds” to escape post-surgical therapies,
thereby giving rise to recurrent tumors during or after treatment. The
exact mechanisms by which these seeds contain pre-existing resistant
cells, and/or gain resistance to therapy remain elusive. Recent findings
demonstrated that communication between normal and GBM cells play
physiological roles in tumor initiation and progression. Here, we aim to
determine how vascular endothelial (VE) cells affect GBM recurrence in
response to radiotherapy. To this end, we first assessed the effect of
secreted factors from VE cells on patient-derived GBM neurospheres in
vitro by using their conditioned medium (CM). GBM neurospheres promoted
their growth with CM from VE cells. qPCR and FACS exhibited that the CM
treatment preferentially protected CD133+ population in GBM neurospheres
that otherwise were depleted by irradiation treatment. Furthermore, RNA
sequencing of VE cells and A2B5-expressing GBM stem-like cells directly
isolated from GBM and epilepsy patients demonstrated that only
tumor-derived VE cells and GBM stem-like cells express a high level of a
secreted factor Endocan (ESM1) and its receptor CD11a, respectively.
Preferential expression of CD11a in perivascular GBM cells was also
confirmed by immunocytochemistry. Further, we found that recombinant
Endocan is able to promote GBM neurosphere growth in vitro after
irradiation and protected them from irradiation-induced aggressive
mesenchymal transition of these cells. Taken together, these results
demonstrate a potential role of a crosstalk between peri-vascular GBM
stem-like cells and their adjacent VE cells, via the ligand-receptor
interaction mechanism. This interactome network may help Proneural GBM
stem cells to escape from radiation therapy, thereby reinitiating the
tumor as recurrence via an Endocan-CD11a signaling. Hence, targeting
Endocan in endothelial cells or CD11a in GBM cells may have potential as
a novel efficacious strategy for preventing recurrence.


