Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LSD1 maintains differentiation and survival of mammary luminal
cells and suppresses invasion of luminal breast cancer cells via GATA3.


LSD1 (also known as KDM1A) is a histone demethylase that has been shown
to play both oncogenic and tumor suppressor roles in breast cancer.
However, the exact context under which it functions as a tumor suppressor
or oncoprotein remains largely elusive. To address this, we characterized
its role in normal mammary epithelial cells (MECs) and found MEC-specific
ablation of Lsd1 largely phenocopied that of Gata3, which encodes a
master regulatory transcription factor for luminal MECs. In the luminal
lineage, LSD1-loss led to reduction in both mature ductal and alveolar
luminal subpopulations. In human luminal breast cancer cells, we found
LSD1 interacts with GATA3 and their common target genes are highly
related to breast cancer. In particular, we found LSD1 might be recruited
by GATA3 to the GATA3 promoter region, to positively regulate GATA3
expression via demethylation of H3K9me2. Knockdown of LSD1 led to
increased invasion of luminal breast cancer cells, in part via
downregulation of GATA3 and multiple cell junction genes (e.g., CDH1,
VCL, CTNNA1), as well as upregulation of mammary stem/progenitor cell
genes (e.g., ELF5, ITGB1). However, LSD1 knockdown also led to reduced
proliferation of luminal breast cancer cells, in part via downregulation
of RBBP4 (encoding a Histone-binding protein) and upregulation of CDKN1A
(encoding p21). Collectively, our data suggest that LSD1 is required for
maintaining luminal MEC differentiation and survival and for suppressing
luminal breast cancer cell invasion, in part via GATA3. As inhibitors of
LSD1 are currently under clinical trials (e.g., in leukemia), our data
suggest that although treatment of luminal breast cancer by the LSD1
inhibitor may lead to reduced tumor cell proliferation (and thus tumor
shrinkage), the treatment may also lead to increased invasion of
surviving breast cancer cells. Thus, our study is expected to have
important implications for developing better epigenetic therapy in an
individualized, context-dependent fashion.


