Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The protumorigenic, proinflammatory effects of obesity are
reversed by weight loss via bariatric surgery, but not a low-fat diet.


Background: Obesity negatively impacts basal-like breast cancer (BLBC)
prognosis, but the reversibility of these pro-cancer effects via weight
loss remains unclear. However, there is consistent evidence suggesting
that weight loss via bariatric surgery reduces breast cancer risk. This
may be related to the reductions in metabolic perturbations and
inflammation that follow bariatric surgery, effects that could be
mediated by epigenetic reprogramming and/or changes in the gut microbiome.

Purpose: We previously demonstrated that mammary tumor growth and
inflammation remain elevated in formerly obese mice, in concordance with
aberrant methylation of inflammation-related genes. Here we aim to
determine the differential effects of surgical versus non-surgical weight
loss on inflammation, DNA methylation, the gut microbiome, and tumor
burden in a mouse model of BLBC.

Methods: Mice were fed a low fat control (n=25) or high fat diet-induced
obesity (DIO, n=75) regimen for 15 weeks to model chronic obesity. DIO
mice were then randomized to remain on DIO (Obese) or receive either a
surgical (sleeve gastrectomy) or dietary (low fat control diet) weight
loss intervention, resulting in formerly obese (FOb)-Surg or FOb-Diet
mice, respectively. The Control mice were maintained on the low fat diet
throughout study. Four weeks after weight stabilization in the FOb mice,
all mice were orthotopically injected with E0771 mammary tumor cells,
which model BLBC. Stool samples were collected at baseline and prior to
tumor cell injection.

Results: The average weight and percent body fat of the FOb-Surg and
FOb-Diet mice were equivalent to Control and significantly lower than
Obese mice at study endpoint. Average tumor weight in FOb-Surg mice was
statistically equivalent to Control mice, but tumor weight in FOb-Diet
mice was significantly greater than Control mice and statistically
equivalent to Obese mice. Furthermore, FOb-Surg mice had significantly
lower serum tumor necrosis factor alpha, mammary gland interleukin-6
expression, and tumor-infiltrating adipocyte area in comparison to
FOb-Diet. To further define the effects of surgical versus non-surgical
weight loss, characterization of the gut microbiota as well as global
mammary tissue gene expression and DNA methylation via paired RNA
sequencing and reduced representation bisulfide sequencing is in progress.

Conclusions: Our results suggest that the strong anti-cancer benefits
seen with bariatric surgery may be related to a significant reduction in
systemic and local inflammation, which did not occur with non-surgical
weight loss. Identification of the mechanisms mediating the protective
effects of bariatric surgery against breast cancer could help identify
new targets and strategies for breaking the obesity-cancer link.


