Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced glycolysis promotes function of tumor associated
macrophages in mouse breast cancer model.


Tumor associated macrophages(TAMs) represent a major part of immune cells
in tumor microenvironment(TME) and play crucial roles in promoting tumor
progression by secreting cytokines or enzymes that could remodel TME or
enhance envision or migration capabilities of tumor cells. Given their
indispensable effect on tumor, the mechanisms underlying TAMs’
tumor-promoting phenotype and function remain unclear. Glucose metabolism
in tumor cells has been intensively studied; however, the status of
glucose metabolism of TAMs is still unclear. In this study, we aim to
identify glucose metabolism status in TAMs, and explore how glucose
metabolism regulates phenotype and function of TAMs. In the begining, we
isolated TAMs from 4T1 mouse breast tumor, spleen macrophages from normal
mouse as a control, and performed RNA sequencing to analyze the
expression pattern in glucose metabolism related genes. The results from
transcriptomics showed that TAM shown up regulation of glycolysis genes
pattern. Then we analyzed and found that HK’s activity was increased
while IDH’s activity was decreased in mouse breast cancer moel.
Furthermore, In vitro, we found that up regulation of impotent glycolysis
genes including HK2, PFK-L and LDHA in mouse peritoneal macrophages
(CMPM) and mouse bone marrow derived macrophages (CMBMDM) conditionally
cultured with 4T1 supernatants. Glucose consumption or production of
lactate and ATP were also increased in CMPM or CMBMDM. Then we monitored
lactate producing rate with seahorse energy metabolism detector, and
found that either CMPM or CMBMDM produced lactate faster than that of
control. Moreover, inhibition of LDHA activity by oxamate ( inhibitor)
also decreased glucose consumption and lactate production. Importantly,
the expression of Arg1 and CD206, positively correlated with glycolysis
and function of TAMs. Finally, we search the underneath mechanism and
found PI3K/AKT pathway was activated in CMPM or CMBMDM. In detail it was
found that p-p85 and p-AKT was upregulated at 8 hour after 4T1
supernatants stimulation. Inhibition of PI3K/AKT pathway by LY294002
(PI3K inhibitor), notably inhibited the expression of glycolysis genes
and markers of TAMs, which indicated that PI3K/AKT pathway maybe involved
in glycolysis of TAMs. Together, we identified that TAMs adopted
glycolysis as a major way to consume glucose and glycolysis was directly
contributed to the phenotype and function of TAMs, which was regulated by
PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.


