Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Somatic exomic landscape of small intestinal adenocarcinomas.


The small intestine makes up 75% of the length of the alimentary tract,
however, small intestinal tumors constitute less than 5% of
gastrointestinal tumors. Of small intestinal tumors, around one third are
aggressive adenocarcinomas with poor outcome (5-year survival rate is
approximately 30%). Reasons for their rarity are still unclear.
Predisposing factors include Crohn´s disease, celiac disease, hereditary
genetic syndromes such as familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), and dietary factors.
Due to the low incidence of small intestinal adenocarcinomas (SIAs), the
number of genetic studies remains insufficient. Since there are limited
data available to guide the therapeutic decisions, our aim is to
characterize the somatic mutational landscape of SIAs in a
population-based material using exome sequencing.

We collected information on all patients diagnosed with SIA in Finland
between the years 2004-2011 utilizing the Finnish Cancer Registry. This
registry maintains a nation-wide database on all cancer cases diagnosed
in Finland since 1953. From these we selected all cases with 1) confirmed
small intestinal primary tumor, 2) available tumor material, and 3) the
tumor content of at least 50%. In order to focus solely on small
intestinal tumors, we excluded tumors of the papillary region since they
might also have arisen from the pancreas or the biliary tract. Altogether
107 tumors representing all three parts of the small intestine were
selected for exome sequencing. The tumor data was filtered against the
ExAC and SISU databases to remove germline variations. In addition,
Sanger sequencing of the corresponding normal tissue will be used to
verify the somatic origin of the most interesting observed mutations. The
data analysis is ongoing. The average number of mutations in a tumor was
358 (range 40 - 4,166). Preliminary results show that the most frequently
mutated known cancer genes were TP53 (42%) and KRAS (31%). We will
identify all the most frequently mutated genes, compare the mutational
patterns between the three different sections of the small intestine, and
further characterize their similarities to gastric and colorectal
adenocarcinomas. We will also analyze the association between the
discovered mutations and patients’ survival time. This comprehensive
characterization of the molecular basis of SIAs will provide better
insight on how these tumors arise and possibly how they should be treated.


