Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutant KRas-mediated AKT2 activation supports lung cancer growth
by activating complex II-driven mitochondrial metabolism.


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the most common type of lung cancer
(comprising 80-85 %), is a leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. KRAS mutation is s major driver oncogene in NSCLC.
Constitutive activation of K-Ras via oncogenic mutations plays a key role
in development and progression of NSCLC, and is an important target for
drug development. Indeed, drugs that target RAF-MAPK and PI3K, the
well-established downstream pathways of K-Ras, are being evaluated in the
clinic. However, to date, no effective treatments specifically targeting
K-Ras have reached the clinic. A new direction for anti-Ras therapies
targeting Ras-mediated altered cellular metabolism is implied by recent
studies. Hence, as an attempt to investigate novel therapeutic targets to
suppress KRAS-driven NSCLC, we assessed metabolic changes in NSCLC cell
line and mouse model systems with oncogenic K-Ras mutations. We show that
activation of Ras causes metabolic alterations, leading to aerobic
glycolysis. Interestingly, despite the changes in the glycolytic pathway,
NSCLC cell line and mouse models carrying K-Ras mutation revealed an
elevated mitochondrial membrane potential, superoxide production as well
as maximal oxygen consumption rate. Moreover, blockade of mitochondrial
respiration effectively reduced mutant KRas-driven neoplastic phenotypes
in NSCLC cell lines vitro and lung tumor formation in vivo. In contrast,
blockade of glycolysis was not effective in the mutant KRas-driven
tumorigenic activities. Mechanistically, mutant KRas-mediated activation
of Akt2 led to increased expression of succinate dehydrogenase subunit A
(SDHA) through increased protein stability by blocking
proteasome-mediated degradation, resulting in mitochondrial complex
II-dependent respiration. Our study suggests that induction of
mitochondrial complex II-dependent respiration is an important mechanism
by which oncogenic mutant KRas induces metabolic changes and ROS stress
in NSCLC cells, contributing to lung carcinogenesis. Our findings
elucidate potential metabolic targets that may provide novel therapeutic
strategy for treating NSCLC with oncogenic KRAS mutations.


