Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neoadjuvant immunotherapy improves efficacy of image-guided
thermal ablation to generate curative responses in a murine breast cancer
model.


Magnetic resonance-guided focused ultrasound (MRgFUS) facilitates local
tumor control via thermal ablation, however, the anti-tumor immune
effects induced are weak and unable to consistently generate robust
objective responses in distant lesions. Here, we set out to optimize a
therapeutic approach for employing immunotherapy with thermal ablation
for systemic cancer treatment. We assessed the efficacy of implementing
MRgFUS ablation with blockade of the PD-1/PD-L1 axis (anti-PD-1) and
activation of TLR9 (CpG oligonucleotide) under various protocols and in
multiple models of murine cancer. Anti-PD-1 (200 µg, i.p., days 21 & 28)
and CpG (100 µg, i.t., days 21, 24 and 28) were administered
coincidentally with MRgFUS ablation (3 MHz central frequency, circular
pattern with R=2 mm, 1 revolution per second, 65ºC for 1 min, days 21
and 28) over the course of a week in bilateral syngeneic neu deletion
line (NDL), 4T-1 and B16 tumor bearing mice. Additionally, we evaluated
the administration of immunotherapy prior to a course of thermal ablation
(i.e., “primed ablation”), where anti-PD-1 (as above on days 21, 28 &
35), CpG (as above on days 21, 24, 28, 31, 38 and 45) and MRgFUS ablation
(as above on days 31, 38 and 45) were administered in bilateral NDL
tumor-bearing mice. Primed ablation generated a robust anti-tumor immune
response in distant lesions two weeks after the start of treatment, where
a threefold increase in tumor infiltrating leukocytes (reaching 40% CD8+
and 20% CD4+ T-cells) was observed. This led to a complete response in
80% of treated mice within 70 days after treatment commenced. This effect
was also observed in animals with high tumor burden and when thermal
ablation was performed sequentially at multiple independent sites; 80% of
untreated lesions were eradicated at 50 days after the start of
treatment. However, therapeutic efficacy was limited when thermal
ablation was performed coincident with the first dose of immunotherapy;
this protocol was not curative in any murine model. To elucidate the
mechanism for this effect, we employed tumor histology and positron
emission tomography immediately after MRgFUS ablation. We found that
thermal ablation induced stromal inflammation, and the loss of cell-cell
adhesion and local vascular integrity, which impacted the intratumoral
transport of small molecules and proteins for 48 hours post treatment.
These data suggest that tumor debulking using image-guided thermal
therapy can be successfully incorporated within a curative protocol in
which immunotherapy is initiated before ablation.


