Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Folate cycle represents a new metabolic vulnerability for
hepatocellular carcinoma treatment.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), primary liver cancer, ranks the third
most lethal cancer worldwide due to late symptom presentation and lack of
promising curative therapy. Metabolic reprogramming has been recognized
as a major and new hallmark of cancer in recent years. Better
understanding of its underpinning molecular mechanisms favoring cancer
growth will be crucial for the development of effective HCC therapeutics.
The folate cycle fuels metabolic processes and the production of
metabolites essential to cell growth and tumorigenesis maintenance.
Through the shuttling of a single carbon unit by a folate derivative
through the tetrahydrofolate (THF) backbone in the cytoplasmic and
mitochondrial compartments, metabolites like NADPH - a major cellular
antioxidant for redox balance, s-adenosyl methionine (SAM) - precursor of
DNA and histone methylation, and pyrimidine and purine - the building
blocks of DNA are produced. We found folate to be indispensable for HCC
cell growth. Furthermore, methylene-THF dehydrogenase 1-like (MTHFD1L), a
key enzyme facilitating the folate cycle from the mitochondria, was found
to be significantly up-regulated in HCC with association to poorer
clinical features for patients. Genetic inhibition of MTHFD1L by
knockdown and knockout by shRNA and CRISPR-Cas9 systems, respectively,
blocked NADPH production. Rapid elevation in oxidative stress induced DNA
damage and cell cycle delay; ultimately inhibiting HCC proliferation.
Binding of the transcription factor NRF2, a potent protector of oxidative
stress, and MTHFD1L was confirmed by ChIP assay. NRF2 over-expression
using the CRISPR-activating system in HCC cells further highlighted the
dependent relationship between NRF2 and MTHFD1L. Metabolomics analysis
showed that MTHFD1L knockdown caused a disruption to the folate cycle and
accumulation of serine. Surprisingly, MTHFD1L knockdown did not reduce
the levels of SAM and nucleotides. Knockdown of MTHFD1L in HCC cells
significantly inhibited primary liver tumor growth and lung metastasis in
orthotopic liver implantation model. Therapeutically, the administration
of methotrexate, an anti-folate agent, sensitized HCC cells towards
Sorafenib treatment both in vitro and vivo. The folate cycle represents a
metabolic vulnerability and attractive therapeutic target for HCC.
Inhibition of MTHFD1L disrupts the folate cycle and sensitizes HCC cells
towards its convention treatment agent, Sorafenib in various HCC mouse
models. Our investigation unravels a metabolic vulnerability in cancer
which contributes to better understanding and is beneficial for the
development of precise inhibitors specifically targeting associated
pathways.


