Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Target engagement approaches to validate small-molecule binders of
the pioneering transcription factor FOXA1.


The discovery of small-molecules that disrupt or promote the function of
transcription factors, often considered ‘undruggable’ targets, is
considered a significant challenge.[1] The development of general and
systematic approaches to discover small-molecule probes of transcription
factors is therefore of substantial value. In this study, a
high-throughput small-molecule microarray (SMM) screen was used to
identify initial binders of FOXA1, which were studied using a variety of
biochemical approaches to identify and characterize target engagement of
these small-molecule probes in a cellular context. Tools for validating
FOXA1 as a therapeutic target do not currently exist, although FOXA1 is a
known mediator of androgen receptor (AR) action in Prostate Cancer (PCa),
and has been demonstrated to both assist and antagonize AR activity,
dependent upon the cellular context.[2,3] Using the SMM technology,
potential small-molecule binders of FOXA1 were identified, and an
enrichment for an interesting class of endogenous metabolites was
observed. While an interaction between these compounds and FOXA1 has not
previously been reported, they were found to exhibit meaningful
inhibition of FOXA1-controlled transcription in prostate cancer cell
lines.

Compound-anchored beads were used to pull-down FOXA1 in whole cell
lysates, and we demonstrated via western blot that the endogenous
metabolite engages the transcription factor in this setting. Target
engagement in live cells was demonstrated using bi-functional chemical
probes, which contain a photo-reactive functional group that transforms
transient protein-ligand interactions into stable covalent bonds upon UV
irradiation. The probes were also modified with a bioorthogonal, or click
chemistry handle, which enabled for assay read-outs using fluorescent
labeling and mass spectrometry.[4] Using these approaches, we
successfully validated the bimolecular interaction between the endogenous
metabolites and FOXA1 in cell lysates and live cells, respectively. This
report details the first known small-molecule to bind FOXA1 in a cellular
setting and suggests a new perspective on the potential role of this
class of endogenous compound in prostate cancer.

References [1] A. N. Koehler, Curr Opin Chem Biol 2010, 14, 331-340. [2]
W. C. Krause et al., Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2014, 54, 49-59. [3] M. M.
Pomerantz et al., Nat Genet 2015, 47, 1346-1351. [4] T. Kambe et al., J
Am Chem Soc 2014, 136, 10777-10782 Funding Sources The Koch Institute
Quinquennial Cancer Research Fellowship. National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship Program (NSF GRFP).


