Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative bioinformatics analyses of ChIP seq and RNA seq data
reveals a complex regulatory landscape of NRF1 network involved in the
pathogenesis of breast cancer.


The expression of redox sensitive transcription factor -nuclear
respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) expression significantly correlates with
histological grades and prognosis of breast cancer. However, the
molecular mechanism by which NRF1 may contribute in the development of
breast cancer is not clear. In this study we examined whether NRF1 is a
molecular risk factor of breast cancer. We also identified regulatory
landscape of NRF1 network involved in the pathogenesis of breast cancer.
Steps followed for the investigation included the selection of mRNA
microarray dataset from TCGA and Metabric, selection and analysis of
ChIP-Seq datasets from different breast cancer cell lines to identify
NRF1 target genes possibly involved in breast cancer through Molecular
Pathway, Gene Ontology and statistical analysis. Analysis of mRNA
expression in breast cancer patients showed that NRF1 was significantly
overexpressed in breast cancer tissues compared to normal tissues.
ChIP-Seq analysis of two different breast cancer cell line - MCF7 and T7D
showed that there are more than 8,000 genes, which contain NRF1 binding
DNA motif(s). The NRF1 binding to ChIP DNA sequences of target gene is
cell context dependent. High percentage of known breast cancer (~50%)
susceptibility genes are transcriptional targets of NRF1. Network
analysis revealed that NRF1 regulates genes, which are key regulators of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), stemness, cell apoptosis, cell
cycle regulation, chromosomal integrity, and DNA damage and repair.
Furthermore, we observed that NRF1 regulates target genes of both breast
cancer and cancer KEGG pathways. Many of the MicroRNAs involved in cancer
and genes of signaling pathways involved in cancer initiation and
progression such as MAPK, PI3K/AKT and Notch signaling are also
transcriptional targets of NRF1. In summary, this study reveals a complex
regulatory landscape of NRF1 network involved in the pathogenesis of
breast cancer. Dysregulation of NRF1 signaling pathways may contribute in
the development of breast cancer. Clinical confirmation of our study will
have significant impact on our understanding of the role of NRF1 as a
valuable biomarker for breast cancer diagnosis and prognosis and will
provide strong rationale for the future studies to further develop NRF1
for breast cancer therapeutic target. This work was in part supported by
a VA MERIT Review (VA BX001463) grant to DR.


