Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Consumer credit, cancer treatment, and health among women with a
history of breast cancer.


Background: Breast cancer treatment may represent an economic shock that
may be influenced by, or may influence a cancer survivor’s
socio-economic position (SEP). Financial toxicity or economic burden due
to cancer treatment and treatment’s adverse effects may be reflected in
one’s consumer credit ratings; however, credit’s contribution to
individual health for cancer survivors or those managing long-term
adverse effects of cancer treatment has not been evaluated. This analysis
examined associations between self-rated health outcomes of women with a
history of breast cancer, type of cancer treatment, and presence of
breast cancer-related lymphedema, a persistent adverse effect of
treatment, and consumer credit rating.

Methods: From May to September 2015, 129 women from Pennsylvania and New
Jersey were enrolled in the PAL Social and Economic Quality of Life
cross-sectional study. All participants had a history of breast cancer,
and completed a survey of: demographics, SEP, co-morbidities, SF-12
self-rated health, psychosocial stress, adjuvant cancer treatments
(chemotherapy, hormone therapy, radiation), breast cancer-related
lymphedema symptoms, and credit quality (5-point scale self-reported as
poor to excellent). Multivariable linear regression measured the
association between credit and health.

Results: Mean respondent age was 64, with 38.2% reporting excellent and
37.4% reporting very good/good credit. Participants completed cancer
treatment on average 11.5 years ago. After adjusting for demographics and
SEP, good credit was associated with a 4.5 (p=0.009) point increase in
composite physical health t-score and -1.13 (p=0.02) decrease in
psychosocial stress compared to women with poor credit, but was not
associated with type of cancer treatment or lymphedema.

Conclusion: While credit was associated with self-rated health for women
with an average 11.5 year history of breast cancer, current credit
quality did not appear to be associated with type of cancer treatment
previously received or with the presence of lymphedema, a persistent
adverse effect of cancer treatment. It is still possible that cancer
treatment may have influenced credit close to time of treatment, and
credit was able to rebound since that time. Future work should test
causal pathways between credit and health outcomes after cancer diagnosis.


