Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-L1 expression on circulating epithelial tumor cells (CETCs)
correlates with the presence of metastasis in breast cancer patients and
differs from PD-L2 expression.


Background: Strategies to improve the efficacy of the immune system
against malignant tumors represent a major innovation focusing on the
programmed cell death-1 receptor (PD-1), with its two ligands PD-L1 and
PD-L2. The expression of PD-L1 has been evaluated in a number of
different tumor types and can be used as a predictive biomarker for
PD-1/PD-L1 checkpoint inhibitor treatment response. PD-L2 has not
received as much attention and its role in modulating tumor immunity is
less clear. We used a non-invasive, real-time liquid biopsy to better
characterize PD-L1/-L2 expression on circulating epithelial tumor cells
(CETCs) in breast cancer patients.

Methods: CETCs were determined from blood of 72 patients suffering from
breast cancer. The number of vital CETCs and their expression of PD-L1
and PD-L2 were investigated using the maintrac® method.

Results: PD-L1 expressing CETCs were detected in 94.5 % of breast cancer
patients whereas only 82% patients had PD-L2 positive CETCs. Breast
cancer patients with metastatic disease had significantly more PD-L1
positive CETCs as compared to patients without metastasis (median 75% vs.
61.1%; pResults: PD-L1 expressing CETCs were detected in 94.5 % of breast
cancer patients whereas only 82% patients had PD-L2 positive CETCs.
Breast cancer patients with metastatic disease had significantly more
PD-L1 positive CETCs as compared to patients without metastasis (median
75% vs. 61.1%; p<0.05). The fraction of PD-L1 positive CETCs was
significantly higher than the fraction of PD-L2 positive CETCs (54.6% vs.
28.7%; pResults: PD-L1 expressing CETCs were detected in 94.5 % of breast
cancer patients whereas only 82% patients had PD-L2 positive CETCs.
Breast cancer patients with metastatic disease had significantly more
PD-L1 positive CETCs as compared to patients without metastasis (median
75% vs. 61.1%; p<0.05). The fraction of PD-L1 positive CETCs was
significantly higher than the fraction of PD-L2 positive CETCs (54.6% vs.
28.7%; p<0.001). Moreover, we observed a significant heterogeneity in
PD-L1 and PD-L2 immunostaining intensity across CETCs from the same
patients.

Conclusion: Breast cancer patients have detectable CETCs with a high
frequency of PD-L1 which correlates with progression of cancer disease.
PD-L1 seems to be a major factor in immune evasion and may be a promising
target of anticancer therapies. Monitoring the frequency of PD-L1
positive CETCs could reflect individual patient’s response to an
anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapy.


