Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly multiplexed and precisely calibrated reference materials
for copy number variation detection.


Introduction: Genomic instability is a hallmark of cancer, and copy
number variation (CNV), including gene duplication and deletion, can be a
key driver of oncogenesis. Detection of CNV is needed for personalized
treatment, and may involve microarray analysis or Next Generation
Sequencing. Often, DNA from patient-derived cell lines is used as
positive control material in these assays. However, these materials are
often poorly characterized, may change over time, and have additional
confounding genetic alterations. Here we describe the development of new
reference materials that are highly characterized by digital PCR and can
aid in the validation and calibration of new diagnostic assays for CNV.

Methods: The GM24385 reference cell line has been extensively
characterized by the Genome in a Bottle project1 and originates from a
participant in the Personal Genome Project. DNA from this cell line was
used to make a library of full-length gene inserts. The library had >12X
coverage of the GM24385 genome and an average insert size of ~135 Kb. PCR
based screening was used to identify and isolate full length MYC, FGFR3
and ERBB2 genes. Next Generation Sequencing, using Illumina Nextera
library preparation kits and a MiSeq instrument, was used to verify the
gene of interest. The genomic DNA and gene inserts were then formulated
into reference materials, in purified DNA format to amplify the copy
numbers of these key genes. Digital PCR was used to control the mixing
and verify the number of copies of genes and/or mutations within the
reference material.

Results: The sequence confirmed genes were formulated into GM24385
genomic DNA at levels consistent with 5X and 10X amplification. Testing
on the ArcherDx VariantPlex™ Solid Tumor Kit indicated that each
amplification could be detected at the expected level.

Conclusions: Highly characterized and consistently manufactured reference
materials for copy number detection are currently lacking. The described
Seraseq CNV Reference Materials provide proof of concept for a
biosynthetic, engineered material that uses digital PCR as an orthologous
reference method and provides a “ground truth” copy number level for
key oncogenes.


