Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic differentiation of pulmonary cancer with squamous cell
histology.


Histologic classification of pulmonary cancer with squamous cell
histology is challenging as reliable immunohistochemical biomarkers are
lacking. In particular smokers with head and neck cancer can develop both
lung metastases and primary lung cancer. However, their differentiation
is clinically important for therapy and risk stratification. Moreover,
molecular targeted therapies for squamous cell carcinoma of the lung are
largely lacking. To identify proteomic diagnostic biomarkers, signaling
patterns and potential novel drug targets we characterized a broad panel
of primary patient-derived formalin-fixed squamous cell carcinomas from
lung and head and neck cancer by quantitative mass spectrometry

Proteins were isolated from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
patient-derived genetically characterized cancer tissues by using a
“filter-aided sample preparation (FASP)” method. The resulting
proteins were analyzed by a Super-SILAC-based mass spectrometry approach
and data was analyzed using the software suites MaxQuant and Perseus to
determine the tumor-type-specific protein expression and signaling
patterns.

In this study we quantitatively analyzed the protein-expression-profiles
of 50 primary patient-derived non-small cell lung cancer specimens with
squamous cell histology and 30 squamous cell carcinomas from the
head-neck-region derived from patients that developed lung tumors with
similar histology in the course of their disease. Using the mass
spectrometric approach we were able to quantify in average around 2500
proteins per sample. Unsupervised clustering- and principal component
analyses revealed that the detected protein expression patterns show a
strong correlation with the cellular origin of the analyzed carcinomas.
Furthermore, secondary lesions with similar histological morphology in
the lung in patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head-neck-region
could be classified as primary or metastatic cancer according to their
protein expression profiles.

Collectively, this study provides a large set of potential proteomic
biomarkers that might be useful to improve diagnostics in the context of
lung tumors with squamous cell histology in the future. In particular the
differentiation of squamous cell carcinoma and head and neck
cancer-derived metastases in the lung - that is still a challenge for
diagnostics - will be improved by the presented biomarker panel.
Moreover, the expression of kinases and activation patterns of signaling
pathways discovered in our study are of interest regarding potential
novel lung cancer therapies as overexpression or hyperactivation of
certain kinases can potentially contribute to the malignant phenotype of
lung cancer cells.


