Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthetic lethality of CDK12 inhibition in tumors with EWS/FLI
rearrangements.


THZ1 is a potent, covalent inhibitor of the transcriptional CDKs,
CDK7/12/13. Chemical genomic profiling of THZ1 across >1,000 diverse
cancer cell lines revealed that EWS/FLI- rearranged Ewing sarcoma cells
were remarkably sensitive to this molecule. We demonstrated that THZ1
inhibits the phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain of RNA Polymerase
II, decreased colony formation capacity, and induced apoptosis in a
dose-dependent manner in Ewing sarcoma cell lines. Using selective CDK7
and CDK12/13 inhibitors, we revealed that the primary target of THZ1 in
Ewing sarcoma is CDK12/13. Genetic suppression of CDK12, but not CDK13,
induced strong anti-viability effects, confirming CDK12 as the primary
target. Treatment of Ewing sarcoma cell lines with THZ531, a novel
CDK12/13 selective inhibitor, preferentially repressed genes involved in
DNA damage repair. Additionally, suppression of EWS/FLI rendered Ewing
sarcoma cells resistant to THZ531 and partially rescued the
anti-viability effects of CDK12 knockdown. These results suggest that
EWS/FLI imparts vulnerability to DNA damage repair inhibition and
implicate a synthetic lethal relationship between the tumor-specific
expression of EWS/FLI and CDK12 inhibition. Furthermore, we demonstrated
that CDK12 and PARP inhibitors are highly synergistic in vitro, inducing
widespread yH2AX foci formation. Interestingly, THZ531 impairs the
ability of the PARP inhibitor, olaparib, to induce RAD51 foci formation,
suggesting that THZ531 specifically causes a defect in homologous
recombination repair. Moreover, we observed striking synergy of THZ1 and
olaparib in two mouse models of Ewing sarcoma with limited toxicity
observed. These findings have important translational significance as
clinical trials with PARP inhibitors as single agents in Ewing sarcoma
failed to demonstrate efficacy, highlighting the need to identify
combination therapies that will enhance the activity of PARP inhibition.
We anticipate that CDK12 and PARP inhibitor combinations will be of
therapeutic interest in other ETS-rearranged tumors, as well as tumors
with defects in DNA repair.


