Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteogenomic classifications and outcome in squamous cell
carcinoma of the lung.


Introduction: Genomic analyses have yielded a tremendous amount of
knowledge on the genetic changes in lung cancers, but translating this
information into actionable data benefitting patients has proven
difficult. The integration of proteomic analyses with genomics and gene
expression profiling allows a more detailed description of the biological
processes, thus improving our understanding of cancer phenotypes. These
insights can potentially be used for better classification and help to
guide patient selection for targeted therapies.

Experimental: We analyzed 116 surgically resected squamous cell lung
carcinoma samples for copy-number alterations, gene expression profiling,
targeted exome-sequencing and global proteomic profiling. The cohort
consisted of mostly early stage tumors (83% Stage I or II) with complete
follow-up (median 58 months). Copy number status was analyzed using the
Affymetrix CytoScan array, DNA mutation status was assessed using a
customized version of the Agilent Comprehensive Cancer Panel for targeted
sequencing, and gene expression profiling was carried out by
RNA-sequencing. Proteomic analysis was performed using TMT labeling, 12-
fraction bRPLC separation and LC-MS/MS analysis with a Thermo Q-Exactive
mass spectrometer. Database searches were performed using multiple search
engines against RefSeq version 78, and summarized using IDPicker 3.

Results: The non-redundant protein inventory consisted of more than 6,000
protein groups with a protein FDR Results: The non-redundant protein
inventory consisted of more than 6,000 protein groups with a protein FDR
<5%. Tumors were classified according to well established gene expression
criteria into 4 classes: Classical, Basal, Primitive and Secretory. At
the protein level, the Classical subtype was associated with xenobiotic
and energy metabolism; the Basal subtype with defense responses and
extracellular matrix changes; the Primitive subtype with nucleic acid
metabolism; and the Secretory subtype with p38 signaling. These findings
confirm and expand on previous mRNA expression studies of squamous cell
lung carcinoma. Proteomics-based classification identified two
sub-categories within the Classical subtype, which were characterized by
inflammatory and stress response signaling. Within this group, patients
with high expression of inflammation-associated proteins had better
cancer-specific survival than those with low expression (p=0.04, Log-rank
test). Targeted exome sequencing of 154 cancer-associated genes revealed
frequent mutations in TP53, CDKN2A, NFE2L2, and other genes. Proteomic
expression of genes located in amplified chromosomal regions was used to
identify driver genes in squamous cell lung carcinoma.

Conclusion: Our results provide new biological insights from the addition
of protein measurements to genomic datasets that have the potential to
improve classification. The data suggest that proteins involved in immune
responses are important for the biological behavior and outcome of the
Classical subtype in squamous cell lung carcinoma.


