Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Superior therapeutic efficacy of nanoparticle albumin-bound
paclitaxel over cremophor-bound paclitaxel in experimental esophageal
adenocarcinoma.


Introduction: Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) has become the dominant
type of esophageal cancer in United States. EAC is the fastest growing
cancer in the western world and the overall 5 year survival rate of EAC
is below 20 percent. Most patients with EAC present with locally advanced
or widespread metastatic disease, where current treatment is largely
ineffective. Prognosis for EAC patients remains poor even with
combination therapies due to high resistance to chemotherapy. Therefore,
new therapeutic approaches are urgently needed. Paclitaxel (PTX) has been
used in combination with carboplatin (CP) as a standard combination
therapy for advanced EAC. PTX required emulsification with solvents to
allow intravenous administration which has resulted in hypersensitivity
reactions and potentially dramatic side effects in patients. Nanoparticle
albumin-bound (nab) PTX is an albumin-stabilized, cremophor-free and
water soluble nanoparticle formulation of PTX. Nab-PTX is a novel
microtubule-inhibitory cytotoxic agent and the potential role of nab-PTX
has not been tested yet in experimental EAC.

Methods: We explored the antiproliferative and antitumor efficacy with
survival advantage following CP, PTX and nab-PTX as monotherapy and in
combinations in in-vitro, and in murine subcutaneous xenograft and
peritoneal metastatic survival models of human EAC.

Results: Nab-PTX inhibited in-vitro cell proliferation with significantly
lower IC50 (0.25 µM in OE19 and 49 nM in OE33) than that of PTX (0.74
µM in OE19 and 98 nM in OE33) and CP (5.21 µM in OE19 and 1.05 µM in
OE33) in OE19 and OE33 EAC cell lines. Nab-PTX treatment resulted in
significantly higher antitumour efficacy and survival benefit compared
with PTX or CP treatment. After two-week nab-PTX, PTX, CP, nab-PTX+CP or
PTX+CP treatments, the average in-vivo local tumor growth inhibition rate
was 73, 60, 35, 81 and 68 percent respectively (p=0.025). Nab-PTX
treatment increased expression of the mitotic-spindle associated
phospho-stathmin, decreased expression of proliferative marker Ki-67 and
enhanced apoptosis as confirmed by increased expression of cleaved-PARP
and cleaved caspase-3. There was an increase in median animal survival
after nab-PTX treatment (65 days) compared to controls (46 days,
p=0.0023), PTX (57 days, p=0.0034) or to CP therapy (53 days, p=0.0034).

Conclusion: In conclusion, the present study demonstrates that nab-PTX
had stronger antiproliferative and antitumor activity in experimental EAC
than the current standard chemotherapeutic agents. This strong antitumor
activity supports the rationale for clinical evaluation of nab-PTX as
promising microtubule-inhibitory agent in EAC.


