Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A retrospective analysis of pediatric and adolescent oncology
patients and congenital anomalies.


Introduction: Congenital anomalies (CAs) are a leading cause of infant
death and contribute to long-term disability and repeated
hospitalizations. Many epidemiology studies have suggested that children
with CAs have an increased cancer risk compared to those without CAs.
This retrospective case series further investigates associations between
CAs and cancer in a large academic center’s pediatric and adolescent
oncology patient population.

Methods: Electronic medical records of 1,435 oncology patients diagnosed
from birth to 23 years of age at St. Louis Children’s Hospital from
January 1, 2004 - December 31, 2014 were reviewed. CA information was
extracted and verified with ICD-9 codes when available. Patients followed
for Methods: Electronic medical records of 1,435 oncology patients
diagnosed from birth to 23 years of age at St. Louis Children’s
Hospital from January 1, 2004 - December 31, 2014 were reviewed. CA
information was extracted and verified with ICD-9 codes when available.
Patients followed for <1 year at SLCH (n=193), and those diagnosed with a
chromosomal anomaly or known cancer predisposition syndrome (n=113) were
excluded from the analysis. Bivariate analyses compared demographic and
other characteristics between patients with and without a CA with
significant differences determined by chi-square tests. We calculated
age-adjusted standardized rate ratios (SRRs) to evaluate whether the
observed number of CAs among specific cancer types (benign, bone, CNS,
epithelial, leukemia, lymphoma, germ cell, and soft tissue tumors) varied
from the expected number using the CA rates from the entire cohort as the
reference. Differences in survival time distributions in cancer cases
with CAs versus those without CAs were evaluated with the log-rank test.

Results: Of 1,129 SLCH pediatric cancer patients, 156 (14%) patients were
identified with a CA. Overall there was an increased proportion of
patients with a CNS tumor who also had a CA compared to those without a
CA (p=0.005). Neurological anomalies were specifically found to be in
excess in CNS tumor cases versus the overall population of pediatric
cancer patients (SRR= 1.42 95% CI 1.02-1.92 p=0.038). There were no
significant differences by age at primary tumor diagnosis, but patients
with a CNS tumor and CA were diagnosed an average of 1.5 years earlier
(7.7 vs. 9.2 years, p=0.075) compared to those without a CA. The rate of
CAs did not vary significantly by sex, but a significant excess of males
with a neurological anomaly was observed among all patients diagnosed
Results: Of 1,129 SLCH pediatric cancer patients, 156 (14%) patients were
identified with a CA. Overall there was an increased proportion of
patients with a CNS tumor who also had a CA compared to those without a
CA (p=0.005). Neurological anomalies were specifically found to be in
excess in CNS tumor cases versus the overall population of pediatric
cancer patients (SRR= 1.42 95% CI 1.02-1.92 p=0.038). There were no
significant differences by age at primary tumor diagnosis, but patients
with a CNS tumor and CA were diagnosed an average of 1.5 years earlier
(7.7 vs. 9.2 years, p=0.075) compared to those without a CA. The rate of
CAs did not vary significantly by sex, but a significant excess of males
with a neurological anomaly was observed among all patients diagnosed <5
years of age (M/F ratio=2.55 95% CI 1.15-5.56 p=0.02). Finally, survival
between those with and without a CA was not significantly different
(p=0.24).

Conclusions: This study provides additional insight into the association
between specific types of CAs and cancer development. Our results suggest
children with neurological anomalies are more likely to develop CNS
cancers and may be more likely to develop cancer at an earlier age,
particularly in males. Our study supports the need for additional
longitudinal surveillance and research that may improve outcomes as well
as translational research to investigate any associated developmental
mechanisms that may underlie tumor predisposition.


