Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthesis of a biotin probe for identification of the ajoene
protein targets in cancer cells ajoene protein targets in cancer cells.


Garlic (Allium sativum) is a medicinal plant belonging to the lily family
which has been used since ancient times for its beneficial health effects
which include protection against infections and cancer. There are a
cluster of bioactive compounds found in crushed garlic which contain
sulfide or polysulfide functional groups. One of these compounds, ajoene,
is able to interfere with biological processes by undergoing thiolysis
exchange reactions with biological thiols, for example glutathione and
cysteine residues on proteins. Importantly, ajoene is cytotoxic to cancer
cells in the low micromolar range. We have previously found that ajoene
targets multiple proteins in cancer cells and the aim of this project is
to identify the specific protein targets of ajoene. To achieve this aim,
we have synthesized a “tagged” ajoene analogue containing a biotin
functional group. As biotin may alter the biological properties of
ajoene, our strategy was to initially synthesize an azide-containing
ajoene analogue (called azide-ajoene) using our 4-step synthetic route to
ajoene analogues previously published. Azide-ajoene was found to retain
cancer cell cytotoxicity similar to that of the parent ajoene. We then
treated cancer cells (MDA-MB-231 breast and WHCO1 oesophageal cancer)
with azide-ajoene to allow transfer of an azide label to the protein
targets during thiolysis exchange with ajoene. We then collected lysate
from the treated cells and performed an in vitro click reaction with a
separately synthesized biotin-alkyne partner which was synthesized via a
series of substitution and amide coupling reactions. Click chemistry
covalently links biotin to the ajoene-tagged protein via a triazole
linkage; and the feasibility of this method was validated by western
blot. The biotinylated protein targets were purified using immobilised
streptavidin beads and identified by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. It is
anticipated that knowledge of the specific ajoene protein targets will
provide valuable insights into the cytotoxic mechanism of action of
ajoene in cancer cells.


