Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic alterations in mucins in cancer.


Mucins promote the growth, aggressiveness, and invasiveness of various
cancer types. Changes in the expression or localization of mucins can
significantly alter patient survival. Due to their predominance in
multiple cancers, biomarkers and therapeutic agents have been developed
to improve patient care. However, an extensive investigation across
multiple cancer subtypes examining the genomic status of the cohort of
mucins has not been performed and could yield significant leads into new
roles of mucins in different cancers. Utilizing The Cancer Genome Atlas,
the cancers of 11 mucin expressing tissues were examined for the genomic
alterations in mutations, mRNA expression levels, copy numbers,
methylation status, and the impact on patient survival due to these
genomic features. It was discovered that different mucins across multiple
tissue origins and cancer subtypes might have a different rate, pattern,
and survival impact. MUC1 was not mutated in the majority of cancers;
however, we did observe a frequent T112P mutation in pancreatic tumors
that was also present in other cancers. MUC4 was frequently mutated at
H4205 and MUC4 mutations were seen to have survival differences. Multiple
significant differences were discovered in mRNA expression, which varied
distinctly between cohorts. One such pattern was observed with de novo
expression of MUC21 in colorectal cancers, in which mRNA expression was
suddenly induced in cancer and increased in a stage dependent manner.
Copy number alterations were seen for only a few cancer subtypes and
mucins, including MUC4 in lung squamous cell carcinomas. Global promoter
demethylation was generally observed across the cancers. MUC15 in renal
cancers was seen to be one of the most demethylated mucins, in which mRNA
was seen to be substantially decreased or expunged. This extensive study
investigated the status of multiple mucins in multiple cancer settings
and highlights a few noticeable mucins that are suggested to be further
studied for roles in biomarkers, survival, and etiology for cancer
progression.


