Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Humanized immune-oncology mouse models.


The recent clinical success of immune checkpoint modulators has
stimulated immune-oncology research leading to the identification of new
tumor immunology targets. However both, target validation and drug
development need better preclinical immune oncology models. Translational
research further urgently needs such models for identification of
clinically relevant biomarkers and defining rational combination
strategies. Human patient-derived xenografts (PDX) from different tumor
indications transplanted on immunodeficient mice have demonstrated strong
predictive power for many drug development programs in cancer research.
However, one caveat of PDX models is, that these mice lack a functional
immune system, which allows tumor engraftment in the xenogenic host. To
overcome these constraints our aim is the development of PDX models on
mice with a functional human immune system. This strategy should allow
implementing the highly predictable PDX in a functional human immune
environment for better drug efficacy and safety studies. We reconstituted
a human immune system in mice by engrafting human hematopoietic stem
cells in immunodeficient mice. We demonstrate the engraftment of a full
set of human immune cells, including T cells, B cells, NK cells,
monocytes and dendritic cells in these mice. Tumor expression of PD-L1 is
currently evaluated as first biomarker for immunotherapy with the PD1
checkpoint inhibitors. We screened our tumor cell lines and PDX models
for PD-L1 expression to identify such a correlation. PD-L1 positive and
negative models were transplanted on humanized mice. Most of them showed
no difference in tumor growth compared to non-humanized mice (= fully
immune resistant). However other PDX showed a delayed growth on the
humanized mice (= partly immune resistant), whereas only one model did
not grow at all (= immune sensitive), demonstrating a high sensitivity to
the innate immune response of this PDX. To evaluate the function of the
human immune cells and checkpoints, mice were treated with checkpoint
inhibitors ipilimumab and nivolumab. Checkpoint inhibitors alone or in
combination led to a minor tumor growth delay and an increased number of
activated T-cells in the blood and in the tumor. Our results from
experiments with n=19 models revealed a first correlation: stronger tumor
growth inhibition on PD-L1 positive PDX and increased sensitivity of
“partly immune resistant” PDX. Furthermore we were able to
demonstrate, that treatment effects of checkpoint inhibitors could be
increased by combination with radiation. Summary: Our humanized PDX
models enable appropriate preclinical studies on tumor immune biology,
evaluation of new immune therapies and combinations, as well as the
identification and validation of biomarkers for tumor immune therapy.


