Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of lifestyle factors on adipocyte size in human breast
tissue.


Background: Accumulating epidemiological studies positively associate
healthy body mass index (BMI) and higher physical activity with lowered
risk of postmenopausal breast cancer. Many of the proposed biomarkers
underlying these associations, such as insulin, inflammatory markers,
steroid hormones, and adipokines, are produced or regulated by adipose
tissue. However, the biological impact of lifestyle factors at the level
of the breast tissue, particularly adipose tissue in the breast, is
unclear and may play a role in the etiology of breast cancer.

Methods: Using a cross-sectional design, we examined the impact of
demographic and lifestyle factors on histological features of breast
adipose tissue. Women (age) undergoing reduction mammoplasty surgery were
consented to collection of their cancer-free breast tissue at the time of
surgery. An adipose rich section of the sample was dissected under
sterile conditions and formalin fixed. Samples were sectioned at 7 µm
thickness and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. The stained sections
were imaged and mean adipocyte size was determined as diameter (µm) from
3 randomly selected areas at 10X magnification and each sample was scored
by two independent assessors using Image J software. BMI status
documented at the time of surgery was abstracted form medical records. A
subset of women completed an additional visit where percent total body
fat was measured by air displacement plethysmography and aerobic fitness
(VO2peak) was measured by a maximal graded exercise test with expired gas
collection. The association between adipocyte size and
demographic/lifestyle factors was examined using multivariate linear
regression adjusted for age and menopausal status.

Results: Participants (n=42) were primarily Caucasian (77%) and
pre/peri-menopausal (62%), with a mean age of 44.6±12.9 years (range
19-70) and mean BMI of 27.7±5.1 kg/m2 (range 19.1-37.4). Adipocyte size
was associated with BMI (per 5 kg/m2 increase, β = 5.6±2.15, p=0.01)
and number of pregnancies (β = 6.04±2.34, p=0.02), but not age (β =
0.1±0.3, p=0.81). In the subset of participants who completed an
additional study visit (n=9), there was a trend towards an inverse
association between adipocyte size and aerobic fitness (per 2 ml/kg/min
of O2 consumption, β = -3.54±1.52, p=0.07) and percent body fat (per 2%
increase, β = 1.94±1.28, p=0.17) in unadjusted analyses.

Conclusion: Higher BMI is associated with larger adipocyte size in
adipose tissue taken from the breast, suggesting a biological role for
body composition in influencing gross histological features of adipocytes
and its behavior that would impact the health of the mammary gland. A
better understanding of the biological mechanisms underlying the observed
epidemiological associations are needed to guide the development of
intervention strategies and the most effective public health messages for
breast cancer prevention.


