Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker monitoring by quantitative MALDI imaging; application to
the tryptophan-kynurenine pathway in immuno-oncology.


Tryptophan is an essential amino acid for cell proliferation and survival
that can be metabolized through different pathways, a major route being
the kynurenine pathway. The first and rate-limiting enzyme of this
pathway is the indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1), that is a natural
endogenous molecular mechanism of immune suppression acting through
modulation of the Trp degradation pathway. Inhibition of T-cell
functions, activation of the regulatory T-cells, and inhibition of
Natural Killer cells are among the important immunosuppressive effects of
IDO1. IDO1 enzyme is proposed to have a therapeutic potential in
immunodeficiency-associated abnormalities, including cancer. IDO1 over
expression has been described in multiple cancer indications and IDO1
inhibitors are being developed to stimulate the anti-tumor immune
response. The existing and standard quantitation methods are based on the
total level of Trp and its metabolites determined by LC-MS/MS analysis in
human plasma, cerebrospinal fluid and brain. We describe the setup,
development and application of a new method based on MSI to detect,
localize, and quantify Trp and Kyn in biological tissues. This method
allows both the study of the sub-tissular localization and the
detection/quantitation of metabolites of interest in tumor tissues. In
the present study, an experimental tumor model overexpressing IDO1 and
its wild-type counterpart were implanted in mice. Tissue sections of
different tumors were realized and used for MSI analysis. MALDI FTICR
high resolution imaging followed by data analysis enabled an absolute on
tissue quantitation. Internal standards of tryptophan (Trp-d5) and
kynurenine (Kyn-d4) metabolites were used for normalization. As expected,
our results showed an increase of Kyn in parallel to a decrease of Trp
amount in IDO1-positive tumors. Following, immunostainings of IDO1 and
Trp-depletion sensor pathways were carried. Overlaying images between the
immunostainings and the molecular MS images allowed co-localization
studies and underlined both the biology and the tumor heterogeneity. This
study allowed us to highlight key metabolites of the Trp pathway that are
responsible for the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment. It
illustrated the heterogeneity of tumor immune areas.The development of
immunotherapies such as IDO1 inhibitors requires a deep understanding of
the interplay between the immune system and cancer cells, these immune
endogenous metabolites can now be followed by QMSI and as biomarkers
towards enhancing immunotherapies efficiency.


