Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic reprogramming in EMT - targeting regulatory nodes in
mesenchymal cells.


To combat cancer we have to avoid development of resistant and metastatic
disease. Breast cancer cells can switch from an epithelial to mesenchymal
phenotype through a process called epithelial to mesenchymal
transition/EMT. Emerging evidence suggests that this process is vital to
avoid treatment pressure and to gain metastatic capacity. Furthermore,
recent literature shows that metabolic reprogramming is an essential
attribute of cellular plasticity. Metabolic targeting could therefore be
an attractive possibility to prevent development of resistance and
metastatic dissemination. Here we tried to understand the metabolic
phenotype of EMT and the mechanisms linking the metabolic programs to
cellular plasticity. We also aimed to unravel compensatory metabolic
pathways and use the metabolic inhibitors to sensitize breast cancer
cells to conventional therapy.

To that end we have investigated the metabolic signature of the D492 EMT
cell model. The D492 cell line, established from human breast epithelial
progenitor cells, has retained stem cell characteristics and has the
ability to undergo EMT upon stromal (endothelial) influence, forming the
mesenchymal D492M cells. Thus, D492 cell system has preserved the natural
flexibility of breast epithelial progenitor cells, and constitutes a
unique platform to unravel the factors responsible for stromal
cell-induced cellular plasticity.

We show that metabolic reprogramming is essential for induction of the
mesenchymal phenotype using metabolomic profiling. Using Ultra
performance liquid chromatography Mass Spectrometry and gene expression
profiling we have created genome-scale metabolic models of D492 and
D492M. Our data show that glycolytic flux and oxidative phosphorylation
is higher in D492, however, D492M cells rely more on amino acid
anaplerosis and fatty acid oxidation to fuel the TCA cycle. Glutamine and
glucose tracing using NMR will give further insight into the difference
in metabolism between the two cell lines.

We have used these data to find metabolic targets that lock the cells in
the epithelial state or identify the means to induce lethality in the
mesenchymal cells.

Using the metabolic rewiring of EMT in the D492 cell model we can
understand the mechanisms responsible for treatment resistance, identify
compensatory metabolic pathways during treatment and find metabolic
inhibitors that will sensitize BC cells to conventional therapy.


