Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: YAP1 and COX2 converge to regulate SOX2 and urothelial cancer stem
cells.


Since cancer stem cell (CSC) are resistant to conventional chemotherapies
that efficiently eliminate bulk tumor cells, the elimination is
indispensable in treating malignant diseases. However, the underlying
mechanisms responsible for the urothelial CSC traits remain elusive. The
tumor microenvironment reinforces a chronic inflammatory state to support
tumor progression by triggering CSCs. In addition, chemotherapy-induced
apoptotic cells release COX2-derived PGE2, which in turn promotes CSC
expansion. Environmental risk factors, such as arsenic (As), cause
chronic inflammation and have been linked to urothelial carcinoma
incidence. We previously developed an in vitro stepwise model for
urothelial malignant transformation by As exposure in normal urothelial
cells line (HUC1), which may reveal the intimate connections between
carcinogenesis, chronic inflammation, and CSCs and provide clues to
develop novel therapeutic strategies.

As-exposed cells displayed more aggressive phenotype than As-unexposed
cells in a time dependent manner. In gene set enrichment analysis of
expression array of chronic As-exposed and unexposed cells; EGFR, COX2
and YAP1 were top-ranked oncogenic signature in As-exposed cells.
Moreover, As exposure induced malignant stemness properties. In stem
cell-specific RT-PCR array, SOX2 has been gradually overexpressed in line
with acquired spheroid formation and self-renewal capacities. SOX2 is
frequently overexpressed in numerous Urothelial carcinoma (UC) cell lines
as well as in As-exposed cells, especially in the spheroid cells. Stable
knockdown of SOX2 reduces in vitro CSCs properties and also in vivo
tumorigenicity. COX2/PGE2 and YAP1 signaling pathways are required to
accelerate SOX2 activity. Mechanistically, COX2/PGE2 signaling induces
promoter methylation of let-7 host gene via inducing DNA
methyltransferases, resulting in downregulated let-7 expression and
subsequent SOX2 expression. On the other hand, YAP1 induces COX2/PGE2
signaling-independent SOX2 expression, and these signaling mutually
compensate via negative feedback mechanism of SOX2, indicating that dual
blockade of these signaling is indispensable to eradicate urothelial
CSCs. The pharmacological inhibition of COX2 and YAP1 elicited
long-lasting therapeutic response by subverting CSCs expansion following
chemotherapy in both UC cells-derived and patient-derived xenograft
models. In basal type UC, EGFR-targeted therapy was effective in line
with previous reports, but the acquired resistance is inevitable. We
reveal that COX2 and YAP1 signaling determine acquired resistance to
treatment with the EGFR inhibitor via SOX2. Thus, our findings indicate
that the combined inhibition of YAP1 and COX2/PGE2 signaling could be an
effective therapeutic strategy to slow CSC expansion and UC progression.


