Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protocol optimization combining activatable nanodelivery with
immunotherapy in a murine breast cancer model.


Activatable nanotherapeutics provide the opportunity to deliver
anthracyclines to a well-controlled region of interest and therefore to
locally stimulate immunogenic cell death. Such a strategy can be combined
with immunotherapy for both local tumor control and creation of an
abscopal effect. Our group previously reported that combining local
administration of a CpG oligonucleotide with local release of doxorubicin
from a temperature-sensitive liposomal nanoparticle (TSL) led to the
elimination of directly treated lesions in a syngeneic murine model of
mammary adenocarcinoma.1 While this therapeutic approach increased the
numbers of tumor infiltrating CD8+ T lymphocytes in distant lesions and
extended survival, distant tumors returned with a growth delay of
approximately 14 days and T-regulatory cells were not reduced by
treatment. Therefore, checkpoint blockade of the programmed death-1
(PD-1) pathway (anti-PD-1) was incorporated in the protocol. CuDox-TSL
were prepared from DPPC:MPPC:DSPE-PEG2k (86:10:4) in the presence of
copper (II) gluconate and triethanolamine at 0.2 mg-drug/mg-lipid. A
complex between doxorubicin and copper was created to enhance the
circulation and stability of TSL and to reduce systemic toxicity. On day
21, mice with bilateral invasive neu deletion (NDL) tumors (~4 mm) were
treated with i.v. administration of CuDox-TSL at 6 mg doxorubicin/kg body
weight. Ultrasound (US) hyperthermia (1.1 MPa, 1.5 MHz, achieving 42°C
for 5 min before and 20 min after drug injection) triggered drug release.
Immediately after US, 100 µg of CpG-ODN 1826 was administered
intratumorally to the insonified tumor; anti-PD-1 (200 µg, i.p.) was
administrated three days later. Flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry
were performed on day 28 after one treatment with each component and
survival was assessed after treatment was repeated for three weeks.

While control mice survived 35 days, 50% of treated mice were tumor-free
after 100 days. All primary tumors and 50% of the contralateral tumors
regressed and were eliminated by day 63. With the incorporation of
immunotherapy, three doses of chemotherapy were sufficient to eliminate
all directly treated tumors, as compared with 8 doses without
immunotherapy. After a single treatment with each component, a
substantial change was observed in systemic immune cells, including a
significant increase in natural killer and dendritic cells in distant
lymph nodes, in CD8+ T cells in tumors and associated lymph nodes and in
IFNɣ-secreting CD4+ T cells in the treated tumor and distant lymph
nodes. The results demonstrate that activatable chemotherapy can be
paired with an immune adjuvant and PD-1 blockade to generate a curative
response in primary and distant tumors. Further, local chemotherapy, as
potentiated by activatable liposomes does not impede a systemic CD8+ T
cell response.

[1] Journal of Controlled Release (2015); 220: 253-264.


