Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Georgetown Database of Cancer (G-DOC): A web-based data
sharing platform for precision medicine.


Introduction An overarching goal of biomedical research is to improve the
use and dissemination of rapidly growing biomedical datasets to support
precision medicine. Individualized molecular profiling and the
identification of predictive biomarkers can powerfully inform the choice
of therapies for cancer patients. However, both require integration of
extensive molecular, clinical, and pharmacological data, often from
disparate and diverse sources. The Georgetown Database of Cancer (G-DOC)
was designed and engineered to be a unique multi-omics data analysis
platform to enable translational research and precision medicine.

Methods G-DOC is home to 61 datasets that contain data from over 10,000
patients across 14 diseases (10 cancers and 4 non-cancers). 1700+
researchers from over 48 different countries worldwide currently use the
platform. The data and tools in the G-DOC system have enabled over 40
research publications. G-DOC has the largest public collection of brain
cancer patients from NCI Rembrandt dataset (671 patients).G-DOC
integrates clinical, transcriptomic, metabolomic, microRNA, next
generation sequencing (NGS) data, and MRI medical images with
systems-level analysis tools into a single, user-friendly platform. The
“Variant Search” feature in G-DOC currently enables exploratory
analysis of mutations based on genes, chromosomes, and functional
location. A researcher can use this feature to 1) identify clinically
actionable mutations in their dataset 2) identify pathways that may be
affected by these mutations, and 3) identify novel mutations in their
dataset and explore their potential impact on protein function.

Results and Conclusion We are currently working on developing features to
support the import, integration, search, and retrieval of
CLIA/CAP-certified cancer molecular diagnostic (molDx) data. This will
enhance G-DOC’s interoperability with clinical and patient molecular
profiling data that may be already stored in other databases. Our vision
is to continuously improve and expand G-DOC with the long-term vision of
supporting integration of informatics techniques into everyday research
and practice.


