Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HMP19, a pancreatic cancer metastasis suppressor, is secreted in
extracellular vesicles and inhibits EGFR activity.


Pancreatic cancer is usually diagnosed when the cancer is already at an
advanced stage. The presence of metastases contributes to the poor
prognosis as do the limited treatment options, resulting in an urgent
need for early detection methods and novel treatments. HMP19 was
identified as a metastasis suppressor in pancreatic duct adenocarcinoma
(PDAC) using unbiased genome wide shRNA screen assay (Kurahara et al.
2016). HMP19 is localized to the membrane of Golgi apparatus and has been
implicated in the vesicular trafficking in neurons (Saberan-Djoneidi et
al. 1994). HMP19 is a predicted type II, single-pass transmembrane
protein with protein binding domains at the N- and C- terminals,
although, the physiological function of HMP19 remains undefined. Our lab
showed that HMP19 attenuates nuclear ERK1/2 activity in PDAC cells.
Furthermore, we found that ectopic HMP19 is secreted in the extracellular
vesicles (EVs) in non-metastatic PDAC cell line, Suit2 subclone 028
(S2-028), but not in metastatic PDAC cell line, S2-007. Furthermore,
silver staining and mass spectrometry showed that the EVs protein
profiles between S2-028 and S2-007 EVs are distinct. We hypothesize that
secreted HMP19 regulates cell migration and proliferation, and also
negatively regulates signaling pathway(s) upstream of ERK. To examine
effects of HMP19-containing EVs on parental cells, HMP19-containg EVs
were incubated with parental cells and proliferation and migration then
were quantified. HMP19-containing EVs treatment inhibited migration but
not proliferation of metastatic S2-007 cells, but not non-metastatic
S2-028 cells. We identified several proteins as HMP19 binding partners in
the co-immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry study and were
subsequently validated by co-immunoprecipitation followed by immunoblot.
HMP19 was found to interact with multiple proteins, including ERK
regulators such as MET and epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR). We
then investigate the role of HMP19 on the MET and EGFR signaling pathway.
Intriguingly, HMP19 down regulates EGFR phosphorylation and protein
expression in metastatic S2-007, but not non-metastatic S2-028 PDAC
cells. Moreover, HMP19 expression had no effect on phosphorylated and
total MET and Janus kinase (JAK) total protein levels. Altogether, the
data suggest that HMP19 may inhibit metastasis through down regulation of
EGFR signaling pathway. In conclusion, we showed that HMP19 is secreted
in EVs and these EVs attenuate PDAC cell migration, and mechanistically,
HMP19 down regulates EGFR in metastatic PDAC cells. Future studies will
further bridge the effects of HMP19 on the EGFR signaling cascade and the
extracellular HMP19-mediated inhibition of migration.


