Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low molecular weight pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD) monomers have
potent cytotoxicity in haematological tumor cells.


The pyrrolo[2,1-c][1,4]benzodiazepines (PBDs) have long been of interest
as potential chemotherapeutic agents due to their ability to form
covalent adducts within the minor groove of the DNA helix. The most
effective synthetic modifications to PBD cores have involved the
conjugation of two DNA-interactive moieties via their C8/C8’-positions
to create PBD dimers capable of cross-linking duplex DNA which improves
cytotoxicity. Research to date has focussed on adding substituents to the
C8-position of the PBD core to improve DNA-interaction and cytotoxicity.
All of these approaches tend to increase the molecular weight of the
compounds, although this has not prevented their successful development
to the clinic, either as stand-alone agents (e.g., SJG-136) or as a
component of Antibody-Drug Conjugates (ADCs) (e.g., SGN-CD33A). During a
structure-activity relationship (SAR) study, we embarked on a
“molecular pruning” exercise to sequentially reduce the length and
bulk of the C8-substituent of a PBD monomer expecting the cytotoxicity to
reduce with a decrease in length/bulk, and to establish the minimal
pharmacophore. Surprisingly, we found that reducing the length of the
C8-substituent maintained cytotoxicity and in some cases enhanced it. A
20-member library of short C8-substituted PBD monomers has been
synthesized featuring C8-substituents of various chemical composition and
length, with some containing aniline substituents. Cytotoxicity
evaluation in several tumour cell types (e.g., primary CLL, JJN-3 and
MDA-MB-231) was carried out, and low nanomolar to high picomolar IC50
values were obtained for several library members including DC-1-194 (IC50
= 4.2nM in CLL, and 0.79nM in MDA MB 231), DC-1-255 (IC50 = 9.5nM in CLL,
and 1.1nM in MDA MB 231), DC-1-253 (IC50 = 8.4nM in CLL, and 10nM in
JJN-3) and DC-1-275 (IC50 = 7.6nM in CLL, and 9.6nM in JJN-3).
Remarkably, many of these more-active compounds had very short
C8-substituents. HPLC and FRET based DNA binding studies were also
carried out, in order to confirm the capacity of these molecules to form
adducts with DNA. The observations reported here are significant, as they
add to an evolving understanding of the SAR of PBD monomer structures.
The results presented here may also have significance for the future
development of PBD-based therapeutic agents where there may be advantages
to working with lower molecular weight molecules.


