Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An ultrasensitive and highly reproducible hybridization
capture-based Next-Generation Sequencing clinical assay to enable
precision oncology in patients with solid tumors.


Sequencing whole cancer exome and whole genome provides useful
information to study cancer evolution. However, cost and amount of data
may become overwhelming. Enrichment capture-based methods to design
custom targeted gene panel have rapidly evolved recently in cancer
genomics arena. Custom targeted gene sequencing entails several
advantages (i.e., better quality, ethical, affordable, technically
suitable, personalized and reimbursable) for cancer patients over whole
exome and whole genome sequencing. With this in mind, and to enable
precision oncology in patients with solid tumors, we developed ICG100 2.0
panel, a hybridization capture-based next-generation sequencing assay for
targeted sequencing of all exons and flanking introns of 162 commonly
mutated cancer genes in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumors.
To establish ICG100 2.0 panel, we compared three commercially available
capture based technologies and evaluated reproducibility, sensitivity,
specificity and the detection limit for low-frequency variants using
internally developed bioinformatics pipeline. Cell lines, reference
standards/synthetic DNA and solid tumor samples with the known genetic
information was utilized in this analysis. Results were derived from
MiSeq and NextSeq platforms and cross-compared on other platforms,
including MassArray and ddPCR for establishing concordance and
uniformity. Intra and interrun replicates were utilized to assess the
quality, precision and reproducibility of variant calling. Mean depth of
coverage was observed at >300X with >99% sensitivity and specificity.
These findings and observations will guide other clinical laboratories to
establish new assay that require less DNA input, enzyme based
fragmentation and reduced preparation time. While we show that the three
capture based methods (after comparison) had an overall accuracy in SNP
and CNV detection similar to each other with minor differences, we
describe an approach to assess and establish the best assay from the
clinical standpoint to guide treatment decisions and match cancer
patients to the most appropriate clinical trials.


