Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CAR T cells targeting ICAM-1 trigger strong antitumor effects
against advanced human thyroid tumors.


Introduction:

Poorly differentiated thyroid cancer and anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC)
are rare yet inherently lethal malignancies with limited treatment
options. Many malignant tumors, including papillary thyroid cancer (PTC)
and ATC, are associated with increased expression of intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), providing a rationale for utilizing
ICAM-1-targeting agents for the treatment of aggressive types of thyroid
cancer. Therefore, we developed a third-generation chimeric antigen
receptor (CAR) targeting ICAM-1 to leverage adoptive T cell therapy as a
new treatment modality against advanced thyroid cancer.

Methods:

We created a firefly luciferase-expressing human ATC model in mice that
develops systemic metastases very rapidly. ATC engrafted mice were
treated with human peripheral blood T cells modified with a lentivirus
encoding an ICAM-1 specific CAR (ICAM-1-CAR) to investigate their
therapeutic efficacy. Tumor burden was longitudinally measured by whole
body bioluminescence imaging of luciferase-positive tumor cells.
Effector:target assays consisting of ICAM-1-CAR T cells co-cultured with
multiple malignant and non-malignant target cells were used to
investigate specific target cell death and ‘off-tumor’ toxicity in
vitro using luminescence and flow cytometry.

Results:

ICAM-1-CAR T cells demonstrated robust and specific killing of PTC and
ATC cell lines in vitro. Strikingly, despite heterogeneous expression of
ICAM-1 in ATC cell lines, addition of cytotoxic CAR T cells induced
increased ICAM-1 expression by T cell-derived interferon gamma such that
all cell lines became targetable by ICAM-1-CAR T cells. Patient-derived,
poorly differentiated PTC cells overexpressed ICAM-1 and were also mostly
eliminated by autologous ICAM-1 CAR T cells in vitro. In mice with
systemic ATC, a single administration of ICAM-1-CAR-T cells at a clinical
dose mediated significant tumor killing with a 100-fold reduction in
primary tumor burden compared to pre-treatment. Reductions in tumor
burden persisted for over 80 days and treated mice demonstrated
significantly improved survival without toxicity.

Conclusion:

Our findings are the first demonstration of the potential for CAR-T cell
therapy for metastatic, advanced thyroid cancers. ICAM-1-CAR T cells
demonstrated significant therapeutic efficacy in vitro and in vivo and
extended survival benefits in animal models.


