Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tryptophan 318/324, the target of C-terminal binding protein
(CtBP) inhibitors, plays a critical role in CtBP enzymatic activity,
oligomerization and transcriptional coregulation.


C-terminal Binding Proteins (CtBP) 1 and 2 constitute a family of
oncogenic transcriptional co-regulators overexpressed in tumor tissues
that are associated with worse prognostic outcome and aggressive tumor
characteristics in multiple cancer types. Specifically, CtBP has been
found to repress expression of genes responsible for apoptosis and EMT
(eg. BIK and CDH1) and promote expression of genes that partake in the
migration of cancer cells and those that are responsible for enhanced
drug resistance (eg. TIAM1 and MDR1). CtBP2 is also critically required
for colon cancer stem cell self-renewal. CtBP is unique among
transcription co-regulators in harboring a conserved D-isomer specific
2-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase (D2DH) domain, which reduces an alpha-keto
acid substrate to an alpha-hydroxy acid in the presence of NADH. The
presence of NADH also facilities oligomerization of CtBP, leading to
assembly of higher order complexes of CtBP with both DNA binding
transcription factors and histone modifying enzymes that then leads to
modulation target genes. We have identified
hydroxyimino-3-phenylpropanoic acid and its 4-chloro derivative (HIPP;
4-Cl-HIPP) as potent substrate competitive inhibitors of the CtBP
dehydrogenase (IC50’s=240nM, 180 nM), which also disrupt CtBP
oligomerization, promoter localization, and transcriptional regulation.
Co-crystallization of HIPP and CtBP1/2 indicated a strong π-π
interaction between the HIPP phenyl ring and the indolyl ring in
tryptophan W318/324 of CtBP1/2, indicating that this tryptophan is
critical to CtBP interaction with HIPP inhibitors, dehydrogenase
function, and quaternary structure. Of note W318/324, though conserved in
CtBP1/2, is unique among D2DH, suggesting that a better understanding of
W318/324 role and function in CtBP structure and function is critical to
optimizing design of inhibitors that targeting this evolutionary unique
residue among dehydrogenases. To further elucidate the mechanism of
action in catalysis and oligomerization, as well as functional importance
for transcription of CtBP2 W324, we analyzed enzyme kinetics,
oligomerization, transcriptional co-regulatory activity and cell
migration in a series of CtBP2 W324 mutants overexpressed in breast and
colon cancer cell lines with concomitant knockdown (siRNA) or knockout
(CRISPR/Cas9) of CtBP2. Our data demonstrates that mutation of W324
abrogated dehydrogenase activity, oligomerization, transactivation of the
validated CtBP target gene TIAM1 and induction of migration. In summary,
our findings suggest that the W324 residue is critical for CtBP2’s
function and its unique conservation in CtBP1/2 vs. other dehydrogenases
will allow the development of high specificity CtBP W318/324 inhibitors
to limit potential toxicity due to off target inhibition of related
metabolic dehydrogenases.


