Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel adenosine A2A receptor antagonist optimized for high
potency in adenosine-rich tumor microenvironment boosts antitumor
immunity.


High levels of extracellular adenosine in the tumor microenvironment are
known to play a significant role in tumor immune evasion and promote
tumor growth and metastasis. We defined the receptor(s) required for
mediating the effect of adenosine on immune cells within the tumor
microenvionment and report the characterization of a novel
Immuno-Oncology-dedicated adenosine receptor 2A antagonist that functions
in the high adenosine concentration found in tumors.

We first explored the expression of the four adenosine receptors in
primary human immune cells. A2A receptor was the main adenosine receptor
expressed by CD4 and CD8 T lymphocytes and monocytes, and the only one in
mature monocyte-derived dendritic cells and NK cells. A2B receptor was
poorly detected in T cells and monocytes, while A1 and A3 receptors were
never detected. Given these expression patterns, we further studied A2A
functions in primary human T lymphocytes and monocytes. Selective A2A
agonists such as CGS-21680 strongly suppressed cytokine production by
activated primary human T lymphocytes, thus highlighting that A2A is the
main effector receptor of the sensing of adenosine in tumors.

We further confirmed the elevated extracellular adenosine level in the
tumor microenvironment in several mouse and human tumors. High adenosine
levels correlated with strong tumoral expression of CD73, the enzyme that
converts AMP to adenosine. Interestingly, we showed that A2A receptor
antagonists designed for Parkinson’s disease dramatically lost potency
in a high adenosine environment ; our data indicated that a 30-fold dose
increase may be required for full target inhibition within tumors.
Therefore we developed a novel and potent A2A blocker with sub-nanomolar
Ki and IC50 in a cAMP assay and a more than 100-fold selectivity over
other adenosine receptors. Our lead compound kept a high potency in an
adenosine-rich environment and restored cytokine production even in the
presence of high concentrations of A2A agonists. iTeos inhibitor also
efficiently reversed AMP-mediated T cell suppression. Furthermore, our
compound rescued A2A receptor agonist-induced decrease of TNFα
production by primary human monocytes, and was able to potently increase
CD8 T cell cytotoxicity in a cytotoxicity assay with CD8 T cells as
effectors and cancer cells as targets.

These results suggest that iTeos new generation of A2A receptor
antagonist, designed to keep a high potency in the adenosine-rich tumor
microenvironment, may offer a new therapeutic opportunity in
Immuno-Oncology.


