Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New molecular evidence associating exposure to aristolochic acid
with urothelial cancers in South Korean patients: Implications for global
public health risk linked to carcinogenic herbal medicines.


Aristolochic acid (AA) is a potent nephrotoxin and carcinogen (IARC Group
1) associated with urothelial, hepatobiliary, and renal carcinomas.
Exposure to AA from dietary intake of traditional herbal medicines
containing Aristolochia species poses a global health hazard, yet also an
opportunity for disease prevention. Molecular epidemiology studies
employing sensitive and specific biomarkers for screening of populations
at risk are thus warranted.

Genome-scale studies established a characteristic mutational signature of
AA. Exploiting its unique features (predominant A>T transversions),
alongside the knowledge of key affected cancer genes, we devised a
cost-effective targeted resequencing (TRseq) method to detect AA etiology
in upper tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC) samples from South Korean
patients. Aristolochia species (e.g., A. contorta, Bunge) are included in
the Korean traditional pharmacopoeia although the local occurrence of
AA-associated cancers remains unexplored.

DNA from archived, paired kidney and UTUC samples of 16 Korean patients
was used for adduct and TRseq analyses. Thirty-one cancer genes,
previously found recurrently mutated in AA-induced UTUCs from Asia and
Europe, were selectively captured using SeqCap EZ enrichment kit
(Nimblegen Roche) and sequenced using Illumina MiSeq. Sets of UTUCs from
Croatia (harboring AA signature) and from US patients (unlikely to be
exposed) were included as respective positive and negative controls.
Somatic variants were called against the patient-matched non-tumor DNA,
using two distinct variant calling strategies.

Three out of 16 kidney cortex samples tested positive for aristolactam-dA
(AL-dA) adducts, indicative of past exposure to AA. One UTUC sample with
A>T-mutated TP53 harbored 32 A>T mutations across the 31-gene panel, and
another 8 cases, 3 of which were adduct-positive, harbored lower counts
of A>T mutations (up to 3 per gene panel per sample). The allelic
frequencies of the considered A>T mutations ranged between 10-83%. The
positive control samples exhibited a strong A>T signal while the US
samples were all A>T-negative, as expected.

We propose that the TRseq approach can detect AA-driven mutagenesis in
UTUC tumors, providing a sensitive complement to the AL-dA adduct
analysis, at low per-sample cost. Importantly, the presence of adducts
and AA signature mutations in South Korean UTUC cases highlights a
previously uncharacterized population at risk. The future use of TRseq,
either alone or in combination with adduct analysis, can address exposure
to AA in extended UTUC case series, thereby assisting in the design of
preventive measures against this global public health hazard.

Funding: IARC; SW is Recipient of research support from the Drs. Martin &
Dorothy Spatz Charitable Foundation; Henry and Marsha Laufer grant to
KGD, VSS, APG.


