Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PLCG2 C2-domain mutations co-occur with BTK and PLCG2 resistance
mutations in chronic lymphocytic leukemia undergoing treatment with the
BTK inhibitor ibrutinib.


Background: The Bruton agammaglobulinemia tyrosine kinase (BTK) activates
B-cell receptor signaling through activation of phospholipase C gamma 2
(PLCG2). Clinical resistance to the Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK)
inhibitor ibrutinib in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is highly
associated with emergence of the BTK C481 mutations that prevent
ibrutinib covalent binding. PLCG2 mutations also occur in these
ibrutinib-resistant samples but the spectrum of mutations and their
occurrence with BTK changes have not been fully delineated.

Materials and Methods: All peripheral blood samples with adequate depth
of sequencing coverage were included from CLL patients receiving
ibrutinib (with or without other therapies) that were submitted from Ohio
State University (OSU) to the OSU James Polaris Molecular Laboratory.
Genomic DNA was extracted from negatively selected B cells and deep
sequencing of the entire coding regions of BTK and PLCG2 performed using
a custom Ion Torrent Ampliseq panel. A mean depth of greater than 1000X
was obtained with hotspot mutations validated down to 1% variant allele
fraction (VAF) in the B cell preparations using orthogonal
mutation-specific detection methods.

Results: Among 1063 CLL samples from 380 patients who received ibrutinib,
BTK C481 resistance mutations were identified in 79 (20.8%) patients
including 20 patients that also had co-occurring PLCG2 mutations. 11
patients (2.9%) had PLCG2 mutations without accompanying BTK C481
alterations for a cumulative incidence of PLCG2 mutations in 8.2% of
ibrutinib-treated patients. These included previously described mutations
in the SH2 and SH3 domain of PLCG2 (R665W, S707F, A708P and L845F) but
also previously uncharacterized mutations in the PLCG2 C2 domain that
were seen in 12 patients (3.2%). C2 domain mutations, always seen in
association with another PLCG2 and/or BTK resistance mutation, affected
codons 1140-1144 that include the highly conserved aspartic acid residues
that bind calcium and mediate membrane localization in other C2-domain
containing proteins. In sequential samples, PLCG2 C2-domain mutations
tracked at similar levels to the co-occurring BTK and PLCG2 resistance
mutations indicating their presence in the same population of CLL cells.

Conclusions: Mutations in three different PLCG2 structural domains
commonly co-occur with BTK C481 mutations. The identification of PLCG2
mutations in the calcium-regulated C2 domain expands the possible
mechanisms that can produce PLCG2 activation following ibrutinib
treatment. The diversity of recurrent mutations observed supports the
need for complete PLCG2 sequencing for full characterization of
ibrutinib-treated CLL samples.


