Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A translational phosphoproteomic approach to study differences in
KRAS signaling in pancreatic, colorectal and lung cancers.


Aims To understand any context-dependent differences in signaling
pathways between pancreatic (PAN), colorectal (CR) and lung (LU) cancers
with KRAS mutations using a targeted phosphoproteomic approach in cell
lines and patient-derived cancer cells exposed to targeted anticancer
drugs ex-vivo.

Materials and Methods We studied a panel of 30 KRAS mutant cell lines: 10
PAN, 10 CR and 10 LU cell lines. Cancer cells were also
immuno-magnetically isolated from pleural effusions and ascites of
patients with KRAS mutant CR and LU cancer and exposed to a DMSO control
and clinically relevant concentrations of PI3K (pictilisib), AKT
(AZD5363), mTOR (everolimus), EGFR (gefitinib), BRAF (vemurafenib), MEK
(trametinib) and HSP90 (luminespib) inhibitors for 1 hr. Dynamic changes
in a panel of 52 relevant phosphoproteins were studied using the Luminex
200 platform. Hierarchical clustering and logistic regression were used
to find differences in dynamic changes in phosphoproteins between KRAS
mutant, PAN, CR and LU cancer cells.

Results Supervised clustering studying exposure to different drugs
revealed that when exposed to the PI3K inhibitor, pictilisib, KRAS mutant
LU cancers did not significantly cluster together; p=0.008, p=0.104
following Benjamini-Hochberg correction. Independently, logistic
regression showed significant differences in signaling of KRAS mutant
cells when exposed to the PI3K inhibitor, pictilisib. PAN and CR cancers
showed an increase in p-MEK while LU cancer cells did not; p=0.0195. LU
cancer cell lines showed significantly more reduction of p-AKT compared
to PAN and CR cell lines when exposed to the PI3K inhibitor; p=0.0423. As
expected, exposure to vemurafenib increased p-MEK levels across the
majority of the KRAS mutant cell lines, however compensatory reductions
in p-mTOR levels were seen significantly more in PAN and CR cell lines
and not in LU cell lines; p=0.0084. The dynamic phosphoprotein changes
caused by pictilisib were validated in cancer cells isolated from serous
effusions of 3 KRAS mutant LU and 4 KRAS mutant CR cancer patients.
Validation of these findings using multiple other inhibitors and
time-points is ongoing.

Interpretation/conclusions We hypothesise that the significantly greater
reduction in p-AKT and less increase of compensatory p-MEK caused by PI3K
inhibition in KRAS mutant LU cells compared to KRAS mutant PAN and CR
cell lines represents preferential signaling of these cells through the
PI3K pathway. Increase in p-MEK driven by BRAF inhibitors caused a
reduction in p-mTOR in PAN and CR but not in LU cell lines also
indicating preferential dependence of signaling in KRAS mutant lung
cancer cells through the PI3K pathway. These findings are important while
designing clinical trials of KRAS mutant cancers and more broadly to
precision medicine where mutation status independent of tissue context is
often used.


