Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug discovery for NF1-associated malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors using the zebrafish model.


Children and young adults with type 1 neurofibromatosis (NF1) are at risk
to develop plexiform neurofibromas, which can undergo malignant
transformation to malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs).
MPNSTs are among the most frequently occurring sarcomas in children and
young adults and are especially problematic in NF1 patients. Currently,
complete surgical excision is the only curative therapy for
NF1-associated MPNST, but these tumors are often not completely
resectable. Therefore, it is very important to identify promising drugs
that can be rapidly moved into clinical trials to improve the therapy of
patients with MPNSTs. We have developed a faithful zebrafish model of
NF1-associated MPNST by using genome engineering to develop zebrafish
lines harboring loss-of-function mutations of the duplicated nf1a and
nf1b genes and p53. Our nf1 and p53 deficient zebrafish models develop
MPNSTs that are very similar to human NF1-associated MPNST, and thus are
ideal for experiments to test the efficacy of FDA-approved small molecule
drugs in vivo. To test the FDA-approved drugs for activity against MPNST
tumor cells, about 100 Sox10:mCherry expressed MPNST primary tumor cells
were transplanted into dechorionized 2 day-post-fertilization (dpf)
larval fish using a micro-injector. MPNST-implanted embryos were exposed
to individual test compounds added to the fish water at a range of
concentrations and to the vehicle control. After 4-days of treatment,
quantitative assessment of the remaining mCherry-labeled tumor cell
numbers were measured using the ImageJ software for each treated embryo.
Currently, trametinib and sunitinib caused marked antitumor effects
indicated by reduced numbers of mCherry-labeled nf1-deficient MPNST cells
compared to the DMSO control in this study. We are now applying this
embryonic implantation assay to identify combinations of FDA-approved
drugs that have a high degree of efficacy against MPNST and can be
rapidly “repurposed” to improve the treatment of this disease.


