Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The prognostic relevance of inflammatory cytokines and growth
factors elaborated from adipose-derived stem cells in breast cancer.


Introduction: Given the high rates of obesity and aggressive breast
cancers, it is paramount to understand how adipose tissue supports the
tumor microenvironment. We previously found that adipose-derived stem
cells cultured with triple-negative tumor cells enhanced the expression
of numerous pro-inflammatory cytokines. This finding is significant as it
could explain, in part, how obesity contributes to worse outcomes in
breast cancer. To further expand this study, we probed the Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) breast invasive carcinoma dataset for the expression
profiles of the inflammatory cytokines we found to be highly up-regulated
in vitro. We predicted TCGA data would demonstrate a correlation between
cytokine overexpression and worse clinical scenarios.

Methods: Cytokines and growth factors were measured in the media of
adipose stromal cells and MDA-MB-231 tumor cells via membrane-based
antibody array. To validate clinical significance, we compared each
cytokine’s mRNA expression profile, available from primary tumor
samples of TCGA breast invasive carcinoma dataset (n = 1,005), to indices
of tumor progression and survival status. For survival analysis, samples
were dichotomized as high or low expression by individual cytokines (z
score ≥ 1.5). Cytokine and growth factor expression was further
stratified according to molecular subtype of breast cancer (luminal A,
luminal B, HER2, triple negative) and receptor status. Ingenuity pathway
analysis (IPA) was performed to identify candidate markers related to
obesity or inflammation.

Results: High levels of FGF7 and CCL5 protein were found in the
conditioned media of tumor and adipose stem cell co-cultures and together
they showed a significant impact on breast cancer survival within TCGA
data. FGF7, CCL5, together with CCL2, IL6, and IL6R were further analyzed
for expression across molecular subtypes of breast cancer. IL6R, CCL5,
and CCL2 expression varied significantly between breast cancer subtypes,
with mean expression highest in triple-negative tumors. After
dichotomizing the samples for estrogen receptor status, IL6R, CCL5, and
CCL2 showed significantly higher mean expression in ER negative tumors.
Greater expression of these cytokines in tumors was correlated with
reduced patient survival in triple-negative tumors and ER negative
subtypes. IPA analysis indicated IL6, IL6R, CCL5, and CCL2, but not FGF7,
cooperate through inflammatory pathways to promote tumor progression.

Conclusions: Genomic data analysis supports in vitro findings that IL6R,
CCL5, and CCL2 overexpression, either independently or synergistically,
predict a worse prognosis in breast cancer. For adipose-driven, hormone
receptor negative breast tumors, these cytokines and growth factors could
serve as novel therapeutic targets. (Supported by NIH P20GM103434 and
NIGMS U54GM104942)


