Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-specific PI3K inhibition via nanoparticle targeted delivery
in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.


Purpose: PI3K-pathway activation is the second most common genetic
abnormality occurring in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
Mutation or amplification of PIK3CA, the gene coding for the p110α
subunit of PI3K, occur in 34%-56% of HNSCC and there is evidence that
targeting PI3Kα in these tumors can be radiosensitizing. Small molecule
kinase inhibitors of PI3Kα are showing promising activity. However, the
use of this molecule is limited by serious side effects such as
hyperglycemia, diarrhea and rush. In this study we aimed to apply novel
nanotechnology for targeted drug delivery via the cell adhesion molecule
P-selectin, which was previously shown to be overexpressed in tumor
microvasculature. Furthermore, P-selectin is up regulated following
radiation therapy (RT), which could enhance drug delivery using targeted
nanoparticles.

Experimental design: We explored the efficacy and specificity of targeted
delivery of BYL719, a potent alpha-specific PI3K inhibitor, using
nanoparticles that selectively target P-selectin present in the tumor
microvasculature in PIK3CA-mutated HNSCC. We compared the antitumor
effects of nanoparticle delivery versus standard oral gavage with free
drug in PIK3CA mutated HNSCC cell line- and patient-derived xenografts
(PDXs). In addition, we compared blood glucose and insulin levels between
standard BYL719 administration and nanoparticle drug delivery at
different time points after treatment. Furthermore, we sought to evaluate
the radiosensitizing properties of BYL719 when combined with fractionated
RT of 5X4Gy.

Results: P-selectin targeted delivery of 50 mg/kg/week BYL719 resulted in
a significant tumor growth delay, which was comparable to the standard
drug administration of 350 mg/kg/week (50 mg/kg/daily). While blood
glucose and insulin levels were spiking after standard oral gavage of
BYL719, these parameters were virtually unchanged upon nanoparticle
administration of the drug. The radiosensitizing abilities of low-dose
nanoparticle-linked BYL719 were comparable to the drug concentrations
used in standard daily BYL719 administration. When given concomitantly
with fractionated RT, both methods showed robust enhancement of
radiotherapy response in all the models tested resulting in durable
control of tumor growth.

Conclusions: P-selectin targeted delivery of a PI3Kα inhibitor resulted
in inhibition of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway without affecting glucose or
insulin levels. The magnitude of pathway inhibition was sufficient to
radiosensitize several HNSCC animal models. This novel targeting strategy
could be translated to the clinic to treat patients with PIK3CA activated
and radioresistant HNSCC tumors sparing most of the systemic adverse
effects of PI3K inhibition.


