Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decomposing oncogenic transcriptional signatures to generate maps
of divergent cellular states.


The systematic sequencing of the cancer genome has provided a powerful
framework for identifying genetic alterations in cancer. However, a
deeper understanding of the functional consequences of these alterations
is necessary to guide appropriate therapeutic strategies. Here, we
describe Onco-GPS (OncoGenic Positioning System), a data-driven analysis
framework, and associated experimental and computational methodology, to
organize individual tumor samples with shared oncogenic alterations onto
a reference map defined by their underlying cellular states. Using this
approach, we generated series of RAS/MAPK sub-signatures that reflect
known and novel downstream pathways. These sub-signatures were then used
to classify KRAS and BRAF mutant cancers into sub groups or cell states,
as represented in the novel visual paradigm “OncoGPS map”. OncoGPS
approach was first applied to cancers with BRAF mutations. The approach
not only accurately classified three groups of BRAF mutant cancers that
aligned with sensitivity to BRAF inhibitors, but also identified
resistance mechanisms associated with each state, validating the overall
approach. OncoGPS also identified four major cell states associated with
KRAS mutant cancers. Further characterization of the four cell states
showed that multiple molecular features representing epithelial-EMT
states and activation of NF-κB pathway delineated two major “axes”
of KRAS mutant cancers. In addition to the pathways and cell states
defined in each group, the OncoGPS approach is able to identify effective
drug combinations which was experimentally tested and confirmed. These
results show that the Onco-GPS is an effective analytic framework to
explore the complex landscape of oncogenic cellular states across
cancers, and a powerful framework to summarize knowledge, establish
relationships, and generate more effective disease models for research or
as part of individualized precision medicine paradigms.


