Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Bcl-2 in hematological cancer formation.


B cell leukemia/lymphoma 2 (BCL-2) is a 26 kilodalton, amphipathic,
anti-apoptotic protein located on the outer mitochondrial membrane. BCL-2
interacts with other anti-apoptotic and pro-apoptotic factors in order to
regulate apoptosis. If a structural change occurs on the BCL-2 gene,
overexpression of the BCL-2 protein can result. This causes a change in
the ratio of BCL-2 to its BCL-2 Homologous 3 (BH3) ligands, preventing
the release of the apoptotic signal. The primary change associated with
BCL-2 overexpression in lymphomas is a t(14;18) chromosomal
translocation, which causes an increase in BCL-2 transcription. The
upregulation of the oncogene allows for the survival of the mutated B
cells by raising the apoptotic threshold, which then dislodges regular
lymphocytes in the bone marrow or lymph nodes. Lack of cell death due to
overexpression of BCL-2 has been linked to hematological malignancies,
specifically lymphomas and myelomas. Both B-lymphocytic cancers can
result from alterations of the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus on
chromosome 14. While BCL2 translocation can cause Follicular Lymphoma,
BCL2 over-expression is observed in many other tumor types and likely
contributes to cancer progression and drug resistance in these tumors.
Treatments to inhibit BCL-2 include attempts at activation and
overexpression of the pro apoptotic BH3 proteins, BCL-2 Associated X
Protein (BAX) and BCL-2 Associated K protein (BAK), and creation of BH3
mimetics. Indeed, the FDA approved the BCL2 inhibitor Venetoclax
(ABT-199) earlier this year for the treatment of Chronic Lymphocytic
Leukemia. These treatments could help cause cancer cell death by binding
to targeted anti-apoptotic proteins and causing the signal for apoptosis
to be released. This could neutralize the cancerous effects of the BCL-2
oncogene upregulation. Walton High School SMART (Students Modeling A
Research Topic) Team used the computer program JMOL to create a 3D
printed model of BCL-2 and composed a review poster of our secondary
research to investigate and demonstrate the relationship between the
structure and function of this molecule.


