Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplexing done differently: flexible, sensitive, and accurate
detection of miRNA and protein analytes using Firefly particle technology.


Detection of molecular biomarkers in biological fluids is used as an
indicator of normal biological processes, pathogenic processes, and
response to therapeutic intervention1,2. Using a combined signature of
multiple biomarkers can better account for patient and epidemiological
heterogeneity, and provide a more accurate indication of patient health2.
This has necessitated the development of technologies that can be used
for multiplex biomarker profiling directly from biofluids such as plasma,
serum, and urine. Conventional assays consume excessive quantities of
precious clinical samples, time and budget when used for discovery and
validation of multi-analyte biomarker signatures. To address this need,
we developed the Firefly Technology platform, which allows for sensitive
and accurate detection of up to 75 protein analytes or 68 miRNAs directly
from a biological sample. The Firefly platform uses patented Firefly®
hydrogel particles and a three-region encoding design that allows for
true, in-well multiplexing, providing flexibility over which analytes can
be quantified in the same well and allowing for custom panel design. For
the detection of protein analytes, the Firefly immunoassays use
high-performance matched antibody pairs that reduce cross reactivity
between individual analytes, provide up to 5 logs dynamic range, and
typically demonstrate single-digit pg/ml sensitivity, while requiring
only 12.5 µl biofluid input. Similarly, the Firefly microRNA assay can
reliably detect as few as 1000 microRNA copies per sample with a linear
dynamic range of ~5 logs, and without the need of prior RNA purification.
This assay utilizes single step RT-PCR signal amplification using
universal primers, thus leveraging PCR sensitivity while eliminating the
need for separate reverse transcription reactions and mitigating
amplification biases introduced by target-specific qPCR. The Firefly
assays have been validated in a wide range of biological samples
including plasma, serum, urine and cell culture supernatant, providing
experimental flexibility. The 96well plate assay format enables
high-throughput screening of samples, with readout conducted on standard
flow cytometers, thereby omitting the need for complex and expensive
dedicated instrumentation. Finally, the integrated Firefly Analysis
Workbench software enables easy and rapid data analysis, visualization,
and export in under ten minutes, and includes key features such as
standard curve analysis and publication-quality heatmaps and graphs. Here
we present data from several studies investigating cytokine profiling in
human and rodent samples, and circulating and tumor microRNA profiles,
using the Firefly Platform. Together, this novel combination of
bioinformatics tools and multiplex, high-sensitivity assays enables rapid
discovery and validation of biomarker signatures from fluid samples.


