Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A targeted RNA-seq assay to measure activating ER mutations and
ER/PR-associated gene expression predicts sensitivity to endocrine
therapy for metastatic breast cancer.


Background: We developed SET4 as a targeted, droplet-based,
next-generation RNA sequencing assay to measure both the SETER/PR index
of gene expression and the percent of estrogen receptor (ER) transcripts
with point mutation in the ligand-binding domain (LBD) in metastatic
biopsies of Stage IV breast cancer. The SETER/PR index (31 genes) is a
cumulative measure of gene expression for transcripts associated with ER
and progesterone receptor (PR), excluding those with a direct role in
proliferation. High SETER/PR could indicate increased sensitivity to
endocrine therapy, whereas LBD mutations indicate resistance but might
also induce high SETER/PR.

Methods: Targeted needle biopsies from a metastatic site were
prospectively obtained from 82 patients with HR+/HER2- breast cancer at
time of any progression event, and preserved in RNAlater. Samples were
prepared for targeted sequencing on a MiSeq by combining purified total
RNA with SET4 primers and RT-PCR master mix into single
molecule-formatted picodroplets using a RainDrop Source instrument,
followed by thermal cycling and sample indexing. Calculated SETER/PR
index and percent ER transcripts with LBD mutations were evaluated as
continuous variables and compared to progression-free and overall
survival using Cox regression analysis with log-rank test, if the next
treatment after biopsy included endocrine therapy.

Results: The average read depth for the LBD of the ER transcript was
33,475X (range: 1230-180,889X), confidently detecting mutation at 1%
frequency. LBD mutations were identified in 17% (14/82) of metastases
(range of mutated transcripts 1%-98%). LBD mutations (>10% of
transcripts) were only observed in metastases with higher SETER/PR (above
the median). In patients who next received endocrine therapy (n=58),
higher SETER/PR predicted longer progression-free (PFS) (HR=0.37,
p=0.0004, Δ median PFS 9 months) and overall survival (OS) (HR=0.49,
p=0.03). The predictions were more pronounced in patients without LBD
mutation (PFS HR=0.32, p=0.0001, Δ median PFS 13 months; OS HR=0.42,
p=0.01). Currently, there are insufficient cases with LBD mutation for
reliable survival analysis.

Conclusion: The SET4 assay measured the percent of ER transcripts with
activating LBD mutation (≥1% prevalence) and also downstream
ER/PR-related transcription. High SETER/PR predicted longer PFS and OS
with endocrine therapy. While activating LBD mutations may be associated
with endocrine resistance of Stage IV cancer, they were associated with
high SETER/PR index. Consequently, metastatic cancers with high SETER/PR
index and no LBD mutation in ER transcripts were particularly sensitive
to endocrine therapy. This single assay unraveled a possible interaction
between genotype, phenotype, and treatment outcome; and is currently
being evaluated in a larger cohort of patients.


