Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of G1T48, a novel orally bioavailable selective estrogen
receptor degrader (SERD), and the CDK4/6 inhibitor, G1T38, on tumor
growth in animal models of endocrine resistant breast cancer.


Background: The combination of targeting the CDK4/6 and ER signaling
pathways with palbociclib and fulvestrant is a proven therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of ER positive breast cancer. However, the
poor physicochemical properties of fulvestrant require monthly
intramuscular injections to patients, which limit the pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic activity of the compound. Therefore, an orally available
compound that more rapidly reaches steady state may lead to a better
clinical response in patients. Here we report the preclinical
characterization of G1T48, a novel, orally bioavailable, non-steroidal
small molecule inhibitor of ERα, which is a potent, selective antagonist
that down regulates ERα in vitro and in vivo in ER-positive models of
breast cancer.

Methods: Breast cancer cells expressing clinically relevant ESR1
mutations (ER-Y537S, ER-D538G) were threated with G1T38, G1T48, and
mechanistically distinct SERMs/SERDs and cellular proliferation was
assessed by measuring DNA content (Hoechst dye). Ovariectomized nu/nu
mice bearing xenograft tumors of clinically relevant tamoxifen (TamR) and
aromatase (long term estrogen deprived) resistant ER+ breast cancer were
treated with G1T38 and G1T48, alone or in combination, with clinically
relevant comparators. Time to progression and tumor volume were assessed
over a 4 week dosing period.

Results: G1T38 and G1T48 significantly inhibited cellular proliferation
of MCF7 breast cancer cells bearing endocrine resistant ER mutations,
ER-Y537S and ER-D538G. G1T48 treatment led to dramatic reductions in ER
protein levels. Importantly, tumor growth inhibition was observed in
mouse models of sensitive and resistant human breast cancer when G1T48
was dosed as a single agent or in combination with G1T38, a potent,
selective CDK4/6 inhibitor.

Conclusions: G1T38, a novel CDK4/6 inhibitor, and G1T48, a novel SERD,
either alone or in combination, demonstrated highly potent inhibition of
tumor growth in animal models of tamoxifen and aromatase resistance.
G1T48 also demonstrated activity in models of endocrine resistance
mediated by ER mutation. G1T48 is currently completing IND enabling
studies.


