Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic modulators show differential activity on lung
adenocarcinoma cells with loss-of-function mutations of SWI/SNF protein
SMARCA4.


SWI/SNF is a multiprotein chromatin remodeler with ATP-dependent
activities leading to selective gene expression, DNA repair,
recombination and replication. Various sequencing efforts indicated that
nearly 20% of cancers bear mutations in at least one subunit of the
complex. One of the crucial regulators of the complex is SMARCA4, a
member of SWI/SNF family of helicases with ATPase activities, which are
thought to regulate transcription of certain genes by altering the
chromatin structure. SMARCA4 is mutated in virtually all cases of small
cell carcinoma of the ovary and SMARCA4 is fourth the most frequently
mutated gene in lung adenocarcinoma. High occurrence of inactivating
mutations prompted several screenings projects focused on synthetic
lethality interactions with other proteins, which led to the
identification of SMARCA2 as an essential gene in SMARCA4 mutated
cancers. This vulnerability could be potentially exploited
therapeutically and several groups managed to identify potent ligands of
SMARCA2 bromodomain. Surprisingly these molecules were inactive in
SMARCA4 mutant cells, however additional studies indicated that ATPase
rather than bromodomain is a target for novel compounds with anticancer
activities. Overall, these results revealed functional complexity of
SMARCA2 and SMARCA4 in cancer cells. In order to characterize molecular
consequences of SMARCA2 silencing in SMARCA4 mutant lung adenocarcinoma
cells, we have carried out a series of gene knockdown experiments,
followed by transcriptional profiling by RNAseq and analysis of
posttranslational histone modifications. These studies indicated rapid
and irreversible loss of viability in SMARCA4 mutant cells after SMARCA2
gene silencing. Interestingly double SMARCA2/SMARCA4 knockdown in SMARCA4
WT cells has not resulted in lowered viability. Transcriptional profiling
of SMARCA2 knockdown in SMARCA4 mutated cells revealed broad,
predominantly repressory effects on gene expression levels. Gene set
enrichment analysis showed significant inhibitory effects of SMARCA2
knockdown, particularly on transcripts which could be induced after
reintroduction of SMARCA4. Furthermore MS/MS analysis indicated global
rearrangements in histone epigenetic marks. These results prompted us to
test activity of small-molecule epigenetic modulators, including DNA
Methyltransferases (DNMTs), Histone Acetyltransferases (HATs), Histone
Deacetylases (HDACs), Histone Methyltransferases (HMTs), Histone
Demethylases (HDMs) and a distinct set of chromatin readers,
bromodomains. Differential activity of these compounds provides a strong
basis for novel strategies for the treatment of cancers with
loss-of-function mutations of SMARCA4.


