Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amine and lipid metabolites are enriched in advanced prostate
cancer.


Background: Obesity is an established risk factor for advanced prostate
cancer. We performed whole body metabolomics profiling in pre-diagnostic
blood specimens to identify metabolites associated with risk of advanced
prostate cancer, and assess the extent to which obesity modifies this
association.

Methods: Our study was nested within the prospective US Health
Professionals Follow-up Study during the study period 1993 and 2014. We
selected 212 advanced prostate cancer (≥ stage T3b, distant metastasis
or cancer death during follow-up) patients and 212 matched controls for
whom pre-diagnostic bloods were collected with a median 5.5 years prior
to diagnosis. Metabolomics profiling was performed at the Broad Institute
using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to assay 295 known
metabolites. We estimated odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals using
multivariable conditional logistic regression to examine associations of
individual metabolites and cancer risk. We also performed pathway
analyses using a method adapted from gene set enrichment analysis to
identify metabolite classes associated with advanced prostate cancer.

Results: We identified 29 circulating metabolites in pre-diagnostic
bloods that were significantly associated with advanced prostate cancer
risk. These metabolites included carnitines and phospholipids,
diacylglycerols (DAG) and triacylglycerols (TAG). Using pathway analyses,
we found metabolites in DAG and TAG pathways were highly significantly
(FDRResults: We identified 29 circulating metabolites in pre-diagnostic
bloods that were significantly associated with advanced prostate cancer
risk. These metabolites included carnitines and phospholipids,
diacylglycerols (DAG) and triacylglycerols (TAG). Using pathway analyses,
we found metabolites in DAG and TAG pathways were highly significantly
(FDR<10-8) enriched in men with advanced prostate cancer. 166 of the 295
metabolites were significantly (pResults: We identified 29 circulating
metabolites in pre-diagnostic bloods that were significantly associated
with advanced prostate cancer risk. These metabolites included carnitines
and phospholipids, diacylglycerols (DAG) and triacylglycerols (TAG).
Using pathway analyses, we found metabolites in DAG and TAG pathways were
highly significantly (FDR<10-8) enriched in men with advanced prostate
cancer. 166 of the 295 metabolites were significantly (p<0.001)
associated with obesity. When we stratified by a man’s obesity status,
we observed unique metabolomics profiles associated with advanced
prostate cancer. Circulating amines (including carnitines) were
associated with advanced prostate cancer in overweight men while lipid
metabolites (including DAGs and TAGs) were associated with advanced
cancer in the healthy weight men.

Conclusion: Altered levels of TAG and DAG metabolites in prediagnostic
bloods are strongly associated with an increased risk of advanced
prostate cancer, independent of obesity. The finding that circulating
lipids were specifically associated with advanced prostate cancer in
healthy weight patients suggests there are men with normal body mass
index but who are metabolically obese. The specific lipid metabolite
classes enriched in advanced prostate cancer support the hypothesis that
obesity acts through dysregulation of liver fatty acid metabolism rather
than through metabolic actions of the adipose tissue itself.


