Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unbiased efficacy-based screening of small molecules highly
selective against hematological malignancies revealed inhibitor of NAD
synthesis.


Effective anticancer drugs can be directed against cell lineage-specific,
rather than tumor-specific, targets (i.e., androgen receptor, CD20,
etc.). We sought to conduct systematic search for novel agents that are
selectively cytotoxic to hematopoietic (HP) malignancies presumably
targeting HP lineage-specific survival factors. Cell-based screening and
subsequent validation of small-molecules in a broad panel of HP and
non-HP cancer cell lines followed by a hit-to lead optimization of the
selected class of compounds has led to a molecule named OT-82
characterized by highly selective cytotoxicity against all HP-derived
cancers tested (14 cell lines, representing human AML, ALL, CML and
lymphoma cells) active within single nanomolar range of concentrations.
OT-82 killed sensitive cells by induction of apoptosis and was up-to
20-fold more toxic to HP-derived than to solid tumor-derived cell lines
and normal primary cells of HP and non-HP origin. OT-82-based affinity
chromatography of cell lysates followed by mass spectrometry led to the
identification of nicotinamide phosphorybosyltransferase (NAMPT) as the
OT-82 target. NAMPT catalyzes the rate limiting step in a major pathway
of synthesis of NAD, an energy metabolism mediator and essential cofactor
of PARP and sirtuins. NAMPT treatment caused dramatic reductions in
cellular NAD levels. Nicotinic acid (NA, vitamin B3), a substrate for the
alternative NAD synthesis pathway, protected cells from the cytotoxic
effects of OT-82. Oral administration of OT-82 was efficacious in
subcutaneous and systemic xenograft models of human AML, ALL,
erythroleukemia and multiple myeloma including complete response in
several models. Therapeutic doses of OT-82 in mice were significantly
lower than maximal tolerated dose (MTD); toxicities observed at doses
above MTD were largely limited to HP and lymphoid organs. Toxicity
profile of OT-82 determined in GLP in mice and non-human primates was
favorably different from that reported for other reported clinical stage
NAMPT inhibitors and did not involve any detectable retinal or cardiac
toxicity. These results indicate high lineage specific and malignant
transformation-specific dependence of HP neoplastic cells on NAMPT,
presumably due to the strong addiction of this cell type on the NAD
levels, and highlight OT-82 as a prospective clinical candidate for the
treatment of hematological malignancies.


