Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AML patient clustering by super-enhancers reveals an RARA
associated transcription factor signaling partner.


Prior studies have shown that the RARA gene is associated with a
super-enhancer (SE) and has upregulated mRNA expression in a subset of
AML patients. Furthermore, this has been found to confer increased
sensitivity to SY-1425, a potent and selective RARα agonist. We sought
to better characterize the cell state and transcription factor circuitry
in these RARA-high AML cells. Clustering of 62 primary AML patient
samples based on their genome wide SE maps identified six discrete
clusters. RARA-high patients partitioned principally into cluster 2, and
to a lesser extent 1, suggesting that RARA upregulation is associated
with a specific transcription factor (TF) network and cell state. To
start unraveling the TF circuitry in the RARA-high cluster, we
investigated which other TFs were SE associated with clusters 1 and 2. In
particular, interferon regulatory factor 8 (IRF8) was found to be
strongly associated with clusters 1 and 2 by SE and mRNA expression,
similar to RARA. Moreover, the expression of both genes is correlated in
primary patient samples. IRF8 is involved in interferon signaling and
previous studies have shown crosstalk between interferon and retinoic
acid signaling. Furthermore, aberrant IRF8 pathway signaling is
implicated in AML and CML pathogenesis. The tight clustering of RARA and
IRF8 in patient subgroups defined by genome wide enhancer maps suggests
RARα and IRF8 may form an integrated transcriptional circuit. Indeed,
treatment with SY-1425 was found to strongly induce interferon-like gene
expression changes in AML cells with high RARA or IRF8 levels, including
the tumor suppressive IFN responsive gene IRF1. While RARA-high AML cell
line models have been previously shown to respond to SY-1425, we found
that models with high IRF8 expression and low levels of RARA were also
found to respond to SY-1425. Such IRF8-high, RARA-low AML cell lines
showed activation of similar transcriptional pathways as RARA-high cell
lines in response to SY-1425 based on GSEA. IRF8-high AML also had
comparable low nM EC50 anti-proliferative effects following SY-1425
treatment. In addition, SY-1425 was found to elicit differentiation in
both RARA-high and IRF8-high AML cell lines based on flow cytometry.
While RARA and IRF8 expression appear correlated, this data suggests that
IRF8 levels may predict for sensitivity to SY-1425 in addition to RARA
levels, particularly in cases of AML with high IRF8 expression but low
RARA levels. Insights derived from enhancer analysis, transcriptional
profiling and differentiation response in preclinical models support the
recently initiated Phase 2 trial of SY-1425 (NCT02807558) in which we are
evaluating the SE based patient selection strategies and gene circuitry
derived pharmacodynamics clinical measurements, including differentiation
markers, in patients with AML and MDS.


