Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PANCeq - Development and validation of a targeted sequencing assay
for detection of mutations and copy number changes in most recurrently
mutated driver genes.


Next generation sequencing is becoming increasingly prevalent as a tool
for the identification of genetic variation to aid diagnosis and support
therapy decisions in routine clinical care. It has been shown that tumors
are comprised of subpopulations of cells with distinct genomic
alterations, and hence tumor heterogeneity is becoming an important
factor in deciding treatment. Deep sequencing of tumor samples allows for
the determination of number and proportions of low variant allele
frequency tumor subclones. Currently, high costs for whole-exome deep
sequencing (> 250X) limit its application in routine clinical care, and
there is a need for more affordable targeted approaches. Here we present
PAN Cancer Sequencing (PANCeq), a targeted deep sequencing panel for the
detection of mutations and copy number variants (CNVs) in most
recurrently mutated cancer driver genes. A platform-independent
computational Docker-based pipeline for data analysis and automatic
report generation was developed. PANCeq uses customized targeted
enrichment, followed by next-generation sequencing of (FFPE) tumor and
matched germline samples.

We included 12 patient samples (breast, ovarian, kidney and prostate) as
well as triplicates of 3 reference standards (HD200, HD753, HD733 -
Horizon). These were sequenced on Illumina NextSeq o an average depth of
1000X. Sequencing data was aligned using BWA to hg19 human reference.
Somatic variants and CNVs were identified using VarDict and CNVkit
respectively.

We mined TCGA data across 26 tumor types, and selected known mutations
from the most recurrently mutated genes, yielding 2849 mutations across
467 genes. In addition, we included 79 pharmacogenomic relevant and 218
sample tracking SNPs as well as 80 cancer relevant CNVs (whole exon), and
designed a custom panel based on their genomic locations, resulting in a
panel size of 708kb. To assess performance, we sequenced reference
standards with known variants spiked-in at varying VAF (1 - 41.5%).
Somatic variant calling was performed against a wildtype sample. For
HD200, out of 21 covered mutations, 14 were correctly classified as
germline, and 7 as somatic. For HD733, out of 21 mutations, 3 were
correctly identified as germline, 18 as somatic. For HD753, all 6
germline and somatic mutations were correctly identified. The 2 CNVs
spiked-in were also correctly identified. In all cases we found a good
agreement between observed and expected VAF. Somatic variant results for
12 patient samples were compared with variants reported by a private
vendor. While we found good agreement at VAF > 20%, our panel detected on
average 7 additional clinically relevant mutations at We mined TCGA data
across 26 tumor types, and selected known mutations from the most
recurrently mutated genes, yielding 2849 mutations across 467 genes. In
addition, we included 79 pharmacogenomic relevant and 218 sample tracking
SNPs as well as 80 cancer relevant CNVs (whole exon), and designed a
custom panel based on their genomic locations, resulting in a panel size
of 708kb. To assess performance, we sequenced reference standards with
known variants spiked-in at varying VAF (1 - 41.5%). Somatic variant
calling was performed against a wildtype sample. For HD200, out of 21
covered mutations, 14 were correctly classified as germline, and 7 as
somatic. For HD733, out of 21 mutations, 3 were correctly identified as
germline, 18 as somatic. For HD753, all 6 germline and somatic mutations
were correctly identified. The 2 CNVs spiked-in were also correctly
identified. In all cases we found a good agreement between observed and
expected VAF. Somatic variant results for 12 patient samples were
compared with variants reported by a private vendor. While we found good
agreement at VAF > 20%, our panel detected on average 7 additional
clinically relevant mutations at < 20%.

We demonstrate that PANCeq is an accurate and sensitive method for timely
identification of clinically actionable mutations and copy number
variations across multiple cancer types.


