Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significance of SERPINE2 expression in peritoneal metastasis in
gastric carcinoma.


Background: Peritoneal metastasis is one of the most frequent causes of
death in patients with advanced gastric carcinoma (GC). However,
molecular mechanisms driving peritoneal dissemination still remain poorly
understood. Here, we aimed to give new insights to the molecular
mechanisms that drive the peritoneal dissemination of GC. This study
identified candidates of potential regulators of peritoneal dissemination
and focused on the significance of one of them in vitro experiments and
clinical samples.

Methods: We utilized previously reported combined expression analysis
with two cell lines and samples and 200 GC patients to identify driver
genes of peritoneal dissemination. The cell lines consist of HSC58, an
established cell lines from scirrhous type primary GC and its progeny
cell line, 58As9, with in vivo-selected highly peritoneal metastatic
potential. In vitro experiments, we utilized the two gastric cancer cell
lines, 58As9 and NUGC4 and evaluated the effect of SERPINE2 knockdown on
proliferation, spheroid formation, invasion, and motility. As for
evaluation of clinical samples, 176 primary gastric carcinomas were
included, which were obtained from patients who underwent curative
gastrectomy in Kumamoto university between 2005 and 2015. We evaluated
expression of SERPINE2 in immunohistochemistry and divided the cohort
into two groups by SERPINE2 expression and analyzed relationship with
clinicopathological factors and survival.

Results: Enrichment analyses of the profile of the peritoneal
dissemination-associated expression signature revealed that poor
prognosis and peritoneal metastasis was related with the two pathways,
focal adhesion (FDR q=0.00195) and extracellular matrix (FDR q=0.00195).
Among the genes related with extracellular matrix, Serine Proteinase
Inhibitor, Clade E, Member 2 (SERPINE2) was found to be highly expressed
in 58As9 compared with HSC58, and we focused on SERPINE2 as a candidate
of potential regulators of peritoneal dissemination. In vitro
experiments, the SERPINE2 knockdown was related with decrease in cell
motility and invasion, but not with decrease in proliferation, spheroid
formation. Immunohistochemistry analysis of the clinical samples revealed
higher SERPINE2 expression was significantly related with invasion of
serosa and lymphatic vessels, and lymph node matastasis, and peritoneal
metastatic metastasis. Survival analysis also revealed SERPINE2
expression was related with poor peritoneal recurrence-free survival
(p=0.038), and peritoneal metastasis-specific survival (p=0.036).

Conclusion: We found SERPINE2 as a candidate of driving molecules of
peritoneal metastasis partly because it promotes invasive potential.
Further study including in vivo study is required to reveal relationship
of SERPINE2 with the other molecules and pathways.


