Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of microRNAs in transformation of
follicular lymphoma to diffuse large B cell lymphoma.


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are important post-transcriptional regulators of gene
expression, and are frequently aberrantly expressed in cancer. We aimed
to understand their role in the transformation of indolent follicular
lymphoma (FL) into an aggressive diffuse large B cell lymphoma. This
happens in ~3% of cases per year during the course of the disease, and is
associated with median survival of only 2 years. The NGS revealed number
of aberrations associated with transformed FL (tFL), including frequent
high-level activity of MYC (amplifications, translocations, and
mutations) or loss of DNA damage regulators (p53, CDKN2A/B). Firstly, we
performed a miRNA profiling (TaqMan miRNA Arrays) in paired FL and tFL
samples (N=8 pairs). This revealed a relatively small group of 5 miRNAs
that are consistently differentially expressed in tFL (P1.5). Since the
most frequently acquired aberration in tFL is the high-level activity of
MYC we performed a correlation analysis of MYC levels and expression of
these miRNAs in additional samples of FL, tFL, and CLL samples
with/without MYC duplication (N=40 FL/tFL, N=39 CLL). This revealed that
at least one of these miRNAs is significantly down-modulated (P1.5).
Since the most frequently acquired aberration in tFL is the high-level
activity of MYC we performed a correlation analysis of MYC levels and
expression of these miRNAs in additional samples of FL, tFL, and CLL
samples with/without MYC duplication (N=40 FL/tFL, N=39 CLL). This
revealed that at least one of these miRNAs is significantly
down-modulated (P<0.05) in cases with high-levels of MYC. The
MYC-mediated repression of miRNA levels was also observed (P1.5). Since
the most frequently acquired aberration in tFL is the high-level activity
of MYC we performed a correlation analysis of MYC levels and expression
of these miRNAs in additional samples of FL, tFL, and CLL samples
with/without MYC duplication (N=40 FL/tFL, N=39 CLL). This revealed that
at least one of these miRNAs is significantly down-modulated (P<0.05) in
cases with high-levels of MYC. The MYC-mediated repression of miRNA
levels was also observed (P<0.05) in B cells from transgenic MYC
over-expressing mice (MYC controlled by an Ig-alpha enhancer) in
comparison to wild-type animals (samples obtained from young animals
before occurrence of any malignancy). We have further shown that the
levels of this miRNA affect B cell proliferation in vitro, and its
low-levels associate with percentage of Ki67 positive cells in FL samples
(P1.5). Since the most frequently acquired aberration in tFL is the
high-level activity of MYC we performed a correlation analysis of MYC
levels and expression of these miRNAs in additional samples of FL, tFL,
and CLL samples with/without MYC duplication (N=40 FL/tFL, N=39 CLL).
This revealed that at least one of these miRNAs is significantly
down-modulated (P<0.05) in cases with high-levels of MYC. The
MYC-mediated repression of miRNA levels was also observed (P<0.05) in B
cells from transgenic MYC over-expressing mice (MYC controlled by an
Ig-alpha enhancer) in comparison to wild-type animals (samples obtained
from young animals before occurrence of any malignancy). We have further
shown that the levels of this miRNA affect B cell proliferation in vitro,
and its low-levels associate with percentage of Ki67 positive cells in FL
samples (P<0.005). Moreover, low levels of tFL-associated miRNA were
present in FL cases with a shorter overall survival (P1.5). Since the
most frequently acquired aberration in tFL is the high-level activity of
MYC we performed a correlation analysis of MYC levels and expression of
these miRNAs in additional samples of FL, tFL, and CLL samples
with/without MYC duplication (N=40 FL/tFL, N=39 CLL). This revealed that
at least one of these miRNAs is significantly down-modulated (P<0.05) in
cases with high-levels of MYC. The MYC-mediated repression of miRNA
levels was also observed (P<0.05) in B cells from transgenic MYC
over-expressing mice (MYC controlled by an Ig-alpha enhancer) in
comparison to wild-type animals (samples obtained from young animals
before occurrence of any malignancy). We have further shown that the
levels of this miRNA affect B cell proliferation in vitro, and its
low-levels associate with percentage of Ki67 positive cells in FL samples
(P<0.005). Moreover, low levels of tFL-associated miRNA were present in
FL cases with a shorter overall survival (P<0.01), and its expression
directly affected BCR signalling (calcium flux assay after anti-IgM). We
have shown that the expression of this miRNA is not only down-modulated
by high-level MYC expression, but also by B cell adhesion to stromal
cells in co-culture in vitro (HS-5 stromal cells). This suggests that its
normal physiological function might be related to regulation of B cell
functions in the context of immune niches, and this might play a role in
FL progression and transformation. It remains to be elucidated what other
molecular mechanisms ensure low-level expression of the studied miRNA in
cases that do not harbor MYC over-expression, and what pool of target
mRNAs is regulated by this miRNA in FL cells.This work was supported by:
the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, grant nr. 16-29622A. All
rights reserved. contact: marek.mraz@email.cz


