Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reproducible elevation of RNA versus DNA mutation signal in low
purity breast tumors.


Background: Accurate detection of somatic mutations is critical for
informing targeted therapy options. Prevalent non-cancer cell admixture
complicates this detection in breast cancer. Conventional mutation
detection relies on DNA sequencing; however in prior work, we
demonstrated that combining RNA and DNA sequencing increases mutation
signal strength, or mutant allele fraction (MAF). The ratio of RNA MAF
versus DNA MAF (RNA:DNA MAF) was greatest in low purity breast tumors. We
hypothesized that this elevation is biologically driven and would be
conserved in a second, distinct tissue specimen of the same tumors. Here,
we compare mutation characteristics between two tissue blocks in a cohort
of breast tumors (n = 8) to evaluate possible preservation of RNA versus
DNA mutation signal throughout the tumor.

Methods: We selected four high purity and four low purity breast tumors
(“Block1”) from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohort and associated
ABSOLUTE purity analysis. For these tumors, we acquired a second tissue
block (“Block2”) not analyzed by TCGA, cut sections, analyzed
sections by H&E stains, and extracted nucleic acids. Whole genome DNA
sequencing and mRNA sequencing was performed for Block2 specimens using
Illumina X and NextSeq 500 sequencers, respectively. Somatic mutations in
Block2 were detected using UNCeqR and compared to published UNCeqR
somatic mutations from TCGA. We then evaluate MAF characteristics in the
entire TCGA breast tumor cohort (n = 695).

Results: Tumor purity estimates, determined by histology and by
sequencing, were reduced in Block2 of the low purity tumor set versus the
high purity tumor set, consistent with Block1 analysis. Molecular
properties of genome-wide gene expression and somatic DNA copy number
were highly similar between block-mated specimens (p Results: Tumor
purity estimates, determined by histology and by sequencing, were reduced
in Block2 of the low purity tumor set versus the high purity tumor set,
consistent with Block1 analysis. Molecular properties of genome-wide gene
expression and somatic DNA copy number were highly similar between
block-mated specimens (p < 0.01). We then identified expressed mutations
present in Block1 and Block2 of the same tumor and compared the MAFs on
these common mutations. DNA MAF and RNA MAF were each significantly
correlated between Block1 and Block2 (p Results: Tumor purity estimates,
determined by histology and by sequencing, were reduced in Block2 of the
low purity tumor set versus the high purity tumor set, consistent with
Block1 analysis. Molecular properties of genome-wide gene expression and
somatic DNA copy number were highly similar between block-mated specimens
(p < 0.01). We then identified expressed mutations present in Block1 and
Block2 of the same tumor and compared the MAFs on these common mutations.
DNA MAF and RNA MAF were each significantly correlated between Block1 and
Block2 (p < 1e-12 in both cases). The average RNA:DNA MAF was 2.5 for the
cohort, indicating that RNA mutation signal is greater than DNA in
general. In Block2 specimens, the RNA:DNA MAFs were significantly greater
in the low purity tumor set than the high purity tumor set (mean 2.7
versus 2.1, p Results: Tumor purity estimates, determined by histology
and by sequencing, were reduced in Block2 of the low purity tumor set
versus the high purity tumor set, consistent with Block1 analysis.
Molecular properties of genome-wide gene expression and somatic DNA copy
number were highly similar between block-mated specimens (p < 0.01). We
then identified expressed mutations present in Block1 and Block2 of the
same tumor and compared the MAFs on these common mutations. DNA MAF and
RNA MAF were each significantly correlated between Block1 and Block2 (p <
1e-12 in both cases). The average RNA:DNA MAF was 2.5 for the cohort,
indicating that RNA mutation signal is greater than DNA in general. In
Block2 specimens, the RNA:DNA MAFs were significantly greater in the low
purity tumor set than the high purity tumor set (mean 2.7 versus 2.1, p <
6e-5), reflecting the same trend observed in Block1 specimens. Analyzing
the entire TCGA cohort, RNA:DNA MAF was positively correlated with
proliferation pathway gene expression (p Results: Tumor purity estimates,
determined by histology and by sequencing, were reduced in Block2 of the
low purity tumor set versus the high purity tumor set, consistent with
Block1 analysis. Molecular properties of genome-wide gene expression and
somatic DNA copy number were highly similar between block-mated specimens
(p < 0.01). We then identified expressed mutations present in Block1 and
Block2 of the same tumor and compared the MAFs on these common mutations.
DNA MAF and RNA MAF were each significantly correlated between Block1 and
Block2 (p < 1e-12 in both cases). The average RNA:DNA MAF was 2.5 for the
cohort, indicating that RNA mutation signal is greater than DNA in
general. In Block2 specimens, the RNA:DNA MAFs were significantly greater
in the low purity tumor set than the high purity tumor set (mean 2.7
versus 2.1, p < 6e-5), reflecting the same trend observed in Block1
specimens. Analyzing the entire TCGA cohort, RNA:DNA MAF was positively
correlated with proliferation pathway gene expression (p < 3e-16 ) and
was greatest in the Basal subtype versus other subtypes (p Results: Tumor
purity estimates, determined by histology and by sequencing, were reduced
in Block2 of the low purity tumor set versus the high purity tumor set,
consistent with Block1 analysis. Molecular properties of genome-wide gene
expression and somatic DNA copy number were highly similar between
block-mated specimens (p < 0.01). We then identified expressed mutations
present in Block1 and Block2 of the same tumor and compared the MAFs on
these common mutations. DNA MAF and RNA MAF were each significantly
correlated between Block1 and Block2 (p < 1e-12 in both cases). The
average RNA:DNA MAF was 2.5 for the cohort, indicating that RNA mutation
signal is greater than DNA in general. In Block2 specimens, the RNA:DNA
MAFs were significantly greater in the low purity tumor set than the high
purity tumor set (mean 2.7 versus 2.1, p < 6e-5), reflecting the same
trend observed in Block1 specimens. Analyzing the entire TCGA cohort,
RNA:DNA MAF was positively correlated with proliferation pathway gene
expression (p < 3e-16 ) and was greatest in the Basal subtype versus
other subtypes (p < 2e-9).

Conclusion: Mutant allele fraction both of DNA and of RNA was conserved
across breast tumor subsections. Low purity and basal subtype breast
tumors had elevated RNA:DNA MAF supporting a relationship to underlying
biology and identifying classes of tumors with pronounced benefit for DNA
and RNA integrated mutation analysis.


