Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NF-kappaB classical versus alternative pathways support distinct
populations of ovarian cancer tumor-initiating cells.


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy in the United
States with high morbidity and mortality due to recurrence and
chemoresistance. Our data suggest tumor-initiating cells (TICs) play an
important role in disease biology. We previously showed that a subset of
ovarian cancer cells depends on NF-kappaB signaling, and that expression
of NF-kappaB proteins is associated with poor survival. Given that
NF-kappaB expression correlates with a poor outcome in ovarian cancer,
and NF-kappaB activity supports drug resistance and tumorigenicity, we
hypothesize that NF-kappaB supports a TIC program responsible for ovarian
cancer relapse. To investigate this pathway in TICs, we designed a novel
method to enrich for TICs from cell lines and patient samples by
culturing non-adherent, floating cells in stem cell conditions defined by
low attachment flasks and serum free media. Preliminary data confirm that
these cells have higher stem cell marker expression, are chemoresistant,
and are more tumorigenic in nude mice compared to their adherent
counterparts. These TIC-enriched culture conditions enhance NF-kappaB
expression and activity. More specifically, alternative NF-kappaB
signaling through the RelB transcription factor supports TIC populations
by regulating aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), an enzyme with high activity
in TICs. Using an inducible shRNA targeting RelB we show that spheroid
formation, ALDH expression and activity, chemoresistance, and
tumorigenesis in both subcutaneous and intrabursal xenograft models,
significantly decreased in the absence of RelB. Interestingly, loss of
classical NF-kappaB signaling, through an shRNA targeting the RelA
transcription factor, was less effective in targeting TICs, but more
effective at targeting a proliferative subpopulation with high Ki67
staining. We conclude that classical and alternative NF-kappaB signaling
support ovarian tumor cells with distinct phenotypes and the
collaboration of these pathways may be critical for supporting tumor
repopulation following chemotherapy. Current studies will measure system
level changes induced by these shRNAs, and identify a gene signature
specific to each NF-kappaB pathway in ovarian TICs. Clarifying the
nuances of NF-kappaB signaling in TICs will increase our understanding of
ovarian cancer recurrence and further focus therapeutic strategies to
prevent relapse.


