Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plucked anagen scalp hair: A reproducible surrogate tissue to
monitor drug induced transcriptional changes and provide pharmacodynamic
biomarker and target engagement information from cancer patients.


Monitoring target engagement is crucial to inform on early drug
development decisions, and development of a peripheral tissue-based gene
expression signature indicative of pathway inhibition could facilitate
the continued clinical development of compounds. Plucked anagen scalp
hair is an ideal source of epithelial tissue to monitor drug induced
transcriptional changes. High vascularisation of the hair follicle,
frequent epithelial origin of tumors, ease of sampling and high degree of
congruence of expression in hair of pathways dysregulated in cancers,
make the cellular bulb of plucked human scalp hair an excellent surrogate
tissue for the non-invasive monitoring of pharmacodynamic (PD) and
mechanism of action (MOA) effects in clinical trials. Using our ex vivo
plucked hair culture platform, hair bulbs from several healthy donors
were exposed to BEZ235, a dual pan-class PI3K and mTOR inhibitor at
different concentrations and durations. Total RNA was isolated from the
cellular bulb of individual anagen hair post-culture and used for
microarray analysis to assess global transcriptional alterations and
develop a gene expression signature indicative of BEZ235 exposure. The
results of the ex vivo plucked assessment generated a dose dependent
appreciable and biologically relevant transcriptional signature following
exposure to BEZ235. Transcriptional readouts from patients also revealed
strong correlations (0.97-0.99) in the genes expressed in anagen scalp
hair between donors and across samples taken from the same donor. In
addition, global gene expression data indicated that assessing three
plucked scalp hairs or less at each collection point was sufficient to
detect significant differential expression (pMonitoring target engagement
is crucial to inform on early drug development decisions, and development
of a peripheral tissue-based gene expression signature indicative of
pathway inhibition could facilitate the continued clinical development of
compounds. Plucked anagen scalp hair is an ideal source of epithelial
tissue to monitor drug induced transcriptional changes. High
vascularisation of the hair follicle, frequent epithelial origin of
tumors, ease of sampling and high degree of congruence of expression in
hair of pathways dysregulated in cancers, make the cellular bulb of
plucked human scalp hair an excellent surrogate tissue for the
non-invasive monitoring of pharmacodynamic (PD) and mechanism of action
(MOA) effects in clinical trials. Using our ex vivo plucked hair culture
platform, hair bulbs from several healthy donors were exposed to BEZ235,
a dual pan-class PI3K and mTOR inhibitor at different concentrations and
durations. Total RNA was isolated from the cellular bulb of individual
anagen hair post-culture and used for microarray analysis to assess
global transcriptional alterations and develop a gene expression
signature indicative of BEZ235 exposure. The results of the ex vivo
plucked assessment generated a dose dependent appreciable and
biologically relevant transcriptional signature following exposure to
BEZ235. Transcriptional readouts from patients also revealed strong
correlations (0.97-0.99) in the genes expressed in anagen scalp hair
between donors and across samples taken from the same donor. In addition,
global gene expression data indicated that assessing three plucked scalp
hairs or less at each collection point was sufficient to detect
significant differential expression (p<0.05 & 1.5 fold change)
underpinning the low variance in the majority of target genes in plucked
hair as a biomarker platform. Gene signatures for compounds targeting the
PI3K/mTOR pathway that were established using the ex vivo plucked scalp
hair platform were used to support clinical trials and scalp hair taken
from patients receiving treatment showed an excellent post-exposure
target signature modulation. In summary, our results substantiate that
plucked anagen scalp hair is an ideal non-invasive surrogate tissue to
obtain drug-induced pharmacodynamic biomarker and target engagement
information from oncology patients.


