Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mass cytometry of human glioblastoma characterizes more than 99
percent of cells and reveals intratumoral cell subsets defined by
contrasting signaling network profiles.


Background: Glioblastoma (GBM) remains largely incurable despite intense
study of resected tissue. Prior studies have revealed GBM cell subsets
(Patel et al., Science 2014) and have implicated subset emergence as a
potential mechanism of poor outcome in other cancer types. Signaling in
rare cells or a mix of cell subsets may enable therapy resistance and
recurrence of GBM. For example, STAT3 RNA expression has been previously
shown to correlate with poor outcome in GBM (Jahani-Asl et al., Nat
Neurosci 2016 and TCGA). The complexity of GBM, combined with the
interconnectedness between cancer and host cells in the microenvironment,
means that a single cell biology approach is needed to comprehensively
characterize patient biopsy cells and determine how protein expression,
signaling, and functional capabilities impact treatment response.

Methods: We developed a novel mass cytometry approach to characterize
human GBM that identified ~90-95% of tumor cells (Leelatian & Doxie et
al., Cytometry B 2016). Here, we applied this approach using a newly
created 35-antibody mass cytometry panel focused on basal phospho-protein
signaling. The published panel of 16 identity proteins included SOX2,
CD44, Nestin, PDGFRα, S100B, and NCAM. This panel was augmented to
measure 10 additional proteins and 9 phospho-proteins including p-STAT3,
p-EGFR, and p-NFκB. Signaling measurements were chosen to match prior
single cell studies of signaling networks that stratified clinical
outcomes in blood cancers (Irish et al., Cell 2004; PNAS 2010, Levine et
al., Cell 2015). Between 10,000 and 250,000 viable cells were
characterized for each tumor (N = 7). Tumors were collected with informed
consent and in accord with the Declaration of Helsinki.

Results: This new 35-antibody mass cytometry panel positively identified
>99% of GBM cells. Subsets of GBM cells displayed protein expression that
matched previously observed transcriptional molecular subclasses (Verhaak
et al., Cancer Cell 2010 and TCGA). Strikingly, this panel revealed novel
GBM cell subsets defined by contrasting basal signaling profiles. An
inverse correlation was observed between baseline STAT3 phosphorylation
and the abundance of CD45+ leukocytes. Additionally, similar signaling
patterns were seen in cells that expressed proteins associated with
distinct functions, such as proliferation and migration.

Conclusions: The correlation between low STAT3 signaling and high immune
cell abundance provides evidence for the idea that an intimate
relationship exists between immune cells and GBM tumor growth and
survival. Moreover, single cell analysis may reveal biomarkers of
treatment response and allow prediction of clinical outcomes. The
abnormal signaling mechanisms observed here in some GBM cell subsets
should be studied further as potential targets for novel cancer-selective
combination therapies.


