Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of carbonic anhydrase & activity between
triple-negative & luminal breast cancer cells.


Tumor microenvironment substantially influences the process of
tumorigenesis. Extracellular acidification within the tumor
microenvironment is an indicator of an aggressive cancer and a marker for
poor patient outcome. In solid tumors, hypoxia leads to extracellular
acidosis. Carbonic anhydrases (CA) are thought to regulate intracellular
and extracellular pH (pHi and pHe, respectively). To explore the effect
of CAs in breast cancer, we compared the expression and activity of two
membrane bound CAs, CAIX and CAXII, between triple negative breast cancer
cells (TNBCs) and luminal breast cancer cells (LBCs).

We chose five different TNBC and LBC lines. Our data show that, among the
TNBC lines, CAIX expression increased in three of the five lines: HBL100,
SUM159, and the new UFH-001 cells under hypoxic condition. UFH-001 cells
also showed strong constitutive expression. None of these TNBC lines
expressed CAXII or estrogen receptor (ER). In LBC lines, four of the five
lines constitutively expressed CAXII: T47D, MCF7, SKBR and SUM52 cells.
CAXII expression was not hypoxia-dependent. Each of the five luminal
lines expressed ER. We also examined CA expression in a tumor graft
model. In tumors grown from cells derived from TNBC patients, we observed
CAIX expression in four of six sample sets. In tumors derived from
ER-positive LBC patients, all five expressed CAXII.

We also used the 18O exchange method to assess CA activity. Two TNBC
lines: UFH-001 and HBL100 cells showed that CAIX activity increased in
hypoxic conditions which was blocked by an impermeant sulfonamide CA
inhibitor (N3500). In the luminal lines, we detected CAXII activity in
T47D and MCF7 cells that was also inhibited by N3500. Like CAXII protein
expression in these cells, CAXII activity was not affected by hypoxia. We
also evaluated the effect of pH on CA activity in TNBC and LBC lines.
Both CAIX and CAXII showed increased activity in response to reduced pH,
which is expected in a bicarbonate-based system. However, UFH-001 cells
also exhibited a hypoxic-dependent increase in CAIX activity which is
associated with increased protein expression.

In conclusion, these observations demonstrate that CAIX expression is
associated with the TNBC phenotype. Based on our activity data, we would
predict that CA activity in TNBC tumors will be sensitive to both hypoxia
(based on enhanced expression) and reduced pH. This change in activity
may serve to regulate pH in the tumor microenvironment favoring an
aggressive phenotype. On the other hand, LBC tumors, which are
ER-positive, are only associated with CAXII expression. In luminal cells,
we expect that only pH and not hypoxia will affect CAXII activity. This
may, in part, explain the more positive prognosis in patients with CAXII
expression.


