Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective tumor targeting with 5-substituted
pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidines with heteroatom bridge substitution.


Three specialized systems exist for membrane transport of folates and
antifolates across biological membranes. The reduced folate carrier (RFC)
is ubiquitously expressed in tumors and normal tissues. Folate receptors
(FR) α and β, and the proton-coupled folate receptor (PCFT) exhibit
narrow patterns of tissue expression and serve specialized physiologic
roles. FRs are expressed in a number of cancer cells (e.g., FRα in
ovarian cancer and non-small cell lung cancer; FRβ in acute myelogenous
leukemia), whereas PCFT is expressed in a large number of human solid
tumors but not leukemias. FRs are either inaccessible to the circulation
(FRα) or are nonfunctional (FRβ) in normal tissues. PCFT transport is
limited in most normal tissues, given the requirement of acidic pH for
optimal activity. These properties facilitate tumor targeting of
cytotoxic compounds with specificities for PCFT or/and FR transport.
Clinically used antifolates such as methotrexate and pemetrexed are
substrates for RFC and their uptake by both normal tissues and tumors
confers dose-limiting toxicity due to limited tumor selectivity. We
previously reported a 5-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine antifolate
with a 4-carbon bridge and a phenyl glutamate side chain (AGF127).
Previous studies of related 6-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidines
established that the nature and length of the bridge region plays an
important role in determining tumor cell potency and transport
selectivity. Thus, it was of interest to vary the length and insert
heteroatoms into the side chain -(CH2)4- of AGF127, including -(CH2)n-S-
(compound 1, n= 3 and compound 2, n = 4) and -(CH2)n-O- (compound 3, n= 3
and compound 4, n = 4), to determine the impact on drug potency and
transport selectivity. The novel analogs were tested as growth inhibitors
against engineered Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells expressing human
FRα (RT16), RFC (PC43-10), and PCFT (R2/PCFT4). AGF127 showed potent
inhibition of CHO cells expressing FRα (IC50 = 8.6 nM), and reduced
activity toward CHO cells expressing RFC (57 nM) or PCFT (840 nM).
Compounds 1, 2, and 3, showed reduced inhibitions toward FRα-expressing
RT16 cells (4-35-fold) compared to AGF127; however, compound 4 was
equipotent to AGF127. Like AGF127, none of the series were effective PCFT
substrates. Compound 3, like AGF127, inhibited RFC-expressing PC43-10
cells (IC50 = 37 nM); RFC activity was reduced 6- to >20-fold for
compounds 1, 2, and 4. Toward FRα-, RFC-, and PCFT-expressing KB human
tumor cells, the order of potency was 4 = AGF127 > 2 = 3 = 1. Compound 4
was also more active (15-fold) than pemetrexed with KB cells.
Collectively, the potent and selective activity of compound 4 toward
FRα-expressing tumor cells and limited activity toward RFC-expressing
cells offers significant advantages over AGF127 and clinically used
non-targeted antifolates, suggesting that further preclinical evaluation
is warranted.


