Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new anticancer agent derived from decenoic acid for the
treatment of colon cancer.


The final goal of the current study is to create a promising lead
compound that targets human colon carcinoma. After discovering in vitro
antiproliferative activity of a naturally occurring compound,
10-hydroxy-2-decenoic acid, we designed and synthesized over 150
derivatives. The initial screening resulted in the discovery of three
primary lead compounds, we then proceeded with modifications in side
chain and eventually obtained a second-generation lead compound, named
PPI (patented in 2014), whose IC50 was 0.3 μM. We focused on the
transcription factor STAT3 that is able to drive carcinogenesis,
apoptosis, and angiogenesis-related genes. In silico docking simulation
exhibited that PPI can bind to SH2 domain of STAT3, suggesting that this
drug blocks dimerization of STAT3, thereby PPI inactivates function of
STAT3. PPI inhibited transcriptional activity of STAT3 when SW480, SW837,
and HT29 human colon carcinoma cells were treated with 3.7 to 5 μM PPI
for 24h. Flowcytometry analysis indicated that when HT29 cells were
treated with 1 μM PPI, the percentage of cells in G1 increased by 5% and
this was associated with a concomitant decrease of cells in the S and
G2-M phases of the cell cycle. The results indicate that PPI causes
carcinoma cells to arrest in the G1 phase. When HT29 cells were treated
with 10 μM PPI, subG1 fraction and DNA fragmentation were seen,
indicating induction of apoptosis. We then performed western blot
analysis to determine whether treatment of carcinoma cells with PPI
alters cellular levels of the G1 cell cycle control protein cyclin D1 and
apoptosis/angiogenesis-related molecules. When HT29 cells were treated
with PPI for 24 to 48h, there was a marked decrease in the levels of
expression of the Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, and VEGF proteins and a marked increase
in the levels of expression of the cleaved caspase 3, 7, 8, 9, and PARP
proteins. PPI also inhibited expression levels and nuclear tanslocation
of pSTAT3. To see if PPI exerts preventive effect on tumor promotion,
F344 rats received sc injections of a carcinogen azoxymethane and then
treated with soybean oil or PPI. There was a dose dependent decrease in
multiplicity of aberrant crypt foci (ACF) in the colon. PPI inhibited the
occurrence of larger ACF consisting of more than 4 aberrant crypts,
indicating inhibitory effect of PPI on tumor promotion. In a mouse
xenograft model, PPI decreased the size and number of blood vessels in
the tumor. All mice survived without causing significant body weight loss
during experiment. No histopathological abnormality was found in any of
organ site. To confirm the effects of PPI on angiogenesis, we performed
chorioallantoic membrane assays and found a dose-dependent decrease in
average number of blood vessels. Inhibition of STAT3 by PPI may affect
the function of molecules that are related to apoptosis, angiogenesis,
and cell cycle progression and eventually contributes to PPI-induced
growth inhibition.


