Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue-based heterogeneity in lobular carcinoma in situ.


Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) is a preinvasive breast lesion
associated with a 6 to 11-fold increased risk of invasive breast cancer.
Despite this increased risk, little is known regarding what qualities of
LCIS predispose individual patients to invasive cancer. Given recent
advances in understanding of the importance of etiologic heterogeneity
within breast cancer, we sought to characterize morphologic markers of
heterogeneity in LCIS and surrounding tissue, with the hypothesis that
features with lesional variation may be important candidate predictors of
breast cancer risk. We identified 64 patients aged ≥ 18 years who were
diagnosed with LCIS at a single institution from 2004-2014. Patients with
concurrent invasive breast cancer in the same breast were excluded.
Archival slides of each case were reviewed by an experienced breast
pathologist to confirm the presence of LCIS and characterize the LCIS
type (classic, florid, or pleomorphic). The number of lobules involved
with LCIS, presence of calcifications or necrosis associated with LCIS,
and presence of other benign lesions [atypical lobular hyperplasia (ALH),
atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH), flat epithelial atypia, fibroadenoma,
intraductal papilloma] were recorded. Age at surgery and surgery type
were abstracted from medical records. The two-sided Fisher’s exact test
was used to examine differences in proportions. The mean age of the cases
was 53 years, and the most common surgery type was excisional/incisional
biopsy or lumpectomy (55%), followed by core biopsy (25%) and mastectomy
(20%). Calcifications were associated with LCIS in 41% of cases. Women
were more likely to have florid LCIS when calcifications were present
compared to when calcifications were absent (PLobular carcinoma in situ
(LCIS) is a preinvasive breast lesion associated with a 6 to 11-fold
increased risk of invasive breast cancer. Despite this increased risk,
little is known regarding what qualities of LCIS predispose individual
patients to invasive cancer. Given recent advances in understanding of
the importance of etiologic heterogeneity within breast cancer, we sought
to characterize morphologic markers of heterogeneity in LCIS and
surrounding tissue, with the hypothesis that features with lesional
variation may be important candidate predictors of breast cancer risk. We
identified 64 patients aged ≥ 18 years who were diagnosed with LCIS at
a single institution from 2004-2014. Patients with concurrent invasive
breast cancer in the same breast were excluded. Archival slides of each
case were reviewed by an experienced breast pathologist to confirm the
presence of LCIS and characterize the LCIS type (classic, florid, or
pleomorphic). The number of lobules involved with LCIS, presence of
calcifications or necrosis associated with LCIS, and presence of other
benign lesions [atypical lobular hyperplasia (ALH), atypical ductal
hyperplasia (ADH), flat epithelial atypia, fibroadenoma, intraductal
papilloma] were recorded. Age at surgery and surgery type were abstracted
from medical records. The two-sided Fisher’s exact test was used to
examine differences in proportions. The mean age of the cases was 53
years, and the most common surgery type was excisional/incisional biopsy
or lumpectomy (55%), followed by core biopsy (25%) and mastectomy (20%).
Calcifications were associated with LCIS in 41% of cases. Women were more
likely to have florid LCIS when calcifications were present compared to
when calcifications were absent (P<0.01). Additionally, cases with
calcifications were more likely to have more than 10 lobules affected by
LCIS (P0.05). ALH was the most common other lesion, present in 70% of
samples.. Our results demonstrate that LCIS-associated calcifications are
common and are associated with more extensive disease, even among LCIS
characterized as ‘classic’. In invasive breast cancer, the presence
of certain types of calcifications has been associated with poor
prognosis. A next step in this research is to understand whether the
heterogeneity we observed in LCIS can be ascribed to a specific
calcification morphology and/or distribution. Understanding this will
help us elucidate the potential biological mechanism and determine
whether LCIS calcifications are a viable marker for the prediction of
breast cancer risk.


