Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of lncRNAs in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is anticipated to be the second
leading cause of cancer related death in western countries by 2030 with a
5-year survival rate of 6%. Recently, genome wide sequencing and
transcriptome analysis have been applied to identify cancer-driving
mutations and mRNA expression profiles of pancreatic tumors. Despite a
better understanding of the molecular drivers and the signaling pathways
dysregulated in PDA, this knowledge has not been able to identify novel
therapeutic targets. A common limitation for the aforementioned studies
is that they have been performed in bulk samples, and they have been
focused on mutations and gene expression analysis of protein-coding
genes, which represents less than 2% of the genome. Long non-coding RNAs
are emerging as essential players in the biology and progression of a
variety of tumors. However, this concept has not been extensively
explored to the study of PDA.

We have developed computational methods and performed experimental
validation to identify functional lncRNAs drivers of tumor progression in
pancreatic cancer. Specifically, we have developed computational tools to
identify lncRNAs associated with genomic traits of PDA using genome wide
high throughput data. The analysis uncovered the existence of 1741
lncRNAs that we termed ncPDAs (non-coding PDA). Using a unique RNA-seq
dataset from >200 laser capture microdissected pancreatic tumors, we
selected those ncPDAs that are expressed specifically in the neoplastic
epithelium of human pancreatic tumors. Within the top 100 ncPDAs enriched
in neoplastic epithelial cells, we identified known lncRNAs drivers in
other tumor types such as CRNDE (ncPDA4), Pvt1 (ncPDA 9), HOTAIR (ncPDA
39), Malat1 (ncPDA 68) and Neat1 (ncPDA 71). We are currently exploring
the role of several ncPDAs in pancreatic cancer cell lines. Loss of
function studies suggest that several ncPDAs are required for tumor
progression. Our investigation will continue to unravel the role of
ncPDAs in the initiation and progression of pancreatic cancer.


