Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome-wide association study among 66,450 women to
identify candidate susceptible genes for ovarian cancer risk.


Background: Large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have
identified ~35 loci associated with epithelial ovarian cancer risk.
However, these genetic loci together explain only a small portion of the
heritability of this malignancy. The large majority of the
GWAS-identified variants are located in non-coding regions, thus possible
causal genes in these loci remain largely unknown. We performed a
transcriptome-wide association study (TWAS) to search for novel genetic
loci for ovarian cancer risk and plausible causal genes at
GWAS-identified loci.

Method: Transcriptome data from normal ovarian tissue samples (n=68) and
all tissue samples (n = 369), along with their high-density genotyping
data, obtained from only European descendants included in the
Genotype-Tissue Expression Project (GTEx), were used to build ovarian
linear prediction models and cross-tissue models (to increase statistical
power) using the elastic net method. Based on model performance, we
evaluated 17,121 genes for their cis-predicted gene expressions in
relation to ovarian cancer risk using summary statistics data generated
in GWAS of ovarian cancer from 25,509 cases and 40,941 controls. MetaXcan
was used to integrate gene expression prediction model with summary
statistics.

Results: We identified 35 genes with predicted expression levels
associated with ovarian cancer risk at P value Results: We identified 35
genes with predicted expression levels associated with ovarian cancer
risk at P value < 2.2 × 10-6, the Bonferroni corrected significance
level for multiple comparisons. Of these, 12 genes at 4 genetic loci are
located ≥500kb away from risk SNPs previously reported in GWAS,
representing potential novel genetic loci for ovarian cancer risk. The
remaining 23 genes at 12 loci are located within known ovarian cancer
risk loci. Fifteen of these genes at the 12 loci have not been reported
in previous studies. Analyses by ovarian cancer histological subtypes
showed that the majority of these 35 genes are associated with serous
invasive carcinoma. Several new associations were identified in
histological subtype analyses.

Conclusion: In this TWAS we identified multiple genes with predicted
expressions related to ovarian cancer risk and provide substantial new
information to enhance the understanding of ovarian cancer biology and
genetics.


