Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired chemotherapeutic drug resistance in colorectal cancer is
regulated by epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and altered cellular
pathways.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer and the second
leading cause of cancer-related death in the western world. Chemotherapy
is the mainstay in the treatment of metastasized CRC. However, cancer
cells acquire resistance to treatment by various mechanisms resulting in
treatment failure. Even though the molecular mechanisms regulating
acquired drug resistance is critical to overcome chemoresistance, it is
poorly understood. We developed a panel of seven CRC cells resistant to
5-FU. The parental and 5-FU resistant CRC cells were assayed for proteins
known for their involvement in chemotherapeutic resistance. In addition,
an unbiased quantitative proteomics and DNA methylation analysis was
performed on the panel of seven parental and 5-FU resistant CRC cells.
The integrated analysis revealed multiple mechanisms contributing to
chemotherapeutic drug resistance including epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), deregulation of apoptosis, increased survival autophagy
and epigenetic modifications resulting in altered drug metabolite
potency. Inhibitors of EMT and autophagy sensitized the 5-FU resistant
CRC cells. Furthermore, CRIPSR based gene knockouts of these candidate
genes (both up and downregulated) either sensitized the CRC cells or
rendered them resistant to 5-FU. As a follow up, PDX mouse models were
established and made resistant to 5-FU. Follow up quantitative proteomics
and biochemical validations of 5-FU resistant PDX tissue lysates
confirmed the role of EMT in acquired chemoresistance. Overall, this
project unravelled multiple mechanisms by which CRC cells may become
resistant to 5-FU. Importantly, some of these mechanisms are also
conserved in many cancer types and hence targeting these mechanisms can
overcome chemoresistance and increase patient survival rates.


