Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The relation of childhood diet to the timing of puberty in boys:
Results from the Longitudinal Studies of Child Health and Development.


Background: Although accumulating evidence from different disciplines
supports an early-life contribution to prostate cancer (PCa) risk, few
studies have focused on this life stage. One major reason for this dearth
of research is the decades-long span of time between early-life exposures
and PCa onset, making traditional epidemiologic study designs
challenging. To overcome this challenge, we took advantage of several
well-supported or recently observed PCa risk factors - age at peak height
velocity (APHV), height at age 13, and adult height - to shorten the time
required to study early-life exposures and to improve exposure
classification by using these risk factors as markers of future PCa risk.
We focused our analysis on childhood diet because it influenced APHV in a
similar study of girls, and because of its strongly suspected role in PCa
development.

Methods: We analyzed data from the Longitudinal Studies of Child Health
and Development, which followed 67 Caucasian boys from Boston from birth
through adolescence in the 1930-40s. At each biannual (or annual) visit,
study staff measured participants’ height and weight, and assessed
their diet by dietary history interviews. We used these data to estimate
age- and energy-adjusted nutrient intake, diet scores (combining
information on fat and animal protein from ages 1-10 years into a Western
diet score, and information on vegetable protein from ages 1-10 into a
healthy diet score), age-specific height-z-scores, body mass index, peak
height velocity (PHV), and APHV. We investigated crude associations
between dietary and anthropometric measures by Pearson correlation
coefficients, and multivariable-adjusted associations by linear
regression.

Results: Childhood consumption of a Western diet (as measured by our
fat-animal protein score) was positively associated with height at age 13
(beta coefficient (ß)=0.08, PResults: Childhood consumption of a Western
diet (as measured by our fat-animal protein score) was positively
associated with height at age 13 (beta coefficient (ß)=0.08, P<0.001)
and adult height (ß=0.05, P=0.013), and inversely associated with APHV
(ß=-0.06, P=0.014). In contrast, childhood consumption of a healthy diet
(as measured by our vegetable protein score) was inversely associated
with height at age 13 (ß= -0.09, P=0.008). No notable associations were
observed for diet and PHV. After controlling for height at ages 1-2 as a
marker of genetic growth potential, only the association between Western
diet and height at age 13 remained significant (ß=0.04, PResults:
Childhood consumption of a Western diet (as measured by our fat-animal
protein score) was positively associated with height at age 13 (beta
coefficient (ß)=0.08, P<0.001) and adult height (ß=0.05, P=0.013), and
inversely associated with APHV (ß=-0.06, P=0.014). In contrast,
childhood consumption of a healthy diet (as measured by our vegetable
protein score) was inversely associated with height at age 13 (ß= -0.09,
P=0.008). No notable associations were observed for diet and PHV. After
controlling for height at ages 1-2 as a marker of genetic growth
potential, only the association between Western diet and height at age 13
remained significant (ß=0.04, P<0.001).

Conclusions: Our findings suggest that consumption of a Western diet
during childhood (1-10 years of age) is associated with greater height at
age 13, a possible marker of both earlier onset of puberty and greater
height. As this measure was recently associated with later PCa
risk/mortality in a large Danish cohort study, our findings may point
towards an early dietary contribution to PCa risk. Future studies should
explore this possible association further for its potential to inform
primary PCa prevention strategies.


