Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipid-peroxidation derived DNA damage is prevented in
obesity-related hepatocarcinogenesis through CD4+ mediated apoptosis in
the livers of mice on a green-tea diet.


Using a C57BL/6J bioassay, we assessed whether formation of a
lipid-peroxidation (LPO)-derived DNA adduct would induce mutations during
the progression of obesity-induced hepatocarcinogenesis and if its
formation could be prevented using a diet infused with Theaphenon E, a
mixture of polyphenols extracted from green tea. Obesity is now the
leading risk factor for the development of hepatocellular carcinoma in
the United States. We have conducted a life-time C57BL/6J tumor bioassay
to assess the role of obesity in the formation of
γ-hydroxy-1,N2-propanodeoxyguanosine (γ-OHPdG), a promutagenic DNA
adduct formed endogenously by LPO. Previously, we have shown γ-OHPdG was
detected in FFPE liver tissues of patients with different stages of liver
disease, demonstrating that its formation is consistent with LPO in the
early stages of liver disease and suggesting that it may be a source of
endogenous DNA damage in hepatocarcinogenesis. Tea polyphenols,
predominately EGCG, are antioxidants that have been shown to prevent
obesity and tumorigenesis. For the bioassay, mice were fed either a high
fat, low fat, or high fat 2% TE diet starting at 4 weeks of age. Tissue
and blood were collected over the course of 80 weeks at 11 separate time
points. Health of the mice was assessed using serum concentrations of ALT
and AST, gross morphology and immunohistochemistry of TUNEL, Ki67 and
CD4+. In contrast to the high-fat and low-fat diet mice, the TE treated
mice maintained a healthy body weight, liver to body weight ratio and low
levels of AST and ALT enzymes which are elevated in liver disease.
Additionally, the health of the liver appears to be maintained through
increased CD4+ mediated apoptosis in TE treated mice as demonstrated
through decreased Ki67 expression and TUNEL staining showing increased
apoptosis in TE treated mice livers in conjunction with increased CD4+
cells. The CD4+ immune response may, therefore, be targeting cells with
mutagenic potential. Similar to the trend indicated by the clinical
samples, during hepatocarcinogenesis in the high fat diet mice, adduct
levels were increased initially and likely fixed into mutation at later
time points, where their levels decreased, as quantified by LC-MS/MS. In
contrast, in the TE treated mice, the average γ-OHPdG levels remained
consistently low. Further studies incorporating whole exome sequencing of
the tumors that were formed during the life-time bioassay will indicate
whether γ-OHPdG may contribute to the mutations that occured. In
conclusion, our study has shown that a robust immune system response
mediated by TE may be an underlying mechanism to combat the DNA
adduct-induced DNA damage that may lead to HCC.


