Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining molecular mechanisms of resistance to glioblastoma
immunity using a novel CRISPR/Cas9 in vivo loss-of-function screening
platform.


OVERVIEW: Despite the impact of cancer immunotherapy, expanding its
clinical utility requires a rational method for identifying combination
therapies and resistance mechanisms. This is pertinent to glioblastoma
(GBM), where initial trials show uncertain response rates. Functional
genomic screens used to identify new therapies and escape mechanisms were
generally conducted in vitro, where interaction with the immune system is
absent. Here we present the development of a high-throughput, in vivo,
loss-of-function screening platform for GBM immune-escape mechanisms.

METHODS: CT2A- and GL261-astrocytoma cells bearing Cas9-endonuclease were
engineered to express a library of barcoded single guide RNAs (sgRNAs).
These cells form tumors when implanted intracranially in immunocompetent
mice. Tumor-bearing mice were treated with vaccination or PD-1 checkpoint
blockade. Dropout of sgRNAs targeting putative immune evasion molecules
or enrichment of sgRNAs mimicking resistance mechanisms were detected
using next-generation sequencing at the time of tumor implantation and
harvest post-immunotherapy.

RESULTS: We first developed an in vivo, pooled, loss-of-function genetic
screen using Cas9/CRISPR genome editing in mouse transplantable tumors
subjected to titratable, selective immune-pressure. Screening 2,400 genes
expressed by melanoma cells for those that synergize with or cause
resistance to checkpoint blockade recovered known immune-evasion
molecules PD-L1 and CD47. Novel immunotherapy targets validated
individually, identifying essential pathways of immune-evasion. We then
sought to recapitulate this approach in the CNS, and showed that 500-1000
genes can be functionally screened under graded immune-pressure. In
optimized immune-competent CT2A and GL261 GBM models, tumors derived from
cancer stem cell CD133hi-rich neurospheres were sensitive to
immunotherapy and more aggressive and infiltrative than tumors derived
from adherent tumor cells. A neurosphere based immune-competent model can
be scaled up to a whole-genome screen due to a shorter experimental time
requirement and improved engraftment allowing for functional screening of
>1000 genes. We curated a GBM-specific library based on differential in
vitro and in vivo gene expression profiles of CT2A and GL261 cells
exposed to graded immune pressure. We are now screening this GBM-specific
library in our optimized in vivo pooled loss-of-function genetic screen
using immune-pressure titration to identify novel immunotherapy targets
in GBM.

CONCLUSIONS: This assay provides the first high-throughput method for
systematically identifying resistance mechanisms and new candidate
targets for immunotherapy in CNS tumors. Our optimized model could be
scaled up to whole-genome loss of function screens, serving as an
important tool for identification of next-generation and combination
immunotherapies.


