Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of secondary resistance to dual PI3K/mTOR inhibition in
sarcomas with complex genetics.


Background: Soft tissue sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of malignant
tumors including more than 70 histological subtypes. We have recently
demonstrated that dual targeting of PI3K/mTOR pathway is associated with
significant anti-tumor activity in in vitro and in vivo models of
leiomyosarcoma (LMS), one of the most frequent sarcoma subtype. Secondary
resistance limits the efficacy of all targeted therapies. We have
developed and characterized resistance models to a dual PI3K/mTOR
inhibitor in order to describe underlying resistance mechanisms and
develop alternative strategies.

Methods: To develop in vitro BEZ-235 (dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor)
resistance models, 3 LMS and 1 myxofibrosarcoma cell lines were exposed
to increasing doses of BEZ-235 several months. To characterize the
resistance models, sensitivity to BEZ-235 was assessed by MTT assay and
Annexin V-PI staining. To test in vivo the resistance models, effects of
BEZ-235 treatment were observed in mice with subcutaneous cell
line-derived xenograft tumors for 3 weeks. The transcriptome profile of
sensitive and resistant tumors to BEZ-235 was analyzed by using RNA-seq.

Results: After prolonged exposure of cell lines to BEZ-235, we obtained
secondary resistant cell lines characterized by an IC50 value 5- to
21-fold higher than parental sensitive cells. Resistant cells were also
significantly less sensitive to BEZ-235-induced apoptosis than parental
cells. We confirmed the resistance patterns in vivo with a significantly
higher anti-tumor effect of BEZ235 in sensitive cell-line derived
xenograft group compared with resistant cell-line derived xenograft
group. Deep transcriptome profiling indicated overexpression of stem
cells related genes in resistant cells as well as a modification of the
cellular metabolism. By using 1) RNAi-mediated suppression of pyruvate
carboxylase (PC), a potential key player in our resistance models and 2)
hallmarks of CSC like CD133 and enhanced aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)
activity, we confirmed that resistant tumors were characterized by a
significantly higher proportion of cancer stem cells and by a metabolic
shift with a strong deregulation of glucose metabolism.

Conclusions: Selection of CSC subpopulation and metabolism shift play a
crucial role in secondary resistance to dual PI3K/mTOR inhibition in
sarcoma. Strategies assessing anti-CSC agents to suppress acquired
resistance may have major implications to improve efficacy of dual
PI3K/mTOR targeting in human malignancies.


