Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ESR1 mutations activate and confer hormone resistance via distinct
mechanisms.


Mutations in the ligand-binding domain (LBD) of ESR1 have been identified
in the tumors and plasma of hormone-resistant, metastatic ER+ breast
cancer patients. The most prevalent alterations are Y537S and D538G, and
both mechanistic and clinical investigations have focused on the
implications of these 2 mutations. Through large-scale clinical
sequencing efforts, we have examined the coding region of ESR1 from over
1000 cases of metastatic breast cancer and found a diversity of ESR1
mutations. These have included a number of never before reported
alterations including mutations in the DNA binding domain and
dimerization interface. The biochemical and biologic impact of many of
these mutations is unknown. In this study, we have examined the impact of
these alterations on ER conformation, transcriptional activity, breast
cancer growth, and drug sensitivity. Using transcriptional assays, we
found several classes of mutation including: (1) mutations that weakly
promoted ligand-independent activity, (2) mutations that led to
ligand-independent activity comparable to estradiol stimulation, and (3)
mutations that impaired transcriptional activity. Among mutations that
promoted some level of ligand-independent activation, we examined whether
they had similar effects on receptor conformation in vitro. First, we
characterized a subset using a FRET-based co-activator recruitment assay
and found that, unlike Y537S and D538G, several mutants (e.g. E380Q and
S463P) were unable to recruit SRC in the absence of estradiol. In keeping
with this observation, trypsin digestion assays also revealed differences
in the local structure within helix 11 between these mutants. To further
characterize the molecular basis for these differences, we conducted
molecular dynamic (MD) modeling of mutants and compared these with the MD
and crystal structure models of apo Y537S and D538G mutants. These
studies further revealed differences in overall receptor conformation
including localization of H12. From a therapeutic point of view, we
examined the effect of different mutants on sensitivity to various ER
antagonists. Once again, we observed important differences between
mutants, with several mutants of class 2 exhibiting reduced sensitivity
to SERDs compared to mutants of class 1. Nevertheless, it appeared that
all mutants could be effectively antagonized by more potent SERDs,
implying a continued ability of the mutant ERs to become distorted into
the antagonist conformation. Taken together, the data reveal distinct
conformational restrictions on ER activity that can be relieved by
different ESR1 mutations. These data also imply the value of more broad
coverage of ER in clinical sequencing efforts in order to effectively
capture all potential resistance alleles.


