Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of CDK8 in colon cancer hepatic metastasis.


About half of all colon cancer patients will develop liver metastases and
the 5-year survival for these patients is less than 13%, making colon
cancer the second most lethal cancer worldwide. Cyclin dependent kinase 8
(CDK8), which regulates transcription but not cell cycle progression, has
been identified as an oncogene amplified in many colon cancers. CDK8 acts
as a positive mediator of oncogenic transcription pathways regulated by
Wnt/beta-catenin and TGF-beta, both of which are strongly associated with
tumor metastasis. In a colon cancer liver metastasis model based on
splenic injection of CT26 murine colon carcinoma cells, treatment with
Senexin B, a highly selective small-molecule inhibitor of CDK8 and its
paralog CDK19, strongly inhibited metastatic growth in the liver and
prolonged the survival of mice with hepatic metastases. In contrast to
the effect on liver metastasis, CDK8 inhibition had little or no effect
on cell growth in culture or at primary tumor sites. Hepatic metastasis
was inhibited to the same extent when Senexin B was administered starting
from the time of tumor injection or only during a later part of the
study, suggesting that the drug affected metastatic growth in the liver
rather than just initial colonization. Liver metastasis was similarly
decreased by CDK8 knockdown in CT26 cells, suggesting that the
anti-metastatic activity of Senexin B was due at least in part to its
effect on tumor cells. Transcription profiling indicated that CDK8
inhibition by shRNA or Senexin B strongly decreased the expression of
metastasis-associated metalloproteinases MMP 13, MMP10, and MMP3 and at
the same time drastically increased the expression of TIMP3, a
metalloproteinase inhibitor. TIMP3 overexpression in CT26 cells, like
CDK8 inhibition, decreased hepatic metastasis. CDK8 inhibition also
blocked TGF-beta or Wnt3a-stimulated transwell Matrigel invasion of CT26
cells in vitro. Knockdown of beta-catenin in CT26 cells decreased the
expression of MMP3 and MMP13, while knockdown of SMAD4 (transcriptional
mediator of TGF-beta pathway) induced TIMP3 expression. Beta-catenin
knockdown decreased both the primary tumor growth in the spleen and
metastatic growth in the liver, whereas SMAD4 knockdown, like that of
CDK8, selectively inhibited liver metastasis. Senexin B also suppressed
hepatic metastasis after splenic injection of human HCT116 colon
carcinoma cells. In summary, our data identified CDK8 as a key
transcriptional regulator of colon cancer metastatic growth in the liver,
interacting with TGF-beta and Wnt/beta-catenin pathways and regulating
the expression of MMPs and Timp3. CDK8/19 inhibitors, which are now
entering clinical trials, may be effective for the treatment of hepatic
metastasis of colon cancer.


