Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-integrative lentiviral particles for immunotherapy: RNA
delivery to drive tumoral antigen presentation in a safe and efficient
way.


Safe and efficient cancer therapies using adoptive transfer of engineered
cells are very promising but very challenging approaches. Opportunities
to improve gene transfer into primary cells involve a better design of
the vectors used. Such improvements must lead to an increase of the
efficiency of gene expression, the cell phenotype preservation and the
increase of the gene number delivered. The use of lentiviral vectors has
largely increased in clinical protocols over the past few years but
safety concerns have slowed down this progression. Actually, the
permanent genetic modification remains a focus of significant regulatory
oversight. On another side, mRNA delivery is a versatile, flexible, and
safe mean for protein therapies, but existing techniques, such as
chemical or electroporation-based transfection protocols, are known to
induce cell toxicity and phenotype modifications of the target cells.
Here, we present an innovative tool, named LentiFlash, allowing RNA
delivery into target cells without any genomic scar. This tool combines
RNA delivery, providing the best expression system to get efficient and
transient expression, and lentiviral delivery which exhibits the best
efficiency of entry into primary and stem cells. The RNA encapsidation is
mediated via an RNA/protein interaction using properties of the MS2
bacteriophage. This new vector breaks with all existing systems. The
resulting lentiviral particle is able to efficiently deliver non-viral
coding or non-coding RNA into the cytoplasm of any cell type. These
LentiFlash particles, are able to transduce delicate primary cells, such
as dendritic cells, T cells and hematopoietic stem cells. They show an
efficient, fast and transient expression of protein and RNA, such as
antigenic peptides or genome editing tools, with no cell phenotype
modification. Here we show a proof of concept on primary murine dendritic
cells transduction with LentiFlash particles, successfully used to
deliver several tumoral antigens. As a result, these dendritic cells are
able to present the antigens to the immune system which in turn can
efficiently fight a tumor development into wild type mice. This new
delivery system gives the opportunity for multiple antigens co-expression
to enhance immune responses, avoiding tumor relapse. Such multiple
co-expressions into immune cells are expected to mimic the innate and
adaptive immune responses. This transient RNA delivery mediated by
LentiFlash is a powerful tool to induce an efficient gene delivery. The
possibility to express multiple genes at once in the target cells is an
attractive therapeutic perspective. The absence of any viral sequence
avoids any integration event, an important safety consideration for human
use. Finally, another advantage of the LentiFlash system is its ability
to utilize lentiviral production platforms already validated in clinical
settings.


