Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Uptake of lung cancer exosomes induces migratory and invasive
phenotypic changes in lung epithelial cells in an oncogene context
dependent manner.


Cancer-derived exosomes are intracellular signaling organelles that can
act via inter-cellular communication to help cancer cells invade
neighboring tissues and prime metastatic sites for cancer cell spread.
Lung cancer is a highly metastatic disease, with metastases often
occurring when tumors are in a clinically early stage. Little is known of
how lung cancer exosomes influence the migratory/ invasive phenotype of
lung cancer cells. We studied migration and invasion mechanisms by
transferring cancer-derived exosomes to recipient cells including cancer
cells, human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs) cells, and HBECs that we
had modified with common lung cancer oncogenic changes. Exosomes isolated
from lung cancer line H1299 cells (p53null, NRAS mutant) and
non-malignant, immortalized HBEC3-KT cells were characterized for exosome
content and type by nanoparticle tracking analysis, electron microscopy,
western blotting with antibodies directed at HSP70 and CD63, and
generation of H1299 and HBEC3-KT derivatives stably transfected with
CD63-GFP, releasing green fluorescence exosomes for tracking purposes.
Exosomes were isolated using a variety of published methods and the
amount quantified: 106 H1299 and HBEC-3KT cells produced 9 x 109 and 7 x
109 exosomes of similar size (125.4nm and 129.8nm). Effect of exosomes
from cancer and HBECs were tested on: 1. cell motility and invasiveness
of HBECs and their oncogenic derivatives determined by transwell chamber
migration assay and scratch assay; 2. vascular leakiness properties in
the lung by evaluating mouse lung endothelial permeability after exosomes
were injected (an early event in metastatic spread for the migrated
cells); and 3. xenograft tumor formation. We found CD63-GFP exosomes from
H1299 and HBEC3-KT are actively incorporated by all of the cell types.
However, only H1299 exosomes (but not HBEC3-KT exosomes) induced
migratory/invasive phenotypic and morphologic changes and they did this
in a concentration-dependent manner in lung cancer cells and HBECs with
oncogenic changes (HBEC sh-p53+KRASv12 and sh-p53+KRASv12+c-MYC
manipulated HBECs) but not in the parental HBEC3-KT cells. Also, H1299
exosomes but not HBEC3-KT exosomes enhanced the lung endothelial
permeability as evaluated by the extravasated dextran leaking. NSCLC
H1299 cells when injected with its own exosomes produced better xenograft
takes compared to H1299 cells alone. Lung cancer-derived exosomes
compared to exosomes derived from immortalized but non-malignant human
bronchial epithelial cells induced an increased migratory/invasive
phenotype with lung vascular leakiness and higher xenograft tumor take
rates. However, they induced these changes only in the context of key
oncogenic changes. These results suggest understanding and targeting the
mechanism of such lung cancer derived exosome behavior could lead to
novel therapeutic strategies.


