Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deconstructing cancer stem cells: IL-6, G-CSF and Activin-A as
mediators of stroma-orchestrated epithelial cells’ dedifferentiation.


Intercellular communication in cancer is a deceiving and extremely
efficient process through which the corporal machinery is hijacked by a
panoply of cellular and molecular strategies turning the entire human
body into an evolutionary arena. The extensive crosstalk mediated by
cytokines and chemokines overcome the inefficiency of the
invasion-metastasis cascade, thus allowing the development of the
often-fatal metastatic disease. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) have recently
been implicated in major steps of the tumorigenic process, namely in
tumor initiation, metastasis formation and tumor relapse following
therapy. Yet, despite their relevance, the exact mechanisms underlying
their formation are still unclear. After observing that the malignant
human bronchial epithelial RenG2 cells dedifferentiated following culture
in the subcutaneous mouse lumbar region, co-cultures of surgically
isolated mice lumbar stromal cells with RenG2 cells were established and
the conditioned media studied by multiplex and ELISA. Consequently,
Interleukin-6 (IL-6), Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and
Activin-A were identified as the paracrine mediators of the intercellular
communication process. Aiming to ascertain the individual role of each
cytokine in the dedifferentiation process, as well as to access the
involvement of exosomes as transport vehicle, the same co-cultures were
reproduced in the presence of specific cytokine-communication blockers,
either individually or in combinations of up to three blockers, and
exosome-mediated communication inhibitors. Finally, exosomes were also
collected from control co-cultures and their cargo screened for the
target cytokines. ELISA showed that the three cytokines were present
inside fibroblasts-secreted exosomes. Moreover, whenever exosomes’
release was blocked, dedifferentiation was abrogated, further proving the
role of the aforementioned cytokines and of exosomes in the
dedifferentiation process. Additionally, the cytokine-blocking
experiments revealed that only IL-6 and Activin-A were endowed with the
potential to orchestrate dedifferentiation, as when at least one of these
cytokines was present a stem cell population developed inside RenG2
cells. Finally, G-CSF appeared to be decisive in maintaining the
undifferentiated phenotype, as a larger pool of CSCs was attained
whenever this cytokine and either IL-6 or Activin-A were present.
Altogether the attained results implicated IL-6 and Activin-A in the
formation of CSCs by dedifferentiation, and G-CSF as a potent keeper of
the dedifferentiation status. Subsequent studies are now required to
access the use of these cytokines as therapeutic targets so the
tumorigenic process may be abrogated in its initial steps, improving
patients’ prognosis and survival.

Work sponsored by FEDER, POFC-COMPETE and the FCT grants
PTDC/BBB-BQB/2450/2012 and SFRH/BD/33884/2009.


