Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exposure-efficacy (OS) analysis of tremelimumab in unresectable
malignant mesothelioma.


Purpose: Tremelimumab is a fully human anti-CTLA-4 IgG2 monoclonal
antibody that enhances human T-cell activation. Tremelimumab was
evaluated in a Phase IIb (DETERMINE), randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study in patients with unresectable pleural or
peritoneal malignant mesothelioma, randomised (2:1) to receive either
tremelimumab (10 mg/kg, seven doses Q4W followed by Q12W) or placebo. The
study demonstrated no clinically meaningful differences in overall
survival (OS). The primary objectives of this analysis were to evaluate
the relationship of exposure with OS, and the impact of potential
confounders.

Methods: A population PK model was developed to estimate and derive PK
exposure metrics (area under the curve at steady state [AUCss] or
clearance [CL]) for exposure-OS analysis. Impact of potential confounders
was evaluated using graphical and exploratory approaches. Factors
including body weight, age, gender, race, ECOG status, anatomical site
(pleural or peritoneal), line of therapy, EORTC status, tumour histology,
baseline tumour size, LDH, and CRP were evaluated. The analyses were
performed using NONMEM 7.2 and R software.

Results: The population PK included 376 patients and 1328 post-first dose
PK concentrations. PK was consistent with previous knowledge and low
incidence of anti-drug antibodies was observed. A 2-compartment linear PK
model adequately described the data. Tremelimumab CL and volume of
distribution (V1) were 310 mL/day and 3.85 L, with moderate variability
of ~38% and ~32%, respectively. There was an apparent exposure-OS
relation when stratified by AUCss. However, at least 3 factors (gender,
CRP, and baseline tumour size) were statistically significant PK
predictors (pResults: The population PK included 376 patients and 1328
post-first dose PK concentrations. PK was consistent with previous
knowledge and low incidence of anti-drug antibodies was observed. A
2-compartment linear PK model adequately described the data. Tremelimumab
CL and volume of distribution (V1) were 310 mL/day and 3.85 L, with
moderate variability of ~38% and ~32%, respectively. There was an
apparent exposure-OS relation when stratified by AUCss. However, at least
3 factors (gender, CRP, and baseline tumour size) were statistically
significant PK predictors (p<0.05 on CL) indicating multi-dimensional
confounding effect. Higher baseline tumor size, higher CRP levels and
males were associated with lower PK exposure of tremelimumab.

Conclusions: The observed apparent exposure-OS relationship is the result
of imbalance in prognostic factors impacting OS rather than a true
association of exposure with efficacy.


