Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel image cytometric analysis method for T-cell-mediated
cytotoxicity of 3D tumor spheroids.


Cell-mediated cytotoxicity assays have been frequently performed to
characterize cancer cytotoxic potential of immune cells, antibodies, and
drug compounds. Traditionally, these assays are performed using release
assays such as Cr51 (radioactivity), Calcein (fluorescence), or LDH
(enzymatic). However, release assays have limitations such as the
handling of hazardous material, the indirect measurement of cell death
leading to an under estimation of cytotoxicity, the requirement for a
large volume of cell sample, and the inability to visually confirm, image
ad track the assay kinetically. In the recent years, Celigo image
cytometry has been used to perform high-throughput cell-mediated
cytotoxicity assays using a direct cell counting method where cancer
cells (Target) are stained with Calcein AM. Upon the addition of effector
immune cells with the fluorescently stained Target cells in the presence
or absence of antibody or drug compounds, the Celigo image cytometer is
used to capture bright-field and fluorescent images and analyze the
change in Target cell count over time to determine the cytotoxicity
percentage. In general, these assays are performed in a 2D cultures. The
2D assays for cancer drug discovery have had some difficulty in
identifying more qualified drug candidates for clinical testing, thus
there has been an increase in interest of performing cytotoxicity assays
in 3D tumor models. Traditional 3D spheroid analysis methods require the
use of standard microscopy, which is time-consuming and subjective.
Celigo imaging cytometer has also been used to rapidly analyze drug
effects on 3D tumor spheroids. In this work, we demonstrate a novel
method of analyzing T cell-mediated cytotoxicity on 3D tumor spheroids in
the presence of absence of ImmTAC molecules, which can promote higher T
cell killing. In this experiment, MDA-MB-453 GFP expressing breast cancer
cells are used to form tumor spheroids in an ultra-low attachment plate.
The spheroids are then treated with primary T cells at 1:10 and 1:50 E:T
ratios, as well as 10, 1, 0.1, 0.01, and 0.001 nM ImmTAC. The results
showed a dose response effect of T cell killing with the addition of
ImmTAC molecules by measuring spheroid size in GFP fluorescence and
viability using propidium iodide. The image cytometry method was able to
monitor changes in spheroid size and fluorescence over time and rapidly
quantify T cell killing, which was as high as 75%. The captured
bright-field and fluorescent images also clearly showed the cytotoxicity
effect from the combination of T cells and ImmTAC. The ability to screen
cytotoxic effects of immune cells, antibody, and drug compounds on 3D
tumor spheroids can provide an alternative tumor model for identifying
more qualified cancer drug candidates for drug discovery campaigns.


