Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triple negative breast cancer patient-derived xenografts as a
translational model for discovery of novel therapeutic targets.


Triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) constitute 12% of all breast
cancers, and is approximately twice more prevalent in African-American
populations. Louisiana has a high proportion of African-American
residents (32.5% in 2015), and thus hosts a higher population of TNBC
patients. TNBCs have an aggressive phenotype that is elusive to the
targeted therapeutics used to treat other breast cancer subtypes. The
claudin-low molecular subtype has higher rates of metastases and
recurrence. Certain kinase families have been extensively studied as
regulators of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process involved
in the initiation of cancer metastasis. Discovery of novel kinase targets
within the subset of uncharacterized kinases could provide important
insight into future targeted therapies. However, current models utilized
in target discovery research are limited by the inability to accurately
recapitulate the complex stromal architecture and heterogenous genetic
and molecular composition of breast cancer. Furthermore, immortalized
cell lines are limited to a 2D environment and over time acquire
mutations that may not reflect the primary tumor. Recently, our
laboratory has successfully established two TNBC patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) models derived from African-American patients, and
generated cell lines (TU-BCx-2K1, TU-BCx-2O0) and mammospheres. One of
these models, 2O0, presents tumor architecture, cellular composition,
genomic (qRT-PCR) and protein (western blot) expressions that are
concordant with a claudin-low subtype. Furthermore, we show that both
TNBC models metastasize to the lungs, and exhibit molecular
characteristics consistent with mesenchymal phenotypes. We utilized these
translational PDX models to screen a library of small molecule inhibitors
that represent a variety of kinase pathways to identify novel therapeutic
targets and/or pathways that are specific to TNBC subtypes. We found in a
preliminary cell morphology screen using three TNBC cell lines
(MDA-MB-231, BT549, MDA-MB-157), two small molecule inhibitors that
increased epithelial marker (CDH1) gene expression, suppressed
mesenchymal (VIM, c-FOS, SNAI1, ZEB1) expression and/or suppressed
cellular motility in transwell migration assays. We observed after ex
vivo treatments with our PDX tumors the two compounds increase the
epithelial marker CDH1 expression, and suppress mesenchymal markers (VIM,
MMP2) expressions. We confirm these findings in the TU-BCx-2K1 cell line.
Kinase array data revealed candidate kinases responsible for the observed
EMT changes in the two compounds of interest (NEK5, NEK9, NEK1
potentially affect cell motility; SRC-family kinases, TAOK2, STK10
potentially affect EMT gene changes); we plan to utilize the PDX cell
lines to characterize these kinases in EMT. We aim to ultimately discover
novel therapeutic targets specific to different TNBC molecular subtypes.


