Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting brain cancer stem cells by potentiating
radiation-induced ER stress.


Background. Glioblastoma (GBM) is one of the most malignant brain tumors
occurring in both children and adults. Despite an aggressive treatment
regimen consisting of surgical resection, radiation therapy and
chemotherapy the five-year survival rate is less than 5%. This poor
outcome has been attributed to the existence of therapy-resistant GBM
stem-like cells (GSCs), which are believed to be responsible for tumor
recurrence and patient relapse. Understanding the resistance mechanisms
employed by brain tumor stem cells and developing novel methods to target
these cells is necessary for prolonged patient survival. Recent evidence
suggests that the endoplasmic reticulum stress response pathway may
mediate therapeutic resistance in cancer. Here we sought to examine the
ER stress response pathway of GSCs in response to ionizing radiation and
to increase the extent of ER stress in an effort to promote cell death
using the glycolytic inhibitor, 2-deoxy glucose (2-DG).

Methods. GSC lines were derived from resected tumor sections. GSCs were
irradiated using the Rad Source 2000 Series Biological Irradiator.
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) was used to investigate the
ultra-structural alterations of GSCs following exposure to 8 Gy
radiation. Viability was determined using trypan blue exclusion, MTS and
LDH assays. Cell signaling pathways were investigated by western blot
analysis.

Results. Consistent with previous findings, minimal cell death was
observed in GSCs exposed to 2-20 Gy radiation. TEM analysis revealed that
exposure to 8 Gy significantly increased ER lumen dilation, suggestive of
ER stress. Western blot analysis indicated an increase in ER stress
markers GRP78, GRP94 and CHOP, confirming that radiation induces ER
stress in GSCs. Treatment with 2-DG induced an increase in ER lumen
diameter and ER stress markers. Combined 2-DG (0.5mM and 2mM) and
radiotherapy (8 Gy) significantly increased ER luminal diameter and ER
stress marker expression over radiation or 2-DG alone. In addition,
combined radiation and 2-DG (0.1-2mM) significantly reduced GSC viability
compared to radiation or 2-DG alone.

Conclusion. The ER stress response pathway is an adaptive mechanism and
thought to mediate therapeutic resistance. Here we demonstrate that
radiation induces ER stress response pathway including ER lumen dilation
and an increase in molecular chaperone expression in GSCs. Potentiating
ER stress can switch the pathway from one of adaptation to cell death.
2-DG increased radiation-induced ER stress and promoted cell death. Our
data suggests that targeting this adaptive response could increase the
efficacy of radiotherapy and prolong patient survival


