Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of arginine methyltransferase PRMT5 as a novel
therapeutic target in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.


Advances in risk-adapted cytotoxic chemotherapy, hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation and supportive care have contributed to significant
improvements in the survival of patients with acute lymphoid leukemia
(ALL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) over the past few decades.
However, despite such progress, a significant percentage of both adult
and pediatric leukemia patients become refractory to therapy or relapse
and eventually die of disease. Hence, there remains an urgent need for
the development of effective and targeted therapies for acute leukemia.
Recent genetic profiling of solid and hematologic malignancies has
identified epigenetic factors as a critical group of genes recurrently
mutated in cancer. Additionally, epigenetic dysregulation has been shown
to play an important role in the development, progression and maintenance
of leukemia. Therefore, pharmacological inhibition of epigenetic factors
represents a potential avenue for the development of novel
epigenetic-targeted therapies.

In order to identify epigenetic vulnerabilities in leukemia, we developed
an epigenetic-focused shRNA screen to search for novel therapeutic
targets in human leukemia cell lines both in vitro and in vivo.
Specifically, T- and B-ALL cell lines were transduced with a library of
shRNAs targeting 449 genes including epigenetic readers, writers and
erasers and other chromatin-related factors. Selected cells were
subsequently cultured in vitro and concurrently injected into mice.
Engraftment of inoculated cells and disease progression were monitored
through bioluminescence imaging. Amongst the universe of epigenetic
regulatory proteins, the arginine methyl transferase, PRMT5, emerged as
the most significantly depleted factor in both in vitro and in vivo
screenings.

Chemical inhibition of PRMT5 enzymatic activity effectively reduced
protein symmetric dimethyl arginine methylation, altered splicing,
inhibited cell growth and promoted apoptosis of both ALL and AML cell
lines in vitro. In addition, inhibition of PRMT5 in vivo using
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) T-ALL mouse models demonstrated
diminished tumor growth and prolonged survival. Notably,

quantification of peripheral blood cell numbers showed that pharmacologic
PRMT5 inhibition was well tolerated and did not affect normal
hematopoiesis in mice suggesting that a therapeutic window exists for
anticancer drugs targeting PRMT5 in acute leukemia. Overall, our data
indicates that pre-mRNA processing and in particular RNA splicing
modulation may represent novel therapeutic targets in leukemia.


