Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of sulfatide reactive type II NKT cells from
mouse lung.


The immune system plays a major role in the elimination of tumors. CD8 T
cell infiltration is known to be a good prognostic indicator. The
development of therapies based on checkpoint inhibitor antibodies was an
important breakthrough in increasing survival by limiting the exhaustion
of cytotoxic cells and increasing tumor cell eradication. However, the
immune system also contains regulatory cells that protect the organism
from inappropriate activation of immune cells against self-antigens.
Thus, the fact that tumor cells are autologous leads regulatory cells to
inhibit the activation of anti-tumor cytotoxic cells and thus increase
tumor escape. Therefore, understanding the function and the activation of
regulatory cells might help to develop therapies to limit the activation
of regulatory cells in order to increase tumor clearance.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are lymphocytes with features of natural
killer (NK) and of T cells placing them at the interface of innate and
adaptive immunity. Like NK cells, they rapidly produce cytokines after
stimulation, orienting the immune response. As T cells, they express a T
cell receptor (TCR) that allows the recognition of specific lipids
presented by the non-classical MHC-I molecule CD1d. According to their
TCR usage, two populations of NKT cells are described: type I and type
II. All type I NKT cells express a semi-invariant TCR (Valpha24Jalpha18
in humans, Valpha14Jalpah18 in mice) that recognizes
α-galactosylceramide (αGalCer). They can be identified with the
αGalCer-loaded CD1d tetramer. In contrast, type II NKT cells express a
more diverse TCR repertoire. There is no currently identified lipid
antigen recognized by all type II NKT cells, making their identification
more difficult. A fraction of them recognize sulfatide. By using
sulfatide-loaded CD1d-tetramers, we observed for the first time that
sulfatide-reactive type II NKT cells were enriched in the lung, a major
site of tumor metastasis. Moreover, we previously showed that in vivo
stimulation of type II NKT cells with sulfatide increased the number of
tumor nodules in the lung. An in-depth phenotype analysis revealed that
they were CD4 or CD8 single positive cells, like conventional T cells,
whereas type I NKT cells are either CD4+CD8- or double negative. Type II
NKT cells do not express PLZF, the master regulator of NKT cell
development and exist in PLZF-/- mice contrary to type I NKT cells. We
showed that type II NKT cells also expressed markers of myeloid cells,
c-Kit, CD11b and Ly6C even though histological analysis revealed
lymphocytic morphology. Interestingly, at steady state, type II NKT cells
expressed granzyme A but not granzyme B or perforin. The in vivo
injection of sulfatide increased the expression of the activation markers
CD69 and CD44 as well as granzyme A. Since the regulatory functions of
type II NKT cells have been shown to be critical in tumor immunity, the
detailed characterization of these cells could help to develop a new
immunotherapy for cancer.


