Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TBK1 regulates mitotic progression by modulating spindle assembly
checkpoint in cancer cells.


TANK Binding Kinase 1 (TBK1) is a non-canonical IkB kinase that
contributes to KRAS-driven lung cancer. It is activated by
phosphorylation of Serine-172 by TLR and RIG1 signaling, and this circuit
triggers phosphorylation of IRF3 and IRF7, activation of NFκB and the
expression of proinflammatory genes and interferons. In addition to its
role role in regulating innate immunity, TBK1 also promotes oncogenesis
by phosphorylating Akt and enhancing cell survival and by promoting
autophagy and mitophagy. TBK1 is also induced under hypoxic conditions
and expressed at significant levels in many solid tumors. TBK1 also
contributes to prostate cancer dormancy and drug resistance by inhibiting
mTOR and to tamoxifen resistance of breast cancer cells by enhancing
transcriptional activity of ERα.

Recent studies from our lab revealed a novel role for TBK1 in regulating
mitosis. It was found that levels of phospho-TBK1 increases and localizes
to centrosomes and the mitotic spindles during mitosis. Depletion of TBK1
was shown to trigger defects in spindle apparatus and prevents mitotic
progression (Pillai et al., Nature Communications, 2015). TBK1 physically
interacts and phosphorylates centrosomal protein CEP170 and mitotic
apparatus protein NuMA. At the same time, it is not clear whether TBK1
regulates mitosis my modulating the Spindle Assembly Checkpoint (SAC).

Our results show that TBK1 colocalizes with Cdc20 on the centrosomes.
Additionally, TBK1-inhibited cells showed an increase in the
colocalization of BUBR1 and Cdc20, with enhanced recruitment of BUBR1 to
kinetochores. To further study how TBK1 affects SAC, lung and breast
cancer cells were depleted of TBK1 by CRISPR/Cas9 mediated genome
editing. Cells depleted of TBK1 showed very few cells in the mitotic
stage; those that entered mitosis had residual levels of TBK1 and showed
multipolarity and unusually stable and bundled microtubules. TBK1
knockout cells not only showed aberrant mitotic structures and had
elevated levels of SAC components including BUBR1 and Cdc20.
Surprisingly, level of mitotic Cyclin B1 remained unchanged in spite of
elevated levels of Cdc20 indicating a possible inactivation of Anaphase
Promoting complex (APC/C). Also, percentage of Cyclin B1 positive cells
was significantly high in mitotic cells enriched using double thymidine
block in the presence of TBK1 inhibitor BX795 (R9+BX) and MRT67307
(R9+MRT) as compared to untreated mitotic cells (R9). Further, double
thymidine blocked released cells displayed elevated levels of SAC
components upon treatment with TBK1 inhibitors. All these findings
suggest that TBK1 facilitates mitotic progression through satisfying SAC.


