Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer characteristics among Indigenous American women from
Peru.


Background: Breast cancer prognosis depends on stage at diagnosis and
varies by intrinsic tumor subtype. In the US, the distribution of
intrinsic subtypes has been shown to differ between racial/ethnic groups,
with African American and Hispanic/Latina women more likely to be
diagnosed with the more aggressive “triple negative” breast cancer
(TNBC), lacking expression of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone
receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2),
compared to Non-Hispanic/Latina White women. Hispanics/Latinos in the US
are a heterogeneous group originating from different countries with
different cultures and ancestral backgrounds. Information about the
distribution of tumor subtypes in Latin American regions is lacking.

Methods: Data for these analyses come from the Instituto Nacional de
Enfermedades Neoplásicas (the Peruvian National Cancer Institute), which
diagnoses and treats 20% of all breast cancers diagnosed in Peru. We have
abstracted data from clinical records for 303 patients diagnosed with
breast cancer between 2010 and 2015 and who self-reported as members of
an Indigenous American community from the Andean Mountain region
(indigenous subgroups: Quechuas, Aimaras, N=232) or the Amazonian region
(indigenous subgroups: Shipibo-Konibo, Awajún, Ashaninka, Kichua, Ese
Eja, Harakbut, Amahuaca, Shawi, Yanesha, Kakataibo, Nomatsigenga, N=71).
We compared the distribution of age at diagnosis and tumor
characteristics by region. Comparisons between the two regions were
conducted using chi-squared tests, as well as a t-test for age at
diagnosis. Breast cancer subtype was defined as luminal A (ER/PR+/HER2-),
luminal B (ER+/HER2+), HER2 overexpressing (ER/PR- HER2+) and triple
negative (ER/PR- HER2-) based on immunohistochemistry.

Results: Overall, tumors from the 303 Indigenous American women from Peru
included in the present study were 37% luminal A, 20% luminal B, 23% HER2
overexpressing and 19% triple negative. Our analyses showed that women
from the Amazonian region were diagnosed at a younger age (50 vs. 55 mean
age at diagnosis, P value =0.001), later stage (53.0% vs. 41.7% stage III
or IV, P value=0.107) and more frequently with triple-negative tumors
compared to women from the Mountain Region (30% vs. 16%, P value =0.115).

Conclusion: Differences between Indigenous American women from the
Amazonian and Mountain Range regions in Peru could be due to variation in
genetic predisposition to particular subtypes of the disease, variation
in environmental exposures, as well as to differences in cancer awareness
and access to care between the different groups. The more we learn by
analyzing diverse populations, subpopulations and revealing heterogeneity
within Latin American women, the better equipped we will be to provide
adequate care for all women.


