Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of PTEN loss in basal-like 2 triple negative breast cancer.


Basal-like 2 (BL2) triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive
molecular subtype of breast cancer with a poor clinical outcome. These
cancers are characterized by overexpression of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR), loss of PTEN protein expression, and presence of mutated
TP53. Despite overexpression of EGFR, EGFR-targeted therapies have
performed poorly in clinical settings. Therefore, understanding the
mechanisms of resistance in these cells is critical for improved patient
care. To understand the oncogenic signaling landscape in BL2 TNBC, our
lab utilizes the BL2 cell lines SUM-149 and SUM-229, which overexpress
EGFR activated by an amphiregulin-mediated autocrine loop, and are PTEN
null. In addition, we utilize the BL1 subtype cell line MDA-MB-468, which
also exhibits overexpression of EGFR and loss of PTEN. Both the BL1 and
BL2 cell lines exhibit elevated levels of phosphorylated AKT (p-AKT)
compared to control MCF-10A cells. However, while treatment of SUM-149
and SUM-229 cells with inhibitors targeting EGFR (Gefitinib), type-1 PI3K
(BKM120, BKM), mTOR (KU-0063794, KU) and pan-AKT (MK2206, MK) did not
reduce p-AKT levels, MCF-10A and MDA-MB-468 cell lines treated with the
same panel of targeted inhibitors showed marked inhibition of p-AKT. In
addition, re-expression of PTEN in SUM-149 and SUM-229 cells had little
effect on p-AKT but dramatically reduced p-AKT in MDA-MB-468 cells.
Although PTEN re-expression alone had little effect on p-AKT in SUM-149
and SUM-229 cells, these cells did display decreased AKT phosphorylation
following treatment with Gefitinib, BKM, KU, and MK. There are three
isoforms of AKT (AKT1, AKT2 and AKT3) of which, AKT3 has been implicated
in the aggressive nature of some cancers. Previous studies in our lab
showed that SUM-149 and SUM-229 cell lines have higher levels of AKT3
message and protein compared to the other AKT isoforms. AKT3 expression
was also higher in the BL2 cell lines compared to BL1 and control cells.
This differential expression of AKT isoforms led us to examine the impact
of AKT isoform-specific signaling. Using PTEN re-expressing SUM-149
cells, we showed that PTEN re-expression resulted in decreased
phosphorylation of AKT1 but not of AKT3. However, PTEN re-expression
combined with Gefitinib treatment dramatically reduced phosphorylation of
both AKT1 and AKT3. Interestingly, while neither re-expression of PTEN
nor Gefitinib expression alone had an effect on colony-forming
efficiency, PTEN re-expression coupled with Gefitinib treatment was able
to reduce colony formation efficiency in both SUM-149 and SUM-229 cell
lines. Taken together, these data indicate that BL2 breast cancers, with
overexpression of EGFR and loss of PTEN expression, have an oncogenic
signaling network involving AKT3 that contributes to the aggressive and
drug-resistant phenotype observed in this subset of TNBC.


