Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting lipid metabolism and ER stress in renal cell carcinoma
by englerin A.


Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is among the top ten most common forms of
cancer and is the leading malignancy of the kidney. Clear cell renal
carcinoma (cc-RCC), the most frequent type of RCC, is one of the most
refractory cancers with an incidence that is on the rise. The two-year
survival rate for patients with metastatic disease is under 20% despite
approved targeted therapies. Hence, there is an urgent need to
investigate novel agents. Screening of plant extracts in search of new
anti-cancer agents resulted in the discovery of englerin A (EA), a
guaiane sesquiterpene with potent cytotoxicity against RCC and a small
subset of other cancers. Although a few cellular targets have been
identified for EA, in most instances, modulation of these targets
required concentrations of EA much higher than that required to kill
tumor cells highly sensitive to EA. Hence, it is still not clear what
mechanisms account for the cytotoxicity of EA in tumor cells highly
sensitive to EA. Unlike any prior study, the current study used a systems
biology approach to explore the mechanism(s) of action of EA.
Metabolomics analyses were conducted after treatment of human RCC A498
cells with 100 nM EA for 24 and 48 h. Pathway analysis revealed that 88%
of the metabolic disturbance associated with englerin A at 24 h was due
to changes in lipid metabolism. In particular, among the top metabolites,
several ceramides and glucosylceramides increased up to 18- and 178-fold,
respectively. On the other hand, all sphingomyelins decreased up to
5.5-fold. Furthermore, EA induced depletion in phosphatidylcholine,
phosphatidylglycerol, and phosphatidylethanolamine phospholipids. At 48 h
of englerin A treatment, the main findings from pathway analysis were the
accumulation of fatty acylcarnitine derivatives, purines, pyrimidines,
and phosphatidyl serine phospholipids, as well as the depletion of
reduced glutathione indicating dysfunctional mitochondria and oxidative
stress. Moreover, microarray analyses determined that EA (100 nM) induced
ER stress signaling and an acute inflammatory response including
interferon signaling, likely due to the generation of ceramides which
were toxic to both A498 and UO-31 renal cancer cells. Quantitative PCR
and Western Blot analyses confirmed that EA induced both the unfolded
protein and acute inflammatory response. Furthermore, fluorescence
confocal microscopy revealed that EA at 25 nM disrupted the morphology of
the ER confirming the deleterious effect of EA on the ER. Collectively,
our findings suggest that cc-RCC is highly sensitive to disruptions in
lipid metabolism and ER stress and that these vulnerabilities can be
targeted for the treatment of cc-RCC and possibly other lipid storing
cancers. Furthermore, our results also suggest that ceramides may be a
mediator of some of the actions of EA. Lastly, the acute inflammatory
response induced by EA may mediate anti-tumor immunity.


