Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Hes1 in the normal and tumor stem cells of the
intestine.


Notch-Hes pathway plays a crucial role in the differentiation,
proliferation, and tumorigenesis of the intestine. We previously reported
that prenatal deletion of Hes1 reduces intestinal tumor proliferation;
however, postnatal deletion of Hes1, which recapitulates Hes1-targeted
tumor therapy, has not been thoroughly investigated. Here, we elucidated
the novel role of Hes1 in normal stem cells (NSCs) and tumor stem cells
(TSCs) of the adult intestine. First, we deleted Hes1 in Lgr5-expressing
or Bmi1-expressing NSCs and performed lineage tracing using
Lgr5CreERT2/+; Hes1flox/flox; Rosa26LacZ/+ and Bmi1CreER/+;
Hes1flox/flox; Rosa26LacZ/+ mice. After Hes1 deletion, Lgr5-expressing or
Bmi1-expressing NSCs gave rise to progeny cells, but could not
self-renew. However, Hes1 deletion in NSCs did not disrupt intestinal
homeostasis, because Hes1-positive NSCs were newly generated soon after
Hes1-deleted NSCs were depleted. Next, we stabilized beta-catenin for
intestinal tumor formation and deleted Hes1 in Lgr5-expressing cells
using Lgr5CreERT2/+; Ctnnb1lox(ex3)/+; Hes1flox/flox mice. Tumor
formation was dramatically suppressed, and the animal survival was
significantly improved, suggesting that Hes1 is required for the
initiation of intestinal tumor formation. Finally, we deleted Hes1 in
Lgr5-expressing TSCs of established intestinal tumors using
Lgr5CreERT2/+; Hes1flox/flox; ApcMin/+ mice. Of note, Hes1 deletion in
TSCs of established intestinal tumors induced immediate apoptosis of TSCs
and significantly reduced the number of tumors. qRT-PCR analysis of
sorted Lgr5-expressing cells one day after Hes1 deletion revealed
upregulation of pro-apoptotic genes and downregulation of anti-apoptotic
genes in Hes1-deleted TSCs, but not in Hes1-deleted NSCs. We also deleted
Hes1 in Dclk1-expressing TSCs of established intestinal tumors, and
confirmed that, irrespective of stem cell markers analyzed, Hes1 deletion
in TSCs leads to tumor regression by inducing immediate apoptosis in
TSCs. Taken together, Hes1 is required in different ways for the
maintenance of NSCs and TSCs: Hes1 deletion in NSCs does not perturb
homeostasis, whereas Hes1 deletion in TSCs leads to tumor regression.
Furthermore, Hes1 is necessary for the initiation of intestinal tumor
formation. Therefore, we propose Hes1 is a novel tumor-specific
therapeutic target.


