Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-cancer effects of selective Cox-2 and EP2 inhibition through
suppression of EMT and the clinical implications of overexpression of
Cox-2 and downregulation of E-cadherin in pharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma.


Background: Overexpression of cyclooxygenase 2 (Cox-2), an inducible
prostaglandin (PG) synthetase, is assumed to promote cancer progression
through its multifaceted function, including induction of angiogenesis,
stimulation of cell proliferation, restraint on apoptosis, and
immunosuppression. Furthermore, recently its inverse relationship with
E-cadherin expression was reported. The epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) accompanied by the downregulation of E-cadherin is
supposed to promote metastasis. However, neither the anti-cancer effect
of selective Cox-2 inhibitors on the regulation of E-cadherin nor its
specific mechanism has been examined in pharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma (PhSCC). In addition, the anti-tumor effect of EP2 antagonist,
a possibly more selective inhibitor of PGE2, remains to be elucidated.

Methods: We used quantitative real-time PCR to examine the effects of a
selective Cox-2 inhibitors, Celecoxib, and a selective EP2 antagonist,
PF-04418948, on the gene expressions of CDH-1, its transcriptional
repressors (snail, ZEB1, twist), and vimentin in the human PhSCC cell
lines BICR6 and FaDu. Alteration in E-cadherin expression on the cell
surface was evaluated by immunofluorescent staining. In vitro
proliferation and migration assays were performed to assess cellular
behaviors. Clinicopathological factors and immunohistochemical
expressions of Cox-2 and E-cadherin were evaluated using surgical
specimens from 54 patients with PhSCC who underwent transoral resection.

Results: Both Celecoxib and PF-04418948 upregulated the CDH-1 expression
and the membranous E-cadherin expression and downregulate the vimentin
expression in the PhSCC cells through the suppression of snail, ZEB1, and
twist expression. The extent of this effect depended on the baseline
expression levels of both E-cadherin and Cox-2 in each cell line.
Additionally, the cell migration was attenuated by both Celecoxib and
PF-04418948, whereas the cell proliferation was not affected. Univariate
analysis showed that differentiation, overexpression of Cox-2, and
decreased expression of E-cadherin were significantly correlated with
lymph node metastasis. Multivariate logistic regression revealed that
overexpression of Cox-2 (odds ratio [OR]=53.49, PResults: Both Celecoxib
and PF-04418948 upregulated the CDH-1 expression and the membranous
E-cadherin expression and downregulate the vimentin expression in the
PhSCC cells through the suppression of snail, ZEB1, and twist expression.
The extent of this effect depended on the baseline expression levels of
both E-cadherin and Cox-2 in each cell line. Additionally, the cell
migration was attenuated by both Celecoxib and PF-04418948, whereas the
cell proliferation was not affected. Univariate analysis showed that
differentiation, overexpression of Cox-2, and decreased expression of
E-cadherin were significantly correlated with lymph node metastasis.
Multivariate logistic regression revealed that overexpression of Cox-2
(odds ratio [OR]=53.49, P<0.001) and decreased expression of E-cadherin
(OR=0.06, P=0.016) were the independent risk factors affecting lymph node
metastasis.

Conclusions: These findings suggest that the appropriately selective
administration of the Cox-2 inhibitor and EP2 antagonist may have an
anti-metastatic effect through suppression of EMT by restoring E-cadherin
expression. In addition, overexpression of Cox-2 and downregulation of
E-cadherin may be closely implicated in lymph node metastasis in PhSCC.


