Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma cells can be converted into
functional hepatocytes by inhibition of Wnt signaling pathway.


Background and Aim:

Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (IHCC) is the second most prevalent
malignancy in the liver, and is one of the most aggressive malignancies
characterized by a poor prognosis. It is believed that IHCC is an
epithelial cell malignancy arising from cholangiocytes composing the
intrahepatic bile ducts. However, patients with viral hepatitis develop
IHCC, suggesting that IHCC is derived from transformed hepatocytes.
Indeed, recent studies have revealed that IHCC can arise from
Notch-mediated conversion of hepatocytes in mice. The new 3D culture
system called organoid culture has been developed, which allows long-term
expansion of Lgr5-positive stem cells. To clarify whether IHCC cells
harbor the potency of conversion into functional hepatocytes, we
established organoids derived from human IHCC and cultured them in
different culture conditions.

Methods:

We established organoids derived from human IHCC and cultured these
organoids with expansion medium (EM) containing R-spondin 1. Conversion
of IHCC cells into hepatocytes was conducted by organoid culture with
differentiation medium (DM) containing BMP7, DAPT, FGF19 and
dexamethasone.

Results:

Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) showed that genes associated with
hepatocyte differentiation signature were significantly enriched in IHCC
organoids cultured with DM compared with those cultured with EM. IHCC
organoids cultured with DM induced up-regulation of hepatocyte markers
albumin, HNF4a and CYP3A4, and acquired mature hepatocyte functions
including albumin secretion, bile acid production and increased CYP3A4
activity. Removal of R-spondin 1, a ligand of Wnt signaling pathway, from
EM enhanced hepatocyte differentiation. IHCC organoids cultured with DM
significantly reduced the malignant potential in vitro and in vivo
compared with those cultured with EM. Further studies using thioacetamide
(TAA)-induced IHCC model mice showed that TAA-induced inflammation in the
liver promoted recruited macrophages to secrete Wnt3a.

Conclusions:

These findings indicated that IHCC cells can be converted into functional
hepatocytes by inhibition of Wnt signaling pathway. Activation of Wnt
signaling pathway by recruited macrophages may play a critical role in
the malignant transformation of hepatocytes into IHCC, which could be an
important therapeutic target for IHCC.


