Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying preclinical predictive biomarkers to taselisib in
breast cancer cell lines.


The phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway is one of the most
frequently activated pathways in cancer, and controls critical cellular
processes such as proliferation, transcription and survival. Taselisib
(GDC0032) is an orally bioavailable, potent, and selective inhibitor of
Class I PI3K alpha, delta, and gamma isoforms, with 30fold less
inhibition of the PI3K beta isoform relative to the PI3K alpha isoform.
Previously published data demonstrated that taselisib has increased
activity against PIK3CA mutant cancer cell lines (Ndubaku CO et al, J Med
Chem, 2013).

A panel of 50 breast cancer cell lines were profiled for sensitivity to
taselisib using viability assays and subsequently correlated with PIK3CA
mutations and expression of ER, PR, HER2 and PTEN. The PIK3CA mutant cell
lines displayed an average of 30-fold greater sensitivity in IC50
compared to the PIK3CA wild-type cell lines. PTEN null cell lines were
largely refractory to taselisib. Within the PIK3CA wild-type cell lines,
the HER2 amplified cells showed an average of 18-fold greater sensitivity
in IC50 over the HER2 wild-type cell lines. No differences in taselisib
sensitivity were seen between the kinase, helical, or the C2 domain of
the PIK3CA gene within the PIK3CA mutant cell lines. In HER2 amplified
PIK3CA wild-type cell lines, taselisib did not fully suppress pAKT and
pS6 signaling, however full suppression was observed in combination with
the HER2 inhibitor, lapatinib. Increased apoptosis was observed with the
combination of taselisib and lapatinib in the HER2 amplified, PIK3CA
mutant cells, but not in HER2 amplified, PIK3CA wild-type cells. In
PIK3CA mutant luminal cell lines, taselisib induced ESR1 transcriptional
activity, but not in PIK3CA wild-type luminal lines, as assessed using
PR, GREB1 and IGFBP4 gene expression. This induction was ER- and
estradiol-dependent, and was suppressed using the estrogen degrader,
fulvestrant. Lastly, as up to 40% of ER+, second line PIK3CA mutant
metastatic tumors have been shown to harbor a mutation in the ESR1 gene
(Spoerke JM et al., Nat Commun, 2016), we assessed the crosstalk between
the PI3K and ER pathways in PIK3CA mutant MCF-7 cells that overexpress
two ESR1 hotspot mutations. These ESR1 mutant cell lines displayed
increased ER transcriptional activity, which was further activated by
taselisib, an observation that was reversed with fulvestrant
co-treatment. These data suggest that the combination of taselisib and an
estrogen degrader can suppress crosstalk between PI3K and ER in both an
ESR1 mutant and wild-type background, and supports the ongoing SANDPIPER
study of taselisib in combination with fulvestrant in metastatic ER+,
PIK3CA mutant cancers that have progressed following an aromatase
inhibitor therapy (NCT02340221).


