Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inflammatory patterns exhibited by African American colon
tumor-derived cell lines.


Despite progress in closing the gap, health disparities still persist
among African American (AA) colon cancer patients both in incidence and
death rates. Previous studies from our group reported that colon tumors
from AAs displayed hypermethylation of DNA regions in inflammatory genes
such as NELL1, GDF1, ARHGEF4, and ITGA4 when compared to Caucasian
Americans (CA). To assess potential differences in the inflammatory
response, we utilized two AA colon cancer cell lines generated in our
laboratory and compared them with the commercially available CAs colon
cancer cell lines, Caco-2 and HT-29. Recent experiments by our group with
the anti-inflammatory drugs Ibuprofen, Sulindac and Aspirin, showed
significantly higher IC50 values in proliferation assays for AA cell
lines compared to CA cell lines. Therefore, we evaluated the
anti-inflammatory effects of these drugs by determining secretion of
inflammatory cytokines and MAPKs activation in response to the
pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-alpha. The same parameters were tested for
the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. As hypothesized, our results in the
CA cell lines demonstrated down-regulation of MAPKs activation in
response to TNF-alpha after pre-treatment with Ibuprofen. On the
contrary, Ibuprofen concentrations as high as the IC50 values for the CA
cell lines were not able to induce down-regulation of MAPKs in the AA
cell lines. Interestingly, IL-10 treatment was more effective in the AA
compared to the CA cell lines, suggesting that the main anti-inflammatory
cytokine of the colon will be more effective in controlling inflammation
in AA colon tumors. Further studies are needed to elucidate the major
differences in inflammatory responses between AA and CA colon cancer cell
lines and their potential role in CRC health disparities. As it has been
documented that AA colon cancer patients are less responsive to the
chemotherapeutics Fluorouracil and Capecitabine, in future studies we
will evaluate the effect of these therapeutic agents on AA and CA cell
lines in terms of inflammation, cell viability, apoptosis and invasion.


