Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SY-1425, a selective RARα agonist, induces high levels of CD38
expression in RARA-high AML tumors creating a susceptibility to anti-CD38
therapeutic antibody treatment.


CD38 is a cell surface protein expressed primarily on white blood cells
and considered a marker of differentiation initiation. CD38 is involved
in the immune system by engaging cross-talk with T and B cells as well as
activation of NK cells. In multiple myeloma (MM), a subset of tumor cells
have high CD38 expression (CD38hi), which has led to the development of
effective anti-CD38 therapeutic antibodies, such as daratumumab (DARA).
Thus, cancer cells that express CD38 can be selectively targeted for
elimination by the immune system using these therapeutic antibodies. In
multiple myeloma, DARA is most effective in patients whose tumor cells
are CD38hi. In contrast, CD38 expression in AML tumors is generally
observed to be negative (CD38neg) or dim (CD38dim), and DARA has not
shown activity in preclinical AML models. We previously reported that
SY-1425, a clinical stage RARα agonist with improved pharmacokinetics,
potency, and selectivity over pan-retinoic acid agonists, induces
differentiation in non-APL AML cell lines and primary patient samples
with a RARA super-enhancer associated biomarker (RARA-high). Since CD38
was found to be among the most differentially expressed genes in response
to SY-1425, we hypothesized that SY-1425 mediated CD38 induction to
levels comparable to MM may sensitize RARA-high AML cells to anti-CD38
therapy. We demonstrate that SY-1425 treatment of four RARA-high AML cell
lines and four RARA-high primary AML patient PBMCs induces the CD38hi
phenotype, as measured by flow cytometry, similar to that found in the
DARA sensitive MM cells. In contrast, we see no induction in RARA-low
cell lines. We then demonstrated the activity of the SY-1425 and DARA
combination in an ex vivo NK cell co-culture assay. Two RARA-high AML
cell lines treated with SY-1425 and DARA were co-cultured with NK cells
and monitored for both antibody dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity
(ADCC) and NK cell activation by interferon gamma production. The
combination of SY-1425 and DARA led to a six-fold increase in tumor cell
death relative to the single agent controls, and 5-10 fold increases in
NK cell activation is observed only in the SY-1425 and DARA combination
treatment of RARA-high AML cell lines. Neither single agent, when
administered alone, resulted in ADCC. Furthermore, a RARA-low AML cell
line does not respond in the ADCC assay following the combination
treatment due to the lack of CD38 induction in this SY-1425 insensitive
line. In summary, we have identified a novel and rational combination
treatment approach for a subset of patients with RARA-high AML. By
inducing the expression of CD38, SY-1425 in combination with DARA elicits
tumor cell death and NK cell activation. Based on these findings, a phase
2 clinical study with SY-1425 in combination with an anti-CD38 antibody
is planned in AML using an RARA biomarker patient selection strategy.


