Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IDH1-mutated gliomas rely on anaplerosis of glutamate and lactate
whereas IDH1 wild-type gliomas rely on glycolysis and acetate anaplerosis.


Hotspot mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1MT) initiate low
grade glioma (LGG) and secondary glioblastoma and induce neomorphic
activity that converts α-ketoglutarate (α-KG) to the oncometabolite
D-2-hydroxyglutarate (D-2-HG). This causes metabolic rewiring that is not
fully understood and in vitro studies have shown that IDH1MT cancer cells
rely on glutaminolysis, providing cells with α-KG via activities of
glutaminase (GLS) and glutamate dehydrogenase (GLUD). Here, we first show
by in silico analysis of 269 IDH1 wild-type (IDH1WT) and 408 IDH1MT
gliomas, obtained from the The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database, that
IDH1WT gliomas have high expression levels of genes encoding for enzymes
that are involved in glycolysis and acetate anaplerosis. On the other
hand, the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, rather than glycolytic lactate
production, is the predominant metabolic pathway in IDH1MT gliomas and is
driven by lactate and glutamate anaplerosis to facilitate production of
α-KG, and ultimately D-2-HG. IDH1WT- and IDH1MT-related differences in
expression were found in both LGG and glioblastoma. Furthermore, via in
situ enzymatic activity mapping, we show in human gliomas and in
xenocraft models that GLUD activity is increased and GLS activity is
decreased in IDH1MT glioma, indicating that IDH1MT gliomas depend on
glutamatolysis, rather than glutaminolysis. We show that transcript
levels in our xenocraft models are in good agreement with our in silico
analysis of the TCGA database. Finally, we confirmed the glutamate
dependency of IDH1MT gliomas by MRS-flux analysis, whereas IDH1WT gliomas
show high lactate production. Taken together, we show that IDH1WT gliomas
have a typical Warburg phenotype and rely on acetate anaplerosis whereas
IDH1MT gliomas are glutamate and lactate dependent. This metabolic
rewiring in IDH1MT glioma, enables targeting of glutaminolysis rather
than direct inhibition of IDH1MT for therapy. It diminishes the supply of
glutamate-derived α-KG and directly inhibits the production of D-2-HG
and simultaneously worsen the redox status of the glioma cells by
inhibiting NAD(P)H production by GLUD. A candidate drug to inhibit GLUD
is epigallocatechin-3-gallate gallate, a component of green tea that is
currently receiving high interest as anti-cancer agent.


