Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deciphering the dynamics of alternative pre-mRNA processing of
glutaminase in metastatic ovarian cancer.


The chronically proliferative cancer phenotype requires metabolic
reprogramming to meet the increased energy and biosynthetic demands of
rapid cell division. This results in increased glucose uptake and usage
(the Warburg effect). Cancer cells that undergo the Warburg effect may
also become reliant on glutamine, a term called ‘glutamine
addiction’. Recent studies in ovarian cancer suggest that highly
invasive ovarian cancer cells show a remarkable dependence on glutamine,
hence implicating glutamine metabolism in metastasis. Glutaminase is the
first enzyme that is involved in glutaminolysis and it catalyzes the
rate-limiting conversion of glutamine to glutamate and ammonia. There are
two genes that code for glutaminase in the human genome, glutaminase 1
(GLS1), and glutaminase 2 (GLS2). GLS2 is associated with cell
differentiation whereas GLS1 expression is up-regulated in cancer. Hence,
GLS1 had been proposed to be better adapted to meet the altered metabolic
needs of the tumor phenotype. GLS1 can be alternatively spliced into two
isoforms, KGA and GAC. Although both KGA and GAC have been implicated in
cancer cell metabolism, there is still controversy over the actual
isoform that is most important for tumorigenesis. Whereas the KGA isoform
is repressed by miR-23, there is no documented miRNA repression of GAC
suggesting that GAC is more tumorigenic. Using next-generation
sequencing, we recently identified an unannotated novel KGA transcript
with a truncated 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR) which is more stable
than the traditionally known KGA transcript. Our goal is to determine the
expression profile of different glutaminase isoforms in the highly lethal
gynecological malignancy, ovarian cancer, and their role in tumorigenesis
and metastasis. We have developed amplicons to measure total GLS1 and
GLS2 transcripts using quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR). Although we
unexpectedly detected both GLS2 and GLS1 transcripts, the mRNA levels of
GLS2 were significantly lower than those of GLS1. To determine the
specific GLS1 isoforms expressed we used isoform specific amplicons and
detected both GAC and KGA using qRT-PCR. Western blot analysis was able
to detect both GAC and KGA protein in one cell line only suggesting that
the KGA mRNA we detected was subject to miR-23 repression. Inhibition of
total GLS1 activity with a glutaminase inhibitor resulted in decreased
colony formation as shown by soft agar assays. In conclusion, the
expression profile of different GLS1 isoforms in highly invasive ovarian
cancer supports the role of glutamine metabolism in maintaining the
metastatic phenotype. This makes glutamine metabolism a viable
therapeutic target for metastatic ovarian cancer.


