Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomics and body mass index among breast cancer survivors in
The Lifestyle, Exercise, and Nutrition (LEAN) Study.


Background: While there is a growing body of literature on metabolomics
and body mass index (BMI), there are limited studies in relation to
weight change in overweight and obese individuals, and to our knowledge,
no such studies in breast cancer survivors.

Methods: The Lifestyle, Exercise and Nutrition (LEAN) randomized diet-
and exercise-induced weight loss trial in breast cancer survivors
enrolled overweight or obese breast cancer survivors (Stage 0-III)
identified via the Yale-New Haven Hospital tumor registry or
self-referral. Participants were randomized to either usual care group
(n=33) or the 6-month lifestyle intervention (11 sessions with a
registered dietitian) (n=67). Height and weight were measured by study
staff at baseline and 6 months, and a fasting (≥ 12 hours) blood draw
was also performed at these time points. Paired (baseline and 6-month)
serum metabolomics data were available for 83 women. Only those
metabolites consistently detected in >80% of quality control samples with
a coefficient of variation Methods: The Lifestyle, Exercise and Nutrition
(LEAN) randomized diet- and exercise-induced weight loss trial in breast
cancer survivors enrolled overweight or obese breast cancer survivors
(Stage 0-III) identified via the Yale-New Haven Hospital tumor registry
or self-referral. Participants were randomized to either usual care group
(n=33) or the 6-month lifestyle intervention (11 sessions with a
registered dietitian) (n=67). Height and weight were measured by study
staff at baseline and 6 months, and a fasting (≥ 12 hours) blood draw
was also performed at these time points. Paired (baseline and 6-month)
serum metabolomics data were available for 83 women. Only those
metabolites consistently detected in >80% of quality control samples with
a coefficient of variation <30% were included in data analysis. We
evaluated partial Pearson correlations between the ratio of metabolites
at baseline versus 6-months and change in BMI adjusted for age and
intervention group. We also assessed mean changes in metabolites from
baseline to 6-months by randomization group using the general estimating
equation in linear regression. Adjustment for multiple comparisons was
based on the False Discovery Rate (FDR) with a threshold of 0.1.

Results: Overall, a total of 307 metabolites were analyzed; 168 were
quantitated by LC-MS and 139 were semi-quantitated by GC-TOF/MS. For BMI
change from baseline to 6-months, we observed correlations with 16
metabolites (isocitric acid, 3-hydroxybutyric acid, serine, L-cysteine,
petroselinic acid, aminomalonic acid, palmitoleic acid, linoleic acid,
2-hydroxybutyric acid, and seven unidentified metabolites, p Results:
Overall, a total of 307 metabolites were analyzed; 168 were quantitated
by LC-MS and 139 were semi-quantitated by GC-TOF/MS. For BMI change from
baseline to 6-months, we observed correlations with 16 metabolites
(isocitric acid, 3-hydroxybutyric acid, serine, L-cysteine, petroselinic
acid, aminomalonic acid, palmitoleic acid, linoleic acid,
2-hydroxybutyric acid, and seven unidentified metabolites, p <0.05),
however FDR correction for multiple comparisons yielded no statistically
significant results. We also observed differences by randomization group
for L-alanine, dopamine, serotonin, PCaaC36:1, 3-hydroxyoleoylcarnitine,
and PCaeC36:1 in bivariate analyses, but in models adjusted for age and
BMI only L-alanine remained significant (pResults: Overall, a total of
307 metabolites were analyzed; 168 were quantitated by LC-MS and 139 were
semi-quantitated by GC-TOF/MS. For BMI change from baseline to 6-months,
we observed correlations with 16 metabolites (isocitric acid,
3-hydroxybutyric acid, serine, L-cysteine, petroselinic acid,
aminomalonic acid, palmitoleic acid, linoleic acid, 2-hydroxybutyric
acid, and seven unidentified metabolites, p <0.05), however FDR
correction for multiple comparisons yielded no statistically significant
results. We also observed differences by randomization group for
L-alanine, dopamine, serotonin, PCaaC36:1, 3-hydroxyoleoylcarnitine, and
PCaeC36:1 in bivariate analyses, but in models adjusted for age and BMI
only L-alanine remained significant (p<0.05). After correction for FDR,
there were no significant differences by randomization group.

Conclusions: There were no clear associations between metabolites and
change in BMI or randomization group among overweight and obese breast
cancer survivors enrolled in a weight loss trial. Larger sample sizes
would help to clarify if any of the potential signals observed in this
population may be associated with BMI or other lifestyle changes, such as
diet quality.


