Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted next-generation sequencing of cell-free tumor DNA to
longitudinally monitor cancer burden and progression.


Targeted sequencing of cell-free (cfDNA) and circulating tumor DNA
(ctcDNA) from blood enables detection of cancer-related mutations using
minimally-invasive sample collection methods, and may make early
detection of cancer possible, as well as improve monitoring of disease
burden in translational research studies.

We have developed a series of targeted panels for detection of multiple
cancer-related mutations. The panels are designed to efficiently amplify
damaged or short fragments of DNA derived from FFPE and cfDNA/ctcDNA,
where hundreds of primer pairs can be amplified in a single tube from
overlapping targets using only 10 ng input material, making these panels
ideal for limiting liquid biopsy samples. A panel which covers known
“hotspot” mutations in 56 oncology-related genes has been used in a
pilot research study to monitor gynecological cancer in 11 women in a
longitudinal study, which found a correlation between the presence of
cancer mutations and morbidity and mortality. In 2 of 11 women, the
initial absence of mutations above 1% allele-frequency was followed by
the appearance of mutations in 1-3 genes at allele frequencies of 5-78%
in the later time point. These 2 patients experienced increased morbidity
or mortality. In 9 of the 11 women, no mutations were observed, and 6
remain in remission, while 3 are living with cancer.

In an effort to further improve both workflow and performance, we are
developing two technologies to incorporate into the panel design for
future studies. The first will normalize library yield during PCR
amplification for simple library pooling, which eliminates the
requirement for library quantification and minimizes the time from sample
to sequence. The second technology is a molecular ID (MID) system to tag
each amplicon uniquely to allow data tracking to individual DNA fragments
from the sample, and to increase confidence in variant calling by
filtering PCR and sequencing errors. By incorporating technologies that
reduce steps in the workflow, the likelihood of error is minimized, and
combined with methods that increase confidence in low frequency variant
calling, an ideal workflow for liquid biopsy samples is created.


