Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diagnosing leukemia structural variations via a novel genome
mapping approach.


Identification of structural variants (SVs) is critical to the prognosis
of AML. SVs are not readily identified by next generation sequencing
methods and are currently diagnosed by cytogenetics, an intrinsically low
resolution tool. We have adapted a new method for determining large SVs
as a clinical tool for evaluating AML and other cancer genomes. The
Bionano Irys images in microfluidic nanochannels large (>150 Kb) segments
of genomic DNA that have been bar coded by site specific nicking and
local incorporation of fluorescent label. The complement of individual
molecules can be assembled through matching bar codes to create a de novo
map of the genome from which, by matching to a reference genome,
identifies and catalogs structural variants at resolution of ca. 1 Kb.

With this technology, we characterized structural variants signatures in
breast cancer, renal clear cell carcinoma, and CML cell lines. Structural
variants were then validated via PCR/Sanger sequencing, fluorescent in
situ hybridization and whole genome sequencing. We identified a thorough
compendium of consistent false positive rearrangements identified by this
technology, most of which reflect errors in the reference human genome
assembly. We then applied this methodology to ten AML patient samples,
seven from archived blood samples and three directly obtained from newly
diagnosed patients. Karyotyping on one archived sample identified a
t(6:9) translocation in the majority of cells. We identified that
rearrangement at a much higher resolution than cytogenetics, which
allowed us to map the breakpoint via PCR/Sanger sequencing to nucleotide
resolution and confirm a fusion of NUP214 to DEK, a known oncogene. We
also discovered the reciprocal t(9:6) translocation, which had not been
identified by cytogenetics. In the six other cases from archived samples,
we have confirmed the translocation identified by cytogenetic karyotyping
and in several cases found additional rearrangements. Moreover, in the
first pediatric case, which we completed within five days of obtaining
the sample, we have identified four distinct translocations, all of which
have been associated previously with AML.

Overall, this is technology has the ability to quickly and accurately
identify SVs in cancer cell lines and AML patient samples with higher
resolution than cytogenetics, demonstrating its clinical usefulness in
the diagnosis and subsequent treatment of leukemia.


