Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor targeting and imaging using 64Cu labeled cyclic RGD
conjugated human serum albumin via click chemistry.


PURPOSE: The RGD specifically recognizes the integrin αvβ3 which is
overexpressed on various malignant tumors. One major drawback of small
peptide such as RGD, however, is short half-life in the blood, which
greatly compromises their targeting efficacy. To improve blood
circulation time and targeting efficacy, we developed cyclic RGDyK
(cRGDyK) conjugated human serum albumin (HSA) using click chemistry
reaction.

METHODS: HSA was conjugated with DBCO-NHS (dibenzyl cyclooctyne) under
physiologically favorable reaction condition for the preparation of
strain promoted azide-alkyne reaction. Using this reaction group,
DBCO-HSA was conjugated with N3-c RGDyK (azido cRGDyK) for integrin
αvβ3 targeting, N3-FNR648 for fluorescence labeling and 64Cu labeled
N3-NOTA (3-azidopropyl-NOTA) for radiolabeling. Cell binding of
cRGDyK-HSA were analyzed with FNR648 labeled probes. Cellular uptake of
64Cu-cRGDyK-HSA were tested for integrin αvβ3 specific binding at cell
level. PET images were acquired after tail vein injection of 64Cu-HSA,
64Cu-cRGDyK-HSA in integrin αvβ3 positive tumor (SK-OV3, ovarian cancer
cell line) bearing BALB/c nude mice. PET signals were quantitatively
analyzed with PET image analysis program, AMIDE.

RESULTS: The number of cRGDyK on DBCO-HSA conjugates was confirmed using

MALDI-TOF MS. cRGDyK-HSA was successfully conjugated with 64Cu labeled
N3-NOTA. Integrin αvβ3 mRNA and protein was highly expressed in SK-OV3
cell line. At fluorescence labeled probes were treated in SK-OV3,
cRGDyK-HSA were highly bound to cell membrane and this pattern were
decreased with pre-treatment of excess cRGDyK. When compared to cellular
uptake level, 64Cu-cRGDyK-HSA were more accumulated at integrin αvβ3
positive cells (SK-OV3) than integrin αvβ3 negative cells (P MALDI-TOF
MS. cRGDyK-HSA was successfully conjugated with 64Cu labeled N3-NOTA.
Integrin αvβ3 mRNA and protein was highly expressed in SK-OV3 cell
line. At fluorescence labeled probes were treated in SK-OV3, cRGDyK-HSA
were highly bound to cell membrane and this pattern were decreased with
pre-treatment of excess cRGDyK. When compared to cellular uptake level,
64Cu-cRGDyK-HSA were more accumulated at integrin αvβ3 positive cells
(SK-OV3) than integrin αvβ3 negative cells (P < 0.05) and there were no
difference in 64Cu-HSA. Serial PET images were acquired 0, 4, 24, 48
hours after tail vein injection of 64Cu-cRGDyK-HSA. Radioactivity of
64Cu-cRGDyK-HSA in SK-OV3 tumor was higher than that of 64Cu-HSA.
64Cu-labeled-cRGDyK-HSA can be observed at 48 hours after injection,
which shows longer circulation time in mice.

CONCLUSION: We successfully conjugated cyclic RGDyK to HSA using click
chemistry approach. We demonstrated that cRGDyK-HSA specifically bind to
integrin αvβ3 in in vitro and in vivo model. And in animal model,
64Cu-labeled-cRGDyK-HSA can be observed at 48 hours after injection,
which shows longer circulation time. Our results indicated that
cRGDyK-HSA have a potential to diagnosis and therapy response monitoring
of tumor expressing integrin αvβ3.


