Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JAK2 as a novel therapeutic target in anaplastic thyroid cancer.


Introduction: Thyroid carcinoma is the most common endocrine malignancy.
Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is rare (1.3%) and represents arguably
the most lethal human malignancy with 1-year survival rates of only 10%.
There are currently no effective treatments for the majority of patients,
highlighting an urgent need for novel therapeutics to manage this disease.

Objective: To validate the functional importance of JAK2 as a therapeutic
target in ATC.

Methods: In this study, we have used siRNA knockdown to interrogate the
JAK2 signaling pathway as a therapeutic target in ATC. We investigated
the mechanism of action and cell death, and assayed for migration and
invasion, in vitro. The chick chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) model was
also utilized for drug testing, whereby 1x106 Cal62 ATC cells were
on-planted to the chick embryo membrane. Two days post on-plant, CAM
models were treated with the vehicle (DMSO) or lestaurtinib to measure
outcomes including tumor volume and vascularity.

Results: We identified the JAK2 inhibitor lestaurtinib as an inhibitory
agent controlling cell line proliferation at submicromolar mean
inhibitory concentrations. Immunoblotting revealed the inhibition of
phosphorylation of the downstream signaling molecule STAT5 in a
dose-dependent manner. Treatment of Cal62 cells resulted in a decrease in
cell migration using the scratch-wound assay. The anti-proliferative
effective of lestaurtinib did not cause apoptosis, autophagy or cell
senescence. CAM models treated with a 4 uM dose of lestaurtinib showed a
significant decrease in both tumor volume and vascularity.

Conclusions: Lestaurtinib was found to provide potent control of ATC cell
proliferation and migration, and was also found to decrease tumor growth
and vascularity in a CAM model. Knockout studies are underway to confirm
that the anticancer effect of this drug is indeed mediated through JAK2
signaling. If validated, JAK2 represents a novel therapeutic target for
the treatment of aggressive thyroid cancers.


