Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implication for checkpoint therapeutics: Expression of
co-stimulatory and co-inhibitory molecules in melanoma cells.


Melanoma is one of the deadliest forms of skin cancer, with a dim
prognosis when metastasized, leading to the highest number of skin cancer
related deaths. In recent years there has been a focus on the use of
checkpoint inhibitor therapies like anti-CTLA-4, anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1
to treat melanoma. PD-L1, HVEM and VISTA expression on cancer cells has
been shown to promote immune evasion and tumor survival. CTLA-4, when
engaged on tumor cells leads to their apoptosis and LIGHT signaling leads
to recruitment of T cells and effective tumor clearance. Thus, since
these molecules do not function in isolation, we need to consider tissue
pleiotropy and the expression of co-stimulatory and co-inhibitory
molecules on tumor tissue. Our laboratory has characterized and
established five primary patient derived melanoma cell lines, MEL-2,
MEL-V, 3MM, KFM and GLM-2. In an effort to understand tumor tissue
pleiotropy, we conducted a comprehensive expression pattern screening of
eight co-inhibitory and ten co-stimulatory molecules by RT-PCR. Among
others, VISTA, a CD4+ T cell suppressor, HVEM, an immune evasion
regulator, LAG3 and TIM3, potential immune checkpoint targets, were seen
to be differentially expressed in these primary cell lines. Current
therapies target CTLA-4, PD-1 and PD-L1, which also exhibit varying
expression in our primary cell lines, pointing to the importance of
considering tissue expression of these molecules when administering these
novel immunotherapies. Additionally, 80% of melanoma patients are
positive for the BRAFV600E genetic lesion and are administered
vemurafenib (PLX4032), an inhibitor of the overactive mutated BRAF. Our
in vitro studies show that treatment with PLX4032, changed the expression
of CTLA-4 and PD-L1 in these primary cells. We observed a decrease in
PD-L1 protein expression in MEL-V and GLM-2 and an increase in PD-L1
protein expression in MEL-2 and KFM, the four BRAFV600E positive cell
lines. CTLA-4 protein expression demonstrated an upward trend on
treatment with PLX4032. This synergy observed between treatment with
drugs targeting genetic lesions and the expression of immunomodulatory
molecules warrants characterization of tumor biopsies prior to designing
an effective combinatorial therapy regime. Our long term goal is to
optimize combinatorial immune and drug therapies directed against both
co-stimulators and checkpoint inhibitors.


