Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-podocalyxin cancer-specific monoclonal antibody: preclinical
study.


Background: Podocalyxin, a CD34-related sialomucin, is expressed in many
tumors including colorectal cancers, breast cancers, mesothelial tumors,
and brain tumors. Overexpression of podocalyxin has been reported to be
an independent predictor of progression, metastasis, and poor outcome.
However, PODXL is known to be highly expressed in normal cells including
many epithelial cells and endothelial cells; therefore, podocalyxin could
not be a target of antibody therapy. Although many monoclonal antibodies
(mAbs) against podocalyxin have been established, they bind to both
cancer and normal cells. We recently established a novel technology for
developing cancer-specific mAbs (CasMabs), which could target only cancer
cells although those membrane proteins are highly expressed in both
cancer and normal cells.

Methods: We first produced a podocalyxin-expressing glioblastoma cell
line. We purified human podocalyxin using PA-tag, and immunized mice with
those proteins. CasMabs were screened using flow cytometry against
podocalyxin-expressing cancer cells and podocalyxin-expressing normal
cells. The cancer specificity was confirmed using immunohistochemistry
against breast cancer tissues. Furthermore, a human-mouse chimeric
anti-podocalyxin mAb was produced. Antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC) was investigated in vitro using glioblastoma cells as
target cells and human NK cells as effector cells. The in vivo efficacy
was evaluated using xenograft models of podocalyxin-expressing cell
lines. Furthermore, we investigated the toxicity of chPcMab-6 using
cynomolgus monkey.

Results: A cancer-specific anti-podocalyxin mAb (clone: PcMab-6; mouse
IgG1, kappa) was established. PcMab-6 reacted with podocalyxin-expressing
many cancer cell lines including brain tumors, malignant mesotheliomas,
colon cancers, and pancreatic cancers whereas it did not bind to vascular
endothelial cells in flow cytometry. Furthermore, PcMab-6 reacted only
with podocalyxin-expressing cancer cells, not with VECs in breast cancer
tissues using immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, we produced chPcMab-6, a
human-mouse chimeric mAb of PcMab-6, which also reacts with only
podocalyxin-expressing cancer cells. ChPcMab-6 possesses ADCC activity in
vitro and antitumor effect in vivo. Single injection of chPcMab-6 induced
no clinical abnormality in male cynomolgus monkey (2 mg/kg and 20 mg/kg)
. In addition, abnormal values were not observed in hematologic test,
urine analysis, and measurement of serum inflammatory cytokines. Tissue
disorders were not found in histology and relative organ weight on
postmortem examination.

Conclusion: ChPcMab-6, a cancer-specific human-mouse chimeric
anti-podocalyxin mAb could be useful for targeting podocalyxin in cancer,
although podocalyxin is highly expressed in many normal cells.


