Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Saturated fatty acids in cell membrane phospholipids play an
important role in chemoresistance in colorectal cancer.


[Background and Aim] Resistance to chemotherapy represents the major
obstacle to survival in patients with chemoresistant colorectal cancer.
Various factors, such as drug efflux, autocrine survival signaling, and
alterations in DNA damage repair mechanisms, can contribute to
chemoresistance; however, the actual underlying mechanism is yet to be
elucidated. The aim of this study was to elucidate the mechanism behind
anticancer drug resistance based on lipidomics.

[Materials and Methods] 1) Spheroids were derived from three colorectal
cancer patient-derived xenograft models (A, B, and C) that were incubated
with chemotherapeutic agents, such as 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). We analyzed
the response rate of spheroids under 5-FU treatment. Global lipid
analysis was performed on 5-FU resistance spheroids (A) and sensitive
spheroids (C) using a Q Exactive LC-MS/MS mass spectrometer, and lipid
identification was performed using the Lipid Search software. 2) We tried
to identify genes that were responsible for changes in phospholipid
profiles in the cell membrane. 3) To determine phospholipid profile
changes in the cell membrane that occur in colon cancer cell lines
(HCT116, SW480) during anticancer drug resistance, the genes responsible
for such resistance were knocked down using siRNA.

[Results and discussion] 1) Response to 5-FU was different in individual
spheroids. Global lipid analysis and chemosensitivity assay revealed that
phospholipids of 5-FU resistant spheroids were rich in saturated fatty
acids (SFAs), while those of the 5-FU sensitive spheroids were rich in
monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs). 2) The enzyme stearoyl-CoA
desaturase (SCD) converts SFAs to MUFAs in the phospholipids. Based on
these findings we hypothesized that decreased SCD expression is possibly
associated with chemoresistance. 3) Cell lines with SCD knock down
demonstrated increased SFA containing phospholipids and chemoresistance
towards 5-FU. Viable cells after the administration of the anti-cancer
agent confirmed that the expression of CD44 was upregulated. Therefore,
changes in the phospholipid composition of cell membranes regulate 5-FU
resistance in colon cancer.

[Conclusions] Identification and analysis of the role of membrane lipids
has become possible using high-sensitivity and high-resolution mass
spectrometers and the relevant software, such as Lipid Search. Changes of
phospholipid composition regulates chemoresistance. In future,
investigation of the pathophysiology of membrane lipids in cancer may
help to reveal novel strategies for cancer therapy.


