Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The adhesion protein JAM-A is important for maintenance of tumor
dormancy in breast cancer cells, and JAM-A high-dormant cells have stem
cell characteristics.


Breast cancer cells which metastasize to bone marrow can remain dormant
and survive multiple rounds of adjuvant chemotherapy. The re-awakening of
dormant populations, particularly in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive
patients, has been associated with tumor cell proliferation and poor
patient outcomes. Tumor dormancy can be modelled in vitro by exposing
cancer cells on fibronectin-coated plates to bFGF-2, a mammary
differentiation factor abundant in the bone marrow stroma, which causes
partial re-differentiation, cell spreading and re-expression of
integrin-α5β1. Ligation of integrin-α5β1 by fibronectin and
activation of the PI3K pathway both contribute to dormant cell survival.
Our study has uncovered a novel potential role for the adhesion protein
Junctional Adhesion Molecule-A (JAM-A) in tumor dormancy. JAM-A
overexpression has previously been linked to increased risk of metastasis
in breast cancer patients, and its expression regulates the angiogenic
functions of bFGF-2. Furthermore, since loss of JAM-A causes
down-regulation of the α5β1 downstream effector FAK, we hypothesized
that JAM-A is required for maintenance of breast cancer cell dormancy. To
investigate this, JAM-A was transiently silenced using siRNA in MCF-7
breast cancer cells grown on fibronectin-coated plates and exposed to
FGF-2. JAM-silenced cells exhibited downregulations in the protein
expression of integrin-α5β1 and FAK in this model, and failed to
exhibit the cortical actin redistribution and morphological spreading
which characterize dormant cells. We next investigated a potential
relationship between JAM-A expression and pro-inflammatory cytokines
which have been linked with the re-awakening of dormant cells in
post-menopausal women. Exposure of MCF-7 cells to the pro-inflammatory
cytokines IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-8 decreased JAM-A expression in in
a concentration-dependent fashion, suggesting that the loss of JAM-A
could be associated with re-awakening from tumor dormancy. We are
currently probing alterations in JAM-A expression and that of
integrin-α5β1 in matched human primary breast tumor specimens and bone
marrow metastases. Since JAM-high dormant cells express high mRNA levels
of the stemness factors (Sox2, Oct3/4, Nanog) and have high Aldefluor
activity, our data also suggest that JAM-A may be required for a
stem-like phenotype. To conclude, our data support a model whereby JAM-A
is important for the maintenance of dormancy in breast cancer cells in a
simulated bone marrow microenvironment, and represents a novel
therapeutic target worthy of investigation in breast cancer.


