Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioorthogonal Profiling of Protein Methylation (BPPM) identified
MCM5 as a new substrate for SETD8 in DNA replication.


SETD8 is the only member of the SET domain containing methyltransferase
family, which catalyzes mono-methylation of K20 on histone H4 (H4K20me1).
Lysine residues of non-histone proteins such as p53 and proliferating
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) are also monomethylated, while lysine
residues in Numb were found to be dimethylated. As a consequence, SETD8
methyltransferase activity is implicated in several fundamental cellular
processes such as transcriptional regulation and heterochromatin
formation as well as processes that ensures genomic stability including
DNA replication and the DNA damage response. Although it has been
suggested that SETD8 is involved in DNA replication as a positive
regulator of origin licensing through H4K20 methyation and by supporting
Okazaki fragment processing through PCNA methylation, to date, there is
no evidence whether other key protein in the replication fork is directly
modified by SETD8. To address this question, we used Bioorthogonal
Profiling of Protein Methylation (BPPM) with engineered enzyme and
synthetic SAM analogues to profile new substrates for SETD8. We
genetically engineered SETD8 and identified mutants amenable to
accommodate non-native SAM analogues containing a terminal alkyne moiety
for click chemistry. The engineered SETD8 can transfer this distinct
chemical moiety into target proteins for subsequent pulldown and
identification of the modified substrates. Among the new substrates
discovered, we identified MCM5, a subunit of the hexameric minichromosome
maintenance (MCM) DNA helicase complex. MCM5 directly interacts with MCM2
and 3 to form the MCM2-7 hexamer which associates with the origins of DNA
replication to form part of the pre-replicative complex (preRC), playing
a key role during replication initiation and elongation. We found that
SETD8 can mono-methylate MCM5 directly affecting its binding affinity to
MCM2 and 3. In addition, MCM5 mutations at the methylated lysine further
evidenced a stronger binding to its interacting partners contributing to
the formation of the MCM hexamer. Taken together our results indicate
that MCM5 methylation contributes to the assembly of the MCM complex
suggesting an important role for SETD8 in replication initiation. Our
findings may bring new perspectives on the biological importance of SETD8
during DNA replication.


