Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PKCα-induced Twist1 phosphorylation is a novel regulator of
Twist1 stabilization.


Background:

Epithelial - mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a pre-requisite for cancer
metastasis. Twist-1 is a transcription factor with a central role in the
process of EMT and therefore metastasis formation. Using ovarian cancer
models, our group has previously shown that although the stationary
epithelial phenotype express Twist1 mRNA, this phenotype is enforced by
mechanisms that constitutively ubiquitinates and degrades the Twist1
protein. The objective of this study is to identify molecular mechanisms
that promote Twist1 protein stabilization and therefore confer a
mesenchymal and mobile phenotype.

Materials and methods:

Novel phosphorylation sites on Twist1 protein, which are adjacent to
ubiquitination sites, were identified using NetPhosK and Ubpred. Further
analysis demonstrates that most of these sites contain the consensus
sequence for PKCα. Constitutively active PKCα (PKCαcat) was
ectopically expressed in HEK293T cells and patient-derived epithelial
ovarian cancer cell lines. Protein expression and phosphorylation status
were determined using western blot analysis using either whole cell
lysates or cellular fractions. Protein-protein interaction was determined
by immunoprecipiation. The specific Twist1 domain required for PKCα
interaction was determined by co-transfection with Twist1 deletion
mutants.

Results:

Ectopic expression of PKC⍺cat in HEK293T cells and ovarian cancer cells
resulted in increased levels of Twist1 protein compared to empty vector
control. In ovarian cancer cells, PKCcat-induced upregulation of Twist1
protein is not associated with an increase in Twist1 mRNA but instead is
associated with Twist1 phosphorylation, decreased ubiquitination, and
enhanced stabilization. We identify the twist box (WR) domain of Twist1
as a pre-requisite for PKCα binding and PKCαcat-induced Twist1
stabilization. Moreover, we identify TGFβ1 as a potent activator of
endogenous PKCα in epithelial ovarian cancer cells. TGFβ1 (1 ng/ml) is
able to: promote the activation and membranal translocation of PKCα;
increase Twist1 protein levels; and induce spheroid formation and EMT in
epithelial ovarian cancer cells. Interestingly, TGFβ1 had no effect on
Twist1 mRNA suggesting that this mechanism is independent of the
classical TGFβ-Smad pathway.

Conclusions:

We demonstrate for the first time a novel TGFβ-PKCα signaling pathway
that specifically targets Twist1 protein for phosphorylation and
stabilization resulting in EMT. This mechanism is independent of the
classical TGFβ-Smad pathway that controls EMT via transcriptional
regulation. Since TGFβ is a pleiotropic cytokine that can affect
multiple cell types, the identification of PKCα as a novel target in
ovarian cancer cells may aid in the development of better therapeutic
modalities that can prevent EMT and curtail metastasis formation.


