Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of PERK by small molecule inhibitors enhances the
response to ionizing radiation in vitro and animal tumor models.


Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a well organized membranous network,
responsible for synthesis and folding of secretory and membrane proteins,
lipid and sterol biosynthesis and intracellular calcium storage.
Perturbations in ER lumen caused by depletion of Ca2+ levels, hypoxia,
nutrient deprivation, affect the ER homeostasis, a condition known as an
ER stress. In order to cope with this stress, cells have developed an
orchestrated biochemical response, termed Unfolded Protein Response
(UPR). Hypoxia, an ER stress inducer, is an important and unique
characteristic of the solid tumor microenvironment, promotes resistance
to radiotherapy and contributes to poor patient prognosis. Cancer cells
overcome these stress conditions through activation the PERK-eIF2α arm
of the UPR, leading to inhibition of global protein synthesis and cell
survival. We hypothesize that the use of small molecule PERK inhibitors
will decrease the survival of hypoxic cells and eventually sensitize them
to irradiation. In this study we used highly radioresistant melanoma and
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines B16F10-ova and SQ20B,
under nomroxia and hypoxia, respectively. We used two specific PERK
inhibitors (PERKi) and tested for their efficacy both in vitro and in
vivo. Induction of ER stress in both cell lines, either by treatment with
the pharmacologic agents thapsigargin (TG) and tunicamycin (TN), or by
exposure to hypoxic conditions (0.2%), was evaluated by activation of
PERK and its downstream targets. Pre-treatment of stressed B16F10-ova and
SQ20B cells for 2h with PERKi (1μM), caused complete inhibition of
PERK-eIF2a-ATF4-CHOP arm of the UPR. Moreover, both cell lines
pre-treated with PERKi presented a significant decrease in survival
fraction under ER-stress induced by TG (0.5μM) as well as under hypoxia
(0.2%) along with increasing doses of irradiation (IR). For the in vivo
experiments, nude and C57BL/6 mice were treated with either 100mg/kg of
PERKi by oral gavage, twice a day for 3weeks, or IR or a combination of
PERKi and IR. Mice treated with PERKi showed a small but not significant
delay of tumor growth in both backgrounds of mice. However, combined
treatment with IR (12 and 15Gy) caused a significant reduction of tumor
volume as well as a delayed tumor growth which was significantly more
pronounced in the immunocompetent mice. Data from flow cytometry analysis
of one of the the PERKi+IR treated tumors from C57BL/6 mice showed that
there is a significant infiltration of CD3+ cells as well as significant
higher number of CD3+CD8+ cells compared to the untreated mice or mice
treated with either PERKi or IR alone. Collectively, our results show
that PERKi effectively reduces the survival of hypoxic B16F10-ova and
SQ20B cells and sensitize them to IR in vitro and in tumors. Further
experiments will clarify whether PERKi have a dual role on reducing the
hypoxic fraction and direct recruitment of the cytotoxic T-cells.


