Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptoma analyses in triple-negative breast cancer with BRCA1
germline mutation.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), characterized by lack of expression
of the estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), is associated with a higher
prevalence of germline BRCA1 mutations, especially in younger women. TNBC
comprises approximately 15% of breast cancer cases and is considered one
of the most aggressive subtypes. BRCA1 protein plays a pivotal role in
DNA damage repair, cell cycle control and transcriptional regulation. In
this context, we aimed to investigate the transcriptional difference of
paired tumor and adjacent normal tissue from young patients in two TNBC
groups - with or without BRCA1 germline mutation. Fourteen early-onset
patients (≤41 years), with TNBC previously evaluated for BRCA1 and 2
germline mutation, were included. From these, nine patients are BRCA1/2
wild-type and five patients were BRCA1 germline mutation carriers. RNASeq
libraries were constructed from rRNA depleted total RNA extracted from
paired tumor and normal adjacent samples and sequenced on Illumina
NextSeq 500 platform. Approximately 20 million reads aligned to human
genome were generated per sample, revealing about 14,500 expressed genes
with at least 10 copies per sample. Expression values were normalized by
library-size read counts followed by a gene-wise normalization. To
explore similarity level between samples we used the full matrix of the
log2-transformed gene expression values and calculated sample-to-sample
distances for each tumor compared to each normal sample, based on the
Euclidian distances between samples considering all available genes. We
observed that 80% of the BRCA1-mutated and 67% of the BRCA1/2 wild-type
samples were clustered together. Also, we detected that BRCA1-mutated
TNBC showed, in general, less difference in transcriptional pattern
related to normal breast tissue than the BRCA1/2-wild type TNBC.
Moreover, we compared differential expression between normal and tumor
samples of each group (BRCA1-mutated and BRCA1/2-wild-type samples) using
a linear-based model in DESeq2 program. Based on the criteria of
fold-change ≥ │4│and FDR ≤ 0.01 we identified 2,809 DEGs, in the
group of BRCA1-mutated samples, being 722 up regulated and 2,087 down
regulated in the tumor and 904 DEGs in the group of BRCA1/2- wild-type
samples, 399 were upregulated and 505 downregulated in the tumor.
Interestingly, both lists of upregulated genes in TNBC of BRCA1-mutated
and BRCA1/2-wild type were significantly enriched in the same molecular
pathway involved with the cell cycle and mitosis, according to Reactome
Pathways software. Overall, our first observation based on this
preliminary data was that, in terms of general gene expression analysis,
BRCA1-mutated TNBC has less transcriptional modification in comparison to
the normal tissue than the BRCA1/2-wild type and that the tumorigenic
process of both groups are similar in terms of defective biological
pathway.


