Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteogenomic heterogeneity in metastatic lung adenocarcinoma
revealed from rapid/warm autopsy.


Introduction: Intratumor heterogeneity has been characterized among
multiple cancer types. However, in lung adenocarcinoma, recent work has
been limited to early stage primary tumors and intertumor heterogeneity
has not been well-studied. Most importantly, an integrated tumor
heterogeneity analysis at the level of somatic variants, copy number,
transcript and protein expression, and the phosphoproteome is outstanding.

Methods: In order to characterize both intra-tumor and inter-tumor
heterogeneity of metastatic lung adenocarcinoma, we applied whole exome
sequencing, RNA-seq, CNV-seq and mass spectrometry-based proteomic
analyses on 33 tumor regions from metastatic sites including lung, liver
and kidney, obtained by rapid/warm autopsy from 4 patients with Stage IV
lung adenocarcinoma. The autopsy procedure was initiated between 2-4
hours of death.

Results: We found considerable intertumor heterogeneity with
organ-specific, branched evolution that was consistent across DNA, RNA
and protein analyses. Intratumor heterogeneity differed depending on
oncogene-status: oncogene-negative tumors (without RTK/RAS/RAF mutations
or known fusion gene) had significantly higher genomic intratumor
heterogeneity than oncogene positive tumors. The degree of heterogeneity
at the genomic and proteomic level was patient-specific. The proteomic
analysis complemented genomic variants-based clonal evolution analysis.
High-confidence driver mutations (KRAS, EGFR, TP53, CTNNB1) uniformly
occurred early in the evolution of metastatic lung adenocarcinoma
consistent with the concept of these mutations as likely ‘founders’.
In contrast, other known driver mutations occurred more often in later
stages among specific organ branches. Notably, oncogene-negative tumors
carried significantly more driver mutations than oncogene-positive tumors
suggesting that genomic alterations may have a larger role in the
metastatic process versus the early evolution of lung adenocarcinoma in
oncogene-negative vs. oncogene-positive tumors. Among all patients, lung
cancer specific focal copy number alterations frequently occurred within
metastatic branch points. Single metastatic site biopsies would therefore
be unlikely to capture all significant driver mutations and copy number
alterations, particularly among oncogene-negative tumors.

Conclusion: Metastatic lung adenocarcinoma evolves through a branched,
organ-specific, process with acquisition of significant driver mutations
and copy number changes, particularly among oncogene-negative tumors. The
branched evolution is ultimately influenced by proteomic and
phosphoproteomic alterations affecting key signaling pathways that may
not be always a result of genomic changes.


