Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential opposing roles of AKT isoforms in indolent versus
aggressive prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer (CaP) is the most commonly diagnosed non-cutaneous cancer
and the second highest contributor to cancer-related deaths in U.S. men.
Localized CaP has a 5-year survival rate of approximately 100%, but
disseminated, metastatic disease (mCaP) dramatically reduces 5-year
survival to Prostate cancer (CaP) is the most commonly diagnosed
non-cutaneous cancer and the second highest contributor to cancer-related
deaths in U.S. men. Localized CaP has a 5-year survival rate of
approximately 100%, but disseminated, metastatic disease (mCaP)
dramatically reduces 5-year survival to <30%. A known driving force in
the progression of CaP is activation of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway
through loss of PTEN, with widespread effects on cell proliferation and
migration. Additional genomic changes, such as the loss of TP53 or RB1,
or the upregulation of MYC, correlate with increased incidence and
aggressiveness of mCaP. However, only a fraction of men with high levels
of circulating and disseminated CaP cells progress to overt,
macro-metastatic disease - the lethal phenotype in CaP. Importantly,
little is known regarding the drivers of indolent vs. aggressive mCaP. We
used two transgenic (Tg) mouse models of mCaP with clinically relevant
genetic alterations which exhibit Akt activation and Rb1 loss, yet one
produces indolent mCaP and the other, systemic aggressive mCaP.
Specifically, mice lacking Rb1 and the metastasis-suppressor,
SSeCKS/Akap12, develop high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia
(HG-PIN) and disseminated disease in the lymph nodes whereas those
lacking Pten and Rb1 develop CaP and aggressive mCaP. The
metastasis-suppressing functions of Akap12 relates to its ability to
scaffold Src and PKC, thereby attenuating their oncogenic signaling
pathways. We will show data suggesting that the pathological differences
between these two Tg models is based on the differential use of PI3K-p110
and Akt isoforms, with aggressiveness correlating with the downregulation
of Smad4, a known metastasis-suppressor in Tg CaP models. Additionally,
differences in Akt isoform usage likely controls the expression of
neurogenesis genes that are especially upregulated in
castration-recurrent CaP that fails second-line androgen receptor
antagonist inhibitors such as enzalutamide. By comparing the differential
transcriptomes and signaling networks in primary-site tumors, lymph node
metastases, and CaP cell lines derived from these two Tg models, several
new potential therapeutic targets have been identified that could be
exploited to prevent or treat aggressive mCaP.


