Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sodium-calcium exchanger-1 regulates the epithelial phenotype and
is lost in renal cancers.


Epithelial cells that line the renal tubules possess apico-basal polarity
and a defined cellular structure maintained by junctional proteins. The
underlying mesenchymal cells are fibroblastic with a non-uniform cell
structure and secrete extracellular matrix proteins. Mesenchymal to
epithelial transition (MET) and epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) are required for renal tubule formation during kidney development.
Failure of renal mesenchymal cells to undergo epithelial transformation
leads to the initiation of Wilms tumor, the most frequently occurring
renal cancer in children. Conversely, aberrant mesenchymal transformation
of tubular epithelial cells in the nephron contributes to the development
of renal cell carcinoma, which constitutes 85-90% of the adult tubular
malignancies.

The role of calcium regulators in governing EMT and MET is becoming
evident. Sodium calcium exchanger 1 (NCX1), located on the basolateral
surface of tubular epithelial cells, is the principal calcium regulator
that mediates calcium reabsorption in these cells. NCX1 mediates the
extrusion of one calcium ion and the influx of three sodium ions in one
exchange movement. We demonstrated earlier that NCX1 regulates epithelial
cell motility. However, the role of NCX1 in EMT was undetermined. We
observed that knockdown of NCX1 in renal epithelial cells (MDCK) induced
fibroblastic morphology, and increased permeability to rhodamine
indicative of leaky cell-cell junctions. Electron micrographs of these
cells displayed increased inter-cellular junctional distance also
suggesting that NCX1 knockdown altered junctions between adjacent cells.
Cells with NCX1 knockdown showed loss of apico-basal polarity in
three-dimensional cultures accompanied by expression of mesenchymal
markers. Furthermore, NCX1 knockdown cells were capable of anchorage
independent growth suggesting that these cells had acquired tumorigenic
potential. Interestingly, we show for the first time that NCX1 mRNA and
protein expression is greatly reduced in both Wilms tumor and renal cell
carcinoma demonstrating a direct correlation between NCX1 expression and
the epithelial phenotype.

Mechanistically, we provide evidence that NCX1 interacts with and anchors
E-cadherin, a classical adhesion molecule, to the cell surface
independent of NCX1 ion transport activity. MDCK cells with NCX1
knockdown exhibited β-catenin nuclear localization and enhanced
transcriptional activity. Taken together, knockdown of NCX1 in MDCK cells
induces mesenchymal transition by destabilization of E-cadherin and
induction of β-catenin transcriptional activity.


