Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A network based analysis for the treatment of triple negative
breast cancer.


Background: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a complex
heterogeneous disease characterized by the absence of three hallmark
receptors: human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), estrogen
receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PR). Compared to other breast
cancer subtypes, TNBC is more aggressive, has a higher prevalence in
African Americans, and more frequently affects younger patients.
Currently, TNBC lacks clinically-accepted targets for tailored therapy,
warranting the need for candidate biomarkers.

Methods: BiomarkerBase, a biomarker knowledgebase developed by Amplion
uses a comprehensive list of synonyms to identify biomarkers registered
in the records of clinical trials via the government website
clinicaltrials.gov. Under each of the registered breast cancer biomarkers
(with the exceptions of HER2, ER, and PR), sub-searches were conducted
for clinical trials that explicitly used TNBC (or the full name, triple
negative breast cancer) in the title of the biomarkers’ studies. Of
note, most trials in this review were completed phase II or III. The
selected candidate biomarkers were classified into four FDA biomarker
categories (surrogate, prognostic, predictive, or pharmacodynamic (PD))
as well as by location (blood/plasma, cell surface, cytoplasm, or
nucleus). Current literature about the biomarkers was further examined
using PubMed. There, we sought to find papers that studied how the
biomarkers may interact. These markers were further organized into a
“cellular protein network” that demonstrates potential connectivity.

Results: Blood biomarkers include VEGF/VEGFR and IL-8; cell surface
biomarkers include EGFR, IGFBP, c-Kit, c-Met, and PD-L1; cytoplasm
biomarkers include PIK3CA/AKT/mTOR-related metabolites (GPC, PCh,
Lactate/ glucose), pPKM2, F1,6BP, SPHK1, STAT1/IRF2BP2, S6, p4E-BP1,
SUV39H1, PTEN, and ALDH1; and nucleus biomarkers include BRCA1, the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR), TP53, and Ki67. Table 1 provides an
overview of the examined surrogate, prognostic, predictive, and PD
biomarkers in TNBC in addition to current literature found in PubMed that
provides support for their potential use.

Conclusion: To date, there are no clinically-validated biomarkers for
TNBC, which has hindered the development of tailored therapy for both
chemosensitive and refractory TNBC. Before validation and use of these
biomarkers occurs, stringent-clinical criteria must be met first. The
list and cellular protein network provided is an inventory and reference
point for promising biomarkers for breakthrough, targeted therapies in
TNBC.


