Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and interleukin-(IL-6) as dual
prognostic biomarkers in progressive metastatic breast cancer.


Objectives: Breast cancer (BC) still remains the leading cause of
mortality in women worldwide despite substantial developments in
diagnosis and therapeutic interventions. Several factors, i.e. different
molecular subtypes, biological behaviors, and risk profiles still pose a
challenge for prognostication and clinical management. Traditional
prognostic and treatment options for BC patients are largely based on
careful histological analysis of tumor size, tumor grade, lymph node
metastasis and tumor subtypes. Molecular mechanisms play critical roles
in developing tumors as well as early and late stage tumor progression of
metastatic disease. It is not surprising that many genes are shared
amongst the various gene signatures and may have a similar performance in
survival risk assessment of the BC patients. Given the production of Shh
and IL-6 in the breast tumor microenvironment, we hypothesized that Shh
and IL-6 might be detectable in the general circulation. If positive,
then it would be clinically useful to identify whether robust expression
of serum Shh and IL-6 is correlated with BC prognosis, distant
metastasis, lymph node positivity, multidrug resistance as well as
self-renewal and maintenance of BC stem cells. We evaluated relative
clinical outcome of Shh and IL-6 in the serum from a cohort of patients
with untreated early operable and progressive metastatic BC.

Patients and Methods: One hundred and ten breast cancer patients and 30
healthy female volunteers, enrolled in this study and, were evaluated for
serum levels of Shh and IL-6 using human ShhN and IL-6 specific
enzyme-linked immunoassays. All patients were regularly monitored for
event free survival (EFS) and overall survival (OS).

Results: Overall outcome analysis was based on serum Shh and IL-6 levels
from 45 early operable and 65 progressive metastatic BC patients. In
patients with progressive metastatic BC, serum Shh was elevated in 44%
(29 of 65) and IL-6 in 63% (41 of 65). Serum Shh (p=0.0001) and IL-6
(p=0.0001) levels were significantly elevated in BC patients compared to
low levels in healthy volunteers, and tended to increase with metastatic
progression and lymph node positivity. High serum Shh and IL-6 levels
were associated with inferior EFS and OS opposite to negative or lower
levels of serum Shh and IL-6. Elevated levels of both serum Shh and IL-6
were mainly observed in hormone refractory BC patients, who had a
significantly higher risk of early recurrence, bone metastasis and death.

Conclusion: Elevated levels of serum Shh and IL-6 are associated with
increased risk of recurrence and a worse survival for patients with
progressive metastatic BC. Further studies are warranted for validating
these biomarkers as prognostic and predictive therapeutic tools in a
larger patients cohort.


