Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selinexor synergizes with DNA damaging agents through
down-regulation of key DNA damage response genes.


Background: Selinexor is a first-in-class, orally bioavailable SINE
(Selective Inhibitor of Nuclear Export) compound currently in phase 1/2
clinical trials of patients with solid and hematological malignancies.
SINE compounds bind exportin 1 (XPO1/CRM1) and inhibit nuclear export,
resulting in nuclear retention of major tumor suppressor proteins (TSPs).
We previously found through Reverse Phase Protein Array analysis that
selinexor treatment alters the level of key DNA damage response (DDR)
proteins. We also observed enhanced anti-tumor activity when combining
selinexor with standard DNA damaging agents (DDA) in pre-clinical models
and clinical studies. We hypothesize that a reduction in DDR protein
expression by selinexor drives the synergy observed in combination with
DDAs.

Methods: Solid and hematological cancer cell lysates treated with
selinexor +/- DDAs (cisplatin, doxorubicin, docetaxel and gemcitabine)
were analyzed by immunoblotting and qPCR. Comet assay and γH2A.X
staining were analyzed by immunofluorescence to evaluate DNA damage. Mice
bearing MDA-MB-231 (triple negative breast cancer) tumors were treated
with sub-toxic doses of selinexor (2.5 mg/kg), cisplatin (4 mg/kg) or
docetaxel (4 mg/kg) alone or in combination. Tumor growth and mouse
weight were followed for 25 days.

Results: Selinexor reduced the expression of DDR mRNA and proteins
involved in single-stranded (SSB) and double-stranded break (DSB) repair
as early as 2 hours post treatment. We observed a dose-dependent
correlation between the degree of DDR protein reduction and selinexor
cytotoxicity in vitro. Selinexor prevented DDR activation following
exposure to DDAs and led to synergistic cell death. Treatment of cells
with selinexor plus DDA showed enhanced activity in comet assays and an
increase in γH2A.X staining when compared to treatment with the single
agents. Exposure to selinexor 6 - 24 hours after DDA treatment inhibited
the DDR mechanism and was more synergistic than the opposite order (Sel
→ DDA) or simultaneous treatment. In a MDA-MB-231 xenograft, treatment
with selinexor, docetaxel (SSB) or cisplatin (DSB) alone resulted in
66.7%, 51.5% or 26.6% TGI, respectively when compared to vehicle control
whereas sequential treatment of docetaxel or cisplatin followed by
selinexor resulted in 93.9% TGI or 9.6% tumor regression, respectively.
No significant weight loss was seen in any of the groups by the end of
the study. IHC staining and immunoblot analysis of tumor tissue and
sections showed a reduction of DDR proteins.

Conclusion: Selinexor synergizes with DDAs by increasing both SSB and DSB
through inhibition of relevant DDR proteins. This data supports clinical
development of selinexor in combination with standard chemotherapeutic
agents in patients with solid and hematological malignancies. The results
also suggest that sequential treatment of patients with DDAs followed by
selinexor might be more beneficial.


