Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inactivation of endogenous genes in cancer cells using targeted
promoter DNA methylation via CRISPR-DNMT3a fusion protein.


Background: Developing technologies for precise manipulation of
individual DNA methylation loci is an attractive challenge in cancer and
lung biology, because aberrant expression via hyper- or hypo-methylation
is so common. Projects such as ENCODE and the Roadmap Epigenetics
Project, have identified thousands of epigenetic marks from human genome.
However, the functional evaluation of these marks has been largely
limited to determining their associations with gene expression.
Technologies for targeting manipulation of epigenetic marks would allow
direct experimental testing of the impact of DNA methylation at specific
residues, mechanisms of gene regulation, and potential use as
interventions, for example to silence constitutively active oncogenes.

Methods: Here, we developed a CRISPR Cas9-based tool for specific DNA
methylation in which the catalytic domain of DNMT3a (DNMT3a-CD) is fused
to the carboxy-terminus of Cas9 D10A-H840A mutant (dCas9). Both construct
promoter strength and transfection strategies were optimized.

Results: We demonstrated targeted and consistent CpG methylation in
30~100bp regions downstream of the PAM (binding) site of the gRNA guided
fusion protein in HEK293 cells. The multiple guide RNAs could target the
dCas9-DNMT3A to multiple sites consistently. DNA methylation activity was
specific for the targeted region and was heritable across cell divisions.
We also found directed promoter DNA methylation of DAL1, GATA5 and C-MYC
could decrease the corresponding mRNA expression by up to 80%; different
DNA methylation positions had consequently different effects on gene
expression. We have now performed C-MYC methylation-mediated knockdown in
A549 lung cancer cells and are evaluating resulting cell cycle and
apoptosis phenotypes.

Conclusion: We believe this new targeted epigenetic technology can be
directed to cancer cells for the purpose of reprogramming lung cancer,
and unregulated stromal and microenvironment cells, for preventive and
therapeutic uses.


