Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenyl butyrate inhibits pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 and
contributes to its anti-cancer effects.


In cancer cells, the metabolic features are significantly different from
those of normal ones, which are hallmarks of several malignancies. Recent
studies brought atypical cellular metabolism, such as aerobic glycolysis
or the Warburg effect, into the scientific limelight. Pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase 1 (PDK1), a key enzyme in the pathway of glucose
metabolism, could inactivate the pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) by
phosphorylating it and preserving the substrates pyruvate, lactate and
alanine for gluconeogenesis. Overexpression of PDK1 could block the
oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to satisfy high oxygen demand in
cancer cells, while inhibition of PDK1 could upregulate the activity of
PDH and rectify the balance between the demand and supply of oxygen,
which could lead to cancer cell death. Thus, inhibitors targeting PDK1
might be a promising strategy for cancer treatment by acting on
glycolytic tumors while showing minimal side effects on the oxidative
healthy organs.

Phenyl butyrate (PB) has been proved to decrease PDH phosphorylation
level and increase PDH activity by inhibiting PDK1 in fibroblast cells,
PDH deficiency zebrafish and wild type mice. PB has also shown efficacy
in many cancers and so far, all of its anti-tumor activity has been
attributed to the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor mode of action. As
PDK1/PDH controls the critical switch between oxidative phosphorylation
and glycolysis in cancer cells, PDK1 is a key target in tumor metabolism
for anti-cancer treatment. We hypothesize that the therapeutic effects of
PB in cancers might depend on suppressing PDKs and promoting PDH
activity, in addition to its proposed role as HDAC inhibitor. We showed
that PB directly inhibited the kinase activity of PDK1 in a purified
system. In several different cancer cell lines, PB reduced the
phosphorylation level of PDH, increased the mitochondrial respiration,
decreased glycolysis in cytoplasm, reversed mitochondrial
hyperpolarization, activated some proteins in apoptotic signalling
pathway and then induced the apoptosis of cells. In summary, this is the
first study indicated that PB could exert its anti-cancer effects through
inhibiting PDK1, altering the mitochondrial bioenergetics and inducing
apoptosis.


