Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal evolution of medulloblastoma BTICs in response to therapy.


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumour.
Global gene expression arrays performed on human MBs have divided this
tumour entity into 4 distinct molecular subgroups. Out of all the
subgroups, Group 3 patients face the highest incidence of leptomeningeal
spread and overall patient survival of less than 50%. Current clinical
trials for recurrent MB patients based on genomic profiles of primary,
treatment-naïve tumours, provide limited clinical benefit since
recurrent metastatic MBs are highly genetically divergent from their
primary tumors. By adapting the existing COG (Children’s Oncology
Group) Protocol for children with newly diagnosed high-risk MB for
treatment of immuno-deficient mice intracranially engrafted with human MB
brain tumour initiating cells (BTICs), we aim to identify and
characterize the rare treatment-refractory cell population in Group 3
MBs. MB cell populations recovered separately from brains and spines at
(i) engraftment; (ii) post-radiation; (iii) post-radiation and
chemotherapy; and (iv) recurrence, during the course of tumor development
and therapy were comprehensively profiled for gene expression analysis,
stem cell and molecular features to generate a global, comparative
profile of MB cells through therapy to relapse. One of the most
intriguing observations from our gene expression data was consistent
over-expression of proteins belonging to Inhibitor of
DNA-binding/differentiation (ID) family, transcription factors with a
basic helix-loop-helix motif that act as suppressors cellular
differentiation and a longevity associated protein
bactericidal/permeability-increasing fold-containing-family-B-member-4
(BPIFB4) in our refractory population. The persistent upregulation of
genes preserving undifferentiated state and cellular longevity further
strengthens the hypothesis of stem-cell like cells driving tumor relapse
in MB. We then set out to determine whether genes upregulated at relapse
correlated with patient outcome in our therapy-adapted patient-derived
xenograft model. Interestingly, the upregulation of the top 90 genes in
our relapse cohort was predictive of worse overall survival in patients
with group 3 MB. In the next set of experiments, through application of
cellular barcoding technology we determined how MB BTICs evolve in
response to therapy by tracking unique vector DNA sequences integrated at
a single copy level into individual cells. Our differential genomic
profile of the “treatment-responsive” tumors against those that fail
therapy will thus contribute to discovery of novel therapeutic approaches
for the most aggressive subgroup of MB.


