Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel cathepsin L/K inhibitors KGP94 and KGP207 prevent M0 to
M2 macrophage differentiation and macrophage-mediated pro-tumor functions.


Tumor-associated macrophages play many important roles in tumor
progression, including facilitating tumor cell invasion and angiogenesis.
Due to their numerous pro-tumor functions, tumor-associated macrophages
represent an important cell population in the design of targeted
anti-cancer therapies. Interleukin-4-mediated activation of macrophages
resulted in an M2-like, or pro-tumor macrophage phenotype, often
associated with increased expression of proteases including the lysosomal
cathepsin L. Cathepsin L is important in both macrophage and tumor cell
invasion, whereby secreted cathepsin L degrades the extracellular matrix,
allowing for cell infiltration. The present study examined the role of
cathepsin L in M0 to M2 differentiation and macrophage-mediated tumor
cell invasion using the novel cathepsin L/K inhibitors KGP94 and KGP207
[Dr. Kevin Pinney, Baylor University]. KGP94 and KGP207 prevented M2
macrophage motility and invasion in in vitro migration and invasion
assays. Moreover, KGP94 and KGP207 reduced macrophage-stimulated invasion
of 4T1 murine breast cancer cells. Together, these data suggested that
cathepsin L was necessary for macrophage invasion and motility and for
macrophage-mediated invasion of breast cancer cells. KGP94 and KGP207
treatment partially prevented IL-4-stimulated M0 to M2 differentiation of
macrophages as determined by a decrease in the IL-4-induced expression of
the M2 marker Arginase-1 upon drug treatment. Additionally, exogenous
recombinant cathepsin L partially stimulated the expression of Arginase-1
in M0 macrophages. Together, these data suggest that cathepsin L plays a
role in macrophage M0 to M2 differentiation. In conclusion, the novel
cathepsin L/K inhibitors KGP94 and KGP207 prevented M0 to M2
differentiation, macrophage invasion, and macrophage-stimulated invasion
of breast cancer cells. These data highlight the importance of cathepsin
L in macrophage functions and suggest that cathepsin L inhibition is a
viable approach for the treatment of tumors associated with high
macrophage infiltration.


