Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Is Latin America ready for the use of genomics in cancer care and
control.


In Latin American (LA) countries cancer is the second most frequent cause
of death after cardiovascular disease. Disease patterns have changed from
infectious to chronic, the population is increasing and becoming elderly,
and countries lack planning to respond adequately to this epidemiological
and socio-demographic transition. By 2025 and increment of nearly 30% of
new cases and 35% of deaths from cancer are predicted. Genomic studies
have profoundly changed cancer management from improved cancer diagnosis
to reformulating cancer prognosis and treatment. However, all these key
advances have been mainly concentrated in highly developed nations and
little is known about the capacities and needs of cancer genomics in the
LA context. In order to evaluate the capacity and development of cancer
genomics in LA, we collected available information for all countries in
Central, South America and Cuba. Data reviewed included: number of NGS
platforms, number of cancer research institutions, research groups
working in cancer genetics, publications on cancer genetics and genomics
in the last 10 years, educational programs on genomics and related
national cancer control policies. Currently, there are a total of 212 NGS
platforms in LA. Mexico and Brazil are the countries with more users, and
Peru and Ecuador have the fewest. 118 research groups in South America
have been working in cancer genetics and started developing cancer
genomics related projects. No data on research groups was available for
countries in Central America. In the last 10 years, 231 articles in
cancer genetic/genomic related topics were published by authors
affiliated to LA institutions. Educational programs in genomics are
scarce, almost exclusive of graduate programs and few applied to cancer.
Twelve countries in LA have national cancer control plans (NCCP). All
NCCPs reviewed consider secondary prevention strategies for early
diagnosis, opportune treatment and decrease of mortality, areas where
genomic analysis could be implemented. Only 5 NCCPs include cancer
research as an action plan to increase cancer prevention strategies and
reduce both incidence and mortality. Despite the recent advances in
introducing cancer genomics knowledge and application in LA, the region
lacks development of integrated genomic research projects, improved use
of platforms, associated educational programs and health policies that
might focus on the most frequent cancers and could impact cancer care.


