Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Large scale integrated transcriptomic and epigenetic profiling
defines the molecular hallmarks of HGSOC and disease origins.


High-grade serous ovarian cancers (HGSOCs) are the most common subtype of
epithelial ovarian cancer. Pathways driving HGSOC development are poorly
understood, and the cellular origins are debated in the literature.
Previously, ovarian surface epithelial cells (OSECs) were thought to be
cellular precursors of HGSOC, but there is now strong evidence that at
least half of all HGSOCs arise from fallopian tube secretory epithelial
cells (FTSECs). We took a large-scale integrated
transcriptomic-epigenomic profiling approach to defining the molecular
hallmarks of HGSOC and to explore the disease cell-of-origin. RNA
sequencing was performed on 121 OSEC cultures and 84 FTSEC cultures and
integrated with 394 HGSOC transcriptomes profiled by TCGA. We identified
around 100 genes that differentiate OSECs and FTSECs, and pathway
analysis of this gene list identified ovarian cancer genes as highly
enriched (p=2.2x10-8), with ZEB1 and estrogen the most significant
predicted upstream regulators (PHigh-grade serous ovarian cancers
(HGSOCs) are the most common subtype of epithelial ovarian cancer.
Pathways driving HGSOC development are poorly understood, and the
cellular origins are debated in the literature. Previously, ovarian
surface epithelial cells (OSECs) were thought to be cellular precursors
of HGSOC, but there is now strong evidence that at least half of all
HGSOCs arise from fallopian tube secretory epithelial cells (FTSECs). We
took a large-scale integrated transcriptomic-epigenomic profiling
approach to defining the molecular hallmarks of HGSOC and to explore the
disease cell-of-origin. RNA sequencing was performed on 121 OSEC cultures
and 84 FTSEC cultures and integrated with 394 HGSOC transcriptomes
profiled by TCGA. We identified around 100 genes that differentiate OSECs
and FTSECs, and pathway analysis of this gene list identified ovarian
cancer genes as highly enriched (p=2.2x10-8), with ZEB1 and estrogen the
most significant predicted upstream regulators (P<3.7x10-7). We
integrated gene expression data with clinical metadata to identify
associations between gene expression signatures and clinical variables
and found that in patients diagnosed with ovarian cancer, OSEC and FTSEC
profiles converged, suggestive of a field cancerization phenotype
occurring in the normal OSECs on the unaffected ovary contralateral to a
clinically diagnosed ovarian carcinoma. Transcriptomic signatures for
OSECs, FTSECs and HGSOCs were then merged with superenhancers defined by
performing chromatin immunoprecipitation data for acetylated H3K27
profiled in primary HGSOC tissue specimens. We detected many more
superenhancer-target gene relationships in the normal cells than in the
tumor cells, suggesting superenhancer fingerprints define the cell of
origin rather than determining upregulation of oncogenes driving cancer.
To explore this further we determined the similarities of HGSOCs to OSEC
and FTSEC using a machine learning model. Using a pre-defined gene
signature of OSECs and FTSECs, our model (high specificity and
sensitivity; 95% CI = 0.77-1, p-value=6.1-5) was applied to HGSOCs and we
observed that the majority of HGSOCs were classified as FTSEC-like.
Interestingly, the mesenchymal subtypes were enriched as FTSEC-like.
Moreover, a subset of HGSOCs were characterized as OSEC-like, and these
tumors were associated with poorer outcomes. Our data describe molecular
subgroups within HGSOC precursor tissues as well as defining the
transcriptional networks that define HGSOC precursor tissues, drive HGSOC
development; furthermore we describe the interplay between the epigenetic
landscape and the transcriptome in these cell types. In closing, these
large-scale integrative analyses support a predominantly FTSEC origin for
HGSOCs, but reinforce conclusions that OSECs cannot be excluded as
origins of HGSOC, and may represent a subset of tumors with a different
biology.


