Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a natural product small molecule inhibitor
against Wnt/β-catenin signalling pathway.


Wnt/β-catenin signalling pathway plays an important role in many
processes like cell proliferation, differentiation, regeneration,
carcinogenesis and regulates stem cell pluripotency. β-Catenin, the
central component of Wnt/β-catenin signalling pathway has a vast number
of binding partners and thus plays different roles in the cells.
Mutations of β-catenin are seen in many cancers, including liver cancer,
colorectal cancer, lung carcinoma, ovarian cancer and malignant breast
tumours. Till date there is not even a single small molecule in clinical
use that can block the β-catenin activity or the activities of this
signalling pathway. In this study, we established many assays for
screening small molecule inhibitors of this signalling pathway.
Initially, we created a library of β-catenin deletion and point mutants
and carried out a comprehensive comparative analysis of these mutants by
luciferase reporter assays, GFP-fluorescence, immunoblotting and
protein-protein interactions. We then screened many known and unknown
natural and synthetic molecules against the wnt/β-catenin pathway and
got 2 hits: C-18 and 055A, bioactive metabolites from actinomycetes. The
IC50 (cell toxicity) of these molecules along with salinomycin, a known
ionophore and inhibitor of β-catenin, were determined in different human
cancer cells by MTT assay. The IC50 of 055A, C-18 and salinomycin in
HepG2 cells was 7.5µM, 9.7µM and 25µM respectively. Interestingly,
C-18 was ineffective against non-cancerous cell line (HEK-293 cells) even
upto 60µM. This shows that C-18 is a very promising hit because it is
active against cancer cells and spares non-cancerous cells. The sub
lethal doses of these molecules were then tested for β-catenin mediated
transcription by luciferase reporter assay in HepG2 cells which harbours
a β-catenin deletion responsible for enhanced β-catenin mediated
transcriptional activity. Our results show that C-18 and 055A
significantly block the β-catenin activity in a dose dependent manner.
The inhibition of wnt/β-catenin pathway by C-18 was observed at lower
nanomolar concentrations in comparison to 055A and salinomycin which
shows activity in micromolar concentrations. The β-catenin target gene
expression analysis showed marked decrease in cyclinD1 by immunoblot
analysis upon treatment of HepG2 cells with C-18. Interestingly, C-18
treated HepG2 cells failed to show any apoptosis as confirmed by Parp-1
and caspase-3 immunoblotting indicating that C-18 can be targeted to
block the activity of wnt/β-catenin pathway, and could act as a lead
molecule. Therefore, it warrants further experimentation and validation
which are underway to draw the further conclusions.


