Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thyroid hormone, thyroxine, promotes cell proliferation and
β-catenin activation in colorectal cancer.


Backgrounds: Being a crucial hormone regulating growth, metabolism and
various physiological processes, the status of thyroid hormone has long
been implicated in cancer risks and tumor developments. In the present
study, we aimed to look at the role of thyroid hormone, thyroxine (T4),
in colorectal cancer cell proliferation and β-catenin activation, which
is highly involved in both normal and oncogenic developments of the gut.

Materials and Methods: The effects of T4 in colorectal cancer cell lines
HCT 116 (APC wild type) and HT-29 (APC mutant) as well as the primary
cells derived from colorectal cancer patients were studied. Cell
proliferation was evaluated according to cell counting, MTT assay and
qRT-PCR. The activation of β-catenin was examined using Western
blotting, qRT-PCR and immunoprecipitation.

Results: The results showed that T4 increased the cell number of both HCT
116 and HT-29 cells compared to the untreated cells. In both cell lines,
T4 induced nuclear β-catenin accumulation and the protein levels of
WNT/β-catenin targets Cyclin D1 and c-Myc. The mRNA expression of CTNNB1
was elevated by T4 in HCT 116 cells, but not in HT-29 cells. In APC wild
type HCT 116 cells, T4 increased the WNT4 mRNA expression and decreased
the association between β-catenin and the WNT-regulated β-catenin
destruction complex. Moreover, the cell numbers of T4-treated primary
cells were higher compared to the untreated cells while the mRNA
expressions of proliferative genes PCNA, CCND1 and c-Myc were elevated by
T4. In the primary cells, T4-induced nuclear β-catenin accumulation,
protein levels of Cyclin D1 and c-Myc, and mRNA expressions of CTNNB1 and
WNT4 were also observed.

Conclusions: T4 promoted cell proliferation and β-catenin activation in
colorectal cancer. In the cells with different APC mutation status, the
activation of β-catenin was regulated by different mechanisms.


