Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic potential of Delta24-ACT, a novel immunostimulatory
oncolytic adenovirus, for the treatment of pediatric solid tumors:
Initial study in pHGG, DIPG and osteosarcoma.


Pediatric High Grade Glioma (pHGG), including Diffuse Intrinsic Pontine
Glioma (DIPG), and osteosarcoma are amongst the most common and lethal
pediatric solid tumors. Despite improvements in surgery, radiotherapy and
chemotherapy, the outcome for children affected with these malignancies
remains dismal since the current treatments are ineffective and inflict
severe side effects. Thus, it is critical to implement novel and
radically different therapeutic approaches to improve the survival and
quality of life of these children. Delta24 is a modified adenovirus with
a tumor dependent replication, and its antitumor effect has been tested
in preclinical and clinical models of both high grade glioma and
osteosarcoma. The adenovirus destroys the tumor mass as it replicates
within the tumor. Additionally, the adenovirus infection triggers the
recruitment of lymphocytes to the tumor. However, tumors are often
characterized by an immunosuppressive environment that hampers the
synergistic effect mediated by the virus and the immune system. Here we
describe the generation of a new oncolytic adenovirus Delta24-ACT, based
on the Delta24 platform, encoding an immunostimulatory protein. For this
project we used relevant immunocompetent pediatric solid models. The
toxicity of the virus was assessed by dose-escalation experiments.
Delta24-ACT was well tolerated and did not lead to important adverse
effects. The antitumor effect of Delta24-ACT was evaluated in
immunocompetent mice bearing orthotopic supratentorial glioma, DIPG or
local osteosarcoma that spontaneously metastasize to lungs, obtaining
significant tumor shrinkage or complete elimination in some of them.
Delta24-ACT also promoted an increased T-cell infiltration within the
tumor and an enhanced antitumor immune response. Of importance, treatment
with Delta24-ACT led to a significant increase in median survival in all
the tumor models tested and resulted in long-term survivors free of
disease. Furthermore, in our osteosarcoma model local treatment of
primary tumors led to the regression of spontaneous lung metastases,
which are usually the leading cause of death in most of the patients
affected by osteosarcoma. Currently, we are performing re-challenge
experiments to evaluate a possible memory effect mediated by the virus
and mechanistic studies to elucidate the mechanism of action. Altogether,
these results demonstrate the potential therapeutic benefit of
Delta24-ACT adenovirus in the treatment of pediatric solid tumors such as
pHGG, DIPG and osteosarcoma, representing an important milestone in the
fight against cancer.


