Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MMP9 modulates ROS levels and DNA repair pathway to maintain
genomic stability in colitis associated cancer.


Introduction: Chronic inflammation predisposes tissues to oncogenic, and
in the colon this condition is termed as colitis associated cancer (CAC).
CAC is the inflammation-dysplasia-carcinoma pathway which is
significantly different compared to the adenoma-carcinoma pathway of
sporadic colon cancer (CRC). In CAC, chronic inflammation causes
accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) resulting in DNA damage
that nurtures tumor microenvironment and accelerates cancer cell growth.
Gut microbiota is important in regulating ROS levels, and DNA repair
pathways are critical in restoring the genomic instability. Matrix
Metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc dependent endopeptidases
which mediate inflammation, tissue remodeling, and tumorigenesis. MMP9 is
the most unique MMP because it is undetectable in healthy tissue but
highly upregulated during inflammation and cancer. We have previously
shown that MMP9 plays a protective role in CAC which is opposite to its
conventional role of mediator in acute inflammation and cancer.

Aim: In this study, we examined that if MMP9 acts as a tumor suppressor
by modulating gut microbiota and mismatch repair (MMR) genes to reinstate
genomic stability in CAC.

Methods: We used C57/B6 transgenic MMP9 mice which can express MMP9 under
villin promoter (TgM9) and their wild type (WT) littermates. CAC was
induced by azoxymethane (AOM) and dextran sodium sulfate (DSS,
inflammation inducer) to assess the microbiota population. As a proof of
principal model, we used MMP9 small interfering RNA (siRNA) encoded
within nanoparticles and gavaged WT mice to inhibit MMP9 in colonic
epithelium.

Results: QPCR data showed that mRNA levels of total microbiota population
were more among TgM9 mice compared to WTs in CAC. QPCR analysis also
indicated increased mRNA levels for the phylum Bacteroidetes sp.,
Akkermansia muciniphila but decreased mRNA levels for the phylum
Firmicutes sp. TgM9 mice had lower levels of ROS compared to WTs in CAC.
WB data showed decrease in protein expressions of γH2AX and MDC1 while
an increase in protein expressions of MLH1 and pCNA compared to WTs in
CAC. WT mice treated with MMP9 siRNA loaded nanoparticles showed worsened
CAC condition compared to WT mice given scrambled siRNA loaded
nanoparticles as reflected by significant bodyweight loss and higher
clinical score. We also observed that WT mice treated with MMP9 siRNA
loaded nanoparticles showed increase in protein expression of γH2AX
while decrease in MLH1 protein levels compared to control group.

Conclusion: Our study has two clinically relevant outcomes that MMP9
expression in CAC: i) promotes the beneficial microbiota population and
controls the ROS production, ii) restores the DNA damage via activation
of the MMR pathway. This implies the contradiction of the use of targeted
MMP9 inhibitors in CAC treatment therapies by showing that MMP9
expression may be a natural way to suppress CAC.


