Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemosensitizing effect of telomerase-dependent oncolytic
adenovirus through virally induced microRNA-29-mediated MCL1
downregulation in osteosarcoma cells.


Osteosarcoma is a rare highly malignant tumor. It is generally refractory
to chemotherapy, which contributes to its poor prognosis. The enhancement
of chemosensitivity is a potential approach to improve the prognostic
outcome of osteosarcoma patients. We developed a telomerase-specific
replication-competent oncolytic adenovirus, OBP-301. We recently
confirmed the antitumor effect of OBP-301 monotherapy in human
osteosarcoma cells. We also revealed the synergistic chemosensitizing
effect of OBP-301 in human epithelial malignant tumor cells. In this
study, we investigated the chemosensitizing effect of OBP-301 and its
underlying mechanisms in human osteosarcoma cells. We used four human
osteosarcoma cell lines, SaOS-2, MNNG/HOS, HOS and 143B. OBP-301 is an
attenuated adenovirus, in which the hTERT promoter drives the expression
of E1 gene, and causes tumor-selective lysis in a variety of human
malignant tumor cells with telomerase activity. OBP-301 infection
enhanced the cytotoxic effect of chemotherapeutic agents (cisplatin and
doxorubicin). The calculation of combination index revealed the
synergistic effects in all four human osteosarcoma cell lines.
Combination of OBP-301 increased chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. To
clarify the molecular mechanism underlying the chemosensitizing effect of
OBP-301, we investigated whether OBP-301 affects the expression of
anti-apoptotic BCL2 family proteins. In SaOS-2 and MNNG/HOS cells, the
expression level of MCL1 was markedly decreased by OBP-301 infection.
MCL1 knockdown by siRNA enhanced the chemotherapy-induced apoptosis as
well as OBP-301. We recently revealed that OBP-301 increase the
expression of cellular miRNAs in human cancer cells. To investigate the
underlying mechanism of OBP-301-mediated MCL1 suppression, we determined
whether OBP-301 upregulates MCL1-targeted miRNAs. OBP-301
dose-dependently upregulated the expression of MCL1 targeted miR-29 in
SaOS-2 and MNNG/HOS cells. Exogenously introduced miR-29 efficiently
suppressed MCL1 expression and enhanced the chemotherapy-induced
apoptosis. Moreover, combination treatment significantly inhibited tumor
growth, as compared to monotherapy, in a subcutaneous xenograft tumor
model. MCL1 is overexpressed in various types of human tumor cells.
Overexpression of anti-apoptotic proteins is an important factor to
prevent chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in cancer. We demonstrated OBP-301
efficiently kills human osteosarcoma cells and markedly sensitizes them
to chemotherapy. MCL1 suppression via OBP-301-induced miR-29 is critical
as the underlying mechanism of the OBP-301 mediated chemosensitizing
effect. These results suggest that replicative virus-mediated tumor
specific MCL1 ablation may be a promising strategy to attenuate
chemoresistance in osteosarcoma patients.


