Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simplified sequencing of full-length isoforms in cancer on the
PacBio Sequel System.


Tremendous flexibility is maintained in the human proteome via
alternative splicing, and cancer genomes often subvert this flexibility
to promote survival. Identification and annotation of cancer-specific
mRNA isoforms is critical to understanding how mutations in the genome
affect the biology of cancer cells. While microarrays and other NGS-based
methods have become useful for studying transcriptomes, these
technologies yield short, fragmented transcripts that remain a challenge
for accurate, complete reconstruction of splice variants. In cancer
proteomics studies, the identification of biomarkers from mass
spectroscopy data is often limited by incomplete gene isoform expression
information to support protein to transcript mapping.

The Iso-Seq™ protocol developed at PacBio offers the only solution for
direct sequencing of full-length, single-molecule cDNA sequences needed
to discover biomarkers for early detection and cancer stratification, to
fully characterize gene fusion events, and to elucidate drug resistance
mechanisms. Knowledge of the complete isoform repertoire is also key for
accurate quantification of isoform abundance. As most transcripts range
from 1 - 10 kb, fully intact RNA molecules can be sequenced using SMRT®
Sequencing without requiring fragmentation or post-sequencing assembly.
However, some cancer research applications have presented a challenge for
the Iso-Seq protocol, due to the combination of limited sample input and
the need to deeply sequence heterogenous samples.

Here we report the optimization of the Iso-Seq library preparation
protocol for the PacBio Sequel platform and its application to cancer
cell lines and tumor samples. We demonstrate how loading enhancements on
the higher-throughput Sequel instrument have decreased the need for size
fractionation steps, reducing sample input requirements while
simultaneously simplifying the sample preparation workflow and increasing
the number of full-length transcripts per SMRT Cell. The results
highlight the potential for broader application of the Iso-Seq method to
more comprehensively characterize alternative splicing in cancer.


