Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Complex interactions between genomic and epigenomic alterations in
esophageal adenocarcinomas.


Background: The incidence of Barrett’s-related esophageal
adenocarcinoma (EAC) is rapidly rising in the USA and the Western
countries. However, the interaction between genomic and epigenomic
alterations in regulating gene expression networks in EAC is poorly
understood.

Results and Discussion: We carried out an integrative analytical approach
to identify DNA copy number, promoter DNA methylation and gene expression
in a panel of esophageal adenocarcinomas, using chip-based technologies.
Our analysis displayed significant differences between EAC and normal
samples in DNA copy numbers, gene expression, and DNA methylation
profiles. Our results identified remarkable incidence of DNA copy number
(CN) alterations showing that 90% of probes had a copy number aberration
(gain or loss) in at least one tumor, suggesting a vast chromosomal
instability in EAC. Integrative analysis indicated that altered
expression of 1755 genes was associated with changes in CN or
methylation. We found that expression alterations in 84 genes (56
overexpressed and 28 down regulated) were associated with changes in both
CN and methylation. These data suggest a strong interaction between
genetic and epigenetic events to modulate gene expression in EAC. Of
note, we detected a prominent K-RAS signature in EAC. Network analysis
predicted activation of several important transcription factor networks
in EAC, including β-catenin, MYB, TWIST1, SOX7, GATA3 and GATA6. 56
genes were overexpressed in EAC with simultaneous promoter
hypomethylation and gene amplification, including CDH17 and GATA6.
Notably, several genes associated with inflammation such as COX2, IL8 and
IL23R were overexpressed and hypomethylated in EAC, a reaffirmation of
the underlying inflammatory process in Barrett’s tumorigenesis and a
suggestion of an epigenetic regulation of these genes.

Conclusions: In summary, our integrative analysis of genetic and
epigenetic alterations in EAC demonstrates a complex interaction between
molecular mechanisms in EAC and provides several novel insights for
future studies.


