Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic cytotoxicity of targeted liposomes containing
doxorubicin and C6-ceramide against nucleolin-overexpressing ovarian
cancer cells is supported by the downregulation of the Akt pathway.


The acknowledgment that cancer stem cells (CSC) may originate from
non-stem cancer cells, interconverting through an EMT-mediated process
has turned these distinct cell subpopulations into two relevant
therapeutic targets. Moreover, the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway is essential to
CSC proliferation and survival and it is often over activated in ovarian
cancer. One of the strategies to target these different tumor cell
populations, relies on the combination of conventional chemotherapeutic
drugs (as tumor debulking agents, targeting non-stem cancer cells) with
sphingolipids targeting CSC (at the level of PI3K/Akt/mTOR). Nucleolin
overexpression has been demonstrated on the surface of both breast CSC
and non-stem breast cancer cells (Fonseca NA, Biomaterials 2015) and
endothelial cells from tumor blood vessels. The pH-sensitive lipid-based
nanoparticle, functionalized with the nucleolin-binding F3 peptide, was
recently modified to encapsulate a synergistic combination of a
sphingolipid (C6-ceramide) and doxorubicin (DXR). Following the promising
results in breast cancer, the aim of this work was to assess the
therapeutic potential of this strategy against nucleolin-overexpressing
ovarian cancer cell lines, as well as the underlying mechanism of action
at the molecular level. A 12.9-fold increase of association of
fluorescently-labelled F3 peptide-targeted liposomes ([F3]L), relative to
the non-targeted counterparts, into (bulk) ovarian cancer cell lines
(SKOV-3, OVCAR-3 and TOV-112D) was observed by flow cytometry.
Importantly, a similar pattern of association by putative CSC enriched
population (CD44high/EpCAMhigh) was also observed. These results
corroborated the marked increase of cytotoxicity (assessed by the
resazurin reduction viability assay) enabled by the targeted drug
combinations, relative to [F3]L containing only DXR. In fact, the
targeted drug combination enabled a 90% death of SKOV-3 cancer cells,
following an 8 h incubation, a level of cell killing not achieved by the
counterpart containing only DXR. Against the OVCAR-3 and TOV-112D cell
lines, the IC90 of the targeted drug combination, following 1 h of
incubation, was 2-fold lower than the one resulting from the incubation
with [F3]L containing only DXR. In addition, the effect of
nucleolin-mediated intracellular delivery of C6-ceramide at the p-Akt
protein levels was further discriminated by western blot analysis in
SKOV-3 cells. The observed 3.2-fold downregulation of p-Akt levels
supported the C6-ceramide-mediated improved cytotoxicity of the drug
combination. Overall, these results pointed out the enhanced efficacy of
targeted synergistic drug combinations against ovarian cancer, due to the
capability to target nucleolin-overexpressing cancer cells and further
inhibit the Akt pathway.


