Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of leptin signaling in the promotion of
obesity-associated tumorigenesis and cancer stem cell characteristics in
a transgenic mouse model of basal-like breast cancer.


Background: Epidemiological studies have linked obesity to a greater risk
of breast cancer-specific mortality. This association may be mediated in
part by enhanced cancer stem cell (CSC) enrichment, as CSCs are thought
to be the primary drivers of tumor initiation, growth, and metastasis. We
and others have have demonstrated that obesity promotes CSC enrichment in
pre-clinical models of basal-like breast cancer, but only when leptin
signaling is present. These findings, coupled with evidence that elevated
serum leptin and breast tumor leptin receptor expression are linked to a
worse breast cancer prognosis, suggest that leptin-induced CSC enrichment
may be a key contributor to obesity-associated breast cancer progression.

Methods: MMTV-Wnt-1 transgenic mice, which develop spontaneous basal-like
mammary tumors, were fed a control diet (10% kcal from fat) or a
diet-induced obesity regimen (DIO, 60% kcal from fat). Mice were
euthanized when tumors reached 1.5 cm in diameter. RNA sequencing was
performed on 4 tumors/diet group. Serum hormones and cytokines were
measured via luminex-based assay. ALDH activity, a putative CSC marker,
was quantified by an ALDH Activity Assay Kit (abcam). Quantitative RT-PCR
was used to determine expression of CSC-related genes, leptin, and the
leptin receptor. Two mammary tumor cell lines isolated from the
MMTV-Wnt-1 model (M-Wnt and E-Wnt cells) and human MDA-MB-231 were
exposed in vitro to pooled serum from DIO or control mice (2%
concentration), and cell viability, migration, invasion and expression of
CSC related genes were measured.

Results: Tumor incidence and growth rate were greater in DIO versus
control mice. RNA sequencing revealed an upregulation in a CSC gene
signature in tumors from DIO versus control mice. Significant
upregulation in several of these genes, including aldh1a, oct4, twist1,
twist2, and akt3, was confirmed by qRT-PCR (P Results: Tumor incidence
and growth rate were greater in DIO versus control mice. RNA sequencing
revealed an upregulation in a CSC gene signature in tumors from DIO
versus control mice. Significant upregulation in several of these genes,
including aldh1a, oct4, twist1, twist2, and akt3, was confirmed by
qRT-PCR (P < 0.05). ALDH activity in the DIO (relative to control) tumors
was also significantly increased (P Results: Tumor incidence and growth
rate were greater in DIO versus control mice. RNA sequencing revealed an
upregulation in a CSC gene signature in tumors from DIO versus control
mice. Significant upregulation in several of these genes, including
aldh1a, oct4, twist1, twist2, and akt3, was confirmed by qRT-PCR (P <
0.05). ALDH activity in the DIO (relative to control) tumors was also
significantly increased (P < 0.05). Serum levels and mammary tissue
expression of leptin and tumor expression of the leptin receptor were
significantly elevated in DIO versus control mice (P Results: Tumor
incidence and growth rate were greater in DIO versus control mice. RNA
sequencing revealed an upregulation in a CSC gene signature in tumors
from DIO versus control mice. Significant upregulation in several of
these genes, including aldh1a, oct4, twist1, twist2, and akt3, was
confirmed by qRT-PCR (P < 0.05). ALDH activity in the DIO (relative to
control) tumors was also significantly increased (P < 0.05). Serum levels
and mammary tissue expression of leptin and tumor expression of the
leptin receptor were significantly elevated in DIO versus control mice (P
< 0.05). Exposure to serum from DIO mice significantly increased
(relative to control) M-Wnt, E-Wnt, and MDA-MB-231 cell viability,
migration, invasion, and expression of CSC-related genes in vitro (P
Results: Tumor incidence and growth rate were greater in DIO versus
control mice. RNA sequencing revealed an upregulation in a CSC gene
signature in tumors from DIO versus control mice. Significant
upregulation in several of these genes, including aldh1a, oct4, twist1,
twist2, and akt3, was confirmed by qRT-PCR (P < 0.05). ALDH activity in
the DIO (relative to control) tumors was also significantly increased (P
< 0.05). Serum levels and mammary tissue expression of leptin and tumor
expression of the leptin receptor were significantly elevated in DIO
versus control mice (P < 0.05). Exposure to serum from DIO mice
significantly increased (relative to control) M-Wnt, E-Wnt, and
MDA-MB-231 cell viability, migration, invasion, and expression of
CSC-related genes in vitro (P < 0.05). The role of leptin signaling in
these effects and in vitro measures of CSC enrichment will be explored
through additional in experiments.

Conclusions: Obesity promotes MMTV-Wnt-1 mammary tumor incidence and
growth rate, possibly via CSC enrichment. Preliminary findings suggest
increased leptin signaling may underlie obesity-associated CSC enrichment
and may contribute to the breast cancer burden in obese women.


