Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting the transcriptional profiles of metastatic and primary
disease across cancer types.


Cancer metastasis is the principal cause of death in individuals with
cancer; nevertheless, the molecular basis of metastases is poorly
understood. Genetic and epigenetic changes in malignant cells and their
interaction with the tumor microenvironment are presumably key events in
the establishment of metastases. In this study, we pursue to provide
insights into potential importance of various fundamental cancer-related
pathways in the metastatic process. We have performed a pathway - based
analysis on mRNA expression data (Agilent 8X60K array) from colorectal
liver metastases (CLM; N = 38 patients, n = 44 metastases), breast
lymph-node metastases (BCM; N = n = 43) and melanoma lymph-node
metastases (MLM; N = n= 44). For each of the 186 pathways in the KEGG
pathway database, each sample is represented as points in a ‘n’
dimensional space according to their gene expression values, where
‘n’ is the number of genes in the pathway. We first calculated
centroids for each of the three metastases types (CLM, BCM and MLM) and
then calculated the Euclidean distance between centroids to get a measure
of how similar or different each cancer type is for that particular
pathway. The findings were compared to the corresponding primary cancer
types and normal tissue available from TCGA to uncover biological
processes specific to metastases. The pathways were functionally
classified into genetic information processing, cellular processes,
environmental information processing and metabolic pathways as per KEGG
database. Across metastases from different cancer types, pathways
involved in genetic information processing (e.g. translation,
transcription, protein folding and degradation, DNA replication and
repair) and metabolic pathways were more similar than the pathways
involved in cellular processes (e.g. cell-cycle, apoptosis, adherence
junction), and signal transduction pathways (e.g. Notch, MTOR, JAK STAT)
responsible for environmental information processing. The genetic
information processing pathways were more similar across cancer types
also in the primary setting than the pathways involved in cellular and
environmental information processing, whereas the metabolic pathways were
more similar across cancer types in the metastatic setting compared to
the primary setting. Preliminary findings suggest that the basic
molecular architecture of the primary tumors is maintained, except for
the metabolic pathways, which become more similar in the metastatic
setting; and hence may be a common denominator across cancer types during
metastatic process.


