Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adverse & anticancer activities of 5-azaCdR & DNA
methyltransferase (DNMT) isoform specific inhibitors: therapeutic
implications.


Activation of methylated and silenced promoters of genes that suppress
tumorigenesis has been the rationale behind the clinical use of DNMT
family inhibitor 5aza for treating cancer. However, the adverse effects
of general DNA methylation inhibition on tumors through activation of
tumor promoting and prometastatic genes as well adverse effects on normal
cells have not been comprehensively assessed, nor is it known which
particular DNMT is responsible for regulating these adverse effects. A
related critical question is whether such potential toxicity could be
reduced by targeting a specific isoform of DNMT. We, therefore, performed
a comprehensive molecular characterization of the effects of the pan DNMT
inhibitor 5aza and isoform-specific inhibition of DNMT1, DNMT3a and
DNMT3b by shRNA on cell growth and invasiveness, the methylome and
transcriptome of the breast, liver and lung cancer cells as well as their
normal primary cell counterparts. Our results suggest that 5aza causes
general DNA methylation inhibition both as far as genomic features as
well as the genes that are affected. This results in activation of genes
involved in promoting cancer and metastasis in both cancer and normal
cells. 5aza also induces rampant activation of retroviral elements and
ectopic transcription initiation in gene bodies and intergenic regions.
Second, isoform-specific exhibit a more limited and specific profile of
activity on promoter methylation and gene expression. Third, the adverse
profile of 5aza corresponds to the effects of specific inhibition of
DNMT3a suggesting that the adverse effects of 5aza are partly mediated
through inhibition of DNMT3a. Fourth, specific inhibition of DNMT1
results in an enriched inhibition of DNA methylation in promoters and
inhibition of growth without triggering activation of tumor suppressor
genes and a more favorable molecular footprint on cancer cells. Our data
provide a comprehensive assessment of the impact of DNA methylation
inhibition on normal and cancer cells and points to the potential adverse
effects of such an approach. However, since the different DNMTs have a
different molecular footprint, these adverse effects might be inhibited
using isoform-specific DNMT inhibitors. Our data needs to be considered
for further clinical development of DNMT inhibitors.


