Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-resolution microbiome profiling and genome wide arrays
uncover bacteria driven alterations of oncogenic and immune pathways in
head and neck cancer patients treated with surgery, chemo-radiation and
PD-1 checkpoint blockade therapy.


Previous microbiome studies at the genus level have described altered
microbiota in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), both in
terms of taxonomic composition and metabolic capacity. We applied
high-resolution microbiome profiling (Resphera Insight) to analyze 16S
rRNA sequencing data in saliva and tissue samples from HNSCC patients and
healthy controls. DNA extraction and amplicon library preparation was
performed for saliva samples from HNSCC (n=38) and controls (n=25), as
well as tissue samples from HNSCC (n=25) and controls (n=8). Raw
sequences were processed for quality and length, screened for chimeras
and filtered for contaminant human and chloroplast DNA. High-quality
passing sequences were submitted to Resphera Insight for species-level
taxonomic assignments, followed-by differential abundance analysis with
the DESeq package. Samples from a subset of HNSCC patients were
significantly enriched with commensal species from the vaginal flora,
including Lactobacillus gasseri/johnsonii (710x higher in saliva and
1990x higher in tissue) and Lactobacillus vaginalis (52x higher in
saliva). These species were not observed in normal saliva or tissue
samples from Hopkins patients (n=33) nor in normal saliva samples (n=292)
from the Human Microbiome Project (HMP). Interestingly, both species were
only observed in saliva from Human Papilloma Virus positive (HPV+) and
HPV negative (HPV-) oropharyngeal cancer patients, and we confirmed their
representation in vaginal samples from the HMP (n=249). We also found
that Fusobacterium nucleatum (F.nucleatum), an oral cavity flora
commensal bacterium linked to colon cancer, is enriched (600x higher in
saliva and 51x higher in tissue) in a subset of HNSCC patients with
advanced tumors (T3 or above). F. nucleatum was detected in samples
obtained before and after treatment with chemo-radiation, but not with
surgery alone. Interestingly, we identified upregulation of the oncogenic
Wnt/Beta catenin pathway (Wnt7B, FZD6, SFRP4) and down regulation of
immune system pathways (TLR10, IRF8) with genome-wide mRNA arrays
(Affymetrix) in HNSCC samples enriched for F.nucleatum. Using fluorogenic
quantitative PCR we confirmed that F.nucleatum and Fusobacterium spp. are
enriched in saliva samples collected prior to treatment in another cohort
of HNSCC patients, and in post-treatment saliva samples obtained from
HNSCC patients treated with PD-1 checkpoint blockade. We also found
enrichment of HPV+ oropharyngeal tumors with F.nucleatum and
Fusobacterium spp., prior to therapy, while some recurrent HPV-
oropharyngeal tumors are enriched only with Fusobacterium spp. Together,
these results suggest that bacteria may impact therapy in HPV+ and HPV-
oropharyngeal and oral cavity cancer by altering oncogenic and immune
system pathways.


