Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PPM1D/Wip1, promising new target in childhood cancers
neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma.


Background:

The most common cytogenetic lesions in the embryonal neural tumors
medulloblastoma (MB) and neuroblastoma (NB) affect chromosome 17, with
17q+ or isochromosome 17q, in approximately one-third of MB with these
aberrations being a significant indicator of poor clinical outcome.
Similarly, in NB gain of 17q is the most powerful genetic predictor of
adverse clinical outcome. 17q+ correlates with poor survival in our
population-based material where we found aberrations of chromosome 17 in
85% of primary neuroblastomas, specifically, gain of PPM1D/Wip1 at 17q23.
Wip1 is a serine/threonine phosphatase encoded by the gene PPM1D,
described as a gatekeeper in the Mdm2-p53 regulatory loop involved in
genetic stability, inflammation and a potential oncogene contributing to
carcinogenesis.

Methods:

Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), immunostaining, mRNA arrays,
qPCR, exome- and RNA-sequencing was used to examine PPM1D/Wip1 in
neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma. Genetic and pharmacological inhibition
was used to analyze the function of Wip1 in preclinical neuroblastoma and
medulloblastoma models.

Results:

CGH-array analysis detected PPM1D/Wip1 extra copies in all tumors and
cell lines containing 17q-gain. Expression arrays and immunostaining
showed high expression of Wip1 in neuroblastoma corresponding to poor
survival. RNA sequencing confirmed PPM1D-gain and revealed truncated
isoforms with oncogenic potential. Exome-sequencing detected a mutation
leading to constitutive PPM1D/Wip1 activation in an aggressive metastatic
infant neuroblastoma. Wip1 knockdown experiments showed significant
decrease of cell viability, proliferation and colony formation as well as
substantial increase of DNA-damage response in neuroblastoma and
medulloblastoma cells. Tumor neuroblastoma xenograft development was
significantly delayed showing median tumor development (0.10 mL) to be
more than doubled (median 15 days, vs. 33 days, pCGH-array analysis
detected PPM1D/Wip1 extra copies in all tumors and cell lines containing
17q-gain. Expression arrays and immunostaining showed high expression of
Wip1 in neuroblastoma corresponding to poor survival. RNA sequencing
confirmed PPM1D-gain and revealed truncated isoforms with oncogenic
potential. Exome-sequencing detected a mutation leading to constitutive
PPM1D/Wip1 activation in an aggressive metastatic infant neuroblastoma.
Wip1 knockdown experiments showed significant decrease of cell viability,
proliferation and colony formation as well as substantial increase of
DNA-damage response in neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma cells. Tumor
neuroblastoma xenograft development was significantly delayed showing
median tumor development (0.10 mL) to be more than doubled (median 15
days, vs. 33 days, p<0.001) after Wip1 downregulation compared to
scrambled controls. A novel Wip1 inhibitor was highly potent in
cytotoxic/cytostatic effect in neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma cell
lines. Furthermore, this Wip1 inhibitor significantly inhibited growth of
established human neuroblastomas and medulloblastomas in nude mice after
treatment (PCGH-array analysis detected PPM1D/Wip1 extra copies in all
tumors and cell lines containing 17q-gain. Expression arrays and
immunostaining showed high expression of Wip1 in neuroblastoma
corresponding to poor survival. RNA sequencing confirmed PPM1D-gain and
revealed truncated isoforms with oncogenic potential. Exome-sequencing
detected a mutation leading to constitutive PPM1D/Wip1 activation in an
aggressive metastatic infant neuroblastoma. Wip1 knockdown experiments
showed significant decrease of cell viability, proliferation and colony
formation as well as substantial increase of DNA-damage response in
neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma cells. Tumor neuroblastoma xenograft
development was significantly delayed showing median tumor development
(0.10 mL) to be more than doubled (median 15 days, vs. 33 days, p<0.001)
after Wip1 downregulation compared to scrambled controls. A novel Wip1
inhibitor was highly potent in cytotoxic/cytostatic effect in
neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma cell lines. Furthermore, this Wip1
inhibitor significantly inhibited growth of established human
neuroblastomas and medulloblastomas in nude mice after treatment (P<0.01).

Conclusions:

Our results show that PPM1D/Wip1 is oncogenic in neuroblastoma and
medulloblastoma development. We propose three different ways on how
PPM1D/Wip1 is activated: due to chromosomal gain, alternative
RNA-isoforms and/or DNA-mutation. PPM1D/Wip1 provides a novel therapeutic
target in neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma.


