Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic modulators for the treatment of invasive lobular
carcinoma breast cancer.


Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) is a breast cancer subtype comprising
10% of breast tumors. The majority of ILC (90%) are estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive and therefore candidates for endocrine therapy.
Unfortunately, de novo resistant to endocrine therapies occurs in 33% of
women and a further 40% will relapse on treatment. Therefore, novel
therapeutic targets are required for ILC. Deregulated transcription is a
recurring theme in cancer, which can be due to epigenetic events. The
bromdomain & extra-terminal domain (BET) family of proteins (BRD2, BRD3,
BRD4, BRDT) function as chromatin readers that bind acetylated lysine
residues on histones and regulate transcription. We performed
RNA-Sequencing analysis on 61 primary ILC samples and found that high
expression of BRD3 is associated with poor survival in ILC (log rank
test, p=0.037). We validated this finding, that high expression of BRD3
is associated with poor survival, in a second cohort of 99 ILC primary
samples from the METABRIC dataset (log rank test, p=0.0157). Next, we
tested if ILC cell lines were sensitive to BET inhibition using the small
molecule inhibitor JQ1, which inhibits all BET family proteins. JQ1
downregulates growth and survival genes in ILC cell lines including MYC,
ER and BCL-XL. Pathway analysis following RNA sequencing revealed that
JQ1 targets the apoptotic and Wnt signalling pathways in ILC cell lines.
Interestingly, JQ1 inhibited the cell growth in all ILC cell lines
tested, however apoptosis was only induced in two ILC cell lines.
Furthermore, ILC cell lines which were relatively resistant to
JQ1-induced apoptosis expressed both the BCL-2 and BCL-XL anti-apoptotic
proteins. This led us to assess the combination of JQ1 and the BH3
mimetics, ABT-199 and ABT-263. ABT-199 is a selective small molecule
inhibitor of BCL-2, whereas ABT-263 is an inhibitor of BCL-2, BCL-XL and
BCL-W proteins. We found the combination of JQ1 and ABT-263, but not the
combination of JQ1 & ABT-199, to be synergistic and enhance apoptosis in
ILC cell lines. This is in accordance with BH3 profiling of ILC cell
lines which indicated that ILC cell lines are dependent on BCL-2/ BCL-XL
proteins for cell survival. As JQ1 is a pan-BET family inhibitor, we also
wish to determine which BET protein is responsible for sensitivity to
JQ1. Following knockdown of each BET protein in the CAMA-1 cell line we
found that BRD3 and BRD4 were responsible for loss of cell viability.
Future work will include determining the specific role of BRD3 in ILC and
the effectiveness of the JQ1 and ABT-263 combination in vivo. Our work
suggests that inhibition of BET proteins in combination with BH3 mimetics
may be a rational therapeutic combination for ILC.


