Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histological heterogeneity contributes to sunitinib resistance in
clear cell renal cell carcinoma.


Introduction: The receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) inhibitor sunitinib is
the first line treatment for advanced clear cell renal cell carcinoma
(ccRCC). Sunitinib inhibits angiogenesis via blocking signaling through
VEGFR. About 80% of patients develop resistance after a drug-sensitive
period. Molecular changes early in treatment may impact drug resistance,
but are poorly understood.

Experimental Procedures: ACHN, 786-O and Renca cell lines were treated
with 1 µM sunitinib. NSG mice were s.c. xenografted with the model cell
lines and were treated with sunitinib at 40 mg/kg/day dose. mRNA
expression was screened using Illumina HT-12 bead chip array and miRNA
expression was assessed by Nanostring nCounter assay. R statistical
packages were used for data processing. Reactome and miRPath softwares
were used for downstream analysis.

Results: Sunitinib treatment of ccRCC xenografts led to several early
changes in tumor histology, such as the emergence of live tumor areas
within the necrotic spaces. These areas showed membranous staining for
E-cadherin, and β-catenin, while the rest of the tumor and
vehicle-treated tumors were negative. In vitro model cell lines developed
cancer spheroids when treated with sunitinib. Cancer spheroids were
highly tumorigenic and metastatic, and expressed several established
cancer stem cell markers. ccRCC cancer spheres, but not the 2D adherent
cells, showed membranous staining for E-cadherin and β-catenin;
similarly to the live tumor areas observed in

in vivo sunitinib treatment. In vitro inhibition of E-cadherin by EGTA or
by siRNA, interfered with viability of sunitinib treated ccRCC cell lines.

Conclusions: Sunitinib treatment causes early phenotypic changes of the
tumor in vivo and in vitro. The formation of highly metastatic and
tumorigenic cancer spheres in model cell lines is the most prominent
effect in vitro. We provide preliminary evidence that sunitinib induced
in vitro cancer spheres and the live tumor areas that survive within
necrotic patches of the sunitinib-treated xenografts, are related.
Finally, membranous expression of E-cadherin enhances the survival of
ccRCC cell lines under sunitinib treatment.


