Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and analysis of EGLN3 as tumor-associated peptide
in ccRCC.


Introduction:

Kidney cancer is the 12th most common cancer world-wide with 338.000
newly diagnosed cases in 2012, according to the World Cancer Research
Fund International. With around 70-80%, clear cell renal cell carcinomas
(ccRCC) make up the vast majority of kidney cancers. Advanced and
metastatic ccRCCs are marked by poor survival rates despite the
availability of targeted therapies. Currently several immunotherapeutic
approaches, including checkpoint-blocking antibodies and dendritic cell
vaccines are undergoing clinical investigations. In this study we
identified tumor-associated peptides which could be used in cancer
vaccines to improve treatment of patients with advanced ccRCC.

Methods:

To identify suitable peptides for cancer vaccines we set up a tissue
collection of paired tumors and normal kidney tissues from 60 ccRCC
patients. From these tissues, HLA molecules were isolated by affinity
chromatography and bound peptides analyzed by mass spectrometry. HLA
ligand profiles of tissues excised from various organ sites of non-ccRCC
patients were used to complement the data. Based on these analyses, Egl
nine homolog 3 (EGLN3) was selected as a candidate for peptide
vaccination and further investigated in our own data cohort comprising
the 60 ccRCC patients. Therefore, mRNA and protein expression, as well as
DNA methylation data were collected and correlated with HLA ligandomics
and clinical data. In addition, we integrated RNA-Seq, DNA methylation,
somatic mutation and clinical data from a ccRCC patient cohort from The
Cancer Genome Atlas in our analyses. Finally, EGLN3 function was analyzed
in 2D and 3D kidney carcinoma cell culture systems.

Results:

16 different peptides from EGLN3 were detected in 32 of the 60 analyzed
tumor samples, with the most frequent peptide found in tumors of 10
different patients. Only two of the peptides were also detected in normal
kidney or other non-ccRCC tissues, rendering EGLN3 peptides promising
candidates to be used in ccRCC-directed vaccines. Most of our patients
were HLA A*02:01 positive, however using NetMHCpan
(http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetMHCpan/) only one of the peptides
identified by HLA ligandomics was also predicted to be a strong binder
for that particular HLA molecule. Expression of EGLN3 mRNA was not
different in patients with and without HLA-presented peptides. Generally,
EGLN3 mRNA expression was strongly induced in ccRCC tumors compared to
normal kidney (p16 different peptides from EGLN3 were detected in 32 of
the 60 analyzed tumor samples, with the most frequent peptide found in
tumors of 10 different patients. Only two of the peptides were also
detected in normal kidney or other non-ccRCC tissues, rendering EGLN3
peptides promising candidates to be used in ccRCC-directed vaccines. Most
of our patients were HLA A*02:01 positive, however using NetMHCpan
(http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetMHCpan/) only one of the peptides
identified by HLA ligandomics was also predicted to be a strong binder
for that particular HLA molecule. Expression of EGLN3 mRNA was not
different in patients with and without HLA-presented peptides. Generally,
EGLN3 mRNA expression was strongly induced in ccRCC tumors compared to
normal kidney (p<10-6), whereas protein levels remained mainly unchanged
in most patients. Functional investigations in different RCC cell culture
models indicated involvement of EGLN3 in regulation of apoptosis and cell
cycle progression.

Conclusion:

Advanced ccRCC is marked by poor survival rates due to ineffective
therapeutic options. Peptides from EGLN3, as well as other
ccRCC-exclusive peptides could represent activators of the immune system
to specifically fight ccRCC tumors. The function and targetability of
EGLN3 remains to be investigated.


