Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment of epithelial ovarian cancer with folate receptor
(α/β) targeted chemotherapy is enhanced by CTLA-4 blockade: Learning
from animal models.


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) remains to be the most lethal form of
gynecologic malignancies despite aggressive cytoreductive surgery (i.e.
debulking) followed by standard chemotherapy. The alpha folate receptor
(FRα) has long been recognized as a tumor target for EOC due to its
frequently intense overexpression (>80%) in the most common serous
histotype. Recently, the beta folate receptor (FRβ) has been discovered
on tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) which are present at various
densities in solid tumors but are also found abundant in malignant
ascites of EOC patients. The ascites TAMs are strongly immunosuppressive,
and high TAM frequency is correlated with poor patient prognosis and
treatment resistance. Respectively, tumor- and TAM-associated FRα and
FRβ are both functionally active which allows for folate-targeted
delivery of small-molecule drug payloads via receptor-mediated
endocytosis.

Using flow cytometry, we characterized total ascites cells harvested from
human IGROV1 xenograft (hFRα) and murine ID8-CL15 syngeneic (mFRα)
models at the time of euthanasia. Approximately 70% of IGROV1 and 25% of
ID8-Cl15 ascites TAMs (F4/80+ CD11b+) were found to express a functional
mFRβ. While ascites fluids from both models caused a dramatic reduction
of FRα functionality on tumor cells in-vivo and ex-vivo, FRβ expression
and functionality on ascites TAMs were largely unaffected. Interestingly,
in the ID8-CL15 model, the ratio of ascites CD8+ T cells to CD4+ T cells
decreased as total FR functionality on TAMs increased. Two small-molecule
folate-drug conjugates with different mechanisms of action showed
activity in extending the survival of tumor-bearing animals. While CTLA-4
blockage alone was completely inactive in the ID8-CL15 model, a
combination regimen significantly enhanced the activity of a folate
conjugate carrying a potent DNA cross-linking agent. Our data suggest
that EOC treatment may require a multi-pronged approach by targeting both
FRα-expressing tumor cells and FRβ-expressing TAMs. In addition, immune
checkpoint inhibitors may further enhance the FR-targeted therapeutics by
modulating the ascites tumor microenvironment.


