Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting telomere maintenance mechanisms in neuroblastoma.


Background. Telomere maintenance is a major cancer hallmark and has
recently attracted attention as an oncogenic mechanism in the pediatric
malignancy, neuroblastoma (NBL), due to detection of frequent structural
rearrangements near the telomerase (TERT) gene. NBLs display substantial
clinical and molecular heterogeneity; tumors with MYCN amplification and
TERT-associated rearrangements define separate groups of high-risk
patients with active TERT. ATRX mutations are frequent in non-TERT active
high-risk tumors, indicating use of alternative lengthening of telomeres
(ALT) as a maintenance mechanism. Furthermore, the 4S low-risk NBLs
display an elevated rate of spontaneous regression and overall good
prognosis; it has been hypothesized that lacking a telomere maintenance
mechanism (“telomere crisis”) may be behind this phenomenon.

Methods. To gain mechanistic insight behind these phenomena, we introduce
an integrative analysis of a cohort comprising 104 high-risk (32
MYCN-amplified) and 23 4S tumors with matched blood/tumor whole genome
sequencing, CpG methylation, and RNA-seq data from the TARGET consortium.

Here, we preformed structural variant (SV), allelic specific expression
(ASE), and differential CpG methylation analyses. Additionally, we
introduce a novel approach to measure relative telomere DNA abundance
from short-read WGS measured as the ratio between tumor and blood
telomeric reads (containing canonical repeats TTAGGG/CCCTAA) per million
(TBrpm).

Results. We identified 26 tumors harboring TERT rearrangements (25% of
all high risk tumors) and 3 tumors with ATRX mutations. We define 4
groups of high-risk NBL with different telomere maintenance mechanisms:
1) Tumors with MYCN amplification or elevated MYC/N activity, TERT gene
body hyper-methylation (β-value≅0.8), and expression of biallelic
TERT; 2) Tumors harboring TERT associated SVs, hemi-methylation
(β-value≅0.5), and expression of mono-allelic TERT, 3) Tumors without
TERT expression, including ATRX mutants with hypo-methylated TERT
(β-value≅0.3), 4) tumors with abnormally high telomeric DNA abundance
(TBrpm > 1.5), hypo-methylation (β-value≅0.3), and no expression of
TERT. Intriguingly, while groups 1-3 show telomeric loss (TBrpm ≅
0.7-0.9), 4S tumors show conservation of telomere abundance between tumor
and blood (TBrpm ≅ 1); hence no indication of telomere crisis, perhaps
due to early timing of biopsy at diagnosis.

Conclusion. We have used ASE status and gene body methylation of TERT in
order to understand and validate mechanisms underlying TERT activation;
we extend MYCN-driven TERT activation to tumors with high MYC/MYCN
activity in the absence of MYCN amplification. Our telomere analysis
suggests that different ALT mechanisms might take place in NBLs. Defining
the mechanism of 4S NBL spontaneous regression requires further
investigation.


