Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequent up-regulation of histone methyltransferase G9a
contributed to liver carcinogenesis by epigenetically silencing of tumor
suppressor RARRES3.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second leading cause of cancer
death worldwide and is the most common type of cancer in sub-Saharan
Africa and Southeast Asia area where hepatitis B infections are common.
The initiation and progression of HCC was attributed to alternations in
genetics and disruptions of epigenetic processes which lead to altered
gene functions in both oncogenes and tumor suppressors. Recent
advancements in the field of cancer epigenetics increasingly emphasize
the important role of every component in the epigenetic machinery.
However, the alternations of epigenetic mechanisms involved in HCC are
still largely unknown. Using transcriptome sequencing, we examined the
expression of 591 epigenetic regulators in hepatitis B-associated human
HCC and found that most of the epigenetic regulators are deregulated
especially the histone modification enzymes. Among all of them, we
identified G9a (Euchromatic histone-lysine N-methyltransferase 2, EHMT2),
a histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) specific histone methyltransferases, as one
of the most significantly up-regulated epigenetic regulators in human
HCCs. Previous studies about epigenetic alternations primarily focused on
promoter DNA hypermethylation. However, little is known about the
pathological implications of histone modifications. Herein, we hypothesis
the frequent up-regulation of G9a causes epigenetic aberrations which
contribute liver carcinogenesis, and targeting G9a could be a potential
epigenetic therapeutic method for HCC treatment. In this study, we found
that G9a was frequently up-regulated in different HCC sample cohorts.
Up-regulation of G9a was significantly associated with HCC disease
progression, cancer aggressiveness, and more malignant tumor phenotypes.
Functionally, we demonstrated that shRNA knockdown and CRISPR/Cas9
knockout of G9a suppressed HCC cell proliferation in vitro and inhibited
subcutaneously xenograft HCC tumorigenicity in vivo. Depletion of G9a
significantly reduced HCC cell migration ability and induced cell
senescence. Pharmacological inhibition of G9a by small molecule
inhibitors, UNC0638 and BIX01294, also suppressed HCC cell growth and
altered cell morphology. Mechanistically, we showed that the frequent
up-regulation of G9a in human HCC was attributed to gene copy number gain
at chromosome 6p21 and loss of miR-1. Furthermore, up-regulation of G9
also epigenetically repressed miR-1 expression and thus formed a
feedforward regulation loop between them. By utilizing RNA-Seq and GSEA
analysis, we identified a potential tumor suppressor RARRES that was
epigenetically silenced by G9a and promoted tumor cells proliferation in
human HCC. Taken together, we showed that G9a are novel oncogenes in
human HCCs and G9a could be novel therapeutic targets for HCC treatment.


