Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of aquaporin 11 as a potential predictor of cisplatin
sensitivity.


Platinum-based combination is a standard of care treatment for lung
cancer patients. Accumulating evidence indicates that aquaporins are
emerging targets in cancer. Aquaporin 11 (AQP11), a non-ubiquitous member
of aquaporins family, is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-specific water
channel mostly present in epithelial cells and is implicated in the
maintenance of ER homeostasis. In our recent publications, we
demonstrated that under the stress the reduction of AQP11 expression is a
pro-apoptotic factor in normal epithelial cells. We revealed that under
normal conditions AQP11 is heavily S-nitrosylated forming functionally
important multimeric structures (> 1000 kDa), whereas cisplatin treatment
interferes with AQP11 causing its structural and post-translational
modification. We hypothesized that if tumor cells express AQP11 then
cells with lower levels of AQP11 are not protected from
cisplatin-associated ER stress and develop higher sensitivity to drug
treatment. In normal lung AQP11 is expressed at low levels. We evaluated
the expression of AQP11 in lung cancer cells to determine whether the
AQP11 expression correlates with cisplatin sensitivity and whether lower
AQP11 expression in lung tumor associates with positive overall survival
in patients with lung adenocarcinoma.

A strong link between the level of AQP11 protein expression and cell
sensitivity to CP was detected using MTT assay. Screening lung cancer
cell lines we found that all tested cancer cell lines expressed AQP11
protein at various levels. Western blot of stress markers showed that
cisplatin-treated cells with higher AQP11 expression had lowered cellular
and ER stress. Reduction of AQP11 expression using shRNA AQP11 silencing
in cispaltin-resistant A549 and HCC827 cell lines, resulted in the
significantly increased up to 3-fold sensitivity to cisplatin compared
with control shRNA transfected or parental non-transfected cells (pA
strong link between the level of AQP11 protein expression and cell
sensitivity to CP was detected using MTT assay. Screening lung cancer
cell lines we found that all tested cancer cell lines expressed AQP11
protein at various levels. Western blot of stress markers showed that
cisplatin-treated cells with higher AQP11 expression had lowered cellular
and ER stress. Reduction of AQP11 expression using shRNA AQP11 silencing
in cispaltin-resistant A549 and HCC827 cell lines, resulted in the
significantly increased up to 3-fold sensitivity to cisplatin compared
with control shRNA transfected or parental non-transfected cells
(p<0.001). In sensitive H460 cells, knocking down AQP11 did not change
sensitivity to cisplatin. TCGA database analysis of previously untreated
lung adenocarcinoma, detected 13% tumors with elevated AQP11 mRNA
expression. Lower AQP11 expression was significantly associated with
higher OS and higher median survival rate (52.5 vs. 34.47 mo) than in
patients with high AQP11 expression (pA strong link between the level of
AQP11 protein expression and cell sensitivity to CP was detected using
MTT assay. Screening lung cancer cell lines we found that all tested
cancer cell lines expressed AQP11 protein at various levels. Western blot
of stress markers showed that cisplatin-treated cells with higher AQP11
expression had lowered cellular and ER stress. Reduction of AQP11
expression using shRNA AQP11 silencing in cispaltin-resistant A549 and
HCC827 cell lines, resulted in the significantly increased up to 3-fold
sensitivity to cisplatin compared with control shRNA transfected or
parental non-transfected cells (p<0.001). In sensitive H460 cells,
knocking down AQP11 did not change sensitivity to cisplatin. TCGA
database analysis of previously untreated lung adenocarcinoma, detected
13% tumors with elevated AQP11 mRNA expression. Lower AQP11 expression
was significantly associated with higher OS and higher median survival
rate (52.5 vs. 34.47 mo) than in patients with high AQP11 expression
(p<0.05).

AQP11 gene is located within oncogenic 11q13-q14 amplicon, which is a
common aberration in solid tumors associated with poor prognosis. The
AQP11 is a pro-survival factor protecting tumor cells from
cisplatin-induced stress. Low AQP11 expression associates with higher OS
in lung adenocarcinoma patients and with higher cispaltin sensitivity in
lung cancer cell. The ER stress aggravation via interference with AQP11
could become a prospective therapeutic approach in anti-tumor treatment.


