Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ex vivo three-dimensional tumor growth assay: 3DX-TGA.


With a 7% likelihood of regulatory approval, oncology drug registration
failure rates lead all therapeutic areas. Further complicating the drug
development process, preclinical oncology models poorly reflect tumor
tissue biology and produce a high level of false positive data. Yet,
monocellular two-dimensional (2D) tissue culture remains the preferred
platform for most laboratory preclinical studies. The popularity of 2D
tissue culture was driven predominantly by fast and dependable
proliferation of human tumor cells rather than alignment to the
pathophysiology of human cancer. As a consequence of this artificial
selection bias, many registered oncology drugs today are highly toxic
with a propensity to attack any dividing cell (i.e., non-targeted).
Fortunately, recent advances in genomics, metabolomics and immunology
have aided in development of new targeted agents, many of which have
achieved regulatory approval.

Nevertheless, rational drug combinations and identification of clinically
meaningful drug targets persist as major challenges in oncology, and each
can be meaningfully addressed using more diverse and biologically
relevant preclinical models. Ex vivo tumor tissue transplant models, such
as patient-derived xenografts (PDX) offer greater model diversity and
more faithfully reflect patient tumor genetics. However, cost and
scalability barriers tend to limit widespread and practical model
utility. In addition, there remains a strong selection bias for autocrine
human tumors that can quickly adapt to a cross-species mouse host.

As a practical alternative to PDX models, we established, serially
propagated and molecularly characterized 300 ex vivo 3D (3DX) models
spanning 15 tumor indications. Given patient tumor seeding success rates
of over 95%, the 3DX-TGA model enabled diverse pharmacologic evaluation
for the vast majority of cancer patient models attempted. After achieving
sufficient tumor biomass, typically within 7 to 8 weeks, thirty-one drugs
were screened for proliferation and viability endpoints over a three-log
dose range. Resistance and sensitivity profiles mirrored population-based
response rates for indication-aligned FDA-registered drugs. Taken
together, the 3DX-TGA model represents a powerful preclinical ex vivo
model that: (1.) more faithfully recapitulates human tumor biology, (2.)
can be scaled at a fraction of time and cost compared to PDX models, and
(3.) provide a superior screening platform for novel drugs and drug-drug
combinations.


