Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactive oxygen species-mediated synergistic and preferential
induction of cell death and reduction of drug resistance in oncogenic
H-Ras-expressing bladder cancer cells by combined romidepsin and
cisplatin with gemcitabine.


Human urinary bladder cancer is the fifth most commonly diagnosed cancer
in the United States and is often associated with induction of oncogenic
H-Ras. Long-term survival of patients is suboptimal with the current
chemotherapeutic regimen of combined cisplatin and gemcitabine and others
due to acquired drug resistance and recurrence. Thus, it is urgent to
develop new regimens effective in control of tumor growth, drug
resistance, and recurrence to reduce the morbidity and mortality of this
disease. We used our cellular system, consisting of human urinary bladder
cancer J82 cells paired with its derived oncogenic H-Ras-expressing
J82-Ras cells, to investigate the efficacy of a novel combination regimen
in treating bladder cancer cells. Our studies revealed, for the first
time, the ability of a combination of cisplatin and romidepsin with
gemcitabine to synergistically and preferentially induced cell death and
reduced drug resistance in J82-Ras versus J82 cells. The Ras-ERK-Nox
pathway played an essential role in mediating signals to elevate reactive
oxygen species (ROS), leading to enhanced caspase activation, DNA damage,
and DNA oxidation, as well as reduced glutathione, to synergistically
increased cell death and reduced drug resistance in cells treated with
combined romidepsin, cisplatin, and gemcitabine. Preferentially induced
Ras-ERK-Nox-ROS pathway, caspase

activation, and DNA damage/oxidation, as well as reduced glutathione,
contributed to the preferentially induced cell death and reduced drug
resistance in J82-Ras versus J82 cells. Synergistically induced death and
reduced drug resistance were also detected in human bladder cancer SW780
cells treated with combined romidepsin, cisplatin, and gemcitabine.
Hence, our results lead us to suggest that a combination of romidepsin,
cisplatin, and gemcitabine should be seriously considered as a new
therapeutic regimen for controlling the development and recurrence of
human urinary bladder cancer, especially Ras-ERK-activated cancers.


