Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNAseq analysis of infiltrating immune cells in liver cancer.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has emerged as second most common cause of
cancer deaths worldwide. During the last 10 years, there has been a clear
delineation of landscape of genetic alterations in HCC and deregulated
pathways in HCC. However, the treatment for patients with advanced HCC is
limited despite of great effort developing therapeutic targeting the
deregulated pathways in HCC. Recent studies reveal a direct causal
relationship between cancer & immune dysfunction, whereby tumor cells and
their microenvironment are able to evade immune attack by exploiting
various immunoregulatory mechanisms in a process termed cancer immune
editing.

Methods In this poster, the objective is to perform exploratory analysis
of TCGA liver cancer data to see if immune infiltrates matter, and if
they offer anti-tumor immunity to a cell. For this purpose, we analyzed
RNA-seq data for a cohort of 75 liver cancer samples from TCGA
collection. We obtained the gene expression data from a pre-selected
group of specific markers for infiltrating lymphocytes (several
subtypes), and explored the association of expression of these markers
with clinical outcome.We downloaded raw RNA-seq data from the TCGA Liver
cancer collection from 75 patients. These included 25 patients who had
Hepatitis B virus (HBV), 25 patients who had Hepatitis C virus (HCV) and
25 patients who had both viruses. After processing of raw data, we
extracted isoform expression (TPM values) from specific markers for
infiltrating lymphocytes. This data was stratified into ‘high’ and
‘low’ expression based on median cutoff.We compared the ‘high’
and ‘low’ expression groups of patients by performing differential
expression & pathway analysis, to see if the differentially expressed
results were linked to immune pathways. We then performed survival
analysis tests (Log rank, Cox regression) and Kaplan Meier (KM) survival
graphs to explore the association with overall survival outcome.

Results We found 14 of 75 HCC cases expressed CD8B isoform, while 61 of
75 HCC cases did not express CD8B isoform. The Log Rank survival test
showed a significant association between the expression of CD8B isoform
and overall survival (Chisq= 5.2 on 1 degrees of freedom, p= 0.0222). The
survival test using a Cox model on the same CDBB isoform, showed that
samples that expressed CD8B isoform were at higher risk of event compared
to those that did not express the isoform. Other markers that showed good
separation of survival curves included CD3 & CD8A.

Conclusion Additional immune cell subtype specific transcripts are being
tested. Based on our preliminary analysis, we saw that most of the
affected pathways were highly relevant to lymphocyte signaling & immune
response and infiltration. Hence, exploring infiltrating lymphocytes can
give evidence of immune surveillance against HCC. Testing immune cell
specific transcript in tumor samples may service as predictor to
treatment targeting immune evasion in cancer patients.


