Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer stem cell inhibition by benzyl isothiocyanate is
hampered by induction of Kruppel-like factor 4.


Breast cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related deaths among women in
the United States. Over the last decade, breast cancer stem cells (bCSC)
have been identified and characterized as a key player in breast cancer
progression and recurrence. Benzyl isothiocyanate (BITC) is a highly
promising cancer chemopreventive constituent of edible cruciferous
vegetables such as garden cress. We have shown previously that BITC
inhibits bCSC in cultured breast cancer cells (MCF-7 and SUM159 cells)
and in spontaneous tumors of mouse mammary tumor virus-neu (MMTV-neu)
mice in vivo. Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), a zinc finger transcription
factor, is known as both oncogene and tumor suppressor in various types
of human cancers and plays an important role in reprogramming
differentiated somatic cells into induced pluripotent stem cells. The
present study demonstrates that KLF4 impedes bCSC inhibition by BITC.
Exposure of breast cancer cells (MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, and SUM159) to
pharmacological concentrations of BITC (2.5 and 5 µM) resulted in
induction of KLF4 protein, which was accompanied by increase of its
transcription. In addition, BITC treatment increased nuclear level of
KLF4 in breast cancer cells. KLF4 protein expression was also higher in
tumors form BITC-treated MMTV-neu mice compared with the control group.
Ectopic expression of KLF4 in MCF-7 cells conferred marked protection
against BITC-mediated inhibition of bCSC as evidenced by aldehyde
dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) activity. Consistent with these observations,
BITC-mediated inhibition of bCSC in MCF-7, MDA-MB-231 and SUM159 cells
was significantly augmented by RNA interference of KLF4 as evidenced by
ALDH1 activity and frequency of mammospheres. KLF4 overexpression also
increased cell migration capacity of MCF-7 cells. Furthermore knockdown
of KLF4 augmented BITC-mediated inhibition of cell migration in SUM159
cells. These results suggest that anticancer activity of BITC may be
enhanced by KLF4 inhibition or knockdown in breast cancer cells. This
study was supported by the grant RO1 CA129347-09 awarded by the National
Cancer Institute.


