Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs): unrecognized potential
therapeutic targets in cancer.


G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the largest class of signaling
receptors in humans and other species and in addition, the most widely
targeted class for FDA-approved therapeutics. However, GPCRs are not
commonly targeted in cancers other than endocrine tumors. We hypothesize
that GPCRs may have been “missed” as targets in cancer, perhaps in
part because they have not been frequently identified as driver
mutations; however, GPCRs may have unappreciated utility as therapeutic
targets in a variety of tumors. To test this hypothesis, we have used
unbiased approaches (Taqman GPCR arrays and RNA-seq), mining of publicly
available datasets (e.g., The Cancer Genome Atlas, TCGA), and validation
studies (e.g., protein and functional analyses) to assess GPCRs in a
variety of human tumors, cancer cells and stromal cells
(cancer-associated fibroblasts, CAFs). A major focus of our efforts has
been on pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells/tumors and
pancreatic CAFs (PCAFs). We find that PDAC cells and PCAFs express >70
different GPCRs, including many orphan GPCRs (receptors without known
physiologic agonists) and that numerous GPCRs are expressed at much
higher levels than in normal precursor cells (pancreatic ductal
epithelial cells for PDAC cells and pancreatic stellate cells and
pancreatic fibroblasts for PCAFs). We find that a cluster of GPCRs is
overexpressed in PDAC tumors. Two such receptors are orphan GPCRs, Orphan
1 and Orphan A, neither of which is mutated but each has high expression,
respectively, in PCAFs and PDAC cells. Orphan 1 and Orphan A have at
least 2-fold higher expression in >90% of PDAC tumors in TCGA compared to
that in normal pancreatic tissue (compiled from the GTEX database).
Higher expression of orphan A is associated with decreased survival and
remission, while Orphan 1 expression correlates with that of numerous
fibrotic genes. Importantly, both Orphan 1 and Orphan A are functional
and appear to contribute to the malignant phenotype. For example, siRNA
knockdown of Orphan 1 in PCAFs blunts production of profibrotic markers
and decreases ability of conditioned media from PCAFs to enhance
proliferation of PDAC cells while transfection of Orphan A increases DNA
synthesis of normal pancreatic ductal epithelial cells. Taken together,
these and other results suggest that in addition to their role in
endocrine tumors, GPCRs represent previously unrecognized contributors to
cancer through actions on tumor cells and stromal cells. These data
suggest the possibility that highly expressed GPCRs (such as Orphan A)
may function as oncogenes. Thus, GPCRs may be druggable, novel targets
for the treatment of cancer, including pancreatic cancer, a tumor for
which new therapeutics are an important, unmet need.


