Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor suppressor klotho: A master regulator of metabolism in
breast cancer.


One of the hallmarks of cancer is reprogramming of energy metabolism,
characterized by a shift to aerobic glycolysis (Warburg effect). A major
regulator of this phenomenon is the IGF-1/Pi3K/AKT pathway. Klotho is a
transmembrane protein, which can be cleaved, shed and act as a
circulating hormone. Klotho-deficient mice manifest a syndrome resembling
accelerated aging, while klotho overexpression extends life span. Klotho
is a potent tumor suppressor in BC. As klotho is a potent inhibitor of
the IGF-1/Pi3K/AKT pathway in BC, we hypothesized that it may revert the
metabolic switch in BC cells. We first analyzed the effect of klotho on
the energy sensor enzyme AMP-activated kinase (AMPK) and its down-stream
effector acetyl CoA carboxylase (ACC). Overexpression of klotho, or
treatment with the soluble protein, elevated AMPK and ACC phosphorylation
in three BC cell lines. AMPK is activated by the tumor suppressor liver
kinase B1 (LKB1) and elevated AMP/ATP ratio. Expression of a dominant
negative LKB1 prevented activation of AMPK by klotho and decreased the
ability of klotho to inhibit cell growth and migration, implying that
klotho tumor suppressor activities are LKB1 dependent. We next analyzed
the effects of klotho on critical components of glucose metabolism.
Treatment with soluble klotho reduced expression of the glucose
transporter GLUT1 and the key glycolytic enzymes hexokinase2 (HK2),
phosphofructokinase1 (PFK1), pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) and pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase 1(PDK1). Using the Seahorse analyzer we noted
reduced oxidative mitochondrial metabolism and glycolysis following
klotho treatment. Energy is obtained essentially in the mitochondria with
the transfer of protons across the inner membrane that produces ATP. We,
therefore, analyzed klotho effect on the mitochondria membrane potential
and noted reduction in the mitochondria potential following treatment
with klotho. Finally, we examined the effects of klotho on specific
metabolites and also conducted an NMR-based metabolic profiling. In
accordance with the alterations in signaling pathways and levels of
glycolytic enzymes, klotho reduced glucose uptake and inhibited lactate,
pyruvate and 3-hydroxy-butyrate production. Furthermore, klotho also
inhibited ATP production. Taken together, our data indicate klotho as a
regulator of metabolic activity in BC and suggest that reversal of the
metabolic switch is a key mechanism of klotho-mediated tumor suppressor
activities.


