Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel approach to circumvent cisplatin resistant lung cancer by
targeting metabolism.


For the past three decades, there are no drugs which could reverse
cisplatin resistance or selectively kill these resistant cells. We have
discovered that cisplatin resistant (CR) lung cancer shares one common
factor which is increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS). Decreased
intracellular thioredoxin-1(TRX1) due to excessive secretion was found in
vitro and in vivo, as well as in patients’ serum which could be a
primary contributory factor to higher mitochondria-ROS levels.
Furthermore, CR cells possess significantly increased number of
mitochondria and consume higher rates of oxygen. Key glycolytic enzymes
(HKII and LDHA) and lactate production were decreased in CR cells which
suggests rewiring of tumor metabolic pathways. NAD+, crucial co-factor of
all redox systems, is significantly reduced in all CR cells. Importantly,
treatment with riluzole (the FDA approved drug that interferes with
cystine/glutamate pump and results in reduced intracellular glutathione
(GSH) levels) led to further decrease in NAD+ and LDHA, as well as
heightened oxidative stress in CR cells. ROS levels were increased (2-3X)
more in resistant cells after riluzole treatment while no significant
change occurred in parental cells. The ID50 dosage of parental cells were
3-4 fold more than theirs CR cell counterparts and no cytotoxicity were
found in normal lung fibroblast (n=8; pFor the past three decades, there
are no drugs which could reverse cisplatin resistance or selectively kill
these resistant cells. We have discovered that cisplatin resistant (CR)
lung cancer shares one common factor which is increase in reactive oxygen
species (ROS). Decreased intracellular thioredoxin-1(TRX1) due to
excessive secretion was found in vitro and in vivo, as well as in
patients’ serum which could be a primary contributory factor to higher
mitochondria-ROS levels. Furthermore, CR cells possess significantly
increased number of mitochondria and consume higher rates of oxygen. Key
glycolytic enzymes (HKII and LDHA) and lactate production were decreased
in CR cells which suggests rewiring of tumor metabolic pathways. NAD+,
crucial co-factor of all redox systems, is significantly reduced in all
CR cells. Importantly, treatment with riluzole (the FDA approved drug
that interferes with cystine/glutamate pump and results in reduced
intracellular glutathione (GSH) levels) led to further decrease in NAD+
and LDHA, as well as heightened oxidative stress in CR cells. ROS levels
were increased (2-3X) more in resistant cells after riluzole treatment
while no significant change occurred in parental cells. The ID50 dosage
of parental cells were 3-4 fold more than theirs CR cell counterparts and
no cytotoxicity were found in normal lung fibroblast (n=8; p<0.05).
Addition of 200 µM NAD+ re-stabilized LDHA, reduced ROS, and reversed
riluzole induced cell death. To further determine whether LDHA correlates
with ROS levels and sensitivity to riluzole, we inhibited LDHA
expressions in parental cell lines S and H460 using siRNA. Lactate
productions were decreased in knockdown cells and further attenuated upon
riluzole treatment when compared with scrambled control. Higher basal
levels of ROS were obtained from S+siLDHA and H460+siLDHA and further
increased in ROS levels were observed when treated with riluzole. We then
evaluated the viability of these cells under riluzole treatment. Both
siLDHA clones were sensitive to riluzole particularly in S+siLDHA which
showed 4 fold more sensitivity. Importantly, treatment of riluzole also
led to further decrease in LDHA expressions at both protein and mRNA
levels. Using riluzole in 2 mouse xenograft models (H460CR (KRAS mutant)
and SC (wt)) resulted in completely disappeared in wild type mice and
were significant reduced in KRAS mutant mice (n=5 per treatment group;
pFor the past three decades, there are no drugs which could reverse
cisplatin resistance or selectively kill these resistant cells. We have
discovered that cisplatin resistant (CR) lung cancer shares one common
factor which is increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS). Decreased
intracellular thioredoxin-1(TRX1) due to excessive secretion was found in
vitro and in vivo, as well as in patients’ serum which could be a
primary contributory factor to higher mitochondria-ROS levels.
Furthermore, CR cells possess significantly increased number of
mitochondria and consume higher rates of oxygen. Key glycolytic enzymes
(HKII and LDHA) and lactate production were decreased in CR cells which
suggests rewiring of tumor metabolic pathways. NAD+, crucial co-factor of
all redox systems, is significantly reduced in all CR cells. Importantly,
treatment with riluzole (the FDA approved drug that interferes with
cystine/glutamate pump and results in reduced intracellular glutathione
(GSH) levels) led to further decrease in NAD+ and LDHA, as well as
heightened oxidative stress in CR cells. ROS levels were increased (2-3X)
more in resistant cells after riluzole treatment while no significant
change occurred in parental cells. The ID50 dosage of parental cells were
3-4 fold more than theirs CR cell counterparts and no cytotoxicity were
found in normal lung fibroblast (n=8; p<0.05). Addition of 200 µM NAD+
re-stabilized LDHA, reduced ROS, and reversed riluzole induced cell
death. To further determine whether LDHA correlates with ROS levels and
sensitivity to riluzole, we inhibited LDHA expressions in parental cell
lines S and H460 using siRNA. Lactate productions were decreased in
knockdown cells and further attenuated upon riluzole treatment when
compared with scrambled control. Higher basal levels of ROS were obtained
from S+siLDHA and H460+siLDHA and further increased in ROS levels were
observed when treated with riluzole. We then evaluated the viability of
these cells under riluzole treatment. Both siLDHA clones were sensitive
to riluzole particularly in S+siLDHA which showed 4 fold more
sensitivity. Importantly, treatment of riluzole also led to further
decrease in LDHA expressions at both protein and mRNA levels. Using
riluzole in 2 mouse xenograft models (H460CR (KRAS mutant) and SC (wt))
resulted in completely disappeared in wild type mice and were significant
reduced in KRAS mutant mice (n=5 per treatment group; p<0.002). Repurpose
of riluzole should be considered for future treatment of CR lung cancer
patients. Supported by Department of Veterans Affairs, CDA2 award
(1K2BX001289) and Woman Cancer Association Fund.


