Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Appropriately delivered curcumin causes recruitment of natural
killer cells into glioblastoma brain, stabilizing M1 polarization of
tumor-associated microglia.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most insidious form of primary adult brain
tumor with a mean life expectancy of 12-24 months. Previously, we have
used the non-invasive strategies of (1) intranasal delivery of a
glioblastoma-directed curcumin (CC) adduct (CC-CD68Ab) and (2) the
intraperitoneal (i.p.) infusion of a lipid-encapsulated formulation of
CC-phytosome to rescue orthotopically GL261-implanted GBM mice and study
the effect of CC on the phenotype of the tumor-associated microglial
cells (TAMs). Both treatment regimens not only caused tumor remission in
50-60% of GL261-implanted GBM mice, but also induced a dramatic change in
the tumor-associated Iba1+ TAMs, suppressing the tumor-promoting
Arginase1high, IL10high, iNOSlow, IL12low M2-type TAMs, while
simultaneously inducing the Arginase1low, IL10low, iNOShigh, IL12high
M1-type TAMs. Concurrently, we observed a marked induction and
phosphorylation-mediated activation of microglial p65 NF-kB and STAT1,
with concomitant suppression and inactivation of STAT3. p-STAT1high,
p-STAT3low M1 microglia are known to cause IL12-dependent
recruitment/activation of tumoricidal NKp46high natural killer (NK)
cells. In determining the kinetics of CC-induced M1 repolarization of
M2-TAMs, we observed that five days of CCP treatment (i.p.) was
sufficient to induce a dramatic change in the tumor-associated Iba1+
TAMs, inhibiting the tumor-promoting M2-type TAM population, while
activating M1-type microglia. As expected, we observed a concomitant
recruitment of NKp46high NK cells into the GBM tumor. Cognizant of the
fact that NK cells activate and stabilize the M1-microglia, we eliminated
the NK cells in these GBM mice using the NK cell-targeted antibody NK1.1
Ab to observe a significant reduction in CC-evoked repolarization of
TAMs. Our results demonstrate a unique oncoimmunotherapeutic function of
CC, which when appropriately delivered, not only eliminates GBM directly,
but also indirectly elicits recruitment and activation of tumoricidal NK
cells and M1-TAMs. Furthermore, maintenance of this CC-evoked M1
phenotype is contingent upon CC-induced recruitment and activation of NK
cells. Thus, when delivered appropriately, CC functions on GBM both
directly as well as by stimulating and recruiting an army of immune cells
that eliminate both GBM and GBM-initiating cells.


