Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of 18F-FDG and 18F-FLT PET imaging for early response
monitoring of nanoparticle-assisted photothermal cancer therapy.


Aim: Nanoparticle-assisted photothermal therapy relies on photo-absorbing
agents that accumulate in tumors and upon irradiation with near-infrared
light, generate hyperthermal temperatures sufficient to ablate
surrounding cancerous tissue. In this study, we used small animal PET
imaging to compare the tracers 18F-FDG and 18F-FLT, that are glucose and
thymidine analogues respectively, for the assessment of silica-gold
nanoshell (NS)-assisted photothermal therapy in a colorectal cancer mouse
model.

Method: Mouse colorectal tumors (CT26) were established subcutaneously in
female Balb/c mice by inoculation of ~ 3x105 cells. When the tumors
reached a volume of ~150 mm3, the animals were divided into treatment
groups receiving either: NS and laser irradiation (NS group), saline and
laser irradiation (saline group), or NS but no laser irradiation (sham
group). 24 h after intravenous injection of either NS or saline, the
tumors were irradiated for 5 minutes with an 807 nm diode laser with an
intensity of 1.5 W/cm2 (day 0) meanwhile the temperature development was
monitored using thermographic imaging. To evaluate the treatment
response, all animals were PET/CT scanned with either 18F-FDG or 18F-FLT
the day before treatment (baseline) and two days after treatment (day 2).
In addition, the change in tumor volume was assessed by CT imaging on day
7. Throughout the study, tumor growth was monitored using caliper
measurements and animals were euthanized when the tumor volume exceeded
1,000 mm3. Regions of interest were manually drawn on the entire tumor
volume on co-registered PET and CT images and the PET tracer uptake
quantified as the mean percentage of injected dose per grams of tissue
(%ID/g).

Results: During laser irradiation, NS-laden tumors reached hyperthermal
temperatures that led to inhibited tumor growth and improved survival
compared to the saline and sham treated groups. In the NS group, PET
imaging showed a reduction in tumor uptake of 18F-FDG of nearly 50% at
day 2 compared to baseline. In the saline and sham groups the tumor
uptake of 18F-FDG was at comparable levels at baseline and day 2. In
addition, a positive correlation was found between the change in tumor
uptake between baseline and day 2 and the change in tumor volume on day 7
in all animals scanned with 18F-FDG. Preliminary data from animals
scanned with 18F-FLT indicates that the tumor uptake is also strongly
reduced after NS-assisted photothermal therapy and that the change in
18F-FLT uptake correlates with inhibited tumor growth on day 7.

Conclusion: Both 18F-FDG and 18F-FLT PET imaging show great potential for
early evaluation of the treatment response after nanoparticle-assisted
photothermal therapy and preliminary data suggest that both tracers can
be used to predict treatment outcome.


