Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological TLR4 antagonism using topical resatorvid blocks
solar UV-induced skin tumorigenesis in SKH-1 mice.


An urgent need exists for the development of more efficacious molecular
strategies targeting non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC), the most common
malignancy worldwide. Inflammatory signaling downstream of Toll-like
receptor 4 (TLR4) is a causative factor in several forms of
tumorigenesis, yet its role in solar UV-induced skin carcinogenesis
remains undefined. In our recently published work based upon
immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of NMSC tissue microarrays and
proteomic analysis of reverse-phase protein microarrays (RPPA) from
banked human tissue, we observed increased TLR4 expression in association
with tumorigenic progression from normal skin to actinic keratosis and
cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. In immortalized keratinocytes
expressing luciferase reporter constructs, resatorvid potently inhibits
UV-induced AP-1 and NF-κB signaling, associated with downregulation of
inflammatory mediators (IL-6, IL-8, IL-10) and MAP Kinase
phosphorylation. In a subsequent acute exposure model in SKH-1 mice,
topical resatorvid efficiently antagonized UV-induced stress signaling
while potentiating UV-induced epidermal apoptosis. In the current report,
we show for the first time that pharmacological inhibition of TLR4 using
the specific antagonist resatorvid (TAK-242) blocks UV-induced
tumorigenesis in SKH-1 mice. After assessing photostability, efficient
cutaneous delivery, and skin residence time of topical resatorvid, we
then tested the feasibility of TLR4-directed inhibition of UV-induced
tumorigenesis. To this end, SKH-1 mice were split into three groups (n =
20). Each group was exposed to solar-simulated UV (three times a week; 15
weeks duration), followed by another 10 weeks in the absence of UV
exposure (sacrifice at week 25). The control group received topical
vehicle (acetone) on their backs 1 hour prior to UV exposure (three times
a week until sacrifice). The “Prevention” group received topical
resatorvid following an analogous dosing regimen. The “Intervention”
group received vehicle 1hr prior to each UV treatment but switched to
topical resatorvid three times a week only after UV was terminated. In
the Prevention model, topical treatment with resatorvid significantly
inhibited both tumor area (66% reduction, p = 0.0052) and tumor
multiplicity (32% reduction, p = 0.0329; cross sectional Kruskal-Wallis
test). In the Intervention model, a marked inhibition of both measures of
tumor yield was observed, yet they did not reach statistical
significance. Likewise, suppression of UV-induced TLR4-driven signaling
was also confirmed in murine skin harvested at week 14 (prior to tumor
onset), as assessed by IHC and RPPA analysis. Taken together, these data
generated using resatorvid in a murine photocarcinogenesis model suggest
that pharmacological TLR4 antagonism may represent a novel molecular
strategy for topical prevention of solar UV-induced NMSC.


