Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of specific DNA aptamers against programmed cell
death-1 (Anti-PD1-Apt) for diagnosis and treatment of cancers.


Cancer cells have an extraordinary ability to escape immune response by
modulating proteins that regulate immune checkpoints and their cognate
ligands. Programmed cell death protein (PD-1), a cell surface receptor
expressed on T cells is one such immune checkpoint receptor when bound to
its ligands- PDL1 or PDL2 transmits an inhibitory signal. Such modulation
often leads to inhibition of T-cell activation and subsequent escape of
tumors from immune surveillance. Recently, several FDA approved
therapeutic antibodies have been successfully developed that target
PD-1/PD-L1 axis and allow the immune system to enhance its anti-cancer
effects. Aptamers are synthetic small molecule ligands composed of short,
single-stranded oligonucleotides ranging from 30 to 60 bases in length.
Based on their highly specific 3-dimensional conformation, aptamers,
analogous to the antibodies can recognize and bind to their targets with
high affinity. Also, the nucleic acid component has several advantages
over the protein counterparts- such as ease of production under less
stringent conditions, long shelf life and low cost. Here, we report the
development of several PD-1 specific aptamers by systematic evolution of
ligands by exponential enrichment (SELEX) technology against endogenous
immunoprecipitated PD-1 protein using DNA library with a complexity of
1014. Following several rounds of SELEX, the selected aptamers sequenced
by high throughput Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) were found to have
highly conserved regions. Six PD-1 specific aptamers (Anti-PD1-Apt) were
then assessed for target validation using leukemic cell lysates (cell
lines and primary patient samples) and were found to bind to the PD-1 in
its native state. The selected Anti-PD1-Apt were able to specifically
pull down the PD-1 protein from the lysates mimicking PD-1 antibody. The
specific interaction of the Anti-PD1-Apt was also demonstrated by flow
cytometry and fluorescent microscopy. As expected, Anti-PD1-Apt was able
to bind to PD-1 with Kd of ~ 500 picomolar affinity as assessed by
Bio-Layer Interferometry. Furthermore, we also characterized and
confirmed Anti-PD1-Apt biological activity using an PD-1/PD-L1 cell-based
assay using PD-1/NFAT reporter-Jurkat cells. We have observed several
fold induction of NFAT luciferase reporter activity (Relative Luciferase
Units) in PD-1/NFAT reporter-Jurkat cells co-cultured with HEK293 cells
overexpressing PD-L1 and TCR activator in the presence of Anti-PD1-Apt
compared to control. Our preliminary data also demonstrate robust
Anti-PD1 blockade in Mixed Lymphocyte Reaction (MLR) along with induction
of Th1 cytokines Interferon-gamma and IL-2 from different donor sets of
PBMCs. We will present additional - in vivo antitumor response data at
the upcoming AACR Annual Meeting at Washington DC, 2017.


