Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caspase-10 suppresses tumorigenesis by targeting ATP-citrate lyase.


p53 fosters metabolic reprogramming, which restricts metabolic adaptation
of tumor cells under energy stress conditions. However, modulation and
directionality of underlying cascades to induce or restrict metabolism
are determined by the downstream target of p53. To explore the role of
p53 in tumor metabolism upon metabolic stress, we performed a microarray
screen in the presence or absence of p53 under glucose starvation. We
observed caspase-10 to be upregulated by p53 upon metabolic stress.
Caspase-10 belongs to the class of initiator caspases and is poorly
understood in terms of substrate specificities. Emerging evidences also
suggest intrinsic activation of caspase-10, distinct from its homologue
caspase-8. Moreover, inactivating mutations as well as downregulation of
caspase-10 in several carcinomas are suggestive of its role in
tumorigenesis. Thus, we investigated the function of caspase-10 as a
tumor suppressor. Our results indicated that caspase-10, upregulated in a
p53-dependent manner in response to metabolic stress, was activated by
homodimerization-induced intrinsic activation mechanism involving
Adenylate Kinase 2 and FADD. We further performed a proteomic screen to
identify novel caspase-10 substrates. We observed that several anabolic
enzymes are caspase-10 interacting partners. However, in vitro and in
vivo assays confirmed only ATP-Citrate Lyase (ACLY) as a novel substrate
of caspase-10. Cleavage of ACLY by caspase-10 abrogates enzymatic
conversion of cytosolic citrate to acetyl-CoA, leading to overall
decrease in nucleocytosolic acetyl-CoA pool. Decrease in cytosolic
acetyl-CoA levels suppress lipogenesis upon metabolic stress. Moreover,
decreased levels of nuclear acetyl-CoA alter global histone acetylation.
Further studies using RNAi established that alteration in histone
acetylation is GCN5-dependent. Caspase-10-dependent abrogation of histone
acetylation reprograms the epigenetic profile of metastatic and
proliferative genes, leading to their diminished expression under
metabolic stress. Concomitant suppression of both cytosolic lipogenesis
and nuclear histone acetylation by caspase-10-mediated ACLY cleavage
decreases proliferation capacity, migration potential and invasiveness of
tumor cells. Further, studies in mouse tumor models confirmed that
caspase-10 restricts tumorigenesis and metastases under metabolic stress
via ACLY and GCN5. Taken together, our findings establish caspase-10 as a
novel integrator of metabolism and epigenetics, by regulating acetyl-CoA
levels. Hence, it functions as a tumor suppressor by disrupting
lipogenesis-mediated metabolic reprogramming and GCN5-mediated epigenetic
reprogramming.


