Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: V-ATPase control of EV signaling in glioma stem cells.


Background: Recent evidences highlighted that GBM secreted microvesicles
(EVs), particularly exosomes (Exo) and large oncosomes (LO), play a major
role in the cross-talk between tumor cell and non-neoplastic parenchyma.
How GBMs manage to thrive in a highly unfavorable, acidic
microenvironment is still unclear, but recent work from our group has
identified the vacuolar pump H+-ATPase (V-ATPase) as an important
effector of GBM growth and glioma stem cells (GSC) maintenance.
Additionally, in ExoCarta database V-ATPase subunits have been described
in Exo from different cancer cell types.

Taken together, these data identify V-ATPase as an important driver of
gliomagenesis, and a novel, actionable therapeutic target for disease
intervention. However, the role of V-ATPase in reprogramming the GBM
microenvironment has not been previously investigated.

Methods: Exo and LO were isolated by an Invitrogen kit and serial
centrifugation, respectively, from media of patients’ derived GBM
neurospheres, enriched in GSC (NS, n=12) or differentiated cultures
(n=8). For EVs internalization studies, Exo or LO were stained using FM
1-43 FX dye and the process was followed live for 30’ and at selected
time points (30’-4h-24h), using a confocal microscopy or flow cytometry
(FACS). Electron microscopy, FACS (of Exo stained with CellTrace and
SytoRNA in combination with CD63 coated beads), Nanosight and
immunoblotting (for CD63, CD9 and Clathrin) analyses were used to confirm
EVs subtypes. Cultures from patients’ derived brain tumor margins or
primary GBM (differentiated and not) were used as EVs-recipient cells.
miRNA profiling was performed using Taqman Low density arrays and
analyzed by R packages. Gene Ontology analysis was performed by DAVID.
The study was approved by the Institutional Ethical Committee.

Results: NS are able to produce different EVs, which are internalized by
recipient cells after 4 and up to 24 hours of co-culture. Both Exo than
LO from NS are able to significantly increase cell growth in recipient
cells (brain tumor margins and primary GMB differentiated monolayers),
and this effect is stronger with EVs produced by NS with higher V-ATPase
expression (V-ATPaseHIGH NS). Primary GBM cells after co-culture with EVs
are able to produce a higher number of NS and V-ATPase activity block by
BafilomycinA1 in NS-producing EVs completely revert this effect. Finally,
the co-culture of V-ATPaseLOW NS with EVs from V-ATPaseHIGH NS increases
their motility in collagen matrixes.

At molecular level, profiling of Exo-derived miRNAs distinguishes
differentiated cultures from NS and, among NS, V-ATPaseHIGH cultures. In
silico analysis and annotation of miRNA target genes from
V-ATPaseHIGH–derived Exo showed an enrichment of cancer, cell cycle and
PI3K/Akt pathways.

Conclusions: Altogether, these data point toward the central role of
different EV types in GBM communication and suggest a role of the
V-ATPase proton pump in regulating EV’s contents.


