Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer invasion of mammary epithelial cells in 3D culture shows
YAP-independent mechanotransduction.


83% of non-invasive breast cancers are diagnosed as ductal carcinoma in
situ (DCIS). While some DCIS tumors remain confined in the mammary duct,
others progress into invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC). The mechanisms
underlying invasion are not well understood. Current diagnostic methods
cannot accurately predict which DCIS cases will progress to IDC, and
unnecessary treatment affects long-term health and quality of life, with
radiation potentially promoting malignancy-inducing mutations. One
possible regulator of invasion may be extracellular matrix (ECM)
stiffness. Increased ECM stiffness has been correlated with invasion and
3D culture models of normal mammary epithelium show that enhanced
stiffness induces an invasive phenotype. However, the mechanisms
underlying stiffness-induced invasion remain unclear. Studies have
converged upon the finding that YAP, a transcriptional regulator that is
deregulated in diverse cancers, is the transducer of ECM stiffness.
However, these studies were primarily performed in 2D culture and
involved col-1, a ligand that activates distinct signaling pathways and
is not normally found in the BM. Here, we examined the gene expression
profiles of 3D cultured MCF10A cells during stiffness-induced invasion
with and without col-1. We generated interpenetrating networks (IPNs) of
reconstituted basement membrane (rBM) and alginate, which allow stiffness
to be tuned in the absence of col-1 and independently of cell adhesion
ligand concentration and matrix pore size. Traditionally used hydrogels
composed of rBM and col-1, with stiffness tuned by increasing
concentrations of col-1, were also produced for 3D culture. Our results
show that enhanced 3D stiffness increases MCF10A cell invasion and
proliferation in both the presence and absence of col-1. However, in
contrast to results from 2D culture, invasive phenotypes in 3D cultured
cells did not correlate with nuclear localization of YAP, indicating lack
of YAP activity. The dispensible nature of YAP in 3D stiffness sensing
was supported by RNA-seq analysis, which showed a lack of increased gene
expression of YAP downstream targets in conditions of enhanced stiffness.
RNA-seq identified 389 differentially expressed genes in response to
enhanced 3D culture stiffness. By relating these genes to transcription
factors using ChIP-Seq data provided by ENCODE, we identified p300, FOS,
STAT3, NELFE, and TAF1 as potential mechanotransducers of
stiffness-induced invasion. Furthermore, highly expressed
stiffness-induced genes were validated by immunofluorescence to identify
potential indicators for invasion. Our RNA-seq results may lead to the
development of a PCR-based prognostic that allows accurate determination
of cancer invasion risk in breast cancer patients, informing course of
treatment.


