Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a pharmacodynamic biomarker assay for AZD4785, an
antisense oligonucleotide targeting KRAS.


AZD4785 is a potent and selective high affinity 2’-4’ constrained
ethyl residues (cEt) containing therapeutic antisense oligonucleotide
(ASO) targeting KRAS. In a patient-derived explant model of non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) carrying a KRAS G12C mutation systemic dosing of
AZD4785 resulted in tumor regression. To determine the level of KRAS mRNA
knockdown achieved by AZD4785 at a dose which causes regression (250
mg/kg/wk), tumor samples were collected and analyzed by RT-PCR. Mean
levels of KRAS mRNA knockdown relative to the PBS control group were
determined to be 61% and 78% from studies dosed for 2 and 4 weeks,
respectively. However, by RT-PCR there was significant variability in
KRAS mRNA levels within the PBS control group, and level of knockdown
varied with different housekeeper normalization genes. In early clinical
studies it will be essential to measure KRAS expression in tumor samples
as a pharmacodynamic marker for AZD4785, hence we sought to develop a
more robust assay compatible with FFPE clinical samples with low RNA
yields. KRAS mRNA levels were quantified by the nanoString platform,
using the panCancer pathways 770 gene codeset. This assay generated
robust data from RNA extracted from 2 x 5µm sections of FFPE material
from each sample, despite very limited yields of RNA. AZD4785 treatment
resulted in comparable levels of KRAS knockdown to the RT-PCR assay, but
assay variability was greatly reduced, from stdev >50% (RT-PCR) to 5%
(nanoString) for PBS control group samples. Using the nanoString assay,
mean KRAS mRNA knockdown was 52% and 68% (p50μm apart within four NSCLC
tissues and was found to be ≤21%. Taken together, these data validate
the use of the KRAS nanoString assay for use in clinical FFPE tissues,
and demonstrate the level of knockdown of KRAS mRNA to be >50% at a dose
of AZD4785 that causes regression in a preclinical PDX model.


