Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recurrent mutations and clinical outcomes in patients with
follicular lymphoma.


Follicular lymphoma (FL), the most common indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma
(NHL), is associated with a highly heterogeneous clinical course. The
genetic landscape of FL is less understood than other B-cell NHLs such as
chronic lymphocytic leukemia and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. With
ongoing clinical trials using therapies targeting B cell receptor
signaling (e.g., ibrutinib) in FL, recurrent mutations could impact the
interpretation of these trial outcomes and the identification of specific
patient subpopulations that have increased or decreased clinical benefit.

To identify novel recurrent mutations in FL, we designed a large custom
capture lymphoma-related gene panel (WUSM-LP) and queried 113
predominantly treatment-naïve FL samples. To design the WUSM-LP reagent
(NimbleGen), we targeted the coding regions of 1716 genes identified in
exome sequencing data from a cohort of 24 patients (28 samples) with FL
combined with genes recurrently mutated in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma in
the literature (Krysiak K et al., Blood, 2016). Previously, we applied
the WUSM-LP to the discovery cohort and an additional 81, primarily
treatment-naïve, FL samples. Using mutations identified in these 105
individuals, we identified 39 significantly mutated genes (SMGs). These
included well-characterized genes in FL (e.g., KMT2D, EZH2, TNFRSF14),
and identified novel mutations (BTK, HVCN1, and others) thereby expanding
the repertoire of mutations affecting genes in the BCR signaling pathway,
SWI/SNF complex and histone family. Including novel BTK mutations, we
identified 23 (22%) individuals harboring mutations that likely
up-regulate signaling downstream of BTK, potentially affecting response
rates to BTK-targeting therapies at the point of FL diagnosis.

We also focused on the subset FL patients (N=59) that were sequenced
within 1 year of front-line therapy in order to identify clinical
associations between recurrent mutations and clinical outcomes, comparing
mutation status of SMGs to progression-free survival (PFS) rates.
Improved PFS was observed in patients harboring HVCN1 mutations (pWe also
focused on the subset FL patients (N=59) that were sequenced within 1
year of front-line therapy in order to identify clinical associations
between recurrent mutations and clinical outcomes, comparing mutation
status of SMGs to progression-free survival (PFS) rates. Improved PFS was
observed in patients harboring HVCN1 mutations (p<0.05) in the treated
cohort. CREBBP mutations were associated with significantly reduced PFS
(pWe also focused on the subset FL patients (N=59) that were sequenced
within 1 year of front-line therapy in order to identify clinical
associations between recurrent mutations and clinical outcomes, comparing
mutation status of SMGs to progression-free survival (PFS) rates.
Improved PFS was observed in patients harboring HVCN1 mutations (p<0.05)
in the treated cohort. CREBBP mutations were associated with
significantly reduced PFS (p<0.05).

Since our initial analysis, we have completed sequencing of an additional
174 FL samples with clinical data available. Confirming our earlier
observations with an independent cohort, we observed 9 TNFAIP3
truncating, 18 CARD11 coiled-coil domain, 4 BCL10 truncating and 8 BTK
mutations in these samples. These mutations affect 18.4% of FL patients
in this cohort, are likely to up-regulate NFkappaB signaling and may
impact ibrutinib sensitivity. With the additional power of 8 HVCN1 and
110 CREBBP mutations we have identified, we will evaluate the previously
identified associations. The analyses of recurrent mutations and clinical
correlations in this combined cohort of nearly 300 FL patients are
ongoing and will be presented.


