Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ONC201 shows efficacy in BRCA-deficient cancer cells and synergy
with PARP inhibitors in glioblastoma, breast, prostate, and ovarian
cancers.


BRCA1 and BRCA2 are involved in control of DNA repair by homologous
recombination (HR). Germline mutations in these genes substantially
increase lifetime risk of developing breast, ovarian and other cancers.
BRCA-deficient tumors show increased sensitivity to therapies that target
defective HR. Sporadic tumors lacking germline BRCA mutations but sharing
the molecular features of BRCA-mutant tumors may respond to these types
of therapies as well. PARP inhibitors represent a form of targeted
therapy for HR-deficient tumors that have been approved in ovarian cancer
and are being tested in clinical trials in breast cancer, metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer, and glioblastoma. Our lab has
previously identified a small molecule called ONC201 in a screen for
compounds capable of inducing the tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) gene. Our lab has previously reported
that ONC201 induces an integrated stress response that involves ATF4/CHOP
and inactivates pro-survival kinases Akt and ERK. The latter leads to
decreased phosphorylation of transcription factor FOXO3a, its nuclear
translocation, and induction of transcription of the target gene TRAIL. A
first-in-human clinical trial showed that the compound is well tolerated,
achieves a therapeutic pharmacokinetic profile, exhibits biological
activity. It has since entered multiple phase I/II trials. ONC201 has
anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects in a wide range of tumor
types including BRCA-deficient breast and ovarian cancers (n=10), with
GI50 values in the low micromolar range. Treatment with ONC201 induces
surface TRAIL and inhibits Akt activity in BRCA deficient breast and
ovarian cancers. PARP inhibitors have been previously shown to upregulate
DR5 through transcription factor CHOP, sensitizing solid tumors to TRAIL.
Resistance to PARP inhibitors can occur through PI3K/Akt pathway
activation, and PI3K/MEK blockade improves their anti-tumor effects. We
observed synergy between ONC201 and PARP inhibitors olaparib and
rucaparib in BRCA-deficient breast and ovarian cancer cell lines in cell
viability assays with combination indices (CI) ranging from 0.4 - 0.8.
Robust synergy was also observed in prostate cancer and glioblastoma
cells. The mechanisms of the observed synergy are currently under
investigation. These results indicate that ONC201 possesses single agent
activity in BRCA-deficient cancer cells and that the combination of
ONC201 with PARP inhibitors represents a promising synergistic
therapeutic approach that could be exploited in multiple solid tumors.


