Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bromodomain and extra-terminal motif protein inhibitors (BETi) in
metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC): A novel
mechanism for regulating androgen receptor variant 7 (ARV7).


Persistent androgen receptor (AR) signaling is key to the development and
progression of metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC).
This is in part due to expression of constitutively active AR splice
variants like AR variant 7 (ARV7), confering resistance to current
anti-androgens including enzalutamide (E) and abiraterone (A). To improve
the outcome for patients with mCRPC, new therapeutic strategies to
overcome AR and ARV7 oncogenic signaling are urgently required. The
inhibition of co-factors modulating AR signaling are currently being
investigated as novel strategies to treat mCRPC. One promising candidate
is BRD4, a member of the BET protein family, that binds the AR on
androgen response elements and facilitates the recruitment of the
transcriptional machinery. BET inhibitors (BETi) have been shown to
regulate AR and ARV7 signalling, however, the exact mechanism of ARV7
regulation remains unclear. As BETi are currently being explored in
clinical trials of unstratified patients with mCRPC, we investigated
their potential mechanism of action in CRPC cell lines, patient derived
organoids (PDOs) and a patient derived mouse xenograft (PDX). Here we
demonstrate that nuclear expression of BRD4 and ARV7 increases as
patients develop resistance to E and/or A and inhibition of BRD4 by BETi
is sufficient to block AR and ARV7 signalling in mCRPC. Both inhibition
of BRD4 by BETi and genetic knockdown of BRD4 reduced the growth of CRPC
cell lines and led to down-regulation of AR and ARV7 at the mRNA and
protein level. To further investigate whether BETi is sufficient to
inhibit ARV7 activity in patients with mCRPC, we treated patient derived
organoids (PDOs) and a mouse xenograft (PDX) grown from metastatic
biopsies of patients resistant to E and/or A with BETi. In this study 5
out of 10 PDOs were sensitive to BETi. Consistent with the cell culture
experiments, BETi treatment of the PDX led to down-regulation of both
ARV7 mRNA and protein expression. Mechanistically, BETi might inhibit
pre-mRNA splicing of AR resulting in the observed decrease of ARV7
expression. However, RNAseq analysis of the ARV7 expressing CRPC cell
line LNCaP95 demonstrated an increase in total splicing events including
skipped exons, retained introns, mutually exclusive exons, alternative
5’ splice site and alternative 3’ splice site after BETi treatment.
Despite this, focused analysis of splicing factors and spliceosome
components identified a subset of eight splicing factors being
down-regulated by BET inhibition including one yet uncharacterized factor
that is crucial for ARV7 expression in LNCaP95 cells. Based on our
results we propose a model that BETi mediated inhibition of this novel
ARV7-mRNA splicing factor may lead to decreased splicing and subsequent
expression of ARV7 at both mRNA and protein level; providing a novel
approach to target ARV7 in mCRPC.


