Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of clinically relevant long
non coding RNA PLUCAT1 in lung adenocarcinoma.


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a leading cause of cancer-related
death worldwide. Disease subtypes include lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and
lung squamous carcinoma (LUSC) and LUAD accounts for nearly 50% of lung
malignancies. Late diagnosis and limited chemotherapy options are the
primary reason for poor prognosis and even among patients diagnosed early
with Stage 1 disease, recurrence occurs in 35-50% of cases. Lack of
discriminatory biomarkers has hampered clinical and therapeutic
management, as current practice tends to group all patients together.
Several attempts to develop gene signatures from microarray datasets to
stratify risk among lung adenocarcinoma patients have not yielded
clinical utility due to poor cross validation and lack of robustness. The
development of RNA-Seq methodologies now enables accurate quantification
of transcriptional abundance that is reproducible and reliable.
Capitalizing on this technology and large datasets such as the cancer
genome atlas (TCGA) as well as individual efforts, thousands of cancer
samples are available for analysis to facilitate deeper understanding of
the disease. One major discovery resulting from large RNA-Seq datasets
are functional long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs; exceeding 200 nucleotides in
length) that can be expressed in tissue-, linage- and cancer-specific
expression patterns. In our previous study we identified a highly
significant prognostic marker set using 255 TCGA LUAD patients. In the
training cohort, 96 genes had prognostic association with pNon-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) is a leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide.
Disease subtypes include lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and lung squamous
carcinoma (LUSC) and LUAD accounts for nearly 50% of lung malignancies.
Late diagnosis and limited chemotherapy options are the primary reason
for poor prognosis and even among patients diagnosed early with Stage 1
disease, recurrence occurs in 35-50% of cases. Lack of discriminatory
biomarkers has hampered clinical and therapeutic management, as current
practice tends to group all patients together. Several attempts to
develop gene signatures from microarray datasets to stratify risk among
lung adenocarcinoma patients have not yielded clinical utility due to
poor cross validation and lack of robustness. The development of RNA-Seq
methodologies now enables accurate quantification of transcriptional
abundance that is reproducible and reliable. Capitalizing on this
technology and large datasets such as the cancer genome atlas (TCGA) as
well as individual efforts, thousands of cancer samples are available for
analysis to facilitate deeper understanding of the disease. One major
discovery resulting from large RNA-Seq datasets are functional long
noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs; exceeding 200 nucleotides in length) that can be
expressed in tissue-, linage- and cancer-specific expression patterns. In
our previous study we identified a highly significant prognostic marker
set using 255 TCGA LUAD patients. In the training cohort, 96 genes had
prognostic association with p<0.001, including 5 long noncoding RNAs
(lncRNAs). Stepwise regression generated a four-gene signature, including
one lncRNA. Signature high risk cases had worse overall survival (OS) in
the TCGA validation cohort (HR=3.07, 95%CI=2.00-14.62). The four-gene
signature was then validated in two independent patient cohorts. The
signature consisted of three protein coding gene and a lncRNA (PLUCAT1).
Knockdown studies showed that the lncRNA promoted lung cell growth in
vitro. Also, inhibition of PLUCAT1 using both siRNA and ASOs induced
cellular senescence in lung cells. Further, RNA pull down followed by
mass-spec identified QKI as a binding partner of PLUCAT1. QKI is a tumor
suppressor gene shown to change splicing pattern in many cancer types. We
now show that PLUCAT1-QKI interaction has functional consequences and
changes splicing pattern of significant number of genes as assessed by
RNA sequencing. Taken together, we have identified PLUCAT1, a member of 4
gene prognostic signature, as a robust prognostic marker for lung
adenocarcinoma prognosis. We also, show that PLUCAT1 binds with tumor
suppressor QKI and inhibits QKI activity.


