Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a RAD51-based assay for determining homologous
recombination proficiency and PARP inhibitor sensitivity.


Homologous recombination (HR) repair deficiency confers sensitivity to
inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). To date, the
identification of tumors with impaired HR has relied on genomic features,
including mutational signature, LOH-based HRD assays or gene expression
analyses defining ‘BRCAness’. These tests analyze history of the
tumor rather than providing a functional assessment of HR status at the
time of diagnosis. Therefore, development of a functional assay for HR
status in tumors is essential to make accurate treatment decisions. Here,
we describe a RAD51-based immunohistochemical (IHC) assay that identifies
HR status. We first screened commercial anti-RAD51 antibodies and
identified a monoclonal antibody that detects RAD51 foci in HR-competent
normal fibroblasts and shows no evidence of foci in HR-deficient
(BRCA2-/-) VU423 fibroblasts after γ-irradiation. Conditions for
detecting RAD51 foci in FFPE samples were identified using HR-deficient
and HR-proficient triple-negative breast cancer cell lines. HR-deficient,
PARP inhibitor-sensitive cell lines exhibited high levels of nuclear
RAD51 and no evidence of foci, whereas HR-proficient, PARP
inhibitor-resistant cells had low levels of nuclear RAD51 and foci. This
result was confirmed in a BRCA1-mutated, PARP inhibitor-sensitive PDX
model, where there was no evidence of foci although RAD51 levels were
high. We further evaluated the pattern of RAD51 staining in 13 high-grade
serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) PDX models, for which sensitivity to
olaparib had been characterized. The only olaparib-sensitive model
demonstrated complete absence of RAD51 staining. Among the other 12
olaparib-resistant models, RAD51 foci were detectable, both before and
after irradiation. The presence or absence of RAD51 foci correlated with
olaparib sensitivity and not with BRCA mutation status. Therefore, tumors
that are HR-deficient and PARP inhibitor-sensitive are characterized by
either high RAD51 nuclear staining without foci, or absence of RAD51
staining. To validate these findings, we analyzed RAD51 staining patterns
in a cohort of 50 primary HGSOCs from patients subsequently treated with
platinum-based chemotherapy. Among these 50 samples, 45 demonstrated
either RAD51 nuclear staining without foci or an absence of RAD51
staining. Five samples demonstrated RAD51 staining with foci. The median
survivals of these groups were 6.1 and 1.5 years, respectively. In
conclusion, we have developed a robust IHC assay for determining the
functional HR-status in tumor samples. Further work will be required to
determine if the staining patterns observed predict PARP inhibitor
sensitivity among primary patient samples. Funded by a Biomarker
Supplement to UM1 CA186709, NIH Grant P50 CA168504, SU2C Ovarian Cancer
Dream Team and BCRF grant.


