Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NME1 mediates a switch in beta integrin subunits that correlates
with prolonged patient survival.


Expression of the metastasis suppressor NME1 in melanoma is associated
with reduced cellular motility, invasion, and metastasis, but the
molecular mechanisms underlying this activity are not completely
understood. Herein we report a novel mechanism through which NME1
modulates focal adhesion dynamics via regulation of integrins β1 and
β3. Stable expression of NME1 significantly altered focal adhesion
turnover at the cell periphery. Interestingly, over-expression of NME1
resulted in a switch from predominantly fast recycling α4β1 integrins
to slower recycling αvβ3 integrins. Contrary to its regulation of other
cell surface receptors, the inhibition of integrin β1 and induction of
integrin β3 by NME1 was found to occur at the transcriptional level
rather than through dynamin mediated endocytosis. Induction of integrin
β3 required both the 3-5’ exonuclease and nucleoside diphosphate
kinase (NDPK) activities of NME1, which are also required for its
metastasis suppressor activities in vivo. Further suggesting that the
induction of integrin β3 is involved in the metastasis suppression
function of NME1, knockdown of integrin β3 significantly increased the
invasion capability of cells expressing NME1 in vitro compared to control
cells. Analysis of metastatic melanoma patients in the TCGA showed
individuals with a 1.5x or greater increase in integrin β3 mRNA had a
significantly longer overall survival times. Additionally, an inverse
correlation was observed between NME1 and integrin β1 mRNA in an
independent microarray of primary melanomas. The inverse correlation of
NME1 and integrin β1 RNA was also a strong predictor of prolonged
distant disease free and overall survival in patients with the basal-like
subtype of breast carcinoma. Together, these data strongly suggest NME1
prevents metastasis of human melanoma and some types of breast cancers by
altering beta integrin expression to reduce recycling of focal adhesions
and, ultimately suppress of cell motility.


