Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Incidence of skeletal related events (SREs) among prostate cancer
patients treated with androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) in Abuja,
Nigeria.


Background: Skeletal related events (SREs) are one or more of the
following conditions, occurring concurrently with or after the first bone
metastasis: fractures, radiotherapy to bone and spinal cord compression.
SREs occur in men with prostate cancer (CaP) and may result from androgen
deprivation therapy (ADT). The purpose of this study was to determine the
incidence of SREs in patients with CaP treated with ADT in our practice.

Methods: Eligible cases were newly diagnosed patients with CaP seen at
the University of Abuja Teaching Hospital (UATH), Abuja, Nigeria between
January 2012 and December 2015 with bone metastases and treated with ADT.
Data compiled from only retrievable patient’s medical records showed
tumor diagnosis, laboratory and radiology results. SREs included spinal
cord compression, surgery to bone, pathologic fracture and radiation to
bone.

Results: All 142 cases of CaP reviewed who received ADT were first
diagnosed as AJCC stage IV prostate cancer.

More than half the patients were > 65 years of age with a mean (SD) of
68.3 (± 9.5) years. Serum PSA range was 1.4- 2461.58 ng/ml with a mean
(SD) of 113.7 (± 288.9) ng/ml.

We identified 29 patients (20.5%) who had one or more SREs: spinal cord
compression (19.1%), pathological fractures (1.4%) and radiotherapy to
the affected bone (1.4%) being the most common SREs. Albeit fifty (35.2%)
more patients had bone pains which was localized to the lumbo-sacral
spine in 52% of them, only two patients had internal fixation to
stabilize pathological fractures and bone radiotherapy respectively.

ADT in the patients was orchiectomy, LHRH, anti-androgens and complete
androgen blockade (CAB) {orchiectomy or LHRH plus anti-androgens} in
14(9.8%), 3(2.1%), 44(30.9%) and 81{57%} patients respectively.

Conclusions: Albeit some clinical trials have found that 36-41% of
high-risk metastatic prostate cancer patients developed SREs during 3
years of follow-up, our review of this hospital-based cohort of patients
with prostate cancer receiving ADT did not show the incidence of SREs to
be as high as what has been reported. Additional studies to explore the
incidence of SREs in patients with metastatic hormone refractory prostate
cancer in our environment may be relevant.


