Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic bias in genomic breast cancer classification due to
selecting cases with high tumor percentage and good RNA quality.


Background

Cancer classification, prognostication, and prediction of treatment
sensitivity increasingly rely on DNA and RNA-based tests. This approach
requires sufficiently high tumor cell percentages to yield enough DNA or
RNA for reliable test results. As a consequence, samples of insufficient
quality may drop out, e.g. due to poor cellularity or high numbers of
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. We hypothesized that requiring a high
tumor cell percentage and high quality RNA causes systemic bias when
interpreting genomic test results in breast cancer, as specific breast
cancer subgroups may be over- or underrepresented.

Patients and methods

For this analysis, we used pre-treatment frozen samples from patients
included in neoadjuvant chemotherapy trials at the Netherlands Cancer
Institute between 2004 and 2012. Histological features and tumor cell
percentage were reviewed and assessed by a consultant breast pathologist.
Gene expression profiling was done if the tumor cell percentage exceeded
50% and RNA quantity (>1 µg) and quality (RIN value≥ 6.5) were
sufficient. We compared patient and tumor characteristics between
patients in whom gene expression profiling could be performed and those
in whom it could not be performed. In addition, we performed a systematic
review on gene expression profiling for breast cancer, to assess the
percentage of sample dropout in published studies.

Results

Frozen biopsies were available from 658 patients (79% of the total study
population) and gene expression profiling could be performed in 60% of
the cases, a percentage comparable to what is reported in the literature.
Reasons for drop out were a low cellularity, poor quality and quantity of
the RNA, or a too small biopsy for processing. These patients had more
grade 3 tumors (43% versus 34%, p=0.04) and were more node positive (76%
versus 69%, p=0.03). Analysis of neoadjuvant chemotherapy response and
survival in these patients is ongoing and will be presented at the AACR
Annual Meeting 2017.

Conclusion

Breast cancers for which gene expression data were successfully obtained
were associated with a higher grade and with lymph node metastasis. Such
tumors represent a more aggressive phenotype and have a relatively poor
prognosis, compared to the patients for whom gene expression data could
not be measured. As gene expression arrays are now broadly used in a
clinical context, it is important to acknowledge this systematic bias,
and to be cautious in applying gene expression based tests on different
patient populations than a test was developed on.


