Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Have you checked? Disparities in cancer screening practices among
minority populations.


Objective: There is a disproportionately higher burden of cancer among
racial and ethnic minorities, with the incidence only expected to
increase significantly by 2050. These racial differences may be due to
the quality of early detection screening among this population. The
purpose of this research is to provide case study reports about cancer
screening practices among at-risk populations as well as those from
underrepresented racial and ethnic minority backgrounds as well as sexual
and gender minorities in order to describe disparities in cancer
screening practices. These five case studies reveal how racial
disparities vary by cancer site. These case studies will share
information about current cancer prevalence, current recommendations for
cancer prevention, national guidelines about early detection for lung,
colorectal, prostate, cervical and breast cancers, as well as discuss
ways to reduce cancer health disparities and improve screening practices.

Methods: Data sources for these case studies include research reports,
literature review, clinically-based articles, research articles,
websites, as well as clinical practice observations and experiences.

Research Summary: These case studies contribute to the growing body of
knowledge related to cancer health disparities, with a special emphasis
on cancer screening behaviors among underrepresented, at-risk, and racial
and ethnic minority backgrounds. Since cancer care is multidisciplinary,
these case reports also highlight the role of oncology nurses in helping
to lead in educating, promoting, and bringing awareness to cancer
screening recommendations and current cancer prevention guidelines for
individuals and their families. Nurses recognize that one of the biggest
barriers to screening is when individual have unrelated health care
priorities that overshadow priorities related to screening, such as food,
shelter, and safety. Nurses are also positioned to provide
cancer-specific screening guidelines and resources to help individuals
implement these recommendations into their daily lives. Improving
screening rates among minority populations requires collaborations with
the health care systems and the community.

Conclusion: Evidence indicates that there are significant disparities
that exist in cancer screening practices among minority populations as
well as disproportionately higher cancer mortality rates in these
populations. Barriers to screening include lack of access to high-quality
health care, lack of health insurance, transportation issues, fear and
lack of trust in the health care team, embarrassment, stigma related to
sexual orientation or gender identity, discrimination in quality care and
treatment, as well as lack of awareness about screening recommendations.
Recognition of barriers to screening among minority populations is
critical to developing targeted interventions that promote adherence and
decrease risks of cancer-related mortality.


