Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated glycolytic gene signature in patient-derived
neuroendocrine prostate cancer xenograft models and its clinical
relevance.


Neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC) is a highly aggressive subtype of
prostate cancer (PCa) that is becoming increasingly common in the clinic.
While the vast majority of PCa presents as androgen-dependent
adenocarcinoma, recent uses of increasingly potent therapeutics targeting
the androgen receptor signaling axis has resulted in the promotion of
NEPC transdifferentiation as a mechanism of treatment resistance.
Unfortunately, there is currently no effective treatment option for NEPC.
Altered cancer metabolism is now recognized as a hallmark of cancer and a
crucial factor for promoting tumour growth and spread. In particular,
altered glucose metabolism and the resultant acidification of the tumor
microenvironment via increased lactic acid production has been shown to
play an important role in multiple cancer-promoting processes, including
tissue invasion/metastasis, angiogenesis, and suppression of local
anticancer immunity. While increased glycolysis is not generally
considered a phenomenon relevant to primary treatment-naive PCa, we have
recently demonstrated its relavance to castration-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) and thus suspect that it is also relevant to the more
aggressive NEPC. Our laboratory has also developed a number of unique
serially transplantable patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of NEPC
that are histologically highly similar to the donor tissues and retain
important genetic and epigenetic features. In particular, we have
developed the first spontaneous NEPC transdifferentiation model in the
field (LTL331/331R). The gene expression profiles of these NEPC PDX
models were compared to that of PCa adenocarcinoma PDX models. To
determine whether certain metabolic pathway alterations were specific to
NEPC, genes from a number of key metabolic pathways were compiled and
overall pathway scores were generated using average expression z-scores.
Furthermore, publically available gene expression data from NEPC patient
tumors were used to validate our findings. From our analysis, we found
that genes in the glycolysis pathway were signficiantlly upregulatied in
both our PDX models and also in patient NEPC samples. Of particular
interest is the upregulation of genes involved in the production and
secretion of lactic acid, such as LDHA and MCT4. As such, our results
suggest that elevated glycolysis and production of lactic acid could be a
clinically important NEPC phenotype. Furthermore, the inhibition of
glycolysis and particularly the inhibition of lactic acid secretion via
MCT4 could be a potentially viable therapeutic strategy for NEPC.


