Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mass spectroscopic analysis of MGMT tryptic peptides allows
detection of O6-alkylguanine adducts in oligodeoxyribonucleotides,
temozolomide modified calf thymus DNA and human colorectal cancer DNA.


Background: Red and processed meat consumption increases human colorectal
cancer (CRC) risk, potentially by heme-catalysed formation of
carcinogenic N-nitrosocompounds (NNOC) that form mutagenic
O6-alkylguanine (O6-alkG) DNA adducts. NNOC formation cannot be
accurately estimated from meat consumption alone due to in situ
processing required for their formation. We are thus developing a novel
approach to assess NNOC exposure by quantifying O6-alkylguanine DNA
adducts that result from their exposure, using the known action of the
DNA repair protein, O6-alkylguanine O6-alkyltransferase (MGMT), to
irreversibly transfer the O6-alkyl to an active site cysteine residue in
MGMT.

Methods: Oligodeoxyribonucleotides (ODNs) containing O6-methylguanine
(O6-MeG), O6-carboxymethylguanine (O6-CMG), O6-carboxyethylguanine
(O6-CEG) were synthesised by alcohol modification of an ODN containing
the convertible base 2-amino-6-methylsulfonylpurine. O6-MeG containing
calf thymus (CT) DNA was prepared by incubation with temozolomide (TMZ).
Both maltose binding protein-MGMT (MBP-MGMT) and his-tagged MGMT
(his-MGMT) fusion proteins were expressed, purified, and MGMT functional
activity determined by tritium transfer using CT DNA methylated with
[3H]-N-Nitrosomethylurea. Double stranded O6-alkG-containing ODNs,
unmodified ODN and methylated CT DNA were incubated with MBP-MGMT and the
resulting alkylated MGMT digested with trypsin and analysed by mass
spectrometry using MALDI-TOF. Human CRC DNA samples were incubated with
his-MGMT which was then recovered using Ni-coated magnetic beads. MGMT
was digested in situ with trypsin and the tryptic peptides analysed by
MALDI-TOF.

Results: S-methylcysteine (m/z 1329.7), S-carboxymethylcysteine (m/z
1373.7) and S-carboxyethylcysteine, modified MGMT active site peptides
were detected in tryptic digests of MBP-MGMT incubated with O6-MeG-,
O6-CMG- and O6-CEG-containing ODNs respectively. Only the unmodified
active site peptide (m/z 1315.7) was found after incubating MGMT with
unmodified ODN. Subsequent MS analysis of tryptic digests of MGMT
incubated with TMZ modified CT DNA also revealed the active site peptide
containing S-methylcysteine. Using this approach, pilot studies revealed
the presence of O6-MeG, O6-CMG and O6-CEG in CRC DNA.

Conclusions: These results demonstrate proof of principle and confirm
that this approach could be used to characterise O6-alkylguanine adducts
in human CRC DNA.


