Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel HDAC inhibitor SBAK-GHA: potential therapuetic molecule for
lymophocytic leukaemia.


In cancer cells, an imbalance exists between Histone acetylase(HAT) and
Histone deacetylase(HDAC) activities and current research focuses
actively on seeking competitive HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) for
chemotherapeutic intervention.We have designed and synthesized a library
of novel HDACi molecules from naturally occurring boswellic acids as an
alternate CAP for already validated pharmacophore of suberanilohydroxamic
acid (SAHA).Novel HDACi molecules were screened against a panel of cancer
cell lines. A lead HDACi
i.e.N1-hydroxy-N5-(3-α-hydroxy-11-oxo-24-norurs-12-en-4-yl) glutaramide
(SBAK-GHA) having IC50 of 1.5µM against leukaemia HL-60 cell line and
6µM in enzyme based assay was obtained. Further HDACi, isoform
evaluation was done for SBAK-GHA and it was found to be HDAC Class 1
Specific, especially against HDAC 2 (IC50 of 200 nM) and HDAC 8(IC50 of
250 nM). Acetylation level of different histone residues on H3 and H4
upon SBAK-GHA treatment in HL-60 cell line was studied by immunoblotting.
HDACi, SAHA and Sodium Butyrate (NaB) were used as positive controls to
compare acetylation levels of different H3 and H4 residues.SAHA and NaB
showed significant increase in H3K9, H3K14, H3K27, H4K5, H4K12, and H4K16
acetylation levels while H3K18 showed mild change in acetylation levels.
On the other hand SBAK-GHA showed significant increase in acetylation
levels of all the lysine residues of histone H3 and H4 especially H4K16
in comparison to SAHA and NaB. In order to analyse varied expression of
cyclins and their corresponding control of different phases of cell
cycle, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP) and
observed acetylation pattern of different histone (H3 and H4) residues
regulates cyclins differently. In order to analyse the correlation of
acetylation on different H3 and H4 residues and their varied pattern of
regulation of cyclins, we next analyzed the effect of SBAK-GHA on
different cell cycle events in HL-60 cells and found G1 phase cell cycle
arrest at significantly low concentration (1µM).We further observed
SBAK-GHA induced apoptosis at lower concentrations while as autophagy was
found at higher concentrations. Furthermore,we conducted mitochondrial
membrane potential studies of SBAK-GHA in HL-60 cells and observed
significant loss in mitochondrial membrane potential. We took our
findings from in vitro studies and analysed effect of SBAK-GHA on
different in vivo murine models. SBAK-GHA showed significant activity
especially against P388 lymphocytic leukemia compared to SAHA and 5-FU.
Moreover, SBAK-GHA showed promising activity against Ehrlich Ascites
Carcinoma (EAC). In conclusion our findings indicate that our lead
molecule of interest have great therapeutic potential singly or in
combination, however further mechanism of action needs to be elucidated
before taking it from Bench to Bedside.


