Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation of subtelomeric repeat D4Z4 in peripheral blood
leukocytes is associated with biochemical recurrence in localized
prostate cancer patients.


Background: Global DNA methylation may affect chromosome structure and
genomic stability and is involved in carcinogenesis. In this study, we
aimed to investigate whether methylation of pericentromeric repeat (NBL2)
and subtelomeric repeat (D4Z4) in peripheral blood leukocytes was
associated with the aggressiveness of prostate cancer (PCa).

Methods: We measured the methylation status of different CpG sites of
NBL2 and D4Z4 in 900 PCa patients via pyrosequencing after bisulfite
treatment. We then used multivariate logistic regression to estimate the
odds ratio (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for analyzing the
association of NBL2 and D4Z4 methylation with the aggressiveness of PCa
at diagnosis. We then analyzed the association of CpG sites with the risk
of biochemical recurrence (BCR) in patients receiving radical
prostatectomy or radiotherapy using a multivariate Cox proportional
hazards model adjusting for age, BMI, smoking status, pack year,
D’Amico risk groups, and treatments. In addition, we used the
Kaplan-Meier survival function and log-rank tests to assess BCR-free
survival associated with these markers.

Results: There was no significant differences in the methylation level of
NBL2 and D4Z4 between clinically defined aggressive and non-aggressive
PCa at diagnosis. However, the methylation of subtelomeric region D4Z4
was associated with BCR, while the methylation of NBL2 was not associated
with BCR. In tertile analysis, we found that patients with higher
methylation of D4Z4 exhibited an increased risk of BCR in localized
patients receiving definitive therapy. Because of the relatively low rate
of BCR among patients, we combined the highest and second tertiles to
increase statistical power. Patients in the second and third (highest)
tertiles had an increased risk of BCR (HR=1.74, 95% CI, 1.14-2.65; p=
0.0096) compared to patients in the lowest tertile after adjustment of
age, BMI, smoking status, pack year, D’Amico risk groups, and
treatments. We assayed 4 CpG sites in this region. In detailed analysis
of each CpG site, the association was mostly attributable to the
methylation of the 2nd methylation site of D4Z4 (HR=1.80, 95% CI, 1.19 -
2.72).

Conclusion: These data suggest that methylation in the subtelomeric
region D4Z4 may be able to predict worse prognosis of localized PCa
patients.


