Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of somatic mutations in exosomal RNA from human oral
squamous cell carcinoma cells.


Exosomes are small vesicles, ranging from 30 to 100 nm in size, secreted
from most types of cells. They contain proteins, lipids, and nucleic
acids (e.g. DNA, mRNA, and microRNA) and are thought to play an important
role in cell proliferation, invasion, and metastasis in human
malignancies. Recently, circulating exosomes have also been of interest
as a source for liquid biopsies. In this study, we examined the
usefulness of exosomal RNA as a biomarker and attempted to detect the
tumor-specific gene mutations from exosomal RNA derived from human oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells. We used 3 human OSCC cells (HSC2,
KT-T, KT-N). KT-T and KT-N cells were established from the lower gingival
tumor and lymph node metastasis, respectively. First, we detected the
somatic mutations in genomic DNA extracted from these cells by
next-generation sequencing (NGS) with the use of HaloPlex Cancer Research
Panel (Agilent Technologies). PIK3CA H1047R mutation was identified in
all OSCC cells, and KT-N cells had the additional HRAS Q61R mutation. We
confirmed these mutations of PIK3CA and HRAS in OSCC cells by TaqMan®
SNP Genotyping Assays (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Subsequently, we
evaluated the gene mutations in exosomal RNA from these OSCC cells.
Exosomal RNA was isolated from the conditioned medium using exoRNeasy
Serum/Plasma Maxi Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacture’s protocol.
In exosomal RNA, we found the PIK3CA H1047R mutation from all OSCC cells
and HRAS Q61R mutation from KT-N cells by genotyping assays. Furthermore,
we assessed the detection of these mutations in tumor xenograft mouse
models. KT-T and KT-N cells (5 x 106) complexed with Matrigel® (BD) in
100-µl aliquots were injected subcutaneously space in the flank of male
athymic nude mice. Exosomal RNA was isolated from the serum of
tumor-bearing nude mice using exoRNeasy Serum/Plasma Midi Kit (Qiagen).
By genotyping assays using serum exosomal RNA, PIK3CA H1047R mutation was
observed in both types of xenograft mice and HRAS Q61R mutation was
positive in KT-N xenograft mice. Cancer cell-derived exosomal RNA had the
same gene mutations in those cells, and could be detected in the serum of
tumor-bearing nude mice. These results suggest that exosomal RNA is
useful for detecting somatic mutations in OSCC cells.


