Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STING colocalizes with gamma-H2AX upon treatment of breast cancer
cells with genotoxics: A new role in DNA repair.


One of the current tumor immunotherapy strategies involves the use of
STING agonist, a well-known inducer of interferon (IFN) signaling in the
immune system, to promote tumor-rejection. However, recent evidence also
indicates that constitutive activation of IFN signaling in the tumor may
lead to a bad outcome. For instance, increased expression of IFN-
stimulated genes (ISGs) at time of surgery was associated with early
breast cancer recurrence, and an IFN-related DNA damage resistance
signature (IRDS) was identified as a predictive marker of recurrence
after radiotherapy. Thus, IFNs secreted into the tumor microenvironment
may have complex opposite effects on tumor behavior and response to
treatment.

Using patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models, we previously showed that
the IFN/STAT1 pathway was activated within breast cancer cells in
response to chemotherapy and that this pathway may be involved in
treatment resistance and recurrence. The aim of this study was to
elucidate the mechanisms by which IFN-signaling is triggered in breast
cancer cells following chemotherapy and how its activation leads to tumor
survival and recurrence. To this aim, the breast cancer cell line MCF7
was treated in vitro with mafosfamide and the activity of different IFN
pathway effectors was monitored using western blot, immunofluorescence
and cell fractionation techniques.

We found that in breast cancer cells, similarly to what is observed in
immune cells, type I IFN expression is triggered in a STING-dependent
manner. STING silencing abrogated chemotherapy-induced type I IFN
production and signaling, while potentiating genotoxic treatment efficacy
by promoting cell death and delaying cell colony regrowth. Surprisingly,
while STING is described as an endoplasmic reticulum resident protein
that relocalizes to perinuclear vesicles upon activation in immune cells,
we showed that STING is constitutively present in the nucleus of breast
cancer cells and, under activation, forms nuclear clusters that
co-localize with gH2AX at DNA breaks.

This study provides the first demonstration of STING activation in breast
cancer cells and describes a potential new role for the nuclear form of
STING in DNA damage response. Our data suggest that genotoxic
stress-induced STING activation is a cell-intrinsic mechanism of breast
cancer cell survival and regrowth. Whether STING pro-survival role is
IFN-dependent (through the activation of given ISGs), IFN-independent
(through its involvement in the DNA damage response) or both is currently
under investigation.


