Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tristetraprolin is a prognostic biomarker for biochemical
recurrence in low Gleason score patients.


PURPOSE: Most prostate cancer patients currently classified as having a
low-risk of disease-specific death are overtreated in the United States,
resulting in hundreds of thousands of men to have debilitating side
effects from unnecessary treatment. However, ~30% of low-risk patients on
active surveillance are later reclassified and require therapeutic
intervention. Thus, there is a dire need for biomarkers that can
discriminate which prostate tumors currently classified as low-risk will
progress into aggressive disease.

EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Retrospective analyses of two independent prostate
cancer expression datasets were performed to determine the relationship
between the expression levels of the tumor suppressor Tristetraprolin
(TTP, ZFP36) and biochemical recurrence (BCR). Further, TTP expression
levels were measured by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) in a cohort
of prostate tumors from Moffitt Cancer Center patients having long-term
follow-up (n=382), and will be correlated to associated clinical data,
including BCR. Finally, the Cancer of the Prostate Risk Assessment
Postsurgical (CAPRA-S) scores, a clinical tool used to predict prostate
cancer outcomes following radical prostatectomy, were calculated along
with BCR for the patients in one of the prostate cancer datasets.

RESULTS: Analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) prostate
adenocarcinoma dataset revealed that tumors with low TTP expression have
an increased rate of BCR compared to those with high TTP levels
(p=0.0096). Further, assessment of the GEO dataset GSE21034 (Taylor et
al., Cancer Cell, 2010) established that prostate cancer patients with
low Gleason scores (6 and 3+4) have an increased chance of BCR if their
tumors express low levels of TTP compared to men with high TTP expressing
tumors (p=0.0001). To validate these findings, patients with low Gleason
score tumors and decreased levels of TTP in the Moffitt Cancer Center
cohort are being analyzed to determine their rate of BCR. In contrast,
CAPRA-S scores for low Gleason score tumors in the GSE20134 dataset
failed to distinguish if a patient would have BCR (p=0.0511).

CONCLUSIONS: Prostate cancer patients with Gleason score 6 or 3+4, which
are currently classified as having a low-risk of dying from prostate
cancer, have an increased risk of BCR if their tumor expresses low levels
of the tumor suppressor TTP. Our data suggests that TTP may be a
biomarker that clearly discriminates which low Gleason score tumors will
progress into aggressive disease.


