Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting of C-terminal binding protein: a key
dependency for polyposis and cancer stem cell activity in APC mutant
neoplasia.


The C terminal binding proteins (CtBP) 1 and 2 are a family of
transcriptional co-repressors overexpressed in a variety of cancers, and
are frequently associated with poor prognosis and chemoresistance. CtBP
has also been characterized in cell culture models as drivers of
migration/invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. CtBP mediates
its transcriptional corepressor activity via its dehydrogenase domain,
and inhibition of this domain interferes with CtBP oncogenic functions.
The role of CtBP in APC mutant neoplasia remains obscure even though APC
is responsible for degradation of both β-catenin and CtBP in suppressing
colorectal tumorigenesis. Our prior work demonstrates that CtBP proteins
can be effectively therapeutically targeted with substrate analogues of
their intrinsic dehydrogenase domains. We now observe that pharmacologic
inhibition of CtBP using either the 1st generation inhibitor
2-keto-4-methylthiobutyrate (MTOB) or the 2nd generation inhibitor
hydroxyimino-3-phenylpropanoic acid (HIPP) significantly reduces the
burden of intestinal polyps in the Apcmin mouse model of the human cancer
predisposition syndrome Familial Adenomatous Polyposis. The number of
intestinal polyps in mice with CtBP2 inhibitors were significantly lower
(21 polyps/mouse for MTOB, 15 polyps/mouse for HIPP) as compared with
vehicle treated mice (45 polyps/mouse) with a P value The C terminal
binding proteins (CtBP) 1 and 2 are a family of transcriptional
co-repressors overexpressed in a variety of cancers, and are frequently
associated with poor prognosis and chemoresistance. CtBP has also been
characterized in cell culture models as drivers of migration/invasion and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. CtBP mediates its transcriptional
corepressor activity via its dehydrogenase domain, and inhibition of this
domain interferes with CtBP oncogenic functions. The role of CtBP in APC
mutant neoplasia remains obscure even though APC is responsible for
degradation of both β-catenin and CtBP in suppressing colorectal
tumorigenesis. Our prior work demonstrates that CtBP proteins can be
effectively therapeutically targeted with substrate analogues of their
intrinsic dehydrogenase domains. We now observe that pharmacologic
inhibition of CtBP using either the 1st generation inhibitor
2-keto-4-methylthiobutyrate (MTOB) or the 2nd generation inhibitor
hydroxyimino-3-phenylpropanoic acid (HIPP) significantly reduces the
burden of intestinal polyps in the Apcmin mouse model of the human cancer
predisposition syndrome Familial Adenomatous Polyposis. The number of
intestinal polyps in mice with CtBP2 inhibitors were significantly lower
(21 polyps/mouse for MTOB, 15 polyps/mouse for HIPP) as compared with
vehicle treated mice (45 polyps/mouse) with a P value <0.0001. Pointing
to the anti-neoplastic mechanism of MTOB and HIPP, polyps that did grow
in MTOB or HIPP treated mice demonstrated robust downregulation of β
catenin and Ctbp2 proteins. This observation points to the role of Ctbp2
as a putative driver oncogene that can be therapeutically targeted in
vivo. In addition, CtBP2 has been reported to play an important role in
human colon cancer stem cells via its interaction with the transcription
factor TCF4 on chromatin. We now show that inhibiting CtBP with HIPP or
HIPP analogues attenuates CtBP2 protein levels in colon cancer stem cells
with resultant decreased expression of CtBP transcriptional target genes,
such as the motility/invasion regulator TIAM1, and c-MYC, a known driver
of the cancer stem cell phenotype. Moreover, colonospheres treated with
CtBP inhibitor showed downregulation of cancer stem cell markers CD133
and c-MYC, as compared with vehicle treatment. Flow cytometry analysis of
intestinal epithelium from Apcmin mice treated with CtBP inhibitor vs.
vehicle indicated a significant reduction in CD133+/CXCR4+ cells that are
associated with a tumor initiating cell phenotype. Our data demonstrate
that CtBP inhibition may reduce colon neoplasia via downregulation of
c-MYC and the cancer stem cell/tumor initiating cell compartment, and
that CtBP is a promising and novel target for therapy in colon cancer.


