Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RXDX-106, a novel, selective and potent small molecule TAM (TYRO3,
AXL, MER) inhibitor, demonstrates efficacy in TAM-driven tumors.


In recent years, the TAM (TYRO3, AXL, and MER) family of receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) has emerged as attractive targets for oncology
therapeutics. Under homeostatic conditions, the TAM RTKs are expressed by
a number of immune cells where they play key roles in the negative
regulation of the immune response. However, their expression on cancer
cells has been specifically associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition, an invasive phenotype, and more generally, with a poor
prognostic outcome in human cancers. Here, we sought (1) to establish
whether expression of the TAM was sufficient to drive cellular
transformation, (2) to demonstrate that RXDX-106, a small molecule
inhibitor of TAM RTKs, could inhibit tumors harboring activating TAM gene
fusions, and furthermore, (3) to decipher how pharmacological inhibition
of TAM signaling pathways both on cancer cells and immune cells would be
beneficial, given their complex regulation and intimate relationship in
the tumor microenvironment. TAM expression on cancer cells has emerged as
one of the key mechanisms of resistance to targeted therapies,
particularly to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI). In addition, novel
gene rearrangements (fusions) have been identified in the TCGA database
for both Mertk (TMEM87B-Mertk) and Axl (Axl-MBIP) that retain the
functionality of the tyrosine kinase domain, but have fusion partners
that alter the expression profile or dimerization frequency,
respectively. Here, we demonstrate both in vitro and in vivo that
expression of either wild type receptors or TMEM87B-MER and AXL-MBIP
fusion proteins is sufficient to drive oncogenic transformation by both
ligand dependent and independent mechanisms. Treatment of these
TAM-expressing cellular populations with RXDX-106 completely inhibits TAM
phosphorylation and downstream signaling and, consistent with our
signaling data, RXDX-106 completely inhibits cellular proliferation and
viability at sub-nanomolar concentrations. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that, in the co-culture of TAM-expressing cancer cells with immune cells
such as macrophages, TAM ligands such as Gas6 are secreted to drive
ligand dependent activation of TAM on cancer cells, leading to their
survival and proliferation. In summary, our data suggest that TAM RTKs
can act as traditional oncodrivers when activated either in a ligand
dependent or ligand independent manner. In addition, we demonstrate that
TAM fusions are tractable therapeutic targets and that patients with
tumors harboring such molecular alterations may derive clinical benefit
from RXDX-106. Finally, we show that RXDX-106 not only has the potential
to inhibit cellular proliferation and survival on the cancer cell itself,
but also affect the TAM-expressing tumor microenvironment to result in a
global anti-cancer environment.


