Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mismatch repair defects and endocrine therapy resistance in
estrogen receptor positive breast cancer.


Estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer is treated with endocrine
therapy but intrinsic resistance occurs in ~1/3 of patients and acquired
resistance in ~1/5 of the remainder. While many resistance mechanisms
have been explored, therapeutic strategies to overcome resistance in the
clinical setting have seen mixed outcomes, and appear most effective in
the acquired resistance setting. Understanding mechanisms of resistance
and finding therapeutic strategies to target them, therefore, remain
important challenges facing breast cancer researchers. In this study we
systematically examine the role of DNA damage repair defects in inducing
endocrine therapy resistance, a relatively understudied question of
recent interest. We use in silico analysis of clinical datasets, in vitro
experiments evaluating endocrine therapy resistance in response to DDR
dysregulation in multiple breast cancer celllines, and in vivo validation
using cellline xenograft and patient-derived xenograft models. We also
use gene expression microarrays and RPPA data from cell lines,
patient-derived xenografts and primary ER+ breast tumors to uncover
therapeutic options that are validated in vitro and in vivo and
corroborated by clinical trial data. The results of this study uncover an
intriguing link between mismatch repair (MMR) deficiency, specifically of
the MutL complex (MLH1/3, PMS1/2), and poor prognosis in ER+ disease. We
find a direct role for MutL loss in endocrine therapy resistance in vitro
and in vivo by knocking down multiple MutL genes using CRISPR and stable
shRNA approaches validated using standard rescue experiments. We identify
the underlying mechanism: MutL deficiency in ER+ breast cancer abrogates
Chk2-mediated feedback inhibition of CDK4/6 that appears necessary for
endocrine therapy responsiveness. Consequently, pharmacological targeting
of CDK4/6 in vitro and in vivo significantly inhibits growth of endocrine
therapy resistant MutL-deficient ER+ breast cancer cells. These results
are corroborated by data from a neoadjuvant clinical trial demonstrating
that cell cycle regulation of MutL-mutant tumors tends to be
estrogen-independent but sensitive to CDK4/6 inhibitors. The results of
this study provide important biological and clinically relevant insights.
1) MMR deficiency is unexpectedly causal to intrinsic endocrine therapy
resistance 2) This causal effect appears to be mediated by abrogation of
cell cycle checkpoint activation in response to endocrine therapy 3) MMR
deficiency in a subset of ER+ tumors explains why CDK4/6 inhibition is
effective against some de novo endocrine therapy resistant tumors. While
there are currently no biomarkers to guide the use of CDK4/6 inhibitors
for ER+ breast cancer, markers of MMR dysregulation could identify
patients in whom CDK4/6 inhibition should be used to prevent disease
recurrence.


