Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Matrilysin/MMP-7 compromises a novel border interaction between
perlecan/HSPG2 and semaphorin 3A to support prostate cancer invasion.


Prostate cancer (PCa) cells interact with the stroma and extracellular
matrix (ECM) during tumor expansion and invasion during metastasis.
Dissecting the complex matrix-cancer interplay is essential to halting
tumor progression. A vital component of the ECM is perlecan/heparan
sulfate proteoglycan 2 (HSPG2). As a large extracellular proteoglycan,
perlecan helps orchestrate tumor angiogenesis, proliferation,
differentiation and invasion. Actively metastasizing cancer cells must
proteolytically degrade several tissue borders which perlecan patrols,
including the basement membrane, vasculature, reactive stromal matrix and
bone marrow. Investigating the effects of perlecan on metastatic PCa
cells showed full length perlecan and specifically conserved domain IV of
perlecan triggers clustering of PCa cells. Perlecan cleavage by the
pro-tumor protease matrilysin/matrix metalloproteinase (MMP-7) reverses
this, favoring cell dispersion and tumor dyscohesion. Network analysis of
a reverse phase protein array and subsequent western blots revealed
clustered cells on intact perlecan/Dm IV induced a strong focal adhesion
kinase (FAK) dephosphorylation/deactivation. Alternatively, FAK was
highly phosphorylated/activated on MMP-7 cleaved perlecan/Dm IV
consistent with an adhesive and dispersive/metastatic phenotype. Several
lines of evidence indicate Dm IV interacts with the classically known
axon guidance protein semaphorin 3A (Sema3A), to shut off pro-metastatic
FAK activation. Notably, a C-terminus directed Sema3A antibody mimics the
clustering activity of Dm IV. We showed Dm IV binds to Sema3A in ELISA
and quartz crystal microbalance experiments and the interaction is
abrogated by the Sema3A antibody. Interestingly, Sema3A also is sensitive
to MMP-7 proteolytic activity. Finally, transient knockdown of Sema3A in
PCa cells inhibits the clustering effect by a Dm IV substrate. This work
shows that perlecan is an effective border molecule because it
coordinates with Sema3A to repulse and cluster cells by switching off FAK
activity. However, PCa cells expressing active MMPs, such as MMP-7, can
destroy this Sema3A/perlecan complex to develop an invasive, metastatic
phenotype associated with lethal disease.


