Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A combined, affordable solution for the performance of automated
3D in vitro hepatotoxicity testing.


Prescription medications, environmental toxins, and non-prescription
herbal remedies together form the major causes of hepatic injury. When
looking at drugs alone, induced hepatic injury is the most common reason
cited for warnings or withdrawal of an approved drug depending on the
severity of the induced hepatotoxicity. Due to this reality, a paradigm
shift has taken place in the way toxicology studies are being performed,
including determination of hepatotoxicity. Early phase assessment of
potential hepatotoxic effects from a wider range of new and existing
drugs or chemicals is now the norm. Coupled with the change in the
development phase where testing takes place is the desire to use cell
models that close the gap between in vitro and in vivo systems.
Hepatotoxicity studies historically have been performed by repeatedly
dosing hepatocytes cultured on the bottom of a microplate with multiple
concentrations of a test drug or compound. Because hepatocytes rapidly
de-differentiate, lose metabolic activity, and lack the communication
networks found in vivo when cultured in this manner, results may be
inaccurate and yield misleading claims regarding the safety of the test
agent. To combat this shortfall, three-dimensional (3D) spheroidal
models, incorporating hiPSC-hepatocytes, can be incorporated that allow
cells to aggregate and retain typical long-term viability, functionality
and communication found in vivo; allowing for the generation of
repeatable, accurate data. To meet the demand for increased
hepatotoxicity testing, automation has been incorporated to streamline
the procedure and reduce the need for large scale manual manipulations.
Typically, included liquid handling systems have been large, expensive,
and many times required placement into clean rooms for sterile
processing. While this type of solution is suitable for pharmaceutical,
biotech, and even larger core facilities, the size and cost can be
prohibitive to the typical academic research lab. Therefore, a smaller,
less expensive instrumentation set, which can still provide accurate and
repeatable results, is necessary. Here we demonstrate the ability to
combine liquid handling with a novel cell imaging multi-mode reader to
perform 3D hepatotoxicity studies. hiPSC-hepatocytes were aggregated into
spheroids easily and efficiently using magnetic bioprinting technology.
Multiple known hepatotoxicants were tested with the automation and cell
model to validate the ability of the combined solution to be used to meet
the need to perform automated, walk-away hepatotoxicity studies in an
academic setting.


