Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic anti-tumor efficacy of combination therapy with
APS001F, a cytosine deaminase (CD) expressing Bifidobacterium,
5-fluorocytosine (5-FC) and anti-mPD-1 antibody in syngeneic mice model.


Immune checkpoint blockers like anti-PD-1 antibody are leading the new
generation in anti-cancer drug development. A lot of scientific evidences
have demonstrated that immune checkpoint antibodies have promising
clinical response in patients with multiple cancer types. Nevertheless,
limited fraction of patients responds to the antibody immunotherapy, and
moreover, immune related serious adverse events caused by nonspecific
reaction with immune checkpoint blockers result in treatment
discontinuation. Many approaches have been attempted to improve
therapeutic outcomes of antibody immunotherapy, particularly a
combination of antibody treatment and other therapies is one of
worth-trying ideas. APS001F is a live recombinant Bifidobacterium longum
expressing cytosine deaminase (CD), which is an enzyme to catalyze the
hydrolytic deamination of cytosine to uracil. Bifidobacterium is a
non-pathogenic anaerobic bacterium derived from normal human intestinal
flora. It can only survive and grow at low oxygen environment such as
solid tumor. Intravenous administration of APS001F to patients leads to
colonization of the B.longum and production of CD enzyme only inside the
solid tumor. Locally expressed CD enzyme converts orally taken prodrug,
5-FC, into anti-tumor drug 5-FU, which increases 5-FU concentration
specifically inside tumor and results in alleviation of side effects
caused by attacking normal organs. The phase 1 clinical trial for APS001F
is conducted in the US sponsored by us.

5-FU has been shown to alleviate Myeloid Derived Suppressor Cells (MDSC)
in the tumor site and release immune suppression in tumor [1].
Furthermore, Van Der Kraak et. al. have reported that 5-FU upregulated
PD-L1 expression on the surface of tumor cells [2]. These findings drove
us to combine anti-PD-1 antibody with the APS001F therapy. At this
present study, systemic administration of APS001F and 5-FC significantly
suppressed tumor growth in CT26 bearing syngeneic mice model, which is
consistent with our previous finding. Additionally, anti-murine PD-1
antibody combined with APS001F and 5-FC further suppressed tumor
progression and some of individual samples achieved complete regression
of CT26 tumors. The combination treatment effect of anti-murine PD-1
antibody and APS001F with 5-FC showed statistical significance in
comparison with either treatment group, which encourages us to expect
much effective results and less side effects in clinic.

Reference: 1. Vincent J. et. al., Cancer Res. 2010 Apr 15;70(8):3052-61,
5-Fluorouracil selectively kills tumor-associated myeloid-derived
suppressor cells resulting in enhanced T cell-dependent antitumor
immunity. 2. Van Der Kraak et. al., J Immunother Cancer., 2016 Oct
18;4:65. 5-Fluorouracil upregulates cell surface B7-H1 (PD-L1) expression
in gastrointestinal cancers.


