Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Testosterone abolishes cabazitaxel efficacy in an in vivo model of
prostate cancer and affects intratumoral concentrations.


Introduction Docetaxel combined with castration provides a major survival
benefit in newly diagnosed metastatic PCa. Conversely, docetaxel without
castration in high-risk localized PCa is not active. Cabazitaxel is a new
taxane retaining its activity in tumors resistant to docetaxel and new
hormonal therapies. We aimed at better characterizing in vivo the
relationship between cabazitaxel and circulating androgens in a
preclinical human-derived xenograft model of castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC). Material and methods Athymic nude mice were
inoculated with the androgen receptor wt, PSA secreting CRPC cell line
PC346C-DCC-K. Mice were surgically castrated when tumors were established
(tumor volume (TV) of 150 mm3). After 7 days, mice were randomized to
receive testosterone (40 mg) or empty pellet. The following day mice were
injected with one bolus injection of cabazitaxel (33 mg/kg) or NaCl
intraperitoneally. Mice were sacrificed when tumors exceeded a volume of
1,500 mm3 or the maximum follow-up of 90 days after cabazitaxel
treatment. Blood was sampled biweekly for PSA and testosterone and
analyzed by an immunoassay. In a second in vivo experiment intratumoral
uptake of cabazitaxel was determined in the presence and absence of
testosterone using a similar experimental set-up, with the exception that
mice were sacrificed 7 days after cabazitaxel treatment. Here,
intratumoral cabazitaxel concentrations were determined in snap frozen
tumors by LC/MS-MS and corrected for tumor weight. Results Cabazitaxel
treatment of castrated male mice bearing PC346C-DCC-K tumors resulted in
a complete or near-complete antitumor response. In contrast, in mice
supplemented with testosterone the anti-tumor effect of cabazitaxel was
not significantly different from placebo (median time till TV 1,500 mm3
48 and 45 days resp.). Importantly, testosterone supplementation alone
did not significantly affect tumor growth, confirming the CRPC nature of
the (PC346C-DCC-K) xenograft. Interestingly, in tumors of testosterone
supplemented castrated mice the intratumoral cabazitaxel concentrations
were significantly decreased compared to mice that did not receive
testosterone (0.39 ng cabazitaxel per mg tumor tissue vs. 1.36 ng/mg,
t-test p=0.0032). Conclusions These findings indicate that circulating
testosterone significantly impairs the efficacy of cabazitaxel.
Testosterone supplementation may alter the metabolism of cabazitaxel, or
may interfere with uptake and/or accumulation of cabazitaxel in PCa
cells. We will further investigate the relationship between circulating
androgens and intratumoral cabazitaxel accumulation as well as anti-tumor
efficacy. The study was supported by a research grant from Sanofi


