Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disrupted endoplasmic reticulum-mitochondria contacts promote
multidrug resistance.


Background: Most high-risk neuroblastoma patients succumb to lethal
therapy resistant disease acquired during the course of intensive
multimodality treatment. This acquired therapy resistance is largely
attributed to insensitivity to drug-induced apoptosis, however the exact
mechanisms remain unknown. Apart from integrating death signals,
mitochondria (mito) interact with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) at close
contact sites known as mitochondria associated membranes (MAM) of the ER
to regulate calcium and lipid transfer and apoptotic sensitivity, a
process often derailed in therapy resistant cancers. ER-mito contact
sites are juxtaposed by various tethering protein complexes that include
MFN2 and PACS2. Pathologic deregulation of these contact sites has been
implicated in the genesis of neurodegenerative and metabolic disorders.
Here, we show that disruption of bona fide ER-mito tethering proteins in
therapy sensitive neuroblastomas induces apoptotic insensitivity and a
drastic shift towards a resistance-like phenotype.

Methods and Results: Previously we showed that isolated mitochondria from
tumors at relapse resist induction of mitochondrial apoptosis when primed
with the terminal death effectors that are downstream of therapeutic
stress (tBid and Bim-BH3 peptide). We isolated mitochondria from seven
matched isogenic tumor pairs obtained at diagnosis (DX) and relapse (REL)
and quantified their apoptotic response to tBid and Bim by measuring
cytochrome C release by ELISA. Electron microscopy (EM) image analyses of
ER-mito contact sites revealed that REL tumors contain up to 70% fewer
ER-mito interactions than their matched DX tumors, as confirmed by IB for
organelle-specific proteins. Here, we recapitulate the post-therapy
resistance phenotype in DX therapy sensitive cells by shRNA silencing of
MFN2 or PACS2 and confirm their apoptotic resistance by BH3 profiling and
drug response in vitro. A 60% decrease in MFN2 protein in DX cells
partially phenocopied the resistance profile of isogenic REL cells. The
degree of apoptotic resistance correlated with the extent of protein
knockdown for MFN2. Treatment of shMFN2 and shPACS2 DX cells with
ABT-737, a BH3 mimetic, or carboplatin, increased their IC50s
multiple-fold compared to control cells, paralleling their blunted
mitochondrial apoptotic response.

Conclusions: Our data implicate ER-mito contact sites as positive
regulators of apoptosis, whose disruption may be necessary for apoptotic
attenuation in therapy resistant cancer cells to enable apoptosis evasion
and survival. We present a potential mechanism for broad therapy
resistance arising under therapeutic stress that selects for reduced
communication of ER with mitochondria.


