Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes and in vitro exhausted
T-cell models to identify unique Immuno-Oncology targets.


In cancer, T cells are exposed to persistent antigen stimulation and/or
inflammatory signals. Such prolonged stimulation is often associated with
deterioration of T cell effector functions resulting in a functional
state termed ‘exhaustion’. Exhausted T cells are characterized by
expression of multiple inhibitory receptors, loss of cytolytic function
and decline in cytokine production capability. T cell exhaustion is
likely associated with inefficient control of tumor progression.
Identification of cell surface proteins involved in induction and
maintenance of the exhausted state could inform novel immunomodulatory
cancer therapies. To comprehensively investigate cell surface signature
of the exhausted state and identify potential immuno-oncology (I-O)
targets, we conducted in-depth expression profiling of membrane proteins
from intact tumors (Colorectal, Pancreatic, Lung, Breast and Prostate
cancer), different in vitro models of T cell exhaustion and primary
tumor-derived lymphocytes (Colorectal, Breast and Lung cancer) by
targeted proteomics for known cell type and activation markers. Using
proteomic expression analysis and statistical clustering analysis
methods, novel I-O targets were identified in both the in vitro models of
T cell exhaustion and primary tumor-derived lymphocytes (TILs). The
cancer specify of novel I-O targets was then interrogated using the
expression profiling of cell membrane proteins from intact tumors. Using
this approach we identified most known T cell inhibitory receptors (PD-1,
CTLA-4, BTLA, TIM-3, KIRs, LAG-3 and TMIGD2) and their described ligands
(B7-H1 to B7-H7). To generate more precise expression data to validate
I-O targets emerging from the above discovery approaches and their known
interacting partners we analyzed single tumors using an integrated
evaluation methodology. Tumors were subject to multiple parallel analysis
steps: (i) proteomic analysis of the tumor and TILs; (ii) TILs were
subject to flow cytometry analysis for specific proteins; (iii) tumor
tissue sections were subject to immuno-histochemical analysis for
specific proteins. The multiple analysis platforms were integrated by key
cell type and functional markers allowing the different types of
information provided by each technique to be placed in an overall 3-D
tumor context. We present one example of a potential I-O target
identified using our integrated proteomic discovery approach which is
further validated at the expression level using multiple whole tumor and
TIL analyses.


