Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SY-1365, a potent and selective CDK7 inhibitor, exhibits promising
anti-tumor activity in multiple preclinical models of aggressive solid
tumors.


CDK7 has recently emerged as an attractive target in cancer since its
inhibition decreases the transcript levels of oncogenic transcription
factors, especially those driven by super-enhancers (SEs). Cancers have
been hypothesized to be addicted to SE regulated genes and simultaneous
suppression of multiple SE associated genes through CDK7 inhibition might
represent a novel, powerful way to selectively kill cancer cells.
Previously, we reported that SY-1365, a highly selective covalent CDK7
inhibitor, induces apoptosis in leukemia cells, but not in non-malignant
cells, and demonstrates anti-tumor activity in in vivo models of
leukemia. In this study, we extend these findings to the identification
of multiple solid tumors that are susceptible to SY-1365 and compare the
effects of SY-1365 on gene expression to other gene control agents.
SY-1365 was screened in a panel of solid tumor cell lines, revealing
activity in breast, ovarian, colorectal and lung cancer cells with low nM
EC50 and rapid induction of apoptosis. In breast cancer, a subset of
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines were found to be more
sensitive than luminal breast cancer cell lines, so we extended our
studies to in vivo models and showed substantial tumor growth inhibition
in multiple patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of TNBC. Since other
compounds have been reported to modulate the expression of SE regulated
genes, we compared the transcriptional effects of SY-1365 treatment with
those of a pan-CDK inhibitor (flavopiridol), a CDK9 inhibitor (NVP2) and
a BRD4 inhibitor (JQ1) using microarray analysis. Applying principal
component analysis, we observed a unique transcriptional response
elicited by SY-1365 compared to the other inhibitors. NVP2 and
flavopiridol inhibited an overlapping and much larger gene set than
either JQ1 or SY-1365. Interestingly, SY-1365 treatment decreased the
expression of oncogenic transcription factors, cell cycle checkpoint
regulators and DNA damage response genes. The downregulation of
transcripts involved in apoptosis and DNA damage response by SY-1365
suggests that CDK7 inhibition might synergize with targeted agents that
affect these processes. Indeed, we observed that SY-1365 was synergistic
with the PARP inhibitor niraparib and the Bcl-2 inhibitor venetoclax in
triple negative breast cancer and AML cell lines, respectively. In
summary, we have identified TNBC, ovarian and small cell lung cancer cell
lines as highly sensitive to SY-1365 in vitro and have observed
substantial tumor growth inhibition in PDX models of TNBC. SY-1365
induced a distinct transcriptional response compared with other
transcriptional inhibitors, with apoptotic and DNA damage pathways being
central. Finally, these mechanism of action studies support a rationale
for investigating combinations of SY-1365 with inhibitors of PARP and
Bcl-2.


