Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relationship of DNA methylation to mutational changes and
transcriptional organization in fusion-positive and fusion-negative
rhabdomyosarcoma tumors.


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma of
childhood and comprises two major subtypes: fusion-positive (FP, most
commonly PAX3-FOXO1 [P3F] or PAX7-FOXO1 [P7F] resulting from 2;13 and
1;13 chromosomal translocations) and fusion-negative (FN). Our previous
study demonstrated that FP and FN RMS tumors exhibit distinct DNA
methylation profiles. To further examine the significance of DNA
methylation, we generated genome-wide DNA methylation profiles for a new
cohort of 48 RMS tumors for which we previously assessed mutation, copy
number and expression status. Investigation of the RMS subsets defined by
methylation clustering revealed a significant association of methylation
with P3F versus P7F fusion status in the FP subset, and an association of
methylation with RAS mutation status in the FN subset. Localization
studies of differentially methylated probes showed these probes were not
evenly distributed with respect to annotated genomic features. In
particular, hypomethylated probes were enriched in FP tumors in the
promoter region and in the intergenic region, whereas hypermethylated
probes were enriched in these regions in FN tumors. In contrast,
hypermethylated probes were enriched in FP tumors in the 3' UTR region
whereas hypomethylated probes were enriched in FN tumors in these
regions. In our new larger cohort of cases, there was a significant
difference in the distribution of P3F binding sites between genes with
and without differential methylation. Integrative analysis of P3F binding
sites, promoter methylation and gene expression demonstrated that genes
with P3F binding sites tended to be more highly expressed in FP tumors
(compared to FN tumors) than genes without P3F binding sites regardless
of promoter methylation status. Though promoter hypomethylation is most
highly associated with enhanced expression among genes with P3F binding
sites, the group of genes with P3F binding sites and promoter
hypomethylation is small in number compared to the much larger group of
genes with P3F binding sites but without promoter hypomethylation. In
conclusion, these results demonstrate the interaction of these epigenetic
changes with mutational alterations and transcriptional organization in
RMS tumors and provide a direction for future studies of these epigenetic
events.


