Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical characteristics and PD-L1 expression of pulmonary
sarcomatoid carcinoma.


Introduction: Pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma (PSC) is a poorly
differentiated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) containing a component
of spindle cell or giant cell. Because the prevalence of PSC is very
rare, there is insufficient data about clinical feature, therapeutic
strategy and prognosis.

Method: We reviewed the medical records of 26 patients diagnosed with PSC
from January 2009 to June 2015, and analyzed the clincopathological
characteristics, treatment modality and their outcome, and risk factors
of overall survival (OS). Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression
was tested in 13 patients by using archival tissues (PD-L1 IHC 22C3
pharmDx assay).

Results: The median age of PSC patients was 69.5 years. 23 patients were
male. 25 patients were current or former heavy smokers. Pleomorphic
carcinoma was the most common subtype, and epidermal growth receptor
mutation (EGFR) was positive in 2 of 11 patients who were tested. Among
13 patients tested for programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1), eight showed
PD-L1 high expression (tumor proportion score, TPS ≥ 50%). Four
patients showed low expression (1% ≤ TPS ≤ 49%), and one patient
showed no expression (TPS Results: The median age of PSC patients was
69.5 years. 23 patients were male. 25 patients were current or former
heavy smokers. Pleomorphic carcinoma was the most common subtype, and
epidermal growth receptor mutation (EGFR) was positive in 2 of 11
patients who were tested. Among 13 patients tested for programmed death
ligand 1 (PD-L1), eight showed PD-L1 high expression (tumor proportion
score, TPS ≥ 50%). Four patients showed low expression (1% ≤ TPS ≤
49%), and one patient showed no expression (TPS < 1%). The median OS of
all patients was 286 days. Age and the time from symptom onset to
diagnosis were significantly associated with OS. PD-L1 expression showed
the trend of positive prognostic value on OS in univariate analysis but
was insignificant in multivariate analysis. 12 patients were treated with
chemotherapy: 9 with platinum-based doublet therapy, 2 with tyrosine
kinase inhibitor and 1 with docetaxel. 7 patients showed partial response
or stable disease. The median OS and progression free survival of
patients receiving chemotherapy were 260 days and 85 days, respectively.

Conclusions: It has poor prognosis compared with ordinary NSCLC. However,
PSC patients showed comparatively fair response to chemotherapy and
generally showed higher PD-L1 expression. Active treatment with cytotoxic
chemotherapy, EGFR TKIs or immune checkpoint inhibitors are necessary to
achieve a better results of PSC management.


