Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Widespread protein interactome network rewiring in human cancer.


In the past decade, genome and exome sequencing projects have identified
thousands of genetic variants in patients across a large number of cancer
types. However, the explosion of genomic information has left many
fundamental questions regarding genotype-phenotype relationships
unresolved. One critical challenge is to distinguish causal disease
mutations from non-pathogenic polymorphisms. Even when causal mutations
are identified, the functional consequence of such mutations is often
elusive. Classical “one gene, one function, one disease” models can
not reconcile with the complexity that different mutations of the same
gene often lead to different phenotypes. The extent to which network
perturbations are involved in disease malfunction and how distinct
interaction perturbation patterns can distinguish cancer mutations are
largely unknown. Here we report a systematic approach to investigate
genetic variant-specific effects on molecular interactions at large scale
across diverse human cancers. Remarkably, in comparison to non-disease
polymorphisms, disease mutations are more likely to associate with
interaction perturbations. A large fraction of missense disease mutations
are found to cause protein interaction alterations. While some result in
loss of all their interactions, many exhibit selective elimination of
specific interactions (“edgetic”). Different mutations of the same
gene give rise to different interaction profiles, accounting for distinct
disease outcomes. Edgetic mutations perturb interactions through
disrupting specific interaction interfaces, and the perturbed partners
are more likely expressed in relevant disease tissue. Together, our
approach is insightful in prioritizing disease-causing variants, and
uncovering patient mutation-specific disease mechanisms at a base-pair
resolution, a critical step towards personalized precision medicine.
Furthermore, our results suggest distinct interaction perturbations as a
widespread mechanism underlying genetic heterogeneity, providing a
fundamental link between genotype and phenotype in cancer.


