Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detailed genomic characterization of CNL/aCML/MPN-U/CMML reveals
disease subgroups that may benefit from rationally-designed combination
therapies.


Purpose: Chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL), chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia (CMML), atypical chronic myeloid leukemia (aCML), and
unclassified myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN-U) are a group of
heterogeneous disorders belonging to rare entities of myeloproliferative
or myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative (MDS/MPN) syndromes. Due to lack of
specific molecular markers and the limited understanding of pathogenesis,
the treatment of these diseases remains empirical, resulting in poor
outcomes. Recently, recurrent mutations in ASXL1, TET2, SRSF2 and cell
signaling genes have been identified in these diseases. In this study we
aim to analyze the co-occurrence patterns of these gene mutations, as
well as the association of different mutations with disease subtypes and
treatment outcomes.

Methods and results: We performed whole exome sequence and RNA-Seq on
primary patient samples. Consistent with previous studies, high
frequencies of ASXL1, SRSF2, TET2, SETBP1 and signaling pathway mutations
were observed; whereas mutations of MPL, CEBPa, IDH1/2, and TP53 were
rare. Further variant allelic frequency analysis demonstrated that
mutations of the chromatin modifiers, epigenetic markers and splicing
factors are mostly present in the major clones indicating early
acquisition of these mutations. In addition, ASXL1/2, splicing factor and
signaling pathway mutations co-occur in around 45% of all patients with
these mutations, indicating that they drive these diseases in a
cooperative manner.

RNA-seq analysis demonstrated two major gene expression clusters with
high levels of either RAS or JAK-STAT signaling alterations respectively,
indicating a potential need for distinct therapeutic targeting of
specific subgroups of these diseases. In addition, we observed that 17%
of patients have more than one signaling pathway mutation, possibly in
distinct subclones, providing rationale for drug combination treatment.

Furthermore, we observed that mutations related to RAS signaling pathway
are prevalent in CMML; CSF3R and JAK2 mutations are enriched in CNL;
whereas, RAS and JAK-STAT pathway double mutations are more frequent in
aCML. Similar incidence of ASXL1, splicing factor and epidemics mutations
are observed across all these diseases.

Conclusions: CNL/aCML/MPN-U/CMML is a group of heterogeneous diseases
associated with chromatin modifier, epigenetic, splicing factor and
signaling pathway mutations in concomitant manner. We propose future
studies of rational drug combinations with agents, targeting epigenetic
and splicing factors, together with the appropriate signaling pathway
inhibitors. Our study represents a large-scale comprehensive genomic
analysis of these diseases, which reveals novel insight into patterns of
mutation co-occurrence which could translate into new treatment paradigms
for these difficult to treat hematologic malignancies.


