Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymorphisms in the arntl2 promoter affect breast cancer
metastasis susceptibility.


Breast cancer mortality is primarily due to metastatic lesions rather
than primary tumors, yet relatively little is known regarding the
mechanisms of metastatic breast cancer, making it difficult to identify
patients who are at risk for metastatic disease. Our hypothesis suggests
that inherited germline mutations contribute to metastatic disease and
that these single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) could be used to
predict outcome in breast cancer patients. To investigate the effect of
inherited SNPs on metastasis, we used a mouse genetics approach comparing
strains with high (FVB) and low (MOLF) metastatic phenotypes and
identified Arntl2, a circadian rhythm transcription factor, as a gene
whose differential expression predicted outcome in breast cancer
patients. To identify SNP differences in Arntl2 between MOLF and FVB, we
performed whole genome sequencing of MOLF and compared it to the FVB
genome. Overlapping the data with DNase hypersensitivity sites revealed
10 SNPs in the predicted promoter of Arntl2. To test the causative role
of the SNPs on Arntl2 expression in vivo, metastatic cell lines were
engineered using the CRISPR-Cas9 approach to specifically replace the FVB
Arntl2 promoter with that of MOLF. In agreement with our hypothesis,
substitution of the MOLF promoter reduced Arntl2 transcript levels and
subsequently decreased lung metastases in orthotopic implantation assays.
In vitro pulldown experiments with strain-specific promoter probes
revealed potential differential binding of chromatin modifier proteins,
demonstrating the significance of the SNPs in regulating Arntl2
transcription. Finally, analysis of SNPs associated with Arntl2
expression in a cohort of Chinese breast cancer patients revealed
significant correlation of Arntl2 expression with overall survival,
validating this gene as a marker in humans. Since Arntl2 is a
transcription factor, current studies are focused on identifying
Arntl2-regulated genes to investigate downstream pathways involved in
metastasis. This study has important implications regarding the role of
circadian rhythm in cancer progression and provides a potential mechanism
to explain the increased risk of breast cancers in nightshift workers.
Furthermore, this provides the first evidence that transcriptional
control elements can be engineered using CRISPR-Cas9 to establish the
causative role of SNPs in inherited susceptibility to cancer metastasis.


