Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear export of E2F7 in squamous cell carcinoma in an actionable
event that reverses resistance to anthracyclines.


Objectives and Background: Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the skin or
head and neck region is a major cause of cancer death in the western
world. Patient with advanced SCC have few therapeutic options and SCC
remains resistant to current treatments. Overcoming drug resistance in
SCC would significantly change patient outcomes and treatment strategies.
We previously showed that SCCs express the activating transcription
factor E2F1 and the inhibitory transcription factor E2F7, which are
mutually antagonistic. We showed that E2F1/7 controlled the sensitivity
to anthracyclines in SCC cells via E2F-dependent regulation of
sphingosine kinase 1 (Sphk1) and its product sphingosine-1-phosphate
(S1P). In addition, we showed that S1P treatment of cells induces
profound anthracycline resistance. However, it was consistently difficult
to reconcile the mutual overexpression of E2F1 and E2F7 with a seemingly
pro-E2F1 environment within the SCC cells (i.e. pro-proliferation,
differentiation-suppressive and pro-survival). In this study we have
examined the role of nuclear export pathways in determining nuclear E2F
activation in SCC.

Methods: We have interrogated human tissue microarrays of normal
stratified epithelia and SCC of the skin or head and neck tumours from
patient samples. To validate our in vivo findings we used a suite of SCC
cell lines and examine the nuclear and cytoplasmic localization of E2F1
and E2F7 by immunofluorescence and western blotting. We deployed
inhibitors of the Exportin 1 (XPO1) pathway and have used siRNA against
XPO1 to confirm a functional role of XPO1 in the nuclear export of E2F7.
We have used inhibitors of XPO1 in vitro and in vivo to examine their
ability to enhance the cytotoxic responses to anthracyclines.

Results & Conclusions: We report that E2F7 is selectively localized to
the cytoplasm of SCC cells and tumors but is exclusively nuclear in
normal cells and tissues. In contrast, E2F1 is almost exclusively
localized to the nucleus in normal and SCC cells and tissues. The
localization of E2F7 to the cytoplasm could be reversed using inhibitors
of the nuclear export protein XPO1 and siRNA against XPO1. XPO1-dependent
nuclear export of E2F7 shows that this pathway is selectively activated
in SCC. The inactivation of XPO1 is now possible using selinexor, a
Selective Inhibitor of Nuclear Export (SINE) compound currently in
advanced clinical trials to treat solid and hematological malignancies.
We show that treatment of SCC cells with selinexor reverses anthracycline
resistance. Significantly, we show that a combination of selinexor +
doxorubicin in vivo induces profound anticancer activity.

Significance: Our studies show that i) E2F7 is selectively mislocalized
in SCC, ii) E2F7 nuclear export is XPO1-dependent, iii) dysregulation of
XPO1 causes derepression of S1P-mediated anthracycline resistance and iv)
anthracycline resistance is reversed with inhibitors of XPO1 in vivo.


