Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Daytime blue-enriched LED light-induced circadian amplification of
the nighttime melatonin signal increases sorafenib sensitivity in human
hepatocellular carcinoma via enhanced suppression of the Warburg effect.


Over 36,000 people in the United States will be diagnosed with
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in 2016, the second leading cause of
cancer death worldwide. Metabolic pathways within the liver and in HCC
are highly regulated by the central circadian clock in the
suprachiastmatic nucleus (SCN). The SCN drives nighttime production of
the circadian anti-cancer hormone melatonin by the pineal gland in rats
and humans. We have shown that the nighttime circadian melatonin signal
suppresses the Warburg effect (aerobic glycolysis) in human breast cancer
xenografts and that blue-enriched light (460-480 nm) from LEDs at daytime
(bLAD), amplifies the nighttime circadian melatonin signal by 7-fold in
rats over cool white fluorescent (CWF) lighting. Here we tested whether
daytime exposure of tissue-isolated HepG2 xenograft-bearing male nude
rats to bLAD amplifies the nighttime melatonin signal to increase tumor
sensitivity to nighttime administered sorafenib (FDA-approved
multi-kinase inhibitor) treatment via enhancing suppression of the
Warburg effect. Animals were randomized to 6 subgroups (n = 4): CWF
Groups I, 12 h light:12 h dark (LD,12:12) (CWF + vehicle) and II (CWF +
sorafenib); bLAD Groups III (LD,12bLAD:12) (bLAD + vehicle), IV (bLAD +
sorafenib), V (bLAD + S20928 MT1/MT2 receptor blocker), and VI (bLAD +
S20928 + sorafenib). Drug treatments began when tumors were 2.5 g
estimated weight. Plasma nighttime melatonin levels were 7-fold higher in
Groups III-VI, compared to Groups I and II. Tumor latency-to-onset of
growth and growth rates were markedly delayed and decreased,
respectively, in Group III compared to Group I. Sorafenib induced tumor
regression at a rate that was 2-fold higher in the bLAD- vs CWF-exposed
rats. Tumor glucose uptake and lactate production (Warburg effect) at the
mid-dark phase were significantly reduced in CWF-exposed rats receiving
sorafenib vs vehicle. In vehicle-treated bLAD-exposed rats, the Warburg
effect was significantly decreased vs CWF-exposed rats receiving vehicle.
In bLAD + sorafenib-treated rats, the Warburg effect was reduced by an
additional 51% (glucose uptake) and 89% (lactate production),
respectively, vs CWF + sorafenib-treated rats. Melatonin receptor blocker
S20928 completely prevented the effects of bLAD and bLAD + sorafenib on
the Warburg effect and made these tumors completely resistant to
sorafenib-induced tumor regression. These findings are the first to show
in vivo that: 1) nighttime circadian sorafenib therapy inhibited the
Warburg effect and induced HepG2 tumor regression under CWF lighting
conditions, and 2) the bLAD-amplified nocturnal circadian melatonin
signal increased tumor sensitivity to sorafenib-induced regression by
enhancing a melatonin receptor-mediated suppression of the Warburg effect.


