Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sustained and controlled in vivo therapeutic levels of drug
payloads in tumors using two separate drug combination platforms:
Antibody nanoparticle-drug conjugates and multi-drug nanoparticle-drug
conjugates, with the potential for improved drug combinability and
anticancer effects.


Our nanoparticle-drug conjugates (NDCs), created at Cerulean Pharma Inc.
by conjugating drug payloads to our novel β-cyclodextrin-PEG (CDP)
copolymer, are designed to significantly mitigate a payload’s
limitations by providing sustained drug delivery to the tumor and
superior therapeutic index through controlled release kinetics. Cerulean
has two NDCs in the clinic, CRLX101 and CRLX301, evidencing the
translatability of our technology. CRLX101 has been dosed in over 400
patients and CRLX301 is in ongoing Phase 2a development. A key and
differentiating feature of our NDC Platform is our linker technology,
which is tailored for an optimal fit with the conjugation functionality
of the API drug payloads (e.g., alcohol, carboxylic acid, amine, amide
and urea functionality) and customizable to achieve desired drug release
profiles. As an illustration of Cerulean’s ability to expand its NDC
platform, we will present the biological and pharmacokinetic (PK) data
supporting our drug combination platform of antibody nanoparticle-drug
conjugates (ANDCs) and multi-drug nanoparticle-drug conjugates (mNDCs).
ANDCs combine potentially any NDC with any conjugatable biologic to
generate an ANDC with ultra-high drug-antibody ratios (DARs). Using our
established NDC linker technology, we generated Herceptin-camptothecin
ANDCs with DARs as high as 500, orders of magnitude higher than ADCs, and
no more than 5-fold loss in binding (greater than 90% binding up to 300
DAR) compared to native Herceptin in our solution-based HER2 antigen
binding assay. In addition, we provide evidence experimentally that
rhodamine-labeled ANDCs penetrate and internalize in HER2+ tumor cells.
The ANDCs demonstrate tunable in vitro release kinetics and long in vivo
half lives in mouse PK studies, including sustained levels of released
drug in tumors (greater than 300h) using an ANDC (average DAR 201)
delivering an 8 mg/kg camptothecin dose. The observed mouse MTD for the
ANDC was at least 3x higher than that of the corresponding NDC. The mNDCs
take advantage of our existing NDC linker platform technology to
conjugate diverse drug combos including DNA damaging agents (DDA) + DNA
damage repair agents (DDR). We generated our POC camptothecin-olaparib
mNDCs spanning a range of drug combination ratios (from 1:1 to 1:20) and
all demonstrated distinguishable and tunable in vitro release rates. PK
study of a 1:1 camptothecin-olaparib mNDC (~8mg/kg each drug)
demonstrated very low clearance and sustained levels of released drug in
tumor (greater than 72h). Our drug combination platforms, ANDCs and
mNDCs, allow delivery of therapeutic agents to their respective
biological targets at clinically-relevant doses, greatly increasing the
diversity of drug combination possibilities.


