Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MTA-mediated inhibition of human T cells: Mechanism and MTAP
overexpression as putative overcoming strategy.


Metabolic changes of malignant cells lead to the secretion of tumor
metabolites which contribute to the shaping of a favorable milieu for
tumor immune escape facilitating cancer development and resistance to
anti-tumor immunotherapy. Recently, disrupted methylthioadenosine
metabolism drew interest as further putative immunoinhibitory metabolic
dysregulation. A broad spectrum of tumor entities was reported to lack
methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) expression leading to elevated
levels of its substrate 5’-deoxy-5’-methylthioadenosine (MTA). MTAP
deficiency is reported to correlate with worse response to adjuvant
interferon-alpha therapy and a higher risk for metastatic disease in
malignant melanoma providing evidence for immunobiological relevance. We
therefore examined the effect of the tumor metabolite MTA on human T cell
responses. We could show that MTA has a strong inhibitory impact on human
T cell function regarding proliferation, viability, activation,
differentiation, tumor antigen-specific expansion and cytotoxicity. We
therefore aimed to overexpress MTAP in human T cells by retroviral
transduction as a putative strategy to overcome MTA-mediated inhibition
of T cells. In addition, we investigated the effect of MTA on T cell
metabolism and maturation of human monocyte derived mDC. We successfully
generated stable MTAP-overexpressing primary human T cells. First studies
were performed to examine the resistance to MTA after equipping the T
cells with higher levels of its metabolizing enzyme MTAP. MTAPhigh T
cells revealed less sensitivity against inhibitory effects of MTA on
proliferation, viability or cytotoxicity compared to mock transduced
controls suggesting a promising approach to strengthen the performance of
T cells facing the MTA-rich milieu of MTAP-deficient tumors.
Mechanistically, we found MTA to interfere with several signaling
pathways. Of most importance, MTA impaired Akt phosphorylation as well as
intracellular protein methylation, both crucial processes for proper T
cell function. In addition, we studied the combined effect of MTA and
PRMT5 inhibition on T cells. Several metabolic studies focusing on
glycolysis and fatty acid metabolism could confirm our findings that MTA
keeps T cells in a rather inactive, naïve state. Finally, we found MTA
to interfere with DC maturation and their potential to induce cytokine
secretion of T cells. Our data emphasizes the crucial role of tumor
metabolites such as MTA in the tumor milieu for tumor immune escape.
Additionally, the identification of potential molecular mechanisms of
MTA-induced immunosuppression offer the opportunity to pharmacologically
tackle MTA-mediated immunoinhibition and will help to develop more
effective immune-based therapies against MTAP-deficient tumors.


