Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mithramycin induces the antiproliferative activity of
chemotherapeutic agents in Ewing sarcoma cells.


Ewing sarcoma (ES) is one of the most frequent primary bone and soft
tissue tumors that occur in pediatric and adolescent population. ES is
often diagnosed after the disease has already metastasized. With
available treatment options, the prognosis of metastatic ES patients is
poor and the 5-year survival rate is less than 20%. Therefore,
identifying precise targeted therapies to induce therapeutic response in
ES patients is urgently needed. An oncogenic fusion protein and
transcription factor EWS-FLI1 is associated with more than 85% of ES
tumors. Mithramycin has been identified as an effective agent to target
EWS-FLI1 and is currently in clinical trials. In this study, we
investigated the efficacy of Mithramycin to induce the anti-proliferative
activity of chemotherapeutic agents commonly used for the treatment of
this malignancy using human ES cell lines. TC71, TC32, CHLA32, CHLA10 and
TC205 cells were treated with increasing concentrations of Mithramycin or
Vincristine or Doxorubicin or Etoposide. Cell growth inhibition was
evaluated at 24 and 48 h post-treatment using CellTiter Glo kit. Results
showed a dose/time-dependent anti-proliferative effect for all agents. To
confirm the effect of Mithramycin on selected cell lines, mRNA expression
of downstream targets of EWS-FLI1 (ID2, LDB2, NROB1 and RCOR1 genes) was
determined by quantitative PCR following treatment with Mithramycin.
Mithramycin significantly down-regulated all tested genes and these
results are in agreement with published work. In order to determine the
combination response, cell growth inhibition of the chemotherapeutic
drugs was assessed in the presence of added Mithramycin. The combination
Index was evaluated by Chou-Talalay method. Further studies were
performed for the combination of Mithramycin and Vincristine to
investigate its effect on apoptosis and cell cycle arrest using CHLA10
and TC205 cells. Apoptotic markers such as the expression of cleaved Poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (c-PARP) and survivin were determined by Western
blot analysis. The apoptotic cell population was measured by Annexin-V
staining using flow cytometry. When compared to individual agents, the
combination of Mithramycin and Vincristine showed greater effect on
apoptosis in both cell lines as evinced by an increase in Annexin-V
positive cells, decrease in survivin expression and up-regulation of
c-PARP. Overall, these results indicate the potential clinical advantage
of combination treatment involving Mithramycin along with other
chemotherapeutic agents for inhibiting the growth of ES cells. Molecular
profiling analysis is underway to elucidate the candidate pathways
associated with beneficial effect of this combination treatment.


