Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TERT promoter mutations in primary papillary thyroid carcinomas
and matched local / distant metastases.


TERT promoter (TERTp) mutations represent a common oncogenic event in
sporadic thyroid follicular cell carcinogenesis. Though TERTp mutations
have been statistically associated with aggressiveness and metastatic
spreading, their involvement in lymph node metastases (LNMs) and / or
distant metastases (DMs) development among papillary thyroid carcinoma
(PTC) patients remains to be defined. To evaluate the role of TERTp
mutations on metastatic tumor expansion, primary tumors (Pt) and matched
LNMs and/or DMs were genotyped by means of PCR-direct sequencing in a
cohort of 33 patients diagnosed of PTC, which had been previously
analyzed for BRAF and RAS mutations. Focal changes in the growth pattern
or microscopic grade within the Pt or the metastases were separately
genotyped to determine the clonal/subclonal nature of TERTp mutations,
their association with particular histological variants of PTC or their
presence in intra-tumoral PDC-like foci. Results were correlated with
clinico-pathological parameters of pour outcome and survival. The
analysis of 99 tumor samples obtained from 33 PTC cases revealed that
TERTp mutations were quite common (42.4%).The mutation C228T was much
more common than the C250T (78,6% vs 21,4%). TERTp mutations did not
correlate with specific PTC subtypes [CL-PTC, FV-PTC or Mixed-PTC] and
were subclonal in half of the cases. The mutations segregated to LNMs in
73% of cases [100% CL-PTC and FV-PTC; 57% Mixed PTC]. In 2 Mixed-PTC
cases the mutation seemingly originated the novo in the LNM. TERTp
mutations were present in all samples of DM. While 71% of the cases
mutated at TERTp bore the BRAFV600E mutation, the coexistence of TERTp
and RAS mutations was exceptional. TERTp mutations were found to be
significantly correlated with age ≥ 45 years old, high grade poorly
differentiated PTC foci or nesting-PDC-like foci, stage at diagnosis or
at last follow-up and patient status. A trend of correlation with male
sex, vascular invasion, tumor recurrence and development of LNM during
the follow-up was also seen. Tumor multifocality was inversely correlated
with TERTp mutations. The coexistence of TERTp and BRAFV600E mutants did
not increase the prognostic power of TERTp mutations alone. All of the
patients who died of disease displayed TERTp mutations. Kaplan-Meier
analysis revealed that patients with PTC bearing TERTp mutations had a
poor prognosis showing a higher tumor recurrence probability [p= 0.0085]
and a reduced disease specific survival [pTERT promoter (TERTp) mutations
represent a common oncogenic event in sporadic thyroid follicular cell
carcinogenesis. Though TERTp mutations have been statistically associated
with aggressiveness and metastatic spreading, their involvement in lymph
node metastases (LNMs) and / or distant metastases (DMs) development
among papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) patients remains to be defined.
To evaluate the role of TERTp mutations on metastatic tumor expansion,
primary tumors (Pt) and matched LNMs and/or DMs were genotyped by means
of PCR-direct sequencing in a cohort of 33 patients diagnosed of PTC,
which had been previously analyzed for BRAF and RAS mutations. Focal
changes in the growth pattern or microscopic grade within the Pt or the
metastases were separately genotyped to determine the clonal/subclonal
nature of TERTp mutations, their association with particular histological
variants of PTC or their presence in intra-tumoral PDC-like foci. Results
were correlated with clinico-pathological parameters of pour outcome and
survival. The analysis of 99 tumor samples obtained from 33 PTC cases
revealed that TERTp mutations were quite common (42.4%).The mutation
C228T was much more common than the C250T (78,6% vs 21,4%). TERTp
mutations did not correlate with specific PTC subtypes [CL-PTC, FV-PTC or
Mixed-PTC] and were subclonal in half of the cases. The mutations
segregated to LNMs in 73% of cases [100% CL-PTC and FV-PTC; 57% Mixed
PTC]. In 2 Mixed-PTC cases the mutation seemingly originated the novo in
the LNM. TERTp mutations were present in all samples of DM. While 71% of
the cases mutated at TERTp bore the BRAFV600E mutation, the coexistence
of TERTp and RAS mutations was exceptional. TERTp mutations were found to
be significantly correlated with age ≥ 45 years old, high grade poorly
differentiated PTC foci or nesting-PDC-like foci, stage at diagnosis or
at last follow-up and patient status. A trend of correlation with male
sex, vascular invasion, tumor recurrence and development of LNM during
the follow-up was also seen. Tumor multifocality was inversely correlated
with TERTp mutations. The coexistence of TERTp and BRAFV600E mutants did
not increase the prognostic power of TERTp mutations alone. All of the
patients who died of disease displayed TERTp mutations. Kaplan-Meier
analysis revealed that patients with PTC bearing TERTp mutations had a
poor prognosis showing a higher tumor recurrence probability [p= 0.0085]
and a reduced disease specific survival [p<0.0001]. The coexistence of
other mutations did not significantly increase the risk of recurrence or
dying of disease. The study indicates that TERTp mutations: 1) are common
in metastatic PTC; 2) are subclonal in half of the cases; 3) spread in
most cases with metastatic cells to LNM and DM but do not drive the
development of LNM; 4) identify PTCs patients with increased risk of
recurrence and mortality; 5) represent “per se” a biomarker for poor
outcome among PTCs


