Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The immunomodulatory anticancer agent RRx-001 induces a
vaccine-like interferon response through epigenetic induction of viral
mimicry.


RRx-001, sourced from the aerospace industry and currently in phase II
clinical trials, is a novel anti-cancer agent that mediates
immunomodulatory effects, either directly through polarization of tumor
associated macrophages or indirectly through vascular normalization and
increased T-lymphocyte infiltration. With multiple additional mechanisms
of action including upregulation of oxidative stress, depletion of GSH
and NADPH, anti-angiogenesis and epigenetic modulation, RRx-001 is being
studied as a single chemotherapeutic agent to resensitize tumors to prior
therapy and to prime tumors to respond to radiation, chemotherapy and
immunotherapy in combination therapy studies. In this study, we
identified another mechanism, viral mimicry, which refers to the
‘unsilencing’ of epigenetically repressed viral genes present in the
tumor that provokes an immune response and may contribute to the
anti-cancer activity of RRx-001. Specifically, RRx-001 inhibited the
growth of human colon cancer cells (HCT 116) and decreased levels of the
DNA methyltransferases Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a in a time and dose-dependent
manner. Treatment of HCT 116 cells with 0.5 μM RRx-001 for 24 hours
significantly increased transcripts of interferon (IFN)-responsive genes
and this induction was sustained for up to 4 weeks after transient
exposure to RRx-001. ELISA assays showed that RRx-001 increased secretion
of type I and III IFNs by HCT 116 cells, and these IFNs were confirmed to
be bioactive. Transcription of endogenous retroviruses was induced by
RRx-001 through demethylation of the promoter of endogenous retrovirus
genes as determined by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction and
combined bisulfite restriction analysis. Immunofluorescence staining with
J2 antibody confirmed induction of double-stranded RNA. In conclusion,
transient exposure of HCT 116 cells to low-dose RRx-001 induced
transcription of silenced retroviral genes present in the cancer cell DNA
with subsequent synthesis of IFN in response to this
“pseudo-pathogenic” stimulus, mimicking an antiviral defense.
RRx-001-mediated IFN induction may have the potential to improve the
efficacy of immunotherapies as well as radiotherapy, standard
chemotherapies and molecularly targeted agents when used in combination.


