Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated level of estrogen enhances chemotherapeutic efficacy
potentially through epigenetic mechanism in human breast cancer cells.


Effectiveness of chemotherapy depends on the age of breast cancer
patients. Breast tissues are estrogen sensitive and the levels of ovarian
estrogen are age-dependent variable among the breast cancer patients.
Whether this variation in estrogen levels influences the chemotherapeutic
efficacy in breast cancer patients is unclear. Therefore, the objective
of this study was to determine the effects of natural estrogen 17
beta-estradiol on the efficacy of chemotherapy in breast cancer cells.
Estrogen responsive MCF-7 breast cancer cells were long-term exposed to
100 pg/ml estrogen for three months. Using these estrogen exposed MCF-7
cells, the efficacy of chemotherapeutic drugs doxorubicin and cisplatin
were determined. The result of cell viability and cell cycle analysis
revealed increased efficacy of doxorubicin and cisplatin in
estrogen-exposed MCF-7 cells as compared to control MCF-7 cells. Gene
expression analysis of marker genes for cell cycle, anti-apoptosis, DNA
repair, and drug transporter genes further confirmed the increased
efficacy of chemotherapeutic drugs in estrogen-exposed cells at molecular
level. To further understand the role of epigenetic mechanism in enhanced
chemotherapeutic efficacy by estrogen, cells were pre-treated with
epigenetic drugs, 5-Aza-2-deoxycytidine and Trichostatin A before
doxorubicin and cisplatin treatments. The enhanced efficacy of
doxorubicin and cisplatin in estrogen-treated cells was significantly
decreased by 5-aza-2 deoxycytidine pre-treatment, suggesting the role of
estrogen-induced hypermethylation in enhanced sensitivity of these drugs
in estrogen-exposed cells. In conclusion, results of this study
demonstrate that sensitivity to chemotherapy depends on the levels of
estrogen in breast cancer cells. Findings of this study will have
clinical implications in selecting the type and dose of chemotherapy in
breast cancer patients depending on the serum estrogen levels that varies
in between pre- and post-menopausal age of the patients.


