Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-resolution 1H human plasma profiling of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma.


Early detection of pancreatic ductal carcinoma (PDAC) is critically
important because by the time PDAC is detected almost 80% of patients are
surgically unresectable1. While imaging with CT, MRI and ultrasound is
making significant inroads in PDAC detection, the costs associated with
imaging impose a barrier for routine screening. Plasma based detection of
PDAC would provide a relatively inexpensive and easy method for routine
screening for the purpose of early detection. Metabolic profiling of
plasma samples using high resolution 1H MRS provides an opportunity to
assist in the detection of PDAC. Here we characterized the plasma
metabolome of normal subjects, subjects with benign pancreatic disease,
and subjects with PDAC to evaluate the ability of 1H MRS to identify
metabolic changes in plasma associated with PDAC.

Plasma from patients with PDAC (n=4), patients with benign pancreatic
disease (n=2) and from healthy control subjects (n=4) were included in
this study. Final diagnosis was established by histopathological
evaluation of surgical specimens. Three hundred micro liter of D2O
phosphate buffer saline (NaCl 0.9% in 90% D2O) was mixed with 300 μL of
plasma and transferred to 5 mm NMR tubes. High-resolution 1H MRS was
performed on an Avance 750 MHz Bruker MR spectrometer. The
Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill (CPMG) pulse sequence with water suppression
[PRESET-90°-(d-180-d)n-Aq] was performed to remove short T2 components
arising due to the presence of macromolecules2.

The metabolites were identified and quantified from 1H MRS spectra from
the three groups. Even with a small sample size clear differences were
identified in metabolites such as lactate, pyruvate, β-hydroxybutyrate,
acetate and acetoacetate in plasma from PDAC subjects compared to normal
subjects. The increase of lactate and pyruvate detected in plasma may
reflect altered glucose metabolism occurring in PDAC. β-hydroxybutyrate,
acetate and acetoacetate are involved in ketone body synthesis and may
reflect altered ketone body metabolism occurring in PDAC.

In a recent study, higher levels of ketone bodies and lactate were
detected in the serum of rats with 7,12-dimethylben(a)anthracen
(DMBA)-induced pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) compared to
plasma. Interestingly, with progression to PDAC several of these
metabolites decreased3. Our data support further investigation of 1H MRS
of human plasma to detect PDAC in combination with techniques such as
circulating tumor cell phenotyping

References:

(1) Kotteas, E., et al. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 2016, 142, 1795-1805.

(2) Van, Q. N., et al. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003, 301, 952-959.

(3) Lin, X., et al. Mol Biosyst 2016, 12, 2883-2892.

This work was supported by NIH R01 CA193365.


