Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting β-catenin/CBP signaling in OSCC.


Objectives: Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is an aggressive
malignancy characterized by molecular heterogeneity and locoregional
spread associated with high morbidity. Aggressive cancers are thought to
arise from populations of cancer initiating cells (CICs) that exhibit the
properties of stem cells and drive tumor development, recurrence and
resistance to therapy. The transcriptional regulator, β-catenin, has
been implicated in OSCC CICs. Nuclear β-catenin has been shown to
recruit the chromatin remodeling CREB binding protein (CBP) to drive
expression of proliferation and survival genes, as well as genes that
maintain stem-like phenotypes. We hypothesized that targeting
β-catenin-CBP interaction will inhibit CICs in oral tumors and restore
an epithelial phenotype.

Methods: To test tumor aggressive potential of OSCC CICs, we used
zebrafish as a model system. We isolated CD44+CD24hiCD29hi cells fom
aggressive HSC-3 OSCC cells by FACS and assayed their ability to drive
tumor growth and metastases in zebrafish compared to unsorted and
CD44+CD24lowCD29low cells. In addition, we examined the role of the
β-catenin/CBP axis in the aggressive phenotype of these cells. We also
assessed whether the β-catenin/CBP axis affected CICs in tumors from
immune competent HPV+ mice.

Results: Zebrafish injected with subpopulation of cells co-expressing
CD44+CD24hiCD2hi primitive cell surface markers drove rapid tumor growth
and metastases, followed by unsorted and sorted CD44+CD24lowCD29low.
Treatment of CD44+CD24hiCD29hi cells with a small molecule inhibitor of
the β-catenin-CBP interaction, ICG-001, interfered with tumor growth and
metastases in zebrafish. Further, ICG-001 inhibited tumor growth in
immunocompetent HPV+ murine model. On a cellular level, ICG-001 promoted
membrane localization of β-catenin, enhanced E-cadherin adhesion and
restored epithelial phenotype. Significantly, ICG-001 gene signatures
tracked with reduced overall patient survival in the cancer genome atlas,
TCGA. Conclusion: Our studies indicate that the β-catenin/CBP axis
promotes OSCC CICs and that ICG-001 may be an effective therapeutic agent
for this malignancy.

Support: Evans Center for Interdisciplinary Biomedical Research ARC
funding AU 5303015 8000000.


