Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytochrome P450 enzyme activity is enhanced in hepatocytes grown
using a perfused 3D cell culture drug screening system.


A critical requirement for assessing drug toxicity in vitro is cytochrome
P450 (CYP) function that is physiologically representative. Due to low
levels of CYP enzyme activity, cell lines such as HepG2 hepatocytes have
largely been supplanted with primary cells derived from human donor
tissue. While these cells retain CYP activity ex vivo, drug screening is
limited to short-term assessments due to de-differentiation. This limits
their efficacy in testing slow-clearing, large-molecule compounds such as
antibody-based therapies and low-turnover drugs. Cell lines in monolayer
cultures have been effective in assessing the safety of small molecule
drugs, but the disparity between cell lines and in vivo tissue biology
proves too substantial for current potential therapies. Three-dimensional
(3D) cultures have been shown to be more physiologically relevant models
of in vivo tissue. However, even they fail to fully mimic living tissue
and suffer from the lack of active oxygen and nutrient transport. Lena
Biosciences has developed a groundbreaking in vitro system that
facilitates long-term survival of 3D cultures. Cells seeded in 3D
hydrogels supported by a rigid scaffold are maintained in statistically
independent wells in their own medium which floats atop a high-density
blood-substitute in which medium is immiscible. Infusion and withdrawal
of this blood-substitute introduces perfusion into a medium-throughput
multiwell system without the need for separate pumps for each culture
condition.

Internal validation experiments using hepatocytes cultured in a 12-well
system showed a two-fold improvement in cellular respiration (measured by
alamarBlue assay) over cultures maintained in a standard multiwell plate
when the blood-substitute was introduced, and a three-fold improvement
when the cultures were perfused. Cell viability (measured by LDH release)
was significantly improved when perfusion was introduced. CYP activity
(assessed using both fluorescent and luminescent substrate-based assays)
was also significantly higher in the perfused hepatocyte cultures. These
data demonstrate the substantial advantages to growing cells in this
novel perfused cell culture model. Scaling the system to include multiple
cell types (primary or cell lines), would allow for simultaneous testing
of target and off-target effects of potential small or large molecule
therapies. Thus, this system serves as a major improvement over the
current organ-on-a-chip solutions in the area of drug safety testing.


