Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation accurately predicts age of cancer onset in patients
with Li Fraumeni Syndrome.


Introduction: Li Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a rare hereditary genetic
cancer predisposition syndrome. Germline mutations of the TP53 tumor
suppressor gene are the underlying cause in >80% of patients with LFS,
and are associated with an increased risk of second tumors and a spectrum
of early onset cancers, even in the absence of a family history of
cancer. We have previously developed and implemented a comprehensive
life-long clinical surveillance protocol for individuals with a germline
TP53 mutation. We set out to make this screening process more targeted by
building a predictive model of age of onset. We accomplished this goal by
implementing machine learning methods on germline methylation data.

Methods: We made use of the Toronto Hospital for Sick Children (SickKids)
LFS family cohort in our predictive model of age of onset. In all, we
have 74 patients with germline methylation data, consisting of ~450,000
probe sites. We subset this data by identifying probes that fall into
differentially methylated regions between LFS and cancer patients with
wild-type TP53. The probes identified in these regions were used in our
predictive model of age of onset. Because age of sample collection was
highly correlated with age of onset (r2 ~ .90), we corrected for
confounding using a strategy that is two-fold: (1) we extracted the
variation of each probe that is independent of the age of sample
collection (the residual after regressing on the age of sample
collection) and use these as predictors in our model, and (2) we test our
models on the task of predicting the age of sample collection for LFS
patients that do not have cancer. The former provided us with more robust
predictions while the latter verified that we are in fact predicting age
of onset, rather than simply predicting age at which the sample was
collected.

Results: Our machine learning model was able to achieve 86% correlation
between true and predicted values of the age of onset. Additionally, we
have tested the ability of our models to predict whether an individual
will be diagnosed before or after the age of 4. Our classification
machine learning model achieved 91% accuracy on average. We verified that
our model does not simply predict age of sample collection by using our
cohort of LFS patients that do not have cancer (n = 37). The distribution
of the age of sample collection matched those of the patients used in our
model. The model has no predictive power on the age of sample collection,
thus confirming that our model is highly predictive of the age of cancer
onset in LFS TP53 Mutation patients.

Conclusions: We identified two predictive models for age of cancer onset
in LFS patients that achieve high accuracy, both when predicting the age
of onset as a continuous variable (86% correlation) and whether cancer
onset will occur before or after the age of 4 (91% accuracy). Our model
will assist clinicians in targeting high risk patients for screening,
lower the cost of treatment, and raise the likelihood of survival among
LFS patients.


