Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The small molecule cathepsin L and K inhibitor KGP-94 impairs the
metastatic phenotype of osteosarcoma cells.


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary malignant bone cancer and
primarily affects adolescents between the ages 10-20 years old. Today, OS
remains the second leading cause of cancer-related death for patients in
this age group. With current therapy, the 5-year survival for patients
with clinically metastatic disease has remained unchanged at 20% since
the early 1970s. There is a significant need for novel therapies that
will increase overall survival for patients with metastatic OS.

Proteases secreted within the tumor microenvironment enable primary tumor
development and potentiate the ability of OS cells to metastasize.
Typically, cysteine proteases under normal physiologic conditions
function primarily within the lysosome to facilitate protein cell
turnover. During tumorigenesis, Cathepsin L (CTSL) is secreted into the
tumor environment by the tumor. CTSL secretion potentiates metastasis
through its regulation of cell motility, extracellular matrix
degradation, angiogenesis, and bone remodeling. Cathepsin K (CTSK) is
overexpressed in OS and is secreted during bone remodeling by osteoclast
to degrade the bone matrix. The bone environment is hypoxic which induces
proteomic changes that enable OS cells to survive in a nutrient deprived
environment and increase CTSL/CTSK secretion by the tumor cells.

The goal of these studies was to determine if CTSL/CTSK inhibition via
KPG-94 (3-bromophenyl-3-hydroxyphenyl-ketone thiosemicarbazone) could
decrease the metastatic phenotype of human osteosarcoma cells under
normoxic and hypoxic conditions. The Hu09 cell line has been
characterized as an osteoblastic cell line with the potential to grow
orthotopically in vivo. Hu09 and its metastatic sublines Hu09-L6 and
Hu09-M112 have been characterized to low and high metastatic capacity,
respectively. Treatment with KGP-94 at 10 and 25 uM effectively decreases
cell motility and invasion of Hu09 and its metastatic sublines under
normoxic and hypoxic conditions.

Our results demonstrate that dual CTSL/CTSK inhibition is effective at
decreasing two signature methods of measuring metastasis: 1) cell
motility and 2) invasiveness. Targeting CTSL/CTSK may provide a novel
therapeutic approach for patients with metastatic OS.


