Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UPR signaling promotes T-cell dysfunction to prevent
immune-mediated cancer cell killing and immune checkpoint therapy
resistance.


A critical point in cancer progression is evading recognition by the
immune system. Cancer cells accomplish this by stimulating immune
checkpoint signals on effector T-cells. In patients with advanced
melanoma treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors, 3-year survival
increased by 20%. While immune checkpoint therapies are the new first
treatment option for advanced melanoma in over a decade, their efficacy
is limited because resistance often develops. Understanding the molecular
mechanisms of immune checkpoint inhibitor resistance is critical to
develop combinatorial drug therapy to potentiate therapeutic
responsiveness. The unfolded protein response (UPR) is an endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress pathway activated when unfolded/misfolded proteins
accumulate within the ER. Highly secretory cell types, such as T-cells,
have larger ER cell compartments and elevated UPR components to deal with
the increased protein synthesis/folding required by these cell types.
Therefore, these cell types may be highly sensitive to ER stress. Our
data demonstrates elevated UPR signaling components as a driver of T-cell
exhaustion/dysfunction. Using a previously established T-cell exhaustion
protocol, we stimulated naïve T-cells with antibodies to CD3/CD28 for 5
days and co-cultured them with MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, Mun2b
melanoma cell line, or CMI patient-derived melanoma cell line. Exhausted
T-cells displayed an increased PD-1 and PERK expression, suggesting that
UPR signaling is activated during T-cell exhaustion. Treatment of naïve
T-cells with DTT, a chemical agent that stimulates ER stress, also
induced PD-1 and PERK compared with vehicle-treated T-cells. Gene
expression analysis of T-cells indicate that co-culture with cancer
cells, not CD3/CD28 activation, elevates T-cell UPR gene expression.
Furthermore, induction of ER stress through low-dose DTT treatment
decreased cytotoxic T-cell mediated cancer cell death, further supporting
our hypothesis of ER stress inducing T-cell exhaustion. Inhibition of
PERK by RNAi in TALL-104, a human cytotoxic T-cell line, enhanced T-cell
mediated cancer cell clearance when exposed to ER stress-inducing agents,
suggesting that PERK may represent a novel target to prevent T-cell
exhaustion or restore T-cell effector capabilities. PERK inhibition in
the patient-derived melanoma cells did not negatively affect
T-cell-mediated killing, suggesting that systemic PERK inhibition may be
an effective therapeutic strategy to enhance anti-tumor immune responses.
Matched PBMC from melanoma patients before treatment or after ipilimumab
therapy resistance indicated increased UPR signaling components in PBMC
samples from patients after ipilimumab resistance when compared with PBMC
samples before therapy, supporting a novel role UPR signaling in
anti-CTLA4 therapy resistance.


