Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HDAC inhibitor Entinostat disrupts function of PMN-MDSC.


Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), consisting of subpopulations of
polymorphonuclear (PMN; CD11b+Ly6G+Ly6Clo) and monocytic (M;
CD11b+Ly6G-Ly6Chi) MDSCs play a major role as immune suppressors in
cancer. MDSC-targeted therapy has not been developed yet. Histone
deacetylases (HDAC) are critically involved in epigenetic regulation of
multiple genes and may regulate MDSC number and function. The purpose of
this study was to evaluate the effect of the class I HDAC inhibitor,
entinostat on differentiation and function of MDSCs in mouse tumor models
of lung cancer (Lewis Lung Carcinoma, LLC) and colon cancer (CT26).

LLC and CT26 tumor-bearing mice were treated with entinostat (10 mg/kg,
p.o. daily for two weeks). Entinostat caused significant increase in the
presence of CD45+ CD11b+ myeloid cells in bone marrow, spleen and tumors.
This increase was largely due to accumulation of Ly6ClowLy6G+ PMN.
Unexpectedly, this was associated with a small decrease in the presence
of common myeloid progenitor (CMP) and granulocyte-macrophage progenitor
(GMP) cells in bone marrow. This suggests that entinostat affects
differentiation of PMN downstream of GMP. Experiments in vitro
demonstrated that entinostat increased differentiation of enriched
hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPC) to PMN in the presence of tumor
explant supernatant (TES), which supported the in vivo result. To assess
the effect of entinostat on the function of PMN-MDSCs, Ly6G+ cells were
purified from spleen and tumor of LLC tumor-bearing mice treated with
entinostat or vehicle alone and tested for their ability to suppress
antigen-specific T cell. As expected Ly6G+ PMN-MDSC from tumor-bearing
mice treated with vehicle alone had strong suppressive activity. In
contrast, Ly6G+ cells from spleen and tumor of entinostat-treated LLC
tumor-bearing mice show significantly reduced suppressive activity. This
result was confirmed in experiments with Ly6G+ cells differentiated from
HPC culture with/without entinostat treatment. To determine whether
entinostat inhibition of PMN-MDSC immunosuppressive function could
enhance immune checkpoint activity, entinostat combined with an anti-PD-1
antibody was evaluated using the LLC tumor-bearing mice. These mice were
treated with entinostat (10 mg/kg, p.o., daily) and anti-mouse PD-1 rat
antibody (10 mg/kg, i.p., twice a week). Entinostat or PD-1 antibody
alone did not significantly inhibit the tumor growth. In striking
contrast, the combination treatment blocked tumor progression.

Our data demonstrate that entinostat increases a population of PMN-MDSCs
that are no longer immunosuppressive leading to enhanced anti-tumor
activity when combined with an immune checkpoint inhibitor. This novel
phenomenon provides further rationale for combination therapy of
entinostat with anti-PD-1 antibody or other checkpoint inhibitors in
clinical settings.


