Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel TGF-β signaling pathway promotes a slow growing phenotype
of cancer cells in response to glutamine insufficiency.


Glutamine is a critical nutrient for proliferating cells and most tumor
cells. Glutamine addiction as one of the dramatic tumor cell adaptive
metabolisms is characterized by increased glutaminolysis. To better
understand how tumor cells respond to glutamine deficiency, we cultured
Hep3B cells in glutamine free media supplemented with ammonia, and
isolated survival clones (MM01). These clones are capable of perpetual
survival in glutamine free media with ammonia, but assume a slow growing
phenotype, which represents the model adapted to long-term glutamine
insufficiency. Comparing MM01 and Hep3B by microarray-based genome-wide
gene expression profiling, we identified functional activation of Smad2/3
in MM01 cells, suggesting that long-term glutamine insufficiency
activates a TGF-β signaling pathway. We have validated that glutamine
insufficiency triggers Samd2 phosphorylation, which in turn, stimulates
the expression of p15INK4B, providing a link to the slow growing
phenotype. To elucidate how glutamine insufficiency triggers TGF-β
signaling, we examined the effects of glutamine insufficiency on the
expression levels of TGF-β family ligands, and found that Inhibin-βE, a
newly discovered inhibin subunit isoform in the TGF-β superfamily, is
up-regulated at both mRNA and protein levels in MM01. Luciferase assays
demonstrate that glutamine insufficiency enhances the activity of
Inhibin-βE promoter. Furthermore, we show that overexpressing
Inhibin-βE is sufficient to induce Smad2/3 activation and growth
inhibition in Hep3B cells. Taken together, our data suggest that
Inhibin-βE likely plays a crucial role in cell adaptation to metabolic
stress, facilitating cancer cell survival by slowing down biosynthesis
and proliferation. A better understanding of the novel
Inhibin-βE-triggered TGF-β signaling pathway may provide potential new
therapeutic targets for cancer treatment.


