Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deep learning to determine breast cancer estrogen receptor status
from nuclear morphometric features in H&E images.


We hypothesized that the spatial arrangement of nuclei in a hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E) stained image contains a vast quantity of latent
information that is currently underutilized. We tested this hypothesis on
the classification of breast cancer biopsies as estrogen receptor (ER)
positive or negative. While determining ER status typically requires
immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining, we aimed to recapitulate this step
by predicting ER status directly from H&E stained slides. By training a
deep neural network on nuclear-morphometric features, we demonstrate the
power of machine learning to provide insights about cancer biology, and
aim to scale precision oncology for the developing world.

We constructed a learning pipeline that segments nuclei from H&E stained
slides scanned into digital images, extracts shape and orientation
descriptors, and uses a deep neural network to learn spatial features to
predict ER status. After training the pipeline on 57 tissue cores of
invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC), we were able to predict ER status in
patients with IDC in a statistically significant manner (AUC=0.72,
95%CI=0.55-0.88, n=56) and ductal carcinoma in situ (AUC=0.82,
95%CI=0.74-0.89, n=106).

To our knowledge, this is the first work to show that nuclear
morphometric information can be used to predict the molecular status of a
breast cancer tumor. An initial analysis of the features learned by the
deep neural network provides a glimpse into the mechanistic differences
between ER+ and ER- cancers: suggesting the importance of spatial
heterogeneity in distinguishing between ER+ and ER-.

We anticipate that further analysis will provide deeper insights about
the morphological differences between ER+ and ER- cancers, and that this
type of analysis can be applied to other markers and cancers. Moreover,
an optimized version of this pipeline may serve patients in the
developing world by providing a means to predict marker status directly
from H&E images.


