Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic alterations induced by ibrutinib in CLL cells as a basis
for drug combinations to enhance ibrutinib therapeutic activity.


The use of ibrutinib, which targets the Bruton tyrosine kinase, has
significantly improved the therapeutic outcome for patients with chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), especially in cases with chromosome 17p
deletion, which usually respond poorly to conventional chemotherapy.
However, ibrutinib is not completely curative, and a small portion of CLL
patients exhibit resistance. The main objectives of this study were to
investigate the effect of ibrutinib on CLL mitochondrial metabolism and
to develop novel strategies to enhance the therapeutic activity of
ibrutinib. Ibrutinib-induced changes in mitochondrial functions were
analyzed by measuring oxygen consumption rate (OCR) as an indicator of
mitochondrial respiration and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) as
a parameter of lactate production from glycolysis using an extracellular
flux analyzer. In a primary CLL cell-stromal cell co-culture system
(which maintains long-term CLL cell viability), ibrutinib induced little
change in OCR and ECAR during the first 48-72 h. However, prolonged drug
exposure (up to 7 days) in vitro caused a consistent and significant
decrease in OCR compared to that in untreated co-cultured CLL cells.
Importantly, CLL cells isolated from patients treated with ibrutinib for
7 days also had significantly decreased OCR compared to pre-treatment
samples from the same patients, suggesting that the impact of ibrutinib
on mitochondrial functions occurred in vivo and was clinically relevant.
On western blot analysis, ibrutinib induced decreases in expression of
certain respiratory chain components associated with AMPK activation. On
electron microscopy, CLL cells treated with ibrutinib in vitro for 6 days
exhibited lower numbers of mitochondria than untreated cells, which was
confirmed by flow cytometry analysis of cells stained with Mitotracker
Green. Functional analysis showed that ibrutinib caused CLL cells to take
up less glutamine but did not affect glucose uptake, suggesting that
ibrutinib has a preferential impact on glutamine metabolism. On testing
the possibility that the metabolic alterations and mitochondrial
dysfunction induced by ibrutinib render CLL cells vulnerable to compounds
that affect mitochondria or inhibit glutamine metabolism, we found that
combinations of ibrutinib with metformin (inhibitor of mitochondrial
OXPHOS) or with C968 (glutaminase inhibitor) resulted in synergistic
activity against CLL cells and induced massive leukemia cell death
compared to either drug alone. Notably, the combination of ibrutinib and
C968 was synergistic in killing CLL cells with 17p deletion. Overall, our
results suggest that ibrutinib induces metabolic alterations
characterized by decreased mitochondrial respiration and attenuated
glutamine metabolism. Such metabolic alterations provide a biochemical
basis for mechanism-based drug combination to enhance the therapeutic
activity of ibrutinib.


