Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of metastasis-associated biomarker PLEC1 by
iTRAQ-based proteomic approach and prognostic role of PLEC1 in patients
with hepatocellular carcinoma.


Purpose: Hepatocellular Carcinoma(HCC)is the fifth most prevalent cancer
and the second most frequent cause of cancer-related death in men
worldwide because of high incidence of recurrence and widespread
metastasis. However, to date, there have been no direct
metastesis-associated biomarker which is critical for the effective
treatment of patients with HCC, we thus aimed to identify novel HCC
metastasis-associated biomarkers with prognostic significance.E

xperimental Design: Two human HCC cell lines, MHCC97-L and MHCC97-H with
similar genetic background and stepwise increasing metastatic potentials,
were used to explore potential metastasis-associated biomarkers for HCC
by isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)
combination with 2D-LC-MS/MS. Ninety-five HCC cancerous and paracancerous
tissues were further analyzed by immunohistochemistry to validate the
correlations between the expression levels of PLEC1 with various
clinicopathologic factors and patient survival.

Results: Using iTRAQ combination with 2D-LC-MS/MS, a total of 47
differentially expressed proteins were found in MHCC97-L and MHCC97-H
cells, of which 26 proteins were up regulated and 21 proteins were down
regulated. Plectin-1 (PLEC1) was identified and re-confirmed as a
potential biomarker for HCC that was highly up-regulated in tumor
tissues, in comparison with that of para-cancerous tissues.
Over-expression of PLEC1 was also strongly correlated with tumor size (P
Results: Using iTRAQ combination with 2D-LC-MS/MS, a total of 47
differentially expressed proteins were found in MHCC97-L and MHCC97-H
cells, of which 26 proteins were up regulated and 21 proteins were down
regulated. Plectin-1 (PLEC1) was identified and re-confirmed as a
potential biomarker for HCC that was highly up-regulated in tumor
tissues, in comparison with that of para-cancerous tissues.
Over-expression of PLEC1 was also strongly correlated with tumor size (P
< 0.05) and TMN stages (P Results: Using iTRAQ combination with
2D-LC-MS/MS, a total of 47 differentially expressed proteins were found
in MHCC97-L and MHCC97-H cells, of which 26 proteins were up regulated
and 21 proteins were down regulated. Plectin-1 (PLEC1) was identified and
re-confirmed as a potential biomarker for HCC that was highly
up-regulated in tumor tissues, in comparison with that of para-cancerous
tissues. Over-expression of PLEC1 was also strongly correlated with tumor
size (P < 0.05) and TMN stages (P < 0.05). In addition, both univariate
and multivariate analyses demonstrate that PLEC1 expression is an
independent prognostic factor for patients with HCC(pResults: Using iTRAQ
combination with 2D-LC-MS/MS, a total of 47 differentially expressed
proteins were found in MHCC97-L and MHCC97-H cells, of which 26 proteins
were up regulated and 21 proteins were down regulated. Plectin-1 (PLEC1)
was identified and re-confirmed as a potential biomarker for HCC that was
highly up-regulated in tumor tissues, in comparison with that of
para-cancerous tissues. Over-expression of PLEC1 was also strongly
correlated with tumor size (P < 0.05) and TMN stages (P < 0.05). In
addition, both univariate and multivariate analyses demonstrate that
PLEC1 expression is an independent prognostic factor for patients with
HCC(p<0.05).

Conclusions: In this study, iTRAQ-based proteomic technology was explored
to uncover novel metastasis-associated biomarkers in HCC. We identified
and validated metastasis-associated protein PLEC1 as a potential
prognostic marker in patients with HCC.


