Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evolution of genomic alterations in breast tumors.


Cancer therapy exerts a strong selection pressure that shapes tumor
evolution. Recent studies have demonstrated high rates of concordance
between primary tumor and recurrences. The main objective of our study
was to demonstrate the molecular evolution of breast cancer using
next-generation sequencing (NGS) across various time points during
treatment.

Methods: We conducted a retrospective analysis of 3 patients with
metastatic breast cancer. Specimens from patients undergoing 1 or more
lines of treatment in the metastatic setting (met2) were tested using
Foundation One, evaluating 343 genes and select rearrangements by NGS.
Archival tumor specimens from primary and first metastases (met1) were
subsequently obtained and tested using the same assay. Each sample was
analyzed independently at the time of submission over a period of two
years and results were compared across all time points.

Results: Functional variants in patient 1 were concordant at all time
points. Patient 2 was hormonal receptor positive and Her-2 negative at
diagnosis and at met1 and 2. A known variant in PIK3CA was detected at
all three time points. She developed an EGFR variant of unknown
significance (VUS) at met1 which was retained in met2 where she also
gained a variant in ESR1, coinciding with development of resistance to
hormonal therapy. Patient 3 was triple negative at diagnosis and at
repeat analysis. A known PIK3CA variant was also detected at all time
points. Her primary tumor sample was positive for an amplification of
RUNX1T1 which was not detected at met1 or 2. At met1 she developed an
amplification of CCNE1 which persisted through met2 in which an ERBB3
variant also arose. Additional discordances in all three patients were
due to technical or interpretive differences at the time of analysis. All
three patients had VUSs reported in primary and met1 time points that
were not present at met2. However, expanded gene bait set was implemented
between the submission of met2 samples and the primary and met1 samples.
Therefore, full concordance of all genes across all samples could not be
determined. Patient 2 had a variant in CHD1 initially classified to have
therapeutic implications based on literature and databases at the time of
analysis. More recent data indicated that it was likely a benign germline
variant and was downgraded to a VUS in subsequent reports. Classification
of ROS1 amplification as significant or a VUS also varied.

Conclusion: In our samples, the majority of genomic alterations showed
concordance throughout the course of breast cancer. There are key
actionable genes which make their presence later on in the metastatic
setting. Repeat tumor assessment by methods such as biopsies or ctDNA
should be a part of breast cancer management as it may lead to changes in
therapy. However, since the methodology and classification of variants
may change over time, reanalysis of all data at each time point is
warranted. We have initiated a prospective larger trial to study the
spectrum of breast cancer evolution.


