Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumour-associated macrophage polarisation and re-education with
oncolytic viruses.


Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) promote key processes in tumour
progression through their plasticity and capacity to become polarised by
tumours to have an immunosuppressive phenotype. However, the plasticity
of these cells provides an opportunity for therapeutic
‘reprogramming’ towards a classically activated inflammatory
phenotype thus preventing tumour-associated immunosuppression and
inducing anti-tumour immunity. Oncolytic viruses (OV) represent a new
class of anti-cancer therapeutics that promote anti-tumour responses
through selective tumour cell killing and the induction of systemic
anti-tumour immunity. We propose that TAMs can be targeted using an OV,
leading to altered macrophage polarization and a reduction in tumour
growth and metastasis. Experimental Design: In-vitro, cytotoxicity, viral
replication and cytokine expression was assessed in a panel of primary
human and murine macrophages following exposure to Sephrevir, an
ICP34.5-deleted oncolytic herpes-simplex virus currently in Phase 1/2a
trials. In-vivo, murine TS1-PyMT cells were implanted into the mammary
fat pads of female FVB mice to establish a syngeneic immunocompetent
mouse model of breast cancer. Tumour growth and overall survival were
assessed following administration of Sephrevir given either by
intratumoural (I.T) or intravenous injection (I.V). Immune cell
enumeration and protective immunity were assessed post-mortem by
immunofluorescence and flow cytometry. Results: Both primary human and
mouse macrophages served as a host for oncolytic viral replication.
Sephrevir was also found to attenuate TAM phenotypes as evidenced by
increased “M1” receptor signatures (e.g. CD40, CD80, CD86, MHC II),
increased pro-inflammatory gene expression (e.g. IL-1, IL-6, IL-8,
CXCL10, TNF-a) and increased nitric oxide production. I.T and I.V
administration of Sephrevir led to marked tumour shrinkage as well as the
recruitment of cytotoxic T cells. Moreover, TAM polarisation was evident
based on a change in signature with TAMs becoming skewed to
IL-12hi/IL-10lo and a change in the iNOS/arginase1 ratio. Conclusions:
Our results demonstrate that Sephrevir is associated with in vivo
anti-tumour effects and importantly can be used for manipulating the
phenotype of the abundant macrophage population located within the tumour
microenvironment.


