Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-proliferative effect and tumor targeting properties of
SurVaxM-derived monoclonal antibodies.


Background: Survivin is an inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) which is
upregulated in many cancers. SurVaxM (active anti-survivin immunotherapy)
is currently being evaluated in a multi-center phase II clinical trial.
Circulating anti-survivin antibodies were recently detected in recurrent
glioblastoma patients who received SurVaxM immunizations in a previous
phase I study. Though primarily functioning as an intracellular molecule,
survivin has also been identified in patient serum, and, recently, in
tumor-derived exosomes.

Methods: Patients in the completed SurVaxM phase I clinical trial
produced both antibody and CD8+ T cell responses against survivin. In
order to gauge whether antibodies to the vaccine provided any therapeutic
benefit, or might serve as potential biomarkers for SurVaxM
responsiveness, we tested these antibodies in pre-clinical tumor models.
Murine hybridomas derived from the SurVaxM peptide were established and
purified yielding several high-affinity IgG antibodies. These antibodies
were characterized for target recognition and therapeutic potential.

Results: Two of the clones with the highest affinities, 2C2 (IgG2a) and
H30 (IgG1), recognized both SurVaxM peptide and the wild type survivin
counterpart (ELISA assay), as well as endogenous, full-length survivin
(western blotting). Survivin was detected on cells with these antibodies
using both immunofluorescence and flow cytometry. Following s.c.
implantation of glioblastoma (GL261) and melanoma (B16) tumors in
immuno-competent C57BL/6 mice, administration of 2C2 and H30 antibodies
(i.p. injection) reduced tumor growth in both models compared to an
irrelevant IgG. An orthotopic intracranial glioma study showed similar
anti-tumor effects when treated with SurVaxM-derived antibodies. Tumor
growth was also inhibited in immuno-compromised (nude) animals treated
with 2C2 or H30 antibodies, although to a lesser extent.

Conclusions: Antibodies generated in response to the SurVaxM vaccination
are highly cross-reactive to survivin and provide therapeutic benefit in
immuno-competent mouse tumor models. These antibodies retain some
efficacy in immuno-compromised models, indicative of a direct T-cell
independent effect. An anti-tumor response through anti-survivin targeted
antibodies is unexpected as surface-accessible survivin expression has
not yet been well described in the literature. Data presented here
highlight possible avenues for investigation of mechanism(s) of action.


