Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNAseq hiPSC-cardiomyocytes reveals altered expression of DNA
damage and cell cycle genes in response to doxorubicin.


Introduction: Doxorubicin is a highly effective chemotherapeutic agent,
but its use is limited due to cumulative and dose-dependent effects that
can lead to irreversible heart damage. Despite efforts in understanding
the mechanisms, the precise genes and pathways implicated in
doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity still remain elusive. We hypothesized
that by exploring time- and dose-dependent changes in gene expression in
human induced pluripotent stem cell derived-cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CM), we
can identify genes and signaling pathways related to doxorubicin-induced
cardiotoxicity.

Methods: hiPSC-CM were treated with 0, 50, 150, or 450 nM of doxorubicin
for 2, 7, or 12 days then subjected to RNA sequencing for assessment of
gene expression. Sequenced reads were aligned to the human reference
genome (GRCh37) with STAR, and a read count matrix was then generated
with the R package GenomicAlignments. Global variation and differential
gene expression analyses were performed using DESeq2 software (P 2.0 and
2.0 and <-2.0 average log2 fold-change in expression.

Results: Hierarchical clustering of expression profiles of 40,861 genes
produced by DESeq2 revealed 192 genes downregulated following doxorubicin
exposure related to mitotic roles of polo-like kinase, cell cycle control
chromosomal replication, and DNA damage checkpoint regulation pathways.
This included a set of nine genes with the highest variation in
expression, MCM5, PRC1, NUSAP1, CENPF, CCNB1, MELK, AURKB, RACGAP1, and
TROAP, with functions in microtubule stabilization and cell cycle
regulation. Following a 2-day exposure to doxorubicin, 242 genes,
including the top nine genes, were differentially expressed between
untreated and treated with enrichment in ribosomal processes, DNA repair
and damage, and oxidation-reductase activity. Time course analysis
revealed 289 genes between 0 nM and 150

nM on days 2, 7 and 12 with enrichment in fatty acid oxidation,
MIF-mediated glucocorticoid regulation, and relaxin signaling pathways.
Transcription regulator, SMARCA4, was identified as the only upstream
regulator with elevated expression following a later recovery time (day 7
to day 12) compared to shorter or earlier time point comparisons at 150
nM dose.

Conclusion: Overlapping genes and pathways identified in these analyses
provide additional support for a role of reactive oxygen species and
mitochondrial dysfunction linked to DNA damage in doxorubicin-induced
cardiotoxicity. This study also warrants further investigation of SMARCA4
since it is a direct regulator of genes with overlapping functions
described for the top nine genes.


