Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prodrug of green tea polyphenol (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate
served as a potentially novel angiogenesis inhibitor in endometrioid
endometrial cancer.


Background and aim: Anti-angiogenesis is a promising treatment in
endometrioid endometrial cancer (EEC) while the present anti-angiogenic
drugs still have limitations such as drug tolerance, toxicity profile and
substantial costs. (-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), the major
polyphenol of green tea, is associated with anti-cancer benefits, but it
is unstable and has poor bioavailability. These limitations can be solved
through peracetate ester of EGCG as a prodrug (ProEGCG), while little is
known about its anti-angiogenesis effect in cancer. The objective is to
study the effect and underling mechanism of ProEGCG on EEC angiogenesis.

Methods and Results: Tumor xenografts were established by subcutaneous
injection of a human EEC cell line (RL95-2) into nude mice, and ProEGCG
or control was orally administered every day. 35 days later, mice treated
with ProEGCG showed significant reduction in lesion size and MVD without
major toxic effects compared to control. To find out how ProEGCG inhibits
tumor progress and angiogenesis, microarray analysis of excised lesions
was conducted and indicated that HIF-1α, VEGFA and CXCR4 were
downregulated by ProEGCG. Compared to control, immunohistochemistry
showed that ProEGCG reduced expression of HIF-1α and VEGFA in RL95-2
cells and decreased CXCR4 expression in tumor-associated macrophages
(TAMs) and endothelial cells (ECs). To further study the role of ProEGCG
on EEC cells, qRT-PCR and Western blotting proved that hypoxia (1% O2)
upregulated the level of HIF-1α and VEGFA in EEC cell lines, which was
reversed by ProEGCG through inhibiting hypoxia-induced ROS formation. It
is known that TAMs play an important role in tumor angiogenesis, and
double immunofluorescence of F4/80 and CD206 antibodies in xenografts was
applied and found that TAMs infiltration was reduced in ProEGCG group
with decreased VEGFA in TAMs. Moreover, proliferation and migration of
ECs are critical for tumor angiogenesis. To study the effect of ProEGCG
on ECs, tube formation and invasion assays were conducted. The addition
of ProEGCG on ECs showed less capillary tube-like structure formation and
less invaded ECs by inhibition of CXCR4 expression on ECs. However, it
was still unclear if CXCL12, the ligand of CXCR4, was affected.
Immunostaining for CXCL12 in tumor lesions indicated that ProEGCG
decreased CXCL12 expression in cancer and stromal cells, which was
further confirmed in primary human endometrial stromal cells by addition
of ProEGCG.

Conclusion: Our study was the first to reveal the mechanism of
anti-angiogenesis of ProEGCG, which decreased HIF1α/VEGFA expression in
tumor cells, inhibited recruitment and differentiation of TAMs and tube
formation of endothelial cells via CXCL12/CXCR4 reduction. These findings
provided that ProEGCG would be an effective, safe and economic
anti-angiogenic drug for EEC.


