Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative prediction of human pharmacokinetics for
duvortuxizumab from cynomolgus monkey data: a translational
pharmacokinetic modeling approach.


Duvortuxizumab (also known as JNJ-64052781 and MGD011) is a bispecific
CD19 x CD3 DART® molecule designed to simultaneously target
CD19-positive cells for recognition and elimination by CD3-expressing
T-lymphocytes as effector cells. Duvortuxizumab is currently in clinical
development for the potential treatment of B-cell malignancies. Here we
report the results from a translational PK model that utilized
duvortuxizumab pharmacokinetic (PK) data from cynomolgus monkeys to
predict duvortuxizumab PK in humans.

The PK of duvortuxizumab administered by intravenous infusion was
evaluated in cynomolgus monkeys in two separate studies. Study 1
evaluated intra-animal escalating doses from 0.5 to 100 µg/kg or
repeated doses from 0.005 to 0.5 µg/kg administered over a period of up
to 4 weeks. Serum concentrations of duvortuxizumab above the lower limit
of quantification were obtained at dose levels >0.5 µg/kg. Study 2
evaluated duvortuxizumab doses of 0.2, 2, 5, or 10 µg/kg administered
once weekly for 4 weeks. Dose-proportional increases in maximum
concentration (Cmax) were observed across the dose ranges evaluated, and
no significant differences between male and female animals were observed.

PK modeling analysis, which integrated data from both study 1 and study 2
at 0.2 to 100 µg/kg dose levels, was performed to further understand the
PK behavior of duvortuxizumab in cynomolgus monkeys. Duvortuxizumab PK
was reasonably characterized using a two compartment model with linear
clearance (CL) from the central compartment. Model estimated parameters
were CL = 0.797 mL/h/kg; volume of distribution for the central
compartment (V1) = 51.7 mL/kg; intercompartmental clearance (Q) = 2.29
mL/h/kg; and volume of distribution for the peripheral compartment (V2) =
88.8 mL/kg. Assuming a body weight of 3 kg and 70 kg for a cynomolgus
monkey and a human, respectively, human PK parameters were estimated
using an allometric scaling factor of 0.75 for CL and 1.0 for volume in
the translational PK model.

Observed duvortuxizumab PK values obtained from an ongoing,
first-in-human (FIH), phase 1 dose-escalation trial in patients with
relapsed or refractory B-cell malignancies (NCT02454270) were used to
validate the translational PK model. Comparison of the predicted and
observed duvortuxizumab PK profiles suggested that the translational PK
model using the allometric scaling method reasonably predicted
duvortuxizumab PK profiles in humans at multiple dose levels (15 to 100
ng/kg).

In conclusion, the developed translational PK model successfully
predicted duvortuxizumab PK in humans and has been used to aid dose
escalation of duvortuxizumab in the ongoing FIH study. This work
showcases the potential of translational PK modeling in supporting the
selection of a FIH dose escalation strategy utilizing preclinical PK
information.


