Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphoproteomic landscape of sarcoma: novel subgroups and
actionable targets.


Sarcomas comprise a heterogeneous group of malignant tumors of the
connective tissue, and disproportionally affect the young. Despite
intensive, multimodal treatments, survival is still limited and
accompanied by many early and late side effects. In contrast to advances
in carcinomas, specific targetable driver mutations have not or rarely
been found in sarcoma and targeted therapies have met with disappointing
clinical results, stressing the need for an unbiased and comprehensive
analysis of oncogenic signaling networks to reveal therapeutic targets
and personalized treatment strategies. We utilized a mass-spectrometry
(MS)-based phosphoproteomics screening approach to profile the largest
and most heterogeneous set of sarcoma cell lines (n=20) to date,
including both adult (gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) and
angiosarcoma (AS)) and multiple pediatric/adolescent and young adult
(AYA; synovial sarcoma (SS), Ewing sarcoma (ES) and rhabdomyosarcoma
(RMS)) sarcomas, as well as soft-tissue sarcomas (STS) and bone sarcomas.
We specifically included cell lines and SS and AS subtypes that were
never phosphoprofiled before, to reveal completely novel molecular
insights into sarcoma pathology. Validations were performed in vitro, in
vivo, and on patient tumor material. Our unique tyrosine phosphorylation
data revealed a novel subclassification of sarcoma, and showed that
particularly the pediatric/AYA sarcoma models did not cluster within
their histological subgroup. Particular tyrosine kinases exhibited
enhanced phosphorylation in particular subtypes, and we identified driver
kinases with outlier levels of activation. ALK was identified as a
completely novel and unexpected driver in the Aska-SS SS cell line, which
was explained by an underlying ALK translocation. Functional ALK
dependency was confirmed with in vitro proliferation assays, showing high
sensitivity for the ALK inhibitor TAE684 (IC50 26±3 nM) and the ALK/MET
inhibitor crizotinib (IC50 46±5 nM). Patient specimens confirmed a
clinical role for ALK in SS, with ALK immunopositivity in 14% (6/43) of
patients and one 16y old patient harboring an ALK translocation, present
in both her primary tumor as in 4 metastases. Other SS cell lines and
sarcoma subtypes exhibited multiple activated tyrosine kinases, providing
a rationale for combined targeting approaches. Indeed, high MET and
PDGFRα phosphorylation in Yamato-SS SS cells predicted sensitivity to
crizotinib and pazopanib (PDGFR) in vitro and in vivo. The clinical
significance was again confirmed in a cohort of SS patients, in which MET
or PDGFRα expression was detected in 58% and 84% of SS patients,
respectively, with co-expression in 56%. Altogether, this is the first
study to provide a deep insight into activated networks and molecular
clustering patterns in sarcoma. Our integrated approach systematically
identified and validated ALK and MET as novel and actionable drivers in
SS.


