Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia-inducible factor 1-α maintains sarcoma stem-like cells in
hypoxic regions of tumors and promotes migration and invasion via
upregulation of platelet-derived growth factor receptors.


Introduction: Sarcomas often thrive in hypoxic conditions to proliferate
and metastasize. To survive in such an environment, sarcomas upregulate
hypoxia inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α), which enhances the transcription
of over 150 genes mediating tumor metabolism, angiogenesis, and
metastasis. HIF-1α may be important for the maintenance of a subset of
tumor cells referred to as “sarcoma stem-like cells” or SSCs.
Platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) is important in
mesenchymal biology and may be a potential target of HIF-1α.

Methods: Three human sarcoma cell lines were examined: HT1080
(fibrosarcoma), SK-LMS-1 (leiomyosarcoma), and DDLS8817 (dedifferentiated
liposarcoma). Cell lines were grown as spheroids on ultra-low attachment
dishes to enrich for SSCs. The roles of HIF-1α and PDGFR-α/β in
promoting SSC phenotypes, such as migratory/invasive capacity, were
assessed via several in vitro assays under hypoxic conditions.

Results: Sarcoma cell lines grown as spheroids had increased levels of
HIF-1α and increased phosphorylation of PDGFR-α/β as compared to when
grown as monolayers; these effects were even more pronounced when sarcoma
spheroids were grown under hypoxic conditions. Hypoxic conditions also
increased migratory and invasive capacity in spheroid cells by 65-73% as
compared to normoxic conditions. HIF-1α knockdown using shRNA in the
three cell lines decreased expression of self-renewal proteins and
decreased spheroid formation by 67-80%. HIF-1α knockdown decreased
expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) transcription
factors and reduced migratory and invasive capacity by 80-87% under
normoxic conditions and 85-87% under hypoxic conditions. Phosphorylation
of PDGFR-α/β was decreased in sarcoma cell lines following HIF-1α
knockdown under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. PDGFR-α/β inhibition
with imatinib reversed chemotherapy resistance in normally resistant
SSCs, and treatment of HT1080 xenografts with doxorubicin chemotherapy
and imatinib reduced tumor formation by 85% as compared to control and by
77% as compared to chemotherapy alone.

Conclusions: The HIF-1α/PDGFR axis supports the maintenance of SSCs,
especially under hypoxic conditions, and promotes SSC phenotypes such as
migratory/invasive capacity and chemotherapy resistance. Combining
chemotherapy with PDGFR-α/β inhibition may be a promising strategy to
reverse chemotherapy resistance and prevent metastasis in sarcomas.


