Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted silencing of elongation factor 2 kinase (EF2K) suppresses
invasion, cell proliferation and growth in an orthotopic model of ovarian
cancer.


Ovarian cancer (OCa) is one of the most aggressive and deadliest cancer
and is currently incurable disease with the poorest prognosis and
survival rates (4%, 5year survival rates). One of the hallmarks of OCa is
its early invasion and metastasis, resistance to chemotherapeutics and
radiotherapy and aggressive tumor progression. These features contribute
to a poor prognosis of this highly complex malignancy with many molecular
alterations and mutations involving multiple genes. The major reason for
patient death is due to metastasis and resistance to current therapies
that include chemotherapy, hormonal therapy and radiation. Therefore,
novel molecular targets and therapeutics strategies are urgently needed
to enhance the efficacy of current therapies and prolong patient
survival. Recently, we discovered that Eukaryotic elongation factor-2
kinase (EF2K), an atypical kinase, is dramatically up-regulated in cells
and promotes cell survival and proliferation, its inhibition
significantly reduces cell growth and colony formation. However, the role
that EF2K in OCa and pathways regulating cell proliferation, colony
formation, survival, invasion/metastasis and resistance remains is
largely unknown. Here, we show that specific inhibition of EF2K by
siRNA-mediated knockdown markedly inhibits OCa (HeyA8 and SKOV3ip1) cell
proliferation, colony formation and invasion/migration in vitro. This
targeting resulted in a substantial decrease in eEF2 phosphorylation in
the tumors, and led to the inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis.
Lack of function demonstrated that EF2K regulates Beta1-integrin, p-SRC,
p-FAK, p-AKT, p-IF2alpha, p-ERK expression. Our western blot data
suggested that EF2K may enhance tumorigenesis and metastasis through the
upregulation of pro-tumorigenic, metastatic proteins and pathways in OCa.
Furthermore, we found that therapeutic inhibition of EF2K by systemically
administered (i.v) nanoliposomal EF2K siRNA inhibited growth SKOV3 tumor
xenografts and intraperitoneal tumor nodules (intraperitoneal metastatic
model) in nude mice (pOvarian cancer (OCa) is one of the most aggressive
and deadliest cancer and is currently incurable disease with the poorest
prognosis and survival rates (4%, 5year survival rates). One of the
hallmarks of OCa is its early invasion and metastasis, resistance to
chemotherapeutics and radiotherapy and aggressive tumor progression.
These features contribute to a poor prognosis of this highly complex
malignancy with many molecular alterations and mutations involving
multiple genes. The major reason for patient death is due to metastasis
and resistance to current therapies that include chemotherapy, hormonal
therapy and radiation. Therefore, novel molecular targets and
therapeutics strategies are urgently needed to enhance the efficacy of
current therapies and prolong patient survival. Recently, we discovered
that Eukaryotic elongation factor-2 kinase (EF2K), an atypical kinase, is
dramatically up-regulated in cells and promotes cell survival and
proliferation, its inhibition significantly reduces cell growth and
colony formation. However, the role that EF2K in OCa and pathways
regulating cell proliferation, colony formation, survival,
invasion/metastasis and resistance remains is largely unknown. Here, we
show that specific inhibition of EF2K by siRNA-mediated knockdown
markedly inhibits OCa (HeyA8 and SKOV3ip1) cell proliferation, colony
formation and invasion/migration in vitro. This targeting resulted in a
substantial decrease in eEF2 phosphorylation in the tumors, and led to
the inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis. Lack of function
demonstrated that EF2K regulates Beta1-integrin, p-SRC, p-FAK, p-AKT,
p-IF2alpha, p-ERK expression. Our western blot data suggested that EF2K
may enhance tumorigenesis and metastasis through the upregulation of
pro-tumorigenic, metastatic proteins and pathways in OCa. Furthermore, we
found that therapeutic inhibition of EF2K by systemically administered
(i.v) nanoliposomal EF2K siRNA inhibited growth SKOV3 tumor xenografts
and intraperitoneal tumor nodules (intraperitoneal metastatic model) in
nude mice (p<0.05), demonstrating the role of EF2K in tumorigenesis and
metastatic phenotype. We also found that treatment with EF2K siRNA
resulted in significant decrease in mean tumor weight, induced apoptosis
(as judged by a positive TUNEL assay) and the downregulation of the
proliferative marker Ki-67. Collectively, our data suggest, for the first
time, the pivotal role of eEF2K in OCa cell proliferation, invasion and
tumor progression and establish eEF2K as a novel potential therapeutic
target in highly aggressive and lethal ovarian cancer.


