Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of proliferation and invasion through the inhibition of
IGF signaling pathway on Epstein-Barr virus associated gastric cancer.


Epstein-Barr virus associated gastric cancer (EBVaGC) is one subtype of
four molecular classifications by TCGA group. Specifically, EBV related
viral RNAs, microRNAs and proteins regulate cancer progression phenomena
like aggressiveness, motility, invasion and metastasis. Nonetheless,
understanding the mechanisms of viral growth dependency beyond malignant
EBV transformation are still deficient. Finding the EBV dependent pathway
with significant biological role and the clinically appropriated drug is
needed for EBVaGC in this regard. We investigated new therapeutic target
and its role of regulating in proliferation and invasion using EBVaGC
cell line model. First, we determined proliferation both of AGS and EBV
infected AGS (AGS-EBV) cell lines during 7 days by proliferation assay.
For the test of BI836845 (IGF ligand neutralizing antibody, Boehringer
Ingelheim, German) efficacy, CCK-8 assay was performed. mRNA expression
levels of IGF-1R, IGF-1, IGFBP-3 and IGFBP-6 which is the key regulator
of IGF-signaling were measured by RT-PCR. Also, protein expression levels
of IGF associated and downstream factors were confirmed by Western
blotting. Lastly, invasiveness of cells was detected by invasion assay.
As a result, AGS-EBV showed the slower proliferation rate compared to
AGS, but the sensitivity to BI836845 was significantly increased in a
dose-dependent manner (pEpstein-Barr virus associated gastric cancer
(EBVaGC) is one subtype of four molecular classifications by TCGA group.
Specifically, EBV related viral RNAs, microRNAs and proteins regulate
cancer progression phenomena like aggressiveness, motility, invasion and
metastasis. Nonetheless, understanding the mechanisms of viral growth
dependency beyond malignant EBV transformation are still deficient.
Finding the EBV dependent pathway with significant biological role and
the clinically appropriated drug is needed for EBVaGC in this regard. We
investigated new therapeutic target and its role of regulating in
proliferation and invasion using EBVaGC cell line model. First, we
determined proliferation both of AGS and EBV infected AGS (AGS-EBV) cell
lines during 7 days by proliferation assay. For the test of BI836845 (IGF
ligand neutralizing antibody, Boehringer Ingelheim, German) efficacy,
CCK-8 assay was performed. mRNA expression levels of IGF-1R, IGF-1,
IGFBP-3 and IGFBP-6 which is the key regulator of IGF-signaling were
measured by RT-PCR. Also, protein expression levels of IGF associated and
downstream factors were confirmed by Western blotting. Lastly,
invasiveness of cells was detected by invasion assay. As a result,
AGS-EBV showed the slower proliferation rate compared to AGS, but the
sensitivity to BI836845 was significantly increased in a dose-dependent
manner (p<0.001). Interestingly, baseline IGFBP-3 mRNA expression of was
enhanced in AGS-EBV compared with AGS. In addition, BI836845 treated
group showed up-regulated IGFBP-3 mRNA level in AGS and down-regulated
IGFBP-3 mRNA level in AGS-EBV. When BI836845 treated to AGS-EBV,
phospho-Akt level was highly inhibited. Moreover, invasiveness of AGS-EBV
was elevated about 2 fold more than AGS. Treatment of BI836845 in AGS-EBV
represented significant decrease the invasiveness (p=0.08). In
conclusion, AGS-EBV seems to modulate their proliferation and invasion
through the IGF signaling pathway. Inhibition of IGF signaling pathway
would be the potential therapeutic strategy for EBV associated gastric
cancer.


