Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteotoxic stress associated with mTORC1 activation in ovarian
carcinoma: proteasome inhibition as a therapeutic strategy.


Genetic profiling studies of high grade serous ovarian carcinoma have
revealed recurrent alterations in the mTORC1 signalling network (e.g.
mutations/copy number alterations in PTEN, TSC1, TSC2, and PIK3CA) and
pathway activation, detected by phospho-4E-BP1, has been associated with
poor prognosis. We sought to characterize functionally the role of mTORC1
signalling and its therapeutic implications in ovarian cancer. Treatment
of ovarian cancer cell lines with rapamycin resulted in inhibition of
mTORC1 signalling and decreased rate of protein synthesis. However,
irrespective of PTEN mutation status, only mild cytostatic effects were
achieved even with high concentrations of rapamycin. We next examined the
phenotypic consequences of mTOR activation, using siRNA directed against
TSC2. Surprisingly, we observed striking growth inhibition in the
majority of ovarian cancer cell lines, whether grown under adherent
monolayer culture or in 3-dimensional spheroid culture conditions. While
mTORC1 pathway activation was confirmed biochemically, knockdown of TSC2
also resulted in activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR), with
elevated levels of phospho-EIF2α and ATF4, consistent with the
accumulation of misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum.

From a therapeutic standpoint, the resulting burden on the
ubiquitin-proteasome system should render these cells particularly
sensitive to proteasome inhibition. We show that treatment with the
proteasome inhibitor, bortezomib, causes increased accumulation of
detergent-insoluble poly-ubiquinated proteins and formation of larger and
more abundant cytoplasmic protein aggregates in siTSC2-transfected
compared to scrambled siRNA-transfected ovarian carcinoma cells. This was
accompanied by a more pronounced UPR stress response, including induction
of pro-apoptotic CHOP, and suppression of autophagy, resulting in marked
cytotoxicity. Conversely, we show that inhibition of protein synthesis by
cycloheximide renders tumor cells resistant to bortezomib. Increased
resistance to bortezomib was also noted when cells were grown as
spheroids, a condition associated with suppression of mTORC1 signalling
and decreased protein synthesis. This resistant phenotype of tumour
spheroids however was ameliorated with TSC2 knockdown. Our findings
demonstrate that protein homeostasis is finely-tuned in ovarian cancer
and that mutations in mTORC1 pathway components do not necessarily imply
“oncogene addiction”. In early-stage clinical trials, bortezomib has
achieved notable responses in a few patients. Ovarian carcinomas with
genetic alterations causing increased mTORC1 signalling may be
particularly amenable to treatment with proteasome inhibitors.


