Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dinaciclib overcomes resistance to BKM120 in triple negative
breast cancer patient-derived xenograft models.


Purpose: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is one of the most lethal
subtypes of breast cancer with limited therapeutic options. Development
of molecularly targeted agents for TNBC is an unmet clinical need. The
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway, which is a major cell growth
and survival pathway, is frequently activated in TNBC as a result of
genetic aberrations such as loss of the negative regulator PTEN or gain
of function mutations in PIK3CA, therefore an attractive therapeutic
target. However, single agent PI3K inhibitors have shown limited
anti-tumor activity in both preclinical models and in clinical trials.
One of the most important mechanisms of resistance to PI3K inhibitor is
amplification of Myc. Dinaciclib, a potent inhibitor of cyclin-dependent
kinases (CDKs)1, 2, 5 and 9, has shown to be particularly effective in
Myc dependent tumors in preclinical studies and in TNBC. We therefore
hypothesized that dinaciclib could overcome tumor cell resistance to PI3K
inhibitors and improve the therapeutic efficacy in TNBC. In this study,
we evaluated the anti-tumor and molecular effect of dinaciclib and BKM120
(Pan-PI3K inhibitor), either alone or in combination, in a panel of
patient derived xenograft (PDX) models of TNBC.

Methods: Four TNBC PDXs models were selected for the study for in-vivo
and ex-vivo response to vehicle, BKM120, dinaciclib, or the combination
of BKM120 and dinaciclib. Tumor volume changes over time in each group
were documented to calculate the percentage of tumor growth inhibition by
either agent alone or in combination. Tumor tissues harvested post
treatment were examined by immunohistochemistry for cleaved PARP to
determine the extent of apoptosis and phospho-Histone H3 for G2 to M
phase cell cycle progression. Western blot analysis and reverse protein
phase array (RPPA) were also performed to determine treatment effect on
PI3K downstream targets and cell cycle molecules.

Results: The combination of BKM120 and dinaciclib induced significantly
greater growth inhibitory effect on tumor growth than either single agent
alone in TNBC PDX models. This is accompanied by an enhanced apoptotic
induction and reduced cell cycle progression. In addition, the
combination of dinaciclib and BKM120 significantly reduced the level of
cyclin B and the key anti-apoptotic protein survivin as well as
significant downregulation of pAKT, and pS6.

Conclusions: These data suggest that dinaciclib and BKM120 combination is
an effective approach in treating TNBC. Additional mechanistic
investigation for the efficacy of this combination is underway.


