Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Production of CD3+ cells using ferrofluids for cell isolation,
activation, expansion and subsequent transfection for adoptive cell
therapy.


The purpose of the study is to demonstrate whether magnetic nanoparticles
functionalized with monoclonal antibodies in conjunction with
solution-phase monoclonal antibodies can be used to activate T cells for
expansion in vitro. The activation, expansion and
transfection/transduction of immune cells—particularly T cells—has
become an area of significant interest based on encouraging data
generated from employing such genetically modified cells for cancer
immunotherapies. The promise of soon being able to cure various types of
cancers has resulted from years of methodical experimentation in the
fields of oncology, immunology, and genetics, as well as the development
of a vast array of enabling technological advances. BioMagnetic Solutions
has developed colloidal magnetic nanoparticles—referred to as
ferrofluids—which can be used to isolate a cell population through an
immunomagnetic separation. These ferrofluids comprise a crystalline core
of magnetite (ca. 100 nm in diameter) coated with multilayers of
clinical-grade human serum albumin and further functionalized with a
clinical-grade rat anti-mouse IgG1 monoclonal antibody. These
“common-capture ferrofluids” (ca. 130 nm in diameter) are capable of
binding cells which have been labeled with a monoclonal mouse IgG1
antibody; for example, CD3+ cells can be readily isolated from a complex
cell mixture by labeling with a monoclonal mouse anti-human CD3 antibody,
adding common-capture ferrofluid, and subjecting the sample to a magnetic
field gradient. This technology can therefore be employed at the clinical
scale to isolate T cells from an apheresis product. In this study, we
investigated whether T cells isolated using common-capture ferrofluids
could subsequently be activated and induced to expand in vitro. Based on
preliminary experiments showing that T cell-bound common-capture
ferrofluid has excess antibody-binding capacity, we designed experiments
to test the hypothesis that solution-phase CD28 could be added to
isolated T cells, which would bind to both CD28 determinants on the cell
surface as well as to the cell-bound common-capture ferrofluid.
Activation was quantified by measuring CD25 expression after four days in
culture and expansion was monitored over 15 days. Following an
immunomagnetic separation of CD3+ cells, magnetically isolated cells were
re-suspended in expansion medium (STEMCELL) supplemented with 100 IU/mL
IL-2 (Gibco) to a total concentration of 106 cells/mL and incubated at 37
°C. The following day, 0.5 µg/mL mouse anti-human CD28 monoclonal
antibody (Mabtech) was added, and thereafter, cells were periodically
agitated and diluted to 106 cells/mL with expansion media. After four
days in culture, 88.4% of cells expressed CD25, while a 311-fold
expansion was observed after 15 days. In summary, we have demonstrated
that common-capture ferrofluids can be used to activate T cells for
expansion in vitro.


