Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of protein kinase D1 as a prognostic factor and
pharmacological target for the treatment of breast cancer.


Tamoxifen-resistant ERα positive (ERα+) breast cancers and
triple-negative breast cancers represent two aggressive subgroups of
mammary tumors with limited treatment options and a poor prognosis. Thus,
there is still an urgent need to develop and improve targeted
pharmacological treatments against these estrogen-independent cancers.

Recent data from our group suggest that the protein kinase D1 (PKD1)
participates in the development and/or maintenance of the
estrogen-independent phenotype in breast cancer. Indeed, up-regulating
PKD1 conferred anchorage-independent growth to estrogen-dependent MCF-7
cells in the absence of β-estradiol. In addition, we found that high
PKD1 mRNA levels were associated with a worse prognosis in
tamoxifen-treated tumors.

PKD1 is a serine-threonine kinase encoded by the prkd1 gene and belongs
to the protein kinase D (PKD) family, a novel subgroup of the calcium and
calmodulin-regulated kinases (CAMK). The PKD family also includes PKD2
and PKD3 which share a high homology with PKD1.

The objective of the present study was to determine whether PKD1 could be
a prognostic factor and/or a pharmacological target for the treatment of
breast cancer. Expression of prkd1, prkd2 and prkd3 was analyzed by
RT-qPCR in 527 breast cancer specimens (181 ERα- tumors including 102
triple negative tumors and 346 ERα+ tumors). We showed that higher prkd1
mRNA levels were associated with a lower metastasis-free survival in the
overall breast cancer population (p=0.015). prkd1 prognostic value was
even stronger in ERα- tumors (p=0.00042) and in triple negative tumors
(p=0.0043). Conversely, prkd1 expression was not associated with
prognosis in ERα+ tumors. Interestingly, high prkd2 and prkd3 mRNA
levels were associated with a better prognosis in the entire cohort
(p=0.0074 and p=0.028 respectively).

We have developed PKD1 inhibitors in collaboration with the AB Science
pharmaceutical company and screened the ability of thirty-five compounds
to inhibit anchorage-independent growth of MCF-7 cells in the absence of
estrogens. The antitumor activity of two PKD1 inhibitors is currently
being evaluated in vivo against patient-derived breast cancer xenografts.

In conclusion, our results show that high prkd1 expression is a
bad-prognosis factor in breast cancer and that PKD1 could be a relevant
therapeutic target for the treatment of breast cancer, in particular
those harboring an estrogen-independent phenotype.


