Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of effective drug combinations of sonidegib and
ribociclib for treatment of Sonic hedgehog medulloblastoma using
mathematical models of the cell cycle and Hedgehog pathways.


Sonic hedgehog (SHH) tumors account for roughly 25% of all pediatric
medulloblastoma. Aberrant signaling of the SHH pathway, typically via
Patched-1 (PTCH) mutation, results in cell proliferation and subsequent
tumor formation. Smoothened (SMO) inhibitors such as sonidegib have been
used clinically to combat tumor progression and have shown initial
promise. However, many tumors acquire resistance to therapy. Combination
therapy with an additional agent targeting another node in pathways
affecting cell-cycle progression such as ribociclib, a cyclin D-dependent
kinase (CDK) 4/6 inhibitor, may improve therapy and reduce tumor burden
by delaying or preventing the development of resistance. Identification
and evaluation of effective anti-cancer drug combinations, along with
their schedule, sequence, and dosage are a major challenge due to the
large number of possible combinations in addition to the cost and time
involved in experimentally testing each possible permutation.
Mathematical models can aid in the discovery of optimal drug
combinations. A mathematical model of the SHH and Cyclin D / CDK / Rb
pathways was designed to evaluate effective sequences and schedules of
sonidegib and ribociclib for the treatment of SHH medulloblastoma. The
model was parameterized using in vitro data from studies treating the
NIH3T3 cell line with sonidegib and ribociclib singly or in combination.
Flow cytometry analysis was used to quantify response to treatment by
obtaining cell-cycle phase distributions for each drug as a single agent
or in combination. Uncertainty and sensitivity analysis of the model
parameters were evaluated via Latin Hypercube Sampling and Partial Rank
Correlation Coefficient analysis to interpret the effects of
amplification or deletion of nodes in the pathway, evaluate potential
targetable nodes, and identify sensitive parameters that need robust
quantification. Sensitivity analysis indicated that the formation of
Cyclin D/CDK4/6 complexes and the dephosphorylation of Rb were
significant nodes that should be included in the model. Uncertainty
analysis indicated that the majority of the variability lies in the
distribution of cells in G0/G1 and S phase. Simulations of single agent
treatment predict a similar response between sonidegib and ribociclib,
with co-treatment indicative of an additive effect. Optimal control
theory methods are being applied to this model to help determine
effective sequence, schedule, and dose of sonidegib and ribociclib to
improve efficacy and reduce drug resistance in the treatment of SHH
medulloblastoma.


