Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AsiDNA induce tumor sensitivity to PARP inhibitors in homologous
recombination proficient breast cancer AsiDNA induce tumor sensitivity to
PARP inhibitors in homologous recombination proficient breast cancer.


Purpose: PARP inhibitors (PARPi) have shown significant benefits in
cancer patients with BRCA mutations. However, their major limitations are
the necessity of homologous recombination (HR) deficiency and the rapid
emergence of resistance. In the current study, we propose a novel
therapeutic strategy, based on drug combination to promote sensitivity to
PARPi independently of the tumor genetics.

Experimental design: We used AsiDNA, a DNA repair pathways agonist (Dbait
concept), consisting in small molecules mimicking double-strand DNA
breaks to activate ectopic signaling of DNA damage and prevent
recruitment at damage sites of HR repair enzymes. We characterized the
DNA repair inhibition activity of AsiDNA by monitoring repair foci
formation and DNA damage and analyzed the cell survival to AsiDNA
monotherapy and combination with the PARPi Olaparib of 21 tumor cell
lines, and 3 non-tumor cell lines. Efficacy of the combination treatment
was analyzed in tumor xenografts derived from the MDA-MB-231 cell line
showing reduced sensitivity to AsiDNA and Olaparib in vitro. We screened
for the frequency of clones resistant to two weeks treatment with AsiDNA
or Olaparib in the 4NQO-mutagenized haploid KBM7 cells.

Results: Molecular analyses of repair foci formed after irradiation
demonstrate that AsiDNA inhibits recruitment of RAD51 and 53BP1 whereas
Olaparib prevents XRCC1. Combination of both drugs increases the
accumulation of unrepaired spontaneous damage resulting in an increase of
cell death in all tumor cell lines. The synergy of the association of
AsiDNA with PARPi was also confirmed with 6 other PARPi. AsiDNA do not
induce any increase in DNA damage or lethality in non-tumor cells when
used in monotherapy as well as in association with PARPi. Multi-omics
analysis of tumor cells highlighted a correlation between similarity to
normal cells profile and AsiDNA resistance. Selection of resistant clones
allowed the emergence of resistance to Olaparib (1.45%), Imatinib (0.6%)
and 6-Thioguanine (1.6%) but not to AsiDNA (Results: Molecular analyses
of repair foci formed after irradiation demonstrate that AsiDNA inhibits
recruitment of RAD51 and 53BP1 whereas Olaparib prevents XRCC1.
Combination of both drugs increases the accumulation of unrepaired
spontaneous damage resulting in an increase of cell death in all tumor
cell lines. The synergy of the association of AsiDNA with PARPi was also
confirmed with 6 other PARPi. AsiDNA do not induce any increase in DNA
damage or lethality in non-tumor cells when used in monotherapy as well
as in association with PARPi. Multi-omics analysis of tumor cells
highlighted a correlation between similarity to normal cells profile and
AsiDNA resistance. Selection of resistant clones allowed the emergence of
resistance to Olaparib (1.45%), Imatinib (0.6%) and 6-Thioguanine (1.6%)
but not to AsiDNA (<0.07%), indicating that the drug acts through
multiple targets. In the MDA-MB-231 xenograft model, whereas Olaparib
failed to prevent tumor growth and AsiDNA provided only a 62% increase in
tumor growth delay, the combination of Olaparib and AsiDNA increase 215%
days the mean tumor growth delay.

Conclusion: Our results highlight the therapeutic interest of combining
AsiDNA and PARPi to recapitulate synthetic lethality in all tumors
independently of their HR status. Moreover, the low frequency of
appearance of resistant clones to AsiDNA suggests a sustained efficacy
during treatment unlike most targeted therapies.


