Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JQ1 induces DNA damage, inhibits expression of DNA repair
proteins, and synergizes with PARP inhibitors in pancreatic cancer cells.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the most common type of
pancreatic cancer. PDAC is a highly aggressive tumor with a 5-year
survival of Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the most common
type of pancreatic cancer. PDAC is a highly aggressive tumor with a
5-year survival of <6%. Surgery remains the only curative treatment for
PDAC patients, but only 20% of newly diagnosed patients have resectable
disease. The remaining 80% present with locally advanced or metastatic
disease, and receive systemic chemotherapy with gemcitabine. The median
survival of this patient population is ~6 months. Development of more
effective therapy for this chemorefractory disease is imperative.

The goal of the current study was to develop effective combination
therapy for PDAC by identifying agents that might be combined with the
BET bromodomain inhibitor JQ1, which we have shown to inhibit the growth
in vivo of PDAC patient derived xenografts (PDX). Expression profile
analysis of tumors from vehicle control and JQ1 treated mice revealed
that JQ1 inhibited the expression of multiple gene products involved in
DNA repair. Notably, JQ1 inhibited expression of DNA double-strand break
(DSB) repair proteins BRCA2 and Ku80. Immunohistochemical staining
confirmed down-regulation of expression of both proteins in tumors of
mice treated with JQ1.

Further, immunoblot and immunofluorescence analyses demonstrated that
decreased expression of BRCA2 and Ku80 was coincident with increased
levels of DNA damage, as reflected by expression of the DNA DSB marker
gamma-H2AX. Data generated in vivo in three independent PDX models
corroborated in vitro data generated using pancreatic cancer cell lines
BxPC3 and Panc1. The data suggest that JQ1 induces DNA damage by
inhibiting DNA repair.

Because DNA repair deficiency sensitizes cells to PARP inhibitors, we
hypothesized that JQ1-induced DNA repair deficiency would sensitize PDAC
cells to PARP inhibitors. To address this hypothesis, we exposed Panc1
and BxPC3 to JQ1 or to a PARP 1/2 inhibitor (veliparib or olaparib) or to
the combinations, and assessed the efficacy of each. Growth inhibition
data, analyzed using Compusyn software and reported as combination
indices, demonstrated that the combinations of JQ1 + veliparib or
olaparib exert synergistic cytotoxicity. Further, the combination of JQ1
+ a PARP inhibitor increased the accumulation of DNA damage in vitro,
compared to either agent alone. We conclude that JQ1 induces DNA damage
due at least in part to DNA repair deficiency, and propose that this
mechanism sensitizes PDAC cells to PARP inhibitors.


