Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GenePattern Notebook: an environment for reproducible cancer
research.


As the availability of genetic and genomic data and analysis tools from
large-scale cancer initiatives continues to increase, the need has become
more urgent for a software environment that supports the entire “idea
to dissemination” cycle of an integrative cancer genomics analysis.
Such a system would need to provide access to a large number of analysis
tools without the need for programming, be sufficiently flexible to
accommodate the practices of non-programming biologists as well as
experienced bioinformaticians, and would provide a way for researchers to
encapsulate their work into a single “executable document” including
not only the analytical workflow but also the associated descriptive
text, graphics, and supporting research. To address these needs, we have
developed GenePattern Notebook, based on the GenePattern environment for
integrative genomics and the Jupyter Notebook system. GenePattern
Notebook unites the phases of in silico research – experiment design,
collaborative analysis, and publication – into a single interface.

GenePattern Notebook presents a familiar lab-notebook format that allows
researchers to build a record of their work by creating “cells”
containing text, graphics, or executable analyses. Researchers add,
delete, and modify cells as the research evolves, supporting the initial
research phases of prototyping and collaborative analysis. When an
analysis is ready for publication, the same document that was used in the
design and analysis phases becomes a research narrative that interleaves
text, graphics, data, and executable analyses, serving as the complete,
reproducible, in silico methods section for a publication.

GenePattern Notebook features are designed to make it easy for
nonprogramming users to create and adapt notebooks. We have developed new
cell types that allow users to choose analyses, specify input parameters
and datasets, navigate results, send result files to new analyses, and
create richly formatted text, all without the need for programming.

We have released a freely available online GenePattern Notebook
workspace, http://notebook.genepattern.org, where researchers can develop
and publish notebook documents. We have provided a collection of template
notebooks that walk users through various machine learning analyses, and
are collaborating with cancer research laboratories to create integrative
cancer genomics notebooks as well. Notebook topics in development include
characterization of intratumoral heterogeneity from single cell RNA-Seq
data, effective clinical interpretation of comprehensive genomic
profiling from whole exome sequencing of a patient’s tumor and germ
line samples, and identification of master regulators/transcription
factors associated with the downstream transcriptional effects associated
with the activation of an oncogene.


