Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining the pan-FGFR inhibitor AZD4547 with radiation in lung
and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.


The fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFR1, FGR2, FRG3, FGR4) are
frequently altered or overexpressed in both lung and head and neck
squamous cell carcinomas (SCC). Amplification of FGFR1 has been reported
to be as high as 22% in lung SCC and 17% in head and neck SCC (HNSCC).
FGFRs have been identified as a potential therapeutic target in lung and
head and neck cancers. In addition, FGFRs activate multiple pathways
involved in the radiation response including RAS/RAF/MAPK, PI3K/AKT and
STAT. AZD4547 is a potent and selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor of the
FGFR family and is currently being investigated in clinical trials. Since
a substantial portion of lung cancer and HNSCC patients are treated with
radiotherapy, we examined the anti-tumor effects of AZD4547 in
combination with radiation in both lung and head and neck cancer model
systems. FGFR protein and RNA expression and cell proliferation with
AZD4547 were evaluated in 8 lung and 8 head and neck cancer cell lines.
Clonogenic survival assays were performed on 4 lung and 4 head and neck
cancer cell lines and xenograft experiments were performed on one HNSCC
cell line. These cell lines demonstrated varying levels of FGFR1, 2 and 3
protein and RNA expression. The half maximal inhibitory concentration
(IC50) of AZD4547 in these cell lines ranged from 0.05 to 128 uM.
Sensitivity to AZD4547 did not correlate directly with protein or RNA
expression. In vitro clonogenic survival assays showed limited effects of
combining AZD4547 with radiation. However, significant tumor growth delay
was observed with the combination of radiation and AZD4547 compared to
radiation or drug alone in the SCC1483 FGFR2 expressing HNSCC xenograft
model. These findings suggest that AZD4547 can augment the response of
radiation in an in vivo model system. Further studies are underway to
test these findings in additional cell lines including FGFR dependent
amplified cancer cell lines.


