Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia via HIF1alpha can regulate Wnt signaling in human colon
cancer cells.


Standard-of-care treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer combines
chemotherapy with bevacizumab, an angiogenesis inhibitor that depletes
nutrients and triggers hypoxia. Unfortunately, this strategy extends
patient survival only a few months because tumors acquire adaptive
resistance, enabling resumption of angiogenesis. Adaptive resistance
arises from reprogrammed metabolism, but the regulatory networks that
govern reprogramming are not defined. Our studies have shown that
overactive Wnt signaling, which is the most common cause of colon cancer,
programs cancer metabolism by promoting glycolysis and angiogenesis.
Interestingly, metabolic genes targeted by Wnt are also regulated by the
hypoxia transcription factor HIF1alpha suggesting there may be crosstalk
between the two pathways. Several studies suggest that HIF1alpha can
influence Wnt signaling, but the reported effects are variable ranging
from positive to negative. We find that HIF1alpha and
LEF/TCF/beta-catenin complexes co-regulate metabolic targets including
LEF1 and TCF1 (TCF7) expression. Using luciferase reporters driven by
LEF/TCF promoters, we observe significantly increased LEF1/TCF1 but not
TCF3(TCF7L1)/TCF4(TCF7L2) promoter activity in hypoxic colon cancer
cells. We identified putative hypoxia responsive elements (HREs) in the
human LEF1 promoter and deletion of these HREs reduced responsiveness to
hypoxia. Furthermore, when colon cancer cells were treated with
inhibitors that either inactivate or reduce HIF1alpha protein, there was
a significant decrease in Wnt reporter activity. These results suggest
that hypoxia and the Wnt pathway crosstalk wherein hypoxia co-regulates
metabolism genes and increases Wnt signaling capacity via LEF/TCF
expression. Current studies are underway to investigate the mechanisms of
crosstalk and joint regulation of metabolic gene programs during adaptive
resistance.


