Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of mTOR downregulates expression of DNA repair proteins
and is highly efficient against BRCA2-mutated breast cancer when combined
to PARP inhibition.


Purpose: DNA repair deficiencies and activation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway
are common events in breast cancer. BRCA1/2 mutations have been
associated with sensitivity to PARP1 inhibitors (synthetic lethality),
while alterations in component of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway might confer
sensitivity to PI3KCA and mTOR inhibitors. Here we explored the
therapeutic benefit of combining a mTOR and a PARP inhibitor in
BRCA2-mutated patient-derived xenografts (PDX) with alterations in the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway.

Experimental design: the combination of the mTOR inhibitor everolimus and
the PARP inhibitor olaparib was tested in two BRCA2-mutated PDX
established from a luminal B tamoxifen-resistant and a basal-like breast
cancers. Both carried alterations in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway: PIK3R1
mutation and PTEN loss for the luminal B PDX and PTEN loss for the
basal-like PDX. To identify putative crosstalk events between mTOR and
DNA repair, a Reverse Phase Protein Array (RPPA) analysis of multiple
signaling pathways and DNA repair processes was performed on untreated
and treated xenografts. Gene and protein expression changes were
confirmed by RT-PCR and Western Blot analyses. The capacity to repair DNA
damage was measured by P-H2AX immunostaining.

Results: in both PDX, everolimus and olaparib showed marked anti-tumor
activity with a growth inhibition comprised between 78% and 86% in the
monotherapy setting and 96% in the combination arm, where 100% of mice
showed tumor regressions. In the luminal B tumor this combination was
more efficient than the combination of everolimus and endocrine therapies
(fulvestrant or tamoxifen). In both PDX, the fraction of P-H2AX (marker
of unrepaired DNA double-strand breaks) positive cells was increased
after everolimus treatment, suggesting a link between mTOR and DNA
damage, and strongly increased in the combination setting. RPPA analysis
of tumors treated by everolimus alone revealed a marked downregulation of
different proteins involved in DNA repair, including FANCD2, RAD50 and
SUV39H1, a chromatin compactor factor essential in homologous
recombination. In the combination setting, expression of these proteins
was almost completely abolished, suggesting convergence of PARP and mTOR
in downregulation of DNA repair components.

Conclusions: our results suggest that combining mTOR and DNA repair
inhibitors could be a successful strategy to treat a subset of breast
cancer with BRCA2 mutation and alterations in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway.
Further experiments with mTOR and PARP inhibitors combinations are
ongoing in sporadic breast cancer PDX showing a BRCAness phenotype.


