Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulating the UPR using the impridone ONC201 to change the impact
of radiation on prostate cancer cells.


Prostate cancer is the highest incidence non-cutaneous cancer in men, and
a significant cause of cancer mortality. Localized disease is treated
with surgery or radiotherapy and whilst androgen deprivation therapy can
extend survival in the subset of cases that progress, metastatic disease
is incurable. We have found that oncogenic drivers of prostate cancer, as
well as therapy, lead to changes in the activation of prostate cancer
cell stress signaling pathways and in particular the unfolded protein
response (UPR). We have previously reported that the androgen receptor
sustains the cytoprotective activity of the IRE1-XBP1 arm of the UPR and
represses the activation of the PERK-ATF4 arm. We showed that treating
prostate cancer cells with radiation leads to the activation of all three
arms of the UPR, culminating in treatment resistance in surviving cells.
In this study we assess whether the activation of the UPR in response to
radiation mirrors the immunogenic/inflammatory response, which is known
to occur in an initially acute apoptotic phase before resolving to a
chronic sustainable level. Further we have evaluated the impact of
combining radiation with ONC201, a novel anti-cancer small molecule in
clinical trials that is an activator of the UPR, on the viability of
prostate cancer. We find that ONC201 has a delayed cytotoxic effect as a
single agent, with the impact on viability occurring from 72 hours
onwards at low microMolar concentrations. However activation of multiple
arms of the UPR occurs earlier and is detectable at 24 hours for ATF4,
ATF6 and IRE1-XBP1 at the protein/mRNA levels. This time difference
creates a window in which to introduce sequential administration of
radiation to test ONC201 as a primer for cytotoxic response radiation. We
have undertaken this work in a panel of cell-lines (PC3, DU145 and
AR-expressing cell-lines) in which we have also knocked down key
regulators (PERK, IRE1, CHOP) of separate arms of the UPR. This
represents the first in vitro study to characterise the impact of ONC201
on the radiation-responsiveness of prostate cancer cells.


