Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical development of a novel biparatopic HER2 antibody with
activity in low to high HER2 expressing cancers.


HER2-directed therapies have improved clinical outcomes for many patients
with HER2 overexpressing breast and gastric cancer. Despite these
successes, there remains a need to develop effective HER2-targeted
therapies for these and other HER2-expressing tumors, particularly in the
setting of recurrent or metastatic disease. One approach is to develop a
single multifunctional antibody that has improved capacity and efficiency
for binding HER2 compared with available HER2 inhibitors, can elicit
ADCC, block ligand induced heterodimerization of HER2 with other HER
family receptors, and down-regulate HER2 protein on the cell surface.

ZW25 is a novel humanized, IgG1-like bispecific antibody directed against
two distinct epitopes on the HER2 receptor. ZW25 has low nM binding
affinity (0.9-16 nM) to recombinant HER2 and to cultured cancer cells
with a range of HER2 expression, and shows higher maximal binding
(1.4-1.9x) than monospecific HER2 antibodies on all tumor cell lines
tested. The unique structure of ZW25 favors crosslinking of multiple HER2
receptors which is thought to promote clustering, and improves HER2
internalization compared to monospecific HER2 antibodies. In vitro
studies demonstrated that ZW25 alone caused significant inhibition in
growth of human cancer cell lines with a wide range of HER2 expression
(5-54% inhibition depending on the cell line), and inhibited
ligand-mediated tumor cell proliferation. ZW25 elicited
concentration-dependent ADCC at nM potency (0.05-64 nM) with maximal
lysis up to 52% on TNBC cell lines expressing HER2 at a 0/1+ level. ZW25
also exhibited synergy and additivity with multiple chemotherapeutic
agents including platins, taxanes, microtubule inhibitors, and DNA
synthesis inhibitors in various HER2 expressing tumor cell lines.

In vivo studies demonstrated antitumor activity and/or improved survival
against xenografts from a range of tumor types. In a HER2 3+ gastric
cancer PDX model ZW25 induced significant tumor regressions, exhibiting
307% tumor growth inhibition relative to hIgG control and a 70% complete
regression rate (trastuzumab exhibited 111% tumor growth control with no
complete regressions). In a HER2 1+ breast cancer PDX model ZW25
significantly improved median survival (58 vs 28 days) and exhibited 141%
tumor growth inhibition relative to hIgG control (trastuzumab exhibited
63% tumor growth inhibition, with median survival 39 days). In a low
HER2-expressing NSCLC CDX model ZW25 improved median survival compared to
hIgG control or cisplatin (> 66 vs 25 or 26 d respectively) and exhibited
159% tumor growth inhibition relative to hIgG control. In a GLP repeat
dose toxicology study, ZW25 was well tolerated with no adverse effects at
doses up to 150 mg/kg weekly IV for up to 8 weeks. Based on these
findings, a first in human clinical trial of ZW25 has been initiated in
patients with recurrent and/or metastatic HER2-expressing cancers.


