Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of Cav-1 is associated with manifestation of stem cell-like
properties via Src-mediated phosphorylation in human breast MDA-MB-231
cancer cells.


A subpopulation of cancer cells, termed cancer stem cells (CSCs), has
self-renewal and differentiation potential, which contributes to cancer
recurrence and tumor resistance. Caveolin-1 (Cav-1), the major structural
protein of flask-shaped plasma membrane invaginations called caveolae,
functions as a tumor suppressor or an oncogene depending on the tumor
type and the grade. Caveolae participate in various cellular functions,
such as vesicle trafficking, cholesterol homeostasis, signal
transduction, and tumor progression. In the present study, we
investigated the role of Cav-1 on the stemness of human breast cancer
(MDA-MB-231) cells. A sphere formation assay has been widely used to
enrich for CSCs through serial passaging. A level of Cav-1 protein
expression decreased in third-generation mammospheres as compared to
parent MDA-MB-231 cells. Under the same experimental conditions, however,
there was no concurrent decrease in the Cav-1 mRNA level. Therefore, it
is likely that stability of Cav-1 protein is decreased during mammosphere
formation. Recently, it has been reported that sustained phosphorylation
of Cav-1 promotes its ubiquitination and degradation by the proteasomes.
We observed that PP2, an inhibitor of Src, suppressed phosphorylation of
Cav-1 in MDA-MB-231-derived mammosphere cells, which in turn increases
its protein stability. Breast CSCs are enriched in cells with enhanced
expression of phenotypic markers, such as CD44+/CD24-. We found that
Cav-1 gene silencing using siRNA enhanced the proportion of CD44+/CD24-
MDA-MB-231 cells. In addition, Cav-1 knockdown increased the number and
the size of secondary mammospheres, and this was accompanied by enhanced
expression of Bmi-1 and Sox-2, which are representative self-renewal
markers. Moreover, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) was decreased
by knockdown of Cav-1 in MDA-MB-231 cells. Taken together, these findings
suggest that loss of Cav-1 protein stability facilitates the formation of
mammospheres through upregulation of self-renewal and EMT markers in
breast CSCs.


