Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) data to accurately predict
electric field delivery to the tumor during TTFields treatment.


Tumor Treating Fields (TTFields) are low intensity (1-3 V/cm) alternating
electric fields in the intermediate frequency range, delivered through
two pairs of transducer arrays placed on the patient's scalp. TTFields
are an anti-mitotic modality approved for the treatment of glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM).

Simulation-based studies show that TTFields distribution within the brain
depends on the location of the arrays on the scalp as well as the anatomy
of the patient. Therefore, to study how field distribution influences
disease progression requires the creation of patient-specific
computational models. To date the creation of such models is based on
accurate segmentation of MRI images into various tissues, and further of
volume mesh assembly. These tasks are performed using semi-automatic,
labor-intensive algorithms, making this approach impractical for studies
which require the creation of a large number of patient models. We
recently outlined that diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) could be used to
construct realistic head models for simulating TTFields distribution
without the need for complex segmentation of the brain. This is possible
because the diffusion tensors evaluated from DTI can be scaled into
anisotropic conductivity tensors using simple relationships. However, the
approach is limited because the acquisition of high-quality DTI data is
not widely practiced for GBM patients. Yet, shorter diffusion weighted
imaging (DWI) sequences, such as an apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC)
map or trace image, are common diagnostic techniques. The aim of this
study was to test whether DWI data could potentially be used to create
realistic head models.

We used a previously developed head model created from structural and DTI
data of a healthy individual. To test pathological scenarios, virtual
lesions were placed. To simulate data acquired with DWI, we substituted
the diffusion tensor at each point within the model with the mean
diffusion (MD), which is the value that can be measured using DWI. The
computational model was then completed by scaling the MD into a
voxel-wise isotropic conductivity map using the same relationship as
applied to convert anisotropic diffusion into conductivity tensors.
TTFields distributions within the model were then evaluated for various
array layouts and tumor locations.

The field distribution within the DWI-derived models did not vary
significantly from those found in the DTI-derived models. The highest
deviation between models was a difference of 5% in the average electric
field intensity in the tumor. The study shows that DWI data can be used
to develop realistic head models for simulating TTFields, opening a new
avenue for creating patient-specific computational models on a large
scale. These models could be beneficial for retrospective studies
investigating possible connections between field distribution and disease
outcome.


