Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunomodulatory effects of an EphA2-targeted docetaxel
antibody-directed nanotherapeutic and synergistic combination with PD-1
inhibitor.


The efficacy of the current class of PD-1/PD-L1 antagonists can be
limited by the immunogenicity of the tumor microenvironment. Studies
showed that some chemotherapeutic agents including taxanes and
anthracyclines can increase immunogenicity, resulting in therapeutic
synergy with immune checkpoint inhibitors. In particular, treatment with
a taxane has been shown to increase the recruitment of CTLs and decrease
immunosuppressive cells such as MDSCs and T-regs. Additionally, the
immune-modulatory activity of paclitaxel has been shown to increase with
prolonged exposure of the taxane at the tumor level, achieved through
metronomic dosing. MM-310 is an Ephrin Receptor A2 (EphA2)-targeted
antibody-directed nanotherapeutic (ADN) that encapsulates a docetaxel
prodrug. Preclinically, MM-310 leads to prolonged exposure of docetaxel
at the tumor level, while lowering systemic exposure to bioavailable
docetaxel, and thus decreasing not only dose-limiting neutropenia but
also the killing of circulating lymphocytes potentially critical to
anti-PD1/PDL1 activity relative to free docetaxel. Taken together, we
hypothesize that MM-310 can synergistically combine with anti-PD-1
therapy. In this study, we evaluated the potential combination of MM-310
and a murine anti-PD-1 Ab in the treatment of several syngeneic mouse
tumor models. The tumor lines EMT-6, CT-26, and LLC were selected to
provide a range of sensitivity to both docetaxel and anti-PD-1. In vivo
activity studies and immune-phenotype studies were performed comparing
MM-310+anti-PD-1 combination to the monotherapies. MM-310 administration
was initiated two days prior to anti-PD-1 therapy and consisted of four
weekly doses, while anti-PD-1 was dosed twice weekly for four weeks. The
response to MM-310 or anti-PD-1 as monotherapies varied between the
models. LLC was unresponsive to anti-PD-1 and poorly responsive to
MM-310, CT-26 was poorly responsive to both anti-PD-1 and MM-310, while
EMT-6 responded moderately to anti-PD-1 with tumor stasis and well to
MM-310, achieving tumor regression. In all models, however, MM-310 given
in combination with anti-PD-1 outperformed controls and both monotherapy
arms in terms of growth inhibition and tumor regression rate. In the
EMT-6 model, combination treatment resulted in durable complete
regressions in 6/10 mice when compared to 2/10 and 0/10 for MM-310 and
anti-PD-1 monotherapies respectively. In MM-310 and MM-310+anti-PD-1
groups, re-challenge of mice with the same tumor cells, at 10 weeks post
treatment interruption, did not lead to tumor growth, suggesting that
treatment with anti-PD1+MM-310 promotes the development of a memory
response against the tumor antigen. In conclusion, the novel combination
of MM-310, an EphA2-targeted docetaxel ADN with an anti-PD-1 antibody, is
highly active in syngeneic tumor models, and represents a promising
strategy for the treatment of cancer.


