Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual inhibition of the PI3k/Akt and MEK5/ERK5 pathways in
tamoxifen resistant breast cancer.


Approximately 70% of breast cancers are considered estrogen receptor
alpha (ER) and/or progesterone receptor (PR) positive, and their growth
is primarily driven by the hormone estrogen. Initially these cancers are
responsive to endocrine therapies such as tamoxifen. However, over time
patients become resistant to conventional endocrine therapy and treatment
becomes more difficult. Tamoxifen resistance occurs due to several
mechanisms: loss of ER expression, gain of function mutations,
pharmacological tolerance, alterations of co-activators, and ligand
independent activation of ER by various kinase cascades. Aberrations in
the Phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) and Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase
(MAPK) pathways have been linked to increased breast cancer proliferation
and survival. It has been proposed that these survival characteristics
are enhanced through compensatory signaling and crosstalk mechanisms. The
crosstalk between PI3K/Akt and MEK1/2/ERK1/2 has been characterized in
several systems. However, new evidence suggests that MEK5/ERK5, a member
of the MAPK family, is a key component in the proliferation and survival
of therapy resistant cancers. MEK5/ERK5 has been shown to promote ER
alpha driven transcription in ER+ breast cancers and actin reorganization
and metastasis in ER- breast cancers. Furthermore, MEK5/ERK5 promotes
hormone independent tumorigenesis in breast cancer. Our lab has
previously investigated these pathways in hormone independent breast
cancers, TNBC (triple negative breast cancer). Our previous results
indicate that combinations of PI3k/Akt and MEK5/ERK5 blockade are
promising because they inhibit both the pro-proliferative and
pro-metastatic pathways in TNBC. Additionally, PI3k/Akt and MEK5/ERK5
inhibition was shown synergistically reduce viability in a diverse panel
of cell lines (TNBC, ER+, and Triple Positive). Based on these initial
results we hypothesize that PI3k/Akt and MEK5/ERK5 inhibition decreases
viability via a hormone independent mechanism: perhaps by reducing the
cytosolic sequestration of Bad. In this study we investigate the utility
PI3k/Akt and MEK5/ERK5 inhibition in a MCF-7 TamR cell line. The goal of
our study is to elucidate the roles of PI3k/Akt/mTOR and MEK5/ERK5 in
endocrine resistant breast cancer and broaden the scope of a dual
inhibition strategy.


