Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection and characterization of extrachromosomal circular DNA in
human plasma.


Background: eccDNA (extrachromosomal circular DNA) has been reported in
most eukaryotes, including in human cells. However, little is known about
the eccDNA profiles in human circulating system such as blood.

Method: We extracted plasma cell free DNA (cfDNA) from three patients
with advanced stage cancers. For each patient, we tested 10ng, 1ng and
0.1ng cfDNA, each with a technical replicate. The cfDNA samples were
subjected to ATP-dependent DNase digestion and whole genome amplification
(WGA). An additional 2ng cfDNA from each patient skipped the DNase
digestion and went directly to WGA step. We sequenced the amplified DNAs
using the Illumina 100bp PE read protocol. We analyzed sequencing data
using a custom split reads-based strategy to retrieve circular DNA
molecules. We further analyzed eccDNAs for their biofeatures using
functional annotation tools.

Results: We received sequence reads at ~14.8 million (11.4~22.4) for each
sample. When read depth≥ 3 as a cutoff, we detected a total number of
2542, 1578, and 57 unique eccDNAs in three patients while negative
controls showed Results: We received sequence reads at ~14.8 million
(11.4~22.4) for each sample. When read depth≥ 3 as a cutoff, we
detected a total number of 2542, 1578, and 57 unique eccDNAs in three
patients while negative controls showed <=5 eccDNAs. For non-DNase
digested cfDNAs, we detected only 3 eccDNAs. By comparing read numbers
mapped to mitochondria and human genome, we found that mitochondrial
sequence reads increased significantly from 0.34-1.1% before digestion to
24.1-50.1% after digestion. Numbers of detected eccDNAs were similar
between technical replicates and proportional to initial input cfDNA.
However, eccDNAs detected also showed few overlaps between technical
replicates. Size distribution ranged from 31bp to 19740bp (median
1801-1962bp). To test if eccDNAs were generated in specific genomic
regions and if eccDNA-involved genes were enriched in specific pathways,
we performed enrichment analysis and observed higher GC content in
smaller eccDNAs (500bp, 41%) (p500bp, 41%) (p<0.001). When compared to
random distribution, eccDNAs were more likely located at CpG islands
(1.36-1.53 fold enrichment). The eccDNAs were also enriched in exons,
5’UTR, 3’UTR and DNase hypersensitive sites (enrichment folds from
1.39 to 2.3). Using DAVID annotation tool, we observed significant
enrichment of the eccDNA-related genes in several categories including
the Coiled coil, phosphoprotein, fibronectin, suggesting a potential
involvement in gene expression regulation and cell adhesion events. Using
GREAT (Genomic Regions Enrichment of Annotations Tool), we found that the
eccDNAs were involved in genes associated with invasive cancer cell gene
expression regulation (p500bp, 41%) (p<0.001). When compared to random
distribution, eccDNAs were more likely located at CpG islands (1.36-1.53
fold enrichment). The eccDNAs were also enriched in exons, 5’UTR,
3’UTR and DNase hypersensitive sites (enrichment folds from 1.39 to
2.3). Using DAVID annotation tool, we observed significant enrichment of
the eccDNA-related genes in several categories including the Coiled coil,
phosphoprotein, fibronectin, suggesting a potential involvement in gene
expression regulation and cell adhesion events. Using GREAT (Genomic
Regions Enrichment of Annotations Tool), we found that the eccDNAs were
involved in genes associated with invasive cancer cell gene expression
regulation (p<0.001).

Conclusion: Human plasma contains an abundant number of eccDNAs.
Distribution of these eccDNAs is nonrandom event and is likely enriched
in genomic regions with known functional consequences and genes that play
a role in gene regulations. Further characterization of circulating
eccDNAs in peripheral blood will facilitate understanding of their
molecular mechanisms and potential clinical utilities.


