Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimizing nanoparticle surface properties using SPR for improved
therapeutic efficacy against triple-negative breast cancer tumors.


Many of the nanoparticle (NP) formulations approved for clinical use in
solid tumor therapy provide only modest improvements in patient survival.
This is in part due to NP tumor penetration barriers, including a dense
and complex extracellular matrix (ECM) and an elevated interstitial fluid
pressure, which hinder the penetration of drugs and NPs into and within
tumors limiting therapeutic efficacy. Using polystyrene (PS) particles
over the size range of 20-100 nm, we recently tested how particle size
impacted NP diffusion in a well-characterized tumor ECM preparation
(Matrigel) and in triple-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer xenografts by
multiple particle tracking (MPT) and intravital microscopy. We also
investigated the effect of PEG surface density on the diffusion of ~60 nm
PS NPs in the same models. Nonspecific binding of the NPs to tumor ECM
components was determined by a surface plasmon resonance (SPR) binding
assay, which was then compared to the NP diffusion results. Furthermore,
biodegradable PLGA NPs with various surface PEG densities and two
clinically-relevant NPs, PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin (Doxil) and
non-PEGylated albumin-bound paclitaxel (Abraxane), were evaluated by SPR
to evaluate their potential tumor penetration ability. These studies
demonstrated that NPs as large as 60 nm, but less than 110 nm in
diameter, diffuse rapidly within tumor ECM and tumor xenograft tissues ex
vivo if they are densely coated with PEG. The penetration of these NPs
within the same tumor models was found to be highly dependent on surface
PEG density. Intravital microscopy of NP spread in living tissue
confirmed a significant difference in tumor tissue penetration between
the 60 and 110 nm PEG-PS NPs, as well as between PEG-coated and uncoated
NPs. Non-specific binding of NPs to tumor ECM components was assessed by
SPR, which revealed a positive correlation with the particle diffusion
results consistent across multiple particle types, including PS and
biodegradable NPs. SPR assays revealed that Abraxane binds significantly
to tumor ECM which has the potential to limit particle dispersion with
tumor tissue. Studies to extend these findings to drug-loaded,
molecularly-targeted biodegradable NPs are underway. We have successfully
encapsulated paclitaxel to the polymer backbone of PLGA containing a
low-molecular weight PEG coating. Additional surface modifications have
been made to enable NP targeting to Fn14-positive triple-negative breast
tumors. In summary, we have developed a NP platform that can diffuse and
penetrate within tumor tissue and selectively target tumors. Using this
approach, we can optimize therapeutics versions to improve drug efficacy
while limiting many of the side effects and risks of free drug and
non-targeted therapies.


