Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UPR biomarker expression correlates with inhibition of migration
of TNBC cells treated with low doses of chemotherapy.


Much attention has been directed to the study of triple-negative breast
cancer (TNBC) because of its short disease-free interval from diagnosis
and more aggressive course in the metastatic setting. TNBC also lacks
specific target receptors for treatment. Third-generation metronomic
chemotherapy using available agents that target DNA repair complexes
(i.e., taxanes), and cell proliferation (i.e., anthracycline) have shown
promise results. However, specific regimens for TNBC at the different
disease stages have not been clearly defined. Therefore, researchers are
seeking molecular biomarkers to predict response to current
chemotherapeutic agents. In a previous study of TNBC, we demonstrated
that low doses of anthracyclines and taxanes, which are known to increase
endoplasmic reticulum stress, increased tumor cell expression of
glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), a key regulator of the unfolding
protein response (UPR), resulting in tumor cell apoptosis. GRP78 gene
expression is upregulated via CREB2L1, an endoplasmic reticulum
transmembrane transcription factor and member of the CREB/ATF family of
transcription factors. CREB3L1 is a metastatic suppressor and functions
as a transducer of UPR. The aim of the present study was to investigate
the effect of low doses of doxorubicin and paclitaxel on UPR activation
in metastatic TNBC cells by determining CREB3L1 protein expression in
correlation to cell-surface GRP78 expression. Furthermore, we related
CREB3L1 and cell-surface GRP78 expression with the migration potential of
the cells in response to treatment. We found that metronomic doses of
doxorubicin significantly induced CREB3L1 and cell surface GRP78
expression in TNBC cells. CREB3L1 increased by 2.5-fold in MDAMB231 and
by 3-fold in MDAMB468 (pMuch attention has been directed to the study of
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) because of its short disease-free
interval from diagnosis and more aggressive course in the metastatic
setting. TNBC also lacks specific target receptors for treatment.
Third-generation metronomic chemotherapy using available agents that
target DNA repair complexes (i.e., taxanes), and cell proliferation
(i.e., anthracycline) have shown promise results. However, specific
regimens for TNBC at the different disease stages have not been clearly
defined. Therefore, researchers are seeking molecular biomarkers to
predict response to current chemotherapeutic agents. In a previous study
of TNBC, we demonstrated that low doses of anthracyclines and taxanes,
which are known to increase endoplasmic reticulum stress, increased tumor
cell expression of glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), a key regulator
of the unfolding protein response (UPR), resulting in tumor cell
apoptosis. GRP78 gene expression is upregulated via CREB2L1, an
endoplasmic reticulum transmembrane transcription factor and member of
the CREB/ATF family of transcription factors. CREB3L1 is a metastatic
suppressor and functions as a transducer of UPR. The aim of the present
study was to investigate the effect of low doses of doxorubicin and
paclitaxel on UPR activation in metastatic TNBC cells by determining
CREB3L1 protein expression in correlation to cell-surface GRP78
expression. Furthermore, we related CREB3L1 and cell-surface GRP78
expression with the migration potential of the cells in response to
treatment. We found that metronomic doses of doxorubicin significantly
induced CREB3L1 and cell surface GRP78 expression in TNBC cells. CREB3L1
increased by 2.5-fold in MDAMB231 and by 3-fold in MDAMB468 (p<0.04);
GRP78 increased by 3.7-fold and 6.1-fold, respectively (pMuch attention
has been directed to the study of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)
because of its short disease-free interval from diagnosis and more
aggressive course in the metastatic setting. TNBC also lacks specific
target receptors for treatment. Third-generation metronomic chemotherapy
using available agents that target DNA repair complexes (i.e., taxanes),
and cell proliferation (i.e., anthracycline) have shown promise results.
However, specific regimens for TNBC at the different disease stages have
not been clearly defined. Therefore, researchers are seeking molecular
biomarkers to predict response to current chemotherapeutic agents. In a
previous study of TNBC, we demonstrated that low doses of anthracyclines
and taxanes, which are known to increase endoplasmic reticulum stress,
increased tumor cell expression of glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78),
a key regulator of the unfolding protein response (UPR), resulting in
tumor cell apoptosis. GRP78 gene expression is upregulated via CREB2L1,
an endoplasmic reticulum transmembrane transcription factor and member of
the CREB/ATF family of transcription factors. CREB3L1 is a metastatic
suppressor and functions as a transducer of UPR. The aim of the present
study was to investigate the effect of low doses of doxorubicin and
paclitaxel on UPR activation in metastatic TNBC cells by determining
CREB3L1 protein expression in correlation to cell-surface GRP78
expression. Furthermore, we related CREB3L1 and cell-surface GRP78
expression with the migration potential of the cells in response to
treatment. We found that metronomic doses of doxorubicin significantly
induced CREB3L1 and cell surface GRP78 expression in TNBC cells. CREB3L1
increased by 2.5-fold in MDAMB231 and by 3-fold in MDAMB468 (p<0.04);
GRP78 increased by 3.7-fold and 6.1-fold, respectively (p<0.01). Similar
results were obtained with low doses of paclitaxel. A strong correlation
was observed between CREB3L1 and cell-surface GRP78 protein expression.
The increased expression of both proteins in MDAMB231 (highly metastatic)
and MDAMB468 (moderated metastatic) was associated with significant
inhibition of the migration capacity of the treated TNBC cells. In
contrast, the migration capacity of treated estrogen-positive MCF7 cells
(non-metastatic) and Her2- positive BT474 cells (highly metastatic) was
poorly inhibited, coinciding with a non-significant increase in CREB3L1
and GRP78 expression. The results demonstrated that the drug effect via
the UPR was specific for TNBC and unrelated to the metastatic profile of
the cells. This study is the first stage in the identification of
UPR-related biomarkers of beneficial outcome of metronomic chemotherapy
for TNBC. Future mechanistic studies should focus on the possible use of
cell surface GRP78 and CREB3L1 as targets for combination therapies.


