Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of genome-wide microRNA and mRNA profiling
reveals unregulated miR-125b associated with poor prognosis by reducing
cell apoptosis in gastric cancer.


Background & Aims: In our prior study, an integrated analysis of microRNA
and mRNA profiling of gastric cancer (GC) revealed a mRNA-regulatory
network. It defined a GC microRNA subtype that was associated with poor
survival in 90 GC cases. In this study, we further demonstrate that
miR-125b, a key node in this microRNA regulatory network, is upregulated
in GC and associated with poor overall survival by interfering in the
apoptosis pathway.

Methods: To further investigate the role of miR-125b in GC, we conducted
both an in vitro experiment and clinical study (cohort of 373 GC
samples). miR-125b and targets in the network were validated through
RT-PCR and tissue microarray GC cases. The miR-125b targeted gene and
related pathway were identified by a gene expression profile analysis in
miR-125b transfected GC cell lines. The Annexin V-FITC and TUNEL assay
were used to assess apoptosis. MTT and flow cytometry were performed to
detect the effect of miR-125b on proliferation and cell cycle. The wound
healing test and transwell assay were used to analyze migration and
invasion.

Results: The markly upregulated expression of miR-125b was validated in
373 GC samples.. Univariate and multivariate analyses find that the
miR-125b was associated with poor prognosis (p=0. 011). Pathway analysis
shows that the predicted targets of miR-125b are highly involved in
apoptosis/program death pathway. The robust apoptosis genes, BIK and
CASP6 are validated as the directed targets of miR-125b. miR-125b can
suppress apoptosis and increas cell growth, migration and invasion in GC
cell lines. Furthermore, low expression of BIK (p=0. 034) and CASP6
(p=0.048) in GC were associated with poor disease-free survival.

Conclusions: The apoptosis pathway was found to be dominant in the
pathway construction based on target genes of miR-125b. Our findings
suggest that miR-125b-regulated apoptosis pathway is important to GC
progression and that the miR-125 may be an important clinical biomarker
for GC survival and possible therapeutic target for GC treatment.


