Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug sensitivity profile of 5TGM1 murine multiple myeloma cell
line emphasizes the translational potential of the syngeneic in vivo
model.


Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most common hematologic malignancy
that originates from B-cells (plasma cells) and causes 2% of
cancer-related deaths. Symptoms of MM include bone pain caused by
multiple osteolytic lesions, pathologic fractures, and hypercalcemia.
Typically, MM has a low growth fraction and it is highly dependent on the
microenvironment. These properties have made it hard to target by
conventional chemotherapy, but could now be exploited by novel
stroma-targeting drugs and immunotherapy. These new approaches underline
the need for well characterized models with functional immune system and
appropriate tumor microenvironment. To gain additional information
supporting the use of the syngeneic 5TGM1 murine multiple myeloma model
in drug development, we tested drug sensitivity of 5TGM1 cells by
screening an extensive panel of drugs.

The compound library consisting of 460 compounds included conventional
chemotherapy, kinase inhibitors, metabolic modifiers, rapalogs,
differentiating/epigenetic modifiers, kinesin inhibitors, apoptotic
modulators, NSAIDs, hormone therapy, immunomodulators and HSP inhibitors.
The compounds were tested in five concentrations covering a 10.000-fold
drug-relevant concentration range in 384-well format. Cells were seeded
to plates with a compound library, followed by cell viability
measurements (CellTiter-Glo) after 72 hours. Maximal and minimal
responses to drugs were analyzed, and the EC50 values were calculated.
Drug Sensitivity Score (DSS) was calculated for each drug as a measure of
reduced viability.

According to DSS analysis, 5TGM1 cells showed sensitivity to conventional
chemotherapy, such as antimitotic drugs, and kinase inhibitors, such as
MEK1/2 inhibitors. In addition, the cells showed particular sensitivity
to several HSP90 inhibitors currently in phase I/II clinical development
for MM. Lenalidomide and pomalidomide, efficient in treating multiple
myeloma in humans, both gave low DSS value indicating that 5TGM1 cells
are not sensitive to these drugs, which is expected because they do not
bind to murine form of the target cereblon. In contrast, 5TGM1 cells were
highly sensitive to the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (DSS 32.2), which
is currently in clinical use.

In conclusion, the murine 5TGM1 cells show sensitivity to various MM
drugs used in the clinic and under development. Evaluating the effects of
the microenvironment on the growth and drug sensitivity of 5TGM1 cells in
vitro and in vivo will be essential. Furthermore, the cell-based compound
screening combined with DSS analysis provides a possibility to profile
cellular responses to an extensive collection of anti-cancer compounds
enabling identification of vulnerabilities in cancer cells and functional
investigation of cellular pathways behind drug sensitivity or resistance.


