Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Orthogonal validation of oncomine cfDNA panel data with digital
PCR using TaqMan Rare Mutation Assays.


The discovery of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in the blood, urine and
other bodily fluids of cancer patients has led to a new type of
non-invasive method of characterizing cancer-causing mutations, the
liquid biopsy. With NGS technologies becoming increasingly sensitive,
down to a 0.1% Limit of Detection (LOD), they are rapidly gaining
traction as a valid assay for cancer genotyping and have potential to
direct cancer treatment plans. The wide-angle view provided by NGS
panels, combined with dPCR’s zoomed-in precision detection of DNA
provide a comprehensive picture of a cancer’s genetic makeup. By
applying these complementary techniques at the appropriate time based on
the disease type and stage, cancer treatment will become quicker, more
precise and more cost-effective in the future. NGS and digital PCR
together provide a complete picture of the cancer genome. As part of our
research, we wet-lab tested a subset of Rare Mutation Assays
corresponding to the Oncomine cfDNA panel for next generation sequencing.
Synthetic plasmid (GeneArt) carrying the mutation was spiked into
wild-type genomic DNA to reflect a mutation rate of 0.1%. Wild-type
genomic DNA was used as negative control. Thermal cycling was performed
according to protocol for digital PCR using the QuantStudio 3D. In this
study, we tested a pilot set of samples using AcroMetrix Oncology Hotspot
Control and Horizon cfDNA Reference Standard with both NGS using Oncomine
cfDNA panel and digital PCR with Rare Mutation Assays. Comparison of NGS
and digital PCR results for the same sample showed excellent correlation
in the low mutation range around 0.1%. This study confirms that digital
PCR using QuantStudio 3D and Rare Mutation Assays is effective as a
method for orthogonal validation of NGS data using the Oncomine cfDNA
panel. Additionally, TaqMan Rare Mutation Assays offer a sensitive and
precise solution for downstream mutation tracking over a time course. For
Research Use Only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures.


