Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoformulation of talazoparib to increase efficacy when combined
with temozolomide for the treatment of Ewing sarcoma xenografts.


Ewing Family of tumors (EFT) comprises the fourth most common highly
malignant childhood cancer. Although sustained event-free survival (EFS)
can be achieved with intensive chemo-radiation therapy for patients with
local-regional disease, this therapy is relatively ineffective in the
treatment of metastatic disease with EFS of 12% at 5 years. Ewing sarcoma
is characterized by a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 11 and
22 that encodes a chimeric oncoprotein resulting from the fusion of EWSR1
to the FLI1 transcription factor in ~85% of tumors. Therapy for patients
with EFT comprises surgery, intensive use of cytotoxic agents and
radiation therapy. Dose intensification and dose compression has resulted
in some improvement in outcome, but patents with advanced or metastatic
disease at diagnosis still represent a challenge. Further, patients alive
at 5 years from diagnosis still have a high probability of subsequent
relapse. Further, long-term consequences of treatment included cardiac
dysfunction, and secondary malignancies. Thus, more effective and less
toxic therapies are required to treat patients with advanced disease.

Our studies, as part of the Pediatric Preclinical Testing Program (PPTP),
identified the combination of the PARP inhibitor, talazoparib, with the
DNA damaging agent temozolomide, as being highly synergistic in xenograft
models of Ewing sarcoma, but not against other tumor types. In this study
5 of 10 Ewing tumor xenografts models showed dramatic regressions to the
combination, while administered as single agents neither talazoparib or
temozolomide were active. We have studied the talazoparib-temozolomide
synergy in vitro, and results indicate that in models where there is no
synergy as xenografts, the cell lines have either intrinsic resistance to
talazoparib, temozolomide or both drugs. In mice, and in the clinical
trial (NCT02116777), the talazoparib-temozolomide combination is toxic
requiring a reduction in temozolomide dose to ~15% of its single
maximum-tolerated dose.

We are exploring the use of nanoparticle-formulated talazoparib (npTLZ)
developed by Nanomaterials Synthesis Laboratory at Northeastern
University without tumor targeting or with antibody-mediated targeting to
increase the tumor-drug delivery, reduce normal tissue toxicity (mainly
thrombocytopenia), and potentially allow escalation of temozolomide dose.
In the PPTP study, the MTD for temozolomide combined with free
talazoparib (0.25 mg/kg PO BID daily x 5) was 12 mg/kg. Our recent data
showed no toxicity of temozolomide at 66 mg/kg (PO daily x 5) in mice
treated with npTLZ (0.5 mg/kg IV daily x 5), suggesting that npTLZ does
not potentiate TMZ toxicity to normal mouse tissues. We anticipate that
nanoparticle delivery of talazoparib combined with temozolomide will
allow reduced toxicity while increasing the response rate for this
combination in preclinical models of Ewing sarcoma.


