Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic radiation induced uPA expression mediates neuroblastoma
cells survival.


Neuroblastoma accounts for more than 15% of cancer-related deaths of
children in the United States. Despite aggressive treatment regimens, the
long-term survival for these children remains less than 40%. The
urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) system plays a role in several
critically important biology processes, such as cell adhesion, migration,
proliferation and survival. This system includes uPA, a serine protease
which converts a zymogen plasminogen into the active serine protease
plasmin, its surface receptor uPAR/CD57, which binds uPA with high
affinity, facilitates proteolytic activation/conversion of uPA precursor
(single-chain uPA, scuPA) into the active two-chain uPA protease (tcuPA)
and mediates uPA-induced activation of several intracellular signaling
cascades, and protects against several inhibitors, e.g. PAI-1, among
others. Recent findings demonstrate that dividing/proliferating cells
translocate intact scuPA to the nucleus via the nucleocytoplasmic shuttle
protein nucleolin. In this study we demonstrate that both SKNBE(2) and
NB1691 neuroblastoma cells when exposed to chronic radiation suppresses
nMYC gene copy number and induces the overexpression of cMYC and uPA
expression levels without observable change in uPA gene copy number.
Increased uPA expression was accompanied with increase in the
mitochondrial mass (4 fold in both NB1691 and SKNBE (2) cells). Knockdown
of uPA expression in chronic radiation cells using siRNA resulted in
reduced cell survival. RT-PCR analysis shows that uPA knockdown resulted
in reduced expression of cMYC and its target genes cyclin A and cyclin
D1. Overexpression of uPA in both SKNBE(2) and NB1691 wildtype cells
resulted in increased cMYC and cyclin D1 expression but not nMYC
expression suggesting that cMYC may be specifically regulated by uPA. In
conclusion, our study shows that uPA plays a vital role in survival of
neuroblastoma cells treated with chronic radiation by associating with
cMYC to compensate for loss of nMYC expression. Our study also implies
that targeting uPA might be a viable option as a combination therapy in
the treatment of high-risk neuroblastoma.


