Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hsp90 inhibitor (NVP-AUY922) enhances anti-cancer effect of Bcl-2
inhibitor (ABT-737) in small cell lung cancer.


Background: Bcl-2 family is a group of apoptosis regulators that plays an
anti-apoptotic role for cell survival and is known to contribute to
induce chemotherapy resistance in small cell lung cancer (SCLC). ABT-737
is an anti-cancer drug that induces apoptosis by selectively blocking the
activities of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL, but not Mcl-1. Consequently, the efficacy
of ABT-737 is largely restricted in the presence of Mcl-1.
Heat-shock-protein 90 (Hsp90) is highly expressed in most tumors and
Hsp90 inhibitors induce the proteasomal degradation of Hsp90 client
proteins. In addition, Hsp90 inhibitor can reduce Mcl-1 expression, a
down-stream of Akt and Erk pathway. Furthermore, Hsp90 inhibitor inhibits
activities of NF-κB by degradation of IKK. Thus, we show that
downregulation of Mcl-1 and NF-κB by Hsp90 inhibitor can lead to
synergistic pro-apoptotic effects with ABT-737.

Materials and methods: The proliferative activity, apoptotic activities,
and expression of apoptotic proteins were assessed in SCLC cell lines
after treatment with ABT-737, NVP-AUY922, or both drugs. The synergy
effects of ABT-737 and NVP-AUY922 were analyzed by cell viabilities with
different concentrations in SCLC cell lines, and the combination index
values were Materials and methods: The proliferative activity, apoptotic
activities, and expression of apoptotic proteins were assessed in SCLC
cell lines after treatment with ABT-737, NVP-AUY922, or both drugs. The
synergy effects of ABT-737 and NVP-AUY922 were analyzed by cell
viabilities with different concentrations in SCLC cell lines, and the
combination index values were < 1. In addition, the synergy effects of
the drugs were showed with xenograft model with human SLCL cell line in
vivo.

Results: Here, we show that NVP-AUY922, an Hsp90 inhibitor, can
potentiate the pro-apoptotic effects of ABT-737 not only by reducing the
levels of Akt but also by inhibiting pNF-κB, both of which are proteins
regulating apoptosis signaling. Western blot analysis revealed that
proteins associated with apoptosis such as PARP, Caspase 3 and 7 were
more upregulated in SCLC cells exposed to the drug combination than in
cells exposed to NVP-AUY922 or ABT-737 alone. In addition, Annexin V &
dead cell assay showed dual inhibition of the Hsp90 and Bcl-2 signaling
pathways more increased apoptotic cells and dead cells in SCLC. In our
result, ABT-737 induced apoptosis by blocking Bcl-2 activation, and
NVP-AUY922 blocked the levels of Hsp90 client proteins, Akt and pErk,
ultimately leading to decreased level of Mcl-1. In addition, NVP-AUY922
induced degradation of IKK, and increased IκB-α inhibited activation of
NF-κB. And this combination treatment showed higher BIM and BID
expression, pro-apoptotic proteins, than single treatment. Furthermore,
synergy effects of combination were verified in xenograft model with
human SCLC cell line.

Conclusions: Consequently, NVP-AUY922 synergizes with ABT-737 to induce
apoptosis by reducing activities of Mcl-1 and NF-κB in SCLC. This study
suggests that adopting an appropriate combination of drugs can lead to
better outcomes compared with monotherapy in SCLC.


