Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kinase inhibitor demonstrates efficacy in patient derived
xenograft model of fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma featuring
DNAJB1-PRKACA gene fusion.


Fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma (FL-HCC) is a rare and distinct
primary hepatic malignancy that has conventionally been considered to be
a histologic variant of hepatocellular carcinoma. However, it has more
recently been recognized as a distinct clinical entity with respect to
its epidemiology and prognosis. The etiology of FL-HCC is unclear and
there is no clinical or histological evidence for association with
chronic liver disease. Recent genetic studies have identified the fusion
gene DNAJB1-PRKACA as a recurrent genetic lesion in the disease.
Molecular pathogenesis of FL-HCC; however, is not well understood and has
been reported to occur in association with focal nodular hyperplasia.
Overexpression of genes in PIK3, MAPK and RAS pathways is observed in
FL-HCC and in contrast to viral-associated HCC, epigenetic instability is
rare in FL-HCC.

Here we describe development of a novel FL-HCC Patient Derived Xenograft
(PDX) model LI5132. RNASeq analysis revealed presence of DNAJB1-PRKACA
gene fusion on chromosome 19, a molecular signature of FL-HCC. Clinical
diagnosis as HCC of fibrolamellar type was confirmed by H&E staining in
the PDX tumor. The PDX tumor had a distinctive intratumoral fibrosis with
a lamellar pattern. PDX model was established by inoculating patient
tumor cells subcutaneously in NOD-SCID mice. Robust tumor growth was
observed with a 100% take rate in NOD-SCID mice.

To evaluate the translational relevance of this model toward therapeutic
development, the efficacy of a novel multi-target Aurora kinase A and
angiokinase inhibitor, ENMD-2076, was evaluated in a therapeutic mode in
this model. ENMD-2076 showed significant efficacy in suppressing tumor
growth in NOD-SCID mice, at the 200 mg/kg dose evaluated in this study.
Weight loss observed during the treatment period could not be attributed
to ENMD-2076 as it was similar to weight loss observed with vehicle
treatment. ENMD-2076 has now progressed in to phase II trials in the
clinic for treatment of FL-HCC. This demonstrates the translational
utility of this FL-HCC model in development of anti-cancer therapeutic
agents.


