Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining peritumoral and tumoral stromal gene signatures
associated with response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer.


Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) is used in breast cancer to decrease
tumor and lymph node burden and the extent of surgery. However, response
is variable and prediction poor. Stromal cells are involved in breast
cancer progression and drug resistance although very little is known
about the mechanisms. Our research aims to characterize breast
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and peritumoral fibroblasts (PTFs)
that predict response to NACT and could be used to influence treatment
choices.

Pre-NACT core biopsies from cancer-associated and peritumoral tissues
were collected under ultrasound guidance. To date, mRNAs from early
passage (passage ≤ 5) fibroblasts isolated from cores of 23 matched
pairs (CAFs and PTFs) (8 triple-negative (TNBC), 7 ER+Her2+ and 8
ER+Her2- tumors) and an additional 8 PT samples (4 TNBC, 1 ER+Her2+ and 3
ER+Her2-) have been analysed by whole-genome expression array (Illumina
beadchip HT12v4). Data were analysed with Partek® Genome SuiteTM 6.6 and
Pathway softwares (Partek Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA). Differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) were identified (t-test, p-value ≤ 0.05,
fold-change (FC) ≥ 1.3) between CAFs and PTFs and between NACT
responders (Residual Cancer Burden (RCB) 0/1) and non-responders (RCB
2/3).

No significant difference between CAFs and PTFs was seen by principal
component analysis and t-test. PTFs showed similar mRNA levels of major
myofibroblast markers (e.g. FAP, ASMA) with only FSP1 being lower in PTFs
compared to CAFs (FC = -1.4, p-value = 0.023), suggesting that PTFs, like
CAFs, are activated myofibroblasts. We then tried to identify a gene
signature in CAFs or PTFs that could predict response to NACT. Comparing
RCB 0/1 vs RCB 2/3 resulted in very few DEGs due to cancer subtype
variation in both CAFs and PTFs. Similar to other studies, only 2/19
patients in our cohort with ER+ tumours achieved RCB 0/1, preventing
analysis of these samples. However, 45% (5/11) TNBC responded to NACT and
we identified 566 DEGs between RCB 0/1 and RCB 2/3 CAFs, with changes in
metabolism, Pi3K/AKT pathway, proteoglycan synthesis or ECM-receptor
interaction. For PTFs, 186 DEGs were identified, with changes in Wnt
signalling and ECM-receptor pathways.

Microarray data from our uniquely large sample set of 23 pairs of CAFs
and PTFs from breast cancer patients suggest that PTFs have a similar
gene expression profile to CAFs. Although others have demonstrated that
CAF phenotype is breast cancer subtype

dependent, we are the first to show similar observations in PTFs.
Finally, we identified gene signatures from both CAFs and PTFs that
relate to NACT response in TNBC. We are currently in the process of
confirming the most highly dysregulated genes by qPCR and/or
immunohistochemistry analysis.


