Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotherapy sensitivity, cytokine IL-8 level, and genetic
expression mRNA IL-8 in gastric cancer treatment response prediction.


Aims: To determine chemotherapy sensitivity in primary gastric cancer
cell isolated from Thai gastric cancer patients against anticancer drugs.
To search for the correlation of interleukin-6 and interleukin-8 levels
in primary gastric cancer cell culture in comparison with tissue mRNA
IL-8 gene expression and drug response or resistance.

Method: The control background of corpus normal epithelial and gastric
adenocarcinoma biopsy tissues were treated for primary cell culture with
single cell isolation technique. The
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay
was performed to ex vivo examine the chemotherapy sensitivity to three
anticancer drug, cisplatin, oxaliplatin, 5-Fluorouracil , and Irinotecan.
Biopsy tissues from tumor site were collected before chemotherapy
treatment in 63 patient who received neo-adjuvant chemotherapy by FOLFOX
IV regimen due to advance stage III and IV in both resectable and
un-resectable cases. The IL-8 mRNA gene expression was reported by
relative quantitation real time RT-PCR. ELISA technique was performed to
investigate the cytokine level from primary cultures taken from 41
gastric cancer patients who undergone biopsy from Maharaj Nakorn Chiang
Mai Hospital during year 2014 to 2016. The clinical data base was
parallel collected and analysed in correlation with clinical response and
ex-vivo response.

Results: Each patient has different sensitivity pattern to the standard
anticancer drugs. There are no significantly direct correlations or
difference between cytokine IL-8 levels or mRNA IL-8 expression, and the
chemotherapy sensitivity to the actual drugs that are being used for
treatment of gastric adenocarcinoma in individual patients. However, the
chemotherapy resistance to all drugs in primary gastric cancer cell
culture has trend to increase after the third cycle of chemotherapy
treatment when compared to prior cell treatment with fluctuation of
cytokine level. Different cytotoxic drug gives the same response result
for chemrsensitivity test in this population. The author observed the
down regulation of tissue mRNA IL-8 expression and cytokine level in the
good responders.

Conclusion: The results provide an additional basis of information for
primary chemotherapy selection in the individualised treatment for
advance gastric adenocarcinoma patients. Therefore, the author suggest to
select the less toxicity cytotoxic drug for being primary chemotherapy of
choice. Cytokine gene level and mRNA IL-8 gene expression show
individually significantly change after chemotherapy treatment in good
responder. This result may lead us to find some new targeted therapy or
additional treatment for its suppression.


