Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel algorithms for spatial modeling of cellular interactions in
the tumor microenvironment.


Background: Understanding the spatial interactions between tumor and
immune cells in the heterogeneous tumor microenvironment is pivotal to
improve clinical outcomes of immunotherapy. Various multiplexed imaging
platforms have been recently developed to visualize the different immune
cell subtypes with various distribution patterns that can impact the
antitumor immunity. However, the lack of tools that allow for the spatial
pattern modeling remains a major barrier for systematic analysis of
cellular interactions in the TME.

Methods: We used multiplexed immunohistochemistry (mIHC) to understand
the cellular interplays in metastatic melanoma TME using FFPE section.
This platform allows in situ quantitative single cell analysis with
high-level of multiplexing while preserving the tumor heterogeneity.
Single cell spatial data (position and location) in the context of TME
can be obtained during mIHC, enabling further spatial modeling to
characterize the cellular interactions between tumor immune cells. Novel
spatial analysis algorithms are developed taking advantages of these
spatial data.

Results: Using R programming language, we developed two novel analytical
approaches to reveal the spatial distributions of various immune cell
subtypes relative to tumor cells. The cell neighborhood analysis
algorithm uses the “applynbd()” function to traverse through every
cellular point on a two-dimensional plane and creates neighborhoods of
24um in diameter centered by a tumor cell. This algorithm captures the
counts of a specific type of immune cells that are in direct contact with
a tumor cell, allowing the visualization and statistical analysis of
cellular attraction/repulsion patterns. The cell aggregate analysis
algorithm uses a sliding-window based approach to capture cell aggregates
with certain densities and the areas within the TME covered by specific
cell aggregates. Combined with the Ripley K-function, the cell aggregate
algorithm captures the aggregation vs. segregation pattern between
different cell types, enabling the clustering and distance analysis of
immune cells relative to tumor cells. Our algorithms demonstrate that
tumor cells either attract CD3+ tumor-infiltrating T cells or favor the
aggregation of CD20+ B cell in peri-tumor areas depends on the levels of
tumor cell human leukocyte antigen-1 (HLA-1) expression.

Conclusion: Our novel spatial analysis algorithms enable the modeling of
different interaction patterns between tumor and immune cells (direct
contact vs. aggregation) at both single cell and TME level. It
demonstrates that tumor cells with heterogeneous properties can impact
the immune cells’ distributions in the TME with various biological
outcomes. It also establishes tools that are necessary for systematic
analysis of the TME, allowing the elucidation of the “homogeneous
patterns” within the heterogeneous TME.


