Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GAPDH loss in a tumorigenic human glioblastoma cell line.


Background: Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) is a
ubiquitous, multifunctional 37 kDa enzyme best known for catalyzing the
sixth step in glycolysis. GAPDH expression is so consistent that it has
been granted “housekeeping” status, and is used as a standard (along
with β-actin) for normalizing Western blots. While increased GAPDH
expression has been described in hypoxia, diabetes, and some cancers,
decreased expression is rare. Here we describe a new human glioblastoma
cell line that exhibits GAPDH loss, while maintaining a high degree of
malignancy.

Methods: Primary cultures of human glioblastoma cells were initiated and
maintained in DMEM with 10% FBS. This particular cell line (designated
E297) grew readily, and was passaged more than 40 times. E297 cells were
confirmed to be negative for HIV, HTLV, hepatitis B and C, CMV, and
mycoplasma contamination. Cells in exponential growth were stained for
routine markers, and studied by DNA flow cytometry. GAPDH expression was
studied by Western blot analysis using polyclonal rabbit anti-human GAPDH
IgG (Abcam, Rosemont, IL), with HeLa, U138, U87 and U251 cells (as well
as β-actin staining) as positive controls. For intracranial implantation
into Wistar-Furth rats (male, 10-11 weeks), cells were suspended at 20 x
106 cells/ml. Using aseptic technique, rats were anesthetized, and placed
into a stereotactic frame. A burr hole was drilled 3 mm right of the
bregma and 25 µl of suspension injected (5 mm depth) over 10 min. by
Hamilton syringe. Rats were studied by MRI and euthanized when
symptomatic.

Results: E297 cells have glial/epithelioid morphology, with a doubling
time of 24 + 2 hours in logarithmic growth phase, with a single DNA
subpopulation with 28% S phase. They stain positively for GFAP, vimentin,
bFGF, c-myc and p53, but fail to express GAPDH. 10/10 animals implanted
intracerebrally developed tumors, becoming symptomatic and requiring
sacrifice at 25 days (mean). Loss of GAPDH expression was confirmed by
Western blot analysis.

Conclusions: The E297 human glioblastoma cell line is highly aggressive
and proliferates rapidly. It is tumorigenic in nonimmunosuppressed rats
but lacks GAPDH protein. We conclude that GAPDH expression is not
essential for glioblastoma cell proliferation under routine culture
conditions, and care needs to be taken when using GAPDH as a
normalization standard for Western blots of cancer cells.


