Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect modifications of vitamin D receptor common polymorphisms
association with prostate cancer by serum vitamin D related behavioral
and biological factors.


Background: Several roles have been proposed for vitamin D and the
vitamin D receptor (VDR) in prostate cancer (PCa) pathogenesis and
progression. However, previous genetic epidemiologic studies have
provided limited support linking VDR polymorphisms to PCa due to
complexity of vitamin D metabolism and potential gene and environmental
interactions. In this study, we investigated the association of VDR
genotypes with PCa incidence and aggressiveness in African Americans
(AAs) and European Americans (EAs) and if the associations were modified
by behavioral and biological factors that influence serum vitamin D
levels.

Methods: The total of 810 AAs and 487 EAs from Chicago, IL and
Washington, D.C. were included in this study. Seven single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in and around the VDR gene and 105 ancestry
informative markers were genotyped. We performed logistic regression
analyses adjusting for relevant variables.

Results: In EAs, TaqI (rs73136) and BsmI (rs1544410) minor alleles
revealed a protective effect against PCa, while in AAs, FokI (rs2228570)
was associated with overall PCa risk (OR=0.74, 95% C.I.: 0.57-0.96). The
heterogeneous associations observed in our study could be due to
difference in prevalence of vitamin D deficiency between AAs and EAS and
effect modifications by behavioral and biological factors that affect
serum vitamin D levels. Therefore, we investigated if behavioral and
biological factors that influence serum vitamin D modified the
associations between VDR polymorphisms and PCa, and we found evidence
suggesting that these behavioral and biological factors modify the effect
of VDR on PCa. In AAs, we observed statistically significant interaction
between two VDR polymorphisms, FokI and TaqI, and vitamin D intake
(PInteraction=0.01 and PInteraction=0.03 respectively). We also observed
evidence of interactions between VDR gene variants and other behavioral
and biological factors that lower serum vitamin D levels in both AAs and
EAs. In AAs, calcium intake and skin pigmentation may modify the effects
of VDR on PCa. In EAs, BMI may modify the effect of VDR.

Conclusions: Although a larger sample size is necessary to confirm the
observation, we demonstrated that vitamin D related behavioral and
biological factors modify the effect of VDR genotypes on PCa. Impact: The
VDR gene is involved in PCa pathogenesis and progression, and
polymorphisms in VDR gene and vitamin D are likely to alter the function
of the gene.


