Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estimating tumor cell dissemination rates through lymph and blood
via computational modeling.


Metastasis is the primary cause of death from most cancer types, but the
relative rates of tumor cell migration through lymphatic versus blood
routes remains an open question. Here we combine data from a xenograft
model of metastatic breast cancer with a computational model of tumor
cell growth and dissemination to help answer this question. Orthotopic
mouse xenografts using the triple negative breast cancer cell line
MDA-MB-231 allowed for monitoring of metastatic cells within the primary
tumor, bloodstream, lymph nodes, and lungs. Experiments resembling a
pulse-chase method helped inform and parameterize the model to the rate
of dissemination to the lymph nodes and lungs. Our ordinary differential
equation model describes primary tumor growth as the balance between
proliferation and death, with the proliferative fraction decreasing with
tumor size, and the apoptotic or necrotic fraction increasing with tumor
size. Intravasation to both lymph and blood rapidly increases early in
tumor growth, followed by a decay to a low rate of tumor cell release
well before the primary tumor grows to its saturating size. The mouse
data guided our parameter estimations based on the assumptions that
disseminated tumor cell death rate is greatest in the harsh environment
of the blood and lowest in the more accommodating lymph node, and that
metastatic cells seeding in the lymph nodes and lungs follow similar
growth dynamics as the primary tumor only with far fewer total cells. We
are currently performing sensitivity analysis to explore the range of
relative rates of tumor cell dissemination that fit the in vivo data, and
thus gain insight into tumor cell dynamics within the different
compartments. These analyses will allow us to estimate what the relative
contributions of blood versus lymphatic tumor cell dissemination are to
overall metastatic burden, as well as suggest experiments that further
constrain these estimates. Such combined experimental and modeling
analysis lend insight into where one might detect pre-metastatic cells
early in disease progression or suggest new targets for anti-metastasis
drugs based on the dominant mode of dissemination.


