Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of metastatic potential by breast cancer type through a
microfluidic blood-brain niche.


Metastasis from the primary tumor site to the brain is the most lethal
complication from advanced cancer. 15% of breast cancers metastasize in
the brain with a median survival of 5-14 months depending on the subtype.
Therefore it is critical to identify when a tumor has the clonal
potential to metastasize to the brain. Current detection methods and
treatment therapies have continued to improve but do not shed light on
clonal metastatic potential. Models for characterizing metastatic
potential of clonal populations currently used include murine in vivo and
simple in vitro systems. Murine models are costly, time intensive, slow
to manifest metastasis and are not easy to analyze. On the other hand, in
vitro systems are faster and more cost effective but currently do not
recapitulate the complexity of the “live” micro-environment. We have
developed a microfluidic device that mimics the cellular and physical
components of the human blood-brain niche to study the brain metastatic
process. The device is composed of two chambers separate by a porous
membrane. The top chamber and apical side of the membrane is seeded with
human brain endothelial cells and uses flow to mimic shear stress
encountered within the vasculature. Cancer cells are introduced into this
chamber in which they adhere to and migrate through the endothelium into
the bottom chamber. The bottom chamber contains astrocytes suspended in a
collagen gel to mimic the brain stroma and provide room for invading
cancer cells to colonize and grow. Barrier integrity is monitored using
TEER (trans-endothelial electrical resistance), and fluctuates as the
tight junctions of the endothelium are compromised by invading cancer
cells. This is characterized by IF and tight junction staining.
Throughout all time points, from introduction into the flow chamber,
adherence to the endothelium, extravasation through the barrier,
migration into the stroma, and proliferation the cancer cells can be
monitored via both microscopy and TEER. We have applied this microfluidic
blood-brain niche model to compare brain-seeking subclones of breast
cancer cell lines of known whole exome sequence and normal-like cell
lines (MCF10A) in terms of their ability to extravasate, migrate and
survive in the niche. We characterize their migratory behavior from
live-cell microscopy and correlate it to the TEER measurements to
establish a metastatic model. We then compare metastatic markers for
∝BBN traversing and non-traversing cells when appropriate.


