Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Saturation mutagenesis of KRAS reveals the functional landscape of
missense variants.


KRAS is the most commonly mutated oncogenes and is a major driver of
tumor initiation and progression. Understanding the functional
consequences of cancer-associated KRAS variants may have important
clinical implications. For example, KRAS mutation status defines those
that are likely to respond to EGFR-directed therapy in KRAS-mutant
metastatic colorectal cancer. A compendium of all possible oncogenic KRAS
alleles would serve as a roadmap for future therapeutic strategies
directed at KRAS itself or downstream signaling effectors. Comprehensive
mutagenesis of KRAS may also elucidate structure-function relationships
that reveal novel biochemical properties that may be exploited for
therapeutic gain. We performed saturation mutagenesis of both a wild-type
(WT) and a G12D mutant form of KRAS cDNA and generated lentiviral
expression libraries of 3,553 and 3,534 single amino acid substitution
mutants of each backbone. We utilized these WT and G12D mutagenesis
libraries for functional genetic screening to identify gain- and
loss-of-function missense variants that alter critical oncogenic
properties of KRAS. First, we sought to comprehensively identify all
possible oncogenic missense mutations in KRAS that mediate oncogenic
transformation. We stably transduced the WT library into immortalized
human epithelial cells and evaluated growth in low attachment (GILA), an
assay that is highly correlated with in vivo tumor formation. We
identified all previously known hotspot oncogenic alleles of KRAS as well
as many functionally relevant alleles that are also discovered at lower
frequency in human tumors. Moreover, we also discovered a group of
transforming KRAS variants that have not been well described in human
tumors, thus revealing potentially novel activating mechanisms for
oncogenic KRAS. In parallel, we utilized the G12D mutagenesis library to
perform second-site suppressor screening to identify loss-of-function
single amino acid changes that abrogate the transforming ability of
oncogenic KRAS. We performed positive-selection screening in primary cell
lines for variants that enable bypass of oncogene-induced senescence.
Additionally, we conducted a negative-selection screen with the G12D
library in a KRAS-dependent cancer cell line with inducible suppression
of endogenous KRAS, thus identifying all possible second-site mutations
that abolish KRAS-driven signaling necessary for maintenance of cellular
proliferation and viability. Structure-function analysis of these data
may reveal novel patterns of amino-acid changes that result in
inactivation of oncogenic KRAS. In summary, this comprehensive dictionary
of gain- and loss-of-function KRAS mutants will facilitate understanding
of clinically important mutations and also yield novel insights into
structure-function relationships that may improve our understanding of
the KRAS oncogene.


