Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A patient driven cancer database to collect information, analyze
data, and predict outcomes.


It is widely held that major breakthroughs in cancer treatment will
result from properly amassing, analyzing and utilizing existing and
emerging “big data.” To date there is no single vehicle that
integrates the data available, and of those being developed, none that
put patient needs and outcomes as primary foci.

CancerBase was released as part of the Cancer Moonshot launch in June
2016. It is a global, real-time data collection tool designed by and for
patients. Patients were recruited through social media to share their
information, including but not limited to, demographic details, personal
cancer data, and history of treatment. Combining open text boxes and drop
down preselected response boxes allow for the capture of information in a
way that patients understand. In addition to cancer data, Facebook
comments demonstrated immediate engagement with the tool and captured the
organic community of patients who eagerly shared their stories with
others. Personal interviews and a communal Twitter chat have recorded the
interests and priorities from patients who were not necessarily familiar
with CancerBase. In addition to medical data, general information and
questions CancerBase participants wanted to add to the system have been
collected.

Incorporation of patient-driven deliverables is unique in the space of
big data and cancer in that other tools, both existing and still in
development, are geared toward the needs of researchers, payors,
policy-makers and clinicians. CancerBase is unique in that it adapts to
growth. Patient feedback drives improvements via ongoing communication
between developers, PIs and participants. Wherever possible, participant
recommendations and questions are rapidly incorporated into the website
design. The remaining patient recommendations are cataloged and will be
incorporated in the forthcoming releases of CancerBase.

The initial launch of CancerBase demonstrated patient willingness to
share personal, anonymized data and to recruit others. Patients were
eager to engage and manipulate the limited data collected in the first
release. Moving forward, patient priorities include: How do my treatment
decisions compare with others and what can I learn from those who have
come before me; What is the likelihood that I will have a recurrence;
and, in the case of metastatic patients, how long might I have between
progressions, to which organ(s) is progression most likely, and what are
my likely survival outcomes. CancerBase is a database tool that resonates
with the patient community and is driven by patient needs and interests.
As the tool becomes increasingly robust it will grow to support the
decision-making needs of clinicians and guide the investigations of
researchers. The relaunch of CancerBase in Spring 2017 will address
emerging patient concerns, integrate collected data, and utilize existing
forecasting databases to add value to patients.


