Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An epigenetic strategy to degrade the estrogen receptor in breast
cancer.


Epigenetic changes in DNA methylation can lead to altered gene expression
and the development and progression of breast cancer. Luminal breast
tumors are associated with increased DNA hypermethylation of CpG islands
while basal, triple negative tumors more commonly have lower levels of
DNA methylation. Increasing evidence suggests that aberrant epigenetic
alterations in DNA methylation and chromatin structure may also
contribute to endocrine resistance in luminal breast cancers. We thus
asked whether epigenetic therapy using the demethylating agent,
5-Azacytidine (AZA) is an effective anti-tumorigenic agent in luminal
breast cancers, what epigenetic mechanisms might be involved in the
response and whether AZA could play a role in the sensitization of
tamoxifen resistant cells.

We have demonstrated using 26 breast cancer cell lines that luminal B,
ER+ breast cancer is more responsive to treatment with AZA than are Her2+
or triple negative (TN) breast cancers. Cells were treated in culture
with low nanomolar doses of AZA for 72 hrs, followed by transplantation
into mice and weekly palpation of tumors. Tumorgraft measurements show
that 67% of luminal B, ER+ cells are sensitive to AZA, whereas only 22%
of TN and 25% of Her2+ cells exhibit an anti-tumorigenic response to AZA
in mice. Expression data showed that AZA leads to decreases in ER mRNA
and protein expression in 50% and 67% of luminal B lines respectively.
Further investigation showed that a longer AZA treatment led to lower
ERα protein levels and stronger tumor growth inhibition. Protease
inhibitor (MG132) treatment rescued ERα protein reduction in 50% of the
luminal B cell lines, suggesting that an AZA-mediated, ubiquitin-26S
proteasomal pathway may be responsible for the degradation of ER. Gene
expression analysis demonstrated that the E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme,
(UBA7-UBE1L) was up-regulated at the mRNA and protein levels by AZA. UBA7
has been suggested to function as a tumor suppressor in lung cancer and
elevations in UBA7 have been correlated with longer overall survival in
breast cancer. The interaction of UBA7 with ERα protein was validated by
immunoprecipitation and over-expression of UBA7 in ZR-75-1 cells led to a
reduction in ERα protein. We further analyzed the UBA7 promoter region
by Illumina 450K array and bisulfite sequencing in our cell lines and
identified two CpG rich sequences in the promoter that may be important
for AZA induced UBA7 promoter demethylation and gene re-expression. We
also demonstrated in both tamoxifen sensitive and resistant cells that
combination therapy with both AZA and tamoxifen was more effective at
inhibiting tumor growth than the single agents. Studies are ongoing in
our lab to better understand this response. Our data suggest that AZA may
be clinically useful to inhibit the growth of some luminal breast tumors
via its actions to increase expression of UBA7 and to degrade ER and may
have efficacy in combination with anti-estrogen treatments.


