Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of paired-like homeodomain 2B in non-small cell lung
cancer progression.


The transcription factor PITX2 (paired-like homeodomain 2) is well known
to play an essential role in normal embryonic development. Emerging
evidence suggests that PITX2 may be involved in human tumorigenesis.
However, the functional role that PITX2 plays in tumor progression remain
unclear. In this study, we investigated its function in human non-small
cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). Using real-time quantitative RT-PCR, we
demonstrated that PITX2B is the most abundant isoform in lung cancer
cells. Enforced expression of PITX2B could promote lung cancer cell
morphological change, migration, invasion, anchorage-dependent growth
ability and tumorigenesis in xenograft model mice. In addition, nuclear
PITX2B localization was correlated with its oncogenic functions and two
important nuclear localization signals (NLSs) were identified. Moreover,
high expression of PITX2B was associated with poor overall survival (PThe
transcription factor PITX2 (paired-like homeodomain 2) is well known to
play an essential role in normal embryonic development. Emerging evidence
suggests that PITX2 may be involved in human tumorigenesis. However, the
functional role that PITX2 plays in tumor progression remain unclear. In
this study, we investigated its function in human non-small cell lung
carcinoma (NSCLC). Using real-time quantitative RT-PCR, we demonstrated
that PITX2B is the most abundant isoform in lung cancer cells. Enforced
expression of PITX2B could promote lung cancer cell morphological change,
migration, invasion, anchorage-dependent growth ability and tumorigenesis
in xenograft model mice. In addition, nuclear PITX2B localization was
correlated with its oncogenic functions and two important nuclear
localization signals (NLSs) were identified. Moreover, high expression of
PITX2B was associated with poor overall survival (P<0.05) in NSCLC
patients. Importantly, silencing of PITX2B by siRNA caused a marked
increase in autophagy based on LC3-II, Beclin-1, and p62 protein
expression, acridine orange fluorescence of acidic vacuoles and electron
microscopic detection of autophagosomes. Furthermore, we found that the
autophagy induced by PITX2B knockdown preceded apoptosis in lung cancer
cells. Treatment of lysosome inhibitor, NH4Cl, could provide a protective
effect that increases cell viability. In conclusion, our studies not only
provide new insights into how PITX2B may contribute to the tumor
progression in lung cancer but also the autophagy induced by PITX2B
knockdown that may be developed as an effective therapeutic strategy for
the treatment of lung cancer.


