Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of RBPMS in cisplatin resistant ovarian cancer.


Epithelial ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer-associated
deaths among women in the United States. High-grade serous ovarian cancer
(HGSOC) is the most common type of epithelial ovarian cancer and accounts
for 70-80% of ovarian cancer patient deaths. RNA-Binding Protein With
Multiple Splicing (RBPMS) is a member of a family of proteins that bind
to the nascent RNA transcripts and regulate their processing, including
the pre-mRNA splicing and the transport, localization, and stability of
the RNA molecules. However, little is known about the biological function
of RBPMS family in ovarian cancer. We hypothesized that decreasing the
expression of RBPMS in high-grade serous ovarian cancer increases ovarian
cancer progression and platinum-based drug resistance. Quantitative
real-time PCR (qPCR) and Western blot (WB) analysis were conducted to
determine the basal mRNA and protein expression of RBPMS in ovarian
cancer cells. The invasion ability of the ovarian cancer cells after
targeting RBPMS with silencing RNA (siRNA) was determined by invasion
assays. The proliferation rate of the ovarian cancer cells overexpressing
RBPMS was determine by colony formation assay. RBPMS is highly expressed
in A2780 cells when compared to the cisplatin resistance ovarian cancer
cells and HGSOC cancer cells. Targeting RBPMS increased the invasion
ability of the A2780 cells. Cisplatin resistant, A2780CP20 cells
overexpressing RBPMS showed a decreased in cell proliferation when
compared to the A2780CP20 empty vector clones. We described here for the
first time the mRNA and protein expression profile of RBPMS in HGSOC and
epithelial ovarian cancer cells. These studies will help to better
understand the role of RBPMS in ovarian cancer and may support the use of
RBPMS as an adjuvant treatment to overcome the platinum-based
chemotherapy resistance characteristic of the high-grade serous ovarian
cancer.


