Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the PAX8 regulatory network in epithelial
ovarian cancer.


PAX8 is a lineage-restricted transcription factor expressed in a large
proportion of epithelial ovarian cancers (EOCs). PAX8 is commonly
upregulated in EOCs relative to precursor tissues, suggesting it
functions as an oncogene. However, the biological role of PAX8 during
cancer initiation and development is poorly understood, and the
genome-wide transcriptional targets have yet to be comprehensively
catalogued. Using stable models of PAX8 knockdown in HEYA8 and IGROV1 EOC
cell lines we show that PAX8 knockdown reduces cell proliferation in
vitro and tumor growth in vivo. To understand how PAX8 regulates
neoplastic phenotypes in cancer cells we performed RNA expression
profiling by microarray in HEYA8 and IGROV1 before and after PAX8
knockdown. We also performed chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
next generation sequencing (ChIP-seq) for PAX8 and a marker of active
chromatin (H3K27ac) in both cell lines. De novo motif discovery in the
ChIP-seq profiles identified a PAX-like binding motif and several
potential PAX8 cofactors in IGROV1 that are not enriched in HEYA8. These
cofactors include members of the TEAD and Sp/KLF families of
transcription factors. We divided the genes from our differential
expression (DE) analysis in PAX8 knockdown into three non-overlapping
categories: (a) direct regulatory targets (RTs), i.e. DE genes with PAX8
binding sites in their promoter regions; (b) putative enhancer RTs, where
DE genes and PAX8 binding sites reside within the same topological
association domain (TAD) defined from embryonic stem cells; and (c)
indirect RTs. Our findings reveal that PAX8 can function as either an
activator or a repressor, and that PAX8 regulates a very different set of
genes in each cell line, as only a small fraction RTs (~50) is shared
between HEYA8 and IGROV1. Nonetheless, independent pathway enrichment
analysis reveals four pathways downstream of PAX8 that are common to both
cell lines: DNA replication, cellular response to lipopolysaccharides,
TNFA signaling via NFKB and anatomical structure morphogenesis.
Individually, we discovered enrichment for G2M checkpoint and EMT
signaling in HEYA8, and tissue morphogenesis and mesenchymal cell
development in IGROV1. Collectively, our results suggest that PAX8
regulates cell proliferation and cancer promoting processes via highly
tissue-specific regulation of common oncogenic pathways.


