Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long term hypoxia induces stable overexpression of JUNB and the
TGFβ pathway in colon cancer.


Introduction: Metastasis is responsible for over 90% of cancer related
mortality, however mutations unique to the metastatic phenotype have yet
to be identified. This raises the possibility that the metastatic
phenotype is the result of a transcriptional profile adopted by cells of
the primary tumor enabling them to spread to distal regions of the body.
The tumor microenvironment (TME) is capable of influencing gene
expression and cellular behavior. Hypoxia, low oxygen tension, is a
component of the TME that arises due to improper tissue architecture and
correlates with poor survival outcome. Stabilization of the transcription
factor HIF-1α during hypoxia induces the expression of genes involved in
metastasis through direct activation and through the alteration of the
epigenome. However, upon re-oxygenation HIF-1α is degraded and can no
longer induce expression of hypoxic responsive genes. During the
metastatic process, cells that have adopted hypoxia induced metastatic
behavior such as increased motility and invasiveness must transit through
regions of normoxia on their way to metastatic colonization.

Hypothesis: As hypoxic cell migrate away from regions of low oxygen
towards oxygen rich environments, such venous blood, genes induced by
hypoxia would be expected to return to basal levels of expression. Those
genes whose expression does not return to levels associated with
normoxia, but instead remain elevated following re-oxygenation, may be
crucial for maintaining the hypoxia induced metastatic phenotype.

Experimental Design: To study the stability of hypoxia induced gene
expression alterations following re-oxygenation, colon cancer cell lines
were grown under hypoxic conditions (1% O2) for up to 3 weeks and then
transitioned to normoxic conditions (21% O2). RNA sequencing was used to
assess changes in gene expression during hypoxia adaptation and for 3
more weeks following re-oxygenation.

Results: While the majority of genes whose expression was induced by
hypoxia returned to basal levels following re-oxygenation, a subset of
genes clustered in the TGF-β pathway remained at elevated levels. In
particular the expression of JunB, a component of the AP-1 transcription
factor, was induced by hypoxia and continued to remain overexpressed
after return to normoxic growth conditions. Conclusion: Long term
culturing of colon cancer cells in hypoxic conditions induces changes in
gene expression that remain stable following return to normoxic growth
conditions. We hypothesis that genes whose expression follows this
pattern may be involved in the hypoxia induced metastatic phenotype.
RNA-seq profiling of cells grown in hypoxic conditions for three weeks
and then returned to normoxic growth conditions for an additional three
weeks identified genes involved in the TGF-β pathway and in particular
JunB that were induced by hypoxia and remained stable following return to
normoxia.


