Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sub-clonal heterogeneity and risk of treatment failure in
Philadelphia-positive leukemias.


Molecularly targeted therapies have been exceptionally successful in the
treatment of some malignancies, most notably chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML). However in other cancers, e.g. Philadelphia-positive acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ ALL), drug resistance is a frequent
occurrence. Resistance mutations may pre-exist as a consequence of
intra-tumor heterogeneity; thus the extent of heterogeneity may determine
the likelihood of treatment failure. Intra-tumor heterogeneity is
challenging to quantitate, as heterogeneous mutations are likely to occur
below the background error rate of conventional approaches for mutation
detection. To overcome this limitation and explore the relationship
between intra-tumor heterogeneity and drug resistance in Ph+ leukemias,
we utilized single-molecule Duplex Sequencing (DS) of the ABL1 gene. DS
eliminates sequencing errors by independently tagging the two strands of
individual DNA molecules; true mutations are present at the same position
in both strands, while PCR and sequencing errors are only present in one
strand. DS has an error rate below 0.00001%, and thus enables
quantitation of heterogeneous mutations with unprecedented resolution. We
find that CP-CML, a disease that is often well controlled with targeted
therapy, has an extremely low burden of intra-tumor heterogeneity at the
time of diagnosis, with a sub-clonal mutation burden similar to that of
normal individuals. Simulations which take into account the low cancer
stem cell fraction of CP-CML and the sub-clonal mutation burden we
measured reveal that only a minority of CP-CML patients will harbor
pre-existing drug resistance, which may explain the unusual success of
targeted therapy in this setting. Next, we studied patients with advanced
Ph+ leukemias (refractory BP-CML and Ph+ ALL), which have a high rate of
treatment failure and poor outcomes. We find that patients with BP-CML
and Ph+ALL have a significant elevation in sub-clonal heterogeneity
relative to those with CP-CML. We demonstrate that the higher extent of
intra-tumor heterogeneity correlates with a significantly higher rate of
drug resistance mutations and compound resistance (i.e. two concurrent
resistance mutations) in patients. Unlike CP-CML, pre-existing mutations
conferring resistance to targeted therapy are nearly certain in
refractory BP-CML and Ph+ ALL as a consequence of the load of intra-tumor
heterogeneity and high cancer stem cell fraction. We support this concept
by three distinct approaches: (i) detection of pre-existing sub-clones
that drive treatment failure; (ii) modeling the growth kinetics of
resistant clones; and (iii) extrapolation of the mutation burden measured
by DS. Our results suggest that intra-tumor heterogeneity influences the
likelihood of resistance to molecularly targeted therapy. Quantitation of
sub-clonal mutation load may be broadly applicable in other malignancies
for predicting the likelihood of response to targeted therapy and
monitoring disease progression.


