Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using 1H NMR metabolomics to study breast cancer and endothelial
cell metabolic interactions.


Breast cancer is the second most commonly diagnosed cancer among women
worldwide. Patient death is typically caused by metastasis development
rather than the primary tumor. Metastasis in breast cancer has been shown
to occur via blood and lymphatic vessels. Research shows that breast
cancer cells ‘educate’ lymphatic and blood endothelial cells to
support tumor growth by stimulating growth factor secretion; specifically
VEGF, PDGF-BB and EGF secretion. In addition, cell metabolism is altered
during malignant transformation. Cancer cells have increased energy and
macromolecule biosynthesis requirements to sustain rapid proliferation.
Increased angiogenesis observed in tumors points to a need for an
increased nutrient supply. However, it remains unclear how tumor
endothelial cell metabolism is altered and how metabolism regulates tumor
angiogenesis. Therefore, this study aims to use 1H NMR metabolomics to
identify breast cancer-endothelial cell metabolic interactions in a
high-throughput manner. Firstly, we studied if in vitro co-culture with
breast cancer altered endothelial cell metabolism. We identified distinct
metabolic profiles for HUVECs grown in monoculture or co-culture with
three different breast cancer cell lines. Metabolism of HUVECs
co-cultured with MCF7 and SKBR3 breast cancer cell lines was
significantly altered compared to mono-culture control. The most impacted
metabolic pathways by co-culture were amino acid metabolism, energy
metabolism and lipid biosynthesis pathways. Culturing HUVECs with
MDA-MB-231 triple negative breast cancer cells did not have a significant
impact on HUVEC metabolism, however. Together, these results indicate
that culturing HUVECs with certain breast cancer lines causes significant
changes in endothelial metabolism. Alterations in endothelial cell
metabolism in response to breast cancer co-culture can further our
understanding of tumor-vascular interactions and may lead to
identification of metabolic biomarkers or therapeutic targets that can
disrupt tumor angiogenesis.


