Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interrogating liver metabolic stress due to cancer-induced
cachexia.


Cancer-induced cachexia accounts for approximately 20% of all cancer
deaths 1. In pancreatic cancer, the syndrome affects nearly 80% of
patients 2,3. Cachectic patients experience a wide range of symptoms
affecting the function of several organs such as muscle, liver, brain,
and heart, that decrease quality of life and worsen prognosis. A major
characteristic of cachexia is the accelerated skeletal muscle and fat
storage wasting causing nutrient mobilization both directly as lipid and
amino acids, and indirectly as glucose derived from the exploitation of
liver gluconeogenesis that reaches the tumor through the bloodstream4.
Patients with cachexia develop a wide range of metabolic stress from
increased proteins and fat tissue burning resulting in increased energy
expenditure. Here, for the first time, we have performed high-resolution
quantitative 1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) of liver tissue
obtained from normal, noncachectic and cachectic mice bearing PDAC that
are cachectic (Pa04C) and noncachectic (Panc1). A significant reduction
in liver weight and significant changes in 1H MRS derived metabolite
profiles were detected with cachexia.

Human pancreatic cancer cell lines, Panc1 and Pa04C, were used for the
study. Six to 8 week old male severe combined immunodeficient mice were
inoculated in the right flank with cancer cells (5×106) and in the right
hind leg muscle with reporter myoblasts (2×106) to monitor the
development of cachexia in mice5. Live animal optical imaging was done
using a Xenogen IVIS® Spectrum (PerkinElmer) optical scanner. Dual phase
solvent extraction was performed on liver tissue to extract water soluble
metabolites. All 1H MR spectra were acquired on an Avance 750 MHz Bruker
NMR spectrometer.

We found, for the first time, that the liver in Pa04C tumor bearing mice
underwent a profound weight loss; although Panc1 tumor bearing mice
showed some liver weight loss this was not as profound as observed with
Pa04C tumors. Significant decreases in lactate, glucose and glutathione
were observed in cachectic mouse liver compared to noncachectic mouse
liver, and the liver from healthy control mice. The significant decrease
of these metabolites in cachectic livers may reflect increased
utilization of glucose, lactate and glutathione by the tumor or other
organs during the cachexia cascade4. These results provide new insights
into changes in liver metabolism during cachexia, and support
investigating metabolic strategies such as supplementing glutathione or
glucose to reduce cachexia associated morbidity.

References: (1) Argiles, J. M., et al. Nature reviews. Cancer 2014, 14,
754-762. (2) Fearon, K. C., et al. HPB (Oxford) 2010, 12, 323-324. (3)
Ozola Zalite, I., et al. Pancreatology 2015, 15, 19-24. (4) Porporato, P.
E. Oncogenesis 2016, 5, e200. (5) Winnard, P. T., et al. Cancer Research
2015.

Acknowledgment: This work was supported by NIH R01 CA193365. We thank Dr.
Marie-France Penet for useful discussions.


