Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a novel PDE10 inhibitor in lung tumor cells
and an orthotopic mouse model of lung cancer.


BACKGROUND: Screening a focused library of indene derivatives for PDE10
inhibitory activity identified novel leads with potent and selective
tumor cell growth inhibitory activity. ADT-030 emerged from lead
optimization chemistry with excellent drug-like properties and oral
bioavailability. Here we characterize the anti-tumor activity of ADT-030
in human lung tumor cells and an orthotopic mouse model of lung cancer.

METHODS: Growth inhibitory activity of ADT-030 was measured in a panel of
human lung tumor cell lines by ATP quantification following 72 h of
treatment. The effect of ADT-030 on intracellular cGMP/cAMP was measured
in whole cell lysates using a competitive ELISA assay. PDE inhibitory
activity of ADT-030 was evaluated in lysates of human lung tumor cells
and by recombinant PDE isozymes using the IMAP fluorescence polarization
PDE assay. Activation of PKG signaling and suppression of β-catenin
levels in response to ADT-030 treatment was evaluated by Western blot
using whole cell lysates of human lung tumor cells. ADT-030 was orally
administrated to C57BL/6 mice and free levels quantified in plasma and
tissues by LC-MS. Anti-tumor activity of ADT-030 was evaluated in athymic
nude-Foxn1nu mice after inoculating the left lung with 1x106 A549 lung
tumor cells and treating once daily by oral administration at dosages
ranging from 25 - 125 mg/kg. Tumor growth was monitored by in situ
bioluminescence using IVIS as well as necropsy and pathological grading
after 4 weeks of treatment.

RESULTS: ADT-030 inhibited the growth of human lung tumor cell lines with
IC50 values in the low micromolar range by inducing apoptosis, while
appreciably higher concentrations were required to affect the growth of
normal human airway epithelial cells. ADT-030 treatment of human lung
tumor cells increased both intracellular cGMP and cAMP levels, activated
PKG and suppressed β-catenin within the same concentration range as
required for tumor cell growth inhibition. Pharmacokinetic studies in
mice demonstrated a half-life suitable for once a day dosing. Tissue
distribution studies revealed appreciably higher concentrations of
ADT-030 in lungs relative to plasma and other tissues, with the highest
accumulation measured in the parenchyma. ADT-030 was well tolerated in
mice implanted with A549 tumor cells and displayed strong anti-tumor
activity as evident by reduced luminescence, tumor grading, and
double-blinded pathological evaluation.

CONCLUSIONS: ADT-030 represents a prospective drug development candidate
with favorable drug-like properties that concentrates in lung after oral
administration exhibiting a strong anti-tumor activity in a pre-clinical
mouse model. The mechanism of lung tumor cell growth inhibition involves
PDE10 inhibition, elevation of cGMP, activation of PKG, and attenuation
of β-catenin.


