Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 knockout library to identify
therapeutic combinations in oral cancer.


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) has remained a disease with poor
survival for decades with few novel treatment options. We anticipate
great potential for personalized targeted therapies, facilitated by
recent characterizations of the mutational landscape of OSCCs.
Combinations of targeted therapies may have greater efficacy through
inhibiting compensatory pathways. For example, targeting EGFR has had
limited success. To identify synergistic combinations with EGFR-targeted
therapy, we introduced Genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 Knock-Out (GeCKO)
libraries into OSCC cell lines. CRISPR-Cas9 generates individual genetic
knockouts through targeted gene editing. We used a pool of CRISPRs
targeting over 18,000 genes to perform genome-scale screening for drivers
of sensitivity to EGFR-targeted therapy. Upon selection of the OSCC GeCKO
pool, we identified gene knockouts in the FGFR pathway that increased
sensitivity to the EGFR inhibitor gefitinib. Using resazurin viability
assays we tested combinations of EGFR and FGFR inhibitors in 14 OSCC cell
lines. Six/14 (43%) of the cell lines were responsive to the combination,
indicating that the FGFR pathway is an alternate mechanism of resistance
to EGFR-targeted therapy in some tumors. In complement, we again used
CRISPR-Cas9 to generate a syngeneic EGFR knockout (KO) OSCC cell line.
The parent OSCC cell line is responsive to the EGFR and FGFR dual
inhibition, and the EGFR KO derivative retains sensitivity to
FGFR-targeted monotherapies. We expect that this EGFR KO cell line will
be a useful tool in further evaluating the compensatory mechanism of the
FGFR pathway. OSCC remains a common and frequently lethal cancer with
great potential for the development of personalized targeted therapies.
Here, we describe the use of genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 library to discover
the synergistic combination of EGFR and FGFR inhibition. Further
investigation suggests the FGFR pathway is a common compensatory
mechanism to EGFR inhibition. We hope to use this approach to identify
additional compensatory mechanisms of resistance to targeted therapies
with the eventual goal of translating these findings to clinic.


