Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting distinct nodes of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR cascade in prostate
cancer cells: impact on cell proliferation, apoptosis and pathway
signaling.


Inactivation of the PTEN gene is a common event in PCa, leading to
activation of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway and promoting PCa progression.
Inhibitors targeting this pathway are currently being developed as
anticancer agents. While recent clinical trials with mTORC1 inhibitors
have shown limited single-agent efficacy in castration-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC), it is still not known whether targeting alternative nodes
of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR cascade may improve response. The current study
aimed to characterize the response of PCa cell lines to multiple
inhibitors targeting the PI3K, AKT and mTOR nodes of the cascade and
identify possible mechanisms of resistance.

The impact of the different PI3K/AKT/mTOR inhibitors on cell
proliferation and apoptosis was measured by WST-1 and ApoTox-Glo assays,
respectively, in a broad panel of established PCa cell lines and primary
cell cultures generated from patient-derived xenografts. PTEN-negative
PCa cell lines showed strong response to PI3Kβ/δ, AKT and mTOR
inhibition, whereas PTEN-positive cells were resistant to PI3Kβ/δ and
showed variable sensitivity to mTOR inhibitors. MTORC1 inhibitor showed
low IC50 but reached plateau at about 70-80% growth inhibition. In
contrast, mTORC1/2 inhibitor could reach complete growth inhibition at
~1μM concentration, in sensitive cell lines. Furthermore, treatment with
PI3K or AKT inhibitor in combination with androgen depletion induced
apoptosis in various PTEN-negative models, which is consistent with
previously reported synergistic effect of PI3K/AKT and androgen receptor
co-targeting. The effect of the inhibitors on phosphorylation of PI3K
downstream targets (AKT, PRAS40, GSK3, S6K1 and 4EBP1) was analyzed by
phospho-specific western blotting. Perturbation of different nodes of the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR cascade resulted in differential phosphorylation of
downstream targets, but there was no evident correlation with in vitro
growth inhibition.

In conclusion, the current study validates PI3Kβ and AKT as alternative
targets in PTEN-negative PCa, whereas PTEN-positive models showed
preferential yet variable responses towards mTOR inhibitors.


