Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The G protein-coupled P2Y6 pyrimidoceptor increases tumorigenesis
potential of epithelial cell in colorectal cancer associated to colitis.


BACKGROUND:

Carcinogenesis is a complex process induced by various genetic mutations,

which is characterized by 3 phases. The initiation phase, inflammation is
predominant, as in

colitis-associated carcinogenesis, and involves the active recruitment of
immune cells like

macrophages, dendritic cells and T cells. The promotion and progression
phases are respectively

tied to dysplasia and carcinoma and metastasis. Inflammatory bowels
disease (IBD), including

colitis, induces an unbalance in pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines, a
breakage in the

epithelial barrier, pathogens infiltration and leucocytes recruitment and
activation. During

inflammation, nucleotides are released in a large amount in the
extracellular environment. The

P2Y6 receptor was associated with IBD where its expression was increased
in T cells infiltrating

inflamed colonic tissue and on the epithelial cells of the inflamed
tissue. In this context,

activation of the P2Y6 receptor may contribute to the formation of a
tumor-promoting

environment by modulating the immune response and establishment of tumors.

METHODS:

Colorectal cancer associated to colitis was induced in P2ry6 gene
knockout mice (P2Y -/-

6 ) using azoxymethane, as a carcinogen, and dextran sulfate sodium
challenges as a promoting agent.

Mice were euthanatized and the number and size of tumor measured. Tissues
were fixed and

stained prior to histological characterization. The impact of P2Y6R
activation on apoptosis and

NFκB pathway was determined by western blotting, and the impact on
inflammatory cytokines

balance and mucus layer were analyzed by histology and qPCR of different
markers.

RESULTS:

Invalidation of the P2ry6 gene in mice lead to a reduction in the number
of colorectal tumors in

our AOM-DSS model. We have linked this observation to the protective role
of P2Y6R toward

TNFα-induced apoptosis of cancerous epithelial cells. Furthermore, P2Y6R
regulates the balance

between pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in inflammatory conditions,
and maintain the

integrity of the epithelial barrier by modulating the density of the
mucus layer.

CONCLUSION:

In this study, we have shown that P2Y6R could contribute to colorectal
cancer colitis associated by

blocking the apoptotic process, modulating the cytokine network, and
regulating the integrity of

the mucus layer. These results suggest that P2Y6R can be a prime target
to reduce colorectal

cancer colitis associated.


