Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-133a function in the pathogenesis of dedifferentiated
liposarcoma.


Background: Sarcomas are malignant heterogeneous tumors of mesenchymal
derivation. Dedifferentiated liposarcoma (DDLPS) exhibits aggressive
biological behavior with an 80% local recurrence rate and the development
of metastasis in approximately 20% of patients. To identify and
characterize the molecular alterations that contribute to the development
and progression of DDLPS, our laboratory characterized a unique miRNA
expression signature associated with human DDLPS tissue compared to
paired subjacent normal tissue. We found that several muscle-specific
miRNAs (myomiRs), miR-1, -133a, and -206, were significantly
underexpressed in liposarcoma tissues. Interestingly, these miRNAs have
recently been shown to have tumor suppressor functions in many human
cancers. The objective of this study is to characterize the biological
and molecular consequences of miR-133a in DDLPS.

Methods: Taqman real-time PCR was used to evaluate expression levels of
myomiRs in human DDLPS tissue, normal fat tissue, and available human
DDLPS cell lines. To evaluate the effects of miR-133a expression on DDLPS
cell line behavior in vitro, cells were stably transduced with miR-133a
vector or empty lentiviral vector and the effects on cell cycle,
proliferation, apoptosis, and migration were assessed. Agilent Seahorse
Bioanalyzer system was used to assess metabolism. We performed an in
silico search for predicted targets of miR-133a using target prediction
databases and compared these target genes to known genes that are highly
expressed in human DDLPS tissue.

Results: The expression levels of myomiRs were significantly decreased in
human DDLPS tissue compared to normal human fat as well as in human DDLPS
cell lines compared to a human preadipocyte cell lines. Overexpression of
miR-133a decreased cell proliferation, decreased glycolysis, and
increased spare respiratory capacity. There was no significant effect on
cell cycle, apoptosis, or migration. Using in silico target gene
analysis, we identified 18 potential targets of miR-133a. These
preliminary results suggest that miR-133a regulates metabolism and
proliferation, and its dysregulation might contribute to the oncogenic
phenotype of DDLPS.

Significance: We have demonstrated that enforced expression of miR-133a
decreased proliferation and metabolism in human DDLPS cells. We have
identified putative gene targets of miR-133a and are currently dissecting
the molecular mechanism by which miR-133a may mediate proliferation and
metabolism in DDLPS cell lines. Taken together, these data suggest that
miR-133a might play a tumor suppressor role in DDLPS, thereby generating
new potential targets for therapeutic intervention to alter the course of
this disease.


