Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA, protein, and cell line reagents to facilitate RAS pathway
drug discovery efforts.


The RAS Reagents Core within the NCI RAS Initiative produces and
distributes qualified DNA vectors, cell lines, and protein production
reagents to the external community to facilitate research into RAS
biology and development of RAS cancer therapeutics. DNA vectors
representing a variety of RAS mutations, as well as a complete collection
of 180 genes in the RAS pathway are available as Gateway-compatible Entry
clones. These clones represent the most commonly expressed transcript
forms of the 180 genes, many of which were not previously available in
full-length, wildtype forms. The vectors can be used with the FNLCR
combinatorial cloning library to easily generate a large number of
different types of expression clones with various promoters, fusion tags,
and plasmid backbones. Cell line reagents include a variety of
Ras-dependent mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) which have a defined
mutant allele of KRAS and which serve as isogenic cell lines for
investigating allele and mutant specific RAS biology, as well as for
valuable screening tools. Protein reagents include E. coli and insect
cell constructs and cell lines for production of a variety of Ras-related
proteins. In particular, we have materials for the high yield production
of properly processed, prenylated KRAS protein using a unique engineered
insect cell expression system. This system can also be used to produce
other prenylated small GTPases at levels not previously attainable. Many
of the resources of the RAS Reference Core are readily available to the
academic community through repositories or material transfer agreements,
and can be licensed to industry scientists as well. The program is also
interested in identifying the needs of the community for additional
RAS-related resources, and is developing methods for vetting requests
from the outside to provide additional reagents.


