Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selinexor or KPT-8602 mediated XPO1 inhibition synergizes with
dexamethasone to repress convergent pathways in the mTORC1 signaling
network and drive cell death in multiple myeloma.


Background: Dexamethasone (DEX), a synthetic glucocorticoid (GC), is
administered to nearly all multiple myeloma (MM) patients as a single
agent and in combination with other chemotherapies or targeted agents.
DEX and other GCs bind to glucocorticoid receptors (GR) in the cytoplasm,
induce nuclear translocation and regulate GR-dependent gene expression
networks in the nucleus. Selective Inhibitor of Nuclear Export (SINE)
compounds (selinexor and KPT-8602) exhibit potent anti-tumor activity in
MM especially when combined with DEX. SINE compounds enhance nuclear
localization of tumor suppressor proteins (TSPs) through inhibition of
the nuclear export protein, XPO1. We discovered that inhibition of the
mechanistic Target of Rapamycin Complex 1 (mTORC1) pathway is a primary
driver of the combination effect. Here we further elucidate the molecular
mechanism of action of the SINE-DEX synergy in MM.

Methods: GR+ MM.1S and GRnull MM.1R MM cell lines were treated with SINE
compounds and/or DEX for 24 hours. Whole cell lysates were subjected to
SDS-PAGE and western blot analysis. Gene expression and GR
transcriptional activity was analyzed using qPCR and ELISA, respectively.
Cell viability was examined using the Celltiter-Fluor assay.

Results: We found that MM cell lines treated with SINE compounds
(selinexor or KPT-8602) have increased basal GR protein levels.
Consistent with these results, the SINE-DEX combination shows enhanced GR
transcriptional activity. Several GR-DEX target genes are known to
inhibit the GTPase, Ras homolog enriched in brain (RHEB), which is
required for mTORC1 activation. We discovered that the SINE-DEX
combination not only reduces RHEB protein but also induces the RHEB
inhibitory pathways containing REDD1 and the KLF15-BCAT2 axis. Although
SINE compound-mediated inhibition of mTORC1 (i.e. reduced phosphorylation
of S6K1 and 4E-BP1) is GR independent, SINE-DEX inhibition is more robust
in GR+ MM.1S cell line when compared to the GRnull MM.1R cells. The
combination resulted in the selinexor IC50 in MM.1S cells shifting from
40 nM to 11 nM in the presence of low dose DEX. As expected, DEX did not
modulate the SINE compounds IC50s in MM.1R cells.

Conclusion: We show that SINE compound inhibition of MM cell viability is
enhanced with DEX. Our results indicate that this combinatorial effect is
due to convergent suppression of mTORC1 signaling by GR targets. The
findings provide mechanism of action data around the SINE-DEX combination
in MM with suggestive biomarkers (REDD1, KLF15, BCAT2 and GR) that may
predict best response to the combination. Therefore, these data may
translate directly to the current clinical development of SINE compounds.


