Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-MALAT1 synthetic oligonucleotides target the proteasome and
exert anti-multiple myeloma activity.


Dysregulation of non-coding RNAs features prominently in the biology of
multiple myeloma (MM). However, if short non-coding RNAs have been
extensively studied in this malignancy, the role of long non-coding RNAs
remains to be elucidated. A custom annotation pipeline of microarray data
investigating lncRNA expression in plasma cells from 20 MGUS, 33
smoldering MM, 170 MM, 36 plasma cell leukemia patients, and 9 healthy
donors, indicates overexpression of the lncRNA MALAT1 during MM
progression. On this finding, we sought to investigate the functional
significance of MALAT1 expression in MM by the use of 16-mer LNA-gapmeR
synthetic oligonucleotides, that trigger specific RNAse H-dependent
degradation of MALAT1. Transfected or gymnotic (naked) anti-MALAT1
gapmeRs decreased MM patients (n=3) and cell lines growth (n=7),
triggering ER stress and apoptosis, while spared healthy peripheral blood
mononuclear cells. Microarray gene profiling indicates that MALAT1
depletion was associated with modulation of various gene sets, and
specifically had a negative impact on genes encoding for 20S proteasome
β subunits, such as PSMβ2/4/5 and 7, whose overexpression is linked to
proteasome impairment in cancer cells. Down-modulation of PSMβs after
anti-MALAT1 gapmeRs exposure was confirmed at protein level and was
associated to reduced trypsine, chymotrypsine and caspase-like
proteasomal activities and to the accumulation of poly-ubiquitylated
species. Consistently, anti-MALAT1 gapmeRs enhanced the in vitro anti-MM
activity of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib in bortezomib-sensitive
and resistant MM cells. In vivo, i.p. administration of naked anti-MALAT1
gapmeRs (10 and 25 mg/kg) inhibited the growth of bortezomib-resistant MM
xenografts, with no evidence of organ toxicity. Mechanistically,
anti-MALAT1-induced PSMβs down-modulation could be ascribed to the
inhibition of the transcription factors NRF1-2, which act as positive
regulators of PSMSβs transcription. On the other hand, siRNA or
pharmacologic inhibition of NRF1 by all-trans retinoic acid decreased
promoter activity and expression of MALAT1, indicating the occurrence of
a feedback loop involving MALAT1 and NRF1. Collectively, our data
indicate that MALAT1-targeting represents a promising strategy to dampen
aberrant proteasome activity in MM cells, and provide the preclinical
rationale to use oligonucleotide therapeutics as anti-MALAT1 gapmeRs for
MM treatment.


