Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E7386 : First-in-class orally active CBP/beta-catenin modulator as
an anticancer agent.


Carcinogenesis is often accelerated by the aberrant activation of
components molecules of Wnt signaling pathway, especially, APC and
beta-catenin are frequently reported to be mutated in various cancers.
Therefore, Wnt signal pathway is thought to be one of the attractive
therapeutic targets. PRI-724 generated by PRISM Pharma is a small
molecule inhibitor of beta-catenin and its transcriptional coactivator
CREB binding protein (CBP) thereby specific modulating Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling pathway by intravenous continuous infusion. Here we firstly
generated orally active small molecular inhibitor, E7386. E7386 disrupted
the interaction between beta-catenin and CBP in co-immunoprecipitation
assay. E7386 inhibited canonical Wnt signaling pathway /TCF reporter gene
activity in LiCl-stimulated HEK-293 and MDA-MB-231 in a dose dependent
manner with IC50 values of 55 nmol/L and 73 nmol/L, respectively. E7386
modulated the expression of Wnt signaling pathway related genes including
AXIN2 and other genes, which were down-regulated by artificial knockdown
of beta-catenin. These results indicate that E7386 controls the
expression of Wnt target genes through modulation of beta-catenin/CBP
interaction. Next we investigated anti-polyposis effect in ApcMin/+ mice
as an in vivo proof of mechanism model. ApcMin/+ mice develops polyps in
the intestinal tract caused by the aberrant activation of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway. Oral administration of E7386
significantly suppressed the number of polyposis in a dose dependent
manner at the dose range from 8.5 to 50 mg/kg. In addition, E7386
significantly changed the expressions of Wnt related genes in whisker
follicle of ApcMin/+mice model. Finally, we investigated anti-tumor
activity of E7386 in vitro tumor proliferation panel against 28 human
tumor cell lines. E7386 showed relatively potent anti-proliferative
activity against cancer cell lines harboring exclusively mutated Wnt
signaling pathway molecules such as APC or beta-catenin. E7386 also
showed significant antitumor activity in a dose dependent manner on human
tumor cell line xenograft harboring APC mutation. Taken together, E7386
is a first in class orally active CBP/beta-catenin modulator and showed
potent inhibitory activity against aberrant activation of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway.


