Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting GPX4 in tumor-associated stromal cells increases
inflammatory-cell infiltration.


The lack of a T-cell inflamed microenvironment in tumors limits
responsiveness to many immunotherapies. T-cell exclusion is often
mediated by a dense infiltration of fibroblast-like stromal cells. Up to
55% of triple-negative breast cancers have ‘stroma-rich’ tumors with
markedly lower T-cell inflammation. Here we report a therapeutic strategy
that can potentially convert stroma-rich tumors into T-cell inflamed
tumors by forcing stromal cells to secrete 5-lipoxygenase products which
are powerful chemo-attractants for T cells.

We were initially interested in identifying selective inhibitors of
stromal-cell function. To achieve this, we used phenotype-based
small-molecule screening in which the phenotype of stroma-induced cancer
cell migration in vitro was a surrogate for stroma-induced metastasis in
vivo. We identified a compound, RSL3 that inhibited this migration. RSL3
was selectively cytotoxic to stromal cells over cancer cells, in
comparisons of immortalized cell lines as well as comparisons of
patient-derived primary breast cancer cells to cancer-associated
fibroblasts (CAFs). We therefore undertook studies to identify its
mechanism of action.

RSL3 was recently reported to target the redox enzyme glutathione
peroxidase 4 (GPX4). GPX4 metabolizes lipid peroxides so we performed
metabolomic profiling of RSL3-treated stroma-cancer co-cultures and found
elevated arachidonic acid products of lipoxygenase enzymes. Stromal cells
were found to contain >10-fold higher levels of lipoxygenase products
than carcinoma cells. Blocking either 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) or
15-lipoxygenase (15-LO) with selective inhibitors abrogated RSL3’s
cytotoxicity to stromal cells. Thus, high lipoxygenase activity in
stromal cells increases their susceptibility to GPX4 inhibition.

Because 5-LO products like leukotriene B4 are powerful chemo-attractants
for myeloid cells and T cells, we studied the impact of GPX4 knockdown in
vivo using xenografts of cancer cells co-injected with stromal cells.
GPX4 knockdown resulted in a large increase in myeloid-cell infiltration
into tumors but, surprisingly, T-cell infiltration was suppressed. We
reasoned that 15-LO products are immunosuppressive based on recent
findings that 15-LO gene amplifications are inversely correlated with
T-cell infiltration in breast cancers in The Cancer Genome Atlas.
Consistent with this, GPX4 inhibition of stroma-cancer co-cultures
suppressed T-cell chemotaxis but combined inhibition of GPX4 and 15-LO
significantly enhanced T-cell chemotaxis over untreated controls in
vitro. We are undertaking in vivo testing of this combination.

In summary, our unbiased chemical biology approach has revealed a
therapeutic strategy to promote T-cell inflammation. We envision this to
be a priming strategy for stroma-rich cancers to become responsive to a
variety of different immunotherapies thereby unleashing their full
curative potential.


