Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of CD137 humanized mouse model for efficacy
assessment of agonistic anti-CD137 therapeutic antibodies.


CD137 belongs to the TNF receptor super family, and its activation is
essential to the function of T cells and NK cells. Multiple agonistic
CD137 antibodies are currently being tested in humans with advanced
cancer, which expected to become an important new immuno-oncology
therapeutics in clinic. It is important to establish preclinical models
for efficacy assessment of investigational CD137 antibodies before
entering clinic. Currently available animal models cannot meet this need.
Syngeneic mouse tumor models provide a useful platform for testing
surrogate immuno-oncology therapies, but cannot be used for testing human
therapeutic antibodies due to the species specificity; human immunity
reconstituted models, by human PBMC or hematopoietic stem cell
inoculation into immune deficient mice, suffering from highly variable
responses, are not robust enough to provide a reliable system for
efficacy studies. Establishing target humanized models by replacing mouse
therapeutic target with human counterpart while maintaining normal mouse
immunity is a practical approach to evaluate human therapeutic antibodies
in vivo. Using CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing, we have engineered human CD137
knock-in model expressing chimeric human/mouse CD137 composed of human
extracellular and transmembrane domains (Exon 4-7), with intact mouse
signal peptide and intracellular domain. FACS analysis of splenocytes
derived from homozygous knock-in mice showed that CD3/CD28 stimulated T
cells only express chimeric CD137 reactive to human CD137 antibodies, but
not mouse CD137; Yet the expression levels of the chimeric CD137 in the
knock-in mice are generally lower than endogenous mouse protein in
wild-type C57BL/6 mice. At present, we are testing the efficacy of
reference human CD137 agonistic antibodies by treating these homozygous
knock-in mice grafted with syngeneic MC38 tumor cells. Data will be
presented at the conference.


