Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinatorial CRISPR-Cas9 gene knockout to enable genetic
interaction mapping in human cells.


Genetic interactions, in particular negative or ‘synthetic-lethal’
interactions for which simultaneous disruption of two genes causes cell
killing, have implications for therapeutic development. The feasibility
of this approach has been demonstrated with the recent approval of the
drug olaparib, an inhibitor of PARP1, specifically for tumors with
loss-of-function mutations in BRCA1/2. However, beyond olaparib, further
applications of synthetic-lethal cancer therapy have been limited by poor
understanding of the important genetic interactions in a cancer cell, and
how these vary from one cancer type to another or from patient to
patient. To enable systematic mapping of these genetic interaction
networks, we developed a CRISPR-Cas9 screening methodology for knocking
out single and pairs of genes in high-throughput. Here, we combined
multiplex targeting with array-based oligonucleotide synthesis to create
dual-gRNA libraries covering up to 10^5 defined gene pairs. In these
libraries, each construct bears two gRNAs, with each gRNA designed to
target either a gene or a scrambled non-targeting sequence absent from
the genome. We conducted genetic interaction screens by transducing the
dual-gRNA lentiviral library into a population of cells stably expressing
Cas9, maintaining these cells in exponential growth over the course of
four weeks, then sampling the relative changes in gRNAs at days 3, 14, 21
and 28 post-transduction. To robustly quantify gene fitness and genetic
interactions, we developed a computational analysis framework that
integrates all samples across the multiple days of the experiment. Using
this method we evaluated all pairwise gene knockout combinations among a
panel of 73 genes divided between tumor-suppressor genes (TSG) and
cancer-relevant drug targets (DT); including negative controls this
amounted to a total of 23,652 combinations. Experiments were performed in
three cancer cell lines: HeLa, A549 and 293T. In total 162
therapeutically relevant interactions were identified, of which 146
(90.1%) were private to one cell line. None of the interactions were
observed in all three cell lines. These patterns replicated in low
throughput assays with combinatorial drugs at 80% precision. In summary,
we have introduced a combinatorial CRISPR-Cas9 genetic interaction
mapping technology that successfully identifies many
therapeutically-relevant genetic interactions in cancer and shows the
great importance of cellular context on the architecture of the genetic
interaction network. Recognizing that there will be great diversity in
genetic interaction between different tumors it will be important to
perform future studies across a large number of samples, which is enabled
by the high-throughput method we have developed.


