Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting nicotinic acetylcholine receptors for the prevention and
reversal of chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy.


While chemotherapy has played a significant role in the survival of
cancer patients, exposure to drugs such as the taxanes, platinum-based
compounds, and bortezomib often results in chemotherapy-induced
peripheral neuropathy (CIPN), a consequence of peripheral nerve fiber
dysfunction or degeneration. CIPN is characterized by sensory symptoms
such as numbness, burning pain, and allodynia, resulting in an overall
decrease in quality of life. Paclitaxel (Taxol), a taxane that is
commonly used to treat breast, lung, and ovarian cancers, has been found
to cause CIPN in 59-78% of cancer patients. There is currently no
effective preventative or therapeutic treatment for this side effect,
which can be a dose-limiting factor or delay treatment. Our studies have
established that the prototypical nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
(nAChR) agonist, nicotine, is capable of preventing and reversing the
development of paclitaxel-induced CIPN, and does not stimulate tumor
growth or interfere with the cytotoxic properties of paclitaxel. Male
C57BL/6J mice were treated with paclitaxel (8 mg/kg, i.p.) every other
day for a total of four injections. Nicotine was either infused via a
subcutaneous 7-day osmotic minipump (24 mg/kg/day) starting 48 hours
prior to paclitaxel treatment, or acutely injected (0.9 mg/kg, i.p.)
following paclitaxel treatment. Von Frey filament testing revealed that
nicotine can prevent and reverse paclitaxel-induced mechanical allodynia;
the latter effect of nicotine can be inhibited by the α7 nAChR
antagonist methyllycaconitine (10 mg/kg, s.c.). Also, α7 nAChR knockout
mice exhibit a greater sustained decrease in mechanical threshold after
paclitaxel administration than wild-type mice, suggesting the involvement
of this receptor in CIPN development and maintenance. This hypothesis was
supported by the reversal of paclitaxel-induced mechanical allodynia by
the α7 nAChR silent agonist R-47. While nicotine activates its receptors
in the tumors cells, based on stimulation of the PI3K/Akt pathway,
MTT/MTS colorimetric assays showed that concentrations of nicotine
ranging from 0.1 to 10 µM fail to significantly increase the viability
of A549 or H460 non-small cell lung cancer cells, murine Lewis lung
carcinoma cells, or primary human lung cancer cells. Most importantly,
the paclitaxel-induced decreases in H460 proliferation and LLC viability
are not significantly attenuated by 1 µM nicotine. Moreover, 1 µM
nicotine does not interfere with paclitaxel-induced apoptosis of A549
cells. Finally, R-47 also suppresses CIPN without increasing lung tumor
cell viability and colony formation, or interfering with the cytotoxicity
of paclitaxel. Our in vitro findings are supported by studies
demonstrating that nicotine does not enhance tumor volume or cause
premature death in tumor-bearing mice. These data suggest that nAChRs may
be promising drug targets for the prevention and treatment of CIPN.


