Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule inhibition of CXCR4 mobilizes prostate disseminated
tumor cells (DTCs) from the chemoprotective bone marrow niche, thereby
sensitizing them to chemotherapy.


Bone metastasis results in the deaths of approximately 28,000 prostate
cancer patients each year in the United States. Disseminated tumor cells
(DTCs) go from the primary tumor site to the bone marrow, which provides
a chemoprotective environment. C-X-C chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4), highly
overexpressed in prostate cancer, is at least partially responsible for
bone homing. CXCR4 is also expressed in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs),
which occupy the same niche within the bone marrow as DTCs. HSCs can be
mobilized from the bone marrow niche via CXCR4 antagonism. We have
previously shown that human tumor cells can be similarly mobilized from
the bone marrow niche via small molecule inhibition of CXCR4. We believe
this represents an ideal strategy for treating bone metastasis and
hypothesize that mobilized DTCs will proliferate in the vascular niche,
causing them to become chemosensitive. Several outstanding questions
still exist that we are in the process of answering. First is the
percentage of DTCs that are mobilized with CXCR4 antagonism. Previously,
we used a qPCR strategy to quantify tumor cells in the bone marrow and
blood of mice. This was imperfect because we could not reliably count
cells, nor could we query the cells further. Therefore, we developed a
novel immunofluorescence protocol to detect, quantify, and query tumor
cells residing in the bone marrow or blood of mice. We will use this
technique to determine the percentage of bone marrow DTCs that are
mobilized. The second outstanding question is whether or not mobilized
DTCs proliferate once mobilized. This is crucial to know, considering
most chemotherapy relies on tumor cell proliferation. Using our novel
protocol, we will determine the percentage of bone marrow DTCs and
mobilized DTCs that are proliferating. Finally, while there is evidence
that combining CXCR4 antagonism with chemotherapy kills more tumor cells
than chemotherapy alone, no one has shown definitively that it works
specifically for prostate bone marrow DTCs or bone metastasis. Not only
will we do this, but we will also be able to quantify how effective each
therapy strategy is by quantifying the tumor cells present in each
scenario. The data from these in vivo murine experiments, which would be
impossible to get from humans, will go hand in hand with a
first-in-prostate cancer clinical trial we are running that tests the
same hypothesis. Combined, these data will be critically important in
deciding whether mobilization therapy combined with chemotherapy is an
effective strategy for treating metastatic prostate cancer.


