Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying ovarian cancer specific targeted drugs using
high-throughput drug sensitivity profiles of primary cancer cells.


Ovarian cancer (OvCa) is the sixth most common cancer in women and
leading cause of death from gynecologic diseases. Poor prognosis in OvCa
is due to late diagnosis and acquired resistance to the commonly used
platinum-based regimens. A significant setback for OvCa treatment is the
lack of reliable biomarkers and effective targeted therapies. In order to
discover novel therapeutic opportunities with approved and emerging drugs
for OvCa, we have established primary cultures using ascites or tumor
tissue samples from chemo-refractory ovarian cancer patients for ex vivo
Drug Sensitivity and Resistance Testing (DSRT) and genomic profiling. In
addition, we have performed DSRT with 31 established OvCa cell lines.
Comparison of the drug sensitivity profiles of ten primary cancer cell
cultures and 31 OvCa cell lines revealed previously unanticipated cancer
selective drug vulnerabilities. Several drug groups were identified
suggesting that the sensitive samples were addicted to the corresponding
signaling networks. For example, in a 53-year old chemorefractory low
grade serous OvCa patient, genomic and transcriptomic analyses revealed a
fusion gene of NRG-1, a target that was recently reported to involve the
NRG1/ERBB3 activation loop in OvCa. We found high expression of ERBB2 and
ERBB3 by RNA-seq as well as high levels of phospho-ERBB3, phospho-ERBB2
and phospho-EGFR by immunohistochemistry. In agreement with the molecular
mechanism, DSRT analysis identified significant sensitivity of primary
cancer cells to EGFR inhibitors, such as erlotinib and to dual EGFR and
Her2 inhibitor afatinib. The patient has received combination therapy of
gemcitabine and erlotinib during nine months, followed by afatinib
monotheraphy that has lead to complete remission after six months
treatment. We have detected activated NRG1/ERBB3 activation loop also in
several additional ovarian cancer patient cases, highlighting the
importance of this signaling pathway in ovarian cancer pathogenesis. Our
study reveals that a subset of serous ovarian cancer patients with
activating NRG1/ERBB3 signaling loop have clinical benefits from
repurposing dual EGFR/Her2 inhibitor afatinib, providing a basis for the
clinical use of EGFR and dual EGFR/Her2 tyrosine kinase inhibitors in
clinical treatment. In conclusion, DSRT technology together with
molecular profiling provides a powerful strategy to identify tumor driver
signals and select clinically actionable inhibitors. Hence, this type of
systems medicine approach can significantly improve the power of mainly
genomics-oriented personalized medicine approaches.


