Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimizing the replication of cancer genomics workflows: case
studies.


Reproducing results is a major issue in cancer biology, whose “work
bench” is dynamic and complex, with frequently updated algorithms and
software. The better to manage our work in this environment we have
developed SyQADA, a System for Quality-Assured Data Analysis -- a
workflow automation system designed to simplify common sequential
analysis processes on the same or different data. SyQADA manages many of
the details of procedural bookkeeping involved in bioinformatics
workflows: What samples are we using? Where are the raw data? Were all
the samples processed? Did every job complete satisfactorily? Is there as
much output as expected? Where are the input files for the next step? How
long does a typical job take to run? Which program versions did we use?
Can we easily compare these results with the output of a different
version of a program, or with different input data?

Using SyQADA, we have found ourselves better able to reproduce results
while at the same time reducing the human effort required to manage our
upstream data analyses. Here, we briefly describe how our lung cancer
studies have benefitted from the use of SyQADA.

To understand the effect of different variant callers for Ion Torrent
deep sequencing data in a lung cancer genomics study, we created a work
protocol that allowed us to compare the different sets of variants called
on 34 distinct somatic DNA samples from 4 patients. This complex
processing framework involved running multiple variant callers,
annotating variants, filtering germline variants using quality control
metrics, and collating results across samples and callers. With SyQADA,
we were able to re-run individual processes changing parameters with
trivial changes to our configuration, yielding improved output. We then
applied that unmodified protocol to the 500 samples from 48 individuals
in our study, and rapidly produced data from which we could perform
biological analysis. We then applied the protocol to a study of
pre-malignant lesions in 25 lung cancer patients. In both studies, our
workflow allowed us to generate comparable results in a matter of hours
rather than days.

SyQADA has been used by individuals with backgrounds ranging from expert
programmer to Unix novice, to perform and repeat dozens of diverse
analytical workflows. Projects to which SyQADA has been applied include
allelic imbalance studies of TCGA samples for cancers of the breast,
pancreas, lung, and colon, processing roughly 6000 samples through a
dozen steps.

A zipfile containing the SyQADA executable source code, documentation,
tutorial examples, and workflows used in our lab will be available.


