Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dynamics of genetic aberrations in Crohn's disease associated
colorectal carcinogenesis.


Crohn’s disease, a condition of chronic inflammation of the intestine,
significantly increases the risk for the development of colorectal cancer
(CRC). Sporadic CRCs are characterized by a specific pattern of genomic
imbalances and a landscape of acquired gene mutations. In this study we
aimed to compare CRCs that arise as a consequence of chronic inflammation
in Crohn’s disease with sporadic CRCs.

We analyzed 26 Crohn’s disease associated CRCs, four matched dysplastic
lesions, six matched inflamed mucosa samples, and two matched lymph node
metastases using array comparative genomic hybridization, targeted
sequencing (564 cancer related genes) and gene expression profiling. As a
control, we used normal intestinal mucosa from the resection margin of
these CRCs and 24 sporadic CRCs.

In general, CRCs that developed in patients with Crohn’s disease had a
similar distribution of genomic imbalances compared to sporadic CRC.
However, we identified distinct mutation signatures: in the Crohn's
disease associated CRCs the most frequently mutated gene was TP53, which
occurred in 65% of the samples. The second, third and fourth most
frequently mutated genes were KRAS (27%), APC (23%) and PIK3CA (19%). In
the control group of sporadically arising CRCs, the most commonly mutated
gene was APC (75%), followed by KRAS (54%), TP53 (33%), SMAD3 (29%) and
SMAD2 (25%). The genetic analyses of multiple lesions from individual
patients revealed a high degree of intertumoral heterogeneity with
diverse patterns of gene mutations and allowed the reconstruction of the
sequence of genetic events during Crohn’s disease associated
tumorigenesis. In contrast to sporadic colorectal carcinogenesis, TP53
mutations were observed as early and common events while APC mutations
occurred rather late and were infrequent.

Our comprehensive molecular profiling of Crohn’s disease associated
CRCs suggests that the genetic landscape of CRC is influenced by the
activation of inflammation related pathways. Furthermore, our findings
offer potential for establishing an early detection marker for dysplasia
in patients with Crohn’s disease.


