Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PiggyBac-manufactured anti-BCMA Centyrin-based CAR-T therapeutic
exhibits improved potency and durability.


Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells have been extremely effective in
treating acute lymphoblastic leukemia and have shown promise against
other malignancies including multiple myeloma (MM). However, relatively
poor potency and durability continue to limit efficacy. Addressing these
shortcomings, we have developed a novel CAR-T cell therapeutic with
enhanced stem cell memory phenotype, reduced immunogenicity, and no
evidence of tonic activity.

P-BCMA-101 employs a BCMA-specific Centyrin rather than a single chain
variable fragment (scFv) for antigen detection and is engineered using
piggyBac (PB). Centyrins are fully human and have similar binding
affinities but are smaller, more thermostable and predicted to be less
immunogenic than a scFv. Furthermore, PB modification of human T cells
requires only in vitro transcribed mRNA and plasmid DNA, eliminating the
need for lentivirus or γ–retrovirus and resulting in time and cost
savings. Additionally, the increased cargo capacity of PB permits the
incorporation of a safety switch and a selectable gene into the product.
The former is incorporated for optional depletion in vivo in case of
adverse events and the latter allows enrichment of CARTyrin+ cells using
the non-genotoxic drug methotrexate (MTX), leading to greater consistency
in patient product material.

Characterization of P-BCMA-101 revealed > 70% of cells possessed a
stem-cell memory phenotype (i.e. CD45RA+ CCR7+ CD62L+ CD95+) and >95% of
the cells were CARTyrin+. In addition, no tonic signaling or T cell
exhaustion was observed, highlighted by low levels of PD-1, Lag3, and
Tim-3. Cells exhibit specific and robust in vitro target-cell killing,
cytokine production, and proliferation in response to BCMA+ tumor cells.
In vivo anti-tumor efficacy of P-BCMA-101 has been evaluated in NSG mice
bearing luciferase+ MM.1S cells, an aggressive human MM-derived cell
line, monitoring tumor growth by bioluminescent imaging (BLI). Following
tumor implantation, animals received a single IV administration of either
4 x 106 or 12 x 106 P-BCMA-101 cells. All untreated control animals
succumbed to disease within four weeks of the treatment date. Conversely,
tumor burden was reduced to the limit of detection by BLI within 7 days
of p-BCMA-101 treatment. As opposed to lentivirus-based products in the
same animal model, P-BCMA-101 persists and expands in the animals,
eliminates tumors from relapse and prolong survival, with most animals
surviving 100 days post-tumor implant. Finally, the effectiveness of the
safety switch has been demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo.

P-BCMA-101 is the first-in-class of Centyrin-based CAR therapeutics
modified using PB and is predicted to have improved potency and
durability given the phenotype and non-immunogenic properties of
Centryrins. We plan to initiate a phase I clinical trial of P-BCMA-101
for the treatment of patients with relapsed and/or refractory MM.


