Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective drug sensitivity score (DSS) for indolent and aggressive
prostate cancer cell lines.


Prostate cancer (PC) is the most common malignancy in men and the second
leading cause of cancer-related deaths. The majority of the PCs are
classified as adenocarcinomas characterized by the expression of androgen
receptor (AR) and prostate-specific antigen (PSA). Two of the most
commonly used cell lines are LNCaP and PC-3 cells, derived from lymph
node and bone metastases, respectively. Also VCaP cells, derived from
vertebral metastases, are widely used in prostate cancer research. It has
been well established that LNCaP and VCaP cells represent the
conventional indolent form of PC expressing AR and PSA and are
androgen-dependent. PC-3 cells, on the other hand, do not express AR and
PSA, are androgen-independent, and represent the highly aggressive form.

The drug sensitivity of the cell lines was assessed by applying a large
panel of drugs covering cancer chemotherapeutics and clinically available
and emerging drugs including conventional chemotherapy, kinase
inhibitors, metabolic modifiers, rapalogs, differentiating/epigenetic
modifiers, kinesin inhibitors, apoptotic modulators, NSAIDs, hormone
therapy, immunomodulators and HSP inhibitors. A panel of 460 compounds
was tested in five concentrations covering a 10.000-fold drug-relevant
concentration range in 384-well format. Cells were seeded to pre-drugged
plates, followed by cell viability measurements (CellTiter-Glo) after 72
hours. Maximal and minimal responses to drugs were analyzed, the EC50
values were calculated and Drug Sensitivity Score (DSS) was calculated
for each drug as a measure of reduced viability. A selective Drug
Sensitivity Score (sDSS) was calculated to identify the selective drug
response pattern of each three cancer cell lines.

As expected, the results indicate that LNCaP and VCaP cells in general
were more sensitive to drugs of different categories than PC-3 cells.
According to DSS analysis, all three cell lines showed sensitivity to
conventional chemotherapy and kinase inhibitors. However, PC-3 cells were
more sensitive to kinase inhibitors than conventional chemotherapy.
Determining sDSS revealed specific sensitivities of each cell line. LNCaP
cells were sensitive to kinase inhibitors, such as mTOR and AKT
inhibitors. Also VCaP cells showed selective sensitivity to kinase
inhibitors, especially Aurora kinase and IGF1R inhibitors. In addition to
kinase inhibitors, VCaP cells were selectively sensitive to HDAC
inhibitors. Furthermore, PC-3 cells were sensitive to e.g. CDK inhibitors.

We conclude that the cell-based compound screening combined with DSS and
sDSS analysis provides a possibility to profile cellular responses to an
extensive collection of anti-cancer compounds enabling repurposing of
existing drugs to new indications, identification of vulnerabilities in
different types of cancer cells and functional investigation of cellular
pathways behind drug sensitivity or resistance.


