Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The clinicopathological significance of glutathione S-transferase
P1 hypermethylation in breast cancer, a meta-analysis and literature
review.


Background: Glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1) has been reported to
function as a tumor suppressor gene in various types of human cancers
including breast cancer (BC). However, the association and
clinicopathological significance between GSTP1 hypermethylation and BC
remains unclear. The purpose of this study is to conduct a meta-analysis
and literature review to investigate clinicopathological significance of
GSTP1 methylation in BC.

Method: A detailed literature search was made in PubMed, EMBASE, Web of
Science and Google Scholar databases. The data were extracted and
assessed by two reviewers independently. Odds Ratios (OR) with 95%
corresponding confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated. A total of
twenty four relevant articles were available for meta-analysis.

Results: The frequency of GSTP1 hypermethylation was significantly
increased in BC than in benign breast disease, the pooled OR was 7.09,
pResults: The frequency of GSTP1 hypermethylation was significantly
increased in BC than in benign breast disease, the pooled OR was 7.09,
p<0.00001. The rate of GSTP1 hypermethylation was significantly different
between early stage I/II and later stage III/IV, OR was 2.05, pResults:
The frequency of GSTP1 hypermethylation was significantly increased in BC
than in benign breast disease, the pooled OR was 7.09, p<0.00001. The
rate of GSTP1 hypermethylation was significantly different between early
stage I/II and later stage III/IV, OR was 2.05, p<0.0001. In addition,
the rate of GSTP1 hypermethylation was also significantly different
regarding the node involvement status. The rate of GSTP1 hypermethylation
in node positive BC was higher than that in node negative BC, OR was
1.77, p=0.006. However, GSTP1 hypermethylation was not significantly
associated with ER, PR and HER2 status.

Conclusion: In summary, our meta-analysis indicated that the frequency of
GSTP1 hypermethylation was significantly increased in BC than in benign
breast disease. The rate of GSTP1 hypermethylation in late stages of BC
was higher than that in early stages. Our data suggested that GSTP1
hypermethylation could be a risk factor and a diagnostic biomarker of BC
carcinogenesis. GSTP1 hypermethylation may have a role in the progression
of BC. GSTP1 is a potential drug target for development of demethylation
treatment for patients with BC.


