Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved quality of life and tumor regression in a patient with
stage IV non-small cell lung cancer with brain metastasis 10 months after
daily treatment with single agent mifepristone.


The FDA granted an IND for a 40 patient study entitled “A phase II
study of treatment with oral mifepristone as salvage therapy in patients
with advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer who have failed 2
or more previous chemotherapy or immunotherapy regimens”. Presented
herein is a description of the effect of treating Case 1 who is a 68 year
old male who presented with stage IV non-small cell lung cancer with
brain metastasis causing seizures following 10 months of treatment with
single agent oral mifepristone (Korlym from Corcept Inc) 300mg qd. He had
shown tumor progression despite treatment with carboplatin, docetaxel,
premetrexed, and gemcitabine. He was not considered a candidate for
nivolumab or pembrolizumab because his tumor was negative for the
programmed cell death factor ligand 1 (PD-L-1) marker. His preclinical
performance status was ECOG 1. After 2 months of daily 300mg mifepristone
treatment he showed a considerable improvement in energy and stamina and
less shortness of breath. There have been no new lung or brain lesions.
In fact, there has been shrinkage of the lung lesions and no growth of
the brain lesion and no more seizures. His ECOG was “0” after 10
months of single agent mifepristone treatment. The mechanism of action is
believed to be by suppressing intracytoplasmic production of an
immunomodulatory protein known as the progesterone induced blocking
factor (PIBF). One of the functions of PIBF is to stabilize perforin
granules in natural killer cells thus inhibiting their cytotoxic
activity. This protein seems to be unique to rapidly growing cells, e.g.,
trophoblast cells or cancer cells. Thus, in general, in low dosages, as
used in this patient, the drug is very well tolerated. PIBF does not seem
to be needed for cells growing at normal speed. In humans, mifepristone
has been found to either cause complete tumor regression, or more
commonly, stabilization of the cancer with improved quality of life.
Previously, mifepristone allowed long-term complete remission from a
terminal small cell lung cancer with associated hyponaotremia. The case
reported here is believed the first involving palliative benefit of
treating advanced non-small cell lung cancer with mifepristone.
Stabilization of the brain metastasis in this report supports evidence
from a previous case of advanced glioblastoma multiforme with a clear
though transient response to mifepristone, that the drug can cross the
blood-brain barrier, and thus be effective for brain lesions. This is the
first case treated with 300mg daily mifepristone (200mg used previously).
Similar to the lower dosage, this patient reported no adverse side
effects. Mifepristone was also found to improve longevity and body
conditioning scores in a placebo controlled study of spontaneous murine
lung cancer.


