Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of antibodies against a novel tumor-associated
MHC/peptide-target and generation of highly specific and potent
HLA-A*02MMP1-003/CD3 TandAbs.


Tumor-associated antigens for effective and safe T-cell engagement are
very limited, leaving a need to open up the therapeutic target space.
Targeting disease-specific MHC/peptide complexes with bispecific
T-cell-recruiting antibodies is a highly attractive strategy to address
this need, but so far, generation of antibodies against these peptides
has been reported to be challenging. Immatics’ unique target discovery
engine XPRESIDENT® holds the promise of identifying novel
tumor-associated MHC/peptide complexes by providing direct and
quantitative evidence for their presence on a large collection of primary
human tumor and normal tissue specimens. By this approach, MMP1-003, an
HLA-A*02-binding peptide originating from matrix metallopeptidase 1
(MMP1), was identified as a promising therapeutic target presented by
several tumor types, including colorectal and lung cancer, but absent on
normal tissues. These findings are underlined by RNAseq analysis of the
source antigen which also points to MMP1 being a highly attractive
tumor-associated target. Consequently, a fully human antibody phage
display library was screened to identify highly specific single chain
antibodies, which were shown to recognize the purified
HLA-A*02/MMP1-003-complex in ELISA assays as well as on peptide-pulsed
HLA-A*02+ T2 cells. The best candidates were reformatted into bispecific
tetravalent TandAbs® through Affimed´s proprietary platform using a
human/cyno-cross-reactive CD3-binding domain for T-cell engagement.
Specific target recognition was confirmed for the TandAbs in binding and
cytotoxicity assays on peptide-pulsed T2 cells.
HLA-A*02/peptide-complexes selected from the broad normal tissue
immunopeptidome with a high degree of sequence similarity to the
HLA-A*02/MMP1-003-complex served as controls to confirm the specificity
and hence the low risk of off-target binding. The most promising
candidates were tested on a panel of endogenously target-expressing
cancer cell lines covering MMP1 +/- and HLA-A*02 +/- expression profiles,
as well as the source proteins for the most closely related control
peptides. The lead TandAb showed excellent target specificity across a
wide range of peptide-pulsed and endogenously expressing cell lines as
well as potent cytotoxicity with picomolar EC50. In summary, we have
identified a tumor-associated MMP1-derived peptide in an HLA-A*02 context
by exploiting the knowledge of tumor and healthy tissue immunopeptidomes
using XPRESIDENT®. Overcoming the existing barrier of developing
antibodies targeting specific MHC/peptide complexes, we generated and
characterized highly specific and potent T-cell-recruiting TandAbs. These
hold the potential to open up the therapeutic target space for T-cell
engagement by providing access to intracellular proteins that are
presented in a disease-specific manner as MHC/peptide complexes.


