Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Destabilizing β-catenin and Ras could be an ideal therapy for
treating metastatic colorectal cancer.


INTRODUCTION Aberrant activations of Wnt/β-catenin and Ras signaling
pathways by APC (90%) and K-Ras (40-50%) mutations are closely interacted
and accelerate CRC tumorigenesis. Protein level of β-catenin as well as
Ras is increased by APC loss via inhibiting GSK3B-mediated
poly-ubiquitination dependent Ras degradation through recruitment of
β-TrCP E3 linker. Moreover, additional K-Ras mutation results in the
liver metastasis by secondary activation of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling
pathways via Ras-ERK and -AKT pathways in addition to the initial
activation by APC loss. Consequently, both β-catenin and Ras were highly
increased in human CRC patient tissues, especially in metastatic tumor.

EXPERIMENT PROCEDURES To investigate the synergistic effects of aberrant
Wnt/β-catenin and Ras signaling pathways on tumor development to
metastasis, we established the APCMin/+/K-RasG12DLA2 compound mouse that
harbor APC and K-Ras mutations in animal model. We also analyzed Ras
protein level using human CRC patient tissues of normal mucosa and
adenocarcinoma (N=24) and metastatic adenocarcinoma (N=26) and tumor
budding (N=10). To recapitulate the metastatic tumor environment which
have enriched receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), we maintained and
experimented with EGF (20ng/ml) in every in vitro studies.

RESULTS We observed that both β-catenin and Ras were increased in
adenocarcinoma and metastatic adenocarcinoma of human CRC compared with
normal mucosa. Interestingly, both β-catenin and Ras were most
significantly increased in tumor budding regions which
histopathologically represent epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT). In
murine model, the EMT phenomenon was effectively induced and invasion of
small intestinal tumors were occurred in APCMin/+/K-RasG12DLA2 with
increased level of β-catenin and Ras compared with APCMin/+. However,
EMT phenomenon and its following events such as migration and invasion of
CRC cells induced by APC and K-Ras mutations were abolished by
destabilization of β-catenin and Ras.

CONCLUSION Our results show that destabilizing β-catenin and Ras could
be effective therapeutic targets for inhibiting metastasis in the early
stage of CRC development


