Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional and mechanistic characterization of oncogenic long
intervening non-coding RNA Linc-CHD1L-1 in hepatocellular carcinoma.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common and lethal
cancers worldwide. Due to the asymptomatic nature of HCC, many patients
were diagnosed at advance stages and available therapeutic options are
very limited. Therefore, a better understanding of the molecular
mechanism underlying hepatocarcinogenesis is urgently needed and is
crucial for the development of effective treatment. Long intervening
non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) are emerging class of regulatory RNA involved
in diverse molecular processes. In this study, we aimed to interrogate
lincRNAs expression in HCC and identify novel lincRNAs that contribute to
hepatocarcinogenesis. To investigate the global expression profile of
lincRNAs in human HCCs, next-generation transcriptome sequencing
(RNA-Seq) was performed in 16 pairs of HBV-associated primary HCCs and
their corresponding non-tumorous liver tissues. Interestingly, the
lincRNA expressions in human HCCs can be unambiguously segregated from
their non-tumorous counterparts by unsupervised clustering analysis,
suggesting that global lincRNA expression profiles between tumors and
non-tumors were remarkably different. From this analysis, we identified
linc-CHD1L-1 as the most significant up-regulated lincRNA in HCCs.
Clinically, linc-CHD1L-1 was overexpressed in over 80% of HCC patients.
Linc-CHD1L-1 expression level in tumors was also shown to be a promising
marker for HCC diagnosis. Functionally, knockdown of linc-CHD1L-1 by
shRNAs had significantly reduced HCC cell proliferation and cell
migration in vitro. Besides, knockdown of linc-CHD1L-1 in HCC cells also
substantially abrogated tumorigenicity in subcutaneous tumor model.
Mechanistically, the expression of linc-CHD1L-1 was significantly and
positively correlated to the expression of its neighboring genes located
on the chromosome 1q. Knockout of linc-CHD1L-1 by CRISPR/Cas9 also
significantly repressed its neighboring genes expression, suggesting that
linc-CHD1L-1 may positively regulate gene expression in a cis-manner.
Finally, DAVID pathway analysis performed on linc-CHD1L co-expressed
protein coding genes further suggested that linc-CHD1L-1 was
significantly co-expressed with genes that are involved in transcription
and chromatin modifications. In conclusion, overexpression of
linc-CHD1L-1 contributes to hepatocarcinogenesis by promoting HCC cell
proliferation and migration through transcriptional and epigenetic
mechanisms.


