Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The molecular basis for specific recognition of the biologically
relevant hybrid-2 type human telomeric G-quadruplex by epiberberine.


G-quadruplex structures have been shown to form in human telomeres, and
the formation of G-quadruplexes can inhibit telomerase, which plays a key
role in cancers by stabilizing telomere length and integrity thereby
granting limitless replicative potential. The human telomeric
G-quadruplex is thus considered to be a potential target for cancer
therapeutics. In physiologically relevant potassium solution, human
telomeric DNA sequences form two equilibrating hybrid-type G-quadruplex
structures, with the hybrid-2 structure being the predominant form in
extended sequences. We discovered that epiberberine (EPI), a naturally
occurring protoberberine alkaloid, can specifically bind the hybrid-2
human telomeric G-quadruplex and can induce the conversion to the
hybrid-2 structure. Using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy,
we determined the solution structure of the 1:1 complex of EPI and
hybrid-2 human telomeric G-quadruplex. Our NMR structure shows EPI bound
at the 5’ end of the hybrid-2 telomeric quadruplex with an unexpectedly
large drug-induced conformational change in the flanking and loop
regions, creating a very well-defined drug binding pocket with extensive
capping structures. The EPI molecule and 5’ flanking adenine form an
induced quasi-triad plane which is intercalated between the external 5’
tetrad and capping structures. Two layers of new capping structures are
formed with the 5’ flanking segment and the second TTA lateral loop to
cover the “intercalated quasi-triad”. Notably, the well-defined
EPI-induced multi-layer binding-site arrangement is only possible in the
hybrid-2 folding topology of telomeric DNA. Our results provide important
insights into specific targeting of the physiologically relevant hybrid-2
human telomeric G-quadruplex by a small molecule compound; EPI’s
asymmetric crescent-shape and the positioning of its dioxolane moiety, as
well as the hybrid-2 folding and the loop and flanking bases in the human
telomeric DNA sequence, all contribute toward the specific recognition of
EPI. In addition, we have conducted polymerase stop assays, which
confirmed that EPI can stabilize the human telomeric G-quadruplex to
inhibit polymerase activity.


