Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diosmetin induces apoptosis in human prostate carcinoma cells via
the Rictor pathway invitro and inhibits tumor growth in vivo.


Cell growth is a fundamental biological process, where mTOR (mammalian
target of rapamycin) pathway has its role, regulates cell growth by
coordinating energy and nutrient signals with growth factor. mTOR protein
kinase have two different complexes; complex-I contains major component
raptor; a target of rapamycin and complex II; insensitive to rapamycin,
has major component rictor. Rictor is important as it phosphorylates
Ser-473 of Akt/PKB, which is essential for full Akt/PKB activation.
Reports suggested that overexpression of mTOR in prostate cancer tissues,
which may have potential role in prostate cancer progression. The known
mTOR inhibitor rapamycin is not specific for mTOR-II complex, as it
doesn’t inhibit main component Rictor. We need to have effective
chemo-preventive agents, which can modulate Rictor signaling cascade to
inhibit prostate cancer. Diosmetin (5, 7-Trihydroxy-4′-methoxyflavone),
a natural flavonoid present in citrus plant, has anti-mutagenic and
anti-allergic properties. Earlier we demonstrated growth factors
Insulin-like growth factor-1 and cytokine (IL-6) induces Rictor
expression, and phosphorylated Akt at Ser-473. Using diosmetin in
concentration dependent fashion (5-40µM) to LNCaP and PC-3 cells down
regulated phosphorylation of Rictor (Thr1135), Akt (Ser-473) and PKCα
(Ser-657) expressions. This resulted in downregulation of survival
molecules; Survivin and X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein, which
induced apoptosis and inhibited cells growth. Luciferase tag PC-3 cells
orthotopic implant in ventral prostate of nude mice represented
significant decrease in tumor volume of diosmetin (20 and
50µg/animal/day) fed mice compared to control mice. Similarly
bioluminescence imaging of orthotopically implanted mice represented
decreased tumor luciferase activity after diosmetin feeding than control
mice. Moreover, diosmetin feeding to tumor bearing nude mice reduced the
phosphorylation of Rictor, (Thr1135), Akt (Ser-473) and PKCα (Ser-657)
expressions and induced apoptotic events to inhibit tumor growth
significantly. Based on results we may suggest diosmetin can be developed
as an anticancer agent for prostate cancer.


