Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenomic characterization of MSC from myeloid malignancies.


Ineffective hematopoiesis is a hallmark of myeloid malignancies such as
Myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDS) or Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML). Our
previous research has shown that mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC), one of
the main cellular regulatory components of the bone marrow niche and
essential for the differentiation of new blood cells from Hematopoietic
Stem Cells (HSC), are molecularly and functionally impaired in MDS and
AML patients. More specifically, these cells display reduced
proliferative and differentiation capacities, an increased cellular
senescence, or the altered expression of key hematopoietic factors,
defects that can provide an explanation for the cytopenia associated with
these diseases. But most interestingly, we have also discovered that MDS-
and AML-derived MSC present aberrant methylomes. Our data, based on 450k
DNA methylation microarrays, show that these abnormalities are shared by
the MSC from both malignancies and affect key transcription factors like
TBX15, PITX2 or HOXB6, formerly linked to differentiation and
development. This results can account for some of the defects observed in
the disease-related MSC and represent an important paradigm for
cancer-induced epigenetic changes in normal cells. Aiming to further
explore the importance of this epigenetic deregulation, we performed
RNAseq experiments using MSC from healthy donors as well as from MDS and
AML patients. This approach not only suggests a profound impact of the
epigenetic aberrancies on gene expression, but also allowed us to
identify TGFβ as the soluble factor that, released by the malignant
cells in the bone marrow, appears to trigger the above-mentioned defects
in the MDS- and AML-derived MSC. Indeed, our results show that, when
treated with TGFβ, healthy MSC undergo the deregulation of TBX15, PITX2
or HOXB6 and develop some of the observed aberrant phenotypes.
Conversely, the treatment of MDS- and AML-derived MSC with a TGFβ
antagonist like SD208 can abrogate these effects. Finally, our
preliminary DNA methylation data reveal a very similar deregulation in
the methylome of MSC from Multiple Myeloma (MM) patients, strongly
suggesting that the same scenario could also be common to other
hematological malignancies from the lymphoid branch.


