Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a rational triple combination therapy for
castration-resistant prostate cancer.


Background The androgen receptor (AR) signaling pathway drives prostate
cancer development and progression, making it a major target for drug
development. However, resistance to AR targeted therapies invariably
develops and eventually leads to an aggressive, castrate-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC). Although CRPC often remains dependent on AR
signaling, anti-androgen therapies can lead to the development of AR
independent disease and metastatic CRPC. Understanding the molecular
basis of this transition and resistance to current anti-androgen therapy
will provide important insight and reveal novel therapeutic strategies
for both AR-positive and -negative disease pathways.

Methods and Results We analyzed in silico data of AR (signaling)-positive
or -negative human CRPC tissue samples and discovered that MET expression
is specifically increased only in AR-negative CRPC samples. When
AR-positive CRPC models are subjected to AR signaling inhibition (by the
AR antagonist enzalutamide or androgen deprivation), MET is increased and
susceptible to activation by its ligand HGF. Therefore, we postulate that
dual targeting of AR and MET signaling pathways may be a better approach
to prevent and overcome resistance-related disease progression. Our
preliminary AR ChIP-seq data suggested that MET transcription is not
affected by AR directly rather, MET protein is modulated by AR signaling
at the post-translational level. Therefore, we hypothesize that a
combination therapy of a proteasome inhibitor and MET inhibitor may have
potential therapeutic benefit for some CRPC patients. By using in vitro
and in vivo models of AR-dependent CRPC, we have showed that combination
of the dual MET/VEGFR2 inhibitor cabozantinib and enzalutamide treatment
is more efficacious than either inhibitor alone. In addition, Bortezomib,
an FDA-approved proteasome inhibitor, showed significant synergistic
effect when paired with cabozantinib in our preliminary data using in
vitro and in vivo CRPC models. In vitro results suggest that triple
combination of anti-androgen, MET inhibitor and proteasome inhibitor
therapies will maximize inhibition in CRPC.

Conclusion MET is a compensatory survival pathway in AR+ CRPC upon
anti-androgen therapy. The rational for triple combination of
anti-androgen, MET inhibitor and proteasome inhibitor therapies is a
feasible approach to maximize inhibition in CRPC while minimizing
development of drug resistance to any single agent.


