Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential role of mutations in clonal evolution in esophageal
mucosa at risk for cancer.


Background Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) develops in close
association with a chronic exposure to heavy drinking and smoking,
frequently in a metachronous manner, suggesting a strong field effect on
ESCC carcinogenesis. However, it is poorly understood how the field
effect promotes clonal evolution in esophageal mucosa to induce
dysplasia, eventually leading to the development of ESCC.

Patients & Methods A total of 221 samples were obtained by multiple
sampling from cancer tissues (n = 53) as well as dysplastic (n = 12) and
non-dysplastic (n = 156) mucosae from 49 cancer-bearing patients and 2
high-risk and 10 healthy patients either by endoscopy or surgery with
different sampling sizes (regular size: 4 - 8 mm2 and small size: 0.2 or
0.8 mm2). All the samples were subjected to whole exome (WES) (n = 99)
and/or targeted-capture (TS) (n = 221) sequencing. Copy number
alterations (CNAs) were also investigated using SNP array- or
sequencing-based karyotyping.

Results WES and TS in regular size samples revealed clonal proliferation
in most of the non-dysplastic samples (98%), although the number of
accompanying mutations and their clone size were significantly lower
compared to those in samples from cancer and dysplasia (respectively, P =
0.021 and P Results WES and TS in regular size samples revealed clonal
proliferation in most of the non-dysplastic samples (98%), although the
number of accompanying mutations and their clone size were significantly
lower compared to those in samples from cancer and dysplasia
(respectively, P = 0.021 and P < 0.001). Non-dysplastic samples were most
frequently accompanied by NOTCH1 mutations (75%), followed by TP53
mutations (50%). By contrast, cancer and dysplasia samples showed much
lower frequencies of NOTCH1 mutations (19% and 66%), but instead
characterized by higher frequency of TP53 mutations (100% and 92%), and
CNAs (83% and 17%), especially those focally involving CCND1, CDKN2A,
PIK3CA, and EGFR, respectively. Mutation signatures also differed
significantly between samples from non-dysplastic mucosa, and
cancer/dysplasia tissues; cancer/dysplasia samples exhibited an enhanced
APOBEC-related and decreased transcription-coupled repair-related
signatures, compared to non-dysplastic samples. In non-dysplasia samples,
both NOTCH1 and TP53 mutations were significantly enriched in heavy
drinkers compared to non- or occasional drinkers (p Results WES and TS in
regular size samples revealed clonal proliferation in most of the
non-dysplastic samples (98%), although the number of accompanying
mutations and their clone size were significantly lower compared to those
in samples from cancer and dysplasia (respectively, P = 0.021 and P <
0.001). Non-dysplastic samples were most frequently accompanied by NOTCH1
mutations (75%), followed by TP53 mutations (50%). By contrast, cancer
and dysplasia samples showed much lower frequencies of NOTCH1 mutations
(19% and 66%), but instead characterized by higher frequency of TP53
mutations (100% and 92%), and CNAs (83% and 17%), especially those
focally involving CCND1, CDKN2A, PIK3CA, and EGFR, respectively. Mutation
signatures also differed significantly between samples from
non-dysplastic mucosa, and cancer/dysplasia tissues; cancer/dysplasia
samples exhibited an enhanced APOBEC-related and decreased
transcription-coupled repair-related signatures, compared to
non-dysplastic samples. In non-dysplasia samples, both NOTCH1 and TP53
mutations were significantly enriched in heavy drinkers compared to non-
or occasional drinkers (p < 0.001 and p = 0.023, respectively). To
decipher the clonal architecture in more detail, we also sequenced 58
samples collected from non-dysplastic mucosae with a smaller sampling
size. Clonal proliferation was confirmed in all the samples analyzed;
NOTCH1 and TP53 mutations were found in 79% and 55% of the samples, where
78% and 27% of the mutated area showed biallelic alteration, respectively.

Conclusions Clonal proliferation in non-cancer esophageal epithelia is
quite common even in non- or occasional drinkers and could be extensive
in heavy drinkers. NOTCH1 and TP53 mutations as well as CNAs play major
roles in clonal evolution but may have differential impacts on esophageal
carcinogenesis, where TP53 mutation and CNAs are likely to make major
contributions possibly under the influence of a higher APOBEC activity.


