Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of 4SC-202 and IFN-γ restores mature APC phenotype in
AML cells.


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is characterized by a differentiation block
resulting in accumulation of immature myeloid cells. Differentiation
therapy, e.g. with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) has become a part of
standard treatment for the acute promyelocytic leukemia variant of AML.
Other agents like cytokines and HDAC inhibitors were shown to enhance
differentiation of AML cells, which results in apoptosis induction or
re-sensitization to ATRA. However, a differentiation therapy resulting in
the restoration of antigen presenting function of AML cells would be a
more desirable asset, since such cells will be able to induce or enhance
immune response against residual malignant AML cells.

Here, we analyzed the impact of 4SC-202 alone and in combination with
different cytokines on differentiation of AML cell lines THP-1, HL-60 and
MOLM-13 (AML-M4, -M2, and -M5 class, respectively). Myeloid lineage
markers CD11b, CD86, CD14 and HLA-DR were analyzed by flow cytometry and
quantitative PCR. Cytokine production was measured using Luminex
multiplex system. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was
performed to assess the direct impact of 4SC-202 on promoter histone
acetylation of differentiation genes.

4SC-202 is an orally available clinical stage epigenetic small molecule
inhibitor which specifically targets histone deacetylases HDAC class I
isoenzymes 1-3 as well as the lysine-specific demethylase LSD1 (KDM1A).
4SC-202 treatment of AML cell lines resulted in a dose-dependent increase
of myeloid differentiation genes CD86 and ITGAM (=CD11b) on mRNA and
protein level. On the chromatin level, 4SC-202 correspondently induced an
upregulation of chromatin activation marks like acetylation of histone H3
lysine 9 and 27 (H3K9ac, H3K27ac) at the promoters of these genes.
Interestingly, reference compounds like ATRA, bexarotene, GM-CSF and
TNF-α were not as efficacious as 4SC-202 in the induction of
differentiation markers in AML cells, whereas IFN-γ strongly induced MHC
class II molecules HLA-DR and myeloid lineage marker CD14. Finally, the
combination of 4SC-202 and IFN-γ resulted in a strong and complementary
induction of differentiation and APC markers CD11b, CD14, CD86 and HLA-DR
resulting in a CD86high/HLA-DRhigh phenotype which was able to produce
pro-inflammatory cytokines.

In summary, we demonstrate that 4SC-202 induces differentiation of AML
cells of different subtypes and thus provide promising preclinical data
for applying this novel epigenetic modulator for differentiation therapy
of AML. Moreover, the mature APC phenotype induced by the combination of
4SC-202 and IFN-γ may further suggest an application in consolidation
treatment of AML to enhance or even elicit a tumor-specific T-cell
response against residual malignant AML cells preventing AML recurrence.


