Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-infiltrating immune cells in gastrointestinal stromal tumors
(GIST) related to the response to tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy.


Purpose: The prognostic predictors for neoadjuvant and palliative
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) effect in GIST patients are few beyond
mutational status. We analyzed the extent and composition of
tumor-infiltrating immune cells in GIST after different TKI therapeutic
regimens and response.

Methods: From 60 GIST patients, surgical specimens were available and
divided into six different groups of 10 cases each, with the

primary tumors graded for malignant behaviour acc. to Miettinen&Lasota
2006. In the neoadjuvant groups all tumors were biopsy proven and had
documented IM-sensitive mutations in the KIT receptor.

- low risk gastric GIST

- high risk GIST of the small bowel

- locally advanced GIST after neoadjuvant imatinib (IM) with - locally
advanced GIST after neoadjuvant imatinib (IM) with <10%

- or >30% of viable cells remaining

- progressive liver metastases resistant to ≥2 TKI inhibitors

- progressive peritoneal mets. resistant to ≥2 TKI inhibitors.

We used 2-μm sections of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue
samples for immunohistochemistry with the used Dako REAL EnVision
Detection System (K5007, Dako) and Anti-CD68 (Dako); Anti-CD11c (Abcam);
Anti-CD163 (Leica); Anti-CD11b (Abcam); Anti-CD4 (Leica);
Anti-CD8(Leica); Anti-FOXP3 (Abcam) antibodies. The phenotypes of immune
cells were compared in the defined GIST groups. Recurrence-free survival
(RFS) was evaluated in neoadjuvant and overall-survivals (OS) after TKI
failure was measured in TKI resistant M1 patients .

Results: The rate of CD11c+ M1 macrophages is higher in low-risk GISTs
compared to high risk GISTs, but CD11b+ myeloid cells are exactly the
opposite. Foxp3+ Tregs, CD163+ M2 macrophages and CD11b+ myeloid cells
are significantly higher in TKI resistance or neoadjuvant (viable
cells>30%) tissues compared with neoadjuvant (viable cellsResults: The
rate of CD11c+ M1 macrophages is higher in low-risk GISTs compared to
high risk GISTs, but CD11b+ myeloid cells are exactly the opposite.
Foxp3+ Tregs, CD163+ M2 macrophages and CD11b+ myeloid cells are
significantly higher in TKI resistance or neoadjuvant (viable cells>30%)
tissues compared with neoadjuvant (viable cells<10%) cases. Kaplan-Meier
curves show high CD163+ M2 macrophages or CD11b+ myeloid cells to
correlate significantly with worse RFS in after neoadjuvant IM (p 0.01).
In the TKI resistant condition, patients with high CD11c+ M1 macrophages
show better median OS (p=0.07).

Conclusions: Our study reveals dynamic changes of tumor-infiltrating
immune cell protagonists in GISTs after different TKI therapeutic regimen
and response. This may help to understand the response to TKI-therapy
beyond mutational status and open an option for immunotherapy in patients
resistant to standard TKIs.


