Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of immunoliposomes as delivery vehicles for the
Rac inhibitor Ehop-016 in HER2 type breast cancer.


Due to the critical need for improved therapeutics against advanced Stage
IV breast cancer, we developed and pre-clinically validated the small
molecule Ehop-016 as a potential anti-metastatic drug. Ehop-016 is a
small molecule inhibitor of the interaction Rac with the guanine
nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) Vav2, which consequently decreases
invasive actin structures and cellular migration. In a human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) type breast cancer model in nude mice,
Ehop-016 inhibits mammary tumor growth, angiogenesis, and metastasis.
Moreover, Ehop-016 reduces HER2++ cancer cell viability and migration,
individually or in combination with anti HER2 or EGFR directed
therapeutics. By inhibiting the key signaling intermediate Rac, Ehop-016
has the potential to block signaling downstream of HER2 and EGFRs, as
well as signaling via the myriad of receptors that activate Rac, and
inhibit cancer progression. Our new results demonstrate that Ehop-016
inhibits both cancer cells and leukocytes in the tumor microenvironment,
as well as cytokine levels (IL-6) in mouse plasma. Even though these
characteristics are desirable in anticancer agents, systemic therapy with
Ehop-016 may adversely affect normal immune system function. Therefore, a
strategy was developed for the targeted delivery of Ehop-016 into mammary
tumors, using nanoliposomes containing the current breast cancer
therapeutic, Trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody directed at the HER2. We
tested various nanoliposome formulations as targeted delivery systems for
Ehop-016. First, the encapsulation efficiency of Ehop-016 loaded
liposomes was tested using different drug loading methods. To obtain HER2
targeted liposomes, we prepared Trastuzumab-lipid conjugates and
incorporated them into the Ehop-016 containing liposomes. The binding,
internalization and selectivity of our HER2 targeted delivery system was
verified in human metastatic breast cancer cell lines, by using
fluorescence microscopy to assess the co-staining of the lipid bilayer
and Trastuzumab. In order to evaluate the effectiveness and selectivity
of the immunoliposomes in delivering Ehop-016 and inhibiting Rac
activity, pull-down assays were performed to detect active Rac-GTP in
cells treated with Ehop-016 alone or Trastuzumab-conjugated liposomes
with Ehop-016. Results show that the Trastuzumab-conjugated liposomes are
more selective at binding to HER2+ breast cancer cells and inhibiting
Rac, than treatment with Ehop-016 alone. In summary, our novel delivery
system containing Ehop-016 and Trastuzumab has been shown to be effective
in breast cancer cells, and needs to be validated in animal models of
metastatic breast cancer. The development of this targeted delivery
system has implications, not only in the field of breast cancer
therapeutics, but may be adapted for the treatment of other diseases, and
used to overcome the side effects of current treatments.


