Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of genetic and epigenetic DNA markers in urine for the
early detection of liver cancer.


The purpose of this study was to explore the potential of urine DNA
biomarkers for the early detection of primary hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). HCC is an aggressive disease with a 5-year survival rate of 26% in
early-stage cancers, and a mere 2% in later stages. The most commonly
used screening biomarker for HCC is serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), which
detects only 40-60% of cases. We have previously shown that urine
contains fragmented, circulation-derived, cell-free DNA that can be used
for detection of cancer-related DNA markers, if a tumor is present. Given
the molecular heterogeneity of HCC, we assembled a panel of frequently
reported early detection DNA biomarkers for HCC that included genetic
mutations (TERT -124 G to A, TP53 249 G to T and CTNNB1 hotspot at codon
32-45) and methylation markers (GSTP1, RASSF1A, CDKN2A, SFRP1, TFPI and
MGMT). In this present study, we developed specialized short amplicon PCR
assays optimized to detect these biomarkers from the urine of patients
with cancer and tested the panel of biomarkers in urine of hepatitis,
cirrhosis and HCC patients to demonstrate the feasibility of a
breakthrough urine DNA test for HCC screening and early detection. Our
evaluation indicated that the TP53 mutation, methylation of RASSF1A and
GSTP1 urine DNA biomarkers were significantly higher in HCC than in
non-HCC population. A correlation analysis indicated that these three
markers do not correlate with each other and are suitable to be combined
in a panel of biomarkers for the early detection of HCC. The 3-marker HCC
urine DNA panel had an AUROC of 0.880 for distinguishing HCC from
cirrhosis and hepatitis. By logistic regression, the sensitivity of the
3-DNA marker urine panel alone or in combination with AFP is 84.5% or
89.5% respectively, with a specificity of 90% for detecting HCC with
AUROC of 0.951. Furthermore, these 3-DNA markers scored 43 of the 49
(87.8%) AFP-negative (less than 20 ng/mL) HCC urine samples "positive" in
this study population. A novel statistic model was built by using Random
Forest machine learning method as compared to full logistic regression in
both open labeled urine samples and 242 blinded urine validation samples.
A sensitivity of 92.3 % at a specificity of 87% was obtained by applying
the random forest algorithm generated from the open labeled data (at 90%
specificity cutoff) to the validation study, where as a sensitivity of
76.9% at a specificity of 84.7% was obtained from the full logistic
regression derived from the open labeled data set. In conclusion, HCC DNA
markers can be detected in urine of patients with HCC by short-amplicon,
PCR-based assays and this urine test has the potential to become the
first line of screening for HCC in high risk populations.


