Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A murine model of von Hippel-Lindau associated retinal
hemangioblastoma.


Purpose: von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) is an autosomal dominant
condition that features a constellation of cysts or highly vascularized
tumors due to loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the VHL gene, resulting in
deregulated hypoxia-induced factors (HIFs). Clinical manifestations of
VHL include hemangioblastomas in the central nervous system and retina.
To date, no VHL animal model has reproduced retinal capillary
hemangioblastomas (RCH), the hallmark lesion of ocular VHL. The RCHs may
arise from arrested hemangioblast progenitor cells, with VHL LOH in the
tumor stroma. The stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene encodes a basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, a critical regulator of
hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis. We aim to generate a murine model of
VHL-associated RCH by conditionally inactivating Vhl in a hemangioblast
progenitor population with the angioblast-specific Cre line, (SCL)
Cre-ERt2.

Methods: We established a genetic mouse model in which the inducible Vhl
gene is specifically “knocked-out” in angioblast cells using the stem
cell leukemia (SCL) Cre-ERt2 transgenic mice. Two-week-old
SCL-CreERt2;Vhl-F/F mice were administrated tamoxifen (2mg/40g body
weight) for 5 consecutive days to activate the Cre recombinase that
induces Vhl deletion in angioblast-derived cells. Fundoscopy was done
monthly to detect retinal lesions. Fluorescein angiography (FA) was
performed on affected mice. All retinas were analyzed by histology at 4
months of age. Genome typing of the Vhl conditional KO allele was
conducted in retinal lesions using microdissection, nest-PCR and Sanger
sequencing.

Results: About 64% (18/28) of the transgenic mice exhibited various
retinal vascular defects following induction. Affected mice demonstrated
retinal vascular lesions that were variably associated with prominent
vessels, anomalous capillary networks, hemorrhage, exudates, and
localized fibrosis. FA revealed vascular leakage from the lesions.
Histological analyses showed RCH-like lesions of tortuous, dilated
vessels surrounded by “tumorlet” cells, isolated foamy stromal cells,
and glia, classically found in RCH. Vhl LOH was detected in the
tumor-like area as verified by sequencing.

Conclusion: This is the first demonstration of VHL-associated RCH in a
transgenic mouse model. This model may be useful for studying RCH
pathogenesis, including HIF-dependent and HIF-independent pathways, and
for testing potential therapies.


