Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutations in the Duffy Antigen Receptor for Chemokines
(DARC/ACKR1) gene result in population-private variants.


By studying the breast cancer microenvironment, we can specifically
address novel aspects of cancer development and progression at the
molecular level. Chemokines are small signaling molecules that are an
important component of this microenvironment, as they shape cellular
composition of this space through recruitment of immune cells, among
other functions. DARC, the Duffy Antigen Receptor for Chemokines, is an
atypical chemokine receptor (ACKR1) that can bind different classes of
chemokines. It is a non-signaling receptor that mainly acts as a
regulator of chemokine homeostasis by removing them from circulation to
recruit appropriate immune cell types. The purpose of this study is to
determine how population-private variants of the DARC/ACKR1 gene across
global population render distinct function and define aspects of human
diversity in immune responses. A well-studied example of this would be
the Duffy-null allele. This allele carries a mutation that is
population-specific to recent decedents of Sub-Saharan Africans, and
removes expression of DARC on red blood cells. Loss of expression on red
blood cells presumably causes these “Duffy-Null” individuals to lose
the ability to sequester chemokines, therefore losing homeostatic balance
of these molecules in circulation. To identify additional mutations, we
completed in silico analysis of minor allele frequencies across the gene
in the 1000 Genomes Project data, and identified several other putative
functional mutations that likely result in additional gene variants,
specific to geographic ancestry groups and likely under similar selection
as the Duffy null allele. We have prioritized our initial functional
study to include mutations in the regulatory regions of the gene, as
these mutations can change how and where the gene is expressed. Future
work is focused on investigating these functional variants in situ, using
human tissue and human breast cell lines, by isolating and re-engineering
ancestry-specific variants in these cell lines. By identifying and
determining functional outcomes of these population-specific mutation, we
can observe differences in immune responses across these global
populations, further defining the role that DARC/ACKR1 plays in the
breast tumor microenvironment.


