Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-cancer activity of extract from the Jamaican round-leaf
yellow yam (RLY2) (Dioscorea cayenensis).


The Jamaican Round-Leaf yellow yams (RLY2), Dioscorea cayenensis, are
edible tubers, bulbils or rhizomes that are of considerable economic
value and possess several health benefits. These RLY2 are a rich source
of anti-oxidants, vitamins and phytochemicals. In addition to its
nutritional value, the Jamaican populace regards RLY2 as an herbal
medicine useful in treatment of diabetes mellitus, hypertension and
certain kind of cancers. Chemical analysis of RLY2 revealed the presence
of a myriad of bioactive ingredients that are likely to be lost due to
the method of preparation for consumption. Thus, we hypothesized that
mild extraction of RLY2 will preserved the bioactive analytes that give
RLY2 its anti-cancer property. To test this hypothesis, different
ethanolic extracts of RLY2 were prepared, and their bioactivity
demonstrated in two models of prostate cancer. The present study
demonstrates dosage and time-dependence inhibition in both the androgen
sensitive LNCaP and androgen insensitive DU-145 prostate cancer cell
lines. We observed that DU-145 was three-times more sensitive to RLY2
ethanol extract than LNCaP. Growth of LNCaP for 3-days with varying
concentration of RLY2 ethanol extract resulted in an IC50 of 750 ppm (95%
C.I. 726-791ppm), whereas DU-145 resulted in an IC 50 of 250 ppm (95%
C.I. 236-281ppm). The maximum growth inhibition by RLY2 extract occurs
within twenty-four hours for both LNCaP and DU-145 with no significant
changes after 5-days. To determine the mechanism of toxicity by RLY2, we
induced both LNCaP and DU-145 with RLY2 for 0-24h and prepared cells for
flow cytometer analysis. The effect of RLY2 on cell cycle and degree of
apoptosis will be discussed. Our data indicated that the ethanol extract
of RLY2 was more sensitive toward androgen-insensitive prostate cancer.
Thus, this study suggests that RLY2 contain bioactive chemical that may
be used in grade II prostate adenocarcinoma represented by the DU-145
phenotype.


