Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TET blocks cell cycle progression in pancreatic cancer cells at
G1-S boundary by decreasing cyclin D1 and increasing CDK inhibitors
(CKIs), p21 (WAF1, Cip1) and p27 (Kip1).


Introduction: Pancreatic cancer (PaCa) is the fourth leading cause of
cancer related deaths in the United States with an overall five-year
survival rate of less than five percent. The current standard treatment/s
for PaCa are largely ineffective thus there is an urgent need for
development of therapeutic agents for the treatment of PaCa. Owing to its
mutational landscape, which involves mutated KRAS and p53 genes these
cancer cells have a deregulated G1 checkpoint of cell cycle control and
therefore confer high rate of proliferation and therapeutic resistance.
Recently we observed that Tetrandrine derivative (TET), a
bis-benzylisoquinoline alkaloid halts cell cycle progression at G0/G1
boundary in vitro and in vivo. In the present study we evaluated
potential mechanism of TET induced cell cycle arrest in two pancreatic
cancer cells with either wild type KRAS or mutant KRAS, and mutant p53 by
evaluating critical cell cycle regulatory proteins involved in G0/G1 to S
transition.

Methods: Pancreatic Cancer cell lines: BxPC3 (Pancreatic Ductal
Adeno-Carcinoma) and MiaPaCa2 (pancreatic carcinoma) were used in the
study. Cells were treated with various concentrations of TET for
different time points. Cell proliferation was evaluated using the MTT
survival assay. Cell cycle was analyzed following PI staining via Flow
cytometry. Changes in protein expression were analyzed by Western Blot
analysis in cells. Changes in mRNA were evaluated by real time PCR.

Results: Treatment of pancreatic cancer cells with TET resulted in
decreased levels cyclin D1 and phospho-Rb, two critical proteins required
for G0/G1 to S transition. Pretreatment of the cells with proteasomal
inhibitor MG132 was able to increase the levels of cyclin D1 in control
cells but was unable to prevent its loss upon TET treatment. Our results
also show that levels of CKIs, p21WAF1/Cip1 and p27Kip1 were increased at
the protein level. Gene expression analysis revealed that cyclin D1 mRNA
was decreased and p21WAF1/Cip1 mRNA was increased while there was no
significant change in p27 mRNA levels. The cycloheximide chase revealed
that TET stabilizes p27Kip1 and to some extent p21WAF1/Cip1 as well,
suggesting that TET increased p27Kip1 and also p21WAF1/Cip1 levels in
part by increasing protein stability. These data suggest a complex
mechanism by which TET regulates expression of critical cell cycle
regulatory molecules at both transcriptional, translational and
post-translational level. Such a mechanism would provide for cell cycle
arrest in pancreatic cancer cells following TET treatment.

Conclusion: These results show that TET halts cell cycle at G0/G1
boundary in PaCa cells by modulating the cell cycle regulatory proteins
and stabilizing the CKIs by altering their protein stability, suggesting
that TET can not only halt deregulated cell cycle but also overcome the
therapeutic resistance in pancreatic cancer cells.


