Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting immune checkpoint therapy to the lung tumor
microenvironment.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. Many lung
cancer patients are diagnosed with advanced disease. These patients have
a low 5-year survival rate and limited treatment options. Novel
therapies, which target biomarkers that are overexpressed in lung cancer
but have basal expression in benign tissue, are desperately needed. The
goal of this work was to develop a targeted agent for immune checkpoint
therapy of lung cancer. Recently, immune checkpoint inhibitors have been
approved for use in lung cancer and many more are being tested in
clinical trials. The current immune checkpoint inhibitor agents are not
tumor-targeted. Targeting the immune checkpoint inhibitor to tumor
cell-surface markers should concentrate the conjugate in the tumor
microenvironment and enhance the immune response in the tumor while
reducing the systemic dosages needed, resulting in lower systemic
toxicity.

The delta opioid receptor (DOR) is expressed in some lung cancers, but is
not expressed or is expressed only at basal levels in normal tissues
outside the brain. We have previously synthesized fluorescently-labeled
DOR-targeted imaging agents based on a synthetic peptide antagonist
(DORL). These targeted fluorescent agents have high affinity and
selectivity for DOR, and exhibit good pharmacokinetic (PK) and
biodistribution (BD) profiles, i.e. specific tumor uptake with rapid
systemic clearance and no uptake in tissues of concern, e.g. brain. We
are now developing lung cancer-specific immunotherapy agents that target
the DOR by conjugating DORL to immunomodulatory molecules. In the current
work, we synthesized a fluorescently-labeled DOR targeting ligand and
conjugated it to an anti-PD1 antibody (DORL-PD1). We synthesized
immunoconjugates with several targeting ligand-to-antibody ratios (TARs).
We engineered murine lung cancer cells to constitutively express the DOR.
By lanthanide time-resolved fluorescence (LTRF) competitive binding
assays, we have shown that the agents have high avidity for the DOR in
vitro with higher TARs resulting in higher binding avidity. We
characterized the uptake of DORL-PD1 in vitro using live-cell
fluorescence microscopy. Using syngeneic engraftment tumor models in
immunocompetent mice, we performed longitudinal fluorescence imaging
studies to determine the agent circulation time (PK), tumor selectivity
and tissue distribution (BD). Immune checkpoint efficacy studies were
performed using the DOR negative mouse tumor models.

In conclusion, we have synthesized fluorescent DOR-targeted immune
checkpoint therapy agents, DORL-PD1; demonstrated avidity and selectivity
for the DOR in vitro and in vivo; and immune checkpoint therapy efficacy
in vivo. Future studies will evaluate the efficacy of DORL-PD1 in immune
competent mice bearing DOR positive tumors. These agents could be useful
for increasing the efficacy and reducing systemic toxicity of
immune-checkpoint therapy of lung cancer.


