Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome engineering to generate models of chromosome arm-level
aneuploidies in lung carcinoma.


Almost 90% of tumors are aneuploid and have arm- or whole- chromosome
level copy number changes. Arm-level copy number alterations cluster by
tumor type, suggesting that specific arm-level changes are influenced by
cell type. Systematic methods of generating copy number changes on a
particular chromosome have not been tested, leaving the effects of
specific aneuploidies in cancer unclear. The most frequent genomic
alteration in lung squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) is loss of chromosome
3p. This alteration occurs in 90% of lung SCCs, and covers the entire
length of the chromosome arm. Over two-thirds of 3p genes show
significantly decreased expression. However, the phenotypic effects of 3p
loss in tumorigenesis are not known.

We used the CRISPR-Cas9 system to generate double-strand breaks (DSBs)
and produce partial aneuploidies of arm-level loss. We have targeted
guide RNAs adjacent to centromeric satellite-repeat sequences on
chromosome arm 3p. At this location, we induced homologous recombination
with a selection cassette and artificial telomere. We have successfully
isolated almost 90 clones of immortalized lung epithelial cells with
deletion of the 3p arm, with 8 validated by whole genome sequencing.
Consistent with patient data, expression of 3p genes is also decreased
upon deletion. Phenotypic characterization revealed that cells with
chromosome 3p deletion proliferate more slowly than their siblings. 3p
deleted cells show increased G1 arrest, but do not undergo increased
apoptosis or cell death. We are currently testing 3p loss in combination
with other frequent SCC alterations, such as SOX2 and TP63 gain. We have
also identified expression changes in trans, outside of chromosome 3p.
These studies provide a robust model that will address a gap in our
understanding of aneuploidy in cancer by using targeted endonuclease
technology to create models of partial aneuploidies. Future work will
include investigation of how different chromosomal changes contribute to
cancer formation, which will have implications on our understanding of
tumorigenesis.


