Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor effect of GAGomer-mediated intra-tumoral IL-2
expression following systemic administration.


Cancer immunotherapies are revolutionizing cancer treatment.
Unfortunately, a large proportion of patients with solid tumors do not
respond to currently available immune-therapeutics. The lack of response
is due to a variety of mechanisms tumors adopt to avoid immune mediated
clearance. The multiplicity of immunosuppressive mechanisms operational
in the tumor microenvironment may not be overcome by single agents and
require interventions at multiple control points. However, systemic
exposure to combinations of immunoregulators may result in severe, dose
limiting, acute and chronic toxicities that might be prevented if the
effect of these agents is focused to the tumor microenvironment.

We are engaged in the discovery of a novel class of immuno-oncology drugs
aimed at maximizing the effect of immunoregulatory molecules in the tumor
microenvironment and minimizing systemic adverse effects. These drugs
incorporate plasmids, engineered to program tumor cells to produce and
secrete immune-regulatory proteins, within hyaluronic acid (HA) coated
lipid nanoparticles, called GAGomers, which specifically target tumor
cells that overexpress activated HA receptors (GAG-pDNA). GAG-pDNA based
therapeutics promise highly potent but localized activation of the immune
system exclusively in the tumor microenvironment following systemic
administration, leading to the destruction of tumor cells by activated
immune cells without debilitating toxic side effects.

To demonstrate the feasibility of the GAG-pDNA approach we have
incorporated a plasmid directing the expression of murine IL-2 into
GAGomers (GAG-pIL2) and assessed the anti-tumor activity of the construct
after systemic delivery into tumor bearing mice. GAG-pIL2 administration
resulted in statistically significant inhibition of tumor growth, which
correlated with elevated IL-2 levels in the tumor and increased
infiltration of T-cells into the tumor microenvironment.

These experiments demonstrate the feasibility of programming tumor cells
using GAG-pDNA to produce and secrete immunoregulatory molecules into the
tumor microenvironment and trigger robust anti-tumor immune responses.


