Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancer cells rely on the NADPH producing enzyme, IDH1,
for adaptive survival against acute metabolic stress.


We recently demonstrated that pancreatic cancer cells adapt to low
nutrient conditions and chemotherapeutic stress through an adaptive
response where HuR (ELAVL1) protects cells from oxidative damage induced
by metabolic stress. RNA sequencing data and a series of protein-RNA
interaction assays proved that HuR stabilizes transcript levels of the
NADPH producing enzyme, isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1). HuR-knockout
cells had near-complete loss of IDH1 expression (manuscript under
review). In light of the fact that IDH1-null mice are particularly
sensitive to oxidative damage, we hypothesize that this enzyme plays a
critical role in PDA survival of acute stress. We examined the expression
levels of all eight well-characterized NADPH-generating enzymes in
pancreatic cancer cells in vitro, and demonstrate that only IDH1 and
phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (PGD) are upregulated by >2-fold after
incubation in low glucose (5 mM) for 48 hours. IDH1-knockout MiaPaCa2
cells were generated through CRISPR gene editing, such that mRNA
expression was detected at We recently demonstrated that pancreatic
cancer cells adapt to low nutrient conditions and chemotherapeutic stress
through an adaptive response where HuR (ELAVL1) protects cells from
oxidative damage induced by metabolic stress. RNA sequencing data and a
series of protein-RNA interaction assays proved that HuR stabilizes
transcript levels of the NADPH producing enzyme, isocitrate dehydrogenase
1 (IDH1). HuR-knockout cells had near-complete loss of IDH1 expression
(manuscript under review). In light of the fact that IDH1-null mice are
particularly sensitive to oxidative damage, we hypothesize that this
enzyme plays a critical role in PDA survival of acute stress. We examined
the expression levels of all eight well-characterized NADPH-generating
enzymes in pancreatic cancer cells in vitro, and demonstrate that only
IDH1 and phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (PGD) are upregulated by >2-fold
after incubation in low glucose (5 mM) for 48 hours. IDH1-knockout
MiaPaCa2 cells were generated through CRISPR gene editing, such that mRNA
expression was detected at <5% of control levels. ROS levels detected by
DCFDA measurements were increased by 55% in IDH1-knockout cells compared
to isogenic controls under normal culture conditions, with even higher
levels under low glucose and chemotherapy stress for 48 hours.
Additionally, IDH1-knockout cells were more sensitive to chemotherapy
under both high and low glucose conditions, compared to IDH1-proficient
control cells. Taken together these results suggest that IDH1 expression
is important for acute antioxidant defense in pancreatic cancer cells in
the face of metabolic stress, and represents a potential therapeutic
target.


