Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E3 ubiquitin ligase Cbl-b prevents tumor metastasis by maintaining
the epithelial phenotype in multiple drug-resistant gastric and breast
cancer cells.


Background: Multiple drug resistance (MDR) and metastasis are two major
unfavorable factors causing failure of cancer treatment. However, the
relationship between MDR and metastasis is not characterized.
Additionally, the role of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Cbl-b in metastasis of
MDR gastric and breast cancer is little known.

Methods: The effect of Cbl-b on tumor invasion and metastasis was
analyzed in P-gp-positive gastric adenocarcinoma tissues. Transfections
of Cbl-b WT and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) WT plasmid were
used to assess Cbl-b and EGFR involvement in epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and tumor metastasis.

Results: MDR gastric and breast cancer cells possess a typical
mesenchymal phenotype and an enhanced cell migration capacity.
Additionally, Cbl-b is poorly expressed in MDR gastric and breast cancer
cells. We performed immunohistochemical analysis on P-gp-positive gastric
adenocarcinoma tissues and identified associations between Cbl-b
expression and clinical pathological parameters. Gastric cancer patients
with low Cbl-b expression were more likely to have tumor invasion
(P=0.016) and lymph node metastasis (P=0.007). Moreover, over-expression
of Cbl-b reduced cell migration in MDR cell cultures both in vitro and in
vivo. Cbl-b over-expression also prevented EMT by inducing ubiquitination
and degradation of EGFR, leading to inhibition of the EGFR-
ERK/Akt-miR-200c-ZEB1 axis. However, further over-expression of EGFR on a
background of Cbl-b over-expression restored both the mesenchymal
phenotype and the cell migration capacity of MDR gastric and breast
cancer cells.

Conclusions: These results suggest that Cbl-b is an important factor for
maintenance of the epithelial phenotype and inhibition of cell migration
in MDR gastric and breast cancer cells.


