Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic transformation of FLT3-ITD is partially dependent on
tyrosine 842 in the activation loop.


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease of the blood.
About 30 % of AML patients carry an oncogenic mutant of the type III
receptor tyrosine kinase FLT3. Among the various mutations in FLT3, the
internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutations in the juxtamembrane domain
are the most common type of mutation, while point mutations in the kinase
domain also occur. Although oncogenic FLT3 mutants are constitutively
active, the wild-type receptor needs its ligand (FLT3 ligand, FL) for
activation. Ligand binding to the receptor induces dimerization,
auto-phosphorylation, and activation of the receptor. Tyrosine
phosphorylation sites on FLT3 constitute docking sites for interacting
proteins that transduce pro-survival and proliferative signals. The
so-called activation loop tyrosine residue (in FLT3, Y842) is well
conserved in all receptor tyrosine kinases and long been known essential
for the activity of some but not all receptor tyrosine kinases. Recently
we have shown that activation loop tyrosine residue in KIT is not
essential for its activation but plays an important role in receptor
stabilization and downstream signaling. However, so far the role of FLT3
activation loop tyrosine residue remains unknown. We generated 32D cell
lines carrying a Y-to-F mutant (Y842F) of FLT3 in either the wild-type or
ITD background to study the role of this tyrosine residue. We show that
the Y842 residue is not necessary for FLT3 activation or stability but is
required for oncogenic transformation. We observed that Y842F mutation
results in reduced cell viability, proliferation and in vitro colony
formation in semi-solid medium. In addition, cells expressing the Y842F
mutant in FLT3-ITD background display a significant reduction in tumor
volume and weight in a xenograft model in nude mice. Gene set enrichment
analysis (GESA) shows that mutation of Y842 causes suppression of
anti-apoptotic genes. Furthermore, we demonstrated that phosphorylated
Y842 is one of the binding sites of the protein tyrosine phosphataseSHP2,
which is required for activation of signaling through the RAS/ERK
pathway. Taken together, our data suggest that activation loop tyrosine
residue in FLT3 plays an important role in the cellular transformation
which is regulated by RAS/ERK signaling.


