Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CYP3A5 positively regulates androgen receptor signaling in
prostate cancer cells: Potential for therapeutic targeting.


Purpose: Prostate cancer is the most common malignancy and second leading
cause of cancer-specific mortality in US men. The androgen receptor (AR)
plays a major role in promoting growth and progression of prostate cancer
and thus has been successfully targeted therapeutically. Therapeutic
resistance to androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) accounts for much of the
morbidity and mortality attributable to prostate cancer. Therapeutic
resistance is typically accompanied by insufficient blockade of AR
activation, whose initial step involves translocation of AR to the
nucleus. Previously we demonstrated that CYP3A5 facilitates the nuclear
translocation of AR, promoting prostate cancer growth. Targeting CYP3A5
and blocking AR nuclear translocation may override therapeutic resistance
to ADT, representing a novel approach for treating men with advanced
prostate cancer. This work focuses on understanding the role of CYP3A5 in
regulating AR nuclear translocation process and its subsequent promotion
of prostate cancer growth.

Methods: AR nuclear translocation is tightly regulated through a process
involving several chaperones, multiple cofactors, and kinases, including
HSP90, HSP70, HSP40 and HSP27. Complexed HSP90 maintains the AR as an
inactive receptor in the cytoplasm. Upon androgen binding and activation,
AR associates with HSP27, then translocates to the nucleus where it
activates transcription of AR regulated genes responsible for prostate
cancer growth. To decipher the role of CYP3A5 in this AR translocation
process we performed a series of co-immunoprecipitation experiments with
CYP3A5 and components of HSP90-AR complex, at different stages of AR
translocation process. We used extracts of LNCaP transfected with a
CYP3A5-Flag-tagged construct with either Flag-agarose or HSP90 and AR
antibodies with A/G beads for immunoprecipitation.

Results: Our co-immunoprecipitation experiments using CYP3A5-Flag
transfected LNCaP extracts demonstrate that CYP3A5 associates with the
HSP90-AR complex that helps to maintain AR in a form that can be readily
activated by androgen. Using Flag-agarose in co-immunoprecipitation
experiments, we demonstrated that CYP3A5 is a component of the HSP90-AR
complex, associating with AR, HSP90, HSP70 and HSP40 each which are
chaperones regulating AR nuclear translocation. We further confirmed the
presence of CYP3A5 in the HSP90-AR complex by co-immunoprecipitation
using HSP90 and AR antibodies in combination with A/G beads instead of
flag-agarose.

Conclusion: Our current finding supports the notion that CYP3A5 is a part
of the HSP90-AR complex and positively regulates AR nuclear
translocation. Therefore, targeting CYP3A5 to block AR nuclear
translocation may be a therapeutic adjunctive approach in advanced
prostate cancer.


