Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hederagenin overcomes the cisplatin resistance of head and neck
cancer by targeting the antioxidant defense mechanisms.


Background: Cisplatin is a first-line chemotherapeutic agent for head and
neck cancer (HNC). Acquired resistance to cisplatin is the most common
reason for the failure of cisplatin chemotherapy. Hederagenin is
extracted from the leaves of Cyclocarya paliurus, also known as sweet
tea, which is one of the most popular teas utilized in traditional
Chinese medicine. There is accumulating evidence it exhibited significant
cytotoxicity against several types of cancers, however, which has been
rarely tested in HNC cells. Herein, we examined the potential utility of
hederagenin for overcoming cisplatin resistance in HNC cells and further
clarified its molecular mechanisms of action.

Methods: Parental and cisplatin-resistant HNC cells, and Nrf2 or SLC7A11
gene overexpressed HNC cell lines and other human HNC cells were used.
The cells were used to examine the effects of hederagenin treatment in
HNC cell lines by measuring cell viability, cell cycle, cell death,
reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, glutathione level,
mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm), and protein expression. The
anti-tumor effect of hederagenin in mouse tumor xenograft models was also
tested.

Results: Hederagenin induced cell death in both cisplatin-sensitive and
-resistant HNC cells. Hederagenin treatment resulted in effective death
of cisplatin-resistant HNC cells in a form of apoptotic cell death with
the ΔΨm change. Hederagenin inhibited Nrf2 and SLC7A11 resulting in an
increased ROS accumulation in HNC cells, of which effects were reversed
by the pretreatment of antioxidant trolox. In addition, hederagenin
caused the apoptosis effectively induced by targeting the antioxidant
defense mechanisms in HNC cells. Subsequently, hederagenin activated
signaling pathways of cell death involving caspase-3, PUMA, and PARP in
the cells. The growth inhibitory effects of hedragenin were also
confirmed in the tumor xenograft model implanted with cisplatin-resistant
HNC cells.

Conclusions: Our data suggests that hederagenin can overcome the
resistance of cisplatin in resistant HNC cells via targeting antioxidant
systems.


