Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NVP-FGF401, a first-in-class highly selective and potent FGFR4
inhibitor for the treatment of HCC.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the seventh most common cancer
worldwide and the third leading cause of cancer-related death. Sorafenib
is the only targeted agent to show a marginal improvement in overall
survival (OS) for patients with advanced HCC. Recent data have implicated
aberrant activation of the FGF19-FGFR4/KLB axis as the driver of certain
forms of HCC, making this pathway a novel therapeutic target in this
disease. The first evidence for this is the finding that aberrant
expression of FGF19, as a consequence of gene amplification and other not
yet known mechanisms, occurs in subsets of HCC’s and HCC cell lines
leading to constitutive FGFR4 activation. In this setting, conditional
knock down of FGF19, as well as its receptors FGFR4 and KLB, suppresses
proliferation of HCC cell lines, supporting the notion that FGF19
activates FGFR4 in an autocrine fashion. Secondly, in transgenic mouse
models, FGF19 produced by non-tumor cells at an ectopic site (skeletal
muscle) acts in a paracrine fashion on the liver hepatocytes leading to
liver dysplasia and HCC. In these mice, tumorigenesis is abolished in an
FGFR4 null background, as well as upon treatment with anti-FGF19 and
anti-FGFR4 blocking antibodies. Thus, we anticipate that targeted
therapies aimed at blocking the FGFR4 pathway might be efficacious in
subsets of HCC’s. We have identified and developed NVP-FGF401, a first
in class, highly selective and potent FGFR4 inhibitor that is currently
in PhI/II clinical testing. NVP-FGF401 binds in a reversible covalent
manner to the FGFR4 kinase domain and it inhibits FGFR4 with an IC50 of
1.1 nM. In biochemical assays, it shows at least 1,000 fold selectivity
against of panel of 65 kinases and in a kinome wide scan, consisting of
456 kinases, FGFR4 was the only target of NVP-FGF401. In xenograft animal
models in vivo, NVP-FGF401 showed a consistent pharmacokinetic /
pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) relationship with phospho-FGFR4 over total FGFR4
(p/tFGFR4) levels in tumor robustly inhibited in a dose dependent manner.
The data support a lowest observed trough concentration (Ctrough) driven
PD/efficacy relationship. The anti-tumor activity was confirmed across
several xenograft animal models, as well as in patient-derived tumor
xenografts (PDX) established in mice. The excellent drug-like properties
of NVP-FGF401 drove us to test its efficacy in HCC patients in a PhI/II
study, being the first selective FGFR4 inhibitor to ever enter into
clinical trials (NCT02325739).


