Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and validation of novel therapeutic targets driving
clonal heterogeneity in treatment-refractory GBM.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common primary adult brain tumor,
characterized by extensive cellular and genetic heterogeneity. Even with
surgery, standard chemotherapy with temozolomide (TMZ), and radiation,
tumor re-growth (or recurrence) and patient relapse are inevitable.
Patients face a median survival of Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common
primary adult brain tumor, characterized by extensive cellular and
genetic heterogeneity. Even with surgery, standard chemotherapy with
temozolomide (TMZ), and radiation, tumor re-growth (or recurrence) and
patient relapse are inevitable. Patients face a median survival of <15
months, with uniformly fatal outcomes upon disease progression
post-therapy. Recent profiling of GBM-initiating genes has shown that
evolution of cancer-driving clones or cell populations within a solid
tumor may progress through (and possibly be driven by) cancer treatment,
such that GBM recurrence may no longer resemble the genetic landscape of
the original primary tumor. Understanding and mapping clonal evolution of
the primary GBM through therapy and at recurrence will allow for the
discovery of novel targets specific to treatment-refractory GBM. Here, we
have developed early passage patient-derived brain tumor initiating cell
(BTIC) lines that have been annotated by genomic deep-sequencing
technologies to systematically characterize and describe the extent of
intratumoral heterogeneity. Tagged with a red florescent protein, these
BTIC lines were engrafted into immunocompromised NOD SCID mice. Following
half-maximal tumor engraftment, tumor bearing mice underwent a clinically
relevant chemoradiotherapy regimen, with 2 Gy gamma-irradiation on the
first day and 66 mg/kg temozolomide for five consecutive days. Following
therapy, mice were kept alive until tumor recurrence. Engrafted BTICs
were harvested at initial tumor formation, minimal residual disease after
chemoradiotherapy, and tumor recurrence. Samples were analyzed by RNA and
genomic deep-sequencing technologies to map cancer progression and
identify novel therapeutic targets in treatment-refractory GBM.

Potential therapeutic targets were validated by their effect on
self-renewal and proliferation of patient-derived BTIC lines of human GBM
in vitro and in vivo. Using CRISPR Cas9, potential targets were knocked
out in patient-derived BTIC lines of human GBM in order to characterize
the effect on sphere formation and proliferation in vitro, and tumor
formation in vivo. Following validation of new therapeutic targets of
treatment-refractor GBM, we aim to build novel biotherapeutics against
highly validated cell surface targets, and establish preclinical testing
protocols using our novel patient-derived and therapy-adapted xenograft
model of treatment-resistant GBM.


