Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immuno-PET with site-specific labeled 89Zr-DFO-trastuzumab
improves immuno-reactivity and tumor uptake in a subcutaneous HER2
positive xenograft mouse model of ovarian adenocarcinoma.


Introduction: The combination of PET with the specificity of monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs), immuno-PET, is an attractive approach to improve tumor
detection and mAb quantification. 89Zirconium (89Zr) is particularly
well-matched for the long circulatory half-life of intact mAbs.
Previously, the use of 89Zr has been limited by the lack of suitable
methods for stable coupling to mAbs. In addition, the conventional
labeling strategies with random introduction of a chelator potentially
reduce antibody binding and affinity towards target. Here we demonstrate
the application of an enzyme- and click chemistry-mediated methodology
for site-specifically labeled 89Zr immuno-PET imaging probes and compare
them to a random labeled probe.

Experimental procedures: Trastuzumab was conjugated to the
p-SCN-Bn-Deferoxamine (p-SCN-Bn-DFO) chelator in three alternate ways:
(1) randomly on lysine residues or site-specifically on enzymatically
treated glycans using either (2) ß-galactosidase or (3) endoglycosidase
S2. DFO-trastuzumab was radiolabeled with 89Zr (89Zr-DFO-trastuzumab) and
injected into SK-OV-3 tumor-bearing NMRI nude mice. In addition, a
dose-escalation study was performed with co-injection of either 100 µg
or 500 µg of unlabeled trastuzumab. At 24, 70 and 110 hours
post-injection, mice underwent small animal PET/CT imaging for
longitudinal assessment. Mice were euthanized and organs resected for ex
vivo biodistribution after the last imaging time-point. Additionally, the
immuno-reactivity and tracer stability in buffer and plasma were assessed
for all three tracers.

Results: All tracers were found to be stable for up to 5 days
post-labeling. PET imaging at 24, 70 and 110 hours after injection of
89Zr-DFO-trastuzumab revealed a gradual increase in tumor uptake and
image contrast over the time-course. At 70 hours post-injection mean
tumor uptakes were 6.7 ± 1.7, 13.9 ± 3.3 and 15.3 ± 3.8 % injected
dose per gram tissue (%ID/g), for random, ß-galactosidase or
endoglycosidase S2 labeled probes, respectively. Site-specific labeling
significantly increased tumor PET uptake (One-way ANOVA, p Results: All
tracers were found to be stable for up to 5 days post-labeling. PET
imaging at 24, 70 and 110 hours after injection of 89Zr-DFO-trastuzumab
revealed a gradual increase in tumor uptake and image contrast over the
time-course. At 70 hours post-injection mean tumor uptakes were 6.7 ±
1.7, 13.9 ± 3.3 and 15.3 ± 3.8 % injected dose per gram tissue (%ID/g),
for random, ß-galactosidase or endoglycosidase S2 labeled probes,
respectively. Site-specific labeling significantly increased tumor PET
uptake (One-way ANOVA, p < 0.0001) at all time-points compared to random
labeling. This was further supported by an immuno-reactivity of 93% for
site-specific labeled probes compared to 80% for the random labeled
trastuzumab. Titration with unlabeled trastuzumab did not affect tumor
uptake considerably and the ex vivo biodistribution confirmed the data
obtained by in vivo PET imaging.

Conclusions: 89Zr-DFO-trastuzumab is well suited for specific immuno-PET
imaging of HER2 positive ovarian cancer and site-specific labeling of
trastuzumab presents with markedly higher immuno-reactivity and tumor
specificity. These findings support the further development of
site-specific radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies for immuno-PET.


