Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heparanase-induced shedding of syndecan-1 promotes cancer cell
invasion : prevention by inhibitory synstatin peptide.


Syndecan-1 (Sdc1, CD138) is highly expressed in multiple myeloma (MM).
Heparanase (HPSE), an enzyme that cleaves heparan sulfate (HS) chains on
Sdc1, induces shedding of the Sdc1 ectodomain; this is associated with
poor prognosis in this disease. However, the link between Sdc1 shedding
and poor prognosis remains unclear. We now show that HPSE-induced shed
Sdc1 (sSdc1) engages α4β1 integrin (VLA-4) and vascular endothelial
cell growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR2) to form a ternary receptor complex
on the cell surface. This coupling of VEGFR2 to clusters of VLA-4 via
sSdc1 leads to autoactivation of VEGFR2 and the subsequent activation of
protein kinase A (PKA) bound to the VEGFR2 cytoplasmic domain. PKA
activation proceeds via VEGFR2-mediated stimulation of the G-protein
coupled cytokine receptor CXCR4 and the subsequent generation of cAMP by
its activation of adenylate cyclase 7. This mechanism is prevented by
SSTNVEGFR2, a peptide that competes for the VEGFR2 docking site in the
Sdc1 ectodomain, thereby disrupting VEGFR2 binding to sSdc1. VLA-4 has
been shown to mediate the polarized invasion of a variety of cells due to
α4 integrin phosphorylation on Ser988 by PKA, followed by Rac GTPase
activation, a process that is restricted to the leading edge of the cell.
But how this is confined at the leading edge is wholly unknown. We find
that HPSE-mediated shedding of Sdc1 promotes an invasive phenotype by
re-localizing VLA-4 and VEGFR2 to the leading edge of migrating myeloma
cells as well as human T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia, melanoma, and
endothelial cells where VEGFR2-dependent PKA activation causes α4
integrin phosphorylation. These results reveal a novel mechanism in which
the expression of HPSE, acting by causing Sdc1 shedding, potentially
regulates angiogenesis and the extravasation and invasion of cancer cells
and identifies SSTNVEGFR2 as a promising cancer therapeutic.


