Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inactivation of DNA repair triggers dynamic neoantigen evolution
and impairs cancer growth.


Colorectal, ovarian, endometrial and other tumors carrying defects in DNA
mismatch repair often show favorable prognosis and indolent progression.
The genomes of these tumors -also known as microsatellite unstable (MSI)
cancers- bear hundreds of thousands of somatic mutations, a feature which
fosters cancer progression and rapid evolution of resistance to targeted
therapies. The molecular bases for the favorable outcome of MMR deficient
cancers have long remained a mystery. Recent evidences that a subset of
MSI tumors respond prominently to anti-immune checkpoint blockade led to
the seminal hypothesis that the presence of high number of somatic
mutations may be responsible for effective immune-surveillance. However,
several reports indicate that a relevant fraction of hyper-mutated tumors
have unfavorable prognosis and do not respond to immune-modulators.
Intrigued by these contradictory findings, we used the CRISPR system to
genetically inactivated MutL homolog 1 (MLH1) in colorectal, breast and
pancreatic mouse cancer cells. The growth of MMR deficient cells was
comparable to their proficient counterparts in vitro and upon
transplantation in immune-compromised mice. Strikingly however, isogenic
MMR deficient colorectal, breast and pancreatic cancer cells were largely
unable to form tumors when injected subcutaneously or orthotopically in
syngeneic mouse models. MMR deficient tumors initially established in
immunodeficient mice continued to grow exponentially when transplanted in
syngeneic animals but regressed promptly when immune checkpoint
inhibitors (anti PD-1 and anti CTLA-4) were administered. Exome
sequencing of MMR proficient cells revealed mutational loads and
neo-antigen profiles that were stable over time. MMR inactivation further
increased the mutation burden and led to highly dynamic mutational
profiles, resulting in persistent renewal of neoantigens. These results
led us hypothesize that enforced increase of the number of mutations in
cancer cells could be -paradoxically- beneficial for therapeutic
purposes. We therefore performed a pharmacological screen to identify
agents capable of permanent inactivation of MMR in colorectal, breast and
PDAC cancer cells. We found that temozolomide triggers MLH1 inactivation
and leads to rapid clonal evolution and dynamic neoantigen profiles.
Temozolomide-treated cells were unable to form tumors in syngeneic
animals, while cells treated with other alkylating agents did. Genomic
analysis of these tumor models revealed that fluctuating levels of
neoantigens, rather than the absolute number of mutations is critical to
provoke immune surveillance. These results provide the rationale for
developing innovative anticancer therapies that target DNA repair
proteins.


