Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of an inhaled TLR9 agonist for the immunotherapy of
lung cancer.


CpG-oligonucleotides (CpG-ODN) stimulate innate immune responses through
Toll-like receptor-9 (TLR9). Intratumoral (IT) administration of CpG-ODN
has been shown to be safe and clinically effective in humans and in
multiple animal species. An important feature of local administration of
a CpG-ODN is the ability to stimulate immune responses that control the
growth of distant, uninjected tumors. Such treatment is especially
effective when combined with a complementary mode of immunotherapy, such
as anti-PD-1 or radiation. However, repeated IT injection is not
practical for many tumor types, including most lung cancers. In mild
asthmatic patients and healthy subjects, CpG-ODN have demonstrated safety
and pharmacologic activity when delivered by inhalation directly to the
lungs. Thus, inhaled CpG presents an alternative to IT injection for
primary lung cancers and for other tumor types with prominent lung
metastases. In the 4T1 mouse model of metastatic breast cancer, treatment
of mice with a CpG-ODN administered intranasally led to a marked
reduction in the number of lung metastases. This reduction was
accompanied by infiltration of tumors with activated CD8+ and CD4+ T
cells and the formation of highly organized tertiary lymphoid structures.
These changes are similar to those observed after IT injection of solid
tumors growing subcutaneously, and are consistent with changes observed
in human tumors responsive to immunotherapy. In the 4T1 model, intranasal
CpG-ODN strongly synergized with systemic anti-PD-1 treatment and induced
complete clearance of lung tumors, as well as metastases in tissues not
exposed to the CpG-ODN, including liver, pancreas and bone. This
generation of systemic immunity resulted in long-term survival in the
majority of mice. Immune cell subset depletion studies implicate both CD8
and CD4 T cells in the rejection of lung tumors treated with inhaled
CpG-ODN plus anti-PD1. Dynavax has developed a CpG-ODN, DV281, that is
optimized for aerosol delivery and plans to initiate clinical studies in
NSCLC patients in 2017.


