Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted ablation of essential oncogenes in rhabdomyosarcoma with
CRISPR/Cas9 gene therapy.


Targeted therapy seeks to exploit unique vulnerabilities in cancer cells
not present in normal tissue. The development of effective therapies
targeting essential tumor proteins has had significant challenges
particularly for tumor oncogenes many of which have proven
“undruggable”. Targeting these critical tumor oncogenes has been one
of the foremost challenges in cancer research. Current sequencing
technology facilitates rapid identification of novel cancer mutations yet
there are no effective therapeutic strategies aimed at targeting
essential cancer genes at the genome level. To overcome the challenges
associated with targeting “undruggable” cancer proteins, we have
employed high efficiency CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing technology to destroy
cancer cells by directly targeting the genomic DNA of essential cancer
genes. We used pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma to demonstrate the potential of
CRISPR/Cas9 gene therapy in solid tumor preclinical xenograft mouse
models. Rhabdomyosarcoma is an aggressive pediatric sarcoma characterized
by myogenic differentiation arrest. The two major subtypes of
rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), embryonal (ERMS) and alveolar (ARMS) are defined
largely by either activation of the RAS pathway (ERMS) or the presence of
a fusion oncogene between PAX3 and FOXO1 (ARMS). CRISPR/Cas9 was first
used to target critical exons in the activated RAS or PAX3/FOXO1
oncogenes unique to each RMS subtype, using inducible or viral CRISPR
delivery systems. Targeting these essential genes resulted in significant
regression of tumor xenografts due to a combination of cell death and
differentiation. By precisely targeting the activating mutations in the
RAS oncogene or the fusion site in the PAX3/FOXO1 fusion gene we further
demonstrate that tumor-specific CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene therapy can
also be achieved. This strategy disrupts the essential cancer oncogenes
with minimal impact to normal cells that do not harbor the unique cancer
mutations. Our results highlight the utility of exploiting essential
cancer genetic mutations for personalized therapy. This novel approach to
cancer therapy provides a potential alternative strategy for targeting
“undruggable” oncogenes while establishing a foundation for further
development of CRISPR/Cas9 gene therapy for cancer treatment


