Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of DLL3 in metastatic melanoma, glioblastoma and
high-grade extrapulmonary neuroendocrine carcinomas as potential
indications for rovalpituzumab tesirine (Rova-T; SC16LD6.5), a delta-like
protein 3 (DLL3)-targeted antibody drug conjugate (ADC).


Expression of DLL3 was examined in additional tumor types, as it was
found to be highly expressed in tumor-initiating cells (TIC) in small
cell lung cancer (SCLC), where a DLL3-targeted antibody drug conjugate
(ADC), rovalpituzumab tesirine (Rova-T; SC16LD6.5; Saunders et al. 2015
Sci Transl Med 7:302ra136)) exerted clinically meaningful anti-tumor
effects in a phase I trial (Spigel et al. 2016 Lancet Oncology; In
Press). DLL3 expression was profiled by qRT-PCR, ELISA and
immunohistochemistry in multiple tumor types. Patient-derived xenografts
(PDX) from melanoma and ovarian small cell carcinoma were established and
used for efficacy studies to determine the ability of Rova-T to impact
tumor growth and TIC frequency. DLL3 expression was seen in metastatic
melanoma (55%), low grade gliomas (90%), glioblastoma (70%), medullary
thyroid cancer (65%), carcinoids (33%), dispersed neuroendocrine tumors
in the pancreas (9%), bladder (57%) and prostate (24%), testicular cancer
(90%), and lung adenocarcinomas with neuroendocrine features (80%).
Unlike SCLC, where DLL3 does not predict clinical outcome on standard
therapies, DLL3 expression negatively correlates with overall survival in
melanoma and small cell bladder cancer. In mice bearing DLL3 positive
melanoma PDX, treatment with a single dose of Rova-T resulted in
effective and durable responses (>100 days), which correlated with a
significant impact on TIC frequency. Similarly, in mice bearing
DLL3-positive ovarian small cell PDX, a single dose of Rova-T resulted in
effective and durable responses (>100 days). Our results show that DLL3
is expressed in many neuroendocrine tumors (lung, ovarian, prostate,
bladder, etc), metastatic melanoma, medullary thyroid cancer, low-grade
gliomas and glioblastoma. Given pre-clinical results showing efficacy of
Rova-T in melanoma and ovarian small cell carcinoma, as well as
encouraging clinical data with Rova-T in patients with
recurrent/refractory SCLC, clinical evaluation of Rova-T in DLL3-positive
melanoma, glioblastoma, medullary thyroid cancer and other high-grade
neuroendocrine carcinomas is warranted. A “basket” trial enrolling
patients with DLL3-positive solid tumors is now recruiting patients
(NCT02709889).


