Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective impairment of intratumoral regulatory T cells by
targeting Ezh2 enhances cancer immunity.


High numbers of tumor infiltrating regulatory T (Treg) cells are
indicative of poor outcome in several malignancies, including ovarian
cancer, colorectal cancer, and melanoma. Thus, selectively abrogating
intratumoral Treg cell function while maintaining systemic immune
tolerance remains an attractive, albeit elusive, strategy for cancer
immunotherapy. We have identified the epigenetic enzyme Ezh2, an H3K27
methyltransferase, to be a critical mediator of lineage stability and
function in activated Treg cells. Consequently, deficiency of Ezh2 in
Treg cells strongly impairs their function in non-lymphoid tissues. We
hypothesized that this phenomenon might translate to a similar defect
that is restricted to the tumor microenvironment. Here we tested this
hypothesis in three transplantable syngeneic tumor models in mice (MC38
colon carcinoma, TRAMP-C2 prostate cancer, and B16F10 melanoma). We
observed that constitutive deletion of Ezh2 in Treg cells resulted in
potent anti-tumor activity, significantly impaired tumor outgrowth, and
in many instances, complete tumor rejection. These results were also
recapitulated when Ezh2 was temporally deleted in the vast majority of
Treg cells at the time of tumor inoculation. Functional analyses at early
time points after Ezh2 deletion revealed enhanced functionality of
effector CD4 and CD8 populations, as evidenced by increased IFN-γ
production. These effects were evident without reduction of intratumoral
Treg cell frequencies and despite presence of residual wild type Treg
cells. Mechanistic studies showed that Ezh2-deficient Treg cells were
destabilized and produced pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-2 and IFN-γ
selectively within the tumor microenvironment, suggesting a direct
contribution of Ezh2-deficient Treg cells to tumor clearance. To more
directly address this hypothesis, we generated mice that harbored both
Ezh2-deficient and wild type Treg cells and observed anti-tumor activity
similar to mice that exclusively harbored Ezh2-deficient Treg cells. In
stark contrast to Ezh2 deficiency, mice whose Treg cells were completely
depleted, using a Foxp3-driven diphtheria toxin receptor allele, were
unable to reject tumors, further supporting a dominant role of
Ezh2-deficient Treg cells in driving anti-tumor immunity. Finally, tumor
protection in the presence of Ezh2-deficient Treg cells occurred without
significant morbidity due to autoimmune pathologies, which were prevalent
in mice with systemic Treg cell depletion. These results suggest that
targeted deletion of Ezh2 in Treg cells drives a unique phenotype among
tumor infiltrating Treg cells, reprogramming the tumor microenvironment
and selectively augmenting the anti-tumor immune response. Cancer
therapies that pharmacologically inhibit Ezh2 to target tumor cells are
under investigation, going forward it will also be important to assess
the potential for beneficial effects via modulating the immune response.


