Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancer signature profiling identifies novel enhancer clusters
for transcription factors in lung cancer.


We previously discovered that the targeted focus of the most significant
amplicon in squamous cell lung cancer lies on the SOX2 gene locus, a
product of which is a critical regulator in specifying squamous cell
lineages in the development at dividing foregut to counteract with
NKX2-1, which specifies tracheal and later lung lineages and is the most
significantly amplified gene in lung adenocarcinoma. Cell lines harboring
such amplification from respective lung cancer subtypes are dependent on
the expression of these lineage-determining factors for their survival.
However, the amplifications of these factors represent only 10-15% of
lung cancer, it remains unknown what other lineage programs the remaining
majority rely upon. Posttranslational modifications of histone proteins
assign different functional regions of the genome, which leads to
chromatin states that create stable expression patterns maintaining
cellular fates. Studies on genome-wide enhancers have revealed the
presence of large enhancer clusters, which are typically enriched in the
proximity of lineage factor genes that establish a program defining
cellular identity.

To identify novel subsets of lung cancer defined by chromatin
modification on lineage-determining factors, we made use of a histone
modification marker H3K27Ac, typically present at active enhancers. We
profiled H3K27Ac by ChIP-seq in 24 cell lines (14 lung adenocarcinoma, 4
squamous cell carcinoma, 4 small cell lung cancer and 2 breast
carcinoma), identifying thousands of active enhancers, i.e. H3K27Ac
enriched, and hundreds of super-enhancers (SEs) defined by ROSE algorithm
per cell line. As a proof of principle, we found a locus adjacent to
NKX2-1 gene as one of the SEs in an NKX2-1-amplified cell line NCI-H3122,
suggesting this approach can detect a lineage program that is overridden
by cancer cells. We performed unsupervised hierarchical clustering
analyses on signals at SEs adjacent to transcriptional regulatory genes
and identified unique subsets segregated primarily by their lineages.
Several SEs on transcription factors are common between multiple cell
lines from the same lineage (e.g., SOX2 and TP63 in squamous cell lineage
and NKX2-1 in lung adenocarcinoma lineage). We identified 6 lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines that contain SE at the locus of NR4A2, a
significantly mutated gene in lung adenocarcinomas, and 2 other lines at
the locus of HOPX, a lineage transcription factor for alveolar type I
cells. These results suggest that this approach can reveal novel
enhancers on lineage factors in a subset of lung cancers.


