Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of YAP1 during hypoxia and its novel role in vascular
mimicry and angiogenesis.


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer-related
mortality. As in other solid tumors, angiogenesis is necessary for the
growth and progression of NSCLC. Vascular mimicry is a phenomenon in
which non-endothelial tumor cells form angiogenic vascular structures. We
have shown in the past that NSCLC cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) have
unique ability to undergo vascular mimicry. The present study shows that
transcriptional co-activator YAP1, the oncogenic component of the Hippo
pathway, enables the NSCLC CSCs to form angiogenic tubule-like structures
in matrigel. Inhibition of YAP1 or depletion of YAP1 suppressed vascular
mimicry of CSCs as well as angiogenic tubule formation by HUVECs in
matrigel as well as in a fibrin gel bead assay (FIBA) assay. The NSCLC
CSCs were found to have higher mRNA expression of VEGF receptor II (KDR)
and Angiopoietin-2 (AngPT-2) and depletion of YAP1 reduced the expression
of VEGF, KDR and AngPT-2 mRNA; these promoters were induced by YAP1 in
transient transfection assays, suggesting a possible molecular mechanism
by which YAP1 regulates angiogenesis. Hypoxia is a strong inducer of
tumor angiogenesis, cancer progression and metastasis. Our experiments
showed that NSCLC cells grown in hypoxic conditions or treated with
hypoxia mimetic DMOG have higher YAP1 mRNA and protein expression.
However, such a change was not observed in the expression of YAP1
orthologue, TAZ, nor in the canonical Hippo pathway proteins like
LATS1&2, Mst1&2, Sav or Mob. We identified a novel regulation of YAP1 by
prolyl hydroxylase PHD2, which is mainly known to regulate HIF1α. PHD2
was found to hydroxylate proline residue(s) in YAP1 in a region between
aa 284 to aa 289 as seen by mutational analysis. YAP1 was found to
directly bind to PHD2 and depletion of PHD2 or treatment with DMOG which
is an inhibitor of prolyl hydroxylases, elevated YAP1 protein levels in
the nucleus. Further, YAP1 was found to associate with HIF1α as detected
by co-immunoprecipitation experiments and could enhance HIF1α-mediated
induction of the VEGF promoter. Proximity ligation assays performed on
TMA showed enhanced YAP1 and HIF1α interaction in lung tumor tissues
compared to normal cells. Our data suggest a novel regulation of YAP1 in
hypoxic environment that supports angiogenesis and tumor growth.


