Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Landscape of somatic mutations in drug-resistant acute myeloid
leukemia.


Introduction: Most patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) initially
respond to cytarabine-anthracycline induction chemotherapy. However, in
many patients, the disease recurs in a lethal drug-resistant form.
Somatic mutations underlying the pathogenesis of AML have been
extensively characterized by sequencing of newly diagnosed AMLs. However,
the mutations driving therapy resistance and disease progression at
relapse have not been well characterized. In this study, we have exome
sequenced a cohort of relapsed and refractory AMLs and compared the
landscape of somatic mutations at relapse to diagnosis phase AMLs to
identify mutations that contribute to therapy resistance and disease
progression.

Materials and Methods: We performed exome sequencing of diagnosis phase
AMLs (n=70) and relapsed or primary refractory AMLs (n=54). Patients with
AML M3 subtype were excluded from the study. Paired diagnosis and relapse
samples were available from 27 patients. A skin biopsy was used as the
germline control. Nine patients had received an allogeneic hematopoietic
stem cell transplant before relapse. Somatic mutations were called using
varscan2 and copy number aberrations using copyCat. Since the
identification of large insertions from next-generation sequencing data
remains challenging using existing algorithms, FLT3 internal tandem
duplications (FLT3-ITDs) were identified using a novel custom algorithm
optimized for FLT3-ITD detection. Population variants were filtered out
to remove donor-derived germline variants in chimeric post-transplant
relapse samples.

Results: Comparison of somatic mutation frequencies in diagnosis and
relapse and refractory samples showed that on average relapsed tumors
have a higher number of driver mutations than tumors at diagnosis. WT1,
TP53, CBL, IDH1 and PTPN11 were mutated at a higher frequency in relapsed
samples than at diagnosis, with 13 %, 11 %, 11 %, 9 % and 9 % of relapsed
or refractory samples and 4 %, 6 %, 3 %, 4 % and 7 % of diagnosis mutated
respectively. Analysis of paired diagnosis-relapse samples showed that in
patients with WT1, CBL or PTPN11 mutation at diagnosis the second allele
is frequently mutated or lost due to uniparental disomy occurring at
relapse.

Conclusions: On average relapsed AMLs have a higher number of driver
mutations than diagnosis phase AMLs indicating that acquisition of
additional driver mutations contributes to relapse. AMLs frequently
acquire additional mutations in the same genes and pathways that already
harbored mutations at diagnosis.


