Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-L1 positive tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and mutational load
in breast cancer.


Background: PD-1 blockade has emerged as an effective treatment for a
subset of cancer patients. Studies have shown that PD-L1 expression is
associated with likelihood of response to PD-1 blockade. In order to
select the right breast cancer patient for immunotherapy,
characterization of the immune landscape of breast tumors is required.
Therefore, we assessed PD-L1 expression and tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs) in different breast tumor subtypes and the link with
prognosis. We also sequenced a panel of genes to assess the mutational
load in triple negative tumors (TNBC) and investigate the association
with PD-L1 positive TILs.

Material and methods: We analyzed 438 tumor samples from breast cancer
patients of all ages treated between 1986 and 2007 with surgery, with or
without adjuvant therapy. PD-L1 was stained using whole slide specimens
(E1L3N® antibody) after methodological validation. Pathologists
quantified TILs based on International TILs Working Group recommendations
and scored PD-L1 based on the percentage of positive (tumor and/or
immune) cells; as negative if 0%, positive if ≥1%, and high if >50%.
Mutational load was assessed based on DNA kinome sequencing. Associations
were measured by Cox/logistic regression model, including pathological
variables. Multiplex imaging of 20 immune-infiltrated areas from four ER
negative tumors were performed using the Vectra® system based on
immunofluorescence staining panel of: CD4, CD68, CD8, FOXP3 and PD-L1.

Results: PD-L1 expression and TILs were higher in ductal (compared with
lobular), high grade and estrogen receptor (ER)-negative tumors (p50%)
was significantly associated with better DMFS: HR=0.51; 95%CI: 0.27-0.98.
TNBC with high PD-L1 expression of TILs (>50%) showed an association with
increased mutation load (p=0.019) and a trend for better DMFS (HR=0.41;
95%CI: 0.16-1.04) compared with tumors lacking TILs. Further
characterization of PD-L1 positivity in the immune-infiltrated cells was
conducted by a multiplex imaging analysis. Preliminary results indicated
that PD-L1 is expressed in CD68+, CD4+, FOXP3+ and CD8+ immune-cells.

Conclusion: Our findings suggest that PD-L1 positive TILs are associated
with worse prognosis in ER-positive breast cancer and with better outcome
in ER-negative group. In TNBC, high mutational load correlates with high
PD-L1 positive TILs.


