Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel MRM-based mass spectrometry assay to quantify HMGB1.


Background: High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) is a versatile protein with
dual roles. Within the cell, this highly conserved chromosomal protein
functions as a DNA chaperone. Outside of the cell, it functions as the
prototypical damage-associated molecular pattern. There is significant
evidence that HMGB1 dysfunction contributes to cancer development,
particularly in mesothelioma, where its role in carcinogenesis is better
defined.

Goal: To develop a mass spectrometry based immune-multiple reaction
monitoring (iMRM) assay to quantify HMGB1 and its disease-associated
post-translationally modified forms.

Methods: Mesothelioma cell lines (Ren, Phi and PP-Mill) known to secrete
HMGB1 were used. Concentrated cell line supernatants, anti-HMGB1
antibody-loaded magnetic beads were incubated overnight. Beads were
extensively washed and the HMGB1 released from the beads was
enzymatically digested prior to targeted MRM mass spectrometry. Known
quantity of N15 labeled synthetic peptides were spiked in to be used as
internal standards to assess the total protein concentrations as well as
the acetylated modified peptides that encompass the Lys residue. To
ensure tight reproducibility during sample processing, we developed an
automated workflow from enrichment to digestion with % coefficient of
variance of less than 20%.

Results: Two multiplex MRM assays were developed for HMGB1: 1) total
HMGB1 protein assay based on trypsin digested peptides and 2) Acetylated
HMGB1 assay based on Endoproteinase GluC (Staphylococcus aureus Protease
V8) digestion to obtain the peptides containing hyper-acetylated Lysine
residues, which are not located within a suitable tryptic peptide. Four
significant milestones were accomplished. i) We optimized the HMGB1
liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry performance through the
utilization of signature synthesized peptides representing the common
amino acid sequence and potential acetylated regions. The calibration
curves for both peptides based on the ratio of light and heavy isotopic
labeled internal standards were achieved. LLOD and LLOQ and the inter and
intra-day variability of the iMRM assay have been achieved. ii) A robust
immuno-capture protocol was established. The final protocol included
isolation of HMGB1 using a capture antibody followed by protein release,
denaturation, reduction, alkylation and digestion. To date, we have
optimized the conditions for HMGB1 attachment to antibody, antibody
coupling to magnetic beads, the wash and elution steps. iii) The protocol
was applied to quantify HMGB1 in mesothelioma cell lines. HMGB1 was
measured in cytoplasm, nucleus and supernatant from the cell lines. iv)
Finally, the assay was adapted to work on human plasma samples.

Conclusion: We successfully developed the iMRM workflow for
quantification of total HMGB1 and acetylated HMGB1 based on the
measurement of the target signature peptides in HMGB1.


