Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential effects of inhibitors of epigenetic modifiers on IDH
mutant cell lines.


Our aim is to find effective drug treatments for IDH mutant glioma cells
and investigate their mechanism of actions by analysing genetic and
epigenetic alterations upon drug treatments.

Drug screen was performed on IDH mutant and wild type cell lines by using
a library of epigenetic modifier inhibitors. Hits for IDH mutant cells
were validated with individual treatments. Combination treatments of
these inhibitors were also performed to see synergistic effects. Then,
IDH wild type glioma cells and BJ fibroblasts were transduced with mutant
IDH1 overexpression plasmid, and checked if they were sensitized to these
drugs or not.

Based on drug screen performed on IDH mutant and wild type glioma cell
lines, we found that IDH mutant cell lines, MGG119 and MGG152, were
highly sensitive to 5-azacytidine, Chaetocin and GSK-J4. For IDH1 mutant
MGG152 cell line, IC50 value for GSK-J4 is 5.2 ± 1.3 µM, for
5-azacytidine is 2.2 ± 0.3 µM, and for Chaetocin is 10.2 ± 1.0 nM at
48h. On the other hand, these drugs did not affect viability of IDH wild
type glioma cell lines and fibroblasts around these concentrations.
Moreover, combination of drugs, especially combination of Chaetocin and
5-azacytidine had a highly synergistic effect on IDH mutant cells while
it was still ineffective on IDH wild type cells. After transduced with
mutant IDH overexpression plasmid, fibroblasts became more sensitive to
these drugs. On the other hand, although their growth rate was reduced,
IDH wild type glioma cells were not significantly sensitized to these
drugs upon mutant IDH overexpression.

IDH mutation mainly inhibits DNA and histone demethylation, and leads to
hypermethylation phenotype. Therefore, it is an expected result that IDH
mutant cell lines are sensitive to 5-azacytidine which is an inhibitor of
DNA methyltransferases, and Chaetocin which is an inhibitor of H3K9
methyltransferases. However, it was interesting to observe that GSK-J4
which is an inhibitor of H3K27 demethylases is also effective on IDH
mutant cells. This may be a result of dependency on low number of active
genes since IDH mutation causes downregulation of many genes by
methylation. GSK-J4 may downregulate these genes by increasing H3K27
methylation. On the other hand, these effects might also be results of
induced cell stress upon drug treatment. To answer this question, now we
are trying to knock-down target genes of these drugs by shRNA, and
obtaining compatible results. We are also planning to perform RNA-seq
analysis to see genes with altered expressions upon drug treatments.

To conclude, unlike IDH wild type glioma cells or healthy fibroblasts,
IDH mutant glioma cells were found to be sensitive to few epigenetic
drugs in low concentrations. This was confirmed by sensitization of
fibroblasts to these drugs upon mutant IDH1 overexpression. In addition,
combination of these drugs had a highly synergistic effect on mutant
cells which may give opportunity to use drugs in very low concentrations
efficiently.


