Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RUNX1 positively regulates ErbB2/HER2 signaling pathway through
modulating the expression of SOS1 in gastric cancer cells.


Although runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) is well known for
its context-dependent oncogenic properties in various malignancies, its
role in gastric cancers has been poorly defined. Up-regulation of
receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) ErbB2/HER2 signaling pathway is
encountered in the vast majority of gastric cancer cases and contributes
to the initiation and maintenance of these cancer cells. This signaling
cascade is partly yet arbitrary mediated by son of sevenless gene 1
(SOS1), which functions as an adaptor protein in RTK cascades. Herein we
report that RUNX1 regulates ErbB2/HER2 signaling pathway in gastric
cancer cells through transcriptionally regulating SOS1 expressions,
rendering itself an ideal target in anticancer strategies.
Mechanistically, RUNX1 interacts with the consensus RUNX1 binding
sequence (5’-TGTGGT-3’) located in the proximal promoter region of
SOS1 and positively regulates it. Short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated
knockdown of RUNX1 in the gastric cancer cell line MKN45 led to the
decreased expression of SOS1 and of phosphorylated form of ErbB2/HER2 as
well as the deactivation of its downstream targets such as AKT and ERK.
RUNX1 knockdown subsequently induced cell cycle arrest at G0/G1 phase and
successive apoptotic cell death in MKN45 cells. Silencing of HER2 or SOS1
in MKN45 cells unalterably suppressed the proliferation of these cancer
cells, highlighting the importance of this ErbB2/HER2 signaling cascade
in the maintenance of gastric cancer cells. We also found that SOS1 is
one of the most consistently up-regulated genes in RUNX1-high expressing
primary gastric cancer cells derived from previously reported human
clinical samples. These data collectively indicates that inhibition of
RUNX1 could be a legitimate therapeutic choice in the management of
gastric cancers. Lastly, we examined the efficacy of a novel small
molecule specifically binds and inhibits RUNX1 (we named it as CM).
Intriguingly, CM was exceptionally effective against MKN45 cells (IC50
value at 403.5 nM). Besides, CM was well-tolerated in mice and fabulously
suppressed the growth of xenotransplanted MKN45 cells in immunodeficient
mice in vivo. Taken together, our work identified a novel interaction of
RUNX1 and ErbB2/HER2 signaling pathway, paving a new way for the
management of dismal-prognostic advanced stage HER2-positive gastric
cancer patients.


