Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bio-competition-based smart NanoVelcro Chip for isolation and gene
expression analysis of circulating tumor cells from prostate cancer
patients.


Introduction and Objective: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are being used
in efforts to identify important transcriptomic features such as androgen
receptor (AR) splicing variants in prostate cancer (PCa) and other
malignancies. The low abundance of CTCs and the fragility of the genetic
materials create a need for tools that obtain high-quality signals with
great efficiency. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) is a
stimulation-responsive nanomaterial which allows for rapid and gentle
cell purification through the use of bio-competition between pheylboronic
acid and carbohydrates. We hypothesized that a combination of PEDOT with
the NanoVelcro cell affinity assay (NanoVelcro-PBA Chip) would yield a
tool that could minimize contamination from white blood cells and
maximize cell viably and molecular intactness. In this study, we
benchmarked the efficiency of this platform for purification of CTCs from
blood specimens and the feasibility of using this approach for detection
of PCa-related RNA signatures from purified CTCs.

Methods: The capture and release efficiency of NanoVelcro-PBA Chip was
tested using PCa cell lines (LNCaP, PC3, 22Rv1) and artificial blood
samples with PCa cells mixed with healthy donor blood. Variations on
operating conditions were tested including the capturing antibodies on
the NanoVelcro substrate, incubation time, sorbitol concentration, and
bio-competition time. Impact was measured on process efficacy and cell
viability. Blood specimens from 17 PCa patients were processed using
NanoVelcro-PBA chip. Analysis focused detection of full length AR
(AR-FL), AR splicing variant 7 (AR-V7), KLK3 (prostate-specific antigen,
PSA), FOLH1 (prostate-specific membrane antigen, PSMA), and
long-noncoding RNA SChLAP1 (second chromosome locus associated with
prostate-1) using quantitative RT-PCR method.

Results: The combination of NanoVelcro substrate, PEDOT nanomaterial, and
capturing antibody exhibits the highest cell capture efficiency (up to
80%). The highest cell release efficiency and viability was achieved by
bio-competition with 100 μmol/200μL sorbitol solution for 30 minutes.
PCa-related RNA signals were detected in 16/17 CTC(+) PCa patients, and
was detected more frequently in patients with metastatic disease and with
higher expression level.

Conclusions: We have developed a novel CTC purification platform,
NanoVelcro-PBA Chip. This platform is capable of purifying CTCs with high
efficiency and while retaining cell viability and molecular integrity.
This in turn allows for detection of disease-relevant RNA signals.
Further this new tool is being moved into clinical studies that will
validate its performance in CTC purification and subsequent RNA detection.


