Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colony lysate arrays for proteomic profiling of drug-persistent
cancer cell subpopulations.


Clonal heterogeneity of cancer cells is one of the key properties by
which to understand relapse after anticancer drug therapy. However, a
very limited number of technologies are available for individually
profiling these heterogeneous drug-resistant subpopulations. Therefore,
the development of techniques to monitor molecular changes in the
subpopulations responsible for drug-resistance, namely, colony-forming
drug-tolerant persisters (DTPs), is needed in order to understand the
occurrence of cancer relapse. To profile DTPs at the molecular level in
relation to the colony-forming function, this study aimed to develop
colony lysate array (CoLA) for the quantitative measurement of protein
levels in individual colonies.

To investigate multiple parameters that may affect the emergence of DTP,
DTPs derived from 5 cancer cell lines grown in the presence of 6 doses of
4 different drugs were collected. A set of >2,000 colony lysates was
printed onto a nitrocellulose-coated glass slide using a microarrayer,
which has been used for the production of reverse-phase protein arrays
(RPPAs). Each resulting CoLA slide was stained with a specific antibody
from the list of 44 functionally-diverse proteins. Immunostained slides
were then scanned using an ordinary optical flatbed scanner for
quantifying the spot intensity.

To evaluate whether the CoLA system produced biologically relevant data
relating to the DTPs, the epithelial/non-epithelial protein relationship
between E-cadherin and vimentin was examined. With the proteomic
profiling of >2,000 DTPs, E-cadherin was negatively correlated with
vimentin (r = -0.74, P To evaluate whether the CoLA system produced
biologically relevant data relating to the DTPs, the
epithelial/non-epithelial protein relationship between E-cadherin and
vimentin was examined. With the proteomic profiling of >2,000 DTPs,
E-cadherin was negatively correlated with vimentin (r = -0.74, P <
0.0001) and positively correlated with CK-8 (r = 0.86, P To evaluate
whether the CoLA system produced biologically relevant data relating to
the DTPs, the epithelial/non-epithelial protein relationship between
E-cadherin and vimentin was examined. With the proteomic profiling of
>2,000 DTPs, E-cadherin was negatively correlated with vimentin (r =
-0.74, P < 0.0001) and positively correlated with CK-8 (r = 0.86, P <
0.0001), suggesting that DTPs may flexibly transit their biological
entity in response to drug administration. A set of hierarchical
clustering of DTPs displays proteomic patterns in each dose, allowing the
comparison of proteomic changes in a dose-response manner. For example,
the “cisplatin-induced cluster” demonstrated similar proteomic
patterns regardless of the drug dose. In contrast to cisplatin, the
“gefitinib-induced cluster” indicated that the proteomic patterns
were similar at drug concentrations from 0 to 0.1 μM; however, those at
1 and 10 μM were distinct from those at lower concentrations. Individual
protein analyses of the DTPs revealed that the level of STAT3 decreased
while that of OCT4A increased according to the gefitinib concentrations.

An RPPA-modified method, CoLA, for individual colony profiling has been
successfully established. The results of validation studies suggest that
CoLA can be a tool for understanding the emergence mechanism of DTPs. The
molecular characteristics of DTPs may reflect the entity of cancer cell
subpopulations that contribute primarily to post-chemotherapeutic cancer
relapse. Further technical development will enhance understanding of the
occurrence of cancer relapse.


