Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of SERCA pump in cell death and autophagy.


The purpose of the study is to elucidate structural and molecular
determinants of SERCA inhibition by Thapsigargin (Tg) and related analogs
for their effects on intracellular calcium homeostasis, ER stress, cell
death and autophagy. Tg specifically binds and blocks the
sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase (SERCA), which pumps Ca2+ from
the cytosol to the ER. Sustained SERCA inhibition leads to calcium
depletion from the ER causing ER stress and ultimately cell death.
Recently we showed that Tg-induced calcium perturbation potently blocks
autophagy (1). Tg is an attractive potential anti-tumor drug because it
effectively kills both slow and fast proliferating cancer cells. However,
since Tg is toxic also to normal cells, it must be targeted towards the
cancer cells. Replacing a side chain with a linker connecting the Tg core
to a peptide prevents Tg from entering cells. Two different
linker-peptide sequences have been introduced in clinically tested Tg
prodrugs; one is cleaved by PSA, secreted by prostate cancer cells, and
the other is cleaved by PSMA, which is secreted by neovascular tissues of
a broad range of tumors. The Tg analogs unmasked by the cleavage are able
to enter cells and exert their toxic effects. Interestingly, however, in
vitro experiments indicate that Tg analogs have different potencies and
cellular effects depending on the terminal amino acid residue (2).
Exploring why this is the case may lead not only to better Tg prodrug
formulations, but also to a deeper understanding of the biological
functions of SERCA pump activity. We compare a broad panel of Tg analogs
in various cell types for their biological effects. Methods used so far
are western blotting, real-time RT-PCR, live-cell imaging, flow
cytometry, and assays that measure autophagic sequestration and
degradation activity. Our unpublished data indicate the ER-stress sensors
PERK, ATF4, CHOP, and IRE1 but not XBP1 and ATF6 to be involved in cell
death signaling in LNCaP prostate cancer cells. Moreover, Tg-induced cell
death required death receptor 5 and caspase-8. All Tg analogs tested
displayed exactly the same molecular requirements for induction of cell
death, although some required 5 to 10 times higher doses than Tg to evoke
the same strength of death signal. Like Tg (1) the analogs inhibited
autophagy before the closure of phagophores, but at higher doses and/or
with slower kinetics. These results indicate that thapsigargin and its
analogs evoke similar anti-autophagic and death signaling pathways.
Further investigations are aimed at exploring the causes for differential
potencies, and include measurements of cytosolic and compartmentalized
calcium, as well as solving crystal structures of selected analog:SERCA
complexes complemented with biophysical studies of analog:SERCA
interactions.

References 1. N. Engedal et al., Autophagy 9, 1475 (2013). 2. C. Dubois
et al., Febs j 280, 5430 (2013).


