Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EZH2 regulation through lysine 63 linked ubiquitination in
prostate cancer.


Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) plays crucial roles on the development
of cells and tissues as well as the progression of prostate cancer (PCa)
and castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). EZH2 can upregulate and
activate progenitor genes including androgen receptor (AR) and the target
genes. However, the mechanisms by which EZH2 is regulated in PCa remain
elusive. Literature reports that tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor
associated factor 6 (TRAF6) is essential for both normal tissue
development and regulation of oncogenic signaling pathways in cancers. In
this study, we reported that EZH2 is regulated by PTEN and SKP2 network
in PCa. Specifically, we showed that the aberrant upregulation of EZH2
and histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) in both Pten null
mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) in vitro and prostate tumors of Pten
null mice in vivo, as compared to the controls. EZH2 levels were
negatively correlated with TRAF6 in human PCa cells upon SKP2
dysregulation. Immunofluorescence (IF) staining results showed a
co-localization of EZH2 and TRAF6 in nucleus of PC3 cells, and
co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) analysis further confirmed a physical
binding of EZH2 and TRAF6 in PC3 cells. Ectopic expression of TRAF6
promoted the K63-linked polyubiquitination of EZH2 to decrease EZH2 and
H3K27me3 levels in PCa cells. Conversely, TRAF6 knockdown resulted in a
reduction of EZH2 polyubiquitination with an increase of EZH2 and
H3K27me3 levels in PCa cells. Furthermore, the catalytically dead mutant
TRAF6 C70A abolished the TRAF6-mediated polyubiquitination of human EZH2
in vivo in 293T cells and in vitro in the recombinant human EZH2 protein,
as compared with TRAF6 WT. Together, we report for the first time a novel
mechanism on EZH2 ubiquitination and an important signaling network of
SKP2-TRAF6-EZH2-H3K27me3 in PCa cells. Our findings provide valuable
clues on the mechanism and efficiency of targeting EZH2 in PCa and CRPC .


