Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEN1309, a novel antibody drug conjugate (ADC) targeting Ly75
antigen, induces complete responses in several xenografts of solid tumors.


The cell surface antigen Lymphocyte antigen 75 (LY75, CD205, DEC-205) is
over-expressed in several tumor histotypes. It is a type I C-type lectin
receptor (CLR), normally expressed on various APC subsets, characterized
by a cytoplasmic domain containing protein motifs crucial for endocytosis
and internalization upon ligation. These features make the antigen ideal
to be exploited as a target for a novel ADC. MEN1309 is a humanized IgG1
antibody directed against the cell surface antigen Ly75, conjugated
through a cleavable linker to a potent maytansinoid microtubule
disruptor, DM4. In this study, we evaluated the in vitro and in vivo
(xenografts and PDX) efficacy of MEN1309 in different tumor histotypes. A
PK/PD relationship was also investigated in tumor-bearing mice. IHC
demonstrated high prevalence of Ly75 in human pancreatic, triple negative
breast, and bladder cancers, as well as in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
In vitro experiments showed that cytotoxic activity of MEN1309 was in
nM/sub nM range against several lymphoma, pancreatic, bladder and
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines. Moreover, MEN1309
exhibited high cell-killing ability against cells having either strong as
well as low to moderate antigen expression. In vivo, MEN1309 at 2.5-5
mg/kg (schedule varying from single dose, q7dx3, or q21dx3) showed an
impressive antitumor activity, resulting in complete and long lasting
responses in most of the xenograft models representing lymphoma, TNBC,
bladder and pancreatic cancers, expressing the antigen at high but also
at low levels. No treatment related toxicity in terms of change of body
weight and death events were detected. Moreover, the administration of
(i) isotype control-DM4, (ii) the non-conjugate antibody IgG1 and (iii)
the free toxin DM4 (at a dosage corresponding to the equimolar
concentration linked at 10 mg/kg ADC) showed little to no therapeutic
efficacy on tumor growth. In TNBC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model
(coming from a heavily pre-treated patient and expressing high level of
the antigen Ly75), MEN1309 (5 mg/kg q21dx3) showed a complete tumor
regression. Finally, in the pancreatic adenocarcinoma xenograft model
HPAFII, the pharmacokinetics profile in serum of MEN1309 at 5 mg/kg was
characterized and it was qualitatively correlated, using
immunofluorescence, with the occurrence of phosphorylation of Serine 10
of H3 Histone in cancer cells, as a pharmacodynamic (PD) marker of DM4
activity on microtubules. Initial ADC exposure was noteworthy and was
followed by a relatively fast decline. In parallel with the decay of the
serum ADC concentrations there was a progressive increase in the number
of positive cells showing the PD marker for mitotic arrest. Overall, our
data suggest that MEN1309 is a selective and potent novel antitumoral ADC
and it deserves to enter into aPhase I study for a variety of Ly75
positive tumor histotypes.


