Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel dual cIAP1/XIAP antagonist ASTX660 activity in preclinical
models of human papillomavirus(+) and (-) head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common
cancer with a five-year survival of ~50%. HNSCC are linked to human
papillomavirus (HPV+) or tobacco carcinogenesis (HPV-). The Cancer Genome
Atlas recently analyzed 279 HNSCC, revealing that 30% overexpress FADD
(Fas-Associated Death Domain), with or without BIRC2/3 genes encoding
cellular Inhibitor of Apoptosis Proteins 1/2 (cIAP1/2), which are
critical components of the Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF) Receptor signaling
pathways that determine cell death or survival. The frequency of such
mutations provides a window for potential therapeutics, as IAP
antagonists have been shown to switch cancer cell TNFα signaling from
being pro-survival to pro-apoptotic. We recently showed that birinapant,
a second mitochondrial activator of caspases (SMAC) mimetic that promotes
IAP degradation, sensitizes HNSCC to cell death by TNFα and eradicates
tumors in combination with radiation in HPV- HNSCC models overexpressing
FADD+/-BIRC2. ASTX660 (developed by Astex Pharmaceuticals) is a novel
dual cIAP1/XIAP antagonist currently in clinical trials for treating
advanced solid tumors and lymphomas. The objective of the present study
is to determine the therapeutic effects of ASTX660 in HPV+/- HNSCC
preclinical models. ASTX660 at nanomolar concentrations was found to
potently inhibit cell proliferation (measured using XTT assays) and
induce apoptosis (Annexin/7-AAD flow cytometry), and displayed
combinatorial activity with TNFα, TRAIL, or cisplatin in multiple human
HPV+/- HNSCC cell lines. Western blotting showed near complete
degradation of cIAP1 expression at nanomolar concentrations in human
HNSCC cell lines. Flow cytometry revealed that ASTX660 in combination
with either TNFα or cisplatin reduced MHC-I expression and increased
PD-L1 expression, suggesting that potential synergistic efficacy could be
observed in combination with immune checkpoint inhibitors. Our results
demonstrate that ASTX660 is a potential therapeutic agent for both HPV+/-
HNSCC. Experiments evaluating the anti-tumor effects of ASTX660 as a
monotherapy and in combination with radiation, cisplatin, and anti-PD-1
therapies are ongoing, using both human HNSCC xenograft and syngeneic
mouse oral cancer (MOC) models. Supported by NIDCD intramural projects
(ZIA-DC-000016, 73 and 74).


