Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3D Biology™ view of cancer: Simultaneous detection of somatic
DNA mutations and expression profiling of genes and signaling proteins
from melanoma tumor FFPE samples.


Prognosis is favorable in patients with primary localized melanoma but
poor in patients with metastatic disease. With more than 76,000 cases
expected to be diagnosed in 2016, more precise prognostic technologies
and new therapies are needed. Although targeted treatment regimens have
been approved in recent years, resistance has emerged in large part due
to adaptive response mechanisms and intratumoral heterogeneity. Analysis
of tumor samples across multiple molecular platforms will help elucidate
the complexities within and across tumors which may underlie response to
therapy as well as assist in identifying predictive biomarkers; however,
these approaches require significant amounts of sample, time, and
resources.

In order to integrate the strengths of analyzing different molecular
analytes, we have modularized Nanostring Technologies' molecular
barcoding technology to permit simultaneous digital measurement of
cancer-associated DNA mutation variants, mRNA expression, and protein
expression in one assay from the same sample (3D Biology). Novel
nucleotide variant probes enable sensitive and specific identification of
DNA mutant allele sequences down to a level of detection of ≤ 5% from 5
ng of FFPE-extracted genomic DNA. Gene expression is measured via unique
digital barcoding technology to measure mRNA transcripts, and protein
expression and activity (via phosphorylation) is measured by DNA-labeled
antibodies. The multi-omic workflow requires only two 5-10 micron
sections of FFPE tissue, whereby DNA and RNA are extracted from one
section and multiplex digital protein profiling is conducted on the
second.

As proof of concept demonstrating the utility of this 3D Biology
platform, we have simultaneously analyzed DNA variants, RNA expression,
and protein expression using NanoString’s nCounter Vantage 3D™ Solid
Tumor Panel on 12 FFPE melanoma tumor samples and one normal tissue from
six patients. This sample set included two metastatic tumors from each
patient, and in one instance multiple regions from each metastatic site
(7 and 2 regions) in order to assess intratumoral heterogeneity.
Importantly, this sample set has associated mRNA expression measured
using the nCounter® PanCancer Pathways for Human panel as well as whole
exome sequencing (WES) data. Somatic variants seen in this latter dataset
were compared with the results from the DNA SNV Solid Tumor Panel.
Samples with variants that were detected in the nCounter assay but not
WES were subjected to deep sequencing for validation. Overall, we show
that this multiplex and multi-omic platform has the potential for rapid
and sensitive assessment of patient samples that will impact clinical
care.


