Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A DAXX-KIFC3 fusion potentiates alternative lengthening of
telomeres in osteosarcoma.


Proliferating cells must enact a program of telomere lengthening to
counteract the chromosome end replication problem. In most types of
cancer cells, telomeres are maintained through the action of the
ribonucleoprotein telomerase, but some cancer cells, particularly those
of mesenchymal origin, utilize an alternative method of telomere repair
and lengthening termed the alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT)
pathway. Since telomere maintenance is essential for tumor cell
immortality, better understanding of the ALT mechanism could potentially
reveal drug targets that could be used to develop novel therapies for
tumors that use ALT. It has been previously observed that ALT tumors
frequently carry mutations in ATRX, which partners with the protein DAXX
in a chromatin remodeling complex, but how these mutations facilitate the
ALT pathway is not well understood. Work in our lab identified an
ALT-positive osteosarcoma cell line, identified here as OS1, in which
DAXX has undergone a fusion event with the non-canonical kinesin KIFC3.
We find that knockdown of the DAXX-KIFC3 fusion neither impairs ALT nor
cell proliferation, suggesting that the fusion represents a loss of
function. Furthermore, inducible restoration of wild-type DAXX,
reversibly abrogates ALT function in this cell line. One of the hallmarks
of ALT is localization of telomeres and DNA recombination machinery to
nuclear PML bodies, resulting in formation of ALT- associated PML Bodies,
or APBs. Thus it may be considered that changes in PML body composition
represent a key aspect of the ALT mechanism. We observe that in OS1 both
DAXX and ATRX fail to localize to PML bodies. This finding is consistent
with the fact that the DAXX-KIFC3 fusion results in loss of a C-terminal
SUMO interaction motif that normally mediates PML body interaction.
Leveraging our inducible system, using biochemical and imaging
approaches, we are working to define the role of DAXX in maintaining PML
body composition.


