Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Y-box binding protein 1 is crucial in acquiring drug resistance in
advanced renal cell carcinoma.


Objective: Investigating the role of Y-box binding protein 1 (YB1) in
drug resistant advanced kidney cancer.

Background: Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the 6th most common malignancy
with approximately 1,800 deaths in 2015 and 2.3% annual increase in
Canada. Despite the partial or total surgical removal of kidney in
patients with localized RCC, metastatic patients are treated with
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in a purely palliative approach.
However, TKI-resistance (Sunitinib) is developed after a median time of
10-14 months. Therefore, identifying the factor(s) responsible for
TKI-resistance development and disease advancement in RCC is imperative.
It is now widely recognized that evolutionarily conserved Y-box binding
protein 1 (YB1) is essential for cell growth and survival. Upregulation
of YB1 in numerous cancer types was found to be positively correlated
with tumor growth, metastasis and drug-resistance development. YB1 is
also involved in intercellular communication through its secretion in the
tumor microenvironment by cell-surface transporters, ABC-transporters.

Summary of the data: Endothelial cells (HUVEC) were co-cultured with
Caki-1DC (Sunitinib-resistant, developed in our lab) and Caki-1WT
(Sunitinib-sensitive) RCC cell-lines, and increased migration of HUVEC
was observed with Caki-1DC compared to Caki-1WT. A drastic increase in
YB1 and its downstream target ABCB1 in Caki-1DC compared to Caki-1WT
cells was also detected. Consistent with previous reports, we observed
granular structures in the Caki-1DC cells that support potential
secretion of YB1 into the tumor microenvironment. Moreover, blocking
ABCB1 reverted the Caki-1DC cells to being drug-sensitive.

Experimental procedures: Caki-1WT and Caki-1DC were co-cultured with
HUVEC cells followed by scratch assay to test for HUVEC cell migration
and associated secretory factors. Western blot and qPCR were used to
determine the protein and mRNA levels respectively between the two
cell-lines. Immuno-histochemical staining was carried out on the RCC
tumors from Sunitinib-sensitive and resistant mouse models (developed in
our animal facility). Granular structures were observed using
immunofluorescence staining against YB1. Presto-blue was used for cell
biomass assay following different drug treatments.

Summary: The molecular function of YB1 in RCC and its potential in
targeted therapy is not well understood. Therefore, understanding the
function of YB1 in metastatic RCC and in drug-resistance development is
of vital importance. Our data suggests that inhibition of YB1 may slow
disease progression and, possibly, revert the drug resistance mechanism.
The results from this study have the potential to introduce YB1
inhibitors in conventional RCC chemotherapy, alone or in combination, to
improve survival in advanced kidney cancer patients.


