Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Soluble lung-derived selectins promote breast cancer cell
migration.


Ninety percent of all breast cancer-related deaths are attributed to
metastasis, as current therapies are largely non-curative in the
metastatic setting. One of the most common sites of breast cancer
metastasis is the lung. Previous work from our lab has demonstrated that
there are over 70 soluble factors produced by murine lung tissue, many of
which have been associated with cancer cell growth, migration, invasion
and metastasis. However, the relative contribution of each individual
factor in enhancing the metastatic behavior of breast cancer cells has
not been examined in detail. Three of the identified soluble lung-derived
proteins are E-, L- and P-selectin, and these were the focus of the
current study. The selectins are a family of glycoproteins with known
physiological roles in vascular/immune cell migration, and soluble
selectins have been clinically observed to be elevated in the sera of
cancer patients. We hypothesized that soluble lung-derived selectins
enhance the metastatic behavior of breast cancer cells. We used a 2D ex
vivo model of the soluble lung microenvironment, generated by isolating
conditioned media from dissociated healthy murine lung. E-, L- and
P-selectin were then individually immunodepleted from the
lung-conditioned media (lung-CM) and the subsequent functional effect on
breast cancer cell migration and proliferation was assessed using
transwell migration and BrdU incorporation assays, respectively.
MDA-MB-231 and SUM149PT human breast cancer cells demonstrated
significantly enhanced cell migration toward lung-CM relative to basal
media, and this migration was significantly reduced when E-, L- or
P-selectin were depleted (pNinety percent of all breast cancer-related
deaths are attributed to metastasis, as current therapies are largely
non-curative in the metastatic setting. One of the most common sites of
breast cancer metastasis is the lung. Previous work from our lab has
demonstrated that there are over 70 soluble factors produced by murine
lung tissue, many of which have been associated with cancer cell growth,
migration, invasion and metastasis. However, the relative contribution of
each individual factor in enhancing the metastatic behavior of breast
cancer cells has not been examined in detail. Three of the identified
soluble lung-derived proteins are E-, L- and P-selectin, and these were
the focus of the current study. The selectins are a family of
glycoproteins with known physiological roles in vascular/immune cell
migration, and soluble selectins have been clinically observed to be
elevated in the sera of cancer patients. We hypothesized that soluble
lung-derived selectins enhance the metastatic behavior of breast cancer
cells. We used a 2D ex vivo model of the soluble lung microenvironment,
generated by isolating conditioned media from dissociated healthy murine
lung. E-, L- and P-selectin were then individually immunodepleted from
the lung-conditioned media (lung-CM) and the subsequent functional effect
on breast cancer cell migration and proliferation was assessed using
transwell migration and BrdU incorporation assays, respectively.
MDA-MB-231 and SUM149PT human breast cancer cells demonstrated
significantly enhanced cell migration toward lung-CM relative to basal
media, and this migration was significantly reduced when E-, L- or
P-selectin were depleted (p<0.05). In contrast, although MDA-MB-231 and
SUM149PT human breast cancer cells demonstrated significantly enhanced
cell proliferation in response to lung-CM relative to basal media
(p0.05). Ongoing studies are aimed at elucidating the pathways through
which soluble lung-derived selectins exert their pro-migratory function.
If these results implicate a common receptor and downstream signalling
pathways for all three selectins, these ligand-receptor interactions may
have value as potential therapeutic targets for the prevention of
pulmonary metastasis in breast cancer patients.


