Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Perfusion-based bioreactor culture of primary cancer tissue
maintains tumor microenvironment complexity and allow in-vitro testing of
immune blockade therapy.


In vitro culture of primary cancer tissue is still very limited and the
generation of patient derived xenograft determine the loss of
human-cancer associated stroma. In this context, the use of 3D in vitro
systems based on human tissue may be an innovative system to be exploited
for keeping the tumor microenvironment (TME) complexity of the tissue in
vitro.

Freshly excised colorectal (CRC) and breast cancer (BrCa) specimens were
fragmented and cultured in 3D “sandwich-like format” between porous
collagen scaffolds under perfusion flow (U-CUP, Cellec Biotek AG). The
maintenance of tumor and immune-infiltrating cells, survival and
phenotypic characterization were histologically assessed. In a second
step cancer treatment were tested.

U-CUP culture allowed the preservation, viability and expansion of tumor
tissue with concomitant stromal and immune cells. Expanding cancer cells
were viable after 10 and 21 days (CRC and BrCa, respectively).
Administration of anti-ER treatment to Lumina A ER+ BrCa was associated
with decreased expansion of cancer tissue into the scaffold after 21
days. The maintenance of immune-infiltrating cells allowed testing of
immune blockade therapy. Administration of anti-PDL1 antibody, alone or
in combination with anti-CTLA4, to the culture medium was associated with
increased expression of markers of immune-activation (i.e. IFNγ) and
decreased expression of immunosuppressive cytokine IL10.

Preserving malignant, interstitial and immunocompetent cells comprised in
surgically excised tumor specimens might allow a direct evaluation of the
effects of various treatments on the complex TME. This engineered in
vitro model could allow animal-free testing and it could be extended as a
platform allowing the testing of innovative approaches for the treatment
of human malignancies. Our findings shed the light on a promising system
for selecting personalized treatment based on a patient’s tumor
specific microenvironment.


