Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative cell-based assays for characterization of antibodies
targeting co-stimulatory immune checkpoint receptors.


The human immune system is regulated by a broad network of co-inhibitory
and co-stimulatory receptors that control the type, scale, and duration
of immune responses. These receptors are now recognized as promising
immunotherapy targets for the treatment of many cancers and autoimmune
diseases. Immunotherapies that block co-inhibitory receptors such as PD-1
and CTLA-4 are showing unprecedented efficacy in the treatment of some
tumors, and have generated interest in the characterization of additional
immunotherapy targets that may broaden the number of patients who can be
helped by these drugs. Immunotherapy research programs are now exploring
a wide range of both co-inhibitory (e.g. LAG-3, TIGIT, Tim-3) and
co-stimulatory (e.g. GITR, 4-1BB, OX40) receptors, individually and in
combination. Quantitative and reproducible functional bioassays are
essential tools in the development of biologics for cancer immunotherapy.
Most existing assays rely on primary cells and suffer from lengthy
protocols and high day-to-day and donor-to-donor variability. These
approaches are cumbersome, error-prone, and do not produce data of the
quality required for drug development in a quality control environment.
To address this, we have developed a suite of cell line-based reporter
bioassays for co-stimulatory immune checkpoint targets including GITR,
4-1BB, OX40, and CD40. In these assays, stable cell lines express
luciferase reporters driven by response elements under the precise
control of intracellular signals mediated by each co-stimulatory
receptor. These bioassays reflect mechanisms of action for drug
candidates designed for each co-stimulatory receptor and demonstrate high
specificity, sensitivity and reproducibility. Reporter-based bioassays
can serve as powerful tools in immunotherapy drug development for
antibody screening, potency testing and stability studies.


