Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations between biomarkers and outcome in a patient cohort
with invasive lobular carcinoma.


Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) represents only 5-15% of all breast
cancer. However, if it were an independent cancer type, it would rank as
the sixth most common cancer in women, as common as non-Hodgkin lymphoma
or melanoma. ILC is chronically understudied as a breast cancer subtype,
but compared to invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) ILC is more often
HR-positive, HER2-negative, and lower histologic grade. Despite these
favorable tumor characteristics, recent studies suggest outcome in ILC is
not consistent with these favorable characteristics. We herein describe
our single institution experience with ILC. Using cancer registry data,
we identified 709 women over the age of 18 (including 85 with
recurrences) diagnosed at our institution between 1990 and 2011 with
HR-positive, early-stage (I-III), primary ILC and potentially available
banked tissue samples. We implemented a case-cohort design to investigate
molecular tumor characteristics associated with ILC prognosis. Patients
were excluded for a history of synchronous bilateral breast cancer at the
time of diagnosis, a prior history of invasive breast cancer, or a
diagnosis of non-breast malignancy within 5 years prior to their
diagnosis of ILC. Originally, a sample of 200 subjects was selected for
further study and molecular characterization. However, tissue
acquisition, subject eligibility and verification of recurrences yielded
a sample of in total 131 subjects (including 33 with recurrences), and
the case-cohort design was recreated for this final sample. All available
information regarding patient and tumor characteristics, treatment
history, and outcome was collected from medical records. ER, PR, and Ki67
protein (IHC) and RNA (Nanostring analysis) levels were analyzed with
respect to outcome of patients. PR H-score, but not ER H-score, was
significantly associated with survival in our overall ILC cohort. In the
case-cohort analysis there was a weak correlation between ER, PR and Ki67
RNA levels (measured by nanostring) and ER, PR and Ki67 protein levels
(measured by IHC) in the ILC tumor samples. After the Nanostring data was
normalized, box plots were constructed for ESR1, PR and MKI67 so that a
simple t-test could look at gene expression in recurrences and
non-recurrences. There was no significant difference in ER expression
between non-recurrences and recurrences. The recurrence cases had
significantly lower PR expression levels. We will present quantitative ER
and PR data, as well as detailed clinical characteristics for this cohort
in relation to outcome.


