Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of novel high-plex protein spatial profiling
quantitation based on NanoString's Digital Spatial Profiling (DSP)
technology with quantitative fluorescence (QIF).


Background: Protein expression in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) tissue is routinely measured by Immunohistochemistry (IHC) on only
one protein, or with quantitative fluorescence (QIF) on a handful of
proteins on a single section. NanoString’s Digital Spatial Profiling
(DSP)* technology can detect and quantify proteins at significantly
higher multiplex (currently 30 plex, potential for up to 800 plex) with
spatial resolution using molecular digital color-coded “barcodes”,
within specific regions of interest on FFPE tissue. Here, we compare
Nanostring DSP technology to automated QIF (AQUA), for accurate and
reproducible measurement of protein expression on a continuous scale.
Additionally, using the multiplexing potential of Nanostring technology,
we did a pilot study to assess cold ischemic time as a variable to
monitor tissue quality by assessment of epitope degradation in Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC).

Methods: The DSP technology uses a cocktail of primary antibodies
conjugated to indexing DNA oligos with a UV Photocleavable linker that
can be counted on the nCounter™ platform. Regions of interest (ROI) on
the tissue are selected with fluorescently labeled antibodies, and oligos
from that region are released via UV mediated linker cleavage. Free
oligos are captured via microcapillary fluidics into a microtiter plate
and then quantitated on the nCounter. The comparator for this technology
was the AQUA method of QIF. We examined a breast cancer tissue microarray
with a range of HER2 expression, and a NSCLC time to fixation
standardization array with timepoints from 20 min to 48 hrs.

Results: Multiple markers were assessed and a high correlation was found
between Nanostring DSP counts and QIF scores (R²>0.7), when the
measurements were performed in the same region of interest (defined by
cytokeratin expression). The dynamic range of DSP exceeded the
quantification range of QIF (nearly 4 logs vs about 2 logs). When the 28
protein markers’ expression was compared at different fixation
timepoints, most were found to be stable over different cold ischemic
timepoints. Two markers, including phospho-ERK (Extracellular
Signal-Regulated Kinases) and phospho-GSK (Glycogen Synthase Kinase)
showed epitope loss as a function of delay to fixation (R²=0.0064 and
R²=0.05 respectively).

Conclusion: The Nanostring DSP is a reproducible method with the
capability of highly multiplexed measurements of protein expression on a
field of view averaged basis. It shows high concordance with the AQUA
method of QIF, an extensively validated technique for protein
quantification. For the first time, the high-plex capacity of DSP allows
inclusion of markers that are sensitive to time to fixation as an
intrinsic control for tissue quality.

*FOR RESEARCH USE ONLY. Not for use in diagnostic procedures.


