Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integral modulation of nuclear factor-kappa B activation by
C/EBPβ and the endoplasmic reticulum stress sensor PERK to mediate
estrogen-induced apoptosis in estrogen-deprived breast cancer cells.


Stress responses are critical for estrogen (E2) to induce apoptosis in
E2-deprived breast cancer cells. Nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) is well
known as a therapeutic target to prevent stress responses in chronic
inflammatory diseases including cancer. However, whether E2 activates
NF-κB to participate in stress-associated apoptosis in E2-deprived
breast cancer cells is unclear. We demonstrated that E2 differentially
modulates NF-κB activity in E2-deprived breast cancer cells according to
the treatment time. Because E2 initially has significant potential to
down modulate the NF-κB activation, it completely suppresses the tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNFα)-induced NF-κB activation. We found that E2
preferentially and constantly enhances the expression of transcription
factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPβ) which is responsible
for suppression of NF-κB activation by E2 in MCF-7:5C cells. The mTOR
signaling pathway promotes repression of NF-κB by C/EBPβ which is
confirmed by the evidence that inhibition of mTOR is synergistic with E2
to upregulate NF-κB-dependent genes, such as TNFα. Interestingly,
NF-κB p65 activity is upregulated when E2-treatment is administered for
48 hours, leading to induction of TNFα. Blocking the nuclear
translocation of NF-κB completely prevents E2 from induction of TNFα
and apoptosis. Importantly, protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum
kinase (PERK), a stress sensor of unfolded protein response, is activated
by E2 and plays an essential role in increasing NF-κB p65 DNA binding
through the activation of STAT3, independently of canonical IκBα signal
pathway. Thus, inhibition of PERK kinase activity completely blocks
nuclear activation of NF-κB and NF-κB-dependent induction of TNFα,
thereby preventing E2-induced apoptosis. All of these findings illustrate
a crucial role for the novel PERK/NF-κB/TNFα axis in E2-induced
apoptosis which is integrally modulated by the stress responsive
transcription factor C/EBPβ and endoplasmic reticulum stress. This study
provides an important rationale for exercising caution in clinical trials
when considering targeting PERK or NF-κB following the development of
acquired resistance to aromatase inhibitors whereas mTOR may be a target
to enhance the therapeutic effects of E2 in antihormone resistant breast
cancer.


