Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: No association between vitamin K intake and prostate cancer risk
in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial
(PLCO).


Prostate cancer is one of the most common cancers worldwide. The etiology
of prostate cancer largely remains unclear, with almost all established
risk factors (e.g. age, race, family history) being not modifiable.
Ecological, migrant, and temporal trend studies suggest that diet plays
role in the occurrence of prostate cancer, but few nutrients that alter
its risk have been identified from case-control and cohort studies.
Vitamin K has two forms that naturally occur in foods, i.e.,
phylloquinone (vitamin K1) and menaquinone (vitamin K2). While
phylloquinone is abundant in green leafy vegetables and some vegetable
oils, menaquinone is primarily derived from fermented food products (e.g.
cheese). Although experimental studies have shown that vitamin K inhibits
the growth of various cancer cell lines (including prostate cancer
cells), only one epidemiologic study has investigated the association
between vitamin K intake and prostate cancer risk. In that German study,
a significant inverse association with advanced prostate cancer was
observed for menaquinone intake. The present study thus sought to
investigate the associations between intake of vitamin K (from both
dietary and supplemental sources) and the risk of total and advanced
prostate cancer among 28,356 PLCO participants. A total of 2978 cases of
prostate cancer (including 490 advanced cases) have been documented
during a median follow up of 11.8 years. Advanced prostate cancer were
defined as disease in stage II with a Gleason score of 8-10, stage III,
or stage IV. Usual dietary intake among study subjects was assessed with
Dietary Questionnaire (DQX) at baseline and Dietary History questionnaire
(DHQ) at year 3, both of which were developed and validated by the
National Cancer Institute. Dietary intake of phylloquinone and
menaquinones were calculated using the USDA National Nutrient Database
for Standard Reference (Release 23), supplemented with menaquinone data
from published studies. Cox proportional hazards regression was performed
to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for
dietary intake of phylloquinone and menaquinones in relation to prostate
cancer risk. After adjustment for confounders, no statistically
significant associations were found between vitamin K intake estimated
from the DQX and prostate cancer risk [HR (95% CI) for the highest
quintile vs. the lowest quintile: 0.99 (0.87, 1.13) for total vitamin K,
0.99 (0.87, 1.12) for phylloquinone, and 1.02 (0.87, 1.18) for total
menaquinones]. Overall null results were also observed when additional
analysis was carried out by the stage of the disease (i.e. advanced and
non-advanced cases) and for vitamin K intake data assessed with the DHQ.
In summary, the present study revealed that intake of total vitamin K and
its two natural forms was not associated with the risk of total and
advanced prostate cancer.


