Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGFR inhibitor, AZD4547, impedes the stemness of mammary
epithelial cells in the premalignant tissues of MMTV-ErbB2 transgenic
mice.


The fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) family (FGFR1-4) of receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) regulates signaling pathways involved in cell
proliferation and differentiation. In particular, FGFR1 and FGFR2, which
are found in the terminal end buds of developing mammary ducts, play a
role in mammary development and glandular morphogenesis involving the
regulation of mammary stem cells (MaSCs) in mice. As such, a number of
FGFR inhibitors are being tested in preclinical studies and clinical
trials for anti-tumor properties. Nevertheless, reports on FGFR
inhibitor-mediated breast cancer prevention are sparse. In this study, we
aimed to investigate the anti-cancer benefits of AZD4547, a small
molecule inhibitor of FGFR1-3, on ErbB2-overexpressing breast cancer
models. We particularly focus on the effects of AZD4547 on MaSCs and
tumor-initiating cells (TICs) in the premalignant tissues of MMTV-ErbB2
transgenic mice. We first demonstrated the anti-proliferative effects of
AZD4547 (1-5 µM) on human ErbB2-overexpressing breast cancer cell lines.
We further showed that AZD4547 confers potent inhibition of the stemness
of these breast cancer cells, as indicated by significant depletion of
ALDH+ cells and impaired tumorsphere formation. To study the in vivo
effects of AZD4547 on the stemness of mammary epithelial cells (MECs),
MMTV-ErbB2 transgenic mice were administered AZD4547 (2-6 mg/kg/day) for
10 weeks (weeks 8-18 of age) during the ‘risk window’ for mammary
tumor development. Histopathological analysis indicated that AZD4547
significantly inhibited ductal branching and MEC proliferation. To
examine the effect of AZD4547 on MEC subpopulations and tissue hierarchy
dynamics in the premalignant mammary tissues of this model, we performed
flow cytometry analyses on the primary MECs using CD24/CD49f and
CD61/CD49f cell surface markers. The results showed that AZD4547
treatment substantially reduced MaSC-derived luminal and myoepithelial
cell populations. AZD4547 also selectively suppressed the
CD61highCD49fhigh cell population, which is enriched with luminal
progenitor cells that give rise to TICs during MMTV-ErbB2 mammary tumor
development. Mammosphere and colony-forming cell (CFC) assays on primary
MECs demonstrated that the stemness of these cells was also blocked by
AZD4547 prior to malignant transformation. Consistently, AZD4547
inhibited the anchorage-independent growth of cells from spontaneous
tumors. Moreover, we demonstrated that AZD4547 downregulated multiple
pathways, including the inactivation of FGFR, EGFR, and Wnt/β-catenin
signaling. Collectively, the morphogenic, MaSC/TIC, and signaling
regulation associated with AZD4547 treatment provides critical evidence
for AZD4547 as a breast cancer preventative and therapeutic agent, which
ultimately reveals clues for more effective eradication of refractory
mammary tumors.


