Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetic study of RCHOP protocol in elderly patients with
non-Hodgkin lymphoma.


Background : Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common
lymphoma in elderly patients and R-CHOP chemotherapy is the standard
treatment protocol for DLBCL. Elderly patients (often defined as 75 years
of age) are treated with anticancer drugs with precaution; however, the
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics (PK and PD) of these agents have
not been thoroughly investigated in this population. In this study we
investigated the PK of cyclophosphamide (CP) and doxorubicin (DOX) in
elderly patients in order to verify if there is an influence of age on
the PK of these anticancer drugs.

Methods: Non-Hodgkin lymphoma elderly patients were treated with a
R-miniCHOP chemotherapy regimen. Dose levels were 25 mg/m², 0.7-1.4
mg/m², 750 mg/m² and 375 mg/m² for DOX, Vincristin (VCR), CP and
Rituximab respectively. For PK analysis, 7 time point samples were
collected over 48 h post administraion on cycle 3. CP and VIN plasma
concentrations were measured using UPLC-MS/MS validated method. DOX
plasma concentrations were measured using UPLC coupled with fluorescence
detection validated method. PK-POP modeling has been performed with a non
linear mixed effect model program (Monolix version 4.3.2).

Results: 31 patients (15 males and 16 females), 75 to 96 years old, were
treated with DOX and CYP. Among them, 19 patients have received VCR. A
total of 134 and 120 concentrations for DOX and CP were used respectively
for PK-POP modeling. A 2-compartment open model adequately described DOX
concentration versus time courses. A 1-compartment open model adequately
described CP concentration versus time courses. The interindividual
variabilities (ISV) could be well estimated for both drugs and for all
structural parameters (clearances: CL, Q, volumes of distribution: Vc,
Vp) except V for CP. The population PK parameters for DOX obtained for
the structural model were: CL=54.5 L/h, Q=54.7 L/h, Vc=30.6 L , Vp= 1140
L. The population PK parameters for CP were: CL=3.49 L/h, Vc=29.2 L. VCR
increases DOX Vc from 30.6 L to 56.9L L/h (p =0.0012). The main covariate
effects were related to gender, age, BW and to albumin.

Conclusions: In this study we have estimated with very good precision PK
parameters of DOX and CP in very elderly patients with DLBCL. Our data
revealed the effect of gender, BW and VCR administration on DOX PK
parameters. We have demonstrated the effect of increasing age on PK of
CP. A PK-PD modeling will be performed in order to verify there are
biological factors explaining the variation in the PK parameters of DOX
and CP in elderly patients.


