Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromosome 3q22-29 amplification is linked to increased expression
of multiple genes in key pathways deregulated in head and neck cancer
tumors and cell lines.


As part of the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Network, our comprehensive
genomic analysis of 279 head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs)
found frequent chromosomal copy number variation (CNV) and mutations of
potential biologic and therapeutic importance. This underscored an urgent
need to identify cell line models that harbor genomic alterations
representative of HNSCC. We performed whole exome-DNA and transcriptome
RNA sequencing on 15 human papillomavirus HPV(−) and 11 HPV(+) HNSCC
cell lines. HNSCC lines harbored chromosome gains (3q, 5p, 7p, 8q, 11q)
and losses (3p, 5q, 8p, 9p, 18q), consistent with those found in HNSCC
tumors by TCGA and previous karyotype studies. Integrative genome-wide
analysis of CNV with gene expression uncovered over 1500 genes that
display significant correlation between CNV and gene expression in both
TCGA tumors and cell lines. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis revealed multiple
genes that converge on key pathways and functions deregulated in HNSCC,
including PI3K/AKT/mTOR, NF-κB, RAS/MAPK, TP53, death receptor
signaling, inflammation, and differentiation. Intriguingly, 103 genes
displaying significant amplification and increased expression were
predominately located on chromosome 3q22-29. These genes encode
components involved in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR, Hippo, TGF-beta and
Wnt/beta-catenin pathways, cell cycle, translational and
post-translational regulation, and mitochondrial biosynthesis. Fisher’s
exact test and survival analysis showed significant co-occurrence and
worse overall survival of 3q26.3 amplification and TP53 mutation in HNSCC
patients from TCGA datasets; 3q26.3 encompasses 53 genes including
PIK3CA, PLD1, ACTL6A and SOX2. HNSCC cell lines also harbor common
mutations found in TCGA, such as TP53, FAT1 and NOTCH1, and novel and
rare tumor suppressor genes, such as MYH9. Our findings suggest that
these cell lines could serve as models for mechanistic studies and
pharmacologic screening, and investigation of genomic and expression
alterations as potential biomarkers for precision diagnosis and prognosis
of HNSCC.

(Supported by NIDCD/NIH intramural projects ZIA-DC-000073, ZIA-DC-000074.

This study utilized the high-performance computational capabilities of
the Biowulf Linux cluster at the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD. (http://biowulf.nih.gov).)


