Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In silico analysis of enhanced radiosensitivity in radiation
treatment combined with androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer.


The purpose of this study is to quantitatively analyze the improved
radiosensitivity of prostate cancer cells to ionizing radiation (IR) when
radiation treatment is combined with androgen deprivation therapy (ADT).
The double strand breaks (DSBs) induced by ionizing radiation are
repaired primarily by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). It is reported
in the literature that NHEJ is impaired after ADT, which then results in
increased radiosensitivity and better IR treatment outcomes in prostate
cancer. In this study, we have used our models for NHEJ repair of DSBs
under IR treatment and IR + ADT combination treatment conditions to
determine how the combination treatment results in better outcomes. We
have modeled the effect of multiple doses of IR that are delivered 24
hours apart to mimic the conventional, fractionated radiation treatment.
The analysis results showed that the DSBs accumulate more in the case of
combined treatment with ADT compared to faster and more efficient repair
when only IR is applied. We have used the experimental data on relative
cell numbers and relative sub-G1 cell numbers from the literature to
determine the difference in the levels of DSBs that lead to cell death
differences between the two treatment strategies. The literature data
also shows that there is patient response variability to ADT in terms of
the reduction in the levels of Ku70/80, which is the first NHEJ protein
complex that is recruited to DSBs. We have modeled this patient
variability in our models by introducing variability to Ku70/80 protein
concentrations used in the simulations. Our simulation results agree with
the observation from clinical data that lower concentration levels of
Ku70/80 lead to better radiosensitization. The amount of IR can be
adjusted with respect to the level of radiosensitization after ADT on a
patient specific level to achieve a desired level of DSBs that will lead
to maximum cell death; this dose optimization effort will be the next
step in our quantitative analysis.


