Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Large-scale ex vivo generation of human neutrophils from cord
blood CD34+ cells.


Ex vivo expansion of hematopoietic stem cell and subsequent
differentiation into mature neutrophils remains a challenge. Here, we
have developed a three-stage culture system to produce efficiently
functional neutrophils derived from cord blood CD34+ cells. A procedure
of ex vivo expansion and differentiation in a large-scale was developed
in a modified IMDM basal medium supplemented with transferrin, insulin,
fetal bovine serum, and some other nutrients with selected cytokine
combination that contained stem cell factor (SCF), Flt-3 ligand (FL),
granulocyte-colony stimulating factor(G-CSF), granulocyte macrophage
colony-stimulating factor(GM-CSF) and thrombopoietin (TPO) in stage I
(days 0~6); SCF, FL, G-CSF, interleukin 3 (IL-3), and GM-CSF in stage II
(days 6~9); SCF, FL, and G-CSF in stage III (days 9~18), respectively.
Enriched CD34+ cells were firstly cultured and expanded in 25-T flasks.
After 6 day-culture, the cells were transferred to a 2-L bottle with 500
ml of medium in the bottle-turning device system. During the
differentiation process, neutrophil marker CD66b was evaluated by flow
cytometry. Ex vivo generated neutrophils or medium only were incubated
with E.coli overnight for its bacteria killing assay, and then the E.coli
colony-forming units were counted separately. Matured neutrophils or
vehicle were transplanted into NOD/SCID mice intravenously for
chemotactic activity in vivo. The cells that accumulated in the pouch
with chemoattractant were collected and subjected to flow cytometric
analysis for human CD66b antigen. The ex vivo generated
neutrophils/progenitors were then injected into sub-lethal irradiated
NOD/SCID mice to monitor the viability and maturation in vivo. After the
three-stage culture, proliferation fold of total cell reached 30013 ±
286.5 with 60.2% ± 2.4% for CD66b+ neutrophils. The calculated yield of
matured neutrophils from each CD34+ cell was ranged from 1.8 × 104 to
1.87 × 104 for 18-day culture. There was no E.coli colony formed after
incubation with neutrophils in bacteria killing assay, indicating that
the generated neutrophils was functional. For in vivo chemotaxis assay,
the neutrophils collected from 18-day culture were injected into mice and
detected at 1.08% ±0.16% for human CD66b+ cells and no any CD66b+ cell
observed for negative control group. In addition, the CD66b+ cells were
extended for 4 days from a 15-day cultured neutrophil group in mouse
peripheral blood (PB), while only for 2 days from a freshly isolated
human PB neutrophils post injection, indicating that the ex vivo
generated neutrophils/progenitors could further matured in vivo. Taken
together, we have established a pilot-scale culture system to produce
functional human neutrophils ex vivo. Considering that one neutrophil
transfusion unit (100ml) contains 2×1010 cells, the CD34+ cells from one
CB unit (80 ml) would generate 1.6×1011 neutrophils, which are
equivalent to 8 unit doses of neutrophils in the clinical application.


