Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microrna signature as a potential biomarker for predicting
survival in colon cancer.


Background: Colon cancer is one of the most common cancers with
increasing incidence and high mortality worldwide. Prognosis and choice
of treatment is largely based on the tumor stage at presentation. Thus,
finding novel biomarkers for predicting survival is highly desirable.
Lately, several studies have been looking at microRNAs (miRNAs) in
several cancers, including colon cancer. MicroRNAs are conserved,
non-coding RNA molecules that play an important role in the regulation of
post-transcriptional gene expression.

Material and Methods: In the present study, we have profiled miRNA in one
hundred and seventy two TNM stage I-IV colon cancer patients and 10
corresponding normal colon tissue samples. Total RNA was extracted from
freshly frozen tissues, and the expression of miRNA profile were assessed
using Pick and Mix focus panels from Exiqon containing 84 miRNAs that
have been linked to cancer.

Results: The results were visualized in a heatmap (Qlucore omics
Software) and more than 20 miRNAs were found to be differentially
expressed in tumors compared to the normal colon. Further, twelve miRNAs
were found to discriminate between relapse and no-relapse patients in
TNM- stage II and III, and four of these miRNAs (miR-23a, miR-25, miR-30d
and miR-31) were found to be statistically significant in binary logistic
regression with relapse as outcome variable. In univariate analysis, low
expression of the four-miRNA signature was associated with better 3-year
disease-free survival (DFS), 88 % versus 63% in low versus high
signature, respectively (P=0.001). Moreover, the signature was a
predictor of poor relapse-free survival in multivariate analyses
(P=0.001; HR 31; 95% CI: 3.8-248.9). Another regression analyses method
(LASSO) identified a 16-miRNA signature, and the four miRNAs found
earlier were among them. The 16-miRNA signature was associated with
better survival (PResults: The results were visualized in a heatmap
(Qlucore omics Software) and more than 20 miRNAs were found to be
differentially expressed in tumors compared to the normal colon. Further,
twelve miRNAs were found to discriminate between relapse and no-relapse
patients in TNM- stage II and III, and four of these miRNAs (miR-23a,
miR-25, miR-30d and miR-31) were found to be statistically significant in
binary logistic regression with relapse as outcome variable. In
univariate analysis, low expression of the four-miRNA signature was
associated with better 3-year disease-free survival (DFS), 88 % versus
63% in low versus high signature, respectively (P=0.001). Moreover, the
signature was a predictor of poor relapse-free survival in multivariate
analyses (P=0.001; HR 31; 95% CI: 3.8-248.9). Another regression analyses
method (LASSO) identified a 16-miRNA signature, and the four miRNAs found
earlier were among them. The 16-miRNA signature was associated with
better survival (P<0.001).

Conclusion: The present study has identified a four-miRNA signature
predicting relapse in colon cancer stage II and III patients.


