Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemoresistant cancer stem cells undergo gene changes that drive
tumor recurrence.


Despite the efficacy of chemotherapy, resistant cells are thought to
contribute to tumor recurrence. In vitro models of recurrence must mimic
the complexity and heterogeneity of in vivo tumors and provide the
longevity needed to capture tumor dormancy following chemotherapy. We
have previously described a 3D in vitro model that simulates in vivo
tumors containing cancer stem cell niches. Encapsulation of murine renal
adenocarcinoma (RENCA) cells in a double layer of agarose that form
spherical macrobeads allows for the development of 3D tumor colonies
comprised of tumor-initiating and tumor-amplifying cells within the inner
agarose matrix. In the current study, we used the RENCA macrobead in
combination with chemotherapy to evaluate genetic regulation that allows
tumor dormancy and drives recurrence.

RENCA macrobeads treated with docetaxel (5 μg/ml) undergo a significant
loss of cell mass and a period of latency followed by tumor recurrence.
RNA isolated from docetaxel-resistant cells (Wk.6 post-treatment),
recurrent tumors (Wk.20 post-treatment) and paired vehicle controls were
characterized using whole-transcriptome profiling (GeneChip® WT Pico Kit
with Transciptome Analysis Console; Affymetrix).

At Wk.6 post-treatment, genes associated with a stem cell phenotype
(Car12, Arrb1, Nos2, Aldh1l2) and members of the ABC1 family associated
with multidrug resistance were enriched in docetaxel-resistant cells.
Genes regulating the canonical Wnt signaling pathway, specifically LRP
family members, were significantly up regulated. Pathway analysis
revealed dysregulated focal adhesion-PI3K-Akt-mTor-signaling, including
genes modulating integrin adhesion (Itga5, Itga7), ECM receptor
interaction (Lama5, Lamb2, Lamc1) and actin cytoskeletal remodeling
(Vcl). Supporting the quiescent nature of the docetaxel-resistant
population, genes implicated in DNA replication (Dbf4, Cdc6, Mcm5),
transcriptional initiation (Taf13, Gtf2h1, Polr2i) and tumor progression
(Mmp3, Mmp13) were significantly down regulated.

At Wk.20 post-treatment, up regulation of matrix metalloproteinases
(Mmp13) and partial retention of stem cell (Nos2, Car12) and drug
resistant (Abcb1) genes supports the evolution of regenerated tumors to a
metastatic phenotype. Genes involved in fatty acid β-oxidation (Acsl5,
Lipf), oxidative phosphorylation (ND3, ND6) and the electron transport
chain (COX2) were down regulated in concert with up regulation of Me2
suggesting reduced flux through the TCA cycle and use of aerobic
glycolysis in rapidly growing cells.

This study further supports the RENCA macrobead as a model system to
evaluate the biology of chemotherapy-resistant cells and tumor recurrence
in a 3D microenvironment. These data are in line with the notion that
chemotherapy-resistant cells exhibit a period of quiescence with a stem
cell-like gene profile and experience an intrinsic transformation towards
an invasive phenotype that drives tumor recurrence.


