Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular and genomic characterization of a newly established male
breast cancer cell line.


Although the majority of breast cancers affect women, approximately 1% of
cases occur in men. At present comparatively little is known about the
molecular mechanisms that influence male breast cancer predisposition and
tumorigenicity. This is largely due to the current unavailability of an
established cell line model in which to study male breast cancer.
Development of in vitro models of the disease is therefore warranted, not
least because growing evidence indicates that it is sufficiently
different from female breast cancer such that extrapolating knowledge
from one to the other may be misleading.

Here we report the establishment and characterisation of a male breast
cancer cell line derived from a primary tumor arising in a 61-year old
male patient. We used 3T3-J2 mouse fibroblast co-culture in the presence
of a ROCK inhibitor to conditionally reprogram epithelial cells from
freshly resected tumor tissue. Once established, the cell line showed a
rapid proliferation rate and growth in full conditioned media without the
support of mouse fibroblasts. Immunohistochemical profiling demonstrated
expression of epithelium-specific antigens AE1/AE3, breast epithelial
marker CK7 and confirmed estrogen receptor positivity in concordance with
the primary tumor. Germline sequencing detected no pathogenic germline
predisposition mutations in either BRCA1 or BRCA2. There was no evidence
of somatic mutation in any of the established female breast cancer driver
genes. Somatic whole genome sequencing of early and late passages
indicated a paucity of structural aberration and little evidence for
obvious accumulation of gross genetic alterations.

In conclusion, we have established a novel in vitro model for studying
male breast cancer. That the cell line genome displays minimal evidence
of significant acquired genetic changes arising due to reprogramming
suggests that it will be of value in future studies of the biology of
male breast cancer.


