Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BGB-A425: a humanized anti-human Tim-3 antibody that exhibits
strong immune cell activation.


Background: Tim-3 (T-cell immunoglobin and mucin-domian containing-3) is
a “checkpoint” inhibitory receptor, which is primarily expressed in
activated or “exhausted” T cells, NK cells, macrophages and DCs.
Engagement of Tim-3 receptor by its ligand phosphatidylserine (PtdSer) or
galectin-9 leads to activation of negative regulatory signaling in
T-cells, promoting functional exhaustion of tumor-infiltrating
T-lymphocytes. BGB-A425 is a novel humanized IgG1 (variant) anti-Tim-3
antibody under preclinical development. The immunomodulatory activity of
BGB-A425 was evaluated both in vitro and in vivo.

Materials and methods: BGB-A425 was generated through hybridoma fusion,
humanized by CDR grafting and structural simulation. The Fc region (IgG1)
of BGB-A425 was engineered to remove Fc gamma receptor (FcγR) binding.
The binding affinity and specificity were studied by ELISA, FACS and SPR
(Biacore). The immunomodulatory functions of BGB-A425 were evaluated
using primary immune cells as well as cell lines.

Results: BGB-A425 binds to the extracellular domain of human Tim-3 with
high affinity (KD = 0.36 nM) and specificity. In a competition assay,
BGB-A425 efficiently blocks the interactions between Tim-3 and PtdSer. In
vitro, BGB-A425 significantly enhances IFN-γ production of primary T
cells and NK-mediated cytotoxicity against tumor cells. In a MLR assay,
BGB-A425 augments T-cell response to allogeneic antigens either alone or
in combination with an anti-PD-1 antibody BGB-A317. Besides blocking
Tim-3, BGB-A425 can also induce the internalization of Tim-3 receptor on
cell surface. In vivo, BGB-A425 in combination with BGB-A317 inhibits
tumor growth in a mouse xenograft cancer model.

Conclusions: BGB-A425 demonstrates potent activity to stimulate immune
cell function both in vitro and in vivo, supporting its clinical
development for the treatment of human cancers.


