Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of two key long non coding RNAs involved in
reprogramming, linc-ROR and lin-P21, in gastric cancer.


Introduction: Gastric cancer (GC) is the second leading cause of
cancer-related death in the world and the most common cancer in southeast
of Caspian Sea (Golestan province) and northwest of Iran (Ardabil). Based
on cancer stem cell (CSC) hypothesis, there are similarities between
process of somatic cell reprogramming, embryogenesis and tumorigenesis.
Malfunction of signaling pathways that are essential for normal
development also involved in the tumor initiation and CSC formation. In
recent years long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), more than 200 nt in length,
have been highly regarded as promising biomarkers for early diagnosis and
prognosis of cancers. Reprogramming-Related Long Intergenic Noncoding RNA
(lincRNA-ROR) plays as modulator in the reprogramming of human induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and also maintenance of embryonic stem
cells (ESCs). On the other hand, lincRNA-P21 induced by P53 and prevents
the somatic cell reprogramming by silencing of pluripotency gene
promoters. In this project, motivate to CSCs, we evaluated the expression
level of lincRNA-ROR and linc-P21 in samples of patients with gastric
cancer and also in human gastric cancer cell lines (AGS and MKN45) and
human embryonal carcinoma cell line (NT2).

Methods: Thirty pairs of gastric samples, including gastric
adenocarcinoma and their matched non-tumor tissue samples, were collected
from the Iran National Tumor Bank (INTB). Cell lines were cultured in the
RPMI1640. Total RNA of samples and cell lines was extracted using TRIZOL
reagent (invitrogene). cDNA synthesis was performed by PrimeScript™ 1st
strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (TAKARA) and real time PCR was performed by
using TaqMan master mix (TAKARA) on Step one Plus™ instrument (ABI).
Gene expression analysis performed by GenEx software program.

Results: Despite of reports indicating the high expression of linc-ROR in
some cancers, our results showed no expression for linc-ROR in gastric
samples (both tumor and non tumor) and also gastric cancer cell lines.
But NT2 embryonal carcinoma cell line revealed high expression of
linc-ROR compared to AGS and MKN45cell lines. According to our
expectation, linc-P21 represents a significant decrease in tumor versus
non tumor samples (pResults: Despite of reports indicating the high
expression of linc-ROR in some cancers, our results showed no expression
for linc-ROR in gastric samples (both tumor and non tumor) and also
gastric cancer cell lines. But NT2 embryonal carcinoma cell line revealed
high expression of linc-ROR compared to AGS and MKN45cell lines.
According to our expectation, linc-P21 represents a significant decrease
in tumor versus non tumor samples (p<0.01) in different grads of
malignancy and also in AGS and MKN45 versus to NT2 cell line.

Conclusion: Dysfunction of linc-ROR and lincRNA-P21 has reported in some
cancers. According to our results, it seems that the expression of
linc-ROR is limited to embryonic stem cells and hasn’t remarkable
expression in gastric samples and cell lines. Based on the low expression
of linc-P21 in tumor samples, it seems that linc-P21 functions as a tumor
suppressor.


