Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the PIM protein kinases for the treatment of a T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia subset.


While intensive chemotherapy regimens result in remission in
approximately 80% of pediatric and 45% of adult ALL patients, new
approaches are needed for the treatment of patients with T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) who fail to achieve remission with
chemotherapy. Early T-cell precursor (ETP) ALL, a subset of T-ALL
associated with a higher rate of relapse and induction failure, with a
10-year overall survival of 19% as compared with 84% for all other
T-ALLs. PIM protein kinases are overexpressed in a number of
hematopoietic malignancies, including ALL, with its overexpression being
associated with poor prognosis. Pan-PIM inhibitors (PIMi) are being
tested in clinical trials in patients with relapsed/refractory multiple
myeloma and acute myeloid leukemia. Analysis of the effects of PIMi
(AZD1208/LGB321) on human T-ALL cell lines demonstrated that the
sensitive cell lines expressed higher PIM1 levels, whereas T-ALL cell
lines with NOTCH mutations tended to have lower levels of PIM1 kinase and
were insensitive to these inhibitors. NOTCH-mutant cells selected for
resistance to gamma secretase inhibitors developed elevated PIM1 kinase
levels and increased sensitivity to PIM inhibitors. Immunophenotype of
all the PIMi insensitive cells lines was consistent with a more mature
T-ALL phenotype. In contrast, sensitive cells, had an immature or ETP-ALL
phenotype.

Bioinformatics analysis of three independent T-ALL patient datasets
(GSE28703, E-MEXP-313, and GSE62156) demonstrated overexpression of PIM1
in the majority of ETP-ALLs and in a small subset of non-ETP-ALL. We also
identified 58 genes changing significantly between PIMi sensitive versus
insensitive cell lines that were common to the differential genes between
ETP versus non-ETP ALL cases from GSE28703, suggesting that high PIM1
expression along with 58 gene signature could be a driver of the ETP
phenotype.

Importantly, we have made the novel observation that, combination of
Ponatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) with the PIMi is
synergistically lethal to T-ALL cells with ETP phenotype. These agents
appear to work together by inducing PARP and Caspase cleavage, sufficient
to drive apoptosis. Following engraftment of NSG mice with H-SB2-Luc
cells, three weeks of dual therapy with AZD1208 (30mg/kg/day) and
Ponatinib (3mg/kg/day) significantly abrogated leukemia as evidenced by
optical scanning for luciferase cells, and reduced number of hCD45+
leukemic cells in the peripheral blood and bone marrow. Also, the dual
therapy significantly prolonged the survival of the treated mice. In
summary, our work demonstrates a strong preclinical rationale for a novel
treatment strategy of combining PIMi and TKI to treat T-ALL patients with
high PIM expression.


