Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DYRK1B inhibitors prevent pharmacologic quiescence and sensitize
lung cancers to EGFR inhibitors.


Many oncoproteins that activate signaling dysregulate cell growth by
activating the cyclinD/cdk4, cdk6 complex and abrogate in the G1
checkpoint (mutant RAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, EGFR etc.) Inhibition of these
oncoproteins inhibits cyclinD expression and kinase activity as well as
RB phosphorylation and results in G0/G1 arrest and apoptosis. It has been
posted that cells arrested in G0/G1 are protected from cell death. DYRK1B
kinase plays an important role in physiologic quiescence by maintaining
the viability of cells arrested in the G0/G1 phases of the cell cycle.
DYRK1B regulates the G0/G1 transition by phosphorylating cyclin D1 and
p27, whereby destabilizing cyclin D1 and stabilizing p27. The balance
between these two proteins is essential for maintenance of cells in G0
(quiescent) state. DYRK1B is sparsely expressed in healthy tissues yet is
overexpressed in patient samples with variety of neoplasms, including
NSCLC. Cancer and normal cells exhibit differential sensitivity to DYRK1B
inhibition. Whereas DYRK1B appears essential for survival of cancer cells
either endogenously expressed or upregulated, its inhibition in healthy
cells was not cytotoxic and had no effect on the cell cycle distribution.
We hypothesized that if DYRK1B is required for maintenance of quiescence,
its inhibition would enhance the effects of inhibitors of oncogenic
signaling. We used a selective, ATP competitive DYRK1B inhibitor to test
this idea. EGFR inhibitors are effective in non-small cell lung cancers
with mutant EGFR and induce G0/G1 block and some apoptosis. These drugs
significantly extend survival, but acquired resistance almost always
supervenes. In vitro, the anti-proliferative response of lung tumors with
mutant EGFR to EGFR inhibitors was shown to be primarily due to the entry
of cells into a quiescent (G0) state associated with an induction of
DYRK1B expression. Moreover, addition of a DYRK1B inhibitor reversed the
quiescent state in cells exposed to EGFR inhibitors. Combined therapy of
EGFR TKIs and the DYRK1B inhibitor significantly enhanced the antitumor
response compare to either drug alone. Specifically, it is shown that
treatment with osimertinib results in an increase of cells in G0 state:
63% as compared to non-treated cells, 29%. The induction of quiescence is
prevented when cells are treated with the combination of osimertinib and
DYRK1B inhibitor and massive apoptosis is observed: 62% compared to 12%
with osimertinib alone. It is important to note that co-treatment with
DYRK1B inhibitor not only prevented the entry of cancer cells into
quiescence but also depleted pre-existent reservoir of quiescent cancer
cells. The results suggest that inhibition of EGFR causes tumor cells to
enter into a DYRK1B-dependent quiescent state in which DYRK1B is required
for their survival. Inhibition of DYRK1B dramatically enhances the
antitumor activity of EGFR inhibition and may improve outcome in patients.


