Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel immunodeficient rat for modeling human cancer.


Animal models of human cancer offer the potential to study human tumor
growth kinetics, genetic variance among human cancers, and provide in
vivo platforms for drug efficacy testing. In particular, immunodeficient
mouse models have been invaluable in modeling a wide range of human
cancers. However, some cancer lines don’t grow well in the available
mouse models or show variability in growth kinetics from mouse to mouse,
making drug efficacy studies difficult due to differences in tumor size
at the onset of treatment. These challenges are also seen in patient
derived xenograft (PDX) models, in addition to long timeframes to obtain
sufficient mice with PDX tissue growth for drug efficacy studies. Mice
are also limited in tumor growth potential with regard to humane
endpoints and small size also limits the volume of blood that can be
collected for analysis. An immunodeficient rat model could provide a
solution to some of these issues. A rat model would allow for larger
tumor size, easier surgical manipulation, and greater volume of tissue
and blood sampling for downstream analysis. In addition, large tumors
from rats could be serially transplanted into mice for drug efficacy
testing and could provide a large number of transplanted mice in a
shorter period of time compared with serially transplanting from mouse to
mouse.

We have created an immunodeficient rat model with a functional deletion
of the Rag2 gene. This knockout, created using spermatogonial stem cells,
lacks mature B and T cells. To assess the capability of the Rag2 knockout
rat to accept human xenografts, we transplanted 2 commercially available
human cancer cell lines into our animals. The human REH acute lymphocytic
leukemia cell line was transplanted via intravenous injection and the
human glioblastoma cell line U87MG was transplanted subcutaneously. Both
cell lines survived in the Rag2 knockout rat and resulted in the growth
of tumors comprised of human cells. Studies are underway to characterize
the Rag2 knockout rat’s ability to grow other human cell lines,
including those that do not grow well in mice, and PDX tissues.


