Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The fate of germline BRCA related mutations in breast tumor
tissues.


Background - aim: Germline mutation carriers in BRCA1 and related genes
frequently develop triple-negative breast carcinomas (TNBC) that
presumably preserve the inherited mutation. Herein, we examined the
clinicopathologic features and prognostic impact of paired germline and
tumor genotypes in this disease.

Methods: We compared baseline germline and paraffin tumor genotype data
(next generation [NGS] and Sanger sequencing) from 194 patients with
operable TNBC who were treated with anthracyclines-taxanes based
chemotherapy within adjuvant trials by our Group. Because tissue NGS did
not target BRCA-related genes, we additionally interrogated the presence
of germline mutations in tumor and non-cancerous breast tissues, in
carriers with available tissue material (n=33). We validated all NGS
germline mutations with Sanger sequencing and ensured matched
germline/tumor identity with microsatellite testing.

Results: We identified 50 (26%) germline mutation carriers, 39 in BRCA1,
4 in BRCA2 and the rest in RAD51C, BARD1, RAD50, NBN, MRE11A and BRIP1.
BRCA1 carriers were younger as compared to non-BRCA1 carriers (median
42y.o. vs. 56y.o, respectively; p=0.020), premenopausal (p=0.014), and
had lower nodal status (pA), and 2 BRCA2 mutations. In one such tumor,
the germline mutation was replaced by a somatic BRCA1 (p.Q1811X
[c.5431C>T]). Tumors with mut-LOH were more often TP53 mutant as compared
to those with preserved germline mutations, which had mutations in other
genes as well (p=0.034). Overall though, TP53 mutations were not
associated with germline status. Germline mutations and tumor TP53
mutations were not individually associated with patient disease-free
survival (DFS) but interacted with each other: in non-carriers, TP53
status did not affect outcome; in carriers, those with mutant TP53 had
unfavorable DFS compared to those with wild-type TP53 tumors (interaction
p, multivariate analysis: 0.053).

Conclusions: Germline BRCA-related TNBC may be distinguished into two
groups with potentially different biological characteristics, those with
preserved and lost inherited mutation. The interaction between germline
status and tumor TP53 mutations may have treatment implications and seems
worthy pursuing in larger studies. Combined germline/tumor genotype
testing may be needed for TNBC patient classification, especially in the
context of clinical trials.


