Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishing an experimental paradigm to study the interphase
effects of microtubule targeting agents.


Microtubule targeting agents (MTAs) are highly effective anticancer
drugs. While these drugs were traditionally classified as antimitotics,
compelling evidence suggests that the ability of MTAs to interrupt
microtubule-dependent trafficking and signaling in interphase cells
contributes to their anticancer efficacies. Previous studies of the
interphase effects of MTAs on oncogenic signaling pathways have led to an
important reevaluation of their mechanisms of anticancer actions. These
effects have been primarily reported in cells that have been treated with
MTAs for extended periods of time. However, MTAs rapidly alter
microtubule dynamics which results, within a few hours, in global changes
to gene expression and cellular signaling. We propose that evaluating the
effects of MTAs on oncogenic pathways at times and concentrations that
are associated with early microtubule disruption will allow analysis of
the initiating events that link the direct action of MTAs on microtubule
structure and dynamics to effects on interphase signaling that contribute
to anticancer efficacy. The concentrations and treatment times that were
optimal for the study of clinically used MTAs on cellular trafficking and
signaling events were first determined. Our experimental paradigm of a 2
h treatment of breast cancer cells with clinically relevant
concentrations of MTAs eliminated contributions due to mitotic
accumulation and changes in gene expression associated with longer
treatments.

While all MTAs disrupt microtubule dynamics, the differences among MTAs
in their rapid downstream effects on cellular signaling have not been
systematically evaluated. A goal of this project was to identify
differences in the effects of diverse MTAs on interphase signaling
pathways that may underlie their differential efficacy in patient
populations. This short term treatment paradigm led to the identification
of profound differences among MTAs in their ability to disrupt
Src-dependent E-cadherin re-localization, canonical and non-canonical
TGF-β signaling, and β-catenin localization. These findings demonstrate
the ability of diverse MTAs to rapidly impact interphase oncogenic
signaling and trafficking pathways. This experimental design sets forth a
method to evaluate the initial effects of diverse MTAs to gain critical
insight into their differential abilities to inhibit key oncogenic
signaling pathways. These types of studies might, in the future, help
facilitate the rational selection of specific MTAs for patients depending
on tumor characteristics. Funding for this work was provided by Eisai Inc.


