Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bazedoxifene as a novel GP130 inhibitor for the treatment of
triple-negative breast cancer.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the only subtype of breast cancer
still lacking effective therapeutic options. Thus, finding novel targets
and therapies to treat TNBC is an urgent clinical issue. IL-6 is one of
the principal oncogenic mediators in breast cancer and systemic IL-6
levels correlates with poor prognosis, advanced disease, and metastases.
Importantly, growth of TNBC cells are replied on autocrine cytokines
including IL-6. Therefore, IL-6 signaling represents a novel approach
with a potential to improve the therapeutic efficacy. To date, however,
no small molecules that target IL-6 signaling are available for clinical
cancer therapy. IL-6 binds to IL-6 Rα, then recruits GP130 to form the
IL-6/IL-6 Rα/GP130 heterotrimer and triggers a signaling cascade
downstream including JAK/STAT3, PI3-K/AKT/mTOR, and MEK/ERK. Therefore,
it is possible to target IL-6 signaling by blocking IL-6 binds to GP130
or IL-6 Rα and thus inhibiting its signaling cascade downstream.To
effectively target IL-6 signaling, we have utilized a novel drug
discovery approach combining Multiple Ligand Simultaneous Docking and
drug repurposing to target GP130, since its structure is more druggable
than IL-6 Rα. We have identified a FDA-approved drug Bazedoxifene (for
the prevention of the postmenopausal osteoporosis in postmenopausal
women) with a novel function to inhibit IL-6 and GP130 protein-protein
interactions and thus blocking IL-6 signaling cascade downstream. In this
study, we examined the therapeutic effect of Bazedoxifene on TNBC, aiming
to verify Bazedoxifene as a Novel IL-6/GP130 Inhibitor for TNBC
treatments.Our data of western blot showed Bazedoxifene inhibited
increased STAT3 phosphorylation induced by IL-6. In addition,
Bazedoxifene inhibited phosphorylation of AKT and ERK in TNBC cells that
were also produced by IL-6. Furthermore, combination of Bazedoxifene with
paclitaxel exhibited more significant inhibition than single agent alone
on cell viability in TNBC cells either in 2D or 3D culture model in
vitro. Results of colony formation showed that Bazedoxifene could
significantly inhibit cell survive and proliferation at 20 μM, which
were more effective than Evista and SC144. Moreover, Bazedoxifene could
inhibit cell migration. We tested the increased proliferation of TNBC
cells using BrdU with the added IL-6, which were then inhibited by
Bazedoxifene, demonstrating the Bazedoxifene could achieve a competed
inhibition of IL6. The result of significant inhibition of tumor growth
in vivo furtherly verified the therapeutic effects of Bazedoxifene. All
results showed the significant therapeutic effects of Bazedoxifene in
TNBC cells by competed blocking IL6 signaling. Thus, Bazedoxifene holds a
great potential for TNBC therapy.


