Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Primate pharmacology of TYG100, a vaccine employing a novel,
antigen-specific checkpoint control mechanism (S-TIR) for pancreatic and
gastroesophageal cancers.


Gastrin neutralization by active immunization with a DT-conjugated
gastrin peptide construct (G17DT) in a water-in-oil emulsion adjuvant has
been shown in several clinical trials to extend median survival for
pancreatic cancer patients declining or ineligible for chemotherapy1, as
well as those receiving standard gemcitabine therapy2. Survival benefit
was highly significant (P ≤ 0.003) for immunological responders to the
vaccine and correlated with the gastrin neutralizing capacity of the
induced immune response. However, the negative contribution of low-level
and non-immunoresponders has constrained overall (ITT) efficacy of the
progenitor vaccine, G17DT. As there is no means of predicting or
selecting for antibody responders, the efficacy of a gastrin vaccine
would be improved by increasing the immune response. TYG100 is a novel,
rationally designed, recombinant vaccine using the S-TIRTM- platform to
generate high levels of antibodies to gastrin 17 and glycine-extended
gastrin 17, proven growth hormones for several gastro-intestinal cancers.
Vaccines based on the S-TIRTM platform target CD32-expressing antigen
presenting cells, whilst activating plasmacytoid dendritic cells through
its intrinsic adjuvant activity. To confirm the first study3 and prepare
for a human trial, doses of 6.2, 30.8 and 154mcg given as an
alum-adsorbed aqueous formulation at 0, 2, 4 and 6 weeks have been
investigated in cynomolgus macaques. The highest dose produced a rapid
rise in titre to yield 150mcg/ml of IgG within 14 days of administration
of the first immunization; the lowest dose was slower in onset but
achieved clinically relevant titres by day 43. Pre- and concurrent
treatment of another group with gemcitabine at 50 mg/kg showed no
attenuation of titre. Peak titre levels of the highest dose were ≥ 3
logs higher than those previously shown to be associated with extended
survival in pancreatic cancer patients1,2. Despite these rapid onset,
high titres, no adverse effects were seen except for a minor and
transient injection site reaction in 2 of the high dose group. Functional
competence of the resulting primate antibodies was confirmed by growth
inhibition of (gastrin-dependent) HT-29 cells.

Cancer Research UK is planning to sponsor and manage a first-in-human
phase I study in patients with advanced solid tumours, evaluating safety,
tolerance and immunogenicity. The study will be undertaken by the
Experimental Cancer Medicines Centres network with the University of
Leeds as lead centre.

1 Pancreas 2012 Apr;41(3):374-9

2 Abstract no 4012, ASCO 2005 meeting publication.

3 Poster presentation, AACR 2014 annual meeting 7 Apr 2014


