Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disulfiram possesses antitumor activity and inhibits cancer
stem-like properties via inhibition of STAT3 activation in
triple-negative breast cancer cells.


Disulfiram (DSF), a clinically used treatment for alcohol dependence, is
considered as a potential anti-cancer agent due to its cytotoxicity in
many cancer cell types on copper (Cu)-dependent processes. However, the
molecular mechanisms underlying DSF-induced antitumor activity in
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) are still poorly understood. Here,
we hypothesized that DSF induces antitumor effects by targeting cancer
stem cells (CSCs) and STAT3 signaling in TNBC. We then examined the
effects of DSF in combination with Cu on the cell viability and
apoptosis, cell proliferation and survival, as well as CSC-like
properties in MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 TNBC cell lines. DSF/Cu effectively
induced cytotoxicity and apoptotic cell death, concomitant with caspase-3
activation and PARP cleavage. DSF/Cu also significantly suppressed cell
migration and mammosphere formation, which are accompanied by a
remarkable decrease in the CD44+/CD24- (or CD49f+/CD24+ in mouse 4T1
cells) stem-like population and ALDH1 activity. These effects were
functionally associated with the inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation
(Tyr705). Furthermore, DSF/Cu treatment resulted in the downregulation of
cyclin D1 and survivin expression, which are downstream targets of STAT3
signaling. Interestingly, phosphorylated STAT3 and STAT3 downstream
signaling were highly upregulated in the mammospheres, and these
upregulated molecules were significantly decreased by DSF/Cu treatment.
In MDA-MB-231-derived xenograft model, DSF administration elicited a
significant reduction in tumor growth with a noticeable downregulation of
CD44, ALDH1 and phosphorylated STAT3 levels. Taken together, our results
suggest that therapeutic treatment to DSF can effectively manifest
antitumor activity by reducing CSC-like properties, and that STAT3 could
be a key molecule of aggressive TNBC that is targeted by DSF.


