Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Copper depletion as an approach for metastatic disruption in
Triple Negative Breast Cancer.


Triple-Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) occurs in approximately 17-20% of
all breast cancer patients, and has an aggressive clinical course even in
patients with early disease stage, with peak of relapse at 3 years after
diagnosis with (35%-40%) of TNBC patients relapsing within 5 years of
diagnosis. Targeted therapies do not exist for TNBC. Recently, copper
(Cu) has emerged as an essential factor in tumor growth and metastasis
supporting the notion that Cu-depletion may serve as an attractive
therapeutic strategy. Using historical controls, a promising single arm
Phase II trial of Tetrathiomolybdate (TM) in breast cancer patients, who
were at a high-risk of relapse (Stage 3 and Stage 4 with no evidence of
disease BC and Stage 2 if triple-negative), was conducted at Weill
Cornell. At a median follow-up of 5.9 years, the progression-free
survival for all patients enrolled in this study is 72% and the overall
survival is 84%. Importantly, levels of circulating LOXL2 and VEGFR2+
endothelial progenitor cells were decreased with Cu-depletion (Chan et
al. 2016). With the knowledge about the efficacy of TM, it is currently
unknown where the effectiveness of Cu-depletion lies, whether it acts at
the pre-metastatic site, on circulating tumor cells, or at the primary
tumor site. We utilized an immunodeficient in vivo breast cancer model
that metastasizes to lungs (MDA231-LM2) in order to evaluate the effect
of Cu-depletion in metastasis, where the animals were either TM-treated
or untreated. To identify whether LOXL2 is a dominant factor downstream
of TM-Cu axis in metastasis suppression, as observed in clinical trials
(Chan et al. 2016), we used “LOXL2-depletion, Cu-repletion” strategy.
We also examined the global functional changes between TM-treated and
untreated groups for various Cu-dependent proteins and angiogenic factors
at the pre-metastatic site and primary tumors. We found that TM-treatment
in the in vivo model significantly lowered disseminated tumor cell
population in animals that were successfully Cu-depleted. Cu-depletion
also altered pre-metastatic niche formation. We are currently exploring
the effect of Cu-depletion on primary tumor and its surrounding
microenvironment that might affect tumor cell shedding, leading to
metastasis. In summary, this study holds essential groundwork for the
identification of a strong mechanistic arm for TM therapy in the
suppression of metastasis/metastatic relapse in TNBC patients. Thus,
aiding in the development of additional therapeutic options, which may be
particularly useful for a subset of TNBC patients impervious to
Cu-depletion with single-agent therapy, or for whom Cu-depletion is
insufficient to prevent metastasis, and may also be extended to other
metastatic solid tumors that are responsive to Cu-depletion therapy.


