Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unravelling the role of androgen targeted therapies in epithelial
plasticity during prostate cancer progression.


Recent evidence suggests that the use of potent androgen receptor (AR)
antagonists have contributed to the increased prevalence of prostate
cancer (PCa) tumors exhibiting therapy resistance. Androgen targeted
therapies (ATT) inhibit the androgen/AR axis which PCa cells rely on for
growth. ATT are initially effective however most men progress to
metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC). Mechanisms of
resistance include programs of epithelial plasticity (EP) such as
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and neuroendocrine
transdifferentiation (NEtD). EMT enables PCa cells to become more motile
and invasive. PCa cells that undergo NEtD gain neuroendocrine (NE)-like
traits. Patients with NE prostate cancer (NEPC) usually present with
visceral metastasis, are refractory to ATT and have short response to
chemotherapies. We aim to characterize models of therapy-induced NEtD
(tNEPC) and to investigate the role of tumor plasticity in the
progression to mCRPC.

To recapitulate ATT in vitro, androgen-dependent LNCaP cells were treated
with either enzalutamide (Enz) (10μM) or shRNA targeting AR in culture
medium containing fetal bovine serum (FBS) or charcoal stripped serum
(CSS) with or without 10nM dihydrotestosterone (DHT). To model EMT, LNCaP
cells were engineered to express doxycycline (Dox) inducible
overexpression of EMT transcription factor Snail. Androgen deprivation in
vitro induced expression of NE markers in LNCaP cells compared with FBS
treated cells (mean fold increase ± SEM): neuron specific enolase (ENO2)
(6.0 ± 2.5), neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) (10.4 ± 6.8) and
midkine (MDK) (13.2 ± 2.4). Cells co-treated with Enz and DHT had
increased expression of NE markers compared to DHT alone: ENO2 (2.7 ±
0.6), NCAM (2.9 ± 0.3) and MDK (2.3 ± 1.8). AR knockdown resulted in a
potent induction of NE markers compared with control cells: ENO2 (8.3 ±
1.4), NCAM (8.3 ± 2.4) and MDK (9.0 ± 2.2). Dox-induced Snail enhanced
androgen deprivation-mediated upregulation of NE markers compared with
no-Dox cells: ENO2 (1.3 ± 0.1), NCAM (8.3 ± 2.4) and MDK (9.0 ± 2.2).
To more accurately model a preclinical setting, LNCaP tumors were grown
subcutaneously in severe combined immune deficiency mice. Once tumors
grew to 200mm3, mice were castrated and upon tumor recurrence mice were
treated with Enz (10mg/kg). At the ethical endpoint, expression of EMT
and NE markers will be assessed.

Patients treated with ATTs show an increase in NE-like traits. Thus,
there is a need to identify molecular mechanisms involved in this
adaptive response. In vitro, we have modelled the acquisition of NE-like
features in PCa cells using ATTs, EMT drivers and AR knockdown. Further
investigation using these models may lead to the development of
biomarkers and therapeutic targets for the clinical management of
advanced PCa.


