Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel therapeutic approach through systemic depletion of
L-cyst(e)ine with engineered cyst(e)inase enzyme for suppression of
prostate tumor growth.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common non-skin neoplasm and second
leading cause of cancer death in men in the USA. The major drawbacks of
PCa treatment is the development of resistance to androgen ablation
therapy. Due to abnormal growth and genetic alterations, cancer cells
experience higher oxidative stress from reactive oxygen species (ROS)
than the normal cells. The L-cysteine (Cys) containing tripeptide,
glutathione (GSH) is the major intracellular antioxidant and is essential
for the survival and proliferation of cancer cells. Under conditions of
elevated ROS, endogenous Cys production is insufficient for GSH
synthesis. This necessitates uptake of Cys that is predominantly in its
disulfide form, L-cystine (CSSC), via the xCT(-) transporter. Cys is a
non-essential amino acid in animals; therefore, eliminating Cys and CSSC
uptake should selectively impact tumors that display increased ROS
production, without causing an adverse effect on normal physiology.
However, inhibition of xCT(-) alone is insufficient because free Cys is
still imported via other transporters. A superior approach is the
elimination of Cys and CSSC through the action of an enzyme that converts
these amino acids into non-toxic products.

Based on the idea that enzyme mediated systemic depletion of the serum
Cys/CSSC pool would constitute a powerful and completely novel
therapeutic approach, we developed a genetically engineered and
pharmacologically optimized human enzyme called cyst(e)inase. We show
that administration of cyst(e)inase mediates sustained depletion of the
extracellular Cys and CSSC pool in mice. Treatment with this enzyme
selectively causes cell cycle arrest and death in cancer cells due to
depletion of intracellular GSH and ensuing elevated ROS; yet no apparent
toxicities in mice even after months of continuous treatment.
Cyst(e)inase suppressed the growth of prostate carcinoma allografts and
reduced tumor growth in PCa xenografts. Mechanistically, cyst(e)inase
treatment increased AMPK phosphorylation, reduced mTORC1 activity,
formation of LC3 II as well as modulation of several cell cycle proteins
including p27, c-Myc, CDK2, CDK4, pRB, E2F4 and cyclins A, D1 and E1.
Further studies showed cyst(e)inase produced synergistic effects with a
GSH synthesis inhibitor, buthionine sulfoximine and the natural compound,
curcumin for cell growth inhibition and ROS production in vitro.
Cyst(e)inase also showed synergistic tumor growth inhibition with
curcumin in a xenograft model of human castrate resistant PCa cells.
Collectively, enzyme-mediated depletion of serum Cys and CSSC pool
suppresses the growth of prostate tumors, and is very well tolerated.
These results suggest that cyst(e)inase represents a potentially safe and
effective therapeutic modality as a single agent or in combination for
the treatment of prostate and possibly other cancers.


