Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA m5C methyltransferases and hnRNPK mediate disease-associated
chromatin structure and drug resistance in leukemia.


The mechanisms governing disease-associated chromatin organization and
drug selectivity are poorly understood. Our epigenetic drug screening
experiments identify two distinct lineage-specific drug-responsive
patterns in myeloid leukemia (MDS/AML) cells. We have established
multiple MDS/AML cell lines resistant to nucleic acid analogues with
different chemical backbones and have demonstrated a clear relationship
between drug-resistance and sugar-phosphate backbone. Based on these
results, we used various experimental approaches to elucidate
leukemia-associated, drug-responsive chromatin structural changes and
their underlying mechanisms. Our data demonstrate that hnRNPK, a
conserved factor in heterogeneous nuclear RNA-binding protein (hnRNP)
complexes, directly interacts with RNA m5C methyltransferases NSUNs/DMNT2
and RNA-polymerase II (pol-II)/CTD9 as well as erythroid vs myeloid
lineage-determining transcription factors (TFs) GATA1 and SPI1/PU.1 to
form distinct drug-responsive chromatin structures in MDS/AML cells.
hnRNP preferentially binds to methylated polypyrimidine RNA sequences to
facilitate transcription elongation. Compared to azacitidine-sensitive
MDS/AML cells, there is a marked increase in azacitidine-resistant
MDS/AML cells in RNA m5C and NUSNs/ DNMT2 associated with a marked
increase in the interaction between hnRNPK and active pol-II/CDK9. By
employing a newly-developed nascent RNA capturing technology coupled with
super-resolution stimulated-emission depletion confocal microscopy, we
demonstrate co-localization of hnRNPK with the TFs and active pol-II at
nascent RNA sites in MDS/AML cells, further supporting the existence of
hnRNPK-mediated drug-responsive transcription and lineage-specific
chromatin structures in MDS/AML cells. Our experiments using clinical
specimens demonstrate a positive correlation between MDS/AML progression
and increase in expression of hnRNPK and RNA m5C methyltransferases,
supporting their importance and clinical relevance. Furthermore,
knockdown of hnRNPK and RNA 5mC methyltransferases effectively inhibited
the growth of MDS/AML cells. In conclusion, our data demonstrate distinct
RNA m5C methyltransferases/hnRNPK-mediated chromatin structures that
control the growth and drug sensitivity of MDS/AML cells. Based on our
data, we propose a novel working model of RNA m5C
methyltransferase/hnRNPK-mediated drug-responsive chromatin structure in
MDS/AML cells, in which RNA m5C methyltransferases function as the
writers of m5C on nascent RNA, and hnRNPK functions as a reader of the
RNA m5C and an operator to regulate transcription elongation and gene
activation. Such novel chromatin structure-based drug action models and
mechanisms may identify new diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers and
therapeutic approaches.


