Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone modifications affect differential regulation of
TGF-beta-induced Nox4 by p53.


Recent studies suggest p53 plays an important role in TGF-β-mediated
cell signaling and migration. Previously, we showed wild-type (WT) and
mutant (mt) forms of p53 differentially regulate reactive oxygen species
(ROS) generation by NADPH oxidase-4 (NOX4). We found that WT-p53
suppresses TGF-β-induced NOX4, ROS production, and cell migration,
whereas tumor-associated p53-mt proteins enhance NOX4 expression and cell
migration by TGF-β/SMAD3-dependent mechanisms. In this study, we
utilized The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) to perform statistical analysis
on gene expression data from primary tumor samples and found a
correlation between tumors with p53 “hotspot” mutations and increased
NOX4 mRNA expression. Furthermore, we examined the basis of human NOX4
promoter regulation by p53 and SMAD3. By deletion analysis of the NOX4
promoter, we found two critical SMAD3 binding elements (SBE) are also
required for p53-dependent promoter activity. Conversely, promoter
activity was abolished by dose-dependent heterologous expression of
p53-WT. Moreover, expression of active SMAD3 resulted in robust NOX4
promoter activity, which was abolished when co-expressed with p53-WT.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis revealed SMAD3 and p53-WT
or p53-mt were associated with specific SBEs and p53 response elements
(p53-RE) in a TGF-β-dependent manner. Interestingly, the repressive
effect by p53-

WT on NOX4 was relieved upon treatment with histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors or mutation of the transactivation domain. Overexpression of
p300, a known p53-mt-binding transcriptional co-regulator and histone
acetyltranserfase (HAT), enhanced p53-mt-mediated NOX4 promoter activity,
whereas the HAT-inactive p300-mt reduced promoter activity. Furthermore,
overexpression of p53-mt augmented TGF-β-mediated acetylation of
histones associated with the NOX4 promoter. Finally, scratch wound assays
demonstrated NOX4 and p300 promote TGF-β/mutant p53-mediated cell
migration. Collectively, these data and provide new insight on
TGF-β/SMAD3 and mutant p53-mediated NOX4 induction involving epigenetic
control of NOX4 in tumor cell migration.


