Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Office cervicoscopy in the diagnosis of HPV infection.


Introduction: Since the association between certain oncogenic (high-risk)
strains of HPV and cervical cancer is well established. Searching for HPV
became a basic step in all screening programs. Laboratory HPV testing is
costly and unavailable in developing countries.

Objective: To compare the diagnostic indices of office cervicoscopy
against cytology and punch biopsy for detection of underlying HPV lesions
in women with suspicious cervix.

Design: An analytic cross-sectional research design

Setting: Early cervical cancer Detection Unit of the Women's Health
University Hospital. Assiut, Egypt.

Patients and methods: A total of 274 non-pregnant women with clinical
diagnosis of suspicious cervix were included in this study. After
cervical smearing with Ayre's spatula, they were subjected to
cervicoscopy utilizing 2.6 mm telescope and a 3.2 mm outer sheath office
hysteroscope. Evaluation of the vulva, vagina, ectocervix, endocervical
canal and the endometrial cavity were done. The cervix was then painted
with saline, acetic acid and Schiller's iodine stains successively as
used during colposcopic examination. Abnormal lesions were biopsied using
punch biopsy forceps. Cytologic evaluation relied on both classic and
non-classic (secondary) criteria for the diagnosis of HPV including "mild
koilocytosis," mild dyskeratocytosis," hyperchromatic nuclei, bi- and
multinucleation, and cleared cytoplasm. Punch biopsies were taken from
every case based on cervicoscopic localization after staining.

Results:. The main complaint was abnormal vaginal discharge in 197 cases
(71.4%) . Pap smear sampling was negative for HPV in 188 cases (68.6%)
and positive in 86 cases (31.4%). Cervicoscopic findings suggestive of
HPV infection were positive in 77 cases ( 28.1% ) and negative in 197
cases (71.9% ). Gold stand histopathology diagnosed HPV in 53 cases only
(19.3%). All diagnostic indices of cervicoscopy significantly improved
after combination with cytology positive results except false positive
results..

Conclusions: Cervicoscopy as a simple, cheap and office procedure can be
used as a quick screening tool of HPV infection in women with suspicious
cervix. It has the advantage of screening of the rest of the genital
tract. In the absence of laboratory HPV testing, cervicoscopy in
conjunction with cytology screening of high-risk cases should be
encouraged.


