Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aldose reductase inhibitor increases doxorubicin-sensitivity of
colon cancer cells and decreases cardiomyopathy.


Chemotherapy is one of the most common option for colorectal cancer
(CRC), specifically at the advanced stages and after surgical resection
of the tumor. Anthracycline drugs such as doxorubicin, daunorubicin are
the most commonly used for the therapy of leukemia, lymphoma and breast
cancer. However, doxorubicin is not a very effective drug to kill CRC
cells since a high amount of doxorubicin is required for colon cancer
therapy, which leads to unwanted side effects like cardiac toxicity and
cardiomyopathy. Therefore, better adjuvant therapies are required to
increase sensitivity of CRC to doxorubicin as well as to decrease the
associated cardiomyopathy. Our recent studies indicate that aldose
reductase (AR; AKR1B1) inhibitors such as fidarestat prevent CRC growth
as well as metastasis in nude mice xenograft models. We now examined our
hypothesis that AR inhibition increases the sensitivity of CRC to
doxorubicin and decreases its cardiotoxicity by modulating oxidative
stress-mediated signaling pathways. We have investigated the effect of
co-administration of doxorubicin along with AR inhibitor fidarestat in in
vitro and in vivo CRC cells growth and toxicity. Our results suggest that
treatment of CRC cells with fidarestat increases the efficacy of
doxorubicin-induced death of HT-29 and SW-480 colon cancer cells. Flow
cytometric analysis indicates that in fidarestat + doxorubicin -treated
CRC cells, the intracellular accumulation of doxorubicin is increased as
compared to doxorubicin alone-treated cells. Further, AR inhibition
prevents doxorubicin-induced increase in the expression of drug
transporter proteins such as MRP-1 and ABCG-2 in CRC cells. In addition,
combination of fidarestat with doxorubicin significantly prevented the
growth of CRC cells in nude mice xenografts as compared to doxorubicin
alone. Fidarestat also prevented the doxorubicin-induced cardiac toxicity
as measured by serum troponin-I levels and inflammatory cytokines and
chemokines in the serum and heart of doxorubicin-treated mice in
combination with fidarestat. Most importantly, fidarestat protects the
cardiac damage and dysfunction in doxorubicin-treated mice. Thus, our
results suggest that fidarestat could be used as a novel adjuvant therapy
in enhancing doxorubicin sensitivity of CRC cells and to reduce the
doxorubicin-associated cardiotoxicity.


