Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FGFR1 inhibitor reverses Smoothened inhibition-induced
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.


The majority of Pancreatic cancer (PaCA) patients present with metastatic
disease and receive little benefit from chemotherapy. Although
nanoparticulate carriers can potentially deposit sustained and high doses
of chemotherapeutics in tumors, PaCA tumors are poorly perfused, which
limits drug deposition. Ten days of oral dosing with NVP-LDE225 (40
mg/kg), an inhibitor of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway (sHHI),
increased tumor deposition of blood-borne, fluorescently labeled,
sterically-stabilized lipidic (SSL) nanoparticles by enhancing the
perfusion and permeability of the otherwise-impermeable microvasculature
of PaCA patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors. However, literature
indicates sHH ablation is associated with increased
Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal (EMT) transition and invasiveness in PaCA. Here
we investigated the compensatory role of FGFR1 in sHHI-induced tumor
progression. Four to 8 daily treatments with the sHHI resulted in no
significant reduction of tumor volume, but markedly increased the ratio
of tumor cells (human mitochondria+) to Collagen1 in the stroma, in two
s.c. low-passage PDX models of varying stromal content. Immunostaining of
sHHI-treated tumors revealed no alteration in total FGFR1 expression, but
showed a significant elevation in the (1) percent of FGFR1+ pixels
correlating with DAPI+ nuclei in tumor (human mitochondria+) cells and
stromal cells, (2) number of vimentin+ (EMT) cells, and (3) proliferative
index marked by Ki67+ nuclei, compared to controls, suggesting
accelerated tumor progression. Nuclear FGFR1 was associated with
vimentin+ cells, but was excluded from the nuclei of Ki67+ cells in all
groups, implicating nuclear translocation of FGFR1 in EMT. NVP-BGJ398, a
small-molecule pan-FGFR inhibitor (FGFRI), administered p.o. for 3 days
(15 mg/kg/day) after 7d of sHHI-pretreatment (1) significantly reduced
nuclear localization of FGFR1 compared to sHHI-treated animals, (2)
reversed the ratio of human mitochondria+ tumor cells to Collagen 1+
stroma, (3) depleted vimentin+ structures by >2 fold, and (4) reduced
Ki67+ cells to control levels. FGFRI without sHHI-pretreatment resulted
in decreased nuclear FGFR1 relative to controls, but did not impact
proliferation, EMT, or tumor cell-to-stroma ratio. Finally, the
sHHI/FGFRI sequence increased functional (FITC-L. esculentum lectin+)
tumor vessel density and area the perfused by vascular permeability
probes (fluorescent SSL) compared to both controls and sHHI-treated
animals. FGFRI administration in vehicle-treated controls had no impact
on vascular permeability or perfusion. We conclude that the combination
of sHHI in sequence with FGFRI may reverse potentially deleterious
effects of sHHI and mediate a transient enhancement of tumor
permeability, and increase deposition and penetration of nanoparticulate
SSL drug formulations into pancreatic cancers.


