Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Demystification of obstacles encountered using convection enhanced
delivery in preclinical models of diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma.


Diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) is a pediatric brain tumor that
arises in the pons of the brainstem. The vital location of the tumor and
the presence of the impermeable blood brain barrier (BBB) make treatments
ineffective and leads to a high mortality rate of DIPG patients.
Convection enhanced delivery (CED) is a promising drug delivery method
because of its ability to bypass the BBB that is currently being
investigated to deliver therapeutic agents directly to brain tumors.
Nonetheless, clinical trials investigating the use of CED to treat
patients have not shown prolonged patient survival. Previous studies have
determined poor distribution in clinical studies due to reflux or back
flow. Additionally, by analyzing the H&E and Ki67 stained brain sections
of a DIPG patient that underwent CED, we determined that areas of
radiation-induced necrosis within the tumor were a possible reason for
treatment failure. In this study, we intend to optimize CED in orthotopic
murine model of DIPG. Specifically, we have tested the ideal volume and
rate of injection, as well as using the combined approach of using CED
and radiation. Ideal injection rate was established by assessing infusion
profiles in agarose brain phantoms using various needles, which resulted
in the injection rate of 0.3ul/min producing the least back flow. Next,
the ideal injection rate and volumes were tested in vivo by injecting
non-tumor bearing mice with trypan blue. To assess the infusion rate,
brain sections were analyzed at necropsy to determine distributions of
the injected dye. To investigate accumulation of CED-mediated payload in
necrotic sites, tumor bearing mice were exposed to radiation and then
injected with the fluorescent dye, DiI. Formalin fixed brain sections
were stained with DAPI and fluorescent images were taken. The results of
this study indicate that a rate of 0.5ul/min results in a significantly
larger distribution area compared to the 0.3ul/min injection rate (50.71
± 4.84 compared to 30.47 ± 1.18, p=0.0462). Fluorescent images of brain
sections of mice injected with DiI indicated the accumulation of dye in
areas where there were no live cells, supporting the assumption that drug
injections may be retreating to necrotic pockets and thus preventing
equal distribution of the drug in the tumor. Ongoing studies include
investigating the survival benefits of using CED to deliver therapeutic
agents in tumor-bearing mice. Understanding the obstacles of convection
enhanced delivery in murine models can help establish better treatment
regimens and devices for patients and provide better preclinical models
for drug testing.


