Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel lincRNA SLINKY is a prognostic biomarker in kidney cancer.


Clear cell renal cell carcinomas (ccRCC) show a broad range of clinical
behavior, and prognostic biomarkers are needed to stratify patients for
appropriate management. We sought to determine whether long intergenic
non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) might predict patient survival. Candidate
prognostic lincRNAs were identified by mining The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) transcriptome (RNA-seq) data on 466 ccRCC cases (randomized into
discovery and validation sets) annotated for ~21,000 lncRNAs. A
previously uncharacterized lincRNA, SLINKY (Survival-predictive LINcRNA
in KidneY cancer), was the top-ranked prognostic lincRNA, and validated
in an independent University of Tokyo cohort (P=0.004). In multivariable
analysis, SLINKY expression predicted overall survival independent of
tumor stage and grade [TCGA HR=3.4 (CI, 2.1-5.4), P Clear cell renal cell
carcinomas (ccRCC) show a broad range of clinical behavior, and
prognostic biomarkers are needed to stratify patients for appropriate
management. We sought to determine whether long intergenic non-coding
RNAs (lincRNAs) might predict patient survival. Candidate prognostic
lincRNAs were identified by mining The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
transcriptome (RNA-seq) data on 466 ccRCC cases (randomized into
discovery and validation sets) annotated for ~21,000 lncRNAs. A
previously uncharacterized lincRNA, SLINKY (Survival-predictive LINcRNA
in KidneY cancer), was the top-ranked prognostic lincRNA, and validated
in an independent University of Tokyo cohort (P=0.004). In multivariable
analysis, SLINKY expression predicted overall survival independent of
tumor stage and grade [TCGA HR=3.4 (CI, 2.1-5.4), P < 0.001; Tokyo HR=9.2
(CI, 2.2-43), P = 0.003], and by decision tree, ROC and decision curve
analysis, added independent prognostic value. In ccRCC cell lines, SLINKY
knockdown reduced cancer cell proliferation (with cell-cycle G1 arrest)
and induced transcriptome changes enriched for cell proliferation and
survival processes. Notably, the genes affected by SLINKY knockdown in
cell lines were themselves prognostic and correlated with SLINKY
expression in the ccRCC patient samples. From a screen for binding
partners, we identified direct binding of SLINKY to Heterogeneous Nuclear
Ribonucleoprotein K (HNRNPK), whose knockdown recapitulated SLINKY
knockdown phenotypes. Thus, SLINKY is a robust prognostic biomarker in
ccRCC, where it functions possibly together with HNRNPK in cancer cell
proliferation.


