Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitophagy induction and interference with cancer-specific
apoptosis in SHetA2-treated cells.


Background: SHetA2 is a small molecule flexible heteroarotinoid
(Flex-Het) compound that exhibited in-vivo cancer therapeutic and
chemoprevention activity, lack of mutagenicity or teratogenicity, and a
pharmacologic profile suitable for an oral drug. First-in-human clinical
trials of SHetA2 for ovarian cancer prevention and cervical cancer
treatment are in development. Autophagy is induced in cancer cells by a
wide variety of therapeutic drugs and commonly interferes with the drugs
efficacies. Because SHetA2 binds to mortalin and induces mitochondrial
damage and apoptosis in cancer, but not in healthy cells, we hypothesized
that this drug induces mitochondria-selective autophagy (mitophagy) in
cancer, but not healthy cells; and that the mitophagy interferes with
SHetA2-induction of apoptosis.

Methods: Cultures of human ovarian and cervical cancer cell lines and
human ovarian surface epithelium (HOSE) were treated with various
concentrations and combinations of SHetA2, 3-methyladenine (3-MA),
Beclin-1 siRNA, and caspase inhibitors. Autophagy was evaluated by
electron microscopy (EM) and fluorescent imaging of LC3B processing in
cells and by Western blot (WB) analysis of p62, Beclin-1 and LC3B
processing. Mitophagy was measured by EM of cells and WB analysis of
BNIP3 total levels and co-immunoprecipitation with LC3B in protein
extracts. Apoptosis was measured by Annexin-V and propidium iodide
staining of cells and by WB analysis of caspase 9 and 3 and PARP-1
cleavage.

Result: Induction of autophagy by SHetA2 treatment was demonstrated by
the development of double-membraned autophagosomes and accumulation of
the processed LC3B II in cancer, but not in HOSE cells. Mitophagy was
demonstrated by the presence of mitochondria inside the autophagosomes
and by reduction of total BNIP3 in association with increased BNIP3/LC3B
complexes in SHetA2 treated cells. Autophagic flux was demonstrated by
gradual reduction of p62. Conversion of autophagy to apoptosis was
associated with reappearance of basal p62 levels and cleavage of
Beclin-1, PARP-1, and caspases 9 and 3 about 24 hours after initiation of
treatment. Interference of the autophagy with apoptosis was demonstrated
by increased levels of apoptosis in cells co-treated with SHetA2 and
autophagy inhibitors (3-MA or Beclin-1 siRNA) along with reduced
apoptosis in cells co-treated with SHetA2 and an autophagy inducer
(rapamycin). This was observed in cell lines harboring mutant or no p53,
but not in an ovarian cancer cell line with wild type p53.

Conclusion: SHetA2-induction of autophagy may be initiated by
mitochondrial damage and reduces, but does prevent, SHetA2-mediated
apoptosis in ovarian and cervical cancer cell lines, but not in a cell
line with wild type p53 or in HOSE cells. Combination of SHetA2 with an
autophagy inhibitor may improve the therapeutic efficacy in clinical
trials of patients harboring mutant or loss of p53 protein.

Funded by: RO1CA196200 and RO1CA200126


