Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilizing multiplex chromogenic IHC and digital image analysis to
evaluate immune cell content and spatial distribution within NSCLC tumor
tissue.


Chromogenic-based immunohistochemistry (IHC) is an established technique
utilized within oncology R&D, allowing cells to be visualized within the
context of their tumor microenvironment. However, when quantifying
chromogenic stained sections via digital image analysis, the number of
targets is usually limited due to constraints in deconvolving more than 3
chromogens present on the same tissue section image. The purpose of this
study was to apply a customized algorithm, including a 5-colour
deconvolution process to triplex chromogen IHC plus hematoxylin stained
Non-Small Cell Lung Carcinoma (NSCLC) tumor tissues in order to quantify
immune cell content and spatial distribution within both tumor and stroma
regions of interest (ROI).

A multiplex IHC assay was developed and applied to FFPE sections of NSCLC
tumor tissue to stain epithelial tumor cells (Pan CK, yellow), CD8+ cells
(purple) and FoxP3+ nuclei (brown), counterstained with hematoxylin
(blue). Immunostained whole slide images were generated for image
analysis. A customized algorithm, which included a 5-chromogen color
deconvolution process, was utilized within the Indica Labs HALO platform
to separate the four IHC chromogens (including counterstain) and a fifth
color (black) representing carbon deposit artefacts. Nuclear objects were
formed by applying weighted optical density values for the brown, purple
and blue colors, which were positive for either CD8 or FoxP3 and
counterstain. A classifier was developed to automatically segment tumor
from stroma. Each positive cell type was identified, using defined size
and shape parameters, and quantified within each ROI.

IHC multiplex staining highlighted CD8+ cells and FoxP3+ nuclei to be
present in both tumor and stroma compartments. Analysis data demonstrated
the number of tumor and stroma CD8+ cells was 120 and 554 cells per mm2,
while the number of tumor and stroma FoxP3+ nuclei was 20 and 19 nuclei
per mm2. This gave a CD8+:FoxP3+ ratio of 6 within the tumor and 29
within the stroma. The average distance of CD8+ cells in the tumor or
stroma to their nearest FoxP3+ nuclei was 92µm and 174µm respectively.
The average distance of CD8+ cells to their nearest tumor cell was 39µm
while the average distance of FoxP3+ nuclei to their nearest tumor cell
was 29µm.

This study demonstrated multiplex chromogenic IHC as a valuable approach
for quantifying multiple cell types within the context of their tumor
microenvironment. Furthermore, up to five chromogen colors can be
separated utilizing a custom 5-plex analysis algorithm, leading to a more
in-depth evaluation of immune cell types present and their spatial
distribution. This propounds a greater potential for interpretation of
therapeutic mechanistic responses within the tumor microenvironment.


