Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differentiated receptor pharmacology of imipridone ONC201: The
first DRD2 antagonist in clinical development for oncology.


ONC201 is the founding member of the imipridone class of compounds which
selectively target G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). ONC201, currently
in clinical trials, possesses an exceptional safety profile combined with
anti-cancer effects that are driven by activation of the integrated
stress response and inhibition of Ras signaling. In this study, we
identified and characterized the previously unknown binding target of
ONC201.

Following its phenotypic discovery, a series of experiments indicated
that ONC201 does not directly interact with many known cancer drug
targets. BANDIT - a machine learning based drug target identification
platform - predicted that ONC201 selectively antagonizes the GPCR
dopamine receptor D2 (DRD2). DRD2 is overexpressed in many cancers,
controls various pro-survival mechanisms including Ras signaling and
stress pathways, and its antagonism causes anti-proliferative and
pro-apoptotic effects in malignant cells.

PathHunter® β-Arrestin and cAMP assays determined that ONC201
selectively antagonizes DRD2 and DRD3. Antipsychotics antagonize multiple
dopamine receptor family members that belong to either the D1-like or
D2-like subfamilies that cause opposing downstream effects. Consistent
with BANDIT, in contrast to antipsychotics, ONC201 did not antagonize
other dopamine receptors or other GPCRs with known ligands. Schild
analysis and radioligand competition assays revealed a DRD2 affinity of
~3uM, consistent with ONC201 anticancer activity. In accordance with
superior selectivity of ONC201 among the GPCR superfamily, ONC201
exhibited a wide therapeutic window in tumor versus normal cell viability
assays compared to antipsychotics. In support of the hypothesis that
selectively targeting D2-like receptors yields superior anti-cancer
efficacy, combined DRD2/DRD1 inhibition with tool compounds was inferior
to DRD2 inhibition alone.

Further characterization revealed that ONC201 had a very slow association
rate for DRD2 relative to antipsychotics, whereas the dissociation rate
was similar to atypical antipsychotics that are well tolerated. Shotgun
mutagenesis alanine scan mapping across 350 amino acids of DRD2
identified 8 residues critical for ONC201-mediated antagonism of
dopamine-induced calcium flux. Several of these residues were not
conserved among the dopamine receptor family and the residue with the
largest effect is not conserved in any other family member, suggesting
the basis of ONC201 specificity. Consistent with competitive inhibition,
several residues were within the orthosteric binding site, however, two
allosteric residues were also identified.

In summary, ONC201 is the first DRD2 antagonist under clinical
development for oncology and its differentiated receptor pharmacology
explains its unique selectivity, anti-cancer activity, and safety that
has been observed in clinical trials.


