Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glypican-1: A tumor suppressor or an oncogene in human bone
metastatic prostate cancer cells.


Glypican-1 (GPC-1) is a cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan that
mediates cell proliferation, differentiation and migration. It also
possess oncogenic functions in breast, pancreatic and lung cancer cells,
and is a proposed biomarker for prostate cancer. Despite these data the
function of GPC-1 in prostate cancer is not fully known. We addressed
this gap-in-knowledge using in vitro and in vivo mouse models. We first
showed that GPC-1 was overexpressed in bone metastatic prostate cancer
cells (PC-3) but was not detected in lymph node metastatic cancer cells
(LNCaP) and non-cancerous prostate cells (RWPE-1). Next, we inhibited
GPC-1 expression using shRNA in bone metastatic cancer cells (PC-3), and
verified inhibition using western blot analysis and qRT-PCR. Crystal
violet staining, trans-well assays, matrigel colony cultures and adhesion
assays were used to determine the effect of GPC-1 inhibition on cancer
cell growth, migration, spheroid formation and cell adhesion. Inhibition
of GPC-1 reduced prostate cancer cell growth, migration and spheroid
formation; however, there were no changes in cell adhesion. These in
vitro data suggested that GPC-1 played a role in prostate cancer
progression by acting as an oncogene. We further investigated this
possibility in vivo using athymic (NCr) mice xenografts. Interestingly,
inhibition of GPC-1 in PC-3 cells appeared to increase tumor size as
compared to scrambled controls. Further analysis showed that that
inhibition of GPC-1 increased the tumor expression of MMP-9 and
N-cadherin, but not E-cadherin. We hypothesized that the discrepancy
between the in vitro and in vivo results may be mediated by interaction
of PC-3 cells with the tumor microenvironment. We addressed this
hypothesis by testing the effect of tumor conditioned media (TCM) from
control and GPC-1 knockdown cells on human bone marrow derived
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) and fibroblast (HS-27). Treatment of both
hMSC and HS-27 cells with TCM from GPC-1 knockdown PC-3 cells increased
MMP-9 and interestingly MMP-2 expression and activity as compared to
control cells. We also detected increases in the expression of N-Cadherin
in a co-culture model. Collectively, these data suggest that GPC-1 acts
as an oncogene to enhance prostate cancer cell growth in vitro; however,
these data also suggest the GPC-1 may act as a tumor suppressor in vivo.
This discrepancy may be due to the interaction off GPC-1 with the tumor
microenvironment, which would not be detected in single-cell culture
models.


