Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic characterization of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma
in Korean population.


Objective: Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) is a subtype of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Environmental risk factors
such as tobacco, alcohol, and especially, human papillomavirus (HPV) are
known to be associated with HNSCC. Also, large-scale sequencing studies
identified several HNSCC-associated genes such as TP53, EGFR and PIK3CA.
However, still the initiation and progression of OPSCC and mutational
profiles of OPSCC in Korean population are unclear.

Methods: Frozen non-tumor mucosa, tumor tissues and blood were collected
from nine OPSCC patients; 6 HPV positive and 3 negative. Adjacent
non-tumor tissues were obtained about 1 cm apart from the tumor tissue
and were histologically confirmed as non-neoplastic. We then performed
whole exome sequencing with Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon Kit v4+UTR,
yielding average on-target coverage of 100X.

Results: First, we compared somatic alterations of adjacent non-tumor and
tumor tissue to understand the genomic status of non-tumor mucosa.
Comparison of genome-wide copy number alterations (CNA) between non-tumor
and OPSCCs showed that majority of somatic CNA (SCNA) was occurred after
tumor progression. Also, non-tumor mucosa rarely harbored genomic
changes, showing average nonsilent mutations rate of 0.07 per Mb. In
contrast, OPSCC showed 1.0 mutations per Mb with few shared mutations
with non-tumor. These results indicate occurrence of new distinct
subclones after tumor progression. Second, somatic mutations and CNA
analysis of 9 OPSCC identified two distinct groups divided by the HPV
status of tumor. HPV(+) tumors showed lower mutation burden than HPV(-)
tumors (0.63 and 1.73 mutations per Mb, respectively). And TP53 and
CDKN2A mutations were detected exclusively in HPV(-) group, accounting
for 66.6% of HPV(-) tumors. Furthermore, HPV(-) tumors showed greater
degree of chromosomal alterations compared to HPV(+) tumors.

Conclusions: Although there are many studies to understand the
relationships between premalignant and malignant tissue, there is a lack
of understanding for genetic changes further from non-neoplastic mucosa.
Our data show that genetic profile of normal crypt mucosa rarely changes
and tumor develops in distinct subclones. This would provide a glimpse
into the fundamental cellular changes of non-tumor cells of tonsillar
crypts and oral cavity. Also, we provide a mutational landscape in HNSCC
of Korean population. Although our OPSCC showed recurrent mutations and
copy number alterations of genes related to RTK/PI(3)K- and
differentiation-signaling pathways, similar as western, mutation burden
in tumors was relatively lower, and somatic mutations on well-known
HNSCC-associated genes such as PIK3CA, FAT1 and HRAS weren’t detected.
Further investigation and molecular experiments are required to
understand the mechanism of carcinogenesis and to discover early driver
mutations of HNSCC.


