Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTEN tumor suppressive effects in glioblastoma are partly mediated
by MET downregulation via a p53-miR-34a axis.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and most lethal primary malignant
brain tumor. Two common alterations in GBM are loss of the tumor
suppressor PTEN and upregulation of the oncogenic receptor tyrosine
kinase MET. We uncovered a new connection between PTEN and MET
expressions and functions in GBM. We found that PTEN expression in GBM
cell lines (U87, U373, A172, LNZ-308) and primary cells (GBM8) inhibits
MET expression. We uncovered the molecular basis and functional
significance of this connection. Based on our previous work and published
literature, PTEN stabilizes p53, p53 induces miR-34a expression, and
miR-34a inhibits MET expression. We therefore hypothesized that PTEN
inhibits MET by regulating p53 and miR-34a and that the PTEN tumor
suppressive effects are partly mediated by MET downregulation. To verify
the hypothesis, we first showed that PTEN restoration leads to miR-34a
upregulation in GBM cells. We then showed that this latter effect is
p53-dependent as p53 knockdown with a specific shRNA partly reversed PTEN
induction of miR-34a. We also showed that PTEN-induced downregulation of
MET expression can be rescued by inhibition of miR-34a with an
anti-miR3a. We therefore established a new molecular cascade that links
PTEN, p53, miR-34a and MET in GBM. To determine the functional relevance
of this cascade, we assessed the effects of PTEN on GBM cell death and
invasion also in the settings of shRNA-mediated knockdown of p53 and
anti-miR-mediated inhibition of miR-34a. PTEN strongly induced GBM cell
death (measured by Annexin V/7AAD flow cytometry) and inhibited transwell
invasion though a collagen IV matrix. The PTEN effects on cell death and
invasion were partly reduced by p53 knock-down and miR-34a inhibition.
This demonstrates that the tumor suppressive effects of PTEN in GBM are
partly mediated by the PTEN/p53/miR-34a/MET cascade. In ongoing
experiments, we are investigating the expressions of PTEN, MET, p53 and
miR-34a in human GBM tissues to determine if there are potential
correlations that are consistent with our above findings. Altogether,
this study establishes a new molecular and functional link between PTEN
and MET that involves p53 and miR-34a in GBM.


