Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Medulloblastoma therapy targeting Hedgehog and PI3K-mTOR signaling
pathways in combination with chemotherapy.


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most frequent malignant brain tumor in
children. MB patients with high-risk disease have poorly understood
biology and few targeted therapies available. Preclinical studies and
molecular profiling of MB have revealed that the aberrant activation and
interaction of the SHH and PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling networks are
frequently associated with poor prognosis MB cases. Emerging evidence
also demonstrate the key role of activated PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway
components in SHH-driven MB therapy-resistance, thus combined targeting
of the SHH and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways may be a viable therapeutic
strategy to treat high-risk patients. Therefore, we investigated the
combined efficacy of SHH inhibitor vismodegib and PI3K-mTOR dual
inhibitor BEZ235 or their combination, individually with the
chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin against high-risk MB. Using four MB cell
lines, including non-MYC and MYC amplified cell lines, and a xenograft
mouse model, the in vitro and in vivo efficacies of the proposed
therapies on cell growth/survival along with associated molecular
mechanism(s) were investigated. Our results showed that both inhibitors
as single agents significantly decreased MB cell growth and induced
apoptosis by targeting the key molecules of the associated pathways in
vitro. BEZ235 as single agent showed a greater anti-MB efficacy compared
to vismodegib. Combined treatment of vismodegib and BEZ235 together or
with cisplatin significantly decreased MB cell growth/survival and
anchorage-independent growth in a dose-dependent fashion compared to
single agent activity. Corresponding changes in the expression of the
targeted molecules following therapy were observed. Results from the
combined approach suggested that the inhibitors not only suppressed MB
cell growth/survival when combined, but also significantly enhanced the
cytotoxic effects of cisplatin. Of these combinations, BEZ235 exhibited a
significantly greater efficacy in enhancing the cisplatin-mediated MB
cytotoxicity. In vitro studies also demonstrated that the MYC amplified
MB cell lines showed a higher sensitivity to these combined therapies
compared to relatively non-MYC amplified cell lines. Therefore, as a next
logical step, we tested the efficacy of above combined approaches against
MYC-amplified MB in vivo using NSG mice. Our in vivo results showed that
the combination of vismodegib and BEZ235 or their combinations
individually with cisplatin significantly delayed tumor growth and
increased survival of xenograft mice compared to single agent activity.
These combination not only significantly reduced tumor growth and
increased survival of the mice but also significantly enhanced anti-MB
efficacy by targeting SHH and mTOR pathways in MB in vivo. Thus, our
studies lay a foundation for translating these combined therapeutic
strategies to the clinical setting to determine their efficacies in
high-risk MB patients.


