Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Probing the expression and function of aldehyde dehydrogenases in
prostate cancer using ALDH-affinic compounds and siRNA.


The human aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDHs) play a major role in
detoxifying highly reactive aldehydes into carboxylic acids. Deregulation
of ALDHs have implications in a number of cancers including prostate
cancer. They play an important role as a cancer stem cell (CSC) marker
due to high activity found in CSCs while high expression is also known to
lead to resistance to drugs including docetaxel. Although the exact role
of ALDHs is not fully understood, emerging information indicates several
isoforms including ALDH1A3 and ALDH7A1 play a key role in cancer. To
further elucidate the role of ALDHs in prostate cancer, we here report on
the perturbation of ALDH expression and function using chemical probes
and siRNA.

Primary prostate epithelial cells cultured from patient tissue were used
for this study. Cancer samples were obtained from radical prostatectomies
and benign samples from transurethral resection of the prostate.

qPCR analysis showed ALDH1A3 to be more highly expressed than ALDH7A1 in
the primary prostate epithelial cultures in 18 patient samples.
Expression of ALDH1A3 was 3-fold higher in the cancer samples compared to
the benign samples. The RNA data correlates with protein expression in 6
patient samples by immunofluorescence. qPCR analysis also showed that
knockdown of ALDH7A1 resulted in an increase in the expression of ALDH1A3
suggesting a compensatory mechanism. Trypan blue exclusion assay showed
that knockdown of ALDH1A3, ALDH7A1 or a combination of both resulted in a
reduction in cell numbers. Flow cytometry was used to study cell
differentiation upon knockdown of ALDH1A3, ALDH7A1 or both. In all 7
samples studied there was a reduction in CD49b expression indicating cell
differentiation. ALDH7A1 knockdown showed a higher level of cell
differentiation in all cases. The colony forming ability of primary cells
was also investigated post-transfection of siRNAs against ALDH1A3,
ALDH7A1 or both using the colony formation assay which resulted in a
lower number of colonies in all 7 samples tested. The effect was more
pronounced in benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) than in malignant cancer
samples and patient variability was observed. ALDH-affinic probe
compounds (DEAB and three derivatives, Ali-9, Ali-14 & Ali-18) were
tested against 5 patient samples to investigate if they have an effect on
cell viability. All four compounds showed reduction in cell viability at
the highest concentration while Ali-14 and Ali-18 showed a synergistic
effect in combination treatment with docetaxel.

In conclusion, knockdown of ALDH1A3 and ALDH7A1 reduce cell number,
induce cells to differentiate and reduce their colony forming ability.
Novel ALDH-affinic probe compounds reduced cell viability alone and in
combination with docetaxel, therefore these compounds may be of value
both as single treatments and to provide a strategy to enhance
taxane-based therapy such as docetaxel.


