Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of orthotopic and subcutaneous implantation of
pancreatic cancer patient-derived xenograft models for drug development.


Patient derived xenograft (PDX) models of pancreatic cancer provide an
excellent platform for understanding human disease, characterizing
tumor-initiating cells, and testing of novel therapeutics. Herein, we
compared the natural pancreatic microenvironment via orthotopic
implantation and the traditional approach of subcutaneous implantation
for effects on PDX tumor growth, tumor morphology, cell population
diversity, tumorigenic potential, metastatic potential, and response to
therapeutics. Two approaches were used: (1) primary human cancer tissue
fragments were implanted in orthotopic and subcutaneous environments;
and, (2) PDX previously established by subcutaneous engraftment were
reimplanted into either an orthotopic or a subcutaneous environment. We
report that orthotopically-engrafted primary PDX more closely reflect the
gross tumor morphology of the original patient than
subcutaneously-derived tumors. In models derived from subcutaneous
engraftment, variation of tumor morphology, tumor growth, cell population
diversity, and tumorigenic potential between tumors grown in orthotopic
and subcutaneous environments were dependent on PDX line; and, stromal
infiltration and mucin production were more prominent in the orthotopic
background for some PDX models. In addition, we observe increased
metastatic potential in orthotopic tumor-bearing mice compared with their
subcutaneous counterparts. Tumor metastasis occurred in distal filtering
organs, including the lung, liver, lymph nodes, and peritoneal cavity,
among others. This result is consistent with the observation of increased
circulating tumor cells in the blood of orthotopic tumor bearing mice.
Comparison of therapeutic efficacy with gemcitabine chemotherapy and
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) therapy in orthotopic and subcutaneous
tumors showed therapeutic response was dependent on PDX line.
Interestingly, for PDX lines that exhibited morphological differences
between orthotopic and subcutaneous backgrounds, treatment was less
effective in the orthotopic microenvironment suggesting the
microenvironment alters the ability of therapeutics to impede tumor
growth. Reduced therapeutic response was also found to be consistent with
reduced ADC uptake and vascularity in orthotopic tumors. Taken together,
the orthotopic PDX model serves as a more accurate representation of
human pancreatic cancer by displaying stromal-rich morphology, exhibiting
metastatic cell behavior, and recapitulating therapeutic response
challenges observed in patients.


