Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accelerating clinical research using cloud technology.


Introduction: Existing protocols for clinical trials are typically slow
and error-prone due to lack of informatics tools for sharing and
accessing clinical data in real time. There is an increasing pressure on
clinical trial laboratories to change the way clinical research is
performed so as to minimize costs and speed up R&D, which in turn will
produce better and faster outcomes. Cloud-based technologies are emerging
as one of the most viable options for streamlining the heavily regulated
clinical research processes.

Description: Cloud-based software tools such as laboratory information
management systems (LIMS) are much more capable than traditional
paper-based or desktop tools for accelerating a clinical trial life
cycle. Cloud-based LIMS enhance collaboration between sponsors and
investigators, enabling more timely and accurate sharing of information
with pharmaceutical companies.

Summary: Many sponsors are now adopting cloud-based LIMS for conducting
clinical trials. The onus is on service providers to keep pace with the
demands of the industry, comply with the regulatory framework and at the
same time deliver value to CROs and testing labs by reducing costs and
maintaining efficiency.

Conclusion: CloudLIMS.com has developed a cloud based software called
CloudLIMS Lite for managing clinical research workflows to provide a cost
effective solution to the clinical research industry. Being on the cloud,
CloudLIMS Lite facilitates users to access and share data in real time,
across multiple laboratories in different geographical locations and
adhere to the regulatory framework. This in turn improves their
operational efficiency. CloudLIMS Lite uses 256-bit AES encryption SSL
protocol, thereby enabling secure data transmission. CloudLIMS Lite
deploys a separate database layer for each of its customers making it
impossible for any third party to view or access data.


