Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Self-renewal of hypoxic glioma stem-like cells is facilitated by
secretion-mediated STAT3 activation.


Glioblastoma, a type of high-grade glioma, is the most common and the
most aggressive primary brain tumor of adults. The median survival is
12-15 months. Despite multimodality treatment, most high-grade gliomas
eventually recur and are ultimately incurable. Several studies suggest
that the initiation, progression, and recurrence of gliomas are driven at
least partly by cancer stem-like cells. A defining characteristic of
these cancer stem-like cells is their capacity to self-renew. We have
identified a pathway dependent upon tumor hypoxia, a commonly found
pathologic feature of GBM, that promotes self-renewal through the
HIF1α-JAK1/2-STAT3 axis. Under hypoxic conditions, the expression of
HIF1α is greatly increased in GBM stem-like cells leading to the
activation of JAK1/2-STAT3 which mediates enhanced tumor stem-like cell
self-renewal. Our data further demonstrate the importance of VEGF
secretion for this pathway of hypoxia-mediated self-renewal. Using tumor
stem-like cells derived from the S100β-v-erbB/p53-/- mouse model of
spontaneous high-grade glioma, we have discovered that the activation of
STAT3 through hypoxia-mediated VEGF secretion is required for
self-renewal of glioma stem-like cells. Media conditioned by these
S100β-v-erbB/p53-/- tumor sphere cells cultured under hypoxic conditions
promoted self-renewal in S100β-v-erbB/p53-/- glioma stem-like cells and
depletion of VEGF from this media was sufficient to inhibit STAT3
phosphorylation. Moreover, we have been able to identify two drugs:
Brefeldin A and EHT-1864, that significantly inhibit VEGF secretion,
decrease stem cell self-renewal, inhibit tumor growth, and increase the
survival of mice allografted with S100β-v-erbB/p53-/- glioma stem-like
cells. Cells treated with these drugs express molecular signatures that
correlated strongly with the increased survival of GBM patients. These
findings suggest a novel treatment strategy to inhibit hypoxia-mediated
self-renewal of glioma stem-like cells in high-grade gliomas by targeting
the secretion of extracellular, paracrine mediators of self-renewal.


