Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-invasive and antimetastatic actions of omega-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids in glioblastoma cells.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive and deadliest brain malignancy
in adults. Despite of surgical techniques, radiotherapy and chemotherapy,
GBM has remained an invariably lethal tumor with a median survival less
than 15 months. Although the anticancer mechanisms of omega-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids (ω3-PUFAs) have been reported in several
cancers, it is still unclear in brain cancer. Here, our data show the
anti-invasive and anti-metastatic effects of ω3-PUFAs in GBM.
Invasiveness using transwell chamber was inhibited by docosahexaenoic
acid (DHA) treatment in D54MG and GL261 cells. In zymography, MMP-2
activity was suppressed by DHA in a dose dependent manner. MMP-2 promoter
activity was also decreased. DHA inhibited both p-STAT3 and β-catenin
levels that contribute to invasion by stimulating pro-invasion factors
such as MMP-2. Additionally, fat-1 (ω3-desaturease) stable D54MG cell
was established and the effect of the high level of ω3-PUFAs was
investigated endogenously. The invasiveness were significantly inhibited
in the fat-1 stable cells compared to control cell. Moreover, the
metastasis in vivo was significantly reduced when GL261 mouse glioma
cells were injected through tail vein into the fat-1 transgenic mice. In
immunohistochemistry, intensity of p-STAT-3 and β-catenin were
significantly weak in metastatic lung tumor from Fat-1 mice compared to
wild type mice. These results indicate that anti-invasive and
anti-metastatic actions of ω3-PUFA may be correlated with inhibition of
MMP-2 through decrease of STAT3 and β-catenin in GBM cells. Thus, these
findings provide important preclinical evidence and molecular insight for
utilization of ω-3 PUFAs for the chemoprevention and treatment of human
GBM. [This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of
Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) (2007-0054932,
NRF-2015R1D1A1A01056887) and by the framework of international
cooperation program managed by National Research Foundation of Korea
(2015K2A2A6002008)].


