Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase I cellular function dependent on its
N-terminal residues.


Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase I (Tdp1) is a highly conserved eukaryotic
DNA repair enzyme that catalyzes the resolution of 3’ and 5’
phospho-DNA adducts. Tdp1 has been implicated in the repair of DNA
topoisomerase I (Top1)-DNA covalent complexes reversibly stabilized by
FDA approved camptothecins (CPTs) derivatives topotecan and irinotecan.
Tdp1 activity relies on two catalytic histidines that function as a
nucleophile and an acid-base residue. A mutation of the acid-base His to
Arg (H493R) in human Tdp1 is associated with the rare recessive ataxia
SCAN1. We defined alternative substitution of either catalytic histidine
that induce cytotoxicity, reduce catalytic activity and enhances the
requisite Tdp1-DNA covalent adduct lifetime in the cell. The phenotypes
of the catalytic mutants provide excellent tools to study Tdp1 cellular
function. Biochemical studies revealed that Tdp1 catalysis in vitro is
independent of the N-terminal domain. Among Tdp1 proteins, the N-terminal
domain is poorly conserved in sequence and size (79aa for yeast and 148aa
for human Tdp1). Conversely, the N-terminal domain regulates the in vitro
activity of these Tdp1 mutants. Additionally, we investigated the role of
the N-terminal domain for Tdp1 activity in the yeast and human cell
models. Expression of N-terminal truncated proteins showed similar
cellular distribution as the full-length proteins. However, these
N-terminal truncated Tdp1 mutants did not display the toxicity that was
observed with the full-length Tdp1 mutant proteins. Our data suggests
that the N-terminal domain is required to resolve protein-DNA covalent
complexes, such as Top1. Indeed, preliminary results suggest that this
domain is also critical to process Top2-DNA covalent complexes, but only
in the presences of etoposide. We are currently investigating other
protein-DNA adducts that are resolved by Tdp1. These results suggests
that the N-terminal domain is a critical determinate of Tdp1 cellular
function. However, further studies are necessary to ensure that these
constructs are properly distributed and retain their catalytic activity.
Additionally, the N-terminal domain of human Tdp1 is post-translational
modified, while our preliminary results suggest that this domain is
important for protein-protein interaction and Tdp1 recruitment to its
substrates. Understanding Tdp1 substrate and protein-interactions are
important in the development of Tdp1 as therapeutic target. This work is
in part supported by the ADDA, UAB Cancer Comprehensive Center
(P30CA013148), ACS-IRG-60-001-53, DOD OCRP (W81XWH-15-1-0198).


