Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lysyl oxidase is required for chemotaxis.


Purpose: Lysyl oxidase (LOX) increases extracellular matrix stiffness by
cross-linking collagen. A stiffer matrix drives integrin activation, and
therefore LOX is believed to promote cancer cell invasion through
enhanced integrin signaling. However increased matrix stiffness does not
necessarily lead to a more permissive environment for invasion. Fibrillar
collagen matrix orientation, density and porosity also determine how well
cells can invade. Assays based on collagen gel-covered transwell systems
have previously been used to show that LOX is required for invasion.
These systems are driven by a chemoattractant gradient, and thus a role
for LOX in chemotaxis could not be excluded. In this study we aimed to
clarify whether LOX was required for matrix invasion or chemotaxis.

Experimental procedures: To set up a 3D invasion assay that was not
driven by a chemoattractant gradient, spheroids from multiple LOX
expressing cancer cell lines were embedded into a thick 3D collagen gel.
Cells were then allowed to randomly invade into the surrounding collagen.
Alternatively, cancer cells were allowed to invade a fibroblast-modified
3D collagen gel in an organotypic assay. In this assay the invasion was
driven by a strong chemoattractant gradient through a dense collagen gel,
with cancer cells cultured atop the collagen gel at the air-medium
interface. A Dunn chemotaxis chamber or a transwell tissue culture insert
was used to investigate chemotaxis towards serum or EGF. Small
interfering RNA (siRNA) or short hairpin RNA (shRNA) specific to human
LOX was used to deplete LOX expression in the cancer cells, to test
potential LOX functions in the above assays.

Results: LOX depletion in parental MDA-MB-231 cells, MDA-MB-231 brain or
bone metastatic sub-population cells, U87 and U118 cells did not impact
3D collagen gel invasion. LOX inhibition by BAPN also did not impact
collagen gel invasion in MDA-MB-231, LN229, U87, U118 and U138 cells. The
data indicated that LOX was not required for invasion through a thick 3D
collagen gel in vitro. However, in the chemotactic-driven organotypic
assay, loss of LOX in MDA-MB-231 cells completely abolished invasion.
When the chemotactic potential towards serum and EGF of LOX depleted
MDA-MB-231 and U87 cells was tested using Dunn chemotaxis chambers, we
observed strong chemotactic defects in both cell lines. The chemotactic
defects of these cells were also observed when a transwell based
chemotaxis assay was used. Random cell migration of MDA-MB-231 and U87
cells were otherwise not affected by LOX depletion.

Conclusions: LOX is not required for collagen matrix invasion per se.
Instead LOX is important for cells to sense chemoattractants and to
maintain directional cell migration. The molecular mechanisms underlying
these observations are now the subject of further investigation.


