Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hexavalent CD27 agonists show single agent anti-tumor activity and
enhanced memory formation in mouse syngeneic tumor models.


Tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily (TNFRSF) proteins are widely
expressed by immune and tumor cells highlighting their importance in
multiple locations and phases of the anti-tumor immune response. Apogenix
has developed a proprietary technology platform for the construction of
novel hexavalent TNFRSF agonists (HERA) for the treatment of cancer. HERA
fusion proteins comprise a perfect molecular mimic of the TNFSF cytokine
structure and are based on dimerization of trivalent single-chain TNFSF
receptor-binding domains (scTNFSF-RBD) via a Fc-γ receptor (FcγR)
binding deficient immunoglobulin Fc domain. As a result of this molecular
design, HERA proteins are capable of clustering six receptors in a
spatially well-defined manner. Signaling following treatment with the
Apogenix HERA “scTNFSF-RBD-Fc fusion proteins” is entirely
independent of secondary crosslinking through FcγRs that is required for
many agonistic anti-TNFRSF antibodies. The HERA engineering concept has
been successfully translated to TRAIL, GITRL, CD40L, LIGHT and CD27L
resulting in agonists that are currently in development. CD27L is a
potent co-stimulatory molecule that drives T cell activation and survival
through interaction with its receptor (CD27). HERA-CD27L is expressed in
CHO suspension cells followed by a lab-scale purification process that
results in homogenous aggregate-free protein lots. The purified protein
binds its respective target-receptor with high affinity. In vitro,
HERA-CD27L was able to bind CD27 expressed on primary human CD4+ and CD8+
T cells. Binding significantly increased T cell expansion following
αCD3/αCD28 stimulation and leads to increased expression of OX40 on
CD4+ T cells and 4-1BB on CD8+ T cells, respectively. In vivo, a single
dose of 10mg/kg HERA-CD27L increases clonal expansion of antigen-specific
CD8+ T cells upon immunization with Ovalbumin (Ova) in the mouse OT-1
model with a kinetics leading to peak levels of >25% Ova-specific CD8+ T
cells at day 6 after treatment. Anti-tumor efficacy of HERA-CD27 was
evaluated in MC38-CEA and CT26 colorectal syngeneic murine tumor models.
In both models treatment with HERA-CD27L resulted in a dose dependent
inhibition of tumor growth. CT26 tumor bearing mice treated with 1mg/kg
HERA-CD27L, twice weekly showed an 85% tumor-growth inhibition (TGI)
compared to the control group. A significant TGI of 48% could be observed
in the MC38-CEA model upon treatment with 10mg/kg, twice weekly. Analysis
of peripheral lymphoid tissues in the MC38-CEA bearing mice could
furthermore show that HERA-CD27L treatment is accompanied with enhanced
memory formation in both CD4+ & CD8+ T cells. In summary, the data on the
hexavalent HERA-CD27L indicate a potent immune cell driven anti tumor
efficacy. Therefore, HERA-CD27 agonists could be applied for the
treatment of cancer as a single agent or in combination with check-point
Inhibitors.


