Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E2F2-mediated copy number changes drive metastasis and therapeutic
response of HER2-positive tumors through Col1a1, CHAD, and AKT-dependent
mechanisms.


The E2F family of transcription factors is classically known to regulate
G1 to S-phase transition in cell cycle but has emerging roles in HER2+
breast cancer. A loss of E2F1 or E2F2, in a HER2 mouse model, MMTV-Neu,
leads to a decrease in tumor metastasis1. It is not known what
mechanistic roles specific E2Fs are playing in this process. To
investigate this, we leveraged and bioinformatic principles, including
genomics and transcriptomics with traditional laboratory science and high
throughput drug screening projects. This experimental approach
immediately revealed that loss of E2F2 is significantly associated with a
more unstable tumor including an increase in copy number alterations,
single nucleotide variants, and translocations. Further analysis revealed
a conserved copy number alteration in both mouse and humans. Specifically
we noted the amplification of 17q21.33 in 25% of HER2+ patients. The
analogous region chromosome 11D was lost in 30% of the less metastatic
MMTV-Neu E2F2 knockout mice indicating a role of the region in tumor
metastasis. Transcriptomic data revealed that two genes, Collagen Type I,
alpha 1 (Col1a1) and Chondroadherin (CHAD), were potential genes of
significance in the amplification event. CRISPR mediated knockout studies
were conducted to determine each gene’s effect on tumor cell migration
and metastasis in mouse and human derived cell lines. Wound healing
assays and tail vein injection have shown the Col1a1 and CHAD KO cell
lines have a delay in cell migration (PThe E2F family of transcription
factors is classically known to regulate G1 to S-phase transition in cell
cycle but has emerging roles in HER2+ breast cancer. A loss of E2F1 or
E2F2, in a HER2 mouse model, MMTV-Neu, leads to a decrease in tumor
metastasis1. It is not known what mechanistic roles specific E2Fs are
playing in this process. To investigate this, we leveraged and
bioinformatic principles, including genomics and transcriptomics with
traditional laboratory science and high throughput drug screening
projects. This experimental approach immediately revealed that loss of
E2F2 is significantly associated with a more unstable tumor including an
increase in copy number alterations, single nucleotide variants, and
translocations. Further analysis revealed a conserved copy number
alteration in both mouse and humans. Specifically we noted the
amplification of 17q21.33 in 25% of HER2+ patients. The analogous region
chromosome 11D was lost in 30% of the less metastatic MMTV-Neu E2F2
knockout mice indicating a role of the region in tumor metastasis.
Transcriptomic data revealed that two genes, Collagen Type I, alpha 1
(Col1a1) and Chondroadherin (CHAD), were potential genes of significance
in the amplification event. CRISPR mediated knockout studies were
conducted to determine each gene’s effect on tumor cell migration and
metastasis in mouse and human derived cell lines. Wound healing assays
and tail vein injection have shown the Col1a1 and CHAD KO cell lines have
a delay in cell migration (P<.01) and reduced ability to colonize the
lung (PThe E2F family of transcription factors is classically known to
regulate G1 to S-phase transition in cell cycle but has emerging roles in
HER2+ breast cancer. A loss of E2F1 or E2F2, in a HER2 mouse model,
MMTV-Neu, leads to a decrease in tumor metastasis1. It is not known what
mechanistic roles specific E2Fs are playing in this process. To
investigate this, we leveraged and bioinformatic principles, including
genomics and transcriptomics with traditional laboratory science and high
throughput drug screening projects. This experimental approach
immediately revealed that loss of E2F2 is significantly associated with a
more unstable tumor including an increase in copy number alterations,
single nucleotide variants, and translocations. Further analysis revealed
a conserved copy number alteration in both mouse and humans. Specifically
we noted the amplification of 17q21.33 in 25% of HER2+ patients. The
analogous region chromosome 11D was lost in 30% of the less metastatic
MMTV-Neu E2F2 knockout mice indicating a role of the region in tumor
metastasis. Transcriptomic data revealed that two genes, Collagen Type I,
alpha 1 (Col1a1) and Chondroadherin (CHAD), were potential genes of
significance in the amplification event. CRISPR mediated knockout studies
were conducted to determine each gene’s effect on tumor cell migration
and metastasis in mouse and human derived cell lines. Wound healing
assays and tail vein injection have shown the Col1a1 and CHAD KO cell
lines have a delay in cell migration (P<.01) and reduced ability to
colonize the lung (P<.05) respectively. Oncogenic signaling data shows
that the 17q21.33 amplification event has higher AKT and E2F2 signaling
than HER2 positive tumors without the event. It was hypothesized that the
tumors would be dependent on the signaling and perturbation of the
network might be an effective therapy for patients with the 17q21.33
amplification event. To investigate this we identified deferentially
lethal siRNAs and compounds between HER2+ tumors with and without the
17q21.33 event in the Achilles, CCLE, and PDX datasets. A String-DB
analysis showed many of the deferentially lethal genes and compounds
centered around AKT. A decrease in AKT signaling through siRNA or
chemical compound results in the death of the cell in the 17q21.33
amplified samples but not the HER2+ samples without the event. This study
reveals that patients’ with a 17q21.33 amplification event have more
metastatic tumors mediated through Col1a1 and CHAD and may be responsive
to AKT targeting therapy.

References1. Andrechek ER: HER2/Neu tumorigenesis and metastasis is
regulated by E2F activator transcription factors. Oncogene 2013.


