Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel targeted therapy for malignant mesothelioma
carcinoma by a midkine inhibitor.


Malignant pleural mesothelioma is an aggressive tumor of mesenchymal
origin and is increasing worldwide as a result of widespread exposure to
asbestos. The median survival of patients with mesothelioma from time of
diagnosis ranges between 1 and 2 years. The mortality is expected to
increase, at least until 2020, which is mainly due to the long latency
(30-50 years) of the disease. Despite considerable advances in the
understanding of its pathogenesis and etiology, malignant mesothelioma
remains largely unresponsive to standard modalities of cancer therapy.
Thus, there is an urgent need for new therapeutic options for
mesothelioma.Midkine (MDK) is a heparin-binding growth factor that is
highly expressed in many malignant tumors, including lung cancers. We
have previously reported that a MDK inhibitor, iMDK, suppresses non-small
cell lung cancer expressing MDK without harming normal cells.
Importantly, iMDK inhibits the PI3 kinase / Akt pathway and induces
apoptosis in MDK expressing non-small cell lung cancer cells. In the
present study, we have investigated the antitumor effect of iMDK against
malignant mesothelioma both in vitro and in vivo. 48 hours after
treatment, iMDK dose-dependently inhibited cell growth of MDK expressing
malignant mesothelioma cells. iMDK also suppressed colony formation of
MSTO-211H mesothelioma cells. TUNEL positive cells were significantly
increased in MSTO-211H cells 48 hours after iMDK treatment in a
dose-dependent manner, confirming the induction of apoptosis in
mesothelioma cells by iMDK. Combination treatment of iMDK and Bcl-2
inhibitor ABT-263 is more effective than each drug alone in MSTO-211H
mesothelioma cells. Moreover, systemic administration of iMDK
significantly inhibited tumor growth in a mesothelioma xenograft tumor in
vivo. Inhibition of MDK with iMDK provides a potential therapeutic
approach for the treatment of malignant mesothelioma that is driven by
MDK.


