Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel isoform of WNT/planar cell polarity
VANGL2 in breast cancer.


The WNT/PCP pathway is an evolutionarily conserved developmental process
which is essential in embryogenesis and development of polarized
structures in metazoans. Its importance in human diseases is best
demonstrated in neural tube closure defects and cancer. WNT/PCP signaling
involves a set of evolutionarily conserved WNT/PCP genes encoding WNT
ligands, transmembrane (vangl2, frizzled, fat, dachsous) and cytoplasmic
(scribble, prickle, dishevelled, diego) molecules triggering a
genetically well-defined non-canonical WNT-JNK pathway. Recent work has
linked defects of this pathway to breast cancer aggressiveness. We have
shown that the non-canonical WNT/PCP transmembrane receptor VANGL2 is
overexpressed in poor prognosis basal breast cancers and implicated in
tumor growth. We also found that VANGL2 binds through its C-terminal
sequence to Scribble and p62/SQSTM1 which are involved in cancer cell
migration and growth. A recent in silico study has suggested the
existence of an N-terminally extended VANGL2 isoform (VANGL2-Long), owing
to the occurrence of an alternative non-AUG translation initiation site,
upstream of the conventional start site. Translation initiation from this
alternative site is expected to add an N-terminal extension of 48 amino
acids. Accordingly, by analyzing VANGL2 immunoprecipitates by mass
spectrometry, we identified a peptide mapping upstream of the first
methionine supporting the existence of a longer isoform of VANGL2. While
missing in Drosophila, this N-terminal extension is found in all
vertebrate VANGL2 sequences that have been examined, suggesting a
function for VANGL2-Long. We provide further experimental evidence in
favor of the VANGL2-Long isoform, using polyclonal antibodies that have
been raised against the predicted VANGL2 N-terminal extension. Using
these tools, we characterized VANGL2-Long and showed that it dimerizes
with VANGL2 and VANGL1, a close homologue, at the endogenous level in
living cells. Our data depict a complex organization of VANGL1/VANGL2
molecules at the plasma membrane and improve the mechanistic
understanding of VANGL2 in normal and cancer cells.


