Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monocarboxylate transporter 1 inhibition with AZD3965 increases
cancer cell dependence on bioenergetic metabolism predicating combination
therapy with mitochondrial inhibitors.


Monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs) are key mediators of lactate
transport that have emerged as promising targets for anti-cancer therapy.
The MCT1 inhibitor AZD3965 (AstraZeneca) has shown promising activity in
various pre-clinical models and is currently in phase I/II clinical
testing. Understanding the impact of this drug on tumour cell metabolism
may unravel dependencies that could be exploited for combination therapy.
Here we investigate changes in glucose metabolism induced by AZD3965
treatment using 13C NMR isotopomer analysis, and examine their
significance for cell survival using mitochondrial metabolism inhibitors.

Exposure of Raji human lymphoma cells to AZD3965 in media supplemented
with [1-13C]glucose led to a marked reduction in glucose uptake and
lactate production in the cellular growth media alongside a build-up in
intracellular [3- 13C]lactate and [1-13C]glucose levels, indicative of
blockade of lactate excretion and inhibition of overall glycolytic
activity. These effects were concomitant with increased [4-13C]glutamate
levels, consistent with re-routing of pyruvate towards mitochondrial
metabolism and enhanced flux through oxidative pyruvate dehydrogenase.

Further, AZD3965 treatment was paralleled with a significant increase in
levels of steady state Krebs cycle-related metabolites (including
succinate, fumarate, acetate and NAD+/NADH) and cellular ATP, as revealed
by bioluminescent and 1H NMR analyses, indicating improved mitochondrial
metabolism and cellular re-energization.

Co-administration of the mitochondrial complex I inhibitor metformin or
the mitochondrial pyruvate carrier inhibitor UK5099 markedly potentiated
the anti-proliferative effects of AZD3965 and led to significantly
increased cell death, indicating that the observed upregulation in
mitochondrial metabolism was necessary to maintain cell survival under
MCT1 inhibitor-induced metabolic stress. Similar effects were observed
with a second human lymphoma cell line, Hut78.

Our findings show that MCT1 inhibition leads to a shift in cellular
metabolism towards mitochondrial bioenergetic metabolism, creating a
metabolic vulnerability that could be exploited for combinatorial therapy
to increase the efficacy of AZD3965.


