Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A long non-coding RNA, H19, as a novel therapeutic target for
pancreatic cancer metastasis.


Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) comprise mRNA-like transcripts longer than
200 ribonucleotides and lack significant open reading frames. Recently,
long non-coding RNAs have been reported to play important roles in
epigenetic regulation, and acts on precursors or inhibitor of micro RNA.
In our previous studies, we injected PANC-1, human pancreatic cancer
cells into the spleens of NOG mice, and established a lung
metastasis-derived cell line from lung metastatic nodules. Lung
metastasis derived pancreatic cells had a high metastatic ability to
liver and lungs compared with the parental cells (Matsuda et al., Am J
Pathol, 2014). To examine the different gene expressions between the lung
metastasis derived cells and parental cells, we performed a DNA
microarray analysis. We found that 11 genes were expressed at greater
than 10-fold levels in lung metastasis derived cancer cells compared to
their parental cells. H19 showed an 82.4-fold increase in expression
levels, and it was the second most increased and the only non-protein
coding gene in the 11 genes. H19 is an imprinted lncRNA transcribed
exclusively from the maternal allele and H19 gene produces a 2.3 kilo
base pair long non-coding RNA. Two microRNAs, miR-675-3p and miR-675-5p
are embedded in the exon1 of H19 and these miRNAs are reported to
correlate with cell proliferation. H19 is an oncofetal RNA expressed in
developing embryos and in tumors including bladder, breast, gastric,
pancreatic, hepatocellular, and prostate cancers. Studies have shown that
H19 enhances cancer invasion and metastasis; however, its role in cancer
remains debatable. We examined the roles of H19 in pancreatic cancer
growth and metastasis. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis using human
pancreatic cancer tissues showed that H19 was more highly expressed in
cancer tissues than the adjacent normal tissues in 11 of 18 cases.
Branched DNA in situ hybridization analysis using tissue microarrays
showed that H19 was detected in 17% (23/139) of invasive ductal
carcinomas, and its expression positively correlated with higher
histological tumor grades (P Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) comprise
mRNA-like transcripts longer than 200 ribonucleotides and lack
significant open reading frames. Recently, long non-coding RNAs have been
reported to play important roles in epigenetic regulation, and acts on
precursors or inhibitor of micro RNA. In our previous studies, we
injected PANC-1, human pancreatic cancer cells into the spleens of NOG
mice, and established a lung metastasis-derived cell line from lung
metastatic nodules. Lung metastasis derived pancreatic cells had a high
metastatic ability to liver and lungs compared with the parental cells
(Matsuda et al., Am J Pathol, 2014). To examine the different gene
expressions between the lung metastasis derived cells and parental cells,
we performed a DNA microarray analysis. We found that 11 genes were
expressed at greater than 10-fold levels in lung metastasis derived
cancer cells compared to their parental cells. H19 showed an 82.4-fold
increase in expression levels, and it was the second most increased and
the only non-protein coding gene in the 11 genes. H19 is an imprinted
lncRNA transcribed exclusively from the maternal allele and H19 gene
produces a 2.3 kilo base pair long non-coding RNA. Two microRNAs,
miR-675-3p and miR-675-5p are embedded in the exon1 of H19 and these
miRNAs are reported to correlate with cell proliferation. H19 is an
oncofetal RNA expressed in developing embryos and in tumors including
bladder, breast, gastric, pancreatic, hepatocellular, and prostate
cancers. Studies have shown that H19 enhances cancer invasion and
metastasis; however, its role in cancer remains debatable. We examined
the roles of H19 in pancreatic cancer growth and metastasis. Quantitative
RT-PCR analysis using human pancreatic cancer tissues showed that H19 was
more highly expressed in cancer tissues than the adjacent normal tissues
in 11 of 18 cases. Branched DNA in situ hybridization analysis using
tissue microarrays showed that H19 was detected in 17% (23/139) of
invasive ductal carcinomas, and its expression positively correlated with
higher histological tumor grades (P < 0.0001). H19 was expressed in 9
pancreatic cancer cell lines at various levels. Overexpression of H19 in
PANC-1 cells induced higher motilities, whereas H19 inhibition using
shRNA and siRNA showed opposite results; however, cell growth rates were
unaffected in vitro. Expression levels of miR-675-3p and miR-675-5p
altered as similar to the H19 levels in both H19 increased PANC-1 cells
and H19 decreased cells. Tail vein injection of H19 shRNA
vector-transfected PANC-1 cells markedly inhibited metastasis in the
liver and lungs of immunodeficient mice. These findings suggest that H19
plays an important role in pancreatic cancer metastasis and H19 is a
novel therapeutic target for metastasis of pancreatic cancer.


