Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemopreventive potential of Lactobacillus kefiri P-IF, a novel
kefir product, on Ehrlich ascites carcinoma cells.


Purpose: Lactic acid bacteria are advantageous microorganisms that exert
beneficial effects for maintaining health. Our previous studies have
shown that Lactobacillus kefiri P-IF, a novel kefir product, has the
ability to activate dendritic cells, and to induce apoptosis in human
gastric cancer cells and MDR myeloid leukemia cells in vitro. In this
study, we aimed to evaluate the anticancer effect of L. kefiri P-IF
against animal bearing Ehrlich Ascites Carcinoma (EAC) and investigate
the mechanisms of action.

Materials and Methods: Mice were inoculated intramuscularly with EAC
cells to develop solid tumors. L. kefiri P-IF was administered orally
(2mg/kg/day) to mice 6 days/week, either two days before tumor cell
inoculation or nine days after inoculation to mice bearing solid tumors.
Tumor growth, blood lymphocyte levels, cell cycle progression, apoptosis,
apoptotic regulators expression, TNF-α expression, changes in
mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), PCNA, and CD4+ and CD8+T cells in
tumor cells were quantitatively evaluated by flow cytometry or RT-PCR.
Further studies in vitro were carried out where EAC cells were cultured
in the presence of L. kefiri P-IF at different concentrations (0, 0.6,
1.25, 2.5, and 5 mg/mL) for 1, 24, and 48 hrs. % cell viability and IC50
was estimated by MTT assay.

Results: 100% of mice that were inoculated with EAC cells alone developed
tumors. Mice pretreated with L. kefiri P-IF showed tumor incidence in
76.5% of the animals. Treatment with L. kefiri P-IF markedly reduced
tumor weight: 64.6% for pretreatment and 48.6% for post treatment. Mice
treated with L. kefiri P-IF showed profound suppression of tumor marker
PCNA expression and cell cycle arrest in the sub-G0/G1 phase, as
indicated by elevation in the apoptotic cell population by 2.7 and 2.3
fold of control for pretreatment and post treatment, respectively.
Pretreatment or post treatment with L. kefiri P-IF in EAC mice increased
the Apoptosis index/ Proliferation index ratio by 3.4 and 2.4 fold,
respectively versus control. L. kefiri P-IF treatment modulated apoptotic
regulators, including upregulation of p53 expression, increased Bax/Bcl-2
ratio, decreased MMP of cancer cells, and activation of caspase-3
expression. L. kefiri P-IF intake maintained blood lymphocytes within the
normal levels, increased the number of infiltrating CD4+ and CD8+ T cells
within the tumor, and enhanced TNF-α expression. Finally, L. kefiri P-IF
enhanced cytotoxicity against EAC cells in vitro, as shown by IC50 of
3.30 mg/ml, 1.56 mg/ml, and 1.11 mg/ml for 1, 24, and 48 hrs,
respectively.

Conclusion: In conclusion, L. kefiri P-IF, a novel symbiotic microbe, may
have chemopreventive potential to reduce tumor incidence and tumor growth
by inducing apoptosis in EAC cells via mitochondrial dependent pathway,
suppressing cell proliferation, and stimulating the immune system.

L. kefiri P-IF was provided by Paitos Co., Ltd. Yokohama, Kanagawa,
Japan. .


