Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined oral cytokine therapy effectively treats colon cancer in
a murine model.


Background: Regardless of its etiology, colorectal cancer development is
intimately associated with dysregulation of the intestinal immune system.
Sustained release, orally delivered IL-10 not only inhibits colon tumor
growth but restores T cell homeostasis both locoregionally and
systemically. However, it does not induce tumor regression. We aimed to
combine orally delivered IL-12, a potent immunostimulatory molecule with
robust anti-tumor effect, with oral IL-10 therapy to induce tumor
regression.

Methods: 6 week old APCmin mice were inoculated with enterotoxic
Bacteroides fragilis (serotype 086) after five days of intestinal flora
depletion with antibiotics dissolved in drinking water. 7-10 days after
bacterial inoculation, mice were treated three times weekly with either
1) blank polylactic acid microspheres for 3 weeks, 2) IL-10 containing
microspheres (0.5 microgram/dose) for 3 weeks, 3) IL-12 containing
microspheres (0.25 micrograms/dose) for 3 weeks, or 4) IL-10 containing
microspheres for 1 week followed by a combination of IL-10 and IL-12
containing microspheres for 2 weeks. After euthanasia, colons were
assessed for polyp counts and select polyps were isolated for confocal
microscopy analysis. Mesenteric lymph node lymphocytes were isolated and
analyzed using flow cytometry.

Results: Mice treated with oral IL-10 and IL-12 demonstrated a reduction
in polyp number compared to those mice treated with IL-10 alone, and both
groups had fewer polyps than mice treated with either IL-12 or blank
microspheres. Addition of IL-12 resulted in increased CD8+ T cell numbers
and IFN-γ production compared to treatment with IL-10 alone. IL-10
retained its effect on CD4+ T cells when combining it with IL-12,
resulting in a decrease in conventional regulatory T cells (FoxP3+ RORγT
-) as well as pathogenic regulatory T cells (FoxP3+ RORγT+) and IL-17
producing CD4+ T cells.

Conclusions: The addition of IL-12 to IL-10 therapy augments the
therapeutic effect of oral cytokine treatment on colon adenocarcinoma in
the APCmin B. fragilis model. The effect appears additive and mediated by
both IL-10’s effect on regulatory T cell populations and IL-12’s
effect on CD8+ T cells. Further studies in the setting of more advanced
disease, including liver metastases, will elucidate the therapeutic
potential of combination oral cytokine therapy with IL-10 and IL-12 for
treatment of colorectal cancer.


