Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transient modulation of the blood-brain barrier with time
dependent adenosine receptor agonism.


Background:

The blood-brain barrier (BBB), a dynamic, highly regulated and poorly
permeable blockade, is the key obstacle to effective drug delivery to the
central nervous system (CNS). Its main function is to protect the brain
from toxic agents such as chemotherapy. The BBB regulates drug entry by
the presence of tight junctions, adherens junctions and multidrug
resistance proteins. Agonism of adenosine A2A receptor (A2AR) by
Regadenoson, a FDA approved A2AR agonist, in non-tumor bearing rodents
has been shown to transiently disrupt BBB permeability. Here, we studied
the time dependent impact of Regadenoson on brain endothelial cells to
transiently decrease tight and adherens junctions, while impairing ABC
transporter function, thus increasing BBB permeability.

Methods:

Mouse brain endothelial cells (bEnd.3), were treated with 10μM
Regadenoson on a time-course of 0-24 hours. Claudin-5, Occludin, ZO-1,
VE-Cadherin, and PECAM-1 expression studies were assessed by flow
cytometry, immunofluorescence and western blotting of subcellular
fractions at varied time points. Additionally, tight and adherens
junctions’ gene expression was assessed by qRT-PCR using SYBR green.
Expression and function of ABCB1, ABCG2 was reported by western blotting
of whole cell lysates, qRT-PCR and flow cytometry measurement of cellular
uptake of MRP substrates. Transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER)
was monitored by cellular impedance of endothelial cell monolayers with
and without Regadenoson to further describe permeability changes.

Results:

Membrane expression of Claudin-5, Occludin, and ZO-1 was decreased
approximately 30 minutes after Regadenoson treatment. Claudin-5 and
Occludin expression returned to basal levels after 8 hours whereas, ZO-1
expression returned to baseline expression by 4 hours after treatment.
Total protein expression was unchanged with Regadenoson treatment, but
the cytoplasmic expression of tight and adherens junctions’ proteins
were increased; suggesting that changes in protein localization is the
cause of transient disruption. Eight hours after treatment, protein
concentration and tRNA expression of ABCB1 and ABCG2 was decreased by
50%. TEER measurements demonstrated a 40% reduction in cell impedance
after Regadenoson.

Conclusion:

Our results demonstrate that A2AR agonism causes transient changes in
junctional and ABC transporter expression and functionality. The short
duration of Regadenoson effects on BBB function may have important
implications for its clinical use to enhance drug delivery of
chemotherapy and other therapies for CNS diseases.


