Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic challenges in derivation of the first cell-based model
of Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome.


Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome (BWS) is a cancer predisposition syndrome
that affects at least 1 in 10,500 children. Up to 25% of children with
BWS develop tumors, primarily Wilms tumor and hepatoblastoma. BWS is due
to genetic or epigenetic changes that affect imprinted loci on chromosome
11 and these same changes are also found in other types of cancer. There
are no cell-based models of BWS and most mouse models do not recapitulate
the tumor phenotype. To understand more about the mechanisms leading to
tumor formation in BWS, we developed the first human cell-based model of
BWS. Human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) models are commonly used
to study disease mechanisms in tissue types that are not normally
accessible for study. In the case of BWS, we plan to use such models to
study how the genetic and epigenetic changes in BWS lead to tumor
formation in hepatic and renal cells. Using skin fibroblasts from four
BWS patients, we derived the first iPSC models of BWS. Prior to iPSC
derivation, we characterized different tissues available from these four
patients, and demonstrated genetic mosaicism in different tissue types,
including blood, skin, and pancreas. During the derivation process, we
demonstrated that both normal and BWS iPSC lines could be derived from
the same patient fibroblast sample and the number of clones of each type
from each sample approximated the initial level of mosaicism in the
original sample. For each patient, these lines are isogenic except for
the BWS critical region. The BWS and isogenic normal iPSCs were
characterized for pluripotency markers and demonstrated to have normal
karyotypes. Following this analysis, BWS and isogenic normal lines were
characterized extensively for DNA methylation at specific imprinted loci
in both early passage and extended culture. Methylation analysis was
performed by both pyrosequencing and COBRA assays. Methylation was
maintained at some imprinted loci but not at others in extended culture.
Importantly, relatively stable methylation levels were observed at the
BWS critical imprinted regions (H19/IGF2 and KvDMR), regardless of
methods of reprogramming, indicating a relatively stable state of DNA
methylation in this region. Additionally, normal methylation was seen at
the SNRPN locus. In contrast, another imprinted locus, IG/MEG3, displayed
abnormal hypermethylation in iPSCs. These data indicate that
reprogramming and extended culture of iPSCs can affect stability of DNA
methylation at certain imprinted loci. Therefore caution should be used
in interpreting studies using iPSCs as these aberrant methylation states
at imprinted loci can affect the downstream functionality of iPSC models.
BWS iPSCs and isogenic controls with normal methylation will be used for
further study of the mechanism of tumor formation in BWS.


