Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming drug resistance by targeting melanoma dedifferentiation
through information-theoretic analysis and single cell proteomics.


Despite impressive initial response of BRAF targeted therapy in mestastic
melanoma patients, acquired drug resistance, often times derived from
tumor heterogeneity, always limit its clinical outcome. A
dedifferentiation process named melanocyte to neural crest transition
(MNT) has shown to be critical in the early stage resistance development.
The dedifferentiation could induce a whole cell state change resulting a
drug tolerant state of melanoma cells, which will lead to initial drug
resistance. Mathematic modeling indicates the nature of the transition as
results of both stochastic phenotypic transition and non-genetic drug
selection, which indicates and further proved that the whole cell state
transition should be reversible during drug removal. Information
theoretic analysis reduced the dimensional of thousands of gene
expression level changes as results of only two unbalanced processes onto
a cellular steady state. Reversible transition trajectory defined through
two processes indicates it to resemble a critical transition in physical
systems. Refined single cell proteomic analysis of those proteins that
associate with major unbalanced processes identify the critical points of
the transition as early as day6, which cannot be resolved from bulk
proteomic measurement. By co-targeting the drivers at the critical points
in combination with original brafi targeted drug successfully arrested
the transition and induced a sustained tumor growth inhibition in
multiple patient-derived melanoma cell lines. This study provides us a
noval methodology of mining whole transcriptomic transition with
information theoretic analysis to reduce the dimensionality and then
using single cell proteomic analysis for refining critical points and
driver proteins which eventually rationalized a effective combination
therapy to stop the drug resistance development early on.


