Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EZH2 reprogramming confers intrinsic stem cell properties and
developmental plasticity driving neuroendocrine prostate cancer.


Introduction: Potent targeting of the androgen receptor (AR) in
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) has altered the archetypal
course of the disease, fueling the emergence of aggressive and incurable
neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC). Alarmingly, no targeted therapies
exist for NEPC, which stems from our poor molecular understanding of the
disease. What regulates the plasticity that allows cells to shed their
dependence on the AR and re-emerge as “AR-indifferent” NEPC,
especially under the pressure of modern AR pathway inhibitors (ARPIs)
such as enzalutamide (ENZ)? Recent data suggest that neuroendocrine
transdifferentiation is aligned with dynamic reprogramming of the
epigenome by developmental regulators, like EZH2, making them attractive
therapeutic targets.

Method: To uncover reprogramming factors that are activated in response
to AR pathway inhibition, we interrogated a panel of cell lines derived
from ENZ-resistant prostate tumors by RNA-seq. Mirroring what is observed
in a subset of patients who progress on ENZ, 25% of ENZ-resistant tumors
and matched cell lines displayed reduction in canonical AR pathway
activity and a NEPC phenotype. Gene set enrichment analysis revealed that
these cells are enriched for a Polycomb/EZH2 signature and share a
conserved transcriptional program with embryonic stem cells. In
particular, we identified a distinct phosphorylated form of EZH2
(EZH2-T350), upregulated in AR-indifferent/NEPC cell lines and patient
tumors, that was found to be indispensable for the emergence and
maintenance of a stem-like state.

Results: Blocking EZH2-T350 phosphorylation in AR-indifferent/NEPC cell
lines yielded a marked reduction in expression of pluripotency
transcription factors and stem-like features, including ALDH activity and
spheroid formation capacity. Notably, EZH2-T350 was found to be
sufficient and required for cells to enter a transient stem-like state, a
pre-requisite for neuroendocrine transdifferentiation under the pressure
of ARPIs both in vitro and in patient-derived prostate tumor xenografts.
As our data revealed a strong association between EZH2 and AR in response
to ENZ we performed ChIP-seq and observed extensive reprogramming of the
AR cistrome, specifically at a core set of genes governing stem cell
identity. EZH2 colocalized at the reprogrammed AR binding sites.
Accordingly, treating AR-indifferent/NEPC cell lines with the EZH2
inhibitor GSK126 yielded a molecular subtype shift from PCS1 to AR-driven
PCS2, and re-sensitized cells to ARPIs.

Conclusion: Our findings establish the centrality of epigenetic
reprogramming in driving the insurgence of a clinically aggressive
neuroendocrine phenotype in response to AR pathway inhibition. Drugging
the epigenome via EZH2 inhibition to reverse the NEPC state and
re-sensitize tumors to our powerful arsenal of ARPIs has the potential to
transform the treatment of prostate cancer.





Wednesday, April 5, 2017


