Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel, selective inhibitor of DNA-dependent protein kinase
(DNA-PK) potentiates the effects of DNA-damaging therapies in
hepatocellular carcinoma.


DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) is a key component in the repair of
DNA double-strand breaks via non-homologous end-joining. Studies have
found elevated DNA-PK expression and activity in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) to be strongly correlated with increased tumor grade, resistance to
DNA-damaging therapies and poor survival (1,2).

We have explored the selective inhibition of DNA-PK in combination with
DNA-damaging agents as a potential therapeutic approach in HCC using
NDD0004 - a novel, orally-bioavailable small molecule inhibitor of DNA-PK
(in vitro IC50 = 8 nM).

NDD0004 was evaluated in a panel of DNA-PK overexpressing human HCC cell
lines (Hep3B, HepG2, Huh7) in combination with ionizing radiation or the
topoisomerase II poison doxorubicin. DNA-PK activity was determined by
Ser2056 phosphorylation status, DNA damage quantified by γH2AX levels,
cell proliferation determined by SRB assays and cell survival assessed
using clonogenic assays. In vivo efficacy was evaluated using a novel
murine model of localized and sustained doxorubicin therapy, involving
intra-tumoral injection of doxorubicin-loaded DC M1 polymer beads into
established Huh7 human HCC xenografts in CD1 nude mice. Oral twice-daily
treatment with 30 mg/kg NDD0004 or vehicle control was commenced 1 hour
following bead implantation and continued for up to 20 days (6 mice per
group).

NDD0004 dose-dependently inhibited activation of DNA-PK in HCC cell lines
in vitro in response to ionizing radiation, and significantly increased
and sustained DNA damage following treatment. Furthermore, NDD0004
sensitized DNA-PK overexpressing HCC cell lines to doxorubicin and
ionizing radiation in proliferation and survival assays by ≥ 5-fold.
Combining NDD0004 with doxorubicin-loaded beads in vivo significantly
inhibited the rapid growth of HCC tumors when compared to treatment with
doxorubicin-loaded bead monotherapy, with the time taken for tumor
volumes to quadruple (RTV4) being extended from 11 to 18 days (PNDD0004
dose-dependently inhibited activation of DNA-PK in HCC cell lines in
vitro in response to ionizing radiation, and significantly increased and
sustained DNA damage following treatment. Furthermore, NDD0004 sensitized
DNA-PK overexpressing HCC cell lines to doxorubicin and ionizing
radiation in proliferation and survival assays by ≥ 5-fold. Combining
NDD0004 with doxorubicin-loaded beads in vivo significantly inhibited the
rapid growth of HCC tumors when compared to treatment with
doxorubicin-loaded bead monotherapy, with the time taken for tumor
volumes to quadruple (RTV4) being extended from 11 to 18 days (P<0.01,
Mann-Whitney). Individual and combination treatments were well tolerated
throughout. Immuno-histochemical analysis revealed γH2AX levels in
hepatocytes surrounding doxorubicin-loaded beads to be significantly
increased by NDD0004 co-treatment for 72-hours (PNDD0004 dose-dependently
inhibited activation of DNA-PK in HCC cell lines in vitro in response to
ionizing radiation, and significantly increased and sustained DNA damage
following treatment. Furthermore, NDD0004 sensitized DNA-PK
overexpressing HCC cell lines to doxorubicin and ionizing radiation in
proliferation and survival assays by ≥ 5-fold. Combining NDD0004 with
doxorubicin-loaded beads in vivo significantly inhibited the rapid growth
of HCC tumors when compared to treatment with doxorubicin-loaded bead
monotherapy, with the time taken for tumor volumes to quadruple (RTV4)
being extended from 11 to 18 days (P<0.01, Mann-Whitney). Individual and
combination treatments were well tolerated throughout.
Immuno-histochemical analysis revealed γH2AX levels in hepatocytes
surrounding doxorubicin-loaded beads to be significantly increased by
NDD0004 co-treatment for 72-hours (P<0.02, 2-way ANOVA).

In conclusion, selective inhibition of DNA-PK catalytic activity
sensitized DNA-PK overexpressing HCC cell lines to doxorubicin
chemotherapy and ionizing radiation in vitro, and augmented the
anti-tumor activity of localized chemotherapy in HCC xenografts in vivo.
These data support the concept of combining a DNA-PK inhibitor with
localized DNA-damaging therapies in the treatment of HCC.

1. Cornell et al. (2015) Clin Cancer Res. 21: 925-33

2. Evert et al. (2013) Br J Cancer. 109: 2654-64


