Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CA125/MUC16 suppresses antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity of
IgG1-based therapies via perturbation of antibody Fc-Receptor engagement
on immune effector cells.


Background: Human cancers employ a number of mechanisms to evade host
immune responses. Here we report the effects of the tumor-shed antigen
CA125 (MUC16) on suppressing IgG1-mediated antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC). This evidence stems from prespecified subgroup
analysis of an 1100 patient Phase 3 clinical trial testing the
investigational agent farletuzumab, a monoclonal antibody (mAb) to folate
receptor alpha, plus standard-of-care in patients with recurrent ovarian
cancer. In this study, patients with low levels of CA125 [no greater than
3X the upper limit of normal (Background: Human cancers employ a number
of mechanisms to evade host immune responses. Here we report the effects
of the tumor-shed antigen CA125 (MUC16) on suppressing IgG1-mediated
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC). This evidence stems from
prespecified subgroup analysis of an 1100 patient Phase 3 clinical trial
testing the investigational agent farletuzumab, a monoclonal antibody
(mAb) to folate receptor alpha, plus standard-of-care in patients with
recurrent ovarian cancer. In this study, patients with low levels of
CA125 [no greater than 3X the upper limit of normal (< 3X ULN)] treated
with farletuzumab compared to placebo demonstrated improvements in both
progression free survival (HR 0.49, p = 0.0028) and overall survival (HR
0.44, p = 0.0108). Farletuzumab’s pharmacologic activity is mediated in
part through ADCC. Here we show that CA125 inhibits farletuzumab’s ADCC
activity by suppressing antibody interaction with the CD16a Fc-Receptor
on effector cells.

Methods: Functional assays employing Jurkat-hCD16 reporter cells as well
as primary NK cells were used to measure ADCC activity. CA125 isolates
from various patients and cell lines were used in ADCC assays to monitor
CA125 effects on immune-effector function. Multiple isogenic tumor cells
expressing endogenous CA125 and their CA125-null counterparts were also
used to monitor CD16a-mediated ADCC activity. CD16a+ cell binding assays
were used to measure the effects of CA125 inhibition on CD16a Fc-Receptor
interaction and activation. Recombinant CD16a and humanized mAbs were
used in ELISA format to measure molecular binding.

Results: Functional assays showed that exogenously added tumor-shed CA125
was able to suppress ADCC mediated by IgG1-type mAbs against several
target cell lines. This CA125-mediated ADCC suppression was also observed
in cells naturally expressing membrane-bound CA125 but not in isogenic
CA125-null cells. Molecular studies suggest that CA125-mediated
immunosuppression is caused by the perturbation of antibody interaction
with the CD16a Fc-Receptor and that this effect is specific to IgG-type
mAbs.

Conclusions: Here we demonstrate that the tumor-shed antigen CA125 can
elicit immunosuppression by blocking the interaction of tumor-targeting
mAbs and CD16a Fc-Receptor on immune effector cells. This effect appears
to be through a direct interaction of CA125 with antibody-CD16a proteins.
These findings support a biological mechanism for the clinical
observation that relapsed ovarian cancer patients with low CA125 blood
levels have improved clinical responses to the experimental agent
farletuzumab. These findings also provide new insights on the potential
biological mechanisms for which tumors produce tumor-shed antigens such
as CA125 to suppress host anti-tumor immune responses.


