Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ELF3 modulates mesenchymal to epithelial transition through
regulation of CD44 variant isoform expression in pancreatic cancer cells.


BACKGROUND: Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) and Mesenchymal to
Epithelial Transition (MET) may participate in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) metastasis. CD44 proteins are cell membrane
proteins which function as co-receptors regulating many cellular
functions. Some reports have shown that isoform switching from CD44
variant form (CD44v) to CD44 standard form (CD44s) takes place during the
EMT. (Brown et al., J. Clin. Invest, 2011, Yae et al., Nat Commun.,
2012). The AIM of this study was to explore the regulation of CD44
isoform switching in PDAC cells.

Methods: The expression levels of CD44v and CD44s in PDAC cell lines were
assessed by immunohistochemistry and immunoblot analysis. PDAC cell lines
were implanted into immunodeficiency mice and treated with sulfasarazine
for 14 days. Sulfasarazine, which inhibits glutamate-cysteine transport,
reduces CD44v-dependent cell growth. CD44v or CD44s positive cells were
isolated using flow cytometry and induced to undergo the EMT by TGF-β
treatment (7.5ng/mL) for 72 hours. A doxycycline inducible system was
employed to overexpress Slug, which promotes the EMT phenotype. To induce
MET, the cells were released from TGF-β treatment and cultured for an
additional 72 hours. E74-like ETS Transcription Factor 3 (ELF3)
expression was knocked-down by siRNA transfection.

RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that CD44v protein is
expressed specifically by PDAC with ductal structures within the complex
tumor environment of these cancers. However, in contrast, CD44v
expression was not observed in solitary infiltrating cancer cells.
PANC-1, AsPC-1 and SUIT-2 PDAC cell lines expressed both CD44v and CD44s
isoforms. Tumor mass in implanted PANC-1, AsPC-1 and SUIT-2 cells were
reduced 69%, 50% and 36% respectively by sulfasarazine treatment
following 2 weeks of therapy. However, CD44v null HPAC cells were
resistant to sulfasarazine therapy following implantation. E-cadherin was
expressed in CD44v positive cells but not in CD44s positive cells, and
both CD44v and E-cadherin protein were reduced by TGF-β treatment. Slug
over expressed cells were resistant to sulfasarazine treatment compared
to non-Slug-induced cells. Removal of TGF-β restored both CD44v and
E-cadherin expression levels which consistently occurs with MET. However,
restoration of CD44v expression was diminished when ELF3 expression was
reduced by siRNA transfection.

CONCLUSION: The isoform switching between CD44v and CD44s was reversible.
The expression of CD44v isoform appears to be controlled by ELF3 during
MET.


