Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mixed-Lineage Kinase 3 signals through the FRA1-MMP1 axis to drive
triple-negative breast cancer invasion and transendothelial migration.


Mixed-lineage kinase 3 (MLK3), a mitogen-activated kinase kinase kinase
(MAP3K), contributes to metastasis of triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC), in part through its regulation of paxillin phosphorylation and
focal adhesion turnover. However the signaling mechanisms through which
MLK3 promotes invasion and metastasis are not fully understood. We found
that in non-metastatic, estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer
cells, induced MLK3 expression robustly upregulates the oncogenic
transcription factor, FOS-related antigen-1 (FRA-1), as well as matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs), MMP-1 and MMP-9. MLK3-induced MMP-1 induction
is abrogated by FRA-1 silencing, demonstrating that MLK3 signals through
FRA-1 to control MMP-1. In complementary experiments performed in
metastatic TNBC models, high levels of FRA-1 are significantly reduced
upon gene silencing of MLK3 or by MLK3 disruption using the CRISPR/Cas9n
approach. Furthermore, both MMP-1 and MMP-9 are decreased upon ablation
of MLK3 or MLK inhibitor treatment. Reduced endothelial permeability and
transendothelial migration is observed in experiments with MLK3-depleted
TNBC cells compared with parental counterparts. In addition, MLK
inhibitor treatment or MLK3 depletion renders TNBC cells defective in
Matrigel invasion. Furthermore, circulating tumor cells (CTCs) derived
from a TNBC-bearing mouse which show an intermediate
epithelial-mesenchymal phenotype display increased levels of MLK3, FRA-1,
and MMP-1 compared with parental cells, supporting a role for the
MLK3-FRA-1-MMP-1 signaling axis in tumor cell invasion and vascular
intravasation. Consistent with the role of MMP-1 in multiple steps of
metastasis, high levels of MMP-1 in breast cancer patient tumor samples
are associated with increased distant metastases and poorer overall
survival, particularly in TNBC. Our results demonstrating the requirement
for MLK3 in controlling the FRA-1/MMP-1 axis suggest that MLK3 is a
potentially effective therapeutic target for TNBC.


