Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effects of the XPO1 inhibitor selinexor with
proteasome inhibitors in pediatric high-grade glioma and diffuse
intrinsic pontine glioma.


Background: Pediatric high-grade gliomas (HGG) and diffuse intrinsic
pontine gliomas (DIPG) account for the majority of pediatric brain tumor
deaths and respond poorly to chemotherapy. Selinexor, a nuclear export
inhibitor, is effective against HGG and DIPG in in vitro and in vivo
models, but resistance to treatment develops. We previously identified
the NF-κB pathway as a likely mediator of selinexor’s activity in
these tumors. NF-κB transcriptional activity is regulated by an
inhibitor, IKB-α, whose levels are in turn regulated by ubiquitination
and proteasomal degradation. IKB-α is a client of exportin-1 (XPO1); its
nuclear levels are increased by selinexor treatment, leading to
inhibition of NF-κB. We subsequently identified proteasome inhibitors as
potentially synergistic with selinexor in HGG and DIPG through a screen
of all FDA-approved chemotherapy agents. Proteasome inhibition has also
been shown to synergize with selinexor treatment in multiple myeloma and
osteosarcoma.

Methods: We treated HGG cell lines (BT245 and GBM1) and DIPG cell lines
(DIPG4, DIPG7 and SF7761) for five days with selinexor in combination
with each of three proteasome inhibitors, bortezomib, carfilzomib and
marizomib, and assayed cell viability at the conclusion of treatment. In
each experiment, cells were treated with selinexor, a proteasome
inhibitor, and a combination of the two drugs at several constant ratios.
IC50 values were computed for each drug acting alone, and the combination
index (CI) of the two drugs acting together was computed using the
Chou-Talalay method. We also treated SF7761 cells with a combination of
radiation (8Gy), selinexor, and a proteasome inhibitor.

Results: The proteasome inhibitors had widely varying IC50 values in the
cell lines treated, ranging from 1nM to 5µM. The CI for the combination
of selinexor and each proteasome inhibitor was consistently less than 1
(indicating a synergistic relationship) in the cell lines tested. We
found that radiation and proteasome inhibition had an antagonistic
relationship (CI>1), radiation and selinexor a synergistic relationship
(CIResults: The proteasome inhibitors had widely varying IC50 values in
the cell lines treated, ranging from 1nM to 5µM. The CI for the
combination of selinexor and each proteasome inhibitor was consistently
less than 1 (indicating a synergistic relationship) in the cell lines
tested. We found that radiation and proteasome inhibition had an
antagonistic relationship (CI>1), radiation and selinexor a synergistic
relationship (CI<1), and the combination of all three was mixed, with
some combinations being synergistic and others antagonistic.

Conclusions: Selinexor and proteasome inhibitors show promise as a
combination therapy for HGG and DIPG. We are conducting in vivo
experiments to further explore this combination for subsequent clinical
trial use.


