Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of VE-cadherin in small cell lung cancer progression.


Background: Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) accounts for ~ 12% of lung
cancers worldwide. Although the majority of patients initially respond
well to chemotherapy, responses are short lived and the disease is
characterized by rapid progression, early metastasis and an overall poor
prognosis. We have shown that a subset of aggressive SCLC tumor cells can
undergo vasculogenic mimicry (VM), an epithelial to endothelial-like
transition, leading to the formation of blood-perfusing channels
independent of host vasculature. We have shown that VE-Cadherin (VE-Cad)
is necessary for VM in a SCLC xenograft model and is present in VM
channels in CTC explant tumors (CDX). Additionally, a rare subset of SCLC
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) co-express cytokeratin and VE-Cad. We
sought to explore the impact of VE-Cad on SCLC biology; specifically
regarding aggressive nature of this disease.

Methods: NCI-H446 (H446) cells were depleted for VE-Cad with shRNA
knockdown (KD) or CRISPR-Cas9 knockout via VE-Cad targeted guide RNAs. VM
was assessed in vitro via a channel forming assay on Matrigel. Cells were
implanted subcutaneously into immunocompromised mice and assessed for
chemotherapy response and metastatic capacity. VM was assessed in vivo
with Periodic Acid Schiff (PAS)/CD31 immunohistochemistry (IHC).
Metastases were assessed in H446 xenografts in vivo by IHC for human
VE-Cad and human mitochondria.

Results: H446 parental cells grew rapidly in vivo and formed extensive
lung metastases. Loss of VE-Cad expression resulted in tumors that took
longer to establish, had fewer VM structures and had reduced ability to
form metastases in vivo and reduced migration and invasion capacity in
vitro. In mice bearing VE-Cad KD tumors with reduced VM, treatment with
cisplatin, the standard of care for SCLC, resulted in reduced
intratumoral drug delivery. This was in keeping with reduced vascularity
in VM low tumors, but conversely, these mice exhibited increased
chemosensitivity. Chemosensitization was also observed in vitro,
suggesting drug sensitivity is independent of both VM vessel formation
and drug delivery. VE-Cad depletion in tumors also led to the expression
of CD56, a classic neuroendocrine SCLC marker, suggesting the adoption of
a more differentiated phenotype. This was confirmed by assessment of a
signature of ‘stem-like’ and VM associated genes by qPCR. VM
competent cells clustered together, while VE-Cad KD caused loss of this
signature and clustering with more differentiated SCLC cells which are
incapable of VM.

Conclusions: VE-Cad has a broad impact on SCLC biology. Depletion of
VE-Cad directly inhibits VM vessel formation, leads to increased drug
sensitivity, and decreases the metastatic potential of these cells, which
also become more differentiated. Future work will investigate the
targeting of VE-Cad signaling for therapeutic benefit, and determine
whether this recapitulates the drug sensitivity and metastasis data
observed in our model.


