Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The importance of co-localized resting CD8+ T cells and
proliferating tumor cells in gastric cancer.


Gastric cancer (GC) is the third leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. With the advent of immunotherapies, there is a need to
characterize the phenotype of tumor infiltrating immune cells and
co-localized cancer cells. We have shown previously that high density of
CD45R0+ T cells is related to better prognosis in Japanese GC. However,
the variation of T-cell infiltration in GC is still not understood. We
hypothesized that an increased CD8+ T-cell infiltration is related to
T-cell activation (high T cell Ki67 proliferation index).

Purpose: To establish the frequency of co-occurrence of Ki67+ and CD8+ in
T cells and their co-localization with tumor cells and evaluate the
relationship with clinicopathological variables including survival.

Patients and Methods: Immunohistochemistry for T cells (CD8),
proliferation (Ki67), and epithelial cells (CK) was performed on tissue
microarrays (TMAs) from 213 GC from the Kanagawa Cancer Centre Hospital
(Yokohama, Japan). Stained slides were scanned, quality controlled, and
analyzed using Tissue Phenomics (Definiens, Munich, Germany) for
cell/nuclei segmentation and automatic co-registration of consecutive
sections. The TMA cores were subdivided into tiles of size 64 µm2 to
count co-localized positive cells. Average ratio of CD8+ cells and Ki67+
cells per tile/patient was used for statistical analyses. The
relationship with pT, pN and histological tumor type was assessed using
the Kruskal-Wallis test. Prognostic features were determined by
univariate stratification which optimizes Kaplan-Meier p-value using 50
independent pre-validations with 3 folds and ranked by the median
pre-validation p-values. P-values Patients and Methods:
Immunohistochemistry for T cells (CD8), proliferation (Ki67), and
epithelial cells (CK) was performed on tissue microarrays (TMAs) from 213
GC from the Kanagawa Cancer Centre Hospital (Yokohama, Japan). Stained
slides were scanned, quality controlled, and analyzed using Tissue
Phenomics (Definiens, Munich, Germany) for cell/nuclei segmentation and
automatic co-registration of consecutive sections. The TMA cores were
subdivided into tiles of size 64 µm2 to count co-localized positive
cells. Average ratio of CD8+ cells and Ki67+ cells per tile/patient was
used for statistical analyses. The relationship with pT, pN and
histological tumor type was assessed using the Kruskal-Wallis test.
Prognostic features were determined by univariate stratification which
optimizes Kaplan-Meier p-value using 50 independent pre-validations with
3 folds and ranked by the median pre-validation p-values. P-values < 0.05
were considered significant.

Results: 60887 tiles were analyzed in total. Median (range) number of
tiles analyzed per patient was 291 (81-345). Median (range) CD8+/Ki67+
ratio was 0.39 (0.01-0.92). Manual inspection of selected image tiles
showed that CD8+ cells are rarely Ki67+. Median (range) % of
tiles/patient where CD8+Ki67- cells co-localized with Ki67+ tumor cells
was 17% (0%-93%). Significant difference of ratio was observed between
histological subtypes (p=0.0096). There was no significant relationship
between CD8+/Ki67+ and pT or pN. A high CD8+/Ki67+ ratio was related to
better survival (p=0.012).

Conclusions: This is the first study to suggest that the majority of CD8+
T cells in GC appear to be resting (Ki67-) T cells rejecting our
hypothesis that high numbers of intratumoral T cells are due to high
intratumoral T cell proliferation. The co-localization of CD8+ T cells
and Ki67+ tumor cells seems to be clinically relevant and characterize
certain histological phenotypes in GC. However, the potential underlying
biological mechanisms of interaction between T cells and tumor cells are
currently unknown. Further studies are needed to validate our findings
and characterize the interface between tumor and immune cells.


