Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor volume as a predictor of lymph node metastases in prostate
cancer.


Introduction: Pelvic lymph node dissection (PLND) is recommended during
radical prostatectomy (RP) in patients with high risk prostate cancer
(PCa). Guidelines recommend extended PLND in patients who have >5%
probability of lymph node involvement, calculated from pre-operative
parameters. PLND increases procedure time and potential morbidity to
patients. Tumour size has been reported to be predictive of biochemical
recurrence after RP. We analysed the utility of several parameters
including tumour size in predicting lymph node metastases in order to
further refine the population who require PLND during RP.

Materials & Methods: We maintained a prospective database of Robotic
Assisted Radical Prostatectomy (RARP) from July 2012 to August 2016
consisting of a cohort of 531 patients. Patients with >5% calculated
probability of lymph node metastasis had PLND during RARP. We performed
multiple linear regression using age, PSA, D’Amico risk score, ISUP
prognostic group, clinical T-stage, radiological T-stage, tumour volume,
tumour volume relative to prostate size (relative tumour volume), and
number of nodes excised during PLND to determine if any of these
parameters could predict the presence of lymph node metastases.

Results: Of the cohort of 531 patients, 154 had PLND during RARP. Of the
PLND cohort, 15 (10%) had pN1 disease. Tumour volume (r2 0.044, p=
0.0098), relative tumour volume (r2 0.033, p=0.026) and number of lymph
nodes excised (r2 0.046, p=0.0075) were independent predictors of pN1
disease. D’Amico risk score (r2 0.019, p=0.089) approached but did not
reach statistical significance. Patients with pN1 disease all had primary
tumours ≥6cc.

Conclusions: In our cohort of PLND patients, tumour volume was an
independent risk factor for pN1 disease. With the increasing availability
of multi-parametric MRI, tumour volume can be measured pre-operatively as
an adjunct to PIRADS scoring. The role of tumour volume and relative
tumour volume in predicting lymph node metastasis in conjunction with
other pre-operative parameters requires further investigation. The use of
tumour volume in determining the need for PLND in patients undergoing RP
may help to further refine the population at highest risk for pN1 disease
and avoid the additional morbidity of PLND in those at low risk. In
addition, our findings support the recommendation of performing an
extended PLND to maximise regional lymph node clearance.


