Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Beclin1 promotes DNA double-strand breaks repair.


Beclin1 is a well-established core mammalian autophagy protein that has
been presumed to suppress oncogenesis via an autophagy-mediated
mechanism. Since its discovery, studies have also shown that Beclin1
interacts with an increasing number of cofactors. However, the tumor
suppressive roles of Beclin1 remain a major research focus, and the exact
mechanism by which Beclin1 acts as a tumor suppressor has remained
largely obscure. Our confocal analysis showed that in embryonic and
neonatal mice, Beclin1 is primarily located in the cytoplasm in
hepatocytes, with a very small portion located in the nucleus. When the
mice were 15d, roughly half of the total Beclin1 was located in the
nucleus. Thereafter, Beclin1 progressively redistributed from cytoplasma
to nucleus within a few weeks after birth. This pattern, was similarly
sustained not only in hepatocytes but also in other tissues. And we found
both 0-50 and 254-278 residues are required for Beclin1 nuclear
localization. Furthermore, loss of Beclin1 resulted in reduced DNA damage
repair. We found that the beclin1-/- cells showed a marked increased
γ-H2AX foci that are considered as a biomarker of DNA DSBs. Moreover,
beclin1-/- cells showed approximately about 60-fold and 30-fold
reductions in DSB repair by NHEJ and HR pathways. A series of key DSBs
repair proteins were significantly reduced in beclin1-/- cells.
Interestingly, Beclin1 regulates DSB repair independent of autophagy.
Autophagic flux was maintained in the beclin1-/- cells. Perhaps an
alternative autophagy may be activated when beclin1 is deleted as ULK1
was upregulated. We further found that Beclin1 promotes DSB repair via a
direct interaction with DNA topoisomerase IIβ (Top2b). Pull down results
showed that Top2b is one of the major Beclin1-interacting proteins in the
nucleus. And we found that this interaction was intensified after
exposure to IR. Top2b and Beclin 1 were found to be colocalized to the
DSB sites, after exposure to IR. Strikingly, depletion of Top2b by gene
silencing completely prohibited Beclin1 localized to the DNA break sites.
We constructed a beclin1-/- cell line using CRISPR/Cas9 system. The spot
counts of protein foci were measured by imaging flow cytometry after
exposure to 6Gy IR. HR and NHEJ reporter assays were used to detect the
activity of DSBs repair pathways. We pulled down nuclear proteins with
ectopically expressed Flag-tagged Beclin1. The identities of the
Beclin1-interacting proteins were determined using mass spectrometry. Our
work establishes that Beclin1 plays an autophagy-independent role in
maintaining genomic integrity by promoting DNA damage repair. The finding
challenge the long-standing paradigm of the mechanisms that are involved
in the autophagy-mediated tumor suppressive role of Beclin1. This finding
suggests that when manipulating cytoplasmic Beclin1 that is involved in
the autophagy pathway in order to explore targeted tumor therapies, the
non-autophagy cytoprotective role of Beclin 1 in the nucleus should also
be considered.


