Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sequencing the circulating and infiltrating T-cell repertoire on
the Ion S5TM.


T-cell repertoire (TCR) sequencing by next-generation sequencing (NGS) is
a valuable tool for building a deeper understanding of the adaptive
immune system. As immunotherapies, particularly T-cell dependent
therapies, show increasing potential in treating cancer, the ability to
gain a detailed, unbiased view of the TCR becomes imperative for
biomarker discovery, immune response to treatment, and study of tumor
microenvironments. A key question the field seeks to understand is the
relationship between circulating T-cells and infiltrating T-cells at the
tumor site. Here, we present a novel approach for TCR sequencing using
the Ion S5 ™ sequencer which leverages simplified library construction
workflows and offers a more complete characterization of the entire V(D)J
region of TCRΒ. This method can leverage mRNA as input, minimizing
requirements in starting materials and focusing sequencing to productive
TCRΒ arrangements. This approach targets the constant (C) and the FR1
regions, minimizing the potential for primer bias and greatly increasing
the phylogenetic information content compared to techniques that
exclusively characterize the CDR3 domain. Our results show that the
observed circulating T-cell repertoire size is approximately 2 orders of
magnitude higher than the infiltrating T-cell repertoire. Accordingly,
while it is difficult to fully capture the complete repertoire of
circulating T-cells due to its vast diversity, we show that it is
possible to reliably capture the complete infiltrating T-cell repertoire
with as high as 10 samples on the Ion 530 ™ chip. Replicate sequencing
runs of infiltrating T-cells offers correlation of ~0.9, indicating that
the results were reproducible, and the samples were sequenced to
appropriate depth. In summary, we believe that this workflow will allow
researchers to more routinely characterize the infiltrating T-cell
repertoire and offers the field a better understanding of the impact of
repertoire diversity on tumor elimination.


