Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Natural compounds alone and in combination with platinum drugs
found to show significant anti-tumour activity against ovarian cancer
cell lines.


Acquired drug resistance remains major problem in platinum based
chemotherapy against ovarian cancer. It is believed that elevated
expression of NF-kB and AKT/PKB is one of the prime reasons for acquired
drug resistance. Since tumour active natural compounds can dampen NF-kB
and AKT/PKB expression, it is thought that platinum drugs in combination
with the natural compounds may produce synergism in killing tumor cells.
The present study aimed to apply combinations of platinum drugs
cisplatin, oxaliplatin, and carboplatin with natural compounds
mycophenolic acid, honokiol, cholecalciferol and 6-shogaol to four
ovarian cancer cell lines: A2780, A2780CisR, A2780ZD0473R and SKOV-3
towards overcoming drug resistance. IC50 values of single compounds were
determined followed by administration of binary combinations. Studies on
DNA damage, cellular platinum accumulation, and platinum-DNA binding
levels were carried out. Proteomic studies will be done to explore the
key proteins involve with drug resistance. Mycophenolic acid (IC50:
1.34-7.83 μM) from Penicillium brevicompactum and 6-shogaol (IC50:
6.79-10.20 μM) from Zingiber officinale showed significant activity
against ovarian cancer cell lines. Ginger derived pure compound 6-shogaol
showed prominent synergism in combination with platinums when
administered as a bolus (0/0h) and with 0/4 h sequence. Honokiol from
Magnolia virginia alone and in combination with cisplatin showed
significant DNA damage in A2780 cell line whereas cholecalciferol did the
same to A2780cisR cell line. Bolus combination of cisplatin and 6-shogoal
produced increased cellular platinum accumulation and 3 times more Pt-DNA
binding than cisplatin alone treated A2780 cells. Though honokiol and
cisplatin (0/0 h) combination have half cellular platinum accumulation in
compare to cisplatin alone treated A2780 cells but showed 9 times higher
Pt-DNA binding. Cholecalciferol and 6-shogaol in combination with
cisplatin also showed promising Pt-DNA in A2780CisR cell line. In
conclusion, 6-shogaol, cholecalciferol and honokiol showed significant
activity alone and in combination with cisplatin and oxaliplatin against
ovarian cancer tumour models.


