Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SHetA2 targets mortalin-p53 interaction in differential induction
of apoptosis in ovarian cancer over normal cells.


Introduction: Identical TP53 mutations observed in fallopian tube
pre-neoplastic lesions and high grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) from
the same patient suggest that these mutations drive ovarian
carcinogenesis. While elevated p53 protein expression caused by these
mutations increase cell survival, persistently high levels can cause
apoptosis. Mortalin (HSPA9) is a chaperone protein which plays a major
role in protecting cancer cells from p53-mediated apoptosis by binding to
p53 and preventing it from translocating to the nucleus where it
transactivates apoptosis-inducing genes and to the mitochondria where it
inhibits Bcl-2 and induces Bax pore formation. SHetA2 is an anti-cancer
drug that binds mortalin and induces apoptosis in cancer, but not in
normal cells. We hypothesized that release of p53 from mortalin
contributes to the mechanism of SHetA2-induced apoptosis in cancer, but
not in normal cells.

Methods: SHetA2 effects on mortalin and p53 interaction and subcellular
localization were evaluated by co-immunoprecipitation in cell extracts
and fluorescent cytochemistry of human ovarian cancer cell lines and
tissues and human fallopian tube secretory epithelial cells (hFTSECs)
cultures and tissues. Effects of SHetA2 and manipulations of mortalin and
p53 expression, function and localization in ovarian cancer cells were
measured using the MTS dye to detect viable cells, Flow cytometric
analysis of Annexin-V/PI cell staining to detect apoptosis and a PCR
array to measure p53 regulated gene expression.

Results: Mortalin bound to p53 in protein extracts of cultures and
tissues from ovarian cancer, but not from hFTSECs. SHetA2 caused
dose-responsive apoptosis in association with nuclear and mitochondrial
accumulation of p53 in ovarian cancer cell lines harboring wild type or
S215R, L130V TP53 mutants, but not in hFTSECs. Mortalin overexpression or
p53 knockdown reduced SHetA2 cytotoxicity in ovarian cancer cells.
Mortalin knockdown, p53 overexpression, and chemical inhibitors of p53
transcription (Pifithrin-α) and p53 mitochondrial localization
(Pifithrin-µ) were lethal to ovarian cancer cells at effective
concentrations and therefore ineffective tools for probing the SHetA2
apoptosis mechanism. In the A2780 cell line containing wild type p53,
SHetA2 caused ≥2 fold regulation of p53 signaling genes (p21, FOXO3,
IGF1R, MDM4, SESN2, SIAH1, DR5, CAPS2, CCNE1, CDC25A, E2F1, PCNA and
TP63). Our analysis of p53 mutations using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
data revealed that majority of HGSOC exhibited p53 mutations spanning
from exon 3-9, with the majority being missense mutations in the DNA
binding domain associated with increased protein stability and gain of
function.

Conclusion: Release of wild type and mutant p53 proteins from mortalin
contributes to the mechanism of SHetA2-induced apoptosis in cancer cells
and does not occur in healthy cells. Funded by R01CA196200.


