Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular matrix remodeling triggered by lysyl oxidase
inhibition promote the lung adenocarcinoma to squamous cell carcinoma
transition independent of LKB1 status.


Introduction: Lung adeno-squamous cell carcinoma represents as the most
malignant subtype of non-small cell lung cancer. We have previously shown
that Lkb1-deficiency triggered the lung adenocarcinoma (ADC) to squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC) transition (AST) in mice through extracellular
matrix remodeling, in which lysyl oxidase (LOX) plays an important role.
Considering the high frequency of P53 mutations in human lung cancer, we
reason it's attractive to test if LOX inhibition could modulate the lung
cancer plasticity and subtype transition independent of LKB1
status.Methods: KrasG12D/P53L/L (KP) mice were used to treat with BAPN or
DPA,two LOX inhibitors, daily via intraperitoneal injection post 4 weeks
of Adeno-Cre infection for 6-8 weeks and then harvested the lungs for
pathological analyses. The histology and expression of related markers
were analyzed by H&E, IHC staining, quantitative PCR and western blot.
Results: BAPN/DPA treatment could result in a dramatic reduction of
collagen deposition. We found no significant changes of total tumor
number, but decreased average tumor size and tumor burden in treatment
groups. Detailed pathological analyses showed that a few tumors from
treatment group displayed typical squamous pathology, with the expression
of squamous markers P63 and K14. In contrast, the tumors from control
groups were adenomatous pathology and only expressing ADC markers TTF1
and SP-C. We further found that either BAPN or DPA treatment in KP mice
promoted apoptosis and inhibited cell proliferation in ADC.
Interestingly, we found the transited SCC showed almost no growth arrest
and low apoptosis rate after BAPN or DPA treatment, indicative of the
resistance to LOX inhibitors. ECM deprivation is a major cause of
oxidative stress that contributes to the accumulation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) through the deregulation of certain metabolic pathways. We
then checked the level of 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-oxo-dGuo), a marker
of DNA oxidative modification by ROS. In treatment groups, 8-oxo-dGuo was
significantly lower in SCC than ADC. In our previous work done in KL
model, we found that the ROS level was significantly up-regulated by LKB1
inactivation, which functionally modulated the AST. However, in KP mouse
model, either LKB1 or p-AMPK level showed no significant change with or
without BAPN/DPA treatment.Conclusions: These data demonstrated that
pharmacological LOX inhibition could trigger the ADC to SCC transition
independent of LKB1 status, highlight a non-cancer-cell autonomous role
in phenotypic transition. Moreover, this lineage transition confers lung
cancer with strong survival capability under environmental stress as well
as the acquisition of drug resistance.


