Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stiffness of extracellular matrix regulates breast cancer
progression by stimulating mesenchymal stem cells.


The tumor microenvironment contains cancer cells, non-cancerous cells,
and extracellular components such as extracellular matrix (ECM). Previous
studies have demonstrated that interactions between the cells and the
microenvironment contribute to cancer progression via chemical stimuli,
such as growth factors, and mechanical stimuli, such as stiffness of the
ECM. Recently, it has been reported that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
differentiate into cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in response to
chemical stimuli from cancer cells and thereby promote cancer
progression. However, the contribution of mechanical stimuli to MSCs in
cancer is poorly understood. In this study, we revealed that MSCs showed
CAF phenotypes and promote mammary cancer progression in response to
mechanical stimuli. On a stiff substrate, MSCs treated with conditioned
media from cancer cell culture expressed increased levels of alpha smooth
muscle actin (alpha-SMA), a marker of CAFs, compared to the MSCs cultured
on a soft substrate. MSCs grown on a stiff substrate displayed higher
expression and activity of YAP and increased phosphorylation of myosin
light chain (MLC) compared to MSCs grown on a soft substrate. In
addition, knockdown of YAP by shRNA decreased the expression of alpha-SMA
and phosphorylation of MLC in MSCs on a stiff substrate. Pharmacological
inhibition of MLC phosphorylation by H1152 treatment also reduced
expression of alpha-SMA and activity of YAP in MSCs. Cell-cell
communication between MSCs and carcinoma cells was bi-directional, as
conditioned medium from MSCs cultured on a stiff substrate, but not a
soft substrate, increased growth of mammary carcinoma cells. The soluble
factor prosaposin was highly secreted by the MSCs on a stiff substrate,
and the addition of recombinant prosaposin increased proliferation and
survival of mammary carcinoma cells. Furthermore, secretion of prosaposin
was promoted in YAP-overexpressed MSCs on a soft substrate. Mammary
carcinoma cells treated with prosaposin showed increased level of
phosphorylation in Akt at T308. In addition, inhibition of
phosphorylation of Akt at T308 prevented proliferation and survival in
mammary carcinoma cells. These results suggest that increased stiffness
of the ECM in the tumor microenvironment induces differentiation of MSCs
to CAFs via YAP and actomyosin contractility, secretion of prosaposion
from MSCs, and as a result, trigger progression of mammary cancer via
phosphorylation of Akt at T308.


