Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel function of PCNA in mammary tumor development and distant
metastasis through tyrosine phosphorylation.


Breast cancer is the most common cancer besides skin cancer and is the
second leading cause of cancer-related death in women in the US. Despite
intensive study, metastasis and tumor dormancy continue to be major
hurdles to eradicate this disease. PCNA forms a homotrimer ring
encircling the DNA double helix and acts as a sliding platform
indispensable for DNA replication, damage repair, and chromatin
remodeling. While a positive role of PCNA in is conceivable, how PCNA
functions in tumor progression remains elusive due to the embryonic
lethal phenotype in PCNA-deficient mice. We have shown that PCNA is
regulated by phosphorylation at tyrosine 211 (Y211) meditated through
multiple growth factor-stimulated signaling pathways. Y211
phosphorylation enhances chromatin-bound PCNA to promote cell
proliferation and is frequently detected in multiple human cancers
including breast cancer. To further dissect its biological functions, we
have generated the PCNA211F/211F “knock-in” mice in which Y211 is
replaced with a structurally similar but non-phosphorylatable amino acid
phenylalanine (F). Comparing to wild-type mice, PCNA211F/211F mice have
significantly reduced mammary tumor formation upon induction by the
carcinogen DMBA. To understand its biological role in oncogene-induced
mammary tumorigenesis, the PCNA211F/211F mice were crossed with the
MMTV-PyMT mice in which mammary gland expression of the oncogene polyoma
virus middle T antigen (PyMT) is driven by the mouse mammary tumor virus
(MMTV) enhancer/promoter. PCNA211F/211F;MMTV-PyMT mice have statistically
significant but only moderate decrease in mammary tumor development.
However, their lung metastasis is dramatically ablated compared to
PCNAWT/WT;MMTV-PyMT mice harboring primary tumors of similar size. These
results suggest that pY211-PCNA has an essential function not only in
tumorigenesis but more importantly in progression to distant metastasis.
Consistently, mammary tumors derived from PCNAWT/WT;MMTV-PyMT mice
exhibits more pronounced stromal activity than tumors of
PCNA211F/211F;MMTV-PyMT mice. The suppression of metastasis and stromal
activity in PCNA211F/211F;MMTV-PyMT mice is associated with reduced
number of tumor-initiating cells (TICs) as determined by in vitro and in
vivo analyses. Further study using syngeneic orthotopic model of
transplanting murine cancer cells into the mammary glands of PCNAWT/WT
and PCNA211F/211F mice unveils an unexpected function of pY211-PCNA in
the stromal compartment on tumor development. Thus, our study reveals a
novel tumor-promoting function of PCNA in both parenchymal and stromal
compartments besides its traditional role in cell proliferation. Given
our prior findings that the signaling pathways leading to Y211
phosphorylation can also be inhibited by FDA-approved drugs, our results
suggest that pY211-PCNA may be a new druggable mechanism to target tumor
metastasis.


