Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting GPR64 in pediatric sarcomas with CAR transgenic T cells.


Introduction: Ewing Sarcoma (ES) is the second most common bone
malignancy in children and young adolescents with a high potential of
dissemination into lung and bones. Patients with disseminated disease
into the bone have an approximate long-term survival rate of only 10%,
compelling the search for new therapeutic treatment modalities like
engineered T cell therapy. Here the therapeutic potential of chimeric
antigen receptor (CAR) transgenic T cells directed against G-protein
coupled receptor 64 (GPR64) was examined.

Experimental procedure: Two different monoclonal antibodies (mAb)
directed against the extracellular region of GPR64 were generated and
characterized. Subsequently, retroviral constructs containing second
generation CARs together with the scFv fragments of the respective mAbs
were designed. Constructs consisting of different spacers and
co-stimulatory elements were compared (dIgG1-CD28-CD3z vs.
CD8a-4-1BB-CD3z). Primary lymphocytes were transduced and tested in vitro
via flow cytometry, ELISpot and xCelligence assay as well as in
immunodeficient xenograft mice.

Results: Antibodies specifically stained ES cells as determined by flow
cytometry and immune histology. The signal intensity was reduced after
RNAi mediated down-regulation of GPR64 in ES cell lines confirming
specificity of the isolated mAbs. Following sequence determination of
those mAbs two different CAR constructs were designed. Retroviruses
containing such CARs transduced primary lymphocytes with high efficiency.
The CAR transgenic T cells were enriched for CD8+CAR+ cells via microbead
isolation and demonstrated strong proliferative capacities in vitro.
Furthermore, target structures were specifically recognized as determined
by ELISpot and xCelligence assays but dIgG1-CD28 CAR T cells derived from
one hybridoma revealed hints of early exhaustion via auto-activation.

Conclusion: CAR transgenic T cells targeting GPR64 show a promising
approach to transfer the success of CARs in hematological malignancies to
solid tumors. The cells generated in this study show strong specificity
towards GPR64 and are able to control tumor cell growth. Since GPR64
expression is not restricted to ES but also up-regulated in a number of
carcinomas derived from prostate, kidney or lung, GPR64-specific CARs may
also be a future treatment option for other tumor entities.


