Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomal delivery of stroma-derived miR-145 inhibits pancreatic
cancer cell proliferation.


We previously reported that within the pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC) microenvironment, miR-145 and miR-199a are exclusively expressed
in tumor-associated stroma (TAS) cells, but these miRNAs are present in
PDAC cells following co-culture with TAS cells. We hypothesized that
miRNAs function as paracrine signals via exosomal exchange between TAS
cells and adjacent PDAC cells.

Primary cultures of human TAS and PDAC cells were employed.
Membrane-bound microparticles were isolated from TAS conditioned,
serum-free culture media by sequential ultracentrifugation followed by
ultrafiltration. Exosomes and microvesicles were then assayed for
particle size distribution using nanoparticle tracking analysis and
electronic microscopy. miRNA expression levels were determined using
quantitative PCR. miRNA transfection was performed with RNAiMax reagents.
Cell viability was measured by Alamar Blue. Statistics were performed
using Prism 6 software.

Following transfection of human TAS cells with cel-miR-39, a nonhuman
miRNA, we demonstrated that miRNA exchanges occurred between TAS cells
and neighboring PDAC cells via a process that is not dependent upon
cell-cell contact. We next confirmed the presence and enrichment of
miR-145-5p in TAS-cell-derived exosomes (8-fold higher concentrations in
exosomes than parental cells, pFollowing transfection of human TAS cells
with cel-miR-39, a nonhuman miRNA, we demonstrated that miRNA exchanges
occurred between TAS cells and neighboring PDAC cells via a process that
is not dependent upon cell-cell contact. We next confirmed the presence
and enrichment of miR-145-5p in TAS-cell-derived exosomes (8-fold higher
concentrations in exosomes than parental cells, p<0.05). Feeding of
TAS-derived exosomes or transfection of miR-145-5p mimics into PDAC cells
led to dose-dependent decreases in PDAC cell viability (pFollowing
transfection of human TAS cells with cel-miR-39, a nonhuman miRNA, we
demonstrated that miRNA exchanges occurred between TAS cells and
neighboring PDAC cells via a process that is not dependent upon cell-cell
contact. We next confirmed the presence and enrichment of miR-145-5p in
TAS-cell-derived exosomes (8-fold higher concentrations in exosomes than
parental cells, p<0.05). Feeding of TAS-derived exosomes or transfection
of miR-145-5p mimics into PDAC cells led to dose-dependent decreases in
PDAC cell viability (p<0.05).

Taken together, our data suggest that stroma derived exosomes deliver
miRNAs to adjacent PDAC cells and may function as tumor-suppressing
paracrine signals in the case of miR-145. This finding provides a
potential explanation for the observation that stroma depletion
paradoxically accelerates PDAC progression in murine models.


