Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Opposing roles of Smad2 and Smad3 in the regulation of growth and
invasion of TNBC through TMEPAI.


The dependency of triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) on TGF-β
signaling activity for their growth and metastasis is well documented.
Breast tumors develop resistance to TGF-β-induced growth inhibition,
which helps in tumor progression. Additionally, TGF-β is enriched in the
tumor microenvironment and is a key inducer of epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in breast cancer. In an effort to understand the
mechanisms by which TGF-β induces breast tumorigenesis, we sought to
identify the relative individual contributions of Smad2 and Smad3 in
mediating cancer cell growth and metastasis by TGF-β. Screening of
several TNBC cell lines showed increased Smad3/Smad2 expression ratio
compared to normal mammary epithelial cells, which suggested breast
cancer cells may escape TGF-β mediated cell cycle arrest by altering
their relative expressions of Smad3 and Smad2. Since overexpression of
R-Smads may not always accurately reflect the functional status of the
endogenous molecules, we individually knocked down each R-Smad and tested
its effect on pro-oncogenic behavior of TGF-β. Although Smad2 deficiency
has no effect on breast cancer cell behavior, Smad3 deficiency reduced
growth and invasion capacity of breast cancer cells. Interestingly, while
Smad3 deficiency was associated with reduced TMEPAI/PMEPA1 and EMT gene
expressions and increased expression of cell cycle inhibitors, Smad2
deficiency had opposite effect on these regulators. Moreover, the
decreased growth, invasion and associated gene expressions were largely
reversed by overexpressing TMEPAI in Smad3 knockdown cells, suggesting
that Smad3-TMEPAI axis may be involved in subverting growth suppressive
effects of TGF-β into growth promotion. Compared to control and Smad2
deficient cells, Smad3 deficient cells had markedly elevated PTEN protein
levels and suppressed Akt phosphorylation both under basal conditions and
TGF-β stimulation. We identified that Smad3 but not Smad2 plays an
important role in stimulating TMEPAI expression, growth and EMT in triple
negative breast cancer cells by promoting TGF-β dependent non-canonical
signaling by decreasing the cellular content of PTEN and p27 in a TMEPAI
dependent manner. Taken together, the results demonstrate a novel role
for Smad3 in cancer transformation and cancer progression through TMEPAI.
Current therapeutic strategies are aiming at antagonizing the whole
TGF-β signaling thereby completely blocking both Smad2 and Smad3
signaling pathways. Selective targeting of TGF-β-Smad3-TMEPAI axis may
be more beneficial in triple negative breast cancer therapy and
prevention.


