Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Over-production of thrombopoietin in the liver of transgenic mice
with liver-specific human BrafV600E expression.


The BrafV637E mutation, which corresponds to the human BRAFV600E
mutation, plays a pivotal role in mouse hepatic carcinogenesis induced by
neonatal treatment with diethylnitrosamine in B6C3F1 mice. We previously
established the transgenic mice that express the human BRAFV600E mutation
in the liver (Mol Carcinog 2016. doi:10.1002/mc22510). The transgenic
mice showed 5 folds increase in liver/body weight as compared to normal
mice, and their liver was entirely consisted of small basophilic
hepatocytes resembling DEN-induced preneoplastic hepatocytes. The
transgenic mice were normally born, but most of them spontaneously died
during 2-3 months after birth. In this study, we investigated the reason
for spontaneous death in the liver-specific BRAFV600E transgenic mice.
The numbers of platelets and megakaryocytes were remarkably increased
respectively in peripheral blood and bone marrow in the transgenic mice.
Furthermore, fragmented red blood cells and activated platelets with
enlarged size were frequently observed in the peripheral blood smear of
the transgenic mice. Thrombopoietin mRNA was abundantly expressed in the
liver of transgenic mice, and the conditioned-medium of the cultured
hepatocytes from the transgenic mice contained increased amount of
thrombopoietin as compared with that of normal mouse hepatocytes.
Histopathological analysis revealed that many platelets were adhered to
the sinusoidal walls in the liver of the transgenic mice. Furthermore,
glomerulonephritis associating with platelet deposition in glomerular
capillaries and interstitial pneumonia accompanying microthrombosis in
alveolar capillaries were also observed. Because platelets have been
shown to promote liver regeneration through interaction with various
hepatic cell components such as hepatocytes, endothelial cells and
Kupffer cells, the platelet accumulation in the liver of the transgenic
mice may represent the stimulation for growth and proliferation of
hepatocytes by platelets. On the other hand, the platelets might cause
the renal and pulmonary diseases which might cause spontaneous death in
these mice. Our results indicate that over-production of thrombopoietin
by the BRAF-mutated hepatocytes may create the macroenvironment that may
favor the growth and proliferation of neoplastic hepatocytes.(Supported
by the grant from Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology.)


