Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential therapeutic use of Estrogen Receptor β agonist in the
prevention and progression of breast cancer using HER-2/neu mouse model.


Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women worldwide.
Hormone-mediated therapy to treat estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) positive
breast cancers include the use of ER antagonist, Tamoxifen, aromatase
inhibitors and other compounds that degrade ERα. Unlike ERα, ERβ has
been shown to have tumor-suppressive function in various cancers,
including breast cancer. Recent studies have identified, synthesized, and
tested the clinical safety of ERβ-selective agonists. Given the
tumor-suppressive properties of ERβ, it may be possible to use these
compounds to induce or activate the ERβ and test their role in the
chemoprevention and blocking the progression of breast cancer. We have
investigated the therapeutic utility of ERβ agonists in the prevention
and progression of breast cancer using MMTV-HER2/neu mice transgenic
mouse model. MMTV-HER2/neu mice develop premalignant lesions at 4-5
months, and tumors starting at month 7 due to overexpression of the
HER2/neu proto-oncogene. MMTV-HER2/neu mice were treated with an ERβ
agonist, LY500307 examined the prevention and progression of mammary
cancers in these mice. When compared to controls, ERβ agonist-treated
mice exhibited a significant decrease in the development of preneoplastic
changes. Differential gene expression analysis revealed a significant
change in the expression of a number of genes in response to LY500307
treatment. Pathway analysis identified an enrichment for chemokines
signaling pathways, particularly TNF, in blocking the development of
preneoplastic changes resulting from treatment with ERβ agonists. Our
studies also show a decrease in the formation of mammary tumors in
HER-2/neu mice with preexisting preneoplastic changes when treated with
LY500307. This study suggests that ERβ agonist treatment may be a
valuable therapeutic option for the prevention in women at increased risk
of breast cancer and in blocking the progression of hormone receptor
positive breast tumors.


