Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mek/erk inhibition enhances anti-pd-l1 effects on the
susceptibility to NK cytotoxicity of cisplatin-resistant non-small cell
lung cancer.


Background: Immunotherapy is often used after chemotherapy failure or in
combination with chemotherapy. Initial chemotherapy may yield clinical
benefit, however; after continuous chemotherapy treatments,
chemoresistance invariably develops. Immunotherapy has shown effects in a
fraction of patients, but not all patients with chemoresistant non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) will respond. We investigated a new mechanism to
enhance natural killer (NK) cell cytotoxicity against cisplatin-resistant
NSCLC and propose to inhibit MEK/Erk pathway to enhance anti-PD-L1
effects on the susceptibility to NK cytotoxicity of cisplatin-resistant
NSCLC.

Methods: NK cell mediated cytotoxicity was conducted using two NK cell
sources: NK92 cell line and primary NK cells. LDH release-based NK
cytotoxicity test and the colony formation assay were applied to monitor
NK cytotoxicity. NK cell cytotoxicities to parental vs.
cisplatin-resistant A549 and H157 sublines (A549CisR and H157CisR) were
compared. We investigated signaling molecules/pathways that are
responsible for the constitutively up-regulated expression of PD-L1 and
down-regulated NKG2D ligands in cisplatin-resistant cells using qPCR and
Western blot analyses and inhibition studies using inhibitors of each
signaling pathway were conducted in parallel.

Results: We found cisplatin-resistant NSCLC cells were resistant to NK
cell cytotoxicity, due to the up-regulation of PD-L1 and down-regulation
of NKG2D ligands in A549CisR and H157CisR cells compared to parental
cells. In addition, we found that the expression of PD-1 in NK cells was
induced after co-culture with cisplatin-resistant cells, but not with
parental cells. Susceptibility of cisplatin-resistant cells to NK cell
cytotoxicity increased when the PD-L1/PD-1 interaction was inhibited by
Abs of PD-1 or PD-L1. In inhibitor studies, we found that the inhibition
of MEK/Erk signaling effectively reduced the PD-L1 level while recovered
the NKG2D ligands levels in cisplatin-resistant cells. Subsequently,
adding the MEK/Erk inhibitor enhanced the PD-L1 Ab effect in increasing
the susceptibility of A549CisR and H157CisR cells to NK cell cytotoxic
action.

Conclusion and Impacts: Our data suggest that the inhibition of MEK/Erk
pathway may enhance the anti PD-L1/PD-1 therapy efficacy in increasing
the susceptibility of cisplatin-resistant cells to NK cell cytotoxicity
via reducing the constitutively expressed PD-L1 levels, while
simultaneously recovering NKG2D ligand levels in these cells. This
strategy of dual effects has the therapeutic potential for molecular
targeted drug development. The immune escape of cisplatin-resistant cells
is an emerging task to overcome in lung cancer therapeutics, thus
positive outcome of our studies may result in clinical significance.


