Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the differential phosphorylation of Bim in plasma
cell disorders.


The pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family protein Bim is known to be phosphorylated
in response to many stimuli. These phosphorylation events have been
linked to proteasomal degradation, release from dynein light chain, and
impacting the ability of Bim to initiate apoptosis. We’ve recently
shown that IL-6 stimulation of myeloma cells results in phosphorylation
of Bim at S69 and S77. IL-6 treatment additionally led to increased
association with Mcl-1 at the expense of Bcl-2/xL. This data, coupled
with our longstanding interest in factors that influence Bim binding to
anti-apoptotic proteins, led us to study the baseline phosphorylation
state of Bim in plasma cell malignancies.

To study the global phosphorylation of Bim, we utilized PhosTag gel
electrophoresis, which allows for detection of phosphorylated forms of a
protein. We’ve shown that Bim is constitutively phosphorylated in
myeloma cell lines and patient samples. Importantly, these cell lines and
samples display differences in their distribution of Bim binding to
anti-apoptotic proteins. The pattern of Bim phosphorylation varies
significantly across cell lines, with expression of anywhere from 1 to 4
phosphorylated forms. Using the Bax/Bak-deficient Waldenström
Macroglobulinemia cell line RPCI-WM1, we were able to recapitulate
constitutive phosphorylation in stable cell lines overexpressing Bim.

In order to identify and characterize constitutive Bim phosphorylation
sites, we created phospho-mimetic (E) and unphosphorylateable (A)
versions with individual and combination of mutations of seven potential
sites—S59, S77, S87, S94, S104, T116 and S118. PhosTag allowed us to
identify individual phosphorylation sites—by mutating individual sites
to A, we could determine if we eliminated phosphorylated Bim bands. These
experiments showed that S118 and S59 are constitutively phosphorylated in
RPCI-WM1. Lastly, we tested whether A and E mutations were affecting the
distribution of Bim among anti-apoptotic proteins and dynein light chain.
We observed that mutation of the T116 residue to either A or E resulted
in increased binding to Mcl-1, suggesting this amino acid is critical for
binding to dynein light chain, regardless of phosphorylation status.

Our results support the presence of multiple constitutive Bim
phosphorylation events, differential signaling and regulation of Bim
across a spectrum of plasma cell disorders, and a potential mechanism
underlying the preferential binding of Bim. Characterization of the
signaling cascades regulating these events may provide novel insights
into improving therapies for cancer. The efficacy of drugs such as
Navitoclax and Venetoclax can be improved by coupling them with kinase
inhibitors that can either mobilize Bim from dynein light chain or alter
its affinity for anti-apoptotic proteins.


