Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leveraging protein coding gene expression profiles to accurately
impute lncRNA transcriptome of cancer cells.


Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) represent a large, diverse and
tissue-specific class of transcripts that are involved in gene
regulation. Recent large-scale cancer sequencing efforts indicate that
lncRNAs are an important component of the cancer transcriptome, and may
play a critical role in carcinogenesis and drug sensitivity. Accurate
profiling of lncRNAs however remains a challenge owing to significantly
lower expression levels than mRNA, requiring deep paired-end total RNA
sequencing, which can be prohibitively expensive. Additionally, previous
generation microarrays that constitute a vast majority of GEO and
ArrayExpress datasets do not provide comprehensive lncRNA coverage.

Here we propose a lncRNA expression imputation (LEXI) framework to
reconstruct the lncRNA transcriptome of cancer cells using their mRNA
expression profiles. Our goal is to provide a tool that enables the
harnessing of enormous wealth of publicly available cancer mRNA datasets
and discover novel lncRNAs associated with carcinogenesis and drug
sensitivity. The LEXI approach is based on learning patterns of mRNA
expression associated with each lncRNA across a diverse cohort of cancer
cells and then predict lncRNA expression profile of uncharacterized cells.

We developed LEXI by evaluating the performance of various
machine-learning algorithms benchmarked in a cross-validation study
across a cohort of 675 cancer cell lines and 9755 pan-cancer tissues. We
adapted the LEXI framework based on optimal performance and computation
time and show that LEXI accurately predicts lncRNA expression profiles in
both cell lines and tissues. To demonstrate the utility of LEXI, we
reconstruct the lncRNA transcriptome of over 1000 cell lines and 2000
TCGA samples, and compare with RNAseq measured lncRNA levels in
corresponding samples. We further show expression levels of MALAT1,
HOTAIR, CCAT1 and other established cancer-associated lncRNAs are
accurately predicted across cancer types, and can be used to discover
novel associations in uncharacterized phenotypes. LEXI will be available
as a free resource for researchers to easily obtain lncRNA profiles using
their own mRNA data.


