Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BGB324, a selective small molecule inhibitor of receptor tyrosine
kinase AXL, abrogates tumor intrinsic and microenvironmental immune
suppression and enhances immune checkpoint inhibitor efficacy in lung and
mammary adenocarcinoma models.


The AXL receptor tyrosine kinase is associated with poor overall survival
in a wide spectrum of cancers including lung and breast adenocarcinomas.
AXL signaling is an important regulator of tumor plasticity related to
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and stem cell traits that
drive metastasis and drug resistance. Signaling via AXL is also a key
suppressor of the anti-tumor innate immune response, and AXL is expressed
on several cells associated with the tumor immune microenvironment
including natural killer (NK) cells and tumor-associated macrophages.
Hence AXL resides uniquely at the nexus between tumor and
microenvironmental anti-tumor immune suppression mechanisms. We report
that BGB324, a selective clinical-stage small molecule Axl kinase
inhibitor, enhances the effect of immune checkpoint blockade in
aggressive adenocarcinoma models with limited immunogenicity by targeting
both tumor intrinsic and microenvironmental immune suppression. Immune
therapy with anti-CTLA4/PD1 in the 4T1 model increased AXL and EMT-marker
expression correlating with a lack of response. Combination with BGB324
resulted in durable primary tumor clearance versus anti-CTLA4/PD1 alone.
In a separate study, BGB324 + anti-CTLA4 treatment resulted in
significant long-term primary tumor clearance while no response was
observed with anti-CTLA4 treatment alone. The extensive metastasis to the
lung, liver and spleen characteristic of the 4T1 model was not detected
in animals responding to the combination treatment. Importantly,
responding animals rejected orthotopic 4T1 tumor cell re-challenge,
demonstrating sustained tumor immunity. In the LL2 Lewis Lung model,
BGB324 in combination with anti-PD1/PDL1 significantly prevented tumor
growth compared to treatment with anti-PD1/PDL1. Tumors from mice treated
with BGB324 in combination with immune checkpoint inhibitors displayed
reduced EMT traits, altered cytokine expression, enhanced tumor
infiltration of effector cells and decreased number of mMDSC. Also,
BGB324 significantly reduced IL10 secretion by isolated human macrophages
and enhanced human NK-cell mediated NSCLC tumor cell lysis. Collectively
these results support a prominent role for AXL in resistance to immune
therapy and support clinical translation of combining BGB324 with immune
checkpoint inhibitors to improve cancer treatment.


