Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiosensitization of glioblastoma stem-like cells by Selinexor, a
selective inhibitor of nuclear export (SINE) compound.


Radiation therapy remains a primary treatment modality for glioblastoma
(GBM). Recently, radiation-induced translational control has been
implicated in regulating processes involved in the cellular radioresponse
of GSCs. Reactome analysis disclosed that one major pathway under
translational control after irradiation in GSCs is the nuclear export
pathway, specifically by the nuclear export receptor Exportin 1 (XPO1,
also referred to as CRM1). XPO1 transports over 200 cargo proteins from
the nucleus to the cytoplasm via the nuclear pore complex, including
several tumor suppressor proteins and it is dysregulated in multiple
types of cancers. Selinexor (KPT-330), a SINE compound, is an XPO1
inhibitor that has shown antineoplastic activity in preclinical and
clinical models, both alone and in combination with other treatments. In
this study, we investigated the effect of XPO1 inhibition by Selinexor in
combination with radiation on GSCs. To determine whether XPO1 could serve
as a target for GSC radiosensitization we focused on the GSC cell line
NSC11. Based on clonogenic survival assay, addition of Selinexor 1h
before irradiation significantly enhanced the radiosensitivity of NSC11
cell as compared to controls. To begin to investigate the mechanism
behind Selinexor-mediated radiosensitivity, γH2AX foci dispersal, a
surrogate marker for DNA double strand breaks (DSB) was evaluated. NSC11
cells treated with Selinexor 1h before irradiation (2Gy) and collected
1-24h later for analysis of γH2AX demonstrated a significant delay in
DNA DSB repair 24h after irradiation. Because XPO1 is responsible for
export of various cargo proteins out of the nucleus, including several
ribosomal subunits, it is predicted to play a role in global translation.
To evaluate the effects of XPO1 inhibition on GSCs, the polysome profiles
of NSC11 treated with Selinexor were evaluated. Polysome profiles of
NSC11 cells demonstrated significant attenuation of the polysome portion
of the profile as early as 1h after treatment with Selinexor. After 24h
of Selinexor treatment, polysomes were almost undetectable with a
decrease in translational efficiency (TE) by more than half. This
attenuation is not accompanied by a change in the monosomal peaks,
suggesting that poly-ribosome binding to mRNA is specifically affected by
radiation. Taken together, these data suggest that XPO1 plays a role in
translation as well as in cellular radioresponse, and inhibition of XPO1
by Selinexor enhances GSC radiosensitivity, possibly by inhibiting global
translation.


