Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Network guided modeling allows tumor type independent prediction
of sensitivity to retinoic acid.


Background: All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) is a differentiating agent
used in the treatment of acute-promyelocytic-leukemia and it is
under-exploited in other malignancies despite its low systemic toxicity.
A rational/personalized use of ATRA requires development of predictive
tools allowing identification of sensitive cancer types and responsive
individuals.

Materials and Methods: RNA-Sequencing data for 10080 patients and 33
different tumor-types were derived from the TCGA and Leucegene datasets
and completely re-processed. The study was performed using machine
learning methods and network analysis.

Results: We profiled a large panel of breast-cancer cell-lines for in
vitro sensitivity to ATRA and exploited the associated basal
gene-expression data to initially generate a model predicting
ATRA-sensitivity in this disease. Starting from these results and using a
network-guided approach, we developed a generalized model (ATRA-21) whose
validity extends to tumor-types other than breast cancer. ATRA-21
predictions correlate with experimentally determined sensitivity in a
large panel of cell-lines representative of numerous tumor-types. In
patients, ATRA-21 correctly identifies APL as the most sensitive
acute-myelogenous-leukemia subtype and indicates that uveal-melanoma and
low-grade glioma are top-ranking diseases as for average predicted
responsiveness to ATRA. There is a consistent number of tumor-types for
which higher ATRA-21 predictions are associated with better outcomes.

Conclusions: In summary, we generated a tumor-type independent
ATRA-sensitivity predictor which consists of a restricted number of genes
and has the potential to be applied in the clinics. Identification of the
tumor-types which are likely to be generally sensitive to the action of
ATRA paves the way to the design of clinical studies in the context of
these diseases. In addition, ATRA-21 may represent an important
diagnostic tool for the selection of individual patients who may benefit
from ATRA-based therapeutic strategies also in tumors characterized by
lower average sensitivity.


