Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diosgenin and temozolamide: A potential combinatorial chemotherapy
to overcome temozolamide resistance in glioblastoma multiforme.


Introduction: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) accounts for the most
aggressive form of tumor showing poor prognosis. Prevailing treatment
modality includes chemotherapy with temozolomide (TMZ) concomitant with
surgical resection and/or irradiation. However, it has been observed that
a number of patients are developing resistance to TMZ owing to its high
dosage regimen. The aim of this study is to examine the effects of
diosgenin (DSG), a natural steroidal saponin obtained from fenugreek, in
combination with TMZ in human GBM cells and TMZ resistant GBM cells.
Methodology: The potential of combinatorial chemotherapy for overcoming
TMZ resistance was evaluated through development of TMZ resistant GBM
clones. These clones were generated by treatment of GBM cells with
sub-lethal dose of TMZ over several cycles. Cellular effects were studied
by viability assay, flow cytometry and wound healing assay on both single
and combined drug treated GBM cells and TMZ resistant cells,
respectively. The morphological study and cellular uptake in combined or
individual drug treated cells was assessed by microscopy and
immunofluorescence staining. The time dependant effect of drugs on
invasive and migratory potential of GBM cells and TMZ resistant cells was
analysed through zymography for matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) activity
and western blot for apoptotic proteins, epithelial and mesenchymal (EMT)
markers, MMPs and VEGF expression. Further, the drug induced apoptosis
was also assessed through chromatin condensation and DNA laddering assay.
Results: Our investigation shows that co-administration of DSG and TMZ
resulted in a substantial increase in GBM cell apoptosis and marked
inhibition of cell growth in vitro. Anti-angiogenic and anti-invasive
potential of DSG and TMZ were assessed through in vitro studies. At
molecular level, DSG and TMZ synergistically lower XIAP expression and
cleavage of intracellular death substrates such as PARP thereby shifting
the balance from survival to apoptosis as indicated by the rise in the
sub-G1 cell population. This combination also alters EMT markers,
downregulates the expression of Bcl-xL, Bcl-2, Mcl1, MMPs and VEGF and
induces expression of Bax, AIF, cytochrome C. Conclusion: The results
suggested that DSG in combination with TMZ reduced the dose of TMZ, when
administered singly, and also inhibited the migration and invasion of GBM
and TMZ resistant cells. It induced apoptosis and altered the expression
of EMT markers. These findings reveal a new therapeutic potential for
overcoming TMZ resistance in GBM therapy. This novel modality may be a
promising tool for GBM treatment.


