Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A patient derived ex vivo platform CANScript™ predicts distinct
therapeutic outcomes to multiple PD-1 checkpoint inhibitors in single
tumor biopsies.


Background: Emerging clinical evidence using immunotherapy in recent
years has demonstrated its power to suppress tumor growth by releasing
the brakes on the immune system. For example, blockade of immune
checkpoints, such as PD-1, has revolutionized treatment options for
patients with aggressive cancers such as head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC). However, clinical responses to PD-1 inhibition vary
widely among patients while majority of them do not show any anti-tumor
response. Multiple FDA-approved drugs against the same immune checkpoints
have resulted in globally distinct outcomes in the clinic. There is a
huge unmet need to understand these disparities at the individual patient
level and to maximize the clinical benefits of these agents.

Methods: Here, we employed a patient-derived ex vivo model, CANScript™
(Majumder B et al. Nature Commun 2015 Feb 27;6:6169 and Goldman A et al.
Nature Commun 2015 Feb 11;6:6139), which recreates the native 3D tumor
microenvironment, autocrine-paracrine dynamic and response to therapy by
incorporating fresh tumor tissue and autologous immune cells with
immunotherapy agents. Utilizing late stage HNSCC (N=50) we interrogated
phenotypic response to two FDA-approved PD-1 inhibitors, Pembrolizumab
(KEYTRUDA) and Nivolumab (OPDIVO). To do this, we used a comprehensive
panel of immunological assays to evaluate changes in the immune
compartments by flowcytometry and immunohistochemistry (primarily CD8,
CD45, FOXP3, CXCR4, CD68, PDL1, PD1), multiplex cytokine profiling (IL6,
IL8, IFN-g, IL10, IL12, Perforin, GranzymeB), along with
functional/phenotypic effects including tumor proliferation, histological
changes and cell death.

Results: The data demonstrated that CANScript™ preserves the
tumor-immune contexture and native heterogeneity across different
clinical stages and patients. Importantly, we observed that PD-1 blockade
resulted in patient-specific therapeutic response, which was
characterized by differential distribution and maintenance of
infiltrating CD8+ and CD4+ lymphocytes, distinct patterning of cytokines
linked to functional dysregulation, and changes in tumor proliferation
and apoptosis. Interestingly, data suggest that both Pembrolizumab and
Nivolumab act on the same immune network axis but trigger functionally
diverse phenotypes in the tumor immune compartment and distinct antitumor
effects within an individual patient tumor.

Conclusion: Together, these findings demonstrate the utility of
CANScript™ as an ex vivo platform to predict therapeutic response of
immune checkpoint inhibitors at the individual patient level. It also
highlights mechanistic variations that could impact clinical outcome of
these agents having the same molecular target. Such information can
re-shape our understanding of patient selection and rational combinations
for novel immune checkpoint inhibitors.


