Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and validation of PCAT14 as prognostic biomarker in
prostate cancer.


Background: Early detection of prostate cancer, largely facilitated by
the advent of PSA screening, has also been attributed to over-diagnosis
and overtreatment of this disease. While stratifying patients into risk
groups based on clinicopathologic features is currently used to guide
treatment decisions, it is clear that current stratification approaches
need to be further refined to allow better personalization of therapy.
Thus, identifying molecular biomarkers to distinguish indolent versus
aggressive disease would address an unmet need in the clinical management
of prostate cancer. Advances in next-generation sequencing technologies
have enabled thorough characterization of cancer transcriptomes,
especially in unraveling the realm of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs). In
particular, lncRNAs, a class of ncRNAs, have gained increasing attention
as biomarkers due to their tissue- and cancer-specific expression
profile. Thus, lncRNAs may be relevant in the clinical management of
prostate cancer (PCa).

Methods and Results: Here we assembled and analyzed a large RNA-seq
dataset, from 585 PCa patient samples, including benign prostate tissue
and both localized and metastatic PCa to discover and validate
differentially expressed genes associated with disease aggressiveness. We
performed Sample Set Enrichment Analysis (SSEA) and identified genes
associated with low versus high Gleason score in the RNA-seq database.
Comparing Gleason 6 versus 9+ PCa samples, we identified 99
differentially expressed genes with variable association to Gleason grade
as well as robust expression in prostate cancer. The top-ranked novel
lncRNA PCAT14, exhibits both cancer and lineage specificity. On
multivariate analysis, low PCAT14 expression independently predicts for
BPFS (P = .00126), PSS (P = .0385), and MFS (P = .000609), with trends
for OS as well (P = .056). An RNA in-situ hybridization (ISH) assay for
PCAT14 distinguished benign versus malignant cases, as well as high
versus low Gleason disease. In prostate cancer cell lines, the endogenous
PCAT14 levels are induced by CRISPR/SAM technique, which significantly
suppresses cell invasion.

Conclusion: By performing differential expression analysis between
prostate cancer with low vs high Gleason scores, we identified lncRNA
PCAT14 as a prostate cancer- and lineage- specific biomarker of indolent
disease. We show that PCAT14 is an AR-regulated transcript and its
overexpression suppresses invasion of prostate cancer cells. Moreover, in
multiple independent datasets, PCAT14 expression associates with
favorable outcomes in prostate cancer and adds prognostic value to
standard clinicopathologic variables.


