Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating clinically relevant pharmacological agents in a rat
ambulation model to ameliorate PEGylated recombinant hyaluronidase PH20
(PEGPH20)-mediated musculoskeletal adverse events.


Some cancers accumulate high levels of the glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan
(HA) within the tumor microenvironment (TME), and this HA accumulation is
associated with rapid tumor progression and poor clinical outcomes. As
preclinical data have demonstrated that enzymatic degradation of HA, via
intravenous (IV) administration of PEGylated recombinant human
hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20), increases therapeutic efficacy in
HA-accumulating tumors, several clinical trials evaluating PEGPH20 in
combination with anti-cancer therapies are ongoing. The most advanced
clinical trial (Phase 3) is evaluating PEGPH20 plus Abraxane®
(nab-paclitaxel)/gemcitabine (AG) in patients with stage IV untreated
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA)(NCT02715804). The safety profile
of PEGPH20/Abraxane/gemcitabine (PAG) was generally similar to AG alone
in an interim analysis of the Phase 2 data, with the exception of a
potential imbalance of thromboembolic events (TEs), and an increased
incidence of musculoskeletal events (MSEs) in the PAG arm, with the
predominant MSE being muscle spasms (55.4% PAG vs. 1.6% AG, all
grades)(Bullock, ASCO 2016). In an effort to find pharmacological
agent(s) that might decrease MSEs in PAG-treated patients, a rat
locomotor activity assay was developed. In brief, locomotor activity of
male Sprague Dawley rats was measured with an automated infrared
photobeam monitoring apparatus (Hamilton/Kinder®, San Diego) during the
12h dark cycle when rats are normally active. Any PEGPH20-mediated
decrease in rat locomotor activity was interpreted as MSE-like effects.
In response to PEGPH20 (1 mg/kg) the locomotor activity of male rats was
reduced by ~75% for the first 2 dark cycles post-treatment (48h), and
then gradually returned to vehicle baseline levels by days 4-5. FDA
approved drugs used clinically to alleviate pain were subsequently tested
for their ability to ameliorate the effects of PEGPH20 on locomotor
activity. Agents included anti-inflammatories, anti-spasmodics,
neuropathic pain medications, neuroleptics, diuretics,
anti-hypertensives, anti-fibromyalgics and opioids. The steroid
dexamethasone, currently being used in the Phase 2 and Phase 3 PDA
clinical trials to manage MSEs, was the positive control. As a class,
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), including ketorolac,
ketoprofen, diclofenac, and piroxicam, increased rat ambulation by ~40%
on the first night following PEGPH20 treatment compared to PEGPH20 alone.
Mobility in rats treated with NSAIDs/PEGPH20 increased ~60% on the second
night compared to PEGPH20 alone. No other drug classes increased rodent
ambulation. These data suggest that NSAIDs may be useful in partially
alleviating the MSEs experienced by patients receiving PEGPH20.


