Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pegylated adenosine deaminase 2 (PEG-ADA2) abrogates the
cytoprotective effects of adenosine against chronic lymphocytic leukemia
cells.


Extracellular adenosine can be generated from ATP and/or ADP through the
concerted action of the ectoenzymes CD39 and CD73. Adenosine can bind
different type-1 purinergic receptors eliciting potent cytoprotective and
immunosuppressive effects. We previously focused on chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL), a disease characterized by the progressive expansion of a
mature population of B lymphocytes, showing that a subset of patients
with a CD73+ clone possess a poor prognosis. This patient subset can
actively generate adenosine, which favors leukemic cell survival,
synthesis of immunosuppressive cytokines, while inhibiting T lymphocyte
proliferation. ADA2 is a human enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of
adenosine into inosine. We hypothesized that depletion of high adenosine
levels from the tumor microenvironment through the administration of
exogenous ADA2 could be therapeutically relevant to limit tumor
protection and immunosuppression. Several engineered PEG-ADA2 variants
possessed improved enzyme activity and pharmacokinetics compared to
wild-type ADA2. Inhibition of adenosine receptor activation was evaluated
by measuring intracellular cAMP concentrations in T lymphocytes purified
from healthy donors. Adenosine depletion was observed with increasing
concentrations of PEG-ADA2-R222Q/S265N and significantly reduced cAMP
levels. PEG-ADA2 variants were then tested on CD73+ CLL lymphocytes to
determine their effects on extracellular adenosine and inosine. Treatment
of leukemic B cells with PEG-ADA2-R222Q/S265N and
PEG-ADA2-R222Q/S265N/K374D resulted in complete removal of high levels of
adenosine, as measured by HPLC. Conversely, PEG-ADA2-E182T, which
possesses significantly attenuated catalytic activity, was less effective
in reducing adenosine. The functional effects of adenosine depletion on
CLL cell survival were analyzed following treatment with the
chemotherapeutic, DNA-damaging agent etoposide that robustly induces
apoptosis within 16 hours. Addition of exogenous adenosine to cultures of
purified CD73+ CLL cells significantly rescued cells from
etoposide-induced apoptosis. However, when these primary leukemic cells
were pretreated with PEG-ADA2-R222Q/S265N or PEG-ADA2-R222Q/S265N/K374D,
the cell viability rate was significantly decreased, abrogating the
cytoprotective effects of adenosine. On the contrary, PEG-ADA2-E182T had
a minimal effect, suggesting enzymatic depletion of adenosine is critical
to observe these effects. Similar effects were observed by the PEG-ADA2
variants on a CLL cell line expressing CD73+. These preliminary results
suggest that enzymatic depletion of extracellular adenosine following
treatment with PEG-ADA2 is a relevant approach to counteract the
cytoprotective effects of adenosine, warranting further development of
PEG-ADA2 as a possible approach to treat CLL.


