Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin D supplementation decreases serum 27-hydroxycholesterol
and expression of CYP27A1 in tumors of breast cancer patients.


The goal of this study was to investigate whether vitamin D regulates the
conversion of cholesterol to 27-hydroxycholesterol (27HC), an endogenous
selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) that can act as a driver of
estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer, particularly in
post-menopausal women with low circulating estrogen levels. The
hypothesis of this study was that the active metabolite of vitamin D,
calcitriol, can inhibit expression of CYP27A1, the synthesizing enzyme
for 27HC, thereby decreasing the concentration of 27HC in the blood. Both
27HC and 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25OHD) were quantified by LC-MS/MS in the
serum of 29 breast cancer patients, 26 of which had ER+ cancer, pre- and
post-treatment with either a low dose (control) of 400 IU vitamin D or a
high dose of 10,000 IU vitamin D per day during the neoadjuvant period,
which ranged between 7 and 37 days. In addition to these blood samples,
tissue biopsies pre-treatment and the excised tumor collected
post-treatment were tested for gene expression by microarray analysis. A
significant increase (p = 4.3E-5) was observed in serum 25OHD for
patients who received the high dose vitamin D compared to those who
received the low dose, whose 25OHD values remained stable. A greater
decrease (p = 1.7E-1) was observed in serum 27HC for the high dose group
compared to the low dose group, with greater decreases in 27HC on average
for those with larger increases in 25OHD concentration. Gene expression
measurements showed a decrease in CYP27A1 expression (p = 4.5E-1) in
breast cancer tissue for the high dose group compared to the low dose
group, with greater decreases in expression observed for patients on high
dose vitamin D treatment for longer times. These preliminary data show
good evidence that high dose vitamin D supplementation can decrease 27HC
levels in the body by inhibiting expression of CYP27A1 and that the
longer this treatment, the greater the effect. While larger scale studies
are needed, the data in this study point to vitamin D supplementation as
a possible simple method for inhibiting ER+ breast cancer growth and
suggests this reduction in CYP27A1 expression as an additional pathway by
which vitamin D can mitigate risk and improve outcomes for ER+ breast
cancer patients.


