Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved T Cell activation bioassays to advance the development of
bispecific antibodies and engineered T cell immunotherapies.


T cells play a central role in cell-mediated immunity and can mediate
long-term, antigen-specific, effector and memory responses. In recent
years, a variety of immunotherapy strategies aimed at inducing,
strengthening or engineering T cell responses have emerged as promising
approaches for the treatment of diseases such as cancer and autoimmunity.
Current methods used to measure TCR-mediated T cell proliferation and
cytokine production rely on primary PBMCs as a source of T cells, which
must be stimulated via co-culture with APCs or anti-TCR/CD3 antibodies.
These assays are laborious and highly variable due to their reliance on
donor primary cells, complex assay protocols and unqualified assay
reagents. As a result, these assays are difficult to establish in
quality-controlled drug development settings. To overcome this barrier,
we developed two reporter-based bioluminescent T cell activation
bioassays that can be used for the development of bispecific antibodies
and engineered T cell immunotherapies. The assays consist of Jurkat T
cells genetically engineered to express luciferase downstream of either
NFAT or IL-2 response elements. The T cell activation bioassays reflect
the mechanisms of action of biologics designed to induce TCR and/or
CD28-mediated T cell activation, as demonstrated using anti-CD3 and/or
anti-CD28 antibodies as well as blinatumomab, a bispecific antibody that
simultaneously binds CD3 expressed on T cells and CD19 expressed on
malignant B cells. The bioassays are pre-qualified according to ICH
guidelines and show assay specificity, precision, accuracy and linearity
required for routine use in potency and stability studies. Finally, our
data illustrate the use of reporter-based T cell activation bioassays for
characterizing and measuring the activity of engineered chimeric antigen
receptor T cells.


