Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New insights into the roles of histone lysine-specific demethylase
2 (LSD2) in breast cancer.


Background: Epigenetic modifiers have been emerging as new players in
breast cancer development. FAD-dependent histone demethylases have been
proved to play important roles in regulating breast tumor initiation and
development. While the role of histone lysine-specific demethylase 1
(LSD1) in breast cancer progression has been well characterized, the
activity of its homolog, lysine-specific demethylase 2 (LSD2), in breast
cancer is still a riddle that needs to be uncovered.

Methods: To explore the precise role of LSD2 in breast cancer, we
overexpressed LSD2 protein in MDA-MB-231 cells (LSD2-OE). The phenotypic
effect of LSD2-OE on MM231 cells was characterized by proliferation
assay, soft agar assay (3D growth), trans-well cell migration and
invasion assay and mammosphere formation assay. To extend stem cell-like
features study of LSD2 overexpressed MM231 cells, we examined CD44+/CD24-
subpopulation by flow cytometry and the expression of several stem cell
markers by qPCR and western blot. In addition, we also investigated the
potential altered phenotypes of LSD2 knockdown in MM231 cells via RNAi.

Results: Results from Oncomine database show that LSD2 expression level
is greatly increased in invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) vs. non-invasive
breast cancers. The cellular proliferation assay revealed that LSD2-OE
promoted MM231 cell growth. Similarly, LSD2 overexpressed MM231 cells
were capable of forming large colonies in soft agar. Trans-well cell
migration and invasion assay results indicated LSD2-OE significantly
decreased both migration and invasion in MM231 cells. Mammosphere
formation assay results showed LSD2 overexpression increased the number
of primary and tertiary mammospheres in MM231 cells. Consistent with
increase of mammosphere forming efficiency, NANOG and SOX2 were increased
by LSD2 overexpression at the protein level. However, LSD2-OE
significantly decreased CD44+/CD24- subpopulation. Moreover, siRNA
mediated LSD2 depletion significantly decreased cell growth in multiple
breast cancer cell lines without altering migration and invasion in MM231
cells. Finally, no obvious phenotypic changes were observed in MM231
cells expressing stable LSD2 shRNA.

Conclusion: The multifaceted effects of LSD2 on breast cancer phenotypes
may reflect the profound influence of LSD2 activity on chromatin
structure and gene expression in the breast cancer genome. Our studies
suggest that overexpression of LSD2 facilitates growth and confers stem
cell-like traits to breast cancer cells, and transient LSD2 inhibition by
siRNA hinders breast cancer cell growth. These results suggest that LSD2
might be a valuable therapeutic target in breast cancer.


