Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNAseq analysis obtained from on-purpose tumor biopsies of
patients in the MATCH-R trial allows the identification of potential
mechanisms of acquired resistance to PD(L)1 therapies.


Background: MATCH-R is a prospective molecular characterization trial
(NCT02517892) aiming at defining the molecular basis of acquired
resistance to targeted agents and immune checkpoint blockers. RNA
sequencing (RNAseq) has been used to identify mechanisms of secondary
resistance to immunotherapy.

Patients and methods: Patients’ metastatic tumors were multi-site
biopsied at relapse under immunotherapies after a period of clinical
benefit, defined by a partial response or a stable disease of more than 6
months. Genome-wide RNAseq counts were intra-patient normalized and a
score of each gene’s expression was computed in comparison to a cohort
of 450 metastatic cancer patients with RNAseq available at the time of
analysis.

Results: To date, 10 patients treated by immunotherapies have had a
successful RNAseq in the MATCH-R trial. Five patients were treated with
PD-1 inhibitors and 5 with PD-L1 inhibitors. Three patients had NSCLC, 2
MSI high endometrial carcinoma, 2 anal carcinoma, 2 urothelial carcinoma
and 1 TNBC. Eight out off ten patients had an expression of IDO1 higher
than the median expression of IDO1 in our 450 controls (p value = 0.005).
A patient with endometrial carcinoma had one of the highest expressions
of IDO1 in the cohort. Consistently, IDO1 activation has previously been
reported as a mechanism of secondary resistance to immunotherapies. A 40
year old smoker NSCLC patient with a TP53 mutation has been treated
during 11 months with anti-PD1. RNAseq analysis on the biopsy of a
progressive lesion showed decreased expression of different actors of the
JAK-STAT pathway (biopsy composed of 40% tumor cells and 60%
microenvironment). Of the 78 genes signatures used (including 52
immunogenes signatures), the interferon gamma signature had the lowest
expression (p value = 0.004), consistent with a previous report of
JAK-STAT-induced resistance to immunotherapy. Two more patients had an
altered immune profile that could be involved in resistance to
immunotherapies, but was not yet reported in the litterature.
Confirmation of the RNAseq analysis with immunohistochemistry is
currently ongoing. The gene signatures of the 10 patients, composed of
immunogenes, DNA repair genes and epigenes, were compared to the whole
cohort in order to deduce corresponding false discovery rates. As such we
could identify 2 gene clusters, one enriched in T cells, dendritic cells
and macrophages, and the other enriched in epigenes and DNA repair genes.
Analysis of more patients is currently ongoing in order to cluster the
results with clinical characteristics.

Conclusion: Gene expression in the biopsy of patients that relapsed after
initial benefit to immunotherapy is informative and helps to identify the
mechanism of acquired resistance.


