Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA regulation of radiation sensitivity in colorectal cancer.


Background Patients with locally advanced rectal cancer receive
neoadjuvant chemoradiation therapy (CRT) and subsequent surgery. While
10-25% of patients have complete response to CRT, the remaining patients
undergo extensive tumor excision resulting in significant quality of life
issues. Response to CRT is an independent predictor of overall survival
highlighting the importance of improving CRT response rates. Several
tumor intrinsic factors govern responses to CRT including specific gene
expression programs. Emerging evidence suggests that microRNAs (miRs)
modulate gene expression programs in response to radiation and have been
implicated in several pathological processes associated with colorectal
cancer progression. In this context, we hypothesized that differential
expression of miRs regulates colorectal cancer radiation sensitivity and
can be used as a biomarker to predict radiation efficacy.

Methods To investigate the differences in miR profiles between rectal
cancer patients that had either a pathological partial response (PR) or
no response (NR), we isolated RNA from FFPE biopsies using the miRvana
microRNA isolation kit (Life Technologies). We used the Nanostring miR
profiling platform and obtained absolute counts for >700 human miRs. We
performed in vitro gain and loss of studies with candidate miR
transfections in human CRC cell lines and used a luminescence-based assay
for proliferation (Cell titer glo, Promega). Surviving fraction assays
were performed by seeding cells and counting colonies stained with
Crystal Violet. Eight distinct miR bioinformatic target prediction
algorithms initiated miR target identification, and a RISC-Trap assay was
implemented to confirm miR-target interactions. The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) datasets were accessed to acquire provisional survival data on 639
colorectal adenocarcinoma patients.

Results We identified 17 miRs that were differentially expressed, and
miR-451a, among the most upregulated miRs, inhibited proliferation and
colony formation in 2D and 3D assays in the presence of radiation. Target
prediction algorithms highlighted CAB39, EMSY, EREG, and MEX3C as
prominent miR-451a targets in colorectal cancer and/or radiation. TCGA
subset anaylsis found CAB39 and EMSY protein levels were found to be
upregulated in 14% and 6% of cases, respectively, and upregulated
co-expression of these genes significantly reduced 3 year overall
survival (69% vs 78%, p Results We identified 17 miRs that were
differentially expressed, and miR-451a, among the most upregulated miRs,
inhibited proliferation and colony formation in 2D and 3D assays in the
presence of radiation. Target prediction algorithms highlighted CAB39,
EMSY, EREG, and MEX3C as prominent miR-451a targets in colorectal cancer
and/or radiation. TCGA subset anaylsis found CAB39 and EMSY protein
levels were found to be upregulated in 14% and 6% of cases, respectively,
and upregulated co-expression of these genes significantly reduced 3 year
overall survival (69% vs 78%, p < 0.05). miR-target interaction was
confirmed via the RISC-Trap assay with miR-451a mimic transfection
resulting in robust 2.4-, 1.2-, and 2.8-fold enrichment of EREG, CAB39,
and EMSY, respectively. In our partial responders patient cohort
possessing upregulated miR-451a, there was significant downregulation of
CAB39 and EMSY mRNA and protein compared to non-responders.

Conclusions miRs alter cell survival networks affecting radiation
sensitivity and serve to identify pathways amenable to alternative
therapeutic modulation


