Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromatin remodelers as potential new targets for therapy of
pediatric sarcoma.


Fusion-positive rhabdomyosarcoma (FP-RMS) is a pediatric malignancy
driven by the fusion transcription factor PAX3-FOXO1, which generates an
aberrant gene expression signature leading to cell transformation. Since
FP-RMS cells are highly addicted to the fusion protein, it is in focus as
target for alternative therapies. Nevertheless, PAX3-FOXO1, as a
transcription factor, does not contain structural cavities and has a low
druggability. We therefore hypothesize that we can affect this aggressive
subtype of RMS by targeting the co-regulators that collaborate with the
fusion protein in regulating transcription. Recently, we have identified
the NuRD (Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase) complex as a potential
partner of PAX3-FOXO1 in gene expression modulation. The NuRD complex is
unique among chromatin remodeling complexes due to its dual enzymatic
activity (histone deacetylation through HDAC1/2 and nucleosome
positioning by CHD4 - chromodomain-DNA-binding protein 4), offering new
possible therapeutic targets. Silencing of two core members of NuRD, CHD4
and RBBP4, led to a drastic decrease in FP-RMS cell viability.
Additionally, CHD4 depletion caused a complete regression of mouse tumor
xenografts, but it did not affect proliferation of myoblasts, fibroblasts
or fusion negative RMS cells, despite the fact that these cells also
carry high CHD4 expression levels. We further investigated the nucleosome
remodeler CHD4 and learnt that it affects the expression of approximately
50% of PAX3-FOXO1 target genes with most of these genes being
upregulated, suggesting an activating role for CHD4 in these cases.
Consistent with a positive effect of CHD4 on gene expression, ChIP-seq
experiments with FP-RMS cell lines demonstrated that NuRD occupies
promoter and enhancer regions of highly expressed genes and co-localizes
with the fusion protein at regulatory regions of a subset of its target
genes. Next, we studied the influence of this nucleosome remodeler on the
chromatin status by DNase hypersensitivity assays and determined that the
presence of a DNase signal at PAX3-FOXO1 binding sites is concordant with
the presence of CHD4. Hence, we suggest a scenario where CHD4 plays an
essential role on FP-RMS tumorigenesis by allowing chromatin to acquire
an open architecture that enables PAX3-FOXO1 mediated gene expression. In
summary, our data propose that CHD4 has a crucial role as a co-regulator
of PAX3-FOXO1 driven gene expression. To our knowledge, CHD4 is the first
identified chromatin remodeler associated with PAX3-FOXO1 transcriptional
activity, thus highlighting the relevance of epigenetic regulation in
FP-RMS tumor development and opening chromatin remodelling as a possible
new field of action against this tumor, which is driving ongoing work
aimed at finding first-in-class small molecules to inhibit CHD4 function.


