Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of a potential breast cancer stem cell model from
induced pluripotent stem cells.


The role of cancer stem cells (CSC) in the present scenario of breast
cancer research is perceived as indispensable in the development and
progression of the disease. The CSC niche maintains a heirarchy of
heterogeneous cells, which facilitates the inception of the tumor until
its invasion. Therefore, our study focuses on the development of an
effective breast cancer stem cell model from mouse induced pluripotent
stem cells (miPSCs).

Taking into consideration the intertumor heterogeneity of breast cancer,
three human breast cancer cell lines, namely BT549, SKBR3 and T47D
representing three major hormone subtypes were used to derive respective
conditioned medium. The miPSCs were treated with these conditioned media
separately for a period of one month following the protocol previously
established by our laboratory. The resulting survived cells were
subcutaneously and orthotopically transplanted into Balb/c nude mice.
Within a short span of 15-20 days, both subcutaneous and orthotopic
tumors were developed. Serial transplantations in to nude mice also
generated malignant tumors with same vigor. Histopathological studies of
these tumors confirmed a malignant infiltrating ductal carcinoma with
apparent desmoplasia in orthotopic tumor and Her2 expression in
comparison with subcutaneous ones, all of which confirmed us the
conversion of miPSCs to CSCs. Presence of lung metastatic nodes further
ascertained the invasiveness of this in vitro generated CSCs. Marked
expression of prominent CSC markers namely CD44, Nanog, Sox2 and CD49f
were observed in primary cells generated from these tumors. Tumor sphere
formation assay further confirmed the presence of a good population of
self renewing CSC population in the tumor tissues.

This study attempts to recapitulate human breast cancer disease in mice
without any genetic manipulation, but by exploiting the tumor
microenvironment in the form of conditioned medium. This should pave the
way for the establishment of personalized therapy and a model to assess
effective therapeutic interventions.


