Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomal miR-19a: a novel communicator between cancer cell and
osteoclast in osteolytic bone metastasis of breast cancer.


Bone is the most common site for breast cancer (BC) metastasis and
relapse. Bone metastasis (BM) causes considerable complications due to
osteoclast-mediated bone resorption. Current treatment for osteolysis in
BM is limited due to their side effects and inability to extend the
patients’ survival. Thus, there is an urgent need for developing early
predictive markers and alternative therapies for BC-BM. Recently,
circulating miRNAs have been found to harbor great potential for
diagnostic and prognostic purposes. Due to the low stability of cell-free
RNA in serum, these circulating miRNAs exist mostly in a form of
membrane-wrapped extracellular vesicles (EVs) and they play important
roles in cancer progression. In this study, we aim to identify EVs
derived-miRNA from serum of BC patients as biomarkers for diagnosis and
prognosis of BC-BM.

To find the circulating miRNAs that are associated with BC-BM, we applied
a four-layer screening system combining bioinformatic analyses and
experimental verification. Firstly, 85 BC associated circulating miRNAs
were identified to be up-regulated in the serum of 32 BC patients
compared to 22 healthy donors. Next, we performed Kaplan-Meier survival
analysis for these 85 miRNAs and found that 10 miRNAs were positively
correlated with metastases. To select the miRNAs specifically involved in
BM, we compared the EVs derived miRNA profiles between bone metastatic
cell lines and the parental cell lines (231BoM-1833 vs MDA-MB-231,
MCF7-BoM2d vs MCF7). Among the 10 miRNAs, only miR-19a was significantly
up-regulated in EVs derived from bone metastatic cell lines. MiR-19a was
also found to be highly enriched in exosomes compared to microvesicles
and apoptotic bodies. Lastly, we verified the high expression of miR-19a
in the serum of BC-BM patients compared to the BC patients without BM.

To study the role of miR19a in BC-BM, we applied the CRISPR/Cas9
technology to knockout the miR-19a in 231BoM-1833 and MCF7-BoM2d cells.
The knockout of miR-19a didn’t alter the proliferation or migration of
BC cells. However, it significantly decreased bone metastasis in our
xenograft mouse models. We also found that the knockout of miR-19a
decreased osteolytic lesions in the tumor-bearing bones, indicating the
possible role of exosomal miR-19a in osteoclast cells. To test this
hypothesis, we treated osteoclast cells with miR-19a-enriched exosomes
and miR-19a-knockout exosomes. The results of tartrate-resistant acid
phosphatase assay and bone resorption assay indicated that
miR19a-enriched exosomes significantly promoted osteoclast
differentiation and activity.

Our study identified exosome derived miR-19a as a mediator of cell-cell
communication between breast cancer and osteoclast cell, warranting
further investigation on exosomal miR-19a as a novel biomarker and a
therapeutic target for breast cancer bone metastasis.


