Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of activated signal transduction pathways and
molecules in the HMGB-1 induced angiogenesis.


High-mobility group box-1 (HMGB-1) is a highly conserved protein playing
various roles both in the nucleus and cytosol and known to be expressed
in almost all types of mammalian cells. Secreted HMGB-1 has been most
intensively studied and reported as an immune cell derived cytokine
regulating systemic inflammation, signal transduction, and activation of
endothelial cells (EC). Especially, HMGB-1 over-expression is now
considered as a hallmark in cancers based on its involvement in cell
proliferation, inflammatory microenvironment, invasion, metastasis, and
sustained angiogenesis. Numerous studies have shown that secreted HMGB-1
directly or indirectly promotes angiogenesis by activation of ECs.
However, mechanisms of HMGB-1 mediated angiogenesis have not yet been
fully understood, especially, in terms of genomic changes caused by
HMGB-1 treatment. Moreover, differences between vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) mediated and HMGB-1 mediated angiogenesis have not
been studied.

To explore the roles of HMGB-1 in angiogenesis, we first confirmed
whether HMGB-1 treatment renders ECs angiogenic by evaluating
proliferation, migration, wound-healing, and tubule formation of ECs
after HMGB-1 treatment. In addition, we performed gene expression
microarray to clarify how HMGB-1 treatment induced EC activation at
various time points and subsequent angiogenic features according to
time-dependent gene expression changes.

We show that HMGB-1 treatment induces proangiogenic features to ECs such
as stimulation of tubule formation, promotion of proliferation, and
accelerated wound healing. By analysis of microarray data, we found that
VEGF and HMGB-1 commonly promoted the activation of MAPK, cell
proliferation, and wound healing pathways which directly regulate
angiogenesis. On the other hand, axon guidance, gap junction, P53
signaling, cell cycle, and cell differentiation pathways were
specifically up-regulated by HMGB-1. Taken together, HMGB-1 leads to
angiogenesis via upregulation of both angiogenic and nonangiogenic genes.


