Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IHC and flow cytometry quantifies BRD4 levels in surrogate tissues
after ex-vivo and in-vivo dosing with a BRD4 degrading PROTAC.


The Bromodomain and Extra-Terminal (BET) protein BRD4 has been identified
as a key transcriptional regulator of various oncogenes, most notably
MYC, in numerous human malignancies. Efforts have been extensive over
recent years to inhibit the gene regulatory action of BRD4 and BET
inhibitors have entered clinical trials. In a new approach to cancer
therapeutics, we have developed a proteolysis-targeting chimera (PROTAC)
molecule, ARCC-29, which induces degradation of BET (BRD4/3/2) proteins
via the proteasome. ARCC-29 degrades BRD4 in several human malignant cell
lines and in in-vivo rodent xenograft tumors. In mice xenograft models of
prostate (22Rv1), DLBCL (SU-DHL-6) and ovarian (A2780) tumors, this
molecule demonstrates a strong PK/PD/efficacy relationship. Obtaining
tumor tissue from patients often requires invasive procedures and may be
unavailable. We have developed two assays using surrogate tissues to
evaluate PROTAC mechanism of action which could be applied in the
clinical setting. We have developed a flow cytometry protocol to
quantitatively assess intra-cellular BRD4 levels in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Frozen or fresh human PBMCs were cultured for
six hours ex-vivo with ARCC-29, fixed and permeabilized for
intra-cellular BRD4 staining, and BRD4 levels quantified in gated
lymphocytes. ARCC-29 reduced BRD4 levels to 13, 10, 16, and 9 percent of
vehicle in four fresh PBMC samples, and to 10, 9, 11, 6, 8 and 35 percent
in six frozen PBMC samples. Treatment of PBMCs with the BRD4 inhibitor
OTX-015, showed similar or increased levels of BRD4 compared to vehicle
control. Inactive stereoisomers of ARCC-29 also showed BRD4 levels
increased or similar to vehicle control. Duplicates of selected
experiments were analyzed by western blot, corroborating the depletion of
BRD4. The second assay uses immunohistochemistry (IHC) to evaluate BRD4
degradation in skin biopsies of Sprague Dawley and nude male rats dosed
with 2mg/kg intravenous (i.v.) BRD4 PROTAC ARCC-29. IHC analysis of rat
skin eight hours after in-vivo dosing with ARCC-29 demonstrated a
dose-dependent reduction in BRD4 protein. Rats dosed once a week with
ARCC-29 [2 mg/kg] showed a 60-90% reduction in BRD4 levels compared to
vehicle, while 0.3 mg/kg twice per week showed a 10-30% decrease in BRD4
levels. These experiments demonstrate that BRD4 degradation can be
evaluated in surrogate tissue. Flow cytometry using PBMCs and skin IHC
provide potential alternative methods for confirming the PROTAC
mechanism-of-action in the clinic using pre- and post-treatment patient
samples. DISCLOSURES All authors are employed by Arvinas, LLC.


