Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A potential role for NKG2A to influence post-transplant outcomes
in multiple myeloma.


While there is currently no clear consensus regarding optimal maintenance
therapy after autologous stem cell transplant (autoSCT), the early
post-transplant setting is a potential site of augmentation to improve
post-transplant outcomes. We previously characterized stem cell graft
lymphocytes in association with progression free survival (PFS) after
autoSCT in multiple myeloma (MM), and showed that there was an inverse
correlation between NKG2A expression on CD56dim NK cells and PFS.
Therefore, we aimed to investigate a potential role for NKG2A modulation,
especially in the post-transplant setting with maintenance chemotherapy.
We performed immunophenotypic analyses of NK cells from patients in the
immediate post-transplant setting as well as from patients at various
time points after transplant on lenalidomide maintenance therapy. In the
immediate post-transplant setting (mean time since transplant=13 days)
NKG2A was upregulated on NK cells when compared with KIR2DL1 (p=0.001)
and KIR2DL2 (p=0.002). Additionally, in immunophenotypic analyses of PBMC
from MM patients on various treatments, patients receiving lenalidomide
maintenance therapy that recently underwent stem cell transplant (mean
time since transplant=0.53 years) had elevated NKG2A expression compared
to patients receiving no treatment (p=0.029). Conversely, patients
receiving lenalidomide maintenance therapy over years (mean time since
transplant=4.21 years) after transplant showed reduced NKG2A expression
compared to patients receiving no treatment (p=0.0161). In bone marrow
aspirates from patients with MM, primary CD138-positive myeloma cells in
the bone marrow express HLA-E, the cognate antigen for NKG2A, which makes
the overexpression of NKG2A biologically relevant. These data suggest
that the NKG2A/HLA-E checkpoint axis may be more biologically relevant
than KIR in myeloma, particularly in the post-transplant setting. This
has important potential implications for treatment, as it demonstrates
that NKG2A could serve as a potential target for modulation in the
immediate post-transplant setting to improve survival, especially in the
setting of maintenance chemotherapy. Further investigation should be
aimed delineating the potential effect of NKG2A modulation on immune
recovery and tumor surveillance to increase survival in the
post-transplant setting.


