Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Divergence analysis with coarse coding of omics data across cancer
phenotypes.


Motivation: Complex cancer omics data can be difficult to interpret and
analyze with standard statistical methods. We thereby propose an
innovative data representation that drastically reduces complexity while
improving usability and interpretability for complex cancer phenotype
analysis.

Method: Despite recent advances in omics technologies, the robustness of
predictive biomarkers in cancer remains severely limited. We hypothesize
that this is primarily due to an overemphasis on applying statistical
learning methods without taking into consideration the underlying
biological processes driving cancer. We therefore propose a new approach
based on representing data based on the comparison to a baseline group.
This results in a data format that encodes biologically meaningful
information and can be easily analyzed. We apply this transformation to
publicly available datasets obtained across multiple tumor types using
different omics technologies. For each cancer phenotype considered, we
cross-validate the learned decision rules using SVMs and random forests
and demonstrate that there is no drop in performance despite the use of a
simplified data representation. We also apply the Chi-squared test to our
simplified data to select genomic features differentially associated with
relevant cancer phenotypes. To this end we compare our method to
traditional class comparison approaches. Overall, this analysis shows
that omics features selected by our method provides equal or better
classification performance than standard methods. Further, we show that
our simplified data representation filters out much of the biologically
irrelevant variation and that the resulting data can be successfully
applied to gene set analysis applications, ultimately improving inference
on disease phenotypes. For instance, by applying our method to signaling
pathways and cancer hallmarks gene sets, we show that our approach can be
used to detect dysregulated pathways more efficiently than with
traditional methods.

Conclusion: By comparing cancer omics data to a baseline status, we
obtain a much simpler data representation that preserves biologically
relevant information while eliminating much of the unwanted variance that
is often confounding in the analysis of high-dimensional data.
Furthermore, data represented using our approach can be easily stored and
analyzed, and it is equivalent or superior to traditional data
representation methods for predicting clinically relevant cancer
phenotypes and detecting biologically relevant cancer pathways.


