Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic profiling of syngeneic mouse cell lines and in vitro
screen of the models against checkpoint inhibitors and target agents for
preclinical application.


Cancer immunotherapy has provided substantial clinical benefit in a
significant number of patients with advanced diseases. In pre-clinical
studies, CrownBio has developed a large collection of syngeneic models to
facilitate in vivo efficacy testing of immune-oncology agents in mice
(MuScreenTM). To combine the ostensibly separate therapeutic strategies
of activating immune cells against and targeting the unique genetic
characteristics of a tumor model, we sought to thoroughly characterize
the mutation profiles of these syngeneic mouse cell lines and examine
drug response profiles of these cell line models. The goal of this work
was to provide an in vitro system in evaluating combination effectiveness
when targeting both immune checkpoint markers and oncogenic targets in
preclinical studies.

To this end, we investigated mutation and gene expression profiles of 18
mouse cancer cell lines out of the panel of 23 syngeneic mouse models
included in the MuScreenTM for 50 well defined cancer-related mutations
among 30,690 variants in exonic regions called by RNAseq (Illumina HiSeq
X10). The somatic mutations revealed through the bioinformatics analysis
include ALK (3 - frequency, same for the rest), BRAF (4), BRCA1 (7),
BRCA2 (12), EGFR (3), ERBB2 (6), EGFR3 (2), FBXW7 (10), FLT3 (12), HRAS
(1), KRAS (8), NRAS (1), PDGFRA (11), PTCH1 (9), PIK3CA (2), PTEN (6),
RET (3), SETD2 (5), SMAD4 (3), SMO (13), TRP53 (13), TSC1 (3), and TSC2
(10). All of these oncogenic alterations are clinically actionable
(Cancer Discovery 2, 82-93, 2012). The same set of genes was also subject
to mRNA expression change analysis.

We screened the 18 mouse cell lines with a few selected target therapy
agents, and performed combination assays of these agents together with
check point inhibitors such as aPD1, aPDL1, in a co-culture system with
mouse T cells. An IncuCyte real-time imaging platform was used to
distinguish activities on T cells and tumor cells. The results and the
implications will be discussed.


