Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic activity of H3.3 K27M in a spontaneous DIPG mouse model.


Pediatric diffuse high-grade gliomas (HGG) cause a devastatingly poor
outcome. Diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas (DIPG) are brainstem HGGs
found almost exclusively in children and represent approximately 50
percent of all pediatric HGGs. Recurrent, clonal somatic mutations in
histone H3 are a molecular hallmark that distinguish the genetic
mechanisms underlying pediatric and adult HGG, and indicate a strong link
between epigenetic dysfunction and pediatric brain tumorigenesis. H3 K27M
mutations found in nearly 80 percent of DIPGs and over half of
non-brainstem HGGs occurring in thalamus or other midline structures,
induce a dominant loss of genome-wide H3K27me3. In contrast, mutually
exclusive H3.3 G34R/V mutations occur in approximately 14 percent of
cortical HGG tumors in older children through young adulthood suggesting
a distinct developmental origin compared to K27M mutant tumors. DNA
methylation and gene expression patterns distinguish G34R/V and K27M
tumors, but the oncogenic mechanisms and reasons for brain region
selectivity of histone mutations remain uncertain. To study these
mutations in the developing mammalian brain and investigate how they
contribute to oncogenesis, we generated conditionally activated,
epitope-tagged knock-in mice to express K27M, G34R or non-mutated H3.3
proteins from the endogenous H3f3a locus. Untransformed embryonic neural
precursor or astrocyte cells expressing H3.3 K27M demonstrated H3K27me3
loss and a growth advantage in vitro with brain region-specific,
stage-dependent expression and epigenetic signatures. DIPGs frequently
harbor genetic alterations in TP53 and PDGFRα in addition to H3.3 K27M,
and mice with induced brain-specific Trp53 deletion plus mutated
PDGFRαV544ins expression developed spontaneous HGG in vivo. Induction of
H3.3 K27M significantly accelerated PDGFRαV544ins;Trp53 knockout HGG
formation involving the brainstem. Importantly, the non-mutated H3.3
epitope-tagged protein did not affect tumor burden or latency. The H3.3
K27M tumors recapitulate characteristics observed in human DIPG including
histopathological features, strong nuclear K27M expression and robust
loss of H3K27me3 throughout the tumors. We relate the genetic, epigenetic
and transcriptional landscapes of these models to primary pediatric DIPG
to help identify their developmental origins and oncogenic mechanisms
downstream of histone H3.3 K27M.


