Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adoptively transferred B cells directly kill tumor cells via the
CXCR4/CXCL12 & perforin pathways.


Over the years, the role of B cells in the host immune response to
malignancy has been overshadowed by our focus on T cells. The role played
by B cells in cancer immunology is complex and controversial. The
observation made by our lab that activated B cells alone can mediate
tumor regression in the adoptive immunotherapy of solid tumors is
innovative (JI 2009; CCR 2011; JSO 2012; EJI 2015). One novel mechanism
by which activated B cells mediate tumor regression is via direct tumor
cell cytotoxicity in the absence of antibodies. We previously reported
that antitumor B cells directly kill tumor cells via the Fas/FasL pathway
and are regulated by IL-10. In this study, we defined additional
mechanisms involved in B cell antitumor immunity. Administration of IL-2
significantly augmented the therapeutic efficacy of adoptively
transferred tumor-draining lymph node (TDLN) B cells which express IL-2R.
Culture supernatant of purified B splenocytes harvested from the mice
that received adoptive transfer of 4T1 TDLN B cells plus IL-2
administration produced larger amounts of IgG which bound to 4T1,
resulting in 4T1 lysis. Furthermore, we detected CXCR4 expression on 4T1
TDLN B cells, and 4T1 tumor cells produced its ligand CXCL12. Transwell
experiments demonstrated the chemotraction of CXCR4-expressing 4T1 TDLN B
cells towards CXCL12-producing 4T1 cells. Blockade of CXCR4 using a
CXCR4-specific inhibitor, AMD3100, significantly reduced the killing of
4T1 tumor cells by 4T1 TDLN B cells. Blockade of FasL and CXCR4
concurrently inhibited B cell-mediated direct killing of tumor cells in
an additive manner, indicating that both Fas/FasL and CXCL12/CXCR4
pathways are involved in the direct killing of 4T1 cells by 4T1 TDLN B
cells. TDLN B cells produced perforin. Additional transwell experiments
showed that effector B cells could directly kill tumor cells in cell-cell
contact via the Fas/FasL and CXCR4/CXCL12 pathways as well as perforin,
while without cell contact, perforin secreted by B cells led to tumor
cell cytotoxicity. These findings underscore the diversity of function by
which B cells can play an important role in the host immune response to
tumor, and clearly indicated that transferred effector B cells can act
independently of T cells in causing tumor destruction in adoptive
immunotherapy.


