Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bicyclic peptides for PET imaging of MT1-MMP expressing tumors.


The Bicycle® technology is based on repertoires of short peptides
displayed on the surface of bacteriophages which can be modified with
homo-trifunctional organochemical scaffolds, thus creating large diverse
libraries of constrained, bicyclic peptides. These large combinatorial
libraries have been extensively used for iterative selections to identify
high affinity binding peptides to a wide array of targets, including
receptors, interleukins and proteases.

Bicyclic peptides are chemically synthesized macrocyclic entities with
drug-like properties that exhibit sub-nanomolar affinities and exquisite
selectivity towards targets. Unlike biologics, their synthetic nature
allows facile modulation of metabolic and pharmacokinetic properties, as
well as site-specific conjugation to effector molecules such as
fluorophores, radionuclides, and cytotoxic drugs.

In the present work, novel phage display derived bicyclic peptides were
identified targeting the matrix metalloproteinase 14 (also known as
MT1-MMP), a tumor associated surface protein overexpressed in a variety
of cancers (i.e. lung, breast). A prototype bicyclic peptide with high
affinity to MT1-MMP (Kd at ~1 nM) was identified, and confocal microscopy
using fluoresceinated bicyclic peptide derivatives shows target-dependent
internalisation in MT1-MMP+ cells. In the in vivo mouse, selective tumor
binding in an MT1-MMP+ xenograft model is demonstrated for a DOTA
conjugate loaded with Ga-68 or Lu-177. Upon proteolytic optimization of
the prototype bicycle peptide, a striking enhancement in tumor signal is
observed in biodistribution studies. Compared to radiolabeled antibodies
directed against the same target, the lead compound showed fast
background clearance (In the present work, novel phage display derived
bicyclic peptides were identified targeting the matrix metalloproteinase
14 (also known as MT1-MMP), a tumor associated surface protein
overexpressed in a variety of cancers (i.e. lung, breast). A prototype
bicyclic peptide with high affinity to MT1-MMP (Kd at ~1 nM) was
identified, and confocal microscopy using fluoresceinated bicyclic
peptide derivatives shows target-dependent internalisation in MT1-MMP+
cells. In the in vivo mouse, selective tumor binding in an MT1-MMP+
xenograft model is demonstrated for a DOTA conjugate loaded with Ga-68 or
Lu-177. Upon proteolytic optimization of the prototype bicycle peptide, a
striking enhancement in tumor signal is observed in biodistribution
studies. Compared to radiolabeled antibodies directed against the same
target, the lead compound showed fast background clearance (< 1 %ID/g for
all organs apart from kidneys) resulting in high imaging contrast in
µPET studies as early as 30 minutes post injection. Importantly, most of
the non-tumor associated bicyclic peptide rapidly clears into the bladder.

Together, tumor targeting bicyclic peptides can, through their small size
and high selectivity, facilitate efficient penetration and visualization
of tumors in vivo, demonstrating their potential as diagnostic imaging
agents in profiling and therapeutic management of patients.


