Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual-strand tumor-suppressor microRNA-145 (miR-145-5p and
miR-145-3p) are involved in castration-resistant prostate cancer
pathogenesis.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the
second leading cause of cancer-related death among men in developed
countries. Androgen signaling through the androgen receptor (AR) is an
important oncogenic pathway for PCa progression. Most patients initially
respond to androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT), but eventually acquire
resistance and progress to castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).
Although several clinical trials for CRPC have been carried out,
resulting in the availability of novel chemotherapeutic agents, these
treatments provide limited benefits and are not considered curative.
Therefore, identification of effective biomarkers for detection of CRPC
and understanding the molecular mechanisms of androgen-independent
signaling and metastatic signaling pathways underlying PCa using current
genomic approaches would help to improve therapies for and prevention of
the disease. The discovery of microRNAs (miRNAs) has resulted in major
advancements in cancer research. miRNAs are small noncoding RNAs that
function to fine tune the expression of protein coding/noncoding RNAs by
repressing translation or cleaving RNA transcripts in a
sequence-depending manner. The unique characteristic function of miRNAs
is to regulate RNA transcripts in human cells. Therefore, dysregulated
expression of miRNAs can disrupt tightly regulated RNA networks in cancer
cells. miRNAs play critical roles in various biological processes, and
their dysregulation is shown in several human cancers. In this study, we
constructed the miRNA expression signature of CRPC using clinical
specimens because the development of therapeutic strategies is a central
theme in the advancement of PCa treatments. Using CRPC expression
signature data, we investigated the specific roles of miRNAs in PCa and
CRPC oncogenesis by examining differentially expressed miRNAs. Based on
the CRPC signature, we focused on the dual strand of pre-miR-145,
miR-145-5p and miR-145-3p because these miRNAs were significantly reduced
in cancer tissues, suggesting these miRNAs act as antitumor miRNAs in
this disease. In miRNA biogenesis, it is the general consensus that
processing of the pre-miRNA through Dicer1 generates a miRNA duplex (a
passenger strand and a guide strand), and that the passenger strand has
degradation and no regulatory activity and disintegrates in cells. Our
present data showed that both miRNAs, miR-145-5p and miR-145-3p
significantly suppressed cancer cell migration and invasion. Moreover,
Kaplan-Meier survival curves showed that low expression of miR-145-3p
predicted a short duration of progression to CRPC. Dual strand of
pre-miR-145 functioned as tumor suppressors based on the miRNA expression
signature of CRPC. Identification of miRNA-mediated cancer networks may
provide novel molecular pathogenesis of the disease.


