Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular matrix stimuli regulate cancer stem cell population
and migratory potential in glioblastoma.


Introduction Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and lethal form of
brain cancer. Poor survival is linked to diffuse infiltration throughout
the brain, suggesting the need to examine the effect of the tissue
environment at the margins of the GBM tumor on processes of GBM invasion.
Further, the presence of GBM cancer stem cells (GSCs) in primary tumor
specimens is believe to play a significant role in GBM spreading,
recurrence, and therapeutic resistance. While biophysical properties of
the tumor microenvironment, such as spatial gradients in matrix stiffness
and hyaluronic acid (HA) content as well as regional hypoxia, may affect
GBM invasive phenotypes, limited tools are available to rigorously
examine the relationship between tissue microenvironment and tumor
growth, invasion, and therapeutic outcomes. This work focuses on the
integration of HA-functionalized gelatin hydrogels with 3D cell invasion
assays to investigate the impact of tissue microenvironment on GBM
invasion and GSC population.

Methods Hydrogels are generated from methacrylamide functionalized
gelatin (GelMA) and methacrylated HA. Prepolymer mixture was crosslinked
under UV light in the presence of a photoinitiator. GBM cells, either U87
cell lines or patient-derived xenografts (PDX), were mixed with
prepolymer solution prior to polymerization and collected for up to 7
days in culture. To assess invasion, cells were seeded onto dextran beads
overnight, with populational invasion metrics calculated after 3 and 7
days, while live cell tracing via confocal microscopy was employed for
single cell invasion metrics. Samples were cultured with 5% CO2 and ~20%
O2 (normoxia) or 1% O2(hypoxia).

Results The invasion of U87 and U87viii (constitutively active EGFR)
cells increased significantly in GelMA hydrogels lacking HA, consistent
with our previous findings that compensatory secretion of soluble HA in
the absence of matrix-bound HA was associated with upregulated invasion.
Heightened U87 invasion was observed in the presence of hypoxia for all
hydrogel compositions, and was associated with upregualted markers of
invasion (gene expression: MMP-2, VEGF; protein expression: ERK1/2) while
PI3K was downregulated, suggesting cells respond to hypoxia by
alternating invasion and proliferation behaviors. We subsequently
examined the effect of matrix biophysical properties and hypoxia on the
expansion of GSC populations within PDX cells (a gift of Jann Sarkaria,
Mayo Clinic). Here, the expansion of the GSC population in EGFRviii
mutant GBM6 was a function of hypoxia as well as matrix-bound HA.

Conclusions This work demonstrates that GBM cells respond dynamically to
their matrix biophysical (Stiffness, HA content, hypoxia) properties.
Using PDX cells, we provide evidence that the expansion of GSC is related
with both metabolic environment (O2%) and matrix composition (+/- HA).
Ongoing work seeks to understand how GSCs contribute to the invasive
phenotype of GBM.


