Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRAF3 serves as a tumor suppressor in HPV-associated head and neck
squamous cell carcinomas.


The molecular mechanisms that control transformation and tumorigenicity
of human papillomavirus-associated (HPV+) head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas (HNSCCs) are currently being investigated. The number of HPV+
HNSCC cases has increased sharply in recent years, especially in tonsil
and oropharyngeal cancers. These HPV+ HNSCCs often respond differently to
treatments. Recently, The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, 2015) identified
novel loss-of-function genomic alterations of TNF receptor-associated
factor 3 (TRAF3) in HPV+ HNSCCs. TRAF3 is a ring-finger E3 Ubiquitin
Ligase which inhibits downstream alternative NF-κB signaling and
promotes anti-viral immunity by promoting degradation of ubiquitinated
proteins. To assess TRAF3’s role in HPV+ HNSCCs, we identified cell
lines with lower level of TRAF3 protein, consistent with deficient TRAF3
expression identified in TCGA data. Functional studies showed that TRAF3
expression led to decreased steady-state protein levels of the
alternative NF-κB pathway components RELB and NF-κB2/p52, as assessed
by Western blot, reporter assays and immunofluorescence. Additionally,
TRAF3 expression led to decreased cell proliferation, tumorigenic
activity and migration, and increased sensitivity to chemotherapy agent
cisplatin. Interestingly, TRAF3 increases the steady state protein level
of the classical tumor suppressors RB and p53 in HPV+ HNSCC cell lines as
assessed by Western blot. Further in vitro characterization of TRAF3’s
function in HPV+ HNSCCs was assessed using clinically identified TRAF3
loss-of-function mutagenic isoforms, mimicking both TCGA data and HNSCC
cell line data for TRAF3 defects. In contrast to wtTRAF3, these mutant
forms of TRAF3 do not as strongly restore p53 or inhibit RELB and
NF-κB2/p52 protein levels. One specific mutation which causes a
frameshift at residue 210 greatly inhibits TRAF3 function as assessed by
Western blot. To further assess effects of wt or TRAF3 loss-of-function
mutants in vitro and in vivo, an inducible HPV+ HNSCC line expressing
TRAF3 using the TET-ON system, and TRAF3 knockout in HPV+ HNSCC line and
Human Oral Keratinocyte (HOK) line using CRISPR-Cas9 genomic editing are
generated. In conclusion, the ring-finger E3 ubiquitin ligase TRAF3
inhibits the pro-survival alternative NF-κB signaling pathway and
restores TP53 and RB, thereby serving as a tumor suppressor in HPV+
HNSCCs.

(Supported by NIDCD intramural project ZIA-DC-000016, 73 and 74)


