Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A study in locus heterogeneity: Targeted sequencing analysis of 6q
reveals multiple significant loci as the source of a previous linkage
peak in familial lung cancer.


Lung cancer is the leading cancer-related cause of death in the United
States. We had previously performed multipoint linkage analysis on
families with a strong family history of lung cancer and found
significant linkage to the 6q25 region. In order to find the source of
that linkage signal, we performed targeted sequencing 6q23-6q27 on 75
individuals from the 9 most highly linked families. We performed two
types of parametric linkage analysis, using an autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance with 10% penetrance for carriers and a 1% phenocopy rate
using a disease allele frequency of 1%. The first type was a two-point
analysis using an Elston-Stewart algorithm. This approach did not lead to
any genome-wide significant results but demonstrated significant
heterogeneity throughout the nine families.In an effort to recover the
power from the original multipoint analysis, we performed a regional
linkage analysis using SEQLinkage and MERLIN. SEQLinkage built regional
haplotypes that corresponded to a gene or an intergenic region - the
regions were based on a customized map of our design. The regional
markers were multiallelic which allowed for greater information content
and were similar to the microsatellites that were used in the original
multipoint analysis. The regional markers were then analyzed in a
two-point linkage analysis via MERLIN. This allowed us to identify two
genome-wide significant signals at PACRG-AS1 at 6q26 (HLOD = 3.4) and
SAMD5 at 6q24 (3.3). The PACRG-AS1 is novel, though it is associated with
the known lung cancer gene PARK2. SAMD5 may be involved in lung cancer
cell proliferation. The heterogeneity of the two signals was particularly
interesting. The PACRG-AS1 was driven primarily by two families. The
SAMD5 marker was not being strongly driven by any of the families and
appears to be a small cumulative effect across the nine families. In
addition, several families have large, but non-significant LOD scores at
other loci across the region. This further reinforces the locus
heterogeneity within the region, and it is likely that our two
significant signals here are not the only variants affecting the
phenotype. We further attempted to localize the signals by running
SEQLinkage using a custom map where genes are broken into exons and
introns. Though this resulted in no significant markers, the highest
signal was located in the intronic region of SAMD5 (HLOD = 3) and several
other suggestive signals were localized to intronic regions of good
candidate genes like SASH1 and ARID1B. Examination of predicted effects
of the candidate regulatory variants using eQTL databases is ongoing.
This is a region full of promising candidates, and it is likely that the
two significant signals found here are just part of many that could be
affecting lung cancer risk. We plan to do further analysis within the
individual families to elucidate any more genes affecting this signal.


