Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR mutational detection in ctDNA, Vortex-enriched CTCs and
comparison to tumor tissue in non-small-cell-lung-cancer (NSCLC) patients.


Background: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality
worldwide. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) therapies, based on the evaluation of EGFR mutation, have
shown dramatic clinical benefits. EGFR mutation assays are mainly
performed on tumor biopsies, which carry risks and expense and are not
always successful. In order to identify the development of secondary EGFR
mutations, which cause resistance to 1st and 2nd generation TKI’s and
an indication for therapy with a 3rd generation drug, effective and
non-invasive monitoring is needed. Liquid biopsy biomarkers, such as
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA), allow
such monitoring over the course of the therapy. Interestingly, ctDNA or
CTC analysis alone had less sensitivity vs. combining both, with a
genotyping of 70% and 80% for CTCs and ctDNA respectively, but 100% when
combined2. Vortex technology is a platform enabling label-free capture of
CTCs from blood samples and genomic assays downstream3. The aim of this
study is to demonstrate the sensitivity of a combined CTC and ctDNA assay
through Vortex using blood samples spiked with molecularly-characterized
lung cancer cell lines and then to apply this technique to matched blood
and tumor samples from NSCLC patients.

Method: Lung cancer cell lines with different EGFR mutations (A549: wild
type, H1975: L858R+ and T790M+, HCC827: 19del+) were used to validate our
CTC workflow. Blood samples and matched tumor tissues were collected from
NSCLC patients. Plasma was extracted first for ctDNA assay. CTCs were
isolated from the plasma-depleted-blood using Vortex technology,
immunostained (CK, Vimentin, CD45) and enumerated. DNA from CTCs, plasma
and matched tumor tissue was analyzed for EGFR mutations 19del, L858R and
T790M using the ctEGFR kit from EntroGen.

Results: Mutant DNA could be identified at a quantity as low as 0.5 ng
(~83 cells), with a sensitivity ranging from 0.1% to 2% for a total DNA
varying from 25ng (~4 CTCs among 4000 WBCs) to 1ng (~4 CTCs among 200
WBCs). We demonstrated the ability of Vortex technology to enrich CTCs
from metastatic NSCLC patients. Processing of plasma-depleted-blood
showed the same capture efficiency when compared to whole blood. This
makes possible the detection of EGFR mutations on CTC samples collected
by Vortex technology. > 10 NSCLC patients are being enrolled in this
study and results will be presented at AACR.

Conclusion: The ctEGFR mutation assay performed well on both
Vortex-enriched CTCs and ctDNA, enabling a low cost approach to analyze
EGFR mutation from a single blood tube. This non-invasive EGFR mutation
analysis will be potentially a useful tool for monitoring treatment and
medication guidance of NSCLC patients. 1. Calabuig-Fariñas et al. Transl
Lung Cancer Res. 2016. 2. Sundaresan TK et al. Clin Cancer Res. 2016. 3.
Kidess-Sigal E et al. Oncotarget 2016.


