Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benefit from combination cancer therapy arising from
patient-to-patient variability rather than additive or synergistic drug
action.


Combination cancer therapy is an important means to increase rates and
durability of drug response. Superior responses to combination therapies
are commonly interpreted as evidence that individual tumors respond more
strongly to a combination than to a monotherapy, and combinations are
often developed based on pre-clinical observations of drug additivity or
synergy. Here we explore an alternative hypothesis, namely that
combination therapy can confer benefit simply by providing multiple
chances of an above-average response to monotherapy.

The benefit conferred by two-drug combination therapy in human clinical
trials and PDX animals was compared with a model of independent drug
action postulating that net response in each patient equals the better of
two potential responses to drugs given individually with no benefit from
the second agent. Data were derived from clinical trials of drug
combinations in melanoma, ovarian, colorectal, pancreatic, and breast
cancers treated with immunotherapies, chemotherapies and inhibitors of
kinases, growth factor receptors, angiogenesis, and DNA repair enzymes;
as well as analysis of 4,500 drug response measurements in
patient-derived tumor xenografts, and a first-principles model of tumor
kinetics and variability in drug response.

A majority of approved combination cancer therapies analyzed confer
benefits consistent with independent drug action. This benefit arises
from high inter-subject variability, which can be assessed from clinical
trials, and low correlation in responsiveness to different drugs,
assessed from PDX studies. In a minority of cases responses exceed this
expectation, sometimes dramatically, and are likely to represent true
drug interaction. Therefore, independent drug action, without any
assumption about additive or synergistic effects, provides a sufficient
and more parsimonious explanation for the superiority of many clinically
approved combination cancer therapies and changes how such data are
interpreted mechanistically. Optimization of independent action also
provides an alternative means for designing new drug combinations.


