Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3D genome architecture changes during cancer cell migration and
metastasis.


Metastasis, the most deadly part of cancer, results from cancer cell
migration and invasion from a tumor into surrounding tissues. During this
migration, the cell often has to squeeze and deform its nucleus through
tight spaces. This nuclear squeezing is a rate-limiting step in
migration, and the deformations can even rupture the nucleus. The
organization of the genome inside the nucleus into loops, domains, and
territories is important for proper gene regulation, DNA replication, and
genome repair. However, little is known about the characteristics of
nuclear organization that might allow for the nuclear deformation of
metastatic cancer cells. We are using Chromatin Conformation Capture
(Hi-C) and microscopy techniques to study genome organization during
cancer cell migration. Using photoconvertible fluorophore Dendra2-H4 we
draw and monitor patterns on nuclei of cells migrating through dense
collagen matrices, Transwell filters, or microfluidic channels. Our data
show changes in these patterns, indicating spatial reorganization of the
genome during migration. Previous work has suggested that cancer cell
migration requires global condensation of the genome. Some cancer
chemotherapeutics act on epigenetic marks to decondense chromatin. We are
testing whether such chromatin decondensation affects the physical
deformability of the nucleus and thus effective migration. We have used
Transwell and wound healing migration assays to monitor migration of
cells treated with histone deacetylase inhibitors and histone
methyltransferase inhibitors. Our results show that the drugs inhibit
migration in a Transwell assay but not in the wound healing assay. This
suggests that genome decondensation prevents the passage of the nucleus
through narrow 3D spaces. But, a condensed genome organization is not
necessary for 2D cell motility, where nuclei are unconfined. Hi-C
experiments on migrating cells with deformed nuclei and drug-treated
cells will characterize the specific rearrangements in genome structure
that occur during cancer cell migration and whether these specific
changes are counteracted by epigenetically active drugs.


