Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Towards an RNA expression-based signature for oncogene-induced
replication stress.


Introduction Certain tumor subgroups, including triple negative breast
cancers (TNBCs), are characterized by high levels of genomic instability
(GI). These tumors are typically very aggressive and difficult to threat.
Increasingly, we realize that GI is fueled by replication stress (RS). RS
can be induced by expression of oncogenes, including CCNE1, MYC and
CDC25A, which perturb initiation, elongation and/or termination phases of
DNA replication. RS poses a threat to cellular viability, and tumor cells
with high levels of RS will therefore increasingly depend for their
survival on DNA damage checkpoint and repair pathways. Possibly, this
increased dependence creates therapeutic opportunities. Unfortunately, it
is currently difficult to determine levels of RS in tumors, a requirement
to efficiently select patients for novel treatments. The aim of this work
is to develop an RNA expression-based signature for oncogene-induced
replication-stress.

Material & Methods A panel of cell lines (RPE-1, RPE-1-P53-/-,
MDA-MB-231, BT-549 and HCC-1806) was engineered to doxycycline-inducibly
express a set of oncogenes (CDC25A, CCNE1 or MYC). Single DNA fiber
replication analysis in combination with immunoblot analysis of RS
markers was used to validate the cell line models. MTT assays were
performed to assess sensitivity to ATR and Wee1 inhibitors.
RNA-sequencing was used to uncover expression changes upon RS induction.

Results Treatment with doxycycline resulted in high expression levels of
CDC25A, CYCLINE or MYC. Expression was heterogeneous but present in the
far majority of RPE-1 cells (40% CDC25A, 88% CCNE1 and 93% MYC). DNA
fiber analysis was subsequently used to study the alteration of DNA
replication dynamics. Severe reduction on ongoing DNA synthesis velocity
was shown in engineered cells (RPE-1 and MDA-MB231) under doxycycline
treatment, confirming prominent RS. In line with elevated levels of RS,
oncogene induction resulted in elevated levels of ATR activity, as judged
by phospho-CHK1 and phospho-RPA levels. Importantly, oncogene-expression
enhanced sensitivity to Wee1 and ATR checkpoint inhibitors. Subsequently,
RNA samples were harvested under the presence and absence of doxycycline.
In parallel to oncogene-expression, hydroxyurea, a chemical agent known
to increase stalled replication forks was applied as a DNA damage
control. RNA-sequencing analysis will be performed to identify
differentially expressed genes upon oncogene expression. Commonly
identified genes over multiple cell lines and shared between the
different oncogenes will be used to build a ‘RS’ profile.

Conclusion Our results indicate that oncogene expression provokes RS in
multiple cell line models and induces impaired replication fork stability
and sensitivity to cell cycle checkpoint inhibitors. These models are
therefore valid to develop an RNA expression-based qualifier in order to
facilitate patient selection towards novel therapeutics.


