Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of a transcriptome of oncogenic mutant p53 in
triple-negative breast cancer.


The purpose of this study was to generate a transcriptional profile
specific for mutant p53 in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC),
representing potential novel therapeutic targets. The highly
heterogeneous TNBC tumor subgroup is established as having a poor
clinical outcome. There are currently no targeted therapies for women
with TNBC; consequently, there is an unmet clinical need to identify
targetable pathways. Approximately 75% of these tumors are known to
harbour a mutation in Tp53 (mutp53). Chromatin Immunoprecipitation
Sequencing (ChIP-Seq) for mutp53 and ETS-1 (a known mutp53 interactor)
was carried out using the D0-1 (sc-126) and sc-20 antibodies
respectively, in the MDA-MB-468 TNBC cell line. The aim of these ChIP-seq
experiments was to identify sites bound by endogenous R273H mutp53 and
ETS-1 and to confirm that target genes were co-regulated. We identified
282 novel mutp53 specific genomic binding sites and 37 mutant p53 and
ETS1 shared binding sites. In-house data analysis and peak calling
generated a list of potential transcriptionally co-regulated genes
adjacent to these genomic sites. PDGFβ, TRIB3, BTRC, TNFSF18 & PI3 were
successfully validated as being transcriptionally regulated by R273H
mutp53 and not wild-type p53 (as shown by MCF7 ChIP-seq comparisons). A
number of these genes are known to be aberrantly expressed in TNBC
patient tumors and harbor interesting immune biology, providing potential
opportunities for novel therapeutic strategies. In addition, DNA damaging
chemotherapy-resistant MDA-MB-468 derivatives express elevated levels of
mutp53 protein and altered expression of our validated transcriptional
targets, suggesting that they may also have roles in promoting resistance
to current chemotherapy treatments, downstream of mutp53. In conclusion,
we have identified a cohort of ‘mutp53 specific’ transcriptional
targets which may have roles in modulating immune responses to TNBCs,
driving resistance to current chemotherapies and could provide
opportunities for the development of novel treatments for TNBCs.


