Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-infiltrating PMN-MDSCs mediate sorafenib resistance in
hepatocellular carcinoma through immune suppression.


Background]: The mechanisms underlying the inherent or acquired
resistance to sorafenib in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are
not fully understood. We studied the role of myeloid-derived suppressor
cells (MDSCs), a subset of bone marrow cells with immune-suppressive and
proangiogenic activities, in sorafenib-treated mice and patients.

Materials and Methods: An orthotopic mouse liver cancer model was
established by implanting BNL cells to BALB/cByJNarl mice. Liver
tumor-bearing mice were treated with sorafenib (5 mg/kg/d) for 1 week or
3 weeks from the day 8 after tumor cells implantation. For combination
therapy, mice were treated sorafenib and anti-IL-6 Ab or its isotype
control Ab (500 μg/every 3 days starting from day 4 for 4 doses).
Tumor-infiltrating leukocytes (TILs) and leukocytes of other tissues
including liver, spleen, peripheral blood, and bone marrow were isolated,
and characterized by flow cytometry analysis. Morphological
characteristics of MDSCs were determined by cytospin and Liu staining.
Pro-inflammatory cytokines were detected by ELISA or mouse inflammatory
cytokines beads array (BD). Paired HCC tissues from advanced HCC patients
treated with sorafenib (before and post-sorafenib progression tissues)
were evaluated for the expression of CD11b, CD15, and CD66b in TILs by
immunohistochemistry.

Results: In mice treated with sorafenib, the CD11b+Gr1+Ly6G+ MDSCs were
significantly increased in liver tumors, but not in others tissues.
Morphologically, these MDSCs were segmented nuclear PMN type cells. The
analysis of TILs revealed that the percentage of total immune effectors
(CD4+ or CD8+ IFN-γ-expressing T cells) versus total immune suppressors
(IL-10 or TGF β-expressing CD4+ T cell, FOXP3-expressing CD4+ T cells)
was lower in the tumors of sorafenib-treated mice than those of the
vehicle-treated mice. The T cell proliferation capability was also
significantly decreased in TILs of sorafenib-treated mice versus TILs of
vehicle-treated mice. Multiple inflammatory cytokines including VEGF,
G-CSF, MCP-1, and IL-6 were significantly increased in mouse liver tumors
treated with sorafenib. When combined with sorafenib, anti-IL-6 antibody
alleviated the early tumor-infiltration of Ly6G+ MDSCs, restored the
proliferative activity of TILs, decreased the levels of pro-inflammatory
factors in tumors, and suppressed

the liver tumor growth synergistically. In 6 paired human HCC tissues, we
found that 3 exhibited higher proportion of CD11b, CD15, or CD66b+ cells
in post-sorafenib progression tissues than their pre-sorafenib treatment
tissues.

Conclusions: Our data indicate that tumor-infiltrating PMN type MDSCs and
associated immunosuppression may be an important mechanism impeding the
therapeutic efficacy of sorafenib in HCC. (This works was supported by
MOST 105-2314-B-002-180).


