Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phase II study using cardiac MRI to assess cardiac injury in
breast cancer patients receiving three-dimensional conformal regional
nodal radiotherapy (3DCRT) with heart dose constraints.


Purpose/Objectives: Regional nodal radiotherapy (RNR) can improve
survival for node positive breast cancer (NPBC) patients, yet this
benefit is offset by potential late cardiac toxicity. Most cardiac
toxicity reports from RNR have been in eras where no specific dose or
volume heart constraint was used. Cardiac MRI (CMR) is ideal to assess
ventricular function and volumes. We report a phase II trial designed to
assess cardiac injury by CMR in NPBC patients who received chemotherapy
(CT) and RNR planned with 3DCRT using heart constraints.

Materials/Methods: 244 NPBC patients treated with 3DCRT RNR following
surgery planned with heart constraints between 2000-2008 were screened.
Eligibility included prior anthracycline CT, no cardiac disease pre-NPBC,
and no recurrent disease. Patients with active atrial fibrillation were
excluded. The cardiac dose constraint utilized was V25Materials/Methods:
244 NPBC patients treated with 3DCRT RNR following surgery planned with
heart constraints between 2000-2008 were screened. Eligibility included
prior anthracycline CT, no cardiac disease pre-NPBC, and no recurrent
disease. Patients with active atrial fibrillation were excluded. The
cardiac dose constraint utilized was V25<10% of the heart. Mean heart
dose was not constrained. Eligible women were invited via letter to
enroll in the IRB-approved trial. CMR parameters to be evaluated included
indicators of left ventricular (LV) function: ejection fraction (EF), LV
mass (LVMI), and LV dimensions, as well as late gadolinium enhancement
(LGE) and total heart extracellular volume fraction (ECV) as measures of
cardiac injury and/or early cardiac fibrosis. Planned analysis included
correlation of CMR parameters with cardiac dose-volume constraints using
Spearman and Pearson correlations.

Results: The first 15 L-sided and 5 R-sided patients consented underwent
CMR. Median age at diagnosis was 50 (32-77); median age at CMR was 60
(40-83). Median time after 3DCRT was 8.3 yr (5.7-14.4). The median
L-sided mean heart dose was 4.8 Gy (1.1-11.2) and V25 was 5.7% (0-12%).
No patient had clinical cardiac disease at time of CMR. Median LVEF was
63%. No LGE and no abnormal total heart ECV values (>25%) were obtained.
Values mildly outside normal limits were seen for LVMI or LV dimensions
in 4/15 (27%) L-sided and 2/5 (40%) right-sided patients. No correlations
were seen between heart mean and max doses, V5, V10, V25, and V45 and the
CMR variables of LVEF, LV mass, and LV dimensions. Two patients had
valvular abnormalities found on CMR (L-sided with aortic regurgitation
and R-sided with mitral regurgitation).

Conclusions: CMR findings were largely within normal limits at a median
follow of 8.3 years in this cohort of NPBC patients who received prior
cardiotoxic chemotherapy and RNR planned with heart constraints. A subset
of patients had subclinical mildly abnormal LV measurements, but these
did not correlate with heart dose or laterality, and the significance
remains unknown. In this cohort, no significant cardiac injury from RNR
as measured with CMR was seen. Conversely, CMR may not be a sensitive
tool for subclinical partial heart injury from RNR. Larger corroborating
studies are warranted.


