Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PELP1 cytoplasmic mislocalization favors estrogen-induced
signaling via AIB1 in ER+ breast cancer models.


Luminal breast cancers account for ~75% of cases and express (ER) and
frequently contain a range of progesterone receptor (PR) positive cells.
ER and PR are steroid hormone receptors (SR) that rapidly and dynamically
shuttle between the cytoplasm and the nucleus, a process that allows for
essential crosstalk with cytoplasmic signaling pathways that serve as
direct inputs to SR transcriptional functions. During disease
progression, aberrant hormone signaling often leads to expression of
altered SR gene programs and endocrine resistance. An emerging biomarker
of increased risk and aggressive cancer behavior is cytoplasmic PELP1.
Our lab was the first to show that PELP1 forms a functional signaling and
transcriptional complex with ER and PR to regulate novel estrogen-driven
SR target genes associated with endocrine resistance. PELP1 is primarily
nuclear in normal breast tissue, but cytoplasmic localization of PELP1
(cyto-PELP1) is observed in 40-58% of invasive tumors. To elucidate the
impact of PELP1 mislocalization on SR signaling pathways and
transcription programs, we have generated SR+ breast cancer cell models
expressing vector, wild-type (nuclear) PELP1, and cyto-PELP1. Our studies
show that cells expressing cyto-PELP1 exhibit increased mammosphere
formation relative to WT-PELP1 or vector control cells in response to
estrogen. Moreover, we have identified AIB1 (ER co-activator) as a robust
binding partner for cytoplasmic, but not nuclear PELP1, through mass
spectrometry. This interaction occurs in a hormone-dependent manner as
shown by co-immunoprecipitation assays. AIB1 activation (i.e.
phosphorylation levels) is increased in cyto-PELP1 cells relative to
WT-PELP1 or control cells. Knockdown of AIB1 reduces cyto-PELP1 protein
levels and leads to decreased gene expression of key pro-inflammatory and
immune regulatory cyto-PELP1 target genes. Our results reveal novel
cytoplasmic actions of AIB1 and highlight the significance of delineating
the impact of dynamic PELP1 shuttling/mislocalization with respect to
altered hormone/SR-driven target gene expression in luminal breast cancer
progression. We conclude direct signaling inputs to SR complexes are
profoundly altered in the context of PELP1 mislocalization and
interaction with AIB1. Our findings are relevant to mechanisms of
endocrine resistance that may be targeted by inhibitors of the PELP1/SR
interaction.


