Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting physical and stromal sources of tumor heterogeneity with
photodynamic therapy-based combinations.


Tumor heterogeneity and drug resistance to conventional therapies remain
major causes of treatment failure, recurrence and dismal survival rates
for patients with advanced stage cancers. A range of cellular,
architectural, and physical cues in the tumor microenvironment influence
the intrinsic and acquired resistance mechanisms that lead to treatment
failure. These include communication with heterocellular stromal partners
and physical forces such as hydrodynamic shear stress, which remain
understudied as determinants of tumor heterogeneity and variability in
treatment response. Strategies that leverage photodynamic therapy (PDT),
a mechanistically-distinct modality, to regionally target and prime
stubborn tumor populations may be essential to overcoming key barriers to
durable cancer management while minimizing toxicity from traditional
agents. A multi-faceted approach is needed to evaluate and optimize
PDT-based combination therapies, including the development of
bioengineered 3D models that integrate cues such as physical forces and
heterotypic cellular communication. Here the impact of hydrodynamic
stress and stromal biology is evaluated in the context of ovarian cancer
(OvCa). Metastatic OvCa spreads predominantly via flushing of ascites
along preferential fluidic pathways and communicates with the local
microenvironment, including the extracellular matrix (ECM) and tumor
endothelial cells (TECs), to form peritoneal implants. A microfluidic
model that supports 3D tumor growth was developed to investigate the role
of fluidic stress on the heterogeneity of metastatic OvCa. The motivation
for this study was based on clinical observations that the most stubborn
tumors are often found in regions such as the peritoneal gutter, which is
subjected to fluidic stress from ascites and is a common site of
resistance and recurrence. Tumor nodules cultured under flow showed
increased epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) compared to non-flow
cultures. Molecular and morphological changes consistent with EMT
included a transcriptionally-regulated significant decrease in
E-cadherin, a significant increase in vimentin, and significant decrease
in fractal dimension, a metric adapted to quantify spindle-like
morphology. A concomitant significant post-translational upregulation of
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) expression and activation, and
chemoresistance was seen. The impact of heterotypic communication between
TECs and OvCa cells was investigated in a 3D model. Tumors grown in the
presence of TECs were differentially susceptible to chemotherapy and
benzoporphyrin derivative (BPD)-based PDT and showed increased
heterogeneity in response to treatment. This heterogeneity was overcome
by PDT priming of tumors prior to chemotherapy. The potential value of
using bioengineered models to guide customized PDT-based combinations
will be presented.


