Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-13 conjugated quantum dots to identify glioma
initiating cells and exosomes.


High grade brain tumors like glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and certain
other brain metastatic cancers possess high tumor invasive and
infiltrating properties making them harder to detect. Identification of
cancer stem cells and exosomes secreted by them in the biofluids like
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) will be an ideal way of detecting the presence
of residual cancer after therapy. In the current approach, a ligand
conjugated quantum dot (QD) was utilized to specifically label the cancer
stem cells and exosomes to identify the presence of IL13Rα2 a tumor
invasive marker. Human glioma initiating cells were cultured in adherent
form and were exposed to interleukin-13 conjugated quantum dots (IL13QD),
which binds the glioma initiating cells expressing IL13Rα2 receptor.
Similarly the exosomes isolated from cancer stem cell condition media and
CSF was briefly incubated with IL13QD, before analyzing their complexing
pattern. Exosomes that were isolated from glioma stem cells and patients
CSF were demonstrated to express IL13Rα2 receptor. Fluorescent
microscopy, transmission electron microscopy and flow cytometry were
performed on the exosomes after complexing with IL13QD. IL13QD was
demonstrated to specifically bind glioma stem cells both in the monolayer
and spheroid culture. The binding affinity of the exosomes to the quantum
dots were quantitatively and qualitatively confirmed by atomic force
microscopy (AFM). The morphology and size of exosomes before and after
complexing with exosomes were confirmed by electron microscopy and AFM.
The density plot from the flow cytometry experiments with IL13QD-exosomes
complex indicates a possibility to identify the tumor associated
exosomes. Our experiment infers that tumor targeted quantum dots can
selectively bind with glioma stem cells and extracellular vesicles
(exosomes) that are secreted by cancer cells. This binding profile could
be utilized to identify the expression of certain tumor promoting
receptors and antigens on the surface of exosomes present in the CSF and
cancer stem cells from the glioma patients. Experiments are in progress
to identify the tumor initiating cells in an orthotopic mouse glioma
tumor model after intravenous administration of wild type IL13 and
certain high affinity mutated IL13 conjugated quantum dots, by
non-invasive way.


