Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and characterization of late-stage breast cancer
estrogen receptor alpha 1 bound long non-coding RNAs.


Breast cancer (BC) is the second most common newly diagnosed cancer and
the second leading cause of cancer death among women in the United
States. Despite the proven benefits of adjuvant endocrine therapy in
women with hormone receptor positive BC, relapses still occur even after
initial treatment with endocrine therapy for 5 years, referred to as
late-stage relapse. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been shown to be
dysregulated in breast cancer. Recent studies have also shown lncRNAs to
function by interfacing with corresponding RNA binding proteins to play
critical regulatory roles of diverse cellular processes. Therefore, we
hypothesize that lncRNAs may interact with ER to regulate genes promoting
late-stage relapse. To address this, we aimed to identify lncRNAs bound
to the estrogen receptor alpha 1 protein (ESR1) that promote late-stage
relapse breast cancer. We first used transcriptome sequencing to identify
altered expression levels of lncRNAs between 72 primary tumors and 24
late-stage relapse breast cancer patients. We detected 1192 altered
lncRNAs when comparing the metastatic to the primary samples (FDR Breast
cancer (BC) is the second most common newly diagnosed cancer and the
second leading cause of cancer death among women in the United States.
Despite the proven benefits of adjuvant endocrine therapy in women with
hormone receptor positive BC, relapses still occur even after initial
treatment with endocrine therapy for 5 years, referred to as late-stage
relapse. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been shown to be
dysregulated in breast cancer. Recent studies have also shown lncRNAs to
function by interfacing with corresponding RNA binding proteins to play
critical regulatory roles of diverse cellular processes. Therefore, we
hypothesize that lncRNAs may interact with ER to regulate genes promoting
late-stage relapse. To address this, we aimed to identify lncRNAs bound
to the estrogen receptor alpha 1 protein (ESR1) that promote late-stage
relapse breast cancer. We first used transcriptome sequencing to identify
altered expression levels of lncRNAs between 72 primary tumors and 24
late-stage relapse breast cancer patients. We detected 1192 altered
lncRNAs when comparing the metastatic to the primary samples (FDR <0.05).
Next, to identify ESR1 bound lncRNAs associated with late-stage BC, we
conducted RNA Immunoprecipitation Sequencing of all transcripts bound to
ESR1 as compared to an IgG control in the ER+ T47D cell line. We
identified 217 lncRNAs bound to ESR1 of which 50 were up-regulated in
late-stage BC, termed Late-Stage Relapse BC ESR1-bound lncRNAs (LASERs).
Next, we focused on characterizing the most up-regulated differentially
expressed lncRNA, LASER1. We found that LASER1 has increased expression
in ER+ breast cancer cell lines. Further, elevated expression of LASER1
was also detected in MCF7 long-term estrogen deprived cells lines that
have amplified ER+, suggesting an ER dependent mechanism. Preliminary
functional studies indicate LASER1 to promote proliferation and invasion
in BC cell lines. Ongoing studies will decipher how LASERs interact with
ESR1 to promote late-stage relapse. Overall, this is the first study to
discover ESR1 bound lncRNAs that may be contributing to late-stage
relapse in BC patients.


