Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional evaluation of superenhancers as mediators of epithelial
ovarian cancer risk.


Superenhancers are master regulators of genes involved in cellular
differentiation and tumorigenesis. While it is now well established that
typical enhancers are key mediators of alleles associated with a mild
risk of polygenic diseases, including cancer, the role of superenhancers
is less understood. We evaluated the role of superenhancers in mediating
risk of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). Using FunciVar software and
superenhancers defined using H3K27ac chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by next generation sequencing, performed in cell lines and
tissues, we characterized the superenhancer-risk SNP intersect and
identified a series of risk-associated loci where multiple candidate
causal alleles overlap with ovarian superenhancers. In particular, locus
3q25, the locus most associated with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) risk
from GWAS studies, has >70 candidate causal risk SNPs, all of which
coincide with superenhancers detected in ovarian cancer precursor cells
(ovarian and fallopian tube epithelia) but not in ovarian cancers. We are
proposing that the presence of one or more SNPs occurring at this locus
leads to a higher expression of one or more genes by modulating
activation of the superenhancer region. We tested the effect of
decreasing the binding affinity of BRD4, a protein that binds
superenhancer regions, using a small molecule inhibitor on the expression
of genes in this locus. We identified three candidate genes—LEKR1,
SSR3, and TiPARP—that demonstrated a decrease expression level as a
result of BRD4 binding inhibition.

Preliminary results show that partial knockdown of either SSR3 or TiPARP
decreases normal ovarian and fallopian cell proliferation, and knocking
down both SSR3 and TiPARP simultaneously shows an enhanced proliferation
decrease compared with knockdown of a single gene. We then created stable
knockout (KO) models using the CRISPR-Cas9 system to fully KO one, two or
all three of our candidate causal genes: LEKR1, SSR3, and TiPARP.
Functional evaluation of these KO models is currently underway to test
the hypothesis that risk SNPs may regulate more than one gene at this
locus. In all we identify a potential role for superenhancers at a subset
of EOC risk loci, and present a functional pipeline for identification of
the target gene/genes and evaluation of their role in neoplastic
transformation.


