Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of Hedgehog signaling via Sirt6 activation is
important to docosahexaenoic acid-induced cell death in human EGFR mutant
non-small cell lung cancer.


Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) induces apoptotic cell death through several
mechanisms in cancer cells. Here we report that DHA-induced apoptotic
cell death is related to the inhibition of Hedgehog signaling via SIRT6
activation in human PC9 and H1975 nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
DHA-induced cell death was confirmed increase of the protein levels of
cleaved PARP and caspase-3 Bax as well as the number of TUNEL positive
cells and the Sub-G1 proportion in PC9 and H1975. DHA significantly
increased the SIRT6 levels. Knockdown of SIRT6 by siRNAs inhibited
apoptosis induced by DHA, while SIRT6 overexpression increased apoptotic
cell death, indicating that DHA-induced SIRT6 activation results in
apoptosis. In addition, SIRT6 activation by DHA treatment was associated
with downregulation of Hh signaling and knockdown of SIRT6 resulted in
augmentation of Hh signaling, suggesting elevation of SIRT6 levels in
DHA-treated NSCLC cells leads to downregulate the Hh signaling. Smo
activator SAG increased the protein levels of Hh signaling molecules by
DHA, and SAG plus DHA treatment decreased cleaved PARP levels, implying
that DHA-inhibited Hh signaling is related to apoptotic cell death. To
unveil the effects of endogenous DHA on apoptosis via SIRT6-mediated Hh
signaling downregulation, we used PC9 stable cell lines of fat-1
(ω3-desaturase) gene. The SIRT6 levels were significantly increased and
Hh signaling molecules were diminished in fat-1 stable PC9 (f-PC9) cells,
compared with the cells transfected with the control vector (c-PC9).
Moreover, SIRT6 expression was elevated and Gli and smo levels were
inhibited in tumor tissues from f-PC9 cells-injected mice, demonstrating
that DHA regulates SIRT6 and Hh signaling in vivo. Taken together, these
results suggest that DHA may induce apoptotic cell death through
SIRT6-modulated Hh signaling suppression in human NSCLC cells. These
findings implicate that ω3-PUFAs may represent a potential effective
therapy for the chemoprevention and treatment of human NSCLC. [This work
was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant
funded by the Korea government (MEST) (2007-0054932,
NRF-2015R1D1A1A01056887) and by the framework of international
cooperation program managed by National Research Foundation of Korea
(2015K2A2A6002008)].


