Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of nuclear export with selinexor or KPT-8602 reduces
androgen receptor expression and leads to potent anti-tumor activity in
preclinical models of androgen-independent prostate cancer.


Metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) is an advanced
form of prostate cancer (PC) associated with poor prognosis.
Approximately 20 - 40% of mCRPCs are androgen-independent and do not
respond to treatment with abiraterone or enzalutamide, drugs that
suppress androgen synthesis or directly target androgen ligand binding
domains (LBD) respectively. Patients initially responding to these drugs
eventually relapse, highlighting the need for alternative therapies.
Resistance is attributed to the emergence of constitutively active AR
splice variants lacking C-terminal LBDs such as AR variant 7. Although
ARv7 activity cannot be mitigated by current therapeutic approaches, it
is known that AR mRNA is exported from the nucleus by eIF4E and
exportin-1 (XPO1). Selinexor and KPT-8602 are orally bioavailable SINE
(Selective Inhibitor of Nuclear Export) compounds that specifically
target XPO1. The purpose of this study is to provide mechanistic evidence
for using SINE compounds as novel therapies for androgen-independent
mCRPC.

Methods: In vitro, selinexor or KPT-8602 were tested on
androgen-independent PC cell line 22Rv1. RNA and protein were analyzed by
qPCR and immunoblot. Cell viability was examined using the Celltiter-Glo
assay. In vivo, immune deficient SCID mice were injected subcutaneously
with 22Rv1 cells. Tumors were grown to ~150 mm3 before treatment with
selinexor (10 mg/kg qodx3) or KPT-8602 (15 mg/kg reduce to 10 mg/kg
qdx5). Tumor growth and animal weights were monitored to determine tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) and tolerability to treatment. Tumors were
analyzed using immunohistochemistry (IHC).

Results: We found that expression of AR, ARv7 and prostate specific
antigen (PSA; transcriptionally regulated by AR) proteins are reduced
following 24-hour treatment with SINE compounds. Nuclear vs. cytoplasmic
fractionation of RNA revealed that ARv7 and PSA mRNA localization was
increased in the nucleus (4-fold and 3-fold, respectively) and reduced in
the cytoplasm (5-fold and 3-fold, respectively). Moreover, KPT-8602
potently inhibited cell viability (IC50: 100 nM), while enzalutamide and
abiraterone had no effect. Finally, mice bearing 22Rv1 xenografts,
treated with selinexor or KPT-8602 exhibited a complete reduction in
tumor volume (95% and 94% TGI, respectively), which coincided with
prolonged overall survival. IHC analysis showed a reduction of
proliferation markers and a concomitant increase in cell death makers in
selinexor and KPT-8602 treated tumors.

Conclusion: SINE compounds show strong anti-tumor activity in
androgen-independent prostate cancer models in vitro and in vivo by
reducing AR, ARv7, and PSA expression. These findings highlight the
promise of SINE compounds as treatment options for androgen-independent
mCRPCs resistant to first line therapies.


