Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Osteopontin, p53 and PTEN isoforms expression patterns in
endometrium carcinoma cell lines.


Total osteopontin (OPN) is overexpressed in endometrium carcinoma (EC)
and modifications at TP53 and PTEN genes correspond to major genetic
alterations in these tumors. Althought total OPN expression has been
correlated to p53 and PTEN expression, no data is available regarding OPN
splice variants and their association to p53 and PTEN isoforms
expression. OPN has three splicing isoforms (OPN-SI), named OPNa, OPNb
and OPNc, while p53 has at least 12 variants, such as p53 (full lenght),
p53β, p53γ, Δ40p53, Δ133p53 and Δ160p53. Moreover, PTEN splicing
isoforms (PTEN-SI) are named vs-fl (full lenght variant), vs-3a-3c,
vs-5a-5d, and vs-D6. We aimed to evaluate the expression profile of OPN,
p53 and PTEN isoforms as a first approach to establish their presumptive
associations and functional interactions in endometrial tumoral and non
tumoral cells. Total RNA has been extracted from endometrial non-tumoral
(E6/E7 and EM42) and tumoral (Ishikawa, RL95-2, AN3CA and KLE) cell
lines, followed by cDNA synthesis. Transcriptional and protein expression
patterns have been evaluated for OPN, p53 or PTEN isoforms, using
quantitative real time PCR, immunoblot or immunofluorescence. OPNa is
overexpressed in tumoral and non-tumoral cell lines in relation to OPNb
and OPNc. Regarding p53, the full lengh isoform is overexpressed,
followed by Δ40p53, in relation to other variants in EC cells.
Conversely, Δ40p53 it is the major expressed transcript in both EM42 and
E6/E7 non-tumoral cells. Otherwise, in EC and endometrial non-tumoral
cells, PTEN vs-fl isoform is overexpressed in relation to the other
splice variants. Specifically in E6/E7 cells, all PTEN-SI, except vs-3b e
vs-D6, are overexpressed in relation to EC cell lines. At the protein
level, both p53 and PTEN isoforms are overexpressed in E6/E7 cells, when
compared to EC cells. Of note, distinct isoforms for most of these
variant transcripts have not been detected at the protein level. Our data
demonstrate that full lenght OPN, p53 and PTEN are the major expressed
variants in EC tumor cell lines. However, most of these transcript
variants display differential expression between endometrial tumor and
non-tumoral cells and also among distinct EC cell lines. These data
provide early evidence that these variants can differently modulate the
expression and functional roles of their full length couterparts. Further
work should investigate the impact of OPNa overerexpression on p53 and
PTEN isoforms and their putative cellular and molecular roles on
modulating p53 and PTEN tumor supressive roles.


