Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Celecoxib fixed dose combinations - patient level data analyses.


Background: Celecoxib is a highly effective anti-inflammatory drug.
However, its use is associated with adverse events including edema and
hypertension (HTN). High dose celecoxib has been shown to be effective
against familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). However, it was
discontinued because of safety concerns. Here we examined the impact of
celecoxib intake on HTN and edema. The concomitant intake of celecoxib
and one of the antihypertensives (AH) was also evaluated as means to
suppress the side effects of celecoxib.

Methods: This is a retrospective study that uses two patient level data
(PLD) sources: (1) anonymous PLD from Symphony from Jan 2012 to Dec 2014
(3 years), and (2) Pinnacle registry data from American College of
Cardiology (ACC) over the same time period with detailed clinical data
such as blood pressure (BP) readings, peripheral edema flags, etc. In
Symphony dataset there are 162 million (M) unique patients, 4.3M patients
on celecoxib, 16.3M patients with osteoarthritis (OA)(15.4M only OA) ,and
2.3M patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) (1.4M only RA). In ACC
dataset, there are 1.58M unique patients with BP readings, 870K patients
with edema flag.

Results: There was no impact of celecoxib consumed on the change in BP
readings. There were as many increases as decreases, regardless of the
amount of celecoxib consumed between BP readings. A breakdown by baseline
BP readings did not reveal any trends. Concomitant use of AH with
celecoxib did not impact BP. Onset of edema was not correlated with total
dose of celecoxib. Less than 10% of the observations indicated a change
in edema status. However, unlike BP, increasing % of edema was observed
for increment in doses and days of treatment with celecoxib plus any
other drug combination, suggesting drug induced edema. Edema was
baselined with concomitant consumption of angiotensin receptor blocker
(ARB) or angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) or hydrochlorothiazide. It
was further aggravated by non-thiazide diuretics and minimally impacted
by calcium channel blocker.

Conclusion: Previous analysis has shown that dose increment of celecoxib
to more than 200mg/day did not improve treatment efficacy, but
significantly increased the edema rate but not BP in OA patients. Here we
confirmed our meta-analysis using PLD data. Celecoxib with ARB exhibited
the lowest incidence of edema and with non-thiazide diuretics the highest
incidence (Odds ratio = 3.34 (95% CI = 2.85-3.94), pConclusion: Previous
analysis has shown that dose increment of celecoxib to more than
200mg/day did not improve treatment efficacy, but significantly increased
the edema rate but not BP in OA patients. Here we confirmed our
meta-analysis using PLD data. Celecoxib with ARB exhibited the lowest
incidence of edema and with non-thiazide diuretics the highest incidence
(Odds ratio = 3.34 (95% CI = 2.85-3.94), p<0.0001). ARB with celecoxib
displayed a significant reduction in edema incidence compared to
celecoxib alone (Odds ratio = 0.626 (95% CI = 0.539-0.724), pConclusion:
Previous analysis has shown that dose increment of celecoxib to more than
200mg/day did not improve treatment efficacy, but significantly increased
the edema rate but not BP in OA patients. Here we confirmed our
meta-analysis using PLD data. Celecoxib with ARB exhibited the lowest
incidence of edema and with non-thiazide diuretics the highest incidence
(Odds ratio = 3.34 (95% CI = 2.85-3.94), p<0.0001). ARB with celecoxib
displayed a significant reduction in edema incidence compared to
celecoxib alone (Odds ratio = 0.626 (95% CI = 0.539-0.724), p<0.0001).
The celecoxib-ARB and celecoxib-ACE FDCs are being investigated further
as therapy for FAP and more broadly for colorectal cancers.


