Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AKT mediates transcriptional regulation of H3K4 demethylase in
PTEN null prostate cancer.


One of the common contributors to the pre-disposition of most human
cancers is inappropriate activation of AKT due to loss of its negative
regulator PTEN. Activated AKT regulates changes in metabolic processes
such as acetyl-CoA production that impacts chromatin. AKT phosphorylates
a wide variety of histone modulating enzymes including acetyltransferases
and methyltransferases resulting in their hyperactivation or inhibition.
Therefore, understanding the impact of AKT inhibition on global histone
modification would be ideal to identify novel histone modifiers regulated
by AKT. We performed unbiased and comprehensive profiling of histone
modifications in prostate specific PTEN knockout mice treated with an AKT
inhibitor (Perifosine, 10mg/kg body weight daily for 4 weeks) and
observed that AKT inhibition significantly induces di and tri methylation
of H3K4, concomitant with reduction acetylation of H3K9. Changes in other
histone modifications such as H3K36 and H3K79 methylation and acetylation
were not observed. Mechanistically, we observed that AKT inihibiton
reduces the expression of H3K4 methylation related histone demethylases
KDM5 family, especially KDM5B expression at transcriptional level.
Similar observations were noted at translational level also. To further
understand the transcriptional regulation of KDM5B by AKT we focused on
miR-137 and miR-138 as these have been shown to transcriptionally
regulate H3K4 demethylases. We observed that AKT activation negatively
regulated miR-137 but not miR-138 levels, which further transcriptionally
represses KDM5B expression. Overexpression of miR-137 significantly
reduced KDM5B and increased H3K4 di and tri methylation levels but failed
to change AKT phosphorylation. Genetic knockdown of AKT or inhibition of
AKT phosphorylation increased miR137 and reduced both KDM5B levels.
Overall, we observed that AKT transcriptionally regulates KDM5B mainly
via repression of miR137. Our data identify a mechanism by which PI3K/AKT
signaling modulates the prostate cancer epigenome through regulating H3K4
methylation and KDM5B expression. Additional studies that assess the
impact of AKT inhibiton on genome occupancy of H3K4 methylation will help
in the identification of targets and devise novel strategies to enhance
the therapeutic efficacy of PI3K/AKT inhibitors that are currently in
clinical development.


