Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Designing of a novel strategy for cancer gene therapy by selective
delivery of Adenovirus-based toxin.


Introduction:

Aberrant activation of the Ras pathway exists in many human tumors (Lung
~25%, pancreatic (PC) >95% and colorectal cancers (CRC) ~50%. Development
of numerous direct and in direct Ras inhibitors have failed. This led us
to think differently; we exploit the hyperactive Ras pathway rather than
trying to inhibit it. We previously had reported that recombinant
adenoviruses, carrying a pro-apoptotic gene (PUMA) under the regulation
of Ras-responsive elements suppressed the growth of cancer cells
harboring hyperactive Ras. Moreover, replacing the PUMA gene with more
potent toxins (bacterial MazF-MazE toxin-antitoxin unique regulated
system), the potency of this killing strategy was significantly improved.

P53 is a classical tumor suppressor mutated in many tumors. Herein, the
WT p53 is use to protect normal cells from any systematic toxin leakage.

Aim:

To establish a tight control of the toxin expression in malignant cells,
and the anti-toxin in normal cells dual system based on the Ras and p53
responsive elements

Methods:

Adenoviral vectors carrying the toxin (PY4-MazF-mcherry) and the
antitoxin (RGC-MazE-GFP) were designed under the regulation of Ras and
p53 responsive elements, respectively. Those two constructs were cloned
into a “first generation” ΔE1/ΔE3 human type5 adenoviral vector.
Virus particles were produced, their titer was calculated by the
End-Point Dilution Assay and their potency was tested in vitro. Cell
death was measured qualitatively by using the fluorescent microscopy and
was quantified by the enzymatic MTT assay. SHP77;Rasmut/p53mut,
H2030;Rasmut/p53wt, H1650;Raswt/p53wt and H1975;Raswt/p53mut lung
cancer cell lines were used for testing the potency of the system.
MIA-PACA2, Colo357, Panc-1;Rasmut/p53mut, and BxPC3;Raswt/p53mut PC
cell lines were tested as well. Different ratios of toxin-antitoxin (2:1,
1:1 and 1:0.5) were used.

Results:

Massive cell death was induced in a dose-dependent manner (70% with a
titer of 7.5 MOI in lung cells with mutated Ras compared to 21% in cells
with WT Ras). Similar results were obtained in a colony formation assay
and qualitatively confirmed by fluorescence microscopy. Similarly, in PC,
cells with mutated Ras showed 50% cell death in a dose-dependent manner
with a titer of 15 MOI, compared to 18% in cells with WT Ras. Ratio of
1:0.5, showed decrease in the mortality of the mutated Ras cells
expressing WT p53; 36% with a titer of 7.5 MOI. These results indicate
that the antitoxin indeed actively protects cells with wt p53.

Conclusion:

Outside the box cancer gene therapy by exploiting activate Ras and P53
pathways are effective in vitro. The low toxicity in WT Ras as well as WT
p53 expressing holds promise for effective and safe therapy.


