Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of molecular mechanisms of cytoplasmic
trafficking and nuclear translocation of AR splice variants ARv7.


Androgen receptor (AR) signaling is critical to not only
hormone-sensitive but also advanced castration-resistant prostate cancer.
AR inhibitors (abiraterone and enzalutamide), the next generation of
androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) have been used for metastatic
castration-resistant PC (mCRPC) treatment, however, the majority of
patients progress due to the development of drug resistance. AR variants
has emerged as one of the mechanisms of resistance to these drugs. ARv7
and Arv567 splice variants that found lacking the ligand -binding domain
are constitutively active in the nucleus and thus restore AR function
despite AR inhibitors treatment. We have reported that microtubules and
dynein motor protein is required as transportation system for AR for its
nuclear translocation and activity and that taxanes inhibit AR signaling
downstream of microtubule inhibitors. In addition, we identified that the
AR hinge region mediates binding to microtubules is present in ARv567 but
missing from ARv7. ARv7 is expressed in about 60% of CRPC patients and
has been shown to confer clinical resistance to next generation AR
signaling inhibitors. Currently, there is no therapeutic modality
targeting specifically ARv7 expression or function. Using fluorescent
recovery after photobleaching experiments (FRAP) we have shown that ARv7
translocation to the nucleus occurs much faster than AR-FL (t1/2 11s and
23 s respectively) and that its nuclear import is independent of the
importin a/b pathway utilized by AR-FL and proteins with canonical NLS.
Furthermore, transient expression of the Q69L RanGTP mutant protein,
which acts as dominant negative by occluding the nucleoporins, had
minimal effect on ARv7 nuclear import, while it completely blocked AR-FL
and AR-v567. Collectively, these data suggest that the nuclear import
pathway for ARv7 is distinct from that utilized by AR-FL. We believe that
ARv7 undoubtedly uses facilitated transport because of its size (75 kDa),
therefore we are tackling three possibilities of nuclear translocation of
ARv7. First, ARv7 could interact directly with FG repeat nucleoporins
(without receptor) as reported for beta catenin. We are investigating
this by the use of importin β-(71-876) mutant cell line for in vitro
studies which blocks all members of the importin family. In addition, we
are investigating the role of karyopherin transport receptors by
individual knockdown experiments coupled with live cell imaging and
kinetic quantitation of ARv7 nucleocytoplasmic trafficking. Further,
ARv7could translocate to nucleus by utilizes a piggyback on another
protein with a classical nuclear localization signals. Overexpression of
glutathione S-transferase- importin β binding domain fragment which will
block all importin β pathways will exclude this mechanism. Elucidation
of this mechanism will be vital to facilitate design an alternative
therapeutic modality to halt AR signaling for CRPC treatment.


