Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-6/STAT3 activation in hepatocytes drives the formation of a
pro-metastatic niche in the liver during pancreatic tumorigenesis.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth-leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the United States with metastasis to the liver
as the major cause of mortality. While the propensity of PDAC to spread
to the liver may reflect mechanical trapping of tumor cells that enter
the portal circulation, primary tumor cells have also been suggested to
secrete factors that may promote recruitment of myeloid cells to
establish a pro-metastatic niche. In this study, we used the
LSL-KrasG12D/+;LSL-Trp53R127H/+;Pdx-1-Cre (KPC) mouse model of PDAC to
investigate the impact of PDAC development on the formation of a
pro-metastatic niche in the liver. We found that KPC mice (compared to
age- and gender-matched control mice) demonstrated an increased
susceptibility to tumor seeding in the liver even prior to development of
invasive PDAC. Examination of the liver of KPC mice revealed diffuse
activation of Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3 (STAT3)
signaling, particularly in hepatocytes. Although hepatocytes are
recognized as important regulators of inflammation, their role in
establishing a pro-metastatic niche is unknown. To define changes in the
liver associated with development of a pro-metastatic niche, we performed
QuantSeq analysis on RNA isolated from the liver of KPC versus control PC
mice. Our results showed increased transcriptional levels of myeloid
chemoattractants, particularly serum amyloid A proteins that are
predominantly produced by hepatocytes. Consistent with this finding, we
observed an accumulation of F4/80+ and Ly6G+ myeloid cells in the liver
of KPC mice by immunofluorescence microscopy. We next determined the role
of tumor cells in driving cellular activation seen in the liver by
establishing intraperitoneal and orthotopic models of PDAC. Using these
models, we found that implantation of pancreatic tumor cells induced
STAT3 activation in hepatocytes and stimulated F4/80+ and Ly6G+ myeloid
cell recruitment to the liver. To determine whether cellular activation
in the liver was associated with systemic release of soluble factors, we
performed parabiotic joining of tumor-implanted mice and control wild
type mice, and we found evidence of STAT3 activation and myeloid
recruitment to the liver in parabiotic pairs. As interleukin-6 (IL-6) is
a key inflammatory cytokine that can activate STAT3 signaling, we
hypothesized a role for IL-6 directed STAT3 activation in hepatocytes for
development of a pro-metastatic niche in the liver. Consistent with this
hypothesis, we found that IL-6 receptor blocking antibodies administered
after tumor implantation reduced STAT3 activation in hepatocytes and
decreased transcriptional levels of hepatocyte-derived chemoattractants.
Together, our findings support a role for IL-6/STAT3 signaling in
hepatocytes in driving a pro-metastatic niche in the liver during PDAC
development.


