Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective inhibition of copper metabolism as a novel approach to
treat triple-negative breast cancer.


Rationale: Treatment of patients with triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC) remains challenging due to unpredictable disease progression and
acquired resistance to chemotherapy. Finding novel targets in TNBC is
important for the development of anticancer therapy. Cancer cells
frequently adapt to cytotoxicity of existing pharmacological agents by
exploiting metabolic pathways. Elevated copper metabolism and adaptations
to oxidative stress have been linked to cancer progression. Copper
chelation with tetrathiomolybdate (TM) was reported to control disease
progression, especially in patients with TNBC. However, long-term
consequences of global copper depletion are still under investigation. An
alternative strategy is provided by a recently developed small molecule
DCAC50 that blocks the copper transfer interface of two major copper
chaperons, ATOX-1 and CCS. Protein levels of ATOX-1 and CCS are elevated
in TNBC cells compared to normal cells. Thus, we hypothesized that
disrupting copper transport by targeting ATOX-1 and CCS with DCAC50 may
suppress TNBC progression.

Results: We investigated efficacy and potency of novel small molecule
DCAC50 to induce cytotoxicity in a panel of TNBC cells lines. DCAC50
reduced cell proliferation in dose-dependent manner, measured by MTS
assay. IC50 doses ranged from 3-10uM. Most importantly, DCAC50 induced
apoptosis in TNBC cells, detected by Caspase 3/7 activity and Annexin
V/PI staining. As expected, DCAC50 elevated intracellular copper levels.
Moreover, TNBC cells treated with DCAC50 had significantly higher levels
of oxidized glutathione (GSSG) and caused increased oxidation of DCF-DA
reagent, demonstrating elevated oxidative stress. Surprisingly, activity
of CCS downstream target, SOD1, was not affected by selective inhibition
of copper transport with DCAC50; suggesting that intracellular copper
accumulation and oxidative stress is mediated by ATOX-1 inhibition.
Interestingly, copper depletion with TM inhibited SOD1 activity but
failed to significantly impact oxidative stress in TNBC cells.
Recognizing DCAC50 generates oxidative stress triggering apoptosis in
TNBC cells we evaluated benefits of combining DCAC50 treatment with
paclitaxel. Multi-drug combination dose-response analysis revealed that
co-treatment induced synergistic cytotoxicity and resulted in favorable
dose reduction of both drugs.

Conclusions: Selective inhibition of copper metabolism with novel small
molecule DCAC50 elevates oxidative stress triggering apoptosis in TNBC
cells. This approach may be valuable in combination with chemotherapy
especially when tumor cells acquire resistance to first line therapy in
TNBC. Ongoing studies comparing selective inhibition of copper transport
to global copper chelation, and investigating efficacy and biological
activity of DCAC50 in vivo will help further estimate benefits and
clinical relevance of this approach for treatment of TNBC patients.


