Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Duplex Sequencing detects cancer-associated mutations arising
during normal aging: Clonal evolution over a century of human lifetime.


High-throughput DNA sequencing has fundamentally changed practice
standards in clinical oncology. We can now systematically examine the
dysfunctional genes and pathways of individual tumors and can often pair
these with targeted therapies. Moreover, NGS has improved our ability to
resolve molecular heterogeneity, such as results from evolving subclones
within a tumor or admixtures of cancer-derived and normal DNA in liquid
biopsies. However, this remains imperfect. With standard NGS, sequencing
errors create a background that obscures variants present at less than
1-2%. Methods of tag-based error correction improve accuracy, but most
rely on hemimolecular tagging and are thus still limited by certain types
of errors caused by DNA damage. Our group pioneered Duplex Sequencing, an
error correction technology that independently genotypes and compares
both single-stranded halves of individual DNA duplexes. This approach
improves sequencing accuracy by >100,000-fold and allows detection of a
single mutation among ten million unmutated nucleotides. We carried out
Duplex Sequencing on uterine lavages from women with and without
high-grade serous ovarian cancer to determine the sensitivity for
identifying tumor-derived TP53 mutations as a screening test. Under
blinded conditions we detected tumor-derived mutations in 80% of cancer
cases. However, in addition, we found that nearly all women, including
those without cancer, carried very low frequency TP53 mutations that did
not originate from a tumor. These could not be explained by technical
errors, as they exhibited a strong signature of positive selection,
indicated by higher-than-random non-synonymous fraction, substantial
clustering in cancer-associated hotspots and a spectrum, exonic
distribution and predicted pathogenicity closely mirroring TP53 mutations
in cancer databases. Furthermore, abundance of these “biological
background” mutations increased with age. To more broadly investigate
the extent of clonal evolution in normal aging, we used Duplex Sequencing
to examine tissue specimens from two individuals without cancer,
differing in age by 101 years. We assessed relative mutation load in 22
cancer-associated genes and one non-cancer associated gene in 19
different tissues. Initial results indicate that the extent of
age-associated mutation accumulation varies by organ and the pattern of
apparent clonal selection is influenced by both tissue type and genetic
context. Our findings illustrate the near-universal presence of
cancer-like mutations arising from age-associated processes in multiple
non-neoplastic tissues. Somatic clonal evolution appears to be a
ubiquitous part of human life. Beyond many biological implications, this
highlights an important specificity challenge that must be accounted for
when using ultra-accurate sequencing technologies for cancer screening
and other sensitive diagnostics.


