Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying predictive markers of endocrine response in high-grade
serous ovarian cancer using RNA sequencing.


Epithelial ovarian cancer is a complex disease and patients vary
considerably in response to treatment. A subset of patients responds well
to endocrine therapy, however hormone receptor positivity does not
predict response and there are no biomarkers in clinical use to help
select patients that would benefit from endocrine agents. We aimed to
identify markers of endocrine response in high-grade serous ovarian
cancer (HGSOC) by analysis of genes that are differentially expressed in
tumors from patients that are endocrine responders compared with
non-responders, combined with analysis of estrogen (E2) regulated genes
that differ between E2 sensitive and E2 insensitive HGSOC cell lines.

Methods: Among women recruited to the Australian Ovarian Cancer Study, we
identified 10 HGSOC patients treated with endocrine therapy (5 responders
and 5 non-responders, based on GCIG CA125 response criteria) and
performed RNAseq on cryopreserved tumor tissue. We also utilized paired
E2 receptor (ER) positive HGSOC cell lines, derived from the same
patient, with differential sensitivity to the growth effect of E2, PEO1
(E2 insensitive) and PEO4 (E2 sensitive). RNA was extracted following
treatment with 0.1 nM E2 (or vehicle) for 24 hrs and gene expression
changes in response to E2 were determined using RNAseq. Expression of
selected ER responsive genes was validated using PCR array. Differential
gene expression was determined using EdgeR. Pathway and Gene Ontology
enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes were performed
using Metacore.

Results: Between endocrine responders and non-responders, 27 genes were
significantly differentially expressed (False Discovery Rate
(FDR)Results: Between endocrine responders and non-responders, 27 genes
were significantly differentially expressed (False Discovery Rate
(FDR)<0.05, absolute log2 Fold-Change (FC)≥1). In the paired HGSOC cell
lines, significantly more genes were regulated by E2 in E2-sensitive
PEO4, compared with E2-insensitive PEO1 (896 genes compared to 56 genes,
respectively, FDRResults: Between endocrine responders and
non-responders, 27 genes were significantly differentially expressed
(False Discovery Rate (FDR)<0.05, absolute log2 Fold-Change (FC)≥1). In
the paired HGSOC cell lines, significantly more genes were regulated by
E2 in E2-sensitive PEO4, compared with E2-insensitive PEO1 (896 genes
compared to 56 genes, respectively, FDR<0.05, absolute log2FC≥1). In
response to E2, up-regulation of NRP1 in PEO1, up-regulation of LTBP1,
MYC, PDZK1 and down-regulation of S100A6 and CYP1A1 in PEO4 were
validated by PCR array profiling of ER-related genes. Genes regulated by
E2 in cell lines and also differentially expressed between endocrine
responders and non-responders included anoctamin 1 (ANO1) and
NOTCH-Regulated Ankyrin Repeat Protein (NRARP). Both were up-regulated in
endocrine responders and also up-regulated by E2 in PEO4.

Conclusion: The use of RNAseq in both tumors and cell line models was
able to identify plausible sets of genes with prior evidence of
association with endocrine sensitivity. In breast cancer, ANO1 has been
associated with good prognosis following tamoxifen treatment, while NOTCH
signaling, implicated in endocrine resistance, is negatively regulated by
NRARP. Further validation is required to test the utility of these genes
as predictive biomarkers that may aid in identifying HGSOC patients
likely to respond to endocrine treatment.


