Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of c-Met in the development and progression of Tpl2-related
skin cancer.


Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC), a form of non-melanoma skin
cancer, is the second most common form of cancer in the United States,
with over one million cases diagnosed annually. Tpl2 (MAP3K8) is a serine
threonine protein kinase in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signal transduction cascade. Tpl2 was identified by our laboratory as
having a tumor suppressive function in skin carcinogenesis, with Tpl2
knockout mice developing significantly more papillomas and squamous cell
carcinomas than matched wildtype (WT) controls. Cellular mesenchymal to
epithelial transition factor (c-Met) is a receptor heightened in
malignant skin cancers and involved in Tpl2 signaling. When bound to its
ligand, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), c-Met can regulate cell
proliferation, survival, angiogenesis and invasion. The aim of this study
was to ascertain whether c-Met signaling contributes to the heightened
skin tumorigenesis in Tpl2-/- mice. Forty-four WT and Tpl2 -/- mice were
subjected to a two-stage chemical carcinogenesis protocol for one year to
induce skin tumors. Starting at the time of promotion, half of the WT and
Tpl2 -/- mice were placed on normal diet and half received diet plus
30mg/kg Capmatinib, a pharmacological inihibitor of c-Met. This diet
continued for the duration of the study. No adverse health effects were
found in Capmatinib-treated mice. Similar to what we previously reported,
Tpl2 -/- mice developed tumors earlier than WT controls and had
statistically higher tumor incidence and overall tumor burden than WT
mice. The number of tumor bearing Tpl2 -/- and Tpl2 -/- + Capmatinib fed
mice was similar, although Capmatinib fed mice had a 60% reduction in
overall tumor burden. Studies are underway to determine if Capmatinib
affected the frequency of malignant conversion in Tpl2 -/- mice. In
summary, our studies demonstrate that heightened c-Met signaling
contributes to the higher tumor formation in Tpl2-/- mice and should be
evaluated further as a possible therapeutic target in Tpl2-related skin
cancers.


