Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of microsatellite instable colorectal cancers from
routine NGS panel sequencing data.


Introduction

In about 15% of all colorectal cancers, microsatellite instability (MSI)
caused by defects in the DNA mismatch repair machinery can be detected.
MSI driven tumors have a better prognosis compared to microsatellite
stable (MSS) tumors and show good response to drugs targeting the
PD-1-PD-L1 axis. Current molecular diagnostic procedures for colorectal
cancer are primarily focused on the detection of oncogenic mutations in
RAS family genes by either classical Sanger sequencing or next-generation
sequencing. Routine testingof MSI status for therapeutic purposes is
still rare and usually carried out by a different array of methods
including PCR and immunohistochemistry.

Experimental procedures

In our routine diagnostic CRC screening, we sequenced more than 600
colorectal tumors with an entity specific customized 180 amplicon NGS
panel encompassing HotSpot regions of 31 genes. This panel includes
several homopolymeric regions of genes that are known to be affected by
MSI. We retrospectively analysed this data set for MSI signatures,
including deletion/insertion mutations in 20 different homopolymeric
regions (>7) and mutations/deletions of MLH1, MSH3, MSH6 and TGFBR2.
Cases with an MSI signature detected by panel sequencing were reevaluated
by PCR-based screening (Bethesda panel).

Results

From the 20 homopolymeric regions analyzed, several loci showed
deletion/insertion mutations in MSI-positive patients. The highest
discriminatory power presented a homopolymeric region within the ACVR2A
gene showing a high analytical sensitivity and specificity towards MSI
prediction. In combination with the readout of additional homopolymeric
regions and the mutation status of MLH1, MSH3, MSH6 and TGFBR2, a
sensitive and specific detection algorithm for MSI can be obtained from
routine panel sequencing data. In conclusion, using only one assay, this
approach facilitates simultaneous detection of mutations in RAS genes
(and other druggable targets) and the MSI status in CRC As the assay is
tissue sparing and time saving it may be advantageous over classic test
approaches that are currently being employed in routine diagnostics.


