Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Providing confidence around computational tissue analysis using
heterogeneity assessments.


Background: Though the techniques to interrogate the appearance of a
biomarker in tissue sections have greatly advanced, there are limitations
as to how representative an analysis of a tissue section is compared to
the entire diseased tissue. Depending on the heterogeneous expression
level of a biomarker, tissue sampling can result in different
interpretations of the biomarker’s appearance, and hence could
potentially lead to a false therapeutic intervention.

Hypothesis: Digital image analysis has demonstrated tremendous value in
quantifying many features related to biomarker distribution and
expression in biological tissues. The information can be collected for
various indications and biomarkers and a phenotypic signature can be
established that describes a biomarker representation across indications.
Moreover, the assessment of new samples can be compared to the
established phenotypic signature and a confidence score applied in
support to the determined endpoint.

Approach: For a proof of concept, 6 prostate cancer samples were
processed and a single section was collected after every 100microns. A
total of 7 sections per sample were stained for the lymphocyte marker
CD3, and the number of positive target cells were determined in the tumor
and tumor microenvironment using tissue Image Analysis (tIA™). To
assess how indicative the evaluation of a single tissue section would be
for the entire tumor, the heterogeneity level was determined on the
section level as well as by random grid analysis on each individual
section. Both criteria were utilized to define an indication and
biomarker specific confidence interval and heterogeneity score.

Conclusion: The combination of IHC and tIA is a powerful tool to convert
complex data into meaningful interpretations. tIA is also a capable tool
to catalogue valuable information about the biomarker’s expression
pattern across different disease stages and hence could be used to
evaluate how representative a single biomarker evaluation is in the grand
scheme. Ultimately, we demonstrated a technique that can be applied to
any biomarker and would assist in guiding therapeutic decisions.


