Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Celecoxib fixed dose combination - therapeutic drug monitoring.


Background: The anticancer properties of Celecoxib (CEL) have been
demonstrated in different cancer indications, including colorectal,
breast and non-small cell lung cancers. However, its use is associated
with dose related cardiovascular adverse events including edema and
hypertension. We have shown that combination of CEL and OLM (Olmesartan)
would negate drug induced edema caused by CEL. To further improve on the
safety of this combination, we are now exploring therapeutic drug
monitoring (TDM) guided dosing on CEL. This study demonstrated that TDM
via lateral flow platform would be able to quantify plasma drug
concentration and guide the optimal dosing for CEL.

Methods: Pharmacokinetic (PK) data (Cmax and AUC) to oral formulations of
CEL as single dose to healthy adults were collected from published
clinical trials. PK data were analyzed against dose and demographic
factors to evaluate the variability. To develop the lateral flow methods
for quantification, mAbs against CEL were generated by synthesizing
BSA-CEL immunogen and hybridoma technology. The best clones demonstrating
a dose response to CEL were selected and tested. The assay requires the
configuration of immobilizing BSA-CEL onto the membrane followed by
flowing the colloidal-gold labeled mAb against CEL through in presence of
test analyte. This resulted in a competitive assay where the signal
decreased as the concentration of CEL in blood increased.

Results: For CEL, the AUC and Cmax across multiple doses were
significantly overlapped. With 200 mg CEL, we used meta-analysis to show
that older subjects have a significantly higher AUC than young subjects
(pResults: For CEL, the AUC and Cmax across multiple doses were
significantly overlapped. With 200 mg CEL, we used meta-analysis to show
that older subjects have a significantly higher AUC than young subjects
(p<0.001). These results indicated that different individuals may have
very different drug exposure with same dose of CEL, depending on their
age and other factors, resulting in over exposure and toxicity. Using a
cutoff of 6,741 ng*hr/mL, we were able to separate out almost all of the
elderly subjects from the young subjects. Therefore, to avoid toxicity,
we will use TDM guided dosing to maintain AUC at the target AUC of 6,741
ng*hr/mL. To make possible TDM guided dosing, we developed a quantitative
point of care lateral flow assay for CEL. mAb against CEL were selected
based on good sensitivity and binding ability to CEL. Coupled with the
lateral flow reader by Qiagen, the assay exhibited a dynamic range of
7.5ng/ml to 30mg/ml of CEL, from a drop of blood with read time of less
than 20 min.

Conclusion: A quantitative lateral flow platform coupled to a reader was
developed to easily detect the CEL concentrations in finger-prick blood
samples, allowing for in-home personal PK testing. The individual PK
profiles built from the concentration data will be used to guide the
optimal dosing of CEL, to maximize treatment efficacy and minimize
toxicity. This should allow for higher dosing of CEL without hitting the
toxic exposure limit. This additional enhancement on top of combination
with OLM in the fixed dose combination should insure the safety of our
patients on these drugs.


