Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization strategy for fluorescent multiplex
immunohistochemistry tissue staining.


Introduction: Recent insights into the tumor microenvironment have fueled
the need for additional information beyond the one or two phenotypes
provided by traditional immunohistochemistry (IHC). As a response, manual
and automated fluorescent multiplex immunohistochemistry (fIHC)
techniques have been recently developed and accepted by the
immuno-oncology space. Fluorescent multiplex immunohistochemistry (fIHC)
assays are designed to simultaneously measure multiple biomarkers in
tissue sections with visual context that is lost in other methods, such
as flow cytometry. Here we describe a novel optimization strategy to
achieve quantitative, robust, and specific multiplex fIHC staining
results with both manual and automated multiple-color Opal procedures.

Methods: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples of primary tumors were
immunostained using Opal™ reagents both manually and on a fully
automated Leica BOND RX™ stainer. The impact of different reagent
concentrations and quantities were analyzed in respect to signal
specificity and robustness, stripping efficiency, signal co-localization,
signal to noise, and color separation. Images were acquired on a Vectra
3.0® automated imaging system, and analyzed with inForm® software.

Results: The goals of this study were two-fold:

-to understand the impact of Opal reagent concentrations/quantities on
fluorescent signal intensities acquired from cells within the context of
tissue.

-to develop an Opal reagent optimization method that yields more
consistent, quantitative results from separated and co-localized
fluorescent signals.

We’ve applied this novel fIHC experimental approach and optimization
strategy to Opal monoplex and multiplex assays and explored staining
robustness, contextual specificity, staining order independence, and
co-localized signal separation. Using the novel optimization strategy, we
have achieved optimal staining patterns with improved confidence in the
quantitative characteristics of the assay. Tissue sections stained after
optimization have exhibited staining order independence and closely align
with traditional IHC patterns.

Conclusion: This novel optimization strategy, developed for Opal fIHC
assays, is more quantitative, improves staining results, and minimizes
interference between co-localized biomarkers.


