Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 18F-FDG PET/CT-based early treatment response evaluation of
nanoparticle-assisted photothermal therapy.


Aim: Nanoparticle-assisted photothermal therapy is a new promising
therapeutic strategy that utilizes photo-absorbing nanoparticles
irradiated with near infrared light to generate a local temperature
increase in tumor tissue. Here we used small animal 18F-FDG PET/CT to
evaluate the treatment response of silica-gold nanoshell (NS)-assisted
photothermal therapy in human tumor xenografts in mice.

Method: NMRI nude mice had ~ 106 human neuroendocrine tumor cells (H727)
inoculated into the left flank. After 4-5 weeks, animals were divided
into three groups: one receiving NS and laser irradiation (NS group, n =
9), one receiving saline and laser irradiation (saline group, n = 9), and
one receiving NS but no laser irradiation (sham group, n = 5). All
animals were PET scanned with 18F-FDG one day before treatment
(baseline), followed by iv administration of either NS or saline.
Approximately 24 hours after injection, the animals were placed on a
laser treatment platform and the tumors were irradiated with an 807 nm
diode laser for 5 minutes using a laser intensity of 1.8 W/cm2. During
irradiation, the temperature at the surface of the tumor was measured
using thermographic imaging. The mice were 18F-FDG PET scanned again at
day 1 after treatment and tumor growth was followed by caliper
measurements with the humane endpoint defined as a tumor volume of 1,000
mm3. PET and CT images were co-registered, and regions of interest were
manually drawn on whole tumor regions. 18F-FDG uptake was quantified as
mean percentage of injected dose per grams of tissue (%ID/g) and the
treatment response was evaluated based on the reduction in tumor uptake
of 18F-FDG between baseline and day 1.

Results: Thermographic imaging showed that the tumor surface on average
reached 49.2 ± 3.3 °C in the NS group. In comparison, the average
temperatures reached 44.5 ± 1.9 °C in the saline group and 33 ± 1.0
°C in the sham group. This was consistent with an overall inhibited
tumor growth, as well as improved survival in the NS group compared to
the sham and saline groups. The tumor accumulation of 18F-FDG uptake was
comparable between groups at baseline but PET imaging revealed a
significant reduction in tumor uptake at day 1 in the NS group ( 84 ± 8
% (day 1/baseline)) compared to the saline (= 108 ± 21 %; p Results:
Thermographic imaging showed that the tumor surface on average reached
49.2 ± 3.3 °C in the NS group. In comparison, the average temperatures
reached 44.5 ± 1.9 °C in the saline group and 33 ± 1.0 °C in the sham
group. This was consistent with an overall inhibited tumor growth, as
well as improved survival in the NS group compared to the sham and saline
groups. The tumor accumulation of 18F-FDG uptake was comparable between
groups at baseline but PET imaging revealed a significant reduction in
tumor uptake at day 1 in the NS group ( 84 ± 8 % (day 1/baseline))
compared to the saline (= 108 ± 21 %; p < 0.01) and sham (= 110 ± 11 %;
p Results: Thermographic imaging showed that the tumor surface on average
reached 49.2 ± 3.3 °C in the NS group. In comparison, the average
temperatures reached 44.5 ± 1.9 °C in the saline group and 33 ± 1.0
°C in the sham group. This was consistent with an overall inhibited
tumor growth, as well as improved survival in the NS group compared to
the sham and saline groups. The tumor accumulation of 18F-FDG uptake was
comparable between groups at baseline but PET imaging revealed a
significant reduction in tumor uptake at day 1 in the NS group ( 84 ± 8
% (day 1/baseline)) compared to the saline (= 108 ± 21 %; p < 0.01) and
sham (= 110 ± 11 %; p < 0.05) groups. Moreover, the change in 18F-FDG
tumor uptake (day 1/baseline), was used to stratify animals into
responders and non-responders, where the responding group matched
inhibited tumor growth and improved survival.

Conclusion: In this study we showed that 18F-FDG PET could be used for
early response monitoring of the therapeutic outcome of
nanoparticle-assisted photothermal therapy in human tumor xenografts in
mice. Based on this, we suggest that PET can also be used for
optimization of therapy, both for guiding treatment planning and early
identification of non-responders for which the treatment strategy should
then be changed.


