Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Forced induction of differentiation in osteosarcoma tumor
initiating cells.


Osteosarcoma (OS) is a highly malignant bone cancer that is defined
histologically by the secretion of immature osteoid. The chemotherapeutic
regimen has not changed in the last 40 years and similarly, the five-year
survival rate remains at ~60%, with the majority of fatalities arising
from metastases in the lungs. OS is believed to originate from osteogenic
committed progenitors, involving disruption of extracellular matrix
synthesis in favor of proliferation. In previous work, our lab has
developed a method to selectively identify Tumor Initiating Cells (TICs)
in OS xenografts based on their ability to activate a transcriptional
reporter comprised of a human OCT4 promoter linked to green fluorescent
protein (GFP) coding sequence. Clonally derived, stably transfected OS
Oct4/GFP+ TICs are capable of initiating and maintaining the growth of
heterogeneous tumors and driving disease progression. The loss of GFP
expression and tumorigenic capacity occurs during tumor formation in
response to cues within the tumor microenvironment, resulting in adoption
of a specialized secretory phenotype as an adaptive survival mechanism: a
phenotypic change similar to that seen in physiological differentiation.
During skeletal formation, Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMP) play key
roles in osteogenic maturation. Because the OS lineage of origin suggests
an innate sensitivity to BMP proteins, we hypothesize that BMP
stimulation will force the induction of differentiation in OS TICs and
will impair the ability of these cells to initiate and maintain tumor
growth. To first probe that OS TICs respond to BMP stimulation, we
detected by flow cytometry the expression of BMP Receptors Type II and 1A
in two primary OS-derived cell lines (OS521 and OS156), with similar
expression seen in Mesenchymal Stem Cells. Furthermore, by treating OS
TICs with BMP heterodimers - BMP2/7 and BMP4/7 - we observed an
activation of canonical BMP signaling, suggesting a functional and intact
signaling network. BMP4/7 stimulation of OS521 TICs in vitro showed an
increase in cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle, visualized by DAPI,
and higher p21 and p27 expression than controls, shown in immunoblotting.
On the other hand, BMP4/7 treatment of OS156 TICs reduced its invasion
capacity through a complex of Fibronectin and Bovine Serum Albumin by 33%
(p= 0.00144) compared to untreated controls. Strikingly, in vivo studies
revealed that time to tumor onset of BMP4/7 pretreated OS521 TICs in NSG
mice at a dose of 3x104 cells was significantly longer than in controls
(p=0.0003). In summary, our data suggests a reduction of OS
tumorigenicity due to a BMP4/7 induced differentiation-based response.
Such a differentiation-based therapy could become a more effective and
safer alternative to cytotoxic chemotherapy. Future studies include TIC
treatment with hypoxia, adenosine, and calcium, to investigate the
underlying mechanisms responsible for BMP involvement in the tumorigenic
capacity of osteosarcoma.


