Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new glycan biomarker for pancreatic cancer complements CA19-9
and identifies a distinct subpopulation of cancer cells.


A major challenge in diagnosing and treating pancreatic cancer is the
complex diversity between and within tumors in cellular morphologies and
behaviors. Molecular markers to detect and classify specific variants of
cancer cells could facilitate drug targeting of subtypes of cancer cells.
We recently found that a glycan related to the CA19-9 antigen is a strong
serological biomarker and is elevated in the plasma of about half of the
patients with low CA19-9. We hypothesized that the cancer cells producing
CA19-9 are a different subtype than those producing the new biomarker,
referred to as sTRA. Using multimarker immunofluorescence on tissue
microarrays, we found that sTRA was significantly elevated (p A major
challenge in diagnosing and treating pancreatic cancer is the complex
diversity between and within tumors in cellular morphologies and
behaviors. Molecular markers to detect and classify specific variants of
cancer cells could facilitate drug targeting of subtypes of cancer cells.
We recently found that a glycan related to the CA19-9 antigen is a strong
serological biomarker and is elevated in the plasma of about half of the
patients with low CA19-9. We hypothesized that the cancer cells producing
CA19-9 are a different subtype than those producing the new biomarker,
referred to as sTRA. Using multimarker immunofluorescence on tissue
microarrays, we found that sTRA was significantly elevated (p < 0.001) in
tumor tissue relative to adjacent pancreatic tissue in 3 separate TMAs
covering 38 patients. The sTRA and CA19-9 markers were present in 31/38
(82%) and 20/38 (53%) of the tumors, respectively, with 17/38 (45%)
displaying both and 3/38 (8%) displaying neither. The morphologies of the
cancer cells fell into distinct categories based on glycan expression.
Cells with dual staining of both markers tended to be in
well-to-moderately differentiated ducts with good nuclear polarization
and foamy cytoplasm, or with flat and thin epithelium. Cells with
predominant or exclusive CA19-9 staining tended to be part of
well-differentiated ducts with mucinous cytoplasm or
moderately-differentiated ducts with poor membrane integrity. In
contrast, strong sTRA staining was present in small clusters of cells or
single cells with poor differentiation and large vacuoles, or in small
and invasive ducts. The phenotypes were consistent in xenograft models
made with either cells lines or patient-derived material, as well as in
2D culture. Costaining with protein markers of differentiation showed
that the CA19-9-positive/sTRA-negative regions colocalized more with
MUC5AC, CK19, and E-cadherin relative to the sTRA-positive cells,
indicating ductal differentiation, and the sTRA-positive/CA19-9-negative
regions were more likely to colocalize with beta-catenin than any other
marker, indicating potential for anchorage-independent growth or altered
cellular cohesion. The time-to-progression after surgery was associated
with the relative levels of the two markers, based on staining of tumors
from 48 patients in an independent TMA. Patients with higher
dual-staining of CA19-9 and sTRA had statistically longer (p = 0.01 by
log-rank test) time-to-progression, and patients with higher exclusive
staining of either marker relative to the dual staining had shorter
time-to-progression. Thus the sTRA marker used in conjunction with CA19-9
could provide a basis for classifying and targeting subtypes of cancer
cells.


