Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: R-SPONDIN3 antagonism sensitizes colorectal cancer to taxane
treatment.


Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer
diagnosed in both men and women. Dysregulation of the WNT/β-catenin
pathway is the most commonly mutated pathway in CRC. R-spondins (RSPO), a
family of secreted proteins, are enhancers of WNT signaling. Previous
preclinical studies have demonstrated that WNT inhibition results in
superior antitumor efficacy in combination with taxanes. This superior
combinatorial activity with taxanes has been identified in lung, ovarian,
breast and pancreatic cancers. Taxanes have been found to be generally
ineffective in the clinical treatment of colorectal cancer. Analysis of
the local microenvironment, or stem cell niche, has identified stromal
cells as an abundant source of RSPO. In patient-derived tumor xenografts
(PDX), the murine stromal cells replace human stromal cells and provide
the microenvironment that supports tumor cell growth. We have classified
PDX tumors as human RSPO3 high or low/negative using RNA sequencing and
by expression studies. Inhibition of RSPO3 with OMP-131R10, a clinical
stage therapeutic antibody which binds to human and murine RSPO3, has
demonstrated efficacy in human RSPO3 high, APCWT PDX.

Purpose: Common features in CRC are mutations in APC or β-catenin which
are present in approximately 90% of cases. Tumors with RSPO3 genomic
translocation and/or overexpression of RSPO3 are generally APC WT and
β-cateninWT, and thus RSPO overexpression represents an alternative
mechanism to upregulate the Wnt pathway. Alternatively, RSPO3 may be
secreted by murine stromal cells, or by a rare population of tumor cells.
In this study, we tested OMP-131R10 in combination with taxane treatment
in human RSPO3 low CRC PDX models with APC or β-catenin mutations and in
a PDX model with a RSPO3 translocation.

Results: Anti-RSPO3 was highly effective in combination with
nab-paclitaxel in a CRC model with an RSPO3 translocation and RSPO3
overexpression. Furthermore, the combination of OMP-131R10 and taxane
treatment resulted in synergistic inhibition of tumor growth in 8/10 PDX
models with APC or β -catenin mutations and low human tumor cell RSPO3
expression. Tumor regression or durable stable disease was evident in 6/8
models. Responsive models contained either heterozygous inactivating
mutations in APC (6/8) or homozygous activating mutations in β-catenin
(2/8). Combination of OMP-131R10 with paclitaxel potentiated mitotic
arrest, enhanced terminal differentiation and reduced the tumorigenic
cell frequency by 40 fold based on serial transplantation studies.

Conclusion: Anti-RSPO3 (OMP-131R10) was active in the majority of CRC PDX
models tested when combined with taxane treatment. These CRC models
harbored mutations in APC and β-catenin. This data indicates that RSPO3
inhibition is an effective means to target the mutated Wnt pathway in
CRC, and that antagonizing RSPO3 in combination with paclitaxel may
improve survival for CRC patients.


