Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hierarchical gene master regulators of papillary and anaplastic
thyroid cancer phenotype.


The incidence of thyroid cancer (TCa) has doubled in the last decade.
Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC), that comprises of 80% of all TCas, is
treatable with great outcomes. However, undifferentiated anaplastic
thyroid cancer (ATC), with very poor prognosis, is considered a clinical
challenge and currently a losing battle. Moreover, the molecular
mechanisms responsible for various forms of TCa are largely unknown. We
believe that the cells of histopathologically distinct regions of a
heterogeneous thyroid tumor are governed by different sets of master gene
regulators. The smart manipulation of such master genes will be able to
selectively destroy cancer cells but not normal tissue, opening a novel
and much more effective avenue in the thyroid cancer targeted gene
therapy. Our analysis established the gene hierarchical governance in
each region based on their Gene Commanding Height (GCH). GCH is a measure
that combines the gene expression coordination with other genes and the
expression stability among biological replicas provided by the internal
homeostatic mechanisms. Here, we provide experimental evidence that
standard papillary (BCPAP) and anaplastic (8505C) human thyroid cancer
cell lines have different master regulators. We identified the master
regulators of BCPAP and 8505C, and determined their GCH. Transfection of
master gene regulators of a particular cell line has significantly larger
effects on the cell line they command than on other cells. We found that
the stable transfection with TMEM194A, a nuclear envelope protein,
regulated twice more genes in BCPAP than in 8505C cells. The analysis
using human thyroid cancer cells reaffirmed our hypothesis of the
existence of hierarchical master gene regulators and that the phenotypic
changes can be manipulated with the introduction of these genes. We
further validate these concepts using human thyroid biopsy samples. We
found substantial differences in the GCH scores of cancer versus normal
tissue of a surgically removed 32.0mm papillary carcinoma from the left
lobe of a 33y old male. Because of such differences between the cancer
region and the normal tissue, manipulation of cancer regulators is
expected to affect the cancer cells in a greater degree than the normal
cells. These results suggest that we have defined a master gene regulator
hierarchy in thyroid cancer and extrapolation of this analysis to compare
anaplastic and papillary thyroid cancer will lead to novel gene
therapeutic modalities. Our long-term goal is to identify master
regulators of cancer nodules for each patient and develop personalized
cancer therapy targeting these master regulators.


