Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch pathway activation predicts resistance to bevacizumab
therapy in glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma, the most common adult glioma, is associated with a dismal
prognosis. Treatment with bevacizumab has not significantly prolonged
overall patient survival times. Glioblastoma resistance to angiogenesis
inhibitors is attributed to multiple interacting mechanisms. We have thus
embarked on a comprehensive effort to detecting expression signatures
that are associated with response to the therapy and these signatures may
allow prospective selection of patients with high likelihood of
responding to therapy. Notch signaling pathway is an evolutionarily
conserved pathway that plays an important role in multiple cellular and
developmental processes including cell fate decision, differentiation,
proliferation, survival, angiogenesis and migration. Analysis of The
Cancer Genome Atlas expression dataset identified a group (43.9%) of
tumors with proneural signature showing high Notch pathway activation. In
this study, we compared CD133, Notch, and VEGF expressions in
histological sections of primary and recurrent glioblastomas after
radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Tumor samples were collected from 27
patients at the time of tumor recurrence. We used immunohistochemical
techniques to compare expression of CD133, Notch-1 and VEGF. Expressions
of CD133-, Notch-1-, and VEGF-positive glioma cells were higher in
recurrent glioblastoma after radiotherapy and chemotherapy. To determine
the clinical importance of Notch-1 expression in glioblastoma, we
analyzed 15 patients who had received bevacizumab therapy followed by a
second surgery at recurrence. OS was significantly longer in cases with
Notch-1 negativity (8.8 months) than in those with Notch-1 positivity
(6.8 months). Electron microscopic observation of two autopsy cases
revealed the effects of blood vessel normalization in Notch-1 positive
glioblastoma. Electron microscopic images confirmed the presence of
pericytes surrounding the vascular endothelium. Autopsied tumors
exhibited marked proliferation of Notch-1 and VEGF positive cells around
vessels. In tumor angiogenesis, vascular endothelial growth factor and
Notch signaling induce sprouting angiogenesis and recruitment of vascular
endothelial cells such as tip cells, stalk cells, and phalanx cells.
Fully mature phalanx cells are in close contact with pericytes. These
findings indicate that bevacizumab treatment promotes vascular
normalization by recruiting mature pericytes and associated with
resistance to bevacizumab therapy in glioblastoma with high Notch pathway
activation.


