Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reprogramming the tumor microenvironment by targeting endothelial
DNA repair.


The tumor microenvironment (TME) plays a critical role in orchestrating
immune infiltration, tumor progression and response to therapeutics.
Therefore, strategies to manipulate the TME including cytokine gene
therapy, antibodies to reverse macrophage polarization etc are under
active investigation. We have identified an alternative approach to
target the TME by disrupting DNA repair in the tumor endothelial cells
(ECs). We discovered a seven-microRNA (miR) signature induced in ECs in
in vitro and in vivo by oxidative stress and DNA damage. The top miR
candidate in this signature, miR-103 altered the TME by inducing DNA
damage in ECs, eliciting type I interferons, upregulating immune
costimulatory receptors and decreasing PD-L1 expressing tumor associated
macrophages and granulocytes. Moreover, miR-103 treatment had a paracrine
effect on the tumors and upregulated Fas and TRAIL receptors.
Mechanistically, these functions of miR-103 were largely due to its
downregulation of the three prime exonuclease TREX1. Local, systemic or
vascular targeted delivery of miR-103 decreased both angiogenesis and
tumor burden in multiple mouse tumor models.

Complementary to the role of miR-103, two additional miRs in the miR
signature, miRs 494 and 99b each induced senescence in the vasculature by
downregulating the Mre11a-Rad50-NBN (MRN) complex. Ectopic expression of
miRs 494 or 99b decreased telomerase activity, increase p21 levels with a
concomitant decrease in pRb levels. Vascular targeted delivery of miR-494
decreased angiogenesis in vivo whereas systemic delivery decreased tumor
growth. Interestingly, both miR mimics and the MRN knockdowns induced the
transcription of a number of senescence associated genes including CD44.
Taken together these data suggest that miRs 494 and 99b targeting of the
MRN complex induces senescence.

The MRN complex interacts with the ATM kinase, histone H2AX and TREX1
suggesting that the miRs we identified disrupt critical nodes of a DNA
Damage Response (DDR) network. Our findings reveal a complex, miR
mediated cross talk between EC DNA damage pathways, the TME and tumor
cells. These interactions can be exploited for designing therapies that
synergize with tumor cell killing to enhance host anti-tumor responses.


