Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone marrow adipocytes drive transcriptional changes in leukemic
blasts to enhance their capacity to derive energy from free fatty acid
metabolism.


Introduction: Most patients diagnosed with acute myeloid leukaemia [AML]
die of their disease and the average age of patients at diagnosis is 72
years. For this reason, new therapeutic strategies with tolerability in
the fragile, less fit population is necessary for reducing the mortality
rate associated with this disease. The tumor microenvironment is an
emerging target in the search for less cytotoxic therapies. We have
previously shown that the adipocyte component of the bone marrow (BM) is
a key player in blast survival, proliferation and chemotherapy evasion.
In this study, we draw focus onto the status of an adipocyte rich
environment in the context of leukemia and highlight the key players in
regulating leukemic cell metabolism through transport and metabolism of
fatty acids. Objective: We hypothesize that the presence of adipocytes
within the proximity of AML blasts creates a FA rich environment for
increased β - oxidation within the blasts.

Methods: We used primary AML blasts and normal CD34+ hematopoietic stem
cells (HSC) following informed consent (LRCEref07/H0310/146). Adipocytes
were derived from bone marrow stromal cells (BMSC). Differential
expression analysis of RNA sequencing data (GEO ID: GSE49642, GSE48846)
was used to compare respiratory gene signatures of BM AML blasts,
peripheral blood obtained AML and normal CD34+ HSC. Fatty acid binding
protein 4 (FABP4) and carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A (CPT1A) were
identified as one of the key genes involved in the lipolysis and
oxidation signature differential expression. Oxygen consumption rate
(OCR) of adipocyte co-cultured blasts and normal CD34+ were analyzed
using Seahorse technology. Lentiviral-knockdown of FABP4 and CPT1A were
performed on blasts prior to in vivo xenograft mouse model injection.

Results: Leukemic blasts showed increased adipocyte lipolysis stimulation
compared with normal CD34+ cells. Moreover, adipocytes increased
transcriptional activation of FABP4 and CPT1A in malignant blasts
compared to CD34+ HSC. FABP4 inhibitor reduced AML blast survival when
cells were cultured with adipocytes which is in contrast to normal CD34+
HSC. Moreover, AML had increased oxygen consumption rate when grown on
adipocytes which was inhibited by etomoxir (β - oxidation inhibitor).
Finally in-vivo lentiviral mediated knockdown of FABP4 and CPT1A reveled
an increased survival of AML xenografts.

Conclusion: Our results show that the stimulation of lipolysis and fatty
acid oxidative genes that contribute to the genetic signatures of these
processes are a malignant blast exclusive profile. Interventions at a
molecular level reveal survival favorable outcomes in xenograft models
suggesting the need for enhancing strategies which include targeting the
FABP4 and CPT1A axis. Our data provide a biologic rationale for exploring
future therapies that target the adipocyte/AML interactions.


