Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockdown of cell division cycle-associated 8 (CDCA8) suppresses
hepatocellular carcinoma growth via the upregulation of tumor suppressor
ATF3.


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third most lethal
cancer worldwide which remains a major challenge due to poor prognosis
and limited treatment options. Cell division cycle associated 8 (CDCA8)
is known as a component of a chromosomal passenger complex required for
stability of the bipolar mitotic spindle and it is commonly overexpressed
in human HCC. However, the functional role of CDCA8 in HCC progression
remains to be clarified. In this study, we hypothesized if targeting of
CDCA8 with small interfering (si) RNA could alter the course of HCC
progression. We also investigated the molecular mechanism that mediates
HCC cell death caused by CDCA8 silencing.

Methods: Human HCC cell lines, Huh1 and Huh7, were transfected with CDCA8
siRNA and tested for growth inhibition and apoptotic induction using MTS,
FACS and microscopic analysis. To obtain insights into the molecular
changes in response to CDCA8 knockdown, global changes in gene expression
were examined using RNA sequencing.

Results: siRNA silencing of CDCA8 inhibited HCC cell growth and long-term
colony formation by blocking cell cycle progression and by inducing
apoptotic cell death. RNA sequencing data showed that, representatively,
the anti-proliferative effects were driven by a subset of molecular
alterations including the upregulation of tumor suppressive ATF3 and
GADD34 genes and the downregulation of BGLAP, a key regulator of cell
growth and invasiveness. Subsequent Western blot analysis affirmed that
CDCA8 silencing induces the increase in the levels of ATF3 and GADD34 and
the decrease in phosphorylated Akt in both Huh1 and Huh7 cells. Also, the
same condition decreased the levels of PARP-1 and pro-caspase 3,
accelerating apoptosis. Of importance, silencing of CDCA8 expression
effectively suppressed HCC tumor growth in a murine xenograft model.

Conclusion: These findings suggest that targeting CDCA8 could be an
attractive option for molecular therapy of HCC.


