Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hafnium oxide nanoparticles (NBTXR3), a novel radiation enhancer
achieves marked antitumor efficacy across five tumor types.


NBTXR3 are hafnium oxide nanoparticles (NPs) used for a single intratumor
administration as radioenhancer in combination with radiation therapy
(RT) as part of multi-modality of cancer treatment. The size, shape and
surface of the NPs have been designed to develop strong interactions with
cancer cells - effective cell binding and uptake - and to persist within
the tumor mass during the whole RT treatment. The high electron density
of the NPs is responsible for an increased probability of interaction
with incoming ionizing radiations (when compared to tumor tissues with
low electron density) and an increased energy dose deposition within the
cancer cells which results in an enhanced tumor destruction when compared
to RT alone. NBTXR3 works similar to the physical mode of action of RT,
it does not rely on any biological system or target and constantly
amplifies the radiation dose deposition (“on/off” activation). Here
we present the transferability of the approach from one type of cancer to
the other evaluating (i) the feasibility of the intratumor injection
(intratumor availability of NBTXR3 nanoparticles by Computed Tomography
(CT) or µCT) and (ii), the antitumor efficacy of NBTXR3 exposed to
radiation. NBTXR3 NPs demonstrated a good intratumor availability and
persistence across all tested tumor models (epithelial or mesenchymal
origin), including human PDX tumor models. Notably, in PAC-120 tumor
model the persistence of NBTXR3 NPs within the tumor mass was observed
for more than 50 days which is equivalent to the entire duration of RT
treatment. The antitumor efficacy was systematically enhanced in terms of
tumor growth delay for animals treated with NBTXR3 and exposed to RT when
compared to RT alone. NBTXR3 is currently in clinical trials in seven
cancer indications including: soft tissue sarcoma, head and neck (H&N),
liver, rectal and prostate. These preclinical studies support the
rationale for the development of NBTXR3 across all cancer indications
where radiation treatment is used.

NBTXR3 intratumor availability and antitumor efficacy



Tumor model

X-ray sources (antitumor efficacy)

CT or µCT



Sarcoma

HT1080

200kV, Ir192





LPS80T3 (PDX)

200kV, Co60

x



A673

Co60





Prostate

PC3

150kV

x



DU145

200kV

x



PAC120 (PDX)



x



H&N

CAL33

200kV

x



FaDu

200kV

x



Colorectal

HCT116

Ir192

x



Lung

NCI-H460-luc2

200kV

x


