Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of gene expression biomarkers from enriched CTC
preparations.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) offer an opportunity for non-invasive
characterization of metastatic cancer, including the ability to follow
subtype evolution, development of resistance, tissue homing biomarkers,
and changes in cell signaling mechanisms required for metastasis and
continued growth and survival of the tumor. Analysis of CTCs and
translation of a CTC assay into a clinical test has been difficult due to
issues of obtaining high purity, high yield preparations and/or isolating
individual CTCs. This is further compounded by the heterogeneity of CTCs,
hurdles in profiling their molecular signatures, and difficulty
correlating CTC number/subtype to actionable therapy. We pursued a
detailed analysis of CTC gene expression using whole transcriptome
TempO-Seq targeted sequencing, a highly sensitive, direct lysis, addition
only assay. As this assay does not require purified CTC isolation or RNA
extraction, there is no risk of CTC nor RNA loss. We exploited the single
cell sensitivity of TempO-Seq to profile enriched CTC preparations
prepared by RosetteSep gradient centrifugation, allowing us to
characterize the phenotypes of CTCs within a high background of normal
blood cells. To handle this large and potentially overwhelming background
we developed and exploited a proprietary method of sample normalization
that increased the sensitivity and consistency of CTC gene signature
measurements. We demonstrated that the TempO-Seq assay could detect a
single MCF7 (EpCAM+) Luminal-like cell in a background of 1,000 MDA MB
231 (EpCAM-) Basal-like cells (positive for an Endothelial Mesenchymal
Transition, EMT), and vice versa. Next, we prepared mixtures of different
proportions of these cultured cells spiked into normal blood, enriched
the model “CTCs” using RosetteSep, and profiled the bulk preparation.
Proportional discrimination of cell-specific signatures were obtained
with as few as 40 spike-in cells. Finally, we profiled enriched CTC
preparations from the blood of patients with metastatic breast cancer.
The results demonstrated that the expression of HER2, ER, and EpCAM could
be measured as well as biomarkers of drug resistance, bone/brain homing,
EMT, and all 50 Hallmark cell signaling pathways. TempO-Seq EpCAM gene
level correlated with the percent EpCAM+ cells measured by flow analysis
while EMT signature levels correlated inversely. Patients with HER2-
primary tumor and HER2+ CTCs could be identified, as could patients with
elevated chemotherapy resistance pathways. These data demonstrate that it
is possible to profile CTC phenotypes that are important in metastases
and useful for selecting therapy using a bulk CTC preparation combined
with the sensitivity of the TempO-Seq whole transcriptome assay. This
suggests the opportunity for the development of a predictive test using
currently available purification platforms without need for expensive
specialized equipment or separation into single cells.


