Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomal oncogenic proteins promote tumor progression, metastasis
and chemoresistance in ovarian cancer.


Introduction: Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy.
Despite its clinical significance, the factors that regulate the
development and tumor progression and metastasis are among the least
understood of all major human malignancies. In this study we show that
the oncogenic proteins which are specifically packed in the cargo of the
exosomes released from the ovarian cancer cells play a role in tumor
progression, metastasis and chemo-resistance.

Methods: The exosomes were isolated using Exo-quick solution from
different primary ovarian cancer cells (POCC), HGSOC cell lines, normal
ovarian epithelial cells (OSE) and patient ascites. Further quantified by
NTA and morphologically characterized by TEM, their purity was validated
by the presence of exosome specific markers and absence of golgi matrix
protein. Protein profiling in exosomes was done using Capillary LCMS/MS
analysis. Proteomic data sets were analyzed by
(http://www.qiagen.com/ingenuity) Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) to
gain biological insight in disease mechanisms, associated to the observed
expression changes. Cell proliferation assay and cell migration assay
were carried out in normal and ovarian cancer cell lines with and without
exosome co-culture. STAT3 and Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) expression
in exosomes and Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in different cell lines
were analyzed using Western Blotting. Also in-vivo studies were carried
out using orthotopic tumor model in mice. In addition cisplatin
accumulation studies were done using ICP-MS.

Results: The exosome concentration from POCC and HGSOC cells was much
higher (2-10 fold times) than from the OSE cells. Expression of CD9,
CD63, TSG101 and EpCAM confirmed the exosomes. HGF, Complement factor H
(CFH) and Lysyl oxidase- 2 (LOXL2) were selected from the top 25 proteins
identified by IPA based on their expression ratio and disease relevance.
IPA scored STAT3 as the top regulator effect network and furthermore HGF
was activated in our data set. The expression of activated STAT3 and HGF
were confirmed in the exosomes from HGSOC cells and patient ascites. Cell
proliferation and migration was significantly increased with concurrent
increased expression of MMP-2 and -9 in- vitro favoring the role of
exosomal oncogenic proteins in tumor progression and metastasis as
evidenced in in-vivo orthotopic tumor mice. The decrease in cisplatin
accumulation in OVCAR8 cells observed, when co-cultured with exosomes
from Cisplatin resistant cell line suggests its role in chemo-resistance
as well. In addition, blocking exosome function inhibits cell
proliferation and increases the cytotoxicity to cisplatin.

Conclusion: The results conclude that tumor exosomes carry a unique set
of highly elevated oncogenic proteins that play a very important role in
mediating tumor progression and metastasis while inducing
chemo-resistance as well and are evident from our in-vitro and in-vitro
studies.


