Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combined effects of polyamine and GSH inhibition on the
viability of human cancer cell lines.


Polyamines play essential roles in DNA stability and cell proliferation,
making polyamine metabolism a potential target for cancer therapeutics.
The spermine analog N1,N11- Diethylnorspermine (DenSpm) reduces levels of
ODC, the enzyme responsible for polyamine biosynthesis, and also induces
the enzyme SSAT, responsible for the catabolism of polyamines. Polyamines
have been shown to inactivate reactive oxygen species (ROS), including
peroxides, protecting mammalian cells from oxidative damage to nucleic
acids. The catabolism of polyamines by SSAT, in contrast, leads to the
production of ROS, which results in cellular death and limits the
progression of cancer. Buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) selectively depletes
stores of intracellular glutathione GSH, an antioxidant that neutralizes
ROS. We hypothesized that treating cancer cell lines with both DenSpm and
BSO will have a synergistic cytotoxic effect on the cells, due to the
depletion of ROS-scavenging polyamines, the generation of ROS caused by
DenSpm and the absence of GSH. Treatment of the four cell lines, MCF-7,
MDA-MD-231, Caco-2 and PANC-1, with DenSpm resulted in moderate
reductions in cell viability as measured using the Cell Titer Blue assay
(Promega, Inc.). As has been widely reported in other mammalian systems,
DenSpm (10 µM) reduced intracellular polyamine concentrations (HPLC of
benzoylated polyamine derivatives) and induced SSAT (Western Blots).
Treatment of cells with BSO (500 µM) caused a significant decrease in
intracellular GSH levels. Similar findings have been reported in previous
studies with human neuroblastoma lines (Anderson, et al. 1999). The
combination of BSO and DenSpm had effects markedly greater than either
compound alone. Pretreatment of cells with BSO (500 µM) for 24 hours
with subsequent removal of BSO before DenSpm (10, 100, 1000 µM) addition
resulted in significantly reduced viability in all cell lines. DenSpm was
found to be most effective in the continued presence of BSO as compared
to a 24-hour BSO pretreatment. The compounds used in combination also
enhanced ROS production, further demonstrating their synergistic effects.


