Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association to drug-induced leukopenia using whole-exome
sequencing of non-small cell lung cancer patients on
gemcitabine/carboplatin regimen.


A classical non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) chemotherapy treatment is
gemcitabine in combination with carboplatin. The treatment is known to
cause severe hematological toxicity such as leukopenia, which can lead to
chemotherapy cessation or even death. It would therefore a priori be of
advantage to identify patients at risk of severe leukopenia to allow for
a personalized treatment approach. In this study we aim to identify
genetic markers for chemotherapy induced leukopenia in non-small cell
lung cancer.

In total, 212 non-small cell lung cancer patients treated with
gemcitabine and carboplatin regimen were included in the study. Whole
blood extracted DNA was prepared with Nextera Rapid Capture kit and whole
exome sequenced using Illumina HiSeq 2500. Leukopenia was assessed from
leukocyte particle count at baseline and the first cycle nadir values.

The statistical approach was to study association of single common
variants (MAF > 0.01) to leukopenia using linear regression in PLINK and
association of genes (common and rare variants) to leukopenia using SKATO
in the R-package SKAT. An enrichment analysis, with input from the
association results (p The statistical approach was to study association
of single common variants (MAF > 0.01) to leukopenia using linear
regression in PLINK and association of genes (common and rare variants)
to leukopenia using SKATO in the R-package SKAT. An enrichment analysis,
with input from the association results (p < 0.001), was performed using
the online tool ConsensusPathDB-human to identify overrepresented
pathways. A prediction model was created from the single variant analysis
results (n=10 causal and n=10 protective) using weighted genetic risk
score from the R-package PredictABEL.

The single variant analysis of common variants identified 133 variants (p
The single variant analysis of common variants identified 133 variants (p
< 0.001) and the gene based analysis identified 54 genes (p The single
variant analysis of common variants identified 133 variants (p < 0.001)
and the gene based analysis identified 54 genes (p < 0.001). The pathway
analysis identified 20 enriched pathways (p The single variant analysis
of common variants identified 133 variants (p < 0.001) and the gene based
analysis identified 54 genes (p < 0.001). The pathway analysis identified
20 enriched pathways (p < 0.05). A prediction model was created to assess
the risk of leukopenia.

The top pathway, HIF-1-alpha transcription factor network, overlaps with
four genes (HDAC7, NDRG1, HK2 and CP). It can be of interest to
leukopenia as regulation of HIF-1 alpha is essential for maintenance of
hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow hypoxic niche. It has also
been shown that HIF-1 alpha knocked mice are more sensitive to
myelosuppressive treatment compared to unknocked mice, supporting the
involvement of the pathway in chemotherapy induced myelosuppression.

We have identified variants located in genes and pathways likely to be
involved in leukocyte sensitivity after exposure of gemcitabine and
carboplatin. A prediction model has been created to estimate the risk
that patients will suffer from severe leukopenia. The biological
connection of the pathway HIF-1-alpha transcription factor network to
leukopenia supports the relevance of these results. Further studies on
this are of interest to improve identification of patients at high risk
of severe leukopenia after gemcitabine and carboplatin treatment.


