Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SIRT1 protects against radiation-induced lung injury via
de-acetylating the Ku70 and P65.


Radiation-induced lung injury (RILI) is a common and serious complication
in the radiation therapy of thoracic cancer, which significantly
restricts the radiation doses of tumor. The prevention and treatment of
RILI have long been clinical challenges. SIRT1 is an NAD+ dependent
protein deacetylase and the exact role of SIRT1 in RILI remains unclear.
The aim of this study is to investigate the prevention and repairing
efficacy of RILI by adenovirus-mediated SIRT1 gene overexpression in a
mice model. Our studies confirmed that the protein expression and
activity of SIRT1 in lung tissues were decreased in RILI mice models in a
time-dependent manner, but the mRNA expression level was not obviously
changed. The activity of SIRT1 was elevated by orally given resveratrol,
an agonist of SIRT1. The extent of RILI could be evidently alleviated by
orally given resveratrol, as assayed by histopathology, malondialdehyde
(MDA) and plasma cytokines (IL-1β, TNF-α and active TGF-β1).
Overexpressing SIRT1 could obviously mitigate the extent of RILI (H&E
staining and CT scan), the concentration of MDA and ROS in lung, IL-1β
and active TGF-β1 in plasma; as well as improve the mice survival.
Moreover, SIRT1 could inhibit the radiation-induced DNA damage in vivo
and in vitro, and decreased the expression of acetylated- Ku70 in the
lung. In vitro Co-IP experiment showed that the expression of SIRT1 in
irradiated cells was reduced and the acetylated- Ku70 was increased;
over-expressing SIRT1 promoted the de-acetylation of Ku70; interference
of Ku70 could reverse the effect of SIRT1 in DNA repair. Furthermore,
overexpressing SIRT1 could inhibit the acetylation level of NF-κB
subunit RELA (P65) in the lung; in vitro report gene experiment showed
that SIRT1 suppressed the NF-κB transcriptional activity. In conclusion,
our results suggest that SIRT1 could evidently mitigate the RILI, repair
the irradiation-induced DNA damage and inflammation via de-acetylating
the Ku70 and P65. Our study may provide new avenue for the prevention and
treatment of RILI in clinic.


