Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting compensatory mechanisms of resistance to
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitors in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.


Recent sequencing studies of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas
(HNSCCs) have identified the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway
as the most frequently mutated, oncogenic pathway in this cancer type.
Despite the frequency of activating mutations or amplification in PIK3CA
(the gene encoding the catalytic subunit of PI3K), targeted inhibitors of
PI3K have not shown clinical efficacy as monotherapies. We tested a panel
of more than 20 patient-derived oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma
(OCSCC) cell lines, which were profiled by Nimblegen V3 exome sequencing,
and observed resistance to PI3K inhibitors despite PIK3CA copy number
amplification and/or mutation. Of six inhibitors tested, only
alpha-isoform selective and pan-PI3K agents were somewhat effective;
these inhibitors, despite on-target and downstream activity, did not
cause an appreciable reduction in cell viability when administered at
submicromolar concentrations. We hypothesized that other oncogenic
pathways might still be functional in the presence of PI3K inhibitors and
might serve as mediators of this resistance. For example, our group and
others have evaluated co-dependence on the Ras-MEK-ERK pathway in OCSCC,
showing that this serves as a compensatory mechanism in some models. In
order to more fully characterize other novel mechanisms of resistance, we
have also developed a high-throughput screening approach that utilizes a
resazurin cell viability assay. This screen serves as an unbiased means
of testing ~1400 inhibitors as monotherapies and in combination with
alpha-isoform selective PI3K inhibitor HS-173 and pan-PI3K inhibitor
BKM120 in several OCSCC models. Further validation of “hits” from
this screen, which are drugs that are effective in combination but not as
monotherapies, may identify additional resistance mechanisms and lead to
combination therapies to improve HNSCC patient prognosis.


