Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: onTARGET: a new computational strategy to predict in vivo relevant
targets against neuroblastoma.


One of the main bottlenecks of anticancer drug development is the
assessment of the in vivo relevance of emerging therapies. Previously,
drugs that suppress the in vivo progression of neuroblastoma have been
hard to identify. To address this problem, we propose a new computational
technique, onTARGET, that enables researchers to select, with good
accuracy, compounds that are likely to induce changes in cellular
pathways that are consistent with specific clinical outcomes and
subgroups.

onTARGET prediction is based on an integration of massive expression and
other data resources, including the NIH LINCS dataset (with 1,300,000
expression profiles), the NIH TARGET and R2-AMC neuroblastoma cohorts,
and our own in-house databases. In a first step, the datasets are
preprocessed by factor analysis to remove systematic bias in these large
data sets. In a second step, Bayesian statistics are applied to
prioritize compounds whose cellular responses match clinically relevant
differences between patient subsets, such as MYCN status, survival hazard
ratio, or histopathological assessment.

To evaluate the method, we used onTARGET prediction to identify compounds
and gene targets relevant for clinical outcomes in the NIH-TARGET (n=249)
and R2-AMC (n=98) neuroblastoma cohorts. The algorithm confirmed existing
targets and made interesting predictions. Of 50 the top-ranking compounds
associated with a survival outcome, agents targeting the mTOR/PI3K axis
are highly prevalent. The algorithm correctly predicts targeting of the
MYC pathway, and predicts possible modulators of MYC signaling, such as
TRRAP, AURKA and BMP2. In addition to nominating agents with a favorable
outcome, the algorithm can also flag compounds that might worsen
prognosis, further facilitating the prioritization of targets for
evaluation.

In summary, onTARGET may guide target selection for neuroblastoma studies
and can be adapted for other cancers as well. The many targets that were
identified immediately suggest an opportunity for continued evaluation in
cells and in vivo models. This work has been initiated in collaboration
with researchers at Lund University.


