Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mechanism of premetastatic niche formation through
FBXW7/NOTCH/CCL2 pathway and clinical trial using CCL2 inhibitor
“SK-818” for breast cancer patients.


Background Metastasis is a major cause of death in cancer patients, &
elucidation of the mechanisms is expected to provide a basis for the
development of new cancer treatment. Premetastatic niche whereby tumors
prepare defined organs for metastasized cells is considered to be crucial
for the development of metastasis, which consists of host cells such as
monocytes, macrophages, & other inflammatory cells. However, the
mechanism of how tumor cells communicate with host cells to develop a
premetastatic niche remains unclear. FBXW7 is the F-box protein component
of an SCF-type ubiquitin ligase, in which it functions as a receptor
responsible for substrate recognition followed by the degradation of the
substrate. Some part of the substrates of FBXW7 regulates the recruitment
of monocytes, macrophages, & other inflammatory cells. Therefore, we
hypothesized that expression of FBXW7 in the host cells is a key
determinant of the formation of premetastatic niches.

Materials & Methods To investigate the role of FBXW7 in the formation of
premetastatic niche, we developed bone marrow-specific FBXW7-deficient
mice.

1. We transferred B16F10 melanoma cells or E0771 mouse breast cancer
cells into the tail vein or mammary fat pad of the mice & the wild type
mice to evaluate the metastatic potential to lung.

2. We examined the serum concentrations of various cytokines or
chemokines in the mice before & after E0771 cells transplantation using
cytokine array.

3. To examine whether the enhanced metastasis apparent in FBXW7-deficient
mice is dependent on the CCL2/CCR2 pathway, we treated FBXW7-deficient
mice with SK-818, a CCR2 antagonist.

4. We measured the expression of FBXW7 mRNA in peripheral blood of breast
cancer patients by qRT-PCR & examined the relationship between FBXW7 mRNA
expression & prognosis.

Results

1. The extent of lung metastasis of B16F10 or E0771 cell was markedly
enhanced in FBXW7-deficient mice.

2. FBXW7-deficient mice exhibited increased serum levels of CCL2.
Moreover, accumulation of NOTCH & consequent transcriptional activation
of CCL2 was observed in bone marrow-derived stromal cells of
FBXW7-deficient mice.

3. Administration of SK-818 blocked the enhancement of lung metastasis in
FBXW7-deficient mice.

4. In human breast cancer patients, low FBXW7 mRNA expression in
peripheral blood showed high concentration of CCL2 in serum & poor
prognosis.

Conclusions We found that the FBXW7/NOTCH/CCL2 pathway play a key role in
the regulation of cancer metastasis through the formation of
premetastatic niches, & that SK-818 inhibit cancer metastasis in mice.
SK-818 is currently administered clinically for the treatment of patients
with hepatitis B virus infection in Japan. Based on these findings, we
have been conducting Phase I clinical trial to assess the safety of
SK-818 for breast cancer patients.


