Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: t-Darpp chemoresistence protein: insights into its structure,
oligomerization status, calcium-binding properties and phosphorylation
sites.


t-Darpp, one of two protein isoforms encoded by the PPP1R1B gene, is
overexpressed in gastric, esophageal, colon, prostate, and breast
cancers; and confers resistance to trastuzumab in Her2+ breast cancer
cells. To gain insight into the trastuzumab-resistance mechanism of
t-Darpp, we studied its structure, oligomerization status, metal-binding
properties, and sites of phosphorylation. Circular dichroism spectroscopy
analysis showed that recombinant t-Darpp exhibits 12% alpha helix, 29%
beta strand, 24% beta turn and 35% random coil character at 25째C. Upon
mild heat treatment (50째C for five min) the secondary structure does not
appreciably change. Metal ion-binding analyses through inductively
coupled plasma-mass spectrometry and graphite furnace-atomic absorption
indicated that t-Darpp co-purifies with calcium, but not other metals
commonly found in biological systems. The T75 site, critical for t-Darpp
activation of the Akt signaling pathway, is a substrate for
phosphorylation by cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) and cyclin-dependent
kinase 5 (CDK5). Gel filtration chromatography, sedimentation equilibrium
analysis, native blue gel electrophoresis, and glutaraldehyde-mediated
crosslinking experiments showed that the majority of t-Darpp (calculated
mass = 19 kDa) exists as a monomer, but forms low levels (t-Darpp, one of
two protein isoforms encoded by the PPP1R1B gene, is overexpressed in
gastric, esophageal, colon, prostate, and breast cancers; and confers
resistance to trastuzumab in Her2+ breast cancer cells. To gain insight
into the trastuzumab-resistance mechanism of t-Darpp, we studied its
structure, oligomerization status, metal-binding properties, and sites of
phosphorylation. Circular dichroism spectroscopy analysis showed that
recombinant t-Darpp exhibits 12% alpha helix, 29% beta strand, 24% beta
turn and 35% random coil character at 25째C. Upon mild heat treatment
(50째C for five min) the secondary structure does not appreciably change.
Metal ion-binding analyses through inductively coupled plasma-mass
spectrometry and graphite furnace-atomic absorption indicated that
t-Darpp co-purifies with calcium, but not other metals commonly found in
biological systems. The T75 site, critical for t-Darpp activation of the
Akt signaling pathway, is a substrate for phosphorylation by
cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) and cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5).
Gel filtration chromatography, sedimentation equilibrium analysis, native
blue gel electrophoresis, and glutaraldehyde-mediated crosslinking
experiments showed that the majority of t-Darpp (calculated mass = 19
kDa) exists as a monomer, but forms low levels (< 3%) of hetero-oligomers
with its longer isoform Darpp-32. t-Darpp has a relatively large Stokes
radius of 4.4 nm, suggesting an elongated structure. In summary, this
study indicates that t-Darpp is an elongated, mild-heat-stable, and
monomeric calcium-binding protein that is capable of being phosphorylated
at T75 by CDK1 and CDK5. Blockage of t-Darpp calcium binding capacity or
T75 phosphorylation may therefore help sustain Her2+ breast cancer
sensitivity to trastuzumab therapy.


