Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inflammation and estrogen receptor beta modulate bacterial
diversity of the gut.


Background: Chronic inflammation is a risk factor of colorectal cancer
(CRC), and the microbiota of the gut is important in both colitis and
carcinogenesis. Estrogen receptor beta (ERβ) is the predominant nuclear
receptor in the colon, and is downregulated in CRC. Here, we explore the
role of colitis and ERβ signaling with respect to the microbiota
diversity.

Methods: Intestinal ERβ-/- mice were generated using the Cre-loxP
system. WT and knockout mice were treated with AOM/DSS inducing colitis
(at 9 weeks) and CRC (at 16 weeks). After 9 and 16 weeks, stool pellets
were collected from treated and untreated mice (n=39), and DNA was
extracted. Library preparation and 16S rRNA-sequencing was performed
using the illumina Miseq platform with specific primers targeting the
V3-V4 regions, and QIIME software was used to analyze microbiota
diversity. Sequencing results were validated by qPCR

Results: High-throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing demonstrated that
treatment induced significant differentiation of both alpha (p=0.01) and
beta (p=0.01) microbiota diversity. Alpha diversity indicators implied a
significant reduction of microbiota richness and evenness after
treatment. qPCR confirmed that 9-weeks treatment increased OTUs
affiliated with Bifidobacteria (p=0.03), Bacteroidetes (p=0.04),
Lactobacilli (p=0.0014), Cyanobacteria (p=0.0023) and Gammaproteobacteria
(p=0.05) in WT mice. After 16 weeks treatment, 16s rRNA sequencing show
enrichment of Tenercutes, Proteobacteria and Cyanobacteria in all
tumor-bearing mice (treated WT and ERβ-/-), while Verrucomicrobia
increased in untreated mice (No tumors). Further treated ERβ-/- but not
WT mice displayed significant reduction of Gammaproteobaceria (p=0.0083).

Conclusion: Our data demonstrate a clear effect of colitis-induced
treatment on the microbiota, and that ERβ attenuates this response.
Lactobacilli and Bifidobacteria has, for example, been shown to attenuate
inflammatory response. We note an increase in Lactobacilli and
Bifidobacteia after treatment in WT mice, but not in ERβ-/- mice. This
can result in increased colitis in ERβ-/- mice and help explain the
increased expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines we note in treated
ERβ-/- mice.


