Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromatin remodeler HELLS is an epigenetic driver for
hepatocellular carcinoma progression.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the major type of liver cancer and the
second leading cause of cancer death worldwide. Every year, more than six
hundred thousand people are newly diagnosed. For the advanced HCC
patients, only one FDA-approved drug is currently available. Therefore,
there is an urge to delineate the molecular mechanism of HCC progression
for developing new therapeutics. Increasing evidence showed that
epigenetic alterations play an important role in the carcinogenesis
process. The epigenetic regulatory mechanism is accomplished by DNA
methylation, histone modification, and chromatin remodeling. Deregulation
of DNA methylation and histone modifications have recently been
characterized in HCC, but the significance of chromatin remodeling in
liver carcinogenesis remains to be explored. In this study, we employed
RNA-seq to investigate the expression of chromatin remodelers in human
HCCs. We found that HELicase, Lymphoid-Specific (HELLS), a SWI2/SNF2
chromatin remodeling enzyme, was remarkably overexpressed in HCC.
Overexpression of HELLS was correlated with more aggressive
clinicopathological features and poorer patient prognosis. We further
showed that up-regulation of HELLS in HCC was conferred by
hyper-activation of transcription factor SP1. To investigate the
functions of HELLS in HCC, we generated both gain- and loss-of-function
models by CRISPR activation system, lentiviral shRNA, and CRISPR/Cas9
genome editing system. We demonstrated that overexpression of HELLS
augmented HCC cell proliferation and migration. In contrast, depletion of
HELLS reduced HCC cell growth and motility. Moreover, inactivation of
HELLS induced apoptosis in HCC cells. Coherently, ablation of HELLS also
mitigated tumorigenicity and lung metastasis in vivo as demonstrated with
both subcutaneous and orthotopic tumor implantation models.
Mechanistically, by using RNA-seq and MNase-seq, we revealed that HELLS
controls the nucleosome occupancy at gene enhancer and transcription
start site (TSS). Overexpression of HELLS increased nucleosome occupancy
that obstructed the accessibility of enhancers and hindered the formation
of nucleosome-free region (NFR) at TSS of its target genes, thereby
blocks the binding of transcription factors for activating gene
expression. Consequently, though this mechanism, up-regulation of HELLS
mediated epigenetic silencing of multiple tumor suppressor genes
including E-Cadherin, FBP1, IGFBP3, XAF1 and CREB-H in HCC. In
conclusion, our data unravel that HELLS is a key epigenetic driver of
HCC. By altering the nucleosome occupancy at NFR and enhancer, HELLS
epigenetically suppresses numerous tumor suppressor genes to promote HCC
progression.


