Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive value of co-expression network consisting of FOXM1 and
its neighbor genes in cancers.


Purpose: Forkhead box protein M1 (FOXM1) is a key regulator of
tumorigenesis. Previous studies demonstrated that FOXM1 expression was
strongly correlated with poor prognosis of various cancers. The aim of
this study is to define a signature consisting of FOXM1 and its
associated genes and assess its prognostic potential in cancers including
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and others.

Experimental procedures: We analyzed a gene expression profile of 100
patients with HCC to identify FOXM1-correlated genes (the FOXM1
signature) associated with the prognosis of HCC patients. The validity of
the FOXM1 signature was verified in an independent HCC cohort (n = 242).
Using the signature, we also analyzed different cancer types including
pancreatic adenocarcinoma, lung adenocarcinoma, breast carcinoma, and
bladder urothelial carcinoma to verify the association between the FOXM1
signature and prognosis. Various statistical methods were applied to
signature finding and validation. Upstream regulator and gene-to-gene
network analyses were performed to identify potential key mediators of
the FOXM1 signature.

Results: Through a gene expression profiling in 100 patients with HCC, we
identified a gene set consisting of FOXM1 and its co-expressed genes for
predicting poor prognosis. A predictive value of the signature was
validated in an independent cohort containing 242 HCC patients. In
multivariate analysis, the FOXM1 signature showed the most significant
prognostic value (HR = 1.706, 95% CI = 1.176-2.475, P = 0.005). By
directly applying the signature to four data sets in different cancer
types, our signature showed a consistent prognostic significance,
regardless of tumor types. Finally, upstream regulator and gene-to-gene
network analyses found an interconnection of network hubs composed by
FOXM1, MYC, and E2F1 that might be common key mediators of patient
survival in cancer.

Conclusions: The FOXM1 signature represents a promising common diagnostic
tool to identify high-risk cancer patients and may extend treatment
options in various cancers.


