Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of an off-the-shelf cell-based platform (PDC-vac) for
active antitumor immunotherapy.


The development of efficient vaccines for the treatment of cancers in
combination or not with other agents such as checkpoint inhibitors
represents a major public health issue but remains a challenge. A dozen
of vaccine drug products is expected to be marketed in the next few
years. In this context, off-the-shelf and potent platforms are more
attractive than individualized vaccines that are tailored to each patient
in many aspects. We have recently developed a new cell-based vaccine
approach named PDC*vac (formerly GeniusVac). This cell-based vaccine was
developed thanks to the establishment, from leukemic PDC, of unique human
PDC line (PDC*line). We have previously shown the potential of
peptide-loaded PDC*line to induce strong and fully functional
HLA-A*02:01-restricted anti-tumor immunity in vitro and in vivo (Aspord
et al, 2010, 2012). PDC*mel (GenusVac-Mel4), our first product is
currently developed for the treatment of melanoma patients (NCT01863108).
The high efficiency of PDC*vac renders the strategy very attractive for
further clinical developments in active immunotherapy field. Our aim is
to optimize PDC*vac technology by passing use peptides and render the
vaccine easier to manufacture. We engineered our PDC*line using
retrovirus to force the endogenous expression of one or more tumor or
viral antigenic peptides or whole tumor/viral proteins (gp100,
tyrosinase, Melan-A, Mage-A3, CMVpp65, flu, EBV) that broaden the panel
of antigens presented. Data obtaining with different polypeptide and
protein gene coding constructions and the expansion of multi-specific
antigen-specific T-cells at the same time will be presented. Moreover, we
will present how we succeed to obtain 100% of efficacy in antigen
presentation by the PDC*line engineered to express tumor proteins or
polyepitopes. We have validated the use of retrovirus constructs to
create a new generation of an “off-the-shelf” cancer vaccines highly
potent to stimulate antitumor-specific T-cells.


