Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced anti-tumor effects by a combination approach of
interferon-γ producing recombinant Bifidobacterium and anti-mPD-1
antibody in syngeneic mouse model.


Cancer immunotherapies like antibodies targeting immune checkpoint
molecules have resulted in an extraordinary success in cancer treatment.
Still, large fraction of cancer patients doesn’t respond to the
antibody immunotherapy and lots of patients are suffered from
immune-related adverse events (irAEs) which sometimes cause
discontinuation of the treatment. The above problems highlight the needs
in the cancer immunotherapy for attempting various approaches like
synergistic combination therapy to minimize adverse events and enhance
efficacy.

Interferon-γ is a cytokine having antitumor activity and has been
developed as an anticancer drug in multiple cancer indications but failed
due to its limited efficacy and severe adverse events. In several
publications, IFN-γ has been clarified to induce PD-L1 expression in
tumors [1,2]. Upreguration of PD-L1 renders tumor resistance to cytotoxic
T cell and it may cause the limited efficacy of IFN-γ therapy. Our
preliminary experiments suggested that an intratumoral injection of
purified IFN-γ and following addition with anti-murine PD-1 antibody
showed significant tumor suppression, implying a combination effects of
regional IFN-γ and immune checkpoint blockers.

Here in the present report, in an aim of decreasing adverse events, we
have created recombinant Bifidobacterium, which is a non-pathogenic
anaerobic bacterium to secrete IFN-γ specifically inside solid tumor,
and then demonstrated the combination of IFN-γ producing Bifidobacterium
and anti-murine PD-1 antibody significantly suppress tumor growth whereas
each single treatment moderately contributes to tumor suppression in a
CT26 bearing syngeneic mouse model. In addition, ELISA assay indicated
that there are substantial IFN-γ detected in tumor tissue but none of
them are detectable in blood on the Day 4 of treatment. All in together,
combination treatment with IFN-γ producing Bifidobacterium and
anti-murine PD-1 antibody offers a promising anti-tumor approach.

Reference:

1. Abiko K., Br J Cancer, 2015 Apr 28;112(9):1501-9. IFN-γ from
lymphocytes induces PD-L1 expression and promotes progression of ovarian
cancer.

2. Mimura K., Cancer Sci., 2014 Oct;105(10):1236-44. Inhibition of
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway can induce upregulation of human
leukocyte antigen class I without PD-L1-upregulation in contrast to
interferon-γ treatment.


