Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thrombomodulin expression regulates the tumor stroma
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells for controlling tumor growth.


Introduction: Thrombomodulin (TM), a thrombin receptor on endothelial
cell surface, acts as an anti-coagulant factor in thrombin-catalyzed
protein C activation and inhibits the pro-coagulant functions of
thrombin. Owing to TM’s widely expression patterns on various cell
types, our studies have demonstrated that beside anti-coagulation, TM
also participates in controlling cell-cell adhesion, tumor growth,
inflammation, angiogenesis, and atherosclerosis. However, the
significance of TM expression in mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) has never
been investigated. The non-hematopoietic MSCs could specifically home
into the developing tumors and becomes the active components of tumor
stroma, which affects tumor’s growth, immunity, progression, and
therapeutic resistance. Recently, we investigated the role of TM on the
tumor microenvironment differentiation of MSCs for establishing the
active stroma that assists tumor growth.

Materials & methods: Normal and TM gene-targeting transgenic
mice-isolated bone marrow-derived MSCs were used as the research models
to investigate the expressing significance of TM on MSC’s biological
activities and differentiations during mouse melanoma B16F10 cell’s
conditioning in vitro and in vivo.

Results: Our data showed that MSC's TM expression was low in the
quiescent state but was up-regulated while treating with B16F10 cell’s
conditioned medium in the mechanism of plate-derived growth factor
signaling dependence. Accordingly, using conditional gene knockout
strategy, under the condition of tumor cell other than normal culture
resulted in that TM gene knockout significantly affected MSC’s
proliferation, migration, interleukin-6 secretion, angiogenic activity,
and tumor-associated fibroblast differentiation in vitro. Furthermore, TM
knockout notably reduced the capacity of MSCs on regulating the growth,
vasculogenesis, and active stroma establishment of B16F10 melanoma
xenograft in vivo.

Conclusion: These results indicate that the secretion of tumor-associated
plate-derived growth factor is a critical event for MSC’s TM expression
that controls MSC’s stroma differentiation for developing active tumor
microenvironment, which promotes tumor progression. This study further
suggests that the modulation of TM expression on MSCs has the therapeutic
potential via diminishing the establishment of functional tumor stroma
that sensitizes tumor for the therapies.


