Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-myogenic origin of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma.


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma in
children. Despite aggressive chemotherapy, radiotherapy and surgery,
clinical outcomes for RMS have not improved for three decades,
emphasizing the need to uncover the molecular underpinnings of the
disease. RMS includes two histopathologic subtypes: alveolar RMS, driven
by the fusion protein PAX3/7-FOXO1, and embryonal RMS (ERMS), which is
genetically heterogeneous. RMS has been presumed to originate from
derailed muscle progenitors based on the histologic appearance and gene
expression pattern of the tumors. However, an origin restricted to
skeletal muscle does not explain RMS occurring in tissues devoid of
skeletal muscle such as the prostate, bladder, biliary tree and the
omentum. Previously, we showed that activation of Sonic Hedgehog
signaling through expression of a conditional, constitutively active
Smoothened allele, SmoM2, under control of an adipocyte-restricted
adipose protein 2 (aP2)-Cre recombinase transgene in mice gives rise to
aggressive skeletal muscle tumors that display the histologic and
molecular characteristics of human ERMS. In this model, tumorigenesis
occurs with high penetrance (~80%), is early onset (by 2 months of age),
and is restricted to the head and neck. Also, unlike previous RMS models,
this model requires no additional background mutations, such as
inactivation of p53, and results in only ERMS neoplasia. We illustrated
that the gene expression signature of the aP2-Cre;SmoM2 tumors
recapitulates both other mouse ERMS models as well as human ERMS. With
the short latency and anatomic restricted tumor location, we sought to
leverage this model to explore the cell of origin. Here, we use genetic
fate mapping of aP2-cre with reporter mice to determine the effect of
constitutive hedgehog activation on the identity and localization of
aP2-Cre expressing cells. aP2-cre expressing cells are found in both
brown and white adipose and to be localized within the muscle intersitium
but not beneath the laminin sheath of the muscle fibers. These aP2-cre
expressing cells are distinct from Pax7-positive skeletal muscle stem
cells or satellite cells and do not contribute to myofiber formation.
Instead these cells were confirmed to be endothelial by gene expression
analysis. Colocalization between aP2-cre expressing cells and CD31 was
also observed. When compared to aP2-Cre;R26-Tom mice, the addition of
oncogenic SmoM2 (aP2-Cre;R26-Tom;SmoM2) resulted in embryonic expansion
of these aP2-lineage interstitial muscle cells and formation of ERMS. Our
findings suggest that non-skeletal muscle progenitors are a cell of
origin for Sonic Hedgehog-driven ERMS.


