Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the ERK5 pathway as a novel approach to target human
chronic myeloid leukemia stem cells.


Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKi) targeting BCR/ABL are very effective for
the treatment of Chronic Myeloid Leukaemia (CML). However, resistance
mechanisms or their inefficacy on CML leukaemia stem cells (LSC) may lead
to relapse. Therefore, there is urgent need to identify new molecular
targets. The Extracellular signal-Regulated Kinase 5 (ERK5) is a
Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase involved in cancer. Our aim was to study
a possible role of the ERK5 pathway in CML LSC.

Cells used were: human CML cell lines K562 and KCL22 that express
constitutively active ERK5; CML patient-derived cells and CD34+ cells
from heathy donors (after informed consent had been obtained). Cells were
incubated in normoxic (routine) or hypoxic (0.2% O2) primary cultures
(LC1) in the presence or the absence of drugs. Day-7 LC1 cells were
transferred to drug-free, non-selective normoxic secondary cultures
(LC2), to measure LC2 repopulation as a read-out of progenitor/stem cell
potential (CRA assay). Compounds: XMD8-92 (ERK5 inhibitor) and BIX02189
(MEK5 inhibitor); imatinib (BCR/ABL inhibitor, IM).

We previously showed that stem cell potential of CML LSC is maintained in
severe hypoxia. In K562 and KCL22 cells and in primary cells derived from
9 CML patients, the treatment in hypoxic LC1 with XMD8-92 or BIX02189,
but not with IM, impaired progenitor/stem cell potential. The same
results were obtained by combined treatment of XMD892 with IM.
Importantly, XMD8-92 did not affect progenitor/stem cell potential of
CD34+ cells from heathy donors. In colony formation ability assays ERK5
inhibition decreased colony formation by human primary CML cells to a
higher extent than that by normal human CD34+ hematopoietic cells.
Interestingly, in hypoxia, combined treatment XMD8-92/IM decreased the
expression of genes relevant for stem cell maintenance such as p21, nanog
and c-myc and the expression of CD26, a CML LSC marker. Moreover,
combined XMD8-

92/IM maintained low the expression of p27, another gene involved in stem
cell maintenance, that is increased by either drug when administered
alone.

This indicate that the ERK5 pathway inhibitors impaired LSC maintenance
of CML cell lines and primary CML cells.


