Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Technical validation of novel 325 RNA predictive biomarkers using
gene expression data generated by Nanostring n-counter and Affymetrix
microarray.


Background: With new developments of oncology drug combinations and
targeted treatments, the ability to stratify categories of patient
populations and to develop companion diagnostics has become increasingly
important. A panel of 325 RNA-biomarkers was selected based on
cancer-related biological processes of healthy cells and gene expression
changes over time during non-malignant epithelial cell organization. This
"cancer in reverse" approach in combination with empirically derived
algorithms resulted in a panel of biomarkers having little overlap with 9
other widely-used commercial gene panels analyzed to date (e.g., overlap
with FoundationOne was 2% (lowest) and with OncotypeDX was 14%
(highest)), providing a more in-depth and comprehensive view of gene
expression profiles and key cellular signaling pathways beyond mutations
in "driver-genes", and drug associations including chemotherapies,
immunotherapies, and targeted-therapies.

Objective: In order to technically validate an assay for the 325
RNA-biomarkers we compared gene expression profiles side-by-side using
two technology platforms to address the reproducibility of the assay.

Methods and Results: We have mapped the 325 RNA transcripts and 7
housekeeping genes in a custom NanoString n-Counter expression panel to
be compared to all potential probe sets in the Affymetrix Human Genome
U133 Plus 2.0 microarray. The experiments were conducted with 10 unique
biological formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) breast tumor samples.
Each site extracted RNA from four sections of 10-microns thick FFPE
tissue over three different days by three different operators using an
optimized standard operating procedure and quality control criteria.
Samples were analyzed using mas5 in BioConductor and NanoStringNorm in R.
Pearson correlation showed reproducibility between sites for all 60
samples with r=0.995 for Affymetrix and r=0.999 for NanoString.
Correlation in multiple days and multiple users were for Affymetrix
r=(0.962-0.999) and for NanoString r=(0.982-0.991). The platforms were
compared using relative expression fold changes using linear regression
(lm). Concordant genes were defined to have gene expression levels within
+/- 2 standard deviation (sd) of each other at 95% confidence interval,
or to have greater than +/- 2 sd but have changes in the same direction
in both platforms. The discordant genes were defined to have opposite
direction of changes. By this definition, approximately 90% of the genes
fell into the concordant category.

Conclusion: The 325 RNA-biomarkers showed reproducibility in two
technology platforms with high concordance. With five predictive tests
under development for breast (3), lung and pancreatic cancers future
directions include performing clinical validation studies and generate
rationale for patient selection in clinical trials using the technically
validated assays.


