Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of calcium sensing receptor polymorphisms at rs1801725
with circulating calcium in breast cancer patients.


Patients with metastatic or end-stage breast cancer (BC) inevitably
develop hypercalcemia, while up to 30% of BC patients develop
cancer-induced hypercalcemia (CIH) in the absence of metastases or bone
diseases. The commonly diagnosed mild increase in circulating calcium
activates the calcium sensing receptor (CaSR) and has been shown to be
associated with larger and more aggressive breast tumors in
postmenopausal and premenopausal patients respectively. Whether
differences in circulating calcium and/or specific inactivating CaSR
variants play any role in disparities in BC outcomes remains unclear.
DESIGN METHODS: We identified 199 BC cases and 384 age and genetic
ancestry-matched controls with calcium assay and genotyping data from the
Vanderbilt University DNA biorepository (BioVU) linked to de-identified
electronic medical records. The linear mixed effects and codominant
models were used to assess the relationship between inactivating CaSR
mutations at rs1801725 (codon 986) and rs1801726 (codon 1011) and either
circulating calcium levels or risk of high calcium-driven aggressive BC
outcomes. RESULTS: We observed that circulating calcium levels were
significantly higher in BC cases compared to control subjects (p=0.001)
and interestingly, in subjects of African ancestry compared to Caucasians
(p=0.001). The A986S mutant CaSR is common among Caucasians while the
Q1011E mutant receptor is common among African Americans. However, only
inactivating mutations at rs1801725 locus were significantly associated
with higher calcium levels (p=0.006) and a higher (69%) risk of high
calcium-driven aggressive BC outcomes compared to the wild type receptor.
We also demonstrate that invasive BC cells are tolerant to sustained high
calcium and that their adaptation to high calcium occurs via
up-regulation of calcium-activated early response and
malignancy-associated genes. CONCLUSION: These data suggest that
inactivating CaSR polymorphisms at rs1801725 predispose BC patients to
hypercalcemia and that high circulating calcium-driven aggressive disease
outcomes occur via calcium modulated malignancy-associated genes such as
MAGEC2/CT10.


