Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The use of sodium sulfide, a hydrogen sulfide donor, to sensitize
glioblastoma multiforme to photon and proton radiotherapy.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common glial tumor accounting
for 12-15% of all brain tumors worldwide. It is a rapidly progressing,
life-threatening disease with a median survival of 3-6 months when left
untreated. Minimal advancements in the treatment of GBM have limited its
management. Conventional treatment with surgical resection of the primary
tumor followed by photon radiation (60 Gy in 2 Gy fractions) in
combination with adjuvant chemotherapy can limit recurrence and prolong
median survival to 15 months.

Proton radiotherapy has received increased attention in recent years due
to its more precise energy deposition and 10% higher relative biological
effectiveness (RBE) when compared to photon therapy. Several clinical
trials have shown that high dose photon/proton therapy reduces central
recurrence rate and extends median survival of GBM patients to 21.6
months. Unfortunately, the high rate of radionecrosis has limited its
widespread adoption. Radiosensitization agents may overcome this problem
by allowing for the use of lower radiation doses to achieve comparable
cytotoxic effects; however, no radiosensitizers are currently approved
for the treatment of GBM.

The current study examines the use of sodium sulfide (Na2S), a hydrogen
sulfide donor, as a radiosensitizing agent for both photon and proton
therapy in two human glioblastoma cell lines, T98G and U87-MG. Survival
curves were generated for T98G cells using a colony forming assay.
Protons had an increased RBE of 1.18, which is in close agreement to the
accepted RBE of 1.1. Na2S (0 μM, 10 μM, 100 μM, 500 μM, 1000 μM) was
given as a pre-treatment in two 2-hour incubations: 2 hours prior to
radiation and again immediately before radiation. Na2S alone exhibited a
concentration dependent cytotoxic effect with maximal killing of
approximately 50% at 500 μM. Further increases in sodium sulfide up to
1000μM had no effect on cell survival. Similar killing was not observed
in a non-cancer mouse retinal endothelial cell line even at extremely
high doses of 1000 μM suggesting that Na2S cytotoxicity is specific and
limited to cancer cells. Na2S increased killing in both photons and
protons at 6 Gy by decreasing the surviving fraction from 27.7% to 20%
and 16% to 3% respectively. Initial studies into the mechanism of
radiosensitization using bleomycin as a radiomimetic agent have suggested
Na2S increases the number of DNA double strand breaks (DSB), a highly
cytotoxic form of DNA damage, as seen by γH2AX staining in both T98G and
U87-MG cells.

The benefits of high dose radiation therapy, particularly with proton
boost, in the treatment of high-grade central nervous system tumors such
as GBM are apparent, but the increased risk of radionecrosis has limited
its use. While further studies need to be conducted to elucidate the
exact mechanism, preliminary results strongly suggest that sodium sulfide
can act as a radiosensitizing agent by increasing DNA DSB formation.


