Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new standardized CD8 and PD-L1 dual assay.


PD1/PD-L1 pathway blockade results in a durable clinical response in a
fraction of the non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Today, the
expression of PD-L1, detected by immunohistochemistry (IHC) at the
surface of tumor or tumor-infiltrating immune cells, is used to select
patients that may respond to immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICI). However
the predictive value of that biomarker alone is questioned. In order to
better stratify NSCLC patients, we have developed a new dual-staining IHC
assay of PD-L1+ and CD8+ cells (TILs) present in the tumor
microenvironment on a single slide prepared from FFPE tissue.

The assay was optimized and fully automated on the Benchmark XT platform
(Roche Ventana) with anti-PD-L1 (HDX3) and anti-CD8 (HDX2) monoclonal
primary antibodies, respectively revealed with DAB and fast red
substrates. Stained slides are analyzed by a pathologist like any other
existing IVD test together with the TILs information. In addition, after
digitization, the samples are analyzed to quantify brown and red cells
with a newly developed digital Pathology (DP) tool.

The following parameters are reported by the DP tool: (1) CD8+ cell
density (cells/mm²) ; (2) PD-L1+ cell density (cells/mm²) ; proximity
between CD8+ and PD-L1+ cells, either centered on CD8+ or on PD-L1+ cells
and finally cluster indexes for CD8+ cells and PD-L1+ cells. HalioDx DP
analysis tool can calculate these parameters on any Regions Of Interest
(ROI) defined by the user.

Accuracy of the automated numeration of CD8+ and PD-L1+ cells was
validated by an expert pathologist. Cell-to-cell distances were validated
with an independent DP tool. Variability was assessed for all parameters
using adjacent dual-stained slides on complete tissue sections. The
concordance with main IVD approved PD-L1 methods was established on a
representative set of 55 NSCLC tumours.

HalioDx has developed an innovative assay based on the dual staining of
CD8+ and PD-L1+ cells associated to a DP tool to standardize the
evaluation of the tumor microenvironment. This assay could have higher
predictive performance than existing IVD tests used to identify ICI
resistant NSCLC patients.


