Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TM4SF1 regulates cell cycle and ROS status in bladder cancer cells
by targeting FOXO3a via PPARγ-SIRT1 negative feedback loop.


Transmembrane 4 superfamily member 1 (TM4SF1) is a member of tetraspanin
family, which locates in the cell membrane, functions as signal
transducer to regulate cell development, growth and motility. Currently,
TM4SF1 has been reported to be overexpressed in liver cancer, pancreatic
cancer and colorectal cancer, but its role in bladder cancer (BCa) has
not been illustrated. We have found that TM4SF1 was strongly upregulated
in human bladder cancer tissues at both transcription and translation
levels, compared with the paracancerous tissues and normal bladder
tissues. This result was corroborated with our transcriptome analysis.
Moreover, the tissue array data showed that TM4SF1 closely related with
survival rate of BCa as the patients with high expression of TM4SF1 have
a poorer prognosis. Furthermore, in vitro and in vivo studies suggested
that proliferation of BCa cells was significantly suppressed by knockdown
of TM4SF1. Moreover, downregulation of TM4SF1 induced G0/G1 phase cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis possibly via induced reactive oxygen species
(ROS) status in BCa cells. In addition, we observed that
phosphorylated/total SIRT1 proteins were considerably reduced in the BCa
cells lacking TM4SF1. In contrast, PPARγ as well as its target
phosphorylated/total FOXO3a were strongly increased, an important
downstream transcriptional factor of PPARγ/SIRT1 negative feedback loop,
regulating cell cycle, apoptosis and ROS metabolism. Therefore, we
treated the TM4SF1-silencing BCa cells with GW9662 (antagonist of PPARγ)
and resveratrol (activator of SIRT1), showing a recovery of the G0/G1
phase cell cycle arrest and scavenge of ROS status. Interestingly, the
increase of phosphorylated/total FOXO3a by knockdown of TM4SF1 could also
be rescued by using GW9662 and resveratrol. In conclusion, our results
suggested that TM4SF1 may regulate cell cycle and ROS status of BCa cells
by targeting FOXO3a via the PPARγ-SIRT1 negative feedback loop.


