Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic evaluation of transcriptome sequencing shows comparable
profiles for an exome-capture method for formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) breast cancer tissues and the standard poly-A
method for matched fresh frozen (FF) tissues.


Background: Tissue samples are routinely preserved as FFPE blocks. This
abundant sample reservoir holds promises in clinical omics for disease
diagnosis and precision cancer medicine. However, due to extensive
cross-linking, nucleic acids are not efficiently extracted from FFPE
samples and are heavily degraded, posing challenges for molecular assays
including next generation sequencing. Our study aims to identify the RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) library prep method for FFPE samples that provides
comparable data to the established poly-A enrichment method for FF tissue.

Methods: RNA-seq data were collected on matched FF and FFPE samples from
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC; n=7) and normal breast tissues
(n=2). Tissues were sourced from a commercial vendor. Three library
preparation protocols from Illumina were tested: poly(A) enrichment
protocol (Poly-A; FF only), ribosomal RNA deletion protocol (Ribo-Zero
Gold), and exome-capture based protocol (RNA-Access). Data were compared
on absolute and differential gene expression, as well as molecular
subtyping for breast cancer (PAM50; Parker 2009).

Results: Both absolute expression values and log fold changes between
tumor and normal samples correlate strongly across different tissue
preservation and library preparation methods. Among tested methods,
RNA-Access had the highest yield of mappable reads on coding region and
provided uniform transcript coverage with less rRNA contamination.
Regardless of the protocol, all TNBC samples were classified as PAM50
basal-like subtype. As expected, FF with either Ribo-Zero or RNA-Access
had the strongest correlation with FF PolyA on the distance to subtype
centroids (r=0.99). For FFPE methods, RNA-Access (r=0.94) had the
strongest correlation with FF PolyA, followed by Ribo-Zero (r=0.85).
Principal component analysis showed that samples were primarily
segregated by technical differences (library preparation or tissue
preservation method) rather than biological differences (tumor/normal
status or patient identification), suggesting strong technical bias in
the data. Gene families and biological processes underlying the
differentially expressed genes due to technical variations included
ribosomal, histone and metabolic pathways proteins. The aforementioned
technical bias can be largely eliminated by a batch effect adjustment
method (COMBAT; Johnson 2007).

Conclusion: As expected, RNA-seq data is primarily impacted by technical
differences. RNA-Access based transcriptome sequencing on breast FFPE
samples generated highly concordant gene expression profiles when
compared to data derived from FF samples. Our study supports the use of
RNA-Access based transcriptome sequencing on FFPE samples when FF samples
are not available.


