Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down-regulation of long non-coding RNA MALL-2 is associated with
metastasis and poor survival in lung adenocarcinoma.


Lung adenocarcinoma accounts for ~40% of lung cancers and is among the
deadliest cancers worldwide. Patients with metastatic lung adenocarcinoma
exhibit poor outcome with the average 5-year survival of ~1%. Long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have recently emerged as having critical roles
in tumorigenesis. While a subset of lncRNAs have been shown to promote
tumor invasion and metastasis, little is known about the role of lncRNAs
in metastatic lung adenocarcinoma. Therefore, we analyzed publicly
available microarray and RNA-Seq gene expression datasets that include
primary and metastatic tissues. Through this meta-analysis we discovered
98 metastasis associated lncRNAs that were dysregulated in metastatic
tumors compared to non-metastatic tumors (MALLs). Notably, only two
lncRNAs (MALL-2 and MALL-36) were found to be down-regulated in primary
tumors, relative to normal tissue, and even further down-regulated in
metastatic tumors relative to primary tumors. Gene set enrichment
analysis revealed that MALL-2, the most down-regulated lncRNA in
metastasis, was coexpressed with protein-coding genes enriched with
biological concepts associated with repressing tumor growth and
metastasis. Furthermore, we found that FOXA2, a metastasis repressor
gene, was highly coexpressed with MALL-2 in lung cancer. A pan-cancer
analysis using ~7,000 TCGA RNA-Seq tumor samples across 20 cancer types
revealed that MALL-2 was also down-regulated and coexpressed with FOXA2
in multiple cancers suggesting the conserved regulatory relationship
between the two genes. We confirmed that FOXA2 expression was decreased
upon knock-down of MALL-2 and silencing MALL-2 resulted in a significant
increase in cellular migration in lung adenocarcinoma cell lines. Last,
we found that low expression of MALL-2 was consistently associated with
poor overall survival across multiple independent lung adenocarcinoma
cohorts. Taken together, our integrative analysis has revealed MALL-2
that acts as a repressor of lung adenocarcinoma metastasis by regulating
FOXA2 and could serve as a biomarker of lung adenocarcinoma patient
outcome.


