Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive analysis of T cells responsive to neoantigens
derived from tumor-specific genetic mutations.


Neoantigens derived from tumor-specific genetic mutations can be
recognized as foreign by the host immune system, and might be suitable as
target for cancer immunotherapy possibly due to their higher
immunogenicity. In this study, to really know the immunogenicity of
tumor-specific neoantigens, we comprehensively investigated T cell
responses against neoantigens derived from genetic mutations in gastric
cancer. Using next-generation sequencing, 156 missense mutations were
identified in tumor cells from two gastric cancer patients. From them, we
selected 30 potentially immunogenic amino acid sequences, which were
derived from the mutations and predicted to potentially bind to HLA-class
I (A*0201, A*0206, or A*2402) by an epitope prediction server, IEBD. We
synthesized 30 kinds of 27mer long peptides, in which the mutated
sequences were located in the center, and then cultured peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) from healthy donors in the presence of the
synthetic peptides to evaluate whether they could really induce
antigen-specific T cell responses. In the analysis with PBMC from 18
healthy donors, 27/30 (90%) synthetic peptides showed an ability to
induce antigen-specific T cell responses in at least one donor, assessed
by cytokine production assay. Among them, 15 peptides were immunogenic in
more than one donor. The antigen-specific T cell responses were detected
more frequently in CD4+ T cells (70%) than in CD8+ T cells (43%). The
specificity of T cell responses to mutated sequences, but not to the
corresponding wild type sequences, were confirmed in 5 of 8 (63%)
peptides examined. In addition, antigen-specific T cell responses induced
by mutated peptides were shown to be much higher than those induced by
the corresponding wild type peptides. These findings clearly demonstrated
high immunogenicity and specificity of neoantigens derived from
tumor-specific genetic mutations. Further studies would be recommended to
develop a novel immunotherapeutic approach, “personalized cancer
vaccination”, targeting mutation-derived neoantigens.


