Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral IFN-α gene transfer reduces trafficking of Tregs
into tumor by inhibition of CCL17 expression.


Type I interferon (IFN) is a pleiotropic cytokine regulating the cancer
cell death and immune response. IFN-α can effectively induce an
antitumor immunity by the activation of tumor-specific T cells and
maturation of dendritic cells in various animal models. It is widely
known that an induction of tolerance by the tumor is one of the critical
mechanisms involved in tumor progression and resistance for immune
therapy. Extensive studies have shown that CD4+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells
(Tregs) are critical in controlling antitumor immune responses in the
tumor microenvironment. Since the effect of type I IFN on an
immunotolerant microenvironment is unknown, we investigated the
immunological effects of intratumoral IFN-α gene transfer on
tumor-infiltrating Tregs in a mouse model.

Here, to examine whether the expression of IFN-α affects the
immunotolerant microenvironment in tumors, CT26 murine colon cancer
tumors were directly injected once with 1 x 108 PFU of IFN-α-expressing
adenovirus (Ad-mIFN). The injection of Ad-mIFN significantly suppressed
the tumor growth. We found that intratumoral IFN-α gene transfer
significantly decreased the frequency of Tregs per CD4+ T cells in tumors
compared with control vector injection.

We hypothesized that Treg-homing cytokines such as CCL17 and CCL22
cytokines are involved in the reduction of tumor-infiltrating Tregs by
the Ad-mIFN injection. The IFN-α expression significantly suppressed of
CCL17 and CCL22 expression of tumors, and the expression of CCR4 and CCR5
expression on Tregs was not changed. IFN-α protein significantly
suppressed CCL17 of CT26 cells in vitro in a dose-dependent manner. Then,
we constructed CCL17 shRNA-transduced CT26 cells (CT26shCCL17) to examine
the immunological role of CCL17 in vivo. The frequency of Tregs per CD4+
T cells was significantly reduced in subcutaneous tumors of CT26shCCL17
cells (25.9 %), and tumor growth was inhibited compared with that of
control shRNA-transduced CT26 cells (39.4%), suggesting CCL17 has an
important role to migrate Tregs into tumors. The study demonstrated that
IFN-α gene delivery creates an environment strongly supporting the
enhancement of antitumor immunity through the suppression of Tregs.


