Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human tissue Kallikrein 6 enzyme activity regulates
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in colon cancer.


Background: Kallikrein-related peptidase 6 (KLK6) belongs to the family
of human tissue kallikrein genes, majority of which are shown to be
differentially expressed in cancers. Clinical studies have demonstrated
that upregulation of KLK6 in primary colorectal tumors and lymph nodes
correlates with serosal invasion, liver metastasis and indicative of poor
prognosis in patients. It has been reported that KLK6 protein is involved
in regulation of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program in
an organ-specific context. The aim in this study was to investigate
contribution of KLK6 enzyme in the EMT during neoplastic transformation
in the colon.

Results: We expressed enzymatically active or inactive KLK6, using
pcDNA3.1(+)preproKLK6 and pcDNA3.1(+)preproKLK6 Ser197Ala mutant
plasmids, in Caco-2 colon cancer cell line, which has been characterized
before as a very low KLK6 expresser with an undetectable secreted KLK6.
Stable isogenic clones were selected and further evaluated for their
ability to migrate and invade using in vitro assays and to metastasize in
vivo using SCID orthotopic mouse model. We found no effect of KLK6 enzyme
activity on migration of Caco-2 cells, expressing the empty vector
(Caco-2 mock), and Caco-2 cells, expressing an enzymatically active KLK6
(Caco-2 KLK6 wt) or inactive KLK6 (Caco-2 KLK6 mut). But Caco-2 KLK6 wt
cells demonstrated the invasive phenotype in Matrigel invasion assays
(pResults: We expressed enzymatically active or inactive KLK6, using
pcDNA3.1(+)preproKLK6 and pcDNA3.1(+)preproKLK6 Ser197Ala mutant
plasmids, in Caco-2 colon cancer cell line, which has been characterized
before as a very low KLK6 expresser with an undetectable secreted KLK6.
Stable isogenic clones were selected and further evaluated for their
ability to migrate and invade using in vitro assays and to metastasize in
vivo using SCID orthotopic mouse model. We found no effect of KLK6 enzyme
activity on migration of Caco-2 cells, expressing the empty vector
(Caco-2 mock), and Caco-2 cells, expressing an enzymatically active KLK6
(Caco-2 KLK6 wt) or inactive KLK6 (Caco-2 KLK6 mut). But Caco-2 KLK6 wt
cells demonstrated the invasive phenotype in Matrigel invasion assays
(p<0.001, compared to Caco-2 mock and Caco2 KLK6 mut cells). The Caco-2
mock and Caco-2 KLK6 mut cells, injected in SCID mice orthotopically,
developed primary colon tumors but no metastatic lesions were identified.
In contrast, Caco-2 KLK6 wt cells formed primary colon tumors and
metastasized locally, although they failed to form the distant metastasis
(lung and mesentery). Animals, growing the Caco-2 KLK6 wt tumors,
displayed a significant decrease in their survival rates, compared to
other groups (p=0.02). In Caco-2 KLK6 wt cells TGF-β protein expression
and secretion was induced, which resulted in activation of TGF-β-SMAD2/3
signaling pathway. This phenotype was associated with the elevated
expression of known regulator of the EMT, zinc-finger protein Snail. In
addition, the expression of a high-mobility group AT-hook 2 (HMGA2)
protein was induced in Caco-2 KLK6 wt cells. The HMGA2 expression is
implicated in the EMT program, acting through the TGF-β signaling
pathway and is associated with a poor survival in colorectal cancer.

Conclusion. These findings demonstrate that KLK6 enzyme activity is
required for colon cancer progression via induction of the EMT program.
We identified the TGF-β- signaling pathway as a mechanism driving the
EMT in colon cancer cells expressing KLK6 enzyme.


