Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of function mutation in TIMP2 gene accelerates tumorigenesis
and mortality in murine model of lung cancer through EGFR signaling.


The aim of this study is to determine the effect of the tissue inhibitor
of metalloproteinase-2 (TIMP-2) on lung tumorigenesis and investigate the
underlying molecular mechanisms using an orthotopic mouse model with a
loss of function mutation in the Timp2 gene (T2M). T2M and wildtype (WT)
control mice were given 1x106 Lewis lung carcinoma cells transfected with
luciferase (LL/2-Luc-M38, Caliper) in 50μL PBS via intratracheal
installation. IVIS imaging revealed a higher tumor burden in T2M mice
compared to WT littermates, suggesting that loss of function of the Timp2
gene enhances tumor growth (pThe aim of this study is to determine the
effect of the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 (TIMP-2) on lung
tumorigenesis and investigate the underlying molecular mechanisms using
an orthotopic mouse model with a loss of function mutation in the Timp2
gene (T2M). T2M and wildtype (WT) control mice were given 1x106 Lewis
lung carcinoma cells transfected with luciferase (LL/2-Luc-M38, Caliper)
in 50μL PBS via intratracheal installation. IVIS imaging revealed a
higher tumor burden in T2M mice compared to WT littermates, suggesting
that loss of function of the Timp2 gene enhances tumor growth (p<0.05).
We also conducted a Kaplan-Meier analysis to determine the effect of this
mutation on mortality following cancer development. We found that LL/2
tumor-induced mortality was significantly higher in T2M mice compared to
WT controls (p = 0.01). Histologic analysis and H&E staining of lung
tissue sections revealed a significant increase in the number of tumor
nodules of T2M mice compared to WT controls (p The aim of this study is
to determine the effect of the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2
(TIMP-2) on lung tumorigenesis and investigate the underlying molecular
mechanisms using an orthotopic mouse model with a loss of function
mutation in the Timp2 gene (T2M). T2M and wildtype (WT) control mice were
given 1x106 Lewis lung carcinoma cells transfected with luciferase
(LL/2-Luc-M38, Caliper) in 50μL PBS via intratracheal installation. IVIS
imaging revealed a higher tumor burden in T2M mice compared to WT
littermates, suggesting that loss of function of the Timp2 gene enhances
tumor growth (p<0.05). We also conducted a Kaplan-Meier analysis to
determine the effect of this mutation on mortality following cancer
development. We found that LL/2 tumor-induced mortality was significantly
higher in T2M mice compared to WT controls (p = 0.01). Histologic
analysis and H&E staining of lung tissue sections revealed a significant
increase in the number of tumor nodules of T2M mice compared to WT
controls (p <0.01). CD31 staining showed a significant increase in
microvessel density (MVD) in T2M mice compared to WT controls (pThe aim
of this study is to determine the effect of the tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase-2 (TIMP-2) on lung tumorigenesis and investigate the
underlying molecular mechanisms using an orthotopic mouse model with a
loss of function mutation in the Timp2 gene (T2M). T2M and wildtype (WT)
control mice were given 1x106 Lewis lung carcinoma cells transfected with
luciferase (LL/2-Luc-M38, Caliper) in 50μL PBS via intratracheal
installation. IVIS imaging revealed a higher tumor burden in T2M mice
compared to WT littermates, suggesting that loss of function of the Timp2
gene enhances tumor growth (p<0.05). We also conducted a Kaplan-Meier
analysis to determine the effect of this mutation on mortality following
cancer development. We found that LL/2 tumor-induced mortality was
significantly higher in T2M mice compared to WT controls (p = 0.01).
Histologic analysis and H&E staining of lung tissue sections revealed a
significant increase in the number of tumor nodules of T2M mice compared
to WT controls (p <0.01). CD31 staining showed a significant increase in
microvessel density (MVD) in T2M mice compared to WT controls (p<0.01).
Given that VEGF is a primary driver of tumor neovascularization, we
determined mRNA levels of VEGF expression in healthy and tumor bearing
mice by qRTPCR analysis. Interestingly, basal VEGF expression levels were
increased in lungs of both non-tumor bearing and tumor bearing T2M mice
compared to WT controls (pThe aim of this study is to determine the
effect of the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 (TIMP-2) on lung
tumorigenesis and investigate the underlying molecular mechanisms using
an orthotopic mouse model with a loss of function mutation in the Timp2
gene (T2M). T2M and wildtype (WT) control mice were given 1x106 Lewis
lung carcinoma cells transfected with luciferase (LL/2-Luc-M38, Caliper)
in 50μL PBS via intratracheal installation. IVIS imaging revealed a
higher tumor burden in T2M mice compared to WT littermates, suggesting
that loss of function of the Timp2 gene enhances tumor growth (p<0.05).
We also conducted a Kaplan-Meier analysis to determine the effect of this
mutation on mortality following cancer development. We found that LL/2
tumor-induced mortality was significantly higher in T2M mice compared to
WT controls (p = 0.01). Histologic analysis and H&E staining of lung
tissue sections revealed a significant increase in the number of tumor
nodules of T2M mice compared to WT controls (p <0.01). CD31 staining
showed a significant increase in microvessel density (MVD) in T2M mice
compared to WT controls (p<0.01). Given that VEGF is a primary driver of
tumor neovascularization, we determined mRNA levels of VEGF expression in
healthy and tumor bearing mice by qRTPCR analysis. Interestingly, basal
VEGF expression levels were increased in lungs of both non-tumor bearing
and tumor bearing T2M mice compared to WT controls (p<0.01). VEGF is the
direct downstream target of HIF-2α, a transcription factor implicated in
tumor hypoxia and expression correlates with decreased overall survival
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Similarly, an examination
of TIMP-2 and HIF-2α mRNA expression in a small cohort of patient
samples revealed decreased TIMP-2 and increased HIF2α in NSCLC tumors
compared to surrounding non-tumor lung tissue. Hypoxia induces EGFR
signaling through HIF-2α. Thus, we determined the effect of mutated T2M
on the EGFR signaling pathway. We found increased levels of EGFR
phosphorylation as well as downstream ERK and Akt activation in tumor
bearing and non-tumor bearing T2M lungs compared to WT controls. In
conclusion, these findings offer new avenues for TIMP-2 research in
regulating hypoxic mediators within the tumor microenvironment through
EGFR signaling, suggesting TIMP-2 as a novel bio-therapeutic for lung
cancer therapy.

* Corresponding author This work is supported by center for cancer
research, intramural research program, NCI/NIH research grants ZIA
BC011204 & ZIA SC 009179 to WGSS


