Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MGA is a potential tumor suppressor in acute myeloid leukemia.


MGA is an incompletely studied gene with a high mutation frequency in
MLL-PTD AML (9%) and in core bind factor AML (8%). This gene encodes a
MAX-interacting protein and is believed to act as a transcription factor
that suppresses MYC binding to its target. By in silico analysis, we
found that MGA is expressed in normal myeloid hematopoietic cells and
AML, and the expression level is comparable with TET2 or DNMT3A. Further
data mining of TCGA revealed a high frequency of inactivating mutations
of the MGA gene in a variety of cancers such as various adenocarcinomas.
To interrogate functionally its role in leukemogenesis, lentiviral
constructs containing either shRNA or CRISPR-sgRNA targeted to different
regions of the MGA gene were generated. MGA expressing AML cell line
EOL-1 was silenced by shRNA or CRISPER system. Silencing was confirmed by
western blot (shRNA) and Sanger Sequencing (sgRNA). An increase of
methylcellulose colony number (~30%) was observed in MGA silenced cell
lines. Control EOL-1 cells or EOL-1 cells silenced with MGA CRISPR sgRNAs
were injected into both flanks of NSG mice, and tumor masses were
harvested 21 days after injection. Silencing of MGA by CRISPR-sgRNA
consistently enhanced in vivo xenograft cell growth. In addition, western
blot analyses revealed silencing of MGA in EOL-1 cells increased protein
levels of Cyclin E1 and phos-RB (S807 phosphorylation inhibits the
ability of RB to target protein allowing cell cycle progression),
indicative of a proliferative advantage conferred by the silencing of MGA.

MGA may be a potential regulator of the MYC pathway. We, therefore,
examined whether silencing of MGA alters MYC transcriptional activity.
Luciferase reporter assay was carried out in 293FT cells stabilized with
either scramble or shRNA- targeting MGA. Luciferase activities were
measured 48 h after transfection of cells with MYC activity reporter
pMyc4ElbLuc and normalized to the corresponding co-transfected Renilla
luciferase activity. A fourfold increase in luciferase activity was
observed in MGA silenced cells when compared with non- targeting shRNA
controls. Furthermore, Kaplan–Meier survival analysis was performed in
the TCGA-AML patients by comparison of cases with highest versus lowest
expression of MGA. P-values were calculated by log-rank test. MGA
expression data and patient survival data were retrieved from TCGA-AML
patients RNA seq, or microarray (70 AML patients). The MGA expression
‘high’ and ‘low’ groups were defined by 15% higher than the
median or 15% lower than the median, respectively. AML patients with
lower levels of MGA in their leukemic samples had a worse outcome
compared with those whose leukemic cells expressed higher levels of MGA.
Collectively, our results suggest that MGA may function as a potential
tumor-suppressor in AML.


