Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: POPDC1 inhibits breast cancer cell migration and proliferation,
and is regulated by EGFR (ErbB1) and cAMP.


Despite progress in the development of new treatments, breast cancer
remains the second leading cause of global cancer morbidity and mortality
(1). Identification and validation of effective therapeutic targets is
thus essential for the development of better breast cancer treatments and
improved prognoses. This project seeks to develop POPDC proteins as
potential therapeutic targets for inhibiting breast cancer migration and
proliferation. POPDC1 (also known as blood vessel epicardial substance or
BVES), is a cAMP-binding transmembrane protein encoded by the POPDC1
gene. Loss or suppression of POPDC1 has been correlated with enhanced
aggressive cancer cell behaviour (2-6). Suppression of POPDC1 promotes
cell migration and invasion in hepatocellular carcinoma and
tumourigenesis in colorectal cancer (2,4,5,7). Furthermore, we have
previously shown that loss of POPDC1 promotes cell proliferation and
migration in breast cancer and glioblastoma cells (3,8).

Using a cAMP-agarose pulldown assay, we confirmed that POPDC1 interact
with, and is upregulated by cAMP in luminal A (MCF7) and triple-negative
(MDA231) breast cancer cells. Furthermore, immunocytochemistry and
Western blotting has shown that POPDC1 expression is abrogated in MCF7
and MDA231 breast cancer cells compared to normal breast cells (HMepC).
To confirm that POPDC1 negatively regulates migration and proliferation
in breast cancer cells, we conducted knock-in experiments where
overexpression of POPDC1 significantly inhibited cell migration and
proliferation in MCF7 and MDA231 cells. Interestingly, epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR/ErbB1) signalling negatively regulates POPDC1
expression in MCF7 and MDA231 cells and reduces the capacity of POPDC1 to
inhibit cell migration. Epidermal growth factor reversed POPDC1-mediated
inhibition of cell migration, an effect blocked by the AG 1478 (an EGFR
inhibitor), suggesting EGFR-dependent modulation of POPDC1 activity.
Furthermore, we have established for the first time using human breast
tissue sections that Her2- status correlates with low POPDC1 expression
while Her2+ status correlates with high POPDC1 expression. This suggests
further interaction between EGF and POPDC1 and that any links between
these molecules diverges at the level of the different EGFRs.

Taken together, this strong dataset shows that POPDC1 plays a major role
in breast cancer tumourigenesis that is at least in part, modulated by
EGFR and cAMP signalling pathways. Indeed, these seem to demonstrate
differential control of POPDC1 expression. This interplay and the fact
that POPDC1 downregulation may be a downstream molecular target of the
EGF cascade suggest that POPDC1 and its stabilisation may be a
therapeutic strategy in the future of breast cancer.


