Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of cancer-associated fibroblast-induced chemokine ligand
11 in tumor microenvironment contributes to the progression of oral
cancer.


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is one of the leading causes of
cancer-related death in Taiwan and worldwide. The prognosis of OSCC is
usually poor because of its propensity of extensive invasion, local
recurrence and frequent regional lymph node metastasis, even at initial
diagnosis. Recent studies showed carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs),
a major type of tumor-surrounding stromal cell, generate certain
mediators through which CAFs interact with tumors and contribute to
cancer progression in numerous cancers. The orchestration between CAFs
and cancer cells is complex and its underlying mechanism needs to be
explored. In the present study, we used organotypic culture to
investigate CAFs that promote aggressive behavior of cancer cells. Using
microarray analysis, we detected abundant expression of chemokine (C-C
motif) ligand 11(CCL11), also named Eotaxin, secreted by CAFs and further
be identified as a critical mediator in CAF-induced invasiveness. We
planned to validate that CCL11 played a major role in the crosstalk
between fibroblasts and OSCC cells via the paracrine manner. CCL11was
found upregulated in CAFs than in normal fibroblasts via Western blot
analysis. Cells lines of OSCC, Fadu and TW204, treated with recombinant
CCL11 increased capabilities of sphere formation in ten days.
Administration of CCL11 promoted migration and invasion abilities through
induction of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transdifferentiation with
corresponding morphological alterations of cancer cells. Counteracting
CCL11 activity diminished the aggressive phenotype of cancer cells
induced by CAFs. We further studied the relationship between the
expression of CCL11 in both CAFs and OSCC cells and clinical outcome in
the patients with OSCC. As a result, a high CCL11 expression level was
associated with poor prognosis in terms of nodal metastasis and survival.
These results indicate that CAFs promote cancer invasiveness via a
paracrine effect on microenvironmental CCL11 signaling and suggest that
CCL11 is a potential prognostic biomarker that may be considered in
therapeutic strategies for the treatment of patients with OSCC.


