Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide discovery and identification of a novel microrna
signature for recurrence prediction in colorectal cancer.


Purpose: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the leading causes of
cancer-related deaths worldwide. In 2016, there were estimated 95,270
newly diagnosed CRC cases, and 49,190 deaths from this disease in the
United States. Survival of patients is closely associated with the tumor
stage at the time of diagnosis as 5-year relative survival rates range
from 65% for all stages, 90% for localized primary tumor, 71% for
regional metastasis and 13% for distant metastasis. Post-surgery,
adjuvant therapy is only recommended to those with high risk stage II, as
well as stage III and IV tumors. However, approximately 40-50% of the
patients undergo curative surgery only and 20-30% that are treated with
adjuvant chemotherapy, eventually relapse and experience a metastatic
disease and eventual death. The current gold standard TNM (Tumor, Node,
Metastasis) staging for determining the prognosis of CRC patients remains
inadequate at identification of high-risk stage II and III patients that
have a high potential of developing tumor recurrence. MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
play an important role in CRC development and are emerging as important
disease biomarkers. Therefore, in this study we sought to determine the
prognostic potential of the miRNAs using a systematic, genome-wide
biomarker discovery approach, followed by validation of biomarkers in
multiple patient cohorts

Experimental design: Three independent publicly available genome-wide
miRNA expression datasets were used for miRNA biomarker discovery (n=158)
and validation (n=109 and n=40) of this miRNA signature for recurrence
prediction in stage II and III CRC using multivariate Cox regression
analysis. The eight gene miRNA signature discovered from the genome-wide
analysis was analytically validated in two independent patient cohorts
(n=127 and n=96) using Taqman-based RT-PCR assays.

Results: The genome-wide comprehensive analysis led to the identification
of an eight gene miRNA classifier that significantly predicted recurrence
free survival (RFS) in training (log-rank p=0.003) and two independent
validation cohorts (log-rank pResults: The genome-wide comprehensive
analysis led to the identification of an eight gene miRNA classifier that
significantly predicted recurrence free survival (RFS) in training
(log-rank p=0.003) and two independent validation cohorts (log-rank
p<0.0001 and p=0.002). The RT-PCR based training and validation of the
eight gene classifier in two independent clinical cohorts significantly
associated with poor prognosis in stage II and III CRC patients (log-rank
pResults: The genome-wide comprehensive analysis led to the
identification of an eight gene miRNA classifier that significantly
predicted recurrence free survival (RFS) in training (log-rank p=0.003)
and two independent validation cohorts (log-rank p<0.0001 and p=0.002).
The RT-PCR based training and validation of the eight gene classifier in
two independent clinical cohorts significantly associated with poor
prognosis in stage II and III CRC patients (log-rank p<0.004 and
pResults: The genome-wide comprehensive analysis led to the
identification of an eight gene miRNA classifier that significantly
predicted recurrence free survival (RFS) in training (log-rank p=0.003)
and two independent validation cohorts (log-rank p<0.0001 and p=0.002).
The RT-PCR based training and validation of the eight gene classifier in
two independent clinical cohorts significantly associated with poor
prognosis in stage II and III CRC patients (log-rank p<0.004 and
p<0.0001). Multivariate analyses performed in these two patient cohorts
revealed that the eight gene miRNA classifier served as an independent
predictor of poor prognosis in stage II and III CRC patients.

Conclusions: In conclusion, we have identified a novel miRNA-based
classifier, which is robustly predictive of poor prognosis in patents
with stage II/III CRC, and might facilitate identification and
stratification of high-risk patients that are candidates for adjuvant
chemotherapy and clinical surveillance.


