Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo acquired resistance to an emibetuzumab analogue in
MET-amplified gastric xenografts can be overcome by a MET-targeting
antibody mixture or PIK3CA/AKT/mTOR inhibition.


Aberrant over-activation of MET receptor tyrosine kinase is involved in
driving malignancies such as gastric and non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), and in the development of resistance to EGFR-targeting
therapeutics. This has led to the development of several MET-targeting
agents in the form of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs), many of which are in clinical development. However,
resistance to MET-targeted agents is an emerging problem. This study aims
to understand mechanisms underlying resistance development to an analogue
of emibetuzumab, a mAb targeting MET. Upon long term in vivo treatment,
emibetuzumab-resistant tumors and cell lines were generated, isolated,
and characterized to investigate their acquired resistance mechanisms.
Extensive reverse phase protein array and network analysis were used to
characterize the proteomic profiles of three resistant cell lines,
revealing three distinct resistance profiles, one involving activation of
the PI3Kinase/AKT/mTOR pathway. We further show, how these resistance
mechanisms can be overcome by treatment with other targeting therapeutics
both in vitro and in vivo. Two of the models demonstrated in vivo
sensitivity to Sym015, a novel mixture of two mAbs targeting
non-overlapping epitopes of MET, partly due to ADCC, indicating that
Sym015 can overcome acquired resistance to emibetuzumab. The third model
demonstrated a marked increase in PI3Kinase/AKT/mTOR pathway activation.
This activation translated into induced cancer cell and tumor growth,
which could be inhibited by agents targeting PI3Kinase, AKT, or mTOR.
This study thus points to treatment of patients with acquired resistance
to single targeting MET mAbs with PI3Kinase/AKT/mTOR-targeting agents or
a MET-targeting antibody mixture such as Sym015.


