Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intravital discovery of miRNA drivers of human cancer cell
directional invasion.




Metastatic cancer cells often use directional ECM cues such as blood
vessels or collagen fibers when invading through live tissue. Oncogenic
miRNAs have been implicated as key regulators of cancer progression yet
the systemic discovery of miRNAs that drive directional cancer cell
invasion has not been achieved.

Here we describe the first in vivo quantitative whole human miRNAome
screen for miRNA drivers of directional cancer cell invasion using an ex
ovo avian embryo model of human cancer cell metastasis combined with high
resolution intravital imaging. We identified more than twenty novel
miRNAs that promote cancer cell invasion during the key rate-limiting
step of cancer metastasis, the initiation and expansion of overt
metastatic lesions. In silico miRNA target analysis (DIANA, Targetscan)
showed significant enrichment in gene targets/pathways that control
cancer cell-ECM adhesion and cancer cell contractility. These findings
were further confirmed using Affymetrix gene expression analysis that
showed significant changes in the expression of genes that regulate actin
cytoskeleton rearrangement, cancer cell-ECM interaction and cell
surface-receptor signaling. Public cancer gene expression database
analysis (Oncoprint) showed that these miRNA-mRNA networks deregulated in
several deadly cancers (pancreas, prostate, breast) and negatively
correlate with the cancer patient survival.

To elucidate potential mechanisms of these pro-metastatic miRNAs, we
utilized an intravital imaging approach. In vivo 4D cancer cell tracking
revealed that these pro-metastatic miRNAs are required for successful
invasion into collagen-rich tissue and for attachment to the outer
surface of the vascular wall. Deregulation of these miRNAs led to
formation of loose contacts with the vasculature and chaotic,
non-directional cancer cell invasion patterns in living tissue.
Intravital second-harmonic microscopy analysis showed that inhibition of
the expression of these miRNAs blocked the ability of cancer cells to
rearrange the disorganized fine collagen fiber network into thicker
collagen bundles that guide directional tumor cell invasion. In contrast
to parental tumor cells that persistently moved along the collagen
bundles, miRNA-deficient tumor cells were observed to transiently
associate with multiple collagen fibers without establishing persistent
collagen fiber-tumor cell protrusion contacts. Moreover, miRNA-deficient
tumor cells failed to attach and protrude along preexisting perivascular
collagen bundles, resulting in the complete abrogation of cancer
cell/blood vessel co-option.

In summary, we identified a novel panel of human miRNAs that are
functionally involved in the regulation of directional invasion and
metastasis. This work establishes these miRNAs as promising therapeutic
targets to block the metastatic spread of lethal cancers.


