Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adaptive resistance to chemotherapy in triple-negative breast
cancer revealed by single cell DNA and RNA sequencing.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype that
displays extensive intratumor heterogeneity and frequently (46%) develops
resistance to neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC). Currently, the genomic
basis of chemoresistance remains poorly understood. An important question
is whether resistance to chemotherapy is driven by the selection of rare
pre-existing subclones with genomic mutations and transcriptional
programs that confer resistance to chemotherapy (adaptive resistance) or
by the spontaneous induction of new mutations and expression changes that
confer a resistant phenotype (acquired resistance). To investigate this
question we applied single cell DNA and RNA sequencing methods and
deep-exome sequencing to longitudinal time-point samples collected from a
cohort of 20 TNBC patients. Deep-exome sequencing of the cohort at three
time points revealed a random death model, wherein multiple clones were
targeted, as opposed to the selection of specific somatic mutations. In
contrast, single cell copy number profiling of ~800 cells from 8 patients
identified an adaptive resistance model, wherein minor subclones from the
pre-treatment tumors were selected and expanded in response to NAC.
Similarly, single cell RNA sequencing of ~8000 cells from 8 patients
identified subclones with chemoresistant phenotypes that were selected in
response to NAC, resulting in the expansion of the resistant tumor mass.
These data suggest that chemoresistance evolves through the selection of
copy number changes and expression changes in signaling pathways
associated with chemoresistance, rather than point mutations. This
adaptive resistance model has important translational implications in
clinical diagnostics, by suggesting that resistant clones can be detected
in TNBC patients prior to the administration of chemotherapy.


