Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The p53 tumor suppressor protein paradoxically drives
chemo-resistance in human medulloblastoma cells through suppressing the
mTOR AKT pathway.


Medulloblastoma (MB) accounts for approximately 25% of childhood brain
tumors with 70% of the cases occurring in children under 10. Prognosis
for children less than three years old is considerably worse and, due to
its destructive effects on the developing nervous system, irradiation is
largely avoided in this age group. The p53 pathway is considered a key
determinant of anti-tumor responses in many tumors; however, its role in
the regulation of cell survival, chemo-sensitivity and chemo-resistance
in MB is much less well defined. It has been shown that p53 pathway
defects, mutations and nuclear levels increase significantly from MB
diagnosis to relapse and correlate with an adverse prognosis. We recently
reported on the highly novel and unexpected finding that both the genetic
(sh-RNA) and chemical silencing of p53 led to a significant increase in
cell death by the drug VMY in MB cell lines with elevated basal p53 (e.g.
in D556 cells which express wild type p53 and in DAOY cells that contain
mutant p53) as measured by colony forming assays, DNA degradation assays
and annexin-V staining, suggesting a surprising commonality in the p53
signaling in both cell lines despite the differences in their p53 status.
Equally surprising was the observation that the silencing of p53 in D556
cells enhanced cell death by the clinically used drugs doxorubicin and
vincristine. Conversely, we now find that suppressing p53 with sh-RNA in
D283 cells, which express much lower levels of wild type p53 compared to
D556, resulted in the more classical chemoresistance profile, suggesting
a form of p53 ‘addiction’ in D556 and DAOY cells. Mechanistically, we
observed that suppressing p53 with sh-RNA in D556 cells treated with VMY
or doxorubicin significantly increased the levels of phosphorylated Chk1,
S6K, gH2AX, and MDM2. Importantly, phospho-mTOR levels were also
significantly increased in the D556/p53 sh-RNA cells and the suppression
of mTOR enhanced chemoresistance. These somewhat paradoxical findings
suggest that activated Akt/mTOR may induce MB cell death and that
suppression of mTOR by p53 enhances chemoresistance. Our data provide new
mechanistic insights into the role of p53 in primitive neuroectodermal
tumors and may provide new approaches for enhancing the clinical outcome
of patients with MB.


