Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune checkpoint protein VISTA suppresses Toll-like receptor
signaling and the production of inflammatory cytokines.


Introduction: V-domain Ig suppressor of T-cell activation (VISTA, gene
Vsir) is an inhibitory immune-checkpoint molecule that suppresses CD4+
and CD8+ T cell activation. Previous studies have shown that Vsir-/- mice
developed chronic inflammatory phenotypes, and Vsir-/- CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells were hyper-responsive towards self- and foreign antigens. Whether
VISTA regulates innate immunity is still unknown.

Methods: Peritoneal macrophages from WT or Vsir-/- mice were isolated and
stimulated with TLR agonists such as CpG (TLR9), R848 (TLR7), LPS (TLR4),
Pam3csk4 (TLR2), and poly (I:C) (TLR3). Alternatively, human monocyte
THP-1 cells overexpressing VISTA were stimulated by TLR2 agonist
Pam3CSK4. The activation of TLR signaling pathways and the production of
inflammatory cytokines were examined by Western Blotting, gel shift
assay, or ELISA. The ubiquitination status of key signaling molecules
such as TRAF6, IRAK1/4 and MyD88 was examined by immunoprecipitation and
Western Blotting. To examine the role of VISTA in regulating TLR-mediated
inflammatory responses in the context of cancer vaccine, tumor-bearing
mice were treated with VISTA-specific monoclonal antibody (mAb) and a
peptide vaccine containing TLR agonists. The production of inflammatory
cytokines and chemokines within the tumor microenvironment (TME) was
examined via quantitative RT-PCR.

Results: Vsir-/- macrophages were hyper-responsive towards TLR2/4/7/9
agonists, but not TLR3 agonist, resulting in increased production of
inflammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-12, and TNFa. Analysis of signaling
cascade revealed that VISTA inhibited the activation of MyD88-dependent
TLR signaling, via suppressing the activation of MAPKs, and the
activation of transcription factors AP-1 and NF-kB. Consistent with the
role of VISTA in regulating TLR-mediated innate immunity, treatment with
VISTA-blocking mAb augmented levels of inflammatory cytokines and
chemokines within the TME, and synergized with TLR/peptide vaccine,
resulting in an optimal therapeutic outcome.

Conclusions: Our study establishes that VISTA critically regulates the
inflammatory responses of myeloid cells mediated by TLR signaling. In the
context of cancer vaccine therapy, VISTA-blocking mAb treatment enhanced
levels of inflammatory cytokine and chemokines within the TME, which is
critical for the development of optimal tumor-specific T cell responses
and the tumor-controlling therapeutic outcome.


