Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tmem 205-mediated cisplatin resistance in ovarian clear cell
carcinoma (OCCC) is overcome by herpes simplex virus (oHSV)/cisplatin
combination therapy.


Objectives: Ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC) is an aggressive form of
ovarian cancer and unfavorable treatment outcomes have been attributed to
its relative chemoresistance and recurrence, limiting the available
treatment options. Therefore, identifying novel unique protein(s)
involved in OCCC chemoresistance and designing a therapeutic modality
selectively targeting those proteins would make a significant impact on
therapy. TMEM 205 is one such protein which has been recently linked to
cisplatin resistance in human epidermoid carcinoma, but the precise
molecular mechanism of this resistance still needs to be elucidated. This
proposed study was planned to a) decipher the role of TMEM205 expression
in OCCC (relative to HGSOC) b) mechanism by which TMEM205 imparts
chemoresistance c) evaluate the in vitro and in vivo efficacy of oHSV as
a single agent or in combination with standard chemotherapy

Methods: Human patient tissue samples from OCCC patients as well as OCCC
cell lines like JHOC, OVTOKO, OVISE and ES2 were analyzed for the
expression of TMEM205 using Western blot, IHC/ICC and real time qPCR. In
situ pO2 was measured in the cells as well as mice using EPR oximetry.
Exosomes were isolated and characterized using NTA. TMEM205
overexpression and knockdown experiments were performed in vitro in
OVTOKO cells to confirm the role of TMEM205 in OCCC. Cispaltin
accumulation in cells and exosomes was quantified using ICP-MS. oHSV
virus therapy was further tested in vitro or in vivo-alone or combined
with cisplatin treatment.

Results demonstrate that the OCCC tissues as well as cell lines have high
expression of TMEM205. OCCC cells and mice injected with these cells are
severely hypoxic and cisplatin accumulation is more in the exosomes
derived from them, which goes down with the knockdown of TMEM205. oHSV
treatment suppresses TMEM205 expression in OVTOKO and JHOC cells.
Further, ICC showed that TMEM205 and oHSV co-localize in the cells,
indicating that oHSV may interact with TMEM205 and suppress its
expression and activity. oHSV pretreatment followed by treatment with
cisplatin (CP) increases apoptosis and decreases cell survival, in vitro
within 48 hours as well as in vivo.

Conclusions: TMEM205 mediates drug resistance through exosomes and
knockdown of TMEM205 in OCCC contributes to enhanced chemotherapy
sensitivity. This will pave the way for exploring the clinical
implications of TMEM205 in OCCC, and evaluating whether TMEM205
expression is key to higher risk of resistance and recurrence seen in
OCCC.


