Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin E related genetic variants and prostate cancer risk: A
Mendelian randomization analysis.


Alpha-tocopherol is a highly biologically active form of vitamin E that
has been inconsistently associated with prostate cancer risk in cohorts
and supplementation trials. In order to further elucidate the association
using a Mendelian randomization approach that avoids sources of bias
common in observational research, we examined genetic variants related to
vitamin E status, including those from GWAS analyses of circulating
vitamin E, in relation to prostate cancer risk in the Prostate Cancer
Association Group to Investigate Cancer Associated Alterations in the
Genome (PRACTICAL) Consortium. The analysis included 38,868 cases and
25,210 controls from 35 participating cohorts and examined the
association between 847 vitamin E-related single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in (or near) six genes and risk of prostate cancer. Logistical
regression was used to estimate meta-analyzed case-control odds ratios
(OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the per allele risk
associations. Both genotyped and imputed data were examined, and results
for the latter are presented based on the consistency between the two
sets of findings. In addition to examining SNPs demonstrating nominal
significance (alpha-error pAlpha-tocopherol is a highly biologically
active form of vitamin E that has been inconsistently associated with
prostate cancer risk in cohorts and supplementation trials. In order to
further elucidate the association using a Mendelian randomization
approach that avoids sources of bias common in observational research, we
examined genetic variants related to vitamin E status, including those
from GWAS analyses of circulating vitamin E, in relation to prostate
cancer risk in the Prostate Cancer Association Group to Investigate
Cancer Associated Alterations in the Genome (PRACTICAL) Consortium. The
analysis included 38,868 cases and 25,210 controls from 35 participating
cohorts and examined the association between 847 vitamin E-related single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in (or near) six genes and risk of
prostate cancer. Logistical regression was used to estimate meta-analyzed
case-control odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the
per allele risk associations. Both genotyped and imputed data were
examined, and results for the latter are presented based on the
consistency between the two sets of findings. In addition to examining
SNPs demonstrating nominal significance (alpha-error p<0.05), a
Bonferroni threshold of Alpha-tocopherol is a highly biologically active
form of vitamin E that has been inconsistently associated with prostate
cancer risk in cohorts and supplementation trials. In order to further
elucidate the association using a Mendelian randomization approach that
avoids sources of bias common in observational research, we examined
genetic variants related to vitamin E status, including those from GWAS
analyses of circulating vitamin E, in relation to prostate cancer risk in
the Prostate Cancer Association Group to Investigate Cancer Associated
Alterations in the Genome (PRACTICAL) Consortium. The analysis included
38,868 cases and 25,210 controls from 35 participating cohorts and
examined the association between 847 vitamin E-related single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in (or near) six genes and risk of prostate cancer.
Logistical regression was used to estimate meta-analyzed case-control
odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the per allele
risk associations. Both genotyped and imputed data were examined, and
results for the latter are presented based on the consistency between the
two sets of findings. In addition to examining SNPs demonstrating nominal
significance (alpha-error p<0.05), a Bonferroni threshold of <0.00006 was
applied to adjust for multiple comparisons. We found 89 SNPs were
nominally significantly associated with prostate cancer risk. This
included SNPs involved in vitamin E transport (i.e., SEC14L2 and SCARB1)
and metabolism (i.e., BUD13/ZNF259). The top three risk-associated SNPs
(P Alpha-tocopherol is a highly biologically active form of vitamin E
that has been inconsistently associated with prostate cancer risk in
cohorts and supplementation trials. In order to further elucidate the
association using a Mendelian randomization approach that avoids sources
of bias common in observational research, we examined genetic variants
related to vitamin E status, including those from GWAS analyses of
circulating vitamin E, in relation to prostate cancer risk in the
Prostate Cancer Association Group to Investigate Cancer Associated
Alterations in the Genome (PRACTICAL) Consortium. The analysis included
38,868 cases and 25,210 controls from 35 participating cohorts and
examined the association between 847 vitamin E-related single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in (or near) six genes and risk of prostate cancer.
Logistical regression was used to estimate meta-analyzed case-control
odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the per allele
risk associations. Both genotyped and imputed data were examined, and
results for the latter are presented based on the consistency between the
two sets of findings. In addition to examining SNPs demonstrating nominal
significance (alpha-error p<0.05), a Bonferroni threshold of <0.00006 was
applied to adjust for multiple comparisons. We found 89 SNPs were
nominally significantly associated with prostate cancer risk. This
included SNPs involved in vitamin E transport (i.e., SEC14L2 and SCARB1)
and metabolism (i.e., BUD13/ZNF259). The top three risk-associated SNPs
(P <0.001) included rs141696823 (OR = 0.59, P=6.0x10-5) in CYP4F8
(cytochrome P450 family 4 subfamily F member 8) on 19p13.12 which
functions as a prostaglandin hydroxylase in the seminal vesicles, and
rs1915379 (OR = 1.04, P=0.0002) in CYP4F3 (cytochrome P450 family 4
subfamily F member 3) on 19p13.12 which oxidizes arachidonic acid and
omega-hydroxylates tocopherol phytyl side chains, and has been directly
associated with higher circulating alpha-tocopherol. The final SNP
(r185614299, OR = 1.19, P=0.0004) is in NKAIN3 on 8q12.3, which encodes
the Na+/K+ transporting ATPase Interacting Protein 3, a plasma membrane
enzyme responsible for maintenance of intracellular electrolyte
gradients. Vitamin E has been shown to reduce cell membrane lipid
peroxidation, thereby promoting Na/K-ATPase activity. Other variants on
this gene have previously been associated with serum alpha-tocopherol
concentration in response to vitamin E supplementation in the ATBC Study.
The present Mendelian randomization analysis suggests genetic variants
related to vitamin E metabolism, its role as an antioxidant, and its
function in inflammatory processes, may be associated with prostate
cancer risk.


