Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bcl-xL overexpression promotes tumor aggressiveness.


Bcl-xL is an antiapoptotic protein highly expressed in cancer and
contributes to tumor initiation and progression by promoting cell
survival. It also promotes tumor angiogenesis and metastasis. By using
M14 melanoma and ADF glioblastoma cell lines and their derivative bcl-xL
overexpressing clones, in the current study, we investigated the role of
bcl-xL in aggressive features of melanoma and glioblastoma models. We
found that in both models, bcl-xL overexpression increased in vitro cell
migration and invasion and facilitated tumor cells to form de novo
vasculogenic structures. Furthermore, bcl-xL overexpressing cells
exhibited significantly higher tumorsphere formation capacity, reflecting
the self-renewal activity, and expressed high levels of some stem cell
markers, supporting the concept that bcl-xL plays essential roles in the
maintenance of cancer stem cells phenotype. Forced expression of bcl-xL
in melanoma cells also increased vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) and matrix metalloprotease-2 (MMP-2) expression, and the
activation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), a key pathway involved
in melanoma vascularization and aggressiveness. On the contrary, no
differences were observed after bcl-xL overexpression in glioblastoma
model, in terms of HIF-1 expression and activity, and VEGF protein
secretion. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the expression of
the vascular markers, and the vasculogenic mimicry were upregulated in
the bcl-xL overexpressing xenografts derived from both tumor histotypes.
The work presented here brings further support to the understanding of
the malignant actions of bcl-xL both in melanoma and glioblastoma, and in
particular to the concept that bcl-xL contributes to the aggressiveness
of these two tumor histotypes by promoting invasion, migration,
vasculogenic mimicry and cancer stem cells phenotype. It also indicates a
cell type-specific effect of bcl-xL on HIF-1/VEGF axis.


