Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between fecal microbiome, diet, and colon adenomas and
hyperplastic polyps.


Background: Colorectal cancer arises from adenomatous and serrated colon
polyps that are identifiable with colonoscopy. Generally, a healthy gut
is characterized by higher fecal microbiota. We conducted a study to
determine whether fecal microbiota composition and structure are
associated with colon adenomas and hyperplastic polyps in a set of
identical (MZ, monozygotic) twins.

Methods: We enrolled 83 individual twins from the California Twin
Program. Of these, 56 (representing 38 twin pairs) had documented past
colonoscopy and no gastrointestinal diseases, cancer or recent antibiotic
use. Body mass index (BMI) and food frequency information was collected
15 years before stool collection and again at the time of stool
collection. The V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene was sequenced using the
HiSeq 2500 system. Alpha diversity measures including number of OTU
(operational taxonomic units) and Shannon index were calculated for each
sample. Mixed ANOVA models with a random effect accounting for twin pair
status, were used to examine the association of alpha diversity with
polyp status.

Results: Alpha diversity measured by Shannon index and number of unique
OTUs was inversely associated with obesity and high beef consumption and
positively associated with yogurt consumption. Surprisingly, we found
that fecal microbiota alpha diversity was higher in subjects with
adenomas and hyperplastic polyps compared to subjects with no polyps.
When restricted to subjects with colonoscopy in the 3 years prior to
stool collection, differences were stronger and statistically significant
(mean OTUs for subjects with adenoma, hyperplastic polyps and no polyps =
908, 850, and 801, respectively; Padenoma vs. no = 0.017, Phyperplastic
vs no = 0.007; Plinear trend= 0.018). In order to determine whether diet
changes may have played a role, we examined dietary change from food
frequency questionnaires collected 15 years apart. We found that subjects
with no polyps increased yogurt consumption by 50% over the 15 year
period, whereas subjects diagnosed with adenomas and hyperplastic polyps
increased their yogurt consumption more (140% and 130%, respectively).

Conclusion: Participants diagnosed with adenomas and hyperplastic polyps
had higher fecal microbiota alpha diversity compared to those without
polyps. The timing of measurement of fecal microbiota years after
colonoscopy obscures the causal relationship between adenoma and fecal
microbiome. One possibility is that subjects may have increased their
yogurt consumption after a polyp diagnosis, resulting in increased fecal
alpha diversity, compared to subjects who were not diagnosed with polyps.
Alternatively, polyp removal may alter microbial diversity. A third
possibility is that polyp susceptibility is associated with an outgrowth
of deleterious bacteria, still present after polyp removal, reflected as
increased alpha diversity. Twin comparisons will be presented.


