Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of intratumoral heterogeneity using MR-defined tumor
habitats in breast cancer model under melatonin treatment.


Breast cancer shows high intratumoral heterogeneity, which can be
visualized as localized sub-populations of tumor cells with different
malignancy potential and treatment responsiveness. These regions are like
“habitats” that contain different combinations of environmental
selection forces, such as hypoxia, acidosis, or nutrient availability.
Thus, agents that can perturb these forces may be useful in limiting
cancer progression. Studies have shown that melatonin can affect tumor
metabolism and we hypothesize that this may be a mechanism by which the
disruption of circadian melatonin production by light exposure at night
(LAN) promotes breast cancer initiation and progression. The aim of this
study was to evaluate the effect of melatonin on intratumoral
heterogeneity measured by non-invasive MR imaging in a syngeneic mouse
model of breast cancer (4T1). To visualize habitats, clusters were
generated from combined MR images generated by different pulse sequences.
These were co-registered with histology using tumor specific 3-D printed
cradles to classify these tumor habitats. Methods: Mice were exposed to
LAN (Control) or LAN plus melatonin. The melatonin metabolite
6-sulfatoxymelatonin (6-SMT) was assessed in urine as a measure of
melatonin production. Mice were imaged in a 7T MRI system with: 1)
anatomical T2 images, 2) T2*, 3) diffusion-weighted MRI (DWI); and 4) T1
weighted dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE). DCE maps were obtained through
semi-quantitative analysis of the pre- and post-contrast agent bolus
time-series on a pixel-by-pixel basis. These were combined to the
corresponding T2, T2* and Apparent Diffusion Coefficient (ADC) values to
generate parameter maps. Parameter maps were used to classify multiple
clusters, based on a Gaussian mixture model. Following euthanasia, a 3D
printed mold based on the T2 tumor isosurface was created in order to
co-register the MRI and histology. Tumors were stained with H&E and for
pimonidazole (hypoxia) by immunohistochemistry. Results: Melatonin
treatment increased the 6-SMT in urine of mice exposed to LAN and
statistically reduced tumor growth by day 15 (pBreast cancer shows high
intratumoral heterogeneity, which can be visualized as localized
sub-populations of tumor cells with different malignancy potential and
treatment responsiveness. These regions are like “habitats” that
contain different combinations of environmental selection forces, such as
hypoxia, acidosis, or nutrient availability. Thus, agents that can
perturb these forces may be useful in limiting cancer progression.
Studies have shown that melatonin can affect tumor metabolism and we
hypothesize that this may be a mechanism by which the disruption of
circadian melatonin production by light exposure at night (LAN) promotes
breast cancer initiation and progression. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the effect of melatonin on intratumoral heterogeneity measured
by non-invasive MR imaging in a syngeneic mouse model of breast cancer
(4T1). To visualize habitats, clusters were generated from combined MR
images generated by different pulse sequences. These were co-registered
with histology using tumor specific 3-D printed cradles to classify these
tumor habitats. Methods: Mice were exposed to LAN (Control) or LAN plus
melatonin. The melatonin metabolite 6-sulfatoxymelatonin (6-SMT) was
assessed in urine as a measure of melatonin production. Mice were imaged
in a 7T MRI system with: 1) anatomical T2 images, 2) T2*, 3)
diffusion-weighted MRI (DWI); and 4) T1 weighted dynamic contrast
enhanced (DCE). DCE maps were obtained through semi-quantitative analysis
of the pre- and post-contrast agent bolus time-series on a pixel-by-pixel
basis. These were combined to the corresponding T2, T2* and Apparent
Diffusion Coefficient (ADC) values to generate parameter maps. Parameter
maps were used to classify multiple clusters, based on a Gaussian mixture
model. Following euthanasia, a 3D printed mold based on the T2 tumor
isosurface was created in order to co-register the MRI and histology.
Tumors were stained with H&E and for pimonidazole (hypoxia) by
immunohistochemistry. Results: Melatonin treatment increased the 6-SMT in
urine of mice exposed to LAN and statistically reduced tumor growth by
day 15 (p<0.05). Distinct hypoxic habitats have been observed by MRI.
Habitat clusters with low values in ADC (high cellularity) and low
contrast enhancement were associated with positive staining of
pimonidazole. Initial results suggest that the melatonin-treated mice had
more homogeneous tumors, although additional numbers will be needed to
reach statistical significance. Conclusion: These data indicate that the
spatial heterogeneity of breast tumors, corroborated by histological
features, may be used as a non-invasive imaging method for monitoring the
changes in intratumoral heterogeneity following cancer therapy.


