Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Natural killer cell licensing contributes to clearance of lung
cancer.


a) Natural Killer (NK) cell Inhibitory receptors function in a
dichotomous role. Their engagement by MHC Class I upon encountering a
target results in the inhibition of cytotoxicity. During NK development,
however, their interaction with MHC Class I mediates the process of
licensing or education, leading to an increase in responsiveness and
cytotoxicity. For this reason the role of inhibitory receptors in
controlling the clearance of MHC Class I+ solid tumors such as lung
cancer is poorly defined. Since NK cells comprise the primary cytotoxic
lymphocyte responsible for clearance of lung cancer, we set out to
determine whether the licensing status of NK cells contributes to lung
cancer susceptibility.

b) Growth of MHC Class I+ murine lung cancer was evaluated in MHC Class
I- mice, with unlicensed NK cells in direct comparison to MHC Class I+
mice with licensed NK cells. IFN-γ production was evaluated after plate
bound antibody stimulation through the NKp46 and NKG2D pathways both flow
cytometrically and by quantitative RT-PCR. Bone marrow transplantation
was performed by injection of 10x106 unfractionated bone marrow cells
after 500cGy irradiation and NK and CD4+ T cell depletion of recipient
host.

c) Injection of Lewis Lung Carcinoma (LLC) revealed a significant
decrease in pulmonary tumor burden in mice with licensed NK cells
(230.4±21.6 vs. 442.7±53.8 mg) that disappeared after NK depletion
(421.4±36.8 vs. 421.9±66.3 mg). Freshly isolated licensed NK cells
lysed LLC more robustly than unlicensed NK cells (28.7±.16% vs. 4.9±.2%
specific lysis at 100:1 ratio respectively). Lung cancer expresses stress
ligands recognized by NKG2D and NKp46 activating receptors. Licensed NK
cells produced significantly more IFN-γ than their unlicensed
counterparts after plate-bound stimulation with anti-NKp46 and anti-NKG2D
(17.9±2.8% vs. 5.4±.8% respectively for dual NKp46 and NKG2D
stimulation). No differences were evident between licensed and unlicensed
NK cells in ribosomal mass, making it unlikely that translational defects
were responsible for altered cytokine production. Licensing status also
did not affect stability of IFN-γ but did affect mRNA levels. This
suggests transcriptional control of licensing-mediated NK activity.
IFN-γ production could be significantly increased in unlicensed NK cells
by reintroduction of MHC Class I through non-myeloablative bone marrow
transplantation from MHC Class I-sufficient congenic donors. Blockade of
H2Kb-Ly49c (MHC Class I-inhibitory receptor) interaction during NK
development in C57BL/6 mice using a non-depleting anti-Ly49c antibody
(clone 4LO) decreased IFN-γ production in NK cells.

d) The role of NK cell licensing and tumor-specific cytotoxicity is
highly controversial. We now demonstrate that licensed NK cells mediate a
superior lung cancer-specific immune response in a murine model. Our data
suggests that altering the licensing status of NK cells may be an avenue
of lung cancer-specific immunotherapy.


