Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical efficacy of the selective GR antagonist, CORT125134.


The role of activation of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in the
response of several solid tumor types to chemotherapy has been reported
by several groups. Skor et al1 have demonstrated that the non-selective
GR antagonist mifepristone can potentiate the effect of paclitaxel in a
mouse xenograft derived from a human triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)
cell line. GR activation is thought to play a role in the regulation of
pro- and anti-apoptotic genes. Isikbay et al2 have demonstrated the
benefits of combining androgen deprivation therapy with GR antagonism in
prostate cancer xenograft model. Signaling via GR appears to be able to
compensate for lack of androgen receptor signaling, and to contribute to
castrate resistance.

CORT125134 is a novel, selective GR antagonist being developed for the
treatment of a variety of solid tumors, in combination with an
appropriate standard of care agent. CORT125134 is currently being studied
in a Phase1/2 study in solid tumors, in combination with nab-paclitaxel.

The efficacy of CORT125134 in combination with standard of care agents
has been investigated in mouse xenograft models of several tumor types.
Previous reports of the benefit of adding a GR antagonist to chemotherapy
in a TNBC model and an ovarian cancer model have been confirmed. An
enhancement of the anti-tumor effect of castration by the addition of a
GR antagonist has been confirmed in a model of prostate cancer. In
addition, CORT125134 has been shown to provide a significant improvement
in the efficacy of paclitaxel in a pancreatic cancer model. In a
MIAPaca-2 xenograft model, paclitaxel was given i.v. every 4 days either
alone or in combination with CORT125134. The combination provided
significantly better tumor group inhibition than paclitaxel alone (pThe
efficacy of CORT125134 in combination with standard of care agents has
been investigated in mouse xenograft models of several tumor types.
Previous reports of the benefit of adding a GR antagonist to chemotherapy
in a TNBC model and an ovarian cancer model have been confirmed. An
enhancement of the anti-tumor effect of castration by the addition of a
GR antagonist has been confirmed in a model of prostate cancer. In
addition, CORT125134 has been shown to provide a significant improvement
in the efficacy of paclitaxel in a pancreatic cancer model. In a
MIAPaca-2 xenograft model, paclitaxel was given i.v. every 4 days either
alone or in combination with CORT125134. The combination provided
significantly better tumor group inhibition than paclitaxel alone
(p<0.0001). These encouraging results in a pancreatic cancer model extend
the potential utility of GR antagonism in a variety of solid tumor types.
In the TNBC model, alternative dosing regimens have been investigated,
and suggest that stress during dosing is a confounding factor in these
studies.

1. Skor MN, Wonder E, Kocherginsky M, et al. Glucocorticoid receptor
antagonism as a novel therapy for triple negative breast cancer. Clinical
Cancer Res. 2013;19(22):6163-6172.

2. Isikbay M, Otto K, Kregel S, et al. Glucocorticoid receptor activity
contributes to resistance to androgen-targeted therapy in prostate
cancer. Horm Cancer. 2014;5(2):72-89.


