Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CRISPR-Cas9 dissection of heparan sulfate.


Heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) are expressed on virtually all
animal cells and play important roles in tumor growth and metastasis.
Each HSPG consists of a core protein with one or more covalently attached
linear heparan sulfate (HS) chains composed of alternating glucosamine
and uronic acids that are heterogeneously N- and O-sulfated. These
complex cell surface carbohydrates regulate important biological
processes including cell proliferation and development through their
interaction with a large number of matrix proteins and growth factors.
The arrangement and orientation of the sulfated sugar residues of HS
specify the location of distinct ligand binding sites on the cell
surface, and these modifications can vary temporally during development
and spatially across tissues. Previous studies have shown that HSPGs can
modulate tumor growth kinetics and are abundantly expressed on the cell
surface of many types of cancer. Additionally, genetically reducing the
sulfation of HS has been shown to selectively inhibit tumor angiogenesis
and lymph node metastasis. While most of the enzymes involved in HS
biosynthesis have been studied extensively, much less information exists
regarding the specific mechanisms that give rise to the variable
composition and binding properties of HS. The overall goal of this
project is to uncover and characterize novel genes whose expression
influences HS-mediated regulatory networks in tumor growth and
metastasis. A genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9-mediated screen was developed to
uncover and characterize novel genes other than those encoding known HS
biosynthetic enzymes. A lentiviral single guide RNA (sgRNA) library was
utilized to knock down gene expression across the entire genome in a
human malignant melanoma cell line. Subsequently, a high-throughput
screening assay was adapted to identify lentiviral-encoded sgRNAs that
induce resistance to cytotoxins whose action depends on HSPGs. Parallel
screens using alternative HS-dependent toxins or plant lectins that cause
cytotoxicity dependent on other types of glycosylation were performed in
order to sort genes that selectively affect HS biosynthesis. From the
toxin screens, we identified previously studied genes essential for HS
formation and factors involved in the intoxication of cells by diphtheria
toxin, an HS-dependent exotoxin. Furthermore, we uncovered potential
candidate genes whose function is unknown relative to HS biosynthesis.
Top hits from the screens were characterized and categorized based on
their predicted gene functions and are currently being individually
validated and examined for their potential involvement in the regulation
of HS biosynthesis. Overall, these studies will provide a better
understanding of the genetic regulatory factors involved in HS
biogenesis. Additionally, the factors we identify could reveal novel
targets for anti-cancer therapies, as well as lead us to methods to
manipulate HS and its activities in other cellular processes that go awry
in human diseases.


