Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tracking HPV vaccination of young boys: is parental recall as
dependable as physician records.


Introduction: HPV vaccine is administered to young boys and girls aged
11-12 years in multiple doses rather than single dose. The interval
between doses is critical as well as completion of the dose series.
Moreover, the administration of the HPV vaccine in 2 doses is a recent
change from the 3 doses previously recommended for children aged 11-12
years. Therefore, it is critical that HPV vaccination uptake records are
accurately kept as interventions are developed to increase HPV vaccine
uptake. Previous studies on the validity of parental reported HPV vaccine
uptake have focused only on adolescent girls. This is because the HPV
vaccine recommendation for boys came 5 years after that for girls.
Currently, vaccination rates among boys lag behind those for girls across
the United States. This study compared the validity of parent- vs.
provider-reported HPV vaccine initiation and completion rates among a
national sample of adolescent boys in the United States.

Methods: We analyzed the 2014 National Immunization Survey-Teen data for
adolescent boys only (n = 9,493), and obtained information on the records
of HPV vaccine uptake [initiation (≥1 dose) and completion (≥ 3
doses)] for both parents (parental recall) and provider reports
(electronic medical records). We compared the validity of parent- versus
provider-reported HPV vaccination by computing validity measures
[sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), negative
predictive value (NPV), and kappa].

Results: Rates reported by provider and parental recall were similar for
HPV vaccine initiation (41.8% vs. 42.7%, respectively), and completion
(19.6% vs. 21.9%, respectively). Compared to provider report,
parent-reported HPV vaccine initiation had a sensitivity of 83.0%, a
specificity of 88.8%, a PPV of 84.1%, a NPV of 87.9%, and a kappa
coefficient of 0.72. Compared to provider report, parent-reported HPV
vaccine completion had a sensitivity of 68.6%, a specificity of 92.9%, a
PPV of 72.9%, a NPV of 91.4%, and a kappa coefficient of 0.63.

Conclusions: Both parent- and provider-reported HPV vaccine initiation
and completion rates were comparable; however, parental recall of HPV
vaccine completion among boys was less sensitive. Ongoing surveillance of
HPV vaccination rates among boys is important as more studies are
designed to improve HPV vaccine uptake and understand parental HPV
vaccine barriers. In this regard, parental recall may be used as an
effective alternative in assessing HPV vaccine uptake in the United
States.


