Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discrete super-enhancer networks in pancreatic cancer cells and
cancer associated fibroblasts are targeted and modulated by triptolide.


Background: Pancreatic cancer (PC) is the 3rd leading cause of adult
cancer death in the USA. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) accounts
for >90% of all PC cases and has a dismal 5-year survival rate of
Background: Pancreatic cancer (PC) is the 3rd leading cause of adult
cancer death in the USA. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) accounts
for >90% of all PC cases and has a dismal 5-year survival rate of < 6%,
mostly due to lack of reliable methods for early detection, and limited
treatment options. A unique, highly fibrotic and hypo-vascularized tumor
stroma or “desmoplastic reaction” (DR) forms the major barrier to
currently available therapeutics. Activated cancer associated fibroblasts
(CAFs) play an important role in driving and maintaining the DR in PDAC.
Thus therapeutic regimens that reprogram pancreatic CAFs can potentially
enhance sensitivity to anti-tumor agents and may improve patient
outcomes. Recent studies implicate the role of super-enhancers (SE) in
maintaining cell specific gene expression networks in both normal and
diseased cells. Here we aim to define SE networks in pancreatic CAFs and
epithelial tumor cells and explore the role of triptolide in modulating
SE signatures.

Methods: Using genomic techniques on control vs triptolide treated
pancreatic tumor and CAF cells, we measured occupancy of BRD4 and
acetylated histone 3 at lysine27 (H3K27ac), marks of active SEs, using
ChIP-seq. RNA-seq revealed differentially regulated genes via SE
modulation by triptolide. Immunoblotting was performed to validate the
effect of triptolide on the protein signature associated with
dysregulated SEs.

Results: Top ranked SEs between BRD4 and H3K27ac marks showed extensive
overlap, but were highly distinct between cancer cells and CAFs. The SEs
in tumor cells associated with genes related to transcription
(e.g.POLR2E, PARK7, MYC), whereas those in CAFs associated with genes
involved in desmoplasia/fibrosis (e.g. COL1A1, COL1A2, TGFBI). Triptolide
significantly altered SE activation at diverse and discrete genomic loci
in both cell types. Specifically, SE regions associated with COL1A2 and
TGFBI showed reduced H3K27ac binding in CAFs exposed to triptolide but
not in tumor cells, which showed reduced histone signal at RNA Pol II
region. Transcriptional deregulation by triptolide exceeded in CAFs vs
tumor cells (1282 vs 23 genes upregulated, 1496 vs 321 genes
downregulated). Finally, triptolide resulted in reduced expression of
BRD4 and RNA Pol II in both tumor and CAFs, while c-MYC and Collagen I
were specifically and significantly downregulated in tumor and CAFs,
respectively.

Conclusions: Our results suggest that pancreatic CAFs and tumor cells
harbor distinct SE networks that are characteristic of their different
cell types and states. Triptolide might exert its antitumor activity by
potentially targeting distinct SEs in different cells. Epigenetic
reprogramming of transcription by exploiting SE modulating compounds like
triptolide alone or in combination with current standard of care may
provide more effective treatment options for PC patients.


