Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HPRT as a biomarker for tumor classification and its variability
of expression in breast cancer.


The purpose of this study is to investigate the differential expression
of HRPT between various

breast cancer tissues in comparison to healthy breast tissue in order to
evaluate its potential use

as a diagnostic tool. Breast cancer is the most common malignancy
diagnosed in women and

remains incurable in the metastatic setting requiring accurate and
reliable tools for early

diagnosis. We analyzed HPRT, a purine salvage pathway enzyme responsible
for synthesizing

90% of the available GMP and IMP in cellular maintenance. Due to its
critical role in

maintaining necessary nucleotides for cell proliferation, we hypothesized
an increase in the

expression of HPRT in cancer. Tissues from 48 patients with breast
carcinoma were stained

using standard immunohistochemistry (IHC) techniques. We examined
infiltrating ductal

carcinoma, margin of carcinoma, hyperplasia, atypical hyperplasia,
adenosis, collagen fibers

tissues, and normal breast tissue in order to determine expression
between various breast cancers.

Briefly, tissues were treated with a polyclonal anti-HPRT antibody along
with a GADPH

positive control and a universal negative control. Tissues were incubated
with an HRP-polymer

conjugated antibody, and DAP substrate which reacts to antibody-antigen
binding sites and

results in a color change. Adenosis and hyperplasia are benign breast
conditions and are early

signs of breast carcinoma development. Hyperplasia tissues, which are in
a state of rapid

proliferation, showed significant upregulation of HPRT and adenosis
tissues showed

approximately 42% upregulation. This HPRT upregulation in pre-stage 1
tissues indicates that it

may be used as a biomarker to detect early stages of breast cancer.
Expression of HPRT was also

found to be upregulated in 65% of infiltrating duct carcinoma showing
high expression in active

malignant areas. In marginal tissue located on the perimeter of primary
tumors only 31% of

tissues show upregulation of the protein. Because the levels of HPRT in
marginal tissue is

significantly lower than those found in primary tumors, HPRT may serve as
a useful diagnostic

tool when evaluating successful tumor removal. These data suggests HPRT
as a useful diagnostic

tool when identifying tissue with a high proliferation rate indicative of
potential cancer

development. Additionally, HPRT may also be used as a tool for
pathologists to evaluate the

success of tumor removal.


