Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic and clonal characterization of immunogenic epitope
landscape across The Cancer Genome Atlas.


Recent advances in cancer immunotherapy and genomic sequencing
technologies have created promising opportunities for precision cancer
medicine. Somatic mutation in coding regions of cancer genomes may lead
to amino acid alterations that generate immunogenic peptides, called
neoantigens. These novel peptides are tumor-specific. An individual’s
own MHC genotypes restricts the presentation of these tumor-specific
peptides and thus there are a limited number of candidate epitopes for
immune cellular recognition. Current studies have not comprehensively
studied how MHC-restricted neoantigens are present across tens of
thousands of cancer. Nor have these studies determined how somatic
mutations and their associated neoantigens are represented among
different subclonal populations existing within individual tumors. To
address these limitations, we have mapped the complex immunogenomic
topology of neoantigen epitopes across 8,000 tumors representing 18
different cancer types. This neoantigen landscape accounts for how
neoepitope candidates are distributed among the various clonal
subpopulations existing within any given tumor.Our study utilized genomic
data from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Our automated pipeline provides
results from 8,000 samples from 18 cancer types that have somatic variant
calls, copy number variation, whole exome sequence, and RNA-Seq data.
Identification of somatic mutations that lead to highly immunogenic
antigens involved five different steps; i) in-silico translation of
identified mutations, ii) expression as measured per RNA-Seq, iii)
patient’s own major histocompatibility complex genotype, iv) binding
affinity specific to the MHC alleles for any given patient and v)
occurrence of clonal subpopulations as demonstrated by intratumoral
genetic heterogeneity. We mapped the neoantigen landscape with
quantitative representation of the genetic clonal diversity existing
within individual tumors. In average, 2% of missense mutations from a
patient are detected in RNA-Seq, with binding affinity to own HLA
genotypes, and from the dominant clonal subpopulation.In summary, our
study demonstrates the various relationships among the number of optimal
antigens, the number of clonal subpopulations, the number of mutations,
and clinical phenotypes such as tumor stage. Our automated bioinformatics
process facilitates the use of exome and RNA-Seq as potential diagnostic
analytic process for precision immunotherapy.


