Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lifting the iron curtain: Imaging cellular barriers to combination
chelation-immune checkpoint therapy.


Iron accumulation in cancer cells and macrophages can result in a tumor
microenvironment that is unfavorable for checkpoint immune therapy.
Chelation is a safe approach of reducing cellular iron accumulation that
while affecting all cells biochemically, has been shown to also regulate
tumor growth via specific “off-label” effects on macrophages that can
hypothetically support an immune therapy responsive microenvironment. To
further investigate the connection between infiltration of macrophages,
iron chelation therapy, and synergy with immune therapy, we used
established orthotopic Myc-CaP and TRAMP-C2 prostate cancer models and
quantitative iron and cellular MRI, histology, and FACS to evaluate
pre-treatment and post-chelation macrophage/immunological status, and MRI
to monitor tumor growth. Quantitative assessment of cellular iron from
MRI and histology of tumors, livers, and spleens revealed differences in
tissue iron levels between host mouse strains, and enabled us to
correlate these differences with extent of iron-macrophage infiltration
in the tissues. To see if we could reduce these cells metabolically we
administered the oral chelator deferiprone at tumor onset which resulted
in reductions in endpoint tumor volume in both prostate tumor models with
the largest response to chelation being observed in low-iron C57BL6 model
backgrounds; a result subsequently confirmed in MMTV-PyMT orthotopic
breast cancer models. Even in cases of complete tumor growth inhibition,
systemic iron-load was not significantly affected, indicating that
chelation achieved these therapeutic gains without harmful side-effects.
Reduction of iron-macrophages and tumor volume accompanied shifts in
macrophage surface receptor presentation and T-cell repertoire indicating
that pro-tumor (M2) macrophage de-polarization to anti-tumor (M1)
phenotypes occurred with chelation therapy. As these changes can
potentially support improved action of checkpoint PDL-1 inhibitors, we
then tested the combination chelation-checkpoint therapy approach in the
prostate tumor models. These trials showed a modest reduction in tumor
growth with either chelation or immune checkpoint therapy alone. A
notable synergistic effect was observed using combination
chelation-checkpoint therapy that accompanied a shift in macrophage
polarization suggesting that chelation was sufficient to enhance
checkpoint response. These therapeutic imaging studies demonstrate how
tumor infiltration of iron-macrophages can be used as a biomarker of the
immune-microenvironment, and how by using iron-chelation
immunotherapeutic response can be enhanced.


