Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predicting stochastic proliferation and death in response to drugs
with mechanistic models tailored to genomic, transcriptomic, and
proteomic data.


Over the past decade we have seen a shift in cancer therapy from broadly
cytotoxic drugs to molecular therapies targeting “driver” mutations.
Although targeted therapy has seen great success for some cancers (e.g.
imatinib for leukemia), it has struggled with poor efficacy in treating
other cancers that can sometimes possess multiple “driver” mutations.
This highlights the complex, and at times non-intuitive, interplay
between multiple players in a signaling cascade, which can be highly
dependent on the biological context – that is, gene expression levels
and mutational architecture – of a tumor or cell line. A quantitative,
mechanistic, biologically-tailored understanding of how these signaling
dynamics drive proliferation and death could improve precision
pharmacology approaches to treat cancer.

Here, we constructed the first highly detailed, large-scale ordinary
differential equation (ODE) mechanistic mathematical model depicting the
most commonly mutated cancer signaling pathways across human cancers, as
indicated by a pan-cancer analysis by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). The
model includes the RTK/Ras/MAPK, PI3K/AKT/mTOR, CDK/RB cell cycle,
p53/MDM2 DNA damage response, and BCL/Caspases apoptosis pathways. The
adjustable parameters of the model can be informed by measurements from
patients or cell lines, including copy number alterations, mutations, and
gene expression levels. This single-cell model links stochastic gene
expression processes to quantitative signaling dynamics, and once
tailored to a biological context can be used to simulate the effect of
various anti-cancer therapies on cell fate behavior such as proliferation
and death for a population of cells.

The first instance of the model integrated genomic, transcriptomic, and
proteomic data from the MCF10A cell line, a non-transformed cell line
with predictable phenotypic behaviors. We trained the model using western
blot and flow cytometry experiments to refine various biochemical
parameters and phenotypic outcomes. Many fundamental questions in signal
transduction arose during this process, such as how EGF and insulin
synergize to drive S-phase entry or how a specific biological context
confers sensitivity or resistance to inhibitors of the ERK and AKT
pathways. Simultaneously, we are tailoring the model to patient-derived
genetic information from primary glioblastoma tumors and screening
brain-penetrable compounds in a patient-specific manner.

In conclusion, a quantitative, mechanistic, biologically-tailored
mathematical model depicting the major cancer pathways allows us to probe
the mechanisms that underlie how signaling dynamics drive proliferation
and death in response to various perturbations, and gain insight into
their dependence on the biological context of cell lines and patient
tumors.


