Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Osteoblasts protect AML cells from cytarabine-induced death.


The hematological malignancy acute myeloid leukemia (AML) interacts
closely with osteoblasts within the protective bone marrow
microenvironment. The bone marrow microenvironment protects tumor cells
from chemotherapies, which can prevent sufficient eradication of tumor
cells. To study the role of osteoblasts in the bone marrow
microenvironment, our lab utilized a co-culture model of osteoblasts
(MC3T3 osteoblast cell line) and acute myelogenous leukemia cells (KG1a
AML cell line or AML patient samples from bone marrow aspirates).
Osteoblasts were cultured with AML cells, or AML cells were cultured
alone; AML cells were challenged with the standard chemotherapeutic agent
cytarabine (Ara-C) at doses of 0µM, 0.1µM, 0.5µM, 1µM, 5µM, or 10µM
in the presence or absence of osteoblasts; and AML cells were assayed by
flow cytometry to assess cell death via annexin-V staining. Our lab has
previously found that differentiating osteoblasts protect AML cells from
an apoptosis inducing agent naturally present in the bone marrow. We now
show that osteoblasts are also capable of protecting AML cells from the
standard chemotherapeutic cytarabine. In addition, we have found that
treatment of osteoblasts with the histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi)
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) prevents these treated osteoblasts
from protecting AML cells from cytarabine treatment, which is consistent
with our lab’s previous findings that HDACi treatment inhibits
protection of AML cells from an apoptosis inducing agent naturally
present in the bone marrow. We have preliminary data that indicates that
TAZS89A over-expression, a constitutively active form of TAZ, which is a
transcriptional modulator that regulates osteoblast differentiation, may
be sufficient to inhibit osteoblast mediated protection of AML cells from
cytarabine. This finding would be consistent with the HDACi manipulated
Nherf1-protein phosphatase 1α-TAZ signaling pathway that we have
previously found to be sufficient to inhibit protection of AML cells from
an apoptosis inducing agent naturally present in the bone marrow.
Overall, these studies have delivered insights into the role of
osteoblasts in protecting AML cells from chemotherapy in the bone marrow
microenvironment and begun the characterization of mechanisms and targets
responsible for the protective effects of osteoblasts. Manipulating
differentiating osteoblasts within the bone marrow microenvironment
therapeutically could aid in more complete destruction of the tumor cell
burden and improve patient survival.


