Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel network predictor for drug sensitivity in cell line response
data.


Sequencing patient tumors has enabled the design of treatment regimens
that exploit sensitizing genomic alterations. Associating drugs with
mutations that enhance their effect is a key component of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology vision for the next two decades of cancer
treatment. Methods that distinguish drug sensitizing molecular events
from the millions of extraneous alterations common within a tumor will
help researchers implement precision medicine strategies. Here we use
molecular data from the cancer cell line encyclopedia; including
mutations, copy number alterations and gene expression changes along with
drug response data, to identify subnetworks of interacting proteins that
contain drug sensitizing alterations.

Building upon the ability of fuzzy logic models to capture gene activity
from different molecular data types, we create ‘Network-FLM’, a
method to identify drug sensitizing molecular markers using a subnetwork
model that distinguishes a drug sensitive sample from a drug insensitive
one. Because the subnetwork model incorporates the sign and direction of
network edges and the magnitude of gene activity changes, biologically
meaningful features are captured. We integrate protein interaction
information from Metacore database with somatic mutation, copy number and
gene expression measurements, profiled by CCLE. Using cross validation,
we evaluate the mean AUC of the predictor for 24 anti-cancer compounds
(Barretina et al., 2012).

We build subnetwork classifiers for each compound using mutation, copy
number and expression data separately and in all possible combinations.
We find that the Network-FLM approach performs well for targeted agents
such as Sorafenib, and also for drugs with pleitropic mechanisms of
action. Gene expression data alone creates effective predictive
subnetworks for 8 compounds (Nilotinib, Sorafenib, Irinotecan, PLX4720,
Paclitaxel, Topotecan, TAE684, and Erlotinib). Adding copy number changes
to gene expression data created better predictive networks for 8
compounds (PF2341066, AZD6244, L685458, RAF265, PD0325901, ZD6474,
PHA665752, and 17-AAG). Likewise, three compounds benefit from adding
mutation data to expression data (Panobinostat, PD0332991, and
Lapatinib). Combining all datatypes created the best predictors for
AEW541 and AZD0530. For three compounds, mutation data alone and together
with copy number alterations is the best input for building predictive
models.

We identified hyper-active subnetworks in cancer cell lines and used them
to predict drug sensitivity. We plan to further explore the potential of
these networks to improve patient response to anti-cancer drugs.


