Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bayesian fine-mapping using summary data of 145,000 subjects
refines common risk associations, discovers secondary signals and novel
candidate genes for prostate cancer.


Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified more than 160
prostate cancer (PrCa) genetic risk loci, however these variants rarely
point directly to the true underlying functional variant driving the
association. In this fine-mapping study to narrow the credible causal
variant set for 80 PrCa regions representing 89 original independent GWAS
signals, we performed Bayesian variable selection in combination with
functional annotation and quantile regression. We used imputed data for
83,511 PrCa cases and 62,283 controls investigated with high-density
genotyping arrays from the OncoArray, iCOGS and 5 previous GWAS studies
from the PRACTICAL/ELLIPSE consortia. To facilitate fine-mapping from
one-at-a-time SNP associations meta-analyzed over the consortia we first
applied JAM, a novel Bayesian algorithm which searches multi-SNP models
in summary data by imputing the correlation structure according to a
reference panel. JAM provides inference on the number of independent
signals, as well as the set of potential SNPs driving those signals. We
utilized functional annotation and eQTL analysis (TCGA prostate tumor
data) in combination with quantile regression to further prioritize the
most likely causal variants within the credible set of SNPs and identify
potential candidate genes and functional mechanisms. The median credible
set size from JAM was 17 SNPs per region, shrinking the post-QC input set
of variants by about 98%. In 13 regions evidence was found for multiple
independent signals, up to a maximum of 5 SNPs. Within the single hit
regions, almost half had less than 10 variants selected. In 34 regions
the credible set included at least one SNP that was co-localized with a
significant eQTL. Quantile regression highlighted enrichment for variants
in promoters, DNase hypersensitivity site and eQTLs - representing
candidate biological mechanisms underpinning disease development. This
study has substantially reduced and prioritized the candidate causal PrCa
risk variants within previously known GWAS regions, identifying a small
subset of variants for further functional investigation and novel
candidate genes at a number of loci.


