Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATR inhibitor AZD6738 as monotherapy and in combination with
olaparib or chemotherapy: defining pre-clinical dose-schedules and
efficacy modelling.


Introduction: AZD6738 is a potent and selective oral inhibitor of the
ataxia telangiectasia and rad3 related (ATR) protein kinase. ATR has a
key role in the DNA replication stress response (RSR) pathway of DNA
repairby facilitating the recovery and repair of potentially cytotoxic
persistent, stalled DNA replication forks. Inhibition of ATR leads to the
inability to resolve replication associated damage and the accumulation
of DNA strand breaks, which if remains unrepaired leads to cell death.
AZD6738 is currently in Phase I/II clinical trials being evaluated as a
monotherapy and in combination with novel agents olaparib / Lynparza
(PARP DNA damage response inhibitor), durvalumab (PD-L1 immune checkpoint
inhibitor) and DNA-damaging agents such as carboplatin and ionising
radiation. Critical in helping to guide the clinical usage of AZD6738 and
maximise patient benefit, pre-clinical studies were performed to
determine optimal doses and schedules as monotherapy and in combination
with olaparib and carboplatin.

Experimental procedures: Human cancer cell lines, xenograft and
patient-derived explant (PDX) models of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), head & neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), and triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC) were tested comparing once daily versus twice daily
dosing, the number of consecutive days dosing (3 days/week, 5 days/week,
continuous) and co-dosing versus sequential or intermittent dosing with
AZD6738 alone or in combination with olaparib or carboplatin. The
magnitude and duration of anti-tumour responses were then compared with
AZD6738 mouse pharmacokinetic (PK), pharmacodynamic (PD) and in vitro
target (IC) / growth inhibition (GI) profiles.

Results: A mathematical model was derived which adequately described the
AZD6738 PK/PD-efficacy relationship. This modelling confirms that
duration of cover (time) above cellular ATR target inhibition thresholds
(IC90 pCHK1 / GI90) per day, rather than Cmax or exposures per se, is the
major determinant of anti-tumour responses. As monotherapy, in sensitive
ATM-deficient models, it is necessary to inhibit ATR continuously to give
tumour stabilisation, which can be achieved through repeat daily of
AZD6738 over several weeks. Co-dosing AZD6738 in combination with
olaparib or carboplatin gives best efficacy compared to sequential dosing
and PK cover over the first 48-72 hours is necessary to give tumour
regressions. The models predict that extending the duration of ATR cover,
achieved through repeat daily dosing, further increases efficacy. These
pre-clinical dose-schedules were compared to human free plasma AZD6738 PK
data and predicted efficacious exposures found to be clinically
achievable.

Conclusions: Together these data further support the clinical evaluation
of AZD6738 and suggest optimal dosing schedules for ATR inhibitors.


