Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The oncogenic activity of a pro-oxidant intracellular milieu is
associated with redox dependent activation of NF-kB.


Evidence over the years has highlighted that intracellular redox status
plays a critical role in determining cell fate. To date, we have shown
that a pro-oxidant milieu, specifically a mild elevation of intracellular
superoxide, promotes cancer cell survival and chemoresistance. To that
end, we demonstrated in vitro that elevated superoxide, upon silencing of
superoxide dismutase (SOD1), resulted in sustained phosphorylation of
Bcl-2 at serine 70, thereby stabilizing its anti-apoptotic activity.
These findings were corroborated by the abundance of Serine 70
Bcl2-phosphorylation and low SOD1 expression in lysates of patients with
aggressive lymphomas and/or disease with poor prognosis. In addition to
the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2, the pro-inflammatory transcription
factor nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB)- mediated signaling was also shown
to be modulated by intracellular redox milieu. As constitutive activation
of NF-κB has been reported in various human tumors, which is often
associated with malignant progression and chemotherapeutic resistance,
here we set out to investigate whether a pro-oxidant environment,
specifically the upregulation of intracellular superoxide, was associated
with the induction of NF-κB transcriptional activity. Indeed, we
demonstrate that elevated intracellular superoxide via the
pharmacological inhibition and genetic silencing of SOD1 results in
enhanced activation of canonical NF-κB signalling. This is accompanied
by increased p65 nuclear localization and transcription of NF-κB
regulated genes, which potentially confer survival advantages to tumour
cells upon chemotherapeutic treatments. Considering the association
between NF-kB activation, chronic inflammation and the process of
carcinogenesis, these preliminary data provide a novel mechanism of
activation of this master transcriptional factor with potential
therapeutic implications.


