Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accurate molecular profiling of sequence and copy number
alterations from sub-nanogram FFPE DNA amounts.


Introduction: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens represent
an invaluable source of material for precision oncology. However, FFPE
samples pose significant challenges for molecular assays, such as
targeted Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS), because of the highly variable
DNA quality and often limited sample size. Here we present a complete
workflow from sample quality control to targeted library preparation to
reliably detect sequence and copy number alterations (CNA) through
targeted NGS from extremely low input FFPE samples.

Materials & methods: Three FFPE specimens from patients with breast
(BrCa) or pancreatic cancer, with DNA quality varying over a broad range
and with low tumor cellularity (down to 10%) were selected for targeted
NGS profiling. The DNA quality was determined using the DEPArray™ FFPE
QC Kit, a qPCR-based assay yielding a QC score defined as the ratio
between the quantification of a 132 bp amplicon, corresponding
approximately to the average length (116bp) of DEPArray OncoSeek
amplicons, and a shorter amplicon of 54 bp. The QC scores of the 3 FFPE
specimens ranged between 0.23 to 0.74. We then used QC score, multiplied
by the ploidy (assessed on DEPArray during cell sorting) and by the
number of cells recovered, to estimate the effectively amplifiable
template (EAT). Thirty two pure cell populations (21 stromal and 11
tumor), with different EATs (80-300), corresponding to a wide range of
number of cells per pool (31-214), were collected with the DEPArray
digital sorter. Libraries were prepared from each cell pool, using the
single-tube, Illumina-compatible DEPArray OncoSeek panel comprising 63
oncology relevant genes (average 740,000 sequenced amplicons per sample).

Results: Variant calling showed sensitivity comprised between 93% and 99%
and specificity > 99% for EATs ≥ 80 equivalent to as low as ≈250 pg
of DNA. Analysis of CNAs in stromal cells was highly specific (zero false
positive at 1.5 fold-change threshold). Moreover, analysis allowed to
highly reproducibly identify CNAs in CCND1 (3x), ERBB2 (8x), MYC (3x) and
PIK3KA (2x) in both replicates of one BrCa sample. Similarly, ERBB2
amplification (7x) was found in the other BrCa sample (10% tumor
cellularity) across two replicates at different EATs (80, 120)
corresponding to as low as 59 and 75 cells. As expected by the low tumor
content, in the corresponding unsorted sample ERBB2 was below the 2-fold
gain threshold with respect to the stromal control, which would not
qualify a sample as Her2-amplified.

Highlights: Starting from pure intact cells with well characterized DNA
quality and ploidy, our workflow allows reliable molecular profiling of
sub-nanogram DNA samples by determining with precision the extremely-low
minimum amount of cells necessary to obtain highly reproducible sequence
variant calling and CNAs detection by targeted NGS.


