Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoengineered mesenchymal stem cells for targeted lung cancer
therapy.


Solid tumors are characterized by increased interstitial fluid pressure
and enhanced solid stress, contributing to poor intra–tumoral
penetration of nano drug carriers. This offsets the benefits of enhanced
permeation and retention effect often attributed to these drug carriers.
We have developed a novel cell based targeting approach using mesenchymal
stem cells (MSCs) as cellular drug carriers. MSCs have been indicated in
the tumor-targeted therapy owing to their selective ability to home to
tumors. Our work is focused on non–genetic modification of MSCs by
incorporating nanoparticles loaded with chemotherapeutics to create
cellular drug depots capable of homing to tumors and releasing drugs over
a sustained period of time. Nano–engineered MSCs were manufactured by
incubating MSCs with 100µg/mL of paclitaxel loaded (18.5% w/w
paclitaxel) PLGA nanoparticles for 4 hours at 37°C without affecting
their viability and migration potential. Anti-cancer efficacy of
nano-engineered MSCs was evaluated in the A549 lung tumor model.
Bioluminescence imaging was used to monitor tumor growth. Animals that
developed tumors (lung bioluminescence between 0.5 x 106 – 1 x 106
photons/sec) were randomly divided into different treatment groups.
Animals received 1 million nano-engineered MSCs (equivalent to 5 mg/kg of
paclitaxel) or 106 MSCs that were either unmodified or loaded with
equivalent concentration of blank nanoparticles. The animals were then
re-dosed with half the initial dose of MSCs every two weeks. Additional
groups of animals received three doses of 40 mg/kg of
nanoparticle-encapsulated or free paclitaxel once every week. Treatment
with nano-engineered MSCs resulted in a significant inhibition of the
lung tumor growth (p Solid tumors are characterized by increased
interstitial fluid pressure and enhanced solid stress, contributing to
poor intra–tumoral penetration of nano drug carriers. This offsets the
benefits of enhanced permeation and retention effect often attributed to
these drug carriers. We have developed a novel cell based targeting
approach using mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) as cellular drug carriers.
MSCs have been indicated in the tumor-targeted therapy owing to their
selective ability to home to tumors. Our work is focused on non–genetic
modification of MSCs by incorporating nanoparticles loaded with
chemotherapeutics to create cellular drug depots capable of homing to
tumors and releasing drugs over a sustained period of time.
Nano–engineered MSCs were manufactured by incubating MSCs with
100µg/mL of paclitaxel loaded (18.5% w/w paclitaxel) PLGA nanoparticles
for 4 hours at 37°C without affecting their viability and migration
potential. Anti-cancer efficacy of nano-engineered MSCs was evaluated in
the A549 lung tumor model. Bioluminescence imaging was used to monitor
tumor growth. Animals that developed tumors (lung bioluminescence between
0.5 x 106 – 1 x 106 photons/sec) were randomly divided into different
treatment groups. Animals received 1 million nano-engineered MSCs
(equivalent to 5 mg/kg of paclitaxel) or 106 MSCs that were either
unmodified or loaded with equivalent concentration of blank
nanoparticles. The animals were then re-dosed with half the initial dose
of MSCs every two weeks. Additional groups of animals received three
doses of 40 mg/kg of nanoparticle-encapsulated or free paclitaxel once
every week. Treatment with nano-engineered MSCs resulted in a significant
inhibition of the lung tumor growth (p < 0.01) compared to that with
other controls. It was interesting to note that despite being dosed at a
significantly lower concentration of paclitaxel (~17.5 mg/kg vs. 120
mg/kg total dose), nano-engineered MSCs were significantly more effective
than free paclitaxel or paclitaxel nanoparticles, suggesting better
delivery to the tumor. The biodistribution studies and pharmacokinetic
analysis indicated a rapid migration and enhanced retention of the
nano–engineered MSCs to the lung tumors. Our studies demonstrated that
nano-engineered MSCs are efficient carriers for tumor-specific drug
delivery. Funding: R01EB022558


