Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ADAM9-plectin interaction involved in prostate cancer malignancy
progression.


Introduction: To identify a specific biomarker for malignant prostate
cancer progression and therapeutic target, we had demonstrated the
correlation of ADAM9 expression and cancer progression. The aim is to
clarify the association of ADAM9 and interactive proteins in malignant
phenotypic progression.

Methods: Knockdown of ADAM9 expression was conducted to explore its role
in cell motility and metastasis activities. Pull-down assays were
performed to identify the proteins that interact with ADAM9 during cancer
cell migration. Proximity ligation assay (PLA) was carried out to
validate the protein-protein interaction. Transmission electron
microscope (TEM) analysis to confirm ADAM9 and plectin interaction.
Protein degradation test was conducted to determine the regulation
pathway.

Results: Our study demonstrated that ADAM9 play an important role in the
regulation of prostate cancer migration, invasion and metastasis in the
in vitro assay and xenograft animal models. The combination of ADAM9
pull-down assays and mass spectrum analysis demonstrated hemidesmosome
components, plectin, ladinin, and cytoskeleton were pull-down with ADAM9.
However, the key element of hemidesmosome, integrin α6β4, did not
pull-down together. Both TEM and PLA confirmed the interaction of ADAM9
and plectin in the protrusion end of migrating cells. This interaction
can be strengthened after knockdown integrin β4; and vice verse,
knockdown of ADAM9 increased interaction of integrin β4 and plecin.
These results indicated ADAM9 and integrin β4 compete for plectin
binding. Furthermore, shADAM9 attenuated the degradation of integrin β4.
Clinical evaluation of 96 patient samples in TMU demonstrated increased
of ADAM9 and plectin interaction in tumor region when compared to the
benign part of the same patient.

Conclusions: Our studies demonstrated that ADAM9 promotes cancer
metastasis through alteration of hemidesmosome dynamic by enhancing of
integrin β4 degradation. Therefore, these results indicated possible to
use ADAM9-plectin interaction to predict prostate cancer malignancy
progression.


