Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer prevention using a novel fatty acid synthase inhibitor.


Tumor growth and survival is dependent upon de novo fatty acid synthesis
regulated via preferential upregulation of fatty acid synthase (FASN) in
tumor cells. Here a novel FASN inhibitor that has shown antitumor
activity in established tumor models (Alwarawrah Y et al., 2016), now
shows promise blocking oncogene-induced cell transformation and
significantly delaying time to tumor development in a prevention study
using a GEMM of triple negative breast cancer.

Non-malignant, immortalized MCF10A human breast epithelial cells were
infected with lentivirus encoding for the highly oncogenic 110 kDa
truncated form of HER2, herein referred to as p110, under a doxycycline
inducible promoter. Lentivirus containing a sham insert served as a
control. Forty-eight hours after lentiviral infection, p110 was induced
by dox and cells treated with FASN (2 and 4 μM) or vehicle alone for 21
days, and then assessed for cell growth and evidence of senescence. The
C3TAg GEMM model of triple negative breast cancer was used to study FASN
in the prevention setting. The mice (FVB/N background) express C(3)SV40
T-antigen resulting in the inactivation of p53 and Rb. Eighteen mice were
randomized to receive FASN treatment (15mg/kg/ 5 days per week) or
control (non-treatment [NT]). The mice were randomized and started
treatment at 6 weeks of age, and continued until tumors reached an
average size of 87.5mm3. All mice were monitored (5 times/week) for
weight loss and time to tumor development.

Expression of p110 led to the transformation of MCF10A cells, as
evidenced by the formation of plaques in cell culture. Treatment with
FASN blocked transformation in p110 expressing MCF10A cells and instead
induced growth arrest, expression of senescence associated β-gal, and
morphologic appearance consistent with cell senescence. Analysis of
viable p110 expressing MCF10A cells that were maintained in the
continuous presence of FASN for 60 days led to the identification of a
potential mechanism of therapeutic resistance. In the C3TAg in vivo
prevention study, FASN resulted in a significant prolongation in time to
tumor development (Log-rank (Mantel-Cox); p Expression of p110 led to the
transformation of MCF10A cells, as evidenced by the formation of plaques
in cell culture. Treatment with FASN blocked transformation in p110
expressing MCF10A cells and instead induced growth arrest, expression of
senescence associated β-gal, and morphologic appearance consistent with
cell senescence. Analysis of viable p110 expressing MCF10A cells that
were maintained in the continuous presence of FASN for 60 days led to the
identification of a potential mechanism of therapeutic resistance. In the
C3TAg in vivo prevention study, FASN resulted in a significant
prolongation in time to tumor development (Log-rank (Mantel-Cox); p
<0.0056). The median days of tumor onset between the NT and treated
groups were 111 and 145 with a range of 84-130 and 85-163, respectively.
No gross toxicity or weight loss was observed in FASN treated animals.

A novel small molecule FASN inhibitor blocked oncogenic cell
transformation and induced a state of senescence. Moreover, FASN
significantly delayed the onset of mammary tumors in a GEMM model of
aggressive triple negative breast cancer. Identification of a
mechanism(s) enabling tumor cells to survive long term FASN inhibition
will provide rationale combination strategies to induce permanent
senescence or apoptosis, and improve the efficacy of FASN inhibitors as
preventative agents.


