Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional elongation mediates human papillomavirus type 16
late promoter activation.


Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are small DNA viruses that infect
keratinocytes of squamous epithelia and cause benign lesions that can
progress to several malignancies, including cervical cancer. Upregulation
of viral transcripts by the HPV16 late promoter is dependent on host
cellular differentiation. We sought to investigate the main cellular
transcription regulators that correlate with differentiation-dependent
increase in the late viral transcripts. Here, we show evidence that the
step in transcription cycle that is responsible for late promoter
activation is transcriptional elongation.

We began by establishing that the increase in viral transcripts
originating from the late promoter is primarily regulated at the
transcript synthesis level rather than post-transcription level. Based on
this observation, we investigated whether there is a correlation between
late promoter activation and activities that occur during the initiation,
pausing or elongation steps of transcription cycle. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP), we did not observed a
differentiation-dependent increase of RNA Polymerase II (RNAP II) in the
late promoter region. However, there was a significant increase of RNAP
II at downstream sites of late promoter suggesting elongation is
regulated by differentiation.

We then sought to investigate the cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs) that
are known to regulate transcription elongation. ChIP did not show a
significant increase of the elongation factor CDK9 in the late promoter;
however, the enrichment of CDK9 at downstream sites of the viral genome
significantly increased upon differentiation, suggesting that
differentiation induces recruitment of CDK9 to facilitate elongation.
Additionally, CDK8, a component of the Mediator complex that recruits
CDK9 to the RNAP II, was increased upon differentiation. Kinase
inhibitors against CDK8 did not affect late viral transcripts; however,
knocking down CDK8 resulted in significant reduction of viral
transcripts, suggesting that CDK8 could be involved in protein-protein
interactions that are required for the synthesis of late viral
transcripts.

These findings suggest that HPV has evolved to utilize cellular
transcriptional elongation machinery as a way of regulating its late gene
expression. This mechanism allows the virus to persistently infect host
cells and cause HPV-associated malignancies.


