Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the microenvironment of murine primary triple
negative breast cancer.


The purpose of this study was to investigate the role of inflammatory
cells in the metastatic process using reliably metastatic murine models
of Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC). We have previously selected,
developed and characterized two reliably metastatic TNBC mouse models for
our investigations. The T11 (claudin-low) and 2225LM (basal-like)
Balb/c-derived transplantable tumors display molecular profiles that
mirror human TNBC. Here we report characterization of the inflammatory
cells and microenvironment in these primary TNBC tumors and at metastatic
sites in both heterotopic and orthotopic models. Tumors were implanted in
the s.c. flank or mammary fat pad and resected 1-2 weeks later to promote
the growth of seeded metastases, when volumes reached ~700 mm3 or 300
mm3, respectively. Both flow cytometric analysis and immunohistochemistry
of primary tumors demonstrated high infiltration by myeloid-derived cells
(CD11b+) and low levels of lymphoid cells (CD3+). Myeloid cells were also
the major infiltrating cells in lung metastases and were significantly
elevated compared to normal lung. The granulocytic subset (CD11b+Ly6G+)
predominated, consistent with an immunosuppressive role for cells with
this phenotype (N2, G-MDSC, etc.). Primary 2225LM and T11 tumors and
metastatic lung tumor homogenates were assayed for immunomodulators and
compared to normal breast and lung tissue from age-matched contemporary
controls. G-CSF was significantly increased in tumors and levels (pg/mg
protein) were correlated with tumor burden. VEGF was significantly
elevated in all tumors, as were chemoattractants for granulocytic cells
(KC/CXCL1, MIP-2/CXCL2), monocytic cells (MCP-1/CCL2), eosinophils
(Eotaxin/CCL11) and T cells (MIG/CXCL-9). In the heterotopic model, lung
levels of KC/CXCL1 and MCP-1/CCL2 were significantly increased prior to
frank lung metastasis (5-30 days post-implant). These data suggest that
TNBC-derived G-CSF may play a role in the mobilization of CD11b+Ly6G+
granulocytes and progenitors from the bone marrow and key chemokines may
mediate migration of these cells to metastatic sites. Future studies will
define phenotypic and functional characteristics of the G-MDSC that are
promoting tumor progression in these murine TNBC models.


