Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNAs as novel therapeutic adjuvants for improving the efficacy
of vincristine and radiation therapy in treating medulloblastoma.


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor.
Despite recent improvements in the overall survival, only a modest
percentage of patients survive Myc-driven high-risk MB. The quality of
life for surviving patients is substantially reduced due to the
devastating and often irreversible side effects of radiation and
chemotherapy. Recently, in a large unbiased genomic screen, we uncovered
a group of microRNAs (miRNAs) capable of meditating drug sensitivity in
c-myc amplified high-risk MB. Our functional screen of ~1900 miRNAs
identified miR-584-5p as a potent candidate that uniquely sensitizes
high-risk MB to radiation as well as vincristine (VCR) (20 to 25-fold
dose reduction), an anti-mitotic agent routinely administered alongside
radiation and in combination with other chemotherapeutic drugs to treat
medulloblastoma patients. Our studies revealed that miR-584 might act as
a potent tumor suppressor as it inhibited MB growth in vivo as well as
migration and invasion of c-myc amplified MB. We show that miR-584
overexpression results in defective mitosis leading to mitotic
catastrophe, apoptosis, DNA damage and G2-M cell-cycle arrest in
high-risk MB cells without affecting normal neural stem cell growth.
Notably, we discovered that miR-584 directly regulates the expression and
activity of genes including histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), and eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 4e family member 3 (EIF4E3) that are known
to play important roles in microtubule dynamics, metaphase-anaphase
transition and radio-resistance. Moreover, silencing either of these two
target genes resulted in significant inhibition of MB growth and enhanced
sensitivity to VCR and ionizing radiation. Overexpressing miR-584 or
silencing either HDAC1 or EIF4E3 also inhibited the MB stem cell
proliferation and self-renewal. We report that while miR-584-5p is
predominantly expressed in normal brain and cerebellum, its expression is
significantly reduced in MB patient derived xenografts (PDXs). In
contrast to miR-584, EIF4E3 and HDAC1 were found to be overexpressed in
medulloblastoma patients. These findings are highly significant,
unexpected and innovative as this miRNA and its target genes are the
first to be shown to affect the therapeutic efficacy of VCR and radiation
in c-myc amplified high-risk medulloblastoma.


