Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostaglandin E2 accumulation enhances the expansion of
ALDH1-positive cells and Kras-driven tumorigenesis in the pancreas.


Background: Chronic inflammation is known to be a risk factor of
carcinogenesis and tumor development, and it was demonstrated that oral
aspirin intake reduced cancer-related death including pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) through inhibiting prostaglandin synthases. On the
other hand, cancer stem cells (CSCs) refer to a subset of tumor cells
that have self-renewal ability and generate plenty of non-CSC cells that
comprise a tumor. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and inhibition of 15-PGDH,
which is an enzyme degrading PGE2, promoted hematopoietic and tissue stem
cell fraction, however, little is known about the role of PGE2
accumulation for CSC fraction. A number of CSC marker candidates have
been explored to date, and Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) was
identified as one of CSC markers in PDAC. The aim of this study is to
elucidate the functional role of PGE2 in ALDH1 positive CSC fraction
during tumor development in pancreas.

Methods: The clonogenic growth potential of ALDH1-positive PDAC cells was
assessed in vitro by growth assays and sphere formation assays. We next
investigated the expression of ALDH1 and self-renewal related genes in
PDAC cell lines with PGE2 or 15-PGDH inhibitor treatment. We further
conducted functional experiments using siALDH1 in PDAC progression.
Furthermore, we examined the effect of PGE2 for pancreatic tumorigenesis
using Kras-driven genetic mouse model treated with 15-PGDH inhibitor.
Finally, ALDH1 and Ki67 expression was examined by immunohistochemistry
in 121 primary surgical specimens of PDAC and analyzed a relationship
with clinicopathological factors and clinical outcomes.

Results: The number of ALDH1-positive cells was significantly increased
by PGE2 treatment, and PGE2 promoted growth and sphere formation
potential in PDAC cells. In addition, 15-PGDH inhibitor induced PGE2
accumulation and gave rise to ALDH1-positive cells harboring high
proliferating potential in PDAC cells. The growth and sphere formation
potential were inhibited by silencing ALDH1 expression in PDAC cells. We
next found that the expression of Nanog and Oct-4 genes was regulated by
PGE2-ALDH1 signaling. Furthermore, 15-PGDH inhibitor induced ALDH1
expression and promoted PanIN formation in Kras-driven genetic mouse
model. Finally, a high level of ALDH1 expression was significantly
associated with large tumor size and high Ki67expression, and poor
prognosis in PDAC patients.

Conclusion: Current findings suggested that PGE2 positively regulated
ALDH1 expression, and the growth and sphere formation potential were
promoted by regulating self-renewal related genes expression, resulting
in poor prognosis of PDAC patients. Inhibiting PGE2-ALDH1 signaling could
lead to the suppression of tumor growth in PDAC patients.


