Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alternated activation of TGFβ pathway and differential expression
of epithelial to mesenchymal transition transcription factors in relation
to lymph node metastasis in two subtypes of breast cancer tumors.


Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer death among women worldwide,
being distant metastases the main cause of death. Epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been implicated in promoting cancer
invasion and metastasis. This process can be induced by TGFβ through the
expression of transcription factors: TWIST, SNAIL, SLUG and ZEB1, which
expression may be promoted by different signaling pathways such as
SMAD2/SMAD3, PI3K/AKT and ERK/MAPK. The expression of EMT transcription
factors has been previously studied in several cancer cell lines,
although no studies have been performed in breast cancer tumors. In this
study, we analyzed by immunohistochemistry the expression of the four
transcription factors, and the signal transduction key proteins p-SMAD2
(ser465/467), p-SMAD2L (ser245/250/,255) and p-AKT (ser473), in 107
breast cancer tumors. We found expression of at least one transcription
factor in all triple negative tumors (n=24), while only 70% luminal
tumors showed expression of at least one of these proteins. Expression of
ZEB1, SNAIL and SLUG was observed in tumors with metastases to lymph
node, whereas the majority of tumors expressing TWIST were negative for
lymph node status. All triple negative tumors with an active state of the
signal transduction pathway TGFβ/SMAD showed expression of at least one
transcription factor, whereas 65% of luminal tumors with an active state
of the same pathway showed no expression of these transcription factors.
Active state of PI3K/AKT pathway was observed only for luminal tumors as
it has been described. Sixty-three percent of tumors having this pathway
active showed expression of at least one transcription factor. In
conclusion we found differential expression of EMT transcription factors
in relation to lymph node status and a differential active state of
signaling pathways in relation to tumoral subtype of breast cancer
tumors. Our results suggest a different mechanism of EMT induction by
TGFβ in relation to two tumor’s subtypes and lymph node metastasis.


