Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-452 inhibits migration and invasion of prostate cancer cells
by targeting E3 ubiquitin ligase-1 (WWP1).


Introduction: Most prostate cancer (PCa) patients initially respond to
androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT), but eventually acquire resistance to
ADT and progress to castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC),
resulting in metastasis causing PCa death. We have developed the microRNA
(miRNA) expression signature of PCa using clinical specimens and
determined the target genes of the tumor suppressive miRNAs, whose
expressions are significantly decreased in PCa specimens. Based on the
signature, our previous study revealed that miR-224 functions as a tumor
suppressor, especially contributes to cancer cell metastasis directly
targeting miR-224-TPD52 signaling. In human genome, miR-452 is located
nearby tumor-suppressive miR-224, forming clustered miRNAs on chromosome
Xq28 region. The aim of the study was to investigate the functional
significance of miR-452 and to identify novel miR-452-mediated cancer
pathways and responsible genes in PCa cells.

Material and methods: Clinical prostate specimens were obtained from
patients admitted to the Teikyo University Chiba Medical Center from 2008
to 2013. Ninety-two patients with elevated PSA levels underwent
transrectal prostate needle biopsy, and three patients who died of CRPC
underwent autopsies. PCa tissues (n=54), noncancerous prostate tissues
(non-PCa, n=36), were used for analysis of expression levels of miRNAs.
Functional studies of differentially expressed miRNAs were analyzed using
PC3 and DU145 cells. The influence on CRPC-free survival of expression
levels of miRNA was estimated using the Kaplan-Meier methods. In silico
database and genome-wide gene expression analyses were performed to
identify molecular targets regulated by the miRNAs.

Results: (The miRNA expression signature of PCa specimens showed that the
cluster miRNAs miR-224 was significantly downregulated, suggesting that
this miRNA may act as tumor suppressor.) Clinical data using advanced PCa
showed that low expression of miR-452 predicted a short duration of
progression to CRPC. Restoration of miR-452 in PC3 and DU145 cells
revealed significant inhibition of cancer cell migration and invasion. WW
domain-containing E3 ubiquitin protein ligase-1 (WWP1) was confirmed as a
direct target of miR-452 by in vitro transfection of miR-452 and
Luciferase assay. Knockdown of the expression of WWP1 using siRNA showed
inhibiting cell migration and invasion in PC3 and DU145 cells.
Immunohistochemistry showed overexpressed WWP1 in advanced PCa.

Conclusions: Loss of the tumor suppressive miR-452 enhanced migration and
invasion in PCa cells. Regulation of the miR-452-WWP1 axis contributed to
PCa cell migration and invasion, and elucidation of downstream signaling
of this axis will provide new insights into the mechanisms of
(progression to CRPC) metastasis of PCa.


