Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LSD1 modulates androgen receptor cistrome in prostate cancer via
regulation of FOXA1 chromatin binding.


Patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer (PCa) benefit from
CYP17A1 inhibitors and more potent AR antagonists, but still relapse with
tumors expressing high levels of AR and AR regulated genes, indicating
restoration of AR activity. Therefore, there remains a pressing need for
further development of novel AR targeted therapies.

One major mechanism that contributes to the PCa development is
reprogramming of AR cistrome by transcriptional factors and chromatin
modifiers. In this process, AR is recruited to a subset of newly
established enhancers that can drive the expression of proliferation
genes. FOXA1 is one such transcriptional factor that determines
cell-lineage and is characterized as a “pioneer” factor to facilitate
the access of additional transcription factors (such as AR or ER) to the
regions with compact chromatin. A recent study by comparing the AR
cistrome in normal prostate and PCa tissues suggests that FOXA1 is
responsible for driving AR reprograming. Whole genome analyses in PCa
cells have revealed that FOXA1 can recognize enhancer regions with active
histone marks (H3K4me1,2) and then further open up the sites to allow
subsequent AR binding. However, the molecular mechanism on how FOXA1 is
guided to the target region in PCa is still elusive and studying this
mechanism exhibits significant translational potential on modulating AR
activity in PCa.

Lysine Specific Demethylase 1 (LSD1/KDM1A) is an important epigenetic
modifier that can function as a repressor by demethylating H3K4me1,2.
However, LSD1 also often associates with enhancers and can function as an
activator in some contexts. Our previous studies showed that LSD1 binding
significantly overlaps with FOXA1 and the overlapping sites that are
marked by high levels of H3K4me2 enrich for AR activated genes. LSD1 also
interacts with FOXA1 and this interaction enhances binding of both
proteins at AR-mediated enhancers. These findings suggest that LSD1 may
regulate the availability of enhancers to AR via interaction with FOXA1
and hence may reprogram AR cistrome in PCa cells. In this study, we
performed ChIP-seq analyses of FOXA1 and AR in PCa cells treated with
LSD1 inhibitors. The results showed that the global FOXA1 binding was
drastically diminished by inhibiting LSD1, indicating that its
demethylase activity is required for FOXA1 binding. Importantly,
inhibiting LSD1 also results in distinct AR binding patterns with the
expression of many classic AR-activated genes being impaired and new
AR-activated genes emerged. We are currently carrying out xenograft
studies to examine the impact on tumor progression and AR cistrome by
LSD1 inhibitor. Overall, our results suggest that the LSD1-FOXA1
interaction functions as an important modulator of AR cistrome and
targeting LSD1 in conjunction with AR antagonists may be a promising
therapeutic approach to treat PCa.


