Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of fruquintinib, a potent and selective oral VEGFR
inhibitor, in combination with targeted therapies or immune checkpoint
inhibitors in preclinical tumor models.


The development of therapies targeting tumor angiogenesis, tumor driver
gene alterations and tumor immune evasion has made tremendous advancement
in improving overall survival. However, efficacy may be limited and
resistance often develops rapidly when targeting a single axis of
tumorigenesis. Therefore, it is worthwhile to explore rational
combination of therapies based on tumor-specific features. Fruquintinib
is a potent and selective oral VEGFR inhibitor currently in Phase III
clinical trials for non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and colorectal
cancer (CRC). We report here the evaluation of anti-tumor effect of
fruquintinib in preclinical animal tumor models in combination with
therapies targeting tumor driver gene alterations such as EGFR and c-MET
or with immune checkpoints. In NSCLC xenograft models with EGFR
activation such as activating mutations, gene amplification or protein
overexpression, fruquintinib plus an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor such
as gefitinib or theliatinib (HMPL-309) was found to be more efficacious
than either monotherapy. For instance, in PC-9 subcutaneous tumor model
carrying EGFR exon 19 deletion, single agent treatment with fruquintinib
at 2 mg/kg and gefitinib at 5 mg/kg produced the tumor growth inhibition
(TGI) of 58% and 63%, respectively, while the combination treatment
resulted in a TGI of 100% and tumor regression was observed in 11 of 16
mice treated with combinational therapy. In multiple xenograft models
derived from lung cancer or renal cell cancer with c-MET activation
(amplification or over-expression), addition of fruquintinib to a c-MET
inhibitor savolitinib (AZD6094, HMPL-504) also improved the tumor growth
inhibition substantially. At the end of the efficacy studies, CD31 and
phosphorylation of EGFR, c-MET, AKT and ERK were analyzed with
immunohistochemistry and western blotting method in tumor tissues. The
results suggested that the enhanced anti-tumor effect in combination
therapy could be attributed to the simultaneous blockade of cell
signaling in tumor cells (EGFR or c-MET) and VEGFR suppression in the
tumor microenvironment. Up-regulation of the immune inhibitory
checkpoints induced by VEGF is one of the important mechanisms for tumor
cells to escape immune surveillance. In a syngeneic murine tumor model,
co-administration of fruquintinib and anti-PD-L1 antibody was found to
provide improved anti-tumor effect compared to fruquintinib or anti-PD-L1
single agent alone. Studies to understand the mechanism responsible for
the combination effect are under way. All combinations with fruquintinib
described above were well tolerated. The efficacy observed in these
models suggested that simultaneous blockade of tumor angiogenesis and
tumor cell signaling or immune evasion may be a promising approach in
improving treatment outcomes.


