Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Complementary NGS approaches on digitally sorted pure tumor cells
reveal hidden molecular characteristics in low tumor content FFPE
specimens.


Introduction:

Precise characterization of tumor cell populations is an essential
requirement for guiding the cancer care, allowing patients to receive
personalized therapies. Poor biopsies with low-tumor content represent a
significant barrier for sample enrollment in clinical trials. Here we
describe a multi-level approach for precisely characterizing the genetic
mutation landscape of pure tumor cell populations sorted by the
DEPArray™ technology from low-cellularity FFPE samples.

Methods:

50μm sections of FFPE from breast infiltrating ductal adenocarcinoma
with 10% tumor content were processed by DEPArray sorting protocol.
Illumina-compatible libraries were prepared from sorted stromal (n=497)
and tumor (n=419) cell pools, and from the unsorted sample. An aliquot of
these libraries was processed using SeqCap EZ MedExome enrichment kit
(Roche) for whole-exome sequencing (WES) with a HiSeq 2500, reaching a
mean coverage of 27x for tumor and 25x for stromal libraries. A second
aliquot was used for low-pass (≈1M fragments per sample) whole-genome
sequencing (WGS) on a MiSeq to analyze copy-number alterations (CNA).
Other cell lysates from stromal (n=104, n=112) and pure tumor (n=75)
populations were used in DEPArray OncoSeek amplicon-based assay for
focused analysis of clinically relevant somatic variants and copy-number
alterations.

Results:

In sorted pure tumor populations, WES analysis of B-allele frequencies of
germline heterozygous SNPs clearly outlined an aberrant profile,
precisely revealing several Loss-of-Heterozygosity (LOH) and copy-altered
regions. Conversely, unsorted gDNA showed a flat profile
non-distinguishable from sorted stromal cells, as expected for a
low-cellularity tumor sample. Similar results were obtained by low-pass
WGS, where the huge number of copy number aberrations (≈1.2 Gbp) in
tumor is contrasted by lack of gains and losses in stromal cells and
unsorted gDNA. Noteworthy, WES, low-pass and targeted sequencing by
OncoSeek panel highlighted a focal amplification of ERBB2 gene (>13
copies), which was just barely detectable as a 1-copy gain in bulk gDNA.
Genetic analyses showed a high concordance between WES and targeted panel
data, with two non-synonymous homozygous somatic mutations found in TP53
(p.L111R) and ERBB2 (p.D769Y). In the unsorted sample, the TP53 mutation
was missed because allelic frequency was below the limit of detection due
to normal-cell dilution, while the ERBB2 mutation was still detectable
only because of the high-level amplification.

Conclusions:

DEPArray sorting technology is an indispensable tool for accurately
investigating cancer genomes, enabling multi-level applications for
obtaining a fine-grain characterization of copy-numbers, LOH, and
tumor-specific variants, independent of original tumor content.


