Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profile of peripheral blood mononuclear cells in
breast cancer patients may be contribute to the identification and the
immunological classification of breast cancer patients by blood test.


It is reported that gene expression profile of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) exhibits unique gene expression signature in
cancer patients including renal cell carcinoma, pancreatic cancer and
lung cancer. Since pancreatic cancer diagnosis is difficult in not only
early detection of the disease but also in the diagnosis itself,
development of novel diagnostic tools in addition to conventional
diagnostic strategy has been awaited. On the other hand, in breast
cancer, because early diagnosis by mammography and ultra sound
examination on breast is established successfully, exploration of gene
expression profile of PBMCs may be important in terms of insight to host
antitumor immune response aspects.

In the current study, we performed RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis on
RNA of PBMCs from 3 healthy volunteers, 6 early and 7 metastatic breast
cancer patients including all phenotypes defined by ER, PgR and HER2.
Genes that showed FDRIn the current study, we performed RNA sequencing
(RNA-seq) analysis on RNA of PBMCs from 3 healthy volunteers, 6 early and
7 metastatic breast cancer patients including all phenotypes defined by
ER, PgR and HER2. Genes that showed FDR<0.05 and fold change of In the
current study, we performed RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis on RNA of
PBMCs from 3 healthy volunteers, 6 early and 7 metastatic breast cancer
patients including all phenotypes defined by ER, PgR and HER2. Genes that
showed FDR<0.05 and fold change of <0.5 and 2.0In the current study, we
performed RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis on RNA of PBMCs from 3
healthy volunteers, 6 early and 7 metastatic breast cancer patients
including all phenotypes defined by ER, PgR and HER2. Genes that showed
FDR<0.05 and fold change of <0.5 and 2.0< in comparison of healthy
volunteers and breast cancer patients were applied to clustering analysis
by Ward method. We found significant unique gene expression signature
between healthy volunteers and breast cancer patients. Furthermore, it
was shown that HER2 overexpressing breast cancer patients, which breast
cancer patients were divided into 3 clusters including HER2 type and
other 2 different groups, seemed to be classified into healthy group
different from other phenotypes of breast cancer patients.

These findings suggested that evaluation of gene expression patterns of
PBMCs of breast cancer patients might distinguish breast cancer patients
from healthy subjects and the gene expression signature of PBMCs which
divided breast cancer patients into 3 groups might reveal immunologically
important biologic properties such as response prediction of cancer
immunotherapy including immune checkpoint inhibition treatment.


