Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cullin3-KLHL25 ubiquitin ligase targets ACLY for degradation to
inhibit lipid synthesis and tumor progression.


Increased lipid synthesis is a key characteristic of many cancers, which
is critical for cancer progression. As a key enzyme in lipid synthesis,
ACLY (ATP citrate lyase) converts citrate in the cytosol to acetyl-CoA,
which is a precursor for lipid synthesis. ACLY is frequently
overexpressed or activated in cancer, which plays an important role in
promoting lipid synthesis and cancer progression. Currently, the
mechanism underlying ACLY overexpression and increased lipid synthesis in
cancer is poorly understood. Cullin3 (CUL3) is a core protein for
CUL3-RING ubiquitin ligase complex. CUL3 has been recently reported to be
a tumor suppressor and its expression is frequently down-regulated in
lung cancer. The mechanism of CUL3 in tumor suppression is not
well-understood. In this study, we found that CUL3 interacted with ACLY
through its adaptor protein KLHL25 to ubiquitinate and degrade ACLY in
cells. Ectopic CUL3 expression in lung cancer cells greatly inhibited
lipid synthesis, cell proliferation and tumor growth, whereas knockdown
of endogenous CUL3 in lung cancer cells greatly promoted lipid synthesis,
cell proliferation and tumor growth. Furthermore, negative regulation of
ACLY contributes greatly to these functions of CUL3. Supplementation of
lipid metabolites in culture medium, such as oleic acid, mevalonate and
acetate, significantly reduced the inhibitory effect of CUL3 on
proliferation and colony formation of cancer cells. SB-204990, a
small-molecule ACLY inhibitor greatly abolished the promoting effect of
CUL3 down-regulation on lipid synthesis, cell proliferation and tumor
growth. In addition, we identified K540, K546 and K554 of ALCY as major
ubiquitination sites of CUL3. Mutations of K540, K546 and K554
(K540R/K546R/K554R) greatly reduced CUL3-mediated ubiquitination and
degradation of ACLY, and greatly compromised the inhibitory effect of
CUL3 on tumor growth as well. Importantly, low CUL3 expression is
significantly associated with high ACLY expression in clinical lung
cancer specimens, and poor prognosis in lung cancer patients. In summary,
our results identified CUL3-KLHL25 ubiquitin ligase as a novel negative
regulator for ACLY and lipid synthesis, and demonstrated that decreased
CUL3 expression is an important mechanism for increased ACLY expression
and lipid synthesis in lung cancer. These results also revealed that
negative regulation of ACLY and lipid synthesis is a novel and critical
mechanism for CUL3 in tumor suppression.


