Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIF-1-dependent regulation of creatine kinase metabolism promotes
breast cancer invasion and metastasis.


Dysregulated tumor cell metabolism is a hallmark of cancer progression
and therapeutic resistance. In a screen for Hypoxia-Inducible Factor
(HIF)-dependent genes regulating metabolism, we identified creatine
kinase, brain isoform (CKB) as down-regulated in HIF-1 knockout mammary
tumor cells. Creatine kinases (CKs) reversibly catalyze the transfer of a
high-energy phosphoryl group from ATP to creatine, generating
phosphocreatine in the forward reaction, and ATP in the reverse reaction.
CKs are up-regulated in a variety of solid tumors, including ovarian,
breast, colon, lung and brain. Knockdown of CKB in the polyoma middle T
(PyMT) transgenic mouse model of metastatic breast cancer suppressed the
production of intracellular ATP and invasion in vitro, and inhibited
metastasis from the mammary gland to the lung in vivo. CK activity is
known to be inhibited by cyclocreatine, a creatine kinase substrate that
represses CK-dependent generation of ATP from phosphocreatine. When
female FVB/Nj mice were injected with wild type PyMT cells in a tail vein
assay and then treated with cCr (1g/kg/day, IP), lung metastasis was
repressed to the same extent as Ckb gene knockdown. Moreover, when cCr
therapy was administered 7 days after tail vein injection, cCr was
effective in preventing the transition of lung micrometastases to
macrometastases. To explore the role of CK activity in regulating cell
proliferation, survival in suspension, cellular metabolism and invasion,
we next created CKB loss- and gain-of-function models using human breast
cancer cell lines, and compared phenotypes to cCr treatment. Whereas
deletion of CKB had no effect on cell proliferation or survival in
adherent conditions or in suspension, either deletion of CKB or cCr
therapy potently reduced ATP levels and invasive potential in vitro.
Preliminary data also indicate that pre-treatment of triple negative
breast cancer cell lines with cCr sensitizes cells to doxorubicin.
Together, these data suggest that inhibition of CK activity may be
effective in treating stage IV breast cancer. We are currently testing
whether cCr has anti-metastatic efficacy as a monotherapy, or in
combination with conventional chemotherapies, using luciferase-labeled
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models.

This work was sponsored by the NIH (CA138488), the Dept. of Defense
(BC150640), the METAvivor foundation, and the West Cancer Center in
Memphis, TN.


