Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishing patient derived preclinical in vitro and in vivo
models of pediatric brain cancers.


The recent surge in understanding genomic aberrations of some of the
deadliest childhood brain cancers has highlighted the need for robust
preclinical models. Such models will allow for robust drug screening and
preclinical evaluation of efficacy, toxicity, and tumor penetrance in
vivo. Given the rarity and importance of patient derived specimens,
handling and processing methods are perhaps the most critical steps for
successful establishment of viable and reproducible in vitro and in vivo
models. Since specimen source varies (biopsy, autopsy, or
cryo-preserved), processing methods should be refined to allow for
optimal extraction of maximum numbers of viable cells from each specimen
type. We have developed standardized procedures for handling and
processing of tissue samples obtained from biopsy, autopsy, or
cryo-preserved specimens as well as necropsy tissue obtained from
existing xenograft models. Two processing methods for generating viable
cell suspensions are described. The first method, which uses
collagenase-DNAse mediated digestion of the tissue is efficient with
bulky samples and can be used with tissues obtained at autopsy. The
second method uses a commercially available enzymatic dissociation kit
optimal for small volume samples such as biopsy, cryo-preserved and mouse
necropsy specimens. We show that obtaining viable cell suspension from
precious tumor tissue by these methods results in successful generation
of pre-clinical in vitro and in vivo models of DIPG, pilocytic
astrocytoma and medulloblastoma that represent the exact genetic makeup
of the original patient tumor. We further demonstrate intracranial
injections of these cells into P2 mice for generating orthotopic
xenograft models of brainstem or cortical tumors. Our methods and results
allow for rapid establishment of preclinical models using rare and
valuable childhood brain tumor specimens. These pre-clinical models serve
as valuable tools for understanding the molecular mechanisms of the
disease, identifying targetable molecules, and screening of novel
therapeutics.


