Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 1-Methoxyphaseollidin: Novel gamma secretase inhibitor targeting
notch-1 signaling in breast cancer stem cells.


We recently showed that two different ALDH+ and CD44+/CD24-/low breast
cancer stem cells (BSCSs) exhibited stem cell characteristics that
include self-renewal, extensive proliferation, the ability to form
non-adherent spherical clusters, chemotherapy resistance and high Notch1
expression. We have identified a compound compound:
6-(3-methylbut-2-enyl) coumestrol (Pso) and treatment with Pso resulted
in growth inhibition and an EMT phenotype in both BCSCs and BC cells.
Oral Pso administration at physiologically achievable doses (25 mg/kg/BW)
suppressed the growth of BCSCs and BC xenografts without toxicity. In the
current studies, we identified several novel Pso-derived analogs that may
be more potent than the parent compound. One such compound,
1-methoxyphaseollidin (1MP), obtained via three main functional group
changes: (i) translocation of the isoprenyl moiety from the phenyl ring
fused to the pyran ring (as in Pso) to the phenyl ring adjacent to the
furan ring, (ii) removal of the carbonyl group from the pyran ring, and
(iii) introduction of a methoxy group at the 1-position, inhibited Notch1
activity and growth of both BSCS and BC cells at nM concentration (IC50:
300nM), which is 100 times more potently than Pso in cell culture models.
Molecular studies suggest that 1MP inhibits Notch signaling pathways
(Hes1, Hey1 and Presenilin) in both BCSC and BC cells. Further,
downregulation of AKT signaling (pAKT (S473), p65 and BCl-2 were seen in
1MP treated cells. Docking studies suggest that 1MP binds outside of the
catalytic unit of γ-secretase and induces a conformational change,
resulting in Notch1 inhibition in both BCSCs and BC cells. More
importantly, administration of 1MP significantly inhibited the growth of
BCSC and BC tumors without causing gastrointestinal toxicity in
tumor-bearing mice. H&E staining suggests that 1MP treated tumors show
infiltrate to margins are less as compared to vehicle treated mice’s.
We believe targeting notch1 signaling and optimizing 1MP could be an
effective therapeutic strategy for treating breast cancer.


