Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Theory and methodology for the design and analysis of PDX mouse
clinical trials.


Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) is a well-accepted experimental cancer
model mimicking original patients in histo- & molecular pathology, as
well as drug response. Mouse clinical trials (MCT) using PDX becomes
increasingly prevalent in oncology research, yet the theory and
methodology for trial design and analysis is underdeveloped. By analyzing
tumor growths of 34081 PDX mice, we showed that majority of them can be
satisfactorily modeled by exponential growth kinetics, based on which we
derived a new drug response readout called the AUC ratio that is superior
to the tumor growth inhibition (TGI) and its variants. We outlined a
bootstrap algorithm to calculate its confidence interval, and showed that
a 4:4 (4 mice in both treatment groups) or up design sharply increases
measurement accuracy over the lesser design. Next, we introduce three
approaches for drug evaluation and biomarker discovery in MCTs. In the
end-point based analysis, we used a cohort of gastric PDXs to show a
positive correlation between EGFR mRNA expression and cetuximab efficacy,
in agreement with clinical trial results. We then used linear mixed
models (LMMs) to describe MCTs as clustered longitudinal studies that
capture the growth and drug response heterogeneities across PDXs and
among mice within a PDX. Further, LMMs can separate prognostic and
predictive biomarker effects, quantify response difference to a drug for
multiple cancers, or efficacy difference of multiple drugs to a cohort of
PDXs. Thirdly, we used additive frailty models to perform survival
analysis on MCTs. We defined survival endpoints of PFS and OS in PDXs,
and showed that hazard ratios can be more accurately estimated. We
revealed an inherent connection between frailty and growth rate for PDXs.
We performed computational simulations for the last two methods to show
that statistical power improves tremendously with a 3:3 or up design.
This work lays the foundation for rational design and analysis of PDX
mouse clinical trials.


