Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting stearoyl CoA desaturase 1 (SCD1) in hepatobilliary
carcinoma.


Background: The paucity of effective therapeutic agents for
hepatocellular cancer (HCC) underscores the critical need for more
effective therapeutic strategies. Recent studies indicate lipid
biosynthesis and desaturation is required for HCC survival. Targeting
these may prove beneficial because such changes contribute to therapeutic
resistance. Stearoyl CoA desaturase (SCD1), a key mediator of fatty acid
(FA) biosynthesis and rate-limiting in conversion of saturated fatty
acids (SFAs) to mono-unsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs), is upregulated in
HCC and many other cancers. As such, we therapeutically targeted a novel
lipogenic tumor survival mechanism mediated by SCD1 as a means to combat
the chemoresistance associated with HCC. In so doing, we evaluated a
novel lead SCD1 inhibitor in HCC.

Methods: Paraffin embedded patient HCC tissues were examined for SCD1
expression. Using combined computational and synthetic chemistry
approaches, we synthesized four novel specific SCD1 inhibitors with SSI-4
being the lead SCD1 inhibitor. HCC cell lines were examined using
proliferation assays for response to SSI-4. IC50 concentrations for
blocking SCD1 enzyme activity was determined. Blood half-life and
bioavailability of single dose SSI-4 was determined. Mechanisms of action
of SCD1 were examined that included Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. In
vivo, antitumor activity was determined using HCC patient derived
xenograft (PDX) mouse models.

Results: We identified elevated SCD1 mRNA and protein in HCCs tissues.
SSI-4 dose-dependently inhibits cell proliferation in HCC cell lines with
specificity demonstrated by oleic acid (MUFA) co-culture. Single dose
oral gavage SSI-4 demonstrated a half-life of ~4 hours and excellent oral
bioavailability. SSI-4 was well tolerated with long-term daily dosing.
SSI-4 treatment of HCC cells and tumors led to endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress followed by apoptotic cell death. Single agent SSI-4 demonstrated
antitumor activity in HCC PDX mouse models with suppression of ER stress
regulated proteins.

Conclusions: Targeting a novel lipid metabolic pathway in HCC may provide
effective therapy for aggressive HCC.


