Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dicer suppresses cytoskeleton remodeling and tumorigenesis of
colorectal epithelium by miR-324-5p mediated suppression of HMGXB3 and
WASF-2.


Emerging evidence indicates that microRNAs, a class of small and
well-conserved noncoding RNAs, participate in many physiological and
pathological processes. RNase III endonuclease DICER is one of the key
enzymes for microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis. However, the role of Dicer and
its downstream miRNAs in colorectal cancer (CRC) remain largely unclear.
Here, we found that Dicer was downregulated in tumour samples of CRC
patients at both mRNA and protein levels. Importantly, more tumours were
developed in mice with intestinal epithelial cells specific deletion of
Dicer (Dicerloxp/+&VillinCre mice) after azoxymethane (AOM) and dextran
sulfate sodium (DSS) administration. Interestingly, deletion of Dicer in
intestinal epithelial cells led to severe chronic inflammation and
cytoskeleton remodeling of intestinal epithelium layer in mice with or
without DSS administration. Microarray analysis of 3 paired Dicer
deletion CRC cell lines (RKO-WT/RKO-DICER-/-, HCT116-WT/ HCT116-DICER-/-
and DLD-WT/DLD-DICER-/-) showed that miR-324-5p was one of the most
significant decreased miRNAs. In the intestinal epithelium of
Dicerloxp/loxp&VillinCre mice, miR-324-5p was also found to be markedly
downregulated. Mechanistically, miR-324-5p directly bound to the
3'untranslated regions (3'UTRs) of HMGXB3 and WASF-2, two key proteins
participated in cytoskeleton remodeling, to suppress their expression.
Intraperitoneal injection of miR-324-5p AgomiR curtailed chronic
inflammation and cytoskeleton remodeling of colorectal epithelium and
restored intestinal barrier function in Dicerloxp/+&VillinCre mice
induced by DSS. Therefore, our study reveals a key role of a
DICER/miR-324-5p/HMGXB3/WASF-2 axis in cytoskeleton remodeling and
maintaining integrity of intestinal barriers and as such alludes to the
possibility of screening for small-molecule compounds that boost Dicer
activity as a potential strategy in the treatment of colorectal cancer.


