Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The functional synergism and pro-metastatic role of FOXM1 and
CENPF in hepatocellular carcinoma.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second leading cause of cancer
death worldwide and metastasis is regarded as the major cause of
HCC-associated lethality. In this study, we have analysed the TCGA
whole-transcriptome sequencing data of paired human HCC samples (n=50),
and identified Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) and Centromere Protein F (CENPF)
to be the top-listing upregulated genes. Interestingly, both of them are
the essential components in cell-cycle progression. FOXM1 encodes for the
cell-cycle-dependent transcription factor that regulates genes for DNA
replication and mitosis, while CENPF encodes for the centromere protein
that is required for kinetochore function and chromosome segregation in
mitosis.

We hypothesized that the upregulation of FOXM1-CENPF signaling axis may
drive hepatocarcinogenesis. In our human HCC cohort (n=34), FOXM1 and
CENPF were shown to be upregulated compared with the non-tumorous liver
tissues, and their mRNA expressions were positively correlated (pWe
hypothesized that the upregulation of FOXM1-CENPF signaling axis may
drive hepatocarcinogenesis. In our human HCC cohort (n=34), FOXM1 and
CENPF were shown to be upregulated compared with the non-tumorous liver
tissues, and their mRNA expressions were positively correlated
(p<0.0001). Co-upregulation of FOXM1 and CENPF in patient samples was
demonstrated to be positively correlated with the absence of tumor
encapsulation (p=0.035) in our clinico-pathological correlation analysis,
whereas the samples without their co-upregulation was less likely to be
correlated with venous invasion (p =0.045). This indicated that FOXM1 and
CENPF are likely to be associated with HCC metastasis synergistically.

Stable single and co-knockdown clones of FOXM1 and CENPF in four HCC cell
lines (BEL7402, SMMC-7721, MHCC-97L, Huh7) were established using
short-hairpin (sh) RNA approach for subsequent functional
characterization. Both single and co-knockdown of FOXM1 and CENPF cells
have shown reduced proliferation rate (pStable single and co-knockdown
clones of FOXM1 and CENPF in four HCC cell lines (BEL7402, SMMC-7721,
MHCC-97L, Huh7) were established using short-hairpin (sh) RNA approach
for subsequent functional characterization. Both single and co-knockdown
of FOXM1 and CENPF cells have shown reduced proliferation rate (p<0.05)
in cell proliferation assay. Moreover, all single and co-knockdown of
FOXM1 and CENPF cell lines were found to have a at least 2-fold reduction
in migration and invasion rate (pStable single and co-knockdown clones of
FOXM1 and CENPF in four HCC cell lines (BEL7402, SMMC-7721, MHCC-97L,
Huh7) were established using short-hairpin (sh) RNA approach for
subsequent functional characterization. Both single and co-knockdown of
FOXM1 and CENPF cells have shown reduced proliferation rate (p<0.05) in
cell proliferation assay. Moreover, all single and co-knockdown of FOXM1
and CENPF cell lines were found to have a at least 2-fold reduction in
migration and invasion rate (p<0.0001) in transwell cell migration and
invasion assay. These suggested that FOXM1 and CENPF are critical for HCC
cell proliferation, migration and invasion.

To assess the translational significance of targeting FOXM1 and CENPF,
seven HCC cell lines (BEL7402, SMMC-7721, MHCC-97L, Huh7, Hep3B, HepG2,
PLC/PRF/5) were challenged with thiostrepton and zoledronic acid, which
are inhibitors against FOXM1 and CENPF, respectively. Intriguingly, both
individual and combined treatments of these inhibitors effectively
inhibited HCC cell growth. It was also demonstrated that such inhibition
acts via suppressing the respective endogenous transcript and protein
expression of FOXM1 and CENPF. Taken together, our study has demonstrated
that FOXM1 and CENPF play a critical oncogenic role in HCC and they may
function as an attractive molecular therapeutic target.

This study is supported in part by Health and Medical Research Fund
(03142836).


