Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the relevant genome in solid tumors.


Decades of cancer research including comprehensive molecular profiling
combined with the development of a broad array of targeted therapies have
created the opportunity to transform cancer care by implementing
precision oncology based approaches. An important element of this system
is the widespread availability of robust and cost-effective multi-variate
profiling methods to characterize relevant cancer associated molecular
alterations in the future. Current commercially available multi-variate
profiling methods vary dramatically with regard to the number of cancer
genes that are interrogated. Given that many large scale and detailed
molecular profiling studies have been completed, the landscape of somatic
alterations in solid tumors is reasonably well-known. Furthermore, the
specific gene variants that are relevant to application of targeted
therapies are also a matter of record. Therefore, we set out to define
the number of relevant cancer genes for precision oncology research based
on the currently available empirical evidence. To define recurrent
somatic alterations in solid tumors, we created a compendium of variant
calls from > 15,000 exomes, defined focal amplifications and deletions
from > 30,000 arrays, and defined recurrent fusions from several thousand
RNAseq profiles. Statistical approaches were implemented to define genes
containing recurrent missense mutations (i.e., hotspots), enriched in
truncating mutations or subject to recurrent copy number gain/loss or
translocation. This gene set was then used to comprehensively search
approved cancer drug labels, clinical practice guidelines, and clinical
trials to identify records containing published evidence that specific
recurrent somatic gene variants were used as part of the indication
statement of an approved targeted therapy, were recommended for testing
as part of clinical practice for therapeutic decisions, or were used as
enrollment criteria in clinical trials. The relevant cancer genome thus
defined consists of Decades of cancer research including comprehensive
molecular profiling combined with the development of a broad array of
targeted therapies have created the opportunity to transform cancer care
by implementing precision oncology based approaches. An important element
of this system is the widespread availability of robust and
cost-effective multi-variate profiling methods to characterize relevant
cancer associated molecular alterations in the future. Current
commercially available multi-variate profiling methods vary dramatically
with regard to the number of cancer genes that are interrogated. Given
that many large scale and detailed molecular profiling studies have been
completed, the landscape of somatic alterations in solid tumors is
reasonably well-known. Furthermore, the specific gene variants that are
relevant to application of targeted therapies are also a matter of
record. Therefore, we set out to define the number of relevant cancer
genes for precision oncology research based on the currently available
empirical evidence. To define recurrent somatic alterations in solid
tumors, we created a compendium of variant calls from > 15,000 exomes,
defined focal amplifications and deletions from > 30,000 arrays, and
defined recurrent fusions from several thousand RNAseq profiles.
Statistical approaches were implemented to define genes containing
recurrent missense mutations (i.e., hotspots), enriched in truncating
mutations or subject to recurrent copy number gain/loss or translocation.
This gene set was then used to comprehensively search approved cancer
drug labels, clinical practice guidelines, and clinical trials to
identify records containing published evidence that specific recurrent
somatic gene variants were used as part of the indication statement of an
approved targeted therapy, were recommended for testing as part of
clinical practice for therapeutic decisions, or were used as enrollment
criteria in clinical trials. The relevant cancer genome thus defined
consists of < 100 genes. These results suggest that targeted
multi-variate profiling approaches may be sufficient to support precision
oncology goals in the future.


