Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving the efficacy of radioimmunotherapy by controlling the
tumor microenvironment of gastric cancer.


Purpose: Radioimmunotherapy(RIT) of solid tumor is limited to poor
antibody distribution due to extracellular matrix (ECM) of tumor
microenvironments. In this study, we investigated the effect of the
protein X, which is known to degrade ECM, on the accumulation and the
microdistribution of trastuzumab.

Methods: Tumor xenografts were established by subcutaneous inoculation of
5 x 106 NCI-N87 cells (human gastric cancer) into each flank of nude mice
(n=5 / group). When the tumor size reached ~200 mm2, the mice was
intravenously injected with 150 µg of Alexa 488-labeled trastuzumab
under the treatment of protein X. As a control, we used the same dose of
antibody under the non-treatment of protein X. For investigating antibody
penetration, we calculated the intensity per area, vascular density and
the intensity from the tumor edge (~500 µm) and blood vessel (~150 µm)
by analyzing fluorescence image of whole tumor using In Cell analyzer.
For in vivo PET image, trastuzumab was labeled with 64Cu using DOTA
chelator and the mice was intravenously injected with 150 µg (400 µCi)
of 64Cu-DOTA-trastuzumab under the treatment of protein X. We acquired
PET image at 2, 15, 40 and 64 hours after injection.

Results: In mouse model, protein X decreased ECM protein in tumor
microenvironments and that resulted in the change of intensity compared
with non-treatment of protein X; 1) the intensity per area: 2.5 times
increase, 2) vascular density: not changed, 3) the intensity from the
tumor edge: 5 times increase, and 4) the intensity from blood vessel: 3.7
times increase. As analyzed result of in vivo PET image, the protein
X-treated mice showed 3.9 %ID/g tumor uptake; the non-treated mice showed
2.3 %ID/g tumor uptake 2 hours after injection and the protein X-treated
mice showed 4.6 %ID/g tumor uptake; the non-treated mice showed 3.8 %ID/g
tumor uptake 15 hours after injection. In addition significantly
increased anti-tumor effect of RIT were observed in the combined
treatment group.

Conclusion: This study demonstrates that the treatment of protein X was
significantly enhances the uptake of trastuzumab without vascular change
in implanted tumor tissue of nude mice. This finding implies that ECM
degraded function of protein X improves antibody accumulation of tumor
tissue and that can enhance the effect of RIT.


