Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Workflow automation and parallelization improves the isolation and
analysis of tumor-infiltrating immune subpopulations.


Immunotherapy against cancer has proven clinical efficacy and tremendous
potential in multiple tumor entities. Syngeneic mouse tumor models
represent the gold standard to analyze effects of immunotherapy due to
their fully competent immune-repertoire. However, the amount and
composition of tumor infiltrating leukocytes (TIL) is highly variable,
complicating the targeted analysis of subpopulations. In particular,
small subpopulations cannot be analyzed properly but may be lost in the
background noise. When working with large cohort sizes, even the
immune-phenotyping of TIL by flow cytometry is time consuming and data
processing highly work intensive making pre-enrichment methods for sample
debulking attractive.

We have established an automated workflow combining tissue dissociation
with TIL specific isolation to improve and accelerate downstream
analysis. Tumor dissociation was automated using the gentleMACS™Octo
Dissociator and optimized for epitope conservation to overcome bias in
immune-phenotyping caused by dissociation with aggressive of impure
enzymes. Next, isolation of TIL was improved by developing a new
CD45-specific enrichment reagent for the magnetic cell sorting (MACS)
based isolation directly from dissociated tumor tissue. The whole
workflow takes only about 90 min. To validate this method on starting
material showing variable frequencies of TIL infiltration, we used
syngeneic mouse tumors derived by injection three independent tumor cell
lines. Tumors derived from injection of B16.F10 melanoma showed TIL
frequencies of 2-4%, CT26.WT colon carcinoma tumors 15-21%, and 4T1
breast carcinoma tumors 32-37% among total viable cells after
dissociation. Using a manual separation system, TIL were enriched to
purities above 90% at yields above 70% for CT26.WT and 4T1 tumors, and
purities above 80% at high yields above 95% for B16.F10 tumors. To
address the need of parallelization and automation for sample processing
in large cohort sizes used in in vivo studies, a fully automated version
of the MultiMACS™ Cell24 Separator was developed by integrating the
instrument in a liquid handling robotic platform. This new system, the
MultiMACS™ X, can process 24 cell separations in parallel with minimal
hands-on time. When compared to the manual system, equal purities were
achieved whereas the overall yield of target cells was increased from 70%
to 90% as shown in the case of CT26.WT tumors. Importantly, while the TIL
enrichment significantly reduced the time and reagent costs in immune
subset analysis, the composition of infiltrating immune cells was not
affected, excluding the risk of introducing a bias by this method.

Taken together, we have developed an automated workflow for the isolation
of TIL from mouse tumors reducing time and costs of downstream analysis
while standardizing and enhancing the detection and quantification of
immune cell subpopulations.


