Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor beta and p53 signaling crosstalk: implications
for ER beta as a potential therapeutic target in triple negative breast
cancer.


Despite over 20 years of research, there is no current consensus on
whether estrogen receptor β (ERβ) is pro- or anti-tumorigenic. With its
expression found among all breast cancer subtypes, ERβ is a potentially
valuable therapeutic target for breast cancers that lack effective,
targeted therapies, especially the triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)
subtype. In the published literature, there has been no consensus as to
whether ERβ functions as a pro- or anti-tumorigenic protein, although a
bifaceted role for ERβ has been proposed. Previous studies from our lab
have shown that ERβ can directly bind and interact with p53, resulting
in inhibition of its functions. Knockdown of ERβ in a breast cancer cell
line with wild-type (wt) p53 (MCF-7) elicits opposite functional effects
compared to knockdown of ERβ in a TNBC breast cancer cell line with
mutant (mut) p53 (MDA-MB-231). Therefore, our hypothesis is that ERβ
functions are dependent on p53 context. Besides having different p53
statuses, these two cell systems also have many other genetic differences
that may or may not contribute to the opposing functions of ERβ.
Currently, we are using an isogenic cell system that allows for
expression of different combinations of ERβ and p53 (wt or mut)
proteins. Here, we used CRISPR/Cas9 technology to knockout (KO) the TP53
gene in MDA-MB-231 cells, resulting in a complete absence of the
endogenous mut-p53 protein. By transiently transfecting back in wt-p53,
we can induce a prototypical wt-p53 response, which causes an increase in
p53 target genes accompanied by a decrease in cell growth. Meanwhile, the
parental cell line with endogenous mut-53 protein expression shows
downregulation of p53 target genes and increases cell growth. This
demonstrates that wt-p53 is still functional in the context of a cell
that originally expressed mut-p53, and that wt-p53 and mut-p53 have
opposing functions. In this system, we demonstrate that ERβ decreases
p53 target gene expression and apoptosis in the wt-p53 context.
Conversely, in the mut-p53 context, ERβ increases p53 target gene
expression, while decreasing cell cycle progression. Taken together,
these data support a pro-tumorigenic role of ERβ in the wt-p53 context,
and an anti-tumorigenic role of ERβ in the mut-p53 context in our
isogenic system. Finally, we explore the ability of ERβ ligands to
modulate the ERβ-p53 interaction and subsequently affect p53 functions.
We have found that two ERβ antagonists, 4-hydroxytamoxifen and PHTPP,
have opposite effects on p53 target genes, suggesting a difference in
their ability to modulate the ERβ-p53 interaction. Our data show that
p53 status of the tumor should be taken into consideration for
therapeutic targeting of ERβ in TNBC.


