Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recent trends in racial and regional disparities in cervical
cancer incidence and mortality.


Background: Although black and Hispanic women experienced greater
cervical cancer rate reduction in recent years, they continue to have
higher incidence rates than whites. Great variations also exist among
geographic regions of the US, with the South having both the highest
incidence and mortality rates compared to other regions. The present
study explores the question of whether living in the South is associated
with greater racial disparity in cervical cancer incidence and mortality
by examining race- and region-specific rates and the trend between 2000
and 2012.

Methods: The Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) 18
Program data was used. Incidence and mortality rates, annual percent
changes, and disparity ratios of cervical cancer were calculated using
SEER*Stat software and Joinpoint regression for four groups:
US14-Non-Hispanic White (NHW), US14-Non-Hispanic Black (NHB), South-NHW,
and South-NHB, where the South included 4 registries from Georgia and
Louisiana.

Results: The incidence and mortality rates were much higher among NHB
women compared to NHW in the South and the US. The degree of racial
disparities between NHB and NHW women was greater in terms of mortality
rates than incidence rates. For all age groups, NHB women in the South
consistently had higher incidence rates than NHB women in the US14
region. The mortality disparity ratios was highest among NHB women,
followed by NHW women in the South, NHW women in US14, and finally NHB
women in the South.

Conclusions: Although racial disparity has been narrowed in recent years,
there has been little change or even a growing gap between white women in
the South and their counterparts in the US14 region. Age-specific
analysis further indicated that the emerging regional gap observed among
white women might be attributable to the excess number of new cases and
deaths among young women.


