Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metastasis promoting long non-coding RNA, FEZF1-AS1, is an
important therapeutic target for Ewing sarcoma.


Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a universally metastatic tumor of bone and soft
tissue. Five-year survival in patients with metastases at diagnosis is
about 20% despite intense treatment strategies. 85% of these tumors
harbor a chromosomal translocation resulting in a fusion gene, EWS-FLI1.
EWS-FLI1 imparts an oncogenic phenotype by modifying critical genes in
signaling pathways, thus allowing for uninhibited cell growth, invasion,
and metastasis while evading differentiation. EWS-FLI1 is thus an ideal
therapeutic candidate, but targeting this fusion protein has proven
difficult. In an attempt to better understand ES biology and identify
candidate therapeutic targets downstream of EWS-FLI1, we profiled RNA
transcription in over 140 ES cases and compared the data to other
pediatric cancers. Among the most highly expressed was a recently
discovered long non-coding RNA (lncRNA), FEZF1-AS1, in addition to
protein-coding genes such as NR0B1, and CD99, which are known to be
important targets of the EWS-FLI1 chimeric protein. FEZF1-AS1 expression
was specific for ES and was increased more than a hundred fold in ES when
compared to other pediatric tumors. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
studies along with luciferase promoter assays showed that EWS-FLI1
induces FEZF1-AS1 expression by binding to promoter GGAA repeats.
shRNA-mediated lncRNA knockdown did not affect cell growth or survival.
Instead, metastatic potential was markedly reduced, based on Matrigel
assays. Conversely, ES cells transfected to overexpress FEZF1-AS1
engrafted better in mice and metastasized faster than control cells.
Expression profiling of lncRNA-knockdown cells showed that the lncRNA
upregulated genes were involved in cell movement and cell organization.
ChIP-seq documented significant reduction in H3K4me3 and the H3K27ac
histone marks in the promoters of genes that were downregulated as a
result of lncRNA-knockdown. In order to document FEZF1-AS1 function, we
delivered FEZF1-AS1-specific antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) and GFP-ASO
in anti-CD99-targeted-nanoparticles to ES cells. An efficient uptake of
nanoparticles and lncRNA-ASO delivery to ES cells led to a 70% decrease
in lncRNA expression in cells within four hours of initiating treatment.
LncRNA-ASO-targeted ES cells maintained low lncRNA expression for 72
hours and showed decrease invasion on matrigel assays. The cells
tolerated the treatment well with no adverse effect on cell survival and
proliferation. These results suggest that FEZF1-AS1 is a highly
functional and ES-specific lncRNA that can be an important therapeutic
target, reduced expression of which markedly decreases metastasis of ES
tumors. The primary mechanism of action appears to be histone acetylation
that activates genes involved in cell migration. The nanoparticle data
indicates that FEZF1-AS1 is also a potential therapeutic target, via
targeted delivery of inhibitory ASOs.


