Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An industrial method of manufacturing a novel RNAi anticancer
drug, DFP-10825, for the treatment of peritoneal disseminated gastric
cancer.


We have developed an RNAi based anticancer drug, DFP-10825 [a cationic
liposome and short-hairpin RNAi molecule for thymidylate synthase (TS
shRNA)] and here established an industrial method of manufacturing the
formulation. The therapeutic efficacy of the DFP-10825 was examined in a
MKN45 human gastric carcinoma xenograft mouse model (peritoneal
disseminated gastric cancer model). The mice were received
intraperitoneal injection with 5 doses of DFP-10825 or control
formulation (short-hairpin RNA for luciferase) (1 mg shRNA/kg/day) once
every 3 days. The treatment with DFP-10825 obviously prolonged survival
time of the mice compared to control formulation and significantly
suppressed the target mRNA level in the peritoneal disseminated tumors.
We recently reported that DFP-10825 showed a significant therapeutic
efficiency in the human malignant pleural mesothelioma orthotopic
xenograft model. Accordingly, DFP-10825 may lead a clinical benefit to
patients with pulmonary malignant mesothelioma or disseminated peritoneal
tumor. In addition, we established an industrial method of manufacturing
DFP-10825, which provides a large scale preparation. Water solution of TS
shRNA was gently mixed at an optimal ratio with ethanol solution of
cationic lipids, composed of DC-6-14 (a cationic lipid), DOPE and DOPC.
Then, the mixture was lyophilized under optimal condition. The
freeze-dried cake provided a ready for injection formulation by a
one-step hydration with saline. Physicochemical properties of the
obtained DFP-10825 such as particle size, zeta-potential, and size
distribution were almost comparable with those of conventionally prepared
DFP-10825, which prepared with conventional preparation method, mixing TS
shRNA solution and cationic liposomes. Our findings in this study
demonstrate that intraperitoneal chemotherapy with a simple freeze-dried
RNAi medicine, DFP-10825, showing an equivalent pharmaceutical and
therapeutic potency with conventionally prepared DFP-10825, meets a
criteria to use for clinical settings and will have a clinical benefit to
treat patients with disseminated peritoneal and pulmonary cancers.


