Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Building a novel 3D hyaluronan-based tri-culture model of the bone
metastatic microenvironment for cancer studies.


The high attrition rate of potential anti-cancer drugs entering clinical
trials predicates a need for more predictive pre-clinical model systems.
Three-dimensional (3D) culture systems provide cells a more physiological
microenvironment than traditional cell culture methods—including
relevant extracellular matrix (ECM) cues and cell-cell
interactions—while allowing greater experimental control and
higher-throughput studies than animal models. Prevalent cancers,
including breast and prostate cancer, metastasize preferentially to bone,
where they become incurable. The bone marrow microenvironment is a
complex network of interacting bone homeostatic and hematopoietic niches
that contribute to osteotropic cancer homing, proliferation, and
treatment resistance. We created a 3D in vitro tri-culture model of the
bone metastatic microenvironment to serve as a new platform to study the
“trialogue” between bone metastatic cancer, bone marrow stroma, and
bone marrow endothelial cells. This tool can be used to inform drug
discovery and to combat treatment resistance. Within the present study,
the utility of peptide-functionalized hyaluronan hydrogels for supporting
the self-organization of 3D bone marrow microvascular networks was
explored. Gel crosslinking density was varied to examine the effect of
matrix porosity on cell migration and organization over time. Tubule
length and diameter were quantified and the endothelial structures were
assessed for indicators of mature vasculature, including lumen formation,
basement membrane production, and the recruitment of supporting stromal
cells. Breast/prostate cancer cell growth, survival, and physical
association with bone marrow stromal and bone marrow microvascular
endothelial cell networks was examined in tri-culture models. Ongoing
studies seek to identify and disrupt key cell signaling pathways that
mediate cell-cell interaction and promote cancer cell proliferation and
survival, providing new tools to combat bone metastatic disease.


