Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylome differences in differentiated thyroid cancers and benign
adenomas.


Many recent studies examining aberrant DNA methylation in thyroid cancer
are restricted to either candidate genes or genome-wide methylation in
specific thyroid tumor subtypes. The goal of this study was to identify
differentially methylated genes globally and their association with
molecular pathways and signaling networks. Common mutations in papillary
thyroid cancer (PTC), follicular thyroid cancer (FTC), follicular adenoma
(FA) and normal thyroid were also examined. Genome-wide methylation
profiling using the Infinium HumanMethylation450FFPE (formalin fixed
paraffin embedded) BeadChip Array was performed on 24 thyroid cases (8
PTC, 8 FTC, 4 FA and 4 normal thyroid). Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA)
was utilized to assess the roles of significantly differentially
methylated genes in biological functions, signaling/metabolic pathways,
and networks. Common mutations in 4 genes (BRAF, NRAS, HRAS, and KRAS)
were assessed using TaqMan Mutation Detection assay. Twelve genes were
significantly differentially methylated among 4 comparison groups: cancer
vs normal, cancer vs adenoma, PTC vs normal, and PTC follicular variant
(PTC-FV) vs PTC-Classic. CTU1 and HLA-DPB1 were significantly
hypermethylated and AARS2, TMSB10, RNF216L, KIF15, KIAA1143, and SLC2A13
were significantly hypomethylated between cancer and normal. Significant
differential hypermethylation was noted for PNPLA7 and NPC1L1 in cancer
vs adenoma and SNX6 in PTC-FV vs PTC-Classic. NT5C1B was hypermethylated
and AARS2 was hypomethylated in PTC vs normal. IPA identified 2 gene
networks, involving 11/12 genes, characterized by 1) Cellular
development, Cellular growth and proliferation, Connective tissue
development and function and 2) Drug metabolism, Cell-mediated immune
response, Cellular development. NT5C1B was involved in all 4 highly
ranked canonical nucleotide degradation pathways. Several significant
bio-functions involved NPC1L1. Mutations of NRAS codon 61 were identified
in 1 sample each of FTC-Classic, PTC-FV and FA and BRAF V600E in one
PTC-Classic sample. Differential methylation of AARS2, CTU1, HLA-DPB1,
SLC2A13, PNPLA7, NPC1L1, NT5C1B and SNX6 suggest potential markers for
discriminating thyroid cancers from adenomas and normal. NT5C1B was noted
in highly ranked canonical pathways, suggesting a role in nucleotide
degradation. Pathway analysis of differentially methylated genes support
important biological processes in thyroid cancer pathogenesis. Supported
by JFCI/CRAG A20038


