Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitization of nasopharyngeal carcinoma to radiotherapy by
targeting GFPT1/TGF-β1 signaling pathways.


Background: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a unique cancer with high
susceptibility to radiation and mainstay treatment is radiotherapy.
Effectiveness of NPC treatment is therefore dependent on the sensitivity
of cancer cells to ionizing radiation treatment. Further, development of
radio-resistant phenotype is a risk factor for distant metastasis and
disease recurrence. Therefore, enhancing the degree of radiation
sensitivity could improve prognosis and reduce the toxicity of
radiotherapy with the use of lower radiation dose. Transforming growth
factor β1(TGF-β1) expression is responsive to radiation treatment and
the increase is important in the post-irradiation DNA repair. Tumor with
low TGF-β1 level is more responsive to radiation treatment. Therefore,
inhibiting TGF-β1 production can enhance the radiation damage to cancer
cell DNA and also intensify the sensitivity of cancer cells to radiation.
Our preliminary results indicate that TGF-β1 production in NPC is
mediated by hexosamine pathway. Of which, GFPT1
(glucosamine-fructose-6-phosphate aminotransferase) is the rate-limiting
enzyme.

Purpose of the study: To enhance radiation sensitivity by targeting
GFPT1/ TGF-β1 cascade in NPC.

Experimental procedures: Radiation protective effects of TGF-β1 was
examined by colony formation assay and Danio rerio (zebrafish) embryonic
system. Production of TGF-β1 by activated hexosamine pathway in NPC was
revealed by glucose and glucosamine treatment. Effects of GFPT1 silencing
on radiosensitization are revealed by GFPT1 siRNA treatment followed by
colony formation assay and gamma-H2AX formation assays.

Results: Pretreatment of HONE1 cells with recombinant TGF-β1 protein
enhanced the clonogenic ability of irradiated cells. TGF-β1
significantly increased the survival of zebrafish embryos after
irradiation. Glucose and glucosamine treatment increased the expression
of TGF-β1 protein in HONE1 cells. Silence of GFPT1 reduced TGF-β1 mRNA
and protein expression in HONE1 cells. Silencing GFPT1 reduced the
clonogenic capacity of head and neck cancer cells after radiotherapy and
enhanced the degree of radiation-induced DNA double-strand breaks.

Conclusions: Targeting GFPT1 enhances head and neck cancer cell
sensitivity to radiation. GFPT1 inhibition can enhance the radiation
sensitivity of head and neck cancer cells by inhibiting the expression of
TGF-β1.


