Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of intratumoral mature dendritic cells on prognosis of the
patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.


[Background] Promising efficacy of the immunotherapy with anti-PD-1
antibody for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is expected.
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)have been found to be associated
with favorable outcome of patients in many cancers including ESCC.
However, the contributing factor of TILs in the primary tumor remains
unclear. Dendritic cells (DCs) are the most potent antigen-presenting
cells to induce cytotoxic T lymphocytes. [Purpose] The aim of this study
was to examine the correlation of mature dendritic cells with CD8+ cells
in the tumor in order to clarify the impact of DCs on locally infiltrated
lymphocytes in ESCC. [Object and Methods] Formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded blocks of primary lesions were collected from 80
patients with ESCC who underwent surgical treatment at Osaka City
University Hospital. Immunohistochemical analysis using anti-LAMP-3
antibody and CD8 antibody was used to evaluate intratumoral DCs and TILs.
The number of LAMP-3⁺DCs and TILs were counted at ×400 magnification.
We divided the 80 cases into two groups according to the median number of
intratumoral DCs and TILs to examine the clinicopathological features.
[Results] LAMP-3⁺DCs were predominantly observed in peritumoral area
and sparsely found in intratumoral area, whereas CD8⁺T cells
distributed between both peritumoral and intratumoral areas. The number
of DCs was significantly associated with increasing TNM stage. For
example, the median number of DCs was 59.9 in pathological T1, 34.2 in
T2/3, 62.4 in pN1, 34.1 in pN1/2/3. In addition, many patients with high
infiltaraion of DCs had positive lymphatic invasion (Ly). The number of
intratumoral DCs was significantly correlated with the number of TILs
which were observed in intratumoral regions. Patients in the high
infiltration of DCs group showed a significant better prognosis than
patients in the low infiltration group. Double staining showed that
LAMP3⁺DC-CD8⁺T cell clusters were seen in peritumoral area.


