Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant RNA editing of GLI1 promotes malignant regeneration in
multiple myeloma.


Introduction: Despite novel therapies, most of multiple myeloma (MM)
patients relapse as a result of clonal evolution in inflammatory
microenvironments. Adenosine-to-inosine (A-to-I) RNA editing, driven by
inflammatory cytokine-responsive adenosine deaminase acting on RNA1
(ADAR1), promotes cancer progression by enhancing survival and
self-renewal of malignant progenitor cells. Amplifications of chromosome
1q21, containing IL-6R and ADAR1 loci, occur frequently in high-risk MM
patients, who frequently develop secondary plasma cell leukemia (PCL) and
have shorter survival. While increased IL-6 signaling has been linked to
relapse and A-to-I editing contributes to therapeutic resistance in a
broad array of malignancies, the role of ADAR1 in MM pathogenesis has not
been elucidated. This study aimed to investigate whether pro-inflammatory
cues in MM activate ADAR1 editing thereby promoting malignant
regeneration.

Procedures: Publicly available primary patient datasets were analyzed and
validated in a separate cohort of biobanked primary samples and human
myeloma cell lines. Lentiviral vector-mediated activation or knockdown of
ADAR1, or treatment with extrinsic pro-inflammatory stimuli, was utilized
to probe the functional impact of RNA editing activity in MM models.
Site-specific qPCR was used to quantify RNA editing in specific cancer
stem cell-associated loci. Functional effects of ADAR1 activity were
assessed in in vitro survival and self-renewal assays, and in novel in
vivo PCL xenografts.

Results: Patients harboring 1q21 amplification showed significant and
stage-dependent increases in ADAR1 expression. In a set of separate
primary PCL samples, aberrant RNA editing in the coding region of the
Hedgehog (Hh) pathway transcription factor GLI1 was observed in high
ADAR1-expressing samples. Notably, increased GLI1 editing, previously
reported to have increased capacity to activate its transcriptional
targets, was detected in serially transplantable, patient-derived
xenograft models. Furthermore, abolition of ADAR1 editase activity
impaired GLI1 editing. Lastly, in vitro pro-inflammatory IL-6
stimulation, or continuous exposure to the immunomodulatory drug
lenalidomide led to increased ADAR1 mRNA and protein levels, with a
concomitant induction of RNA editing activity.

Conclusions: In MM, 1q21 amplification has been linked to progression. We
provide new evidence linking expression and activity of ADAR1, located on
1q21, and disease stage. Because ADAR1 induces transcript recoding,
A-to-I editing could contribute to the marked transcriptomic diversity
typical of advanced MM. While the Hh pathway has been linked to cancer
stem cell generation in human MM, here we identified a primate-specific
mechanism of Hh pathway activation in MM through RNA editing-dependent
stabilization of GLI1. Together, both genetic and microenvironmental
factors modulate epitranscriptomic deregulation of cancer stem cell
pathways in MM.


