Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing a variety of primary mouse tumor allograft models for
evaluating efficacy of PARP inhibitor.


Recent success of multiple poly (adenosine diphosphate [ADP]) ribose
polymerase inhibitors (PARPi) in treating BRCA mutant ovarian cancers has
fueled the development of PARPi in several areas, including expanding its
use in other BRCA mutant or wildtype cancers; exploring resistant
mechanisms and overcoming resistance; seeking for its combination with
chemotherapy, radiotherapy and emerging immunotherapy to achieve
persistent efficacy. Especially considering the mechanism of action of
PARPi, its use can increase the mutational loads in tumors with defects
in homologous recombination and DNA double strand break repair, which
potentially would enhance the immunogenicity of the tumors. Therefore it
would be very interesting to test the effectiveness of combining PARPi
with anti-PD1/PD-L1 or anti-CTLA4. However, relevant animal models are
lacking for such studies.Syngeneic mouse tumors offer about 30 viable in
vivo models for proof of concept studies. However, these models suffer
from several limitations: 1) only a few available and responsive to the
current checkpoint inhibitors -- for given strains of mouse, there are
only very few choices of cells/disease types; 2) not mimicking patient
tumors since they are in vitro immortalized cell lines; 3) not reflective
of patient disease pathways thus unfit for common target agents, either
in mono- or combination therapy. We have established allografts of
spontaneous mouse tumors (MuPrime®) derived from genetically engineered
mouse models (GEMMs) as a new type of immuno-oncology models with
following advantages: 1) its primary nature of “stem cell diseases”
and relevant tumor microenvironment; 2) its diverse cancer types/strains
of mice; 3) engineered oncogenic drivers as seen in human diseases,
deriving from a wide range of available GEMMs, suitable for targeted
agents. Thus far, we have built a small library of allografts and are
testing them to facilitate pharmacological investigation, particularly
those of immuno-oncology.We have found a few models, including an
APCmin/+ skin squamous cell carcinoma and a P53 null sarcoma responded
well to PARPi Niraparib. Continuous treatment with Niraparib led to
development of partial or complete resistance. We are now profiling the
resistant models to find out their general mutation loads, as well as
specific biomarkers render resistant mechanisms. We are also treating the
tumors with mouse PD1 antibody to test whether presumably enhanced
mutation loads would sensitize these tumors to immunotherapy. The data of
these studies will be presented at the meeting.


