Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dose-dependent tissue distribution and tumor targeting of
Notch3-ADC using fluorescence molecular tomography imaging.


Background: NOTCH3, a cell surface receptor involved in cell-cell
communications, is over-expressed or amplified in certain human tumors.
NOTCH3 is known to regulate proliferation, differentiation and survival
of cancer cells or cancer stem cells and thus an important therapeutic
target. NOTCH3 antibody drug conjugate (ADC) is comprised of humanized
anti-NOTCH3 antibody conjugated to an auristatin based cytotoxic payload.
NOTCH3-ADC has shown promising results in pre-clinical tumor models. In
this study we evaluated the kinetics, dose-dependent tissue distribution,
tumor accumulation and targeting specificity of the NOTCH3-ADC in OVCAR3
xenograft model using fluorescence molecular tomography (FMT) imaging.
The NOTCH3-ADC is mouse cross-reactive thus providing an accurate
assessment of biodistribution.

Methods: NOTCH3-ADC was conjugated to the near-infrared dye,
AlexaFluor680 (AF680). The in vitro cellular binding was evaluated by
cell-based ELISA. In vivo biodistribution was evaluated using OVCAR3
subcutaneous xenograft model. NOTCH3-ADC-AF680 (1mg/kg; 3mg/kg and
10mg/kg) was injected when the tumors were ~300mm3 and imaged 5 min, 24,
48, 96, 168 and 240 h post-injection. Ex vivo FMT imaging,
pharmacokinetic analysis and immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed at
48 and 240 h after whole-body perfusion. An in vivo receptor competition
FMT study was performed by injecting excess of unconjugated anti-NOTCH3
antibody (Ab) or a non-targeted control Ab.

Results: In vitro cell binding studies showed that conjugation of AF680
to NOTCH3-ADC did not change its binding ability. A dose-dependent tumor
regression was also observed after a single injection of
NOTCH3-ADC-AF680. In vivo FMT imaging showed dose-dependent whole-body
clearance kinetics of NOTCH3-ADC. Dose-dependent accumulation in the
tumors was observed with peak accumulation at 24-48 h post-injection and
a slow decline at later time-points. A maximum accumulation of ~10 %ID/g
was observed which was independent of the dose of NOTCH3-ADC-AF680. Ex
vivo FMT quantitation of tumor was consistent with the IHC for antibody
and LC/MS analysis of released payload. Pharmacological competition with
excess unlabeled control Ab did not block tumor accumulation of
NOTCH3-ADC-AF680, whereas excess unlabeled NOTCH3-Ab blocked ~47% of
NOTCH3-ADC-AF680 accumulation. There was no significant specific
accumulation of NOTCH3-ADC in other organs as observed by FMT imaging or
IHC.

Conclusions: These imaging studies provided understanding of the
kinetics, tumor accumulation and biodistribution of NOTCH3-ADC. Further
this work showcase the utility of non-invasive FMT imaging in better
understanding of pharmacology and behavior of biologic drugs.


