Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Salvage pathway enzyme HPRT as a molecular marker for Burkitt’s
Lymphoma.


The aim of this study is to investigate the potential of Hypoxanthine
phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) as a surface biomarker and target for
future immunotherapies in Burkitt’s B-cell Lymphoma. B-cell
malignancies are the most common type of childhood cancer. Development of
immunotherapies could improve current treatment. HPRT is a cytosolic
transferase involved in nucleotide production via the purine salvage
pathway. Altered expression of TK1, a salvage pathway enzyme, is an
indicator of prognosis and diagnosis in multiple cancer types due to
active proliferation of cells and the resulting elevated nucleotide
demand. It has previously been reported that some salvage pathway enzymes
are found on the surface of Burkitt’s Lymphoma cells. HPRT presence on
the surface of this B-cell lymphoma subtype could provide a target for
adoptive cell transfer and other immunotherapies. The potential surface
presentation of HPRT was assessed using flow cytometry, scanning electron
microscopy (SEM), and cytoplasmic staining on both healthy lymphocytes
and Burkitt’s Lymphoma cells (Raji). Flow cytometry experiments with
HPRT antibodies and fluorescent-labeled secondary antibodies show that
Raji cells exhibit an 81.4% (p-value .0001) positive fluorescence shift
when compared to IgG controls (1.5%). Healthy lymphocytes had a
fluorescence shift of 2.38% (p-value .9787). The presence of HPRT on the
surface of both Raji cells and healthy lymphocytes was further confirmed
using gold-labeled antibodies. Utilizing a scanning electron microscope,
the presence of the protein on the surface was evaluated and quantified
via increases in gold weight percentage of the sample. When treated with
antibodies against HPRT, there was a significant increase in gold binding
along with an increase in gold weight percentage. These results suggest a
direct relationship between HPRT and the surface of Burkitt’s lymphoma
cells, indicating HPRT as a potential target for future immunotherapeutic
treatment in Burkitt’s B-cell lymphoma pediatric patients.


