Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High mRNA expression of splice variant SYK short correlates with
poor hepatic metastasis free survival in untreated lymph node negative
colon cancer patients.


Introduction: In lymph node negative (LNN) colon cancer 20% of the
patients will develop recurrence of disease. Identification of these
patients is an unmet need. SYK, a protein kinase, has been ascribed both
a tumor promoter and suppressor role in epithelial cancers. The
prognostic value of SYK and its splice variants, largely uknown in
colorectal cancer however, was explored in a clinically well-defined
cohort of colon cancer patients. Methods: Total mRNA expression of SYK
[SYK(T)] and of its two splice variants SYK short(S) and SYK long(L) were
measured using RT-qPCR in a clinically well-defined prospectively
collected cohort of 240 colon cancer patients (n=160 untreated lymph node
negative [LNN] and n=80 adjuvant treated lymph node positive [LNP]
patients) selected from the MATCH-cohort. mRNA expression levels were
related to microsatellite instability (MSI), mRNA expression of
epithelial (EPCAM), stromal (BGN, FAP, INHBA) and infiltrate markers
(VEGFA, CD45), known CRC mutations (n=238), and disease free (DFS),
hepatic metastasis free (HFS) and overall survival (OS). Results: Overall
increased SYK levels were associated with stage I/II, a left-sided
located primary tumor and MicroSatellite Stability (MSS). However, these
associations and their interrelation differed significantly between
SYK(T), SYK(S) and SYK(L) expression implicating an added value for
measuring mRNA expression of the splice variants next to SYK(T). SYK(T),
SYK(S) and SYK(L) levels all showed a significant positive correlation
with the expression of EPCAM, FAP was weakly negatively associated with
SYK(S) and VEGFA was weakly positively correlated with SYK(T) and SYK(S).
This suggests a higher expression of SYK in epithelial-rich, stromal-poor
tumors. SYK(T) and SYK(S) expression was significantly lower in tumors
with a BRAF or PTEN mutation (mt) compared to wild type (wt) tumors.
Although others reported differential expression of SYK between
KRAS-dependent and KRAS-independent cell lines and KRAS mt versus wt
tumors in 221 TCGA-samples (p=0.008), we observed no significant
differences for expression of SYK(T), SYK(S) and SYK(L) between
KRAS-mutant (mt) and KRAS-wild type (wt) tumors. In the LNN group, using
univariate Cox regression analysis increasing mRNA expression of SYK(T)
(HR=2.05 95%CI=1.01-4.17 p=0.047) and SYK(S) (HR=1.83 95%CI=1.09-3.05
p=0.021) was associated with worse HFS, which remained significant for
SYK(S) when correcting for the number of assessed lymph nodes (HR=1.83;
95% CI=1.08-3.12; p=0.026 and HR=1.27; 95%CI=1.009-1.60; p=0.042). No
other significant associations between SYK(T), SYK(S) and SYK(L), and
DFS, HFS and OS were observed. Conclusion: In our untreated LNN colon
cancer cohort SYK(S) is a pure prognostic marker for HFS. These results
may help to identify LNN patients at overall low risk to develop liver
metastases.


