Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum parathyroid hormone and risks of colorectal adenoma, adenoma
recurrence and colorectal cancer, results from the Prostate, Lung,
Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial.


Background: Serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) may be related to risk of
incident colorectal cancer. However, no study has prospectively examined
whether serum PTH is differentially related to risks of different stages
of colorectal carcinogenesis (incident adenoma and metachronous adenoma).
Further, it is unclear if PTH is associated with risk of incident
colorectal neoplasia in individuals receiving endoscopic screenings. To
address these important scientific inquiries, we have conducted three
nested case-control studies within the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and
Ovarian (PLCO) cancer screening trial.

Methods: The PLCO is a large, multicenter, population-based randomized
trial designed to determine the effects of screening on cancer-related
mortality with a median of 12.5 years of follow up. We evaluated the
associations between serum PTH and the risks of incident colorectal
adenoma (755 cases and 514 controls), metachronous adenoma (755 cases and
755 controls) and incident colorectal cancer (755 cases and 514 controls)
within PLCO participants aged 55 to 74 years. Odds ratios (OR) and 95%
confidence intervals (95%CIs) were estimated using unconditional logistic
regression models after adjusting for potential confounding factors.

Results: Compared to low serum PTH (Results: Compared to low serum PTH
(<30 ng/L), higher concentrations of serum PTH were associated with
significantly reduced risk of incident colorectal cancer with the ORs
(95% CIs) being 0.65(0.48-0.88) and 0.52(0.35-0.76) for PTH ≥30 ng/L
and PTH≥65 ng/L (p for trend, 0.001). The inverse associations appeared
significant for both women and men. However, overall, serum PTH was not
related to risk of incident adenoma and metachronous adenoma.

Conclusion: In conclusion, compared to the lowest PTH levels, higher
serum PTH were related to reduced risks of incident colorectal cancer
among an US population who received endoscopy, but not incident
colorectal adenoma and metachronous adenoma.


