Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly cytotoxic, completely human constructs targeting HER2 and
containing the immuno-oncology payload granzyme B.


Recent immunotherapeutic approaches designed to augment T- and B-cell
mediated killing of tumor cells has met with clinical success suggesting
that immuno-oncology (IO) approaches have tremendous potential for
treatment in a broad spectrum of tumor types. After complex recognition
of target cells by T and B cells, delivery of the serine protease
granzyme B (GrB) to tumor cells comprises the cytotoxic insult resulting
in a well-characterized, multimodal apoptotic cascade. We designed a
recombinant fusion construct composed of a human anti-Her2 scFv fused to
active GrB for recognition and delivery of GrB to tumor cells simulating
T and B-cell therapy. The GrB-Fc-4D5 dimeric construct (mw 160 kDa) was
generated and expressed in stably-transfected CHO-S cells at ~60 mg/L and
purified to homogeneity. The enzymatic activity of the fusion construct
was similar to commercially-available GrB and the affinity of the
construct for purified Her2 extracellular domain (ECD) was 0.328 nM,
comparable to that of Herceptin (0.150 nM). The GrB-Fc-4D5 construct was
highly cytotoxic to Her2-positive cells such as SKBR3, MCF7 and
MDA-MB-231 with IC50 values of 56, 99 and 27 nM respectively. Using
immunofluorescence, the fusion construct internalized rapidly into target
(SKBR3 or SKOV3) cells within 1 h of exposure, rapidly delivering GrB to
the cytoplasmic compartment in a similar manner to that of immune T and
B-cell targeting but without the action of the transmembrane pore-forming
agent perforin. Against a large panel of various tumor types, GrB-Fc-4D5
was highly cytotoxic to virtually all cells regardless of natural
expression levels of the nominal endogenous GrB inhibitor PI-9.
Contemporaneous studies with Kadcyla demonstrate similar levels of in
vitro activity against virtually all HER2-positive cells tested.
GrB-Fc-4D5 demonstrated activity against both log-phase and confluent
tumor cells. In keeping with its relatively high molecular weight (~160
kDa), the construct demonstrated a terminal-phase half-life of 13.6 hrs.
In vivo efficacy studies are currently ongoing in several orthotopic
xenograft models. Also ongoing are pre-IND toxicology, histopathology and
clinical chemistry studies. Research conducted, in part, by the Clayton
Foundation for Research.


