Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HMGA1 amplifies Wnt signaling and expands the intestinal stem cell
compartment to drive premalignant polyposis in transgenic mice.


Emerging evidence suggests that cancer cells undergo chromatin remodeling
and epigenetic reprogramming to co-opt stem cell properties and drive
tumor progression. The HMGA1 chromatin remodeling protein is an
architectural transcription factor that binds to DNA at AT-rich sequences
where it “opens” chromatin, recruits transcriptional complexes, and
modulates gene expression. The HMGA1 gene is highly expressed during
embryogenesis and in adult stem cells, but silenced postnatally in
differentiated tissues. HMGA1 becomes re-expressed in most high-grade
cancers and high levels portend adverse clinical outcomes. In colon
cancer, HMGA1 is among the genes most highly overexpressed compared to
normal intestinal epithelium. We previously reported that HMGA1 drives
tumor progression in colon cancer by inducing stem cell genes involved in
an epithelial-mesenchymal transition. We also discovered that Hmga1
transgenic mice develop marked proliferative changes and pre-malignant
polyposis in the intestinal epithelium. To determine how Hmga1 functions
in the intestines during tissue homeostasis and carcinogenesis, we
examined in transgenic mice and organoid models. Here, we uncover a novel
role for Hmga1 in maintaining the intestinal stem cell (ISC) pool and
Paneth cell niche. Hmga1 is required by ISCs to organize into
three-dimensional organoids in vitro; silencing Hmga1 disrupts organoid
formation and bud development. Conversely, overexpression of Hmga1
increases organoid formation, bud development, and replating efficiency,
suggesting that Hmga1 enhances ISC function and/or number. We therefore
crossed the Hmga1 transgenic mice onto the Lgr5-EGFP background to
enumerate ISCs and found that Hmga1 expands the ISC compartment. To
determine how this occurs, we performed in vivo imaging and discovered
that Hmga1 enhances self-renewal of ISCs. Mechanistically, we found that
Hmga1 amplifies Wnt/β-catenin signaling by inducing genes encoding both
Wnt agonist receptors and downstream Wnt target genes. Surprisingly,
Hmga1 also expands the Paneth cell niche, which is comprised of
terminally differentiated crypt cells that secrete Wnt to support ISCs.
Because Paneth cells require Sox9 for development, we determined whether
Hmga1 regulates its expression. Hmga1 binds directly to the Sox9 promoter
at 2 AT-rich sites to activate its expression. In human colonic
epithelium, HMGA1 and SOX9 are positively correlated, and both become
markedly up-regulated in colon carcinogenesis. This work not only
provides new insights into the role of Hmga1 in intestinal homeostasis by
maintaining both the stem cell pool and epithelial niche compartment, but
also suggests that deregulated Hmga1 perturbs this equilibrium during
polyposis and carcinogenesis. Our results also highlight the
HMGA1-WNT-SOX9 pathway as rational therapeutic target in colon
carcinogenesis.


