Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational landscape in the normal-appearing airway cancerization
field of early-stage non-small cell lung cancer.


Lung cancer, of which non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most
common form, is the second most prevalent cancer in the U.S. and the
leading cause of cancer mortality. Field cancerization phenomenon
establishes that normal appearing tissues surrounding a tumor will
exhibit a field effect -- particularly in smokers -- with the tissues
proximal to the tumor showing more, and even sharing, alterations with
the tumor. Previous studies in NSCLC provide evidence for both complex
progression trajectories, yet, precise mechanisms remain unknown. To
investigate the field cancerization phenomenon, we conducted a
genome-wide survey of acquired DNA alterations in normal-appearing
tissues including small airways adjacent to NSCLC, mainstem bronchi
(large airways), nasal epithelium, distant normal lung and blood, along
with multiple samples from their surgically resected paired tumors, for a
total of 500 samples from 48 patients with early-stage NSCLC (11 squamous
cell carcinomas and 37 adenocarcinomas). Since we expect low mutation
burdens and mutant cell fractions in pathologically normal tissues, we
assessed somatic point mutations via deep targeted sequencing of 409
genes and paired these data with our recent study of acquired copy number
alterations (CNAs) inferred from high-density whole-genome SNP
microarrays, thus offering a deep and wide survey of somatic DNA
alterations. After aggregating results from multiple mutation callers, we
observed somatic mutations (exonic, splicing and UTRs) in 257 samples of
which 65 (in 35 patients) were from normal-appearing field (non-tumor,
non-blood) samples. Tumor and field samples in smokers showed a higher
mutation burden and large proportion of C:G>A:T changes. We also observed
concordance of mutations in the airway and corresponding tumor profiles.
Further, a statistically significant field effect was established with
mutational burden (measured by the variant allele frequency) increasing
with proximity to the tumor. Among the 35 NSCLC cases with field
mutations, the small adjacent (to tumor) airways in six patients
exhibited mutations in lung cancer drivers such as KRAS, STK11, TP53 and
KEAP1. We also identified mutations in the large airway (TP53, SETD2,
CDKN2A), distant normal lung parenchyma (RB1, RET) and nasal epithelium
(AKT1). We then correlated point mutation and CNA mutation profiles. Of
eight cases showing a nonsynonymous or stopgain variants in established
lung cancer drivers in the airways, four exhibited putative “two-hit”
progression models, e.g. both KEAP1 and STK11 mutations with 19p loss,
overlapping TP53 mutation/17p loss, or KRAS mutation/12p gain. Our
findings in normal-appearing tissues of the respiratory epithelium offer
insights into the earliest mutational events in their progression to
NSCLC and, possibly, in tumor relapse and that may represent suitable
targets for early detection and chemoprevention.


