Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using CRISPR/Cas9 to generate isogenic cell lines and reference
standards for applications in cancer diagnostics.


We are entering an era of precision medicine, in which there are
significant initiatives to employ companion diagnostics and molecular
profiling to inform clinical decisions in therapeutic treatment. In order
for these initiatives to work as effectively as possible, there is a need
for molecular reference materials that can help facilitate precision
assay development. Cell-line based reference standards are ideal for such
applications because they represent a reproducible and renewable source
of control materials that can be employed for assay development, quality
control, or lead compound discovery. With this in mind, we have used the
CRISPR/Cas9 platform to engineer series of isogenic cell lines that
feature 51 recurrent mutations in the MAPK signaling pathway. These cell
lines contain footprint-free, homozygous mutations in the kinase domains
of the EGFR, KRAS, and BRAF genes in HCT116 and RKO cancer cell lines,
with 32 mutations in EGFR, 12 mutations in KRAS, and 7 mutations in BRAF.
The mutations include precise deletions, point mutations and small
fragment insertions, and these engineered cell lines have been further
employed for the development of derivative reference materials, including
genomic DNA (gDNA) and FFPE cell line blocks. Such materials can be
employed as positive and negative controls in diverse assay platforms,
including next generation sequencing (NGS), quantitative PCR (qPCR), in
situ hybridization (ISH), and others. We present quality control data for
these reference materials, which demonstrate excellent consistency and
uniformity, as well as examples of the application of these materials in
molecular assay validation. We conclude that using CRISPR/Cas9 technology
to generate molecular reference standards is a very efficient and precise
method in generating footprint-free, biorelevant mutations for companion
diagnostic assays.


