Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational profiles from targeted NGS combine with miRNA-based
liquid biopsy to predict survival in LDCT screening-detected lung cancers.


In order to increase cost-effectiveness of low-dose computed tomography
(LDCT) lung cancer screening programs, a change in the management of
screening-detected lung tumors should be considered. The higher
percentage and the better 5-year overall survival of early stage tumors
in LDCT screening series than in clinical practice argue in favor of
screening programs. On the other hand, the overall limited reduction of
mortality observed in screening trials with an observational control arm
suggests that some of the screening-detected early stage tumors might be
over-diagnosed. In our Institution we are trying to address this issue by
the development of complementary biomarkers able to improve detection of
aggressive disease. Targeted next-generation sequencing was performed in
94 LDCT screening-detected lung tumors resected from subjects
participating in 3 screening trials enrolling 9,248 volunteers. Mutation
profile was associated with subjects’ clinicopathologic features and
with the risk profile of a plasma microRNA signature classifier (MSC).
Using data available through The Cancer Genome Atlas database (TCGA), we
compared the mutations of a selected set of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cases detected in standard clinical practice to LDCT
screening-detected NSCLC cases. The 5-year overall survival (OS) of
screening patients with and without mutations in the tumors was 64% and
100%, respectively (p=0.019). By combining the mutational status with the
MSC, patients were stratified into 3 groups with 5-year OS ranging from
41% to 96% (pIn order to increase cost-effectiveness of low-dose computed
tomography (LDCT) lung cancer screening programs, a change in the
management of screening-detected lung tumors should be considered. The
higher percentage and the better 5-year overall survival of early stage
tumors in LDCT screening series than in clinical practice argue in favor
of screening programs. On the other hand, the overall limited reduction
of mortality observed in screening trials with an observational control
arm suggests that some of the screening-detected early stage tumors might
be over-diagnosed. In our Institution we are trying to address this issue
by the development of complementary biomarkers able to improve detection
of aggressive disease. Targeted next-generation sequencing was performed
in 94 LDCT screening-detected lung tumors resected from subjects
participating in 3 screening trials enrolling 9,248 volunteers. Mutation
profile was associated with subjects’ clinicopathologic features and
with the risk profile of a plasma microRNA signature classifier (MSC).
Using data available through The Cancer Genome Atlas database (TCGA), we
compared the mutations of a selected set of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cases detected in standard clinical practice to LDCT
screening-detected NSCLC cases. The 5-year overall survival (OS) of
screening patients with and without mutations in the tumors was 64% and
100%, respectively (p=0.019). By combining the mutational status with the
MSC, patients were stratified into 3 groups with 5-year OS ranging from
41% to 96% (p<0.0001) and the prognostic value was significant even when
controlling for stage (p=0.017). The comparison with TCGA data revealed a
higher number of non-mutated NSCLC among screening patients (21% vs.
13%), despite the similar spectrum and frequency of mutations. In
addition, the difference in 5-year OS between subjects with and without
mutations was exclusively detected in screening patients. The mutation
profile of screening-detected tumors, while similar to that of clinically
detected tumors, was a strong predictor of OS. The combination of tumor
mutational status and a circulating miRNA-based risk classifier predicts
tumor aggressiveness and clinical outcome and may find rapid application
in LDCT screening programs.


