Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting replication stress by carbazole blue- A novel strategy
to treat triple negative breast cancers.


Background: Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) are the most aggressive
forms of breast cancer and almost 60% of patients with TNBCs develop
chemo-resistance, leading to recurrence, poor prognosis and poor
survival. TNBCs have been reported to have high levels of replication
stress, which plays pivotal role in genomic instability, and therapy
resistance. Targeting replication stress is an emerging approach for
better TNBC treatment. Here, we evaluated the anticancer efficacy of
carbazole blue (CB), a synthetic analogue of carbazole that we recently
synthesized on TNBC cells growth and progression.

Experimental Design: The effect of CB on breast cancer growth was
assessed in vitro as well as in orthotopic mouse xenograft and PDX-models
of breast cancer. In addition, the therapeutic efficacy and safety of CB
was determined in long term toxicity studies in mice and also in ex-vivo
explants from breast cancer patients. The mechanism of action of CB was
evaluated by performing gene expression, cell cycle, apoptosis and DNA
repair studies as well as proteins involved in the above mentioned
mechanisms.

Results: Our results demonstrated that CB inhibits short and long term
viability of TNBC cells in a dose dependent manner without affecting
normal mammary epithelial cells. We show that the systemic delivery of CB
using nanoparticle-based delivery approach suppressed breast cancer
growth without inducing toxicity in preclinical and PDX mouse models of
triple negative breast cancer. Our long term toxicity studies reveled
that CB treatment did not induce any toxicity in Balb/c mice. Using
ex-vivo explants from breast cancer patients, we demonstrated that CB
modulated breast cancer growth. Consistent with that, our results
revealed that CB treatment induced G1/S cell cycle arrest and apoptosis
in TNBCs. Interestingly, our gene expression analysis revealed that CB
modulates expression and activity of several genes known to be involved
in DNA replication and DNA repair machinery.

Conclusions: Our results for the first time showed the CB can serve as a
novel and potent therapeutic agent for treating breast cancer in general
and TNBC in particular. These findings highlight the potential of CB to
be applied as a safe regimen for treating breast cancer patients. As
exploiting replication stress to treat cancer is gaining major interest,
compound/s that may induce replication stress and inhibit DNA repair
ability of cancer cells, has immense translational potential.


