Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide profiling of PAK4 DNA-binding sites and transcriptome
reveals its potential transcriptional control on DNA repair-related genes
in ovarian cancer cells.


Oncogenic role of p21-activated protein 4 (PAK4) in relation to cell
growth and migration through various signalling cascades has been well
studied in multiple cancer types. Such role might be contributed largely
by cytoplasmic PAK4 as most of the known PAK4 signalling events occur in
the cytoplasm. However, recent studies have demonstrated that PAK4 is
capable of shuttling between nucleus and cytoplasm. The precise function
of nuclear PAK4 (nPAK4) remains substantially unexplored. We have
previously shown that PAK4 can act as a transcription factor. Herein, we
aim to identify nPAK4-regulated genes by delineating the PAK4-binding
landscape in ovarian cancer genome and mapping the PAK4 transcriptome in
ovarian cancer cells.

PAK4-enriched genomic regions were identified by chromatin
immunoprecipitation with a PAK4 antibody followed by next-generation
sequencing (ChIP-seq) in OVCAR3 cells. PAK4 transcriptome data was
generated using RNA extracted from SKOV3 cells stably expressing PAK4 in
the Affymetrix GeneChIP速 Human Transcriptome Array 2.0 system. Gene
lists generated from both ChIP-seq and microarray dataset were subjected
to pathway enrichment analysis by Partek速 PathwayTM. Among the 20 most
significantly enriched pathways from microarray studies, several pathways
in which PAK4 has no known reported function by far have been identified.
Notably, DNA repair pathways that are known to influence drug
chemosensitivity in ovarian cancer, such as the nucleotide excision
repair (p=0.008), homologous recombination (p=0.012), mismatch repair
(p=0.018) and DNA replication (p=0.018) pathways were significantly
enriched. In concordance with the findings, the nucleotide excision
repair pathway was also significantly enriched (pPAK4-enriched genomic
regions were identified by chromatin immunoprecipitation with a PAK4
antibody followed by next-generation sequencing (ChIP-seq) in OVCAR3
cells. PAK4 transcriptome data was generated using RNA extracted from
SKOV3 cells stably expressing PAK4 in the Affymetrix GeneChIP速 Human
Transcriptome Array 2.0 system. Gene lists generated from both ChIP-seq
and microarray dataset were subjected to pathway enrichment analysis by
Partek速 PathwayTM. Among the 20 most significantly enriched pathways
from microarray studies, several pathways in which PAK4 has no known
reported function by far have been identified. Notably, DNA repair
pathways that are known to influence drug chemosensitivity in ovarian
cancer, such as the nucleotide excision repair (p=0.008), homologous
recombination (p=0.012), mismatch repair (p=0.018) and DNA replication
(p=0.018) pathways were significantly enriched. In concordance with the
findings, the nucleotide excision repair pathway was also significantly
enriched (p<0.006) in the gene list derived from promoter-restricted PAK4
binding sites in the ovarian cancer genome. Among the many candidates
that were deregulated by PAK4, cyclin-dependent kinase 7 (CDK7), a core
component in the CAK subcomplex crucial to nucleotide excision repair
pathway, was further validated. The transcription start site (TSS) of
cyclin-dependent kinase 7 (CDK7) was bound by PAK4. CDK7 mRNA expression
was upregulated upon PAK4 overexpression. Quantitative-PCR showed
downregulated CDK7 mRNA expression upon siRNA-mediated knockdown of PAK4
in OVCAR3 and TUOS3. This study points to the possible role of PAK4 in
regulating gene transcription as PAK4 is mapped to several core
promoter/TSS regions in the ovarian cancer genome. Our findings also shed
light into the potential role of PAK4 in regulating drug chemosensitivity
via its transcriptional control on genes implicated in DNA repair
pathways. We postulate CDK7 as a direct transcriptional target of PAK4
and thereby contributes to chemoresistance in ovarian cancer cells.


