Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive 10 color flow cytometry analysis of the
neuroblastoma intratumoral immune response using the murine syngeneic
neuro-2a tumor model.


Neuroblastoma is the most prevalent solid tumor in childhood and the most
common tumor in infants less than 1 year of age. In spite of aggressive
multi-modal therapeutic approaches, the 5-year survival rate in patients
with high-risk neuroblastoma remains poor at Neuroblastoma is the most
prevalent solid tumor in childhood and the most common tumor in infants
less than 1 year of age. In spite of aggressive multi-modal therapeutic
approaches, the 5-year survival rate in patients with high-risk
neuroblastoma remains poor at <50%. Recent advances have focused on
harnessing the immune system to combat neuroblastoma. Antibodies that
abrogate the immune checkpoint signaling pathway such as anti-CTLA-4 and
anti-PD-L1 suppress neuroblastoma growth in certain mouse models of
disease. Furthermore, the dinutuximab antibody that targets ganglioside
GD2 expressing cells has been demonstrated to trigger neuroblastoma
regression using a mechanism that involves several immune subsets.
Although evidence suggest the host immune response can be exploited to
fight neuroblastoma, the key immune subsets, their relative contribution,
and mechanism of action to suppress neuroblastoma growth have yet to be
fully characterized. To this end, we used flow cytometry to
immunophenotype the intratumoral immune response in the neuro-2a model of
neuroblastoma. This was accomplished by developing two 10-color panels to
quantify the proportions of various myeloid and T cell subsets
respectively. Using the myeloid panel, our results showed that total
neuro-2a tumor immune cells were predominantly myeloid lineage-derived
(CD11b+). A combination of Ly-6G and Ly-6C antibodies demonstrated that
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) comprised the bulk of the
myeloid cells and were more heavily skewed towards the granulocytic
phenotype versus monocytic. An MDSC exclusion gate and a combination of
F4/80, MHC class II, and CD206 antibodies enabled the analysis of
tumor-associated macrophage subsets. Our results revealed that neuro-2a
tumors contained relatively few activated M1 macrophages, which are
typically associated with anti-tumor responses, and instead were
dominated with a pro-tumor M2 macrophage response. The T cell antibody
panel revealed that CD4+ T cells outnumbered CD8+ T cells by 2-fold.
Regulatory T cells (Tregs) in the CD4+ T cell fraction were identified by
a combination of FoxP3 and CD25 antibodies. The frequency of Tregs varied
but represented Neuroblastoma is the most prevalent solid tumor in
childhood and the most common tumor in infants less than 1 year of age.
In spite of aggressive multi-modal therapeutic approaches, the 5-year
survival rate in patients with high-risk neuroblastoma remains poor at
<50%. Recent advances have focused on harnessing the immune system to
combat neuroblastoma. Antibodies that abrogate the immune checkpoint
signaling pathway such as anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-L1 suppress
neuroblastoma growth in certain mouse models of disease. Furthermore, the
dinutuximab antibody that targets ganglioside GD2 expressing cells has
been demonstrated to trigger neuroblastoma regression using a mechanism
that involves several immune subsets. Although evidence suggest the host
immune response can be exploited to fight neuroblastoma, the key immune
subsets, their relative contribution, and mechanism of action to suppress
neuroblastoma growth have yet to be fully characterized. To this end, we
used flow cytometry to immunophenotype the intratumoral immune response
in the neuro-2a model of neuroblastoma. This was accomplished by
developing two 10-color panels to quantify the proportions of various
myeloid and T cell subsets respectively. Using the myeloid panel, our
results showed that total neuro-2a tumor immune cells were predominantly
myeloid lineage-derived (CD11b+). A combination of Ly-6G and Ly-6C
antibodies demonstrated that myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs)
comprised the bulk of the myeloid cells and were more heavily skewed
towards the granulocytic phenotype versus monocytic. An MDSC exclusion
gate and a combination of F4/80, MHC class II, and CD206 antibodies
enabled the analysis of tumor-associated macrophage subsets. Our results
revealed that neuro-2a tumors contained relatively few activated M1
macrophages, which are typically associated with anti-tumor responses,
and instead were dominated with a pro-tumor M2 macrophage response. The T
cell antibody panel revealed that CD4+ T cells outnumbered CD8+ T cells
by 2-fold. Regulatory T cells (Tregs) in the CD4+ T cell fraction were
identified by a combination of FoxP3 and CD25 antibodies. The frequency
of Tregs varied but represented <50% of total CD4+ T cells. Finally, the
activation state of CD8+ T cells was examined using Ki-67, CTLA-4, and
PD-1 antibodies. Analysis demonstrated that the majority of CD8+ T cells
in neuro-2a tumors were actively proliferating based on the expression of
Ki-67. However, most of the proliferating CD8+ T cells also co-expressed
PD-1 suggesting a loss of anti-tumor functionality and an exhausted
phenotype. This study provides a comprehensive immune profile of neuro-2a
tumors and supports a platform with which to test new single agent and
combination therapies designed to treat neuroblastoma.


