Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Copy-number profiling of single, digitally-sorted PD-L1 positive
cells in NSCLC FFPE tissues.


Introduction:

Immune system strongly affects cancer cell fate; indeed,
immune-checkpoint blockade is emerging as an effective therapeutic
strategy in a broad range of tumor types. The effectiveness of these
therapies depends on different aspects of tumor biology such as the
expression of immune checkpoint proteins, the presence of infiltrating
active immune cells and many others. To date, a robust biomarker to
predict therapeutic response to these drugs has not been found yet.

Among all the strategies used to identify effective biomarkers, a
single-cell level molecular profiling of tumor, stromal and infiltrating
cells, has not been explored due to technical challenges. Here we present
a method for the digital isolation of single PD-L1+ cells from FFPE
tissues, along with their genetic characterization for the identification
of novel biomarkers.

Methods:

FFPE tissue sections from two NSCLC patients, were independently tested
for PD-L1 expression using IHC VENTANA PD-L1 (SP142) Assay and scored in
terms of tumor content (30%, 85%), percentage of PD-L1 positive tumor
cells (70%, 95%), PD-L1 intensity, and H-score (130, 175). From the same
tissue blocks, additional FFPE sections were dissociated down to cell
suspension, and immunofluorescently labelled using
Keratin-AlexaFluor®488, Vimentin-AlexaFluor®647 and PD-L1 (clone
SP263)-AlexaFluor®546. Four cell populations (Keratin+PD-L1-,
Keratin+PD-L1+, Vimentin+PD-L1- and Vimentin+PD-L1+) were identified at
the DEPArray™ platform and, for each, we isolated pools of precise
number (range 43-121) of cells, along with pure single cells. Recovered
cells were whole genome amplified (Ampli1™ WGA), and genome-wide
copy-number aberrations (CNA) profiles were obtained by Ampli1™ LowPass
kit and IonTorrent sequencing.

Results:

The expression of PD-L1 on cell membrane was attributed -by means of
co-expression of either keratin or vimentin- to tumor or stromal cells,
respectively. For both patients, in the tumor populations numerous gains
and losses were clearly identified along the genome; Keratin+PD-L1+ and
Keratin+PD-L1- pooled cells displayed comparable profiles. Notably, in
both patients copy gains were identified on chromosome 9 region including
the PD-L1 gene. A variable range of alleles (3 to 6) on the same PD-L1
locus was detected on single tumor cells, along with a high inter-cell
heterogeneity in terms of gain extent and genomic regions involved,
suggestive of the presence of different tumor clones, hidden in pooled
cells data. All the stromal (Vimentin+PD-L1+/-) cells showed flat
profiles.

Conclusions:

This study demonstrates an innovative approach for isolation and genetic
profiling of single pure PD-L1+ cells from FFPE tissue. DEPArray™
sorting combined with low-pass whole genome sequencing enables high
quality genome-wide profiling of pure single cells and pools isolated
from phenotypically distinct populations in FFPE tumor tissue.


