Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the biology of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors by
whole genome CRISPR/Cas9 screening.


Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumors are rare, highly aggressive, paediatric
tumours with a dismal prognosis. Rhabdoid Tumours (RT) have one key
genetic defect (biallelic inactivation of SMARCB1 in > 90% of patients)
which, when re-expressed in RT cells, causes differentiation and growth
arrest. We used whole genome CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced
short palindromic repeats)/Cas9 screening; a technique by which mutations
are created systematically in each gene in the genome - to identify novel
SMARCB1-dependent therapeutic targets and synthetic lethal relationships
in RT.

A panel of RT cell lines were transduced with a GeCKO (Genome Scale
CRISPR Knock-Out) library which contains 122,441 guide constructs
targeting 19,050 genes and 1,864 miRNAs; each cell contained a single
CRISPR insert. This panel was further transduced with a SMARCB1
expression lentivirus or an empty vector control, cells were collected at
0, 7 and14 days post infection (300x library coverage, 3.7 x 107 cells
per time point).

CRISPR inserts were sequenced, counted, normalized and analyzed to
identify those whose abundance was significantly altered, representing
candidate gene targets which promote or inhibit RT cell growth/viability
in a SMARCB1-dependent manner. CRISPR hits were further cross-validated
with primary patient and functional model genomic data
(RNA-sequencing/450k DNA methylation array) to identify several high
confidence deleterious events with strong SMARCB1 dependency.

Hundreds of significantly enriched (both positively and negatively) genes
were identified which alter when SMARCB1 is present or absent including
MYC family targets, cell cycle targets, SHH pathway and the Aurora kinase
family. TGFβ was identified as a top upstream SMARCB1/methylation
dependent regulator and when SMARCB1 re-expression data was overlaid onto
the TGFβ canonical pathway showed a convincing enrichment in pathway
regulation. Pathway members SMAD 2/3 showed a ‘synthetic lethal’
phenotype and represent a functional SMARCB1-dependent relationship which
is also observed in SMARCB1 re-expression and methylation model data and
is characteristic of primary RT. This phenotype was validated
functionally by expression of a dominant negative TGFBR2.

Combining RNA-sequencing and 450K DNA methylation microarray data from
primary tumours and experimental models, coupled with whole-genome
functional screening, provides a genome-wide view of key RT tumorigenic
genes/pathways and their SMARCB1 dependence. These data suggest synthetic
lethal phenotypes and enable prioritisation of true SMARCB1-dependent
events and therapeutic targets, in this rare yet lethal paediatric tumour.


