Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The significance of a p53 gain-of-function mutation in the
acquisition of metastatic traits in the SW13 cell line.


The therapeutic potential of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi),
shown to epigenetically regulate a variety of genes, has yet to be fully
realized due to their documented pleiotropic effects in vivo. Currently,
four HDACi are FDA-approved for the treatment of hematological
malignancies, but their effectiveness against other types of cancers have
been shown to be limited at best and, as a result, most of these clinical
trials have failed. A comprehensive review of the recent literature has
identified that approximately 50% of all cell lines treated with an HDACi
demonstrate an increase in metastatic potential as measured by increases
in migration and invasion. Of these cell lines that respond with
increased metastatic potential to HDACi treatment, 60% have a
gain-of-function mutation within p53 (p=0.03). As HDACi have been shown
to destabilize mutant p53, they have been used in studies to examine the
effects of HDACi treatment on cancers with an identified p53 mutation.
This is concerning as the specific p53 mutation in these cancers is not
always known, and thus treatment could potentially result in an increase
in cancer cell growth. Previous work in our lab demonstrates that the
human SW13 adrenal adenocarcinoma cell line, which harbors a homozygous
H193Y gain-of-function mutation, does have an HDACi-induced metastatic
phenotype; treated cells demonstrate significant increases in MMP
activity and ~50% reduction in p53 protein expression compared to
untreated cells. To investigate the role that a decrease in mutant p53
expression plays in the acquisition of metastatic characteristics we
utilized stable shRNA plasmids to knock-down p53 expression in the SW13
cell line. HeLa cells, which possess a wild-type p53 gene, were used as a
positive control. We found that a decrease in p53 expression alone was
not sufficient to induce changes in SW13 growth or invasiveness. In fact,
even though p53 expression was knocked down by ~70% in the shRNA lines,
HDAC inhibition still induced the acquisition of metastatic properties in
these cells. Intriguingly, while the DNA binding activity of mutant p53
was correlated with protein expression and was significantly decreased
following HDAC inhibition, the same response was not observed in HeLa
cells. These findings suggest that p53 status may be an important
determinant of therapeutic response to HDAC inhibition.


