Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peptidylarginine deiminase IV (PADI4) is a novel tumor suppressor
that may contribute to regulation of breast cancer stem cell dynamics.


Breast cancer is a global problem that accounts for almost a fourth of
all cancers in women. Despite the many therapeutic strategies currently
in use, treated patients often suffer from cancer relapse and metastasis
due to the presence of a subpopulation of tumorigenic cells capable of
self-renewal and termed cancer stem cells (CSCs). To address the
properties of this critical sub-population, we utilized our
recently-developed lentiviral CSC reporter carrying an Oct4/Sox2 response
element coupled to a green fluorescent protein (SORE6-GFP) to detect and
isolate the CSC population in a low-grade ER+ human breast cancer model,
MCF10Ca1h, by FACS. Whole transcriptome sequencing analysis (RNA-seq) on
the sorted cells identified Peptidylarginine deiminase IV (PADI4) as
differentially expressed between CSCs and non-CSCs. PADI4 was recently
shown to regulate citrullination of histone H1, displacing it from
chromatin and resulting in global chromatin decondensation and
pluripotency induction in embryonic stem cells (Christophorou, et al.,
2014, Nature 507:104). Thus, we hypothesized that PADI4 may also regulate
the stemness phenotype in breast cancer CSCs, likely through effects on
chromatin structure. We showed that PADI4 protein expression is higher in
luminal breast cancer cell lines than other subtypes, and we did shRNA
knockdown (KD) of PADI4 in the luminal MCF10Ca1h model. PADI4 KD
increased tumorosphere formation and clonogenicity indicating increased
CSC population/activity. Additionally, MCF10Ca1h cells treated with a
PADI4 selective inhibitor showed an increase in CSCs as assessed using
the SORE6-GFP stem cell reporter. In vivo limiting dilution studies
demonstrate that PADI4 KD increased tumor incidence at low cell inoculum,
reflecting a statistically significant 2-4 fold increase in CSCs upon
PADI4 KD. Our findings suggest that PADI4 may function as a tumor
suppressor in luminal breast cancer. In support of this conclusion, deep
deletions of PADI4 locus are found in 1% of human breast cancers in the
TCGA datasets. Analysis of the effect of PADI4 KD on chromatin
organization in the CSC and non-CSC compartments is ongoing.


