Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing the effects of TIMP2 knockout on lung cancer cell lines
cultured in 3D.


Tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are a small family
of endogenous proteins that classically function to inhibit
metalloproteinase activity. Since the original description of this
protein family in the 80s and 90s, various MMP-independent biological
functions of TIMPs have been described. This built the impression that
MMP/TIMP ratios may play an important role in tissue homeostasis, an idea
which is supported by the observation that altered MMP/TIMP expression
ratios are often associated with a number of human conditions such as
cancer, cardiovascular and CNS disease. TIMP2 is the most abundantly
expressed protein in this family and has previously been shown to
interact with several membrane proteins including MT1-MMP, insulin-like
growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-I-R) and alpha3 beta1 integrin (α3β1) to
mediate downstream intracellular signaling. In addition, TIMP2 has been
shown to inhibit growth factor stimulated proliferation, angiogenesis and
tumor cell invasion and metastasis, highlighting the potential for
TIMP2-based cancer bio-therapies that can be used in conjunction with
conventional treatments. Recent studies in our lab highlight that
syngeneic lung tumors (LL2 cells; Lewis lung carcinoma) developed in
C57BL mice harboring a loss-of-function mutation in TIMP2 are
significantly larger than tumors grown in their WT counterparts. To gain
a deeper understanding of the role of TIMP2 in tumor initiation and
progression we have used CRISPR-Cas9 to develop stable TIMP2 knockout
(T2KO) human lung cancer cell lines. Although indistinguishable in 2D
culture, T2KO tumor cells display a morphologically distinct phenotype
when grown in spheroids. Preliminary data show that, when grown in
spheroids, T2KO cells exhibit enhanced EGFR activation in comparison to
WT cells. By assessing the functional characteristics and gene expression
of T2KO cells grown in 3D culture conditions we hope to gain further
insight into the biological functions of TIMP2 and to provide a
mechanistic link between the loss of TIMP2 activity and enhanced tumor
formation that is observed in our mouse model.


