Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A DNMT3A-independent hypomethylator phenotype is a unifying
epigenetic signature of AML with good risk cytogenetics.


Background: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) causes the most leukemia-related
deaths in the United States, and has frequent mutations in epigenetic
regulators, including DNMT3A, IDH, and TET2. Such aberrations have been
proposed to transform the epigenetic state in cancer, often involving DNA
hypomethylation, however, the genomic specificity, causes, and clinical
consequences of such methylation changes in AML remain unclear.

Methods: We queried genome-wide CpG methylation using The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) AML samples (n=194) run on Illumina 450k arrays. We used
RNA-seq data to study gene expression changes associated with
hypomethylator phenotypes (HP). Analysis was done using R.

Results: Genome-wide analysis of CpG sites that are highly methylated in
normal blood, and variably methylated in AML (β-value standard deviation
in AML > 0.2; average β-value in normal blood > 0.8) revealed two
distinct HPs by hierarchical clustering: Good-risk (GR) HP which included
favorable cytogenetics, and DNMT-HP, which was enriched for DNMT3A
mutations. We refined DNA methylation signatures of each HP cluster by
differential methylation analysis and re-classified patients accordingly.
Strikingly, all patients with t(8;21), inv(16), or t(15;17) belonged to
the GR-HP+ group, suggesting that a common epigenetic thread connects
these otherwise disparate genetic aberrations. From a clinical
perspective GR-HP+ patients were younger than GR-HP- patients, and had
significantly longer overall survival (median OS, years: GR-HP+ = Not
reached; GR-HP- = 1.00; P Results: Genome-wide analysis of CpG sites that
are highly methylated in normal blood, and variably methylated in AML
(β-value standard deviation in AML > 0.2; average β-value in normal
blood > 0.8) revealed two distinct HPs by hierarchical clustering:
Good-risk (GR) HP which included favorable cytogenetics, and DNMT-HP,
which was enriched for DNMT3A mutations. We refined DNA methylation
signatures of each HP cluster by differential methylation analysis and
re-classified patients accordingly. Strikingly, all patients with
t(8;21), inv(16), or t(15;17) belonged to the GR-HP+ group, suggesting
that a common epigenetic thread connects these otherwise disparate
genetic aberrations. From a clinical perspective GR-HP+ patients were
younger than GR-HP- patients, and had significantly longer overall
survival (median OS, years: GR-HP+ = Not reached; GR-HP- = 1.00; P <
0.001). In contrast, DNMT-HP+ cases were statistically equivalent to
DNMT-HP- except for an enrichment for higher WBC counts, including no
difference in survival (median OS, years: DNMT-HP+ = 0.92; DNMT-HP- =
1.34; P = 0.27). From an epigenetic perspective the two HP clusters
harbored distinct DNA methylation changes; although both favored
hypomethylation within non-CpG islands relative to CpG islands, the
enrichment was more pronounced for DNMT-HP (Odds ratio: hypomethylated
CpG islands/hypomethylated non-CpG islands, GR-HP = 0.64; DNMT-HP =
0.18). Genetic analysis revealed that GR-HP+ leukemia had wild-type IDH,
DNMT3A, and NPM1 genes. In contrast, DNMT-HP+ AML had significantly more
FLT3, NPM1, and DNMT3A mutations compared to DNMT-HP- patients. RNA-seq
revealed significant up-regulation of genes in both HP phenotypes (216,
and 150 genes for GR-HP and DNMT-HP, respectively at FDR 2). Pathway
analysis of these genes revealed enrichments for ion channels and the
complement pathway in DNMT-HP, and for nervous system and developmental
genes in GR-HP.

Conclusions: Our data suggest that two HPs exist in AML with unique
epigenetic and transcriptomic signatures. The striking association
between GR-HP and different favorable cytogenetic changes suggests that a
common set of epigenetic features may contribute to improved survival in
these patients.


