Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hydrogel-assisted pathological study of the circulating tumor
cells filtered from the renal cell carcinoma patients’ blood.


Introduction: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs), defined as tumor cells
detached from the primary tumor site and circulating in the peripheral
blood, are a promising marker to get the information about tumor status
and metastatic potential. However, the limited detection ability as well
as their biased specificity of current CTC isolation struggle from
understanding the comprehensive characteristics of CTCs. In addition,
previous CTC isolation depending on epithelial cell adhesion molecule
(EpCAM) antibody make their cytological and pathological study hard. We
developed the methods which capture CTCs based on their size and
deformability, and construct a hydrogel-assisted cell block for verifying
the diagnostic utility for various cancer-associated immuno-markers and
their pathological studies.

Methods: Two renal cell carcinoma cell lines, SN12C and 769P, and 7
different cancer patients’ blood with renal cell carcinoma were used.
To find the applicable markers for diagnosing renal cell carcinoma, we
constructed the cell blocks of two cell lines. For the encapsulation of
the cells, 4 % alginate was prepared by dissolving in deionized water
under constant stirring at 85 °C. Then, the separately prepared renal
cancer cells were gently mixed into the dissolved alginate solution.
After careful mixing, the solution was loaded into calcium chloride
solution drop by drop using volume pipette, followed by 15 min of further
incubation with constant stirring. Next, the cell-containing beads were
applied to the commonly used procedure for paraffin tissue blocks, and 8
different cancer-associated immuno-markers (EpCAM, CK (AE1/AE3), CAM5.2,
EMA, CD10, CA IX, RCC, and vimentin) were stained with each dissected
cell blocks. The CTCs from the 7 clinical samples were isolated by
tapered-slit filter, and cell containing slides were
immunohistochemically stained and examined by pathologist.

Results: The four markers, EpCAM, CK (AE1/AE3), CD10, and vimentin in the
SN12C cell block were highly expressed. The three markers, CK (AE1/AE3),
CD10, and vimentin in the 769-P cell block were predominantly expressed.
The EpCAM, CK (AE1/AE3), and CD10 are chosen as the potential
immunomarkers for CTC-based diagnosing for RCC. In the clinical study
using the 0.5-3.0 ml of blood samples, CTCs were successfully isolated
and detected immunohistochemically in 57.1 % (4 of 7) of patients and
ranged from 1 to 5. Of 4 CTC positive samples, two had CK (AE1/AE3)
positive, each one had EpCAM and CD10 positive CTCs, respectively.

Discussion and conclusion: Although the vimentin is highly expressed in
both cell blocks, due to diffuse positivity for leukocyte, single use of
vimentin for cancer diagnosis is limited. This comprehensive study
including immuno-markers screening and their applicability test with
clinical samples demonstrates the clinical utility of the present device
and hydrogel-assisted cell block for CTC isolation and cancer studies.


