Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic drugs modulate long noncoding RNAs expression in BRAF
inhibitor-resistant melanoma.


Emergence of drug resistance is the major cause of failure of BRAF
inhibitors (BRAFi) treatment in cutaneous melanoma (CM). Epigenetic
modifications are known to physiologically trigger massive modifications
in cellular commitment and several studies report a correlation between
the drug-resistant phenotype and epigenetic alterations of tumor cells.
In this setting, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) represent a class of gene
regulators acting at epigenetic, transcriptional and post-transcriptional
level. Several studies have implicated lncRNAs in chemoresistance through
their ability to impair cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, but also to
induce and modulate epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cell
adhesion-associated signaling pathways. LncRNAs interact with histone
modifying complexes and/or DNA methyltransferases, being also targets of
these epigenetic mediators. Furthermore, epigenetic drugs have been
recently identified as modulators for lncRNAs function as well as their
related targeting signals. Starting from these evidences, we asked the
question whether epigenetic drugs could differentially affect the
survival of BRAFi-resistant (VR) and -sensitive CM cells, investigating
the mechanistic network involved, with a specific focus on the role of
lncRNA. A panel of BRAFi-sensitive and VR CM cell lines was treated with
the FDA-approved HDAC inhibitor vorinostat (SAHA). FACS analysis of
annexin V-FITC/propidium iodide stained cells showed that SAHA cytotoxic
activity was more pronounced on VR CM cells than on their parental
counterparts. RNA-Seq analysis revealed that a large number of
differentially expressed lncRNAs was modulated in VR CM cells treated
with SAHA. Intriguingly, the expression of several VR up-regulated
lncRNAs was decreased to levels similar to those observed in the matched
parental cells. Functional analysis indicated these lncRNAs were
statistically enriched in pathways involving cellular growth and
proliferation, but also cellular assembly and organization. Though
additional studies are required, epigenetic modulation of VR-associated
lncRNAs promises to have significant therapeutic potential to restore
BRAFi sensivity in CM, being concomitantly effective in killing VR cells
as monotherapy. Based on our preliminary data, we could anticipate that
the combined use of epigenetic and targeted drugs would increase
therapeutic efficacy in CM patients relapsing to BRAFi.


