Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncoprotein SET determines the radiosensitivity of hepatocellular
carcinoma cell and antagonizing SET augments the effects of radiotherapy
via reactivating PP2A-mediated Akt downregulation.


Background:

SET is a novel oncoprotein with growing evidence suggesting its roles in
promoting the survival of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and other types
of malignant disease. Notably, pre-clinical data suggesting SET
overexpression in cancer cell leaded to the development of resistance to
various anti-cancer medications, and antagonizing SET reversely enhanced
therapeutic efficacy. Radiotherapy (RT) is a commonly used anti-cancer
modality, but its role for the treatment of HCC is largely limited for
the concern of endogenous radioresistance. In this report, we explored
the role of SET regarding the radiosensitivity of HCC cells. Furthermore,
we explored whether SET serve as a valid target to enhance RT against HCC.

Method:

A panel of HCC cell lines, including Hep3B, PLC5, HA22T and HA59T, were
used for in vitro experiments, and the PLC5 subcutaneous xenograft mice
model was used for in vivo testing. HCC cells and tumors were treated
with RT and/or SET antagonist and harvested for subsequent experiments.
The viability of cancer cells were assessed by sub-G1, colony and sphere
formation assay. Molecular events were determined by western blot and
PP2A activity.

Result:

Through manipulating the expression of SET in cancer cells, we showed the
crucial role of SET in mediating the effects of RT in HCC cells. Using
colony formation and hepatosphere formation assay, we showed that RT
significantly reduced the number and size of both tumor colony and sphere
formed by Hep3B and PLC5 cells. In contrast, ectopic expression of SET in
Hep3B and PLC5 cells abolished the effects of RT. More importantly,
SET-knockdown oppositely potentiated the RT-induced growth inhibition in
HCC cells. Based on our findings, we hypothesized that targeting SET may
exert potential to enhance RT for the treatment of HCC. In order to
validate our hypothesis, we tested the effects of RT in combine with a
novel SET antagonist, EMQA, developed and characterized in our previous
works. As expected, we found that EMQA significantly potentiated the
anti-HCC effects of RT in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, we found that
antagonizing SET to restore PP2A-mediated p-Akt downregulation was
responsible for the synergism between EMQA and RT.

Conclusion

Oncoprotein SET plays a critical role in affecting the radiosensitivity
of HCC cells. Using SET antagonist plus RT showed promising results in
pre-clinical HCC models, and yields further investigation.


