Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The FGFR4-388Arg variant exerts pro-tumorogenic effects in lung
cancer by inducing an EMT phenotype.


The FGFR4-388Arg allele, where an arginine substitutes a glycine in the
388 codon of the FGFR4 gene, has been associated to poorer patient
outcome in different tumor types. In lung cancer, the variant has been
related to shorter overall survival in adenocarcinoma (ADC) patients,
while no relationship with squamous cell carcinoma prognosis (SCC) has
been reported. Mechanistically, the FGFR4-388Arg variant has been related
to increased MAPK pathway activation and to EMT in prostate cancer in
vitro models. Furthermore, the variant has been associated with higher
STAT3 signaling in murine models of breast and lung cancer. However, so
far the molecular biology for this FGFR4 variant in lung cancer patients
has not been addressed.

We overexpressed the FGFR4-388Gly and FGFR4-388Arg variants in lung
cancer cell lines from different histologic backgrounds and performed
tumorogenicity surrogate assays and downstream signaling activation
assessment. In the generated stable cell lines, we also determined the
expression of EMT markers. Furthermore, we determined the FGFR4 variant
and the FGFR4 and N-cadherin mRNA expression in a cohort of NSCLC
patients (N=65) and correlated these data to patient outcome.

We reported that FGFR4-388Arg increases tumorogenicity in lung cancer
cell lines. Mechanistically, these functional effects seem to be mediated
by MAPK and STAT3 overactivation and by the induction of an EMT
phenotype, which includes N-cadherin increased expression. In fact, this
induction of N-cadherin protein expression by the FGFR4-388Arg variant
seems to be responsible for the pro-oncogenic effects reported. In NSCLC
patient tumor samples, the FGFR4-388Arg variant correlates with higher
N-cadherin expression and with poorer survival.

In conclusion, the FGFR4-388Arg variant is a potential prognostic
biomarker in NSCLC, including ADC and SCC patients. This variant
increases tumorogenesis through the activation of MAPK and STAT3
signaling pathways and through the promotion of an EMT phenotype.


