Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevalence of GITR expression and pharmacodynamic (PD) biomarkers
in syngeneic tumor models treated by a GITR agonist (GITRL-Fc).


GITRL (Glucocorticoid-Induced Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor Ligand,
TNFSF18) is a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) ligand
superfamily. GITRL binds and activates the co-stimulatory surface
receptor GITR, which promotes proliferation and activation of effector T
cells (Teff) and inhibits suppressive activity of regulatory T cells
(Treg). It is thus hypothesized that co-stimulation of GITR by agonist
agents will promote anti-tumor immunity. We generated a novel single-gene
GITRL trimer fused to an immunoglobulin Fc domain (GITRL-Fc) that shows
robust single agent antitumor efficacy and immune effects in multiple
syngeneic mouse models, suggesting its potential benefit in cancer
immunotherapy To investigate the prevalence of GITR expression in human
tumors, RNA-Seq data analyses of 33 tumor types in TCGA showed GITR is
highly expressed in a subset of solid tumors, including head & neck,
lung, breast, esophageal, and bladder cancers. In most solid tumors, GITR
expression correlated poorly with T cell markers, implying that GITR may
not be exclusive to immune cells and may be expressed in tumor cells as
well. Similar findings emerged from RNA-Seq data analysis of
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) samples from 24 tumor types. The gene
expression data was corroborated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis
of GITR expression in 17 tumor types which showed that in addition to
immune cells, GITR was expressed on tumor cell membranes. A
multi-platform approach was taken to investigate GITRL-Fc pharmacodynamic
(PD) biomarkers in tumors and in matched whole blood samples from mice
bearing CT26 colon, 4T1 breast, and B16F10 melanoma carcinoma models.
Global gene expression levels were profiled by microarray on treated and
control tissues. We also monitored the changes of immune cell populations
and cytokine secretions by flow cytometry, Luminex and IHC. Immune gene
changes were more robust in tumors than in blood samples. In tumor
samples, GITRL-Fc increased the gene expression associated with T cells,
CD8 T cells, cytotoxicity, Th1 cells, interferon gamma (IFN-γ), natural
killer cells, Teff cells, and T cell activation markers. These gene
changes were validated by quantitative real-time PCR. Similarly, flow
cytometry analysis showed that GITRL-Fc promoted activation of CD4+
effector cells, decreased Treg frequency, and increased the ratio of CD8+
T cell/Treg in the tumor. GITRL-Fc also modulated secretion of cytokines
in splenocytes, including an increase in IFN-γ. Taken together, the PD
biomarker changes in immune-related gene expression, immune cell
populations, and cytokine secretions observed in these preclinical tumor
models are consistent with GITRL-Fc mechanism of action and demonstrated
target engagement of GITRL-Fc. Additional approaches, including in-silico
sorting, to monitor rare immune cell populations in tumor samples will be
discussed.


