Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Supporting neoantigen identification for personalized cancer
vaccines trough analytical validation of an augmented content enhanced
(ACE) transcriptome.


The identification of neoantigens has become a critical step in the
development of neoantigen-based personalized cancer vaccines and other
immunotherapy applications. Since neoantigens can be generated from tumor
specific mutations in any expressed gene, the first step in neoantigen
identification typically involves deep sequencing of the tumor exome and
transcriptome combined with exome sequencing of the matched normal. As
personalized vaccines enter clinical trials, there is a growing need for
strong analytical validation of these platforms.

To address this, we have developed the ACE Exome (~200X) and
Transcriptome platforms for neoantigen identification which harness an
augmented exome approach specifically designed to increase sensitivity
for neoantigens in low complexity, difficult to sequence regions. To
enable this platform for neoantigen based personalized cancer vaccines,
we have performed a validation of both our ACE Exome (tumor and normal)
and ACE transcriptome platforms for detecting DNA-based SNVs and Indels,
as well as for RNA based small variant and fusion calls, variant types
that are especially important for neoantigen identification. In this
abstract, we describe the ACE Transcriptome validation.

To validate the ACE Transcriptome, we assessed analytical sensitivity
(AS) and positive predictive accuracy (PPA). AS was calculated from a
reference set of 894 SNVs and 19 indels across 11 tumor cancer cell lines
with matched normals. The reference set was constructed based on
previously observed variants in CCLE, COSMIC or had been validated by
Sanger sequencing. PPA and limit of detection (LOD) were calculated in a
series of tumor-normal dilutions representing allele frequencies ranging
from 10% to 100%. For fusions, we further selected an additional 10 cell
lines to test the detection of 16 previously characterized fusion events
including several clinically actionable fusions (ALK and BCR-ABL1).

We report an analytical sensitivity for SNVs of >99%, and a PPA of >96%
for small variants with >=10% minor allele frequency (MAF). For fusion
events, we report an analytical sensitivity of >99%, with the detection
of all 16 fusion events supported by at least 5 reads.

We demonstrate that our ACE Transcriptome assay and RNA cancer pipeline
is a highly sensitive and robust platform for detecting small variants
and fusions in the RNA.


