Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Semaphorin 5A preserves epithelial phenotype in pancreatic cancer
cells by regulating cross-talk between Wnt and TGF-β signaling.


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is one of the deadliest forms of cancers. In spite
of recent advances, minimal progress has been made in our understanding
of PC progression, metastasis, and treatment of PC patients with advanced
disease. Striking similarity between the process of cancer metastasis and
guidance of neuronal cells to their target sites has generated interest
in pharmacologically targeting guidance cue molecules for treatment of
metastasis. Among the guidance cue family members, Semaphorin5A (SEMA5A),
was found to be involved in organ-specific homing during PC metastasis.
With an interest to delineate the function of SEMA5A in PC, we generated
SEMA5A knockdown in metastatic PC cell lines. Knock down of SEMA5A
expression resulted in loss of cellular differentiation and epithelial
phenotype with higher motility as compared to vector control cells. This
observation is in accordance with our previous finding that SEMA5A
expression was higher in well-differentiated tumors in comparison with
undifferentiated pancreatic tumors. Loss of SEMA5A increased TGF-β2
production, decreased expression of E-cadherin, and nuclear translocation
of β-catenin. Furthermore, we observed higher Wnt activity and increased
expression of the transcription factor SNAIL in SEMA5A knockdown cells in
comparison with vector control cells. Higher Wnt signaling along with
increased TGF-β2 production explains the loss of differentiation and
epithelial markers. Moreover, we observed that non canonical TGF-β2/AKT
mediated inhibition of GSK3-β is responsible for increased stability of
β-catenin and SNAIL, thereby activating Wnt signaling in SEMA5A
knockdown cells. Our observations demonstrate that SEMA5A has a potential
role in maintaining the epithelial phenotype in PC cells by keeping
cross-talk between Wnt and TGF-β signaling under check.


