Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of EBV BamHI W region in surgical cancer specimen is a
useful method to evaluate the risk of lymphomagenesis in patient-derived
tumor xenografts.


Patient-derived tumor xenografts (PDXs) established by
xenotransplantation of surgically-resected human cancer specimens are an
attractive model to analyze the character of cancer cells within the
patient cancer tissues. However, establishment of PDX is occasionally
hampered by lymphomagenesis.

Lymphomagenesis in the PDX has been observed in the xenotransplantation
of several types of cancers, such as lung, liver, gastric, bladder,
breast, prostate, and colorectal cancers. Lymphomagenesis in the PDX is
caused by the proliferation of the EBV-infected lymphocytes under
insufficient immunosurveillance in the immunodeficient mice. However, it
is still difficult to predict lymphomagenesis before xenotransplantation.

In this study, we analyzed the expression of EBV-related genes in the 15
surgical specimens of the consented colorectal cancer (CRC) patients and
the PDXs established by their xenotransplantation. The CRC specimens and
the established PDX tumors were histologically examined. Then, the
specimens were immunohistochemically stained with anti-CD3 and CD20
antibodies. The presence of EBV was histologically evaluated by EBER in
situ. The expression levels of EBV-related genes, such as EBNAs, LMP1,
EBER, BamHI W region and EBV-associated microRNAs, were evaluated using
the genomic DNA and mRNAs prepared from the CRC specimens and the
established PDX tumors.

Nine PDXs were established by the xenotransplantation. Histological
examination showed that 7 of 9 (78%) PDX recapitulated histopathological
characteristics of the patient CRC tissues. However, 2 of 9 (22%) PDXs
exhibited the morphological characteristics of EBV-associated human
diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Then, we confirmed that lymphoma
was formed by clonal proliferation of human B-cell lymphocytes, and
strongly positive for EBER. We investigated whether the expression of
EBV-related genes in the patient specimen is associated with
lymphomagenesis in the PDXs. Expression of EBV genes and RNAs in patient
CRC tissues were not clearly associated with lymphomagenesis in the PDXs.
BamHI W region is a major internal repeat in EBV genome and the PCR
amplification of this region is useful to evaluate the presence and
amount of EBV. When the EBV BamHI W region was detectable in the patient
specimens, the transplantation of the samples resulted in lymphomagenesis
in 2 out of 3 patient cancer specimens. In contrast, when this region was
undetectable, no patient cancer specimens resulted in lymphomagenesis (0
out of 7 patient cancer specimens).

These results suggest that the amount and/or presence of EBV itself in
the patient cancer specimens is one of the factors that are associated
with lymphomagenesis in the PDXs. Therefore, the PCR amplification of EBV
BamHI W region is an attractive method to evaluate the risk of
lymphomagenesis before xenotransplantation.


