Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt/β-catenin signaling mediates resistance of colorectal cancer
cell lines to chemoradiotherapy.


Background: Activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling plays a central role
in the development and progression of colorectal cancer (CRC).
Previously, we demonstrated that the Wnt transcription factor TCF7L2 was
overexpressed in primary rectal cancers that were resistant to
chemoradiotherapy (CRT), and that TCF7L2 functionally mediates resistance
of CRC to clinically relevant doses of CRT. However, it remained unclear
whether the resistance was mediated by a TCF7L2 inherent mechanism or
Wnt/β-catenin signaling in general.

Methods: We silenced another key-component of canonical Wnt-signaling,
CTNNB1 (β-catenin) in rectal cancer cell lines LS1034, SW480, and SW837
by RNAi. Afterwards cells were exposed to varying doses of irradiation
(+/- 5 FU) to assess the influence of β-catenin on radiation response.
Activation of Wnt-signaling in “normal” epithelial cells (retina
pigment epithelial cells RPE) was achieved either by stimulation with
Wnt-3A, or stable overexpression of non-degradable β-catenin
(S33Y-mutated) and confirmed by a dual luciferase reporter assay. Changes
in radio-(chemo-) sensitivity were analyzed again by a colony formation
assay. SW1463 were repeatedly irradiated (68Gy) to establish an isogenic
radio-resistant cell line. Gene-expression profiles, without or 6h after
a single dose of 4Gy, of RPE cells expressing a control vector or
overexpressing β-catenin and radioresistant or wildtype SW1463 cells
were established using micro Arrays.

Results: Silencing of CTNNB1 resulted in (chemo-) radiation-sensitization
of all three CRC-cell lines. To further investigate the potential role of
Wnt/β-catenin signaling in controlling therapeutic responsiveness,
non-tumorigenic RPE cells were stimulated with Wnt-3A, which
significantly increased resistance to CRT. This effect could be
recapitulated by overexpression of β-catenin (S33Y-mut.), resulting in a
significantly increased resistance to CRT. The effect could be rescued by
siRNA mediated knockdown of β-catenin. Consistent with these findings,
we observed higher expression levels of active (unphosphorylated)
β-catenin as well as increased TCF reporter activity in SW1463 cells
that were rendered radiation-resistant due to repeated IR treatment. Gene
expression profiling of radioresistant and wildtype SW1463 as well as RPE
cells overexpressing β-catenin or a control vector revealed significant
transcriptomal changes. Most interestingly the resistant cells
(radioresistant SW1463 and RPE overexpressing β-catenin) reacted with
differential activation of metabolic, inflammatory, cell survival and
cell cycle pathways to irradiation.

Conclusion: Together, these findings strongly support the interpretation
that Wnt/β-catenin signaling plays a central role in mediating
resistance of CRC cells to CRT by deregulating essential pathways. Hence,
pathway inhibition may represent a promising strategy to increase
therapeutic responsiveness to CRT.


