Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotherapeutic sensitivity of myeloid-derived suppressor cells
during cancer therapy is dictated by selective expression of clusterin.


Diverse chemotherapeutic agents, including Docetaxel, have been reported
by us and others to specifically target myeloid-derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs) which mediate tumor-associated immune repression. However, the
mechanism is unknown. To find a less toxic anticancer drug, we focused on
Curcumin which exhibits natural anti-oxidant and antitumor activities
with low toxicity to normal cells. Here, we demonstrate that curcumin,
like Docetaxel, promotes cytotoxic function against tumor cells and
depletes MDSC populations in vivo and in vitro. In 4T1 mammary
tumor-bearing BALB/c mice treated with curcumin, we observed
dose-dependent tumor reductions in mice treated with curcumin compared to
DMSO controls, indicating that curcumin can be an effective antitumor
agent. To elucidate the mechanism, we embarked on examining different
populations of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs). Flow cytometric
analysis of splenic cells from tumor bearers indicated that the antitumor
effect by curcumin is due to depletion of immunosuppressive Ly6G+
granulocytic (G)-MDSC lineage with selective promotion of Ly6C+ monocytic
(M)-MDSC towards the CCR7+F4/80+ M1 subset. Furthermore, the increase in
M1 MDSCs correlated with greater T-cell adaptive immune response and
cytotoxicity against 4T1 tumor cells. Since clearance of G-MDSCs was
mediated by apoptosis as evidenced by our Annexin V staining, we
hypothesized that clusterin (sCLU), a potent anti-apoptotic protein,
unrelated to the Bcl-2 family, may be the underlying mechanism by which
M-MDSCs and M1 cells are selected out following treatment of curcumin.
Western blot analysis revealed that sCLU was, indeed, differentially
expressed in M1-MDSCs but not in G-MDSCs. Antisense-CLU transfection into
M-MDSCs reduced chemoresistance not only to curcumin but also to
Docetaxel, confirming the critical involvement of CLU in selective
survival of M-MDSCs. Using both curcumin and Docetaxel we confirmed that
sCLU works by binding Bax, preventing its translation to the mitochondria
to initiate apoptosis. For clinical relevance, we examined human breast
cancer samples and noted that the tumor microenvironment is replete with
immature CD33+ MDSCs which lack sCLU expression, unlike infiltrating
mature CD68+ macrophages which possess high sCLU expression. Our results
taken together indicate that selective survival of M-MDSCs under
chemotherapy dictate their survival advantage, allowing for maturation
into M1 cells and promotion of adaptive T cell immunity against cancer.


