Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic reprogramming of radiation fibrosis using adipose
derived stromal cells.


Background: Soft tissue radiation fibrosis (RF) affects up to 70% of
cancer survivors post-radiotherapy. RF is an irreversible and progressive
side effect of radiotherapy characterized by poor tissue elasticity and
increased ECM deposition, clinically translating to increased morbidity
due to hardening, distortion, and pain. Recent evidence has highlighted
the potential role of metabolic alterations in the onset and progression
of fibrosis. Adipose derived stromal cells (ADSCs) have been used
effectively for enhancing complex wound repair in a number of clinical
trials. The therapeutic effect of ADSCs has been attributed to its
secretion of paracrine factors, which can regulate the metabolism of
target cells. Even so, the metabolic effects of ADSCs on target cells is
not well described.

Methods and Results: Transcriptomic profiling and targeted metabolomics
of human radiated tissue and a murine model of RF revealed that
suppression of fatty acid oxidation (FAO) is hallmark of RF. TGF-B, a
master regulator of fibrosis, has a large effect in suppressing FAO in
primary human fibroblasts in vitro through downregulating genes in the
PPAR pathway, a major regulatory pathway for FAO, and through inhibiting
oxidation of the long chain fatty acid, palmitic acid (pMethods and
Results: Transcriptomic profiling and targeted metabolomics of human
radiated tissue and a murine model of RF revealed that suppression of
fatty acid oxidation (FAO) is hallmark of RF. TGF-B, a master regulator
of fibrosis, has a large effect in suppressing FAO in primary human
fibroblasts in vitro through downregulating genes in the PPAR pathway, a
major regulatory pathway for FAO, and through inhibiting oxidation of the
long chain fatty acid, palmitic acid (p<0.05, t-test). Treatment of TGF-B
stimulated fibroblasts with ADSC conditioned media resulted in an
improvement in FAO and a reduction in fibronectin, collagen-1, and PAI-1
protein levels, three of major contributors to fibrosis. Transplantation
of ADSCs into murine RF resulted in a metabolic shift back to FAO and a
significant reduction in RF both functionally (percentage leg contracture
36% vs 26%, 2-way ANOVA Methods and Results: Transcriptomic profiling and
targeted metabolomics of human radiated tissue and a murine model of RF
revealed that suppression of fatty acid oxidation (FAO) is hallmark of
RF. TGF-B, a master regulator of fibrosis, has a large effect in
suppressing FAO in primary human fibroblasts in vitro through
downregulating genes in the PPAR pathway, a major regulatory pathway for
FAO, and through inhibiting oxidation of the long chain fatty acid,
palmitic acid (p<0.05, t-test). Treatment of TGF-B stimulated fibroblasts
with ADSC conditioned media resulted in an improvement in FAO and a
reduction in fibronectin, collagen-1, and PAI-1 protein levels, three of
major contributors to fibrosis. Transplantation of ADSCs into murine RF
resulted in a metabolic shift back to FAO and a significant reduction in
RF both functionally (percentage leg contracture 36% vs 26%, 2-way ANOVA
< 0.05) and histologically through image analysis of trichrome staining
(pMethods and Results: Transcriptomic profiling and targeted metabolomics
of human radiated tissue and a murine model of RF revealed that
suppression of fatty acid oxidation (FAO) is hallmark of RF. TGF-B, a
master regulator of fibrosis, has a large effect in suppressing FAO in
primary human fibroblasts in vitro through downregulating genes in the
PPAR pathway, a major regulatory pathway for FAO, and through inhibiting
oxidation of the long chain fatty acid, palmitic acid (p<0.05, t-test).
Treatment of TGF-B stimulated fibroblasts with ADSC conditioned media
resulted in an improvement in FAO and a reduction in fibronectin,
collagen-1, and PAI-1 protein levels, three of major contributors to
fibrosis. Transplantation of ADSCs into murine RF resulted in a metabolic
shift back to FAO and a significant reduction in RF both functionally
(percentage leg contracture 36% vs 26%, 2-way ANOVA < 0.05) and
histologically through image analysis of trichrome staining (p<0.01,
t-test). Pathway analysis of significant genes altered by ADSCs revealed
an upregulation of the PPAR pathway was the most significant effect of
ADSC transplantation. Untargeted metabolomics confirmed that FAO
metabolites were significantly upregulated with ADSC transplantation. To
confirm the importance of metabolic regulation by ADSCs, we utilized a
pharmacogenomics strategy to uncover a compound that mimicked the effect
of ADSCs. Drug A ranked highest and replicated the anti-fibrotic and
pro-FAO effects of ADSCs both on TGF-B stimulated primary fibroblasts and
in murine RF. Etomoxir, a FAO inhibitor, inhibited the effect of ADSCs
and Drug A in regulating protein levels of fibronectin and collagen,
revealing that ADSCs and Drug A require an intact FAO pathway to exert
their anti-fibrotic effects.

Conclusions: Inhibition of FAO is a novel hallmark of RF. ADSC-mediated
metabolic reprogramming resulted in an enhancement of FAO and a reduction
in RF through upregulating the PPAR pathway. ADSC-directed
pharmacogenomics uncovered Drug A, which mimicked the pro-FAO and
anti-fibrotic effects of ADSCs. Our research has highlighted the
importance of reversing metabolic aberrations to reduce RF.


