Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multicenter evaluation of technology platforms for the enumeration
of circulating tumor cells.


Metastasis represents the deadliest feature of cancer, which is fueled by
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) being released into the bloodstream from
the primary tumor. In addition to the clinical value of CTC enumeration
for metastatic risk assessment, CTCs are considered to be a minimally
invasive source for studying the molecular and genetic features of the
disease as well as response to anticancer therapy. Given the molecular
heterogeneity of CTCs, which includes loss of epithelial surface marker
expression, several microfluidic and filtration technology platforms were
developed to overcome the limitations of surface marker dependent CTC
enrichment. Here we describe the efforts of the Innovative Medicines
Initiative (IMI) consortium CANCER-ID (www.cancer-id.eu), which
represents a joint undertaking of experts from academia and
pharmaceutical industry, in generating comparative data using different
CTC enrichment platforms in a multicenter ring trial.

To address clinically relevant subtypes of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer
(NSCLC), different NSCLC cell lines were profiled for genetic aberrations
(mutations and copy number aberrations), expression of epithelial markers
(epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EPCAM) and cytokeratins) as well as
cell size. Cell lines were selected to generate spike-in samples using
blood of healthy volunteers with informed consent in a centralized way.
Analysis was performed by at least three CANCER-ID partners using
different CTC enrichment technologies including the Siemens filtration
device, the Parsortix PR1, VyCap filtration and the CellSearch system.

To ensure quality and comparability of results, CANCER-ID partners
established standard operation procedures (SOPs) for pre-analytic sample
handling including sample fixation, storage and shipment. Special
attention was paid on the development of SOPs for the actual CTC
enrichment procedure and the integration of downstream applications
including single cell isolation by DEPArray™ followed by Ampli1™ WGA
and molecular and genetic characterization of isolated cells.
Epitope-independent enrichment by filtration or microfluidic devices was
evaluated by using NSCLC cells with substantially different cell size. In
addition, comparative data on spike-in samples was generated using the
EPCAM-expression dependent CellSearch system, which failed to detect
EPCAM-negative tumor cells.

In conclusion, the evaluation of different CTC enrichment technologies
and the integration of workflows for downstream analysis of single cells
blaze the trail for the next phase of IMI’s CANCER-ID, which includes
the analysis of real-life NSCLC patient material.

This work is supported by IMI JU & EFPIA (grant no. 115749).


