Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lactate dehydrogenase expression in African American women with
triple-negative breast cancer.


The incidence of breast cancer in African American women (AAW) is much
lower than those of their Caucasian counterparts. However, the age
adjusted mortality rates are much greater for AAW compared to Caucasian
American women (CAW). These differences in survival between AAW and CAW
were attributed to socioeconomic factors and access to health care. Yet,
after adjusting these differences, AAW still had lower survival rates
than CAW. Genetic and immunohistochemical studies have revealed that
biological variations may account for this disparity. These studies have
suggested as a causative: a higher prevalence of basal-like tumors in
premenopausal AAW and low prevalence of luminal tumor. These are
characterized by being high-grade aggressive tumors that are estrogen
receptor negative (ER-), progesterone receptor negative (PR-), human
epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER-2) +/-; with high rate of lymph
node involvement. Despite this understanding, there is little evidence to
indicate which genetic or non-genetic factors contribute to causing
aggressive breast cancer thereby limiting the development of prevention
and treatment option. We proposed that the phenotypic diversity of breast
cancer might be accompanied by a corresponding diversity in protein
expression patterns that can be reveal using proteomic technologies. We
hypothesized that in addition to ER- and PR-, and the absence in
expression of HER-2, the protein composition of triple-negative tumors
varies among African-American and Caucasian. Two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis, mass spectrophotometry and data analysis of protein from
breast cancer tissues were used to identify differentially expressed
proteins from African American and Caucasian women. Western blot of
luminal and TNBC cell lines were used to confirm the expression of
identified proteins. We have found that many proteins were differentially
expressed in AAW breast cancer tissues compared to CAW. One of these is
lactate dehydrogenase which was found to be overexpressed in tissues from
AAW. Western blot analysis confirmed expression.


