Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant glycoprotein expression in recurrent and non-recurrent
prostate cancer tissue.


The primary aim of this study is to identify and quantify aberrancies in
glycosylation patterns and glycoprotein levels expressed in high grade
prostate cancer tissue from men with and without recurrence following
radical prostatectomy using multi-dimensional chromatography and tandem
mass spectrometry techniques. Glycosylation is a common and highly
complex posttranslational modification, and is linked to protein
function. Elucidating specific glycan structures is key to understanding
the underlying role glycosylation plays in regulating cellular activity,
including tumorigenesis, invasion, and metastasis. Aberrant glycosylation
is an emerging hallmark of various cancers, demonstrating that
alterations in glycosylation disrupt cellular behavior in key pathways.
Furthermore, comprehensive glycan characterization can lead to more
effective biomarkers with increased clinical utility for distinguishing
indolent disease from cancers that are more likely to become metastatic,
recur and/or pose higher risk.

In this study, glycoproteomic analysis was performed on prostate cancer
tissue and matched normal prostate tissue from ten men with high grade
prostate cancer (Gleason 7/8) - five of which experienced recurrence.
Proteins were extracted from tissue lysates, denatured, reduced and
alkylated. Isotopic labels for quantitation were incorporated during
alkylation - normal and cancer tissue was labeled with 12C and 13C
acrylamide respectively. Paired normal/cancer tissues were combined.
Glycosylated proteins from each pair were separated by multi-lectin
chromatography designed to capture sialylated, core-fucosylated, and
highly branched complex glycans, fractionating the complex mixture into
four discrete fractions containing specific glycoforms. LC-MS/MS was used
to analyze the tryptic digest from each fraction for protein
identification and quantitation.

This experimental design reveals differences between the glycosylation
patterns and protein levels of cancerous and normal tissue in ten men,
but also allows for the comparison between those with recurrent cancers.
The glycosylation patterns across hundreds of prostate tissue proteins
were systematically screened, enabling the detection and relative
quantitation of specific glycoforms of proteins that may be dysregulated
in prostate cancer. Preliminary results reveal the identification of
6,202 unique proteins, and quantitation of 2,894 proteins, most of which
contained sialylated glycoforms. In all patients (regardless of treatment
outcome), several hundred proteins had elevated total protein levels in
the 13C-labeled cancer tissue compared to the 12C-labeled normal tissue
proteins, such as TACSTD2 and LPP, while other proteins demonstrated
upregulation only among certain glycoforms. Other glycoproteins were
up-regulated in cancer only in recurrent patients, including CPNE1,
TXND5, and CASC4.


