Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of epigenetic mark profile, cell cycle alteration and DNA
repair in resistance of glioblastoma cells to photodynamic therapy.


Glioblastoma is the most aggressive primary brain tumor. Treatment
regimens for glioblastoma tumors, such as surgery, radiotherapy, and
chemotherapy, are very invasive and can only prolong the median patient
life to several months. It was shown that 5-aminolevulinic acid
(5-ALA)-based photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a promising and less
aggressive adjuvant modality for diagnosis and treatment of glioblastoma.

Limiting point of PDT outcome is appearing of cells with intrinsic or
acquired PDT resistance that finally results in repopulating the tumor
and short-term survival of glioma patients. Therefore, our study was
designed to determine therapy resistance markers in PDT resistant
glioblastoma cell line. Potential markers subsequently can be used for
sensitization of glioblastoma to PDT.

Glioblastoma (U-87) cell line resistant to PDT (U-87R) was isolated from
parental, sensitive line (U-87P) by applying several cycles of ALA-PDT,
and further growing of surviving cells. U-87R cells subsequently were
characterized from different aspects such as epigenetic markers, cell
cycle events, oxidative stress and DNA repair capacity.

Assessment of nucleotide modifications and epigenetic marks in PDT
resistant glioblastoma and its parental cell line showed significant
higher level of two epigenetic marks including 5-methylcytosine (5-mC)
and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC) in U-87R compare to U-87P, before and
after PDT.

Doubling time of U-87R cells was considerably longer than that of U-87P.
Cell cycle analysis showed longer G1 phase in U-87R cells compare to
U-87P. Moreover, accumulation in G2 phase following PDT was observed
earlier in resistant cells than in parental line. That suggests the role
of early activation of DNA damage response in resistant cells. Resistant
glioblastoma cells were then sensitized to PDT by applying inhibitor of
one of the main kinases of DNA damage response, ATM kinase. In comparison
with parental cells, U-87R cells also showed higher activity of some DNA
base excision repair (BER) enzymes including glycosylases and
AP-endonuclease1 (APE1).

Studies of the whole protein profile of PDT resistant and parental cells
demonstrated that the level of superoxide dismutase (SOD) was
considerably higher in U-87R than in U-87P. That data was then confirmed
by detecting lower oxidative stress in U-87R following PDT.

PDT resistant glioblastoma cells as a model of resistant cells in
glioblastoma tumor population demonstrated the significant role of
epigenetic mark profile, cell cycle alteration, higher DNA repair
capacity, and antioxidant defense in conferring resistance to
photodynamic therapy.

This work was supported by the Polish National Science Centre (NCN)
grants: DEC-2012/07/B/NZ1/00008, UMO-2014/15/B/NZ5/01444,
UMO-2014/13/N/NZ3/00863


