Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly efficient antibody drug conjugation with a novel
photoactivation strategy.


Meditope SnAP (site-specific novel antibody platform) technology is a
novel way to target molecules to antibodies in a site specific,
non-destructive fashion. A “meditope” is a proprietary peptide that
can bind a meditope-enabled antibody in a unique site and in such a way
that antigen binding is not compromised. This specific peptide antibody
interaction can be readily employed for site-specific covalent
conjugation of cytotoxic payloads to any meditope-enabled antibody. To
facilitate covalent conjugation, the meditope peptide has been rationally
designed with a photoactivatable side chain and the generation of the
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) occurs in a highly efficient manner
following the specific binding of the meditope to the enabled antibody.
To test the hypothesis that photoactivation would be an efficacious and
homogenous way to make an ADC, meditope-enabled ADCs were designed and
tested in vitro and in vivo. Toxin conjugation was tested, as was
efficiency of covalent interaction following short-term exposure of the
antibody peptide conjugates to a nondestructive wavelength of 340 nM.
Photoactivation proved to be a highly efficient and scalable way to make
an ADC. Payload stability was confirmed in vivo with multiple toxins and
in vivo potency of two unique ADCs were tested in an EGFR positive
gastric cancer xenograft as well as a HER2 positive ovarian cancer
xenograft. The meditope-enabled photogenerated anti-HER2 ADC was
benchmarked against conventionally conjugated T-DM1 and showed equivalent
efficacy, but with the site-directed conjugated meditope ADC using less
toxin. Meditope-directed photoactivated-controlled conjugation can be
readily extended to any meditope-enabled antibody, resulting in a novel
way to develop ADCs. This methodology, with its high efficiency, speed
and homogeneity has evident advantages for the development of
antibody-drug conjugates.


