Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiRNA-652 induces neuroendocrine-like differentiation in LNCaP
prostate cancer cells through decreased PP2A function.


Background: MicroRNA (miRNA) dysregulation has been shown to contribute
to prostate cancer progression. Recently, we identified a panel of five
miRNAs associated with prostate cancer recurrence and metastasis using
next generation miRNA sequencing. Here, we examine the clinical
implications of dysregulation of miR-652 and its biological mechanism.

Methods: Using a cohort of 585 patients treated with radical
prostatectomy, we examined the prognostic significance of miR-652 using
the Kaplan Meier method and Cox proportional hazard models. We examined
miR-652 expression in prostate cancer cells and created cell lines that
overexpressed miR-652 for functional assays. Finally, we examined
pathways through which miR-652 may function using prediction algorithms,
and confirmed by Western blotting, IHC and luciferase reporter assays.

Results: Patients overexpressing miR-652 had significantly increased
rates of biochemical recurrence (pResults: Patients overexpressing
miR-652 had significantly increased rates of biochemical recurrence
(p<0.0001). In multivariable models adjusting for known clinical
prognostic factors, patients with high miR-652 expression had an
increased risk of biochemical recurrence (HR 1.47, 95% CI 1.09-1.98).
Overexpression of miR-652 in PC3 and LNCaP cells resulted in increased
growth, migration and invasion. Prostate cancer cell xenografts
overexpressing miR-652 had increased tumorigenicity and metastases. Using
the miRNA target prediction program miRanda, we identified the B”
regulatory subunit, PPP2R3A, of the tumor suppressor PP2A as a potential
target of miR-652. PC3 and LNCaP cells transfected with miR-652 mimic
dowregulated the PR72 isoform of PPP2R3A. Mutation of the miR-652 binding
site in the PPP2R3A gene negated this effect. Western blotting
demonstrated that mir-652 induced PPR2R3A inhibition induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in PC3 cells. Prolonged miR-652
expression in LNCaP cells induced a neurite-like morphology, suggesting
neurodocrine-like differentiation (NED). Western blotting of LNCaP cells
after prolonged miR-652 exposure, resulted in increased phospho-AKT and
phospho-β-catenin (phosphorylated at Serine 552), reduced AR expression,
and upregulation of the NED marker, neuron specific enolase (NSE),
consistent with NED. Expression of NED markers, chromogranin A, NSE, and
synaptophysin were also observed in a xenografted tumor derived from
LNCaP-652 overexpressing cells.

Conclusion: These observations suggest that increased levels of miR-652
found in prostate cancer may contribute to tumor progression by promoting
NED, tumor cell survival and cell migration/invasion through decreased
PP2A function which may provide an opportunity for novel therapy in
prostate cancer.


