Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Podocyte-specific SMPDl3b modulates radiation-induced renal
dysfunction.


Background: The underlying mechanisms responsible for the renal failure
and proteinuria in radiation nephropathy remain largely unknown.
Radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy may result in radiation-induced
kidney injury in pelvic malignancies such as gynecologic cancers,
lymphomas, gastrointestinal cancers, sarcomas of the upper abdomen and
during total body irradiation. The current study investigates the role of
sphingolipids in radiation-induced podocytopathy using a murine model.
The molecular and functional effects of kidney irradiation were evaluated
after single-dose exposures.

Material/Methods: In cell culture, SMPDL3b expression post radiation
(8Gy) was determined by real-time PCR (RT-PCR) and Western blotting.
Morphological changes and DNA damage were detected post radiation using
immunofluorescence microscopy. Wild-type C57BL/6 male and female mice
(age 10-14 weeks) were irradiated with a single dose of X-ray (14 Gy)
using an image guided small animal arc radiation treatment system
(iSMAART). Rituximab/IgG was administered (50 mg/kg, intraperitoneal
injection) 30 min before the single dose of irradiation. Functional
kidney parameters, kidney histology, and gene expression were analyzed at
20, 30 and 40 weeks after irradiation.

Results: Following irradiation, SMPDL3b expression at protein level was
significantly reduced in vitro and in vivo. However, no significant
changes were observed at the transcriptional level. Podocyte number also
decreased significantly post radiation in vivo. iSMAART dynamic contrast
enhanced (DCE) imaging data analysis showed reduced glomerular filtration
rate post radiation. In agreement with the functional data, hematoxylin
and eosin staining of kidney sections showed a multifocal increase in the
number of pericytes, tubular atrophy, and glomerular damage. Periodic
Acid-Schiff (PAS) staining showed an increase in glomerular mesangial
matrix accumulation post radiation. Sirius red staining showed diffuse
intertubular fibrosis, especially in the renal cortex post radiation.
These histological changes were paralleled by the change in serum
Creatinine, urine albumin. Rituximab pretreatment to mice, improved
kidney functional parameters, vascular structure, normalization of
pericyte coverage, suppress the development of fibrosis and tubular
damage post irradiation.

Conclusion: This study shows that rituximab pretreatment protects mice
against radiation-induced nephrotoxicity, which may have therapeutic
implications for radiation-induced injuries in cancer patients.


