Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The polymeric fluoropyrimidine F10 is effective towards cell and
organoid models of 5-FU-resistant colorectal cancer.


Background: Fluoropyrimidine drugs (FPs, e.g. 5-fluorouracil (5-FU))
constitute the backbone of most chemotherapy regimens for treating
locally-advanced and metastatic colon cancer (e.g. FOLFOX, FOLFIRI,
FOLFOXIRI). While current FPs improve survival and are the preferred
drugs for most colorectal (CRC) cases, drug resistance is a serious
problem. One of the most prevalent causes of 5-FU resistance is mutation
in TP53 which occur in more than one-third of stage III CRC tumors. 5-FU
requires wtp53 for initiation of apoptosis and CRC cells with mtp53 are
markedly less sensitive to 5-FU.

Methods: To test if F10 induced p53-independent apoptosis in CRC cells,
we obtained p53-/- and p53+/+ HCT-116 cells from Professor Vogelstein
(Johns Hopkins) and evaluated drug-response in cell-based, organoid, and
xenograft models. Cell viability and apoptosis were assessed using
Cell-Titer Glo and Caspase Glo assays (Promega). Cell-cycle distribution
was evaluated by flow cytometry analysis of propidium iodide stained
cells. Thymidylate synthase (TS) activity was assessed using a 3H-release
assay and Topoisomerase 1 cleavage complex (Top1cc) formation was
assessed using an in vivo complex of enzyme (ICE) bioassay. Cell division
was quantified by time-lapse video microscopy. Organoids were developed
by bioprinting cells on a biogel matrix to produce a center comprised of
tumor cells encompassed by stromal cells. Drug effects in each cell type
were evaluated using a “Live-Dead” assay. Drug effects in vivo were
evaluated using xenograft models.

Results: p53-/- HCT-116 cells were resistant to 5-FU, but sensitive to
F10 and underwent p53-independent apoptosis. While F10 is more efficient
than 5-FU at inhibiting TS, it uniquely supported continued DNA
synthesis, mitosis, and cell division in p53-null cells while
5-FU-treated cells underwent S-phase arrest under thymineless conditions.
Following cell division, F10 induced high levels of Top1cc in daughter
cells causing massive DNA damage. Using a DT40 knockout system we
determined that Tdp1 and PARP-1 were important for F10-induced DNA
damage. Organoid models demonstrated selective killing of malignant cells
relative to stroma by F10, but not 5-FU. Xenograft models are in progress.

Conclusions: F10 is much more potent than 5-FU and induces
p53-independent apoptosis. F10 differs from 5-FU in supporting continued
DNA synthesis under thymineless conditions leading to Top1-mediated DNA
damage, Top1 depletion, genomic instability and activation of the
extrinsic apoptotic pathway.


