Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regression of malignant ascites via PAPP-A inhibition in ovarian
cancer patient-derived xenograft model.


Malignant ascites is one of the most common causes of morbidity in end
stage ovarian cancer patients with negative impact on quality of life.
Novel non-invasive palliative therapeutic options are lacking for such
patients.

The zinc metalloprotease, pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A),
plays a key role in the insulin-like growth factor (IGF) pathway,
promoting ovarian cancer cellular transformation, growth and
invasiveness. Furthermore, patient primary malignant ascites is known to
contain high levels of PAPP-A by ELISA. Preliminary data shows that
inhibition of PAPP-A through a neutralizing monoclonal PAPP-A antibody
(mAb-PA) inhibits the accumulation and promote the regression of ascites
in an ovarian cancer patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models. In the
current study, we investigated whether mAb-PA can promote ascites
regression in an additional ovarian PDX model with measurable ascites.

Patient derived ascites xenograft (PDAX) models were defined as SCID mice
that developed ascites after intraperitoneal heterotransplantation of
patient solid tumor collected at the time of primary cytoreduction.
Ascites from these models (n=51) was screened for human PAPP-A protein by
ELISA and models were divided into two groups by the relative
concentration of PAPPA-A: high (n=18) and low (n=33).

PAPP-A High PDAX model PH438 was re-established intraperitoneal in 20
SCID mice by ascites injection (0.1 ml per mouse). When ascites area
reached a threshold of >0.60 cm2 by ultrasound, mice were treated with
60mg/Kg of mAb-PA (n=10) or IgG2a control (n=10) on day one and three. On
day four, a second ultrasound measurement was obtained and the mice were
euthanized. Ascites burden was measured at necropsy. Personnel involved
with the acquisition of ultrasounds measurements, subsequent ascites
harvests, and post hoc analyses were blinded to the treatments. The ratio
of mean ascites (mAb-PA/IgG2a in grams) collected at necropsy was
2.04/2.51, indicating that the mAb-PA arm had less ascites compared to
control. These data were consistent with pre- and post-treatment
ultrasound measurements of ascites burden; a statistically significant
(p=0.0283 by paired t test) reduction of ascites burden of 52.3% was
observed, compared to the starting baseline, indicating that mAb-PA
treatment causes ascites regression. Ascites weight at necropsy was
compared to the area of greatest fluid echogenicity by ultrasound and the
Pearson correlation R value achieved was of 0.859 (pPAPP-A High PDAX
model PH438 was re-established intraperitoneal in 20 SCID mice by ascites
injection (0.1 ml per mouse). When ascites area reached a threshold of
>0.60 cm2 by ultrasound, mice were treated with 60mg/Kg of mAb-PA (n=10)
or IgG2a control (n=10) on day one and three. On day four, a second
ultrasound measurement was obtained and the mice were euthanized. Ascites
burden was measured at necropsy. Personnel involved with the acquisition
of ultrasounds measurements, subsequent ascites harvests, and post hoc
analyses were blinded to the treatments. The ratio of mean ascites
(mAb-PA/IgG2a in grams) collected at necropsy was 2.04/2.51, indicating
that the mAb-PA arm had less ascites compared to control. These data were
consistent with pre- and post-treatment ultrasound measurements of
ascites burden; a statistically significant (p=0.0283 by paired t test)
reduction of ascites burden of 52.3% was observed, compared to the
starting baseline, indicating that mAb-PA treatment causes ascites
regression. Ascites weight at necropsy was compared to the area of
greatest fluid echogenicity by ultrasound and the Pearson correlation R
value achieved was of 0.859 (p<0.0001).

These PDAX data implicate PAPP-A attenuation as a potential strategy to
treat malignant ascites in OC. Additional PDAX models are under
examination to confirm these findings and support the translational
development of PAPP-A as a new therapeutic target for women with
refractory ascites.


