Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GNS561 a new quinoline derivative inhibits the growth of
hepatocellular carcinoma in a cirrhotic rat and human PDX orthotopic
mouse models.


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains a major health
problem, often diagnosed at late stages with limited number of
therapeutic options. New drugs with original mechanisms of action are
urgently aimed to improve current armamentarium in HCC patients.
Quinoline derivatives are novel class of oral small molecules inducing
multiple cellular effects such as inhibition of autophagy, induction of
apoptosis, and cell cycle modulation. The aim of these studies was to
assess tolerance and efficacy of a new quinolone derivative GNS561.

Material and methods: In vitro experiments were realized with viability,
apoptosis and migration in tumor cells in HCC cell lines and primary
tumor. Drug tolerance and plasma and liver pharmacokinetic were evaluated
after single and repeated dosing in mice and rat. GNS561 and sorafenib
efficacy in vivo were evaluated in a PDX orthotopic BALB/c-nu mouse model
and in a diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced HCC cirrhotic rat model. AFP,
cell proliferation and tumor weight and size were assessed in mice. In
rat tumor progression was followed by MRI, pathological analysis (tumor
size and number), immunohistochemistry and PCR analysis after 6weeks of
treatment.

Results: GNS 561 shows potent anti-proliferative activity when assayed
against a panel of human tumor cell lines and notably against a panel of
HCC patient primry tumors even in those with sorafenib resistance (Mean
EC50 3µM vs 11µM for sorafenib). GNS561 is highly selectively trapped
in the liver. Plasma and liver PK in mice and rats after single and
repeated doses confirm this selectivity with good tolerance and oral
bioavailability. In PDX mouse model, tumor growth was significantly
reduced by GNS561 with a dose-response manner, this tumor regression was
associated with AFP level decreases by 72% with GNS561 (p=0.002) and 54%
with sorafenib (p=0.046) compared to control. In rat model, mean number
of tumors was significantly lower in GNS561 at 15mg/kg group (n=50.6), in
sorafanib at 10mg/kg (n=65.1) and in combination group (n=40.6), when
compared to control (n=100.4; p=0.0024, p= 0.029 and p=0.0002). Tumor
decrease measured by MRI was associated with a significantly reduced
proliferation of tumor cells particularly in GNS561 group (70%) and
combination (84%) compared to control, whereas the effect of sorafenib
alone on proliferation was modest (30%).

Conclusions: GNS561 is a liver selective drug with good tolerance and
promising efficacy in different HCC animal models. GNS 561 was more
efficient than sorafenib to control tumor growth in preclinical models.
Based on its safe toxicity profile and potent activity in rodent models,
GNS 561 is now aimed to further reach clinical development in patients
with HCC in 2017.


