Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of ADCC resistance profoundly alters tumor cell
phenotype and stress response.


Antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) is one mechanism by which
monoclonal antibodies (mAb) work. In addition to ADCC, mAbs act on their
target by causing signal perturbation and complement activation.
Cetuximab is an EGFR targeting mAb used to target EGFR overexpression and
amplification seen in many types of cancer. While mechanisms of
resistance to EGFR targeted therapy have been extensively studied,
resistance to ADCC has not, mainly due to the lack of ADCC-resistance
models for study. To address this limitation we established a model
system for anti-EGFR ADCC using NK92-CD16V effector cells, cetuximab, and
the high EGFR-expressing squamous cell carcinoma cell line A431.
Continuous A431 exposure to ADCC yielded an ADCC resistant phenotype
(ADCCr) that exhibits a stable phenotype in the absence of continued ADCC
selection. We have explored: ADCCr cell gene expression profile, NK cell
activation, metabolic signature and subsequent RPPA analysis to further
understand the causes and properties associated with this resistance.
This ADCCr cell line has a distinctive transcriptional profile
highlighted by overexpression of histone- and interferon-related genes,
reduced sensitivity to antimetabolites, DNA-intercalating and ABC
transporter-regulated cytotoxic agents. Intense ADCC selection causes
epigenetic modification and stress response characterized by the
transcriptional overexpression of PCAF (KAT2B), which initiates histone
hyper-acetylation and epigenetic changes, inducing DNA replication
arrest, DNA damage and stress responses that activate checkpoint
signaling in the cell cycle. The pharmacologic inhibition of KAT2B
reverses the ADCCr phenotype. Immune checkpoints such as PD-L1 do not
modulate ADCC in this model system. These results shed light on new
mechanisms of ADCC resistance and inform future combinatorial treatments
for mAb therapy. We are exploring the possibility that stress response
mechanisms are responsible for resistance for diverse selection pressures
imposed by immune synapse-mediated cytotoxic attack.


