Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer activity of medicinal plant and neuroglioma.


Neuroglioma, also called gliocytoma, is one of the common malignant
tumors in central nervous system at present. Neuroglioma can make
aggressive growth around brain tissue, so complete radical treatment can
be realized by single excision. Nutritional and botanical treatments have
been found useful in treating neuroglioma and other types of cancers.
Vernonia amygdalina (VA) is a valuable medicinal plant that is widespread
in East and West Africa. It has been reported to have not only diverse
therapeutic effects for many tropical diseases, but has recently been
shown to possess anti-cancer properties. Therefore, the goal of this
research was to determine the therapeutic mechanisms of VA leaf extracts
in the management of brain tumor. To achieve this goal, Human H4
neuroglioma cells were treated with different concentrations of Vernonia
Amygdalina for 24 hr. Cell survival was determined by MTs assay. The
extent of oxidative cell/tissue damage was determined by measuring
malondialdehyde (lipid peroxidation biomarker) concentrations by
spectrophotometry. Cell apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry
assessment (Annexin V/PI assay). Data obtained from the MTS assay
indicated that VA significantly (p Neuroglioma, also called gliocytoma,
is one of the common malignant tumors in central nervous system at
present. Neuroglioma can make aggressive growth around brain tissue, so
complete radical treatment can be realized by single excision.
Nutritional and botanical treatments have been found useful in treating
neuroglioma and other types of cancers. Vernonia amygdalina (VA) is a
valuable medicinal plant that is widespread in East and West Africa. It
has been reported to have not only diverse therapeutic effects for many
tropical diseases, but has recently been shown to possess anti-cancer
properties. Therefore, the goal of this research was to determine the
therapeutic mechanisms of VA leaf extracts in the management of brain
tumor. To achieve this goal, Human H4 neuroglioma cells were treated with
different concentrations of Vernonia Amygdalina for 24 hr. Cell survival
was determined by MTs assay. The extent of oxidative cell/tissue damage
was determined by measuring malondialdehyde (lipid peroxidation
biomarker) concentrations by spectrophotometry. Cell apoptosis was
measured by flow cytometry assessment (Annexin V/PI assay). Data obtained
from the MTS assay indicated that VA significantly (p < 0.05) reduced the
viability of in H4 cells in a concentration-dependent manner. We detected
a significant (p Neuroglioma, also called gliocytoma, is one of the
common malignant tumors in central nervous system at present. Neuroglioma
can make aggressive growth around brain tissue, so complete radical
treatment can be realized by single excision. Nutritional and botanical
treatments have been found useful in treating neuroglioma and other types
of cancers. Vernonia amygdalina (VA) is a valuable medicinal plant that
is widespread in East and West Africa. It has been reported to have not
only diverse therapeutic effects for many tropical diseases, but has
recently been shown to possess anti-cancer properties. Therefore, the
goal of this research was to determine the therapeutic mechanisms of VA
leaf extracts in the management of brain tumor. To achieve this goal,
Human H4 neuroglioma cells were treated with different concentrations of
Vernonia Amygdalina for 24 hr. Cell survival was determined by MTs assay.
The extent of oxidative cell/tissue damage was determined by measuring
malondialdehyde (lipid peroxidation biomarker) concentrations by
spectrophotometry. Cell apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry
assessment (Annexin V/PI assay). Data obtained from the MTS assay
indicated that VA significantly (p < 0.05) reduced the viability of in H4
cells in a concentration-dependent manner. We detected a significant (p <
0.05) increase in malondialdehyde (MDA) concentrations in VA-treated
glioblastoma cells compared to the control. Flow cytometry data showed a
strong concentration-response relationship between VA exposure annexin
V/PI positive cells. Taken together, our finding indicates that VA
induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis in H4 cells is associated with the
formation of MDA, a by-product of lipid peroxidation and biomarker of
oxidative stress. At therapeutic concentrations, VA-induced cytotoxic and
apoptotic effects in H4 cells is mediated by oxidative stress.


