Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Time course analysis of gene expression and epigenetic
interactions in acquired cetuximab resistance in head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma.


The current study performs time course genomics and epigenomics profiling
to determine the complex dynamics of interactions between gene expression
and epigenetic changes that alter cellular signaling and drive acquired
therapeutic resistance. Targeted therapeutic agents block the activity of
specific molecules critical for tumor progression. Cetuximab is a
monoclonal antibody against EGFR currently used in the treatment of head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and metastatic colorectal
cancers. Similar to many targeted therapeutics, cetuximab improves
survival for a brief period of two years, after which most patients
acquire resistance resulting in tumor progression or recurrence. The
mechanisms that alter cellular signaling pathways and cause resistance
are poorly understood. We hypothesize that the molecular alterations that
precede the resistance phenotype are more likely to be responsible for
the resistance than the widespread alterations observed once the
resistance is established. To test this hypothesis, we develop a novel
time course experimental and bioinformatics model of acquired resistance.
Specifically, this protocol enables weekly profiling of RNA, DNA, and
proliferation as cetuximab resistance developed in vitro. We apply the
CoGAPS bioinformatics algorithm to perform integrated analysis of gene
expression and DNA methylation. This analysis distinguishes signatures of
sustained activation of cellular pathways in response to treatment from
signatures of clonal expansion associated with acquired cetuximab
resistance. Despite identifying massive changes in gene expression driven
by therapeutic response, only the expression changes associated with the
acquired resistance, and not response to treatment, have corresponding
epigenetic signatures. The genomic signature associated with acquired
resistance is enriched for gene targets of the AP-2 family of
transcription factors. In a previous study, we found that these gene
targets were overexpressed after short-term treatment in cetuximab
sensitive cell lines and HNSCC tumors. Our data suggest that this family
of transcription factors serves as a feedback mechanism to maintain
homeostasis to growth factors receptor signaling. As a result, AP-2
transcription factors serve as a natural mechanism to cause subsequent
therapeutic resistance without addition of genetic alterations. Further
investigation is needed to determine the role of AP-2 transcription
factors in acquired cetuximab resistance.


