Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sonic Hedgehog ligand drives tumor progression and chromosomal
instability in a mouse model of small cell lung cancer.


Activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is well documented in
many cancers including Small Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC). Whilst it has been
shown that Smoothened, the central Hh pathway mediator, is required for
the initiation and progression of SCLC in a mouse model, it is unclear
what drives activation of this pathway in these tumors.

To address this question, we used a well-characterized conditional
genetic mouse model of SCLC in which inhalation of recombinant adenovirus
expressing Cre can trigger recombination at loxP sites in the airway
epithelium. When the virus is administered to mice double homozygous for
the conditional p53 and Rb knockout alleles (p53lox/lox;Rblox/lox), mice
develop multiple tumors over 9 months.

In order to manipulate Shh expression in this model, we crossed these
animals with either gain-of-function or loss-of-function Shh alleles to
observe the effects on SCLC initiation and progression in vivo. Aged
cohorts of AdenoCre-infected p53lox/lox;Rblox/lox;ShhTg mice developed
more frequent and significantly larger tumors compared to
p53lox/lox;Rblox/lox littermate controls, with tumors exhibiting a highly
malignant and proliferative phenotype. Conversely, deletion of Shh
resulted in no significant change in tumor number but a dramatic
reduction in tumor size in p53lox/lox;Rblox/lox;Shhlox/lox mice compared
to littermate controls.

Interestingly, Shh ligand overexpression also induced marked chromosomal
instability and the Smoothened-independent nuclear translocation and
activity of Cyclin B1. In turn, overexpression of Cyclin B1 induced
chromosomal instability in cells lacking both p53 and Rb. These results
suggest that Shh ligand drives progression of SCLC by activating both the
canonical and non-canonical arms of the Hh pathway and that Shh may be a
potentially useful therapeutic target.


