Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pervasive associations between mutational processes and driver
mutations across cancer types.


More than 30 distinct mutational signatures, each the result of an
underlying mutational process, have now been described in human cancers
-- we have sought to address the extent to which these mutational
processes shape the spectrum of driver mutations across cancer types.

Using publicly available genomic data from 10,188 cancers across 22
common cancer types, we have statistically assessed the association
between mutational process activity and the presence of individual
pathogenic driver mutations. Specifically, we determined the
sample-specific exposures for each mutational signature. For each
recurrent driver mutation in each cancer type, we tested for a difference
in the exposure to each mutational signature in samples with the driver
mutation compared to those without. We used an independent analysis based
on the causal SNV(s) for each driver mutation to test our hypothesis that
many of the associations between driver mutations and mutational
signatures are causative in nature.

Our method is novel in linking specific pathogenic amino-acid changes to
mutational process activity. This allows us to investigate mutational
causality in carcinogenesis, and permits us to delineate the
inter-related effects of mutation and clonal selection.

Our data indicate that both extrinsic (mutagen driven) and intrinsic (DNA
replication and repair) associated mutational processes have pan-cancer
associations with multiple distinct driver mutations, many of which are
causative in nature. Of particular note is the identification of a
pan-cancer driving role for both the APOBEC and microsatellite
instability (MSI) associated mutational processes, an early causative
role for defective DNA proof reading in colorectal and endometrial
cancers, and the identification of a general ‘mutational sensitivity’
to oncogenic PIK3CA mutations in many cancer types. In addition, our
analysis also provides quantitative understanding of the relative effects
of the distinct evolutionary forces of mutation and selection, via a
detailed analysis of the mutually exclusive mutations to the IDH1 and
IDH2, and KRAS and BRAF, genes respectively. Taking into account
mutational signatures, our data suggest preferential selection for IDH1
R132H compared to other common IDH1 and IDH2 mutations and preferential
selection for KRAS G12D compared to other common KRAS and BRAF mutations,
in a subset of cancer types.

These data demonstrate the functional importance of mutational processes
in shaping the landscape of driver mutations across cancer types,
informing our understanding of the relative effects of mutation and
selection in carcinogenesis. Our study has ramifications for both cancer
prevention, by providing knowledge of how removing mutagen exposure could
impact carcinogenesis, and for treatment choice by indicating the
relationship of mutational processes and the likely presence of
actionable or resistance mutations.


