Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lifestyle improvements delay cancer onset and progression by
adapting endocrine and immune signaling in mouse models.


Metabolic syndromes instigate substantial morbidity and mortality
worldwide via its negative effects of many diseases including cancer.
Obesity in particular has been deemed a causative factor for breast
cancer in post-menopausal women, while worsening prognosis regardless of
menopausal status. Importantly, progression of many metabolic syndromes
can largely be slowed or reversed with aggressive lifestyle changes, thus
also having the potential to mitigate cancer onset. A mouse model of
environmental enrichment (EE) to improve motosensory, cognitive, and
social stimulation by increasing physical engagement and social
interaction triggers vast improvements in overall health. These include
boosting mental health, reducing adiposity, prevention of diet-induced
obesity (DIO), promoting the white to brown fat transition, enhancing
insulin sensitivity, improving immune function, limiting inflammation,
and inhibition of cancer growth. We have elucidated the central mechanism
of EE to be the activation of the hypothalamic-sympathoneural-adipocyte
(HSA) axis, a specific neuroendocrine route in which the brain
communicates with adipose tissue via the sympathetic nervous system. Once
activated, norepinephrine (NE) is released directly onto adipose tissue
which induces the observed metabolic improvements. Breast cancer is
uniquely exposed to this adipose-NE so we sought to explore this
distinctive microenvironment in the context of both local and systemic
endocrine and immune signaling in varied body mass states and menopausal
statuses. Our data showed that EE diminished leptin levels and delayed
cancer onset in the MMTV-PyMT spontaneous mouse model of breast cancer
and slowed growth in a DIO allograft model. In contrast, EE failed to
attenuate tumor progression in ob/ob mice in the absence of leptin, but
rather enhanced tumor growth, suggesting that the leptin-NE relationship
is one of the key peripheral mediators of the EE anti-breast cancer
effects. We also observed significant immune cell modulation in the
adipose tissue following EE. Initial characterization revealed a decrease
in the proportion of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and an overall
anti-inflammatory response which together with the drop in leptin may
contribute to the observed anti-cancer effects. We plan to further
elucidate this EE-induced adipose and immune cell modulation with the
ultimate goal of developing therapeutic strategies to treat both
metabolic syndromes as well as associated and possibly independent cancer
types.


