Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing hormone therapy-resistance phenotypes in metastatic
breast cancer conferred by estrogen receptor (ER) mutations.


232,000 new cases of invasive breast cancer will be diagnosed in 2016.
40,300 patients will die primarily from metastatic disease. Mortality
results from the ability of cancer to evolve and evade therapy. Estrogen
receptor (ER+) breast cancer accounts for 70% of invasive breast cancer.
The mainstay treatment of ER+ breast cancer involves estrogen deprivation
therapy using aromatase inhibitors as well as estrogen receptor
antagonists and degraders. We and others have shown that patients treated
with aromatase inhibitors often (14-54%) acquire ESR1 mutations in their
metastases in contrast to only a 0.5% ESR1 mutation frequency detectable
in their primary tumors. We hypothesize that ESR1 mutations are selected
during estrogen deprivation therapy as a result of Darwinian forces of
evolution and represent targetable dependencies for ER+ metastatic
disease. We reasoned that characterization of the phenotype engendered by
ESR1 mutations under physiologically relevant conditions will help us
understand the mechanism of ER(+)metastatic cancer. To achieve this
objective we have stably expressed the two most common ESR1 mutations
observed in the clinic (i.e., D538G and Y537S) in a parental human breast
cancer cell line (T47D) using both lentiviral transfection and
CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing. We used an estrogen response element (ERE)
transactivation luciferase-based reporter assay to determine the estrogen
response of each ESR1 mutant expressing cell line and their respective
sensitivity to approved and investigational ER antagonist drugs.
Expression of each mutant confers estrogen-independent (constitutive) ERE
transactivation in contrast to the parental and wild type control cells.
Furthermore, partial and potentially clinically relevant resistance of
these ESR1 mutant-expressing cells to ER antagonists such as fulvestrant
and 4-hydroxytamoxifen was evident. In addition, using this reporter
assay, mutant ESR1-expressing cell lines show similar resistance in the
absence of estrogen. We are using a human microphysiological model of
liver metastasis as a complementary approach to patient-derived xenograft
models to investigate metastatic associated phenotypes conferred by these
mutations. Since our previous studies indicated the existence of
polyclonal mutations within individual patients (P.Wang, A. Bahreini et
al., CCR 2016), we are testing the hypothesis that the persistence of
this heterogeneity results from cooperation among these mutant-expressing
clones. These studies form the basis for our continuing efforts to
understand ER+ metastatic disease and use this knowledge to identify more
effective therapies.


