Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt/p53 regulate stemness of mucoepidermoid carcinoma cells in
vitro.


Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC) is the most common malignant salivary
gland cancer, yet very little is known about the pathobiology of this
disease. As a result, no mechanism-based therapies have been developed
for the treatment of MEC. Little to no response has been observed with
the use of conventional chemotherapies. Consequently, standard of care is
limited to surgery and/or radiation therapy, resulting in high patient
morbidity. Work done by our group showed that cancer stem cells (CSCs),
identified by ALDHhighCD44high cells, are drivers of MEC tumorigenesis.
MI-773 is an inhibitor of the MDM2/p53 protein-protein interaction that
results in p53 accumulation and activation of p53-mediated signaling. Our
group found that treatment of MEC cell lines (UM-HMC-1, UM-HMC-3A,
UM-HMC-3B) with sub-lethal doses of MI-773 significantly decreases the
CSC population in vitro and in xenograph tumors. Moreover, recent studies
have implicated p53-regulated mi-RNAs in the transcriptional regulation
of several components of the Wnt/beta-Catenin pathway. We hypothesize
that the canonical Wnt and p53 pathways crosstalk to regulate MEC stem
cell maintenance. To address this hypothesis, we isolated or measured the
fraction of the CSCs via flow cytometry, conducted sphere assays that
measure survival/self-renewal of CSCs, and used western blots for cell
signaling studies. We found that Wnt1, active beta-Catenin, and p53
protein levels are higher in CSCs than the non-CSCs in MEC cell lines.
Moreover, we found that MI-773 reduces the expression of key Wnt pathway
proteins, such as Wnt1 while also decreasing the number of spheres formed
by MEC cells. Opposite results are observed when p53 is silenced.
Notably, inhibiting the beta-Catenin pathway with PNU74654 or JW67 also
decreases the fraction of CSCs and inhibits sphere formation.
Collectively, these results indicate that both the Wnt and p53 pathways
are important for MEC stem cell maintenance. Revealing pathways important
for MEC stem cell maintenance will help identify effective
mechanism-based therapies to sensitize MEC to conventional
chemotherapies. This work was funded by grants R01-DE21139 and
R01-DE23220 from the NIH/NIDCR.


