Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishing doxorubicin resistant HCC1806 triple negative breast
cancer cell lines result in the differential expression of let7a and
miR34a.


Resistance to chemotherapy is one of the major difficulties in the
treatment of triple negative breast cancer. Besides the typical known
causes of drug resistance, tumor microenvironment can also promote
resistance by preventing the drug from accumulating in tumor cells in
order to elicit a cytotoxic response. TNBC is characterized by the loss
or low expression of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2
proteins that have been targeted and established as somewhat effective
therapy regiments in other breast cancer subtypes including liminal
breast cancer. Since TNBC tumors are missing these well-known drug
targets, there is little to no advancement in the establishment of drug
therapies to accurately target this breast cancer subtype. TNBC is termed
as aggressive due to the fact of its invasiveness and metastatic
properties. One potential mediator of TNBC aggressive behavior may be due
to the fact that this breast cancer subtype may have as high as an 80%
p53 tumor suppressor gene mutation rate which may also play a role in the
ability of TNBC to recur as a result of the inability to kill all
remaining TNBC cells leading to chemotherapy resistance. In these
studies, we hope to mimic TNBC recurrence by establishing doxorubicin
resistant HCC1806 TNBC cell lines. Here we show that we were able to
sustain TNBC cell growth after pulse treatments with increasing
concentrations of doxorubicin, and we revealed that p53-related miRNAs,
let7a and miR34a, were differentially expressed after pulse treating the
HCC1806 cells. Understanding the molecular and mechanistic factors
related to recurrence and doxorubicin-resistance in HCC1806 cells may
help to develop a list of possible targets for molecular therapy to
overwhelm tumor drug resistance in triple negative breast cancer and may
develop or establish a list of potential targets for disabling, or
combating resistance to doxorubicin treatment in TNBC patients.


