Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation combined with checkpoint blockades enhanced antitumor
efficacy for osteosarcoma.


Osteosarcoama is one of the common malignancies at bone in children and
adolescent. Recent study demonstrated that combination of anti-PD-L1 and
anti-CTLA-4 antibodies provided grate control of metastatic osteosarcoma.
However, a strong local treatment strategy including surgery or high
precision radiation therapy is necessary to elucidate osteosarcoma.
Radiation therapy plays an important role in local control for malignant
tumors but previous studies demonstrated that radiation enhanced immune
response in which not only local tumor regression at irradiated sites but
also regression of metastatic tumor outside the radiation field were
observed. Although this phenomenon, so called the abscopal effect, is
rarely seen, recent studies demonstrated that combination of X-ray
irradiation with checkpoint blockades provided higher probability of the
abscopal effect for some kind of tumors. However, the effect of x-ray
irradiation combined with checkpoint blockade on the abscopal effect for
osteosarcoma has been totally unknown. We investigated whether local
X-ray irradiation combined with the anti-PD-L1 and anti-CTLA-4 antibodies
enhances local and distant antitumor efficacy for osteosarcoma.

LM8 mouse osteosarcoma cells were inoculated into both legs of C3H mice.
Mice were treated by 10 Gy X-ray irradiation alone to the tumor in the
one side

leg (RAD group) at day 12, 150 ug of anti-PD-L1 and anti-CTLA-4
antibodies (P1C4 group) at days 9, 12, and 15, or those combination (COMB
group).

Administration of anti-PD-L1 and anti-CTLA-4 antibodies provided tumor
growth delay or complete response at day 37 for about 20% of the mice.
X-ray irradiation strongly inhibited tumor growth at irradiated tumor but
not in unirradiated tumor. On the other hand, the combination therapy
provided the strongest tumor growth inhibition not only at irradiated
tumor but also at unirradiated tumor for about 89% of the mice.
Accordingly, lung metastasis in mice in COMB group was strongly reduced
by 97% with the significant survival benefit compared with the mice in
P1C4 group. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that mice in COMB group
significantly recruited CD8 tumor infiltrating lymphocytes with moderate
reduction of regularly T cells (Tregs), thereby increasing the CD8/Treg
ratio. Furthermore, quantitative real time PCR showed significant
induction of PD-L1 on irradiated LM8 cells in vitro. The
radiation-induced upregulations of PD-L1, B7-1, and B7-2, the ligands of
CTLA-4, were also confirmed by flow cytometry, indicating that the
enhanced efficacy anti-PDL1 and CTLA-4 antibodies may associate with
these upregulations by radiation.

These results suggest that X-ray irradiation contributes to the
enhancement of

the efficacy for the distant metastasis as well as local control in the
treatment of anti-PD-L1 and anti-CTLA-4 antibodies for osteosarcoma. Our
data provide a rational to establish a new therapeutic strategy and start
up a clinical trial for osteosarcoma.


