Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved isolation and detection of circulating tumor cells of
pancreatic cancer patients with characterization by mutational analysis.


Introduction: Isolation of circulating tumor cells based on cell surface
markers is often hindered by epithelial to mesenchymal transition with
loss of epithelial antigens. Low numbers of CTCs and fewer cases of CTC
positive pancreatic cancer compared to other cancers (e.g. breast cancer)
lead to the assumption that pancreatic tumors do not release CTCs as
frequently or that the pancreatic CTCs lack EpCAM expression. Isolation
of CTCs based on their size is independent of EMT-like phenotypical
changes. We therefore compared a filtration-based isolation method with
an EpCAM-based isolation method. We optimized CTC detection by using a
highly sensitive anti-cytokeratin antibody panel for the detection of
cancer cells with moderate cytokeratin expression. In order to use
isolated CTCs as liquid biopsy for tumor characterization and treatment
selection, downstream analysis is necessary. We here show the feasibility
of mutational analysis of isolated CTCs by castPCR.

Methods: EpCAM high, medium and low cells were enriched and isolated by
an EpCAM-based immunomagnetic procedure (IsoFlux) and a filtration device
(Siemens) to determine recovery rates of both methods. Isolated cells
were detected by an improved immunofluorescent staining with an
anti-Cytokeratins, anti-EpCAM and anti-PBMC panel and characterized by
competitive allele-specific TaqMan PCR (castPCR) for KRAS mutations.

Results: Cytokeratin expression is crucial for detection of CTCs in a
high background of blood cells. Improvement of the staining protocol
helps to increase the sensitivity of detection. The filtration based
approach is superior to the surface antigen-based isolation. With the
size-dependent method we obtained a recovery rate of 52 % even for
EpCAM-low cells compared to only 1 % based on the immune-affinity
purification. Cells isolated by filtration can be characterized for
expression of therapeutic targets by immunostaining. The utility of the
size dependent platform for subsequent functional characterization of the
CTCs was also demonstrated by detection of k-ras mutations in single
isolated CTCs by castPCR.

Conclusion: For CTCs undergoing EMT, filtration yields higher recovery
compared to the standard surface antigen (EpCAM)-based methods. Isolation
by filtration also allows for mutational analysis which can be used to
confirm the identity of the isolated cell as CTC. In addition, mutational
analysis of CTCs can be used to guide the treatment of patients. Use of
liquid biopsies for treatment selection will facilitate truly
personalized medicine.


