Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of tumor expression of PD-1 promotes lung cancer growth
in a murine model.


Lung cancer remains one of the most prevalent and fatal malignancies
worldwide. There are substantial evidences that immunotherapies offer
significant benefits among lung cancer patients. Pembrolizumab, a
humanized programmed death receptor-1(anti-PD-1) antibody is now approved
by FDA as a first-line treatment of patients with metastatic non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Recent data demonstrate that PD-1 is not only
expressed by immune cells, but also by human melanoma cells. However,
little is known about the biological significance of PD-1 pathway in
cancer including NSCLC. Thus, we examined PD-1 expression in a series of
established murine lung cancer cell lines. RT-PCR amplification and
sequencing of the full coding sequence of the murine PD-1 (PDCD1) gene
revealed the presence of PDCD1 mRNA in the M109 lung cancer cells. Flow
cytometry and immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated PD-1 protein
expression in these murine lung cancer cells. To determine the molecular
function of tumor PD-1 in lung cancer survival, we treated M109 cells in
culture with either anti- mouse PD-1(100ug/ml) or isotype control
antibody and found that PD-1 inhibition significantly enhanced cancer
cell viability as measured by MTT and clonogenic assay. Alternative PD1
inhibition by either knockdown of PDCD1 via siRNA or knockout of PDCD1 by
CRISPR-Cas9 all lead to increased survival of M109 cells. Furthermore,
PDCD1-knockout M109 cells had no survival difference in the presence of
anti-PD1 compared to its PD1-expressing parental cells. Conversely,
treatment with recombinant PD-L1 fusion protein exhibited significantly
increased apoptotic rates (7.5±3.2% vs 2.1±1.2%) suppressing the tumor
cell growth in the wild-type M109 in culture. To validate these results
in in vivo models, NSG mice were used to determine the direct impact of
anti-PD1 on M109 xenografts without the interplay of host immune system.
M109 xenografts treated with antiPD-1 (10mg/kg i.p.) antibodies showed
accelerated growth compared to those treated by IgG control (2487±473 vs
1499±292mm3 at days 21 after tumor inoculation, p=0.013). M109
subcutaneous tumors in the PD-1 knockout mice also manifested more rapid
growth than the same tumors implanted in wild-type mice. Taken together,
our results uncover a novel function of PD-1/PD-L1 axis in lung cancer
survival and implicate possible tumor-promoting effects from anti-PD-1
therapy upon PD1-expressing lung cancer in the absence of effective
immune response. We plan to interrogate bio-specimens collected through
NRG trials to establish the translational potential of these findings.


