Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Promotion of immunogenicity using epigenetic modulation and immune
checkpoint inhibition in mouse models of breast cancer.


Checkpoint inhibition is a very successful treatment strategy in cancers
that are naturally immunogenic by attracting T cells into the tumor
microenvironment (TME) and promoting cytotoxic signaling pathways. While
this strategy has shown some efficacy in metastatic breast cancer, most
breast cancers are not highly immunogenic likely due to an
immunosuppressive microenvironment and a lack of tumor antigen expression
and recognition. One strategy to transform the breast TME into one that
is immune responsive, is to use epigenetic modulation to expose tumor
antigens, promote cytokine production, thus, attracting inflammatory
cells into the tumor. Epigenetic modulation also has the potential to
affect activation and trafficking of myeloid derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs), known to alter the immunogenicity of the TME and thus,
sensitizing tumors to checkpoint modulation. We hypothesize that
combinatorial therapy primes the TME by increasing immunogenicity via
alteration of T cells and MDSCs. We also hypothesize that combination
therapy will significantly affect immune modulatory pathways. Alterations
in these could serve as a functional read out of combinatorial therapy.
We are using a Her-2/neu (neu-N) transgenic mouse model which through the
use of various syngeneic cell lines has the capability to inform the
response of Her2 and triple negative subtypes of breast cancer to
immunotherapy. This model enables us to study the efficacy of different
combinations of an epigenetic agent, the histone deacetylase inhibitor
entinostat, and checkpoint inhibitors anti -programmed cell death protein
(PD1) and anti-cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA4)
antibodies, on tumor growth and metastatic progression, and to help
identify co-stimulatory and inhibitory factors regulating T cell and MDSC
responses. Characterization of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes and their
functional capabilities are being investigated in primary tumors and
metastases using fluorescence-activated cell sorting and
immunohistochemistry. Thus far, there is a significant improvement in
survival and delay in tumor growth in mice inoculated with neu expressing
tumor cells treated with combination anti-PD1, anti-CTLA4 and entinostat
as well as with anti-PD1 in combination with Entinostat. Preliminary
results also suggest that epigenetic modulation with entinostat in
combination with checkpoint inhibition improves the immune response
within these tumors as evidenced by increased CD8+/T-regulatory cell
infiltration, and increased monocytic-MDSCs into the TME. There are
ongoing survival studies testing this combination therapy in mice
inoculated with triple negative breast tumor cells. Future studies will
further delineate the mechanisms by which epigenetic therapy alters the
function of the inflammatory response to immunotherapy.


