Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistin potentiates stemness and chemoresistance of breast cancer
cells through STAT3 activation: implications in breast cancer health
disparity.


Breast cancer (BC) is most frequently diagnosed cancer and remains the
second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in women in the United
States. African American (AA) women bear an additional burden of BC with
early onset of disease, poorer prognosis, higher risk of recurrence, and
worst clinical outcome as compared to Caucasian American (CA) women.
Emerging evidence strongly argue the role of tumor-microenvironment (TME)
in BC of AA and CA racial backgrounds. On the similar line, our earlier
findings suggested that serum levels of resistin; an inflammatory
cytokine are significantly elevated in AA BC patients compared to their
CA counterparts. Furthermore, we demonstrated that resistin promoted
growth and aggressiveness of BC cells. In the present study, we
investigated the role of resistin in stemness and chemoresistance of BC
cells. For this, two BC cells of CA (MDA-MB-231) and AA (MDA-MB-468)
origin were treated with resistin and sphere-forming ability, a key
characteristic of cancer stem cells, was determined. Data demonstrate
that number of spheres is significantly enhanced in both the BC cells
upon resistin stimulation. Immunoblot analyses reveal that
resistin-induced sphere-forming ability is associated with enhanced
levels of stemness-associated transcription factors (Nanog and KLF4) in
BC cells. We next examined if resistin conferred chemoresistance to BC
cells. Our data suggest that resistin-treated MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468
BC cells develop greater resistance against doxorubicin-induced
cytotoxicity. Notably, the effects conferred by resistin were more
prominent in AA BC cells comparing to CA BC cells. Our mechanistic
studies unveiled an important role of STAT3 activation in the
resistin-induced stemness and chemoresistance of BC cells. Taken
together, our findings provide novel insight into the role of resistin in
BC biology and further strengthen its role in racially disparate clinical
outcomes.


