Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the genomic landscape of bladder cancer with
circulating tumor DNA.


Background: Targeted agents are emerging as promising treatment options
for patients with metastatic bladder cancer (BCa). However, since the
genomic landscape of BCa is highly heterogeneous, future clinical trial
success will likely depend upon tumor molecular stratification and
therefore require a practical method for somatic genome analysis.
Circulating cell-free tumor DNA (ctDNA) collected from peripheral blood
has been established in several major solid malignancies as a
minimally-invasive tool to profile the tumor genome but is under-explored
in BCa.

Goal: Our aim was to identify the spectrum of clinically-informative
genomic alterations detectable in plasma cell-free DNA (cfDNA) collected
from patients with BCa.

Patient cohort and methodology: We recruited 45 patients with BCa, 14
with localized disease and 31 with metastatic disease, and collected
whole blood samples for isolation of cfDNA. Isolation of plasma cfDNA was
performed using the QIAAmp Circulating Nucleic Acid Kit, while germline
control DNA was extracted from buffy coat using the DNEasy Kit (Qiagen).
A custom targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) strategy was employed
to detect BCa- specific somatic alterations in ctDNA; samples underwent
deep (>500X) targeted DNA sequencing using the NimbleGen SeqCap EZ Choice
system and Illumina technology. Our custom panel included key tumor
suppressors (e.g. TP53, RB1, CDKN2A), cell cycle drivers (e.g. CCND1,
CCNE1), DNA repair genes (e.g. ATM, BAP1, ERCC2), PI3K pathway genes
(e.g. PIK3CA, PTEN, AKT1), and other oncogenes (e.g. RAS/RAF, EGFR,
ERBB2, PPARG, FGFR3).

Results: The majority of patients with metastatic BCa (18/31 patients,
24/43 samples) had robust evidence of somatic alterations and therefore
ctDNA. Our findings were consistent with the known landscape of BCa,
including mutations in TP53 and ARID1A (and other chromatin modifiers),
hotspot activating mutations in PIK3CA, as well as typical copy number
changes such as focal amplifications of ERBB2, KRAS, and CCNE1. In
addition, we identified complex gene rearrangements including in one case
an activating FGFR3 gene fusion. Some samples had evidence of very high
mutation rates, indicative of somatic ‘hypermutation’. Interestingly,
in contrast to the metastatic setting, 85% of patients with localized BCa
had no evidence of ctDNA, despite elevated cfDNA yields in some patients.

Conclusion: The majority of metastatic BCa patients have high levels of
ctDNA suitable for standard targeted sequencing approaches, while
patients with localized muscle-invasive tumors appear not to harbor ctDNA
at fractions greater than 1-2%. The robust detection of so-called
‘actionable’ copy number alterations, mutations and rearrangements in
ctDNA provides an unparalleled opportunity for practical molecular
stratification of patients in clinical trials of novel targeted agents.


