Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CA102N, a conjugate of hyaluronic acid (ha) and Nimuselide
derivative (H-Nim) interferes with PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway in
colorectal cancer (CRC) cells and inhibits tumor growth in vivo.


Aberrant PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway is common in several human
cancers, including CRC. The pathway regulates many major cellular
processes and promotes tumorigenesis and inhibition of apoptosis.
Targeting the PI3K/Akt/mTOR network could be important in resistance
mechanisms in cancer. CA102N, is a conjugate of Hyaluronic Acid (HA) and
H-Nim, a nimuselide (COX-2 inhibitor) derivative, currently under
investigation for preclinical development in CRC. Studies have suggested
that the anti-proliferative effects of COX-2 inhibitors could be
attributed to modulation of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway; therefore, in
this study we aimed to examine the overall molecular mechanism of the
antitumor activity of CA102N and evaluate its impact on the PI3K pathway
proteins. Cell based studies indicated that in addition to cell cycle
arrest; the antitumor activity of CA102N is also related to apoptosis.
Administration of CA102N to nude mice bearing established HT29
subcutaneous tumor xenografts caused significant tumor growth inhibition
with no signs of systemic toxicity. Immunohistochemical analyses of
xenograft tumors demonstrated inhibition of VEGF and CD31, suggesting a
role for CA102N in angiogenesis. Disruption of angiogenesis and apoptosis
was correlated with a decrease in VEGF and the antiapoptotic protein
BCL-2. Suppression of PI3K downstream signaling was a key observation in
HT29 cells in vitro and in xenograft tumors treated with CA102N. As
compared to untreated vehicle control, a significant decrease in
phosphorylation of AKT, mTOR, p70S6K, PRAS40, 4EBP1 and FOXO1 was
detected by Western blot analyses. The reduction observed may be caused
by both specific protein dephosphorylation/deactivation and by
ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation of pathway proteins. These
results suggest that the antitumor activity of CA102N may be at least
partly related to the modulation of the PI3K/Akt pathway proteins. CA102N
represents a promising anticancer agent with minimal toxicity, the
insights provided into the mechanisms of its anticancer activity may be
the basis for advancing this candidate into clinic.


