Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of the transcribed ultraconserved region Uc.63+ in
prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most prevalent cancer among men and the
second leading cause of cancer related death in western world. Currently,
there is a lack of effective treatment options for advanced PCa.
Understanding the molecular mechanisms in prostate cancer development and
progression would allow the identification of novel prognostic markers or
therapeutic targets. The transcribed-ultraconserved regions (T-UCRs) are
novel class of noncoding RNAs that are absolutely conserved (100%)
between orthologous regions of the human, rat and mouse genomes. Some
studies showed that T-UCRs exhibit distinct profiles in various human
cancers. We examined the expression profile of representative 26 T-UCRs
using qRT-PCR in 12 PCa tissues and 10 non-neoplastic prostate tissues,
and found that the expression of Uc.63+ was higher in PCa tissues than
that in non-neoplastic tissues. Further analysis revealed that the
expression of Uc.63+ significantly correlated with higher PSA levels (p =
0.007) and higher Gleason score (p Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most
prevalent cancer among men and the second leading cause of cancer related
death in western world. Currently, there is a lack of effective treatment
options for advanced PCa. Understanding the molecular mechanisms in
prostate cancer development and progression would allow the
identification of novel prognostic markers or therapeutic targets. The
transcribed-ultraconserved regions (T-UCRs) are novel class of noncoding
RNAs that are absolutely conserved (100%) between orthologous regions of
the human, rat and mouse genomes. Some studies showed that T-UCRs exhibit
distinct profiles in various human cancers. We examined the expression
profile of representative 26 T-UCRs using qRT-PCR in 12 PCa tissues and
10 non-neoplastic prostate tissues, and found that the expression of
Uc.63+ was higher in PCa tissues than that in non-neoplastic tissues.
Further analysis revealed that the expression of Uc.63+ significantly
correlated with higher PSA levels (p = 0.007) and higher Gleason score (p
< 0.001). In order to verify biological function of Uc.63+ in PCa, we
firstly transfected Uc.63+ expression vector into LNCaP cells expressing
low level of Uc.63+. MTT assay and wound healing assay revealed that
overexpression of Uc.63+ significantly increased the cell growth and
migration. We also confirmed that downregulation of Uc.63+ using siRNA in
DU145 and PC3 expressing high level of Uc.63+. Knockdown of Uc.63+
decreased the cell growth and migration. A recent report indicates that
T-UCRs may act as endogenous competing RNA. miR-130b was found to have
binding sites within the Uc.63+ using online software. We examined the
expression of miR-130b by qRT-PCR in PCa tissues and non-neoplastic
prostate tissues. We found a significant downregulation of miR-130b in
PCa tissues compared with non-neoplastic prostate tissues, which figured
out that there was a significant inverse correlation between Uc.63+ and
miR-130b in PCa (p = 0.002). The expression of miR-130b in LNCaP was
higher than that in DU145 and PC3. It has been shown that MMP2 is a
direct target of miR-130b. Western blot analysis and qRT-PCR revealed
that MMP2 expression was higher in LNCaP cells transfected with Uc.63+
expression than that in LNCaP cells transfected with empty vector. These
results suggest that Uc.63+ may contribute to the progression of PC
through miR-130b interaction.


