Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A cross comparison of technologies for the detection of immune
system related gene expression signatures in clinical FFPE samples of
metastatic prostate cancer patients.


The success of immunotherapy for the treatment of metastatic cancers
relies on the prediction and identification of potential neo-antigens. In
recent years expression levels of these neo-antigens along with other
immune system related genes have been evaluated in an effort to better
understand response rates for immunotherapy in various cancers. Gene
expression levels can be assessed by numerous techniques including
hybridization-based or direct sequencing technologies. Two platforms-HTG
Molecular and NanoString nCounter have been utilized to profile changes
in gene expression and offer unique advantages for analyzing challenging
specimens such as formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues. The
NanoString nCounter platform utilizes hybridized fluorescent probes
targeted against genes of interest for a non-amplified measurement of
gene expression. Several studies have been shown that the NanoString
platform has good sensitivity, specificity, and reproducibility for the
assessment of gene expression levels from FFPE samples. The HTG platform
is relatively new and also uses a hybridization based method to enrich
genes of interest without first isolating RNA. To determine the
robustness of the HTG platform, we profiled a set of 30 metastatic
prostate cancer samples using the HTG Molecular EdgeSeq Immuno-Oncology
Assay. In these experiments, we found that expression data obtained by
using both extracted RNA and lysate from FFPE slides was highly
reproducible (Spearman coefficient > 0.85). In addition, the expression
profile of targeted genes obtained by using different slides from the
same blocks was also highly correlated (Spearman coefficient > 0.90). Our
experiments also showed a high correlation between gene expressions
profiles obtained by HTG, the NanoString PanCancer Immune Profiling panel
and RNA-Seq from the same set of 30 metastatic prostate cancer samples.
Further analysis to evaluate and compare the sensitivity of different
platforms is being performed and results of these will be presented.


