Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of membrane-associated guanylate kinase inverted 2 in
advanced and castration-resistant prostate cancers.


Background: Prostate cancer is the most common non-cutaneous malignancy
for men in the U.S. Patients with advanced and/or metastatic prostate
cancer are commonly treated with androgen deprivation therapy.
Unfortunately, incurable castration resistant prostate cancer commonly
develops 2-3 years after initial treatment.

Methods: To identify candidate cancer genes involved in the development
of castration resistance, the Sleeping Beauty (SB) transposon system and
androgen-sensitive LNCaP cell line were used in a forward mutagenesis
screen designed to model the transition from androgen sensitive to
androgen insensitive prostate cancer. MAGI-2 was identified in the screen
as a common insertion site gene, potentially involved in the transition
to androgen independence. Clinical significance of MAGI-2 in prostate
cancer was further supported by human TCGA data. Functional assays were
used to confirm the involvement of MAGI-2 in prostate cancer progression.

Results: MAGI-2 expression was prognostic for patient survival outcome.
Ectopic expression of MAGI-2 in 22Rv1 cells resulted in a decrease in
cell proliferation and colony formation in in vitro studies. At the
molecular level, overexpression of MAGI2 induced a suppression of known
androgen responsive genes. MAGI-2 overexpression also limited the growth
of grafts compared to empty vector grafts in in vivo xenograft models.

Conclusion: MAGI-2 was identified in a forward mutagenesis screen
modeling the development of castration resistant prostate cancer. Human
protein expression data from patient tissues supported a possible role
for MAGI-2 in prostate cancer. Functional studies confirmed the potential
involvement of MAGI-2 in prostate cancer progression. Future studies are
seeking to elucidate the functional role and mechanism-of-action for
MAGI-2 in prostate cancer. Ultimately, this may identify MAGI-2-regulated
signaling pathways as therapeutic targets for prostate cancer.


