Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Muc5ac plays an essential role in promotion of k-ras mutant lung
cancer.


Worldwide, lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality, and
cigarette smoking (CS) is its principal cause. However, several studies
have found that smokers with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), an inflammatory disease of the lung, have an increased risk of
lung cancer (3 to 10-fold) compared to smokers with comparable cigarette
exposure but without COPD. Importantly, among smokers with COPD, even
following withdrawal of cigarette smoke, inflammation persists and lung
function continues to deteriorate as does the increased risk of lung
cancer. These facts suggest a strong link between COPD-related lung
inflammation and lung cancer, however, the precise mechanistic link is
not known. Mucociliary dysfunction and mucin hyperproduction are
important features of COPD with inflammation being the major trigger.
Interestingly, lung cancer with mucin overexpression has higher
malignancy potential and poor prognosis, which around 76% having
mutations in K-ras oncogene, the most frequent oncogenic mutation in lung
adenocarcinoma. Taken these together, we hypothesized that mucins
contribute to promotion of K-ras mutant lung cancer by inflammation. Here
we first investigated whether Muc5ac, predominant airway mucin that plays
a primary role in inflammatory lung diseases, is predictive of clinical
outcome in KRAS-mutant human lung adenocarcinomas. We determined Muc5ac
mRNA expression by array analysis of 150 lung adenocarcinomas from
patients that did not received neoadjuvant therapy and we found that,
Muc5ac mRNA level was a significant predictor of poor disease-free
survival in KRAS-mutant lung adenocarcinomas. We have further found
increased mucin and high expression of Muc5ac in lung tumor tissues of
the mice with airway specific expression of a mutant form of K-ras (CC-LR
mice). Then, we crossed previously developed Muc5ac knockout (KO) mice to
CC-LR mice in order to develop a K-ras mutant lung cancer mouse model
with lack of Muc5ac (CC-LR/Muc5ac KO mice). This resulted in a
significant tumor reduction by ~54% (2.2-fold) in lung of CC-LR/Muc5ac KO
mice compared to age and sex matched control CC-LR mice. Lung
inflammation was evaluated by analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
and revealed a significant reduction (3-fold) in number of macrophages,
and levels of IL-6 and IL-17 in CC-LR/Muc5ac KO mice compared to CC-LR
control mice. Immunohistopathological analysis of lung sections confirmed
lower inflammation, decreased tumor number and size, less adenomatous
lesions, and reduced tumor cell proliferation and angiogenesis in CC-LR
mice with lack of Muc5ac compared to control CC-LR mice. Our experimental
results suggest that Muc5ac has an essential role in promotion of K-ras
mutant lung cancer through autocrine cell intrinsic and paracrine immune
cell mediated mechanisms.


