Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: eIF4E reshapes the surface of migrating AML cells through
regulating Hyaluronic Acid synthesis & CD44 expression.


Formation of cell surface protrusions has long been associated with tumor
cell migration, metastasis & bone marrow homing & retention. It was shown
that increased expression of endogenous or exogenous hyaluronic acid
synthesizing enzyme 3 (HAS3) induces growth of microvillus-like cell
surface protrusions. Some of the biological signals triggered by HA are
dependent on its recognition by the cell surface receptor CD44. In our
studies we observe that overexpression of the eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) increases formation of cell surface
protrusions resembling those produced by HAS3 upregulation. eIF4E
regulates mRNA export & translation through binding to the m7G cap of
mRNA in the nucleus & the cytoplasm, respectively. Strikingly, analysis
of our two complimentary screens (immunoprecipitation of mRNAs bound to
eIF4E in the nucleus, and mRNA export assay with ribavirin, an
established inhibitor of eIF4E) that we carried out to identify candidate
eIF4E mRNA export targets, showed that nearly all the enzymes involved in
HA synthesis as well as CD44. Here, we hypothesize that eIF4E regulates
HA synthesis & CD44 overexpression to reshape the surface of cancer cells
producing HA-rich microvillus-like pseudopods.

Following validation of the positive hits, we used immunofluorescence
staining with biotinylated HA binding protein (HABP) to determine the
effect of eIF4E expression on protrusion formation. Our data revealed
that eIF4E overexpression increased formation of HA-rich cell surface
protrusions & was correlated with increased invasiveness of eIF4E
overexpressing cells in in vitro matrigel assay, compared to respective
controls. Colocalization studies using confocal microscopy indicated that
protrusions positively stained for CD44. Further, pharmacological
inhibition with ribavirin and genetic knockdown of eIF4E (or HAS3/CD44 in
the context of eIF4E overexpression) abrogated protrusion formation and
decreased the invasion capacity of eIF4E overexpressing cells. Together,
these data indicate that eIF4E modulates protrusion formation & tumor
invasion through coordinately regulating the export of RNAs in the
CD44-HA regulon. To establish the clinical relevance of our findings in
AML, we examined primary AML specimens with high eIF4E levels for
expression of HA synthesizing enzymes, CD44 & we directly measured HA
using confocal methods. This comparison showed that these pathways are
dysregulated in AML patients & that their inhibition correlates with
response to eIF4E inhibition by ribavirin. While HA has long been
considered as a component of the tumor microenvironment required for the
migration of cancer cells though interaction with surface CD44, our
results provide a novel role for eIF4E in the motility & bone marrow
homing. These findings offer a rationale for potentially inhibiting tumor
cell metastasis through the combinatorial inhibition of eIF4E and CD44 or
HAS3.


