Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Palbociclib enhances the antitumor activity of taxanes by
abrogating cell cycle checkpoints and alleviating hypoxia in squamous
cell lung cancer.


Lung cancer remains one of the leading causes of cancer-related
mortality. Squamous cell lung cancer (SqCLC) is the second most common
subtype of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and is responsible for
~100,000 deaths in the US and EU. Most SqCLC patients receive
chemotherapy as 1st line treatments and have a high un-met medical need
for new therapies. Therapeutic approaches that enhance the efficacy of
chemotherapy would therefore improve clinical outcomes for this patient
population. CDK inhibitors comprise a class of drugs that target the
dysregulated cell cycle in malignant cells. Treatment of tumor cells with
the CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib inhibits tumor growth by decreasing
retinoblastoma (RB) protein phosphorylation and inducing cell cycle
arrest at the G1/S phase transition. Based on promising clinical trial
results, palbociclib in combination with letrozole was granted
accelerated approval by the US FDA for the treatment of postmenopausal
women with ER-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer. Like
hormone receptor positive breast cancer patients, the vast majority of
SqCLC patients harbor wild type RB and thus may also benefit from
palbociclib treatment. Previously, we reported robust cytotoxicity and
antitumor effects of palbociclib plus taxanes, including nanoparticle
albumin-bound paclitaxel (Nab-PTX) or docetaxel (DTX), in several
preclinical models of SqCLC. In the present study, we extended our
efficacy studies of this combination to additional RB+ SqCLC models with
diverse molecular genetic backgrounds. In search of mechanisms of action
underlying the observed combinatorial effects, we identified several
novel mechanisms, including cell cycle checkpoint abrogation as well as
reduction of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1α). Decrease in
HIF-1α protein led to strong modulation of downstream genes involved in
angiogenesis, resulting in reduced blood vessel size in tumor
vasculature. Our results suggest that palbociclib enhances the antitumor
activity of taxanes by abrogating cell cycle checkpoints and alleviating
hypoxia in SqCLC.


