Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EVT801: Standalone cancer immunotherapy in VEGFR3+ tumors and
combination with immune checkpoint therapies in VEGFR3- tumors.


In collaboration with Sanofi, we previously showed that inhibition of the
VEGFR3 pathway by SAR131675 leads to reduction of tumor growth by acting
on the tumor microenvironment. We have identified a new drug candidate,
EVT801, and evaluated its activity on tumor models expressing VEGFR3. For
proof-of-concept, we transfected the mouse BNL hepatoma cell line with
VEGFR3. EVT801 displayed a strong therapeutic activity by acting on both
VEGFR3+ tumor cells and on the Tumor Microenvironment (TME). By
deciphering the mechanism of action of the compounds we showed that
EVT801 strongly decreased tumor-associated immunosuppression by
decreasing MDSCs (Myeloid Derived Suppressor cells) and CD4+ regulatory T
cells and by increasing macrophages with a M1 phenotype inside the tumor.
As a consequence the T-cell:MDSC ratios were increased in the TME and
also in peripheral blood. In addition to its immunomodulatory properties,
EVT801 decreased angiogenesis without increasing hypoxia. We have
evaluated EVT801 therapeutic activity in syngeneic tumor mouse models
which are not expressing VEGFR3 such as 4T1 mammary carcinoma and CT26
colon carcinoma models. As expected, we observed an intermediate
therapeutic activity of the compound on both tumor models. Positive
modulation of the TME was equivalent to what we observed with the VEGFR3+
tumor model. With this unique mechanism of action of EVT801 on the TME,
we evaluated its ability to increase therapeutic activity of standard
Immune Checkpoint Therapies (ICT) such as anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1 mAbs.
Strong additive therapeutic activities were observed with EVT801 in
combination with these ICT as illustrated by the development of long-term
tumor-specific memory CD8+ T cell responses.

Toxicological data show that EVT801 has a favorable pharmacological
profile consistent with its entry into pre-clinical development. Taken
together, these results indicate that EVT801 represents an innovative
drug for cancer Immunotherapy which provide a favorable microenvironment
to promote tumor regression. In addition, EVT801 may improve the
frequency of response to ICT.


