Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous visual assessment of RNA and protein expression in
circulating tumor cells using the AccuCyte-Cytefinder system.


Background. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) provide real-time information
regarding patient tumor phenotype, including RNA expression. This
information may be valuable in guiding care of cancer patients.
Simultaneous RNA and protein assessment has been reported previously in
large populations of cells. Here, we describe methods to simultaneously
evaluate RNA and protein expression on rare single CTCs using the
AccuCyte – CyteFinder system (RareCyte).

Methods. To establish RNA detection in model CTCs (mCTCs), we used SkBr3
cells spiked into blood and the isolated buffy coat was processed by
AccuCyte onto microscope slides. RNAscope® in-situ hybridization (ISH,
Advanced Cell Diagnostics) was performed to detect Her2, UBC (positive
control) and dapB (negative control) expression in mCTCs. A process to
simultaneously stain for RNA and protein was then developed to allow
identification of mCTCs by protein expression of cytokeratin (CK) and
EpCAM and measurement of gene expression with RNAscope. Various blood
collection tubes were tested to measure gene expression, protein
expression, and cell recovery up to 48 hours after blood draw. Image
analysis software was developed to automatically analyze and count RNA
dot number from 40x z-stack images of mCTCs. Finally, clinical samples
were stained with the combined RNA/protein assay.

Results. Using RNAscope, Her2 and UBC expression could be detected in all
SkBr3 cells and was negative in surrounding white blood cells (WBC).
Using blood collected into EDTA tubes and processed immediately after
spike-in, there were an average of 29 Her2 mRNA dots and 20 UBC
dots/cell; negative control dapB gave 1 dot/cell. Using CK and EpCAM
expression for mCTCs identification, recovery of mCTCs was over 95%. The
RNA/protein assay was compared using blood collected and stored in EDTA,
CellSave®, Cell-Free DNA®, Cell-Free RNA®, Cyto-Chex®, and RareCyte
BCT tubes. At 48 hours, Cell-Free RNA tubes had the highest number of RNA
dots/cell – about half as many dots/cell compared to fresh EDTA
samples. Clinical samples were successfully stained with the RNA/protein
assay.

Conclusions. We have developed a protocol that identifies rare mCTCs
using protein staining, and measures RNA expression by RNAscope ISH. This
assay may be a useful clinical tool for the real-time investigation of
CTC gene expression in cancer patients.


