Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating "harmonization" of PD-L1 assays using image analysis.


The current diagnostics landscape for therapeutics that target the
PD1/PD-L1 pathway is highly complex. Four different companion or
complementary diagnostics have been developed for pembrolizumab in NSCLC,
nivolumab in NSCLC and melanoma, and atezolizumab in urothelial
carcinoma. The need to reconcile diagnostics for this class of targeted
therapies has been recognized by the creation of the FDA-AACR-ASCO
“PD-L1 Blueprint” working group to explore means to “harmonize”
PD-L1 testing in tissue based IHC assays. The results reported from this
working group noted similarities, but also several important
discrepancies, between the current assays. Since each test uses a
specific interpretation for each assay and indication, this creates a
highly complex diagnostic landscape, which is likely to continue to
increase in complexity as more PD-1/PD-L1 therapeutics and potentially
novel diagnostics continue to be approved in additional indications.

To address the need for adaptive, sustainable harmonization for PD-L1
diagnostics, Flagship Biosciences evaluated the utility of image
analysis-based methods to harmonize multiple PD-L1 tests. We executed a
proof-of-concept study utilizing a cohort of serial tissue sections from
the same NSCLC patients, stained with the FDA approved Dako PD-L1 tests
(28-8 and 22C3 clones), and our in-house PD-L1 assays (SP142 and E1L3N
clones) for comparison. We digitized the tissue slides using a whole
slide scanner, and evaluated the samples with our tissue Image Analysis
(tIA™) technology. As expected, the patient samples stained with the
separate PD-L1 assays yielded differences in staining and, thus, the
reported scores for PD-L1 expression based on each test used, despite
serial sections being derived from the same patient. To attempt to
harmonize the scoring approaches for each test, we leveraged our
computational Tissue Analysis (cTA™) platform to create a
mathematically-derived “virtual slide score” for each sample, which
enabled calibration of the various tests to deliver cross PD-L1
comparative scores. Based on the proof-of-concept demonstrated in this
study, the cTA™ approaches could enable harmonization of the various
PD-L1 tests through use of a digital pathology platform. The data
presented provides a foundation for potential application of the cTA™
platform in the clinical laboratory setting to achieve harmonization of
multiple PD-L1 tests.


