Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing the utility of circulating tumor DNA as a surveillance
tool for sarcomas and Li-Fraumeni syndrome using a pre-clinical model.


Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a hereditary cancer predisposition syndrome
commonly characterized by the presence of inherited mutations in the
tumor suppressor gene TP53. This leads to an early onset of a wide
spectrum of tumors in multiple organ systems. Current surveillance
protocols for early tumor detection include biochemical screening, MRI
and ultrasound scans, colonoscopy and mammography (for adults). While
early detection is associated with improved survival, the complexity of
testing, potential to ‘misdiagnose’ tumors (false positive/negative)
and requirement for multiple imaging modalities makes clinical
surveillance challenging to implement and interpret. Liquid biopsies are
a recently described diagnostic and prognostic tool that takes advantage
of analyzing circulating tumor DNA - fragmented genomic material that are
released into the blood from dying tumor cells.

In this proof-of-principle study, we use mouse xenograft tumor models to
assess the dynamic relationship between tumor burden and ctDNA
concentrations, as well as resolve the sensitivity of capturing the
presence of lesions in their earliest stages of growth. Longitudinal
analyses of ctDNA from serially collected blood were performed on mice
with xenografts of rhabdomyosarcoma (Rh4 and Rh30), osteosarcoma (HOS)
and non-small cell lung carcinoma (H1975) of both localized and simulated
metastatic tumors. We characterized ctDNA using droplet digital PCR
(ddPCR) for known gene mutations that were specific for the cancer cell
lines used. We observe obvious increases in ctDNA with increased tumor
burden and a complete clearance of ctDNA after tumor resection. In
addition, using the metastatic model, we have conducted synchronized
imaging and blood-based biopsies to determine the smallest lesion able to
be detected in the blood by ctDNA.

These studies provide the foundation for early tumor detection with ctDNA
in Trp53 mutant mice that develop spontaneous tumors analogous to LFS.
This model will help further our understanding on the utility of ctDNA as
a surveillance and diagnostic tool for LFS as well as assess its
potential for clinical use.


