Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A long non-coding RNA regulates the androgen receptor and mediates
prostate cancer progression.


The pervasive expression of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and their
roles in a plethora of cellular processes has revolutionized our
understanding of functional genetic elements. Emerging evidence suggest
that lncRNAs are promising cancer biomarkers and dysregulation of lncRNAs
results in attenuated or accelerated oncogenic phenotypes. In support of
these findings, recent reports from the Chinnaiyan lab suggest that
lncRNAs can potentially drive and act as independent predictors of
aggressive prostate cancer (PCa). Central to PCa progression is the
androgen receptor (AR), a nuclear hormone receptor, and the dysregulated
transcription program it mediates. Consequently, androgen deprivation
therapy (ADT) supplemented with anti-androgens is the initial
standard-of-care in treating advanced PCa. Yet, the disease often
manifests as a lethal, hormone-refractory castration-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) after initial ADT and this phenomenon is linked to the
resumption of AR activity. Therefore, we sought to identify novel and
therapeutically actionable targets of AR that can detect the onset of PCa
or stratify PCa variants. To this end, our lab recently characterized the
transcriptional landscape of cancer and discovered > 50,000 novel
transcripts, a significant fraction of which were tissue- and
cancer-specific lncRNAs. Using this updated transcriptome as a reference
and performing RNA-seq on PCa cells stimulated with dihydrotestosterone
(an androgen), we identified Androgen Receptor regulated lncRNA-1
(ARlnc1) as an important PCa-specific, AR-regulated lncRNA that
reciprocally regulates AR. By employing single-molecule fluorescence in
situ hybridization (smFISH), we find that ARlnc1 and AR transcripts
colocalize within the nucleus of PCa cells and that ARlnc1 promotes
transcription of AR. Moreover, we found that ARlnc1 interacts with
anti-apoptotic, stress-granule related proteins and regulates PCa cell
proliferation in vitro and in mouse xenografts. We have additionally
found that anti-sense oligonucleotides (ASOs) that target this lncRNA can
reduce tumor growth in xenograft models. Taken together, our data
suggests that ARlnc1 and AR reciprocally and positively modulate each
other to promote PCa progression and that ARlnc1 may serve as an enhancer
RNA that regulates AR transcription. Our data suggests that ARlnc1 can be
therapeutically targeted to orthogonally modulate the AR signaling axis
for PCa treatment.


