Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UCP2’s tumor-promoting role via regulating lipid signaling and
PLCγ -1 activity.


Mitochondrial abnormalities are long suspected to play important roles in
tumor cell differentiation, proliferation and metabolism. Dysfunction of
mitochondrial-dependent processes appear to be key features of cancerous
cells. Among many such abnormal features of cancerous cells, a
mitochondrial uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) is shown to be up-regulated in
various aggressive human cancers. Uncoupling proteins are a family of
mitochondrial proteins present in the inner mitochondrial membrane whose
physiological role is to decrease membrane potential and reactive oxygen
species (ROS) production.

UCP2 over-expression recently been proposed as a novel survival mechanism
for cancer cells. However, till date, the exact role of UCP2 in cancer
remains inconclusive.

We recently reported that UCP2 appears to be a key regulator of cell
proliferation, cell cycle and cell death during skin tumorigenesis. Using
JB6P+ cells that overexpress UCP2, we showed that UCP2 expression
correlated closely with cell proliferation and cell transformation.
Moreover, inhibition of UCP2, decreased colony formation and 3D culture
growth. Since UCP2 is the crucial player in the regulation of reactive
oxygen species, and mitochondrial bioenergetics, we wanted to dissect out
the role of UCP2 in redox regulation and tumor promotion.

Our data demonstrated that UCP2 differentially regulated ROS. UCP2
upregulation, decreased superoxide production, whereas increased hydrogen
peroxide production with a concomitant increase in manganese superoxide
dismutase (MnSOD) expression and activity. Furthermore, hydrogen peroxide
was responsible for induction of lipid peroxidation and PLCγ-1
activation in UCP2 overexpressed cells. Moreover, PLCγ-1 activation
enhanced tumorigenecity. Strikingly, pharmacological and siRNA mediated
inhibition of PLCγ-1 markedly reduced colony formation and 3D growth in
vitro. Lastly, restricting hydrogen peroxide production with hydrogen
peroxide scavenger catalase, suppressed lipid peroxidation and dampened
PLCγ-1 activity.

Taken together, our data suggest that hydrogen peroxide might be the
mediator of UCP2’s tumor promoting role, and pharmacological disruption
of PLCγ-1, and/or hydrogen peroxide may have clinical utility for
UCP2-overexpressed cancers.

This research was funded by NCI and Feist-Wellier Cancer Center of
LSUHSC-S


