Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel Wnt-SCD-LRP5/6 pathway linking liver fibrosis to cancer.


Activated hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) are primarily responsible for the
genesis of liver fibrosis which promotes liver tumor development.
Stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD) which synthesizes monounsaturated fatty
acid (MUFA such as oleic acid or palmitoleic acid), is implicated in
metabolic syndrome, tumorigenesis and stemness. Indeed, we demonstrate
SCD upregulation in both HSCs and liver tumor cells in patients. Further,
SCD correlates with the advancing grade of HCC and mortality in patients.
However, its causality in tumorigenesis and mesenchyme-tumor crosstalk,
and underlying mechanisms, are unknown. The present study aimed to
determine whether and how SCD promotes and links liver fibrosis and
cancer. In both HSCs and liver tumor-initiating stem cell-like cells
(TIC), we reveal that the Wnt effector β-catenin is a potent
co-activator for SREBP-1-dependent Scd transcription as demonstrated by
promoter-reporter assay and re-ChIP analysis. We also discover β-catenin
which drives SCD expression is in turn stabilized by SCD-derived MUFA. To
identify molecular targets of MUFA mediating this SCD-β-catenin positive
loop, we performed MUFA-nano-beads pull-down assay with TIC lysate,
ESI-MS based identification of MUFA interacting proteins, computational
docking analysis, co-IP and ribonucleoprotein-IP. These analyses reveal
that MUFA is essential for LRP5/6 expression: MUFA interferes
Transportin-1 and Ran-1 interaction, resulting in suppressed nuclear
import of the mRNA binding protein HuR, HuR cytoplasmic accumulation, and
increased HuR binding to and stabilization of Wnt co-receptor Lrp5/6
mRNA. As such, genetic or pharmacologic SCD inhibition reduces cytosolic
HuR, LRP5/6 expression, β-catenin stabilization, HSC activation and TIC
self-renewal and attenuates liver fibrosis and tumorigenesis in mice.
Moreover, conditional genetic ablation of Scd2 in HSCs not only abrogates
HSC-mediated promotion of TIC-derived tumorigenesis in a xenograft mouse
model but also inhibits DEN-induced liver tumor development in
Col1a1-Cre; Scd2flox/flox mice (tumor volume reduced to 21.5 + 7.9 vs.
360.9 + 193 mm3 in Scd2flox/flox mice; tumor multiplicity decreased to 18
+ 5.4 vs. 45 + 8.4 in Scd2flox/flox mice, both pActivated hepatic
stellate cells (HSCs) are primarily responsible for the genesis of liver
fibrosis which promotes liver tumor development. Stearoyl-CoA desaturase
(SCD) which synthesizes monounsaturated fatty acid (MUFA such as oleic
acid or palmitoleic acid), is implicated in metabolic syndrome,
tumorigenesis and stemness. Indeed, we demonstrate SCD upregulation in
both HSCs and liver tumor cells in patients. Further, SCD correlates with
the advancing grade of HCC and mortality in patients. However, its
causality in tumorigenesis and mesenchyme-tumor crosstalk, and underlying
mechanisms, are unknown. The present study aimed to determine whether and
how SCD promotes and links liver fibrosis and cancer. In both HSCs and
liver tumor-initiating stem cell-like cells (TIC), we reveal that the Wnt
effector β-catenin is a potent co-activator for SREBP-1-dependent Scd
transcription as demonstrated by promoter-reporter assay and re-ChIP
analysis. We also discover β-catenin which drives SCD expression is in
turn stabilized by SCD-derived MUFA. To identify molecular targets of
MUFA mediating this SCD-β-catenin positive loop, we performed
MUFA-nano-beads pull-down assay with TIC lysate, ESI-MS based
identification of MUFA interacting proteins, computational docking
analysis, co-IP and ribonucleoprotein-IP. These analyses reveal that MUFA
is essential for LRP5/6 expression: MUFA interferes Transportin-1 and
Ran-1 interaction, resulting in suppressed nuclear import of the mRNA
binding protein HuR, HuR cytoplasmic accumulation, and increased HuR
binding to and stabilization of Wnt co-receptor Lrp5/6 mRNA. As such,
genetic or pharmacologic SCD inhibition reduces cytosolic HuR, LRP5/6
expression, β-catenin stabilization, HSC activation and TIC self-renewal
and attenuates liver fibrosis and tumorigenesis in mice. Moreover,
conditional genetic ablation of Scd2 in HSCs not only abrogates
HSC-mediated promotion of TIC-derived tumorigenesis in a xenograft mouse
model but also inhibits DEN-induced liver tumor development in
Col1a1-Cre; Scd2flox/flox mice (tumor volume reduced to 21.5 + 7.9 vs.
360.9 + 193 mm3 in Scd2flox/flox mice; tumor multiplicity decreased to 18
+ 5.4 vs. 45 + 8.4 in Scd2flox/flox mice, both p<0.05). Collectively, our
findings support that a newly disclosed Wnt-SCD-LRP5/6 loop may serve as
a novel therapeutic target for liver cancer and underlies a known
crosstalk between liver mesenchyme and liver tumor development.


