Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altering nuclear size impacts cancer cell characteristics in
melanoma cell lines.


Nuclear size is altered in cancer cells, a change used by pathologists to
distinguish cancer from normal cells. Previous studies in Xenopus
identified two nuclear transport proteins, importin α and NTF2, as
regulators of nuclear size. In general, importin α and NTF2 levels
positively and negatively affect nuclear size, respectively. Increased
importin α expression is used as a biomarker in non-small cell lung
carcinoma and breast cancer and correlates with increased nuclear size.
We identified decreased NTF2 protein expression as a potential biomarker
in melanoma, consistent with NTF2 levels negatively regulating nuclear
size. Following up on this result, our current studies focus on
manipulating nuclear size in melanoma cells to assess the impact on
cancer cell characteristics, including proliferation rate, migration
potential, and apoptosis.

First, we measured nuclear size and NTF2 expression levels in different
stage melanoma cell lines. Compared to a normal melanocyte cell line, we
consistently observed larger nuclei and lower NTF2 protein levels in all
melanoma cell lines examined. Next, we performed transient transfections
in HeLa, MRC5, and melanoma cell lines, demonstrating that ectopic NTF2
expression leads to reduced nuclear size. The most dramatic effects were
observed in primary melanoma cell line WM3211 where higher NTF2
expression caused a 40% reduction in nuclear cross-sectional area.

To obtain more precise control over NTF2 expression levels, we generated
a stably transfected metastatic melanoma cell line (WM983B) in which NTF2
expression can be titrated by varying the concentration of doxycycline in
the growth media. Higher doxycycline levels lead to increased NTF2
expression and smaller nuclei. In particular, 20 ng/ml doxycycline
induced a 10% reduction in nuclear cross-sectional area. In a wound
healing assay, doxycycline-treated cells exhibited a 40% reduction in
cell motility compared to non-treated cells or the parent cell line
treated with doxycycline. Furthermore, the doxycycline-treated cells
exhibited an increased rate of apoptosis. We propose that reduced nuclear
size in the doxycycline-treated cells causes changes in chromatin
organization and gene expression, thus giving rise to observed effects on
cell migration and apoptosis. To test this idea, we are currently
performing a global transcriptomics analysis of our cell lines to
identify genes whose expression is altered by nuclear size. Using this
information, we will use DNA FISH to map the intranuclear position of
differentially-expressed genes as a function of nuclear size. Also in
vivo experiments are ongoing in which we have subcutaneously injected
NTF2-inducible melanoma cells into NSG mice in order to examine tumor
formation and metastatic capacity of cells with differently-sized nuclei.

Regarding that in most cancer cells nuclear size is enlarged,
understanding the causes and effects of these changes can help us to
better understand cancer biology.


