Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary fat, fatty acids, and ovarian cancer risk: Preliminary
findings from the Shanghai Women’s Health Study.


Introduction: Dietary fat is an essential nutrient for human growth and
development, but epidemiological studies have linked excess fat to the
development of multiple malignancies. The few existing studies on ovarian
cancer risk are inconsistent, possibly due to differences in sources and
subtypes of fat. For example, omega-3 (n-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids
(PUFAs) are thought to be antineoplastic, while omega-6 (n-6) PUFAs may
promote carcinogenesis.

Approach: We evaluated dietary fat in relation to ovarian cancer risk in
the prospective Shanghai Women’s Health Study (SWHS). Intake levels
were determined from food frequency questionnaires (FFQ) administered at
baseline and during follow-up; specific nutrient components were based on
the sum of specific foods multiplied by nutrient content from the Chinese
Food Composition Table. Cox proportional hazards regression was used to
estimate relative risks (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for
dietary fat and fatty acid components categorized into quintiles. Minimal
models included age and residual adjustment for total energy intake;
fully adjusted models also included education, years of menstruation,
years of oral contraceptive use, parity, years of breastfeeding, family
history of ovarian cancer, smoking, drinking, NSAID use, BMI, and
physical activity.

Results: Among 73,144 SWHS participants, we identified a total of 219
ovarian cancer cases in 1,114,828 person-years of follow-up. We found
significant dose-response relationships between increasing total PUFA
(P-trend=0.032) and n-6 PUFA (P-trend=0.022) intakes and decreased
ovarian cancer risk. In both minimally and fully adjusted models, women
with the highest quintile of total dietary PUFAs were approximately 35%
less likely to develop ovarian cancer (RR=0.65, 95% CI: 0.43-1.00), and
women with the highest n-6 PUFA intake had a nearly 40% lower risk
(RR=0.61, 95% CI: 0.40-0.93). Total fat, monounsaturated fat, and n-3
PUFA intake were not significantly related to ovarian cancer risk.

Conclusions: Findings from our preliminary analysis of a large
prospective cohort of Chinese women suggest that total PUFA intake may be
protective of ovarian cancer, and that this association may be driven by
n-6 rather than n-3 PUFAs. Further evaluation, including stratification,
sensitivity analysis, and evaluation of source of dietary fatty acids, is
currently underway.


