Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: in vitro PDX models: 3D cultured patient-derived tumors for
compound evaluation.


Background. Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models in immune-compromised
mice allow propagation of and compound testing in human-derived tumors in
vivo. To expand the potential of these human-relevant PDX models, we
sought to develop 3D in vitro culture methods for PDX-derived tumor cells
that show in vivo-like growth characteristics, invasion and responses to
therapeutics. In combination with advanced 3D image analysis methods, we
created a unique high throughput in vitro PDX screening platform that not
only allows efficient identification of active and selective molecules
but also enables selection of the optimal PDX tumor models for subsequent
validation of candidates in vivo. Results. Each PDX model has its own
unique growth characteristics. Hydrogel and growth media composition were
optimized to support growth of tumor tissues in vitro from cells derived
from bladder, stomach, breast, pancreas, colon and lung cancer PDX
tumors. Tumor tissues were cultured in a 384-well format and used to test
chemotherapeutics (e.g. 5-FU, doxorubicin, paclitaxel, cisplatin), small
molecules (e.g. erlotinib, lapatinib, trametinib, everolimus), antibodies
(e.g. cetuximab, trastuzumab) and antibody-drug-conjugate (ADC, T-DM1)
dose ranges. Using OcellO’s 3D image analysis platform, Ominer,
tumoroid growth, cell proliferation, apoptosis, invasion, cell polarity,
differentiation and other aspects of cell and tissue architecture were
analyzed and the effects of compound exposure on tumoroids was
determined. By performing feature training based on reference compounds,
we selected ±10 morphological features (out of more than 500) to
generate a phenotypic signature that described the unique phenotypic
change induced by each compound. Different compounds that target the same
molecule were found to induce a similar morphological change whereas
compounds with off-target effects could be discriminated. This approach
enabled a high resolution evaluation and comparison of compound activity
in an automated manner. Conclusions. We established several PDX
model-derived 3D tumor cultures in which standard-of-care and novel
therapeutic agents (small molecules, antibodies and ADCs) can efficiently
be screened, based on therapeutically relevant parameters and their
changing morphological profile. This method enables both the in vitro
selection of promising compounds in a pre-clinically relevant setting and
the selection of optimum PDX tumor models for follow-up in vivo studies.
This highly translational in vitro-in vivo PDX pipeline is expected to
reduce attrition and increase efficiency in early drug-discovery.


