Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HDAC inhibitors and the mechanism of resistance in colorectal
cancer: RAS and MYC - the partners in crime.


Although histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are considered a
promising novel therapeutic approach in the light of their potent
tumour-selective effects, the use of these inhibitors for treatment of
colorectal cancer (CRC) have thus far demonstrated limited success as a
monotherapy. What this eventually boils down to is our incomplete
understanding of the molecular mechanisms, the impact of oncogenes, and
thus the key pathways through which HDACi affect tumour cell growth. To
shed further light on this, the involvement of oncogenic RAS - a key
driver of CRC, in determining the responsiveness to HDACi has been
explored. By using cell line model systems harbouring conditional
oncogenic NRAS, KRAS and HRAS, we uncovered an oncogenic RAS-dependent
“safeguard” mechanism imposed in order to evade the cytotoxic effect
of HDACi and therefore apoptosis. Characteristically, cells harbouring
oncogenic RAS were observed to undergo a reversible senescence-like
growth arrest in G2, allowing for re-entry into cell cycle following the
withdrawal of HDACi. This mechanism is implemented as a consequence of
the direct targeting of RAS by HDAC inhibition, which resulted in a
further amplified GTP-binding activity and subsequent signalling through
the MAPK pathway. The observed outcome was an increase in the priming of
MYC for ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation, thereby enabling the
cells to exit the cell cycle and enter the protective state of G2 arrest.
This process was functionally reversed with a conditional non-degradable
MYC (T58A/S62A), which in turn rendered the cells more susceptible to
undergo apoptosis. Conclusively, in the context of a constitutively
activating RAS mutation, the prospect of HDACi treatment was effectively
improved using current MAPK-targeted therapy by preventing the observed
pro-oncogenic effect of the HDACi treatment alone.


