Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotypic, genomic, and clinical associations of Circulating
Tumor Cells (CTCs) lacking epithelial biomarkers in metastatic Castration
Resistant Prostate Cancer (mCRPC).


Background: Epithelial Plasticity (EP) is a proposed mechanism of immune
escape, resistance to programmed cell death, resistance to specific
drugs, and promotion of metastasis. EP has been extensively explored in
mathematical, cell biological, and animal models, which predict the
presence of these tumor cells in circulation. Most studies on CTCs in
human subjects are based on enrichment of cells expressing EpCAM prior to
enumeration or molecular interrogation, which precludes analysis of cells
that might be EP. The non-enrichment Epic Sciences platform was utilized
to identify CTCs in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer
patient samples phenotypically consistent with EP: CTCs that do not
express cytokeratins (CK), but do express malignant or EP biomarkers:
Androgen Receptor (AR), AR splice variant 7 isoform (AR-V7) or
N-cadherin. Phenotypic and genotypic analyses of individual CTCs were
performed to assess the malignant origin of CK- CTCs and their prevalence
associated with overall patient survival.

Methods: 221 pre-therapy mCRPC blood samples were collected at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and shipped to Epic Sciences. Patients
represent a diverse number of previous therapies and tumor burdens. All
nucleated cells were plated to glass slides and subjected to DAPI and
immunofluorescent (IF) staining of cytokeratin (CK), CD45 and another
tumor marker (AR, AR-V7, or N-cadherin), followed by CTC identification
by fluorescent scanners and malignant morphology. All samples were
stained for AR, with a subset of samples stained for AR-V7 or N-Cadherin
as well. Additionally, 83 AR(+)/CK(-) and 9 AR-V7(+)/CK(-) CTCs were
analyzed for copy number variation (CNV) by low pass whole genome single
CTC sequencing. Abnormal genomes were identified by amplifications and
deletions of known oncogenes and tumor suppressors.

Results: 3931 AR(+) CTCs were detected, of which 2996 (76%) expressed CK
and 935 (24%) did not. The AR(+)/CK(-) CTCs had a lower median AR signal,
less nucleoli, and more nuclear speckles by digital pathology vs. CK(+)
CTCs. AR(+)/CK(-) and AR-V7(+)/CK(-) CTCs had gross genomic alterations
consistent with malignant prostate origin (AR gain, PTEN loss, RB1 loss,
8q gain, 8p loss, etc), often sharing the same genomic alterations with
CK(+) CTCs in the same patients, with some having unique CNV profiles
Presence of AR(+)/CK(-) CTCs was associated with worse overall survival
(median 13.7 mo vs. 33.9 mo, p Results: 3931 AR(+) CTCs were detected, of
which 2996 (76%) expressed CK and 935 (24%) did not. The AR(+)/CK(-) CTCs
had a lower median AR signal, less nucleoli, and more nuclear speckles by
digital pathology vs. CK(+) CTCs. AR(+)/CK(-) and AR-V7(+)/CK(-) CTCs had
gross genomic alterations consistent with malignant prostate origin (AR
gain, PTEN loss, RB1 loss, 8q gain, 8p loss, etc), often sharing the same
genomic alterations with CK(+) CTCs in the same patients, with some
having unique CNV profiles Presence of AR(+)/CK(-) CTCs was associated
with worse overall survival (median 13.7 mo vs. 33.9 mo, p < 0.0001) and
remained additive and independent to treatment Line, pre-therapy PSA, and
therapy type in multivariate models.

Conclusions: Similar to CTCs expressing epithelial markers, CK(-) CTCs
have gross genomic aberrations consistent with metastatic prostate cancer
and are a negative prognostic factor associated with worse overall
survival in both iterative threshold and multivariable analyses.


