Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radioimmunotherapy for acute myeloid leukemia targeting human
aspartyl (asparaginyl) β-hydroxylase.


Treatment options for acute myeloid leukemia (AML) are limited and have
modest impact on 5-year survival rates in patients Treatment options for
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) are limited and have modest impact on 5-year
survival rates in patients <60 years of age (~35-40%) and on median
survival of older patients (Treatment options for acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) are limited and have modest impact on 5-year survival rates in
patients <60 years of age (~35-40%) and on median survival of older
patients (< 1 year). The incidence of AML has been rising, with an
anticipated 19,950 new cases in 2016. Thus, the need for novel, more
efficacious and better tolerated therapy for AML is urgent. Human
aspartyl (asparaginyl) β-hydroxylase (HAAH) is an
embryonic/developmental protein, which is down-regulated in normal cells
after birth but overexpressed on the surface of many malignant cells,
where it has been demonstrated to be sufficient to induce cancer cell
proliferation, motility and invasiveness. We hypothesized that HAAH is
selectively overexpressed on leukemia cells and thus targeting it with a
fully human monoclonal antibody (mAb) conjugated to the short half-life
α-emitter 213Bi could provide a novel radioimmunotherapy (RIT) treatment
option with a reasonable therapeutic index. Using immunocytochemistry and
flow cytometry with anti-HAAH mouse mAbs as well as a fully human mAb,
PAN-622, we investigated the expression of HAAH on a variety of
cytogenetically- and mutationally heterogeneous leukemia cell lines,
including MV4-11, MOLM-14, HL-60, KG1α, Kasumi-1, K562, J45.1, and
CCRF-CEM, as well as on normal human leukocytes. PAN-622 was further
modified with DTPA-maleimide to allow chelation of radionuclides,
specifically 213Bi, to the antibody. The 213Bi-DTPA-PAN-622 was then
employed in killing assays to measure selective dose-dependent killing of
leukemic cells. HAAH was highly expressed, as detected by flow cytometry,
on all tested leukemia cell lines with KG1α and HL-60 demonstrating the
highest levels of expression amongst the AML lines. Binding was observed
by both PAN-622 and the modified DTPA-PAN-622 conjugate. Interestingly,
expression of HAAH was not detected on CD45+ normal human leukocytes,
including in subpopulations of monocytes (CD14+), B-cells (CD19+),
T-cells (CD3+) or hematopoietic stem cells (CD34+). To determine whether
PAN-622 could selectively target leukemia cells in a background of normal
human blood, flow cytometry was performed on leukemia cells spiked into
whole blood. Only leukemia cells were stained with the PAN-622 antibody
as indicated by simultaneous staining for surface markers specific to the
various leukocyte subpopulations. Selective killing of leukemia cell
lines was demonstrated following incubation with 213Bi-DTPA-PAN-622 which
induced dose dependent specific killing over a 6.7-670 pM concentration
range. No killing was detected when using 213Bi conjugated to an
isotype-matched control antibody at a similar specific activity and dose
range. Thus, HAAH is a novel oncogenic target expressed on leukemia
cells, which can be selectively targeted for RIT via the fully-human
PAN-622 mAb. Experiments targeting primary leukemia cells in
patient-derived bone marrow aspirates are ongoing.


