Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficient KO of PD1 into primary T cells using a new
non-integrative lentiviral particle expressing CRISPR/Cas9 system.


Gene editing by the CRISPR system shows great promises for gene therapy.
Nevertheless, it must now face a number of challenges especially for the
development of safe and efficient delivery tools for in vivo, as well as
ex vivo gene editing. Cas9 and sgRNA delivery, mediated either by viral
vectors (AAV- or Lentivirus-derived) or transfection protocols (chemical
or by electroporation) have been largely and efficiently used but they
bring major drawbacks incompatible with clinical applications. Indeed,
viral vectors can display uncontrolled chromosomal integrations and
transfection protocols are known to induce cell toxicity and/or phenotype
modifications of the target cells.. Moreover, the CRISPR technology
entails a “hit-and-run” mechanism that only requires a transient
expression of the nuclease complex. Therefore, achieving an efficient
delivery into hard-to-transfect cells, such as T cells, remains
challenging and the need for delivery tools that would allow efficient
transfer on most cell types without causing any cell damages is essential
for downstream therapeutic applications. Here, we present an innovative
tool, named LentiFlash, allowing RNA delivery into target cells without
any genomic scar. The RNA encapsidation is mediated via an RNA/protein
interaction: the respective properties of the MS2 bacteriophage and the
lentiviral vectors have been combined to build a non-integrative
packaging system in which the wild type HIV packaging sequence is
replaced by the MS2 stem-loop repeats and the MS2 coat protein is
inserted into the Nucleocapsid. This new vector breaks with all existing
systems, as the resulting lentiparticle is able to deliver non-viral
coding or non-coding RNA, at high efficiency, into the cytoplasm of any
cell type. Transduction of a large range of cells, from immortalized
cells to delicate primary cells, such as T cells and hematopoietic stem
cells, with LentiFlash shows an efficient, fast and transient expression
of proteins and RNA, with no cell phenotype modification. In particular,
LentiFlash particles were successfully used to deliver Cas9, alone or in
association with an sgRNA not only targeting a reporter gene into
immortalized cells, but outstandingly knocking-out the PD-1 gene into
primary human T lymphocytes. This new RNA delivery system is an efficient
and safe tool for the delivery of CRISPR editing machinery in most cell
types without affecting cell viability and phenotype. The transient,
RNA-based mechanism of LentiFlash vector, preventing the risk of
integration, associated with its ability to utilize lentiviral production
platforms already validated in clinical settings, make it a promising
tool for CRISPR therapeutic applications. As a matter of fact, beyond
gene editing efficiency, safety of delivery tools is a major concern that
should be addressed to move forward with CRISPR clinical development.


