Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of prostate cancer risk loci by
SNPs-seq and STARR-seq.


Background. By SNP genotyping and RNA sequencing of 471 normal prostate
samples, we recently created a prostate tissue-based eQTL dataset and
identified significant eQTL signals at 51 prostate cancer risk loci. To
functionally characterize these risk SNPs, we developed a massively
parallel sequencing technology to screen SNPs for their allele-dependent
protein binding differences. We combined this technology (called
SNPs-seq) with another high throughput assay (called STARR-seq) to screen
the risk loci with significant prostate-specific eQTL signals.

Methods. To select candidate functional SNPs in eQTL regions, we took
advantage of existing epigenomic datasets and available tools including
ENCODE, HaploReg, and Regulome. For all selected SNPs, we first made
allele-specific double-strand oligos and performed DNA-protein binding
assays. We then performed sequencing analysis on the protein-bound DNA
oligos and determined allele-specific protein binding differences. To
evaluate reproducibility of SNPs-seq, we performed each assay in
duplicates. We cloned SNPs-seq screened SNP regions showing
allele-specific protein binding differences into the STARR-seq vector to
further determine allele-specific enhancer activities. Finally, we
performed EMSA and luciferase reporter assays to validate a set of
promising candidate SNPs.

Results. From 51 risk loci with strong eQTL signals, we selected 374 SNPs
with strong indication of regulatory potential, as evidenced by
overlapping with epigenomic marks. When comparing technical duplicates,
sequence read counts from the SNPs-seq showed significant correlation
with r2>=0.99. By normalizing input controls, we found 101 of the 374
SNPs showing significant allelic protein binding differences (>=1.5-fold
binding difference between variant and reference alleles). Interestingly,
three published functional SNPs (rs12769019, rs10993994, and rs4907792)
were also among the significant SNPs, validating SNPs-seq as functional
SNP screening tool. To further validate the candidate SNPs from SNPs-seq,
we applied STARR-seq and tested the 101 SNPs-containing sequences
(371-686bp) in LNCaP cell line under androgen treatment. This analysis
revealed 11 SNPs that not only demonstrated enhancer/repressor activity
but also functioned with allelic differences. EMSA and luciferase
reporter assays confirmed 6 SNPs with allele-dependent enhancer/repressor
activity.

Conclusions. We developed a high throughput sequencing-based technology
to screen large number candidate SNPs for their allelic protein binding
differences. The SNPs-seq coupled with STARR-seq will provide a powerful
strategy for functionally characterizing risk loci in prostate cancer and
other common diseases. Further understanding genetic role of prostate
cancer etiology may facilitate the translation of population-based
discovery into biological mechanisms and eventually benefit clinical
practice.


