Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor cell death caused by INT230-6 induces protective T cell
immunity.


Standard care for many types of cancer involves systemic administration
of cytotoxic agents. This may result in low drug concentration at tumor
sites, which limits cell killing. More recently it has been shown that
cytotoxic formulations designed for intratumoral delivery improve drug
efficacy presumably by increasing drug concentration at the tumor site.
Furthermore, it has been discovered that the mechanisms of anticancer
agents extend beyond direct tumor cell lysis. One major aspect is that
cell death often induces an immune response. Different types of cell
death such as necrosis, apoptosis and autophagic cell death induced by
cytotoxic agents trigger immune responses with varying degrees of
inflammation and involving different types of immune cells. The ideal
immune responses that may give maximum benefit to patients would be
strong and long lasting anti-tumor T cell responses. In this study, a
novel, tissue and cell diffusive cytotoxic formulation, INT230-6, was
administered intratumorally over 5 sequential days into subcutaneous
300mm3 murine Colon26 tumors. Treatment resulted in regression from
baseline of 100% of the tumors and up to 80% complete response (CR). We
then analyzed the T cell responses in the protection induced by INT230-6.
No animals achieved a CR after CD8 or CD8/CD4 double depletion at
treatment onset, indicating a critical T-cell role in tumor regression.
Mice with CRs were protected from re-challenge by either subcutaneous or
intravenous re-inoculation of the Colon26. The protection was abrogated
by CD4/CD8 double depletion prior to the re-challenge, indicating that
immunological T cell memory was induced and was necessary for protection.
Hence, INT230-6 given locally to treat tumors induces tumor-specific
protective T cell immunity. Colon26 tumors express the endogenous
retroviral protein gp70 containing the AH-1 CTL epitope. AH-1-specific
CD8 T cells were detected in tumors of mice without treatment. However,
these highly expressed PD-1. This was consistent with the observation
that the PD-1 blockade enhanced the efficacy of INT230-6. Conversely,
INT230-6 enhances the efficacy of checkpoint inhibitors.


