Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The genomic landscape of premalignant lung squamous cell carcinoma
lesions.


Background: Lung squamous cell carcinoma (SqCC) arises in the epithelial
layer of the bronchial airway and is often preceded by the development of
premalignant lesions. However, not all premalignant lesions progress to
lung SqCC and many regress without therapeutic intervention.
Understanding the somatic alterations that contribute to progression of
premalignant lesions in the airway will allow us to identify biomarkers
for early detection and develop therapeutic strategies for early
intervention.

Methods: Airway biopsies were obtained from high-risk smokers undergoing
lung cancer screening by auto-fluorescence bronchoscopy and chest CT at
the Roswell Park Cancer Institute. For each subject (n=30), multiple
premalignant lesions were sampled repeatedly over time (n=144 samples).
One biopsy from each region was sent for pathological review while
another biopsy was taken for molecular studies. DNA was also isolated
from the blood or cytologically normal bronchial brushings to serve as a
matched normal control. Exome capture was performed using the Illumina
TruSeq Rapid Exome kit and sequenced to a mean depth of coverage of 120x
at Uniform Services University and Walter Reed National Military Medical
Center.

Results: The median number of somatic mutations across all premalignant
lesions was 0.73 per megabase (range: 0.10 - 9.8 per Mb) and displayed a
modest association with histological grade (p=0.07). The most frequently
mutated lung cancer genes included KMT2C (12%), NOTCH1 (11%), FAT1 (6%),
TP53 (5%), and CDKN2A (Results: The median number of somatic mutations
across all premalignant lesions was 0.73 per megabase (range: 0.10 - 9.8
per Mb) and displayed a modest association with histological grade
(p=0.07). The most frequently mutated lung cancer genes included KMT2C
(12%), NOTCH1 (11%), FAT1 (6%), TP53 (5%), and CDKN2A (<1%). Known
oncogenic hotspot mutations were observed in PIK3CA (1%) and KRAS (7/Mb)
were taken from adjacent sites over two time points in the same
individual with a prior history of lung squamous cell carcinoma. These
lesions had a significantly overlapping set of mutations including FAT1
indicating a common evolutionary ancestor.

Conclusions: The somatic alterations observed in known cancer genes such
as TP53, KMT2C, NOTCH1, and FAT1 may be among the earliest driver events
in lung SqCC development and may be useful as biomarkers for early
detection as well as targets for lung cancer interception.


