Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of synergy of carboplatin and an EphA2-targeted
docetaxel antibody-directed nanotherapeutic.


Platinum-taxane combinations are widely used to treat solid tumors either
in first or later lines of therapy. While effective in many settings,
platinum-taxane combinatorial regimens are limited by toxicities. We have
recently developed an antibody directed nanotherapeutic (MM-310)
encapsulating a docetaxel prodrug, targeted to Ephrin receptor A2
(EphA2). Preclinical investigation of MM-310 revealed that the liposomal
formulation leads to prolonged docetaxel exposure of the tumor with
decreased exposure of normal tissues leading to a shift in toxicity
profile and potentially enabling more safe and effective combinations
with platinum-based chemotherapeutics. In this study, we evaluated the
activity of MM-310 in combination with carboplatin in several xenograft
tumor models and compared it to the activity of free docetaxel in
combination with carboplatin at equitoxic dosing. Tolerability of MM-310
in combination with carboplatin in mice was evaluated, including
assessing hepatotoxicity. Biodistribution, microdistribution, in vivo
tumor growth, and mouse survival studies were performed in lung and
ovarian cell line-derived (CDX) and patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
models. MM-310 in combination with carboplatin was found to be well
tolerated, enabling dosing of both drugs at high doses with maximum
tolerability when the drugs were dosed three days apart. Carboplatin
increased nanotherapeutic delivery to the tumor in a CDX model of triple
negative breast cancer and in a PDX model of ovarian cancer. In vivo
studies in lung and ovarian cancer xenograft models showed significant
synergy between MM-310 and carboplatin when compared to the
monotherapies, as well as when compared to free docetaxel with
carboplatin, leading to a significant increase in tumor growth delay and
survival (docetaxel/ carboplatin vs. MM-310/carboplatin, 0 vs 50%
complete tumor regression, 24 vs 80 days median time to regrowth).
Additionally, in the same studies, MM-310 and carboplatin was better
tolerated than free docetaxel and carboplatin. In conclusion, we found
that MM-310 in combination with carboplatin was significantly better
tolerated and more effective than free docetaxel in combination with
carboplatin. Mechanistically, the synergistic anti-tumor activity of
MM-310 with carboplatin may be partially due to a carboplatin mediated
enhancement of nanotherapeutic delivery. The increased preclinical
activity of the MM-310/carboplatin combination, together with the high
tolerability following scheduling optimization tested in mice, makes this
combination a promising regimen that warrants evaluation in clinical
trials.


