Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Copy number estimation from targeted and shallow sequencing in
cancer samples.


Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is mainly used to obtain sequence
variants (SNVs). However, obtaining copy number results from NGS has
gained momentum in both research and clinical applications. Targeted
panel sequencing has been a popular method to achieve high depth of
coverage for certain regions of interest at an affordable cost compared
to whole genome sequencing. Shallow whole genome sequencing, where
average read-depth can be as low as 0.1x, provides a cost
savings-approach for identification of large copy number variant (CNV)
events; it has been utilized in various application areas, including
oncology. Here we introduce the BAM (MultiScale Reference) algorithm,
currently in Nexus Copy Number, to function with shallow and targeted
sequencing data, as well as WGS and WES, using a novel dynamic binning
approach. This approach uses a Hidden Markov Model to segment the genome
into target areas using the reads in targeted regions and the backbone
areas using the off-target reads and additional areas. It uses coarse
binning in the backbone areas that provides copy number base line as well
as large copy number events and uses fine binning in target areas to
provide high resolution copy number detection in targeted regions.
Shallow WGS data and targeted panel NGS data, as well as WES with normal
depth of coverage, were used for the testing. The results were compared
with those from microarray and/or other algorithms in Nexus Copy Number,
BAM ngCGH (matched) and BAM (pooled reference). GC correction schemes
based on a range of window size and presence or absence of GC probe
content were applied to the data and assessed for overall quality.
Differences in overall read-depth resulted in variable sample quality
across the cohorts, however most sample quality was adequate for copy
number estimation and a quality threshold was assessed. Among the samples
tested, the best quality after GC correction comes from the 50kb region
size with or without the probes. Next, the copy number profiles of the
samples from WES and microarray were compared for accuracy. Using
microarray results as a reference for assessing calls greater than 5 MB,
no false positive and one false negative call were observed; the single
false negative call was attributable to low-level mosaicism in the tumor
sample. Results indicate that relative copy number can be estimated and
is comparable to the results achieved with microarray for the same
targeted regions. This analysis series was then repeated using a
secondary cohort of unrelated samples subjected to microarray and
targeted panel NGS to validate results. The BAM (MultiScale Reference)
method has been tested in a variety of cancer samples. This is an ideal
tool for copy number estimation with NGS results in cancer samples
because it provides a way for non-matched-pair analysis with genome,
exome and targeted NGS.


