Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of acute intraoperative hypoxia in breast cancer.


Background: Hypoxia is defined as oxygen levels in tumor microenvironment
of less than that in blood (90-100 mm Hg) and influences many aspects of
tumour biology. During surgery tumour vasculature is cut off gradually
leading to induction of acute hypoxia.The present study aims to
experimentally test the genotypic and phenotypic effects of surgically
induced acute hypoxia in breast cancer tumor samples and cell lines.

Methodology: Core biopsy samples were collected from breast tumors (N=8
patients) at three time points during their curative surgery: prior
(pre), mid-way (intra) and at the end (post). The samples were subjected
to RNA-Seq and a list of differentially expressed genes (DEG) was
prepared. A set of 26 DEG (‘pre’ Vs ‘intra’ Vs ‘post’)
obtained from RNA-Seq analysis and additional 17 genes involved in
inflammation, EMT and hypoxia pathways were chosen for validation in
tumor samples. These genes were validated using a customized qPCR Array
(Qiagen). A gene was considered validated if it was significantly
deregulated in at least 4 out of 8 patients. In another experiment, MCF-7
cells were exposed to varying levels of oxygen concentrations (0.1-20%)
for varying time periods ranging from 30 minutes to 72 hours, to study
time and dose dependent effects of hypoxia on following functional
characteristics: proliferation, invasion and cell cycle changes.

Results: Concordant, statistically significant up-regulation of FOS,
DUSP1, JUNB, FOSB, ZFP36, RGS1, S100A4, CXCL8 and CCL2 were observed in
RNA-Seq and qPCR experiments while MMP13, HIF1A and VEGFA were
up-regulated only in qPCR. However, 7 protein markers of inflammation,
EMT and hypoxia did not show any significant change between pre, intra
and post-operative samples. In MCF-7 cells, a dose and time dependent
decrease in cell viability was observed with increasing severity of
hypoxia as well as decrease in invasiveness, but there was no significant
impact on cell cycle phases. When hypoxic cells were re-incubated under
normoxic conditions an increase in cell proliferation and accumulation of
cells in S phase (with a reduction in G2-M fraction) were observed,
compared to cells grown under only normoxic conditions.

Conclusion: Acute intra-operative hypoxia up-regulates expression of
genes related to cell survival, chemoresistance, invasiveness,
inflammation and angiogenesis in breast tumors. Breast cancer cells
exposed to acute severe hypoxia followed by normoxia show increased
proliferation. These effects may have implications for tumor cells that
disseminate during surgery.


