Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Supporting neoantigen identification for personalized cancer
vaccines through analytical validation of an augmented content enhanced
(ACE) exome.


The identification of neoantigens has become a critical step in the
development of neoantigen-based personalized cancer vaccines and other
immunotherapy applications. Since neoantigens can be generated from tumor
specific mutations in any expressed gene, the first step in
identification of neoantigens typically involves deep exome and
transcriptome sequencing on the tumor and exome sequencing of the matched
normal. As personalized vaccines enter clinical trials with the potential
for clinical use, there is a growing need for strong analytical
validation of these platforms.

To address this we have developed our ACE Exome (~200X) and Transcriptome
platforms for neoantigen identification which utilitize an augmented
exome approach designed to increase sensitivity for neoantigens in low
complexity, traditionally hard to sequencing regions. To enable this
platform for neoantigen based personalized cancer vaccines, we have
performed a validation of both our ACE Exome (tumor and normal) and ACE
transcriptome platforms for detecting DNA-based SNVs and Indels, as well
as for RNA based small variant and fusion calls. These are variant types
are especially important for neoantigen identification. In this abstract
we describe the ACE Exome validation.

We used 11 cancer cell lines and their matched normals to assess
analytical sensitivity and limits of detection (LOD) for small variant
(SNV and Indel) detection using our ACE exome and Tumor Normal
bioinformatics pipeline. We identified a gold set of variants, 875 SNVs
and 19 Indels that were previously validated in these 11 cell lines
(COSMIC, CCLE and Sanger Sequencing confirmed variants). These gold set
variants were used to calculate our analytical sensitivity (percent of
gold variants detected across the 11 cell line pairs using our assay). To
determine our LOD, we chose 3 of the 11 cancer cell lines and created 6
dilutions (5%, 10%, 20%, 30%, 50% and 80% tumor purity) with their
matched normal. We then determined Positive Predictive Agreement (PPA,
percent of pure cell line variants detected in a diluted samples) and
False Discovery Rate (FDR, percent of erroneously detected variants in
the diluted sample that were not detected in the pure cell lines) metrics
for variants across different minor allelic frequencies (MAF) in the
diluted samples.

The ACE “Tumor Normal” Exome assay had a high sensitivity of 98% for
SNVs and 95% for Indels. The assay also showed robust PPA (sensitivity)
of 97% and FDR (specificity) of 2% for SNVs with MAF >= 10% and PPA of
87% and FDR of 3% for Indels with MAF >= 10%.

We demonstrate that the ACE “Tumor Normal” Exome assay is highly
accurate for identification of SNVs and Indels in cancer exomes. With
high analytical sensitivity, PPA and low FDR we believe this assay
provides augmented ability to detect cancer driver and potential
neoantigen generating mutations across various tumor types.


