Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of COX-2 and NFκB activation represent TLR3-independent
undesirable aspects of poly-I:C activity.


Background: Infiltration of cytotoxic T-cells (CTL) in tumors is known to
be associated with improved patient’s clinical outcomes. In contrast,
local infiltration with regulatory T-cells (Treg) predicts accelerated
progression and shorter overall survival. The above observations
highlight the need for new measures to promote selective accumulation of
CTLs but not Tregs in tumor microenvironments (TME). Here we compare the
TME-modulating impact of poly-I:C with a selective TLR3 ligand,
rintatolimod showing an induction of CCL22, CXCL12 and expression of
COX-2 and downstream suppressive factors, selectively by poly-I:C.
Finally, we report on the optimized combinatorial adjuvant to reprogram
tumor microenvironment.

Materials and Methods: Twelve ovarian cancer specimens were cultured in
the presence of IFNα, indometacin (COX-1/2 inhibitor) or/and one of two
synthetic TLR3 ligands, poly-I:C (non-selective activator of TLR3 and
helicases) or rintatolimod (selective TLR3 ligand). Biopsies were
harvested for mRNA measurements and culture supernatants were analyzed
for CCL5, CXCL10 and CCL22 concentrations. Alternatively, established
ovarian cancer cell lines, monocyte-derived macrophages, THP1 cells or
adult fibroblasts were used in analogous experiments. Chemotaxis assays
were performed using pre-activated CD8+ T-cells (top chamber) and
supernatants from the differentially treated ovarian cancer specimens.
Western blot experiments were used to evaluate the impact of NFκB.
Blocking experiments using soluble TNFα receptor inhibitor were
performed.

Results: Both, Poly-I:C and rintatolimod, induced CTL attractant CXCL10.
Unexpectedly, poly-I:C but not rintatolimod promoted the expression of
the MDSC/Treg attractant CXCL12, which was reversed by addition of
indometacin. Furthermore, poly-I:C induced expression of COX-2 and
COX-2-dependent suppressive factors (IDO, IL-10). Evaluating the COX-2
cascade, TNFα was found to be increased in the presence of poly-I:C but
not rintatolimod. Additionally, Western Blot analysis showed I-κB
degradation (as a marker of NF-κB activation), selectively in response
to poly-I:C. We observed that the combination of both TLR-3 ligands with
IFNα and indomethacin selectively induced the desirable chemokines CCL5
and CXCL10 and suppressed CCL22 in tumor samples with similar results in
the macrophages and fibroblasts. The ovarian cancer cell lines showed
only minimal expression of chemokines.

Conclusion: We demonstrate the feasibility of selective modulation of
TME, using different clinically applicable factors and their
combinations. We show for the first time, that poly-I:C, but not a
selective TLR3 ligand, induces NFκB and undesirable COX2-dependent
suppressive factors, which though can be eliminated through addition of a
COX-1/2 inhibitor. These effects may be avoided using a selective TLR3
ligand.


