Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel insights into the regulation of ERK3’s kinase activity and
its ability to promote cancer cell invasiveness.


In comparison with the well-studied conventional MAPKs, such as
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2, much less is known about
the regulation and downstream targets of ERK3, an atypical MAPK. Whereas
dual phosphorylation of the TXY activation motif in ERK1/2 is critical
for their activation, it is unclear if phosphorylation of the single
phospho-acceptor site (S189) in the SEG activation motif of ERK3 is
critical for its kinase activity or function. In addition, little is
known about the functions of the structurally distinct elongated
C-terminus extension of ERK3. Recent studies have revealed important
roles for ERK3 in promoting cancer progression. Of note, our previous
study showed that ERK3 increases cancer cell invasiveness by
phosphorylating the oncogenic protein steroid receptor co-activator 3
(SRC-3) and upregulating SRC-3-mediated matrix metalloproteinase gene
expression. Here we aimed to elucidate the importance of the phospho-site
S189 and the C-terminus in regulating ERK3 kinase activity and its
functions in cancer cells. By performing in vitro kinase assays, we found
that as compared to the wild type (WT) ERK3 protein, ERK3-S189A has
remarkably reduced kinase activity towards auto-phosphorylation and
phosphorylating SRC-3. In line with the critical role of S189 in ERK3
kinase activity, mutation of S189 to alanine greatly reduced ERK3’s
activity in promoting the migration and invasion of lung cancer cells. To
study the regulatory role of the C-terminus in ERK3 kinase activity, we
expressed and purified the N-terminal ERK3 (aa 1-340) that retains the
kinase domain but has deletion of the C-terminus. While it showed higher
auto-phosphorylation ability than the full length ERK3 protein, ERK3 (aa
1-340) had greatly decreased ability to phosphorylate SRC-3.
Interestingly, ERK3-S189A (aa 1-340) exhibited kinase activity equivalent
to that of ERK3 (aa 1-340). These results suggest that on one hand, the
C-terminus may play an auto-inhibitory role on ERK3 kinase activation
through intramolecular interaction and that the phospho-S189 is required
for relieving this auto-inhibition; on the other hand, C-terminus plays a
critical role for ERK3 to recruit substrates, such as SRC-3. In agreement
with its inability to phosphorylate SRC-3, ERK3 (aa 1-340) had decreased
ability to stimulate migration and invasion of lung cancer cells as
compared to full length ERK3. Taken together, our study unravels the
importance of ERK3 S189 residue as well as the C-terminus for the
intramolecular regulation of ERK3 kinase activity and
invasiveness-promoting ability in cancer cells.


