Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of a new oral SERD AZD9496 on ER mediated signaling in
xenograft model of postmenopausal breast cancer.


Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) have made significant improvements in the
treatment outcomes of patients with breast cancer. However, tumors may
eventually acquire resistance. One of the proposed mechanisms of
resistance to AIs is overexpression of ERα and cross-talk of ERα with
growth factor receptors. Studies including our own have shown that
downregulation of ER with fulvestrant may provide benefit in the
treatment of AI-resistant breast cancer. Fulvestrant has been employed in
the clinic as either first or second line treatment for ER positive
breast cancers alone or in combination with AIs. Studies have suggested
that further escalation of dose may provide further benefit. However,
dose escalation of fulvestrant which is administered via intramuscular
injection is difficult due to its poor solubility. To overcome this
shortcoming of an injectable drug, a novel orally active SERD (selective
estrogen receptor downregulator), AZD9496 was developed. We evaluated the
effect of AZD9496 on the growth of hormone sensitive and anastrozole
resistant breast cancer tumors using MCF-7Ca xenograft model of
postmenopausal breast cancer. Mice bearing xenografts of MCF-7Ca were
then treated with fulvestrant (1 mg/d-sc) or AZD9496 (5 mg/kg/d-po),
alone or in combination with anastrozole (200μg/d-sc) for 23 weeks.
Tumors were measured weekly and growth rate was calculated. AZD9496 was
significantly better at inhibiting the growth of tumors compared to
control (p0.99). In the second study, efficacy of AZD9496 was evaluated
on against anastrozole resistant MCF-7Ca xenografts. Tumors were treated
with anastrozole (200μg/d) for 13 weeks. During this time, the tumors
initially regressed but eventually began to grow and had doubled in
volume. At this time-point, they were regrouped to receive second line
treatment. Single agent AZD9496 was marginally significant compared to
continued anastrozole treatment (p=0.07). Nevertheless, second line
treatment with AZD9496 was equally effective as fulvestrant (p=0.36).
AZD9496 treatment was also equally effective in reducing the expression
of ERα protein in MCF-7Ca xenografts as fulvestrant. Next, we measured
the effect of AZD9496 on the mouse uterus. Uterine weight of mice treated
with AZD9496 was not significantly different from mice that were treated
with androstenedione (p=0.99). Furthermore, AZD9496 did not decrease the
expression of ERα in the uterus, confirming its selectivity for mammary
ERα. AZD9496 treatment was also able to reduce intratumoral aromatase
activity. However, it was not due to direct inhibition of the enzyme, but
due to reduction in ERα mediated signaling. These results suggest that
AZD9496 may be a better alternative to fulvestrant due to its oral
bioavailability, selectivity for mammary ER, and ability to reduce
aromatase activity while being equally effective as fulvestrant.


