Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of oncogenic/metastatic driver genes that cooperate
with p53 or p53/Rb-loss to induce triple-negative breast cancer.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBCs) is an aggressive subtype with poor
prognosis; drug-resistant metastases are common and highly lethal for
which identification of therapeutic targets is of major medical interest.

Previously we demonstrated that deletion of p53 and Rb in mouse mammary
epithelium induced TNBC-like tumors but with limited capacity to
metastasize. Therefore, we decided to employ sleeping beauty (SB)
mutagenesis system that can identify oncogenic networks responsible to
drive primary and metastatic tumors. In order to do this, we generated
mice in which p53 (p53f/f) or p53 plus Rb (p53f/f:Rbf/f ) are deleted and
the SB transposon is mobilized from chromosome 9 as well as controls in
which both p53 and Rb are wild type.

Forty primary tumors and forty metastases from each cohort will be
harvested to identify common integration sites followed by deep
sequencing. Then, the top 5-10 candidate oncogenes/tumor suppressors will
be validated to determine whether their loss/activation would accelerate
tumorigenesis/metastasis.

H&E staining of mammary tumors collected so far from different genotypes
revealed histologically diverse tumor types which includes but not
limited to poorly differentiated tumors with areas of
mesenchymal/spindle-like cells, acinar adenocarcinomas, and well
differentiated tumors. All mice analyzed developed multiple mammary
tumors in more than one mammary gland with average latency of 108, 158
and 170 days for p53/Rb deleted (N=7), p53 deleted (N=12), and wild type
mice (N=2), respectively (p H&E staining of mammary tumors collected so
far from different genotypes revealed histologically diverse tumor types
which includes but not limited to poorly differentiated tumors with areas
of mesenchymal/spindle-like cells, acinar adenocarcinomas, and well
differentiated tumors. All mice analyzed developed multiple mammary
tumors in more than one mammary gland with average latency of 108, 158
and 170 days for p53/Rb deleted (N=7), p53 deleted (N=12), and wild type
mice (N=2), respectively (p < 0.05). However, we did not always observe
macro metastases in mice with primary mammary tumors and we decided to
perform primary tumor survival surgery when tumors are oversized and let
the mice live longer to develop metastases. With this technique, 3 out of
4 mice that underwent tumor removal surgery developed lung metastases
when sacrificed. In total, lung metastases were observed in 5 out of 28
mice analyzed so far with/without surgery (18%) which histologically
resemble their primary tumors.

Since removing tumors from multiple glands is challenging, we decided to
take a transplantation approach of the primary mammary epithelial cells
of mid-pregnancy (13-16 dpc) p53f/f:Rbf/f:SB+ females and injecting them
into the mammary glands of 3-4 week old NSG mice. So far, four NSG mice
developed mammary tumors with average latency of 176 days. These tumors
resemble spindle-shape histology.

SB mutagenesis can promote metastasis in mouse models with limited
dissemination potential such as the model proposed herein. The proposed
experiments will identify novel oncogenic events that cooperate with
p53-loss or combined p53/Rb-loss to induce primary and metastatic TNBCs
which may serve as therapeutic targets for this aggressive disease. I
have generated 3 sets of cohort of SB mutagenesis to identify these
oncogenic events which are currently being analyzed in details.


