Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Roles of the acetyltransferases CBP/p300 in breast cancer.


Intrinsic drug resistance renders certain breast cancer (BC) patients
unresponsive to standard-of-care therapies. For example, ~50% of patients
with estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) tumors do not respond to endocrine
therapies (ETs, e.g., tamoxifen). Acquired drug resistance is another
cause for treatment failure and deadly relapse. Therefore, new strategies
that tackle both intrinsic and acquired resistance are needed for
improving clinical outcome for BC patients. ER-alpha, the defining factor
for ER+ tumors, is an estrogen-activated transcription factor (TF) that
drives tumor growth and progression. It critically depends on the
coactivators CBP/p300 for gene expression underpinning tumor biology of
ER+ subtypes that account for ~75% of all BC cases. Recent advances
revealed that another hormone receptor, the androgen receptor (AR), is
expressed in the majority of ER+ BCs as well as in a subset of ER- BCs.
Evidence has shown that AR signaling is implicated in ET resistance. For
the HER2-enriched tumors, high levels of AR expression correlate with
poor prognosis. Similarly for ER-alpha, CBP/p300 act as key coactivators
for AR-mediated gene expression. Additionally, other oncogenic TFs (e.g.,
beta-catenin/TCF and STAT3) also depend on CBP/p300 for gene activation.
Importantly, these pathways are active in all BC subtypes, regardless of
the hormone receptor status. CBP/p300 overexpression and heightened
acetyltransferase activity are detected in clinical BC samples and
correlate with disease progression. Thus, CBP/p300 represent attractive
targets for developing novel therapies broadly applicable for treating
all major BC subtypes. We have discovered a novel class of highly potent
CBP/p300 inhibitors. Our previous studies indicated that this class of
compounds is highly effective to suppress tumor growth in vivo using a
xenograft mouse model. We will present genomic features of CBP/p300 in
different breast cancer subtypes and experimental data underlying
potential mechanisms by which CBP/p300 regulate oncogenic phenotypes, as
well as effects of pharmacologic inhibition of CBP/p300 on sensitivity of
breast cancer cells to standard anticancer therapeutics.


