Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression profiling of paired benign and breast cancer lesions in
African American women.


Benign breast disease, a known risk factor for subsequent breast cancer,
includes a histological spectrum of lesions that can be subdivided based
on the overall impression into non-proliferative lesions, proliferative
lesions without atypia, and atypical hyperplasia. Yet little is known
about the molecular characteristics of benign breast tissue from African
American women, who suffer from disproportionately high breast cancer
mortality rates. 72 breast samples from African American women were
obtained. RNA was extracted from archival formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) blocks. Gene expression profiling was performed
on these samples using the Affymetrix HTA2.0 exon array chip. A fit
linear model using generalized least squares identified probe sets with
differential expression in benign-in situ and benign-invasive breast
cancer paired lesions. 36 benign and 36 breast cancer paired lesions were
included in the study. In the benign-in situ set (n=20), 978 probe sets
were differentially expressed (threshold: fold-change, 1.50; p Benign
breast disease, a known risk factor for subsequent breast cancer,
includes a histological spectrum of lesions that can be subdivided based
on the overall impression into non-proliferative lesions, proliferative
lesions without atypia, and atypical hyperplasia. Yet little is known
about the molecular characteristics of benign breast tissue from African
American women, who suffer from disproportionately high breast cancer
mortality rates. 72 breast samples from African American women were
obtained. RNA was extracted from archival formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) blocks. Gene expression profiling was performed
on these samples using the Affymetrix HTA2.0 exon array chip. A fit
linear model using generalized least squares identified probe sets with
differential expression in benign-in situ and benign-invasive breast
cancer paired lesions. 36 benign and 36 breast cancer paired lesions were
included in the study. In the benign-in situ set (n=20), 978 probe sets
were differentially expressed (threshold: fold-change, 1.50; p < 0.05).
Probe sets mapped to 125 annotated genes, of which 69 (55.2%) were
involved in cancer. The benign-invasive set (n=52) identified 351
differentially expressed probe sets that mapped to 84 annotated genes, of
which 61 (72.6%) had known cancer significance. Genes involved in
cellular growth and proliferation were significantly over-expressed in
both benign-in situ and benign-invasive lesions (p-values Benign breast
disease, a known risk factor for subsequent breast cancer, includes a
histological spectrum of lesions that can be subdivided based on the
overall impression into non-proliferative lesions, proliferative lesions
without atypia, and atypical hyperplasia. Yet little is known about the
molecular characteristics of benign breast tissue from African American
women, who suffer from disproportionately high breast cancer mortality
rates. 72 breast samples from African American women were obtained. RNA
was extracted from archival formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
blocks. Gene expression profiling was performed on these samples using
the Affymetrix HTA2.0 exon array chip. A fit linear model using
generalized least squares identified probe sets with differential
expression in benign-in situ and benign-invasive breast cancer paired
lesions. 36 benign and 36 breast cancer paired lesions were included in
the study. In the benign-in situ set (n=20), 978 probe sets were
differentially expressed (threshold: fold-change, 1.50; p < 0.05). Probe
sets mapped to 125 annotated genes, of which 69 (55.2%) were involved in
cancer. The benign-invasive set (n=52) identified 351 differentially
expressed probe sets that mapped to 84 annotated genes, of which 61
(72.6%) had known cancer significance. Genes involved in cellular growth
and proliferation were significantly over-expressed in both benign-in
situ and benign-invasive lesions (p-values < 0.0104). In the population
of 36 paired samples, differentially expressed genes were found to
regulate the estrogen receptor (ESR1) through distinct network
associations. Many genes are differentially expressed by benign and
breast cancer lesions, and in situ/invasive histology contribute to the
distinct molecular characteristics and pathways of breast malignancy. Our
findings highlight the first study to assess expression profiling of
paired benign and breast cancer lesions among African American women.


