Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization of library and enrichment procedures for RNASeq using
RNA from formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue.


Large repositories of diagnostic formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
tissue remain underutilized for transcriptome sequence analysis due to
degradation of the RNA from the fixation process, which makes the samples
unsuitable for traditional mRNA sequencing (mRNASeq). The use of random
primers to generate cDNA, and biotinylated exon baits to enrich for
coding regions allows for the generation of RNASeq data, but still yields
data of variable quality, in part due to differences in FFPE sample
processing. We performed a systematic analysis to determine which aspects
of library construction and the enrichment process can be optimized to
provide the best RNASeq data from FFPE samples.

The TruSeq RNA Access Library Prep Kit (Illumina) protocol was selected
to evaluate optimization procedures for RNASeq from FFPE material. RNA
was isolated from FFPE tissue using the Maxwell automated system
(Promega). RNA libraries were also prepared with RNA extracted from
frozen tissue of the matching samples using the TruSeq V2 mRNASeq Library
Prep Kit (Illumina) for a comparison of exon coverage metrics. Samples
derived from different types of pediatric cancer were selected for
evaluation, including 2 low-grade gliomas, 2 ependymomas, 9 melanomas and
1 Ewing sarcoma. All of the FF tumor samples selected contained oncogenic
gene fusions, previously identified by analysis of mRNASeq data. The
parameters investigated included the initial amount of RNA input
(10ng-400ng), library amplification PCR cycle number (9 cycles-15
cycles), and the duration of time for exon probe hybridization (1.5 hours
vs 16 hours). The quality of the data was based on the overall library
complexity and exon coverage. The complexity of the sequencing was
measured using duplication rate (DupRate) defined as a library inserts
from different sequence reads mapping to the same location in the
reference genome; while the coverage was measured using the percentage of
coding bases with coverage >=20x (PCB20x).

Using the RNA Access protocol, we found that the PCB20x metrics were
comparable between the FFPE samples and matched FF mRNASeq controls under
the non-optimized conditions of 20ng of RNA input, 1.6 hour
hybridization, and 15 cycles of PCR for library amplification. However,
optimizing the protocol by increasing the input of RNA to 400ng, reducing
the PCR to between 9-11 cycles, and extending the hybridization time to
16 hours increased library diversity, reduced the DupRate from greater
than 80% to less than 44%, and increased coding region coverage PCB20x by
at least 10%. All expected gene fusions identified in the RNASEQ data
from the FF samples were also detected in the FFPE samples.

We have shown that increasing RNA input, reducing PCR cycles and
extending the length of hybridization can significantly improve data
quality and maximize library diversity, allowing for greater utilization
of archival FFPE material for RNASeq.


