Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of CD44 as a regulator of adaptive plasticity in pancreatic
cancer cells.


Purpose: Patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) may show
an initial objective response to chemotherapy that is usually of short
duration. Our research goal is to understand the molecular mechanisms for
this short duration response and to more fully define differences between
chemosensitive and chemoresistant cells. Cancer cells that undergo an EMT
and metastatic tumors show an increase in CD44s expression. In this
study, we use CD44 Low and CD44 High isogenic cell models to identifying
key molecular networks and potential targets that could benefit therapy.

Experiments design: CFPAC1-CD44 Hi and Low cells were sorted by
flowcytometry and single clone selection. Isogenic model systems were
generated by overexpression CD44s in CF-Low cells. Western blot, MTT,
migration and invasion assays had been used to characterize cell growth,
invasiveness and gemcitabine sensitivity. Receptor Tyrosine Kinase arrays
were used to identify the CD44 regulated molecular networks in these
isogenic cell models treated with/without CD44 ligand hyaluronan acid
(HA).

Summary: CD44s high cells show an EMT phenotype (increase of vimentin and
loss of E-cadherin) and increase invasion. Expression of CD44s in CD44
low cells was sufficient to drive EMT partially and drive invasion. By in
vitro testing over expressing CD44s is not sufficient to decrease
sensitivity to gemcitabine. By Receptor Tyrosine Kinase arrays, CD44 Hi
clone cells show increase in IGF-1R phosphorylation. Preliminary data had
shown that HA may stimulate ROR2, VEGFR1, and EphB2 phosphorylation in
CD44 Hi clone cells.

Conclusion: Our previous study suggested that CD44 could be a therapeutic
target in Gemcitabine resistant PDAC cells. The current study will
further identify the molecular targets that regulated by CD44 pathways.
These newly identified targets could be hopefully used for the optimized
multimodality therapy to sensitize the PDAC cells to therapy and to
benefit the pancreatic cancer patients.


