Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colorectal cancer screening in rural community health clinics
using the fecal immunochemical test (FIT).


Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC), the second leading cause of cancer
death in the United States, can be significantly reduced if it is
detected early. Although overall CRC screening rates have increased
significantly, disparities persist among low income individuals, adults
with low literacy and those living in rural areas. These groups all have
screening completion rates below 50%.

Objectives: To assess patient knowledge, beliefs, and self-efficacy about
CRC screening and compare the effectiveness of two health literacy
informed telephone follow-up strategies to improve initial and annual
repeat screening with Fecal Immunochemical Test (FIT) in rural community
clinics.

Methods: A two-arm, randomized controlled trial is being implemented in
four community clinics. Clinics reported CRC baseline screening rates of
1% to 3%. Eligible patients, age 50-75, are recruited at the clinic prior
to a scheduled appointment. A research assistant (RA) conducts a baseline
structured interview measuring CRC screening knowledge, beliefs, and
self-efficacy. The RA then recommends screening and gives brief literacy
and culturally appropriate education using a pamphlet (4th grade level),
the FIT kit with pre-addressed envelope, simplified instructions (3rd
grade level) and a demonstration of how to use it, At four weeks patients
who have not returned their kit receive either 1) a personal follow-up
call (PC) from a central prevention coordinator using motivational
interviewing skills and reminding them to complete and mail FIT kits; or
2) an automated follow-up call (AC) using plain language and motivational
messages encourages patients to complete and mail the FIT. Outcomes
include FIT completion after intervention, and again at 12 and 24 months.
650 patients will be enrolled.

Results: To date 599 patients not up-to-date with screening have been
enrolled; 64% African American, 56% women; 40% inadequate literacy.
Although 90% reported having heard of CRC, only 64% knew a test to check
for CRC. 70% reported a provider had recommended CRC screening in the
past and 91% reported they would want to know if they have CRC.
Self-efficacy was high with over 90% indicating they would return the kit
to the lab. Screening results: 599 patients enrolled to date (AC: n=300 /
PC: n=299); 412 (69%) completed tests (AC: n=210 (70%) / PC: n=202
(68%)). Follow-up calls for Unreturned Kits - AC: 113 people called - 26
returned FIT (23% of people called completed FIT). PC: 115 people called
- 22 returned FIT - (19% of people called completed FIT). 2nd Year
Screening: 129 Second kits mailed out to-date. AC (n=61): n=29 (48%)
completed kits. PC (n=68): 28 (41%) completed kits.

Discussion: Implementing literacy and culturally appropriate CRC
education and screening strategies using the FIT and phone reminders has
the potential to increase CRC screening rural community clinics and
address public health disparities.


