Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor profiling of separated carcinomatous and sarcomatous
components from uterine carcinosarcoma biopsies provides insights into
their development.


Uterine carcinosarcoma (UCS) is a rare and aggressive form of uterine
cancer. It is bi-phasic, exhibiting histological features of both
malignant epithelial (carcinomatous) and mesenchymal (sarcomatous)
elements. Studies have indicated that UCS arises from sarcomatous
differentiation of high-grade carcinoma while others have suggested a
bi-clonal nature. Given these differences, we sought to separate the
carcinoma and sarcoma elements of UCS to try to understand their
molecular differences and gain further insights into how these tumors
develop. We macrodissected carcinomatous, sarcomatous, and normal cells
from formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) uterine samples of 10 UCS
patients. DNA and RNA were isolated and extracted using the Qiagen
AllPrep DNA/RNA FFPE kit. Whole-genome SNP microarrays and deep
sequencing of 26 cancer genes was performed, using the Illumina Infinium
OmniExpressExome array and the TruSight Tumor panel respectively.
Illumina HiSeq mRNA sequencing was also performed to quantify gene
expression. The genomic allelic imbalance (AI) profiling, called from the
SNP data by hapLOH, showed that sarcoma samples were more aberrant than
their carcinoma counterparts (abstract 131, AACR 2016). From the targeted
sequencing, the Illumina Amplicon-DS Somatic Variant Caller was employed
to call somatic mutations. Mutations were identified in TP53 in both the
sarcoma and carcinoma samples of all 10 patients. Frequently mutated
genes included APC, EGFR, MET and MSH6 which were found in 60-80% of the
patients. Genes mutated in less than 50% of the patients included PTEN,
KRAS, KIT, FBXW7, PIK3CA, FGFR2, and CTNNB1. Current results showed no
association of a mutated gene to either the sarcoma or carcinoma
component of UCS. RSEM, STAR and EBSeq were applied to the RNA-seq data
for gene expression quantification. Approximately 2500 genes were
identified as being differentially expressed (DE) between normal and
carcinoma samples. Just over 4000 genes were identified as being DE
between normal and sarcoma samples. 75% of the DE genes in the carcinoma
were also identified in the sarcoma. Using DAVID functional annotation
tool, we characterized these gene sets with KEGG pathways. Deregulated
pathways identified in both carcinoma and sarcoma include: cell cycle,
transcriptional regulation, Ras and p53 signaling. Some additional
pathways are putatively associated with sarcoma only, including MAPK and
PI3K-Akt signaling. We report here the differences between sarcoma and
carcinoma components of UCS from multiple molecular perspectives. From
the genomic AI and DE analysis, the carcinoma aberrations appear to be
mostly a subset of the sarcoma tumor profiles, where sarcoma samples
appear to be more highly aberrant compared to the carcinoma samples. One
possible inference from this is that the sarcoma originated and evolved
from the carcinoma cells.


