Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGFβ controls the DNA damage response via miR-182 regulation of
BRCA1 and ATM.


Transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) is a well-documented tumor
suppressor; a poorly studied aspect of TGFβ biology is its control of
genomic stability. Our prior work showed that TGFβ compromises ATM
(ataxia telangiectasia mutated) kinase activity, which mediates
recognition and repair of DNA damage. Consequently, inhibiting TGFβ
following ionizing radiation increases clonogenic death in vitro and
tumor control in vivo in breast, brain, and lung cancer preclinical
models. As yet unknown is how TGFβ controls ATM kinase. We recently
determined that TGFβ regulates mammary lineage commitment by
post-transcriptional control of BRCA1 mRNA and protein by its suppression
of miR-182 (Martinez-Ruiz et al., Science Signaling, in press).
miR-182-mediated downregulation of BRCA1 impacts DNA repair and
sensitivity to PARP inhibitors in cancer cell lines
(10.1016/j.molcel.2010.12.005) Here we used two cell culture models to
investigate the effect of TGFβ regulation of BRCA1 and miR-182 on DNA
damage response. Spontaneously immortalized Tgfb1 heterozygote and wild
type fibroblasts from primary mammary epithelial preparations were
synchronized in S-phase and exposed to UV radiation before fixation to
detect unrepaired DNA damage by quantitative image analysis of 53BP1
foci. Consistent with compromised BRCA1 function, more than twice as many
cells with 53BP1 foci were evident in Tgfb1 heterozygote fibroblasts
compared to wild type cells (pTransforming growth factor β (TGFβ) is a
well-documented tumor suppressor; a poorly studied aspect of TGFβ
biology is its control of genomic stability. Our prior work showed that
TGFβ compromises ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) kinase activity,
which mediates recognition and repair of DNA damage. Consequently,
inhibiting TGFβ following ionizing radiation increases clonogenic death
in vitro and tumor control in vivo in breast, brain, and lung cancer
preclinical models. As yet unknown is how TGFβ controls ATM kinase. We
recently determined that TGFβ regulates mammary lineage commitment by
post-transcriptional control of BRCA1 mRNA and protein by its suppression
of miR-182 (Martinez-Ruiz et al., Science Signaling, in press).
miR-182-mediated downregulation of BRCA1 impacts DNA repair and
sensitivity to PARP inhibitors in cancer cell lines
(10.1016/j.molcel.2010.12.005) Here we used two cell culture models to
investigate the effect of TGFβ regulation of BRCA1 and miR-182 on DNA
damage response. Spontaneously immortalized Tgfb1 heterozygote and wild
type fibroblasts from primary mammary epithelial preparations were
synchronized in S-phase and exposed to UV radiation before fixation to
detect unrepaired DNA damage by quantitative image analysis of 53BP1
foci. Consistent with compromised BRCA1 function, more than twice as many
cells with 53BP1 foci were evident in Tgfb1 heterozygote fibroblasts
compared to wild type cells (p<0.01). The second model consisted of
non-malignant human breast epithelial cell line, MCF10A, stably
transduced with a scrambled or miR-182 antagomir, grown under serum free
conditions and treated with a small molecule inhibitor of TGFβ type I
receptor kinase, LY364937. FOXO3 is a target of miR-182 and thus also
regulated by TGFβ. and FOXO3 association with ATM is required for its
kinase activity (10.1038/ncb1709). As reported, FOXO3 and ATM
co-immunoprecipitated, but was eliminated by TGFβ inhibition and this
effect was lost in MCF10A cells expressing a miR-182 antagomir. The
impaired DNA repair phenotype induced by TGFβ inhibition can be fully
rescued by antagonizing miR-182. These studies support TGFβ as stringent
regulator of the DNA damage response via suppression miR-182, which
directly targets BRCA1 and indirectly affects ATM activity via FOXO3. We
predict that cancers that have lost TGFβ signaling capacity will be
genomically unstable due to defective DNA damage control, which is
consistent with our studies showing that TGFβ inhibition sensitize
cancers to radiation therapy.


