Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction of insulin-like growth factor-I and insulin
resistance-related genetic variants with obesity and lifestyle factors on
postmenopausal breast cancer risk.


Objectives: Genetic variants and traits in metabolic signaling pathways
may interact with obesity, physical activity, and exogenous estrogen (E),
influencing postmenopausal breast cancer risk, but these inter-related
pathways are incompletely understood. Stratifying via obesity and
lifestyle modifiers, we evaluated the effects of insulin-like growth
factor-I (IGF-I)/insulin resistance (IR)–related traits on breast
cancer risk as a mediator or influencing factor in this case-cohort study.

Method: Using 75 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes related
to IGF-I/IR traits and signaling pathways, and data from 1,003
postmenopausal women in Women’s Health Initiative Observation ancillary
studies, we assessed the effects of IGF-I/IR-traits (fasting total and
free IGF-I, IGF binding protein-3, glucose, insulin, and homeostatic
model assessment–insulin resistance) by proportional change estimation.
Using traits as mediators of the IGF-I/IR–traits genetic
variants-cancer relationship, we partitioned total effect of these
genetic variants on cancer risk into two putative mechanisms: 1) indirect
(mediated by traits) and 2) direct (through pathways other than traits).
For the effects of IGF-I/IR traits on IGF-I/IR signaling
pathways–relevant genetic variants–cancer risk, we used the same
algorithm as that for mediator, but interpreted as an influential factor.

Results: Seven SNPs in IGF-I and INS genes were associated with breast
cancer risk. These associations differed between non-obese/active and
obese/inactive women and between exogenous E nonusers and users. The
mediation effects of IGF-I/IR traits on these SNPs–cancer relationship
differed between strata, but only roughly 35% of the cancer risk due to
the SNPs was mediated by IGF-I/IR traits. Similarly, carriers of 20 SNPs
in PIK3R1, AKT1/2, and MAPK1 genes (signaling pathways–related genetic
variants) had different associations with breast cancer between strata,
and the proportion of the SNP–cancer relationship explained by IGF-I/IR
traits varied 45-50% between the strata.

Conclusions: Our findings suggest that IGF-I/IR genetic variants interact
with obesity and lifestyle factors, altering cancer risk partially
through pathways other than IGF-I/IR traits.


