Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human endothelial progenitor cells: A new target for anti-vascular
therapy.


Breast cancer affects one in eight women in the USA. Early diagnosis and
newer treatment modalities have rendered breast cancer manageable.
However, triple negative breast cancer is still difficult to treat and
warrantes a search for newer targets. One strategy that has emerged in
cancer research involves targeting of tumor associated blood vessels
which provide growing tumors with oxygenated blood and growth factors
necessary for maintenance and metastasis. Antiangiogenic drug therapy is
transient and has not been able to gain mainstream therapeutic modality.
We discovered that endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) are mobilized from
the bone marrow to the tumor site and contribute to the development of
breast tumor vessel formation in an estrogen dependent manner. Therefore,
characterization of tumor associated endothelial progenitor cells in
breast cancer may provide a more specific antivascular therapy. Using the
highly proliferative human umbilical cord blood derived EPCs, having the
phenotype (CD133+, CD34+, VEGFR-2+), the effect of growth factor and
chemokine rich EPCs conditioned medium (CM) was assessed in luminal
(MCF-7), and post-EMT (MDA-MB-231) breast carcinoma cell lines. We
observed an initial halt in cellular proliferation in MCF-7 followed by a
significant increase in proliferation after forty eight hours of
treatment. On the other hand, MDA-MB-231 showed decreased proliferation
even after forty eight hours of treatment. Treating the EPCs with breast
cancer conditioned medium resulted in morphological and cellular growth
changes in the EPCs. MDA-MB-231 CM resulted in an increase of the EPCs
proliferation and differentiation by increasing the number of spindle
shaped attaching cells, and MCF-7 CM resulted only in an increase in the
differentiation rate by increasing the number of cell clusters. This
increase in EPCs proliferation and differentiation associated with
MDA-MB-231 CM treatment might explain the invasiveness of this breast
cancer cells through the increase in the tumor associated
neovascularization. The analysis of the paracrine interaction between
breast cancer cells and EPCs along with the associated cellular changes
will facilitate identification of the interactive mediators and
subsequent development of effective antivascular therapy.


