Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circadian/melatonin disruption by dim light at night drives human
epithelial breast cancer to a metastatic phenotype.


Cancer patients with disrupted 24-hour (circadian) rhythms are reported
to have poorer survival as compared to those with normal

rhythms. Severe alterations in circadian rhythms predict an increased
risk of death in patients with colorectal and breast cancer,

suggesting that circadian disruption may impact tumor progression and
metastasis. We recently reported that circadian/melatonin

(MLT) disruption by exposure to dim light at night (dLAN) resulted in
constitutive phospho-activation of ERK1/2, CREB, NF-kB,

and STAT3 in breast tumor xenografts promoting resistance to Tamoxifen
and Doxorubicin therapy. Given that chemoresistant

breast cancer is frequently metastatic, this study examined if
dLAN-induced circadian/MLT disruption can promote epithelial-to-

mesenchymal transition (EMT) of epithelial MCF-7 breast tumor xenografts
leading to the development of metastatic foci in the

lungs, livers, and brains of circadian complete (MLT-producing) athymic
nude female rats and mice.

Female nude rats with ERα+ MCF-7 or T47D human epithelial breast cancer
xenografts were housed in LD,12:12 and

LD,12:12dLAN (dLAN) photoperiods or in dLAN supplemented with nighttime
MLT (0.05 µg/ml) in the drinking water, with lights

on at 0600 hrs and off at 1800 hrs. Blood samples collected during the
mid-dark phase (2400 hrs) showed elevated nocturnal

melatonin (118.4 pg/ml) in the LD,12:12 group, but significantly
suppressed melatonin (10.0 pg/ml) in the dLAN group. Tumor

xenografts from rats housed in dLAN showed a ~3-fold decrease in
latency-to-onset and a ~2.8-fold increase in growth rates vs.

those from rats in dLAN + MLT. Tumor cAMP levels, as well as numerous
signaling pathways involved in promoting EMT

(Vimentin, β-catenin, and SNAIL) and metastasis (HER2/HER3, pCREB,
pERK1/2, pRSK2, and pSTAT3), showed increased

expression/phospho-activation at 2400 hrs in response to dLAN but
repressed expression in tumors from rats in dLAN + MLT.

Follow-up studies with Foxn1nude female mice implanted with
non-metastatic luciferase expressing MCF-7 breast cancer

cells showed that exposure to dLAN suppressed the nighttime serum levels
of MLT by 93% in these mice compared to those in a

LD,12:12 photoperiod. Exposure of mice to dLAN induced the rapid growth
of MCF-7luc tumor xenografts and, after 5 weeks,

induced the metastatic outgrowth of MCF-7 xenografts to form luciferase
identifiable metastatic foci in the lungs, livers, and brains

of all mice, as measured by IVIS small animal imaging system. Conversely,
MCF-7luc tumor xenografts from mice exposed to

dLAN and supplemented with nighttime MLT showed a reduced tumor
development, 3-fold slower tumor growth, and a small

metastatic lesion in one lung of a single mouse. This study is the first
to show that circadian/MLT disruption by host exposure to

dLAN is able to drive EMT in human epithelial breast cancer xenografts to
generate metastatic foci in lung, liver, and brain of mice.


