Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing a novel miR-15a mimic as a potential therapeutic
molecule to eliminate resistant colorectal cancer stem cells.


In the last 15 years, it has become well established that microRNA play
important roles in cancer biology. Due to their ability to regulate the
expression of important target genes, aberrant expression of miRNAs has
been linked to cancer development and progression. Based on these
important functions, there is great interest in developing miRNA based
therapeutics. In colorectal cancer, treatment using 5-flurouracil (5-FU)
based chemotherapy has improved patient outcomes. However, there remain
challenges associated with chemoresistance and recurrence for patients
with advanced stage colorectal cancer. miRNA based therapeutics may
represent an potential novel therapeutic option for colorectal cancer
therapy either alone or in combination with 5-FU based chemotherapy.
miR-15a was of the first miRNAs identified to be associated with cancer,
and has been shown to have important roles in several tumor types.
miR-15a is downregulated in colon cancer and associated with poor patient
prognosis. We have identified several important cancer related targets of
miR-15a in colon cancer, including YAP1, DCLK1, BMI1 and BCL2. Through
the regulation of these targets, miR-15a expression can be used as a
potent inhibitor to reduce colon cancer cell proliferation, invasion and
improve sensitivity to 5-FU, as well as decreasing tumor growth in vivo
mouse colon tumor models using colon cancer stem cells. In the interest
of developing miR-15a based colon cancer therapeutics, we have made a
modified miR-15a mimic that shows enhanced abilities to disrupt resistant
colon cancer cell proliferation and induction of cell cycle arrest when
compared to unmodified miR-15a. Following transfection with miR-15a
mimic, cell number was reduced by 84% compared to control and 66%
compared to miR-15a precursor. Cell cycle analysis showed that G1/S ratio
was increased from 1.07 for control to 2.87 for precursor miR-15a and
7.07 for miR-15a mimic. This miR-15a mimic also maintains its ability to
regulate these important target genes in colon cancer stem cells. In
mouse models using colon cancer stem cells, miR-15a mimic has
demonstrated therapeutic potential by reducing tumor growth. Based on
these findings, there is potential that modified miR-15a could be adapted
for treatment of patients to improve survival of advanced stage
colorectal cancer patients.


