Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systemic immunological changes during first line chemotherapy in
patients with high-grade serous ovarian cancer.


Ovarian cancer remains the most lethal gynecological malignancy and new
therapeutic strategies are urgently needed. High-grade serous ovarian
cancer (HGSC), in particular, is associated with a five-year survival of
only 40%. A promising new approach for treating HGSC is immunotherapy,
which has resulted in complete and durable responses, albeit in a
minority of patients. One potential approach for improving these response
rates is by combining chemo- and immunotherapy. Indeed, carboplatin/taxol
chemotherapy was shown to augment immune responses in cervical cancer
patients by depleting circulating myeloid suppressor cells. As patients
with HGSC are treated in first line with similar carboplatin/taxol
chemotherapy, we explored the effects of chemotherapy on systemic
immunity in HGSC patients. Within this prospective observational study,
75 patients with suspected ovarian cancer were included. Blood was
collected at three different time points during first line chemotherapy
treatment, namely: prior to chemotherapy, between the third and fourth
cycle of chemotherapy and 4-6 weeks after the sixth cycle of
chemotherapy. All patients received 6 cycles of carboplatin/taxol
chemotherapy and cytoreductive surgery (either as primary debulking, or
after 3 cycles of neo-adjuvant chemotherapy). Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells were isolated and analyzed for a total of 36 immune
markers using 9 flow cytometry panels, in total analyzing 49 immune cell
subsets. Results were compared to an age-matched cohort consisting of
women surgically treated for a benign disease, and a cohort of healthy
young volunteers. 75 patients have been included so far from which 22
were diagnosed with benign disease, 3 were diagnosed with another
malignancy, and 50 were diagnosed with OC. Of the 50 OC patients, 18 were
diagnosed with HGSC and from 9 HGSC patients, multiple time points were
available for analysis of chemotherapy-dependent changes in the immune
cell subsets. All patients developed leukopenia as a result of
chemotherapeutic treatment. Age-related changes in lymphocyte and myeloid
cell subsets were observed in all HGSC patients and patients with benign
disease. Chemotherapy-dependent depletion of myeloid cells was observed
in a subset of patients. Depletion of myeloid subsets was equally
distributed among monocytes, macrophages and dendritic cells. No HGSC- or
chemotherapy-dependent changes in T cell subsets or migration and
activation markers were observed. Taken together, we observed no major
systemic changes in immune cell subsets during carboplatin/taxol
chemotherapy treatment, suggesting that combined chemo-immunotherapeutic
strategies could be feasible during first line treatment of HGSC.


