Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gastric cancer organoid culture shows preserved genomic stability
in long-term passage.


With recent advances in 3D organoid culture techniques, normal epithelial
and tumor cells can be directly cultured from clinical specimens in vitro
and expanded long-term with a very high success rate. Thus, this
constitutes a good platform for various mechanistic functional studies
and clinical applications. A previous karyotyping and gene expression
profiling study has indicated that organoid culture of normal epithelial
cells can be propagated for long periods of time without genomic
alterations. However, data on the genomic stability of tumor organoids in
long-term culture are not yet available. We have successfully established
organoid cultures derived from either primary tumor or lymph node
metastasis from 4 gastric cancer patients. For each sample, we performed
long-term culture for at least 6 months. DNA was extracted from blood, as
well as the early and late passages of these organoids, and submitted for
whole-exome sequencing (WES), achieving a mean coverage approaching 50X.
Somatic mutations detected in early versus late passage gastric cancer
organoids were compared. Furthermore, we examined the organoids for copy
number variations based on the coverage and loss of heterozygosity (LOH)
information derived from exome sequencing.

We detected between 80 to 228 somatic mutations in the 4 early passage
organoids, in which over 84-99% of them were retained during long-term
culture. We detected 16, 20, 31 and 98 new mutations in the 4 long-term
cultures, respectively. The one case with a substantially large number of
new mutations (n=98) appeared to have emerged from a subclone of TP53
wild-type cells in a TP53 mutant tumor. Notably, the C>T mutation was the
most dominant mutation spectrum in this case, constituting 48%. Despite
the presence of frequent long segment LOH and chromosomal aberrations in
early passage organoids, indicating the presence of chromosomal
instability, these patterns of aberrations were stably maintained in
long-term passage.

Overall, with the current organoid culture protocol, tumor genomes are
mostly stably maintained with the accumulation of only a small number of
new mutations. Our results indicate that this is a reliable and stable in
vitro cell culture model for various cancer-related and clinical studies.


