Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mGluR1 drives invasion of proneural subtype of glioblastoma cells.


A major cause for the therapeutic failure and subsequent morbidity and
mortality of glioblastoma (GBM) is the aggressive invasion of malignant
cells into the surrounding normal brain that effectively renders complete
surgical resection impossible and virtually assures recurrent tumor
growth. Multi-omic profiling of GBM led to their molecular
sub-classification into two distinct molecular subtypes: proneural (PN)
and mesenchymal (MES). However, very little is known about shared or
distinct invasion processes of cells in these genomically different
subtypes. Using Microarray gene expression profiles of microdissected
paired stationary core and invasive rim samples from 19 patients, we
demonstrated that invasive gene signature of MES subtypes differs from
PN. Specifically, using three orthogonal but intersecting bioinformatic
approaches, i.e. gene set variation analysis, causal network analysis,
and iRegulon analysis; we discovered that genes differentially expressed
between PN core and rim could, to a meaningful degree, be accounted for
based on their annotation as “regulated by the transcription factor
REST”. REST functions as a repressor of gene expression. Of the genes
repressed by REST, mGluR1 (Metabotropic Glutamate Receptor 1) was
significantly overexpressed at the rim of PN glioma cells as compared to
the core. Finally, we also investigated the role of mGluR1 in glutamate
induced glioma cell migration; our results show that glutamate stimulates
migration of proneural-like glioma cells (A172) as compare to
non-proneural-like glioma cell (T98G). mGluR1 activation by glutamate has
shown to induce activation of Pyk2 and Src in astrocytes; knockout of
mGluR1 is not embryonic lethal. In summary, our data demonstrate that
glutamate-induced glioma cell migration of PN subtype of GBM is dependent
on mGluR1 and thus raises the prospect that therapeutic targeting of
mGluR1 may be a novel approach to controlling the invasion of this deadly
disease.


