Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of blood based liquid biopsy methodologies for improved
risk assessment of prostate cancer (PCa).


Approximately 28,000 men die from prostate cancer in the US each year.
Predictive biomarkers can provide patient risk assessment to enable
therapeutic decision making. Compared to tumor, blood based liquid
biopsies offer greater flexibility for noninvasive sample collection and
allows for continuous monitoring of treatment response. While various
liquid biopsy sample types and methodologies are currently available, it
is critical to identify which method offers the highest sensitivity and
specificity for clinical decision making. In this study we systematically
compared specificity and sensitivity of prostate cancer detection using a
pre-selected panel of PCa specific mRNA transcripts using four different
methodologies. In this prospective laboratory study, we collected five
blood tubes from a cohort of 40 metastatic castrate resistant prostate
cancer (mCRPC) patients and 20 age matched healthy volunteers (HV).
Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) were enumerated and blood samples enriched
for CTCs were isolated for mRNA evaluation. Two tubes of plasma samples
were utilized to isolate exosomes using ExoRNAeasy columns and CellSearch
EpCAM capture respectively, while RNA was extracted directly from whole
blood collected in PAXgene tubes. RNA isolated from blood samples
enriched for CTCs, two exosome preps and whole blood samples were tested
using qPCR (Fluidigm) for a panel of 48 prostate specific mRNA
transcripts and three endogenous controls previously shown to be detected
in whole blood. Receiver operator analysis (ROC) was performed to compare
expression of mRNA transcripts across all four methods. Results showed
PCa specific genes were detected in whole blood, Exo-52 exosome prep and
samples enriched for CTCs, while exosomes isolated using CellSearch EpCAM
capture failed to detect any PCa transcripts. ROC showed ExoRNAeasy
exosome prep detected PCa specific mRNA transcripts with significantly
higher sensitivity and specificity compared to three other methodologies.
Area under curve (AUC) for ExoRNA prep 0.65 to 0.75 (average of z score
at 3.27 p= 0.0023), compared to AUC for PAXgene is 0.55 to 0.83, (average
of z score at 2.64 and p=0.05) and CTC samples is 0.52 to 0.67, (average
of z score at 1.63 and p= 0.19). For CellSearch exosome method, the AUC
is 0.47 to 0.52, average of z score at 0.66 and p= 0.32). These early
results support the utility of exosome derived mRNA assay as a viable
alternative to whole blood and CTC based assays. Further testing for
expression of markers associated with prognosis and treatment response is
necessary to warrant its prognostic or predictive clinical utility.


