Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STING signaling in breast tumor microenvironment modulates immune
checkpoint blockade efficacy in the neu-N mouse model of breast cancer.


Background: The presence of tumor infiltrating T cells (TILs) is
associated with improved clinical outcomes in multiple tumor types and is
also necessary for response to immune checkpoint blockade. While T cell
responses to some tumors occur spontaneously, the majority of cancers are
not naturally recognized by the immune system. The lack of response is
attributed primarily to insufficient T cell infiltration into the tumor
microenvironment (TME). Activating the STING pathway represents one
strategy for increasing infiltration of T cells into the TME. This
induces interferon-β (IFN-β) production, leading to dendritic cell (DC)
activation and priming of tumor antigen specific CD8+ T cells that
mediate tumor regression. The intratumoral injection (IT) of ML-RR-S2-CDA
(ADU-S100), a synthetic cyclic dinucleotide STING agonist, has antitumor
efficacy in several aggressive mouse tumor models, including B16
melanoma, CT26 colon carcinoma, Panc02 pancreatic carcinoma, and 4T1
triple negative breast cancer. However, the impact of antigen-specific
tolerance on tumor regression associated with STING-activation remains
poorly understood. Therefore, we evaluated the efficacy of IT ADU-S100 in
both non-tolerant parental FVB/N and the immune tolerant neu/N transgenic
mice bearing established HER-2+ breast tumors.

Methods: First we first evaluated the impact of IT ADU-S100 on tumor
regression, survival, innate sensing, and priming of HER-2 specific CD8+
T cells in both tumor-bearing non-tolerant FVB/N control and tolerant
neu/N mice. Then we determined whether modulating the most highly
expressed immune checkpoints on tumor infiltrating CD8+ T cells enhanced
intratumoral STING activation with ADU-S100 in the tolerant neu/N mouse
model of HER-2+ breast cancer.

Results: ADU S-100 induced HER-2-specific CD8+ T cell priming and durable
tumor clearance in 100% of non-tolerant, FVB/N mice. In contrast, ADU
S-100 failed to sufficiently prime HER-2-specific CD8+ T cells in
tolerant neu/N mice, delaying tumor growth and clearing tumors in only
10% of mice. No differences in IFN-β production, DC priming, or
HER-2-specific CD8+ T cell trafficking were detected between FVB/N and
neu/N mice. However, activation and expansion of HER-2-specific CD8+ T
cells was defective in neu/N mice. Immune cell infiltrates of untreated
tumor-bearing neu/N mice expressed high levels of PD1 and OX40 on CD8+ T
cells, and high levels of PD-L1 on both myeloid and tumor cells.
Modulating PD-L1 and OX40 signaling combined with IT ADU S-100 enhanced
HER-2-specific CD8+ T cell activity, clearing tumors from 40% of neu/N
mice.

Conclusions: Intratumoral STING activation synergizes with PD1
pathway-blockade and OX40 receptor stimulation to overcome immune
tolerance and prime tumor antigen-specific CD8+ T cell responses that
mediate effective tumor regression.


