Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel regulatory mechanisms for Bcl2-related Ovarian Killer (BOK)
expression in breast cancer.


Deregulation of apoptosis is central to cancer progression and a major
obstacle to effective treatment. The Bcl-2 gene family members play
important roles in the regulation of apoptosis and are frequently altered
in cancers. One such member is Bcl-2-related Ovarian Killer (BOK), which
is a pro-apoptotic protein. Despite its critical role in apoptosis, the
regulation of BOK expression is poorly understood in cancers. Here, we
discovered that miR-296-5p, regulates BOK expression by binding to its
3’UTR in breast cancers. Furthermore, we show that depletion of BOK by
either miR-296-5p or siRNA against BOK protected breast cancer cells from
undergoing paclitaxel-induced apoptosis. Interestingly, miR-296-5p also
regulates the expression of Mcl-1, which is an anti-apoptotic protein and
is highly expressed in breast cancers. Our results reveal that Mcl-1 is
important for suppression of BOK function as ectopic BOK expression
induced Mcl-1, while silencing of BOK resulted in reduced Mcl-1 levels in
breast cancer cells. In addition, we show that specific silencing of
Mcl-1 reduced the long-term growth of breast cancer cells, whereas BOK
inhibition didn’t have any effect on the growth of breast cancer cells.
Surprisingly, silencing of both Mcl-1 and BOK rescued the effect of Mcl-1
silencing on breast cancer cell growth, suggesting that BOK is important
for attenuating cell growth in the absence of Mcl-1, and also showing a
tight feedback regulatory loop between BOK and Mcl-1 in breast cancer
cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated that BOK protein level is regulated
post-translationally by GSK3α and to some extent GSK3β as GSK3
inhibitor (CHIR99021) or silencing of GSK3 significantly increased BOK
protein levels in breast cancer cells. Notably, we found that Mcl-1
interacts with GSK3α/β and silencing of Mcl-1 using siRNA significantly
attenuated endogenous GSK3α/β levels in breast cancer cells. Taken
together, our results suggest that fine tuning (either
post-transcriptionally by miR-296-5p or post-translationally by GSK3) of
the levels of pro-apoptotic protein BOK and anti-apoptotic protein Mcl-1
decide the fate of cancer cells to either undergo Apoptosis or
proliferation.


