Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk of ipsilateral invasive breast cancer after DCIS: a
comparison of primary DCIS and subsequent invasive disease by
morphological and immunohistochemical analysis.


INTRODUCTION. The wide spread adoption of population-based breast cancer
screening has led to a substantial increase in diagnosis of ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS). When detected, almost all DCIS is treated to
prevent progression to invasive disease, even though the majority of DCIS
will never progress. Yet, we are unable to discriminate harmless from
potentially hazardous DCIS. Hence, there is an urgent need to find
characteristics of DCIS and biomarkers that predict subsequent invasive
tumor development. In this study, we compared primary DCIS lesions with
their subsequent ipsilateral invasive breast cancer (iIBC), to explore
how the initial DCIS lesion and its subsequent iIBC are related.

PATIENTS AND METHODS. We used a population-based, nation-wide cohort
consisting of 2,654 women who were treated for primary DCIS by breast
conserving surgery (BCS) only. Within a median follow-up time of 10.7
years, 316 women developed a subsequent iIBC (12%). FFPE tissue blocks of
both DCIS and subsequent iIBC could be collected for 158 of these 316
women. We assessed histology characteristics, tumor location, estrogen
and progesterone receptor status, p16 expression, and HER2 and p53
overexpression. Additionally, DNA and RNA were simultaneously isolated
from 100 DCIS and 100 matched subsequent iIBC specimens for extensive
molecular profiling.

RESULTS. More than 95% of the invasive recurrences were located at or
near the site of the primary DCIS. Concordant histological grade was
found in 94% of the matched pairs and identical immunohistochemical (IHC)
marker expression in 58%. Of the 44 patients with HER2 positive DCIS, 36%
developed HER2 negative iIBC. Furthermore, this change in HER2 status was
also a main cause of a change in surrogate intrinsic subtype (based on
ER, PR, HER2) between DCIS and iIBC, which was observed in 16% of the
patients. These dissimilarities were not found when we compared invasive
disease with synchronous DCIS (present in 83 of 158 patients). Molecular
analyses is still ongoing.

CONCLUSION. This is the first time that an unbiased comparison could be
made between primary DCIS and its subsequent iIBC within such a large
patient group, integrating clinical, histological and IHC data. Our
results suggest that the majority of invasive breast cancers in our
cohort reflect outgrowth of residual disease based on tumor location and
histological grade. DCIS and iIBC are very similar when comparing
histological grade, but frequently show differences on the IHC level.
Remarkably, the dissimilarities in HER2 status and surrogate intrinsic
subtype as seen in primary DCIS vs. iIBC are missing when comparing IBC
with synchronous DCIS. As a next step, we will analyse the lesions on the
molecular level, to verify these findings and to look for molecular
characteristics of DCIS that could be associated with progression to
invasive disease.


