Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LY3200882, a novel, highly selective TGFβRI small molecule
inhibitor.


The transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) signaling pathway is a
pleiotropic cellular pathway that plays a critical role in cancer. In
fact, aggressive tumors are typically associated with high ligand levels
and thus associated with poor prognosis in various tumor types. Cancer
cells use autocrine and paracrine TGFβ signaling to modulate tumor cells
and the tumor microenvironment leading to a highly invasive and
metastatic phenotype, inducing and increasing tumor vascularization,
modulating the extracellular matrix in the stroma, and inhibiting immune
surveillance and antitumor immunity. Clinical studies with galunisertib
(aka LY2157299 monohydrate), a small molecule inhibitor targeting the
TGFβ pathway, have provided proof of concept data supporting the role of
TGFβ in cancer and the utility of targeting the TGFβ pathway.

Here we describe the identification of LY3200882, a next generation small
molecule inhibitor of TGF-β receptor type 1 (TGFβRI). The molecule is a
potent, highly selective inhibitor of TGFβRI embodied in a structural
platform with a synthetically scalable route. It is an ATP competitive
inhibitor of the serine-threonine kinase domain of TGFβRI.

Mechanism of action studies reveal revealed that LY3200882 inhibits
various pro-tumorigenic activities. LY3200882 potently inhibits TGFβ
mediated SMAD phosphorylation in vitro in tumor and immune cells and in
vivo in subcutaneous tumors in a dose dependent fashion. In preclinical
tumor models, LY3200882 showed potent anti-tumor activity in the
orthotopic 4T1-LP model of triple negative breast cancer and this
activity correlated with enhanced tumor infiltrating lymphocytes in the
tumor microenvironment. Durable tumor regressions in the orthotopic
4T1-LP model were observed and rechallenge of congenic tumors resulted in
complete rejection in all mice. In in vitro immune suppression assays,
LY3200882 has shown the ability to rescue TGFβ1 suppressed or T
regulatory cell suppressed naïve T cell activity and restore
proliferation. Therefore, LY3200882 shows promising activity as an immune
modulatory agent. In addition, LY3200882 has shown anti-metastatic
activity in vitro in migration assays as well as in vivo in an
experimental metastasis tumor model (intravenous EMT6-LM2 model of triple
negative breast cancer). Finally, LY3200882 shows combinatorial
anti-tumor benefits with checkpoint inhibition (anti-PD-L1) in the
syngeneic CT26 model.

In conclusion, we have developed a novel potent and highly selective
small molecule inhibitor of TGFβRI for the treatment of cancer.


