Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting tumors by inhibiting mitochondrial electron transport.


Recently, we demonstrated that the monoterpene, citral, is potent
inhibitor of cell proliferation. Here, we are demonstrating that the
α,β-unsaturated carbonyl functionality of citral is responsible for its
biological activity causing substantial increase in intracellular oxygen
radicals. The resulting oxidative stress activates p53. Neutralization of
oxygen radicals by N-acetylcysteine attenuates the cytotoxic effect of
citral and inhibits activation of p53. Inhibition of p53 by pifithrin-α
inhibits citral-induced apoptosis. Oxidative stress caused by citral
initiates downstream events causing apoptosis of cancer cells. With the
identification of α,β-unsaturated carbonyl group as the obligatory
functionality for the anti-cancer effects of citral, we surveyed other
small molecule drugs that shared this chemical entity. Cinnamaldehyde,
nonenal, perillaldehyde, curcumin, and plumbagin have the
α,β-unsaturated carbonyl functional groups and have demonstrated
anti-cancer effects. Using curcumin and plumbagin as prototypes, we were
able to demonstrate similarities in the cytotoxic mechanism with citral.
The oxidative stress caused by curcumin and plumbagin is the initiating
step required for cancer cell apoptosis. Fluorescent Lifetime Imaging
Microscopy (FLIM) showed that exposure to plumbagin results in an
increase in free NADH levels and a decrease in the NADH/FAD ratio.
Additionally, in silico modeling showed that plumbagin and curcumin
docked to the active site of complex I and III of the mitochondrial
electron transport chain. Using the Seahorse analyzer, our experiments
showed that plumbagin and curcumin inhibited the oxygen consumption rate
in treated cells. These results indicate that the α,β-unsaturated
carbonyl containing compounds produce their cytotoxic effects by
interfering with the electron transport chain. The cancer cells respond
to the surge in oxygen radicals by increasing the expression of Nrf-2,
the transcription factor that regulates major anti-oxidant responses.
This compensatory mechanism is a form of chemoresistance that allows
cancer cells to evade the cytotoxic effects of agents such as citral. We
will present data from strategies to inhibit the Nrf-2-mediated
compensation and thereby enhance the cytotoxic activity of citral,
curcumin and plumbagin. The data obtained through these experiments is
providing important information that will allow designing of novel agents
that can interfere with the electron transport chain and inhibit tumor
growth by inducing oxidative stress.


