Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Feasibility of magnetic relaxometry for early ovarian cancer
detection: preliminary evaluation of sensitivity and specificity in cell
culture and in mice.


Introduction: Most ovarian cancers are diagnosed in a late, incurable
stage, which has prompted efforts towards earlier detection and more
effective screening strategies. To be considered effective, screening
must provide sufficient sensitivity and specificity to impact patient
mortality while minimizing false positives. Magnetic relaxometry (MRX),
which detects binding of targeted iron oxide nanoparticles (NPs) to
cancer cells, offers the promise of improved sensitivity and specificity
over conventional early detection modalities.

Methods: We investigated the sensitivity and specificity of MRX by
scanning ovarian cancer cell samples containing 105, 106, and 107 cells
incubated with a fixed amount (57 µg Fe3O4) of anti-HER2
antibody-conjugated, PEG-coated NPs or unconjugated, PEG-coated NPs
(Senior Scientific LLC). To further evaluate specificity, we used cell
lines with both high and low expression of HER2 (SKOV3 and HEY,
respectively). To assess MRX under in vivo conditions, we subcutaneously
injected 105, 106, and 107 anti-HER2 NP-labeled SKOV3 cells into nude
mice (n = 9) and immediately performed MRX scanning. Prior to performing
this study, we verified successful antibody-NP conjugation through an
ELISA assay, which confirmed the presence of anti-HER2 antibody in NP
pellets. Additionally, we performed flow cytometry to confirm a high
level of specific binding between SKOV3 cells and anti-HER2-conjugated
NPs.

Results: Our in vitro data revealed strong linearity between cell number
and MRX signal for both SKOV3 and HEY cells incubated with anti-HER2 NPs
(R2 = 0.99 and 1, respectively). Furthermore, there was little to no MRX
signal for all cell samples incubated with unconjugated, PEG NPs
regardless of cell number. The highest MRX signal was observed when 107
SKOV3 cells were incubated with anti-HER2 NPs, which was 2.1 ± 0.3 and
15.7 ± 1.4 times higher than when 107 Hey cells were incubated with
anti-HER2 NPs or when 107 SKOV3 cells were incubated with unconjugated
PEG NPs, respectively; significantly higher MRX signals (relative to the
controls; p Results: Our in vitro data revealed strong linearity between
cell number and MRX signal for both SKOV3 and HEY cells incubated with
anti-HER2 NPs (R2 = 0.99 and 1, respectively). Furthermore, there was
little to no MRX signal for all cell samples incubated with unconjugated,
PEG NPs regardless of cell number. The highest MRX signal was observed
when 107 SKOV3 cells were incubated with anti-HER2 NPs, which was 2.1 ±
0.3 and 15.7 ± 1.4 times higher than when 107 Hey cells were incubated
with anti-HER2 NPs or when 107 SKOV3 cells were incubated with
unconjugated PEG NPs, respectively; significantly higher MRX signals
(relative to the controls; p < .01) were also noted for samples
containing 106 SKOV3 cells incubated with anti-HER2 NPs. When scanning
live mice injected with 107 anti-HER2 NP-labeled SKOV3 cells, the MRX
signal was significantly higher than the signal from the mice prior to
the injection (p Results: Our in vitro data revealed strong linearity
between cell number and MRX signal for both SKOV3 and HEY cells incubated
with anti-HER2 NPs (R2 = 0.99 and 1, respectively). Furthermore, there
was little to no MRX signal for all cell samples incubated with
unconjugated, PEG NPs regardless of cell number. The highest MRX signal
was observed when 107 SKOV3 cells were incubated with anti-HER2 NPs,
which was 2.1 ± 0.3 and 15.7 ± 1.4 times higher than when 107 Hey cells
were incubated with anti-HER2 NPs or when 107 SKOV3 cells were incubated
with unconjugated PEG NPs, respectively; significantly higher MRX signals
(relative to the controls; p < .01) were also noted for samples
containing 106 SKOV3 cells incubated with anti-HER2 NPs. When scanning
live mice injected with 107 anti-HER2 NP-labeled SKOV3 cells, the MRX
signal was significantly higher than the signal from the mice prior to
the injection (p < .001). Additionally, MRX signal versus cell number in
the injected mice was highly correlated (r = 0.99) with the MRX data from
the corresponding cell sample scans.

Conclusion: MRX is sufficiently sensitive to detect 1 million cells in
culture or 10 million cells in mice with a high level of specificity.
Sensitivity may be improved by using nanoparticles coated with antibodies
against antigens that are overexpressed by a larger fraction of ovarian
cancers and will be the focus of future work.


