Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating benefits of PD-L1 image analysis for the clinical
setting.


Tissue-based investigations can prove challenging due to complex tissue
architecture and heterogeneous biomarker expression, visual and cognitive
“traps” that affect interpretive precision, and subjective
assessments that affect reproducibility. A major concern is that these
challenges could increase the risk of failure for therapeutic/diagnostic
co-development and clinical use, as the biomarker measurements continue
to increase in complexity and require increasingly precise diagnostic
cut-points.

Image analysis tools have been developed to overcome some of the
challenges for conventional anatomic pathology practices, capitalizing on
the objectivity and computational power of a digital platform. A
computer, however, lacks the cognitive ability and experience of a human
to interpret tissue architecture and context. Flagship Biosciences’
computational Tissue Analysis (cTA™) platform integrates the power of
our tissue Image Analysis (tIA™) technology with the contextual
experience of an anatomic pathologist to produce robust, precise,
quantitative results that demonstrate biomarker content in the tissue
context. Flagship Biosciences envisions the integration of our cTA™
technology into a computer-aided clinical pathology workflow as a method
to improve the precision of scoring for even some of the most challenging
tissue-based biomarker measurements.

In a proof-of-concept study, we evaluated the performance of manual
versus digital scoring approaches in a cohort of non-small cell lung
carcinoma (NSCLC) samples stained with the IHC protocol for the PD-L1
PharmDx 28-8 complementary diagnostic. A comparison of the 2 modalities
demonstrated that in nearly all cases, the within sample standard
deviation of the cTA™ digital score results was less than the manual
score (median inter-pathologist %CVs were reduced from 124.9% to 7.8% and
intra-pathologists from 65.4% to 7.6% for manual and digital scores,
respectively). As an additional exploratory examination, the effect of
heterogeneity on PD-L1 interpretation was also investigated. Pathologists
evaluated the same whole tissue slides within 5 high powered fields
(HPFs) using both manual and cTA™ -derived scoring. Results
demonstrated that the use of cTA™ provides improves agreement between
HPF and whole slide assessments (absolute difference between the manual
scores from HPF to whole slide were larger than the absolute differences
for the digitally derived scores, at 3.14% and 8.27%, respectively).
Taken together, these studies demonstrate that the use of cTA™ can
significantly reduce variability in PD-L1 scoring, as compared to a
manual scoring approach.


