Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sigma-2 receptor ligands induce apoptosis and inhibit
proliferation in breast cancer cell line mda-mb-231.


Introduction: Despite the reduction in mortality from breast cancer
achieved in the last 30 years due to more effective targeted therapies,
the survival rate for patients with triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)
is poor and has virtually plateaued. Due to the absence of estrogen,
progesterone, and human epidermal growth factor receptors 2, no targeted
treatment options are currently available for TNBC. Moreover, the current
standard systemic treatments are known to cause tremendous side effects.
Thus, there is an urgent need to identify novel strategies for treating
TNBC. Several reports have revealed that sigma-2 receptors are
over-expressed in all solid tumors including TNBC, making it a plausible
biomarker to explore for TNBC treatment. In this study, we investigated
the effects of novel sigma-2 receptor ligands (XYZ-XI-14 and XYZ-VII-69)
synthesized in our lab on the viability and survival of the TNBC,
MDA-MB-231.

Methods: MDA-MB-231 cells were treated for 48 h with XYZ-XI-14 and
XYZ-VII-69, cell viability and proliferation were assessed using
resazurin cell titre assay and cell count methods respectively. The
effects of the ligands on spheroids formation, cell cycle, and mode of
cell death were also investigated.

Results: XYZ-XI-14 and XYZ-VII-69 decreased cell viability of MDA-MB-231
cells in a concentration-dependent manner. The EC50 for XYZ-XI-14 and
XYZ-VII-69 were 12 and 13 µM respectively; and at 5 µM, the ligands
inhibited cell proliferation, induced apoptosis, and arrested MDA-MB-231
cells at the G0/G1 phase of cell cycle. Additionally, concentrations of
the ligand as low as 1 µM prevented the formation of spheroids as
evidenced by the lack of compact spheroids, and caused the disintegration
of preformed spheroids.

Conclusion: This study indicates that targeting sigma-2 receptors with
novel sigma-2 ligands (XYZ-XII-14 and XYZ-VII-69) effectively inhibits
TNBC cancer cell growth by inducing apoptosis and cell cycle arrest, thus
presenting a unique and effective pathway for treating TNBC.
Additionally, the sigma-2 receptor ligands (XYZ-XI-14 and XYZ-VII-69)
have the potential to halt tumor growth and prevent tumor relapse, as
seen in our 3D culture assays. Thus, the sigma-2 receptor has the
potential to be a valuable target for the development of novel agents for
the treatment of TNBC.


