Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high-throughput screen identified cancer selective small
molecules that kill independent of mitochondrial apoptosis.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) lacks expression of oestrogen
receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth
factor 2 (HER2). Importantly, there have been fewer advances in the
treatment of TNBC with the mainstay of treatment being cytotoxic
chemotherapy. All too often though tumor responds poorly to chemotherapy,
or relapse and resistance follow an initial response. We previously found
in a range of hematological and solid tumors that chemoresistant cancers
are far from the mitochondrial apoptotic threshold. To identify novel
therapeutics for the treatment of chemoresistant breast cancer, we
performed a high-throughput screen to identify small molecules that are
cancer selective but can kill independent of the mitochondrial pathway of
apoptosis. To perform this screen we used TNBC line MDA-MB-231 in which
the pro-death proteins BAX/BAK were knocked down. BAX/BAK are essential
for mitochondrial apoptosis. To enrich for compounds that were not
non-specifically toxic, we simultaneously counter-screened against the
non-transformed breast epithelial cell line MCF10a. We screened a total
of 30,000 compounds in duplicate across the two cell lines. There was a
hit rate of 0.3% in the screen and 85 compounds were retested in the
validation cherry pick screen. From the cherry pick screen 18 compounds
were further validated with low-throughput assessment for mitochondrial
independent killing and selectivity for cancer cells. To identify the
mechanism of action of the lead compound we used a genetic approach to
generate an RNAi signature for the compound. This signature enables
classification of the compound into known or novel class of compounds.
The lead compound signature was most like that of histone deacetylase
inhibitors (HDAC). Using an in vitro HDAC inhibitor screen, we identified
that the compound selectively inhibited HDAC6. Importantly, we validated
that the lead compound caused an increase in acetylated tubulin in cells,
a target of HDAC6. In conclusion, we have identified a novel HDAC6
specific inhibitor that selectively kills cancer cells independent of
mitochondrial apoptosis.


