Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computational method to identify non-coding cancer drivers.


Cancer is caused by mutations in driver genes - yet ~25% patients do not
show any mutations in known drivers. ~99% somatic mutations obtained from
whole-genome sequencing localize to regions that do not code for proteins
and many of these non-coding mutations regulate gene expression. Although
variants in protein-coding regions have received the majority of
attention, numerous studies have now noted the importance of non-coding
variants in cancer - for example, mutations in the promoter of the TERT
gene. Identification of functional non-coding variants that drive tumor
growth remains a challenge and a bottleneck for the use of whole-genome
sequencing in the clinic. Cancer drivers are generally identified by the
high frequency at which their mutations occur across patients. However,
mutation rate is highly heterogeneous across the genome and many
non-driver elements show higher mutation frequency than others, such as
regions bound by transcription factors (TFs) in melanoma or regions
replicating late during cell division in colon cancer. We have developed
a novel computational approach to predict non-coding cancer drivers that
differentiates between regions highly mutated due to positive selection
(true drivers) vs those due to mutation rate heterogeneity (false
positives). This method integrates the signals of high functional impact
of variants with the recurrence of variants across multiple tumor samples
to identify the elements that show more and higher functional impact
mutations than expected randomly. Our method controls for multiple
covariates of mutation rates, such as replication timing, histone
modification marks and open chromatin regions to identify the non-coding
cancer drivers. The functional impact is predicted using the FunSeq
scheme that uses the properties of ENCODE elements (including
conservation, TF motif disruption and network properties) within a
weighted scoring scheme to predict deleteriousness of non-coding
variants. I will present the details of this method and discuss the
ongoing efforts to analyze ~2,900 tumor whole-genomes in the
‘Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes, PCAWG’ consortium.


