Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deciphering the immune system in small intestine: Multiplex
strategies for inflammatory bowel disease.


Introduction

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) can affect the lower part of the small
intestine (ileum) and the colon. It can, however, occur in any part of
the large intestine, small intestine, or stomach. Recent evidence
suggests that several factors may tip the balance between homeostasis and
intestinal inflammation, presenting future challenges for the development
of new therapies for IBD.

In this study, we use normal small intestine as a model to identify
multiple immune targets using mouse and rabbit monoclonal antibodies.
Peyer Patches are lymphoid tissues in the wall of the small intestine
that are involved in the development of immunity to antigens presented in
that milieu. Small intestine and cases of IBD were evaluated as a
potential model using immunohistochemistry (IHC) to identify categories
of immune cells including cytotoxic T-cells, costimulatory cells
(agonists), T-regulatory cells (TREGs), T-cell effector cells
(regulators) and checkpoint inhibitors. cases of IBD were also examined
for the utilization of single and double/triple stains.

Design

Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded cases of small intestine and IBD were
cut to 4 micron thickness and stained with H&E. Mouse and rabbit
monoclonal antibodies including CD56 (natural killer cells), CD163
(macrophages), CD8 and CD4 (cytotoxic T-cells and helper T- cells),
CD103, OX40 and CD137 (costimulatory), FOXP3 and LAG3 (TREGs), T-bet and
RORγT (T-cell effectors), and PD-1 and PD-L1 (immune checkpoints) were
tittered for optimization and evaluated for IHC. Several IHC multiplex
stains (double and triple stains) were also developed and compared with
the relevant single stains.

Results

Single, double and triple stains utilizing CD56, CD163, CD4, CD8, CD103,
OX40, CD137, FOXP3, LAG3, T-Bet, RORγT, PD-1 and PD-L1 antibodies were
successfully established using small intestine as staining model for IBD
cases. All single stains versus double and triple stains gave equivalent
results. Double stains and/or co-expression of CD8 + CD103, CD8 + PD-1,
and triple stain CD8 + PD-1 + FOXP3 were easily visualized with blue,
brown, red or black chromogen staining.

Conclusion

Small intestine is a good model to develop single or multiplex stains for
a host of immune cell targets. Enhanced visualization of these targets is
possible with the use of double and triple stains; thus, this technique
may help facilitate acquisition of important prognostic information and
help support new strategies for inflammatory bowel disease in targeted
therapeutic treatment.


