Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cucurbitacin D inhibits prostate tumor growth via targeting
glucose metabolism.


Background: Emergence of hormone-refractory PrCa (HRPC) after the
anti-androgen therapy, cancer metastasis and chemo-resistance are the
major hurdle for the treatment of prostate cancer (PrCa) patients.
Accumulative evidence suggests that altered glucose metabolism is one of
the mechanisms for metastatic PrCa cell survival and chemo-resistance.
Therefore, identification and generation of natural/or synthetic
pharmacological agents that can limit altered glucose metabolism might be
highly useful for the treatment of metastatic and chemo-resistant PrCa.
Cucurbitacins have shown potent anti-cancer and glucagonostic activities
along with severe liver toxicity. Thus, a focus on developing different
analogues of cucurbitacin is being pursued by scientific community.
Herein, we report that Cucurbitacin D, an analogue of cucurbitacin,
suppresses the growth of metastatic PrCa cells in vitro and in vivo via
targeting glucose metabolism and its associated molecular targets.

Methods: HRPC cells (PC3 and DU145) was used as a model system. Effect of
Cucurbitacin D on PrCa cell proliferation and apoptosis was performed by
MTS, xCELLigence and Annexin V assays. Effect of Cucurbitacin D on
clonogenic potential of PrCa cells was examined by colony formation
assay. In silico analysis was performed to study if Cucurbitacin D
interacts with GLUT1 receptor. Effect of Cucurbitacin D on glucose
metabolism of PrCa cells was performed by metabolic shift, glucose and
lactate uptake assays. Effect of Cucurbitacin D treatment on key
molecules of cell survival and glucose metabolism signaling pathways in
PrCa cells was analyzed by Western blot and qRT-PCR analyses. Therapeutic
efficacy of Cucurbitacin D against PrCa was evaluated in an ectopic PrCa
xenograft mouse model.

Results: Cucurbitacin D (0.1 to 1 µM) treatment significantly (PResults:
Cucurbitacin D (0.1 to 1 µM) treatment significantly (P<0.01) inhibited
the growth and metastatic potential of PrCa cells in a dose-dependent
manner. Cucurbitacin D effectively induced apoptosis in PrCa cells as
shown by enhanced Annexin V staining and PARP protein cleavage and
arrested cells in G2/M phase via modulation of cell cycle regulatory
proteins (inhibition of cyclin D1/E and Mcl-1 and induction of p21 and
p27). Cucurbitacin D treatment dose-dependently decreased the lactate
production, glucose uptake in PrCa cells which was correlated by
suppressed expression of GLUT1 and its proficient docking with GLUT1
(with binding energy for this complex is -8.5 kcal mol-1). It has been
reported that miR-132 targets the GLUT1, interestingly, Cucurbitacin D
replenished the expression of miR-132 in PrCa cells. These growth
inhibitory effects of Cucurbitacin D were confirmed in PrCa xenograft
mouse model while administered intra-tumorally (1 mg/kg body weight
thrice/week).

Conclusion: Our results suggest that Cucurbitacin D is a novel modulator
of glucose metabolism which could be a promising therapeutic modality
alone or in combination of conventional chemotherapeutic agents for PrCa.


