Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody-conjugated nanoparticles for targeting metastatic
triple-negative breast cancer.


Early detection and the availability of new treatments have improved the
survival rates of patients presenting with local or regional breast
cancer to as high as 99% and 85%, respectively. On the contrary, patients
with metastatic disease have a dismal 5-year survival rate of 17%. Thus,
there is an urgent need for treatment strategies directed towards
metastasis. Our lab has developed antibodies (Clone 6 and AM6) capable of
recognizing tumor cells that have undergone epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), a key step in the generation of circulating tumor cells
and metastasis. The goal of the current study was to determine whether we
use these antibodies as targeting ligands for directing anticancer
drug-loaded polymeric nanoparticles to metastatic triple negative breast
cancer cells as a novel therapeutic option. Polymeric PLGA nanoparticles
loaded with paclitaxel, a chemotherapeutic agent, were functionalized
with the antibodies using thiol-maleimide chemistry. We optimized the
conjugation reaction in order to achieve maximal cell uptake of
nanoparticles without compromising antibody binding. In vitro studies
were carried out in an MDA-MB-231 derivative cell line with enhanced lung
metastatic potential as well as a melanoma metastatic cell line M12.
Clone 6 nanoparticles and AM6 nanoparticles showed significant
improvement in cellular uptake as well as retention. A competition
experiment confirmed target-mediated uptake of nanoparticles.
Cytotoxicity studies showed improved cell kill using Clone 6
nanoparticles and AM6 nanoparticles. Based on these promising in vitro
results, we are currently carrying out in vivo studies in mice. The
development of a targeted drug delivery system for the treatment of
metastatic triple negative breast cancer can significantly enhance the
survival rate for patients who often have a life-expectancy of less than
one year.


