Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative study of anti-PD1 and CSF1R inhibition on
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and macrophage populations across a panel
of syngeneic tumor models.


Immunotherapy represents an extremely promising treatment approach for
cancer patients. The success in this field has been signified by multiple
recent approvals of checkpoint inhibitors across a range of cancer types.
Subsequently, there is an increasing need to understand why certain
patients and diseases benefit from these treatments while others do not,
as well as how to maximize the benefits from these treatments.

To address some of these questions, we used an in vivo screening
platform, MuScreen, which allows for evaluation of multiple syngeneic
models and treatment modalities.We have characterized baseline and
treated tumor immune infiltrates for a panel of syngeneic models using
flow cytometry. The correlation between responsiveness and effects of
checkpoint inhibitors (e.g., anti-PD-1), and macrophage targeted agents
(e.g., CSF1R inhibition) on immune infiltrates including tumor-associated
macrophages (TAMs) were investigated in 6 syngeneic models. Furthermore,
M1/M2 polarization of macrophages was investigated to explore the
potential role of these cells in establishing an immunosuppressed tumor
microenvironment that may affect response to therapy.

Here, we show that the baseline immune cell population varies across
models, and that immune checkpoint inhibitors and macrophage-targeted
agents had variable efficacy across different tumor models. We also
present the correlation of immune cell infiltration, including tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), TAMs, and responsiveness to
immunotherapy intervention.

Having an in-depth understanding of the immune make up of a model in
which an immunomodulatory compound is screened is paramount for
successful translation into the clinic. A well-characterized and fully
profiled panel of syngeneic models such as the MuScreen platform allows
for finding the right model for screening test compounds to be used alone
or in combination with immunotherapy.


