Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and isolation of enormous number of circulating tumor
cells in breast cancer patient’s blood based upon cell attachment
property.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are detached from primary tumors into the
bloodstream and known to play a role in tumor metastasis. CTCs are known
to be rare, estimated at 1-10 CTCs among 1010 blood cells in a milliliter
of blood. Most of existing technologies for CTC enrichment are based on
marker expression or size. However, recent studies have suggested that
CTCs may have a wide range of marker expression and sizes. The number of
CTCs that is isolated from the patient’s blood is fewer than expected.
This infrequent and unreliable detection impedes the clinical use of CTCs.

We adopted a concept that presumptive CTC would have differential
attachment properties compared to WBC in tissue culture plate because it
originated from carcinoma where tumor cells attach each other. To prove
the concept, we spiked breast cancer cell lines into 7.5ml of healthy
blood. RBC was removed by Ficoll. Diluted peripheral blood mononuclear
cells were incubated with 5% CO2 in cell culture incubator for 2h at
37℃. After a thorough rinse with 1×PBS, the plates were treated with
10mM EDTA to detach cells from the bottom. The cells collected were
followed by lysis and DNA extraction, or placed on glass slide and
stained with anti-CD45, -CK, -HER2, and DAPI. Typically, slides were
analyzed by confocal microscope or Metafer slide scanning platform for
enumeration of cells. 7.5 mL of peripheral blood was collected from
breast cancer patient, and handled as described above.

Our method showed higher detection sensitivities for 6 breast cancer cell
lines. We verified that breast cancer cell lines were collected more than
80% of spiked cell number in 2 hours. This technique is applied to
isolation of CTCs in actual breast cancer patients, and unexpectedly
considerable numbers of CTCs were observed. We found in a range of CTCs
from 0.5 × 105 to 1 × 106 per ml of blood. These numbers are in
striking contrast to previous studies. CTCs were observed in 61 of 114
samples (53.51%) from metastatic breast cancer patients and 15 of 48
samples (31.25%) from early breast cancer patients. We also discovered
that there are various sized CTCs, and categorized these CTCs according
to their diameter; small (10 μM) CTCs. All three types of CTCs appeared
in large numbers. HER2 and EpCAM expression of CTC vary by patients and
didn’t always coincide with expression in primary tumor.

In summary, we have developed a promising strategy for CTC isolation by
using the preference of cancer cells to adhere to cell culture plates. We
have demonstrated that this is a simple yet very efficient approach to
isolate CTCs and broadly applicable to capturing heterogeneous CTCs
populations independently of their marker expression and size. Our study
discovered that enormous amount of CTCs are existing in the blood of
breast cancer patient in a variety of sizes.


