Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of whole blood interferon gamma production for patient
selection in vaccination with autologous formalin-fixed tumor vaccine.


Introduction:

Immune checkpoint blockade by anti-CTLA-4 antibody and anti-PD-1 antibody
led to clinical breakthrough for the treatment of patients with solid
tumors. Moreover, recent reports have shown that neoantigens are
important functional targets mediating response to immune checkpoint
inhibitors. Therefore, sequential combination of personalized cancer
vaccines and immune checkpoint blockade has emerged as a potential
therapeutic strategy. However, existing drawbacks is that it is difficult
to identify robust biomarkers for patient selection in vaccination with
cancer vaccine. In this study, we examined whether the development of
delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) response, measured after vaccination
with autologous formalin-fixed tumor vaccine (AFTV), correlates to
parameters of immune function such as whole blood cytokine levels and
peripheral regulatory T cells (Treg) in patients with solid tumors.

Methods:

Subjects comprised 52 patients with solid malignancy. AFTV treatment
consisted of 3 courses of vaccination performed at intervals of 2 weeks.
DTH test was performed before and after vaccination. A positive DTH
response was defined as a ≥ 10mm diameter erythema/induration. We
evaluated whole blood cytokine production after phytohemagglutinin (PHA)
stimulation using the bioplex array system. We also assessed the number
of peripheral Tregs as well as routine hematological and biochemical
parameters.

Results:

DTH positive patients and DTH negative patients did not differ with
respect to the number of peripheral Tregs, leukocytes, lymphocytes or
granulocyte/lymphocyte ratio. Whole blood IFN-γ production levels after
phytohemagglutinin (PHA) stimulation at baseline in DTH positive patients
were significantly higher than those in DTH negative patients (p=0.0397).

Conclusion:

These data indicate that whole blood IFN-γ production at baseline is
likely to be useful to assess immunologic competence in vaccinated
patients with AFTV. Consequently, clinical utility of whole blood IFN-γ
production, as immunomonitoring method for patient selection in
vaccination with cancer vaccine, is required to investigate in larger
clinical studies in the future.


