Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive evaluation of human immune system reconstitution in
NSGTM and NSGTM-SGM3 toward the development of a novel Onco-HuTM
xenograft model.


The recent successes of immunotherapeutic approaches to the treatment of
melanoma and the promise of similar treatments in a variety of other
cancers underscore the importance of the immune system in cancer. Indeed,
effective therapeutic design and evaluation require a comprehensive
understanding of the interplay between the immune compartment and the
proliferating tumor cells that comprise the tumor microenvironment. A
humanized mouse strain engrafted with cancerous tissue from a patient
derived xenograft (PDX) tumor provides researchers with a highly
sophisticated tool, ideally suited to facilitate the design of treatment
strategies that prevent tumor evasion of immune cells and that improve
cytotoxic responses. Severely combined immunodeficient mice such as NOD
scid gamma (NSGTM) and triple transgenic NSG mice expressing human
cytokines KITLG, CSF2, and IL-3 (NSGTM-SGM3) are proven hosts for the
engraftment of human tumors and establishment of human immune system
components following hematopoietic stem cell (CD34+) transplantation. The
endogenous expression of cytokines that support the development of
myeloid lineages and regulatory T cells potentially represents a
substantial improvement over standard NSG mice. Here we employ four
14-color flow cytometry panels to perform a comprehensive and detailed
analysis of the entire immune system. The four panels are designed to
fully characterize specific branches of the immune system: 1) T cells 2)
NK cells/dendritic cells/B cells 3) myeloid lineages, and 4) immune
checkpoint markers. Blood, spleen, and bone marrow tissue from both NSG
and NSG-SGM3 mice were evaluated at 9, 16, 21, and 31 weeks of age using
each of the four phenotyping panels. Our results indicate that the triple
transgenic NSG-SGM3 mice exhibit a more completely humanized immune
system compared to NSG mice, with specific improvements in the
distribution of T-cell subsets and overall representation of the myeloid
lineage. NSG mice engrafted with allogeneic human tumors represent a
valuable preclinical testing platform for immuno-oncology.


