Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase expression induces altering
glucose metabolism and tumor progression in hepatocellular carcinoma.


Background:

A recent study reported the loss of gluconeogenic capacity in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBP1), the
rate-limiting enzyme in gluconeogenesis, is reduced in expression in some
cancers. However, the role of FBP1 in altered glucose metabolism in HCC
was unclear. Therefore, the objective of this study was to examine the
function and clinical significance of FBP1 expression in HCC.

Materials and Methods:

First, three independent cohorts totaling 594 cases of HCC (118 real-time
RT-PCR data from our institution, 242 expression array data from
GSE14520, and 234 RNA-sequencing data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA)) were analyzed to address clinical significance. Data from
methylation arrays, SNP arrays, and whole-exome sequencing were also
analyzed to investigate the regulation of FBP1 expression in the TCGA
cohort.

Second, we analyzed mRNA expression, promoter methylation, and DNA copy
number profiles of 967 human cancer cell lines, including 27 liver
cancer, in the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia.

Third, we established HCC cell lines stably expressing FBP1 or empty
vector control. We performed sphere formation assay and xenograft studies
to evaluate the role of FBP1 on HCC progression. Furthermore, in order to
assess the effect of FBP1 on altered glucose metabolism, isotopomer
distribution analysis was performed using [U-13C] glucose.

Finally, to validate the effects of FBP1 expression on survival, risk of
recurrence, and glucose metabolism, we performed gene set enrichment
analysis (GSEA).

Results:

Lower FBP1 expression associated with advanced tumor stage, poor overall
survival (OS), and poor recurrence-free survival (RFS) in three
independent HCC cohorts. For either OS or RFS in each cohort, this
prognostic impact persisted, even after adjusting for tumor stage. In HCC
cell lines, where endogenous FBP1 expression is low, engineering its
ectopic overexpression inhibited tumor growth and intracellular glucose
uptake by reducing aerobic glycolysis. In patient specimens, promoter
methylation and copy-number loss of FBP1 were independently associated
with decreased FBP1 expression. Similarly, FBP1 downregulation in HCC
cell lines was also associated with copy-number loss. HCC specimens
exhibiting low expression of FBP1 had a highly malignant phenotype,
including large tumor size, poor

differentiation, impaired gluconeogenesis, and enhanced aerobic
glycolysis. The effects of FBP1 expression on prognosis and glucose
metabolism were confirmed by GSEA.

Conclusion:

Our findings established that FBP1 downregulation in HCC contributed to
tumor progression and poor prognosis by altering glucose metabolism, and
they rationalize further study of FBP1 as a prognostic biomarker and
therapeutic target in HCC patients.


