Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Automated identification of circulating tumor cells by image
analysis.


In the field of Circulating Tumor Cell (CTC) research many new
technologies are emerging to isolate CTCs. Some of them provide
accompanying automated image analysis tools that present possible CTCs to
the user. Others need fully manual image analysis. For all CTC isolation
technologies the definition of a CTC based on the immuno-morphologic
criteria is either customized to the specific platform or subjective to
the user causing high interreader differences – a problem which may
condemn many CTC-based clinical studies to failure. Thus, an important
issue that the field is confronted with is the lack of a unified and
standardized definition to classify a cellular object as a CTC. This
problem is addressed within the European FP7 consortium CTCTrap and the
Innovative Medicines Initiative (IMI) consortium CANCER-ID by the
development of an open-source image analysis toolbox for CTC
identification and enumeration. This toolbox is baptized ACCEPT
(Automated CTC Classification, Enumeration and Phenotyping) and can
process images generated by various CTC isolation technologies. The main
software components are the Marker Characterization, the Full Detection
and the Automatic Classification. The Marker Characterization tool aims
at quantifying the antigens expressed by previously selected CTCs. The
Full Detection tool is based on advanced mathematical methods to reliably
detect all objects in the images, visualize the objects in scatter plots
and enable the user to classify the cell types by the use of gates or
selection of specific objects in the scatter plots or on the actual
images. The Automatic Classification tool first detects all objects in
the images followed by an automated classification approach that – as a
result – presents found CTCs to the user. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of these tools on two different datasets.

The Marker Characterization tool was tested for Her2 expression on
archived CTC images isolated and classified by the CellSearch system from
patients with metastatic breast cancer. Investigators from three
different institutes were asked to score these cells for Her2 positivity
first on the images generated by the CellTracks Analyzer and afterwards
using ACCEPT. We show that the improved CTC visualization provided in
ACCEPT, combined with several measurements which we extract for each
cell, can reduce the inter-user variability.

The Full Detection and Automatic Classification tools of ACCEPT were
tested on archived samples of patients with castration resistant prostate
cancer processed with the CellSearch system as well as on microsieves
obtained after filtration of the blood discarded by the CellSearch
system. Results were compared with manually scored CTCs and showed the
improvement of CTC classification by the availability of quantitative
image analysis tools.

The Open Source ACCEPT program will be available on the MCBP website
(http://www.tnw.utwente.nl/mcbp).


