Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ALT-positive pediatric high grade glioma cells display
chemosensitivity to ATR pathway inhibition.


Overcoming the end-replication problem is a major hurdle for cancer cells
due to progressive telomere shortening that results from excessive cell
division during tumorigenesis. While most cancers activate telomerase to
maintain their telomere length, about five percent of cancers use a
telomerase-independent telomere maintenance mechanism, termed alternative
lengthening of telomeres (ALT). Despite its low overall frequency in
cancer, ALT is enriched in several cancer subtypes, including pediatric
high grade glioma (HGG). Previous work in our laboratory suggests that
nearly half of pediatric HGG utilize the ALT mechanism. To date,
therapeutic options are largely ineffective for children with HGG,
reflected in the dismal five-year survival rate, which is less than 33
percent. Our goal is to better harness ALT as a clinical marker in
pediatric HGG, specifically by identifying drugs that target ALT-positive
cancers. In order to study ALT in this context, we obtained and
characterized a panel of six pediatric HGG cell lines. Two of the six
cell lines in this panel display hallmarks of the ALT pathway. To assess
the potential of ALT as a therapeutic biomarker in pediatric HGG, we
measured cell viability in the presence of inhibitors, stratifying our
analysis by ALT status. ALT is predicted to occur via a
homologous-recombination-based mechanism. As such, we focused our
attention on inhibitors of the DNA damage response, as well as agents
that induce DNA damage. Treatment with inhibitors of DNA-PK, RAD51, and
MRE11 did not result in significant differences in cell viability when
stratified by ALT status, nor did treatment with temozolomide or
hydroxyurea. However, inhibitors of ATR (VE-821, VE-822/VX-970, and
AZD-6738) and CHK1 (MK-8776) led to significantly greater reductions in
cell viability in ALT-positive cells. In order to further our
understanding of the mechanism through which ATR inhibition
preferentially targets ALT-positive cell lines, we examined the effect of
these inhibitors on ALT-specific properties, such as the presence of
ultrabright telomeric foci and extrachromosomal telomeric DNA
(c-circles). Preliminary results indicate that ATR inhibition does not
diminish these ALT-associated properties and, therefore, the differential
sensitivity to these agents is unlikely to be due to directly blocking
the ALT telomere maintenance mechanism. Continued study of the effect of
ATR/CHK1 inhibition on ALT-positive cells will yield further insight into
the mechanism of ALT-specific toxicity. Overall, we have identified
ATR/CHK1 as a promising pathway to target for ALT-positive pediatric HGG.
Our goal is to better understand the relationship between ATR/CHK1
signaling and ALT in order to effectively translate this observation to
the clinic, both for pediatric HGG and for other ALT-positive cancers.


