Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization and integration of mantle cell lymphoma
microenvironments are determinant for the development of rational
targeted therapies.


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) accumulates in lymph nodes (LN) and
disseminates early on in extranodal tissues. Recent effort has been
invested on the identification of intrinsic MCL abnormalities but little
attention has been paid to the importance of the surrounding cells and
soluble factors in this pathology. Further investigations that integrate
the key role of the microenvironments are now needed to overcome drug
resistance in this incurable malignancy. Despite a significant level of
the proliferation index Ki67 in LN, we did not detect any proliferating
peripheral blood (PB) MCL cells, suggesting a major role of the tumor
ecosystem. To determine whether stromal (hMSC) or lymphoid-like (CD40L)
interactions could support survival and proliferation, primary
circulating MCL cells were cocultured ex vivo. In all the 21 samples
tested, CD40L, but not hMSC, induced cell-cycle progression that was
amplified by a MCL-specific cytokine cocktail (Ck). To determine the
microenvironment dependent molecular modulations, RNA-seq in MCL cells
from PB or cocultured was performed (n=8) and compared with genes
expressed in MCL cells from LN and PB (Geo, PB n=77, LN n=107). More than
65 % of genes induced by “CD40L+Ck” were also upregulated in the LN.
Our model recapitulated molecular signatures that are characteristic of
MCL i.e., cell cycle, BCR, NFkB, NIK and survival, confirming the
relevance of the coculture. We further studied the coculture-induced
regulation of the genes belonging to the survival signature. The major
regulation was an increase in expression of Bcl-xL protein associated
with a striking downregulation of Bcl2 and Bim. Using the functional
BH3-profiling assay, we demonstrated that, whereas PB MCL cells were
dependent on Bcl2 for survival, Bcl-xL upregulation was responsible for
loss of mitochondrial priming and drug resistance. Consequently, whereas
clinically available Bcl2 BH3-mimetic efficiently triggered apoptosis in
PB MCL, cells protected by the microenvironment were resistant. We then
hypothesized that targeting BclxL could increase treatment efficacy. By
integration of microenvironment modulations using our coculture model, we
developed efficient targeted strategies (i.e.: BTK inhibitor, Type II
anti-CD20), which counteract BclxL overexpression and overcome drug
resistance in primary cells ex vivo. This strategy should target cells
protected into their niches and our ongoing OAsIs Trial (NTC#02558816)
will rapidly determine in vivo efficacy in MCL. In summary, we reported
here the development of a relevant model that provides new insights into
the microenvironment-dependent regulation of proliferation and Bcl-2
family expression. Our increased understanding of intrinsic abnormalities
and the integration of extrinsic signaling offer new opportunities to
design mechanism-based strategies to overcome drug resistance in MCL and
other B cell malignancies.


