Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Natural killer T cells regulate tumor immunity in mouse pancreatic
cancer organoid orthotropic model.


Natural killer T (NKT) cells are lymphocytes with features of natural
killer (NK) and of T cells placing them at the interface of innate and
adaptive immunity. Like NK cells, they rapidly produce cytokines after
stimulation, orienting the immune response. As T cells, they express a T
cell receptor (TCR) that allows the recognition of specific lipids
presented by the non-classical MHC-I molecule CD1d. There are two subsets
of NKT cells, type I and type II, distinguished by their T-cell
receptors. All type I NKT cells express a semi-invariant TCR (Vα24α18
in humans, Vα14Jα18 in mice) that recognizes α-galactosylceramide
(α-GalCer). In contrast, type II NKT cells express a more diverse TCR
repertoire. The biological activity of these two subsets of NKT cells is
assessed comparing Jα18-/- mice that specifically lack type I NKT cells
and in CD1d-/- mice which lack all populations of NKT cells. In tumor
immunity, these two subsets of NKT cells have opposite functions. Type I
NKT cells enhance and type II NKT cells suppress anti-tumor responses. It
has been also reported that these two types of NKT cells cross-regulate
each other. Although there is no currently identified lipid antigen
recognized by all type II NKT cells, sulfatide is a relatively
well-defined self-antigen recognized by a fraction of type II NKT cells.
In human organs, sulfatide is rich in myelin sheath of nerve tissue and
pancreas. Thus, sulfatide may release from pancreatic tissue during the
invasive growth of the pancreatic cancer, and activate a fraction of type
II NKT cells. To test this hypothesis, we analyzed the involvement of NKT
cells in the regulation of tumor immunity in pancreatic cancer, using
mouse pancreatic cancer organoid orthotropic model. The pancreatic
organoids derived from KrasG12D mice were transduced with Cre and shRNA
against p16, to activate Kras and repress p16, respectively. These
transduced organoids were then subcutaneously injected to C57BL/6J wild
type mice, and tumors were harvested after two weeks. The tumors were cut
into small pieces, and the weight of each piece was measured. The piece
of tumor was sewn to the pancreas of wild type, Jα18-/- mice and CD1d-/-
mice. After two weeks, tumors were harvested, and the weight of tumor was
measured. The tumor weight was significantly heavier in CD1d-/- mice than
wild type mice (p=0.0416). Although it was not statistically significant,
the tumor weight was slightly heavier in Jα18-/- mice than wild type
mice. We also analyzed the population of T cell subsets in peripheral
bloods, however, there were no differences among the three strains of
mice. Considering these results, NKT cells may regulate tumor immunity in
the microenvironment of the pancreatic cancer. Moreover, since sulfatide
is rich in pancreas, sulfatide-reactive type II NKT cells may be involved
in this local immune response. The detailed analysis of the regulatory
functions of NKT cells in pancreas could help to develop a new
immunotherapy for pancreatic cancer.


