Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting G-quadruplex nucleic acids: a series of β-carboline
alkaloids with new skeletons from the seeds of Peganum harmala.


G-quadruplexes are DNA secondary structures implicated in essential
physiological and pathological processes, such as tumorgenesis. Small
molecules which can stabilize or induce G-quadruplex formation have
potential as antitumor agents through the alteration of oncogene
expression levels or the disruption of telomere maintenance. Targeting
G-quadruplex nucleic acids, we screened 17 medicinal plants for binding
activity to a model G-quadruplex d(TTGGGTT)4 system by 1H NMR experiment.
We found that the crude extract of Peganum harmala L. seeds showed the
most potential binding activity and specific cytotoxicity against the
PC-3 cancer cell line with an IC50 value of 13.65 μg/mL. Subsequently,
1H NMR and bioassay co-guided isolation of the extract of P. harmala L.
was performed and obtained 21 new alkaloids, including 10 novel
β-carboline alkaloids with unprecedented carbon skeletons, and 12 known
analogues. Their structures including the absolute configurations were
determined by extensive analysis of spectroscopic data, X-ray
crystallography, ECD calculations, and ECD exciton chirality approaches.
The antiproliferative activities and G-quadruplex binding activities were
evaluated for these newly discovered and previously reported alkaloids.
Some of the isolates showed pronounced cytotoxic effects with IC50 values
below 10 µM and significant G-quadruplex binding activities. More
interestingly, pegaharmine D (4), which showed the strongest G-quadruplex
interaction, exhibited significant cytotoxic activity against HL-60, PC-3
and SGC-7901 cell lines, with IC50 values of 3.81 ± 0.32, 11.52 ± 0.62,
and 15.16 ± 0.42 µM, respectively. The G-quadruplex interactions
positively correlated with antiproliferative activities suggesting these
β-carboline alkaloids may exert their anti-cancer effects through
G-quadruplex interactions. This work contributed a practical strategy at
first time for the discovery of novel G-quadruplex ligands from natural
products and provided potential insights for using β-carboline alkaloids
as anticancer lead compounds specifically targeting G-quadruplexes.


