Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase II clinical trial patient responses to the macrophage
activating agent RRx-001 correlate to TGF- β pathway activation and
markers for fibrosis.


Introduction: RRx-001 is a novel systemically non-toxic small molecule
macrophage stimulating agent with promising activity in an ongoing
clinical trial in small cell and non-small cell lung cancer and in
neuroendocrine tumors. In preclinical studies, RRx-001 activated normally
immune-suppressive M2-like Tumor Associated Macrophages (TAMs) to express
a series of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as
transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1), tumor necrosis factor-α
TNF-α), inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), and interleukins-10 and
-12, a profile that resembles the M1 activated macrophage state. Due to
its chemotactic activity for macrophages, TGF-β1 was hypothesized to be
involved in the antitumor mechanism of RRx-001. We therefore compared
expression patterns of TGF-β1 and TGF-βRI in patient-derived biopsy
samples obtained at screening and post RRx-001. As TGF-β1 is closely
associated with the induction of fibrosis, we also examined key fibrosis
markers.

Methods: Tumor biopsies before and after treatment with RRx-001 were
obtained from consented patients with NSCLC, SCLC, and neuroendocrine
tumors in the QUADRUPLE THREAT Phase II clinical trial (NCT02489903).
Post treatment biopsies were obtained following 6 weeks of once-weekly
RRx-001 treatment co-incidental with the first on-study CT scan. Tumor
samples were evaluated immune-histochemically with putative markers for
TGFβ pathway activation (TGF-β1, TGF-βR1), fibrosis (alpha-smooth
muscle actin [α-SMA], Matrix metallopeptidase-9 [MMP-9], and Collagen
III deposition), and macrophage activation. Patients were subsequently
followed for tumor progression.

Results: Positive immune-histochemical staining for TGF-β1 and TGF-βR1
was seen in all responding patients, and in none of the non-responding
patients to date. In responders we also found that MMP-9 and α-SMA
activity was down regulated post RRx-001. The down-regulation of these
fibrosis markers is suggestive of less invasive malignancy. The number of
tumor associated macrophages and their activation was related to the
activity of RRx-001.

Conclusions: Our pre and post dose patient derived data to date indicate
a correlation between TGF-β signaling activation and a response to
RRx-001 that may also correlate with increased numbers of macrophages,
and their activation status, in the vicinity of the tumor. These data
suggest that activation of the TGF-β1 pathway, as evident by expression
of TGF-β1 and TGF-βR1 by tumor cells, could be a predictive biomarker
for RRx-001 treatment.


