Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Papillary renal cell carcinoma, proposal of a new classification
system based on integrated molecular, histological and clinical analysis.


Background:

Papillary Renal Cell Carcinoma (PRCC) is divided into histological
subtypes 1 and 2. Type 2 is known to have worse clinical behavior. A
number of PRCC cases (~ 50%), fail to meet all reported morphological
criteria for either type, hence are best characterized as PRCC not
otherwise specified (NOS). There are yet no reliable markers to resolve
the PRCC NOS category. That in turn reflects the clinical dilemma of how
to manage these patients.

Experimental Design:

PRCC patient cohort of 115 cases was selected for the study. Cases were
subtyped histologically into PRCC types 1, 2 and NOS. Potentially
distinguishing markers ABCC2, CA9, SAll4, and BCL2 selected from our
previous genomic analysis, were assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC). A
total of 24 cases were further selected for molecular analysis using
miRNA expression and copy number variation (CNV). Univariate and
multivariate survival analysis were performed using Log rank test and cox
proportionate hazards.

Results:

Markers ABCC2, CA9 exhibited distinct staining patterns between the two
classic PRCC subtypes; and successfully classified many of the PRCC NOS
(45%) cases. Moreover, immunomarkers revealed a third distinct subtype of
PRCC (35% of the PRCC cohort). Molecular

testing using miRNA expression and CNV analysis confirmed the presence of
three distinct molecular signatures corresponding to the 3 subtypes. On
univariate analysis DFS was significantly enhanced in the type1 versus 2&
3 (p value 0.047). PRCC subtyping retained

significance on multivariate analysis (p value 0.025, HR:6, 95% CI 1.25
to 32.2) .

Conclusion:

We propose a new classification system of PRCC integrating morphological,
immunophenotypical, and molecular analysis. Our classification reveals a
3rd PRCC subtype that was not previously described. This subtype has
overlapping morphology of with PRCC types 1 and 2, hence would be
subtyped as PRCC NOS in the current classification. Molecularly PRCC type
3 has a distinct signature and clinically it behaves similar to PRCC type
2. The new classification stratifies PRCC patients into clinically
relevant subgroups and has significant future implications on the
management of PRCC.


