Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HERA-CD40L: A novel hexavalent CD40 agonist with superior
biological activity.


Introduction: Targeted therapeutics for cancer treatment are mostly
developed as antibodies, however, the natural signaling complexes of the
members of the TNF superfamily and their receptors consist of clusters of
trimers. Consequently, most of these bivalent agonistic antibodies depend
on Fc receptor mediated crosslinking for biological activity. The
HERA-Technology developed by Apogenix generates hexavalent fusion
proteins targeting the TNF-receptor superfamily with high clustering
capacity for the cognate receptor, which overcomes this disadvantage of
antibody-based drugs. Here we compared the efficacy of different CD40
agonist formats, including the novel HERA-CD40L and the functional
consequences of differential receptor clustering.

Materials & Methods: Biological activity of CD40 agonists was compared
using an engineered reporter cell line and by flow cytometric analysis of
CD40-induced IκBα degradation in Ramos B cells. T lymphocytes and
monocytes were isolated from buffy coats and expression of CD markers
upon CD40 ligation was analysed by multicolor flow cytometry (MC-FC).
Secretion of cytokines in response to CD40 ligation was determined by
ELISA. Monitoring of T cell-induced killing of tumor cells in direct
co-cultures employed a real-time cell analysis system (xCELLigence).

Results: Direct comparison of bivalent CD40 antibodies with trivalent
CD40L and the hexavalent HERA-CD40L in two independent bioactivity assay
formats demonstrated that only the hexavalent agonist was fully active
without additional crosslinking. In contrast to HERA-CD40L, neither the
bivalent agonistic CD40 antibody nor the trivalent CD40L were able to
upregulate expression of activation markers on B cells or to induce
secretion of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-12 and TNFα by PBMCs.
In vitro generated M2-macrophages acquired an M1 phenotype and enhanced
proliferation of naïve CD4+ T cells in direct co-culture. Similarly,
direct co-culture of CD4+ T cells with Ramos B cells in the presence of
HERA-CD40L induced cytotoxic activity of CD4+ cells against tumor cells.
The activating effect was dependent on cell-cell contacts and was not
observed in indirect co-cultures. Importantly, only the hexavalent
HERA-CD40L showed full biological activity without additional
crosslinking.

Conclusion: The hexavalent CD40 agonist HERA-CD40L produced by Apogenix
HERA-Technology platform triggers CD40 signaling on B cells and cells of
the monocytic lineage, leads to direct cytolytic activation and
proliferation of CD4+ T cells and shifts the M1/M2 balance towards
proinflammatory conditions. Unlike bivalent CD40 antibodies or trivalent
CD40L_ based agonists, the hexavalent HERA-CD40L forms highly clustered
signaling complexes and thus exhibits superior biological activity over
other agonistic formats without the need for Fc receptor mediated
crosslinking.


