Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying selective vulnerabilities in colorectal cancer
molecular subtypes using in vivo functional genomic screens.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a leading cause of cancer-related morbidity
and mortality with significantly heterogeneous features and drug
responses. Recently, the international Colorectal Cancer Subtyping
Consortium identified four robust consensus molecular subtypes of CRC
(CMS1-4) using large-scale gene expression data. These findings may
enable us to identify molecularly homogenous subsets of CRC patients and
accelerate effective drug development strategies. To identify potential
therapeutic targets and novel selective vulnerabilities in CRC molecular
subtypes, we developed an in vivo loss-of-function genomic screen using
CRC patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) for each molecular subtype. Our
PDX-derived CRC models underwent comprehensive integrated molecular
characterization of mRNA profiles, DNA mutations, and histochemical
profiles upon confirmed serial retransplantation to determine whether
characteristics of the subtypes are recapitulated in vivo. Because the
original CMS classification algorithm was trained and validated using
Affymetrix data, profiling the PDX-derived cell lines using this
technology provided the most robust analysis of the CMS subtypes. In vivo
pooled short hairpin RNA (shRNA) screens rely on specific elimination of
individual shRNAs in a cell population and require that the infected
tumor cell population is adequately endowed with engraftment capacity
when implanted into recipient mice. Therefore, we determined the
transduction efficiency of the PDX models, the frequency of
tumor-initiating cells, and the maximum library complexity allowed by
each model. To identify targets that represent selective vulnerabilities
in specific CRC molecular subtypes, we screened each model in vivo with
an shRNA library targeting about 200 genes specifically belonging to U.S.
Food and Drug Administration-approved targeted therapies (FDAome; 10
shRNAs/gene ). We leveraged redundant shRNA activity analysis to evaluate
“hits” (or top-scoring genes) emerging from our screening. We further
applied ranking-based analytics in combination with integromic approaches
(use of computational packages to unravel relationships between -omics)
to inform on selective CMS specific top-scoring genes. One of the
benefits of using an FDAome library is the direct correspondence of
target genes with clinically available drugs. We therefore tested these
drugs for validation in fully annotated PDXs. These efforts, in
association with systematic profiling of the CMS subtypes at the patient
level through adaptation of NanoString technology, may enable us to
stratify CRC patients who will benefit from selective U.S. Food and Drug
Administration-approved drugs and to rapidly design successful
preclinical and clinical trials in CRC patients.


