Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct evidence for a pro-tumor role of APOBEC3A in cancer
initiation and progression in vivo: enhanced mutagenesis and immune
suppression in a novel humanized autochthonous model of pancreatic cancer.


Introduction: The apolipoprotein B editing complex 3 (APOBEC3) family of
enzymes are possible candidates for inducing mutations across a number of
tumors, including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA; Alexandrov et
al, 2013; Roberts et al, 2013). APOBEC3A (hA3A) is one of eight
identified isoforms in humans and known to deaminate cytidines in genomic
ssDNA at a specific sequence motif. Large scale sequencing studies
demonstrate significant enrichment of this signature in a number of human
cancers. Furthermore, hA3A is overexpressed in a variety of solid tumors,
including PDA. Taken together, these data suggest that hA3A may catalyze
point mutations in cancer and drive cancer initiation and progression.
However, direct evidence to support this hypothesis in vivo are lacking.
Here, we utilize a novel genetically engineered mouse model to determine
the precise effects of hA3A on PDA initiation and progression.

Methods: As opposed to humans, mice only contain one APOBEC3 isoform
which has limited to no deaminating activity on genomic DNA. Thus, to
delineate the function of hA3A on PDA initiation and progression, we
exchanged the murine APOBEC3 protein coding sequence for hA3A, leaving
the murine 5’ and 3’ endogenous regulatory sequences intact to ensure
physiologic expression (murine APOBEC3 and hA3A reflect similar
expression kinetics during PDA development). We then bred these mice to a
well-established GEMM of PC (Rhim et al., Cell 2012) to yield
LSL-KrasG12D; p53fl/+; Pdx1-Cre; RosaLSL-YFP; hA3A+/- (KPCY;hA3A) mice.
We compared these mice to KPCY mice. We genotyped tumors from both
cohorts with Ilumina exome capture sequencing with variant calling by a
custom caller based on VarScan.

Results: All KPCY; hA3A (n=11) mice developed tumors and expired
significantly faster compared to KPCY (n=18) controls (3.9 v. 7.0 mo;
pResults: All KPCY; hA3A (n=11) mice developed tumors and expired
significantly faster compared to KPCY (n=18) controls (3.9 v. 7.0 mo;
p<0.01). One third of the KPCY; hA3A mice developed macrometastatic
disease compared to 3/12 in the KPCY control. Interestingly, KPCY; hA3A
tumors contained dramatic desmoplasia, far surpassing the KPCY controls.
Moreover, comparative RNAseq and histologic analyses revealed dramatic
differences in the number and distribution of various T-cell and B-cell
subsets. Finally, we found that KPCY; hA3A mice contained significantly
more single nucleotide variants compared to KPCY controls (51.3 v. 8.4;
pResults: All KPCY; hA3A (n=11) mice developed tumors and expired
significantly faster compared to KPCY (n=18) controls (3.9 v. 7.0 mo;
p<0.01). One third of the KPCY; hA3A mice developed macrometastatic
disease compared to 3/12 in the KPCY control. Interestingly, KPCY; hA3A
tumors contained dramatic desmoplasia, far surpassing the KPCY controls.
Moreover, comparative RNAseq and histologic analyses revealed dramatic
differences in the number and distribution of various T-cell and B-cell
subsets. Finally, we found that KPCY; hA3A mice contained significantly
more single nucleotide variants compared to KPCY controls (51.3 v. 8.4;
p<0.05).

Conclusions: These data show for the first time that physiologic
expression of hA3A in vivo leads to increased mutations, altered immune
response and more aggressive cancer. Future studies will address the
precise mechanisms by which hA3A catalyzes tumorigenesis using our novel
gain of function model. Furthermore, our data suggest that incorporating
our humanized A3A germline allele may provide a more genomically
recapitulative model of cancer.


