Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining enzymatic DNA fragmentation with NGS library
construction results in high quality, high yield libraries.


The use of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) data has been instrumental in
advancing our understanding of human genetics, identifying the molecular
events that contribute to human disease, and supporting drug development
targeted towards precision medicine. Continued advancement relies on
overcoming the limitations and bottlenecks associated with NGS. In this
work, we have focused on NGS library preparation, where the requirement
for expensive equipment and numerous steps can lead to sample loss,
errors, and limited throughput. Specifically, we have developed a library
construction method that integrates enzymatic DNA fragmentation into the
workflow and combines fragmentation with end repair and dA-tailing in a
single step. Integrating these reactions eliminates the need for costly
equipment to shear DNA and reduces the number of sample transfers and
losses. Adaptor ligation is also carried out in the same tube, after
which a single cleanup step is performed. For low input samples, PCR
amplification is performed prior to sequencing. This method is compatible
with a broad range of DNA inputs and insert sizes. Libraries generated
using this streamlined method with inputs ranging from 500 pg to 500 ng
of intact DNA show no significant difference in coverage uniformity or
sequence quality metrics, compared to libraries generated with
mechanically sheared DNA. Similarly, libraries generated to contain
insert sizes that range from 150bp to 1kb display no significant
difference in sequence quality from each other or from those generated
with mechanically sheared DNA. Finally, this streamlined method generates
libraries of substantially higher yields than those generated using
mechanically fragmented DNA, allowing the use of lower DNA inputs and
fewer PCR cycles. The ability to generate high quality NGS libraries from
intact DNA without the need for costly equipment and numerous cleanup or
liquid transfer steps substantially reduces the time, cost and errors
associated with library construction. In addition, these advances will
enable greater use and adoption of NGS technologies in clinical and
diagnostic settings.


