Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A distinct role of RhoB in simvastatin-induced cytotoxicity in
breast cancer cells.


Purpose Statins, a class of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A
(HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors, are initially developed as
cholesterol-lowering drugs by inhibiting the mevalonate pathway. They
have recently gained attention for their potential anticancer properties,
but the mechanisms of their anticancer effects remain elusive. This study
aims to investigate the antiproliferative effects of statins in breast
cancer cell lines.

Methods We screened a panel of breast cancer cell lines (Estrogen
receptor positive (ER+): CAMA1, MCF7, T47D, ZR-75-1 and Hcc1428; triple
negative (TNBC): MDA MB231, MDA MB468, BT549, Hs578T and Hcc1806) and
assessed the sensitivity of these cells to simvastatin in relation to
their hormone receptor status using cell proliferation assay. Next, to
elucidate the mechanisms underlying simvastatin sensitivity, we evaluated
the (i) expression of key enzymes in the mevalonate pathway using qPCR
and western blot analysis and (ii) the role of sterol biosynthesis
metabolites by exogenously adding these compounds and testing their
effects on simvastatin-induced cytotoxicity. Finally, we performed
functional assays following siRNA knockout to identify the key small
GTPase involved.

Results We found TNBC cell lines to be more susceptible to simvastatin
compared to ER+ cell lines (mean IC50 of 7.98μM [95%CI 2.75-13.22]
versus 41.74μM [95%CI 6.71-76.78]). Simvastatin treatment induced robust
apoptosis in TNBC but not the ER+ cells. There was no significant
difference in mRNA expression of HMGCR, HMGCS, MVK, MVD, IDI1 enzymes
involved in the mevalonate pathway between TNBC and ER+ breast cancer
cell lines. Supplementation with geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate but not
farnesyl pyrophosphate, inhibited simvastatin-mediated cell death,
suggesting the involvement of geranylgeranylated proteins such as Rho
family of GTPases. Here, we identified RhoB to be a key player in
simvastatin-mediated cytotoxicity. RhoB showed a significant increase in
transcript and protein levels in response to simvastatin treatment in the
TNBC cells. Interestingly, the increase in protein expression was not
associated with an increase in its prenylation as the accumulation of
RhoB was observed only in the cytosolic fraction. Finally, silencing RhoB
was able to abrogate the cytotoxic effects mediated by simvastatin in
TNBC cells.

Conclusions Taken together, our data reveals a critical role of RhoB in
the anticancer activity of simvastatin, which appears to be exclusive to
TNBC cells suggesting that HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors may provide new
therapeutic strategies for TNBC treatment.


