Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of HER2/β-catenin signaling by penfluridol overcomes
resistance to paclitaxel in breast cancer.


Paclitaxel is a first line treatment option for patients with metastatic
breast cancer. However, inherited or acquired resistance is a limiting
factor for therapy with paclitaxel. The mechanism of paclitaxel
resistance remains obscured and hinders the development of therapeutic
strategies. HER2 is an oncogene overexpressed in about 30% of breast
cancer patients and plays role in drug resistance leading to poor
prognosis. To identify more clinically relevant mechanism of paclitaxel
resistance, we developed resistance to paclitaxel in MCF-7 and 4T1 breast
cancer cell lines. The continuous exposure to paclitaxel for several
months resulted in >1000 fold resistance in MCF-7 cells and >100 fold
resistance in 4T1 cells. Western blot analysis showed enhanced expression
of HER2, β-catenin and downstream molecules such as TCF/LEF, c-Myc,
Cyclin D in these resistant cells. We have recently demonstrated that
penfluridol, an anti-psychotic drug, suppresses the growth of triple
negative metastatic breast cancer cells (Ranjan and Srivastava, Cancer
Res 2016; 76(4): 877-890), giving us the rationale to evaluate whether
penfluridol inhibits HER2 and β-catenin signaling. Our current results
showed that penfluridol treatment not only suppressed HER2 but also
inhibited β-catenin expression. We also observed down regulation of
LEF-1/TCF, Cyclin D1 and c-Myc expression with penfluridol treatment in
paclitaxel sensitive as well as resistant cells resulting in reduced
survival of cells. Our results further showed that penfluridol treatment
synergistically enhanced the growth suppressive effects of paclitaxel in
MCF-7 and 4T1 paclitaxel resistant cells. Treatment of paclitaxel
resistant 4T1 cells with 1.5μM of penfluridol in combination with 50nM
of paclitaxel resulted in 65% of cell growth suppression whereas either
treatment alone was not cytotoxic at all. We also observed an enhanced
down regulation of proteins involved in paclitaxel resistance such as
HER2, β-catenin, c-Myc and Cyclin D1 as well as increase in apoptotic
markers such as Cl-PARP and Cl-Caspase3 when paclitaxel treatment was
combined with penfluridol in resistant cells. Taken together, our results
provided a novel insight into the mechanism of resistance to paclitaxel
and also opened new avenues for application of penfluridol in cancer
therapeutics. Further detailed mechanistic and in vivo studies are in
progress. (Supported in part by RO1 grant CA129038, awarded by National
Cancer Institute, NIH).


