Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole exome sequencing of circulating tumor DNA highlights spatial
and temporal tumor heterogeneity in neuroblastoma.


Background : Liquid biopsies are revolutionary tools to monitor
tumour-specific genetic alterations in sequential samples. In
neuroblastoma (NB), significant levels of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA)
in the bloodstream enable the detection of tumour cell-specific markers
including MYCN amplification or activating ALK mutations. As clonal
evolution plays a role in NB progression, analysis of a single genetic
marker will be insufficient for ctDNA-based disease follow-up. Methods :
To gain further insights into mechanisms of clonal evolution in NB, we
isolated ctDNA from plasma at diagnosis (n=19) and during follow-up
(final time-point: partial or complete remission (PR/CR), n=7;
progressive disease (PD), n=9) for 19 NB patients for whom primary NB and
matched germline DNA whole exome/whole genome sequencing data (WES/WGS)
was available. CtDNA (7-100ng) was subjected to Illumina 100PE WES
following modified library construction and capture approaches to account
for small ctDNA molecules (target depth 100x). SNVs/mutations were called
using GATK-UnifiedGenotyper, GATK-HaplotypeCaller and Samtools.
Copy-number profiles were generated using Varscan and DNAcopy. Results :
CtDNA WES yielded satisfactory depth in all cases. At diagnosis, a
majority of observed SNVs were common to the primary NB and corresponding
diagnostic ctDNA of a given patient (mean number of SNVs: 19; range 9-69)
with MAF (mutated allele fractions) corresponding to the estimated ctDNA
content in the total cell free DNA. At diagnosis, few SNVs specific to
the NB (mean: 6; range 0-18) or specific to ctDNA (mean:22; range 9-69)
were observed, suggesting spatial heterogeneity with different ctDNA
amounts released by different clones. In PR or CR ctDNA samples, lower
numbers of SNVs with lower MAFs were detected (mean: 11, range 0-12).
Interestingly, PD ctDNA samples harboured an increase in MAFs and a
higher numbers of SNVs, with additional relapse-specific SNVs (mean: 22;
range 0-55) targeting, amongst others, the protein kinase A signaling
pathway. Analysis of additional ctDNA samples obtained between diagnosis
and relapse (2-6 samples/patient) using deep sequencing techniques
demonstrated a disappearance of SNVs coinciding with response to therapy,
and re-appearance of SNVs at the time of tumor progression. Discussion
and Conclusion: CtDNA WES proves to be an extremely powerful tool to
study spatial and temporal heterogeneity in NB, providing further proof
of the importance of clonal evolution in NB progression. Full
characterization of ctDNA, which might represent more aggressive clones,
might orient targeted treatment approaches.


