Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DFMO synergizes with BET inhibitors targeting ODC and MYCN to
impede neuroblastoma cell proliferation and tumor initiation.


Background: Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial solid
pediatric tumor and is associated with MYCN amplification. MYCN is a
regulator of ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), the rate-limiting enzyme of
polyamine biosynthesis. Inhibition of this pathway in MYCN-amplified NB
tumors has been shown to be a target for treatment.
Alpha-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) inhibits ODC and is currently being
used in a Phase II clinical trial for NB. BET inhibitors JQ1 and OTX-015
have been shown to be effective against MYCN-amplified cancers; it is
hypothesized that they downregulate MYCN as well as cancer stem cell
(CSC) signaling. We propose that inhibiting MYCN with a BET inhibitor,
coupled with inhibition of ODC with DFMO, will result in enhanced
inhibition of NB growth and tumor-initiating properties.

Methods: Single and combination drug treatments were conducted on
BE(2)-C, SMS-KCNR, CHLA90, and one patient-derived cell line.
CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay was used to determine cell
viability in 96-well plates. IC50 values were calculated with a
four-parameter variable-slope dose response curve using GraphPad Prism
v.5 software. Drug combination studies were conducted in MYCN amplified
tumors BE(2)-C and SMS-KCNR using ray designs to evaluate for synergism.
IncuCyte ZOOM Live-Cell Imaging system was used for kinetic monitoring of
cytotoxicity and apoptosis in NB cells. Western blots measured protein
levels of apoptosis markers (cleaved caspase 3 and cleaved PARP) and CSC
markers (Nanog, Sox2, NF-kB, CXCR4, Lin28B, and MYCN). Neurosphere assays
were used to evaluate tumor initiation via sphere formation.

Results: Cell viability of MYCN amplified NB showed an IC50 range of
1.48-1.69 μM for JQ1 and 839.3 nM-2.36 μM for OTX-015; MYCN
non-amplified NB showed an IC50 range of 4.22-11.58 μM for JQ1 and
2.99-11.03 uM for OTX-015. Combination treatment in MYCN NB had a
synergistic effect, based on Loewe-additivity as the null hypothesis, for
cell viability suppression by ray design experiments for BE(2)-C and
SMS-KCNR. Western blots showed greater expression of apoptosis markers
and decreased expression of CSC markers in combination relative to single
drug treatments. A greater than 50% decrease in neurosphere formation
with combination treatment in BE(2)-C, SMS-KCNR, and the patient cell
line provides evidence for reduced CSC activity. IncuCyte imaging showed
an increase in cell death with time post-treatment.

Conclusion: The combination of DFMO with BET inhibitors has a synergistic
effect in treating MYCN amplified NBs as shown by a decrease in cell
viability. This combination targets CSC pathways and decreases
tumor-initiating ability. Given the lack of effective treatment options
for children with relapsed or refractory high-risk NB, this combination
may be a promising novel therapy.


