Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serologic markers of infection and risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in
a pooled prospective study of three Chinese cohorts.


Background: Infections with some viruses, including HIV and Epstein-Barr
Virus (EBV) in immunocompromised individuals, are known risk factors for
specific subtypes of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Epidemiological studies
have also provided evidence that hepatitis viruses, and EBV in
immunocompetent individuals, may also be associated with NHL. There are
limited population-based prospective studies with pre-diagnostic blood
samples that have comprehensively evaluated viral biomarkers and NHL risk
in East Asians, in whom the descriptive characteristics of NHL and the
prevalence of certain viral infections differ compared to Western
populations.

Methods: We conducted a nested case-control study of 214 NHL cases and
214 controls from three population-based prospective cohorts in Shanghai
and Singapore. Cases and controls were individually matched by age, sex,
date of blood draw, and cohort. Antibodies to 21 antigens associated with
the evaluated viruses (herpesviruses, Hepatitis B (HBV) and C (HCV), and
polyomaviruses) were measured in plasma/serum using fluorescent
bead-based multiplex serology. Conditional logistic regression was used
to evaluate associations between viral antibody levels measured as median
fluorescence intensity and NHL.

Results: For herpesviruses, an increased risk of NHL was observed for
higher compared to lower early antigen diffuse (EA-D) (OR = 2.2, 95% CI =
1.2-4.1) and BZLF1-encoded replication activator (ZEBRA) (OR = 2.2, 95%
CI = 1.0-4.9) antibodies (rsp = +0.5) associated with EBV. An increased
risk of NHL was also observed among those seropositive for the
intermediate-early 1A antigen (OR = 1.9, 95% CI = 1.0-3.3; rsp with EBV
antibodies = +0.2) associated with human herpesvirus-6 (HHV-6). For
hepatitis viruses, a significant NHL risk was observed for higher
compared to lower antibodies to the HBV-associated core (HBc) antigen (OR
= 1.8, 95% CI = 1.1-3.1), and this risk was particularly apparent in
those with the highest HBc and EBV EA-D antibody levels (OR = 4.2, 95% CI
= 1.4-12.7) compared to the lowest. Seropositivity to HCV was low (1.4%
cases; 0.9% controls). No associations with NHL risk were observed for
individual polyomaviruses (BK, JC, TSV, MCV). Discussion: Our study of
serologic markers of infection and NHL risk in three prospective
population-based studies of Chinese individuals suggests a role of
specific viral agents in lymphomagenesis. The findings for EBV are
consistent with some data from Western cohorts and indicate that EBV
reactivation may be associated with NHL risk in the Chinese general
population. HHV-6 is a lymphotropic virus that has been observed in some
retrospective studies to be associated with lymphoma, but to our
knowledge has not previously been associated with NHL prospectively in
the general population. HBV is endemic to regions of East Asia, including
China, and our data suggest that high levels of antibodies to the HBc
antigen may be a marker for NHL risk.


