Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fucosylation inhibits invadopodia formation and melanoma invasion.


Background: Melanoma is the most deadly skin cancer and metastasis is
essentially responsible for all melanoma related death. Recently, fucose
treatment has been shown to inhibit melanoma cell migration and invasion
in vitro, and melanoma metastasis in a mouse model, suggesting that
protein fucosylation could be exploited to prevent or suppress melanoma
metastasis. Invadopodia are proteolytic actin-rich protrusions used by
metastatic melanoma cells to degrade extracellular matrix and to promote
invasion and metastasis. In this study, we investigated the mechanisms by
which fucosylation regulate melanoma invasion and invadopodia formation

Method: The melanoma cells were treated with L-fucose-supplemented medium
or infected with fucokinase-expressing lentivirus to increase protein
fucosylation. shRNAs were also employed to knockdown fucokinase and to
inhibit fucosylation in melanoma cells. The effects of fucosylation on
invadopodia formation and extracellular matrix degradation were
determined by phalloidin staining and degradation of fluorescently
labeled gelatin thin film.

Results: Here, we show that the addition of L-fucose to complete media
inhibits the ability of melanoma cells to form invadopodia in a
dose-dependent manner. The overexpression of hFUK in WM793 cells showed a
similar result as L-fucose treatment, where invadopodia formation was
significantly reduced. In addition, we observed a significant decrease in
the percentage of cells that have invadopodia during L-fucose
supplementation or hFUK overexpression. In an invadopodia precursor
assay, the hFUK-overexpressing cell line exhibited delayed FBS-stimulated
invadopodia formation.

Conclusions: Our data suggest that fucose or the overexpression of hFUK
reduces melanoma invasion by inhibiting invadopodia formation. Given that
invadopodia formation was hindered within an hour after stimulation, we
believe that invadopodia initiation is affected by increased
fucosylation, resulting in fewer invadopodia and slower extracellular
matrix degradation.


