Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic and epigenetic characteristics of esophageal cancer
tissues with microbiome fusobacterium nucleatum.


Background: Research into the microbiome is a rapidly advancing field in
human cancers. The gut microbiome has recently been shown to play an
important role in health, as well as in diseases such as obesity,
inflammatory bowel disease, diabetes, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease,
and several types of cancers. Fusobacterium nucleatum is a component of
the human microbiome that primarily inhabits the oral cavity. It causes
periodontal disease and has also been implicated in the development of
human cancers. We have recently reported that Fusobacterium nucleatum in
esophageal cancer tissues was associated with shorter survival,
suggesting a potential role as a prognostic biomarker. In addition, our
KEGG enrichment analysis using microarray data showed that Fusobacterium
nucleatum might also contribute to aggressive tumor behavior through
activation of chemokines such as CCL20. Nonetheless, molecular features
of Fusobacterium nucleatum-positive esophageal cancers have been still
unknown. Methods: Using 325 esophageal cancers, we detected Fusobacterium
nucleatum DNA in 74 tumors (23%). We assessed other genetic and
epigenetic events including mutations in KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA gene, p53
expression, phosphorylated-AKT expression, LINE-1 methylation level
(global DNA methylation level), IGF2 DMR0 methylation, MGMT methylation,
and MLH1 methylation. Results: The LINE-1 methylation levels of
Fusobacterium nucleatum-positive tumors was significantly lower compared
with that of Fusobacterium nucleatum-negative tumors (PBackground:
Research into the microbiome is a rapidly advancing field in human
cancers. The gut microbiome has recently been shown to play an important
role in health, as well as in diseases such as obesity, inflammatory
bowel disease, diabetes, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, and several
types of cancers. Fusobacterium nucleatum is a component of the human
microbiome that primarily inhabits the oral cavity. It causes periodontal
disease and has also been implicated in the development of human cancers.
We have recently reported that Fusobacterium nucleatum in esophageal
cancer tissues was associated with shorter survival, suggesting a
potential role as a prognostic biomarker. In addition, our KEGG
enrichment analysis using microarray data showed that Fusobacterium
nucleatum might also contribute to aggressive tumor behavior through
activation of chemokines such as CCL20. Nonetheless, molecular features
of Fusobacterium nucleatum-positive esophageal cancers have been still
unknown. Methods: Using 325 esophageal cancers, we detected Fusobacterium
nucleatum DNA in 74 tumors (23%). We assessed other genetic and
epigenetic events including mutations in KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA gene, p53
expression, phosphorylated-AKT expression, LINE-1 methylation level
(global DNA methylation level), IGF2 DMR0 methylation, MGMT methylation,
and MLH1 methylation. Results: The LINE-1 methylation levels of
Fusobacterium nucleatum-positive tumors was significantly lower compared
with that of Fusobacterium nucleatum-negative tumors (P<0.0001). In
addition, Fusobacterium nucleatum was significantly associated with
PIK3CA wild type (P=0.010). There was no relationship of Fusobacterium
nucleatum with KRAS, BRAF mutation, p53 expression, p-AKT expression,
IGF2 DMR0 methylation, MGMT methylation, or MLH1 methylation. Conclusion:
Fusobacterium nucleatum was related with LINE-1 hypomethylation and
PIK3CA wild type. Our findings may shed lights on understanding the
mechanism by which Fusobacterium nucleatum affects aggressive tumor
behavior. .


