Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted deep sequencing of colorectal tumor tissues to study
associations of tumor subtypes with germline genetic, lifestyle, and
environmental risk factors.


The Genetics and Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO) in
collaboration with the Colorectal Cancer Family Registry (CCFR) aims to
identify genetic variants and environmental risk factors that impact
colorectal cancer (CRC). Over 30 studies from North America, Europe, and
Australia participate in GECCO. These studies have collected clinical,
epidemiological, and survival data, as well as blood and tumor
biospecimens, for over 80,000 CRC cases and controls.

The current study aims to conduct targeted deep sequencing of tumors and
matching normal DNA to identify recurrent and novel somatic and germline
variants in 4,200 CRC cases. To achieve this goal, an AmpliSeq targeted
sequencing panel of 1.12 Mbp was constructed to sequence the coding
regions of 190 significantly mutated genes identified from whole exome
sequencing datasets generated by the Nurses’ Health Study and Health
Professional’s Follow-up Study, and The Cancer Genome Atlas. The panel
also covers coding regions of 15 genes with germline high penetrance
mutations in CRC, 54 regions to detect CRC-related copy number
alterations (CNAs), and microsatellite and homopolymer repeat regions to
identify defective DNA mismatch repair. Primers were also included to
detect Fusobacterium nucleatum DNA in tumor biopsies, as F. nucleatum is
thought to promote CRC carcinogenesis.

Sequencing of the DNA libraries on Illumina HiSeq 2500 produced a mean
coverage of greater than 500X for tumor DNA and 100X for normal DNA, with
>85% of the bases covered at the target at 50x. So far, targeted
sequencing of >1,500 DNA samples from CRC tumors and normal tissues has
identified recurrent and novel somatic mutations, germline genetic
variants, and hypermutation status of the tumors due to defective DNA
mismatch repair or pathogenic mutations in the POLE gene. Targeted
sequencing has also allowed quantification of the F. nucleatum DNA in
tumor biopsies; the results were validated by a multiplex QPCR assay.

At the AACR annual meeting, we will present targeted sequencing results
generated from the first two GECCO-participating studies (n=1,300 cases).
These data will be valuable for future association testing of somatic
mutations, CNAs, hypermutation status, and F. nucleatum with germline
genetic variants, lifestyle, and environmental risk factors and survival.
This large study will allow development of better strategies for
diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of CRC.


