Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-omic profiling of prostate cancer evolution in 39 patients.


The pathological molecular events occurring during prostate cancer (PCa)
progression have not been comprehensively investigated. It remains
elusive how genomic aberration is transcribed into transcriptomic
abnormalities that eventually influence proteins in the progression of
PCa. We aimed to study the biological information flow along the central
dogma and to identify critical molecular mechanisms in PCa evolution.

We performed comprehensive, multi-omics analyses of 105 prostate samples,
consisting of both benign prostatic hyperplasia regions and malignant
tumors from 39 PCa patients. Patients were from different risk groups,
including 12 low-grade (Gleason score < 7), 17 intermediate (Gleason
score =7), and 10 high-grade (Gleason score > 7) PCas. The omics data
comprised exome sequencing, copy number variation (CNV) analysis, RNAseq,
quantitative proteomics, and tissue morphology. Furthermore, peripheral
blood samples from each patient were genomically profiled as reference.

We detected 806 somatic gene mutations from the 105 tissue samples, out
of which 18 genes were mutated in three samples and 129 genes were
mutated in two samples. More mutations were detected in patients with
higher Gleason scores. We also found the copy numbers of 914 genes to be
substantially up- or down-regulated in at least one sample. For RNAseq,
we determined genes with either strictly monotonically increasing or
decreasing expression from normal to intermediate and high-grade PCa per
patient and per patient group, based on the regularized log-transformed
read counts. Moreover, we collected tissue punches and analyzed each
punch in technical duplicates by PCT-SWATH and used OpenSWATH software
for data interpretation. We obtained precise quantification for several
thousand proteins. The differential analysis revealed increasing and
decreasing patterns of proteins of interest. Furthermore, we used network
smoothing to determine overlapping molecular aberrations by comparing
shortlisted DNA-mRNA-protein pathways.

By integrating proteogenomics with additional omic information, we
demonstrated that molecular changes in PCa at genomic level are buffered
at transcriptional level, and further condensed to a few modular changes
in protein networks. We also found high correlation between pathway
activities with tumor progression and heterogeneity. Our multi-omic
profiling further revealed PCa evolution by using molecular alterations
at different layers with associated mutant allele frequencies and
uncovered several protein modules as key events in the progression of
prostate cancer.


