Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stable aneuploid cells are more sensitive to TTK inhibition than
chromosome instable cell lines.


Inhibition of the spindle assembly checkpoint kinase TTK causes
chromosome mis-segregation and tumor cell death. High levels of TTK
correlate with chromosomal instability (CIN), which can lead to
aneuploidy. To investigate the potential relationship of CIN and
sensitivity to TTK inhibition, we performed CIN analysis in human cancer
cell lines from different tumor tissue origins and with different
relative sensitivity to the selective TTK inhibitor NTRC 0066-0 [1]. By
time lapse microscopy we observed that treatment with TTK inhibitor
resulted in overriding of the mitotic checkpoint, irrespective of cell
line sensitivity. Aneuploid but chromosomal stable cell lines were more
sensitive than cell lines that already displayed high levels of CIN. In
sensitive cell lines, treatment with TTK inhibitor induced acute
chromosome mis-segregration. On the contrary, in populations of cells
that already showed high levels of CIN, there was only a small additional
fraction of cells mis-segregating their chromosomes. The resistant cell
lines were all hypo-triploid instable cell lines, which are thought to be
derived from cells with a double diploid genome (tetraploid cells) that
have lost certain chromosomes. Next, we studied the effect of NTRC 0066-0
on three cell lines evolved via tetraploidization of the colorectal
adenocarcinoma cell line HCT 116 referred as tetraploids. The tetraploids
have low levels of CIN and were recently shown to display low level
multidrug resistance against various cytotoxic agents and several
targeted drugs. Proliferation of the tetraploids was inhibited with the
same potency as the diploid parental cell line by three TTK inhibitors.
Parental and tetraploids were also equally sensitive to reversine, a
compound that is often used as a TTK reference inhibitor but whose
selectivity has been disputed. In surface plasmon resonance binding
experiments we measured a 800 times more potent binding of reversine to
TTK over Aurora B. In a comparative cancer cell panel profiling study
with 122 different anti-cancer agents [2], reversine clustered together
with TTK inhibitors, demonstrating that in cells reversine acts as a TTK
inhibitor. Finally, we show that NTRC 0066-0 inhibits the proliferation
of primary human patient-derived colorectal cancer organoids with
potencies similar to that of immortalized cancer cell lines. In contrast,
treatment with TTK inhibitor did not reduce the viability T cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia cell samples, which are non-proliferating cells
and very sensitive to classic chemotherapeutic agents, such as
daunorubicin. These data is consistent with the function of TTK as a
spindle assembly checkpoint kinase that is only active in proliferating
cells. Consequently, TTK inhibitor therapy is expected to spare
non-dividing cells, whereas it may be used to target stable aneuploid
tumors. [1] Maia et al. (2015) Annals of Oncology; [2] Uitdehaag et al.
(2016) Molecular Cancer Therapeutics.


