Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pan-ERBB inhibitor blocks tumor growth and metastasis.


The Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor family of transmembrane tyrosine
kinases (ErbB) is over-expressed, correlates with poor prognosis and
negatively correlates with disease free survival in many cancer types.
EGFR, HER2 and ErbB3 are known to be highly expressed and active, and
have been targeted by both kinase inhibitors and monoclonal antibodies,
both with disappointing results. Importantly, though, these therapeutics
only target either a single receptor or the kinase domain alone. It is
well known that these receptors function as heterodimers, and blocking of
a single receptor will only promote the hetero-dimerization of the
remaining family members. Furthermore, while the tyrosine kinase activity
of these receptors is well known, less appreciated are the
kinase-independent mechanisms by which they drive cancer progression.
These include the modulation of calcium signaling and mitochondrial and
nuclear translocation and activity as transcriptional co-factors. The
highly conserved juxta-membrane domain (JD) of the ErbB receptors
regulates these kinase-independent functions, as well as receptor homo-
and hetero-dimerization. Upon ligand binding, the JD forms anti-parallel
dimers between the receptors, resulting in receptor dimerization and
intracellular trafficking. These protein-protein interactions result in
cell growth, survival, migration and invasion.

We have previously shown that peptides mimicking this JD can act in a
dominant-negative fashion, promoting the formation of non-functional ErbB
dimers (consisting of EGFR, HER2 and ErbB3) that induce rapid,
ErbB-dependent cell death. Using Cell Penetrating Peptides synthesized in
tandem with the JD, these peptides (called EJ1) rapidly cross the plasma
membrane, bind the ErbB receptors, and induce cell death in cell lines
and PDX lines grown in culture. Death results from a combination of
apoptotic and necrotic mechanisms, due to inactivation of mitochondrial
function and calcium signaling (as well as kinase inhibition). Although
EJ1 peptides display rapid ErbB-dependent cell death in vitro, they are
rapidly cleared in vivo, limiting their efficacy. To stabilize in vivo
activity, the active peptide (which is an alpha-helix) was stabilized
with hydrocarbon staples. Based on this, we hypothesized that SAH-EJ1
would be an effective targeted therapeutic for the treatment of
ErbB-dependent cancer. We therefore tested SAH-EJ1 in 3 different
ErbB-dependent models of cancer, including EGFRvIII-driven glioblastoma,
a PDX model of basal-like breast cancer with EGFR and ErbB3
amplification, and a PDX model of lung cancer with EGFR kinase domain
mutations driven by Erlotinib treatment. In each of these models,
substantial inhibition of tumor growth was observed, as well as extended
survival.


