Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thymoquinone inhibits elongation factor 2 kinase signaling axis by
inducing tumor suppressor miR-603 in triple negative breast cancer cells.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), is a highly heterogeneous and
aggressive subtype of breast cancer (BC), which poses a significant
clinical challenge. TNBC constitutes about 15-20 % of BC cases, and is
characterized by lack of estrogen (ER), progesterone (PR) and human
epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2) receptors. Thus, patients cannot benefit
from targeted therapies such as anti-estrogens (eg.Tamoxifen) and
anti-HER2 (eg.trastuzumab) treatments. Therefore, identification of new
molecular targets and treatment strategies are highly warranted to
improve patient outcome. We previously reported that elongation factor 2
kinase (EF-2K) is highly expressed in TNBC cell lines and is associated
with poor patient survival and prognosis. Furthermore, in vivo targeting
of EF-2K by siRNA nano-therapeutics inhibited cell proliferation,
migration/invasion, and significantly decreased tumor growth in 2
different orthotopic TNBC mouse models (MDA MB-231 and MDA MB-436).
Collectively, our work suggests that EF-2K is an excellent novel
therapeutic target in TNBC. In search of a potential safe and effective
EF-2K inhibitor, we identified Thymoquinone (TQ), a dietary natural
compound, known to have diverse anti-cancerous properties in several in
vitro and in vivo models, including TNBC. However, the mechanism by which
TQ mediates its effects are not well elucidated. Our current study is the
first to demonstrate that TQ inhibits protein and mRNA expression of
EF-2K, as well as its clinically significant downstream targets such as
Src/FAK, PI3K/AKT, and CyclinD1; resulting in a significant decrease in
proliferation, migration/invasion of TNBC cells. To determine the
molecular mechanism by which TQ inhibits EF-2K expression, we
investigated if TQ induces tumor suppressor microRNAs that we identified
to bind to the 3’-UTR of EF-2K. We found that TQ induces miR-603
expression, which we had reported to directly bind and inhibit EF-2K
expression; resulting in decreased TNBC growth and progression, both in
vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, we showed that inhibition of nuclear
factor kappa B (NF-κB) (a well established target for TQ), also induces
miR-603 and inhibits EF-2K expression in TNBC cells. In conclusion, our
study is the first to show that TQ treatment decreases EF-2K expression
through modulating the NF-κB/miR-603 axis; ultimately resulting in
decreased cell proliferation, migration/invasion of TNBC. Our data
suggests a novel molecular mechanism for TQ that represents a potential
therapeutic strategy in inhibiting TNBC tumor growth and progression.


