Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel pro-tumorigenic role for IDO1 in inflammatory
neovascularization.


Small molecule inhibitors of the tryptophan catabolizing enzyme IDO1
(indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1) have shown early promise in clinical
trials as immuno-oncology agents. While the tolerogenic activity of IDO1
has been well established, we have recently identified an additional role
for IDO1 in supporting neovascularization at the regulatory interface
between the inflammatory cytokines IFNγ (interferon γ) and IL6
(interleukin 6). IFNγ is a primary inducer of IDO1, but is also a key
mediator of immune-based tumor suppression, which studies have associated
with its anti-angiogenic activity. Conversely, genetic studies in mice
have clearly established the tumor-promoting role of IDO1, suggesting
that it may act in a negative feedback capacity. Targeted disruption of
the Ido1 gene in mice resulted in enhanced resistance to lung tumor and
metastasis development. This corresponded with attenuated induction of
the pro-angiogenic cytokine IL6, which, when provided through ectopic
expression, was able to restore pulmonary metastasis susceptibility to
Ido1-/- mice. These initial findings led us to hypothesize that IDO1
might contribute to cancer promotion by countering the anti-neovascular
effect of IFNγ, possibly through IDO1-potentiated elevation of IL6.
Testing this hypothesis in mouse models of oxygen-induced retinopathy and
pulmonary metastasis, we determined that loss of IDO1 did indeed result
in reduced neovascularization in conjunction with impaired metastasis
outgrowth, effects that were completely reversed by the concurrent
elimination of IFNγ. Loss of IL6 was likewise associated with
IFNγ-dependent reductions in neovascularization and impaired metastasis
outgrowth, as predicted. Having established a novel role for IDO1 in
inflammatory neovascularization, current investigations are focused on
the underlying molecular and cellular mechanisms involved. At the
molecular level, one of the consequences of tryptophan catabolism by IDO1
can be to trigger the ISR (integrated stress response) through activation
of the GCN2/CHOP pathway that has previously been linked to the
downstream induction of IL6. Thus far, data collected in both the
oxygen-induced retinopathy and pulmonary metastasis models are consistent
with the ISR being the relevant downstream signaling pathway from IDO1 in
this biological context. At the cellular level, we have detected the
incorporation of non-endothelial, IDO1-positive cells into the vessels
that comprise the neovascular tufts, implicating IDO1 in the process of
vasculogenesis. These insights into this unrecognized aspect of IDO1
biology are likely to have important ramifications for IDO1 inhibitor
development, not only in cancer where clinical trials are currently
ongoing, but in other disease indications involving neovascularization as
well.


