Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant nuclear expression of GSK-3beta in human head and neck
carcinoma.


Background: Recurrent/metastatic head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(SCCHN) and salivary gland malignancies are difficult to treat with
limited standard of care options at the present time. Glycogen Synthase
Kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta), a serine/threonine protein kinase, has been
implicated as a potential therapeutic target in human cancer. Our in vivo
studies demonstrated that our novel GSK-3 inhibitors significantly
potentiated the effects of conventional chemotherapy in patient-derived
xenograft models of glioblastoma and breast cancer leading to regression
of tumors. In order to develop a rationale to test our novel GSK-3
inhibitors in head and neck (H&N) malignancies, we evaluated the
expression pattern of GSK-3beta in human H&N benign tissue and malignant
tumors.

Methods: We used immunohistochemical staining of H&N tumor tissue
Microarray (TMA), 48 total cases (20 benign tissues, 28 malignant), to
study the expression pattern of GSK-3beta. GSK-3beta nuclear accumulation
was defined as positive staining of more than 50% of cancer cell nuclei
throughout the tumor regardless of cytoplasmic staining.

Results: Of the 20 malignant H&N samples (15 SCCHN, 1 nasopharyngeal and
5 other histology), 13 (65%) were found to have aberrant nuclear
accumulation of GSK-3beta. Amongst SCCHN, 73% (11 of 15 samples) had
aberrant nuclear accumulation of GSK-3beta. In contrast, none (0%) of the
11 benign non-salivary H&N tissue showed detectable expression of
GSK-3beta. Of interest, 60% of salivary adenoid cystic carcinoma
specimens and 44% of benign salivary gland tissue showed GSK-3beta
expression.

Conclusions: Our results demonstrate for the first time, that there is
aberrant nuclear expression of GSK-3beta in SCCHN. This finding supports
further exploring of our novel GSK-3beta inhibitor as a potential
therapeutic target for recurrent/metastatic SCCHN and also, as a
potential prognostic and predictive biomarker for risk of recurrent
disease and chemo- or radio-resistance. Its role in salivary gland
malignancies requires further studying.


