Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual-switch TCR: A two-ligand system to control PRAME TCR-modified
T cell proliferation and death using inducible MyD88/CD40 and caspase-9.


T cells engineered to express the α and β chains of antigen-specific T
cell receptors (TCRs) have shown promise as a cancer immunotherapy
treatment; however, durable responses have been limited by poor
persistence of gene-modified T cells. Additionally, severe toxicities,
including patient deaths, have occurred upon infusion of large numbers of
TCR-modified T cells. To enhance T cell persistence while providing a
safeguard against life-threatening toxicity, we developed a dual-switch
αβ TCR platform that uses a rapamycin (Rap)-induced caspase-9 (iRC9)
together with a rimiducid (Rim)-controlled activation switch, inducible
MyD88/CD40 (iMC).

The αβ TCR sequence derived from an HLA-A2-restricted, PRAME-specific T
cell clone was synthesized and placed in-frame with iMC, comprising
signaling domains from MyD88 and CD40 fused to tandem Rim-binding mutant
FKBP12v36 domains to generate the iMC-PRAME TCR. Caspase-9 was fused to
FRB and wild-type FKBP12 domains and cloned in-frame with a selectable
marker, truncated CD19 (ΔCD19), to generate iRC9-ΔCD19 retrovirus. All
modules were separated by 2A polypeptide, bond-skipping sequences.
Activated human T cells were dual-transduced with iMC-PRAME TCR and
iRC9-ΔCD19 viruses and subsequently enriched for CD19 expression using
magnetic selection. iMC and iRC9 were activated by exposing transduced T
cells to 10 nM Rim or Rap, respectively. Proliferation, cytokine
production and cytotoxicity of TCR-modified T cells were assessed in
co-culture assays with U266 (myeloma) and THP-1 (AML) cells in the
presence or absence of inducible ligands.

T cells transduced with iMC-PRAME TCR and iRC9-ΔCD19 showed efficient
and stable expression for TCR and ΔCD19 post-CD19 selection (82±9%
CD3+Vβ1+, 96±2% CD3+CD19+). In coculture assays, dual-switch PRAME
TCR-modified T cells demonstrated specific lysis of HLA-A2+PRAME+ THP-1
and U266 tumor cells compared to an irrelevant TCR
(CMVpp65-specific)-modified T cells with or without iMC activation.
However, Rim exposure induced a 42-fold induction of IL-2 (9±0.3 versus
385±180 pg/ml IL-2) and resulted in 13-fold greater expansion of
TCR-modified T cells. The expression of iRC9 did not interfere with TCR
function, nor with the synergy between TCR and iMC activation.
Furthermore, exposure to Rap triggered rapid apoptosis of dual-switch
TCR-modified T cells (72±5% Annexin-V+ with Rap versus 14±4% without
drug), indicating that the suicide switch is also functional.

iMC is a potent “Go” switch that utilizes rimiducid to provide
costimulation to TCR-engineered T cells. In addition, iRC9 is a novel
rapamycin-inducible suicide switch that can eliminate T cells in case of
severe toxicity. This iMC-enhanced iRC9-incorporating TCR is the first
reported prototype of a dual switch TCR-engineered T cell therapy to
increase efficacy, durability and safety of adoptive T cell therapies.


