Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ZVex® lentiviral vector strongly activates pro-inflammatory,
antigen processing, and anti-viral defense response pathways in
monocyte-derived dendritic cells.


Background: Dendritic cells (DCs) are professional antigen presenting
cells that effectively bridge the innate and adaptive immune responses
and require activation for successful priming of naïve T-cells. We have
developed ZVex, an integration deficient, hybrid lentiviral vector
engineered to target DC-SIGN expressed on immature myeloid DCs for
genetic immunization against tumor antigens. As lentiviruses normally
don't efficiently infect DCs, little is known about the functional effect
of LV transduction of conventional DCs. Here, the effect of DC
transduction with ZVex vectors was studied by gene expression profiling.

Material and Methods: Human moDCs from multiple donors were prepared by
5-day stimulation with IL-4 and GM-CSF and transduced with ZVex-GFP or
control vectors, such as a ZVex with nonfunctional reverse transcriptase
(RT-dead), ZVex particles generated to contain no vector genome (empty
ZVex), and a heat-inactivated ZVex preparation. Cellular RNA was isolated
at different time points from transduced DC cultures and used for gene
expression profiling with Nanostring’s human pan cancer immune panel
(770 genes).

Results: DCs transduced with ZVex vectors displayed statistically
significant up-regulation of genes involved in pro-inflammatory, antigen
processing, and anti-viral defense pathways. Noteworthy among the
up-regulated genes were classical anti-viral response genes like OAS3,
MX1, and interferon stimulated genes like ISG15 and ISG20. Incubation
with the RT-dead mutant vector also led to up-regulation of these genes,
albeit to a much lower extent, suggesting that LV-RNA itself can result
in the activation of these pathways in DCs, though reverse transcription
appears to further potentiate the response. Of note, cells transduced
with empty ZVex, which consists of an intact virion particle but lacks
encapsulated LV RNA, also mediated a low magnitude and breadth of DC
transcriptional activation, possibly via signaling through DC-SIGN.

Conclusions: ZVex incorporates several elements capable of inducing a
potent innate immune activation in DCs. DCs are relatively insensitive to
lentiviral infection, but the use of accessory proteins in ZVex makes DCs
conducive to ZVex transduction and results in the induction of a Type-1
IFN response that seems to be largely dependent on reverse transcription.
In addition, other engineered vector particle components such as
non-reverse transcribed viral RNA, viral structural proteins, and/or
engagement of the DC-SIGN receptor, also contribute to DC activation.


