Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of novel Btk inhibitor, CB988 targering
ibrutinib-resistant Btk C481S mutant.


Introduction: Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) is a member of the Tec
family of cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase. Btk plays a crucial role in the
BCR signaling, essential for B-cell development, and Btk has been
recognized as a validated therapeutic target for B-cell malignancies.
Ibrutinib, the first FDA-approved Btk inhibitor, has been appreciated as
a promising targeted therapy for patients with B‐cell malignancies.
Ibrutinib covalently binds to the Cys481 residue of Btk to inhibit Btk
enzymatic activity, but recent studies suggested that the C481S mutation
in Btk disrupts the irreversible binding of ibrutinib, and resulted in
ibrutinib-resistance in patients. Therefore a non-covalent Btk inhibitor
is highly demanded to overcome ibrutinib resistance. Material and
methods: We produced two conformationally different Btks, an activated
form of Btk (Btk[A]) and an unactivated form of Btk (Btk[U]) by treating
Btk protein with ATP (autophosphorylation) or with Lambda Protein
Phosphatase (dephosphorylation), respectively. To evaluate cellular
potency of Btk inhibitors, phosphorylations of Btk and PLC- ɤ were
analyzed by Western blotting in Ramos cells, a human Burkitt’s lymphoma
cell line. ABC-type DLBCL cell line, OCI-Ly10 was used to evaluate
anti-tumor efficacy of Btk inhibitors. The ibrutinib-resistant Btk[C481S]
mutant was produced to assess efficacy of compounds against the drug
resistant enzyme. Kinase selectivity profiling was performed to confirm
inhibitor selectivity. Results: Based on structure activity relationship
studies, we identified a novel Btk inhibitor, CB988 as a highly selective
non-covalent Btk inhibitor. CB988 exhibited remarkable activity for the
both conformations of Btks with sub-nanomolar enzyme inhibitory potency
in a reversible manner (IC50 = 0.78 and 0.09 nM for Btk[A] and Btk[U],
respectively). These results suggested that CB988 preferentially binds to
an inactive conformation of Btk. In cellular assays, CB988 strongly
reduced Tyr223 phosphorylation of Btk at nano-molar concentration, and
decreased phosphorylation of PLC-ɤ in Ramos cells. Furthermore, CB988
significantly reduced the proliferation of OCI-Ly10 cells. More
importantly, CB988 potently inhibited the ibrutinib-resistant Btk[C481S]
mutant in vitro (IC50 = 0.6 nM), which differs from other covalent Btk
inhibitors. Conclusions: Btk[C481S] mutation have been reported in
ibrutinib relapsed CLL and MCL patients. Novel non-covalent Btk
inhibitor, CB988 strongly inhibited Btk[C481S] mutant enzyme, suggesting
that CB988 has the potential to treat patients who are
relapsed/refractory to ibrutinib.


