Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating the role of recurrent ESR1-CCDC170 fusion in breast
cancer endocrine resistance.


Background: Recurrent gene fusions resulting from chromosome
rearrangements are central to the formation of cancer. Previously, our
lab identified recurrent rearrangements between the estrogen receptor α
(ERα) gene ESR1 and its neighbor gene CCDC170, in ~6-8% of luminal B
tumors, a more aggressive form of ER+ breast cancer that has worse
clinical outcome after endocrine therapy. ESR1-CCDC170 rearrangements
enable the expression of different-sized N-terminally truncated CCDC170
(ΔCCDC170) under ESR1 promoter, such as the E2-E7 or E2-E10 variants in
which exon 2 of ESR1 fused with exon 7 or exon 10 of CCDC170. Consistent
with the behavior of luminal B tumors, ectopic ΔCCDC170 expression in
ER+ breast cancer cells transformed cells to a more aggressive form and
led to reduced endocrine sensitivity in vitro, as well as enhanced
xenograft growth in vivo. In the present study, we examined the role of
ESR1-CCDC170 in breast cancer endocrine resistance in vivo and further
elucidated the potential engaged mechanisms of its actions.

Results: Our in vivo endocrine sensitivity study showed that, while
tamoxifen (Tam) treatment rendered tumor regression in the
vector-expressing T47D xenograft tumors, it made the E2-E7 overexpressing
T47D xenografts static and less likely to regress, whereas the E2-E10
overexpressing xenografts, though grew initially upon Tam treatment,
became cytostatic and showed significant reduction in tumor regression.
Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed a significantly worse progression-free
survival for E2-E7 (pResults: Our in vivo endocrine sensitivity study
showed that, while tamoxifen (Tam) treatment rendered tumor regression in
the vector-expressing T47D xenograft tumors, it made the E2-E7
overexpressing T47D xenografts static and less likely to regress, whereas
the E2-E10 overexpressing xenografts, though grew initially upon Tam
treatment, became cytostatic and showed significant reduction in tumor
regression. Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed a significantly worse
progression-free survival for E2-E7 (p<0.01) and E2-E10 (pResults: Our in
vivo endocrine sensitivity study showed that, while tamoxifen (Tam)
treatment rendered tumor regression in the vector-expressing T47D
xenograft tumors, it made the E2-E7 overexpressing T47D xenografts static
and less likely to regress, whereas the E2-E10 overexpressing xenografts,
though grew initially upon Tam treatment, became cytostatic and showed
significant reduction in tumor regression. Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed
a significantly worse progression-free survival for E2-E7 (p<0.01) and
E2-E10 (p<0.001) overexpressing tumors treated with Tam compared to the
control tumors. These data suggest that ESR1-CCDC170 variants differ in
level of reduced responsivity to Tam, and may render the T47D xenografts
less sensitive or resistant to Tam in vivo. Further studies suggest that
ΔCCDC170 protein preferentially localizes to cytoplasm (different from
wild-type CCDC170 protein enriched in nucleus), physically interacts with
ERα and HER2, and forms homodimers. RPPA analysis showed that silencing
of ESR1-CCDC170 repressed ERα and BCL2 protein levels, as well as
total/phospho-HER2 levels, consistent with the findings of ΔCCDC170
interactions with ERα and HER2. Importantly, analysis of ΔCCDC170
protein sequence revealed a potential high-affinity ATP-binding pocket at
its C-terminus, suggesting that ΔCCDC170 may be directly druggable.

Conclusion: These data suggest a potential role of ESR1-CCDC170 in
mediating breast cancer endocrine responsivity, which may possibly
through cytoplasmic mislocalization of ΔCCDC170 and interactions with
ERα and HER2. Further studies will affirm and elucidate the role of
overexpressed or endogenous ESR1-CCDC170 in breast cancer endocrine
resistance, and pinpoint the precise mechanisms of its oncogenic
function, in order to develop a novel target therapy against it for the
fusion-carrying patient community around the world.


