Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The S-phase checkpoint function of MGMT provides an unexpected
rational route to profoundly increase the efficacy of anticancer
antimetabolites in cell culture and xenograft models.


MGMT is an anti-mutagenic DNA repair protein highly expressed not only in
brain tumors, but also breast cancers, melanoma and colon cancers, and
confers drug resistance. Recently, we showed that human MGMT has
non-repair functions with vital roles in cell cycle; MGMT underwent
PCNA-dependent degradation in the S-phase along with p21cip1 and CDT1
proteins. MGMT inactivation by O6-benzylguanine (BG) or a pool of shRNAs
in asynchronous or G1/S-phase synchronized cells led to the activation of
a checkpoint resulting in a significant inhibition of DNA synthesis and
greatly diminished progression of cells into S-phase. We hypothesized
that the replication stress caused by MGMT inactivation will provide a
means to combine the S-phase specific drugs for synergistic cytotoxicity.
We screened the sensitivity of a panel of colon cancer and glioblastoma
cell lines with this combination using MTT and clonogenic growth assays.
Annexin V/PI and acridine orange/ EtBr cell stainings were used to
quantify apoptosis. MGMT inhibition/depletion significantly reduced the
IC50 (5 to 10-fold) for different antimetabolites (5-FU, gemcitabine,
Ara-C) and enhanced the overall apoptotic cell death (>5-fold).
Nevertheless, the synergistic effects strongly depended on time and
administration schedule of these two agents. Thus, a pretreatment of BG
or MGMT shRNA followed by 5-FU for or a simultaneous treatment of the two
were far less cytotoxic than the antimetabolite first followed by BG or
shRNA as in the post-treatment mode. While the pre or simultaneous MGMT
inhibition significantly prolonged the antimetabolite-induced S-phase
arrest, the BG-post-treatments resulted in the abrogation of
antimetabolite-induced cell cycle block and rapid progression into
premature mitosis and apoptosis. We observed an increased activation of
checkpoint kinases (pChk1 or pChk2) during pre or simultaneous
treatments. In contrast, the post-MGMT inhibition interfered with S-phase
checkpoint activity and had an abnormal CDK2 activation. Finally, we
verified the therapeutic potentiation of antimetabolites by BG using the
HT29-luc2 subcutaneous xenografts developed in nude mice. BG (60mg/Kg),
5-FU (30 mg/Kg), gemcitabine (100 mg/Kg) and Ara-C (40 mg/Kg/dose) were
administered through i.p. route once a week for 7 weeks. Tumor growth
revealed a 50 to 70% more reduction in combination groups
(antimetabolites+BG) compared with drugs alone. No significant changes in
mouse body weight, liver functions, and whole blood counts were noted. A
marked downregulation of ki-67 and increased levels of apoptotic markers
(cleaved caspase-3, cleaved PARP) in was evident in tumor tissues.
Collectively, our data suggest that MGMT inhibition is a rational
strategy not only for alkylating agents but also for antimetabolites as
well (supported by CPRIT RP130266 & RP170207 grants to KSS).


