Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pooled genome-wide association study of pancreatic cancer
susceptibility loci in American Jews.


Jews are estimated to be at increased risk of pancreatic cancer compared
to non-Jews. The higher risk of pancreatic cancer in Jews can be
partially explained by the increased frequency of BRCA1 and BRCA2
mutations in the Ashkenazi Jewish population; however, the remaining
40-70% excess risk of pancreatic cancer in Jews is not explained by other
established non-genetic and genetic risk factors. The genetic origins of
modern Ashkenazi Jews can be traced back to a founder population
bottleneck between the 11th and 15th centuries follow by a rapid
endogamous population expansion, making the Ashkenazi Jewish population a
genetic isolate ideal for exploring genetic contributions to pancreatic
cancer. We conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in a
case-control sample of American Jews, largely Ashkenazi, including 406
pancreatic cancer patients and 2,332 controls, identified in the database
of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP) Pancreatic Cancer Cohort and
Case-Control Consortium I/II (PanScan I/II), Pancreatic Cancer
Case-Control Consortium (PanC4), and Genetic Epidemiology Research on
Adult Health and Aging (GERA) data sets. We then examined those single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with PJews are estimated to be at
increased risk of pancreatic cancer compared to non-Jews. The higher risk
of pancreatic cancer in Jews can be partially explained by the increased
frequency of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in the Ashkenazi Jewish
population; however, the remaining 40-70% excess risk of pancreatic
cancer in Jews is not explained by other established non-genetic and
genetic risk factors. The genetic origins of modern Ashkenazi Jews can be
traced back to a founder population bottleneck between the 11th and 15th
centuries follow by a rapid endogamous population expansion, making the
Ashkenazi Jewish population a genetic isolate ideal for exploring genetic
contributions to pancreatic cancer. We conducted a genome-wide
association study (GWAS) in a case-control sample of American Jews,
largely Ashkenazi, including 406 pancreatic cancer patients and 2,332
controls, identified in the database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
Pancreatic Cancer Cohort and Case-Control Consortium I/II (PanScan I/II),
Pancreatic Cancer Case-Control Consortium (PanC4), and Genetic
Epidemiology Research on Adult Health and Aging (GERA) data sets. We then
examined those single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with P<10-7 in an
expanded sample set, of 539 full- plus part-Jewish pancreatic cancer
patients and 4,117 full- plus part-Jewish controls from the same data
sets. Jewish ancestry was genetically determined using seeded fast
principal component analysis. In our data set, the part-Jewish subjects
had mixed genetic ancestry both from Jews and from non-Jewish
white-Europeans. Among the full Jews, a novel genome-wide significant
association was detected on chromosome 19p12 (rs66562280, OR=1.55, 95%
CI=1.33-1.81, P=2.30x10-8). A suggestive association was detected on
chromosome 19p13.3 (rs2656937, OR=1.53, 95% CI=1.31-1.78, P=9.96x10-8).
Similar associations were seen for these SNPs among the full- plus
part-Jews. No SNPs meeting the quality control filter inclusion criteria
were found in the full- plus part-Jewish subjects to be significant at
the P=10-7 level. Overall, we identified in Jews one novel susceptibility
locus and one suggestive novel susceptibility locus for pancreatic cancer
that warrant follow-up work. This is the first GWAS conducted for
pancreatic cancer in the increased-risk Jewish population. The novel
susceptibility locus discovered on chromosome 19p12 could explain up to
~15%, and the novel suggestive susceptibility locus on chromosome 19p13.3
could explain up to an additional ~15% of the increased risk for
pancreatic cancer in the Jewish population.


