Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic siRNA and chemical screens identify SETD8 inhibition as
a therapeutic strategy to reactivate p53 in high-risk neuroblastoma.


Neuroblastoma (NB) is considered a failure of sympathoadrenal
differentiation. High-risk neuroblastoma (HR-NB) is an aggressive
pediatric tumor accounting for 15% of all pediatric oncology deaths. Less
than 50% of HR-NB patients have long-term survival, despite intense
multimodality treatment. Given the paucity of druggable mutations and
findings that epigenetic drivers contribute to NB tumorigenesis, we
undertook a chromatin-focused siRNA screen to uncover epigenetic
regulators critical for survival of high-risk NBs. Of the 400 genes
analyzed, high-content Opera imaging identified 53 genes whose loss of
expression led to significant decreases in NB cell number with 16 also
inducing differentiation. A screen with 21 epigenetic compounds in 8 NB
cell lines and 2 non-transformed cell lines prioritized those siRNA hits
with active tool compounds in the drug development pipeline. This
revealed UNC0379 (targets SETD8) inhibited NB cell growth and identified
SETD8 as an important and druggable NB target. SETD8 is the H4K20me1
methyltransferase which regulates DNA replication, chromosome
condensation and gene expression. Analysis of primary NB revealed that
high expression of SETD8 is associated with poor prognosis in NB (R2
platform ex. Kocak; p=1.4e-07). Levels of SETD8 were not significantly
different between Stage 4 MYCN-amp compared to MYCN-WT tumors but high
SETD8 levels were only associated with poor prognosis in the Stage 4
MYCN-WT(p=0.03). To understand SETD8-mechanism of action, we performed
RNA-seq transcriptome analyses after genetic or pharmacological
inhibition of SETD8. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis revealed that SETD8
ablation rescued p53 pro-apoptotic and cell-cycle arrest functions by
activating the canonical p53 pathway. Functional studies showed SETD8
methylates p53 (K382) leading to its inactivation. Levels of p53K382me1
are higher in MYCN-WT NB cell lines compared to those with MYCN-amp. Less
than 2% of NB tumors have p53 mutations but multiple mechanisms have been
identified in MYCN-amp NB that functionally inactivate p53. This study
identified that SETD8 inactivates p53 in NB and may be an important
mechanism to inactivate p53 in MYCN-WT HR-NB. This subgroup represents
60-70% of HR-NB tumors. SETD8 inhibition led to increases in
caspase-dependent cell death only in p53-WT but not -mutant or -null NB
cells. Genetic rescue experiments confirmed that SETD8-induced cell death
is p53 dependent and p53K382 is important for this activity. Our in vivo
xenograft NB models, showed that genetic or pharmacologic (UNC0379)
inhibition of SETD8 confers a significant survival advantage. This work
identifies that SETD8 is a novel therapeutic target and its inhibition
may be especially relevant for the subset of high-risk NB tumors with
wildtype MYCN. This is the first in vivo preclinical study showing that
targeting SETD8 inhibits tumor growth.


