Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) cell line screen of standard of
care (etoposide/carboplatin) plus a third agent.


The standard-of-care for limited stage and extensive stage SCLC has
remained etoposide and a platinum complex for more than 30 years because
60-80% of patients respond; however, SCLC inevitably recurs. Recurrent
SCLC has proven to be resistant to many therapeutics administered as
second- or third-line treatments; therefore, combining therapies in the
first instance may be a critically useful strategy. A high throughput
screen was performed where 62 SCLC lines were exposed to etoposide
(0.3uM)/carboplatin (3.7 uM) (E/C) with or without simultaneous exposure
to a third agent (n = 220). Viability of the cells was measured using
CellTiter-Glo after 96 hr exposure to 9 concentrations of each individual
compound or combination with E/C. The test concentrations encompassed the
clinical Cmax for each third agent, and the concentrations of E/C
selected for the screen were systematically determined to produce SCLC
kill that would allow observation of additivity/synergy upon addition of
a third agent. IC50s were determined from the concentration response data
and showed that the predominant effect of adding a third agent to E/C was
additive. Less than additive effects occurred more frequently in SCLC
lines that were sensitive to etoposide/carboplatin. Antagonism with E/C
occurred in combination with taxanes and tubulin fragmenters such as
vinorelbine. Effective single agents such as the nuclear kinase
inhibitors (aurora kinase inhibitors, KSP/EG5 inhibitors and polo-like
kinase inhibitors) were antagonistic in combination with E/C but were
effective single agents. Greater than additive SCLC killing occurred with
E/C in combination with several classes of agents. The combination of the
Chk1 inhibitor rabusertib with E/C resulted in an IC50 that was >1 log
lower than that of rabusertib alone in several SCLC lines. The GSK-3β
inhibitor LY-2090314 produced greater than additive SCLC killing in
combination with E/C. LY-2090314 had little effect on the SCLC lines
alone but the simultaneous combination with E/C resulted in multi-log
killing in selected SCLC lines. The BET bromodomain inhibitor MK-8628 was
highly effective when combined with E/C as was the PARP1 inhibitor
talazoparib in a small subset of the SCLC lines. While many agents have
been tested in combination with E/C in SCLC and failed to improve
patients’ survival, the findings of this study identified third agents
that may represent new leads for the treatment of this recalcitrant
disease. Distinct patterns of response in select subsets of the 62 SCLC
lines tested may allow identification of biomarkers predictive of the
responders to certain 3-drug regimens. This project has been funded in
whole or in part with federal funds from the National Cancer Institute,
NIH, under contract no. HHSN261200800001E.


