Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel α-Gal-based immunotherapy AGI-134 invokes CD8+ T
cell-mediated immunity by driving tumor cell destruction, phagocytosis
and tumor-associated antigen cross-presentation via multiple
antibody-mediated effector functions.


Background: AGI-134 is a fully synthetic α-Gal
(Galα1-3Galβ1-4GlcNAc-R) glycolipid that is being developed for the
treatment of solid tumors. The α-Gal epitope is not expressed in humans,
who, as a result of constant antigenic stimulation by α-Gal-bearing
commensal bacteria, develop high titer natural antibodies to α-Gal. We
have previously demonstrated that AGI-134 recruits anti-Gal antibodies to
tumor cells in vitro, activating complement and driving phagocytosis by
antigen presenting cells. AGI-134 also confers systemic protection from
distal lesion development in a mouse model of melanoma and synergizes
with anti-PD-11. Here we present further data characterizing the multiple
pathways activated by the anti-Gal subclasses to drive AGI-134-mediated
anti-tumor immunity.

Results: Using quantitative methods, we demonstrate that human anti-Gal
is composed of a diverse repertoire of effector antibodies in a panel of
serum samples, with IgM, IgG1 and IgG2 being the major subclasses.
Polyclonal anti-Gal IgG purified from human IVIG was, like human serum,
comprised mainly of IgG1 and IgG2. When AGI-134 treated cells were
incubated with human serum, binding of all anti-Gal subclasses was
detected by flow cytometry, demonstrating that all anti-Gal subclasses
can interact with AGI-134 treated cells and are available to activate
downstream effector functions. When human serum was depleted of IgG,
AGI-134 stimulated complement dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) was still
effective, indicating that anti-Gal IgM is primarily responsible for
deposition of complement on AGI-134 treated cells. AGI-134 treated cells
incubated with purified polyclonal anti-Gal IgG activated FcγRIIIA on a
reporter cell line and promoted natural killer cell-mediated
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). Opsonization of
AGI-134 treated human cancer cells with human anti-Gal and complement
stimulated their phagocytosis by human monocyte-derived macrophages.
Ovalbumin-expressing cells treated with AGI-134 and then incubated with
human serum to initiate CDC were specifically phagocytosed by murine
CD8α+ dendritic cells and the immunodominant antigen of ovalbumin,
SIINFEKL, was cross-presented to CD8+ T cells. In conclusion, AGI-134
stimulates adaptive anti-tumor immunity through immune activation and
antigen cross-presentation, which is driven by the diverse repertoire of
anti-Gal antibodies.

1. Shaw, S. et al. Abstract 4862: AGI-134: a fully synthetic alpha-Gal
glycolipid that prevents the development of distal lesions and is
synergistic with an anti-PD-1 antibody in a mouse melanoma model.
[abstract]. AACR; Cancer Res 2016;76(14 Suppl):Abstract nr 4862.


