Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor activity of selinexor is enhanced by palbociclib in
preclinical models of HER2+ breast cancer.


Introduction: XPO1 (exportin-1/ CRM1) inhibitor selinexor (KPT-330) is
the first-in-class, orally bioavailable, clinical stage SINE (Selective
Inhibitor of Nuclear Export) compound with marked anti-tumor activity
towards solid and hematological malignancies. This activity can be
further enhanced by other therapeutic agents. We have previously shown
strong synergistic preclinical activity of selinexor plus trastuzumab
against HER2+ breast cancer. In cancer models of acquired resistance to
HER2-targeted therapies, G1/S phase cell cycle regulators Cyclin D1 and
CDK4/6 are inappropriately activated. We therefore investigated the
combinatorial effect of selinexor plus palbociclib, a CDK4/6 inhibitor,
in HER2+ breast cancer models as a treatment option for recurrent and
relapsed HER2+ breast cancers.

Methods: The effects of selinexor or palbociclib single agents or in
combination were tested in vitro with BT474 HER2+ breast cancer cell
line. Total RNA and protein was extracted from cell lysates and analyzed
by qPCR and immunoblots. In vivo, a subcutaneous BT474 xenograft mouse
model was treated with selinexor (5 mg/kg or 15 mg/kg; qodx3) or
palbociclib (50 mg/kg or 150 mg/kg; qd) single agents or in combination.
Tumor growth and body weights were monitored for 60 days. Tumors were
harvested and analyzed by immunohistochemistry (IHC).

Results: Selinexor plus palbociclib was highly effective in vitro and in
vivo in BT474 breast cancer cells. In in vitro assays, selinexor or
palbociclib single agents demonstrated inhibitory effects on cell
proliferation and showed strong synergy when combined. In vivo, the
combination resulted in significant survival benefit and enhanced tumor
growth inhibition compared to vehicle or either single agent. IHC
analysis of xenograft tumors showed synergistic inhibition of cell
proliferation by selinexor plus palbociclib. The Ki67 proliferation index
determined by IHC was 25% for vehicle control, 20% for selinexor, 7% for
palbociclib and 2% for the combination. Based on IHC analysis, the
synergistic anti-tumor activity of selinexor plus palbociclib was
achieved at multiple levels of the CDK4/6 pathway. Selinexor treatment
increased p21, p27 and Rb nuclear staining. Both p21 and p27 are
inhibitors of CDK4/6 while Rb is a negative regulator of cell cycle
progression. CDK4/6 phosphorylates and inactivates Rb, which allows cell
cycle progression. In selinexor as well as palbociclib treated samples,
phosphorylated Rb in the nucleus decreased, indicating a down-regulation
of the CDK4/6 pathway.

Conclusion: Selinexor plus palbociclib shows synergistic inhibition of
cell proliferation in vivo and in vitro in HER2+ breast cancer cell line
BT474 by down-regulation of CDK4/6 pathway. This combination therapy
warrants further investigation as an effective treatment option for
recurrent and relapsed HER2+ breast cancer.


