Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinicopathological and molecular study of breast cancer in
Algerian women from the Aures region: Data from the anti-cancer center of
Batna.


Background:Breast cancer is currently the leading cause of cancer
morbidity and mortality among Algerian women. The aim of this study was
to analyze the different proportions and distribution of breast cancer
molecular subtypes and to determine their associations with some clinical
and pathological characteristics in women from the Aures region. We also
screened for the prevalence of BRCA1 germline mutations in HBOC patients.

Materials and Methods: Clinical and tumor characteristics data of 1144
breast cancer patients were collected from cancer registry of anticancer
center of Batna. Breast cancers were diagnosed between 2011 and 2015.
Breast cancer subtypes definitions were as follow: Luminal A (ER+ and/or
PR+,HER2-), Luminal B (ER+ and/or PR+,HER2+),TNBC (ER-, PR-,HER2-) and
HER2+ (ER-, PR-, HER2+). We also compared patients with TNBC and those
with other breast cancer subtypes. Differences between the two groups
with regard to clinicopathologic parameters: age at diagnosis, menopausal
status, histological type, histological grade, breast feeding and oral
contraception were examined using Chi square test. BRCA1 was screened by
PCR direct sequencing in 22 HBOC patients including all exons where a
mutation was previously found in Algerian population (exons 3, 5, 11).

Results: The mean age at diagnosis cancer was 48.5 years. Proportions of
luminal A, luminal B, TNBC and HER2+ breast cancer subtypes were 47.29%,
21.94%, 21.24% and 9.52%, respectively. We noted a significant difference
in the distribution of age at diagnosis among the four cancer subtypes (P
= 0.04). Invasive Ductal Carcinoma was the most common histological type
in all breast cancer subtypes. Tumors with histological grade 2 and 3
were more common in patients for the four breast cancer subtypes. Our
data showed significant differences between premenopausal and
postmenopausal status (P=0.00) and tumor histological grade (PG and
c.798_799delTT have not been detected in our present study.

Conclusion: We report here for the first time, the distribution of
molecular subtypes of breast cancer and some clinical and pathological
characteristics in a cohort of female breast cancer patients from the
Aures region. Interestingly, the proportion of TNBC subtype in women
found in our study is similar to African-American breast cancer patients
and higher than reported in white women in Europe and America. Further
studies are needed to determine the outcome of the different breast
cancer subtypes in the Aures region. Large studies of the screening of
BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are on going for the implementation of the genetic
testing.


