Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.


Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a developmental program, which
is associated with tumor progression and metastasis. Here we investigated
the DNA methylation and histone modifications in the regulation of EMT in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). The RNA-Seq analysis
identified a total of 6150 differentially expressed genes (3423
up-regulated and 2727 down-regulated). The GO terms showed that these
genes belonged to several molecular functions and biological pathways.
The abnormal expression of key EMT genes, some of Sox family genes and
EZH2 significantly related to patient survival. The MeDIP-Seq analysis
identified differentially methylated regions (DMRs) on the whole genome
level with focal hypermethylation and widespread global DNA
hypomethylation. The gene ontology analysis showed that the DMRs related
genes belonged to several different ontological domains, such as EMT
progression, cell cycle, adhesion, proliferation, and apoptosis. The
results of the bisulfite-sequencing confirmed the EMT gene DMRs
identified by MeDIP-Seq. However, further analyses showed that the EMT
gene DMRs only related to gene expression, but not the patient survival.
ChIP-Seq was then performed to observe the relationship between histone
methylation and gene expression. A total of 295 genes were found to
correlate with H3K27 tri-methylation (H3K27me3) , and a certain number of
key EMT genes, such as ZEB1/2,AREG, GATA4,and CDH8 were identified.
Further study showed that Ezh2-mediated H3K27me3 regulate the expression
of key EMT genes. Ablation of Ezh2 expression prevents EMT, whereas
forced expression of Ezh2 restores EMT. Sox4 gene could directly regulate
Ezh2 expression, tri-methylated H3K27me3 for EMT gene repression. Taken
together, our results suggest that both of the DNA methylation and
H3K27me3 modification involved in the regulation of EMT in ESCC.
Sox4-Ezh2-mediated H3K27me3 marks associate with key EMT gene regulation,
representing an important epigenetic EMT signature.


