Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial membrane protein-2 is a novel regulator of immune
editing in breast cancer.


Cancer immuno-editing is a process that describes the interaction between
immune cells and tumor cells. This interaction can result in elimination
of a developing tumor, tumor dormancy, or tumor cells that are capable of
surviving in an immune-competent host. We have recently uncovered a novel
mechanism of immunoediting by the tetraspan protein Epithelial membrane
protein or EMP2. We propose that EMP2 serves as a bridge between innate
and adaptive immunity via tumor mediated type I interferon expression.
Most tumor cells evade the immune system through suppression or
ignorance. EMP2 levels promote type I interferon expression which was
found to correlate with PDL1 expression in a number of cell lines.
Concordantly, in vivo, in multiple breast cancer cell lines, EMP2
promoted tumor growth. In contrast, reduction in EMP2 levels correlated
with a reduction in tumor size and a corresponding increase in tumor
associated macrophages. Given that tumors with lower levels of EMP2 grow
poorly, we hypothesized that targeting EMP2 may provide a therapeutic
benefit. Recently, we have developed a panel of novel IgG1 monoclonal
antibodies to EMP2 and tested their ability to treat both xenograft and
syngeneic mouse models. Our results show that anti-EMP2 IgG1
significantly reduces tumor load in both models in part through the
recruitment of M1 macrophages. To explore this observation more fully,
experiments using murine syngeneic models were employed. Anti-EMP2
therapy elicits a robust ADCC response, producing an immune infiltrate
rich in macrophages, NK cells, and lymphocytes. In addition, we show that
CD8 cells show reduced exhaustion in the presence of anti-EMP2
antibodies. Conclusions: EMP2 is a protein upregulated in a number of
cancers in women including breast, ovarian, and endometrial tumors. Our
work collectively show that EMP2 is a novel immune regulator where its
expression creates an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment. We thus
predict that targeting EMP2 may improve therapeutic outcomes for cancers
in women.


