Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of microtubules on solution conductance and
capacitance; implications for the use of AC electric fields in cancer
therapy.


Microtubules (MTs) form mitotic spindles in dividing cells but have also
been implicated in electrical signaling in biology, and may act as
biological nanowires. Importantly, relatively weak AC electric fields
with frequencies between 100-300 kHz and strengths in the range ~1-2.5
V/cm, called Tumor Treating Fields (TTFields), have been shown to arrest
cancer cells’ mitosis and have led to an FDA approved treatment of
glioblastoma multiforme. TTFields’ effect on MTs has motivated our
study of their electrical properties. Here, we designed two platinum
electrodes 14 μm apart and performed electrical characterization of
solutions with various concentrations of MTs, tubulin dimers and ions, at
a range of AC frequencies between 1 kHz and 1 MHz to uncover an optimal
protocol to quantify MT electrical effects in vitro. We generated a
theoretical basis for the results observed, by analyzing the response of
ions as the principal charge carriers attracted to MTs and tubulin. We
observed that MTs measurably increase the solution’s conductance, and
this effect is more pronounced at lower ionic concentrations. We model
the possibility that this effect is due to a larger percentage of ions
being able to use MTs as low-resistance cables. The intrinsic
conductivity of MTs has been found to be two orders of magnitude greater
than that of the buffer solution. Moreover, we found that at 100 kHz the
conductance of MTs reaches its peak. On the other hand, at low protein
concentration, free tubulin dimers decrease solution’s conductance, and
we model this as being due to tubulin attracting ionic charges and
lowering their mobility. Both tubulin and MTs were found to increase
capacitance of buffer solutions, due to their formation of ionic double
layers. These results point to MTs being very sensitive to AC electric
fields and further support their electrical signaling, an emerging
property in biological organization. Modulating electrical signaling via
100kHz fields may impact intra-cellular communication as well as
organization of the cytoskeleton. These results bring insight into MTs
ability to modulate the capacitance and conductance of the cytoplasm and
act as low resistance pathways for ions, which has implications for
understanding of the action of TTFields on cancer cells.


