Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deciphering the diversity of somatic alterations and Salmonella
infection in gallbladder cancer by whole exome sequencing.


Background: Gallbladder cancer is fifth most common cancers among the
gastrointestinal cancers with the majority of patients presented at an
advanced state of the disease. In India, gallbladder cancer is a major
problem in the northern part of the country with its highest incidence of
22/1,00,000 women and risk factors ranging from gallstones, female
gender, ethnicity, Salmonella infections and genetic alterations. Despite
its high incidence in our country, there is only few candidate gene based
studies and systematic genome-wide studies are far in dismal. Hence there
is an unmet need to understand the genomic landscape of Indian
gallbladder cancer genome.

Materials and methods: We interrogated the coding region of gallbladder
cancer genome of 27 samples (10 paired and 7 unpaired tumors) using whole
exome sequencing at an average coverage of 100X and above. Further, we
validated our findings from whole exome sequencing in an extended cohort
of 27 FFPE (Formalin fixed paraffin embedded) samples using other
sequencing technologies. In addition we used a computational subtraction
tool to identify Salmonella DNA sequences in the whole exome sequencing
data.

Results: We identified 383 somatic alterations across 17 tumors, which
includes an average 112 synonymous, 245 missense, 8 nonsense, 8 indels
and 8 splice site changes. The average mutation rate considering the
paired tumors is about 14 mutations/Mb. We found recurrent alterations in
TP53, CTNNB1, SF3B1, ATM, AKAP11 and other genes by exome sequencing
analysis. In addition, we examined our exome sequencing data for
identifying Salmonella sequences as well as presence of 143 HPV types
using computational subtraction based on HPVDetector. In our analysis we
found association of typhoidal Salmonella strains in 11 of 26 gall
bladder cancer samples and non-typhoidal Salmonella species in 12 of 26
sample, 6 samples were co-infected with both. Moreover, we observed
co-occurrence of TP53 alterations in 4 of 16 Salmonella positive samples
while we did not observe TP53 alterations in Salmonella negative samples.

Conclusion: Taken together, we present the landscape of somatic
alterations in Indian gallbladder cancer genome and identification of
non-typhoidal Salmonella species along with co- occurrence of TP53
alterations could aid in the treatment of gallbladder cancer.


