Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of lung cancer CTCs competent for lung metastasis.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have been implicated as a population of
cells that may seed metastasis, which led to the 90% of dead in cancer
patients. Though the detection technologies has been developing swiftly,
how to culture the cells successfully and established a permanent cell
line are the bottleneck in the research of metastasis mechanism. Here, we
report, for the first time, the establishment of permanent cell line from
CTCs of one Non-small cell lung cancer patient and identifying the
biological characterization. The cell line designated CTC-0430 has been
cultured for more than one and half years, and the cells have been
characterized at the genome, proliferation, drug resistance, the
expression of surface marker, cytokine secretion level and the
characterization of tumor formation in vivo by immunohistochemisty and
immunofluorescence. This thorough analysis showed that CTC-0430 cells
display a stable phenotype characterized by an intermediate
epithelial/mesenchymal phenotype, stem-cell like properties and the drug
sensitivity test indicating stronger drug resistance compared to A549 and
95-D. When compare with A549 and 95-D cells, CTC-0430 cells high
expression of ICAM-1 and ICAM-3, low expression of CX3CL1 and CXCL1.
Functional studies showed that CTC-0430 cells induced rapidly in vivo
tumors after subcutaneous transplantation in immunodeficient mice, and
the lung metastasis were found after six months later. Besides, three
months after we injected the cells into the caudal vein of NOD/SCID mice,
the lung metastasis were formed. And then the metastasis lung tissue were
used to make IHC and IF, which indicated that the biological
characterizations of this cell line are different from A549. The
establishment stable cell line of lung cancer CTCs can provide in vivo
research platform for the intervention study of postoperative metastasis
of lung cancer.


