Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rb1 suppresses prostate cancer metastasis and lineage plasticity
underlying castration resistance.


Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is an effective treatment for
metastatic prostate cancer (mPCa), but patients eventually relapse with
ADT resistant disease. Well-characterized mechanisms of ADT resistance
include AR amplification, intra-tumoral androgen synthesis, AR splice
variants, and growth receptor bypass. All of these mechanisms function to
maintain sufficient AR signaling for tumor growth and survival. Improved
ADT like abiraterone acetate (AA) and enzalutamide (Enza) were developed
to combat such resistance mechanisms associated with alterations in
androgen receptor or androgen metabolism. While AA and Enza extend
survival, clinical benefits are short-lived. A new form of resistance is
increasingly appreciated in patients relapsing from AA or Enza,
histologic transformation of prostate adenocarcinoma (PADC) to
neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC) variants. NEPC is lethal and the
survival time is less than a year as effective targeted therapy is
unavailable. NEPC typically exhibits reduced AR expression, increased
expression of neuroendocrine markers, and visceral metastasis in the
absence of rising PSA. Of note, NEPC possesses the similar genome
rearrangements with adjacent PADC cells, indicating they share clonal
origin. Thus, NEPC may arise by histologic transformation of PADC.
Underlying mechanisms of histologic transformation are not understood and
experimental models are limited, hindering development of effective
remedies. RB1 loss is common in NEPC, but rare in PADC; genetic profiling
shows human NEPC exhibit elevated levels of several epigenetic modifiers.
We hypothesize that transdifferentiation from PADC to NEPC in the context
of RB1 loss is due to epigenetic alterations and can be reversed or
blocked by epigenetic targeted therapies. We established several
genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) to test the role of Rb1, and
we find Rb1 loss causes metastatic progression of PADC initiated by Pten
deficiency. This Rb1/Pten deficient (DKO) PADC exhibits expression
markers for both PADC and NEPC as seen in human patients. Yet, these
tumors are sensitive to ADT but relapse with low AR expression and
acquired Trp53 mutations. RNA profiling demonstrates the phenotype of DKO
tumors is similar to human NEPC. Both human and mouse NEPC is accompanied
by increased expression of epigenetic reprogramming factors like Sox2 and
Ezh2. Clinically relevant Ezh2 inhibitors GSK126 and EPZ6438 can restore
Enza sensitivity by reversing neuroendocrine transformation. This finding
has been genetically validated using short-hairpin RNA(shRNA) in vitro.
These results uncover genetic mutations driving prostate cancer lineage
plasticity and suggest an epigenetic approach for extending the clinical
benefits of ADT.


