Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nucleic acid clamp-mediated recognition and transcriptional
modulation of MYC oncogenes through the stabilization of G-quadruplexes.


G-quadruplexes (G4s) tend to cluster around biologically important
regions such as promoters of DNA, 5’-UTR of mRNA and telomeres.
Modulating the stability of G4 as in these regulatory sequences is an
emerging approach for cancer treatment. MYC proto-oncogene is
overexpressed in over 80% of tumor types, contributing to deregulated
cancer cell proliferation. Silencing MYC expression has been demonstrated
to be an effective approach to inhibit tumor growth. Among all the
silencing strategies, stabilizing MYC promoter G4 that serves as an
on-off switch for the transcription of MYC has been explored by the
targeting of small molecules. However, the binding specificity of small
molecule retarded the drug development process. Exploring novel MYC
G4-targeting strategies is necessary to potentiate the pharmacological
specificity of MYC G4 modulation. Here, we adopted a nucleic acid clamp
based approach to recognize and stabilize the physiologically predominant
MYC G4. Previously, a clamp (clamp A) was been demonstrated to recognize
the physiologically relevant MYC G4 with high specificity and to
downregulate MYC promoter activity. In the current research, we modified
and optimized this clamp to allow for flexibility with labeling and
monitoring techniques. The original 18 Å polyethylene glycol phosphate
linker connecting the 5’ and 3’ regions of clamp A were substituted
with thymine bases of varying lengths; 5 thymines were found to be
optimal. The binding specificity and MYC G4 recognizing ability of this
optimized clamp A T5 were confirmed by EMSA and ECD; the G4 stabilizing
ability of clamp A T5 was demonstrated by DMS footprinting. The
cytotoxicity of clamp A T5 was examined by MTS assay on HEK-293 and MCF-7
cells. The intracellular localization of clamp A T5 is being determined
microscopically with a 6-FAM-labeled clamp A T5 after being transfected
into and incubated with HEK-293 and MCF-7 cells for 48 hr. Nuclear
localization is being examined by co-staining with DAPI, and MYC promoter
localization is being determined by clustering with a MYC FISH probe. The
modification of the clamp is both cost-effective, and enables the
detailed study of intracellular functions. This clamp has potential as
both a diagnostic tool to inform the use of MYC G4-targeted small
molecules, and as a nanotherapeutic.


