Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paving the path to metastasis/invasion through GIV: Identification
of a polarized ex(o)citing machinery for cancer invasion.


Polarized exocytosis is a fundamental process involving the delivery of
membrane and cargo proteins to target sites the plasma membrane (PM) and
it is essential for a wide range of biological functions such as cell
growth, morphogenesis, and polarized cell migration. Polarized exocytosis
requires precise spatial control of vesicle tethering to target sites at
the PM. This is mediated by the octameric exocyst complex that is
conserved from yeast to man. How the exocyst complex imparts polarity
during exocytosis remained a mystery until recent insights emerged from
studies on budding yeast. A functional interaction between exocyst
component Exo70p and the yeast polarity determinant scaffold protein
Bem1p was reported, and it was shown that Bem1p regulates the targeting
of Exo70p to polarized exocytic sites. Despite these insights, the
counterpart of Bem1p in higher species remained elusive. Here we
demonstrate that a novel polarity-determinant protein called GIV
(Gα-interacting vesicle associated protein/Girdin) fulfills the key
criteria and functions of its yeast counterpart Bem1p. GIV provides an
evolutionary upgrade to the process of polarized exocytosis by making it
responsive to growth factors and other external cues and by modulating it
through G protein signaling that is unique to mammalian cells. GIV was
originally identified in a yeast-2 hybrid screen as a binding partner of
EXOC1, and subsequently validated by us as a PI4P-binding protein that is
a direct binding partner of mammalian Exo70. Biochemical assays have
confirmed that the mechanism of GIV:Exo70 interaction bears close
semblance to the Bem1p:Exo70p interaction. Sequence alignment studies led
to the identification of single point mutants in Bem1p and GIV that are
selectively defective in binding to Exo70. Using genetic manipulation of
cancer cells we have observed that GIV is essential for polarized
tethering of Exo70-coated vesicles at the cell periphery. Consistent with
the previously described prometastatic role of GIV, we found that GIV is
required for EGF-stimulated exocytosis of matrix metalloproteases that
aid in cancer invasion in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and that
specific point mutants of GIV that interrupt the interaction with Exo70
cause a reduction in the ability of these breast cancer cells to invade
and degrade components of the extracellular matrix. Furthermore, GIV
interacts specifically with TC-10●GTP[active], a monomeric GTPase that
regulates fusion of exocytic vesicles at the plasma membrane. Insights
gained continue to provide an in-depth understanding of how GIV affects a
fundamental process of exocytosis, and what impact that may have on
cancer invasion and metastasis.


