Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Positive cross-regulatory loop links ZBTB7A to estrogen receptor
alpha expression in breast cancer.


In breast development and tumorigenesis the biological functions of
estrogen are mediated by estrogen receptor alpha (ERα). Approximately
70% of breast cancers are classified as ERα positive and are therefore
candidates to receive various forms of endocrine therapy. De novo or
acquired resistance to endocrine therapies limits their clinical
effectiveness. Identification of novel targets is critical to combat
disease progression. Our lab has recently discovered that ZBTB7A
suppresses glycolysis by transcriptionally repressing key genes within
the glycolytic pathway in various cancer types (Liu, X.S., et al. 2014).
Currently, ZBTB7A is proposed to be an oncogene in breast cancer (Zu, X.,
et al. 2011), however its function in ERα positive breast cancers has
yet to be fully addressed. Using publically available datasets, we found
that in luminal breast cancers relapse free survival was improved for
patients whose tumors expressed high levels of ZBTB7A. Gene expression
analysis of TCGA datasets revealed that ZBTB7A and ERα are highly
correlated in human breast tumors prompting us to evaluate their
potential cross regulation. ERα mRNA and protein levels were
significantly decreased upon ZBTB7A silencing both in MCF-7 and T47D
breast cancer cell lines. Upon estradiol stimulation, ZBTB7A silencing
reduced ERα target gene expression and estrogen response element driven
luciferase reporter activity. Additionally, silencing of ZBTB7A inhibited
estradiol-induced proliferation and decreased sensitivity to tamoxifen in
MCF-7 and T47D cells. These data suggest that ZBTB7A may be required to
mediate the pro-proliferative signal of estradiol through its regulation
of ERα expression in breast cancer cell lines. To evaluate the potential
regulation of ERα on ZBTB7A, ERα was silenced and ZBTB7A mRNA and
protein expression were determined. ERα silencing had no effect on
ZBTB7A mRNA levels, but led to decreased ZBTB7A protein expression. These
effects on ZBTB7A protein expression were attenuated by the presence of
the proteasomal inhibitor MG132. Together, these data suggest a model in
which ZBTB7A promotes ERα expression at the transcript level while ERα
stabilizes ZBTB7A post-transcriptionally conferring a positive feedback
loop and sensitivity to estradiol and endocrine therapies. ZBTB7A may
contribute to the transcriptional program maintaining a hormone and
endocrine therapy responsive phenotype in breast cancer.


