Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-scale time-lapse intravital imaging of soft tissues to map
single cell behavior.


After more than 10 years of research into the tumor micro-environment and
the sources of tumor micro-heterogeneity, it is becoming increasingly
clear that in addition to driver mutations, the tumor microenvironment
determines tumor metastatic phenotype. This research has led to a new
understanding of the impact of tumor microenvironments and their
heterogeneity upon tumor cell proliferation, dissemination, dormancy, and
survival. A full understanding of this heterogeneity, both temporally and
spatially, how it supports tumor cell dissemination, dormancy and
eventual further metastatic growth, and how it responds to therapeutic
interventions, is crucial. Traditional single parameter studies have not
been as productive as hoped in revealing the above relationships and have
highlighted the need to understand tumors as integrated systems of genes,
gene networks, and intracellular interactions, particularly with regard
to the interplay between cells and their immediate microenvironment. To
accomplish this, we have developed a new technology in the form of large
volume intravital imaging using multiphoton intravital microscopy (MIVM)
where images of large tumor volumes are stitched together to form a
comprehensive record of the genes, gene networks, and intracellular
interactions that occur throughout many tumor microenvironments at single
cell resolution. Here, we report a protocol for obtaining large area
high-resolution mosaic imaging in living animals. The protocol is
composed of surgical techniques for the stabilization of soft tissues
including mammary gland, lymph node, liver, and lung and the acquisition
of multiple high-magnification tiles that are stitched together to form a
large-area low-magnification image. We have developed specific protocols
for the surgery as well as tools for tissue stabilization and the
acquisition and stitching of the images to generate very large MVIM data
sets. We have interfaced these very large MVIM image data sets with
support vector machine (SVM) classification, a nonlinear, multiparametric
classification algorithm suitable for analysis of systems with arbitrary
distributions and/or non-linear parameter’s correlations. To define the
combinations of microenvironment parameters where tumor cell phenotypes
of interest are likely to occur, we used these microenvironment
parameters as an “input” for the SVM classifier to identify
associated tumor cell phenotypes as the classifier’s “output”.
Using this approach at widely varying temporal and spatial scales (from
minutes to weeks and from sub-cellular to tissue wide) and at different
stages (early carcinoma on to metastasis), has resulted in a catalog of
associations between microenvironment conditions and tumor cell
phenotypes associated with progression. These associations resulted in
new insights into the mechanisms of metastasis.


