Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A landscape of deubiquinating enzymes (DUB) in lung cancer using
activity based protein profiling (ABPP).


Dysregulation of ubiquitin signaling has been linked to many diseases,
including cancer. Numerous DUBs are implicated in key pro-cancer
pathways, including regulation of HIF1α, control of RAS signaling,
signaling through both canonical and non-canonical NFκB pathways, and
regulation of p53 activity. Overexpression of USP14, USP17 and USP28 is
linked to promoting non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). OTUB1 has shown
to trigger lung cancer progress by inhibiting RAS monoubiquitination in
KRAS mutant NSCLC. Notably, BAP1 (tumor suppressor) expression decreases
in lung cancer tissues although its mRNA levels did not reflect it. Based
on these findings, we hypothesized that profiling DUB proteins and their
activity in lung cancer cells and tissues could uncover new therapeutic
targets. Since proteogenomics studies have revealed that mRNA expression
is not a reliable predictor of the protein expression, we have used ABPP
assays to profile DUB. ABPP, which uses chemical probes directed against
the active sites of enzymes to interrogate the functional state of
enzymes in biological samples, can serve as an important tool to nominate
DUB targets. HA-tagged active site-directed ubiquitin probe, HA-Ub-VME
was used to evaluate the DUBs profile of KRAS and EGFR mutant cell lines.
Cell lysate was labeled in presence or absence of DUB inhibitors (DUBi)
and the modified enzymes were visualized by anti-HA immunoblotting.
Labeled proteome was enriched and analyzed using mass spectrometry and
data was analyzed using APOSTL. In addition to DUB profiling, we screened
lung cancer cell lines to DUBi, including small cell lung cancer, KRAS
mutant, EGFR mutant, and models of EGFR TKI resistance. Immunoblotting in
various KRAS and EGFR mutant cell lines displayed diverse profiles of
DUBs. Enrichment of DUBs in A549 cells showed 23 DUBs and competition
with bAP15, a well-known DUBi for USP14 resulted in reduced probe binding
to USP14. We optimized the approach to capture maximum DUBs by examining
parameters such as protein/probe ratio, probe incubation time and probing
different lung cancer cells that may harvest a larger or complementary
repertoire of DUBs. A preliminary screen of DUBi across 20 SCLC and NSCLC
cell lines lead to a panel of DUBi (IC50=100nM-5µM), with broad or
selective activity in particular cell lines. These results are being used
for competitive DUB profiling using ABPP to comprehend target engagement
and resulting changes in cell viability induced by DUBi. These results
enable future studies to profile the DUB landscape in lung cancer cell
lines, PDX tumor cohorts, and tumor tissues from patients. DUB ABPP can
identify important DUBs in lung cancer cells to both identify new drug
targets, as well as discern mechanism of action of drugs identified from
compound screening campaigns.


