Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EZH2 inhibitors in immunotherapy of melanoma.


EZH2 contains the catalytic subunit of the PRC2 complex, which plays a
role in maintenance of stem cell- like state of cancer cells and in the
progression of melanoma. Our previous studies have shown that
hyperactivation of EZH2 by somatic mutations or copy number gain occurs
in 20% of melanoma patients and impacts overall survival. Elevated
activity of EZH2 in cancer can be targeted by small molecule drugs (e.g.
GSK126) and is associated with sensitivity to apoptotic cell death.
Transcriptomic profiling showed that several well-known tumor suppressors
such as BOK, NDRG1 and RASSF5 are down-regulated in cells with
abnormalities in EZH2, which can be reversed by inhibitor treatment. By
using our in vitro EZH2 drug targeting assay we validated genes
associated with immune recognition and MHC class II antigen presentation
such as HLA A and B,DR and CD74 (HLA DR invariant chain). In addition,
ChIP-Seq studies identified adhesion molecules, chemokine ligands, and
receptors involved in traffic of lymphocytes to tumors as well as the
function of NK cells. Treatment of melanoma with EZH2 inhibitors showed
increased killing by NK cells suggesting that an immunosuppressive effect
of EZH2 involving both innate and adaptive immunity. In a mouse model of
subcutaneous B16 melanoma, a course of daily treatment with an EZH2
inhibitor did not change tumour growth or immune responses in
immunosufficient mice but caused a transient 9-fold increase in
circulating Ly6G+ [granulocytic] myeloid-derived suppressor cells [MDSCs]
suggesting the effect of EZH2 modifiers on the myeloid compartment. In
summary, patients with somatic activation of EZH2 may benefit from
treatment combinations that include inhibitors of EZH2. Supported by
NHMRC program grant 633004, Sydney medical school foundation and Cancer
Institute NSW. F.V.F. is grateful for the support of grants CA154887 from
the National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute and CRCC
CRN-17-427258.


