Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Collection of lung cancer patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models
to evaluate precision therapeutic strategies.


Background: Translational cancer research needs appropriated preclinical
models to discover predictive biomarkers and evaluate precision
therapeutic strategies. Conventional available preclinical models have
proven not been optimal to this end, since cell lines based xenografts do
not reconstitute the complexity of human cancer and carry acquired
mutations not found in the original tumor. For these reasons our aim was
generate and completely characterize a collection of non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) PDX models useful for translational lung cancer research.

Materials and methods: Resected primary tumors from NSCLC patients were
subcutaneous xenografted in athymic nude mice and expanded in successive
groups of mice to get a perpetual live bank of each tumor. Every tumor,
which successfully grew in mice, was analyzed by histologic and molecular
techniques (NGS gene panel, exome and RNA Seq). Furthermore, a bank of
frozen pieces of tumor was expanded and stored in order to generate later
cohorts of tumor-bearing mice suitable for preclinical drug evaluation.

Results: Our collection consists on 42 PDX models (26 SCC, 12ADC, 3LCC).
We have characterized all of them histologically and molecularly with a
22 genes NGS panel. Furthermore, we have analyzed the exome and
transcriptome of 33 models (20 SCC, 10 ADC and 3 LCC). All PDX models
mostly retain the principal histologic and molecular characteristics of
their donors and recapitulate the heterogeneity of human lung tumors. In
our PDX collection we have sufficiently represented all the NSCLC
histology and the most relevant molecular alterations in lung cancer in
order to perform precision medicine evaluation studies.

Conclusions: We have generated a collection of 42 PDX models of NSCLC
characterized at the histological, genomic and transcriptomic level,
which represents the most frequent histological and molecular subtypes of
this type of lung cancer. This collection will be really useful to
integrate drug screening with biomarker discovery and to evaluate
precision therapeutic strategies. Our future aim will be to use this
collection for biomarkers identification and preclinical evaluation of
new therapeutic strategies targeted to bad prognostic lung tumors with
suboptimal therapeutic approaches.


