Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of physical activity with risk of prostate cancer
defined by TMPRSS2:ERG.


Background

There is growing evidence of heterogeneity in risk factor associations
for prostate cancer defined by clinical and molecular characteristics.
Physical activity has moderate protective effects on development of
prostate cancer, in particular of advanced and fatal disease. We
hypothesized that the influence of physical activity on hormonal and
anti-inflammatory pathways may differentially affect the development of
TMPRSS2:ERG-positive compared to TMPRSS2:ERG-negative tumors. Our
objective was to examine the association between physical activity and
risk of prostate cancer defined by the TMPRSS2:ERG fusion.

Materials & Methods

We followed 49,160 men in the prospective Health Professionals Follow-up
Study from 1986 to 2010. Participants were age 40 years or older, had no
previous cancer diagnosis, and reported physical activity by
questionnaire. Men self-reported the average number of hours per week
spent engaged in various forms of recreational physical activity at
baseline and every two years thereafter with greater than 90% follow-up
rates. We examined long-term physical activity type and intensity in
units of metabolic equivalent of task (MET)-hours per week. Presence of
the TMPRSS2:ERG fusion in tumor tissue was estimated by ERG protein
expression using immunohistochemistry. We used competing risks models to
obtain subtype-specific hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals
(CIs) for incidence of fusion-positive and fusion-negative prostate
cancer.

Results

During 23 years of follow-up, 5,819 men were diagnosed with prostate
cancer. Of the 2,389 men who underwent radical prostatectomy, 910 were
assayed for ERG. Men with higher cumulative average vigorous activity had
a lower risk of developing TMPRSS2:ERG-positive prostate cancer (top vs.
bottom quintile multivariate HR: 0.64, 95% CI: 0.46-0.90, P-value for
trend=0.01). There was no significant association observed between
vigorous activity and risk of TMPRSS2:ERG-negative prostate cancer (HR:
0.93, 95% CI: 0.67-1.28, P-value for trend=0.46). However, the test for
heterogeneity in these associations was not significant (P-value for
heterogeneity=0.55). No association was observed between total activity
and risk of either TMPRSS2:ERG subtype.

Conclusions

Physical activity of vigorous intensity is inversely associated with risk
of TMPRSS2:ERG-positive but not TMPRSS2:ERG-negative prostate cancer.
These findings suggest that regular vigorous activity may lower risk of
prostate cancer through mechanisms specific to development of this fusion
in prostate tumors. Future studies are needed to further elucidate these
mechanisms and translate these findings into recommendations for prostate
cancer prevention.


