Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of autophagy by 3-MA enhances the effect of ursolic
acid-induced apoptosis in hepatoma SK-Hep-1 cells.


Purpose

The aim of this study is to investigate the autophagic effect of Ursolic
Acid (UA) on hepatoma SK-Hep-1 cells.

Methods

The cytotoxicity of UA in hepatoma SK-Hep-1 cells was measured by MTT
assay, the accumulation of acidic vesicular organelles was measured by
FACS, the protein expression of LC3-II was detected by immunofluorescence
staining, and the autophagic protein expression was evaluated by western
blotting.

Hepatoma SK-Hep-1 cells treated with a combination of autophagy inhibitor
3-Methyladenine (3-MA) and UA, then use Annexin V/PI Double Staining and
western blotting to detect apoptosis and apoptotic protein levels.

Statistical Analyses

Data was expressed as the mean ± standard deviation and were compared
using the Student’s t-test. A p value of Data was expressed as the mean
± standard deviation and were compared using the Student’s t-test. A p
value of <0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance. All
statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software,
version 4.0 (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA).

Preliminary Results

SK-Hep-1 cells treated with different concentrations of UA (0, 20, 40,
and 60 μM). Regarding the results, the half-maximal inhibitory
concentration (IC50) was 45.9 and 36.6 μM for 24 and 48 h, respectively.
The FACS results showed that when increase the dose of UA could increase
the percentages of autophagic populations. The anti-autophagic proteins
such as Beclin, Atg-5, Atg-7, and LC3-II, in our results showed that UA
decreased the protein expression of mTOR, PI3K, and p62 and PI3K/Akt/mTOR
expression. Immunocytochemistry staining showed that SK-Hep-1 cells
treated with UA increased the protein expression of LC3-II. The
combination treatment of 3-MA and UA significantly increased the
apoptotic cell death as monitored by increased protein expression of
Caspase-3 and PAPR.

Conclusions

UA could induced autophagy in hepatoma SK-Hep-1 cells through inhibition
of mTOR and PI3K signaling pathways. SK-Hep-1 cells treated with UA
exhibited LC3-І/LC3-II conversion, increased protein expression levels
of Beclin, Atg-7, and Atg-5 along with reduced protein expression levels
of p62. UA-induced apoptosis was enhanced by the treatment of autophagy
inhibitor 3-MA. Our findings may assist in the development of novel
chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment of malignant types of liver
cancer.


