Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing human melanoma treatment response in vivo using
single-cell mass cytometry analysis of longitudinal tumor biopsies.


Introduction: Metastatic melanoma that harbor BRAFV600E mutations are
treated with inhibitors that inhibit MAPK signaling downstream of BRAF.
Although these treatments improve patient survival, the majority of
tumors develop resistance. It is increasingly clear that the presence and
emergence of cell subsets in the tumor microenvironment shapes treatment
responses. Mass cytometry is a single cell platform capable of measuring
>35 proteins on millions of tumor cells. Here, mass cytometry was used to
characterize matched tumor samples obtained before, during, and after
therapy in order to quantify the impact of therapy on tumor cell
populations.

Methods: Melanoma tumors from adults with metastases were biopsied or
surgically resected from 12 patients with consent. Patients received two
weeks of BRAFV600E inhibitor dabrafenib followed by two weeks of
dabrafenib and MEK inhibitor trametinib. Tumors were enzymatically
digested and cryopreserved with protocols for mass cytometry (Leelatian
and Doxie et al., Cytometry B 2016). Samples were stained with a 30+
antibody panel focused on melanoma identity and markers of lineage and
trafficking for leukocytes, fibroblast, and endothelial cells. Viable
nucleated cells were identified by total histone H3 and rhodium dye
exclusion. Expert biaxial gating and viSNE analysis were used to
identify, computationally map, and track populations and their subsets
over time. Tissue microarrays were also analyzed by histology to confirm
findings observed by mass cytometry.

Results: More than 99% of cells were characterized and fell into one of
the four major populations. Melanoma phenotypes included loss of MHC
class I and/or expression of one or more markers of identity including
SOX10, SOX2, nestin, S100β, and MCAM. Significant decreases in nestin,
MCAM, MHC I and S100β (p Results: More than 99% of cells were
characterized and fell into one of the four major populations. Melanoma
phenotypes included loss of MHC class I and/or expression of one or more
markers of identity including SOX10, SOX2, nestin, S100β, and MCAM.
Significant decreases in nestin, MCAM, MHC I and S100β (p < 0.01, p
Results: More than 99% of cells were characterized and fell into one of
the four major populations. Melanoma phenotypes included loss of MHC
class I and/or expression of one or more markers of identity including
SOX10, SOX2, nestin, S100β, and MCAM. Significant decreases in nestin,
MCAM, MHC I and S100β (p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p Results: More than 99% of
cells were characterized and fell into one of the four major populations.
Melanoma phenotypes included loss of MHC class I and/or expression of one
or more markers of identity including SOX10, SOX2, nestin, S100β, and
MCAM. Significant decreases in nestin, MCAM, MHC I and S100β (p < 0.01,
p < 0.05, p < 0.05, and pResults: More than 99% of cells were
characterized and fell into one of the four major populations. Melanoma
phenotypes included loss of MHC class I and/or expression of one or more
markers of identity including SOX10, SOX2, nestin, S100β, and MCAM.
Significant decreases in nestin, MCAM, MHC I and S100β (p < 0.01, p <
0.05, p < 0.05, and p<0.05, respectively) were observed in cells after
treatment. Decreases in nestin and S100β populations identified by mass
cytometry were observed in histology analysis of TMAs from matched
tumors. Analysis of pre- and post-therapy melanoma cells and BRAF mutated
cell lines indicated pre-therapy tumor cells had phenotypes most similar
to cell lines. Strikingly, 6hrs or 1 day of treatment of cell lines with
dabrafenib and trametinib did not result in decrease in nestin
expression. The nestin low post-therapy phenotype of melanoma tumor cells
was present in all melanoma cell lines at a low abundance (average of
7.0% +/- 3.9% in cell lines, N = 7).

Conclusions: Single cell analysis and longitudinal monitoring of
patient’s revealed tumor ecosystems experience rapid changes in
cellular diversity during targeted therapy. Lower nestin expression
distinguished treated melanoma tumor cells. The in vitro results suggest
that in vivo remodeling of the tumor microenvironment results from a
shift in host-tumor cellular interactions and not a direct response to
inhibitors.


