Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging biomarkers of aromatase-inhibitor induced joint pain.


Estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer patients undergoing
treatment with aromatase inhibitors (AI) tend to discontinue the
supplement when to painful side effects appear. It is believed that women
with AI-induced musculoskeletal syndrome (AIMSS) have specific
physiological conditions that differentiate them from women with normal
aging-related inflammatory processes (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis or RA).
Ultrasound shear wave elastography (USWE) provides a real-time,
quantitative assessment of the elastic modulus of soft tissue, which is a
potential biomarker that is altered in women with AIMSS.

Because USWE is a completely noninvasive technique available on
state-of-the-art clinical ultrasound scanners, it can be readily applied
to study patients who undergo AI treatment and help predict adverse
effects during therapy.

A Siemens s3000 clinical scanner and 9 MHz linear probe were used for
USWE of the hands and wrists in postmenopausal women on AI,
postmenopausal women with RA and healthy postmenopausal women. The scans
included an evaluation of major wrist tendons, nerve, and joints with
shear wave velocities ranging from 0.5 to 15 m/s, which are directly
related to the local shear modulus -- an absolute measure of tissue
stiffness. The ultrasound images and raw shear wave data were then
analyzed in MATLAB-TM using a custom graphical user interface (GUI) to
calculate the distribution of velocities (or shear moduli) in a
user-defined region of interest (ROI). The results were exported to a
spreadsheet in Excel for further analysis and comparison among the
different groups.

Initial results suggest the shear wave velocity and estimated Young’s
modulus (λ) were significantly higher in AI patients (14.6 ± 0.2 m/s,
λ=642 ± 17 kPa) compared to RA (6.84 ± 1.1 m/s, λ=143 ± 43 kPa) and
healthy (7.58 ± 0.9 m/s, λ=174 ± 42 kPa) patients. These values
suggest that the mechanical properties of tendons in the wrist may change
during treatment with AI and contribute to joint pain in these subjects.
It is critical that ER+ patients on AI complete their full treatment. As
a potential biomarker of AIMSS and associated pain, USWE may help predict
which patients are most susceptible to these side effects, promote early
intervention to reduce or eliminate symptoms, and help increase adherence
to AI therapy.


