Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic, RNAi screening, and functional validation reveal cross
activation of classical and alternative NFκB pathways in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma of different HPV status.


Aberrant activation of transcription factor NF-κB promotes tumorigenesis
of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), but the genomic
alterations and pathways affecting NF-κB signaling have not been fully
dissected. As part of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project for head and
neck cancer, our laboratory recently uncovered that HNSCC harbored
frequent alterations affecting gene expression of signal molecules in
NF-κB and cell death pathways. We analyzed the transcriptome, integrated
with the genetic alterations of 279 TCGA tumors with different HPV status
in parallel with 15 HPV(-) and 11 HPV(+) HNSCC cell lines sequenced in
our laboratory through whole exome and transcriptome sequencing. Using
bioinformatics and pathway analyses, we identified 61 genes interacting
with the genetically altered components of the NF-κB pathway. We found
expression for 38 of these 61 genes were significantly higher in tumors
than in mucosa tissues. Differential expression affecting more components
of the canonical than the alternative NF-κB pathways were found in the
HPV(-) group, while the alternative NF-κB pathway components were
predominantly affected in the HPV(+) group. The distribution of genomic
DNA copy number variation (CNV) between groups differing in HPV status
support this observation. The mRNA levels are significantly correlated
with their corresponding CNV for more than 2/3 of top 30 genes in both
TCGA cohort and the cell lines. Supervised clustering analysis of mRNA
expression of the TCGA and cell lines revealed distinct gene expression
patterns related to their genetic features and HPV status. Functional
genome-wide RNAi screening was performed using HNSCC cell lines stably
transfected with the β-lactamase NF-κB reporter construct (Gene
BLAzer). We identified 16 genes that significantly modulated TNF-α or
Lymphotoxin β (LTβ) induced NF-κB activity and/or cell survival in
both HPV(-) or HPV(+) HNSCC lines. Knocking down TNFR, LTβR, or
downstream signaling components demonstrated cross-activation of
classical and alternative NF-κB pathways in response to TNF-α or LTβ
in HPV(-) or HPV(+) cells. Our study uncovers the prominent contribution
of key molecules involved in canonical and alternative NF-κB activation,
which modulate survival and migration of HNSCC. (Supported by NIDCD/NIH
intramural projects ZIA-DC-000016, 73, and 74; and NCI/NIH, under
contract number HHSN261200800001E).


