Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of polyploidy and senescence induces intrinsic
apoptosis in double hit or double expresser DLBCL.


Introduction: Double Hit (DH) or Double Expresser (DE) DLBCL are
aggressive Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphomas (NHLs) with translocation or
over-expression of MYC and BCL-2 which are incurable with current
therapies. MYC is a critical driver of oncogenic phenotypes and regulates
expression of numerous genes including aurora kinases (AKs), which are
validated drug targets. AKs are over-expressed in DLBCL and AK inhibition
in two Phase-II trials of relapsed and refractory B/T-NHL resulted in
20%-30% overall response rate. Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) plays a
central role in B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling and inhibitors of BTK
have shown efficacy in B-NHL clinical trials. Targeting CD20 (rituximab)
in DLBCL inhibits BCL-2 and induces apoptosis via caspase-3 activation.
We hypothesized that DH/DE-DLBCL are amenable to a novel therapeutic
strategy of AK, BTK and CD20 inhibition.

Methods: Four DH/DE DLBCL cell lines were evaluated for viability by MTS;
polyploidy, senescence and apoptosis by flow cytometry; DNA damage by
TUNEL assay. Phospho-BCL-2, -AK and -BTK analysis by western. Safety and
efficacy of drug combinations in a mouse xenograft model. Analysis of
patient samples and mouse tumors by IHC.

Results: DH/DE-DLBCL cell lines and patient samples displayed
over-expression of MYC, BCL-2, BTK and AK-A proteins. Cell viability
assays with alisertib alone showed ~30% cell death, while majority of
remaining ~70% cells were polyploid and senescent at day-4 (a mechanism
of treatment failure). These polyploid and senescent cells (PASC) showed
increased levels of phospho-BTK indicating increased BCR signaling (a
rationale for combination therapy). We show that alisertib + ibrutinib +
rituximab significantly reduced PASCs leading to intrinsic cell death
compared to single/double combinations. Dual inhibition of AK + BTK
reduced phospho-ERK-1/2, -Bcl-6 and -MYC with increased DNA breaks
indicated by up regulation of phospho-H2A-X, -Chk-2, and pro-apoptotic
Noxa and Puma proteins. Triple therapy reduced Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and
increased Noxa and Puma compromising the mitochondrial outer membrane
potential, release of Cyt-C, activation of caspase-3 and induction
apoptosis by PARP cleavage. A DLBCL SCID mouse xenograft model showed
ibrutinib alone is inactive while alisertib + ibrutinib was additive with
a tumor growth inhibition (TGI) rate of ~25%. TGI for ibrutinib +
rituximab was ~50-60%. However, triple therapy showed a TGI of >90% and
was well tolerated. Survival analysis: 67% of mice alive at day-89 with
triple therapy versus 20% with ibrutinib + rituximab. Other treatments
showed no survival past day-52.

Conclusions: A novel triple therapy consisting of alisertib + ibrutinib +
rituximab inhibits PASCs induced by AK inhibition in DH/DE-DLBCL leading
to a significant anti-proliferative signal and intrinsic apoptosis. Our
work provides a rationale for exploring these combinations in the clinic.


