Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody targeting of ADAM8 for treatment of triple-negative
breast cancer.


Triple-Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) accounts for 25% of breast cancer
deaths. Current therapeutic options are restricted to chemotherapy (CT)
and radiation, which fail to block disease progression. Recently, we
identified the cell surface protein ADAM8 as a critical driver of TNBC
tumor growth and of metastasis in half of all breast cancers (EMBO Mol.
Med. 6:278, 2014). Elevated ADAM8 levels correlate with poor breast
cancer patient outcome. One third of TNBC patient samples have high ADAM8
levels, while it is undetectable in normal breast tissue. ADAM8
Metalloproteinase (MP) and Disintegrin (DI) domains promote angiogenesis
needed for tumor growth, and cancer cell adhesion to and invasion through
the endothelium needed for dissemination, respectively. Using a prototype
reagent in mice, we validated a unique antibody-based strategy that
simultaneously targets ADAM8 MP/DI activities as an effective therapeutic
intervention in TNBC.

Our group has now prepared a panel of pre-clinical, highly specific
anti-human ADAM8 mouse monoclonal antibodies (ADPs) of either IgG1 or
IgG2 subclass with dual MP/DI antagonist activity. The top 6 ADPs bind
ADAM8 with low dissociation constants of 1.3 x 10-9 M to 7.23 x 10-8 M.
The 4 most effective inhibitory ADPs in cell-based assays were screened
in a single-dose efficacy study (10 mg/kg 3x/wk) against pre-existing
MDA-MB-231 cell-derived tumors (50-75 mm3). ADP2 and ADP13 treatment
resulted in significant tumor volume reduction, of 47% and 52%,
respectively. Dose-response curves are in progress. ADP13 was also tested
in a neo-adjuvant model for its ability to reduce metastases. Antibody
treatment was initiated as above and continued for 6 weeks after tumors
were resected at a volume of ~200 mm3. Metastases in dissected organs
were examined using biophotonic imaging. ADP13 substantially decreased
metastasis to multiple organs. Lastly, a neo-adjuvant survival experiment
was performed, as above, except that following surgical resection of
tumors mice were treated for 12 weeks. Recurrence at the primary site was
assessed using palpation. Mice were sacrificed when recurrent tumors
reached 900 mm3. ADP13 treatment resulted in significantly improved
disease-free survival (P=0.05) and overall survival (P=0.03). More
recently, we noted that ADAM8 regulates miRNAs associated with resistance
to CT and showed that ADAM8 inhibition sensitizes TNBC cells to
Cisplatin, Paclitaxel, and Doxorubicin. In vivo testing of a
combinatorial anti-ADAM8 + CT approach is in progress and may present a
promising strategy for early entry into the clinic.

Conclusions: A new anti-ADAM8 antibody therapeutic shows efficacy against
TNBC tumor growth and dissemination, and improves survival in
pre-clinical testing. We hypothesize that addition of an anti-ADAM8
antibody to current CT standards of care will enhance tumor killing,
reduce metastasis, and increase survival of patients with
ADAM8-expressing TNBC.


