Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mutational landscape of recurrent and nonrecurrent human
papillomavirus-associated head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.


Background: Despite the better prognosis for human papillomavirus
(HPV)-associated head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) compared
to HPV-negative HNSCC, 10% to 25% of HPV-associated cases recur within 3
years of completing therapy. We sought to compare the mutational profiles
of primary tumors among recurrent and non-recurrent HPV-associated HNSCC.
We hypothesized that the mutational profile of primary tumors from
recurrent cases resembles that of HPV-negative HNSCC.

Methods: Sequencing was performed on DNA extracted from the primary
tumors of p16-positive recurrent and non-recurrent HNSCC cases utilizing
a high-coverage (>500X), CLIA-certified, 262 multiplexed gene sequencing
panel (i.e., UW OncoPlex). Primary tumors from 11 recurrent and 13
non-recurrent cases were included in our sample. Mutational differences
between the primary tumors of recurrent and non-recurrent tumors were
evaluated.

Results: 88% of patients were male with a mean (standard deviation; SD)
age of 60.3 (11) years. Among the recurrent cases, 100% arose from the
oropharynx. Among the non-recurrent cases, 77% arose from the oropharynx
with the remainder originating from the oral cavity, nasal cavity, and
larynx. 83% of patients presented with stage III or higher disease, and
the median survival time was 21 months and 19 months among the recurrent
and non-recurrent cases, respectively. The mean (SD) number of somatic
nucleotide variants per tumor among the recurrent cases was 16.4 (12.2)
compared to 4.3 (1.5) among non-recurrent cases (p Results: 88% of
patients were male with a mean (standard deviation; SD) age of 60.3 (11)
years. Among the recurrent cases, 100% arose from the oropharynx. Among
the non-recurrent cases, 77% arose from the oropharynx with the remainder
originating from the oral cavity, nasal cavity, and larynx. 83% of
patients presented with stage III or higher disease, and the median
survival time was 21 months and 19 months among the recurrent and
non-recurrent cases, respectively. The mean (SD) number of somatic
nucleotide variants per tumor among the recurrent cases was 16.4 (12.2)
compared to 4.3 (1.5) among non-recurrent cases (p < 0.05). The ratio of
nonsynonymous to synonymous variants among primary tumors of recurrent
cases was 2 vs 5 among the non-recurrent cases (p = 0.224). Among primary
tumors of recurrent cases, 17% of variants included indels, splice site,
and nonsense mutations vs 14% of variants among the non-recurrent cases.
The mean (SD) number of tumor suppressor mutations per tumor was 1.2
(1.3) among recurrent cases vs 1.0 (1.0) among non-recurrent cases (p =
0.81). Interestingly, the mean (SD) number of mutations in DNA damage
response (DDR) genes among the primary tumors of recurrent cases was 2.7
(2.4) compared to 0.7 (1.2) mutations per tumor among non-recurrent cases
(p = 0.07).

Conclusion: We observed a greater mutational burden among the primary
tumors of recurrent HPV-associated HNSCC compared to non-recurrent HNSCC.
Moreover, among the primary tumors of recurrent cases, there were more
mutations in DNA damage response genes coupled and relatively fewer
deleterious mutations compared to non-recurrent cases. Dysregulation of
DDR genes may select for advantageous mutations via genomic instability.
Alternatively, gain of function of DDR genes may promote treatment
resistance. Future work aims to further characterize mutational
differences between the primary tumors of HPV-associated recurrent and
non-recurrent HNSCC and evaluate mechanisms promoting treatment
resistance.


