Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FoxF1 is a potential oncogene in prostate cancer.


Background: FoxF1 belongs to the family of forkhead box transcription
factors. Many forkhead box proteins are linked to cancer development and
progression. However, the regulation and exact function of FoxF1 remains
unclear. The aim of this study was to elucidate how the transcriptional
activity of FoxF1 is controlled and to assess the role of FoxF1 within
prostate cancer.

Design: For assessment of FoxF1 functions tumor cell lines were stably
transfected with wild type FoxF1 or mutant FoxF1 constructs lacking
putative phosphorylation sites. Protein expression and localization of
FoxF1 were analyzed by immunprecipitation and Western Blot. Using tissue
microarrays of prostate cancer cohorts we analyzed the protein expression
and intracellular localization of FoxF1 in tumors compared to benign
tissue.

Results: Primary tumors and distant metastases exhibited a significantly
higher FoxF1 expression compared to benign prostate tissue. In tumors and
metastases nuclear localized FoxF1 was more abundant compared to benign
tissue.

Transfection of tumor cell lines with FoxF1 followed by
immunprecipitation and Western Blot showed that nuclear FoxF1 but not
cytoplasmic FoxF1 is phosphorylated in tyrosine residues, conceivably
tyrosine-39, as suggested by literature data. We further transfected
tumor cell lines with different amino acid exchange mutants of putative
phosphorylation sites and analyzed the transcription of the known FoxF1
target gene Pecam-1, revealing a complex pattern of regulation, dependent
on the site of phosphorylation.

Overexpression of FoxF1 in tumor cell lines resulted in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, as observed by loss of E-cadherin
expression, gain of Vimentin expression, the up-regulation of Snail and
Twist and changes to a spindle-like morphology. Furthermore,
overexpression of FoxF1 led to anchorage-independent growth in soft agar
as well as increased migration rates in vitro without affecting the
proliferation rate.

Transfection of tumor cell lines with FoxF1 followed by
immunprecipitation and Western Blot showed that nuclear FoxF1 but not
cytoplasmic FoxF1 is phosphorylated in tyrosine residues, conceivably
tyrosine-39, as suggested by literature data. We further transfected
tumor cell lines with different amino acid exchange mutants of putative
phosphorylation sites and analyzed the transcription of the known FoxF1
target gene Pecam-1, revealing a complex pattern of regulation.

Conclusion: In summary, our results point to a role of FoxF1 as a
potential oncogene in prostate cancer whose nuclear localization and
activity is regulated by phosphorylation.


