Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A SHARP /Xist complex regulates breast cancer stem cells.


Many cancers including breast cancer display hieratical organization and
are driven by a cellular sub-population that displays stem cell
properties. These cancer stem cells (CSC’s) mediate metastasis and
contribute to treatment resistance highlighting the importance of
elucidating CSC regulatory pathways. Nuclear proteins and lncRNAs
involved in the maintenance of chromatin structure have been shown to
play roles in CSC regulation. Among them the polycomb proteins bmi-1 and
EZH2 are involved in epigenetic regulation of CSC’s in breast and other
cancers. SHARP/SPEN, an RNA binding protein, has been previously been
found to bind the lncRNA Xist which, by recruiting the PRC2 polycomb
complex mediates transcriptional repression of the X chromosome. We
utilized breast cancer cell lines and xenograft models to examine the
role of the SHARP/Xist complex in the regulation of breast CSC’s. In a
series of breast cancer cell lines including MCF7 (luminal )and SUM 159
(basal/claudin low) cells, SHARP mRNA and protein as well as the lncRNA
Xist were more highly expressed in cells expressing aldehyde
dehydrogenase as accessed by the Aldefluor assay than in ALDH -cells .
Conditional knockdown of SHARP or Xist in SUM159 significantly decreased
the ALDH+ CSC population without affecting cell growth in vitro.
Furthermore, SHARP or Xist knockdown significantly reduced tumor
initiating capacity and growth of SUM 159 cells in NOD/SCID mice. To
determine the mechanism of breast CSC regulation by the SHARP complex we
compared mRNA expression patterns of control and SHARP knockdown SUM 159
cells using RNAseq. There was significant overlap between the genes
regulated by SHARP with genes regulated by the PCR1 and PRC2 polycomb
complexes in addition to many histone genes. These studies suggest that
the SHARP/Xist complex my regulate breast CSC’s through epigenetic
regulatory histone and polycomb genes. Since SHARP expression is elevated
in a number of cancers including breast cancer this pathway may represent
a novel therapeutic target.


