Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining MEK and HDAC inhibitors as a therapeutic strategy to
promote differentiation of colorectal cancer.


The five-year survival rate for patients with metastatic colorectal
cancer is less than 15%, necessitating an urgent need to develop novel
therapeutic strategies for this disease. Loss of differentiation is
associated with worse overall survival in colorectal cancer, suggesting
that strategies to re-induce differentiation may provide clinical
benefit. Differentiation therapy is effective in the treatment of acute
promyelocytic leukemia but whether this approach can be efficacious in
treating colorectal cancer is unknown. Inhibitors of the MAPK signaling
pathway including the MEK inhibitor Trametinib can induce markers of
differentiation in colorectal cancer cells. Trametinib also induces
expression of Cdx-2, a known driver of colonic cell differentiation.
Similarly, histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) induce markers of
differentiation in multiple tumor cell lines, including colon cancer
cells. The aim of this study was to assess the potential therapeutic
benefit of combining MEK (Trametinib) and HDAC (Panobinostat) inhibitors
to further promote differentiation in colorectal cancer cells, and to
elucidate the mechanistic basis for this effect. Combination treatment of
HT29 and T84 cells with Trametinib and Panobinostat significantly
enhanced mRNA and protein expression of the differentiation markers
Cadherin 17 (CDH17) and Keratin 20 (KRT20), compared to either agent
alone. Trametinib also induced expression of Cdx-2, an effect that was
enhanced upon combination treatment with Panobinostat. Notably, Cdx-2
knockdown attenuated CDH17 and KRT20 induction by the combination,
establishing a direct role for Cdx-2 in differentiation induction by the
Trametinib/Panobinostat combination. Concomitant with inducing
differentiation, the drug combination also invoked more apoptosis than
either agent alone. To validate these findings in vivo, HT29 cells grown
as xenografts were treated with Trametinib and Panobinostat alone and in
combination. Mice treated with the combination had significantly smaller
tumours than mice treated with vehicle or either agent alone. Consistent
with the in vitro findings, immunostaining of the tumour xenografts
demonstrated a strong increase in CDH17, KRT20 and Cdx2 expression upon
treatment with the drug combination. Collectively, this study highlights
a drug combination strategy to re-induce differentiation for the
treatment of colorectal cancers.


