Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel cancer driver genes in hepatocellular
carcinoma cells by RNAi screening method.


Recent studies revealed that EpCAM is one of the molecular markers for
hepatic cancer initiating cells. However, the mechanism how the EpCAM
expression in the liver cancer cell is regulated still remains to be
delineated. In this study, we identified candidate genes critical for the
maintenance of EpCAM positive hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells using
a global RNAi screening method. HCC cells were infected with pools of
~200,000 lentiviral shRNA library, then they were sorted to EpCAM
positive or negative group. The abundance of shRNA in each group was
analyzed using a microarray hybridization method. As a result, 76
candidate shRNAs with significantly different expression between EpCAM
positive and negative populations were identified by class comparison
analysis. Unsupervised clustering analysis of these genes in 247 HCC
samples clearly separated EpCAM positive HCC cases from negative cases.
Furthermore, we found that the EpCAM-dependent gene signature can predict
survival in epithelial-like HCC cases. We focused on shRNA for PMPCB
gene, which has an important role for processing mitochondrial protein,
since it ranks as the top differentially altered shRNA-targeted gene
between EpCAM positive and negative cells. PMPCB shRNA efficiently
reduced EpCAM positive population and effectively inhibited cell
proliferation both in vitro and in vivo. Interestingly, PMPCB shRNA
specifically induced cell death in EpCAM positive HCC cells, but not in
EpCAM negative cells. These data suggest that EpCAM positive cells
functionally depend on PMPCB expression. On the other hand, we confirmed
that PMPCB shRNA induced physiological dysregulation of mitochondrial
function, leading to the increase of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production. We found that PMPCB shRNA significantly reduced TCF4 activity
as well as the expression level of c-myc and cyclin D1, which are the
downstream molecules of Wnt/β-catenin pathway. Although total β-catenin
levels in the cytosol and nuclei fractions were not affected by PMPCB
knockdown, overexpression of constitutively activated mutant β-catenin
partially rescued the cells from PMPCB-induced apoptosis. Forkhead box O
(FOXO) is known to be induced by the ROS production, bind β-catenin and
decrease TCF activity, leading to the induction of apoptosis. We found
that the nuclear translocation of FOXO family molecules, such as FOXO1
and FOXO3, were facilitated by PMPCB shRNA in EpCAM positive cells. These
results suggest that the activation of FOXOs induced by PMPCB
knockdown-mediated ROS production suppressed the activity of
Wnt/β-catenin pathway, leading to the death of EpCAM positive HCC cells.
In conclusion, we discovered a novel candidate target molecule of EpCAM
positive HCC cells using a genome-wide RNAi screening method. Our study
shed light on the mechanisms how EpCAM positive HCC cells are maintained
and identified a new target molecule that has therapeutic vulnerability
in EpCAM positive HCC cells.


