Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro metabolomics of mesothelioma: Challenges and outcomes.


Introduction

Early detection of malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is likely to
improve outcome in affected patients. From our previous studies
(MesoBreath 1 & 2) we developed a screening tool in which volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) in breath allowed discrimination of MPM patients
from at risk controls. However it is not yet clear which VOCs arise from
the neoplastic cells themselves or from the host response. Identifying
the cancer cell-specific compounds should increase the specificity of our
breathomic signature model. Therefore, we set up an in vitro experimental
setup model for VOC analysis from the headspace of mesothelioma cell
lines.

Methods

Standard polystyrene culture flasks (NunclonTM Delta Surface, Thermo
Scientific) were mounted with an adapted cap accommodating teflon inlet
and outlet tubes. The inlet tube provides environmental air while an
external pump (Gilian GilAir Plus, Sensidyne) draws headspace air from
the outlet tube over an adsorption column (Tenax GR, Markes
International, UK). The adsorption columns were further processed on a
GC-MS platform (GC: Focus GC, Thermo Finnigan, Milan, Italy; DSQII Single
Quadrupole MS, Thermo Finnigan, Austin, TX, USA). VOC profiles were
processed using supervised clustering algorithms and principal component
analysis.

Results

Using this setup, we have investigated the impact of flow and total
sampled volume on the concentration and range of VOCs detected. For a
constant flow, VOCs were detected in higher concentrations with
increasing sample volume. For a constant volume, a lower sampling flow
yielded a higher concentration of detected VOCs. Most of the VOCs
obtained were alkanes and ketones. We will show data illustrating the
differential VOC profiles of container plastic, cell culture medium and
growing mesothelioma cancer cells, as well as the differential VOC output
of epithelioid vs sarcomatoid mesothelioma cell lines.

Conclusions

We have succesfully developed an in vitro experimental setup allowing
collection and analysis of VOCs emanating from mesothelioma cancer cell
line cultures. This platform will allow us to investigate how VOC
profiles are impacted in different experimental conditions (e.g. hypoxia,
nutrient deprivation, cytostatics, co-culture with leukocytes). The data
collected will help us to pinpoint the cancer cell-derived VOCs from
patient exhaled breath, and increase the robustness of our mesothelioma
breathomic signature.


