Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor cells treated with a PBD-based antibody-drug conjugate
targeting 5T4 develop acquired resistance due to 5T4 down-regulation and
response to alternate therapeutics.


Resistance to antibody-drug conjugates (ADC) has been observed in both
preclinical models and in the clinic. It has been previously reported
that an ADC targeting CD33 with a DNA cross-linking pyrrolobenzodiazepine
(PBD) dimer was active in models of multidrug-resistant (MDR) AML,
suggesting that PBDs, delivered as part of a molecular-targeted cancer
therapy may be effective in MDR settings. However it could still be
possible to develop resistance to PBD-conjugated ADCs though other
mechanisms that remain unknown. Studies were conducted to determine if
tumor cells have innate resistance to PBDs or an anti-5T4 ADC delivering
PBD warhead. It was found that both the ADC and its PBD warhead, SG3199,
completely eradicated MDA-MB-361 breast cancer cells and NCI-N87 gastric
cancer cells in culture, suggesting a lack of intrinsic resistance in
these cell lines. The potential emergence of acquired resistance was
investigated by culturing MDA-MB-361 cells in gradually-increasing
concentrations of either the ADC or SG3199 for over a year and the
variants resistant to either the ADC (361-ADCr) or the PBD warhead
(361-PBDr) were established as determined by decreased sensitivity in
cytotoxicity assays. Transcriptional profiling characterization of these
two cell models demonstrated that neither of them had significant
upregulation of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) or other drug efflux transporter
genes. Significant 5T4 antigen down-regulation was observed in the
361-ADCr cells but not the 361-PBDr cells and these cells also remained
sensitive to alternate treatments including ADCs targeting a different
surface antigen with the same PBD warhead, suggesting that
down-regulation of target was likely the main driver of resistance in
361-ADCr cells. Further transcriptional profiling analyses conducted on
361-PBDr cells suggest a multi-factorial process may be needed to develop
resistance to PBD warheads as differential expression of genes associated
with DNA damage and repair, drug metabolism and cell cycle was observed.
Similar gene expression profiles were observed in both cultured cells and
in tumors derived from these cells. Studies to validate these
differentially expressed genes, including proteomic and phosphoproteomic
profiling are currently being conducted. Collectively these data could
identify how resistance to ADCs conjugated with PBD payloads may develop
in the clinic and more importantly, provide insight into developing
strategies to overcome such resistance.


