Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immuno-target selection of infiltrating immune cells and laser
capture microdissection mediated transcriptional profiling.


Immune checkpoints define an evolving class of inhibitory mediators that
are expressed by tumour cells and infiltrating leucocytes to
down-modulate the effector immune response against tumour cells.
Therefore, the most recent efforts in cancer therapy centre on targeting
immune-mediated mechanisms of tumour evasion. The ability to assess gene
expression profiles from isolated populations of tumour-infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs) can assist in monitoring checkpoint inhibitor therapy
efficacy and provide a better understanding of clinical outcomes.
Ideally, transcriptional profiles should be obtained from isolated cell
populations of interest, free from contaminating cell populations that
may create adverse background noise. Micro sampling by laser capture
microdissection is a powerful tool that allows for specific analysis from
whole tissues, particularly in a heterogeneous microenvironment such as
in a tumour, where less well represented target cells are dwarfed in
abundance by tissue stroma and other cell types. However, whilst the
application is potentially powerful for target discovery and mechanistic
understanding, the process is notoriously difficult, particularly in
clinical specimens. We developed a methodology to successfully overcome
these challenges in analysing target cells, organelles or other tissue
subsets by transcriptional profiling following immunostain-mediated laser
capture microscopy (LCM). Thorough optimisation of traditional
immunohistochemistry techniques enabled us to select target cell
populations of interest from tissue sections whilst minimising
degradation of mRNA and miRNA allowing us to perform genomic and pathway
interrogation using microarray and/or RT-qPCR analysis. Our technique
allows multiple capture types per slide, sample pooling when required,
high capture throughput and capture image documentation. Multiple target
selection, to differentiate lymphocytes, can be performed routinely using
comparative serial sectioning. Here we exhibit simple staining and
immunostaining histology images using methods sympathetic to RNA
integrity which allow for target selection by specific staining or target
morphology, and demonstrate comparative analysis of matched pairs of
disease and healthy sections of colon tumours. We used a Palm MicroBeam 4
LCM platform to identify, cut and specifically capture CD8+
tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes from frozen embedded tissue. This
approach enabled us to isolate discrete targeted cell populations free
from contaminating cell populations. Epistem’s Single Cell RNA-Amp™
was then used to provide robust and linear amplification of RNA and
enable comparative analysis in applications such as target discovery and
pharmacodynamics. The results indicated that transcriptional profiling
was technically robust with a good replicate correlation despite the
limited input obtained by micro-sampling.


