Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down-regulation of c-MYC and hTERT gene expression in triple
negative breast cancer.


Breast cancer is the most common cancer affecting women, with about 1.4
million new cases diagnosed each year. Triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC) which is characterized by lack of expression of estrogen,
progesterone and human epidermal growth factor receptors. Is the most
aggressive group of tumors associated with a poor prognosis (15% of all
mammary tumors). Previous studies have shown that specific G-rich genomic
sequences in the promoters of multiple human genes can form G-quadruplex
structures, resulting in decreased transcription and gene expression.
These regions are generally found within gene promoters especially of
oncogenes such as c-MYC, KRAS, VEGF, BCL2 or hTERT. Most of these genes
are abnormally expressed in breast cancer. The c-MYC gene regulates a
large array of genes essential for cell functions including
proliferation, metabolism, differentiation, adhesion and apoptosis. We
have recently shown that oligonucleotides encoding the G-quadruplex
sequence of the c-MYC, VEGF or hTERT promoters down regulate expression
of their respective genes and inhibit cell proliferation. We hypothesized
that such oligonucleotides could be applied to breast cancer cell lines
in order to inhibit cell proliferation and metastasis. In this study, we
evaluated the effect of oligonucleotides targeted to c-MYC (Pu27 and Pu27
Palmi), KRAS (KRASq), VEGF (VEGFq), hTERT (Tert-FL) and BCL2 (BCL2q) in
Breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231, SKBR3, MCF7) and MCF10A
(non-transformed mammary cells). The effect of each oligonucleotide on
cell growth was evaluated using the MTT assay. Our results reveal that
all oligos inhibit cell growth of MDA-MB-231. However, for SKBR3 and
MCF7, only Tert-FL had growth inhibitory activity. The control cell line,
MCF10A, did not respond suggesting that the oligonucleotides affect
preferentially tumor cells. The effect of the oligonucleotides on gene
expression (qRT-PCR) was performed on MDA-MB-231 exposed for 3 days. The
analysis of gene expression shows the downregulation of c-MYC by Pu27 and
hTERT by Tert-FL suggesting a direct effect on gene expression. In
addition, Pu27 downregulated hTERT and VEGF which are both under c-MYC
control. Since MDA-MB-231 is a TNBC cell line overexpressing c-MYC and is
highly enriched in cancer stem cells, we evaluate the effect of Pu27 and
Tert-FL on the tumorsphere formation. The results showed a very strong
inhibition of tumorsphere formation in the cells treated with Pu27. Our
findings suggest that oligonucleotides which target genes such as c-MYC,
hTERT or KRAS very efficiently inhibit the growth of BC cell lines in
particular MDA-MB-231 TN most likely by downregulating target gene
expression. In addition, we demonstrate that downregulating c-MYC
expression Pu27 dramatically reduces the cancer stem cell numbers. The
use of G-quadruplex forming oligonucleotides targeted to c-MYC and /or
hTERT may constitute a new therapeutic strategy especially for TNBC where
targeted therapy is lacking.


