Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Emerging role of Fra-1 as a novel target for radiosensitization in
HPV-associated cancers.


Background: Activator protein-1 (AP-1) plays a central role in
HPV-mediated cervical and tongue cancer (subset of HNSCC). AP-1, a
homo/heterodimeric protein composed of Jun and Fos family proteins, has
been implicated in chemoradioresistance but the mechanism(s) remained
unexplored. In the present study, AP-1 family protein Fra-1 has been
shown to play a critical role in promoting radiosensitization in enriched
cervical cancer stem-like cells (CaCxSLCs) and can serve as a target for
drug intervention in cervical and other HPV associated cancers.

Experimental Procedure: Cervical cancer stem-like cells (CaCxSLCs) were
isolated and enriched by sequential gating HPV+ve and HPV-ve human
cervical cancer cell lines, SiHa, and C33a using a set of functional and
phenotypic markers (ABCG2, CD49f, CD71, CD133) in defined conditioned
media (DCM) with intermittent culturing. CaCxSLCs were also assessed for
their cervicosphere forming ability, exclusion of DCV dye for generating
SP cells, self renewability and quiescenceness.

Both CaCxSLCs and Non CaCxSLCs were exposed to different dose of UV
irradiation and a herbal compound curcumin, a potent inhibitor of AP-1
was used to examine the role of AP-1 and its family proteins in the
radiosensitization of cancer stem cells.

Results: Upon UV irradiation, CaCxSLCs showed a dose-dependent higher
proliferation and highly increased AP-1 activity whereas it was
completely abolished in non-stem cancer cells. CaCxSLCs also showed
differential overexpression of c-Fos and c-Jun at transcript as well as
in protein level. The loss of AP-1 activity and expression was
accompanied by decrease in cell viability and proliferation in UV
irradiated non-stem cancer cells. Interestingly, CaCxSLCs treated with
curcumin prior to UV irradiation abolished AP-1 activity and a
concomitant reduction in SP cells leading to abrogation of sphere forming
ability, loss of proliferation, induction of apoptosis and the cells were
poorly tumorigenic. The curcumin pre-treatment abolished the expression
of c-Fos and c-Jun but upregulated Fra-1 expression in irradiated
CaCxSLCs.

Conclusion: The study suggests a critical role of AP-1 protein in the
manifestation of radioresistance but curcumin pretreatment helps in
radiosensitizing CaCxSLCs through upregulation of Fra-1 which may serve
as a potential target for elimination of radioresistant cancer stem cells
in HPV-associated malignancies.


