Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced endocytosis as a metabolic detour for cancer cells.


INTRODUCTION: Metabolic defects impair physiology and life cycle of every
somatic cell. However, emerging evidence showed abnormalities in
metabolic pathways paradoxically serve as initial steps in many types of
human cancers. Little is known about the molecular mechanisms that confer
metabolic adaptation and oncogenic predisposition for a transforming cell
with intrinsic metabolic defect. In the present study, we explore the
molecular mechanism that assists cellular adaptation when confronting
metabolic deficiency, and its correlation acquisition of aggressive
phenotypes.

METHOD: We took advantage of clinical cases and in vitro cellular models
with neomorphic IDH1 mutations, as a paradigm of metabolic
deficiency-associated cancer. We investigated whole transcriptomic
profiling based on RNA sequencing on IDH1-mutated cells and seek for
selective activated canonical pathways. As a validation, we investigated
the signature pathways in IDH1-mutated cells, with a focus on
cytoskeleton assembly, cellular migration and endocytosis. Moreover, we
investigated mTORC pathway and identified its pivotal role in the
metabolic adaptation and cellular motility changes in IDH1-mutated cells.

RESULTS: Transcriptomic profiling suggested profound activation in
molecular pathways that govern cell movement, endocytosis, chemotaxis and
invasion in IDH1-mutated cells. Hierarchical clustering analysis
suggested that acquisition of R132C or R132H IDH1 mutant leads to
consistent activation pattern for cellular movement. In addition, we
confirmed that IDH1-mutated cells exhibit stronger capacity in cellular
migration, endocytosis and cytoskeleton re-organization. Importantly, we
demonstrated remarkable enhancement in endocytosis pathways in
IDH1-mutated cells, suggesting cellular transformation eases metabolite
uptake for metabolic deficient cell. Finally, we demonstrated that
Rictor/mTORC2/Rac1 pathway is selectively activated in IDH1-mutated
glioma cells, which is essential to enable cytoskeleton mobilization,
endocytosis and acquisition of aggressive phenotype in transforming cells.

CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate that metabolic deficiency leads to
enhancement in food seeking behavior in cellular level, highlighted with
enhanced cell motility, chemotaxis, and endocytosis; suggesting that this
is an important molecular mechanism in cellular transformation during
oncogenesis. This phenotypic transformation provides additional carbon
sources, compensating for IDH mutation related alterations and may help
explain the enhanced cell migration and invasion characteristic of these
cancers.


