Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of capecitabine in chemoresistant PDX established from
triple-negative breast cancers with residual disease after neoadjuvant
chemotherapy.


Background: triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients with residual
disease following neoadjuvant chemotherapy have a high risk of relapse
and poor survival. Conventional treatments for relapsed patients are
limited, particularly, because standard chemotherapeutic regimens
containing anthracyclines and taxanes have usually already been given in
the neoadjuvant settings. Our objectives were 1) to identify efficient
chemotherapies in patient-derived xenografts (PDX) established from
residual TNBC and 2) to determine feasibility of PDX establishment and
drug testing before tumor recurrence in patients. Methods: tumors from 51
patients with residual disease at surgery were transplanted in nude mice.
Established TNBC PDX were treated with different chemotherapies used in
early stages and metastatic settings: anthracyclines combined to
cyclophosphamide (AC), taxanes, platins, capecitabine and gemcitabine.
Drug responses in PDX were compared to responses in patients who recurred
after surgery and were treated in the metastatic setting. Results:
overall tumor take of residual tumors was 40% and 75% for TNBC, with
15/20 PDX established, more than twice the tumor take of treatment naïve
TNBC (34%). Median latency time, defined as time from implantation till
first tumour growth, was only 60 days and was further reduced to 3-4
weeks during successive tumor passages. On the 8 TNBC PDX evaluated for
chemosensitivity, 7 exhibited a multidrug-resistance phenotype with
resistance or limited response to AC, taxanes and platins. Capecitabine,
a chemotherapy given in the advanced stage as second or third line, was
efficient in 5 out of 8 PDX tested with 3 models showing stable disease
and 2 models durable tumor regressions. Interestingly, capecitabine
efficacy was decreased when xenografts were pre-treated with a first line
containing platins, suggesting that in some tumors capecitabine might
have superior activity when given in the adjuvant setting or as a first
line. In one third of TNBC patients, time to recurrence, comprised
between 7 and 12 months after surgery, was compatible with xenograft
establishment and drug testing. Conclusions and perspectives: we
established a unique panel of PDX models from patients with residual
disease after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. These aggressive PDX recapitulate
the resistance phenotype of patients’ tumors to treatments given in
neo-adjuvant and metastatic settings. We identified capecitabine as
efficient first line chemotherapy for residual chemoresistant PDX. In 30%
of cases, PDX models could have been used to evaluate chemotherapy
responses before tumor recurrence occur in patients. In order to identify
predictive biomarkers of capecitabine response, additional experiments
are ongoing in 25 supplementary TNBC PDX, established from
treatment-naïve patients.


