Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Studying senescence in prostate of selenium treated rats
undergoing carcinogen-induced, androgen-promoted prostate carcinogenesis.


Preclinical studies from us and others have shown that oral intake of
next-generation selenium (Se) forms, especially methylseleninic acid
(MSeA) and Se-methylselenocysteine (MSeC) inhibits mouse prostate
carcinogenesis. Our recent study has shown that MSeA suppresses
pten-deficient mouse high grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia
progression to adenocarcinoma in association with superactivating p53-p21
mediated cellular senescence. To address the question whether the
activation of senescence is induced in prostate carcinogenesis driven by
different etiology, we sought to test the in vivo effect of different
selenium forms fed to rats undergoing chemically induced, androgen
promoted prostate carcinogenesis. Wistar-Unilever (WU) rats (10-12 wks)
were sequentially treated with androgen receptor blocker flutamide for 21
days (10 mg/kg/day by gavage), followed by testosterone propionate (TP,
10 mg/kg, s.c) on day 22. Three days after TP, chemical carcinogen
methylnitrosourea (MNU, 30 mg/kg/bw) was administered by i.p. injection.
One week later, the rats received testosterone-containing silastic
implants. Rats were randomized to groups fed the AIN-93M diet or
supplemented with 3 ppm of Se as MSeA, MSeC, or selenomethionine (SeMet).
Separate groups of rats were fed these diets, but did not receive the
carcinogen treatment. After 16 weeks of this dietary treatment, rats were
euthanized. Blood, major organs and different prostate lobes were
dissected and weighed. The body weight of carcinogen-exposed rats was
significantly lower than their non-carcinogen-exposed counterparts.
However, total prostate complex weight was higher in carcinogen-treated
groups than the non-carcinogen groups, consistent with MNU and
extra-testicular androgen promoting prostate epithelial cell
proliferation. There were no significant organ-to-body weight ratio
differences of various prostate lobes in the different dietary groups,
regardless of the carcinogen exposure status. In order to test the
involvement of senescence in prostate of rats fed different Se diets, we
have undertaken steps to optimize staining method for
senescence-associated β-galactosidase (SA-βgal) activity in different
lobes of prostate frozen sections. Together, with whole slide imaging
using an Aperio Digital Pathology Scanner for quantitation, we are
afforded an approach for more objective interrogation of the role of
senescence in this carcinogenesis model and chemoprevention by selenium
compounds.


