Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methotrexate prevents primary immune responses against recombinant
immunotoxin in murine models.


Recombinant immunotoxins (rITs) are composed of a tumor antigen-targeting
antibody fragment fused to a portion of Pseudomonas exotoxin A. rITs have
been effective in clinical trials for patients with hematologic
malignancies. The CD22 targeting rIT Moxetumomab Pasudotox has achieved
overall response rates of 86% and complete remission rates of 46% in
patients with relapsed-refractory Hairy Cell Leukemia. However, the
therapeutic efficacy of rITs against solid tumors is limited by their
immunogenicity in immune-competent patients. In clinical trials to treat
mesothelioma patients with SS1P, a rIT targeting mesothelin, 90% of
patients developed neutralizing antibodies against SS1P after one cycle
of treatment. When immunosuppressive chemotherapy and SS1P were combined,
more cycles of rIT could be given and several patients with advanced
chemo-refractory mesothelioma had striking tumor regressions. This
implicates high therapeutic potential for rITs against solid tumors once
immunogenicity is surmounted.

Methotrexate (MTX) is a folate antagonist which interferes with purine
biosynthesis, and is used to treat osteosarcomas and other cancers. MTX
also interferes with T cell responses and is used to treat autoimmune
diseases. Based on its immunosuppressive properties, Joly et al.
demonstrated that low-dose MTX prevented the formation of ADAs against
recombinant human alglucosidase alfa in mice in an antigen-specific
manner. We hypothesized that MTX would similarly prevent the formation of
ADAs against rITs in an antigen-specific manner. To test our hypotheses,
mice were treated with the mesothelin-targeting rIT RG7787 with or
without MTX given 0, 24, and 48 hours after RG7787 treatment. Serum was
collected and anti-RG7787 ADAs were measured by direct ELISA. We found
that six doses of RG7787 combined with low dose MTX (1 mg/kg) inhibited
the formation of ADAs against RG7787. This inhibition was sustained
through six challenges with RG7787 without additional MTX. Further, we
found that immunization with RG7787 plus MTX induced RG7787-specific
tolerance, and had no effect on the ADA response against a second
protein, ovalbumin.

We conclude that combination of MTX and RG7787 is effective at preventing
primary immune responses in a durable, antigen-specific manner. We
propose to combine this agent in immune-competent cancer patients
receiving rIT therapy to prevent rIT immunogenicity.


