Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance were decreased in spheroid
culture platform.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer related death in the world.
Platinum-based combination regimen or molecular target drugs, such as
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) are used for first line
chemotherapy of non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Somatic mutation in
the tyrosine kinase domain of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
have been identified in NSCLC and those mutations confer sensitivity to
the EGFR-TKIs such as gefitinib. Unfortunately, it is already known that
the almost cases are developed to drug resistance after chemotherapy.
Several EGFR-TKI resistant mechanisms have been reported, including T790M
gefitinib/erlotinib resistance mutation, C797S osimertinib resistant
mutation, c-MET amplification and ErbB3 activation. In the previous
study, we revealed that the miRNA biosynthesis pathway was critical for
maintain the cisplatin resistant phenotype. Further, it was reported that
EGFR modulated miRNA maturation through the phosphorylation of AGO2.
Protein phosphorylation is one of most important post transcriptional
modification mechanisms and miRNA is also associated with fine tuning of
mRNA expression. Thus, we focused on the relationship between miRNA
expression and kinase signaling in gefitinib resistance.Generally,
developed resistant cell lines and cell culture techniques were used in
resistance research. However, some resistance mechanisms observed in
cultured cells are not reflected the in vivo. Recently, some
three-dimensional (3D) cell culture techniques are developed and expected
to bridge the gap between normal cell culture and in vivo models. In this
study, we attempted to analyze the resistant mechanism of gefitinib
resistant cell lines in suspended spheroid culture using RPMI1640 medium
containing suspension polymer, FP001. We screened differences of relative
resistance to anticancer compounds in 3D culture and normal culture
condition using chemical library and ATP assay. As results; we revealed
that ErbB3 and Akt phosphorylation levels were significantly decreased in
spheroid formed from resistant cell lines in 3D culture condition
compared to these levels with normal culture condition. On the other
hand, miR-205 levels remain high in all resistant cell lines.
Furthermore, some anticancer agents, including kinase inhibitors showed
higher sensitivity in resistant cell lines under 3D condition than that
under normal cell culture. We speculate that the decreased resistance
depends on normal culture in plastic dish and remaining resistant
mechanism in 3D culture is important and similar to in vivo. In
conclusion, this approach with 3D culture is more close to in vivo, such
as xenograft model, and promising contribute to drug resistance research.


