Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proton-sensor GPR4 potentiates intestinal inflammation in the
DSS-induced colitis mouse model.


Inflammation and tissue acidosis are two factors that co-exist in
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and can contribute to increased risk of
colorectal cancer (CRC) development. GPR4 is a proton-sensing G
protein-coupled receptor that can be activated by extracellular acidosis
through several histidine residues and subsequently signal through
downstream G-protein pathways. Recently, GPR4 has been shown to be
activated by acidosis and can increase the expression of numerous
inflammatory and stress response genes in vascular endothelial cells
(ECs) and has functionally increased EC-leukocyte adhesion. Subsequently,
genetic and small molecule approaches for the inhibition of GPR4 activity
have reduced endothelial cell inflammation. In this study, we examined
the role of GPR4 in intestinal inflammation using a dextran sulfate
sodium (DSS)-induced colitis mouse model. We observed that GPR4 mRNA
expression was increased in mouse and human IBD tissues when compared to
control intestinal tissues. To determine the function of GPR4 in
intestinal inflammation, wild-type and GPR4-deficient mice were treated
with 3% DSS for acute and chronic time points for the induction of
colitis. Our results showed that the severity of colitis was decreased in
GPR4-deficient DSS-treated mice in comparison to wild-type DSS-treated
mice. Clinical parameters, macroscopic disease indicators, and
histopathological features were less severe in the DSS-treated
GPR4-deficient mice than the DSS-treated wild-type mice. Inflammatory
gene expression, endothelial adhesion molecule expression, leukocyte
infiltration, and isolated lymphoid follicle (ILF) formation were reduced
in intestinal tissues of DSS-treated GPR4-null mice. In summary, our
results suggest GPR4 potentiates intestinal inflammation as the absence
of GPR4 ameliorates intestinal inflammation in the DSS-induced colitis
mouse model. Use of GPR4 inhibitors could prove a valuable therapeutic in
the reduction of intestinal inflammation and subsequent CRC development.


