Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of immune checkpoint genes revealed by a melanoma tumor
cancer genome atlas (TCGA) analysis - potential implications for
improving immunotherapy.


Introduction: The interface between T lymphocytes and cancer or antigen
presenting cells (C/APCs) is multi-faceted and complex. This interface,
now designated 'the immunological synapse', comprises of both
co-inhibitory and co-stimulatory transmembrane protein pairs ('checkpoint
proteins') that all serve to modulate the signal transmitted to the T
lymphocyte, leading to either activation, anergy or exhaustion. Immune
checkpoint inhibitors have anti-neoplastic activity in a wide range of
malignancies, but not all cancers and not all patients with a given
cancer respond to the currently available checkpoint inhibitors.
Micro-RNAs (miRNAs) are short intracellular RNA molecules known to be
master regulators of gene expression. Our aim was to study the
associations between a miRNA that was previously implicated in cancer and
immune checkpoint genes.

Methods: Bioinformatic analyses of the expression of mRNAs and miRNAs
from 451 samples was performed using the melanoma TCGA database.
Correlation coefficients between the expression of mRNAs or mRNAs/miRNAs
were calculated using the Spearman rho method. Survival analysis was
performed using the Kaplan-Meier method. Potential 3'UTR binding sites of
miRNAs were found using the web-based tool www.targetscan.org.

Results: Of 22 mRNAs of checkpoint genes assessed, the expression of 19
was highly positively correlated to each other. These mRNAs code for both
co-inhibitory and co-stimulatory proteins at the T cell and the C/APC
sides of the immunological synapse, suggesting that there is joint
transcriptional regulation on the expression of these checkpoint genes.
The expression of one specific miRNA was also significantly positively
correlated with the expression of eight of these checkpoint mRNAs (PD1L,
PD1L, B7.1, ICOS, BTLA, LAG3, CTLA4, TNFRSF9). The significant positive
correlation between this miRNA and B7.1 and PD1L was verified in 18 cell
lines in vitro, with rho correlation coefficients of 0.72 and 0.61,
respectively (p=0.001 and 0.01, respectively). This possibly indicates a
joint transcriptional regulation on this miRNA and the mRNAs.
Bioinformatic analyses suggest that this miRNA may potentially target the
3'UTR of 6 of these mRNAs (PD1, PD1L, B7.1, ICOS, BTLA, TNFRSF9). Data
from 163 stage III melanoma patients with documented survival data show
that a high expression level of this miRNA and a low expression level of
either B7.1, B7.2, CD28, ICOS, ICOSL, OX40, OX40L, TNFRSF18 or PD1L was
each significantly associated with poor prognosis relative to all other
expression groups. Eight of these nine mRNAs are co-stimulatory.

Conclusions: It is tempting to speculate that aberrant co-regulation of
the miRNA-mRNAs, leading to high levels of the miRNA and low levels of
co-stimulatory checkpoint genes is associated with worse outcome,
potentially as a result of 'immune evasion' due to decreased
co-stimulation at the synapse.


