Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptomic profiling of two canine mammary cancer cell lines
for translational oncology studies.


Dogs develop spontaneous cancers as humans and shares a variety of
features including histology, genomic alterations, molecular targets,
biological behavior and response to conventional therapies. Although dogs
can be considered good models for translation of new cancer treatments,
there is a lack of established preclinical in vitro models of canine
cancers. Therefore, our aim here was to establish two canine mammary
cancer cell lines and characterize their transcriptomic profile to speed
the translation of new cancer treatments from dogs to humans. Mammary
cancer samples were obtained from female dogs that underwent surgery.
Pieces of the tumors were FFPE for histopathology and the other fragments
were washed with PBS, minced and dissociated with hyaluronidase and
collagenase. Cells were filtered and put in culture with DMEM-F12, 5%FBS
and 1% pen-strep. After 5 passages, FBS was increased to 10%. After
passage 15, cells were characterized for doubling time, karyotype,
immunocytochemistry for cytokeratin, vimentin and α-smooth muscle actin,
matrigel-invasion assay and tumor growth in nude mice. At last, RNA-seq
was performed on total RNA extracted with TRIZOL for functional
enrichment analysis of differentially expressed (DE) genes from cancer
cell lines. From 49 tumor samples, we characterized 2 cell lines named M5
and M25, originally from a comedocarcinoma and a mixed carcinoma,
respectively. Both cell cultures showed spindle-shape cells and were
positive for cytokeratin, vimentin and α-smooth actin, suggesting
myoepithelial origin. The doubling time was 26.0h for M5 and 42.8h for
M25 cells. Karyotyping analysis showed moderate aneuploidy for both cell
cultures. M25 cell line presented significant higher invasion potential
than M5 cells and formed tumors in mice but the latter didn’t.
Histopathology of these tumors resembled the original tumor in the dog.
An average of 16.2 million paired-end 100 bp reads were sequenced per
replicate (three for each cell culture) with an average of 81.1%
alignment to the reference genome. A total of 11,260 and 11,476 genes
with more than 1 count per million were detected in M5 and M25 cell
lines. M5 cell line have 404 and 394 up- and downregulated genes in
comparison to M25 cell line, respectively. Gene ontology of DE genes
showed the more malignant cell (M25) significantly enriched for pathways
related to drug metabolism, ECM-receptor interaction, cell cycle, DNA
replication, focal adhesion and cell differentiation. In conclusion, M25
cell line is more malignant than the M5 which is supported by their
transcriptome. Thus, it is possible to use these cells as a comparative
translational model for drug development especially if one wishes to work
with molecular targets as described above.


