Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Siramesine and lapatinib induce ferroptosis in glioblastoma and
lung adenocarcinoma cells.


Ferroptosis, a morphologically and biochemically distinct cell death
pathway, is characterized by iron-dependent accumulation of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) within the cell. The combination of siramesine, a
lysosome disruptor, and lapatinib, a dual tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has
been shown to synergistically induce cell death in breast cancer cells.
This cell death was blocked by the ferroptosis inhibitor ferrostatin-1
(Fer-1) and the iron chelator deferoxamine (DFO). The objective of the
present study was to determine whether lysosome disruptors and tyrosine
kinase inhibitors, in combination, induced synergic cell death via the
ferroptotic pathway in additional types of cancer. U87 (glioblastoma) and
A549 (lung adenocarcinoma) cells were treated with various lysosome
disruptors (siramesine or desipramine) in combination with tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (lapatinib or sorafenib), and the amount of cell death
was measured by trypan blue exclusion. We found that these combinations
synergistically induced cell death in U87 and A549 cells. To determine
whether ferroptosis was the mechanism of cell death, cells were
pretreated with either Fer-1 or DFO (inhibitors of ferroptosis), or with
exogenous iron chloride (an inducer of ferroptosis) before treatment with
the combination of siramesine and lapatinib. Pretreatment with Fer-1 or
DFO decreased cell death by approximately 35%. Pretreatment with iron
chloride increased the effect of the drug combination by approximately
45%. Prussian Blue staining demonstrated that there was an increase in
intracellular iron accumulation following treatment with the combination
of siramesine and lapatinib. Collectively, these data show that in U87
and A549 cells, the combination of lysosome disruptors and tyrosine
kinase inhibitors, specifically siramesine and lapatinib, induces
ferroptotic cell death. Therefore, inducing ferroptosis in tumor cells is
a potential strategy for therapy in these cancers with limited treatment
options.


