Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating lung tumor cells capture extracellular vesicles
conferring resistance phenotype by the occurrence of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition reprogramming.


Background: The overall prognosis of lung cancer patients remains dismal,
in particular at advanced stages. Only complete surgical resection of
early-stage tumors improves the prognosis of certain non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients. However, migration of circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) into the blood stream is probably an early event of carcinogenesis
inducing metastases. The fact that some of these CTCs could survive
within this “liquid environment” suggest that they acquire phenotypic
changes that would confer them improved resistance against anoikis. In
this context, we looked if immune blood cells could transfer to CTCs some
factors associated with this increased resistance.

Materials and Methods: Lung cancer cells (A549 cell line) were incubated
with different sub-population of blood cells (PBMCs, granulocytes,
platelets) and serum to look for potential transfer of extracellular
vesicles (EVs) into the cancer cells. To assess the inter-cell transfer
we looked for the presence of a validated blood cell specific marker the
miR-223 that should not be expressed in lung cancer cells. By using a
direct method for CTCs detection and characterization, we looked for
these biomarkers within CTCs of lung cancer patients with early and late
stages. Moreover the quantification of these biomarkers was correlated
with the expression of vimentin, cytokeratin and E-cadherin

Results: First, A549 cells were able to quickly capture microRNA (in
particular miR-223) within the control blood samples. We then identified
neutrophils as a major source of these miRNA. The inter-cell transfer was
EVs dependent and promoted improved resistance and survival of A549 cells
cancer cells. In NSCLC patients with different stages, the presence of
some specific miRNAs for blood cells was detected in a subpopulation of
CTCs showing epithelial to mesenchymal phenotype, in particular an
increase of vimentin expression and loss of E-cadherin expression.

Conclusion: These results tend to prove that CTCs may capture
extracellular vesicles from immune blood cells within the bloodstream and
this phenomenon may be associated with a more aggressive phenotype.
Inhibition of specific EVs transfer could be on interest for development
of new targeted immunotherapies.


