Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of proliferating tumor cells in orthotopic xenografts
initiated from glioblastoma stem-like cells and the influence of
radiation.


Brain tumor xenografts initiated from human glioblastoma (GBM) stem-like
cells (GSCs) simulate many of the characteristics of GBMs in situ
including extensive invasiveness, phenotypic heterogeneity and
radioresistance. As an approach to investigating the relationship between
these aspects of GBM biology and tumor cell proliferation, we used the
halogenated thymidine analog CldU (5-chloro-2'-deoxyuridine), which is
incorporated into DNA during S-phase, to identify proliferating cells in
orthotopic brain tumor xenografts. Specifically, CD133+ NSC11 GSCs were
implanted into the right striatum of nude mice; at various times after
tumor cell implantation CldU was delivered in a series of daily
intraperitoneal (IP) injections. Subsequent immunohistochemical analyses
of CldU incorporation along with the GSC marker SOX2 was then used to
determine the percentage of proliferating tumor cells in the mouse brain.
NSC11 tumors are first detectable using bioluminescent imaging (BLI) at
day 21 post-implantation. After 4 daily injections of CldU beginning on
Day 21, approximately 60% and 30% of tumor cells were CldU positive in
the white matter (corpus callosum) and grey matter (striatum),
respectively. However, when CldU injections were initiated on Day 28
post-implantation, approximately 80% of cells were positive in both
tissue locations after 4 doses, which corresponds to a rapid tumor growth
phase according to bioluminescent imaging. Tumor cells were also detected
in the left hemisphere and had lower percentages of CldU positive cells
as compared to the right hemisphere (site of implantation), which
illustrates the extensive invasive capacity of this GSC line and is
consistent with the “grow or go” concept whereby GBM cells switch
between proliferative and migratory states. NSC11 cells also displayed
the hallmark GBM cell migration along white matter tracts. To determine
the pattern of proliferating tumor cell after irradiation, NSC11 brain
tumor xenografts received three daily doses of 12Gy, which results in an
approximate 10-day survival advantage, followed by a series of 4 daily IP
injections of CldU. After the 4 doses of CldU, approximately 2% of tumors
cells were CldU positive in the white matter of the 3x12Gy-treated tumors
and no proliferating cells were detected in the grey matter. These values
can be compared to 50% and 40% CldU positive cells in the white and grey
matter, respectively, of the sham irradiated tumors. When the CldU
injections were initiated 4 days post-3x12Gy, discrete pockets of CldU
positive tumor cells began appearing in both white and grey matter from
7-8 days after the completion of radiation treatment. These pockets of
proliferating cells may reflect radioresistant subpopulations and provide
a framework to further characterize radioresistance based on phenotype
and/or microenvironmental niche.


