Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cysteamine suppresses tumor metastasis by inhibiting activity of
matrix metalloproteases without inducing toxicity in mouse models of
human ovarian cancer.


Previously, we demonstrated that cysteamine, a small molecule inhibitor
of matrixmetalloproteases (MMPs), inhibited tumor invasion in vitro and
metastasis in vivo in mouse models of human pancreatic and ovarian
cancer. We have also shown that subcutaneous cysteamine administration
improved the survival of mice with orthotopically transplanted pancreatic
tumors. Herein, we examined the effect of cysteamine on total MMP
activity, MMP isoforms and activity by substrate gel zymography in tumors
obtained from orthotopic mouse model of human ovarian cancer. We also
investigated any gastro-intestinal and general toxicity in vital organs
of mice treated with the highest dose of cysteamine (250 mg/kg). We
developed orthotopic tumors by injecting two human ovarian cancer cell
lines in the ovary of female athymic nude mice. After 4 days of tumor
implant, the mice were treated with different doses of cysteamine and
followed for 5 weeks. Total MMP activity by fluorogenic substrate, MMP-2,
9 and 14 by ELISA and MMP activity by substrate gel zymography were
measured in tumor lysates and compared with untreated tumors. We
performed H&E staining in vital organs such as heart, lung, liver,
kidney, spleen and brain for evaluating general toxicity of cysteamine.
In addition, we examined stomach and duodenum from cysteamine treated and
vehicle treated mice if they developed any ulcerations. In two orthotopic
murine models of human ovarian cancer, consistent with our previous
observations, tumor metastasis was significantly decreased compared to
controls in cysteamine treated mice. Similarly, total MMP activity was
also significantly decreased in primary tumors treated with cysteamine in
a dose dependent manner (P≤0.05). Zymographic MMP activity was also
decreased significantly in cysteamine treated tumors compared to control
corroborating with total MMP activity (P≤0.05). Interestingly, ELISA
did not show any changes in MMP expression in cysteamine treated and
untreated tumors. Furthermore, we did not observe any symptoms of general
toxicity in animals treated at the highest dose of cysteamine and major
vital organs and gastro-intestinal organs from treated animals showed no
evidence of histological changes as evident by H&E staining. In
conclusion, our results suggest that cysteamine is a potent inhibitor of
MMP activity without affecting expression. Cysteamine does not cause any
gastro-intestinal or vital organ toxicity and may be useful therapeutic
agent for ovarian cancer either alone or in combination therapy with
known anti-cancer agents.


