Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel methods for enrichment of mutations and differentially
methylated sequences from liquid biopsy genomes.


Presence of excess unaltered, wild-type DNA providing no information of
biological or clinical value may often mask rare alterations containing
diagnostic or therapeutic clues for cancer. With the surge of
high-throughput technologies there is a growing demand for removing
unaltered DNA over large pools-of-sequences. Here we present
nuclease-assisted minor-allele enrichment with probe-overlap (NaME-PrO),
a single-step approach with broad genome-coverage that removes WT-DNA
prior to DNA-amplification, following which current genomic analysis
processes remain unchanged. NaME-PrO employs a double-strand-DNA-specific
nuclease and overlapping oligonucleotide-probes interrogating multiple
DNA targets. Following genomic-DNA denaturation, or upon partial
denaturation, the probes form transient double-stranded regions with
their targets, thereby guiding nuclease digestion to selected sites.
Mutations create mismatches that inhibit digestion, thus subsequent
amplification yields DNA with alterations enhanced at multiple targets.
In this manner, WT DNA at hundreds or thousands of DNA regions can be
digested simultaneously. We demonstrate several-hundred-fold multiplexed
mutation-enrichment in diverse human samples on multiple
clinically-relevant targets in 50-247-plex reactions. By adjusting
conditions it is possible to sequence mutations down to 0.00003%
abundance, essentially isolating mutated-DNA. Application with targeted
re-sequencing of tumor-circulating DNA (cfDNA) demonstrated detection of
mutations at the 0.01-0.1% levels with few sequence reads.

In another adaptation of the same approach in the field of methylation
detection, we developed methylation-sensitive nuclease-assisted minor
allele enrichment, MS-NaME. Aberrant methylation changes, often present
in a minor allelic fraction in clinical samples such as cfDNA, are
potentially powerful prognostic and predictive cancer biomarkers. During
MS-NaME, oligonucleotide probes targeting unmethylated sequences in
bisulfite-treated DNA generate local double stranded regions resulting to
digestion of unmethylated targets, and leaving methylated targets intact;
and vice versa. We validated MS-NaME by demonstrating enrichment of
promoters from cancer-related genes like RARb2, ATM, MGMT and GSTP1 in
multiplexed 177-plex reactions using dilutions of methylated/unmethylated
DNA as well as clinical lung cancer samples and matched normal tissue.
NaME-PrO and MS-NaME introduce simple, low-cost, broad genomic coverage
processes that combine seamlessly with next

generation sequencing. This reveals clinically useful DNA alterations
that normally would stay undetectable or require very high read-depth to
be detected. Applications in liquid biopsy-based diagnostics using
circulating DNA will be presented.


