Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of endocytosis in NM23 mediated motility suppression.


NM23 has been identified as a metastasis suppressor gene and is known to
inhibit motility of cancer cells and suppress metastasis in multiple in
vivo model system. Biochemically, NM23 is a nucleoside diphosphate kinase
(NDPK). As an NDPK, NM23 is first autophosphorylated on its histidine 118
before transferring its phosphate to an NDP. NM23 is also known to
trans-phosphorylate other proteins to act as a protein histidine kinase
(PHK) using same histidine H118 phosphorylation intermediate. In spite of
many studies on NM23 in different cancers, the molecular mechanism of
NM23 action has not been well worked out. Studies on Drosophila homologue
of the NM23, awd, highlights its role in regulating cell differentiation
and motility by influencing endocytosis. We now hypothesize that NM23
mediated motility/metastasis suppression could be due to increased
endocytosis of cell surface receptors, needed for cellular motility. We
over expressed NM23 (human H1 and H2 and murine h1) in MDA-MB-231T breast
cancer cells and observed that the motility suppression phenotype (4
fold, pNM23 has been identified as a metastasis suppressor gene and is
known to inhibit motility of cancer cells and suppress metastasis in
multiple in vivo model system. Biochemically, NM23 is a nucleoside
diphosphate kinase (NDPK). As an NDPK, NM23 is first autophosphorylated
on its histidine 118 before transferring its phosphate to an NDP. NM23 is
also known to trans-phosphorylate other proteins to act as a protein
histidine kinase (PHK) using same histidine H118 phosphorylation
intermediate. In spite of many studies on NM23 in different cancers, the
molecular mechanism of NM23 action has not been well worked out. Studies
on Drosophila homologue of the NM23, awd, highlights its role in
regulating cell differentiation and motility by influencing endocytosis.
We now hypothesize that NM23 mediated motility/metastasis suppression
could be due to increased endocytosis of cell surface receptors, needed
for cellular motility. We over expressed NM23 (human H1 and H2 and murine
h1) in MDA-MB-231T breast cancer cells and observed that the motility
suppression phenotype (4 fold, p<0.0001) of NM23 correlates with increase
in NM23 histidine auto phosphorylation, as observed by using a new
anti-histidine 1-phosphate (1-pHis) antibody. NM23 over expressing cells
were studied for the level of endocytosis using Transferrin-Alexa-594 and
pHrodo-Red-EGF labelled dyes. It was observed that NM23 over expression
causes increased endocytosis of both the above labelled ligands. Based on
the literature, Dynamin is known to be involved in endocytosis and is
also an interacting partner of NM23. We validated NM23 and Dynamin
interactions by pulldown studies (using both anti-NM23 and anti-Dynamin
antibodies) in NM23 over expressing cells. We also observed reduced
endocytosis with Dynamin inhibitors. Further, when a series of Dynamin
inhibitors (MiTMAB, OcTMAB, Dynole-34-2 and Iminodyn-22) were used in
motility assays, they were found to be inhibitory to motility. However,
no further decrease in motility was observed upon NM23 overexpression,
highlighting the reversal of NM23 mediated motility suppression in
absence of Dynamin. To further address the role of endocytosis in NM23
mediated motility suppression, two crucial mutants of NM23 namely; P96S
(has NDPK activity with very low HPK activity) and H118F (has no NDPK and
HPK activity) were made and stable cells were generated. We observed that
the motility suppression phenotype of NM23 was reverted to normal in both
the mutants, highlighting a possible role of HPK activity in motility
suppression. Similarly, endocytosis studies on these cells shows loss of
increased endocytosis in both the mutants. To date, the data indicate
that NM23 phosphohistidine levels, motility suppression and increased
endocytosis are well correlated and is being influenced by Dynamin
signaling. Different approaches to further understand the physiological
meaning of NM23-dynamin interactions are underway.





Monday, April 3, 2017


