Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of rapid 3-dimensional culture conditions that support
the in vitro differentiation of conditionally reprogrammed primary
prostate cells for the study of prostate cancer.


Despite decades of research into the causes and possible cures, prostate
cancer (PCa) remains the second leading cause of cancer related death in
men with over 26,000 deaths each year in the United States alone. While
many of the studies performed over the years have identified important
genes and signaling pathways that are involved in prostate
carcinogenesis, the fact remains that due to the limited and suboptimal
prostate cell lines available for correlative analyses, significant unmet
needs exist in validating clinical findings. With this realization, many
agencies such as the DOD and the NIH are funding more rapid and
clinically relevant patient derived models to fill a void in our
understanding of, and our ability to treat, cancer.

Our research has been on the forefront in development of a novel approach
to use patient samples for basic, preclinical and clinical applications,
significantly advancing personalized medicine with a revolutionary new
primary cell culture technique termed conditionally reprogrammed cells
(CRCs). In fact, the CRC approach is a major focus area of NIH U01/PAR
16-344.

We have pioneered the CRC technology for the rapid establishment and
expansion of patient-derived normal and cancerous prostate cell lines in
typical tissue culture conditions. We hypothesize that improved in vitro
and in vivo platforms using patient-derived prostate cells (e.g. CRCs)
are required for the elucidation and subsequent experimental verification
of key molecular and genetic drivers for PCa as well as better curative
approaches.

While prostate CRCs retain their lineage commitment, they fail to express
many of the differentiation markers associated with luminal prostate
cells when grown under normal two dimensional (2D) culture conditions. We
have therefore established three dimensional (3D) non-spheroid based
platforms for differentiation of both normal and malignant prostate CRCs.
These include both transwell-based systems and decellularized tissue
matrices that use defined differentiation medias to enable AR activation
and a luminal cell phenotype. We have now demonstrated the in vitro
re-engagement of key determinates in the AR pathway and differentiation
to luminal prostate cells.

Documentation of the proper engagement of AR signaling is a significant
step in developing a more accurate and tractable model for prostate
cancer research and distinguishing between indolent and aggressive
disease.


