Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cross-talk between BRAF and Hippo/YAP1 signaling in melanoma.


Hippo/YAP1 signaling pathway is a tumor suppressive pathway that controls
the organ size by modulating the cell growth, proliferation and apoptosis
and is conserved from Drosophila to mammals. In mammals, the Hippo tumor
suppressor pathway consists of cascade of kinases in which MST1/2
phosphorylates and activates LATS1/2. The latter phosphorylates the
oncogenic transcriptional coactivators YAP1 and TAZ, leading to their
cytoplasmic retention by 14-3-3 proteins and/or degradation. Inactivation
of MST and LATS kinases allows YAP1 and/ or TAZ nuclear translocation and
subsequent activation of their target genes.

Deregulation of Hippo pathway can induce tumors in model organisms and
occurs in wide range of human cancers including melanoma. Merlin, a key
component of this pathway which inhibits YAP1, is mutated/deleted in 8%
of melanoma. Majority of uveal melanomas are driven by Gq/11 mutations
that trigger YAP1 nuclear translocation, promoting tumor growth. High
levels of YAP1 in BRAFV600E mutant tumors confer resistance to RAF- and
MEK- targeted therapy in patients.

Our results show that YAP1 level is elevated in melanoma and the YAP1
inhibitor verteporfin alone or in combination with B-RAF inhibitor
PLX4720 reduces the viability, invasion and anchorage-independent growth
of B-RAF V600E mutant SK-MEL-28 and SK-MEL-5 cells. In addition,
verteporfin treatment also reduced the viability of PLX4720 resistant
1205 cells. Western blot analysis of verteporfin and PLX4720 treated
SK-MEL-28 and SK-MEL-5 cells displayed reduced levels of YAP1, B-RAF,
pERK, MEK and pMEK.

We also report a novel physical interaction between YAP1 and B-RAF; this
could be detected using double immunofluorescence and
immunoprecipitation-western blotting techniques in both B-RAF V600E
mutant and N-Ras mutant melanoma cells. Proximity ligation assays on
tissue microarray showed that YAP1-B-RAF interaction is elevated in
metastatic melanoma compared to normal skin. These novel findings
highlight the crosstalk between B-RAF and Hippo/YAP1 signaling which
might have a

potential role in melanoma development and progression. Further,
experiments are in progress to elucidate the functional significance of
YAP1-B-RAF interaction in melanoma.


