Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomere DNA damage promotes mammary gland fibrosis and estrogen
receptor-positive breast cancer.


Human breast luminal progenitor cells exhibit telomere DNA damage, which
is associated with mammographic density and increased cancer risk.
Telomeric repeat factor 2 (TRF2) protects telomeres from DNA damage
response and its expression is reduced in human ductal carcinoma in situ
and breast cancers. To determine the relationships between telomere DNA
damage, mammary gland biology, and cancer risk we genetically deleted
TRF2 expression in the mouse mammary gland. TRF2 conditional null mutant
mice also were bred with tumor prone MMTV-Wnt1 animals. Telomere DNA
damage response was determined by localization of 53BP1 at telomeres and
activation of ATM/Chk2/p53 signaling by western blot. Mammary gland and
tumor histopathology were determined by hematoxylin and eosin staining.
Cell proliferation and ER+ differentiation was determined by
immunohistochemistry. Tumor derived CD24+/CD49f+ mammary stem cells and
CD61+ luminal progenitor cells were transplanted to mammary fat pads of
immunodeficient mice. Alternative lengthening of telomeres was determined
by PML localization at telomeres, chromosome orientation-fluorescence in
situ hybridization, and telomere circular DNA amplification. Tumor
bearing mice were injected with 15 mg raloxifene to determine mammary
tumor anti-estrogen sensitivity. Mammary glands lacking TRF2 expression
exhibited increased telomere DNA damage response, histopathological and
functional degeneration, and prominent ductal fibrosis. TRF2 deficient
mammary tumors exhibited rapid onset and increased proliferation. Tumor
derived LP cells failed to form tumors following transplantation. The MSC
population was highly tumorigenic and maintained telomeres via the ALT
mechanism. Telomere DNA damage response in mammary tumors resulted in p53
dependent ER+ cellular differentiation and sensitivity to anti-estrogen
therapy. Telomere DNA damage correlated with estrogen receptor expression
in human breast cancer. We concluded that telomere DNA damage resulted in
mammary gland fibrosis, reduced tumor latency, ER+ differentiation, and
sensitivity to anti-estrogen therapy.


