Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct pharmacological targeting of Gq/11 in uveal melanoma.


Uveal (eye) melanoma is a highly aggressive cancer, in which almost half
of patients develop distant metastases that are refractory to therapy. In
particular, metastatic uveal melanoma has been clinically unresponsive to
the immunotherapeutic agents that have shown success in skin tumors,
making the need for novel therapeutic approaches to uveal melanoma all
the more urgent. Unlike skin melanomas, which are driven by BRAF and NRAS
mutations, uveal melanomas arise typically from mutations that result in
constitutive activity of the alpha subunit of the heterotrimeric
G-protein, Gq, or its paralog G11. The prevalence of constitutively
active Gq/11 in uveal melanoma suggests a dependence of these tumors on
Gq/11 activity that could be exploited therapeutically. To address this
hypothesis, we are using a potent, bioavailable small molecule that binds
to and inhibits Gq/11 to target constitutively active Gq/11 in uveal
melanoma cells. This inhibitor functions by sequestering wild type or
constitutively active Gq/11 in an inactive state. We first used inositol
phosphate accumulation assays and confirmed inhibition of both wildtype
and constitutively active Gq/11 by the inhibitor in all uveal melanoma
cells. We then assayed the affect of Gq/11 inhibition on overall
viability of uveal melanoma cells, and found that uveal melanoma cells
with mutant Gq/11 were highly sensitive to the small molecule; whereas,
uveal melanoma cells with wildtype Gq/11 showed no loss of viability,
even at 1000-fold higher concentrations of inhibitor. In Gq-mutant uveal
melanoma cells, Gq/11 inhibition caused cell cycle arrest in G1, and
dysregulation of several cell cycle regulatory pathways. Inhibitor
treatment also caused Gq/11-driven uveal melanoma cells to become more
differentiated, as indicated by increased pigmentation, elevated
expression of melanin synthesis and melanosome markers, changes in cell
morphology and changes in melanocytic versus melanoma gene programs. None
of these phenotypic changes were seen in BRAF-driven uveal melanoma cells
treated with the Gq/11 inhibitor, demonstrating that the effects of this
inhibitor were exquisitely dependent on the constitutively active Gq/11
oncogene. These results establish that Gq/11 is a druggable target in
uveal melanoma cells, and show that Gq/11-mutant uveal melanoma cells are
exquisitely sensitive to inhibition by small molecule inhibitors. We are
currently transitioning these studies to animal models to establish drug
efficacy and toxicity and explore treatment and delivery options.


