Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and validation of ColoScape™ - a new colorectal
cancer mutation detection assay.


Introduction: Colorectal cancer is a highly preventable disease as early
detection increases rates of patient survival to near 100%. Herein we
report the development and validation of a novel multigene mutation
biomarker real-time PCR based assay for qualitative detection of
colorectal cancer associated biomarkers that comprise tumor specific
mutations in the following genes: APC (Exon 15), KRAS (Exon 2), BRAF
(Exon 15) and CTNNB1 (Exon 3) called ColoScapeTM . The assay allows the
sensitive detection of the presence or absence of mutations in the
targeted regions of the genes interrogated.

Methodology: The high sensitivity of this multigene biomarker assay is
achieved due to xenonucleic acid (XNA) probe technology. XNA probes are
novel backbone modified oligomers having natural nucleoside bases (A,T,C
and G) that hybridize by Watson-Crick base pairing to natural DNA and RNA
with much higher binding affinity than natural deoxyribonucleic acid
oligomers of the same sequence. XNA probes are designed that bind to the
selected wild-type sequences at the respective genetic loci in the target
genes. These XNA probes have a much higher Tm than the primer annealing
temperature and suppress amplification of WT DNA templates and only allow
amplification of the target mutant DNA templates in the sample. Both
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP’s) and insertion/deletions
(indels) mutations can be detected. For each of the selected mutation
sites primers and FAM-labeled TaqMan hydrolysis probes were designed and
tested together with the selected XNA oligomers and analytical assay
performance confirmed. An internal PCR control amplicon selected in the
Human β-Actin (ACTB) gene was employed utilizing a HEX-labeled TaqMan
probe. Performance parameters of the assay were established on DNA of
colorectal cancer patients extracted from FFPE as well as reference DNA
materials (synthetic and cell line derived DNA). The assay demonstrates
high sensitivity and specificity in detection of colon cancer and adenoma
samples based on the set of biomarkers involved in colorectal cancer
neogenesis and disease progression.

Conclusion: The ColoScapeTM Colorectal Cancer Mutation Detection assay is
shown to be a sensitive tool intended to facilitate research in colon
cancer development, early detection, disease monitoring and therapeutic
interventions.


