Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Osteoblasts are educated into a tumor-associated stromal cell by
disseminated breast cancer cells and mediate breast cancer cell
proliferation in the bone microenvironment.


Breast cancer has a predilection for bone metastasis, where the five-year
survival rate is bleak. Disseminated breast cancer cells invade bone and
can remain undetectable and untreatable for decades during a period of
reduced proliferation. Our work reveals that osteoblasts are educated
into a tumor-associated stromal cell by disseminated breast cancer cells
and alter their production of exosomal microRNAs that regulate cancer
cell cycle. Osteoblasts were grown to various stages of maturity and
incubated with the conditioned medium (CM) from human breast cancer cells
to produce tumor-associated osteoblasts (TAOs). TAOs and their CM were
characterized, then TAO cells admixed with human breast cancer cells
in-vitro or in-vivo to elucidate the impact of TAOs on the tumor
microenvironment. Osteoblasts undergo an inflammatory stress response and
gain tumor-associated stromal cell-like properties when either
co-cultured or treated with the CM of human breast cancer cells. These
changes were mediated by crosstalk via gap junction intercellular
communication (connexin 43) and exosome exchange that occurred between
TAO cells and human breast cancer cells. TAO-derived exosomes were found
to contain increased amounts of microRNAs 320a and 193b compared to
normal osteoblasts or breast cancer cells. microRNA 320a is associated
with decreased cellular proliferation and induction of G0 phase of the
cell cycle. miR 193b has been shown to regulate cyclin D1 expression and
repress cellular proliferation. Knock-down of miRs 320a and 193b in
breast cancer cells resulted in a reduced number of cancer cells in G0
and increased numbers of cancer cells in G1/S/G2/M phases of the cell
cycle. Furthermore, TAO cell CM led to decreased activation of TRAP+
osteoclasts. When TAO cells were admixed with human breast cancer cells
and inoculated in-vivo in mice, tumors grew more slowly and were at least
50% smaller than tumors composed of normal osteoblasts plus breast cancer
cells, or breast cancer cells inoculated alone. Mice inoculated with an
admix of TAO cells plus human metastatic breast cancer cells lived ~20
days longer than mice inoculated with an admix of normal osteoblasts plus
metastatic breast cancer cells, or breast cancer cells alone. These data
also suggest that TAO cells regulate the proliferation of metastatic
breast cancer cells in the tumor microenvironment. Overall, these date
suggest that osteoblasts are an important source of factors, specifically
exosomal microRNAs, in breast cancer bone metastasis. The nature of these
factors suggest their importance for facilitating disseminated breast
cancer cell proliferation, as well as osteoclast activation in the bone
microenvironment. Supported by NIH 1RC1 CA146381, 1R01NS06994, P50
CA083639 for FCM; (NRSA) T32 CA079448, NIH 3 R00 CA178177 for KMB.


