Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting M2-tumor associated macrophages (M2-TAMs) using enriched
glycoproteins in lethal prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related deaths of men in the
U.S., and in the past year, over 30,000 men died from this disease. While
localized prostate cancer is highly treatable by surgical resection and
radiation, cancer that has metastasized remains incurable. Alternatively
activated macrophages, also known as M2-macrophages, primarily scavenge
debris and in the process, promote angiogenesis and wound repair.
M2-macrophages are phenotypically similar to M2 tumor-associated
macrophages (M2-TAMs) have been reported to associate with solid tumors
such as prostate cancer to facilitate epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT), tumor invasiveness, metastasis, and resistance to
therapy. As an invasive species within the tumor microenvironment, this
makes M2-TAMs an ideal therapeutic target in prostate cancer. The purpose
of this project is to develop novel therapeutics that will directly
target M2-TAMs for destruction and subsequently attenuate prostate tumor
growth, progression, and metastasis. Our hypothesis is to determine if
targeting of M2-TAMs by using enriched surface antigens that are targeted
by antibody-drug-conjugates (ADCs), be an effective therapy for lethal
prostate cancer while simultaneously eliciting an immune response. To
identify novel surface antigens expressed on M2-macrophages, we developed
a novel method of creating homogenous populations of human macrophages
from CD14+ monocytes in vitro. Our homogenous M1 macrophages secrete
pro-inflammatory cytokines and our M2 macrophages secrete
anti-inflammatory cytokines as well as VEGF. We then performed
solid-phase extraction of N-linked glycopeptides (SPEG) followed by
liquid chromatography-tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on our
homogenous macrophage populations. We discovered five novel peptides that
are enriched exclusively on M2-macrophages relative to M1 macrophages and
CD14+ monocytes. Lastly, we determined if these surface antigens, found
enriched on M2 macrophages, were also expressed in human metastatic
castrate-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC). Using mCRPC tissues from
rapid autopsies supplied by the Departments of Urology and Surgical
Pathology, we were able to determine M2-macrophage infiltration by using
immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry. The studies described here
outline a method of altering the tumor immune microenvironment. To target
M2 macrophages, we used small peptides as well as antibody drug
conjugates (ADCs) that targeted the enriched surface glycoproteins
expressed on M2-macrophage. We then tested their efficacies in vitro and
in a syngeneic prostate tumor mouse model to assess tumor shrinkage and
effector and cytotoxic T Cell infiltration. By identifying specific
markers on M2-TAMs, we predict that this method of targeting will provide
a better prognosis for patients who have been diagnosed with lethal
prostate cancer.


