Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEK inhibitors potentiate tumor immune surveillance by enhancing
cancer cell response of IFNγ.


FDA approved mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase (MEK)
targeting inhibitors such as trametinib have recently been reported to
enhance anti-tumor immunity in multiple preclinical models. It is
hypothesized that the combination of such MEK inhibitors with immune
checkpoint blockade will have synergistic effects and cause further tumor
regression. Immune checkpoint inhibitors such as anti-PD-1 overcome
immunosuppressive signaling in the activated T cells, yielding higher
levels of Interferon-gamma (IFNγ) release. IFNγ plays a key role in a
wide range of immune responses by direct activation of JAK-STAT1 pathway
through the binding of IFNγ receptor. JAK-STAT1 regulates transcription
of downstream effector genes that are involved in tumor immune
surveillance. Many studies have shown that in cancer cells, transcription
of T cell chemokines CXCL9,10,11, as well as PD-L1 and MHC-I are induced
upon stimulation with IFNγ. While there are some recent studies
indicating MEK inhibitors enhance T cell activity and function, here we
report for the first time that targeted inhibition of MEK increases tumor
cells response to IFNγ and results in significant upregulation of target
genes including T cell chemokines, MHC-I, as well as PD-L1.

We treated a panel of 20 human lung cancer cell lines with MEK inhibitor
U0126 followed by IFNγ stimulation, and showed that the expression of
CXCL10 is significantly increased as compared to IFNγ stimulation alone.
Furthermore, we found that instead of MEK inhibition, knock down of KRAS
in the KRAS mutant cell lines such as A549 and H2122 results in more
dramatic CXCL10 upregulation upon IFNγ stimulation. This indicates the
potential of increasing tumor T cell infiltration upon MEK targeted
therapy. Next, to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanism, we
analyzed JAK-STAT1 pathway in mouse lung cancer cell lines LKR, 344, and
colon cancer cell line CT26, in which trametinib mediated synergistic
expression of CXCL9,10, 11 and MHC-I, PD-L1 were observed. The
phosphorylation as well as total protein of JAK2, STAT1 are increased in
cells that are pre-treated with trametinib, as compared to IFNγ
stimulation alone. Treatment of JAK inhibitor Ruxolitinib as well as
knockout of IFNγR1 in LKR cells completely abolishes CXCL10 expression.
Importantly, trametinib enhanced response to PD-1 blockade in the lung
tumor models. In conclusion, our study demonstrates that targeting MEK
signaling in cancer cells increases the response of IFNγ through
JAK-STAT1 pathway, which may potentially enhance immune surveillance and
response to immune checkpoint blockade.


