Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual inhibition of BCR and TLR signaling has therapeutic potential
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.


Introduction: The Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitor ibrutinib is
clinically active in lymphoproliferative diseases driven by B-cell
receptor (BCR) and Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling, including chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia (WM),
respectively. However, deep remissions are uncommon and resistance to
single agent has been described. The hallmark of WM is an activating
mutation in MYD88 in the TLR signaling pathway. While mutations in MYD88
are uncommon in CLL, our previous study identified gene signatures
indicative of active BCR and TLR signaling in CLL cells residing in
lymphoid tissues (Herishanu, Blood 2011). Further, TLR9 activating CpG
oligonucleotides induce proliferation and extend CLL cell survival in
vitro. These observations suggest that BCR and TLR signaling may
cooperate to activate CLL cells in the tissue microenvironment. Here, we
tested the hypothesis that targeting both BCR and TLR signaling could
improve therapy for CLL.

Methods: CLL PBMCs were treated with ibrutinib and/or an IRAK1/4
inhibitor (Calbiochem) for 1h and then stimulated with soluble αIgM,
CpG, or both. We quantified changes in phosphorylation of BTK, PLCγ2 and
ERK (BCR pathway) and STAT3 and STAT1, as well as total IRAK1 (TLR
pathway).

Results: As expected, ibrutinib inhibited phosphorylation of BTK, PLCγ2
and ERK (PResults: As expected, ibrutinib inhibited phosphorylation of
BTK, PLCγ2 and ERK (P<.05) and decreased the survival of CLL cells
stimulated with αIgM (P=.001). CpG stimulated TLR signaling degrades
IRAK1 and the stimulates cytokine secretion that can, in autocrine
fashion, activate STAT phopsphorylation. The IRAK1/4 inhibitor
effectively inhibited TLR signaling resulting in stabilization of IRAK1
(P=.002), decreased phosphorylation of STAT1/3 (P=.04) and decreased
viability compared to CpG stimulated but not IRAK inhibitor treated
cells. Ibrutinib had no effect on CpG-induced IRAK1 degradation, but was
comparable to IRAK1/4 inhibition in reducing STAT phosphorylation,
suggesting that inhibition of BTK can antagonize downstream effects of
TLR activation but not upstream IRAK dependent steps. In contrast,
IRAK1/4 inhibition had no effect on αIgM-induced BCR activation. Next we
evaluated the effect of dual BCR and TLR activation, modelling
co-operative activation of both pathways in the tumor microenvironment.
Under these in vitro conditions, ibrutinib prevented BCR activation and
partial TLR activation, while IRAK1/4 affected only the TLR pathway. When
ibrutinib and the IRAK1/4 inhibitor were combined, activation of both BCR
and TLR signaling was prevented resulting in a significant reduction in
CLL cell viability (P=.01) compared to co-activation of both pathways.

Conclusion: While ibrutinib partially inhibited TLR signaling, an IRAK1/4
inhibitor was required for full inhibition of the pathway. The
combination of BTK and IRAK1/4 inhibition for the treatment of
lymphoproliferative diseases warrants further investigation.


