Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the potent and selective A2aR antagonist AB928
for the treatment of cancer.


Introduction: In the tumor micro-environment, extracellular ATP is
sequentially hydrolyzed to adenosine by the ecto-nucleotidases CD39
(ATP→AMP) and CD73 (AMP→adenosine). Adenosine, through activation of
the A2a receptor (A2aR), is a potent inhibitor of T-cell activation,
resulting in an immunosuppressed phenotype. Thus, inhibition of A2aR has
recently generated great interest in immuno-oncology. We present the
characterization of a novel, selective, and highly potent small molecule
antagonist of A2aR which is slated to enter the clinic in 2017.

Methods: The cellular potency of A2aR antagonists was assessed as a
function of decreased cAMP levels in CHO cells stably over-expressing
hA2aR, a Gs coupled receptor, following stimulation with the agonist
NECA. Experiments were conducted in the presence and absence of human
serum. Selectivity against the Gi-coupled receptor A1R was assessed
similarly as a function of cAMP elevation in CHO cells stably expressing
hA1R, following pretreatment with forskolin and stimulation with NECA.
The ability of AB928 to reverse adenosine-mediated immune suppression (25
μM) of human or mouse CD8+ T-cells was determined using standard
CD3/CD28 activation conditions. CD25 expression and cytokine release were
measured by flow cytometry and ELISA, respectively. The pharmacokinetic
characteristics of AB928 were assessed in rodent and non-rodent species
to facilitate calculation of a projected human dose.

Results: AB928 represents a novel series of potent and selective
compounds designed to inhibit adenosine-mediated A2aR activation. This
molecule is different from most known A2aR antagonists in that it does
not cross the blood brain barrier. AB928 inhibited NECA-mediated A2aR
activation with a potency of Results: AB928 represents a novel series of
potent and selective compounds designed to inhibit adenosine-mediated
A2aR activation. This molecule is different from most known A2aR
antagonists in that it does not cross the blood brain barrier. AB928
inhibited NECA-mediated A2aR activation with a potency of <10 nM and
maintained its potency in the presence of human serum. AB928 did not
significantly inhibit any of the major CYP450 isozymes and did not
significantly inhibit the potassium ion channel hERG. AB928 fully
reversed the ability of adenosine to suppress CD8+ T cell activation as
indicated by CD25 expression and increased levels of cytokines such as
IFN-γ and IL-2 in the supernatants (pResults: AB928 represents a novel
series of potent and selective compounds designed to inhibit
adenosine-mediated A2aR activation. This molecule is different from most
known A2aR antagonists in that it does not cross the blood brain barrier.
AB928 inhibited NECA-mediated A2aR activation with a potency of <10 nM
and maintained its potency in the presence of human serum. AB928 did not
significantly inhibit any of the major CYP450 isozymes and did not
significantly inhibit the potassium ion channel hERG. AB928 fully
reversed the ability of adenosine to suppress CD8+ T cell activation as
indicated by CD25 expression and increased levels of cytokines such as
IFN-γ and IL-2 in the supernatants (p<0.01 vs 25 μM adenosine only).
AB928 inhibited mouse A2aR, as indicted by reversal of adenosine-mediated
immune suppression in the CD8+ T-cell activation assay. Pharmacokinetic
characterization of AB928 showed it to be orally bioavailable with
characteristics suitable for human dosing that will allow ≥ 90% target
inhibition over 24 hrs.

Conclusions: AB928 is a potent, selective and peripherally restricted
antagonist of the A2aR receptor which is slated to enter clinical
development in 2017.


