Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 sensitizes homologous recombination
proficient ovarian cancer cells to the PARP inhibitor olaparib.


Introduction: Lack of effective treatment options for high-grade serous
ovarian cancers (HGSOC) retaining functional homologous recombination
(HR) DNA repair pathways is a significant clinical problem. HR-proficient
HGSOC tumors, for example those harboring cyclin E amplifications, have
poorer clinical outcomes and show relative resistance to DNA-damaging
platinum agents and newer poly ADP ribose polymerase inhibitors (PARPi).
We and others have shown that using epigenetic drugs to reduce HR
efficiency in HR-proficient HGSOC sensitizes these cancer cells to DNA
damaging agents. One mechanism by which these drugs reduce HR efficiency
is by transcriptional down-regulation of HR pathway components. An
emerging class of epigenetic mediators of pro-tumorigenic transcription
is the bromodomain (BRD) family of proteins, and BRD inhibitors (BRDi)
have shown promising preclinical anti-tumor efficacy. However, it is
unknown whether BRDi sensitize HR-proficient HGSOC to DNA damaging
agents. Aims: To test the hypothesis that BRDi decrease efficiency of HR
DNA repair in HR-proficient ovarian cancer cells, thereby sensitizing
them to PARPi.

Methods: The HR-proficient ovarian cancer cell lines, OVCAR-3 (cyclin
E-amplified) and SKOV3, were treated with 0.01% DMSO vehicle, the PARPi
olaparib (Astra Zeneca), the BRDi JQ1 or with the olaparib/JQ1
combination. Sulforhodamine B (SRB) assays assessed cell growth and
viability (72 hours treatment). Immunofluorescence (IF) assays assessed
markers of DNA damage (pH2AX), apoptosis (cleaved caspase-3), and HR
efficiency (RAD51 foci, and GFP expression in cells co-transfected with
I-Sce1 endonuclease and DRGFP HR reporter plasmids) (24 hours treatment).
Steady state levels of the HR protein BRCA1, pH2AX and cleaved caspase-3
were assessed by western blot (24 hours treatment).

Results: The combination of JQ1 and olaparib synergistically reduced
cancer cell viability following isobologram analyses of SRB experiments.
Compared to either drug alone, the JQ1/olaparib combination also
significantly reduced BRCA1 expression and increased protein levels of
cleaved caspase-3 and pH2AX in western blots, and also increased the
number of cells displaying DNA damage and apoptosis in IF assays.
Finally, JQ1 and olaparib combined to significantly reduce HR efficiency
in our RAD51 foci formation and DRGFP assays compared to olaparib alone.

Conclusions: Our results suggest that BRDi sensitize HR-proficient cells
to DNA damaging drugs, in part by reducing efficiency of HR DNA repair.
These findings have important implications for expanding the use of PARPi
in HR-proficient HGSOC through rational combinations with epigenetic
drugs such as BRDi that target the HR pathway.


