Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ICAM-1(CD54) is involved in the osteogenic differentiation of
mesenchymal stem cells and affects the progression of osteosarcoma cells.


Purpose: The aim of this study is to validate the relationship between
the expression of ICAM-1(CD54), a cell surface glycoprotein, and
osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and the role
of ICAM-1 in the progression of osteosarcoma (OS) cells.

Experimental Design: To compare the gene expression profiles between MSCs
and MSCs after osteogenic induction, a microarray analysis was first
performed. The differences in expression of specific genes including
ICAM-1 were confirmed using western blot and flow cytometry. MSCs were
sorted into two groups of cells by CD105+CD44+CD54+ and CD105+C44+CD54-
and properties of these cells were compared. Expression of ICAM-1 among
tumor cell lines and xenograft OS cells were tested at the protein level.
ICAM-1 was stably, constitutively overexpressed in multiple cell types.
Differences in osteogenic differentiation potential between normal cell
lines and transformed cell lines were studied using alizarin red S
staining. Motility, proliferation and invasion as well as the metastatic
potential of the transformed and normal cells were evaluated.

Results: The initial microarray analysis revealed that ICAM-1 expression
was significantly increased in MSCs after osteogenic induction for 15
days (p=0.042). Consistent results were achieved in western blot and flow
cytometry analysis. Further microarray analysis between CD105+CD44+CD54+
and CD105+C44+CD54- groups determined that NF-kB signaling pathway was
differentially activated. As for OS cells, ICAM-1 is not expressed at
high level among OS tumor cell lines and is inconsistently expressed in
xenograft OS cells. Enhanced osteogenic differentiation potential was
observed in ICAM-1 overexpressing cells. Although there were no major
difference in in vitro motility, proliferation or invasion tests,
substantially less lung nodules occurred with transformation as compared
to the normal control.

Conclusions:

ICAM-1 is involved in the osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem
cells and its down regulation may be involved in the progression of
osteosarcoma cells.


