Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling cyclophosphamide induced ovarian toxicity in a novel
translational canine model.


Reproductive failure following chemotherapy and/or ionizing radiation is
a major adverse event, for which there are no established preventive
measures. In previous studies, our laboratory has documented that the
selective estrogen receptor modulator, tamoxifen (TAM) is effective in
both prevention and reversal of ovarian toxicity from cyclophosphamide
(CTX) in rodent models. To validate the effectiveness of this approach in
a more relevant model system, we have developed a canine ovarian explant
tissue model system. Dogs present with many cancers spontaneously and
their pathology and treatment approaches mirror those of the human
cancers. Thus, canine cancers and their treatments are excellent
translational models for human diseases. Furthermore, dogs share the same
environment as humans and have longer life spans than rodents. Our
laboratory has recently established a dog ovarian explant tissue model
system using fresh ovaries collected at the time of ovariohysterectomy.
In the current study, we hypothesized that ovarian toxicity induced by
CTX will be reduced by co-administration of TAM. Using this system,
freshly prepared ovarian cortical tissue sections are cultured in the
presence of TAM and CTX. Ovarian tissue viability is assessed by
primordial and primary follicle morphometry, where the number of
primordial, primary and apoptotic follicles were counted in 9 sections of
1 mm3 of ovarian cortical tissue from each dog, using CTX (at 0, 1 and
10µM) concentrations combined with TAM (0 and10µM). The number and
percentage of each follicle was assessed. In addition, granulosa cells
proliferation is assessed using bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation.
Further, we show that, as in women, anti-mullerian hormone (AMH) can be
used as an indicator of follicle reserves in the dog, thereby
establishing their use as an in-vivo monitoring system to test ovarian
viability in future clinical studies. This study is intended to underpin
a subsequent canine clinical trial testing TAM as a countermeasure
against infertility from cancer treatment in dogs.


