Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Changes in the tumor stroma after MFP treatment in a MPA-induced
murine mammary carcinoma model.


The role of the immune system in the regression of mammary carcinomas
using endocrine therapies has been poorly investigated. The main goals of
this study were: a) to evaluate differences in antiprogestin-induced
regression of hormone receptor positive mammary carcinomas growing in
immunocompetent or immunodeficient mice; b) to characterize the tumor
infiltrating immune cells in mifepristone (MFP)-treated murine mammary
carcinomas and c) to evaluate whether MFP treatment elicits immune
protection in tumor re-challenge assays. Bone marrow (BM) cells from
BALB/c-GFP mice were intravenously inoculated into NSG mice to establish
the NSG/BM-GFP mouse model. GFP cells were detected in spleen, bone
marrow, and blood from NSG/BM-GFP mice two months after BM-GFP cell
inoculation. The murine mammary carcinoma 59-2-HI, originally induced by
the administration of medroxyprogesterone acetate to BALB/c mice,
regresses completely after MFP treatment. Tumors were orthotopically
inoculated into NSG or NSG/BM-GFP female mice two months after BM
grafting. When the tumors reached a size of approximately 50 mm2, low
dose MFP pellets (0.2 mg) were administered in order to inhibit tumor
growth. To characterize the infiltrating immune cells, tumors were
excised after drug administration, disaggregated, and isolated cells were
analyzed by FACs. For the re-challenge assay, tumors were excised 6 days
after MFP treatment and animals were orthotopically re-inoculated with
the same tumor in the opposite flank. Sham operated animals were used as
controls. MFP inhibited the growth of tumors transplanted in either NSG
or NSG/BM-GFP+ and no differences were observed between both groups,
suggesting that the immune system is not a key factor mediating
antiprogestin-induced tumor regression. Tissue remodeling was associated
with an increase in lymphocytes (CD8+; T cells) and macrophages (CD11b+
F480+; p&lt0.01 at day 3 and 6), and a decrease in the Treg subpopulation
(CD4+ CD25+ Foxp3+; p&lt0.05). These results led us to hypothesize that
antiprogestin treatment could elicit a protective antitumor immune memory
response by delaying tumor recurrence. To test this hypothesis we
performed re-challenge assays using animals in which primary tumors have
been previously excised. All tumors of control mice reached the ethical
limit size (200 mm2) before day 47, while only half of the tumors in the
MFP-treated group reached this size by this time (hazard ratio: 1.98). We
conclude that antiprogestins induce tumor regression regardless of the
presence of an impaired immune system and that the reduced intra-tumor
Treg/CD8+ ratio observed in regressing tumors might be used as a
predictive marker of treatment response. The re-challenge experiments
agree with the hypothesis that regressing tumors expose intracellular
antigens that generate a protective immune memory response, which in
turn, could be associated with the long free relapse survival induced by
endocrine therapy.


