Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction of B lymphoma cells with the microenvironment affects
ibrutinib sensitivity.


Introduction:

The cellular microenvironment plays a key role in the pathogenesis of
B-cell malignancies (Amé-Thomas, Blood 2007; Podar, Leukemia 2009). Bone
marrow stromal cell interactions can provide survival signals to CLL
cells (Kurtova, Blood 2009), and stromal cell gene signatures and markers
can predict survival outcomes and add prognostic value, respectively, for
patients with DLBCL (Lenz, NEJM 2008; Meyer, Am J Clin Pathol 2011).
Ibrutinib (ibr), a first-in-class, oral, once-daily inhibitor of
Bruton’s tyrosine kinase, has demonstrated single-agent activity in R/R
DLBCL (Wilson, Nat Med 2015). In this study, we established an in vitro
coculture system and report the effects of stromal cells on ABC-DLBCL
cells and their sensitivity to ibr.

Methods: The effect of ibr on cell growth was evaluated by luminescent
cell viability assay. Flow cytometry was used to evaluate the effect of
ibr on cell death in different cell populations. Live-cell imaging
detected drug effects on apoptosis at different time points. Gene
expression levels in B lymphoma cells were examined by quantitative PCR
and NanoString panels. Human cytokines/chemokines were quantified using
MILLIPLEX® MAP Kit.

Results: Reduced ibr sensitivity was observed in TMD8 DLBCL cells
cocultured with HS-5 bone marrow-derived stromal cells. HS-5 cells
protected TMD8 cells from ibr-induced apoptosis. Treatment with ibr
induced TNFSF10 expression only in TMD8 cells without HS-5 coculture,
providing a survival mechanism for escape of ibr-induced cell death. In
addition, coculturing with HS-5 decreased surface expression of CD20 but
not CD19. Several cytokines/chemokines showed differential expression in
the coculture system (increased CCL22 and IL-10; decreased CCL4 and
TNFβ). Reduced expression of BCR signaling-related miR-155 was observed
in ABC-DLBCL and CLL cell lines with HS-5 coculture, suggesting
downregulation of BCR signaling in these cells. The adhesion molecule,
SELL, showed decreased expression in the ABC-DLBCL cells cultured with
HS-5 as well as in ibr-resistant TMD8 cells, consistent with our
observation that ABC-DLBCL patients with poor responses (PD+SD) to ibr
have lower SELL expression in their tumor samples. We further assessed
expression levels of amino acid metabolism-related genes and demonstrated
significant increases of ASS1 and TDO2 in the TMD8 cells cocultured with
HS-5. Expression levels of amino acid metabolism-related genes varied
across patients with different responses to ibr, further suggesting the
importance of amino acid levels in the tumor microenvironment and ibr
response.

Conclusions: The changes in ABC-DLBCL cells cocultured with stromal cells
identified here may provide new insights into cellular cross-talk in the
microenvironment. Further investigation into cell-cell interactions and
ibr may help stratify patient populations and provide new therapeutic
strategies.


