Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene fusion detection in pediatric tumor samples utilizing
multi-caller fusion detection approach and integrative data analysis.


Gene fusions are an important mechanism of oncogenesis in pediatric
cancers. Fusion detection from RNA sequencing data is challenging for
several reasons including a high false positive rate by individual fusion
callers. We developed a new pipeline for gene fusion detection utilizing
a multi-caller fusion detection approach and focusing on improved
specificity, annotation and visual presentation.

Multiple fusion detection algorithms, integrative data analysis and known
fusions and cancer genes annotation databases are integral parts of our
new pipeline. The following fusion callers were included in the pipeline:
Chimerascan, TopHat Fusion and STAR-Fusion. Fusions called by at least
two fusion callers were included in the final results and annotated by
utilizing the TARGET database (Tumor Alterations Relevant for
Genomics-driven Therapy) and TICdb (Translocation breakpoints In Cancer
database). A Venn diagram was produced for visual presentation of
candidate fusions detected by multiple fusion callers. IGV (Integrative
Genomics Viewer) was used to visualize the alignment of reads at fusion
break points.

The fusion detection pipeline was tested with RNA sequencing data from 11
pediatric tumor samples either suspected to harbor fusions based on
diagnosis (n=7; renal cell carcinoma, osteosarcoma, synovial sarcoma,
glomus tumor, undifferentiated sarcoma) or known to have fusions based on
standard methods (n=4; Ewing-like sarcoma, EWSR1 FISH+ sarcoma, clear
cell sarcoma). In most cases, fusions previously known to be present were
identified with our pipeline. For the difficult to detect fusion
CIC-DUX4, optimization by adding another fusion caller (FusionCatcher)
and adjusting the filtering and annotation parameters was required to
increase sensitivity. Novel fusions were identified in cases suspected to
harbor fusions and in some cases these novel fusions have been validated
to be present with other methods. In one case (synovial sarcoma) the
expected fusion, which was not detected with standard testing (FISH), was
identified with our pipeline. The pipeline was also successfully utilized
to analyze prostate cancer samples (PMID: 27167109).

Our new multi-caller fusion detection pipeline has been successful in
increasing specificity and decreasing the false positive rate for gene
fusion calling in transcriptomic data, while being sensitive enough to
detect the more challenging gene fusions. Additional updates to the
pipeline are anticipated like the realignment against a modified
reference sequence including the gene rearrangement for improved
sensitivity.


