Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myosin 1e colocalization with β1-intergin and association with
tumor progression in colorectal cancer.


For colorectal cancer (CRC), the risk of relapse among stage II and stage
III a/b patients is 20-30% and the benefit of treating these patients
with chemotherapy is uncertain. As a result, many patients are
undertreated, putting them at increased risk for disease relapse, or
overtreated, exposing them to unnecessary and harmful chemotherapy with
little potential benefit. Therefore, defining prognostic biomarkers to
more accurately determine each person’s risk of relapse and need for
chemotherapy is a priority in CRC research. Promising targets for
biomarker discovery are actin-binding proteins. As a broad class, these
proteins regulate the actin cytoskeleton and serve as direct, proximal
regulators of invasive and metastatic phenotypes. Further, the prognostic
utility of several of these proteins has recently been reported in the
literature. Myosin 1e (Myo1e) a long-tailed, class I myosin, is one such
protein with proposed clinical utility as a prognostic biomarker. In
kidney podocyte cells, Myo1e regulates endocytosis, adhesion, migration,
and invadosome dynamics. Despite its expression in numerous cancers, the
functional role of Myo1e specifically in cancer cells and its association
with tumor progression remains elusive. To define a role in cancer cells,
the localization of Myo1e was examined in vitro by immunofluorescence in
T84 human CRC cells. Myo1e co-localized with actin, cortactin and β1
integrin at membrane ruffles, which regulate integrin endocytosis and
trafficking. Interestingly, both Myo1e and β1 integrin also co-localized
with caveolin-1, a regulator of integrin endocytosis, suggesting Myo1e
expression may regulate caveolae-dependent integrin endocytosis and
trafficking. To evaluate potential prognostic utility, Myo1e expression
in colorectal tumors and matched normal adjacent tissue (NAT) was
examined by immunohistochemistry in a tissue microarray constructed from
duplicate tissue cores from 119 CRC patients. The patient cohort was well
balanced across TNM stage: stage 0 (10.1%), stage 1 (20.2%), stage 2
(26.9%), stage 3 (31.1%), and stage 4 (12.6%), and the majority (68.9%)
of CRC tissues examined were of moderate tumor grade. The ratio of Myo1e
expression in tumors compared to NAT was significantly correlated with
clinicopathologic indicators of disease progression, including clinical
stage, depth of invasion at the primary tumor (T-score), and lymph node
metastasis. Together, these data suggest Myo1e expression correlates with
tumor progression and may regulate invasive phenotypes through integrin
trafficking pathways. Examining the prognostic utility and biologic
function of Myo1e may a define a novel biomarker with translational
utility for improved clinical management of colorectal cancer patients.


