Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S-SHIP promoter expression identifies a putative cancer stem cell
population in C3(1)/Tag murine mammary tumors.


Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women worldwide. The isolation
and characterization of breast cancer stem cells (CSC) are crucial for
understanding cancer biology and revealing potential therapeutic targets.
One of the major issues in the study of CSC is the lack of reliable
markers. A transgenic mouse model (Tg 11.5kb–GFP) was generated using
the 11.5kb s-SHIP (stem-SH2-containing 5’-Inositol Phosphatase)
promoter that specifically expressed enhanced green fluorescent protein
(GFP) in embryonic and various tissue stem cells. In the mammary gland,
previous experiments showed that GFP labels puberty cap cells and
pregnancy basal alveolar bud cells, and it has been demonstrated that
these mammary GFP+ cells are activated tissue stem cells. In order to
determine if s-SHIP promoter expression could also mark mammary cancer
stem cells, we generated a bi-transgenic mouse model by crossing Tg
11.5kb-GFP mice with Tg C3(1)/Tag mice. Tg C3(1)/Tag mice express SV40 T
antigen under the regulatory control of the rat prostatic steroid binding
protein C3(1) gene. In female mice, the transgene is expressed primarily
in the mammary gland. Mice develop mammary hyperplasia by 3 months of age
with subsequent development of mammary adenocarcinoma by 6 months of age.

Here we show the presence of a rare population of GFP+ cells in mammary
tumors of female bi-transgenic mice by using immunohistochemical and flow
cytometry analysis. The GFP+ mammary cancer cells are also
CD24+/CD49f+/CD29+. As compared to GFP- cells, GFP+ cells exhibit both a
higher tumor sphere-forming potential, and a higher tumorigenicity when
transplanted into SCID and FVB recipient mice. Moreover, upon subsequent
transplantation, the GFP+ cells generated heterogeneous tumors that
displayed properties similar to the primary tumor. Currently, we are
conducting transcriptomic analysis of these GFP+ and GFP- cells in order
to reveal differentially expressed genes. Altogether, these results
suggest that s-SHIP promoter expression may be a new marker of mammary
CSC that enables their identification and isolation via a single
consistent parameter. Furthermore, our bi-transgenic C3(1)/Tag x
11.5kb-GFP mice provide a novel model for study of mammary cancer stem
cells and investigation of potential therapeutic targets for breast
cancer.


