Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pooled shRNA screening using mouse xenografts of human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells identifies CDK5 as a potential mechanism
mediating sorafenib resistance.


Background: Sorafenib is the only approved systemic agent for
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the efficacy of sorafenib is
modest for HCC with low objective response rate and short time to tumor
progression, indicating that the inherent and acquired resistance
underlies the limited success of sorafenib in HCC. We conducted a pooled
shRNA screening in mouse xenografts of human HCC cells treated with
sorafenib, and intended to identify genes that are involved in the
therapeutic efficacy of sorafenib.

Materials and Methods: We introduced a pool of 3920 shRNAs targeting 1960
genes, including various kinases, transcriptional factors, phosphatase
and cytokine, into Huh7 HCC cells by retrovirus infection. The Huh7 cells
after infection with pooled shRNAs were implanted subcutaneously in
immunocompromised mice, and were treated with vehicle or sorafenib at the
dose of 30mg/kg/day for 4 weeks. Genomic DNAs were extracted from HCC
xenografts, PCR-amplified of the shRNA regions, and deep-sequenced of the
PCR products to quantify the abundance of each shRNA. Candidate genes
were identified from those shRNAs with statistically different
frequencies between vehicle-treated and sorafenib-treated xenografts, and
were further validated by their impacts on sorafenib-sensitivity in HCC
cells.

Results: By calculating the abundance frequencies of each shRNA of
sorafenib- treated xenografts versus that of vehicle-treated xenografts,
we found that 3 candidate sorafenib- resistance genes because their shRNA
abundance was significantly decreased in sorafenib-treated xenografts.
Among them, only the cyclin dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) was further
investigated because its expression was confirmed to be increased in
sorafenib- treated xenografts. In PLC5 and a sorafenib-resistant subline
of Huh7 cells (Huh7-SR), downregulation of CDK5 by RNA interference or
roscovitine, a CDK5 inhibitor, enhanced the sensitivity to sorafenib-
induced growth-suppression. On the other hand, overexpression of CDK5
increased the resistance to sorafenib in Huh7 cells. Mechanistically,
sorafenib combined with shRNA-mediated CDK5 downregulation augmented the
induction of apoptosis, and resulted in an increased downregulation of
multiple anti-apoptosis molecules such as XIAP and survivin in PLC5 and
Huh7-SR cells. In 8 paired human HCC tissues, we found 3 of them have
unequivocally increased expression of CDK5 in HCC cells of post-sorafenib
HCC tissues compared with those of pre-treatment tissues.

Conclusions: Our results suggest that increased CDK5 expression may
mediate resistance to sorafenib in HCC in vivo, and targeting CDK5 is
warranted further studies in the treatment of HCC. (This study was
supported by grants MOST 103-2314-B-002 -181 -MY2, MOST
105-2314-B-002-194-, MOST 103-2314-B-002 -090 - & MOST 104-2314-B-002
-073).


