Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypermethylation status of PDX1 has potential of diagnostic and
predictive biomarker for risk stratification in colorectal cancer
patients.


Background Abnormal DNA methylation is an important epigenetic mechanism
that has been strongly implicated in the pathogenesis and progression of
colorectal neoplasia. In contrast to other potential biomarker species
such as mRNA and protein levels, measurement of DNA methylation has been
shown to be stable, reproducible and consistent between individuals.
Based on these standpoints, detecting aberrant methylation of
cancer-related genes helps for the development of diagnostic and
prognostic biomarkers in colorectal cancer (CRC). In this study, we
comprehensively evaluated whole-genome methylation analysis using
colorectal cancer tissues and normal colonic mucosa to discover candidate
CRC-specific DNA methylation as potential diagnostic and predictive
biomarkers for risk stratification in CRC patients.

Patients and Method The study design included an initial discovery
phases, and followed by a subsequent clinical validation phase. In
discovery phase, we performed whole-genome methylation analysis using CRC
tissues and normal colonic mucosae from total fourteen patients to
identify CRC-specific methylated CpG cites. Furthermore, we evaluated
methylation levels of candidate methylated CpG cites by quantitative
bisulfite pyrosequencing using one hundred six colorectal specimens from
fifty-three CRC patients to validate the findings from discovery phase.

Result In discovery phase, we successfully identified several candidates
of CRC-specific hypermethylated- and hypomethylated-CpG cites in CRC
tissues compared with normal colonic mucosa. Promoter lesion of PDX1 is
one of candidate methylated CpG cites in discovery phase, and we focus a
specific CpG cite of PDX1 promoter lesion as a target cite to progress in
validation phase. We quantified methylation status of PDX1 using 106
colonic tissues, and demonstrated that PDX1 were significantly
hyper-methylated in CRC tissues compared with normal mucosa (pResult In
discovery phase, we successfully identified several candidates of
CRC-specific hypermethylated- and hypomethylated-CpG cites in CRC tissues
compared with normal colonic mucosa. Promoter lesion of PDX1 is one of
candidate methylated CpG cites in discovery phase, and we focus a
specific CpG cite of PDX1 promoter lesion as a target cite to progress in
validation phase. We quantified methylation status of PDX1 using 106
colonic tissues, and demonstrated that PDX1 were significantly
hyper-methylated in CRC tissues compared with normal mucosa (p<0.0001,
Wilcoxon rank correlation test). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curves analysis revealed that methylation levels of PDX1 remarkably
discriminated CRC tissues from normal colonic mucosa (AUC:0.9,
Sensitivity:85.4%, Specificity:91.5%). Interestingly, methylation levels
of PDX1 tend to increase in stage-dependent manner, and hypermethylated
status of PDX1 was significantly correlated with presence of distant
metastasis in validation cohort.

Conclusion Assessment of the PDX1 methylation status could be used as
potential of diagnostic and predictive biomarker for risk stratification
in CRC patients.


