Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic reprogramming of the chromatin landscape in cancer:
Studies in real time.


Reprogramming of the chromatin landscape by sequence-specific
transcription factors (TF) can influence in the prevalence and
progression of several diseases, including cancers. Steroid receptors are
a class of hormone-regulated TF that have a major impact on the
progression of cancers. The link between the androgen receptor (AR)
action in prostate cancer and the glucocorticoid (GR) and estrogen
receptor (ER) action in breast cancer is well-known. Furthermore, other
TFs such as the pioneer factor FoxA1 has been extensively linked to AR
and ER action in these cancers. Although the action of these TF have been
widely studied, the knowledge is almost exclusively based on
population-based assays such as ChIP-seq and DHS-seq. Hence, the dynamic
binding behavior of these factors in living cell remains unclear. For
example, the classical pioneer factor model suggests long term static
binding events between pioneer TFs, such as FoxA1, and chromatin.
However, little is known on the dynamic action of FoxA1 in living cells.

We have examined the behavior of steroid receptors and cofactors,
including FoxA1, at the single-molecule level in living cells. These
factors were fused with HaloTag, and labeled with the bright and stable
fluorophore JF549. Single-molecule tracking (SMT) of these proteins
(using HILO microscopy) revealed a highly dynamic binding behavior of
TFs. This supports transient rather than stable TF chromatin
interactions. Specifically, two distinct binding populations have been
observed for all factors tested; fast or slow stops. Fast stops represent
genomic scanning of TF, while slow stops, with residence time of 6-14
sec, represent functional binding events at specific response elements.
The vast majority of molecules at any given time are either diffusing or
exhibit fast stops, while only a small percentage exhibit slow stops.
However, hormone activation of AR, GR or ER results in an increase in the
percentage of molecules with slow stops compared to the unstimulated
state. Thus, our results indicate that on a single-molecule level, only a
small proportion TFs are functionally bound at any given time.

In addition to affirming the general model that many TFs are highly
dynamic in their chromatin binding activity, SMT experiments in live
cells revealed a highly dynamic interaction of FoxA1 with chromatin in
vivo. Unexpectedly, we also observed by ChIP-seq and DHS-seq analysis
that at subset of genomic sites, the role of pioneer can be reversed,
with the steroid receptors serving to enhance binding of FoxA1. We
propose a general model, dynamic assisted loading, wherein interactions
between TFs and pioneer factors are highly dynamic. Our findings show
that the action of key TFs in cancer development are more complex and
dynamic in real time than previously reported.


