Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitigating tumor-stroma metabolic symbiosis for cancer therapy.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) affects 40,000 patients
annually and is associated with Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) affects 40,000 patients annually and is associated with <50%
5-year survival. There is an urgent need to better understand the biology
of the disease in order to develop more effective therapeutic approaches.
HNSCC tumors are dysplastic with up to 80% fibroblasts. We recently
reported that tumor-associated fibroblasts (TAFs) make HNSCC more
aggressive. Furthermore, we reported that TAFs produce hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF), which binds to the c-Met receptor expressed on HNSCC to
drive aggressiveness. Although we did not detect HGF secretion from HNSCC
cell lines, we reported that paracrine activation of c-Met by
TAF-secreted HGF facilitates HNSCC progression. Reciprocal signaling
between the tumor and stroma has been reported in several cancers to
facilitate tumor growth, invasion and resistance to therapy. Recent
studies have shown that c-Met activation promotes glycolysis. Although
highly glycolytic, the mechanisms regulating HNSCC glycolysis remain
unknown. We show that TAF-secreted HGF through c-Met activation on HNSCC
(a) induces aerobic glycolysis accompanied by lactate production, and b)
regulates expression of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). Studies
have shown that HNSCC tumors have high lactate levels resulting from
increased glycolysis, and this correlates with reduced survival. Our data
demonstrate that TAF-secreted HGF increases key glycolytic enzymes
including hexokinase II. Furthermore, HGF increases glycolysis and
lactate production from HNSCC. We demonstrate that HGF also increases
levels of the bidirectional lactate transporter, monocarboxylate
transporter 1 (MCT1). We demonstrate that MCT1 levels are increased in
both HNSCC and TAFs under co-culture conditions. In addition, HGF
stimulation increases levels of MCT1 in HNSCC indicating a possible
mechanism whereby HNSCC remove the excess lactate generated during
glycolysis. The mechanisms whereby HNSCC tumors survive highly acidic
conditions remain unknown. Since MCT1 levels are increased in TAFs as
well, we sought to determine if TAFs utilize the lactate as a carbon
source to generate energy. Indeed, we found that bFGF secreted by HNSCC,
binds to its cognate FGF receptor (FGFR) on TAFs to facilitate latate
utilization through mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS).
Thus there exists a metabolic symbiosis between HNSCC and TAFs that
contribute to tumor growth. Through these studies, we delineate the
mechanisms of glycolysis regulation in HNSCC and demonstrate that
inhibition of the cross-talk between HNSCC and TAFs can be used as a
novel therapeutic approach.


