Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of the neuroblastoma microenvironment via polyamine
blockade.


Despite improvements in therapy over the last few decades, neuroblastoma
(NB) still accounts for a considerable portion of childhood
cancer-related mortalities and 5-year survival rates in patients with
high-risk disease remains poor (40-50%). Amplification of MYCN and
dysregulation in downstream Myc-related pathways result in NBs with
high-risk features. Notably, MYCN-amplified NBs have elevated polyamine
(PA) levels, and the gate-keeper enzyme in the PA synthesis pathway,
ornithine decarboxylase (ODC1), is a direct target of Myc. Yet, ODC1
activity can be irreversibly inhibited by the FDA-approved drug
difluoromethylornithine (DFMO), and exposure of NB cell lines in vitro to
DFMO reduces cellular growth. In a mouse model of MYCN-driven NB
(TH-MYCN+/+ transgenic mice), inhibition of PA synthesis with DFMO led to
reductions in NB burden and extension of survival that appeared more
profound than that predicted by the in vitro activity of the drug,
suggesting that in addition to tumor-intrinsic effects, DFMO may have
significant effects on the NB tumor microenvironment (TME). We therefore
sought to characterize the tumor microenvironment of NB in TH-MYCN+/+
mice in the presence or absence of DFMO-mediated PA blockade. Tumors from
DFMO treated and untreated mice were dissected, mechanically and
enzymatically dissociated, and the number and frequencies of various TIL
subsets were assessed using an optimized flow cytometry-based protocol.
Our results indicate that DFMO reduces tumor growth and results in
distinct and reproducible alterations in the cellular composition of the
NB TME, the most profound of which was a significant increase in the
frequency of NK cells. Moreover, we found an increase in the percentage
of tumor cells expressing NK cell ligands. Concordantly, we also
witnessed a shift in the NK cell expression of activating and inhibitory
receptors. These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that PA
blockade induces distinct TME changes that predispose to more efficient
immune control of NB growth. To probe the contribution of NK cells to
this process, we are now testing whether antibody-mediated depletion of
NK cells in DFMO-treated TH-MYCN+/+ mice results in loss of the extension
in survival afforded by PA blockade. In parallel, we are also performing
transcriptomic analysis on tumor and NK cells sorted from DFMO-treated
and untreated tumors, to ascertain whether specific signaling pathways
may be being altered by exposure to DFMO. It is our hope that these
studies will complement the data being accrued from phase I/II clinical
studies using DFMO in various therapeutic strategies for NB, and will
allow for an increased understanding of how to more effectively combine
PA blockade with other immunotherapies for this disease.


