Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomic cfDNA/cfRNA profiling for AR-V7 liquid biopsy
test in prostate cancer.


The growth and survival of prostate cancer tumors relies primarily on the
functioning of the androgen receptor (AR) signaling pathway. Recent
studies suggested that the presence of AR-V7, a c-terminal truncated form
of AR, in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) of patients with
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is associated with inherent
and/or acquired resistance to enzalutamide and abiraterone, the stand of
care androgen deprivation therapies in prostate cancer. A series of data
also indicate that AR-Vs (eg, including AR-V7, ARv567es, AR-T878A,
AR-F876L etc) may drive resistance in CRPC. Expression of AR-V7 has been
shown to correlate with disease progression and shortened survival.
Considering that truncated AR splicing variants with C-terminal loss lack
a functional ligand-bingding domain (LBD) and are constitutively active,
C-terminal AR-directed therapies may not be effective for patients with
AR splicing variants. Circulating tumor cell (CTC)-based AR-V7 tests are
currently being tested in the clinic. However, nearly half of the CRPC
patients do not have enough CTCs for AR-V7 test, raising the request for
a complementary, non-CTC platform to detect AR variants as well as other
resistance markers in circulation.

Here we report the development, validation and clinical application of
PrediSeq-Prostate, a non-invasive next generation sequencing-based
diagnostics platform that offers integrated genomic cell-free DNA (cfDNA)
and cell-free RNA (cfRNA) profiling of prostate cancer, identifying known
(such as AR-V7, AR-V9, AR-V2, etc) and novel AR splicing variants, point
mutation, copy number, and translocation (such as TMPRSS2-ERG) using a
single tube of blood. Using plasma samples from mCRPC patients that
developed resistance to enzalutamide and/or abiraterone,
PrediSeq-Prostate NGS test identified AR-V7, AR-V2, AR-V3, AR-V4 and
other splicing variants that impact diagnosis and therapeutic selection.
We also developed a Bio-Rad digital PCR assay measuring AR-V7 and AR-FL
(full length) simultaneously. Collectively, PrediSeq NGS and ddPCR assays
offer comprehensive genomic profiling of both cfDNA and cfRNA in all
patients with prostate cancer, regardless of their status of CTC
enumeration. The successful development and clinical validation of these
tests has potential to enable precision medicine in prostate cancer.


