Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identify tissue-of-origin in cancer cfDNA by whole genome
sequencing.


Cell free DNA (cfDNA) has been shown to be an emerging non-invasive
biomarker to monitor tumor progression in cancer patients. Elevated cfDNA
has been found not only from tumors, but also from normal tissues. Thus,
the identification of cfDNA’s tissue-of-origin is critical to
understand the mechanism of cfDNA release and tumor progression. Recent
efforts to identify cfDNA’s tissue-of-origin begin to utilize cfDNA’s
epigenomic status, such as DNA methylation and nucleosome spacing.
However, both of these methods have limitations: (1) For nucleosome
positioning, lack of reference nucleosome maps in different tumor and
normal tissues has limited its application to tissue-of-origin
deconvolution; (2) For DNA methylation, large DNA degradation during
whole genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) library preparation, even with
current low-input DNA technology, is still the major hurdle for its
clinical application, although extensive DNA methylation studies by WGBS
in tumor and normal tissues during the last decade have provided many
reference maps. Very recently, a pioneer study showed significant
differences between DNA fragment lengths of methylated and unmethylated
cfDNA. Taking advantage of this experimental observation, we developed a
machine learning approach to infer the base pair resolution DNA
methylation level from fragment size information in whole genome
sequencing (WGS). The predicted DNA methylation, from not only high
coverage but also dozens of ultra-low-pass WGS (ULP-WGS), showed high
concordance with the ground truth DNA methylation level from WGBS in the
same cancer patients. Furthermore, by using hundreds of WGBS datasets
from different tumor and normal tissues/cells as the reference map, we
deconvoluted cfDNA’s tissue-of-origin status by inferred DNA
methylation level at ULP-WGS from thousands of breast/prostate cancer
samples and healthy individuals. The cfDNA’s tissue-of-origin status in
cancer patients showed high concordance with confirmed metastasis tissues
from physicians. Interestingly, some clinical information, such as cancer
grades/stages, seemed to be correlated with cfDNA’s tissue-of-origin
status. Overall, our methods here pave the road for cfDNA’s application
in clinical diagnosis and monitoring.


