Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt/beta-catenin and Foxa2 axis activates AR signaling in
castration resistant prostate cancer.


Background: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the leading cancer among men in the
world. Androgen deprivation therapy is a common treatment to cease
prostate growth. However, androgen deprivation eventually fails and PCa
relapses, evolving into castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPCa). It
has been established that androgen receptor (AR) continues to be the
central player in mediating CRPCa. However, the mechanism by which the AR
signaling remains active is unclear. We have reported that activation of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway promotes castrate-resistant
progression. Our study has also shown that activation of the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway induces the expression of Foxa2, a fork-head
transcription factor that is expressed in embryonic prostate & advanced
stage PCa. Here, we study the Wnt pathway and the role of Foxa2 in
retaining active AR signaling in advanced PCa in the absence of
androgens. TRAMP mice, SV40 T-antigen transgenic mouse models for PCa,
were used. It has been recognized that in this model, T-antigen, which is
driven by androgen-responsive probasin promoter, remains expressed
following androgen ablation. In this study, we identified a mechanism
that sustains an active AR signaling in CRPCa.

Methods: To study whether the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is active in
advanced stage PCa, we crossed the TRAMP mice with GFP-Wnt reporter mice.
Some of the TRAMP/Wnt-reporter mice were castrated to study how androgen
deprivation affects Wnt/beta-Catenin signaling and promotes PCa
progression. Prostates were analyzed using IHC and IF staining. We also
established a prostate epithelial cell line that stably expresses Foxa2.
Cell proliferation was examined with IncuCyte Zoom software. The
expression of AR target genes was assessed by using quantitative RT-PCR
and Western blotting. ChIP was conducted to assess the recruitment of
transcriptional machinery to the promoters of AR-regulated genes.

Results: Utilizing the TRAMP/Wnt mouse model, we show that
Wnt/beta-Catenin signaling is active in advanced stage PCa. Additionally,
our data showed that Foxa2, the downstream target of Wnt/beta-Catenin
signaling, drives the expression of androgen-responsive genes, regardless
of androgen deprivation. Furthermore, cell proliferation assays revealed
that the expression of Foxa2 enabled an androgen-independent growth of
prostatic cells. Using this model system, we further explored the
mechanism that activates the transcription of AR-responsive genes in the
absence of androgens. Our data indicated that Foxa2 is capable of
recruiting H3k27Ac to AR-responsive promoters.

Conclusion: Together, these data indicate that Wnt signaling is activated
in advanced stage PCa, driving Foxa2 expression, and promoting AR
signaling to persist. This represents a novel mechanism that enables
advanced PCa to retain AR signaling pathway following androgen ablation.
Targeting both Wnt signaling and Foxa2 may pose as novel therapeutics for
CRPCa.


