Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic architecture of prostate cancer at recurrence following
radiotherapy.


Aim: Spatial intra-tumoural heterogeneity of prostate cancer is secondary
to differential genomics and multi-clonality, even for tumours with the
same Gleason grade. These unique features promote resistance to
treatment. Here, we investigated if clonal selection or adaptation of new
clones dominates in prostate cancer at the time of recurrence following
high dose precision radiotherapy.

Methods: We identified 11 patients with biopsy-proven multi-focal
recurrent prostate cancer following definitive image-guided
radiotherapy/brachytherapy. Copy number aberration (CNA) profiling was
performed on 33 anatomically distinct tumour foci with 11 matched-normals
in the radio-resistant cohort. To assess clonality, 4 cases had matched
pre-radiotherapy tumours for copy number profiling. We evaluated for
recurrent driver amplifications and deletions, and genomic instability as
measured by percent genome aberration (PGA). We also compared these
genomic indices against 373 comprehensively profiled sporadic prostate
cancers from the Canadian Prostate Cancer Gene Network [Fraser, et al.,
Nature, 2016].

Results: Independent of Gleason grade, we observed large intra-patient
(COV of 0.66-1.13) and inter-patient heterogeneity (p Results:
Independent of Gleason grade, we observed large intra-patient (COV of
0.66-1.13) and inter-patient heterogeneity (p <0.001, one-way ANOVA) in
the levels of genomic instability, as judged by PGA scores, among the
radioresistant tumours. Interestingly, although total CNA counts did not
differ between the radioresistant and sporadic (CPC-GENE) cohorts (median
CNAs of 40, radioresistant vs 33, sporadic, p = 0.20], we observed a
trend for increased genomic instability in the radioresistant cohort
(median PGA of 8.8 vs 4.9, p = 0.059). This concurs with the findings on
intra-tumoural spatial CNA analyses, which revealed the acquisition of
CNAs that were both common and non-recurrent in the multi-focal
radioresistant tumours, thus suggesting a common origin with subsequent
divergent evolution. Importantly, we observed a mixture of CNAs,
including known drivers of aggressive prostate cancer, namely NKX3-1,
PTEN, TP53, CDKN1B, and CDH1, that was shared between pre-radiotherapy
and radioresistant tumours, supporting a clonal selection process. We
also discovered a novel deleted region on Chr3p, consisting of RAD18 and
FANCD2, which was unique only in the radioresistant tumours.

Conclusions: Our novel observations in a small cohort of radioresistant
prostate cancers favour the model of selection of radioresistant clones,
as opposed to new-onset tumours. These results support the current
approach of discovering biomarkers a priori, and molecular therapeutic
targets for these radioresistant clones, so as to improve the therapeutic
ratio of precision radiotherapy.


