Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishing a platform for the generation of organoids from
diverse tumor types as part of the NCI patient-derived models (PDM)
initiave.


Cancer Organoids are discrete multicellular structures that recapitulate
tumor microanatomy (1). These reagents can be generated by extended
culture of partially or fully dissociated tumor samples in
three-dimensional matrices. By maintaining tumor and accessory cells in
an appropriate context, they provide a biosimilar platform for studying
disease pathogenesis and cellular pharmacology (2). Similarly, cancer
organoid culture is useful for propagating slow growing tumors or those
requiring heterotypic cell-cell interactions. Here, preliminary data will
be presented regarding generation of organoids from diverse tumor types
as part of the NCI patient-derived models (PDM) initiative. This
initiative aims to develop a national repository of patient-derived
cancer models (PDMs) consisting of clinically annotated patient-derived
xenografts (PDXs) and patient-derived tumor cell cultures (PDCs) prepared
from primary and metastatic tumors (3). A standardized panel of different
organoid media formulations was constructed to optimize culture
conditions for disease subsets. Using this approach, organoids were
generated for colon, prostate, pancreatic, breast, melanoma, NSCLC, and
bladder tumors. Although some samples were refractory to organoid
generation, in several instances, samples that failed to generate 2D
cultures thrived as organoids. A further finding was that direct
implantation of organoid cultures was an efficient means of generating
xenografts. Indeed, work will be presented detailing the exact number of
organoids required to establish xenograft tumors. Protocols were
developed for routine culture, passaging and long-term storage in liquid
nitrogen. Similarly, organoids were amenable to characterization by FACS
analysis, ICC/IHC and qRT-PCR to evaluate metrics such as tumor type,
histological similarity with patient tumor, cell viability, percentage
stroma and whether mouse cells persist in PDX-derived organoids. In
summary, growth, expansion, analysis and storage of tumor organoids is
feasible for a wide range of tumor types. Importantly, for certain
samples, generation of cancer organoids appears to be a useful
intermediary step for subsequent PDX model and 2D culture generation.

Funded by NCI Contract No. HHSN261200800001E.

References:

1. Baker LA, Tiriac H, Clevers H, Tuveson DA. Modeling pancreatic cancer
with organoids. Trends Cancer. 2016;2:176-90.

2. Cantrell MA, Kuo CJ. Organoid modeling for cancer precision medicine.
Genome Med. 2015;7.

3. Doroshow J, Hollingshead M, Evrard Y, Williams M, Datta V, Das B, et
al. NCI patient derived models repository. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of
the AACR-NCI-EORTC International Conference: Molecular Targets and Cancer
Therapeutics; 2015 Nov 5-9; Boston, MA. Philadelphia (PA). Mol Cancer
Ther. 2015;14(12 Suppl 2).


