Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary long-chain omega-3 fatty acids reduce adipose inflammation
in mammary tissue of mice fed moderate fat-isocaloric diets.


Increased adipose tissue Inflammation and breast density; including
ductal epithelial hyperplasia have been associated with increased risks
for breast cancer. Omega 6 (ω6) and omega 3 (ω3) fatty acids (FAs);
serve as substrates for pro-inflammatory and inflammation resolving
mediators respectively, emphasizing the potential regulatory role for
dietary intake of these FAs in inflammation. Western diets have a ω6:ω3
FA ratio of >15:1 with low levels of long-chain (LC)-ω3FA. White adipose
tissue inflammatory foci, characterized by crown-like structures (CLS)
consisting of dead adipocytes and adjacent macrophages in breast tissue
have been related to breast cancer risk in overweight and obese women
presumably by the obesity-inflammation-aromatase axis. However, a role of
dietary ω6:ω3 FA in adipose inflammation, independent of obesity is not
clear. Herein, we examined effects of dietary ω6:ω3 ratio on the
mammary tissue microenvironment and adipose inflammation using a moderate
fat, iso-caloric diets, and pair-fed model. The LieberDeCarli diet
containing 21:1 ratio of ω6:ω3 FA was used as a ω6 diet, whereas
encapsulated fish oil containing a 3:1 ratio of eicosapentaenoic (EPA)
and docosahexaenoic (DHA) acid was used to decrease ω6:ω3 ratio to
0.7:1 in the ω3 diet. Both iso-caloric diets contained 35.5% of calories
derived from fat and were pair-fed to maintain iso-intake. Female BALB/c
mice were established on the ω6 and ω3 diets for 10 weeks and weight
gain and diet consumption monitored. There were no differences in the
volume of diet consumed and weight gain between dietary groups. At
autopsy, mammary fat pads (MFP) were collected and analyzed for fatty
acid composition, histopathology, epithelial proliferation and macrophage
infiltration. Arachidonic acid (AA) levels in the MFPs were not different
between the groups but EPA and DHA were absent in the MFPs from the ω6
diet fed mice. Whereas, (2.41+/- 0.5) mole% of EPA and (1.52+/-0.29)
mole% of DHA were detected in MFP of ω3 diet fed mice. The MFP of ω6
diet fed mice had significantly increased areas of unilocular adipocytes
relative to adipocytes of the ω3 group. Similarly, ω6 diet fed mice had
increased connective tissue in the ductal stroma, significantly higher
numbers of proliferating cells in the ductal epithelium, as well as in
adipose tissue area of MFP. In addition, ω6 diet fed mice had a
significant increase in the numbers of CLS in mammary adipose tissue. In
summary, our studies demonstrated that despite the comparable levels of
AA in MFP in both of groups, the presence of LC-ω3 FA (EPA and DHA) was
able to reduce inflammation in the MFP of ω3 diet fed mice, thus
regulating the MFP microenvironments by reducing macrophage infiltration
and ductal epithelial proliferation in an obesity-independent manner.


