Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vorinostat reexpressed estrogen receptor (ER) in triple negative
breast cancer cell line subtypes and sensitized cells to tamoxifen and
indole-3-carbinol in vitro.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is one of the most aggressive
subtypes of breast cancer. Although about 85% of breast cancers are
estrogen positive, about 15% falls into this category.

This subtype of cancer lacks targeted therapies receptors, such as the
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and the human
epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2).

These patients are limited to cytotoxic chemotherapies with harsh side
effects. In addition to occurring in younger women, other risk factors
for TNBC include: being of African descent, BRCA1 mutation, a strong
family history of breast cancer, lifestyle and environmental factors.

Although mutations are involved in the initiation of TNBC, research has
revealed that individuals are controlled by factors other than DNA
sequences such as epigenetic mechanisms. Environmental and lifestyle
related factors, such as the lack of population-based screening, and lack
of access to care-factors, the urban environment, food deserts, social
stress, racism, diet, lack of exercise, alcohol intake, and tobacco use
(i.e. cigarette smoking) have all been described as factors associated
with breast cancer related disparities. This study investigated the role
of epigenetic mechanisms in the re-expression of ER receptors in triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells by examining the effects of a
FDA-approved epigenetic drug (vorinostat) and the dietary agent
(indole-3-carbinol) on three subtypes of triple negative breast cancer.
Basal-like 2 (HCC1806), mesenchymal stem cell-like (MSL) MDA-MB-231 and
mesenchymal (BT-549) cell lines were treated with vorinostat for 6, 12,
24 and 48 hrs alone. The ER was expressed in HCC1806 (3-fold) and
MDA-MB-231 (5-fold) at 6 hr. The ER was not expressed in BT-549 cells at
any time point. MTS assay demonstrated a significant decreased in
proliferation (60%) in MDA-MB-231 when treated with vorinostat (10, 20 or
30 µM) and 10 µM of tamoxifen. Furthermore, a significant decrease
(40%) in proliferation was also detected in MDA-MB-231 cells treatmented
with I3C (200 µM) and vorinostat (10, 20 or 30 µM). Our preliminary
results show that three triple-negative cell lines representing three
subtypes responded different to treatment with vorinostat in
re-expressing the estrogen receptor. However, these results showed
promising result for the use of this drug in sensitizing triple negative
breast cancer cells to tamoxifen and a dietary agent, indole-3-carbinol.
Further functional studies are currently underway.


