Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of C-MYC and chromatin acetylation induce epigenetic
reprogramming in acute lymphoblastic leukemia.


Epigenetic modifications play a key role in establishing and maintaining
gene expression. In cancer, they are highly altered and responsable of
gene expression deregulation. Epigenetic drugs have the ability to reset
cancer cell epigenome producing cancer cell differentiation and
apoptosis. In a drug screening initiative, we recently reported a series
of FDA-approved drugs with unsuspected epigenetic and anticancer
activities. Here, we tested in a secondary screen the activity of these
drugs against acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cell lines (MOLT-4 and
NALM-6). We found that Proscillaridin A, a cardiac glycoside used for
heart failure treatment, was the most active with IC50 values in the low
nanomolar range, suggesting drug repositioning potential. Proscillaridin
treatments induced a significant decrease in RNA and protein levels of
C-MYC, a master oncogenic driver in ALL. Shortly after proscillaridin A
treatment, C-MYC exhibited a 75% reduction in lysine acetylation, a
post-translational modification known to prevent its degradation. Loss of
acetylation was associated with down-regulation of lysine
acetyltransferases CBP, P300 and Tip60, which also correlated with a
reduction in histone 3 and 4 acetylation levels (H3K14ac, H3K9ac, H3K27ac
and H4K5ac). Preliminary analysis with si-RNA experiments reveal that
independent HAT activities are not responsible of C-MYC downregulation.
RNA sequencing and gene set enrichment analysis in proscillaridin-treated
ALL cells (5 nM for 48h) showed that genes associated with cell
differentiation and apoptosis pathways were up-regulated whereas
down-regulated genes were associated with C-MYC target genes. Altogether,
our findings show that acetylation through lysine acetyltransferase
down-regulation simultaneously induces loss of C-MYC and H3 acetylation
leading to epigenetic reprogramming in ALL cells. This drug repositioning
strategy, using proscillaridin A, has the potential to reprogram cancer
cells that are driven by MYC overexpression or hyperactivation.


