Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective MET kinase inhibition in MET-dependent glioma models.


Background - Grade IV diffuse gliomas (glioblastomas) are notoriously
difficult to treat. Many studies aim at targeting tumor-specific
aberrations, such as mutations in genes encoding oncogenic receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs). Of high interest as a tumor target in diffuse
glioma is the RTK MET, which is amplified in a significant proportion of
glioblastomas, and a number of MET inhibitors have been developed.
However, most RTK inhibitors available in the clinic today, including
those inhibiting MET, are not entirely selective and inhibit additional
kinases at the doses used. They therefore may induce potentially
undesired off-target effects, such as blood-brain barrier normalization
in the case of concomitant VEGFR2 inhibition.

Methods – We studied the effects of the novel, selective MET-kinase
inhibitor (Compound A) and the combined VEGFR2/RET/MET inhibitor
cabozantinib on MET activation and proliferation in the MET-amplified E98
astrocytoma cell line in vitro, using western blot analysis and MTT
proliferation assays. Effects of compound A were also studied in mice
carrying orthotopic xenografts of the same E98 cell line. Survival was
monitored and effects of MET inhibition were investigated by
immunohistochemistry using phospho-specific antibodies.

Results – E98 cells were highly sensitive to treatment with Compound A
in vitro (IC50~9.4 nM). Furthermore, Compound A effectively inhibited
phosphorylation of MET in orthotopic E98 xenografts. In contrast, we have
previously shown that after treatment with cabozantinib in the same model
the high levels of phosphorylated MET were maintained. While treatment
with Compound A significantly prolonged the survival of E98-xenograft
bearing mice, tumors still developed and showed extensive AKT
phosphorylation in the absence of MET phopshorylation, suggesting in vivo
therapy resistance mechanisms. Interestingly, resistance to Compound A
was not seen in vitro in an E98 cell line derived from Compound
A-resistant tumor xenografts.

Conclusions – Compound A is a promising, highly selective MET kinase
inhibitor with activity against gliomas with constitutive MET signaling.
Selective MET kinase inhibitors may be more suited for treatment of
glioma than combined VEGFR2/MET inhibitors, as the latter may induce
vessel

normalization resulting in poor tumor penetration. Similar to clinical
experience, E98 tumor-bearing mice ultimately develop resistance to TKIs.
Combination therapies targeting both MET and potential resistance
pathways may be required to allow long-term tumor treatment.


