Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel ERX-11 and CDK4/6 inhibitor combination therapy for treating
therapy resistant breast cancer.


BACKGROUND: The majority of the breast cancer is estrogen receptor alpha
(ESR1) positive. While tamoxifen and letrozole therapies are effective,
therapy resistance is common. Importantly, both therapy-sensitive and
therapy-resistant tumors retain ESR1 signaling, via interaction with
critical oncogenic coregulator proteins. Further, resistant tumors
commonly acquire cyclin D1:CDK4/6 signaling via multiple mechanisms,
cyclin D1 can independently activate ESR1 and thus contribute to estrogen
independence of ESR+ tumor. Currently, CDK4/6 inhibitors in clinical
trials for treating breast cancer, however, considering complex signaling
interplay of estrogen and CDK axis, combination therapy of CDK inhibitor
with other potent ESR1 targeted agents may have better utility and may
prevent development of resistance to the CDK4/6 inhibitors. We recently
developed a small organic molecule, ESR1 coregulator binding inhibitor
ERX-11 (EtiraRx-11). The objective of this study is to test the utility
of novel combination therapy of ERX-11 with CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib
in treating therapy resistant cancer.

METHODS: We have utilized multiple therapy sensitive and
therapy-resistant models with various genetic back grounds. We tested
efficacy using both acquired resistance and engineered models that
express ESR1 mutations or oncogenes. Efficacy of combination therapy was
tested using established in vitro assays including, MTT, colony
formation, apoptosis, and cell cycle progression. Mechanistic studies
were conducted using reporter gene assays, gene expression and signaling
alterations. Xenograft studies were used to determine the in vivo
efficacy of the combination therapy.

RESULTS: ERX-11 effectively blocked ESR1-mediated oncogenic signaling and
has potent anti-proliferative activity against therapy-sensitive and
therapy-resistant breast cancer cells. Mechansistic studies showed that
ERX-11 blocks the interaction between a subset of coregulators with both
native and mutant forms of ESR1. ERX-11 showed potent activity in both
preclinical xenograft models and patient-derived breast tumor explant
models. Co-treatment of ERX-11 with palbociclib synergistically reduced
cell viability and induced apoptosis of therapy sensitive and resistant
breast cancer model cells. Importantly, combination therapy of ERX-11 and
the palbociclib synergistically reduced the growth and induced apoptosis
of tamoxifen and letrozole resistant xenograft tumors compared to either
drug alone. Mechanistic studies showed combination therapy significantly
altered E2F1 and ESR1 signaling pathways and promoted apoptosis.

CONCLUSIONS: Collectively our studies have discovered a novel
combinational treatment with ERX-11 and palbociclib for patients with
therapy-sensitive and therapy-resistant breast cancers.


