Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Network-driven analytics of published tissue-based biomarkers to
predict response to neoadjuvant therapy in rectal cancer.


Introduction Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (nCRT) plays a central role in
the management of locally advanced rectal cancer. For many, nCRT leads to
clinically meaningful tumour regression. However, up to 20% exhibit
little to no response and, in this group, nCRT results in unnecessary
delays to definitive treatment. There is a critical need for development
of robust molecular methods to predict response to nCRT, to allow for
more precise treatment stratification. Although numerous molecular
pathways and biomarkers have been implicated in radiosensitivity, the
lack of a unifying interpretation of these findings has restricted
translational deployment. The aim of the current study was to develop a
‘knowledge network’ with which to visualise and interpret published,
quantitative, biomarker data relating to radiosensitivity in rectal
cancer, beyond the conventional format of a systematic review.

Methods Existing data on predictive biomarkers were retrieved by way of a
systematic review of electronic bibliographic databases. Biomarkers were
classified according to biological function and built into a hierarchical
Gene Ontology tree. Significance was binarized based on p-values or
multivariate statistics. An interactive, direct acyclic graph was
developed using the Dagre-D3 JavaScript library. Nodes were sized by
number of studied biomarkers and color-coded according to their
significance scores. The scores reflect the ratio of significant versus
non-significant evidence across studied biomarkers. A negative score
range indicates more non-significant biomarker findings for that
ontological term (node). Weightings were applied to reflect those
biomarkers confirmed as significant across two or more studies. p-values
of 0.05 or less (adjusted for multiple comparative analysis where
appropriate) were considered to be statistically significant.

Results 72 individual biomarkers were identified through review. On
highest order classification, the domains of response to stress and
factors inhibiting apoptosis were found to be most significant (aggregate
significance scores across identified biomarkers, 0.75 and 0.714
respectively). A predictive power was not reached for the majority of
prognostic biomarkers; rather, the levels of their statistical
significance were assessed.

Conclusions Building a knowledge-based network analysis of published data
identifies promising areas for further research into cellular mechanisms,
which may aid in biomarker discovery. Regarding significant node clusters
within a network of published data on predictive biomarkers,
modifications in cellular metabolic responses to the insult posed by nCRT
appear to hold promise in developing a panel of biomarkers with a
predictive capacity for response. Network-based analytics takes into
account the complex nature of response to therapy, and is a novel way of
presenting results obtained from a systematic review.


