Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic applications of the selective high affinity ligand
SH7139 may extend beyond NHL to many other types of solid tumors.


SH7139, the first of a new class of cancer therapeutics developed for
treating non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, is unusual in that both targeting and
pro-drug functionalities have been incorporated into the same small
molecule. Functioning similar to an antibody-drug conjugate, SH7139
targets a unique structural epitope within the antigen-binding pocket of
HLA-DR10. HLA-DRs containing this epitope within the β-subunit are
reported to be over-expressed in approximately 85% of B-cell lymphomas.
Upon binding to HLA-DR molecules located on the tumor cell’s surface,
SH7139 is transported into the cytoplasm where it is concentrated and
subsequently metabolized. A series of metabolic products derived from the
SHAL’s recognition elements (three small molecules that are linked
together to create SH7139 and to provide targeting selectivity) are
generated as the drug is broken down, each of which inhibits one or more
activities required for tumor cell survival. Preclinical studies with
SH739 have demonstrated remarkable efficacy in treating B-cell lymphoma
xenografts in mice, providing permanent cures for up to two-thirds of the
animals at a human equivalent dose as low as 0.41 μg/kg. Biopsy tissue
binding studies conducted with SH7129, a biotinylated form of SH7139, and
streptavidin-horse radish peroxidase detection have shown the drug binds
to a significant fraction of tumors obtained from patients diagnosed with
multiple myeloma and each of the B-cell lymphoma subtypes tested to date
(DLBC, Burkitt’s, Mantle Cell, Follicular, MALT, and CLL). SH7129 was
also observed to bind to tumor biopsies obtained from of a number of
patients diagnosed with peripheral T-cell and nodular sclerosis
Hodgkin’s lymphomas, a result consistent with observations reported by
others that HLA-DRs are expressed in a subset of these lymphomas. HLA-DR
expression has also been reported to occur in or be linked to a number of
other types of cancer, including melanoma, cervical, ovarian, pancreatic
and lung cancers. SH7129 staining of tumor microarrays have shown biopsy
cores from a subset of patients diagnosed with each of these cancers also
bind SH7139. While in vivo efficacy has only been tested in Burkitt’s
(Raji), Mantle cell (Granta-519), and T-cell (Jurkat, a cell line control
lacking HLA-DR and showing no efficacy) lymphoma xenografts, these tissue
binding results suggest that in addition to the majority of the NHL
subtypes, nodular sclerosis Hodgkin’s lymphoma, multiple myelomas, as
well as a subset of melanomas, ovarian, cervical, pancreatic, and lung
cancers may also respond to SH7139 therapy. This research was supported
by the National Cancer Institute Phase II SBIR Award R44CA159843.


