Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the expression and function of TIM-3 relative to
PD-1 in human tumors.


While immunotherapies directed against PD-1 and PD-L1 have proven
effective across multiple indications, there is still a large unmet
medical need for therapies for patients who do not respond or who develop
acquired resistance during the course of treatment. There are several
emerging hypotheses to explain the lack of response, including the
overall presence and localization of immune cells, as well as the
up-regulation of additional T-cell checkpoints, including TIM-3 in tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes. To investigate the potential role of TIM-3, we
set out to evaluate the expression and function of TIM-3 and the
relationship to PD-1 in several systems. Firstly, we developed a flow
cytometry methodology to enumerate T-cell, including CD4 and CD8 positive
cells, as well as other immune cell populations in a panel of human tumor
samples, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In these samples,
we investigated the expression profiles of TIM-3 and PD-1 in both T-cell
and non-T-cell populations. In addition, we performed complementary
genomic studies to explore gene expression profiles of not only the bulk
tumor samples but also of isolated PD1 positive/TIM-3 negative versus PD1
and TIM-3 double positive cell populations. The profiling identified
tumors with a range of tumor infiltrating lymphocyte content and also
differences in PD1 and TIM-3 expression. It was found that in addition to
T-cells, TIM-3 was expressed on myeloid cell populations and furthermore,
that there were distinct differences in the gene expression profiles of
PD1 single positive versus PD1 and TIM-3 double positive cells. Building
on the expression studies, the functional role of Tim-3 in T-cells and
also on myeloid-derived cells was explored. Taken together, these studies
provide further evidence for TIM-3 as an important immunological
checkpoint and as a relevant therapeutic target for the treatment of
cancer with the potential for biological effects in both the T-cell and
myeloid compartments of the tumor microenvironment.


