Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDD: functional insights into orphan GPCRs via subfamily domain
architectures.


NCBI’s Conserved Domain Database (CDD,
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/cdd.shtml) is a resource that
aims at classifying ancient conserved domain families and capturing what
is known about their functional diversity. It is a collection of multiple
sequence alignments (MSAs) and derived position-specific score matrices
(PSSMs). RPS-BLAST allows for the rapid identification of conserved
protein domain footprints in protein sequences along with the location of
annotated functional sites. CDD is a redundant collection, it imports
external domain model collections (Pfam, COGs etc.) and supplement these
with manually-curated domain models that are organized into hierarchical
classifications, which facilitate annotation of functionally distinct
protein families and subfamilies. More recently CDD has been curating
information on conserved domain architectures to support functional
labeling of proteins that fall into characterized families: SPARCLE
(Subfamily Protein ArCHitecture Labeling Engine) is both a curation tool
and a public service available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sparcle.
Architecture summaries provide interactive interfaces to lists of
proteins that share the same characteristic domain architecture, and to
their assigned names, functional labels, and supporting evidence. Here we
present the functionally annotated, evolutionary hierarchical
classification of the seven-transmembrane G-protein coupled receptors
(7TM GPCRs), which includes the largest family of promising therapeutic
targets, with more than 140 human orphan GPCRs of unknown function.
Across the three kingdoms of life, GPCRs are involved in a wide array of
critical physiological processes, and have been implicated in tumor
initiation, tumor progression, angiogenesis and metastasis. Orphan
subfamilies with unknown endogenous ligand/function are often found to
have poor sequence similarity to canonical GPCRs. They have been assigned
putative functions with predicted ligand-binding sites, downstream
interacting partners, and/or the location of 7TM helices annotated by
inference from the molecular and physiological functions of known related
GPCR proteins, utilizing more than 25 available 3D-structures,
phylogenetic relationships, and the published literature. We hope that
this updated classification, together with NCBI’s software tools
(Cn3D/CDTree and SPARCLE), will aid researchers in the discovery of
molecular therapeutic targets for cancer treatment by providing insights
regarding as-yet-unidentified intra-and intermolecular interactions as
well as functional mechanisms of GPCR signaling.

Acknowledgement: This research was supported by the Intramural Research
Program of the National Library of Medicine, NIH.


