Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An NGS workflow to detect down to 0.1% allelic frequency in cfDNA
for breast and colon cancers.


Noninvasive detection of rare mutations in blood could allow tumor
monitoring for research purposes. Research studies have suggested that
cfDNA contains DNA from tumor cells with somatic mutations that could
inform on tumor progression and therapeutic resistance. Here, we
demonstrate a complete workflow from a single tube of blood through data
analysis for research samples down to a 0.1% allelic frequency.

The low abundance tumor mutations found in cfDNA requires sensitive and
accurate mutation detection. We have developed two panels that utilize an
amplification-based assay that generates tagged DNA copies, which allows
detection of low abundance tumor mutations found in cfDNA. The two panels
allow multiplex interrogation of primary driver and resistance mutations
specific to ctDNA from breast and colon cancer. The Oncomine Colon cfDNA
panel targets 236 hotspots within 14 genes while the Oncomine Breast
cfDNA panel covers 157 hotspot mutations in 10 genes. This workflow was
validated from matched single blood tubes, Streck and K2EDTA.
Additionally, the utility for cancer research was demonstrated with
concordance studies using matched FFPE and plasma from oncology samples.

To further characterize these panels we have developed an oncology
control for cfDNA with nucleosome fragment sizing and minimal sonication
damage. This engineered control contains SNPs and indels at 0.1% allelic
frequencies, orthogonally confirmed with TaqMan based Rare Mutation
assays. With this control, the Oncomine Breast cfDNA panel had over 81%
sensitivity and 99.9% specificity. The Oncomine Colon cfDNA panel had
over 85% sensitivity and 100% specificity. The Oncomine Breast cfDNA
panel and Oncomine Colon cfDNA panel integrated into a complete workflow
starting from a single tube of blood can advance oncology research with
the ability to detect blood based cancer biomarkers present at 0.1%.


