Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of 16,172 patient-derived tumor samples indicate TPX2 as
being essential for survival of genomically instable cancer cells.


Mutations in homologous recombination (HR) genes, including BRCA1 and
BRCA2, compromise DNA repair and lead to genomic instability (GI). GI is
lethal to normal cells but is a characteristic of many cancers.
Apparently, these cancers are somehow re-wired to survive high levels of
GI. Identification of the genetic alterations that allow viability of
genomically instable tumor cells may uncover novel therapeutic targets.

To elucidate how these tumor cells are rewired, we analyzed publically
available mRNA expression data of 16,172 human cancer samples. Functional
genomic mRNA profiling (FGmRNA-profiling) was applied on these samples to
infer levels of GI and to capture the downstream effects of somatic copy
number alterations on gene expression. A genome-wide association analysis
was subsequently performed to assess the correlation between FGmRNA
signals of individual genes with the degree of GI. From the top 250 genes
with strong positive correlation with GI, 11 genes were prioritized based
on a co-functionality network in which genes are co-regulated and share
similar predicted biological function. The 11 genes that were identified
in this cluster were: BIRC5, UBE2C, CENPA, CDCA3, DEK, SKP2, TPX2, KIF2C,
RAD21, MYBL2 and WDR67.

To validate these findings in genetically-defined models, we engineered a
panel of 5 triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines with
doxycycline-inducible shRNAs targeting BRCA2. BRCA2 depletion resulted in
a failure of RAD51 foci to localize to DNA double strand breaks which
generated isogenic cell line pairs proficient and deficient of HR repair.
First, we depleted each of the identified 11 genes using RNA interference
in BT-549 cells and observed that depletion of TPX2, a
microtubule-associated protein, led to largest differential levels of
cell death when comparing the BRCA2-deficient with the BRCA2-proficient
context (86.6% vs 32.9% cell death in BRCA2-depleted vs controlled
depleted cells respectively). Subsequently, we could replicate this
decreased survival with TPX2 depletion in a BRCA2-deficient context in an
additional 2 out of 4 other TNBC cell lines.

Furthermore, we investigated whether BRCA2-depleted cells were also more
sensitive to depletion of Aurora kinase A, a substrate of TPX2. For this
purpose, mouse mammary tumor cell lines, derived from Tp53-/- or
Brca2-/-;Tp53-/- mice, or a Brca2-reconstituted version thereof were
treated with an Aurora A inhibitor, Alisertib. Again, we found that the
BRCA2-deficient cell line was more sensitive to Aurora A inhibition than
the two BRCA2-proficient cell lines.

In conclusion, FGmRNA-profiling of mRNA expression data of human cancer
samples identified TPX2 as an essential gene for survival of
BRCA2-deficient breast cancer cells, when compared to BRCA2-proficient
cells. Thus, targeting the TPX2/AURKA axis could potentially act as a
novel therapeutic target in the treatment of genomically instable cancers.


