Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stemness markers in colorectal cancer: Analysis in a
racially-diverse population.


The diagnosis of colorectal cancer (CRC) is based on
tumor-node-metastasis staging, a weak staging system due to different
genetic and epigenetic backgrounds. Biological markers improve early
detection and guide clinicians in subsequent therapies. Stemness
molecules have the potential to identify patients at high risk of
developing aggressive cancers. Herein, Zinc finger E-box binding homeobox
1 (ZEB1), Trefoil factor 3 (TFF3), Hepatoma Up-Regulate Protein (HURP),
Mucin 2 (MUC2), and Cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) are
assessed as potential prognostic biomarkers in CRC. There were a total of
(N=56) cases included in this study which were assessed by a pathologist,
out of them 32 were African Americans (AA) and 24 Caucasian Americans
(CA). The median follow-up for 42 surviving patients were noted to be 4.5
years (range 2.5 - 7.5 years). A tissue tumor microarray (TMA) was
created using tumor stage-matched CRC tissues from AA and CA. The TMA was
stained with each biomarker using immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
consisted of 132 cores including both controls and tumors. The individual
staining score ranged from (0-3) for both area and intensity. The product
of area and intensity was used as the final score which ranged from (0-9)
with 0 defining no expression and 9 as high expression. We evaluated the
association for expression of all the five biomarkers with disease-free
survival (DFS) in AA and CA separately. Stratification of the cohort by
race revealed that in CA, high ZEB1 expression (nuclear and cytoplasmic)
was associated with poor DFS (p= 0.015 for cytoplasm, p= 0.116 for
nucleus). ZEB1 expression was not found to be a significant predictor of
DFS in AA who are usually known to have worse CRC outcomes. These
findings suggest that expression of ZEB1 may represent a marker for CRC
prognosis, particularly in CA. High nuclear TFF3 expression in AA was
found to be marginally associated with poorer DFS (p=0.089). However, the
cytoplasmic expression of TFF3 was not significantly associated with DFS.
Both the cytoplasmic and nuclear expression of HURP, MUC2, and CFTR among
the AA and CA did not significantly correlate with DFS. Overall, we have
identified two stemness molecules, ZEB1 and TFF3, with potential as
markers for aggressiveness in CRC. Our findings also provide evidence of
a possible biological basis for ethnicity-related differences with
regards to stemness and regulatory factors of CRC aggressiveness. ZEB1
can contribute to be a novel biomarker to predict the prognosis of CRC in
CA, and TFF3 will be a prognostic marker for AA. Future goals include
collecting additional samples and follow-up of the patients to accurately
estimate the prognosis. In addition, we will expand the project to the
cellular and molecular basis underlining our findings.

Funding sources: PCRP W81XWH-14-1-0151, UMMC Medical Student Research
Program, and UMMC Office of Research.


