Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Shc1 scaffold protein simultaneously balances Stat1 and Stat3
activity in breast cancer to promote immune suppression and resistance to
immunotherapy.


Receptor and cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases are key signal integrators in
poor outcome breast cancers that are central to the establishment of an
immunosuppressive microenvironment. Immunotherapies represent an emerging
approach within the armament of anti-cancer agents. Although the efficacy
of tyrosine kinase inhibitors relies, in part, on their ability to
augment adaptive immunity, the increased heterogeneity and functional
redundancy of the tyrosine kinome in poor outcome breast cancers
represents a significant hurdle to achieving durable responses to
immunotherapies. We previously identified the Shc1 (ShcA) scaffold
protein, a central regulator of tyrosine kinase signaling, as essential
for promoting immune suppression. We recently showed that the ShcA
pathway simultaneously activates STAT3 immunosuppressive signals and
impairs STAT1-driven immune surveillance in breast cancer cells. Impaired
phosphorylation of select tyrosine residues on ShcA potently and
selectively reduces STAT3 activation in breast tumors, profoundly
sensitizing them to immune checkpoint inhibitors and tumor vaccines.
Meanwhile, impaired phosphorylation of other select tyrosine residues on
ShcA potently increased antigen presentation and sensitivity to tumor
vaccines in preclinical mouse models. Based on these results, we have set
out to elucidate protein interactors dependent on distinct ShcA
phospho-tyrosines to regulate STAT1 and STAT3 signaling axis that aid
tumor driven immune suppression. We combined affinity-purification mass
spectrometry (AP/MS) and proximity-dependent biotin identification
(BioID) followed by mass spectrometry (BioID/MS). Known interactors of
ShcA as well novel interactors have been identified. Promising candidates
that could be critical in immune suppression downstream of ShcA have been
validated to be true interactors by co-IP and BioID assays. They have
been screened for immune regulation in vitro for further modulation in
vivo. Currently, inhibitors of phospho-tyrosine motifs of ShcA do not
exists. Therefore, the development of pharmacological inhibitors to
prevent phospho-tyrosine ShcA dependent STAT3 signaling or relieve
suppression of STAT1 signaling may be an attractive method to
strategically sensitize breast tumors to multiple immunotherapies.


