Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the CCL20-CCR6 axis as a novel opportunity to
stimulataneously modulate cancer stem cells and the tumor-immune
infiltrate by a dual anti-cancer mechanism.


Drugs that target cancer stem cells (CSCs) are thought to be a critical
component of any successful therapy against cancer. CSCs are responsible
for chemoresistance, metastasis, and ultimately relapse of the cancer,
even after an initial successful therapeutic intervention. While it is
well known that CSCs are driven by some of the same major self-renewal
pathways that drive embryonic stem cells, knowledge of other cellular
pathways that drive CSC activity is still limited. In this work, we
uncover a novel role for chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 20 (CCL20) in CSC
growth and activity, expanding the role for this chemoattractant protein.
We discovered that CSCs of many tumor types overexpress CCL20, which we
show drives CSC self-renewal and proliferation by autocrine signaling
through its receptor CCR6. Targeting this axis with a neutralizing
monoclonal antibody against CCL20 significantly reduces CSC frequency and
tumor initiation and growth, supporting the novel therapeutic potential
of targeting the CCL20-CCR6 axis as a strategy to eliminate CSCs.
Furthermore, we found that CCL20 secreted by tumor cells also strongly
influences the frequencies not only of T-cells, particularly
immune-suppressive regulatory T-cells (Treg) and Th17 populations, but
also dendritic and neutrophil/gMDSC populations, to promote anti-tumor
immunity that leads to immune-mediated inhibition of tumor growth.
Strikingly, we discovered that tumor-specific CCL20 impacted not just the
immune cell balance within the tumor microenvironment, but had far
reaching effects into the peripheral immune system as well. Thus, our
overall findings propose that CCL20 plays a dual role in the tumor
environment: 1) by driving activity and tumorigenic ability of CSCs, and
2) by promoting an immunosuppressive phenotype. In this work we show that
therapeutic neutralization of CCL20 can deliver a one-two punch against
cancer, by directly inhibiting CSCs, and by relieving immunosuppression,
thereby opening this target up as an exciting novel strategy to treat
cancer.


