Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of EGFR T790M mutation by ddPCR in untreated NSCLC
patients: Correlation with clinical outcome.


Background: Activating EGFR mutations are associated with response to
first generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) that significantly
increased PFS and OS in NSCLC patients. However, almost invariably,
patients relapse while in treatment with TKI, mostly for the presence of
EGFR T790M mutation. New second and third generation EGFR inhibitors
active against T790M are now under development with very promising
results. To date it is not known if the presence of T790M (and its
amount) at diagnosis influences clinical outcome of patients with
activating EGFR mutation.

Methods: We analysed 50 cases with NSCLC. 48 patients harbour TKI
sensitizing mutation in either exon 19 (N=24) or 21 (N=19). 2 EGFR wt
patients (blinded to the investigator) were analysed in parallel. These
patients were screened by ddPCR for the presence of T790M mutation using
Biorad QX200 Droplet Digital PCR System. We used rough DNA extract from
FFPE sections after deparaffinization and proteinase K digestion, as
available in pathology unit for daily diagnosis.

Results: 12 samples failed to amplify, maybe due to the poor quality of
DNA. 13 samples produced results, but were excluded for the analysis
because of too low number of calls retrieved. T790M mutation was detected
in a significant proportion of remaining cases. Among the latter, 4
patients were sampled after TKI treatment and here the percentage of
T790M were higher compared to those patients not treated [0.65% - 28% vs
0.019% - 1.65%, respectively]. One out four of these patients was not
detected by routinely method of sequencing (Sanger or RT-PCR). T790M
positive samples harboured mutations affecting exon 19 or 21 in equal
manner.

Conclusions: ddPCR has proven to be a sensitive method to detect T790M
mutation, although the quality of DNA could affect the results. The
system has been challenged for specificity an sensitivity and the results
proved to be clinically relevant. The correlation between the T790M
positivity and clinical outcome will be available and we plan to define a
ddPCR threshold value which can help in selecting those patients who are
likely to have early recurrence under first generation TKI and that could
therefore be directly shifted to second or third generation inhibitors.


