Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alerting the immune system by removing epigenetic silencing of Th1
chemokines.


BACKGROUND: Solid tumors employ multiple mechanisms to evade an immune
response. However, the potential to enhance the immune response to cancer
has been proven in several malignancie and is under investigation in many
others, including primary CNS tumors. Brain tumors in particular lack
robust T-cell infiltration. Recent studies have found that certain tumors
can be induced to express T-cell attracting chemokines, CXCL9 and CXCL10,
by interferon gamma (IFNg). This response is further amplified using
methyltransferase inhibitors (Peng, et al. Nature 2015. Vol 527:
249-253.), resulting in increased Tcell trafficking to tumors both in
vitro and in vivo. We hypothesized that T-cell trafficking to brain
tumors could likewise be enhanced with DNA and histone methyltransferase
inhibitors to induce CXCL9 and CXCL10 transcription.

METHODS: Assays were performed on 7 human glioma brain tumor cell lines.
CXCL9 and CXCL10 expression were measured by real-time PCR. Two
commercially available methyltransferase inhibitors, 5-AZA-dC and GSK126,
were utilized to demethylate DNA and histone H3 (K9 and K27),
respectively. Histone methylation status was examined using Western blot.
T-cell migration was measured using transwell migration assays.

RESULTS: IFNg increased CXCL9 and CXCL10 transcription in brain tumor
lines. GSK126 and 5-AZA-dC enhanced expression of CXCL9 and CXCL10
compared to IFNg alone. Migration assays confirmed T-cell trafficking
towards chemokines produced by tumor cells in response to
methyltransferase inhibitors.

CONCLUSIONS: These studies demonstrate that brain tumors express T-cell
attracting chemokines CXCL9 and CXCL10 in response to IFNg. Further,
GSK126 and the combination of GSK126 and 5-AZA-dC enhanced expression of
CXCL9 and CXCL10 transcription by real-time PCR and T-cell trafficking by
migration assay. Together, these data provide a potential means to
increase T-cell trafficking into tumors and potentially enhances the
efficacy of immune therapies for brain tumors.


