Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms underlying genomic integrity in breast cancer-derived
dormant circulating tumor cells.


Patients with metastatic breast cancer have a five-year survival rate of
22% compared to 99% in patients with cancer localized to the breast. This
disparity in clinical outcome is at least in part caused by the lack of
diagnostic tools for early detection of metastatic recurrence. This can
be especially valid for breast cancer patients having brain metastases
(BCBM), 10-20% of whom are diagnosed only at autopsy. The early detection
of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in peripheral blood during the
metastatic cascade provides a window of opportunity to prevent BCBM
onset. However, to target CTCs causing BCBM, one must dissect mechanisms
that allow CTCs to retain their brain metastatic potency while remaining
dormant in circulation. We hypothesized that hyperactive mechanisms of
DNA repair preserve the genomic make-up of dormant CTCs allowing them to
maintain over time the potential for BCBM competence. Comprehensive
analyses of breast cancer patient-derived CTC transcriptomes showed that
CTC gene signatures closely relate to basal-like breast cancer cell lines
rather than the molecular subtype of the primary tumor. However, unlike
actively cycling cell lines, a large proportion of CTCs were mitotically
dormant (Ki67-/PCNA-) with low overall mRNA expression and
transcriptional activity. Upon systemic injection of patient-derived
common lineage-depleted cells into immuno-compromised mice, the majority
of CTCs were found at metastatic sites in a state of mitotic/metabolic
dormancy. Second, dormant CTCs had a lower incidence of double-strand DNA
breaks (DSB) than proliferating cells as assessed by Serine139
phosphorylation status of gamma H2AX. Third, we discovered that the human
telomere-associated protein RIF1, a mediator of alternative
non-homologous end joining repair of DNA DSB interplaying with BRCA1/2,
was significantly up-regulated in the Ki67-/PCNA- CTC population.
RIF1/BRCA1 foci formation was confirmed in areas of DNA damage in these
cells. Lastly, shRNA-mediated RIF1 knockdown promoted dormant cell
populations to become more susceptible to UV and bleomycin-induced DNA
damage while activating p38 and ERK stress-response pathways as well as
their phosphorylation ratio. Moreover, RIF1 knockdown in MDA-MB231BR
clone attenuated its metastatic competence to the brain. Collectively,
these findings suggest that RIF1 regulates the genomic integrity of
dormant CTCs allowing them to survive over time while in circulation.
Further elucidation of RIF1-mediated CTC pathways and its dynamics with
BRCA1/2 may provide novel strategies for therapeutic intervention. This
can be clinically useful in breast cancer patients that are yet to
develop overt BCBM.


