Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutant p53 promotes progression and metastasis of mouse oral
tumors induced by 4NQO, associated with specific immune infiltrates.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common
malignancy worldwide. The vast majority of the human HNSCCs contain p53
mutations, some of which acquire oncogenic gain-of-function (GOF)
activities. Previous mouse models in which either the p53R172H GOF
mutation or deletion of the p53 gene were co-activated with oncogenic
K-ras showed that p53R172H can predispose to oral tumor initiation,
accelerate tumor growth and promote progression to SCC. However, the
impact of p53 gain- and loss-of-function (LOF) mutations in metastasis
could not be assessed because of the low rates of progression to SCC in
that model. To overcome this limitation, we used the tobacco-surrogate
4NQO to induce oral lesions that may progress to advance carcinomas
following stepwise changes that resemble the gradual accumulation of
histological and molecular abnormalities observed during human oral
cancer progression. To examine the role of p53 mutations during SCC
malignant progression we applied 4NQO to mice in which the p53R172H
mutation or homozygous deletion of p53 were activated in oral epithelial
cells. We observed that oral tumors appeared faster in the presence of
p53 mutations than in mice with wtp53. No significant difference was
observed between the p53R172H mutation and p53 deletion. However,
survival was shorter in mice expressing p53R172H than in mice with loss
of p53. Notably, regional and distant metastasis were only observed in
mice with oral tumors expressing p53R172H. Therefore, these mice are
excellent tools for pre-clinical studies designed to target early stages
of tumor development or latest stages of progression and metastasis. As
immunotherapy is becoming adopted as part of the standard treatment for
head and neck cancer patients, we conducted a detailed characterization
of the immune infiltrates of the lesions that developed in these mice in
order to assess their immunogenicity. We observed a progressive increase
in T-cell infiltration from normal oral mucosa to oral premalignant
lesions (OPL) to SCC, in the presence or absence of p53 mutations.
Similarly, the expression of immune checkpoint proteins, including PD1,
PDL1 and CTLA4 increased during oral tumor progression, regardless of the
p53 status. Interestingly, we observed a sharp increase in the presence
of immune infiltrates expressing the co-stimulatory OX40 in SCCs relative
to premalignant lesions, with different extent depending on the nature of
the p53 mutation. The significance of these observations is currently
being analyzed. In summary, p53R172H promotes metastasis in oral tumors
induced by 4NQO. In addition, T-cell infiltration and activation of
immune checkpoints during oral tumor progression suggest that this is an
excellent model to test immunotherapy-based strategies. Furthermore, our
findings suggest that OX40-based therapies may be tailored to patients
according to their p53 status.


