Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor microenvironment in cholangiocarcinoma is dominated by
an immunosuppressive infiltrate.


Purpose: To characterize the dynamics of the immune response to
cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) in a genetically engineered mouse model of CCA
in order to identify immune pathways susceptible to targeted
immunotherapies.

Experimental Design: Genetically modified mice with targeted Kras
activation and loss of p53 (Alb-Cre/LSL-KRASG12D /p53Lox/+) in the liver
spontaneously develop CCA recapitulating the histopathologic features of
human disease. To evaluate the in vivo immune response to CCA, tumors
from Kras-p53 mice and normal livers were excised and processed for
histologic examination, flow cytometry, and gene expression analysis.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and flow cytometry were performed on myeloid
and T cell markers to distinguish immune cell subsets. Cell lines
established from isolated CCA tumors were used to assess the functional
impact between the immune system and tumor cells in co-culture in-vitro
studies.

Results: Kras-p53 murine hepatic tumors were highly desmoplastic with a
heavy fibrotic stromal compartment. IHC analysis demonstrated a prominent
inflammatory leukocyte infiltrate compared to normal liver. Flow
cytometry of single cell tumor suspensions showed the immune reaction was
dominated by CD11b+ monocytic (Ly6C+) and granulocytic (Ly6G+) myeloid
cells, and Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (T reg). In vitro studies revealed
tumor educated myeloid cells expressed higher levels of genes associated
with an immunosuppressive phenotype, including Arginase 1 (p=Results:
Kras-p53 murine hepatic tumors were highly desmoplastic with a heavy
fibrotic stromal compartment. IHC analysis demonstrated a prominent
inflammatory leukocyte infiltrate compared to normal liver. Flow
cytometry of single cell tumor suspensions showed the immune reaction was
dominated by CD11b+ monocytic (Ly6C+) and granulocytic (Ly6G+) myeloid
cells, and Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (T reg). In vitro studies revealed
tumor educated myeloid cells expressed higher levels of genes associated
with an immunosuppressive phenotype, including Arginase 1 (p=<0.007).
Invasion assays analyzing the migration potential of CCA cell lines
co-cultured with CD11b+ cells showed increased invasive properties in
these tumor cells when compared to naive controls (p=Results: Kras-p53
murine hepatic tumors were highly desmoplastic with a heavy fibrotic
stromal compartment. IHC analysis demonstrated a prominent inflammatory
leukocyte infiltrate compared to normal liver. Flow cytometry of single
cell tumor suspensions showed the immune reaction was dominated by CD11b+
monocytic (Ly6C+) and granulocytic (Ly6G+) myeloid cells, and Foxp3+
regulatory T cells (T reg). In vitro studies revealed tumor educated
myeloid cells expressed higher levels of genes associated with an
immunosuppressive phenotype, including Arginase 1 (p=<0.007). Invasion
assays analyzing the migration potential of CCA cell lines co-cultured
with CD11b+ cells showed increased invasive properties in these tumor
cells when compared to naive controls (p=<0.0001). Additionally,
increased tumor-initiating properties were seen by qRT-PCR in tumor cell
lines having undergone similar co-culture experiments. These data suggest
the immune response to CCA is predominantly immunosuppressive and tumor
supportive.

Conclusion: CCA tumors from Alb-Cre/LSL-KRASG12D /p53Lox/+ mice have a
prominent immunosuppressive infiltrate recapitulating features of the
immune reaction in human disease. Thus, Kras-p53 mice provide an ideal
model to test targeted immunotherapy for the treatment of CCA.


