Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating EBV microRNA BART2-5p helps to diagnose nasopharyngeal
carcinoma &lt screen for high risk individuals precisely.


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma is an EB-virus associated malignancy which is
highly prevalent in Southeast Asia. If diagnosed early, the 5 year
disease-free survival rate is about 90%. However, most patients have
already developed local or regional invasion when diagnosed, which
results in poor prognosis. So it is essential to develop biomarkers to
screen high risk individuals or diagnose the disease at early stages. As
nasopharyngeal carcinoma is closely related to EBV infection and
microRNAs encoded by BART region (BamHI A Rightward Transcripts) is
abundant in NPC, we propose to identify biomarkers from those BART
microRNAs. To quantify the copy number of microRNAs in serum samples, we
used Taqman Probe-based qPCR. After adding Spiked-in Control (Mixture of
Cel-39,Cel-54, Cel-238) to each 100ul serum sample, we extracted total
RNA and reverse transcribed microRNA into cDNA with corresponding Taqman
primers. Meanwhile, microRNA mimics with known copy number were serial
diluted and reverse transcribed along with the samples. qPCR was
performed to quantify the level of microRNAs in these samples with
diluted cDNA and Taqman Probe. All data was normalized by Spiked-in
controls and exact copy number of each microRNA was calculated through
the standard curve generated by the serial diluted microRNA mimics. Here,
we screened 17 BART microRNAs in discovery stage and found BART 2-5p as a
candidate biomarker. In training cohort consisting of 266 patients with
nasopharyngeal carcinoma and controls from Hong Kong, the sensitivity,
specificity and AUC is 93.2%, 89.8%,0.976 respectively. The results are
similar in validation cohort 1 constituted by 376 patients and controls
from Guang Zhou. To evaluate the ability of BART 2-5p to distinguish
preclinical NPC patients from healthy high risk individuals, we
established a nested case-control study with serum samples prospectively
collected from 10 NPC patients at least one year prior to their clinical
diagnosis and 92 matched healthy high risk controls from a screening
scheme conducted in South China. The sensitivity and specificity is 90.0%
and 31.5%. Taken together, EBV microRNA BART2-5p is a promising biomarker
to improve NPC diagnosis and target preclinical patients more precisely
than serologic test.


