Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of functional heterogeneity and in vivo dynamics
of clonal cell populations derived from the triple-negative breast cancer
cell line MDA-MB-468.


Tumors evolve through progressive accumulation of (epi)genetic
alterations, favoring expansion of the fittest cell populations as a
result of stimuli and selective pressures in the microenvironment.
Intratumor heterogeneity and the interplay of tumor cells with the
microenvironment present an order of complexity that can have profound
effects on tumor progression and drug sensitivity. While tumor cell
heterogeneity has been described at many levels, there is a poor
understanding of the extent of functional heterogeneity within a single
tumor, and the dynamics and spatial organization of distinct cell
populations over time. The overall objective of this study is to
characterize the functional heterogeneity of breast tumor cells and
evaluate the dynamics of clonal populations within mixtures during tumor
progression. We have generated and characterized 31 clonal cell
populations (SCP) from the triple-negative breast cancer cell line
MDA-MB-468. These SCPs display considerable phenotypic heterogeneity with
respect to morphology, proliferation rate, survival in suspension, colony
formation in soft agar, and tumorigenicity. We have also performed
whole-exome sequencing for 7 SCPs, and RNA-seq and RPPA analysis for all
SCPs and the parental cell line. These analyses revealed SCP-unique
single nucleotide variants, and differential expression of numerous
genes. To study the dynamics of SCP mixtures during the development of
xenograft tumors, we have transduced 22 SCPs with unique DNA barcodes
derived from the ClonTracer DNA barcode library. The 22 barcoded SCPs
were mixed in equal proportions and subsequently injected into the
mammary fat pad of NOD/SCID mice. Tumors and lungs were collected at
different time points (3 weeks, 2 months and 4 months) to determine the
relative changes in clonal representation during tumor progression by
next generation sequencing. We identified highly reproducible patterns of
clonal expansion, with SCP01 and SCP03 being temporarily enriched for in
tumor samples collected at 3 weeks and 2 months respectively, and SCP32
becoming progressively enriched for in tumors over time. In addition, we
found recurrent enrichment for SCP01 in most lung samples. Moreover, in
contrast to the tumor samples, we found a slight enrichment for SCP13,
but not SCP32, during in vitro propagation of the SCP mixture. Together
these results suggest the existence of distinct competitive advantages of
individual clonal populations within certain spatial and temporal
windows. In addition, the discordance in SCP dynamics between the in vivo
and in vitro arms suggests that enrichment for SCP01, SCP03 and SCP32 is
the result of stimuli or selective pressures that are specific to the
tumor microenvironment. Guided by the RNA-seq and RPPA analyses, we are
currently testing several hypotheses that may explain the observed
enrichment patterns.


