Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen-repressed and androgen-induced genes: challenging the
traditional dogma of prostate cancer therapy.


Background: Benign and malignant prostate tissues are dependent upon the
activity of androgen receptor (AR). The primary function of full-length
AR is as a ligand activated transcription factor to increase or repress
gene expression. Many androgen-repressed genes regulate the cell cycle
and proliferation. With castration, the main therapeutic approach for
advanced prostate cancer (PC), these genes are believed to play a role in
the initial clinical response. Current approved therapies for advanced PC
and castration-resistant PC (CRPC), target the AR C-terminal
ligand-binding domain (LBD), such as antiandrogens. Recent antagonists of
the AR N-terminal domain (NTD) have been described with EPI-506, the
prodrug of EPI-002, now in Phase 1 clinical trials. EPI-002 binds tau-5
in activation function-1 (AF-1) of the NTD that is essential for AR
transcriptional activity. As expected with an AF-1 antagonist, EPI-002 is
an excellent inhibitor of androgen-induced gene expression and at
blocking the transcriptional activities of truncated AR splice variants
lacking LBD, such as AR-V7. EPI-002 blocks expression of genes regulated
by truncated AR-V7 such as UBE2C while antiandrogens have no effect. Here
we reveal that the major difference in gene expression regulated by
full-length AR between EPI-002 and antiandrogens is their abilities to
de-repress genes that are turned off by androgen.

Methods: The androgen sensitive human prostate cancer cell line LNCaP,
which expresses full-length AR, was treated with antiandrogens
(bicalutamide [BIC] and enzalutamide [ENZA]), EPI-002 and a control
vehicle, with and without androgen. Gene expression was analysed using
Affymetrix microarrays. Bioinformatical analysis was completed and a
selection of androgen-repressed genes that were de-repressed with
antiandrogens and/or EPI-002, were selected for validation using qRT-PCR.

Results: EPI-002 de-repressed known androgen-repressed genes including
SPLTLC3, ST7, PSAT1, TMEM140 and TNFRSF21. EPI-002 was as effective or
better than BIC or ENZA in de-repressing a subset of androgen-repressed
genes. Importantly, EPI-002 failed to de-repress expression of many
androgen-repressed genes that antiandrogens de-repressed, such as
SLITRK3, GPR63 and DAB1.

Conclusions: EPI binds AR NTD which blocks the transcriptional activities
of full-length AR and truncated AR splice variants. EPI-002 was excellent
at inhibiting androgen-induced genes. However, EPI did not broadly
de-repress expression of genes turned off by androgen when compared to
antiandrogens. Such differences between EPI-002, a tau-5/NTD antagonist,
and C-terminal LBD antiandrogens probably reflect the complexities of the
mechanisms of repression of gene expression that may involve different
domains of AR.


