Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CAR T cells specific for CD19 can be redirected to kill CD19
negative tumors.


Introduction. Remarkable progress has been made in the treatment of
relapsed/refractory Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia and Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma
with CAR-CD19 T cells. In contrast, progress against CD19-negative
hematological cancers and solid tumors has been limited. Intensive
efforts to optimize cellular therapeutics for better efficacy include
provision of cytokine support and countering immunosuppression. However,
lack of sufficient antigen is a significant additional hurdle that CAR-T
therapeutics for solid tumors must overcome. We present a novel strategy
to utilize CD19 for sustained antigen presentation in order to promote
cellular therapeutic expansion, efficacy and persistence. The strategy,
called IMPACT (Integrated Modules oPtimize Adoptive Cell Therapy),
employs a methodology that is modular in design and and can be applied to
diverse antigens and tumor types, yet retains the well-established
advantages of CAR T cells directed to CD19.

Experimental Procedures. A 3rd generation CAR-T was constructed in a
lentiviral vector using the FMC63 anti-CD19 scFv for antigen recognition.
A second expression cassette, cloned downstream of the CAR-T cassette,
was constructed using a secretion signal sequence and exons 1 - 4 of the
human CD19 protein linked in frame to a trastuzumab-derived Vh/Vl
sequence. This integrated-gene module thus encodes a fusion protein (FP):
CD19-anti-HER2-scFv.

Results. ELISA and flow cytometry analyses were used to demonstrate
bridging between HER2+ cells and the FMC63 mAb via the CD19 domain of the
FP. ELISA analyses further demonstrated wild type binding of the 2 FP
domains (i.e. CD19/FMC63 and the scFv/HER2). In vitro cytotoxicity
studies showed robust redirected killing of HER2+ (CD19-) tumor cells by
CAR19 T cells that is mediated by the secreted FP. The efficiency of
cytotoxicity was enhanced by the presence of CD19+ B cells. A tumor
xenograft model was used to demonstrate effective killing in vivo when
HER2+ BT474 cells were injected in one flank and CD19+ RAMOS cell were
injected in the opposite flank, but not when HER2+ cell were injected
alone. Thus, in vivo, redirected killing required CD19+ cells for
expansion and persistence sufficient to promote anti-HER2 cytotoxicity.

Conclusions. A CD19-anti-HER2-scFv FP was able to redirect the
cytotoxicity of CAR19 T cells in order to kill HER2+ tumor cells. In vivo
modeling demonstrated that CAR-T cell expansion by CD19 recognition
enabled efficient HER2+ cell cytotoxicity. The IMPACT technology is
modular, allowing for FPs having diverse protein domains paired with
diverse, distinct scFvs to allow CAR T cells to CD19 or other targets to
be used to kill any tumor. We have further developed the technology to
address antigens of utility for hematopoietic and solid tumors, including
BCMA, ROR1, and PD-L1. The technology is broadly applicable and
synergistic with existing cellular therapies.


