Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular classification and clinical characterization of a large
uterine leiomyoma patient cohort.


Uterine leiomyomas (ULs), benign smooth muscle tumors, represent one of
the most common neoplasms in women with an estimated prevalence varying
from 20% to over 70% during the reproductive years. Approximately every
fourth woman with ULs has clinically relevant lesions, which cause
morbidity and thus require treatment. Still today, hysterectomy is the
primary treatment option for ULs worldwide, and remarkably, their annual
societal costs exceed those of colon and breast cancer combined. Our
previous findings, derived from the use of high-throughput technologies,
suggest that there are at least three distinct molecular UL subclasses,
each displaying a characteristic genetic driver aberration and unique
global gene expression profile: MED12 (mediator complex subunit 12)
mutation-positive, HMGA2 (high mobility group AT-hook 2)-overexpressing,
and FH (fumarate hydratase)-deficient ULs. The aim of this study is to
examine the molecular subclasses, their respective proportions, and
clinical characteristics in a large UL patient cohort. The study material
consists of 1026 ULs and corresponding normal myometrium tissue from 322
patients, who had ultrasound-diagnosed ULs and underwent hysterectomy in
Helsinki University Hospital, Finland between October 2013 and June 2016.
From each uterus, we harvested all feasible ULs ≥1 cm in diameter and a
piece of the corresponding normal myometrium tissue. The location of the
collected samples in the uterus, their size, and any observed special
characteristics were carefully documented at the time of sample removal.
In addition, comprehensive clinical information of the patients was
obtained from medical and pathology reports, as well as from a
questionnaire, and the histopathology of all lesions were characterized
according to the WHO 2014 criteria. All collected ULs have been
systematically screened for MED12 mutations by Sanger sequencing.
Overexpression of HMGA2 typically arises from a chromosomal
translocation, and deletions at FH locus suggest the presence of
potential biallelic FH inactivation. Therefore, HMGA2-overexpressing and
FH-deficient ULs have tentatively been identified using a high-density
customizable Infinium® HumanCore-24+ BeadChip with over 305,000 markers.
Currently, the data analyses are ongoing. Sufficient numbers of
well-documented high-quality samples are a prerequisite for successful
research. We hypothesize that ULs can emerge through several distinct
molecular mechanisms that contribute to different biological and
clinicopathological features and response to treatment. Their molecular
classification and further characterization will lead to increased
knowledge on UL genesis as well as improved management of the disease.


