Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotypic characterization of allelic variation within the HEAT
repeats of the mechanistic target of rapamycin.


The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a protein in the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway important to cell cycle
regulation, is frequently activated in cancer. This signaling pathway
regulates cell growth and metabolism, and when dysregulated in cancer, it
contributes to tumor angiogenesis and growth. mTOR contains two distinct
complexes, MTORC1, and MTORC2. MTORC1 plays a role in biosynthesis, while
MTORC2 helps with cellular metabolism. It has been shown that mTOR
knockout models are embryonically lethal to mice. However, lower levels
of functional mTOR have been shown to be beneficial and slow cancer
progression. Allelic variation occurs within inbred strains of mice,
including BALB/c mice. One allelic variant in mTOR, R628C, which
contributes to tumor susceptibility has been identified in BALB/c mice.
This single amino acid change occurs in the HEAT repeats of mTOR. HEAT
repeats have been shown to facilitate binding partner interactions,
dimerization, and localization. Studies on mutations found within the
HEAT repeats in several proteins have altered protein function and
emphasize the structural importance of HEAT repeats. The goal of this
study is to further elucidate the functional significance of HEAT repeats
in TOR function and how allelic variation in the HEAT repeats may
contribute to tumor susceptibility. Characterization of this allelic
variant has shown stress inputs, such as irradiation, lead to a more
severe phenotype and reduced mTORC1/2 signaling. Subsequent in vitro
studies using a tetracycline inducible expression system (T-RExTM) have
shown differential binding to mTORC1/2 complex partners in cells
expressing the Balb/c allele. Additional studies are being performed to
assess other complex binding partners, dimerization state and
localization of the allelic variant. Our findings will model mTOR
signaling activation mechanisms in humans to aid in development of new
cancer treatments.


