Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glioblastoma tumor model to analyze the mechanisms of resistance
to tyrosine kinase inhibitors.


The extracellular matrix (ECM) is increasingly recognized as having a key
role in cancer development. We have developed a biomaterial tumor mimic
that recapitulates systematically the main characteristics and
heterogeneities of glioblastoma ECM. With the use of these 3D in vitro
platforms we seek to understand the key features that make this cancer so
challenging to treat. We are using this device in three different ways:
(1) to further understand how particularities of brain tumor ECM affect
cancer cells and assist in the diagnostic of different glioblastoma (GBM)
tumor types, (2) provide new models for drug screening to afford more
personalized therapies and (3) study the mechanisms of resistance to
current therapies in order to identify more effective combinatorial
treatments and new therapeutic targets.

Hyaluronic acid (HA), is the main component of the brain ECM and GBM is
associated with aberrant HA secretion and overexpression of receptors
associated with HA, such as CD44 and EGFR. We cultured GBM
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) cells within gelatin based hydrogels that
contained variable concentrations of HA. Cell proliferation and gene
expression analyses demonstrate that biomimetic hydrogels support
xenograft culture and cells upregulate matrix remodeling genes and others
related to tumor growth in response to matrix biophysical properties. We
also used these platforms to evaluate the mechanisms of cell resistance
to tyrosine kinase inhibitors. For this purpose, we first focused on the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which has been identified as a
molecular target and associated with worse clinical outcomes. We
characterized the 3D in vitro behavior of 3 PDX that represent these EGFR
variants: GBM10 (EGFR, wild type), GBM12 (EGFR+) and GBM6 (EGFRvIII). We
studied the relationship between the HA contained in the surrounding
matrix and response of GBM cells to a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI),
erlotinib.

Results indicate that while EGFR+ cells are sensitive to TKI in HA
hydrogels, HA seems to collaborate with EGFRvIII signaling to stir cell
activity. Immunoblots demonstrate that this enhanced cell activity is
related to a significant increase in PDGFR concentration. Blockade of the
CD44 receptor, in combination with erlotinib treatment, does not affect
phosphorylation rates of PI3K or ERK, however, it leads to a significant
decrease of STAT3 phosphorylation. This is translated into a lower tumor
cell metabolic activity in HA matrices. Finally, we show that,
patient-derived xenograft cells resistant to erlotinib in vivo (GBM10),
become sensitive when CD44 is blocked in HA-containing matrices, as
demonstrated by a decrease of phosphorylated PI3K.

In summary, we highlight the importance of extracellular HA in EGFR
inhibition efficiency. We demonstrate that this biomaterial tumor model
can be used as a valuable tool in

the mechanistic studies of tumor development and prediction of tyrosine
kinase inhibitors efficacy.


