Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β) inhibitor modulates
cancer stroma in a pancreatic cancer orthotopic mouse model.


Background: The tumor microenvironment (TME) contributes to the
recalcitrance of this disease. Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are
thought to be important for the pancreatic cancer TME. Transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-β) has an important role for CAF induction. The
present report describes the efficacy of a TGF-β-inhibitor to modulate
pancreatic cancer stroma in an orthotopic mouse model.

Materials and methods: BxPC-3 human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells
expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) were implanted subcutaneously
in athymic nude mice expressing red fluorescent protein (RFP).
Established dual-color tumors, with GFP cancer cells and RFP stroma, were
cut into small fragments and then implanted orthotopically onto the tail
of the pancreas of RFP-expressing nude mice. Fourteen mice were
randomized into control group (n = 7, vehicle, i.p., weekly, for 3 weeks)
and treated group (n = 7, SB431542 (TGF-β inhibitor) 0.3 mg, i.p.,
weekly, for 3 weeks) when tumor diameters reached to 7 mm. Pancreatic
cancer stroma was evaluated weekly for 3 weeks by real time intravital
imaging with the FV-1000 confocal microscope. Stroma ratio, the
percentage of the RFP fluorescence area from the stromal cells relative
to the total fluorescence area, was calculated with ImageJ. Tumors were
resected on the 21st day from the initial treatment for histological
evaluation. Microvessel density using anti-CD31 antibody and expression
of TGF-β were examined by immunohistochemical staining.

Results: The GFP cancer cells and RFP stromal cells were distinctly
imaged. The stroma ratio significantly decreased in the TGF-β-inhibitor
treated mice compared to control untreated mice from day 7 to 21. TGF-β
expression and microvessel density were reduced in the treated mice.

Conclusions: The present study demonstrated selective anti-stromal and
anti-angiogenetic activity of TGF-β inhibitor in a dual-color pancreatic
orthotopic mouse model. These results indicate potential benefit of
TGF-β inhibitor to facilitate drug delivery and improve chemotherapy of
pancreatic cancer.


