Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short-term romidepsin treatment combined with clotrimazole or
bifonazole leads to decreased mitochondrial hexokinase 2 and apoptosis in
cancer cells.


In light of disappointing clinical trials in solid tumors, we have sought
novel combinations to increase the efficacy of the histone deacetylase
inhibitor (HDI) romidepsin. Hexokinase 2 (HK2) expression is increased in
cancer cells and is postulated to prevent Bax-mediated cytochrome c
release from mitochondria. Since romidepsin treatment induces apoptosis
via the mitochondrial pathway, combining romidepsin with agents that
detach mitochondrial HK2 might result in synergistic apoptotic effects.
HCT-116 colon carcinoma cells were treated with 25 ng/ml romidepsin alone
for 6h, or with romidepsin in the presence of 25 µM clotrimazole or
bifonazole, compounds known to detach mitochondrial HK2. The medium was
removed and cells were treated for an additional 42 h with or without
clotrimazole or bifonazole. Cells were also treated with clotrimazole or
bifonazole alone for 48 h. Apoptosis was then quantitated by annexin
staining. While short-term romidepsin treatment alone induced modest
annexin staining and 25 µM clotrimazole or bifonazole had little effect,
the combination resulted in significant apoptosis. Similar effects were
observed for A549 lung cancer cells, MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and
786-0 renal carcinoma cells. We also treated HCT-116 and A549 cells
lacking Bak, Bax or both with the clotrimazole/romidepsin combination.
Apoptosis was slightly increased in Bak-/- cells, reduced in Bax-/- cells
and nearly completely abrogated in cells lacking both proteins compared
to wild-type cells suggesting apoptosis occurred through the intrinsic
pathway. The clotrimazole analog TRAM-34 was similarly active to
clotrimazole. Protein expression was determined in cytoplasmic and
mitochondrial fractions of cells treated with romidepsin, clotrimazole or
both and we found a >60% decrease in mitochondrial HK2 in cells treated
with the combination versus untreated cells. Our results suggest that
combining romidepsin with a compound that leads to decreased
mitochondrial hexokinase, such as clotrimazole or bifonazole, results in
increased apoptosis. We postulate that cell death following combined
romidepsin and clotrimazole treatment requires an intact intrinsic
apoptotic pathway and that HK2 serves an anti-apoptotic function at the
mitochondria.


