Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TET2 loss and the lymphoma-associated RHOA mutation cooperate to
disrupt CD4+ T cell function.


Peripheral T cell lymphomas (PTCLs) are a group of rare but aggressive
lymphomas derived from mature T cells or natural killer cells with a
dismal prognosis. Current treatments for PTCL are ineffective with high
relapse rates, largely owing to the lack of targeted therapeutics and a
deep mechanistic understanding of the molecular etiology. Recent exome
sequencing has unveiled the frequent co-existing somatic mutations in
RHOA (G17V) and TET2 in PTCLs, but not in other types of hematological
malignancies. Most notably, mutations in both TET2 and RHOA are
frequently observed (~60-70%) in angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma
(AITL), which is among the most common subtypes of PTCLs with a median
overall survival of approximately 1.5 years. Patients with AITL are often
associated with autoimmune manifestations, but the mechanistic
underpinnings remain unresolved. To examine whether TET2 loss and
RhoAG17V alter mature T cell function, we performed adoptive T cell
transfer experiments with WT or Tet2 knockout transgenic mice. Using this
strategy, we generated four groups of recipient mice transferred with T
cells as follows: WT, RhoAG17V, Tet2-/-, or Tet2-/-RhoAG17V. Among these
four groups, only recipient mice transferred with double mutant T cells
displayed severe inflammatory-like phenotypes that ultimately led to
early lethality in mice. Moribund mice transferred with Tet2-/-RhoAG17V T
cells showed substantial weight loss, severe skin ulcer on tail/paw/ear
accompanied with pruritus, and lymphomegaly as typically seen in AITL
patients. Histopathological analysis on major organs derived from the
Tet2-/-RhoAG17V group indicated severe infiltration of both T and B
lymphocytes in major organs, as well as a pronounced increase in the
numbers of follicles and activated germinal centers in lymph nodes.
Further analysis indicates that Tet2 loss and RhoAG17V mutation
cooperated together to exclusively promote CD4+ T cell proliferation and
survival, and exert no adverse effects on CD8+ T cells, which
recapitulates the mutation spectrum detected in AITL patients, i.e.,
RhoAG17V is primarily detected in CD4+ T cells but not other T cell
subsets. The functional consequence of Tet2 loss and RhoAG17V expression
in CD4+ T cells is characterized by an imbalance between the effector and
regulatory T cells, which may account for the overt immunoinflammatory
phenotypes seen in mouse models. The transcriptome analysis further
revealed a pronounced remodeling of the immune signaling network that
points to the aberrant expression of several key transcriptional factors.
In summary, our study demonstrated a previously-unappreciated
cooperativity between Tet2 loss and RhoAG17V mutation in disrupting
mature CD4+ T cells function, which is made through the synergy between
epigenetic and GTPase signaling pathways. The results obtained from this
study provide an additional basis for future development of new
diagnosis, prognosis and therapy for PTCL patients.


