Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-Met activation mediates resistance to polo-like kinase 1
inhibitor-induced apoptosis in non-small cell lung cancer.


Background: Inhibiting polo-like kinase 1 PLK1 may be an effective
treatment for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). PLK1 is a key regulator
of mitosis and DNA damage checkpoints. PLK1 inhibitors are well
tolerated, but only a few unselected patients with NSCLC respond to
single-agent therapy. However, predictive biomarkers have not been used
to select patients who are likely to experience a response to PLK1
inhibitors, and the mechanisms of resistance to PLK1 inhibitors have not
been elucidated, making these unknowns a major gap in knowledge. To
address this gap, we compared basal gene and protein expression in 63
NSCLC cell lines and discovered that mesenchymal NSCLC cell lines were
more sensitive to PLK1 inhibitors than epithelial cell lines in vitro and
in vivo. The induction of apoptosis in some NSCLC cell lines at very low
drug concentrations and the need to find better therapy for mesenchymal
NSCLC motivated us to further study PLK1 inhibition.

Methods: To identify the pathways involved in PLK1 inhibitor-induced
apoptosis, we used 3 pairs of isogenic NSCLC cell lines in which we had
induced a mesenchymal phenotype using TGF-β. These isogenic lines were
treated with the PLK1 inhibitor (volasertib) for 24 hours and levels of
301 proteins and phosphoproteins were simultaneously measured before and
after treatment with volasertib using reverse phase protein array (RPPA).

Results: The induction of a mesenchymal phenotype using TGF-β increased
PLK1 inhibition-induced DNA damage and apoptosis in 3 NSCLC cell lines.
To further elucidate mechanisms of resistance to PLK1 inhibition, we
compared gene and protein expression in these isogenic cell lines, before
and after PLK1 inhibition. There were 35, 12 and 43 proteins
differentially regulated following PLK1 inhibition in epithelial vs.
mesenchymal lines in HCC366, H1975, and HCC4006 cell lines, respectively
at False Discovery rate 0.1. Phosphorylated FAK (Y397) and c-Met
(Y1234/1235) were consistently inhibited following PLK1 inhibition in the
mesenchymal lines but activated in the epithelial lines. These changes
were confirmed by Western blotting. Total FAK and c-Met protein and mRNA
levels were not affected, demonstrating post-translational changes. The
inhibition of c-Met using EMD 1214063 led to FAK inhibition but FAK
inhibition did not affect c-Met activation. The combination of c-Met
inhibitor and volasertib increases sensitivity in NSCLC cell lines
tested. The combinations led to more apoptosis than the single-agent
inhibitors.

Conclusions: NSCLC cell lines have diverse sensitivities to PLK1
inhibition, which is consistent with the results of clinical trials of
PLK1 inhibitors in solid tumors, but no studies to date explain these
diverse responses to PLK1 inhibition. We have identified c-Met activation
as a previously unknown pathway of resistance to PLK1 inhibition in
epithelial NSCLC.


