Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiotensin-(1-7) reduces triple negative breast cancer brain
metastatic growth in association with decreased c-Met signaling.


Patients with triple negative breast cancer often develop metastatic
brain disease and have limited treatment options due to the lack of
targeted therapeutics that efficiently cross the blood brain barrier. In
the current study, we investigated the effect of angiotensin-(1-7)
[Ang-(1-7)], a heptapeptide hormone with anti-proliferative and
anti-metastatic activities, on the growth of murine brain tumors using
brain trophic BR.5-4T1 cells in a model of metastatic triple negative
breast tumor growth. BR.5-4T1 cells (1.25 x 104) were injected into the
internal carotid artery of female BALB/c mice; after two days, mice were
implanted with osmotic mini-pumps to deliver 24 µg/kg/h Ang-(1-7) and
all mice were sacrificed after 20 days of treatment. Ang-(1-7) treatment
significantly reduced metastatic tumor number in the brain; an average of
20 metastatic lesions per mouse was observed in the brains of an
untreated control cohort while an average of 3 metastatic tumors per
mouse was observed in the Ang-(1-7)-treated cohort. Tumor size was also
reduced 17-fold by treatment with Ang-(1-7). Ki67, a marker of
proliferation, was decreased from 29.1±6.7% to 6.4±2.2% in tumors from
mice treated with Ang-(1-7), indicating that the heptapeptide hormone
decreased metastatic tumor burden in the brain. Aberrant activation of
the c-Met receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathway facilitates tumor
cell invasion and metastasis. Treatment with Ang-(1-7) significantly
reduced the percentage of metastatic tumor cells exhibiting phospho-c-Met
immunoreactivity, from 20.8±3.4% in tumors from untreated mice to
6.7±2.6% in mice treated with Ang-(1-7). Protein phosphatase 1b (PTB1b),
which dephosphorylates and negatively regulates phospho-c-Met, was
increased in the tumor cells of mice treated with Ang-(1-7) compared to
tumor cells from untreated animals, from 4.1±1.4% in sections of tumors
from control mice compared to 8.8±0.9% in sections of tumors from mice
treated with Ang-(1-7). These results suggest that Ang-(1-7) increases
PTP1b to antagonize c-Met signaling and decrease triple negative breast
cancer brain metastasis. In support of a role for c-Met signaling in the
regulation of metastatic brain disease in breast cancer patients,
analysis of publicly available breast cancer cohort databases
demonstrated a significant correlation between low c-Met/high PTP1b
expression and improved survival outcome, including an increase in brain
metastasis-free survival and distant-metastasis free survival. This is
the first report to demonstrate that Ang-(1-7) reduces metastatic triple
negative breast cancer localized to the brain in association with
increased protein phosphatase PTP1b and decreased phospho-c-Met,
suggesting that the heptapeptide hormone may serve as a novel targeted
therapy to reduce metastatic brain tumor burden in triple negative breast
cancer patients.


