Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Niche microenvironments essential for tumor heterogeneity of
primary cancer cells.


Primary culture of cancer cells derived from each patient’s tumor can
provide important information of the “individual tumor.” It is
general to use cell lines in basic research filed. However, cell lines
are quite different from clinical cancers. Clinical cancer tissues are
composed of not only cancer cells but also tumor microenvironments such
as stromal cells and tumor vessels. The primary culture method of
clinical cancer with tumor niche microenvironments has not been
optimized. We have developed a simple 2D-culture method for primary
colorectal cancer (CRC). We obtained 30 samples from surgically resected
tumor. They were mechanically and enzymatically digested and fibrotic
tissue and bacteria were excluded using customized two size filters. And
we cultured the obtained cells on a matrigel-coated plate with embryonic
stem (ES) cells culture medium. We named these cultured cancer cells,
“isolated-tumor derived Cancer Cells (iCCs).” All iCCs grew and about
80 % of iCCs were successfully passaged. Twenty-three iCCs were
transplanted into the subcutaneous layer of NOD-SCID mice, and the tumor
growth and histology of iCCs were examined. The morphology was similar to
each parental clinical tumor. And microarray analysis showed that RNA
expression of iCCs was similar to each parental tumor. Furthermore, we
examined the culture medium; our modified ES culture medium (ES-cultured
iCCs) and 10% FBS medium (serum-cultured iCCs). The expression of surface
markers regarding cancer stem cells such as CD44 and CD24 were different
between ES-cultured iCCs and serum-cultured iCCs, and drug sensitivity of
iCCs were also different. FACS analysis and immunocytochemistry revealed
that iCCs contained PDGFR-positive cells. The results of multi-drug
sensitivity assay were different between iCCs and cell lines especially
in PDGFR inhibitor. Strong correlations were observed between the results
of multi-drug sensitivity assay of iCCs and clinical outcomes of
chemotherapy. We report an innovative primary culture method and the in
vivo and in vitro analyses of iCCs, leading to the future application.


