Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Indotecan (LMP400), imidotecan (LMP776) and LMP744: A new class of
non-camptothecin Top1 inhibitors selective for homologous recombination
deficient (HRD) cells.


To relax DNA supercoiling during transcription and replication,
topoisomerase I (Top1) induces transient DNA cleavage complexes, which
are trapped by anticancer drugs, leading to DNA double-strand breaks
(DSB) that need to be repaired by homologous recombination (HR). BRCA1,
BRCA2 and PALB2, which are key components for HR, lead to “synthetic
lethality” with PARP inhibitors. Topotecan and irinotecan (camptothecin
derivatives) are the only FDA-approved Top1 inhibitors. In spite of their
wide usage they are plagued by their chemical instability, being drug
efflux substrates, having short half-life, and dose-limiting bone marrow
and gastro intestinal toxicity. It is now possible to overcome those
limitations with the non-camptothecin indenoisoquinolines (LMP400, LMP776
and LMP744), which are in clinical trials. To rationally select patients
for phase 2 clinical trials based on cancer-specific genomic alterations,
we have determined whether the LMPs present a “synthetic lethality”
toward BRCA1, BRCA2 or PALB2 deficiency, and whether this selectivity
could be enhanced by combining them with the recently approved PARP
inhibitor, olaparib.Using isogenic DT40 cell lines, with BRCA1, BRCA2 or
PALB2 deficiencies, we assessed the role of HR in the cellular responses
to the LMPs. Survival and cell cycle modifications were tested after
treatment with the LMPs as single agents, as well as in combination with
olaparib. We found that BRCA1-, BRCA2- and PALB2-deficient cells are 3 to
5 times hypersensitive to the LMPs (IC50’s for LMP400 and LMP744= 10 nM
for HR-deficient cells vs. 45 nM for WT cells, and IC50 for LMP776 around
5 nM vs. 18 nM for WT cells). Cell cycle analyses confirmed the death of
these HR-deficient cells. Moreover, combination treatments showed a
significant synergy between each of the three LMPs and olaparib
(Combination indexTo relax DNA supercoiling during transcription and
replication, topoisomerase I (Top1) induces transient DNA cleavage
complexes, which are trapped by anticancer drugs, leading to DNA
double-strand breaks (DSB) that need to be repaired by homologous
recombination (HR). BRCA1, BRCA2 and PALB2, which are key components for
HR, lead to “synthetic lethality” with PARP inhibitors. Topotecan and
irinotecan (camptothecin derivatives) are the only FDA-approved Top1
inhibitors. In spite of their wide usage they are plagued by their
chemical instability, being drug efflux substrates, having short
half-life, and dose-limiting bone marrow and gastro intestinal toxicity.
It is now possible to overcome those limitations with the
non-camptothecin indenoisoquinolines (LMP400, LMP776 and LMP744), which
are in clinical trials. To rationally select patients for phase 2
clinical trials based on cancer-specific genomic alterations, we have
determined whether the LMPs present a “synthetic lethality” toward
BRCA1, BRCA2 or PALB2 deficiency, and whether this selectivity could be
enhanced by combining them with the recently approved PARP inhibitor,
olaparib.Using isogenic DT40 cell lines, with BRCA1, BRCA2 or PALB2
deficiencies, we assessed the role of HR in the cellular responses to the
LMPs. Survival and cell cycle modifications were tested after treatment
with the LMPs as single agents, as well as in combination with olaparib.
We found that BRCA1-, BRCA2- and PALB2-deficient cells are 3 to 5 times
hypersensitive to the LMPs (IC50’s for LMP400 and LMP744= 10 nM for
HR-deficient cells vs. 45 nM for WT cells, and IC50 for LMP776 around 5
nM vs. 18 nM for WT cells). Cell cycle analyses confirmed the death of
these HR-deficient cells. Moreover, combination treatments showed a
significant synergy between each of the three LMPs and olaparib
(Combination index<0.7). The HR-deficient cells being markedly more
sensitive than WT cells (taken as surrogate for normal tissues) to both
treatments, led to a better response to the combination in those
cells.Our results show that the LMPs are active at nanomolar
concentrations, selectively in HR-deficient cells, indicative of a
“synthetic lethality” of the indenoisoquinolines (LMPs) with HRD
genotypes. They also demonstrate that the LMPs synergize with olaparib.
These findings provide a rationale for personalized treatment and Phase 2
clinical trials with the indenoisoquinolines in combination with PARP
inhibitors in HR-deficient cancers.


