Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional knockout of ATRX or DAXX permits the alternative
lengthening of telomeres (ALT) mechanism in prostate cancer cells.


A key hallmark of cancer is unlimited replication, which requires cancer
cells to evade replicative senescence induced by short telomeres. The
majority of cancers overcome this critical replication barrier by
upregulating the telomerase enzyme, a telomere-specific reverse
transcriptase. However, a subset of cancers lack telomerase, and
telomeres are maintained by employing the Alternative Lengthening of
Telomeres (ALT) pathway, which is dependent on homologous recombination.
Across a variety of tumor types, our laboratory and others have reported
a robust correlation between ALT and recurrent cancer-associated somatic
inactivating mutations in the ATRX-DAXX chromatin remodeling complex. In
a previous comprehensive cancer survey of ALT, we reported that ALT was
highly prevalent in some tumor types (e.g. astrocytomas, sarcomas,
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors), but we did not observe any
ALT-positive primary prostate cancer (out of 1,176 analyzed). However, we
subsequently found a subset of metastatic prostate cancers that harbor
ALT, suggesting that mutations giving rise to ALT in this disease are
unique to metastatic prostate cancer.

Here, we have created the first prostate cancer cell lines exhibiting
ALT, with the explicit purpose of molecularly characterizing ALT in
prostate cancer and identifying promising therapeutic targets for men
with ALT-positive lethal metastatic prostate cancer. Inactivating
mutations in either ATRX or DAXX using the CRISPR/Cas9n system were
introduced into the genetically well-characterized, telomerase-positive
(ALT-negative) prostate cancer cell lines, LAPC-4 and CWR22Rv1. Resulting
mutant subclones were compared to their parental (or empty vector)
counterparts. In these new models, abolishing ATRX expression was
sufficient to induce the ALT phenotype in both LAPC-4 and CWR22Rv1, as
assessed by multiple biomarkers of ALT, including the presence of bright
telomeric FISH foci, ALT-associated PML bodies (ABPs), and
extrachromosomal telomere c-circles. Interestingly, abolishing DAXX
expression induced ALT in only a subset (3/5) of LAPC-4 DAXX KO clones,
and a subset (4/19) of CWR22Rv1 DAXX KO clones.

We have successfully activated the ALT telomere maintenance phenotype in
two prostate cancer cell lines through CRISPR-mediated targeted gene
deletion. We are currently utilizing these isogenic cell lines to further
characterize and elucidate the underlying biology of cancers harboring
ALT, with the goal of pharmacologically targeting the molecular features
unique to the ALT phenotype (e.g. ATR inhibition). The identification of
ALT-specific drugs may pave the way for the development of new targeted
treatments for the subset of men with ALT-positive lethal metastatic
prostate cancer, and more broadly, other ALT-positive cancers. ALT is
easily detected in clinical tissue samples, and thus would serve as a
predictive biomarker for personalized medicine.


