Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting tumor-promoting neuroblastoma microenvironment:
inhibiton of tumor development and progression by targeting mPGES-1
expressed by cancer associated fibroblasts.


Background: High-risk neuroblastomas present a tumor promoting
microenvironment with infiltrating cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs)
expressing the mPGES-1 enzyme, essential for prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)
synthesis regulating tumor inflammation and immune suppression,
angiogenesis, genetic instability, tumor progression and therapy
resistance. We investigated the impact of novel therapy targeting the
COX/mPGES-1/PGE2 pathway.

Methods: Human neuroblastomas were investigated for immunosuppressive
microenvironment and expression of the COX/mPGES-1/PGE2/EP-receptor
pathway. High-risk in vivo models, human 11q-deleted xenografts and
transgenic MYCN-driven tumors, were treated with a novel specific mPGES-1
inhibitor. Tumor-fibroblast co-cultures examined cell migration.
Inflammatory lipid mediators were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Tumor tissues
were analyzed by immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence and FACS.

Results: Tumor microenvironment in human high-risk neuroblastomas and
both 11q-deleted xenografts and MYCN-driven transgenic mice displayed
mPGES-1 expression in PDGFRb+ cancer associated fibroblasts. MPGES-1
expression correlated with high-risk neuroblastoma prognosis and
infiltration of tumor-promoting macrophages with M2-polarization markers
CD163 and CD206. The inflammatory regulator STAT3 was active in mPGES-1
expressing CAFs. Expression of the inflammatory
COX/mPGES-1/PGE2/EP-receptor pathway in experimental tumors resembled
high-risk primary human neuroblastomas. Targeting mPGES-1 with a novel
compound decreased PGE2, induced M1 polarization of macrophages,
decreased cancer associated fibroblasts and reduced angiogenesis
significantly in treated tumors. Tumor development in the xenograft model
was delayed and growth of established xenografts and transgenic tumors
was significantly decreased by non-toxic treatment in vivo when compared
to neuroblastoma tumors in untreated animals. Tumor cell stimulated CAF
migration and infiltration was inhibited by targeting mPGES-1.

Conclusions: Tumor-promoting inflammation and suppression of anti-tumor
immunity in neuroblastoma is mediated through prostaglandin E2 and STAT3
expression in cancer associated fibroblasts in the tumor
microenvironment. Early targeting of mPGES-1 may inhibit CAF infiltration
and tumor development. This novel tumor treatment targeting mPGES-1
decreases inflammatory mediators, modulates tumor-promoting
microenvironment and inhibits significantly aggressive tumor growth and
progression. We conclude that treatment targeting non-malignant cells in
the neuroblastoma microenvironment may constitute a novel clinical
therapeutic approach.


