Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) 1 confers resistance to
DNMT inhibitors in human colorectal cancer cells.


DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) 1 is responsible for the maintenance and
propagation of DNA methylation pattern, and plays an important role in
cell survival and proliferation. Thus, targeting DNMT represents a
promising approach for cancer treatment. However, the role of DNMT1 in
treatment efficacy with DNMT inhibitors remains controversial. The aim of
this study was to investigate potential alterations of DNMT
inhibitor-induced cytotoxicity and cellular survival after
disruption/knockout of DNMT1 in cancer cells. The human colorectal cancer
cell line HCT116 and its isogenic DNMT1 knockout pair were treated with
increasing concentrations of 4’-thio-5-aza-2’-deoxycytidine
(aza-TdCyd), a novel DNMT inhibitor, and 5-aza-2’-deoxycytidine
(aza-dCyd). Cytotoxic effects and cell survival were evaluated by MTT and
clonogenic assays. Apoptosis was measured by annexin-V/propidium iodide
test, and expression of DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B was detected by western
blot. After 96h of drug exposure, IC50s of aza-TdCyd and aza-dCyd were
0.031µM and 0.28 µM, respectively, in HCT116 cells. In contrast, DNMT1
knockout cells were remarkably resistant to both drugs with IC50s all
higher than 10 µM. The treatments resulted in a significant increase in
apoptosis in the parental line versus its knockout counterpart. As for
the cell survival, IC50s were ~0.12 µM for aza-TdCyd and ~4.62 µM for
aza-dCyd in HCT116 cells, compared to ~43.77 µM and ~62.09 µM in DNMT1
knockout cells. As such, disruption of DNMT1 caused over 300-fold and
10-fold increase in resistance to aza-TdCyd and aza-dCyd. Moreover, we
observed a G2/M arrest produced by aza-TdCyd versus aza-dCyd in the
parental cells, and no apparent alteration in cell cycle phase
distribution in DNMT1 knockout cells. Notably, aza-TdCyd was more potent
than aza-dCyd in depleting DNMT3A and/or DNMT1 in both cell lines after
48h of treatment. Our findings demonstrate that disruption of DNMT1 leads
to a significantly increased resistance to aza-TdCyd and aza-dCyd,
suggesting that DNMT1 is critical to the antitumor activity of DNMT
inhibitors. Aza-TdCyd is much more potent than aza-dCyd for both
inhibition of DNMTs and growth of cancer cells.


