Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumor heterogeneity impacts treatment response in rectal
carcinoma.


Individual response to radiochemotherapy (RCT) in rectal cancer patients
is highly variable and the underlying mechanisms of treatment resistance
of cancer cells are poorly understood. Recent studies revealed a
considerable degree of genomic tumor heterogeneity. We hypothesize that
this heterogeneity has a direct impact on treatment response as
subpopulations of cancer cells are resistant to currently used RCT and
facilitate tumor growth under treatment. To address this highly relevant
clinical issue, patient-derived rectal cell lines were established. The
tissue was derived from a 59-year-old male presenting with an
adenocarcinoma of lower rectum (T3,N1,M0), who was treated by neoadjuvant
RCT (50.4 Gy plus 5-FU) and low anterior resection. The neoadjuvant
treatment induced a shrinkage of the tumor (staging of the surgical
specimen: ypT3,N0), suggesting a partial response to RCT. A biopsy of the
treatment naïve tumor was implanted heterotopically into an
immunodeficient nude mouse. After in vivo growth, the tumor was
dissociated and introduced to an in vitro culture where murine stromal
cells were depleted using antibody-based columns. The cell line proved to
be of human origin by immunofluorescence for human Keratin 20 as well as
genotyping using short tandem repeat profiling. The characterization of
the genome by array CGH and spectral karyotyping (SKY) revealed a highly
complex near-triploid karyotype with numerous chromosomal imbalances,
which are specific for colorectal cancers, including gains in chromosomes
7, 13 and 20. We also observed other structural abnormalities including
an isochromosome 1q. Multiplex-FISH by consecutive hybridization of
probes for 15 gene loci, which are known to be relevant in colorectal
cancer genesis, revealed a significant degree of clonal heterogeneity of
the cell line. Single cell sorting was then performed to establish single
cell derived cell lines from the genomically well characterized parental
cell line. Exposure of the single cell derived cell lines to irradiation
in combination with 3 uM 5-FU revealed substantial differences in
treatment response. Analyses of the genome by array CGH and transcriptome
by RNA-Seq of the respective single cell derived cell lines are currently
underway. This will allow the comparison of the respective sensitivities
to RCT to the identified aberration profiles. These data will facilitate
the understanding of therapy resistance and potentially allow a reliable
prediction of the patient’s response. A tailored therapy is an
important step towards individualized treatment in colorectal cancer
patients to avoid therapy resistance.


