Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic analysis using a novel high-purity enrichment system for
circulating tumor cells independent of epithelial cell antigen.


Background

Genetic analysis of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) is useful as a liquid
biopsy. However, there are 3 challenging issues in processing of CTC
samples for clinical use of the analysis: [1] numerous residual blood
cells in processed samples, [2] loss of CTCs that do not express
epithelial markers, and [3] very laborious process. Here, we developed a
novel system capable of overcoming all of these problems.

Methods

Our CTC analysis system is composed of 3 steps: [1] filtering of whole
blood followed by immunostaining and magnetic labeling of cells trapped
on the filter, [2] depletion of white blood cells (WBCs) in the cells
recovered from the filter by magnetic separation, and [3] trapping the
resultant cells at an observation chamber in a microfluidic enrichment
device using dielectrophoresis, followed by recovering them as a
concentrated sample after fluorescence microscope observation. SNV and
CNV analysis was conducted using the collected concentrated sample, and
the system performance was substantiated. Genetic mutations of the cells
in the collected sample were detected by the Quenching Probe method. On
the other hand for CNV analysis, cells in the collected concentrated
sample were immobilized on slide glass and analysis of gene amplification
conducted by FISH.

Results

With SNV analysis, our system successfully detected EGFR, KRAS or PIK3CA
mutations of cancer cell lines spiked in 8 mL of whole blood (Table). The
detection sensitivity of our method was 1 cell/mL, and both the cancer
cells and their genetic mutations were detected within 9 hours of
starting the processing of whole blood. Additionally, with CNV analysis,
HER2 gene amplification was confirmed with cell lines spiked in 8 mL of
blood. This detection result was obtained within 48 hours.

Conclusion

Our system would be useful for the analysis of gene mutations in a wide
range of CTC types independent of certain epithelial antigens, such as CK
and EpCAM, and can be used for various genetic analyses.

Table Results of spiking test for SNV analysis



Spiked cell lines

Expected count[cells/8ml]

No. of detected spiked cells [cells]

No. of detected remained WBCs [cells]

Detected genotypes



NCI-H1975

12

9

79

EGFR L858R



NCI-H1650

8

2

25

EGFR exon19 deletion



SW620

8

6

48

KRAS codon12, 13



SNU-1

12

4

154

KRAS codon12, 13



MCF-7

7

7

341

PIK3CA G1633A


