Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical validation of an Omomyc cell-penetrating peptide as a
viable anti-Myc therapy.


Deregulation of the MYC oncoprotein promotes tumorigenesis in most, if
not all, cancers and is often associated with poor prognosis. However,
targeting MYC has long been considered impossible based on the assumption
that it would cause catastrophic side effects in normal tissues. Despite
this general preconceived notion, we showed that MYC inhibition exerts
extraordinary therapeutic impact in various genetic mouse models of
cancer, and causes only mild, well-tolerated and reversible side effects.
For these studies we employed the systemic and conditional expression of
a dominant negative of MYC, called Omomyc, which we designed and
validated, and that can inhibit MYC transactivation function both in
vitro and in vivo. To date, Omomyc has only been considered a proof of
principle, with any potential clinical application limited to gene
therapy. Here we actually show that the 11 kDa Omomyc polypeptide
spontaneously transduces into cancer cells, demonstrating unexpected
cell-penetrating ability. Once inside the nuclei, the polypeptide
effectively blocks MYC binding to its

target DNA sites, interfering with MYC transcriptional regulation and
halting cell proliferation. Moreover, intranasal (i.n.) administration of
the Omomyc polypeptide in mice results in its rapid and persistent
distribution to lungs, as well as to other organs (i.e. intestine, liver,
kidneys and brain). Importantly, i.n. treatment of mice bearing either
Non-Small-Cell-Lung-Cancer (NSCLC) or glioblastoma (GBM) with the Omomyc
cell-penetrating peptide (OmomycCPP) significantly reduces tumor burden
compared to their control counterparts. Notably, tumor regression is
accompanied by significant reprogramming of the tumor microenvironment
and tumor immune response. In summary, our data indicate that this novel
generation of polypeptides represents a new opportunity to potentially
inhibit MYC pharmacologically in a variety of malignant diseases.


