Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C1GALT1 activates multiple RTKs and promotes malignant behaviors
in pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells.


Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC), stands up to the 4th in all cancer
mortalities and remains the most in progress in America. Curative
resection remains the most and only potential strategy but only 15~20% of
patients are candidates. Even though, many of them have dismal prognosis.
Aberrant glycosylation illustrates an attribution of cancer, especially
fot promoting malignant behaviors in adenocarcinomas. Altered expression
of glycans, such as GalNAcα1-O-S/T (Tn antigen) and Galβ1,3-GalNAc-S/T
(T antigen), is hallmark of cancers. Core 1 β1,3-galactosyltransferase
(C1GALT1) catalyzes the transfer of Gal to Tn antigen to form T antigen.
C1GALT1 is reported to contribute to clinicopathological features and
malignant phenotypes in various cancers. However, the expression and
function of C1GALT1 in PDAC remain unrevealed. Our data showed that
C1GALT1 was overexpressed in PDAC tissues and correlated with poor
prognosis. C1GALT1 knockdown inhibited viability, migration, and invasion
analyzed by MTT, transwell migration, and Matrigel invasion assays,
respectively, in PDAC cells, associated with increased Tn antigen but
decreased T antigen expression. Conversely, C1GALT1 overexpression
promoted these malignant behaviors. C1GALT1 knockdown inhibited AKT and
ERK activities in PDAC cells. Consistently, phospho-receptor tyrosine
kinase (p-RTK) array showed decreased phosphorylation of several RTKs
including EGFR, IGF1R, and FLT3. Additionally, flow cytometry of C1GALT1
knockdown cells showed enhanced apoptosis, which was associated with
decreased catalase, Bcl-x, and death receptor DR5 revealed by apoptosis
array. We also found that C1GALT1 knockdown arrested G1 progression in
PDAC cells. Furthermore, gene set enrichment analysis of cDNA microarray
indicated that C1GALT1 regulated cell cycle, cytoskeleton, and chromatin
structure in PDAC cells. These findings indicate that higher C1GALT1
expression predicts worse survival of PDAC and enhances malignant
characters in PDAC cells, highlighting a fundamental role of C1GALT1 in
PDAC development.


