Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination treatment with SAHA and 5-Azacytidine (Decitabine)
induces apoptosis and suppresses tumor growth in preclinical models of
chondrosarcoma.


Chondrosarcomas are the second most frequently occurring type of bone
malignancy, and account for approximately 25% of all bone sarcomas. They
are often highly aggressive neoplasms that rapidly progress and
eventually recur and give distant metastases. They are largely considered
to be resistant to conventional chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Several
studies have reported that targeting epigenetic mechanisms including DNA
methylation or histone acetylation are novel approaches for the treatment
of some human cancers. Previous reports have shown that the interaction
of DNA methylation and histone modification regulates gene expression. In
the present study, we hypothesized that concurrent inhibition of histone
acetylation and DNA methylation could result in decreased viability of
chondrosarcoma cells both in vitro and in vivo. To test this, we used a
panel of chondrosarcoma cell lines including IDH wild type (CH2879), IDH1
mutant (JJ012) and IDH2 mutant (CS1) cell line. Results from our in vitro
proliferation assay showed that combination of sub-IC50 concentrations of
the DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor Decitabine (5-AZA-dC) and
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor (SAHA) resulted in decreased cell
viability of all the three chondrosarcoma cell lines tested when compared
to either drug alone. Western blot analysis showed induction of cleaved
Poly-ADP Ribose Polymerase (PARP), a known marker of apoptosis.
Consistent with augmented DNA damage, combination of Decitabine and SAHA
markedly increased the levels of phospho-H2AX, a DNA damage marker, and
pro-apoptotic BH3-only proteins such as Bim. Combination treatment also
resulted in increased induction of histone acetylation (AcH3) and
increased expression of E-Cadherin. Previous reports have shown that
E-cadherin is critical for apoptosis and depletion and inhibition of
E-Cadherin impairs apoptosis induction via DR4 and DR5 death receptors.
To this end, we showed that induction of cleaved PARP by Apo2L/TRAIL
stimulation decreased over time when E-Cadherin was knocked down by
siRNA. Xenograft studies using IDH2 mutant (CS1) tumor model showed a
significant suppression of tumor volume when animals were treated in
combination with SAHA and Decitabine compared to single agent treatments.
Taken together, our data strongly suggests that combination treatment
with SAHA and Decitabine is a novel treatment approach and merits
evaluation in the treatment of chondrosarcoma.


