Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of EMT biomarker expression in 2D monolayer and 3D
spheroid cultures in a prostate cancer cell model.


The purpose of this study was to examine the induction of epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) in a prostate cancer cell line by measuring
classical biomarker expression in three-dimensional (3D) spheroid
cultures compared to traditional 2D monolayers in an effort to develop a
more biologically relevant assay. Using Ultra-Low Attachment (ULA)
microplates, we grew spheroids from a human prostate cancer cell line (DU
145). Numerous studies have implicated a role for EMT in carcinoma
invasion and metastasis. EMT is characterized by rearrangement of the
extracellular matrix (ECM) and differential regulation of ECM proteins.
We induced EMT using TGF-beta and phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA)
and compared expression levels of specific biomarkers, such as
E-cadherin, fibronectin, and IL-6, using AlphaLISA and LANCE (TR-FRET)
assay technologies. We confirmed that treatment of DU 145 cells with
TGF-beta is sufficient for inducing changes in both EMT biomarker
expression and characteristic cellular morphology in monolayer cultures.
However, in 3D spheroid cultures, we observed only a partial EMT response
to the same TGF-beta treatment as demonstrated by changes in the expected
biomarker expression pattern. Using the small molecule, PMA, we see
significant differences in the levels of IL-6 secretion after EMT
induction between cells grown in monolayer and those grown in spheroids.
Cellular proliferation, growth and vitality were assessed using ATPlite
luminescence assays and confocal microscopy of live-stained cells with a
high content imaging system. Though we observe increased proliferation in
monolayer cultures compared to 3D spheroids, the changes observed in
protein expression patterns cannot be sufficiently explained by
differences in cell number or viability. These data illustrate the
differences in protein expression levels and in cellular tolerance for
compound treatment between a human prostate cancer cell line grown in
monolayers and those same cells grown in 3D spheroids.


