Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel highly potent TLR8 selective agonist for
cancer immunotherapy.


The cancer drug discovery field is experiencing unprecedented revolution
accompanied by growing excitement from researchers, drug developers,
patients and investors, partly due to recent clinical success of cancer
immunotherapy. Human immune defense system comprises both innate and
adaptive immune pathways. All the targets drugged by the recently
approved cancer immunotherapeutic agents including the immune checkpoint
proteins PD-1, PD-L1 and CTLA-4 function in adaptive immune pathways. In
contrast, targets involved in the innate immune pathway have not matured
to regulatory approval for systemic use though several candidates are now
in preclinical and clinical development. Drugs targeting innate immunity
represent great opportunity for more rapid and broader spectrum
anti-cancer effect than adaptive immunity. Furthermore, combinations of
drugs targeting innate and adaptive immunity are expected to produce
strong synergistic efficacy owing to their complementary nature as
body’s immune defense. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are a family of
proteins that recognize pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs).
Their primary function is to activate innate immune responses while also
involved in facilitating adaptive immune responses. Different TLRs exert
distinct functions by activating varied immune cascades. TLR8 is more
broadly expressed in immune cells than other TLRs such as TLR7 and TLR9.
One of the major causes of cancer immunotherapy failure is potent
suppression of immune response by Treg cells. TLR8 is the only TLR that
has been shown to be necessary and sufficient to reverse the suppressive
function of Treg cells leading to strong tumor inhibition. Therefore,
agonists targeting TLR8 are expected to be effective cancer therapy.
However, there is no approved TLR8 selective agonist at present. There is
only one TLR8 selective agonist in clinical development. Through
structure-based drug design, we discovered a novel, highly potent and
selective small molecule TLR8 agonist, DN-A1. DN-A1 exhibited strong in
vitro cellular activity with EC50 at 4.23 nM, about 30-fold more potent
than the only drug candidate in clinical trials. The activity was highly
selective for TLR8 over other TLRs. DN-A1 displayed superior in vitro
ADMET and in vivo PK profiles. DN-A1 showed clean CYP profile with IC50
over 10 μM for all major CYP isoenzymes tested including 3A4, 1A2, 2C9,
2C19 and 2D6. DN-A1 had favorable hERG parameter with IC50 over 30 μM
whereas the reference compound’s hERG IC50 was 3.84 μM suggesting
potential cardiac toxicity. DN-A1 significantly impeded tumor growth as a
single agent and was well-tolerated in mouse tumor models. Taken
together, DN-A1 warrants further development as a potential best-in-class
preclinical drug candidate for TLR8-mediated cancer immunotherapy.


