Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PARP trapping by PARP inhibitors have distinct effects on HR and
ALT NHEJ DSB repair, potentially impacting its therapeutic efficacy in
breast cancers.


PARP inhibitors (PARPi) have exhibited clinical success in inherited
breast cancers with mutations in homologous recombination (HR) DNA double
strand break (DSB) repair genes BRCA 1/2 by synthetic lethality. Novel
PARPi have been shown to function not only by catalytic inhibition of
PARP 1/2 activity, but also by “trapping” of PARP to sites of DNA
damage. Trapping of PARP is a response generated by PARPi that is
independent of the inhibition of PARP’s catalytic activity, and leads
to lethal unrepaired DSBs during replication. Importantly, PARP trapping
ability of PARPi correlates with its cytotoxic effect. In this study, we
investigated whether PARP trapping has distinct effects on regulation of
DNA DSB repair in breast cancer cells. Major DSB repair pathways in
mammalian cells include HR and non-homologous end joining (c-NHEJ).
Alternative NHEJ (ALT-NHEJ) is a recently discovered and highly
error-prone pathway which requires DNA resection like HR, and utilizes
PARP1. Our hypothesis is that PARP1 catalytic inhibition vs
‘trapping’ leads to distinct outcomes on DSB repair, highlighting
inhibitor efficacy. To test our hypothesis, we utilized MCF10A
(non-tumorigenic), MDA-MB-231 (TNBC/BRCA+), and SUM149PT (TNBC/BRCA-)
breast cancer cell lines with stably integrated GFP-reporter plasmids
designed to assess interchromosomal activities of the specific DSB repair
pathways. For our analysis, we used varying concentrations of Talazoparib
(MDV3800), which is a potent PARP trapping agent when used in combination
with DNA damaging agents such as methyl methanesulfonate (MMS). First, we
determined optimal conditions to induce PARP trapping in cells without
leading to significant toxicity. As observed by others, combination
treatments with of MMS/MDV3800 led to a significant increase in PARP
trapping relative to treatments with individual drugs. Studies were also
performed with a potent inhibitor of coenzyme NAD+ (Daporinad/FK866) that
blocks poly-ADP ribosylation activity in combination of MMS. We observed
significant PARP trapping with FK866/MMS combination treatment,
indicating that PARP depletion under the conditions of DNA damage also
leads to potent PARP trapping. Next, we investigated the effects of these
inhibitors on DSB repair. Surprisingly, combination MDV3800/MMS lead to
an overall decrease in HR and increase in ALT NHEJ activity. These
results were observed in both our BRCA+/- lines. Similar results are
observed between the repair activities when using FK866/MMS treatments.
Overall, our results suggest that PARP inhibitors with potent PARP
trapping activity increases ALT NHEJ, which may potentially compensate
for lack of HR. Studies are ongoing to determine whether targeting ALT
NHEJ may increase cytotoxicity in these cells.


