Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human transcriptome alterations in pre-cancer and cancer
epithelium identify candidate biomarkers of progression to pancreatic
cancer.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most common cancers
in the United States. The five-year survival rate for patients with PDAC
remains dismal. Identification of biomarkers for early diagnosis of PDAC
and pre-cancer pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) lesions with
risk of progression to PDAC is critically needed. We hypothesized that
differentially expressed genes and regulatory pathways in PanIN and PDAC
compared to normal duct epithelium (ND) may represent biomarkers of
development of malignancy. We used Affymetrix Human Transcriptome Arrays
2.0 to establish gene expressionprofiles in ND, low-grade PanIN, and PDAC
epithelium. Total RNA was isolated after laser capture microdissection
(LCM) of frozen tissue sections and then used for producing
hybridization-ready DNA. Hybridization quality control was performed with
Expression Console 1.4 software and background corrected/normalized data
were analyzed with Transcriptome Analysis Console (TAC) 3.1 and the
ASSIGN algorithm. We tested RNA from 22 LCM samples (9 PDACs, 5 PanINs,
and 8 ND), including 4 matched trios of ND, PanIN and PDAC from the same
patients. Differential expression analysis with one-way between subject
ANOVA revealed over 2000 genes differentially expressed in PDAC and PanIN
vs. ND group (filter criteria up/down >2; ANOVA p1.5; ANOVA p1.5; ANOVA
p<0.05) in both PanIN and PDAC vs. ND epithelium. Signaling pathway
analysis of WikiPathways showed a number of significantly altered
pathways in PDAC and PanIN compared to ND including the Gastric Cancer
Network 1 with upregulated S100P in both PanIN and PDAC whereas other
genes including CENPF, KIF20B,TPX2, and UBE2C were upregulated in PDAC
only. Using the ASSIGN algorithm and the Kruskal-Willis test for analysis
of difference in pathway activity, we found additional regulatory
pathways with altered activity including Nuclear Receptor meta-pathway
with reduced overall score in PDAC compared to PanIN and ND samples. In
summary, over 400 genes were significantly up-regulated in pre-cancer
PanIN lesions compared to normal duct epithelium, whereas gene
down-regulation was the most frequent alteration in PDAC. Sixty genes,
including 40 coding genes were up-regulated in both PDAC and PanIN. The
altered pathways associated with the differentially expressed genes may
represent an approach for integrated biomarker testing of neoplastic
progression.


