Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining ERY974, a novel T cell-redirecting bispecific antibody
targeting glypican-3, with chemotherapy profoundly improved antitumor
efficacy over its monotherapy in xenograft model.


Background: ERY974 is a humanized IgG4 bispecific T cell-redirecting
antibody (TRAB) currently in Phase 1 clinical trial (NCT02748837). ERY974
consists of a common light chain and two different heavy chains that
respectively recognize glypican-3 (GPC3) and CD3. The Fc portion of
ERY974 is modified to lose FcγR binding to prevent GPC3-independent
Fc-mediated effector function. However, binding activity to FcRn, an
important factor in the PK profile of IgG, is maintained. ERY974
simultaneously binds to GPC3 on the cancer cell surface and to CD3 on the
T cell surface, and induces TRAB-dependent cellular cytotoxicity mediated
by the potent effector function of T cells. ERY974 shows strong antitumor
activity against gastric, lung, ovarian, head & neck, and esophageal
cancer-derived xenograft tumors in a non-obese diabetic/severe combined
immunodeficiency (NOD-SCID) mouse model injected with human T cells.
Cancer immunotherapy, as represented by immune checkpoint inhibitors such
as PD-1, PD-L1, and CTLA-4 antibodies, has recently been demonstrating
remarkable clinical benefit in various tumor types. However, the number
of patients who have survival benefit is limited, and combining cancer
immunotherapy with other agents is required to improve the efficacy.
Although ERY974 monotherapy is expected to show clinical activity based
on the preclinical data, we examined whether further improvement of
ERY974-induced efficacy is attained by combination with chemotherapy.

Method & Results: We evaluated the combination effect of ERY974 with
chemotherapy against xenograft tumors of MKN45 (gastric cancer) or
NCI-H446 (lung cancer) either in a NOD-SCID mouse model injected with
human T cells or in a humanized non-obese diabetic/shi-scid/IL-2Rγnull
model in which differentiated human T cells are constitutively supplied.
Although ERY974 monotherapy shows only minor antitumor effect against
MKN45 and NCI-H446, combination therapy remarkably enhanced efficacy. In
particular, ERY974 in combination with paclitaxel or cisplatin in
NCI-H446 tumors caused a tumor disappearance without regrowth for a long
period. Conclusion: These preclinical data suggest the possibility that
the strategy of combining ERY974 with chemotherapy may succeed in
increasing the clinical benefit. Now the combination effect is being
further investigated to clarify the mechanism.


