Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RUNX1 controls EGFR signaling pathway in non-small cell lung
cancer cells.


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a promising target for
anticancer therapy for non-small lung cancer (NSCLC). Mitogen-inducible
gene 6 (Mig6) is known to be a negative feedback regulator of EGFR. Mig6
inhibits EGFR kinase activity and promote wild-type EGFR trafficking to
the degradation pathway. Down-regulation of Mig6 is found in poor
prognostic NSCLC. Previous gene array analysis results suggested that
Mig6 is downregulated by runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1), yet
the detailed relationship between RUNX1 and Mig6 in NSCLC has not been
elucidated. Herein we demonstrate that RUNX1 inhibition is effective for
wild-type EGFR NSCLC. Tet-inducible shRNA mediated RUNX1 knockdown in
wild-type EGFR cell line LU99A led to the increased expression of Mig6
and decreased expression of phosphorylated form of EGFR as well as
deactivation of EGFR/ERK pathway. RUNX1 knockdown subsequently induced
apoptosis in LU99A cells. Silencing of Mig6 in LU99A cells promoted the
proliferation of these cancer cells and increased expression of
phosphorylated form of EGFR, highlighting the importance of this EGFR
signaling cascade in the maintenance of wild-type EGFR NSCLC. Indeed,
RUNX1 overexpression promoted cell proliferation and decreased expression
of Mig6 and increased phosphorylated form of EGFR. Notably Mig6 knockdown
in RUNX1 knockdown LU99A cells increased their proliferation rates,
indicating that Mig6 plays an important role in RUNX1-mediated
pro-oncogenic pathway. We next examined the efficacy of a novel small
molecule which specifically binds and inhibits the RUNX1 (We named it as
CM). CM was drastically effective for wild-type EGFR NSCLC cell lines
A549 and LU99A which are naturally resistant to EGFR Tyrosine kinase
inhibitor: gefitinib. In addition, CM suppressed tumor growth of
xeno-transplanted A549 cells in immune-deficient mice in vivo. Our study
underscores the importance of RUNX1 inhibition therapy in the management
of gefitinib-resistant NSCLC patients.


