Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Charting the DNA methylation landscape of prostate cancer
associated fibroblasts.


Most studies of the genome and epigenome landscape of tumors focus on the
aberrations in epithelial cancer cells. However, the growth and
progression of solid tumors involves dynamic cross-talk between cancer
epithelium and the surrounding microenvironment, including
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). The molecular landscape of these
cells is still poorly understood, so it is important to define the
epigenetic features that underpin the functional differences between CAFs
and non-malignant prostate fibroblasts (NPFs) and influence cancer
progression. Therefore, we used whole-genome bisulphite sequencing to
chart the epigenome landscape of CAFs at single base resolution. Our data
revealed that NPFs and CAFs from localized prostate cancer have
remarkably different epigenome profiles characterized by locus-specific
rather than global changes in DNA methylation. CAFs exhibited more than
7500 differentially methylated regions compared to NPFs. In contrast, no
recurrent genomic aberrations were detected in CAFs, emphasising the
importance of epigenome changes in reinforcing their pro-tumorigenic
phenotype. Many differentially methylated regions occurred at known
regulatory loci and were associated with differentially expressed genes
measured using RNAseq. The methylation and gene expression changes were
highly consistent across patients when validated using an independent
cohort of patient-matched NPFs and CAFs. Remarkably, a subset of
differentially methylated regions in CAFs is shared with prostate cancer
epithelial cells, revealing the new concept of tumour-specific epigenome
modifications in the tumour and its microenvironment. Collectively, these
data demonstrate that CAFs are defined by an enduring epigenetic
signature that comprises a distinct set of locus-specific DNA methylation
alterations in cancer-related regulatory loci. The distinct methylome of
CAFs provides a novel epigenetic hallmark of the cancer microenvironment
and promises new biomarkers to improve interpretation of diagnostic
samples.


