Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural domains of βIII-Tubulin regulate multiple stress
responses and influence cell growth and survival in glucose-deprived
non-small cell lung cancer.


BACKGROUND: Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) survival rates are dismal
and elevated βIII-tubulin expression is associated with chemotherapy
resistance and tumor aggressiveness1. βIII-tubulin modulates glucose
metabolism and stress response signaling to support cancer cell survival
and proliferation in glucose starvation conditions in the tumor
microenvironment2. βIII-Tubulin shares sequence similarity with other
β-tubulin isotypes, differing in the C-terminal tail region of the
protein, however the function of βIII-tubulin structural domains remain
uncharacterized. This study investigated the importance of the
βIII-tubulin body and tail structural domains in conferring survival
advantage to glucose-starved NSCLC cells.

METHODS: H460 NSCLC cells were gene-edited at the endogenous
βIII-tubulin gene using zinc finger nuclease technology to replace the
endogenous βIII-tubulin protein with either the full-length or truncated
βIII-tubulin protein, or replacement of the βIII-tubulin body or tail
with the βI-tubulin sequence, each fused to a GFP tag. Clones expressing
the modified βIII-tubulin proteins were cultured in glucose-free
conditions for 48h to 10 days and cell growth and viability were measured
by Trypan Blue Dye Exclusion and Annexin-V apoptosis assay. The effect of
the βIII-tubulin modifications on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
response, autophagy and Akt signaling were examined by western blotting.

RESULTS: Characterization of the gene-edited clones revealed that loss of
the βIII-tubulin C-terminal tail or substitution of the βIII-tubulin
body or tail sequence with that of the βI-tubulin sequence did not alter
the microtubule architecture, cellular proliferation rate or viability in
normal growth conditions. However, loss of the βIII-tubulin C-terminal
tail significantly reduced the viability of H460 cells by 37 ± 0.05% in
acute glucose starvation. Substitution of the βIII-tubulin body with the
βI-tubulin body significantly reduced cell number by 53 ± 0.01% during
prolonged glucose starvation. Loss of the βIII-tubulin C-terminal tail
increased Akt activation and LC3B-II expression in glucose-rich
conditions and potentiated the increase in ER stress response markers
GRP78, ATF4 and CHOP in response to glucose starvation. These results
indicate that the βIII-tubulin body and tail differentially confer a
survival advantage to glucose-starved H460 cells and modulate multiple
stress response signaling pathways in an isotype-dependent and
independent manner.

CONCLUSION: This study provides insight into the importance of
βIII-tubulin structural domains in conferring βIII-tubulin function in
NSCLC, thereby advancing our understanding of the role of tubulin
isotypes in cell biology and the mechanisms contributing to poor patient
outcome in this disease. 1 Kavallaris, Nat Rev Cancer 2010 2Parker et
al., Carcinogenesis 2016


