Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional inhibition of brachyury in chordoma is associated
with adoption of quiescent phenotype.


BACKGROUND: Brachyury is a mesoderm specification transcription factor
involved in notochord development and overexpressed in a variety of
cancers, including chordoma. High levels of brachyury protein expression
in cancers is associated with a poor prognosis in part due to its role in
mediating epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). TG02 is a multikinase
inhibitor that targets transcriptional regulation of cyclin-dependent
kinases (CDKs). Because chordoma is characterized by a relative paucity
of genomic mutations and largely driven by the super-enhancer activity of
brachyury expression, we investigated the downstream effect of a
transcriptional inhibitor, TG02, in chordomas.

METHODS: Established chordoma cell lines, UCH-1 and UM-Chor1, were
exposed to increasing concentrations of TG02 to determine effect on
brachyury protein expression. qPCR was used to analyze brachyury mRNA
expression as well as the mesenchymal proteins, vimentin and fibronectin,
typically associated with brachyury expression in tumor cells. Cell
migration was

evaluated using wound healing assay. CellTiterGlo Luminescence Assay was
used to quantify cell viability.

RESULTS: TG02 down-regulated protein expression of brachyury in a
dose-dependent manner. Attenuation of brachyury expression was seen
within 4 hours and persisted for 5 days upon single exposure to a
clinically relevant concentration of TG02. Brachyury downregulation did
not affect cell count or viability, and was associated with a quiescent
phenotype, including impaired migration. Expression of vimentin and
fibronectin, both associated with EMT, was also suppressed within 4 hours
of TG02 treatment and persisted for 24 hours.

CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of brachyury expression and its downstream
signaling is associated with quiescent behavior of chordoma cells.
Pharmacologically induced transcriptional targeting of brachyury using
TG02, a potent CDK9 inhibitor, represents a potential therapeutic
strategy.


