Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-proliferative activities of lipid fraction of extract from
the skin of the catfish Arius Bilineatus, Valenciennes.


The catfish (Arius bilineatus, Val.) secretes a gelatinous substance
composed of biochemically active lipids and proteins from its skin upon
stress or injury. Preparations from the skin have previously been shown
to affect blood clotting and accelerates healing of non-healing diabetic
foot ulcers in man. We have reported previously fish skin preparation
(CSP) derived from the skin of the Catfish and it’s lipid fraction
exerted anti-inflammatory activity in the in vitro cells and in vivo
animal models. Here anti-proliferative effect of a lipid fraction of fish
skin preparation (CSP-L) derived from the skin of the catfish and its
plausible mechanism were investigated in human hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) Hep3B and human pancreatic cancer Panc-1 cells. Cells were treated
with CSP-L (0 to 100 μg/ml) for 72 hrs and cell proliferation was
measured by the MTT assay. The results showed much stronger inhibition by
CSP-L in Panc-1 cells than that of Hep3B cells with IC50 of 5.5 ± 1.4
μg/ml and 19.5 ± 7.7 μg/ml, respectively. Cell cycle analysis with PI
staining suggested that CSP-L (25 - 100 μg/ml) led to G1 phase arrest in
Hep3B cells whereas S phase arrest was observed in Panc-1 cells,
suggesting the differential molecular mechanisms responsible for CSP-L
induced cell growth suppression in Hep3B and Panc-1 cells. The alteration
of cell cycle was concentration dependent. Additionally, CSP-L
concentration dependently suppressed the invasion of Hep3B and Panc-1
cells. The molecular mechanism associated with CSP-L’s
anti-proliferative effect was examined by Western blotting in both Hep3B
and Panc-1 cells. Intriguingly, CSP-L (50 and 100 μg/ml) notably
decreased protein levels of cyclin D, Stat3, pRB and pERk in Hep3 B cells
in a concentration dependent manner. In contrast, only pRB and pERK
protein expression were reduced in CSP-L treated Panc-1 cells. These
again suggest that CSP-L inhibited the proliferation of Hep3B and Panc-1
cells by different molecular mechanisms. Collectively, our preliminary
data suggest that CSP-L has a great potential to be developed as an
anticancer or preventive agent for both HCC or pancreatic cancer and
warrants further investigation. This study was support by a grant from
Kuwait Foundation for the Advancement of Science No. KFAS 2013-120701A-D,
and Kuwait University Research Grant No. SL03/14.


