Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of stromal p38MAPK abrogates breast cancer metastasis.


Bone metastasis is a devastating and fatal complication of breast cancer
for which we lack effective therapies. Thus, identifying therapies that
effectively limit metastases will significantly reduce comorbidities and
improve long-term survival. Recently we demonstrated that the p38MAPK
pathway sustains the pro-tumorigenic senescence-associated secretory
phenotype (SASP) and targeting this pathway limits the tumor-promoting
capabilities of senescent cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs).
Because we found that a significant percentage of p38MAPK-dependent SASP
factors are expressed in the stroma associated with breast cancer
lesions, we asked whether targeting p38MAPK could limit primary and
metastatic breast cancer growth. While p38MAPK inhibition modestly
limited primary tumor growth, we found that its inhibition significantly
reduced breast cancer bone metastases by specifically targeting the
stromal compartment. Further, p38MAPK inhibition was as effective as
paclitaxel at limiting tumor growth in the bone but in contrast to
paclitaxel, which failed to protect from cancer-induced bone loss,
p38MAPK inhibition also protected against devastating bone loss. This
contrasts our p38MAPK approach from zoledronic acid, which limits bone
loss but fails to slow tumor growth in already engrafted tumors. Analysis
of the mechanism(s) responsible for this reduced metastasis suggests that
p38MAPK inhibition targets reactive and/or senescent osteoblasts within
the bones of animals harboring metastatic lesions. Because we find that
senescent osteoblasts are present in human bone, we postulate that they
promote metastatic outgrowth and thus p38MAPK inhibition limits the
pro-metastatic activities of these cells. Finally, we will present recent
data from our preclinical model that demonstrates that inhibition of the
p38MAPK pathway can drastically reduce metastasis from the primary site.
We propose that p38MAPK is an important stromal-specific therapy for
breast cancer metastasis to the bone.


