Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stat3 feedback activation-induced PTGIS expression is associated
with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI in lung cancer.


Targeted cancer therapies can effectively promote tumor regression in
clinical responses. Eventually, most tumors develop resistance to these
drugs. Stat3 activation has been suggested as one of the mechanisms that
cause acquired resistance to EGFR-tyrosin kinase inhibitor (TKI) in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, the underlying molecular
mechanisms are not well studied. In this study, we found that treatment
of gefitinib (EGFR-TKI) in NSCLC cell lines harboring EGFR-TKI sensitive
mutation induced feedback activation of Stat3 in a time- and
dose-dependent manner. High levels of IL-6 were detected in the
conditioned medium of gefitinib-treated cells by cytokine array and were
confirmed by ELISA. We demonstrated that IL-6 treatment could induce
Stat3 activation and conditioned medium treatment-induced Stat3
activation was suppressed by IL-6 neutralizing antibody. We also
demonstrated that gefitinib treatment-induced IL-6 secretion could be
inhibited by knockdown of Stat3 expression. Moreover, pharmacological
inhibition and genetic inhibition of Stat3 activation increased cell
cytotoxicity of gefitinib in both PC9 and HCC827 cells that harboring
EGFR-TKI sensitive mutation. Our data suggested that gefitinib treatment
could induce activation of IL-6/Stat3 signaling loop and modulate cell
cytotoxicity of gefitinib. Microarray and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
(IPA) analysis revealed prostaglandin I2 synthase (PTGIS) as a downstream
target gene of IL-6/Stat3 signaling and PTGIS was up-regulated by
gefitinib treatment. The induction of PTGIS by gefitinib via Stat3
feedback activation was confirmed in vitro genetically and
pharmacologically. Moreover, we showed that cotreatment with PTGIS
inhibitor improves the efficacy of EGFR inhibition in PC9 and HCC827
cells. Importantly, high expression of PTGIS was found in
gefitinib-resistant PC9 cells (PC9/gef) compared with gefitinib-sensitive
PC9 cells. Targeting PTGIS was also effective in decreasing viability of
cells with acquired resistance to gefitinib in PC9/gef cells. Taken
together, our study indicated that Stat3 feedback activation-induced
PTGIS expression participates in modulating gefitinib efficacy and
Stat3/PTGIS inhibition could potentially overcome acquired resistance to
gefitinib in NSCLC.


