Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyphenol-mediated epigenetic reactivation of tumor suppressor
gene SEMA3A in breast cancer cells.


Alterations in DNA methylation occur in cancer, and may underlie
silencing of genes with tumor suppressor functions. Reversing DNA
methylation, thus potentially reactivating genes that combat cancer,
constitutes a promising anti-cancer strategy. Interestingly, studies have
indicated that certain dietary polyphenols, such as resveratrol present
in grapes, exert anti-cancer effects through epigenetic regulation of
gene expression. However, studies have been limited to candidate genes,
and comprehensive and mechanistic insights are missing. In the present
study, following genome-wide DNA methylation analysis with Illumina 450K
BeadChip array, we identified CpG sites within regulatory regions of
tumor suppressor genes that are hypomethylated upon treatment of breast
cancer cells with resveratrol. Non-invasive MCF10CA1h and invasive
MCF10CA1a human breast cancer cell lines were used as an experimental
model. Pyrosequencing and QPCR were performed to assess respectively
methylation and expression of selected genes. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was applied to assess binding events. We
identified 990 hypomethylated CpG sites in MCF10CA1h and 1,146
hypomethylated CpG sites in MCF10CA1a cells upon 9-day treatment with
15µM resveratrol as compared with control untreated cells (differential
methylation ≤-0.05, nominal pAlterations in DNA methylation occur in
cancer, and may underlie silencing of genes with tumor suppressor
functions. Reversing DNA methylation, thus potentially reactivating genes
that combat cancer, constitutes a promising anti-cancer strategy.
Interestingly, studies have indicated that certain dietary polyphenols,
such as resveratrol present in grapes, exert anti-cancer effects through
epigenetic regulation of gene expression. However, studies have been
limited to candidate genes, and comprehensive and mechanistic insights
are missing. In the present study, following genome-wide DNA methylation
analysis with Illumina 450K BeadChip array, we identified CpG sites
within regulatory regions of tumor suppressor genes that are
hypomethylated upon treatment of breast cancer cells with resveratrol.
Non-invasive MCF10CA1h and invasive MCF10CA1a human breast cancer cell
lines were used as an experimental model. Pyrosequencing and QPCR were
performed to assess respectively methylation and expression of selected
genes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was applied to assess binding
events. We identified 990 hypomethylated CpG sites in MCF10CA1h and 1,146
hypomethylated CpG sites in MCF10CA1a cells upon 9-day treatment with
15µM resveratrol as compared with control untreated cells (differential
methylation ≤-0.05, nominal p<0.05, limma t-test). Those CpG sites
corresponded to approximately 650 genes that were predominantly
associated with tumor suppressor function in cancer. We selected tumor
suppressor gene SEMA3A as resveratrol target for further investigation.
As array data indicated, resveratrol led to reduction in methylation of
SEMA3A promoter region. The 18% decrease in methylation of SEMA3A was
confirmed by pyrosequencing in MCF10CA1a breast cancer cells. This
coincided with 23% up-regulation of SEMA3A expression. In addition,
analysis of the effects on DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) demonstrated
that resveratrol decreases expression of DNMT3A. Furthermore, ChIP
indicated decreased occupancy of DNMT3A at the SEMA3A promoter,
suggesting that down-regulation and lower affinity of this de novo DNA
methylating enzyme to DNA may mediate decrease in methylation within
tumor suppressor genes upon resveratrol exposure. In support of
reactivation of SEMA3A, active histone mark, H3K9ac, was significantly
increased and repressive histone mark, H3K27me3, was significantly
decreased after resveratrol treatment, indicating an open, more
transcriptionally active chromatin state. These results demonstrate a
role for polyphenol-mediated epigenetic modifications in reactivation of
tumor suppressor genes in breast cancer and pave the way for further
studies on the mechanism driving these changes. This study was supported
by the PCCR, Indiana CTSI (UL1TR001108), Women’s Global Health
Institute, and USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture (Hatch
project 1005656) granted to BS.


