Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differentiation of carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma from
pleomorphic adenoma by TERT promoter hypermethylation and elevated TERT
mRNA expression.


The purpose of this study was to determine whether i) genetic or ii)
epigenetic aberrations of the TERT promoter, iii) elevated TERT mRNA
level or iv) abnormal p53 expression pattern effectively distinguishes
cases of carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma (CA ex PA) from pleomorphic
adenoma (PA). PA is the most common salivary gland tumor which in rare
cases progresses into an epithelial malignancy, termed CA ex PA. Fusion
genes involving PLAG1, or less commonly HMGA2, are common in both PA and
CA ex PA and are thought to be early genetic drivers in their
development. Although the key molecular events which occur during
malignant transformation of PA are still unknown, some genetic and
epigenetic changes proposed to play a role include amplification of
PLAG1, HMGA2, MYC, ERBB2, or chromosome 12q and aberrant promoter
hypermethylation of RASSF1, especially in combination with promoter
hypermethylation of p16, TERT and WT1. The importance of TERT promoter
hypermethylation for malignant transformation in PA may be
underappreciated since hypermethylation of that region most critical for
malignancy in several cancers, termed the upstream of transcriptional
start site (UTSS), has not previously been assayed in PA or CA ex PA.
Point mutations or genomic rearrangement in the TERT promoter and
elevated TERT mRNA levels are also characteristic of many cancers. We
used a panel of 10 PA and 6 CA ex PA clinical samples to determine
whether these alterations of TERT, or aberrant expression of TERT mRNA or
p53 protein, could effectively distinguish CA ex PA from PA. UTSS
hypermethylation in each sample was determined by treatment of genomic
DNA with sodium bisulfite followed by MassARRAY and Sanger sequencing.
Mutation and arrangement of TERT were screened for by Sanger sequencing
and fluorescence in situ hybridization, respectively. p53 expression
pattern was visualized by immunohistochemistry and TERT mRNA levels were
measured by RT-qPCR. Mutation or rearrangements of the TERT promoter were
not observed. However, all 6 CA ex PA samples harbored hypermethylated
TERT promoter and had much higher TERT mRNA levels than the PA samples.
Two of these samples also had aberrant p53 expression patterns,
suggesting the presence of a TP53 missense mutation. None of the PA
samples had aberrant p53 expression patterns, although 2 had
hypermethylated TERT promoter and elevated TERT mRNA levels as compared
with the other PA samples. The significance of this for long term outcome
in these patients was unclear. Overall, these results suggest that TERT
is commonly upregulated in CA ex PA and that this upregulation is often
mediated through hypermethylation of the TERT promoter UTSS. Future large
scale studies are warranted to determine the usefulness of TERT promoter
hypermethylation for differentiating benign PA from CA ex PA, or the PAs
at risk of malignant transformation.


