Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphodiesterase 10A inhibition as a novel approach to suppress
β-catenin signaling in ovarian cancer cells.


Canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling is known to be associated with
platinum resistance in ovarian cancer in which inhibitors hold promise
for the treatment of refractory disease. Phosphodiesterase 10A (PDE10A)
is a dual cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase isozyme recently
implicated in colon cancer. PDE10A inhibition in colon cancer cells by
siRNA or small molecule inhibitors increased cGMP levels and activated
PKG to inhibit β-catenin signaling. A novel PDE10 inhibitor, ADT-061,
was identified by screening a library of indene derivatives, and showed
strong antineoplastic activity in the Apc+/min-FCCC mouse (Lee K et al.,
unpublished data). Cyclic GMP and phosphodiesterases participate in the
ovarian follicular development, although little is known about PDE10A
expression in ovaries, especially with regard to a potential role in
ovarian tumorigenesis. PDE10A protein was found to be expressed in
various established ovarian cancer cell lines at higher levels than
immortalized or primary ovarian surface epithelial cell lines.
Pf-2545920, a known PDE10A inhibitor, and ADT-061 inhibited the growth of
multiple ovarian tumor cell lines with IC50s around 20µM and 0.5µM,
respectively. Both compounds induced apoptosis after 24h treatment, as
measured by PI/Annexin-V staining and PARP cleavage. Pf-2545920 and
ADT-061 induced phosphorylation of VASP at Ser157 and Ser239 in various
ovarian cancer cell lines, indicating activation of cyclic AMP and cyclic
GMP signaling, respectively. Treatment also decreased levels of
β-catenin and downstream targets of TCF-dependent transcription,
including c-MYC, survivin and cyclin-D1. Homozygous knockout PDE10A
clones of OV-90 ovarian cancer cells obtained using CRISPR/Cas9 showed
decreased clonogenic potential, decreased Pf-2545920-mediated VASP
phosphorylation and β-catenin, c-MYC and survivin expression. Ongoing
efforts are focused on the development of more potent ADT-061 analogs.
These observations support further study of a role of PDE10 in ovarian
tumorigenesis and the development of ADT-061 or analogs for the treatment
of refractory ovarian cancer as well as the prevention of malignant
recurrence.


