Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Examining the role of breast cancer Neuregulin1 and macrophage
ErbB3 in intravasation.


The purpose of our studies is to investigate the role of Neuregulin1
(NRG1) and ErbB3 signaling between breast cancer cells and macrophages in
facilitating tumor cell intravasation. The interaction of breast cancer
cells with other cell types within the tumor microenvironment plays an
important role in metastasis. These interactions are thought to influence
tumor cell invasion and intravasation, two important steps in the process
of metastasis. Our studies are specifically interested in examining the
signaling occurring between tumor cells and macrophages. Previous studies
have established the presence of paracrine signaling between breast
cancer cells and macrophages, where colony stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1)
produced by the tumor cells stimulates the production of epidermal growth
factor (EGF) by macrophages, leading to chemotactic invasion of the tumor
cells. In addition to this paracrine loop signaling between tumor cells
and macrophages, it has been seen that macrophage expression of ErbB3, a
member of the EGFR family of receptor tyrosine kinases, may play a role
in facilitating tumor cell invasion. In order to examine the effects of
signaling between tumor cells and macrophages in intravasation, we
utilize an in vitro transendothelial migration (iTEM) assay. This assay
uses transwells coated with matrigel and endothelial cells in order to
mimic the entry of tumor cells into blood vessels. We show that using an
ErbB3 blocking antibody results in a significant reduction of
macrophage-induced transendothelial migration of breast cancer cells.
Additionally, reduction of expression of the ErbB3 receptor ligand
Neuregulin1 in tumor cells yields a similar result. Stimulation of
macrophages with NRG1 leads to increased expression of Jagged1 (JAG1), a
ligand of the Notch receptor. Activation of the Notch receptor pathway
has been shown to be involved in tumor cell invasion. Overall our studies
look to further examine the interaction between tumor cells and
macrophages, and these observations indicate that ErbB3, NRG1, and JAG1
could all serve as novel targets in metastasis and the tumor
microenvironment.


