Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRAIL-induced apoptosis in TRAIL-resistant breast carcinoma.


Recombinant human tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(rhTRAIL), the optimized form of the endogenous death ligand TRAIL, shows
therapeutic potential for cancer due to its ability to induce apoptosis
in cancer cells independent of p53, while exhibiting minimal toxicity to
normal cells. Despite this, a majority of breast cancers display
resistance to rhTRAIL treatment due to up-regulation of pro-apoptotic
proteins, down-regulation of anti-apoptotic proteins, and/or
up-regulation of death receptors (DR) 4 and 5. To overcome rhTRAIL
resistance, natural compounds have been investigated as sensitizing
agents. This study considered the application of the naturally occurring
flavonol Quercetin (Q). Q has been shown to have the ability to
up-regulate DR5 and down-regulate anti-apoptotic proteins in cancer
cells, and thereby, making Q a favorable choice to be employed as a
sensitizing agent. The intention of this study was to ascertain the
capacity of Q to sensitize rhTRAIL-resistant triple negative breast
cancer BT-20 cells and hormone-dependent breast cancer MCF-7 cells to
rhTRAIL-induced apoptosis and elucidate the underlying mechanism for
Q’s sensitization. Q demonstrated the ability to intensify rhTRAIL’s
pro-apoptotic effects in the breast cancer BT-20 and MCF-7 cell lines as
detected through Annexin V/PI assays followed by FACS analysis. In
comparison to single agent treatments, the cotreatment of Q and rhTRAIL
enhanced the induction of the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis as marked by
PARP cleavage (a hallmark of apoptosis), activation of caspase 8, and
activation of the executioner caspases 3 and 7. The mechanism for Q’s
augmentation in breast cancer was determined to be through the
down-regulation of c-FLIPL (caspase 8 inhibitor) in a dose-dependent
manner. Furthermore, Q promoted the ubiquitination of c-FLIPL
facilitating the proteasome-mediated degradation of c-FLIPL in breast
cancer. An additional mechanism for Q’s sensitization was displayed in
breast cancer BT-20 cells. Q up-regulated DR5 membrane and protein
expression in breast cancer BT-20 cells in a dose-dependent manner.
RT-PCR analysis revealed that Q’s influence on DR5 expression occurred
at the transcriptional level in those breast cancer cells. Thus, these
data suggest that the cotreatment of Q and rhTRAIL possesses the
therapeutic potential to be an effective anti-breast carcinoma regimen.


