Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating role of RECQ1 in response to gemcitabine treatment
in triple negative breast cancer.


The response of cancer cells to therapeutic drugs aimed at causing DNA
damage is dependent on proteins that play roles in DNA repair. Single
nucleotide polymorphism in RECQ1 (also known as RECQL or RECQL1), a DNA
helicase involved in DNA damage and replication stress response, is
reported to influence patient’s response to gemcitabine in pancreatic
cancer leading to poor survival. Gemcitabine is also used as a
chemotherapeutic against triple negative breast cancer; however
resistance to gemcitabine is reported. The mechanism by which gemcitabine
chemoresistance is obtained is poorly understood. Given the importance of
RECQ1 in replication fork restart and it being categorized as a breast
cancer susceptibility gene, we wish to investigate the role of RECQ1 in
modulating cellular response to gemcitabine in triple negative breast
cancer cells. To study RECQ1 functions, we developed isogenic pairs of
RECQ1-proficient and RECQ1-deficient cells by CRISPR-Cas9-mediated
targeted inactivation of RECQ1 in breast cancer cell lines as in vitro
model system. RECQ1-knockout MDA-MB-231 cells displayed reduced cell
growth and proliferation, and increased DNA damage as compared to the
MDA-MB-231 cells expressing wild type RECQ1. As compared to
RECQ1-proficient MDA-MB-231 cells, RECQ1-deficient cells were more
sensitive to gemcitabine treatment, incurred significantly greater load
of double strand breaks upon gemcitabine treatment, and displayed
aberrant cell cycle progression following recovery from gemcitabine
treatment. Our ongoing experiments are investigating the detailed
mechanism of RECQ1’s role in response to gemcitabine and its
implications in therapeutic response.

Funding: This work was funded by the NIGMS/NIH grant SC1GM093999 to Sudha
Sharma. We also acknowledge support from the NIMHD/NIH award number
G12MD007597 and NIA/NIH award number 1R25 AG047843-02. We thank Drs. Ritu
Chaudhary, Xiaoling Li and Ashish Lal (NCI) for their help and support.


