Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteogenomic analysis of alternative splicing in colorectal
adenoma-to-carcinoma progression.


Background

Early diagnosis of colorectal cancer (CRC) and identification of its
precursor lesions (adenomas) is crucial in reducing CRC mortality rates.
The fecal immunochemical test (FIT) is a non-invasive CRC screening test
that detects human protein hemoglobin. Although FIT is beneficial in its
current form with a sensitivity of ~65% for detection of CRC and ~27% for
adenomas, its performance is still suboptimal and needs to be further
improved. Adenoma-to-carcinoma progression is accompanied by alternative
splicing, which results in expression of tumor-specific protein variants.
These may yield novel biomarkers suitable for improving detection of
progressive adenomas and CRCs.

Aim

We aim to identify novel biomarkers to improve early detection of CRC.

Materials and methods

RNA was isolated from 3D organoid cultures derived from 5 adenomas and 4
CRC tissues. RNA and proteins were isolated from 18 healthy human colon
tissues, 30 adenomas and 30 CRCs. Samples were analyzed by RNA sequencing
(Illumina) and in-depth tandem mass spectrometry proteomics (QExactive).
For both organoid- and tissue-datasets differential splicing analysis was
performed on RNA level to enrich the sequence database, against which
mass spectra were searched, with predicted protein isoforms.

Results

Comparative splicing analysis between CRC and adenoma organoids revealed
~90 differentially spliced genes, yielding candidate biomarkers from
epithelial origin. In the tissues, differential splicing analysis between
CRCs and controls and between CRCs and adenomas identified over 1000 of
splice variants. These include known alternatively spliced genes involved
in cancer such as CD44 and VEGFA and a number of candidates overlapping
with the isoforms derived from the organoids. Proteomics analysis
revealed that approximately 150 of the splice variants were expressed on
protein level.

Conclusion and Discussion

We have confirmed that adenoma-to-carcinoma progression is accompanied by
aberrant splicing. Analysis of the organoid cultures allowed us to
identify gene isoforms from (neoplastic) epithelial origin. Tissue
analysis yielded tumor-specific splice variants that represent novel
protein candidate biomarkers for early detection of CRC. The diagnostic
performance of these splice variant proteins will be validated in series
of stool and FIT samples.


