Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stearoyl-CoA Desaturase (SCD1) regulates liver tumor initiating
cells through modulating ER stress.


Sorafenib is the FDA approved drug for patients with advanced
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but the survival benefit is only modest,
partly due to drug resistance. Increasing evidence shows that
tumor-initiating cells (T-ICs) are intrinsically resistant to
conventional treatments, and targeting signaling pathways in T-ICs
provides potential therapeutic targets for HCC. In our established
enriched T-IC population, we identified the activation of a lipogenesis
pathway in which expression of stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 (SCD1), an
enzyme involved in the conversion of saturated into monounsaturated fatty
acids, was most significant. SCD1 overexpression is frequently found in
HCC samples and is significantly associated with poorer patient survival.
Using overexpression and knockdown approaches, SCD1 was found to regulate
the traits of T-ICs, including tumorigenicity, self-renewal,
differentiation, drug resistance and the expression of liver T-IC
markers. Interestingly, SCD1 was markedly upregulated in our established
sorafenib-resistant cell lines as well as patient-derived xenografts
(PDTXs), and its overexpression predicts the clinical response of HCC
patients to sorafenib treatment. Consistently, pharmacological inhibition
of SCD1 suppressed T-IC phenotypes and enhanced sensitivity to sorafenib
treatment. Using a patient-derived xenograft model, we found that a novel
SCD1 inhibitor (SSI-4) in combination with sorafenib demonstrated a
maximal tumor suppressive effect. Induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-mediated T-IC differentiation can account for the enhanced
sensitivity towards sorafenib treatment upon SCD1 suppression. In
conclusion, SCD1-induced ER stress may specifically increase the
sensitivity of liver T-ICs to the effects of sorafenib treatment.
Targeting SCD1 in combination with sorafenib therapy may be a novel
therapeutic regimen against HCC.


