Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A rapid flow cytometry method for analyzing NF-κB activation and
translocation in whole blood.


Background: The end point of most cell-signaling cascades is the
translocation of protein complexes into the nucleus to modify
transcriptional activity. For this reason, the analysis of cytoplasmic
vs. nuclear localization provides important insights into cell
activation. However, assessing nuclear translocation in complex cell
mixtures, such as whole blood, is a difficult task. Leukocytes are a rare
event in blood, with many subpopulations, requiring the cells to first be
concentrated, sorted, rested and often expanded prior to further
molecular analyses. This process can take weeks, and questions regarding
physiological relevance arise from even the first preparatory steps.
Here, we present a buffer-based system to lyse RBCs and differentially
stain leukocytes in order to enable the quantitative analysis of
cytoplasmic vs. nuclear localization in endogenous cells by flow
cytometry. We demonstrate the use of this system by analyzing the
activation of NF-κB signaling in whole-blood monocytes following
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation.

Methods: The main components of the Whole Blood Nuclear Localization Kit
are two buffers: Buffer 1 permeabilizes the cytoplasmic membrane, leaving
the nuclear membrane intact, while Buffer 2 permeabilizes both the
cytoplasmic and nuclear membranes. Briefly, blood was treated for
different times with LPS, fixed for 10 min, split into 2 fractions, and
then one was lysed for 30 min with Buffer 1 and the other with Buffer 2.
Each fraction was washed, stained and acquired on a CytoFLEX-S flow
cytometer (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA). The cytoplasmic and nuclear
signals were calculated using the compensated results from the two tubes.
Blood was collected onsite daily from healthy, consenting human adults.

Results: Following LPS stimulation, nuclear p50 and RelA increased
maximally in monocytes by 10 min. Phospho-RelA S536 was maximal by 5 min
mostly in the cytoplasm, while phospho-RelA S529 was maximal by 10 min in
the nucleus. IκBα degraded maximally by 10 min. Additional kinase
signaling will be presented, as well as controls to demonstrate the
partitioning efficiency.

Conclusions: This system is very fast and user friendly, and can help to
improve our understanding of normal and aberrant signaling in blood,
while also saving researchers time and resources compared to conventional
procedures, e.g., purifying leukocytes and performing Western blots. It
provides clear delineation of the nucleus with minimal perinuclear
staining, and can even be used to improve the quantitation of nuclear
signals from 2D microscopic images. Finally, this system can enable
research where blood volumes are limited, such as with rare and precious
samples and small-animal studies. ***This kit and the CytoFLEX-S are for
Research Use Only. Beckman Coulter and the Beckman Coulter product and
service marks mentioned herein are trademarks or registered trademarks of
Beckman Coulter, Inc. in the United States and other countries.***


