Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell-derived analysis of desmoid tumors for studying
tumor-stroma interactions.


Cancer associated fibroblasts play an important role in the maintenance
and remodeling of the tumor microenvironment, providing the appropriate
conditions for neoplastic cell growth and invasion. Desmoid tumors (DT),
also called aggressive fibromatosis, are rare, locally invasive soft
tissue tumors that consist of fibroblastic cells embedded in
extracellular matrix. Identification of the stromal cells to study
tumor-stroma interactions is difficult due to both populations displaying
a fibroblastic phenotype, and no cell marker exists that reliably
differentiates between the two populations.

Majority of DT arise sporadically due to somatic activating mutations in
beta-catenin (CTNNB1), a major effector molecule of canonical Wnt
signaling. We established single cell derived colonies from multiple DT
samples and characterized the beta-catenin mutation status of each clone
by Sanger sequencing. Indeed, we were able to establish both mutant and
non-mutant colonies from DT samples. Quantitative PCR for beta-catenin
targets AXIN2 and LEF1 confirmed differential activity between the mutant
and non-mutant colonies. The specific CTNNB1 codon mutation had no
difference on beta-catenin transcriptional activity.

We next performed a high throughput surface antigen screen to identify
cell markers that can distinguish between the two subpopulations. Our
screen found CD142 to be uniquely expressed by the mutant colonies, while
the non-mutant colonies uniquely expressed Podoplanin. Quantitative PCR
confirmed the differential expression of these markers. Furthermore, the
CD142-positive population in heterogeneous DT samples correlated with
their mutation frequency. Importantly, CD142-based cell sorting allowed
the isolation of the mutant subpopulation even in samples that appeared
as wild-type by Sanger sequencing.

We also studied the expression of secreted factors in our mutant and
non-mutant populations. We observed that CTHRC1, a ligand related to the
Wnt/PCP pathway, is highly elevated exclusively in the mutant
subpopulations. Recombinant CTHRC1 increased the proliferation rate of DT
primary cultures, as measured by BrdU incorporation, while neutralizing
antibodies against CTHRC1 decreased cell proliferation.

The importance of tumor-stroma interactions cannot be studied without
first identifying and characterizing the two populations. This has been
especially difficult in soft tissue sarcomas where both the neoplastic
and stromal cells exhibit a mesenchymal phenotype. Our study offers a
novel method for identifying the mutant and non-mutant subpopulations
within desmoid tumors to study how they may interact. Rapidly quantifying
tumor composition will also support efforts to understand the natural
progression of disease and how it responds to therapy.


