Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DARPP-32, a bridge between pro-inflammatory NF-kB and STAT3
signaling in gastric cancer.


Background: Gastric cancer is one of the most frequently diagnosed
malignancies with poor prognosis in the world. We have previously shown
that Dopamine and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein, Mr 32000 (DARPP-32) is a
novel cancer gene, which is overexpressed in 2/3 of gastric cancers
patients; and associated with increased cancer cell survival, drug
resistance, and invasion. However, the mechanisms of how DARPP-32
promotes gastric carcinogenesis remain unclear.

Methods: DARPP-32 promoter activity and stat3 activity were measured by
luciferase. The mRNA and protein levels were evaluated by quantitative
real-time PCR and Western blot analysis. The association between DARPP-32
and STAT3 was evaluated by immunofluorescence. SOCS3 degradation was
analyzed by Ubiquitination Assay. The interaction between DARPP-32 and
IGF1R was evaluated by co-immunoprecipitation assays.

Results: Promoter analysis of DARPP-32 indicated the presence of NF-κB
transcription factor putative binding sites in the DARPP-32 promoter
region. We cloned the DARPP-32 promoter into the luciferase reporter
(pGL3-Luc). TNF-α treatment induced DARPP-32 reporter activity (P
Results: Promoter analysis of DARPP-32 indicated the presence of NF-κB
transcription factor putative binding sites in the DARPP-32 promoter
region. We cloned the DARPP-32 promoter into the luciferase reporter
(pGL3-Luc). TNF-α treatment induced DARPP-32 reporter activity (P <
0.01). Using deletion constructs of DARPP-32 promoter and ChIP assay, we
demonstrated that the sequence (-996 to -1008 bp), containing putative
NF-κB binding sites, is the most active region. We confirmed that
activation of NF-kB by TNF-α and H.pylori infection leads to induction
of DARPP-32 mRNA and protein level. Interestingly, we found that DARPP-32
induction leads to increased phosphorylation of STAT3 and activation of
STAT3 luciferase reporter (PResults: Promoter analysis of DARPP-32
indicated the presence of NF-κB transcription factor putative binding
sites in the DARPP-32 promoter region. We cloned the DARPP-32 promoter
into the luciferase reporter (pGL3-Luc). TNF-α treatment induced
DARPP-32 reporter activity (P < 0.01). Using deletion constructs of
DARPP-32 promoter and ChIP assay, we demonstrated that the sequence (-996
to -1008 bp), containing putative NF-κB binding sites, is the most
active region. We confirmed that activation of NF-kB by TNF-α and
H.pylori infection leads to induction of DARPP-32 mRNA and protein level.
Interestingly, we found that DARPP-32 induction leads to increased
phosphorylation of STAT3 and activation of STAT3 luciferase reporter
(P<0.01). We detected a decrease in the protein level of SOC3, a negative
regulator of STAT3. DARPP-32 shortened the SOCS3 protein half-life by
mediating an increase in phosphorylation and ubiquitination of the SOCS3
protein following treatment with MG132 and IL6. Furthermore, we detected
an increase in SRC and IGF1R phosphorylation in DARPP-32-overexpressing
cells. SRC inhibitor (Dasatinib) and SRC-siRNA blocked DARPP-32-induced
activation of STAT3. We further examined our hypothesis that DARPP-32
could interact with IGF1R and enhance IGF1R autophosphorylation. Using
co-immunoprecipitation, we found that DARPP-32 and IGF1R co-exist in the
same protein complex.

Conclusion: We demonstrated, for the first time, the role of NF-κB in
DARPP-32 transcriptional regulation. The in vitro studies indicate that
DARPP-32 plays a role in activation of STAT3 signaling through inhibition
of SOCS3 and activation of IGF1R and SRC. DARPP-32 interacted with IGF1R,
which increasing the phosphorylation of IGF1R and SRC, and induced SOCS3
phosphorylation and degradation. This cascade of events leads to STAT3
activation in gastric cancer cells. We propose DARPP-32 as an important
signaling bridge between NF-kB and STAT3 in response to pro-inflammatory
signaling in gastric carcinogenesis.


