Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of the BRCA2 variant, K3326X.


Individuals with germline mutations in the breast cancer susceptibility
gene, BRCA2, have an approximate 70% risk of developing breast cancer, a
30% risk of developing ovarian cancer, a 20-fold increased risk of
developing prostate cancer, and a 10-fold risk of developing pancreatic
cancer during their lifetime. Loss of function germline mutations in
BRCA2 affect its role in the homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair
pathway leading to significant genomic instability. In addition to
deleterious truncating mutations, several sequence variants, collectively
called Variants of Unknown Significance (VUS), have been identified and
are distributed along its length. One such variant is rs11571833, a
nonsense mutation in the last exon (c.9976A>T, K3326X), resulting in the
loss of the C-terminal 93 amino acid residues in BRCA2. This truncated
variant has been previously described as a polymorphism that does not
increase susceptibility to breast and ovarian cancers, and as a neutral
unclassified variant non-deleterious to its function. However, recent
studies identified K3326X to be enriched in breast cancer cases and to
increase the risk for lung, pancreatic, ovarian, and upper aero-digestive
tract cancers. Preliminary data, obtained from the Rutgers Cancer
Institute of New Jersey breast cancer case-control study, identified
K3326X enrichment in 1.25% of cases compared to 0.7% of controls. Several
of the carriers had second primaries and displayed a trend toward
increased number of family members diagnosed with colon cancer. Notably,
K3326X was also identified in 1.38% (11 of 796) of our
histologically-diverse cohort of genomically-profiled tumors that
included cancers of the breast, ovarian/fallopian tube, lung, vulvar,
cancer of unknown primary, and one breast cancer case having prolonged
response to platinum-based therapy. Thus, K3326X may represent a
functional loss of wild type BRCA2 function, as we observe concomitant
loss of heterozygosity at this locus. In a preliminary study, we
evaluated the K3326X variant, in vitro, in a functional DR-GFP-based
reporter assay measuring HR. Our data reveal the BRCA2 K3326X variant to
be impaired in the HR pathway indicating a loss of wild-type protein
function. We will also evaluate cell viability of the K3326X variant in
the presence of DNA damaging drugs like cisplatin, poly-ADP ribose
polymerase inhibitors and mitomycin C. Future studies will also
incorporate a retrospective evaluation of tumor specimens that have
undergone comprehensive genomic profiling. These data would indicate that
BRCA2 K3326X represents a functional hypomorphic variant that may have
implications in therapeutic approaches and cancer risk evaluations across
a spectrum of tumor types.


