Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Outcome prediction in colorectal cancer using digitized tumor
samples and machine learning.


Additional prognostic stratification of colorectal cancer patients is
needed to improve management of patients. Visual microscopic assessment
of tumor samples remains the standard method for disease subtyping.
However, visual analysis of samples is subjective and weakly reproducible
due to inter- and intra-observer variations. Recent progress within
machine learning, especially its novel branch called deep learning,
enables accurate evaluation of complex patterns observed in microscopic
tissue images. Here, we combined deep learning techniques to evaluate a
set of digitized formalin fixed paraffin embedded hematoxylin-eosin
stained tumor tissue microarray (TMA) samples from 420 randomly selected
patients with colorectal cancer. For each patient a set of
clinicopathological characteristics including histological grade, Dukes
stage and age at diagnosis are available as well as outcome data. Using
convolutional neural networks and Long Short-Term Memory networks we
validated the predictive power of the colorectal TMAs with regards to
patient outcome. Univariate Cox proportional hazard regression analysis
demonstrated that the prognostic accuracy of the deep learning algorithm
on TMAs (hazard ratio 2.3; CI 95% 1.79-3.03) outperforms visual
histological grading performed by a certified pathologist on a whole
slide level (hazard ratio 1.65; CI 95% 1.30-2.15). In multivariate Cox
proportional hazard regression, the deep learning based model was a
prognostic factor, independent of histological grade, Dukes stage and age
at diagnosis (Wald p-value Additional prognostic stratification of
colorectal cancer patients is needed to improve management of patients.
Visual microscopic assessment of tumor samples remains the standard
method for disease subtyping. However, visual analysis of samples is
subjective and weakly reproducible due to inter- and intra-observer
variations. Recent progress within machine learning, especially its novel
branch called deep learning, enables accurate evaluation of complex
patterns observed in microscopic tissue images. Here, we combined deep
learning techniques to evaluate a set of digitized formalin fixed
paraffin embedded hematoxylin-eosin stained tumor tissue microarray (TMA)
samples from 420 randomly selected patients with colorectal cancer. For
each patient a set of clinicopathological characteristics including
histological grade, Dukes stage and age at diagnosis are available as
well as outcome data. Using convolutional neural networks and Long
Short-Term Memory networks we validated the predictive power of the
colorectal TMAs with regards to patient outcome. Univariate Cox
proportional hazard regression analysis demonstrated that the prognostic
accuracy of the deep learning algorithm on TMAs (hazard ratio 2.3; CI 95%
1.79-3.03) outperforms visual histological grading performed by a
certified pathologist on a whole slide level (hazard ratio 1.65; CI 95%
1.30-2.15). In multivariate Cox proportional hazard regression, the deep
learning based model was a prognostic factor, independent of histological
grade, Dukes stage and age at diagnosis (Wald p-value < 0.001). Thus, we
demonstrate that novel deep learning models can serve as digital
prognostic biomarkers in colorectal cancer.


