Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Centromere gene misregulation is a major source of chromosomal
instability in human cancers and predicts patient response to specific
therapies.


Chromosomal instability (CIN) is a cancer hallmark that contributes to
tumor heterogeneity and other malignant properties. Aberrant centromere
function causes CIN through chromosome missegregation in experimental
systems. CENP-A is a histone H3 variant found at centromeres. Centromere
is regulated epigenetically by replenishing CENP-A chromatin during cell
divisions. This process requires a dedicated CENP-A chaperone called
HJURP and other factors. However, we are lack of a comprehensive
understanding about whether these proteins are involved in clinical
cancers, and how centromere misregulation may contribute to cancer
development. Here, basing on our previous findings in Drosophila
melanogaster, we identified a conserved mutual protection mechanism
between CENP-A and HJURP between flies and human cells, where their
physical interaction protects each other from being targeted for
degradation. Moreover, we showed that HJURP stability is regulated both
in vitro and in vivo by the Anaphase Promoting Complex/Cyclosome (APC/C)
ubiquitin E3 ligase. We further demonstrated that CENP-A and APC/C
compete for the same binding site on HJURP. Using isogenic breast cancer
cell culture progression series, we found that many centromere proteins
are progressively overexpressed at the protein level during
tumorigenesis. These results led us to hypothesize that overexpression of
centromere proteins may cause centromere misregulation and CIN, and
contribute to human cancers. To test the idea, we developed a CES
(Centromere and kinetochore gene Expression Score) signature that
quantitates the mRNA levels of 14 key genes required for centromere
structure in cancers. High tumor CES values strongly correlate with
increased copy number alterations and mutation frequencies across many
cancer types, and prognosticate poor patient survival for many cancers.
High CES values also signify high levels of genomic instability that
sensitize cancer cells to additional genotoxicity. Indeed, the CES
signature forecasts patient response to adjuvant chemo- or radiotherapy
for lung and breast cancers. In conclusion, we demonstrate regulation of
HJURP by APC/C ubiquitin E3 ligase, mutual protection between the key
centromere proteins CENP-A and HJURP, and a mode of misregulation of
centromere protein genes in human cancers. We show the efficacy of the
CES signature as a potential biomarker to identify patients who likely
respond to specific treatments, thus spare the non-responding patients
from less effective treatments. These findings are expected to help
address the over-treatment problem prevalent in cancer treatments. Our
approach validates the critical importance of incorporating basic
knowledge of chromosome segregation pathways into cancer research and
clinical applications.


