Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploratory serum biomarker analysis in gastric cancer patients
treated with GS-5745, an MMP9 Inhibitor, in combination with mFOLFOX6.


In the tumor microenvironment, matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) cleaves
and activates substrates such as VEGF, IL8 and TGFβ that promote tumor
growth through angiogenesis and immune suppression. Data from preclinical
models supports the hypothesis that inhibition of MMP9 reduces local
immune suppression, resulting in increased anti-tumor immunity. GS-5745
is a monoclonal antibody in clinical development that is a selective
inhibitor of MMP9. The effect of GS-5745 + mFOLFOX6 (GS+chemo) on
systemic biomarkers related to MMP9 activity, and immune suppression and
activation, was explored in samples from patients in the gastric cancer
cohort of the phase 1b study, NCT01803282.

Immunoassay analysis of a set of serum proteins based on MMP9 biology and
preclinical data (including 10 MMP9 substrates, 5 MMP/TIMPs and 25
inflammatory markers) are reported; exploratory analyses of a larger set
will be presented. Total and GS-5745-free MMP9 was measured using a
proprietary validated assay. Serum was collected at baseline and the
start of every 28-day cycle from 40 gastric cancer patients treated with
GS+chemo every 2 weeks. Biomarker area under the curve (AUC) of fold
change over time was tested using the Wilcoxon signed rank test. Multiple
testing adjustment was based on false discovery rate.

GS+chemo treatment resulted in a significant decrease of 3 MMP9
substrates in serum (TGFβ, VEGF and CXCL5), with non-significant trends
observed for 3 others (Kit-L, IL8 and CXCL1). MMP3, associated with MMP9
activation, was significantly increased by the combination treatment.
MMP2 (an MMP9 homolog) and its binding partner, TIMP2, also showed an
increased trend over time. All MMP9 was bound by GS-5745 after one cycle
of GS+chemo treatment, but total MMP9 was unchanged. Analysis of
biomarkers in the inflammatory set primarily identified trends; factors
(10) related to immunosuppressive monocyte chemoattraction or activation
decreased, whereas a few markers (3) of immune activation increased.
TIMP-2 and TPO were identified by random forests as key markers of a
potential baseline biomarker signature to distinguish responders from
non-responders (best overall response: n=20 and 9, respectively) with
82.8% accuracy (AUC of ROC=0.83).

This exploratory analysis of serum proteins in gastric cancer patients
treated with GS+chemo identified pharmacodynamic changes in biomarkers
related to MMP9 biology, immune suppression and innate inflammation,
consistent with the hypothesis of MMP9-inhibition based upon preclinical
models. Modulation of these systemic biomarkers may reflect inhibition of
MMP9 activity in the tumor consequent with reduced suppression of
anti-tumor immunity; however, conclusions from this study are limited by
the fact that all patients were treated with GS+chemo. Confirmation of
these findings will require a controlled prospective study.

First two authors contributed equally.


