Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GPER1 expression is modulation by D-glucose concentration in
estrogen-responsive cancer and tumor cells.


G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER1, aka GPR30), is a
7-transmembrane receptor that mediates rapid cell signaling events
stimulated by 17β-estradiol (E2) in cancer and tumor cells. In breast
cancer cells, GPER1 mediates E2-induced CTGF-dependent cell migration and
cyclin E expression resulting in cell cycle progression. GPER1 has also
been shown to mediate antiproliferative cell signaling such as
p53-dependent inhibition of cell cycle progression in breast cancer cells
treated with the GPER1-specific agonist G1 and the inhibition of IGF-1R
signaling in tamoxifen-treated breast cancer cells. In addition to E2,
both natural and synthetic compounds have been shown to activate GPER1 in
breast cancer cells. GPER1 has also been shown to regulate cell signaling
in cells that lack ERα. For example, GPER1 is antiproliferative in
triple-negative breast cancer cells. While the importance of GPER1 in the
modulation of E2-responsive tumor and cancer cells as been demonstrated,
there is very little information regarding the regulation of GPER1
expression in these cell types. The work presented here is aimed at
determining the molecular mechanisms that regulate GPER1 expression. To
determine if GPER1 expression is sensitive to D-glucose concentration in
breast cancer cells, MCF-7 and T47D human breast cancer cells were
cultured in media containing increasing concentrations of D-glucose and
GPER1 expression was measured using real-time PCR and immunoblot. Data
from these experiments showed that GPER1 expression was significantly
increased in breast cancer cells cultured in media containing low
D-glucose concentrations (0 and 2.5mM) and significantly reduced in media
containing high D-glucose (25 mM). Since low D-glucose concentration is
known to activate the energy-sensing AMP kinase (AMPK), the observed
GPER1 induction in low D-glucose conditions was determined after
pretreatment with the AMPK inhibitor compound C. GPER1 expression was
inhibited in both MCF-7 and T47D breast cancer cells cultured in low
D-glucose media when pretreated with compound C. Additionally, the AMPK
activator metformin induced GPER1 expression in MCF-7 and T47D breast
cancer cells cultured in high D-glucose (25mM) conditions. These data
suggest that AMPK mediates GPER1 expression in cells cultured in low
D-glucose. The D-glucose sensitivity of GPER1 expression was also
determined in the Eker rat-derived uterine leiomyoma cells (ELT-3 and
ELT-6) which are characterized by hyperactive AMPK. In both ELT-3 and
ELT-6 cells, GPER1 expression was not sensitive to D-glucose
concentration nor was the activation state of AMPK sensitive to D-glucose
concentrations. However, the inhibition of AMPK by compound C in both
ELT-3 and ELT-6 cells resulted in decreased GPER1 expression. These
findings reveal a previously unknown mechanism that regulates GPER1
expression in E2-responsive tumor and cancer cells.


