Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Splicing factors and the role of Navitoclax in drug-resistant
ovarian cancer.


Alternative RNA splicing allows processing of a pre-mRNA into various
mature mRNAs. In this way multiple protein products can be derived from a
single gene. In cancer it is known that specific splice variants may
facilitate malignant transformation and therapeutic resistance. Our
current studies focus on the problem of drug resistance in ovarian cancer
and we have approached this in a variety of ways. Following sequencing
analysis of a panel of ovarian cancer cell lines we identified the RNA
splicing factors TCERG and SRSF2 as being reduced in drug resistant
ovarian cancer cell lines, compared with their drug sensitive
counterpart. TCERG is important in regulating the splicing of variant
forms of the BClx gene: BClxL (long form) and BClxs (short form). There
are clear implications for drug resistance whereby low TCERG results in
reduced BClx splicing to yield the pro-apoptotic BClxs form. In the
SKOV-3 human ovarian cancer cell line panel both paclitaxel resistant
SKOV-3TaxR and SKOV-3CR carboplatin resistant cells showed reduced levels
of TCERG mRNA using qPCR analysis. In addition, qPCR analysis for BClxl
and BClxs levels indicated increased ratio of long:short form with drug
resistance: SKOV-3 parent line ratio 1.0; SKOV-3TaxR 1.8; SKOV-3CR 1.65.
Western immunoblotting showed relatively decreased levels of Bax protein
in drug resistant versus drug sensitive cell line in line with a reduced
apoptotic reduced. We then explored the use of Navitoclax (ABT0263), the
small-molecule Bcl-2 family protein inhibitor for Bcl-xL, Bcl-2 and Bcl-w
in our cell line panel. Navitoclax in combination with paclitaxel for 48h
gave rise to significantly increased apoptotic response in drug-resistant
versus drug sensitive ovarian cancer cell line counterparts, using the
Annexin V assay with PI, indicative of re-sensitisation to paclitaxel.
Synergistic effects were also seen for the parental cell line but the
effects were more marked for the resistant cell lines. Our future work
will also involve the use of clinical biopsies of ovarian cancer cases.


