Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gut microbiota regulates cisplatin mediated cachexia and systemic
toxicity.


Chemotherapy induced toxicity severely affect the cancer survivors and
lowers the quality of life. By 2020, there will be more than 18 million
of cancer survivors all over the world. Majority of them might develop
long term nephrotoxicity, ototoxicity and gut toxicity. In addition,
chemotherapy may also facilitate the initiation and progression of
cachexia. Recent studies have shown that gut microbiota modulates the
efficacy of anti-cancer chemotherapy, however very limited knowledge is
available regarding the role of gut microbiota in regulating systemic
toxicity and cachexia. We hypothesized that gut microbiota modulates
cisplatin induced systemic toxicity as well as cachexia. Four groups
(n=10 in each group) of 6-8 weeks old C57B/6 mice were treated with
cisplatin, cisplatin+antibiotics cocktails (ABX), ABX only and control.
ABX cocktail contained primaxin, vancomycin and neomycin. This experiment
was validated using C57B/6 germ free mice. We performed anti-p-γ-H2AX
based toxicity assay for DNA damage. In addition, we performed
immunohistochemistry for studying cachexia. H&E staining and DNA damage
were assessed by light and super resolution confocal microscopy (Zeiss
880) and quantified by 3-D reconstruction using IMARIS. We also performed
high content imaging to evaluate DNA damage in bone marrow and spleen.
Body weight and kidney blood content were also analyzed to determine the
degree of toxicity. Depletion of gut microbiota significantly reduced
nephrotoxicity and gut toxicity. In addition, we found that depletion of
gut microbiota prevents muscle and adipose tissue loss by down-regulating
UCP-1and PGC-1α in adipose tissue and MURF-1 and Atrogin-1 in muscle.
Experiments are confirmed by using Germ free mice. Our data suggest that
modulation of gut microbiota may be utilized to reduce chemotherapy
associated cachexia and systemic toxicity.


