Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired resistance to cetuximab is mediated by HER3 activation in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.


Cetuximab, an EGFR monocloanal antibody, is commonly known to be an
effective treatment agent in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC). However, despite the clinical efficacy of cetuximab, a majority
of patients with good initial response still suffer from side effects as
the acquired resistance to cetuximab. To understand the mechanisms of
acquired resistance to cetuximab, we developed a model by exposing a head
and neck cancer cell line Cal27 to increasing concentrations of cetuximab
and established cetuximab-resistant clones (CETr) derived from the
cetuximab sensitive (CETp). We examined how the acquired resistance in
the CETr influenced the signaling pathway compared to the CETp. We
investigated the effect of lapatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor
inhibiting HER3, with or without cetuximab combination on CETr clones and
in a xenograft mouse model. Cetuximab-resistant(CETr) clones showed
robust overexpression on the HER family receptors HER3. CETr clones also
expressed upregulated EGFR, HER2, and HER3 activation resulting in
activation of PI3K/ATK and ERK signaling. We also showed that CETr clones
exhibited increased EGFR/HER3 dimerization. Treatment of cetuximab and
siHER3 RNA together reduced EGFR activation in CETr clones to
re-sensitize cells against cetuximab and robustly decreased cell
proliferation. Combined treatment of CETr clones with cetuximab and
lapatinib led to potent anti-proliferative effects. Co-treatment with
cetuximab and lapatinib blocked EGFR, HER2 and HER3 activities and
inhibited downstream signaling pathways. Co-treatment resulted in
suppression of cell growth more effectively than each drug alone and
induced apoptotic cell death through mitochondrial ROS. Furthermore,
Co-treatment with cetuximab and lapatinib also led to suppression of
tumor growth in orthotopic xenograft mouse model of oral tongue cancer.
Our results suggested the upregulation of HER3 as a mechanism underlying
resistance to cetuximab in HNSCC, supporting further clinical treatment
strategy for tumors displaying acquired resistance to cetuximab.


