Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UCART22: allogenic adoptive immunotherapy of leukemia by targeting
CD22 with CAR T-cells.


Adoptive immunotherapy using autologous T-cells endowed with chimeric
antigen receptors (CARs) has given rise to long-term durable remissions
and remarkable objective response rates in patients with refractory
leukemia, raising hopes that a wider application of CAR technology may
lead to a new paradigm in cancer treatment. However, a limitation of the
current autologous approach is that CAR T-cells must be manufactured on a
"per patient basis". To overcome this limitation, we have developed a
standardized platform for manufacturing T-cells from third-party healthy
donors to generate allogeneic "off-the-shelf" engineered CAR+
T-cell-based frozen products.

Our allogenic platform utilizes the Transcription Activator-Like Effector
Nuclease (TALEN) gene editing technology to inactivate the TCRα constant
(TRAC) gene, significantly reducing the potential for T-cells bearing
alloreactive TCR’s to mediate Graft-versus-Host Disease (GvHD). We have
previously demonstrated the precise and efficient disruption of the the
TRAC gene by gene editing, yielding up to 85% of TCRαβ-negative cells.
This allows the production of TCRαβ-deficient T-cells that no longer
mediate alloreactivity in a xeno-GvHD mouse model. In the clinic, the
proof of concept of the applicability of our allogeneic platform was
achieved with early compassionate use for patients treated with UCART19,
an allogeneic engineered CAR T-cell product directed against CD19.
UCART19 clinical trials are currently ongoing.

Here, we have developed T-cells targeting CD22 which is expressed on
tumor cells from the majority of patients with B-cells leukemia. In a
first step, we have screened multiple antigen recognition domains in the
context of different CAR architectures to identify effective CAR
candidates displaying activity against cells expressing variable levels
of the CD22 antigen. As a safety feature, T-cells are engineered to
co-express a depletion gene, rendering them sensitive to the monoclonal
antibody rituximab. Several constructs of depletion genes have been
evaluated in the context of the CD22 CAR. In addition, experiments in an
orthotopic ALL mouse model using UCART22 cells demonstrated important
anti-tumor activity in vivo.

The ability to carry out large scale manufacturing of allogeneic,
non-alloreactive CD22 specific T-cells from a single healthy donor can
offer the possibility of an off-the-shelf treatment that would be
immediately available for administration to a large number of leukemic
patients. UCART22 could also offer an alternative to patients who may
relapse with CD19-negative tumors after CD19 CAR T-cell treatment.


