Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Homogeneous BTK occupancy assay for pharmacodynamic assessment of
GS-4059 target engagement.


Burton’s Tyrosine Kinase (BTK) plays an important role in B cell
signaling, cell proliferation and survival. Hence, it is an attractive
target for therapeutic intervention in B cell malignancies and autoimmune
disorders. GS-4059 (ONO-4059) is a covalent, potent and selective
inhibitor of BTK in clinical development for CLL, NHL, and rheumatoid
arthritis. Accurate measurement of target coverage in early stage
clinical studies is critical to informing dose selection for GS-4059 in
more advanced clinical studies. We developed a novel duplex homogeneous
BTK occupancy assay to enable quantitative measurement of GS-4059 binding
to human BTK for assessing target coverage in the clinic. The assay is
based on Time-Resolved Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (TR-FRET)
and simultaneously measures the levels of free BTK (BTK that is not bound
to GS-4059 in treated human PBMCs ex vivo or PBMCs from patients treated
with GS-4059 in clinical studies) as well as the levels of total BTK
protein. We took advantage of the dual wavelength emission property of
Terbium (Tb) to serve as energy donor for 2 fluorescent energy acceptors
with distinct excitation and emission spectra. We designed and
synthesized a GS-4059 analog with biotin conjugate which showed equal
potency to GS-4059, suggesting that it binds in the same BTK pocket. To
detect free BTK, a Tb-coupled anti-BTK antibody was used as the FRET
energy donor and G2-strepavidin-bound biotinylated GS-4059 as the energy
acceptor. Total BTK was detected in the same well with a second
D2-coupled anti-BTK antibody that binds to a different BTK epitope as the
FRET energy acceptor. The use of a common detection reagent in this
multiplexed format allows measurement of free and total BTK levels in the
same well data. The assay was characterized and qualified using full
length purified recombinant human BTK protein and PBMCs derived from
healthy volunteers and CLL patients. Preliminary data indicate the assay
is also suitable for assessing BTK occupancy in bone marrow derived
cells. Using this assay, we evaluated the BTK synthesis rate following a
1 hour high dose (5 μM) treatment of GS-4059 in BTK inhibitor resistant
ABC-DLBCL and GCB-DLBCL tumor cells. While negligible new BTK synthesis
was observed in BTK inhibitor sensitive DLBCL cells, the free BTK level
in the inhibitor resistant tumor cells recovered rapidly post-treatment.
In summary, we have established a homogeneous TR-FRET based BTK occupancy
assay that simultaneously measures free and total BTK levels in the same
well, yielding quantitative BTK occupancy data to support GS-4059
clinical development.


