Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of resistance to palbociclib and aromatase inhibitors
in hormone receptor positive breast cancer.


Estrogen receptor-positive (HR+) breast cancer is the most common form of
breast cancer that is accountable for the majority of breast cancer
mortality. Currently, the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor palbociclib
in combination with endocrine therapy represents the new standard first
and second line therapy for patients with metastatic HR+ breast cancer.
While palbociclib has been shown to significantly improved progression
free survival in combination with aromatase inhibitor (AI) and
fulvestrant, resistance will inevitably occur in patients with metastatic
breast cancer. However, the mechanisms of resistance to the combination
of palbociclib and AI remain largely unknown. It is also unclear whether
resistance mechanisms would be the same if palbociclib was given as first
line treatment in combination with letrozole vs. if palbociclib was given
as second line treatment after letrozole resistance had already occurred.
To address this, previously well established and well characterizied
letrozole-sensitive MCF7Ca cells and letrozole-resistant LTLTCa cells
were subjected to continuous, long term treatment with increasing doses
of letrozole and palbociclib until resistance to both drugs was achieved
(MCF7Calet+palb and LTLTCapalb, respectively). Preliminary MTT cell
viability assays indicate palbociclib IC50s of 750 nM in MCF7Ca and
LTLTCa cells vs. 21 uM in palbociclib and letrozole-resistant cells.
First line and second line palbociclib resistance correlated with changes
in morphology, protein expression, and cancer stem cell characteristics.
Under phase contrast microscopy, first line and second line
palbociclib-resistant MCF7Ca and LTLTCa cells were larger in size, more
irregular in shape, and tended not to grow in epithelial cell-like groups
compared to palbociclib-sensitive MCF7Ca and letrozole cells, with
second-line palbociclib resistant cells exhibiting these characteristics
the most. Western blot showed that ER protein expression in ER+/HER2-
MCF7Ca cells decreased with first line palbociclib and letrozole
resistance, and that both ER and HER2 protein expression were decreased
with second line palbociclib resistance in ERlow/HER2+ LTLTCa cells.
Lastly, mammosphere assays demonstrated increasing percentage of cancer
stem cells with letrozole resistance alone (4 per 1000 cells plated
MCF7Ca vs. 58 per 1000 planted LTLTCa) and with palbociclib and
palbociclib resistance (317 per 1000 cells plated MCF7Ca and 202 per 1000
cells plated LTLTCa cells). Overall, these results indicate that 1)
resistance to palbociclib, whether as first line or second line treatment
has significant effects on breast cancer cells that may be relevant to
patient diagnosis and treatment.


