Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of IMPACT in survival of cancer cells during tryptophan
deprivation by immunosuppressive enzyme indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase
(IDO1).


A broad range of human malignancies overexpress an enzyme called
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) to suppress antitumor immunity which
associates with poor patient prognosis. One mechanism whereby IDO1
activity suppresses the host’s immune cells is mediated by deprivation
of the essential amino acid tryptophan (Trp) which raises an intriguing
question. How do the cancer cells overcome low levels of the essential
amino acid when the immune T-cells are triggered to self-destruct? A
protein called IMPACT (product of IMPrinted gene with AnCienT domain) was
reported to confer skin cells and neuronal cells increased survival in
Trp-deprived environments. Based on these reports, we hypothesise that
cancer cells hijack IMPACT to gain survival advantage in Trp-deprived
environments. To obtain evidence for this hypothesis, we analysed
publicly available genomics datasets and performed experimental assays.

Murine GL261 glioblastoma cells overexpressing a full-length mouse IMPACT
gene (GL261-IMPACT) were generated by lipofection. IMPACT overexpression
was confirmed by Western blot. Metabolic activity and survival of the
GL261 cells in Trp deprivation experiments were evaluated using MTT assay
and staining with live/dead indicators fluorescein diacetate and
propidium iodide, respectively.

Meta-analysis of the publicly available RNA-sequencing datasets, The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Genotype Tissue Expression (GTEx),
provided evidence that IMPACT was overexpressed in the majority of the 24
analysed human cancers compared to their non-malignant tissue
counterparts. Consistent with the high IMPACT expression in prostate
cancer patients, 12-25% prostate tumors show amplification of the IMPACT
gene (source: cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics). In addition, we found an
association of high IMPACT expression with poorer survival for certain
leukemia and lung cancer patients in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)
portal. To obtain experimental evidence that IMPACT protects cancer cells
during Trp deprivation, GL261-IMPACT cells were cultured in media
containing 2.5 - 50 μM Trp. Metabolic activity of GL261-IMPACT cells
decreased at a slower rate than that of GL261-wild-type cells after 3 to
5 days in media containing limiting Trp concentration (2.5 - 10 μM). On
day 5, GL261-wild-type and GL261-IMPACT cells cultivated in 10 μM Trp
showed 4.5% and 23% metabolic activity (p = 2.8x10-8), respectively,
relative to the same cells grown in 50 μM Trp. Fluorescence microscopy
utilising live/dead staining showed that after 5 days of incubation at
limiting Trp concentrations (5 - 10 μM), the majority of GL261-wild-type
cells were non-viable whereas GL261-IMPACT cells were predominantly
viable.

Our initial results support the hypothesis that IMPACT aids cancer cells
to overcome periods of tryptophan deprivation.


