Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NOTCH ligand-based therapeutics for immunomodulation in cancer and
organ transplantation.


We demonstrated in human and mouse studies that tumor-induced modulation
of Notch ligand expression and Notch signaling in hematopoietic
compartment contributes to tumor immune escape. Down-regulation of
delta-like ligands (DLL) leads to defects in T cell development and T
helper (Th1) cell differentiation with the prevalence of regulatory T
cell (Treg) generation.

To determine the roles of Notch ligands in antigen-presenting dendritic
cells in regulation of antitumor immune responses we generated a set of
lineage-specific knock-out mice lacking one of the Notch ligands in
CD11c+ dendritic cells (DC). We are developing and testing a set of
reagents for clinical application for ligand-specific activation or
inhibition of Notch signaling to stimulate or inhibit, respectively,
various types of immune responses for applications in oncology and immune
diseases.

Mice with DLL1 insufficiency in DC demonstrated remarkably accelerated
growth of Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) tumor, and reduced survival compared
to wild type animals. This associated with impaired anti-tumor immune
responses indicated by the decreased tumor infiltration by
IFNγ-producing T cells. Jagged2 knockout did not cause any significant
alterations. Notch ligand expression in antigen-presenting cells was
identified as a “checkpoint” regulating the type of immune response.
Data reveal that expression of Notch ligands by antigen-presenting cells
is an important immune response specifying mechanism and that
ligand-specific Notch signaling could be a valuable therapeutic target.

Reagents for the pharmacological modulation of immune responses based on
Notch ligand constructs is proposed. Our cell-based study showed that
pharmacological activation of Notch ligands required multivalent
receptor-ligand interaction, whereas soluble ligands acted as competitive
Notch inhibitors. We have generated reagents that comprise specific
domains of the DLL1 in multivalent or monovalent form. Therapeutic
inhibition of Notch by monovalent DLL1-based reagent accelerated LLC
tumor growth and attenuated T cell-mediated anti-tumor immune response.
In a heart transplantation mouse model, monovalent DLL1 reagent
significantly prolonged allograft survival by inhibiting Th1 effector and
memory T cell differentiation. Multivalent forms of DLL1 effectively
stimulated Notch signaling in T cell cultures and enhanced IFNγ
production, whereas monovalent reagent had opposite effects.

Pharmacological up-regulation of DLL1-mediated Notch signaling with
multivalent forms of ligand represents an efficient strategy for the
enhancement of anti-tumor immunity and targeting multiple mechanisms of
tumor growth. Monovalent DLL1 forms could be utilized for therapeutic
inhibition of Th1 responses in autoimmune diseases and organ
transplantation. Reagents based on the mono- and multivalent forms of
Notch ligands can be efficiently utilized for therapeutic modulation of
Notch signaling.


