Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post-transcriptional regulation on PIAS3 expression in malignant
mesothelioma.


Protein Inhibitor of Activated STAT3 (PIAS3) was originally identified as
an endogenous suppressor of STAT3 activity which can specifically
interact with activated STAT3 and block its downstream oncogenic effects.
Previous studies from our lab have shown that low PIAS3 protein
expression in mesothelioma tumors was associated with poor patient
survival. Furthermore, low PIAS3 expression in mesothelioma cell lines
correlated with higher STAT3 activity. Over-expression of PIAS3 decreased
STAT3 activity and cell growth. These findings suggest that low PIAS3
expression may play an important role in mesothelioma tumorigenesis, thus
understanding the regulatory mechanism(s) of PIAS3 expression may provide
new therapeutic strategies in mesothelioma treatment. Initially, we
examined PIAS3 expression by western blotting and RT-qPCR among six
mesothelioma cell lines (H28, 211H, H2052, H2452, HAY, YOU) and found
that while PIAS3 mRNA levels were relatively constant, PIAS3 protein
expression was highly variable. This finding indicated a potential
post-transcriptional regulation of PIAS3 expression in mesothelioma. To
investigate this further, we first examined PIAS3 protein stability in
the presence of proteasome inhibitors and cycloheximide (CHX). We
observed no increase in PIAS3 protein levels during proteasome inhibition
using either MG132 (10 μM) or bortezemib (1 μM) for up to 8 h in 211H,
H2052 and H2452 cells, whereas TP53 protein expression was increased.
Blocking translational protein synthesis with 50 or 100 μg/ml CHX for up
to 24 h also produced little change in PIAS3 protein expression in
mesothelioma cells, indicating that PIAS3 is a very stable protein. We
next explored the PIAS3 3’UTR as a potential site for translational
regulation. We initially utilized a miR microarray and computational
analysis, followed by a PIAS3 3’UTR luciferase reporter assay, to
screen miRNAs that are both increased in cells with low PIAS3 and have
seed sequences targeting the PIAS3 3’UTR and identified miR-18a as our
first candidate. Taken together, our study suggests that variable
expression of PIAS3 protein in mesothelioma is regulated by translational
control and not by protein stability.


