Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Daratumumab combined with CD38(-) natural killer cells armed with
a CS1 chimeric antigen receptor for the treatment of relapsed multiple
myeloma.


Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most frequent hematological cancer in
developed countries. The recent development of monoclonal antibodies,
including Daratumumab (Dara) approved by the FDA, is changing the
treatment algorithm of MM. However, MM still relapses and remains
incurable. Recently, chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell immunotherapy
has been successful in the clinic for the treatment of leukemia and
lymphoma. We previously show that both CS1-CAR T cells and CS1-CAR NK
cells are effective in eradicating MM cells in vitro and in vivo (Chu et
al., 2014, Leukemia and Chu et al., 2014, Clin. Cancer Res.). Both CS1
and CD38 are tumor-associated antigens expressed on the surface of MM
cancer stem-like cells, suggesting that dual targeting of CS1 and CD38
may prevent relapse. Thus, we investigated the combination therapy with
Dara and CS1-CAR NK cells for the treatment of relapsed MM. Our data
showed that CD38 is highly expressed on the surface of both NK and MM
cells. Dara induces NK cell activation, as Dara-treated NK cells display
a higher capacity to produce IFN-gamma and increased cytotoxicity against
MM, the latter of which correlated with augmented expression of the
cytolytic gene, granzyme B. Mechanistically, we found that activation of
NK cells by Dara is CD16-dependent. This is further evidenced by that
Dara also significantly induces phosphorylation of NF-kB and STAT1, the
two downstream mediators of CD16. Furthermore, Dara mediated cytotoxicity
of NK cells against MM cells through antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity (ADCC) against CD38-positive (e.g., MM1.S), but not
CD38-negative (e.g., U266), which can be blocked by a CD16 blocking Ab.
Dara-induced NK cell ADCC against CD38(+) MM MM1.S cells also leads to
increased T cell proliferation and activation in a co-culture system
including dendritic cells. However, Dara also induces apoptosis and
fratricide in NK cells. This is evidenced by the data in vitro as well as
our clinic data showing that Dara depletes NK cells in MM patients.
Cleaved Caspase-3 and cleaved PARP-1were found increased in NK cells
treated with Dara. Dara-induced apoptosis in NK cells is most likely also
through an ADCC mechanism and Dara induces apoptosis in CD16(+) NK cells
but not CD16(-) NK cells. Our data further show that Dara activates but
does not induce apoptosis in CD38(-) NK cells. Thus, we hypothesize that
the combination of Dara and CD38(-) CS1-CAR NK cells can show a
synergistic effect on tumor eradication and prevention of MM relapse. Our
data indeed demonstrated that the combination of CS1 CAR NK cells with
CD38(-) NK cells but not with CD38+ NK cells shows a synergistic effect
to eradicate MM cells. Interestingly, we also found that when compared to
expanded CD38(+) NK cells, expanded CD38(-) NK cells have more cells, a
better capacity of proliferation and survival, a higher potential of
cytokine production, and higher cytotoxicity against MM cells.


