Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a miRNA-based signature to predict human cancer
metastasis.


Metastasis is the primary cause of death for cancer patients, and
invasive cancer cell migration is required at multiple steps during
metastasis (e.g. intravasation and extravasation). Since microRNAs
(miRNAs) have been implicated as key regulators of metastatic spread of
cancer cells, we sought to develop a miRNA signature that can be used to
predict cancer metastasis. We hypothesized that the miRNAs that are
functionally required for invasive cell migration could serve as
biomarkers to predict human cancer metastasis.

We developed an intravital imaging-based approach combined with NGS to
screen for miRNAs that are required for invasive cell migration of human
HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells. The screen-identified miRNAs were validated in
a panel of in vitro and in vivo assays for invasive migration. Microarray
analysis identified genes downregulated in transfected HT1080 cells.
Publically available databases were used to correlate the expression of
screen-identified miRNAs and the progression of multiple human cancers.
We used a qRT-PCR approach combined with machine learning to develop a
miRNA signature to predict metastasis in a 66-patient cohort of prostate
cancer.

We identified over twenty novel miRNAs that regulate directional cancer
invasion. Microarray analysis in HT1080 cells revealed that the altered
expression of metastasis-regulating miRNAs is associated with 50%
reduction in gene expression of migration and adhesion gene network
components such as integrin a4, CDC42, and transgelin).

We evaluated the potential of screen-identified miRNAs to serve as
biomarkers to predict cancer metastasis. Using publically available
databases, we found that majority of screen-identified miRNAs are
dysregulated in multiple human cancer types (e.g. prostate, breast,
ovarian and lung) and the expression of these miRNAs correlate directly
with patient disease progression. We analyzed the expression of the top
two screen-identified miRNAs in plasma samples from the PCa patient
cohort. A signature was generated using a weighted K-nearest neighbor
algorithm that provided a ROC area under the curve of 0.79 for predicting
metastatic disease.

We identified a panel of novel metastasis-regulating miRNAs that is
functionally involved in human cancer metastasis. These miRNAs have the
potential to serve as both biomarkers to predict metastasis and
potentially as therapeutic targets to block metastasis.


