Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial-type CD133+ stem-like lung cancer cells emerge higher
drug resistance through MDFIC-mediated Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway.


Background: The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been
described to promote drug resistance and cancer stem cell (CSC)
properties. Many studies demonstrated that a major proportion of
circulating tumor cell (CTC) exhibits EMT and CSC characteristics. A
recent finding revealed the presence of epithelial type (EpCAM+) CTC was
associated with poor outcome, whereas the mesenchymal type (EpCAM-) CTC
were not. We therefore hypothesize that the epithelial-type CSC may
exhibit higher drug resistant ability.

Methods: We isolated epithelial type (E+) and mesenchymal type (E-)
CD133+ cells and CD133- cells from PC14 lung cancer cell line by
fluorescence assisted cell sorting. We used western blot, QPCR,
immunofluorescence, sphere formation assay and tumor xenograft assay to
characterize the 4 subpopulations. The drug resistant ability was
determined by cell viability assay and in vivo drug response assays. The
drug resistant signature was identified by comparing the gene expression
profile from four subpopulations and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)
database. Knockdown and overexpression of MDFIC in PC14 subpopulations
were established by using lentivirus vectors. Immunoprecipitation and
subcellular fractionation were performed for drug resistant mechanism
investigation.

Results: The epithelial type PC14 CD133+ cells (E+/CD133+ subpopulation)
exhibited higher sphere formation ability and was more resistant to the
treatment of chemotherapy agents compared to the mesenchymal type CD133+
cells (E-CD133+ subpopulation) in vitro and in vivo. Gene expression
profiling showed 86 genes were bioinformatically predicted as drug
resistant signature and were correlated with the disease free survival of
the patients with lung cancer. Among these genes, the mRNA level of 20
genes were significantly related to the patient’s prognosis in the
GSE31210 dataset. Human I-mfa domain-containing protein (MDFIC) was
highly expressed in E+/CD133+ subpopulation. Knockdown and overexpression
of MDFIC modulates drug resistance ability in cancer cells. MDFIC
increased the level of free β-catenin through binding and stabilizing
the axin-GSK3-β-β-catenin destruction complex and increased the
transcriptional activity of Wnt/β-catenin signaling.

Conclusion: The epithelial-type CD133+ stem-like lung cancer cells are
more resistant to the chemotherapy through MDFIC-mediated Wnt/β-catenin
signaling activation.


