Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coordinated regulation of several microRNAs in lung cancer
patients.


Background Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for approximately
85% of all lung cancers. NSCLCs are mainly classified adenocarcinoma and
squamous cell carcinoma. It seems more and more obvious that specific
molecular analyses are necessary to elucidate the complexity of
clinically relevant phenotypes which determine the lung carcinogenesis.
This includes the role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in the disease, involved in
the complexity of gene expression regulation. Different modulator
mechanisms are involved in the biogenesis and function of miRNAs, one of
them is DNA methylation. Alterations in these mechanisms may contribute
to the tumor genesis and progression. The purpose of this study was to
assess miRNA methylation patterns in patients with NSCLC to study the
potential of coordinate regulation of miRNAs as a relevant mechanism
involved in this pathogenesis.

Materials and Methods DNA methylation of gene clusters was analyzed by
Illumina 70 subjects. The samples were divided into two cohorts. A first
cohort constituted from 47 patients who had undergone surgical resection
for clinical early stage NSCLC. A second group from 23 subjects was used
as health cohort. DNA was extracted using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit. For
each assay, 500 ng of DNA was treated with sodium bisulfate using EZ DNA
Methylation™ Kit and cleaned with ZR-96 DNA Clean-up Kit™, before
standard Illumina amplification, hybridization, and imaging steps.
Methylation data were processed using the RnBeads R package.

Results We identified two clusters clearly corregulated by methylation in
lung cancer, involving 49 miRNAs differentially hypomethylated in tumor
samples respect to control tissue. Some of these miRNAs have been
implicated in several pathways in cancer.

Conclusions Our results strongly imply hypomethylation of two miRNA
clusters, which represent key targets in unravelling of the mechanism of
lung tumorigenesis.


