Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inter-site comparison of performance of an ultra-sensitive
sequencing technology for circulating tumor DNA.


The combination of liquid biopsies and ultra-sensitive next-generation
sequencing (NGS) holds tremendous promise in oncology for the detection
and surveillance of somatic mutations that correlate with diagnosis,
prognosis, response prediction, resistance monitoring and tumor burden.
We have developed a capture-based NGS workflow that provides
ultra-sensitive detection of 4 mutation classes - single nucleotide
variants (SNVs), insertions/deletions, copy number amplifications (CNAs)
and fusions - from low input cell-free DNA isolated from plasma.
Sensitivity and specificity of 2 different AVENIO ctDNA Analysis Kits
(for Research Use Only) across 3 sites for 48 samples that included
contrived DNA blends with known mutations validated by digital PCR and
normal reference plasma samples were assessed. The AVENIO ctDNA Targeted
Kit (Targeted) was designed to detect mutations in 17 genes, across 80kb,
included in NCCN Guidelines for solid tumors plus additional variants
relevant for therapy selection. The AVENIO ctDNA Expanded Kit (Expanded)
was designed to detect mutations in 77 genes, across 200kb, associated
with solid tumor including variants relevant for clinical trial research.
Testing sites achieved 100% sensitivity for SNVs and fusions at 0.5% and
1% allelic frequency, respectively, from 30 ng of input DNA for both
kits. Median coverage of 4,200-6,400X was greater with the Targeted kit
relative to that of 2,700-3,800X with the Expanded kit. Specificity was
100% for the Targeted kit either by sample or variant. The Expanded kit
had a specificity of 91.7-100% by sample and 99.7-100% by variant. At an
expected 5X or 8X copy number amplification for multiple genes, both the
Targeted and Expanded kits were 100% sensitive and 93.1-98.4% specific
per gene. The specificity for fusion detection was 100% for both kits
down to 1% mutant allele frequency. The AVENIO ctDNA Analysis Kits for
plasma and NGS applications provide exquisite sensitivity and specificity
for the simultaneous detection of 4 different mutation classes.


