Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased MMPs activity in MDM2 overexpressing cancer cell lines.


The matrix metalloprotenases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-dependent
endopeptidase and have proteolysis activity which found to impact several
physiological and pathophysiological conditions including cancer. In
cancer, over 20 types of MMPs promote invasion, angiogenesis, metastasis,
and proliferation. For instance, MMP-9 is involved in many processes such
as wound healing, tissue remodeling and regulation of inflammation. So
far, several studies have also shown that MMP-9 is associated with poor
clinical outcome. MMP-9 can facilitate angiogenesis and metastasis by
releasing cytokines, pro-angiogenic and pro-metastatic factors.
Conversely, the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMP-1) is a
well-known negative regulator of MMPs which can also modulate other
biological functions independent of MMPs regulation. TIMP-1 dysregulation
has been shown to impact ECM integrity and potentiate metastatic ability
also. Similarly, MDM2 (Murine Double Minute) has been recognized as an
important multi-domain protooncogene which is overexpressed in many types
of cancer and is associated with poor prognosis in different tumor types
including sarcomas and carcinomas. Previously, our group reported that
MDM2 overexpression is regulating MMP-9/TIMP-1 axis in LNCaP and
LNCaP-MST (MDM2 transfected) prostate cancer cells. In order to further
analyze the status of MMP in MDM2 overexpressing cancers the fluorescence
activity assay and the zymography assay were used for measuring the
activity of MMPs including MMP-9. Immunoblotting analysis were also used
to correlate the expression levels of MDM2, MMP-9, and TIMP-1 in MDM2
overexpressing cell lines with and without Nutlin-3 (20 uM) treatment.
Our results indicated that MMP activity is elevated by 97.3 % in
LNCaP-MST cells compared to LNCaP. This may be possibly due to the near
knockdown levels of TIMP-1 that was observed in LNCaP-MST cells. However,
the Nutlin 3 treatment was able to decrease the MMP-9 levels and activity
only marginally, without elevating TIMP-1 levels. This suggests that, in
addition to MDM2, the PTEN loss in LNCaP-MST cells may also play a role
in regulating the levels of TIMP-1 and consequently the activity of
MMP-9. Furthermore, in order to verify our original speculation, we
analyzed the levels of TIMP-1 in SJSA1 and GI-101A cell lines, which are
known to overexpress MDM2 and impart aggressive metastatic abilities.
Interestingly, the levels of TIMP-1 were found to be elevated in both
SJSA1 and GI-101A cell lines compared to LNCaP-MST cells. This finding
indicates that TIMP-1 may paly dual role depending on cancer types and
the gene expression status in the tumor microenvironment. Further studies
are required to fully delineate the interplay between MDM2 and
pro-metastatic mechanisms, including the expression of TIMP-1 and MMP-9.
(The financial support from the Royal Dames of Cancer Research Inc., Ft.
Lauderdale is gratefully acknowledged).


