Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic link between phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate
3-kinase catalytic subunit alpha (PIK3CA) activity and PDL1 expression in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).


Introduction: HNSCC is an immunosuppressive disease, with multiple
functional and quantitative defects contributing to immune evasion and
tumor escape. One of the identified areas for therapy development is the
Programmed Death-1 (PD-1)/Programmed Death Ligand 1 (PD-L1) pathway, as
this pathway has been hypothesized to allow cancer cells to evade the
immune system by promoting T cell anergy and apoptosis. Pembrolizumab, a
PD-L1 inhibitor, has recently been approved for the treatment of
recurrent/metastatic HNSCC. As regulation of PD-L1 expression could play
an important role in the effectiveness of therapy, we further explored
the regulation of PD-L1 expression in HNSCC cells. Specifically, we
targeted our investigation by evaluating the effects on expression of one
of the most frequently mutated genes in HNSCC, PIK3CA. We evaluated this
with and without interferon-γ, which has previously been shown to affect
PD-L1 expression, possibly through activation of the STAT1 pathway.

Methods: HPV+ and HPV- HNSCC cell lines were grown in cell culture and
treated with selective and non-selective PI3K inhibitors, in combination
with interferon-γ. After 72 hours, cells were harvested and flow
cytometry was used to measure the expression of PD-L1. Protein expression
of various pathway intermediaries was evaluated via western blot to
better delineate the mechanism of PD-L1 upregulation.

Results: Treatment with selective PI3K inhibitors in combination with
interferon-γ in several cell lines significantly increased expression of
PD-L1, beyond the increase noted after treatment with interferon-γ
alone. Maintenance of STAT1 phosphorylation correlated with upregulation
of PD-L1 expression, while total STAT1 expression remained stable. The
majority of the cell lines maintaining STAT1 phosphorylation were HPV+,
but a few HPV- cell lines also maintained this phosphorylation with a
correlating upregulation in PD-L1 expression. Additionally, mutation in
PIK3Ca despite HPV- status was noted to maintain phosphorylation of STAT1
with upregulation of PD-L1 expression.

Conclusions: Treatment with PI3K inhibitors in combination with
interferon-γ significantly upregulated PD-L1 expression in several cell
lines, suggesting a possible synergistic effect. Since PD-L1 expression
correlated with maintenance of phosphorylation of STAT1, these results
suggest a pivotal link between PIK3CA signaling, STAT1 activity and PD-L1
expression in PIK3CA aberrant HNSCC.


