Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Examining the contribution of autophagy to TRAIL resistance in an
in vitro model of circulating breast cancer cells.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are cancer cells which dissociate from the
primary tumor and circulate within the peripheral blood, initiating
metastasis at a distant location. CTCs present a “non-invasive, liquid
biopsy”, making them attractive targets for the development of cancer
biomarkers and therapies. In order to form metastases, these cells must
undergo a phenotypic shift acquiring the ability to survive anoikis
within the blood stream and evade immune surveillance involving death
events mediated by death receptors (DRs) expressed on the surface of
cancer cells. Under physiological conditions, these DRs can be activated
by circulating cytokines such as TNF, Fas ligand, and TNF-related
apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL), triggering cell death. In vitro
studies have demonstrated that environmental stress caused by
non-adherent suspension culture conditions, similar to circulation, will
increase autophagy in cancer cell lines aiding anoikis survival. Our lab
has previously identified a link between increased autophagic rates and
decreased DR surface expression. Based on this we were interested in
determining whether increased autophagy due to non-adherent conditions
caused breast cancer cell lines to decrease death receptor expression,
evading immune surveillance and resisting death-ligand induced apoptosis.
To this end, breast cancer cell (BCC) lines were cultured in monolayer or
a non-adherent suspension condition for 7 days. Following 7 days of
culture, death receptor expression and autophagy initiation were measured
using immunoblot and flow cytometry microscopy. BCCs were treated with
TRAIL and analyzed over 24 hours for apoptosis and caspase activation. We
found that the BCC lines decreased total and surface expression of DR5
and total expression of TNFR1 over the 7 days of suspension condition.
The reduced expression of DR5 in suspension cultured BCCs resulted in a
delayed response to TRAIL mediated apoptosis, with delayed caspase
activation and PARP cleavage compared to monolayer cultured parental
cells. Under suspension condition, autophagy was initiated by increased
LC3-II/ LC3-I turnover and p62 degradation. This initiation of autophagy
is potentially due to increased expression of the mitochondrial related
proteins BNIP3 and BNIP3L, which have been implicated in anoikis
survival. This work warrants additional studies investigating the
therapeutic potential of targeting CTCs within the blood to limit
metastatic spread and disease progression in breast cancer. Our findings
suggest the potential to sensitize CTCs to anoikis and circulating death
ligands through autophagy inhibition.


