Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation loss at an enhancer site of the DNA repair gene
TREX2 is an epigenetic feature in multiple cancers.


The onset of numerous cancers is strongly associated with exposure to
genotoxic agents and is counteracted by cellular DNA repair mechanisms.
However, the tumorigenic potential of genotoxic carcinogens varies widely
among individuals. It is still uncertain which genetic and epigenetic
traits shape cancer onset and progression in the general population.
While genetic aberrations in DNA repair genes have been linked to cancer
risk, less is known about the importance of epigenetics for the
regulation of these genes. In order to identify DNA methylation
alterations in laryngeal cancer we carried out targeted DNA methylation
analysis at single CpG sites via mass spectrometry. We focused our
analysis on five DNA repair-associated gene loci previously found to be
altered in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. We report loss of DNA
methylation at the three prime repair exonuclease 2 (TREX2) gene locus in
laryngeal cancer (n=161) and adjacent normal tissue (n=58) samples of
patients from a German population-based case-control study. Following
screening of tumor tissues from Chinese colorectal cancer patients as
well as previously published data from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we
identified TREX2 methylation loss as a frequent trait in multiple
cancers. We further characterized the regulatory activity of the affected
TREX2 site using chromatin immunoprecipitation and luciferase reporter
assays in cell models from different tumor types. Differential TREX2
methylation affects a CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (CEBPA)
binding site serving as a gene enhancer which drives the expression of
TREX2 from a previously uncharacterized gene promoter. We also observed a
strong association between TREX2 methylation and TREX2 protein expression
determined via immunohistochemistry in laryngeal tumors. Finally, we
found a significant association between overall survival and loss of
TREX2 methylation in laryngeal cancer, with TREX2 methylation loss being
a protective factor. Our findings highlight a profound regulatory role of
epigenetic mechanisms for TREX2 in tumors, and underline the usefulness
of TREX2 DNA methylation as a biomarker for patient stratification.


