Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MHC class I polypeptide related sequence A (MICA) in context of
aggressive prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common cancer in American men,
with higher incidence and death rates in African American men (AAM)
relative to Caucasian American men (CAM). MHC class I polypeptide-related
sequence A (MICA) is a protein expressed in the membrane of tumor cells
that binds to the NKG2D receptors in NK cells and subtypes of CD8+T
cells, activating its cytotoxic effects. Aggressive tumors cleave MICA
from the membrane, release the soluble form (sMICA) into the plasma and
downregulate the NKG2D receptor from the immune cells. Reports in PCa
show loss of MICA expression from the cell surface is associated to a
more aggressive phenotype. Likewise, increased levels of sMICA were
linked to patients with Gleason score (GS) greater than 7. We
hypothesized that conditions related to tumor aggressiveness in the
microenvironment, would modify the levels of MICA in PCa. We also
speculated that, when compared to CAM, MICA would be differentially
expressed in tumors from AAM. To access the different expression of MICA
in AAM and CAM PCa patients we stained a TMA containing 41 CAM and 44 AAM
tumor cores for MICA expression. Our results showed that CAM PCa tumor
cores had higher proportion of high expression of MICA than the AAM (38%
vs 7% respectively, p=0.008). Moreover, the association between race and
MICA expression was more profound with GS greater than 7 (p=0.001). Next,
we explored the effect of hypoxia, a condition known to be associated
with tumor aggressiveness, on MICA surface expression. We stained our TMA
for hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha (HIF1-α), the master regulator of
cellular and developmental response to hypoxia. Similar to MICA
expression, HIF1- α expression was observed in tumor cores compared to
normal tissue cores (43% vs 17% respectively, p=0.021). In CAM there was
a positive correlation between MICA and HIF1-α immunostaining (rs= 0.50,
p= 0.004), while in AAM correlation was weak (rs= 0.32, p= 0.081). FACS
analysis on C4-2B cells revealed that 1% O2 (hypoxia) reduced MICA
expression by 24.1%, relative to 20% O2 (normoxia). Likewise, incubation
of PCa cells in the presence of 100µM cobalt chloride, a compound that
mimics hypoxia by inducing HIF-1/3 α, reduced MICA by 16.7%, relative to
control conditions. Altogether, our results indicate that expression of
MICA is modified by disease aggressiveness and hypoxic conditions.
Experiments to validate our results in minorities are currently in
progress. Of equal interest is the progress of experiments focused on
elucidation of the mechanistic involvement of tumor microenvironment on
MICA-mediated tumorigenesis and immunoevasion. Funding acknowledgements:
PCRP W81XWH-14-1-0151 (CRG), UMMC Department of Pathology (CRG), CAPES
(MJS).


