Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Burden of lung cancer in Australia avoidable by modifications to
lifestyle-related risk factors.


Aim: The cancer burden avoidable through risk factor modification can be
quantified using the Population Attributable Fraction (PAF) which
combines estimates of the prevalence of the risk factor exposure in the
population and the strength of the exposure-cancer association. PAF for
risk factors causally related to cancer is most accurately estimated from
cohort studies, using analytical approaches that account for death as a
competing risk. We provide the first such estimates of the
lifestyle-related avoidable lung cancer burden.

Methods: Seven contemporary Australian cohort studies (N = 367,772), with
comprehensive data on exposure to lifestyle-related risk factors, were
linked to the Australian Cancer Database and National Death Index to
identify lung cancers and deaths from any cause. The risk factors were
harmonised across the studies and the data pooled. The strength of the
exposure-cancer and exposure-death associations were estimated using a
proportional hazards model, adjusting for age, sex and the other
lifestyle exposures. Age- and sex-specific exposure prevalence was
estimated from the Australian National Health Survey 2011-2012. These
estimates were then combined to calculate the PAFs and their 95%
confidence intervals (CI) using a newly developed method accounting for
competing risk of death.

Results: During the first 10-years follow-up, 2,030 incident lung cancers
and 20,348 deaths were ascertained as first events. Smoking, physical
inactivity and insufficient fruit intake were statistically significantly
associated with both lung cancer incidence and death. Most of the lung
cancer burden (PAF = 73%, CI = 69-76%) was attributable to current or
past smoking, with 31% (CI = 27-35%) of the burden attributable to
current smokers. Physical activity below Australian recommendations
(Results: During the first 10-years follow-up, 2,030 incident lung
cancers and 20,348 deaths were ascertained as first events. Smoking,
physical inactivity and insufficient fruit intake were statistically
significantly associated with both lung cancer incidence and death. Most
of the lung cancer burden (PAF = 73%, CI = 69-76%) was attributable to
current or past smoking, with 31% (CI = 27-35%) of the burden
attributable to current smokers. Physical activity below Australian
recommendations (< 150 minutes of moderate or 75 minutes of vigorous
exercise per week) explained 14% (CI = 6-22%) and fruit intake below
Australian recommendations (Results: During the first 10-years follow-up,
2,030 incident lung cancers and 20,348 deaths were ascertained as first
events. Smoking, physical inactivity and insufficient fruit intake were
statistically significantly associated with both lung cancer incidence
and death. Most of the lung cancer burden (PAF = 73%, CI = 69-76%) was
attributable to current or past smoking, with 31% (CI = 27-35%) of the
burden attributable to current smokers. Physical activity below
Australian recommendations (< 150 minutes of moderate or 75 minutes of
vigorous exercise per week) explained 14% (CI = 6-22%) and fruit intake
below Australian recommendations (< 2 daily serves) explained 6% (CI =
0-12%) of the lung cancer burden. Each risk factor contributed more to
the lung cancer burden in men than in women. Overall, 78% (CI = 74-81%)
of the lung cancer burden was attributable to current or past smoking,
physical inactivity and insufficient fruit intake. The combined
contribution of modifiable risk factors (i.e. excluding past smoking) was
44% (CI = 37-50%). Based on projected Australian cancer incidence rates,
this would translate to 59,000 avoidable lung cancers in the next 10
years.

Conclusions: According to these joint PAF estimates, the current lung
cancer burden in Australia could be reduced by up to half in 10 years by
quitting smoking and increasing physical activity and fruit intake to the
recommended levels. As the combined effect of risk factors is rarely
additive, knowing both individual and joint effects of risk factors on
cancer burden is essential in planning cancer interventions and public
health policies and predicting their potential impact.


