Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomes promote survival and migration in squamous head and neck
cancer cells after ionizing radiation: Evidence for a bystander effect.


Exosomes are important intercellular communicators in the acute radiation
stress-response. Here we show that exosomes from head and neck tumor
cells confer protective signals to their neighboring cells. This promotes
the tumorigenic and radioresistant phenotype of head and neck cancer
cells.

Isolation of exosomes was performed by serial ultracentrifugation of
conditioned medium collected from irradiated or non-irradiated head and
neck cancer cell lines BHY and FaDu. Quantification by NanoSight
technology indicated an increased exosome release from irradiated
compared to non-irradiated cells 24 hours after treatment. To test
whether the released exosomes influence the radiation response, exosomes
isolated from non-irradiated and irradiated donor cells were transferred
on non-irradiated and irradiated recipient cells. We found an enhanced
uptake of exosomes, when transferred to irradiated recipient cells
compared to the transfer to non-irradiated cells.

Functional analyses indicate increased survival of irradiated recipient
cells after exosome transfer. These findings mesh with increased DNA
double strand break repair that we found after the transfer of exosomes
isolated from irradiated cells. Moreover we observed an increased
migration and enhanced chemotaxis induced motility after the transfer of
exosomes isolated from irradiated cells. To investigate whether
differential protein loading into exosomes is responsible for the
functional differences we performed proteome analysis of the exosomes. We
have identified 679 proteins, of which 39 were up- and 36 were
downregulated by irradiation of the donor cells. In a good agreement with
our functional assays, the proteome profiling showed that exosomal
proteins were mainly involved in wound healing.

Exosomes are functional components of the response of tumor cells to
therapeutic radiation exposure. In a clinical context these results
suggests that radiotherapy modified exosomes may influence the cancer
progression, metastasis and therapeutic success.


