Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LSD1 inhibition alone and in combination with chemotherapy in
Ewing sarcoma cell lines.


Background: Ewing Sarcoma (ES) is the second most common primary bone
cancer affecting children and young adults. Despite advances in treatment
that have led to survival rates of approximately 73% for localized
disease, outcomes for patients with metastatic or recurrent ES remain
poor. A distinguishing feature of ES is the presence of the EWS/FLI1
fusion in 85% of cases. The fusion has been shown to alter expression of
a number of oncogenic genes. Mechanistic studies have demonstrated that
the NuRD co-repressor complex interacts with EWS/FLI1. The associated
protein LSD-1 contributes to the repressive function by histone
modifications. While reversible LSD1 inhibitors demonstrate single agent
activity, in preclinical models, a system to evaluate combinations may be
needed for optimizing effect in clinical trials.

Methods: Here, we seek to confirm promising single drug activity and
evaluate combination therapies using active chemotherapies currently
utilized in ES care (4-HC, etoposide, SN-38, vincristine and doxorubicin)
along with the LSD1 Inhibitors SP2509 and SP2577 and romidepsin, an HDAC
inhibitor. We evaluated these combinations in high-throughput screening
platforms and well-established cell line models for ES (A-673, TC-32,
RD-ES, TC-71). Taking into consideration past lessons learned from in
vitro experiments, we designed stringent screening conditions that assess
the candidate compounds and combinations at clinically-relevant
concentrations and exposure times that mimic the in vivo pharmacokinetics
in an effort to maximize the translational potential of these results to
the clinical setting. All combinations of agents were studied in two-drug
combinations to evaluate for synergy in addition to efficacy.

Results: IC50 for SP2509 was found to be in the submicromolar range
across cell lines with SP2577 being more potent. A-673 and TC-71 were
5-10 fold less sensitive than RD-ES and TC-32. Agents currently utilized
in clinic were universally active at clinically achievable concentrations
and exposure times. Combinations showed additivity frequently and
demonstrated promising activity that can be used to inform further
decision making once LSD1 inhibition toxicities are better known. These
findings suggest potentially promising opportunities for developing
combination clinical trials to maximize development of LSD1 inhibitors.


