Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retinoic acid (RA) relieves EZH2-mediated epigenetic suppression
in high-risk neuroblastoma (HR-NB).


High risk neuroblastoma tumors (HR-NB) are characterized by the presence
of undifferentiated histopathology, while tumors from low risk patients
have histologic evidence of differentiation and a transcriptome enriched
in differentiation genes. Determining the cellular and molecular
underpinnings that contribute to this undifferentiated state will lead to
better understanding of the disease pathogenesis. Retinoic acid (RA) is
known to prime embryonic stem cells for lineage specific differentiation.
To elucidate the early events important for reprogramming of NB cells
leading to changes in the degree of cellular differentiation, we treated
HR-NB cells (KCNR : MYCN amplified) with 5µM RA for 24 hrs. RNA-Seq
analysis, to assess early changes in the transcriptome, showed
significant changes in gene expression [2fold-up-regulated-446,
2fold-down-regulated-250, FDR≤0.01] which were enriched for biological
functions like neuron projection, neuron differentiation, indicating
onset of neurogenesis as a marker of differentiation. Gene set enrichment
analysis identified significant positive enrichment of NB differentiation
(p=0.001) and PRC2 (Polycomb Repressor Complex2) gene sets (p=0.02) along
with downregulation of MYCN signature gene set (p=0.001). PRC2 component
EZH2 (Histone Methyltransferase) is highly expressed in NB and represses
differentiation genes. Though, EZH2 protein levels did not change after
treatment, RA caused 40% reduction in H3 bound EZH2. To gain insight into
how this reduction affects subsequent gene expression; we evaluated
changes in genome wide binding of EZH2 and H3K27me3 after treatment.
Indeed, significant correlation was observed between the changes in
expression levels of genes after RA treatment and relative binding of
EZH2 (p=3.88e-6) and H3K27me3 (p=3.88e-6) at their promoter regions.
One-third (n=147) of the upregulated genes (eg. HEY1, RARB) and half
(n=117) of the downregulated genes (eg. INSM2, CAMK4) were EZH2 targets.
Upregulated genes were related to biological functions like negative
regulation of cell growth and transcription, nervous system development.
To probe the underlying mechanism, in-silico analysis indicated RA
decreased Wnt/ß-catenin, eNOS and PTEN pathways while stimulating cAMP,
Integrin linked kinase and G-coupled protein pathways. Evaluation of the
cAMP pathway candidates identified 13 genes as EZH2 targets. eg CNR1,
DUSP6, PKIA, RSG4. In primary NB tumors, microarray studies indicate that
low levels of CNR1 and DUSP6 are associated with poor prognosis. RA
stimulates 10-fold and 2-fold increases in CNR1 and DUSP6 levels,
respectively. RA treatment inhibits EZH2 binding to its target genes
thereby activating pathways involved in reprogramming of HR-NBs to a more
differentiated state. Studies are underway to further evaluate the
molecular mechanism leading to decreased EZH2 binding upon RA treatment.


