Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Luteolin selectively inhibits EZH2 and blocks H3K27 methylation in
prostate cancer cells.


The histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is the
catalytic subunit of the polycomb repressive complex (PRC2) and is
involved in chromatin remodeling and gene silencing through its
methylation of histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27). Specifically,
trimethylation of H3K27 is associated with gene silencing and plays
critical role in cancer initiation and progression. Therefore, blocking
EZH2 catalytic activity may present a valid preventive and/or therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of cancers with EZH2 overexpression including
prostate cancer. Our multistep approach of molecular modeling and direct
binding has led to the identification of plant flavone luteolin (3’,
4’, 5, 7-tetrahydroxyflavone) as a specific inhibitor of EZH2 with
preferential blocking of its catalytic site. Here we report luteolin, in
micro molar range, inhibits EZH2 catalytic activity, demonstrates
anti-proliferative and anti-invasive activities in functional cell based
assays. Treatment of human prostate cancer DU145 and 22Rv1 cells, which
possess high constitutive EZH2 expression, with 5-20 μM luteolin
significantly inhibits EZH2 and SUZ12 protein expression in dose and time
dependent manner, although luteolin treatment did not affect protein
expression of EED and RbAp46/48 protein, other members of PRC2 complex.
Treatment of both cell lines with luteolin also reduced H3K27me3 and
H3K27me2 protein and its enzymatic activity in dose and time dependent
manner without affecting total H3 protein. In addition, luteolin was also
effective in suppressing in vitro methylation performed using recombinant
PCR2 complex. These events led to increase in the expression of
downstream tumor suppressor genes including E-cadherin, SLIT2 and TIMP3,
respectively. Interestingly, treatment of cells with proteasome
inhibitor, MG132 together with luteolin did not prevent EZH2 degradation
indicating that proteasomal degradation might not contribute to EZH2
inhibition. Taken together, our study suggest that luteolin acts on the
catalytic binding site of EZH2 to exhibit downregulation of histone H3
methylation and could be developed as a potential promising agent for the
prevention and/or treatment of various human cancers including prostate
cancer with EZH2 overexpression.


