Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sigma receptors: Novel targets for the treatment of highly
malignant tumors.


Introduction. More than 7 million patients are diagnosed with cancer
every year, and approximately 24 million new cases of cancer will
probably be registered by 2035. Over the past decades, numerous cancer
targets have been identified and, despite promising results in this
field, the discovery of novel targeted therapies is still a largely unmet
need. Sigma receptors (SRs), more highly expressed in tumor cells than in
normal cells, have aroused the interest of the scientific community
because of increasing evidence of their involvement in proliferation and
survival signaling pathways of cancer cells. Glioblastoma (GBM) and
pancreatic cancer (PCa) are two of the most aggressive and lethal solid
tumors. GBM patients usually relapse within 7-10 months of the end of
first-line treatment with median survival of about 14.6 months while PCa
is the fourth most fatal cancer in both men and women, with median
survival of 6-12 months. Little or no improvement in prognosis has been
obtained over the past 20 years. Thus, new approaches to the treatment of
both tumors are urgently needed.

In the present work, 3D GBM primary cultures endowed with stemness
features and PCa cell lines were used to evaluate the antitumor activity
of a dual S1R and S2R ligand RC-106, a novel sigma receptor modulator.

Methods. RC-106 tissue distribution studies were performed in mice. PCa
cell lines were assessed by cytotoxic assay (CellTiter 96® AQueous One
Solution Cell Proliferation Assay). Molecular analyses were performed by
qRT-PCR and Western blot. Apoptosis and cell cycle were analyzed by flow
cytometry. GBM primary cultures were isolated from surgical tumor
samples. A rotatory cell culture system (RCCS) was used to obtain 3D cell
cultures. Growth and morphology of the colonies were monitored by
open-source AnaSP and ReViSP software tools. Molecular analyses were
performed by flow cytometry and qRT-PCR. 3D cell viability was measured
using CellTiter-Glo® 3D Cell Viability Assay. Apoptosis and cell cycle
were analyzed by flow cytometry.

Results. RC-106 preferentially accumulate in mice pancreas and brain
after intravenous administration, supporting the use of sigma receptor
modulators as a novel therapy for these

tumors. Treatment with RC-106 strongly inhibited cell proliferation and
survival regardless of the type of cancer investigated. 25 μM of the
drug impaired the in vitro clonogenic ability of tumor cells, an effect
lasting for up to 42 days, the longest time tested. RC-106 also led to
the induction of substantial apoptosis mediated by caspase 3 and 9
activation, and to a modulation of the Akt pathway. Furthermore,
treatment with RC-106 significantly reduced the growth of human GBM and
PCa spheroids.

Conclusions. (RC-106) represents the hit compound of a new class of
dual-action ligands targeting S1R and S2R potentially useful for the
treatment of cancer disease.


