Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic function and molecular mechanism of H19 noncoding RNA in
colorectal cancer.


The clinical significance of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) in colorectal
cancer (CRC) remains largely unknown. We analyzed a large panel of
cancer-associated lncRNAs in 483 TCGA CRC cases, and identified that H19
correlates most significantly with overall survival and disease-free
survival, independent of stage and other clinical parameters. We
validated the TCGA findings with two additional CRC cohorts. As one of
the “oldest” lncRNAs, diverse activities of H19 including interaction
with epigenetic regulators, regulation of microRNAs as competing
endogenous RNA (ceRNA), and production of miR-675 as a primary transcript
have been reported. However, an unbiased study to clarify the essential
mechanisms of H19 is lacking. To decipher the functional involvement of
H19 in CRC, we used an integrative approach combining unbiased microarray
analysis, experimental validation, and bioinformatic analysis of clinical
data. With such approach, we revealed not only previously reported
mechanisms such as let-7 and MYC regulation by H19, but also several
novel mechanisms that have not been appreciated before. We discovered a
mechanism of H19 on regulating RB-E2F signaling and accordingly
controlling cell cycle progression. We also identified for the first time
that H19 regulates CDK8, an oncogenic driver in CRC pathogenesis, and
consequently affects β-catenin activity (Firestein et al., Nature,
2008). We further identified an interaction of H19 with macroH2A, a
histone variant reported to repress CDK8 transcription (Kapoor et al.,
Nature, 2010). Importantly, expression correlation analysis with clinical
samples strongly supported the above-identified mechanisms. Combined
analysis of H19 with its targets showed strong independent prediction
power for CRC survival. These data indicate the clinical relevance of
Rb-E2F and CDK8/β-catenin signaling in mediating H19’s oncogenic
activity in CRC.


