Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of Salmonella motility in tumors improves dispersion,
colonization and intracellular invasion of the bacteria.


Diffusion limitations in tumors prevent small molecule therapies from
reaching cancer cells located distally from vasculature. This is one
reason why some cancers become drug resistant and relapse. To circumvent
these diffusional limitations, Salmonella can be used as a drug delivery
vehicle. The facultative anaerobe preferentially colonizes tumor tissue
over normal tissue at ratios greater than 10,000:1. Moreover, flagella
allow the bacteria to penetrate deep into tumor tissue. Finally,
genetically modified Salmonella can invade cancer cells and deliver a
wide range of intracellularly functioning and patient specific therapies
(DNA, RNA, and inhibitory peptides).

But, Salmonella must distribute homogeneously within tumors and invade a
significant number of live cancer cells in order to deliver therapies
uniformly within tumors. To enable this, we hypothesized that
up-regulating the master motility regulator, flhDC, in Salmonella would
improve intratumoral penetration, uniform colonization and intracellular
invasion of cancer cells. Salmonella utilize the transcription factor
complex, flhDC, to regulate flagella synthesis and thus, motility. This
transcription factor complex also positively influences type three
secretion system (T3SS) assembly, which, Salmonella use to
intracellularly invade epithelial cells.

To test this hypothesis, we created a set of synthetic gene circuits that
use arabinose for inducible expression of flhDC, the Plac promoter for
constitutive expression of DSRed and the PSSEJ promoter to express GFP
when Salmonella invade tumor cells. We analyzed aqueous bacterial
motility with video microscopy. Finally, we administered the motility
inducible Salmonella into a tumor-on-a-chip device to examine spatial and
temporal tumor colonization characteristics of the bacteria.

In an aqueous environment, the flhDC induced Salmonella swam
approximately 33% faster than a Salmonella control (PIn an aqueous
environment, the flhDC induced Salmonella swam approximately 33% faster
than a Salmonella control (P<.01). Induction of flhDC increased the
motile fraction (15-30 micrometers/second) of bacteria two-fold (PIn an
aqueous environment, the flhDC induced Salmonella swam approximately 33%
faster than a Salmonella control (P<.01). Induction of flhDC increased
the motile fraction (15-30 micrometers/second) of bacteria two-fold
(P<.05) while also decreasing the non-motile fraction (0-15
micrometers/second) six-fold (PIn an aqueous environment, the flhDC
induced Salmonella swam approximately 33% faster than a Salmonella
control (P<.01). Induction of flhDC increased the motile fraction (15-30
micrometers/second) of bacteria two-fold (P<.05) while also decreasing
the non-motile fraction (0-15 micrometers/second) six-fold (P<.05) when
compared to a Salmonella control.

In a microfluidic device, flhDC induced Salmonella exhibited increased
colonization and growth in tumor tissue located far away from channels
that were meant to resemble tumor microvasculature (PIn a microfluidic
device, flhDC induced Salmonella exhibited increased colonization and
growth in tumor tissue located far away from channels that were meant to
resemble tumor microvasculature (P<.05), when compared to a control.
Finally, flhDC induction increased tumor cell invasion approximately
two-fold in tissue located both proximal and distal to the micro-channels
within the microfluidic device (PIn a microfluidic device, flhDC induced
Salmonella exhibited increased colonization and growth in tumor tissue
located far away from channels that were meant to resemble tumor
microvasculature (P<.05), when compared to a control. Finally, flhDC
induction increased tumor cell invasion approximately two-fold in tissue
located both proximal and distal to the micro-channels within the
microfluidic device (P<.05), when compared to a control.

Highly motile Salmonella could reduce the occurrence of drug resistant
cancer relapse by delivering targeted therapies uniformly to cancer cells
that would otherwise remain untreated with conventional therapy.


