Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The co-chaperone UNC45A controls cancer cell proliferation through
Nek7 and centrosomal separation.


Recent findings have shown that the Heat Shock Protein 90 (Hsp90)
co-chaperone UNC45A is overexpressed in ovarian and breast cancers.
Previously, we have shown that UNC45A is a centrosomal protein essential
for cervical tumor cell growth through activation of the checkpoint
kinase 1 (ChK1). In this report, we further examined the role of UNC45A
in breast tumorigenesis using a variety of biochemical and cell biology
techniques and animal models. We confirmed that UNC45A is highly
overexpressed in human breast-infiltrating ductal carcinomas as compared
to adjacent normal tissues. Silencing UNC45A in vitro blocked the
proliferation of all breast cancer subtypes and drastically reduced tumor
growth of the triple negative MDA-MB-231 cell line implanted in mammary
fat pads of NOD/SCID mice. However, loss of UNC45A did not affect the
proliferation of normal mammary cells. Remarkably, UNC45A becomes more
nuclear in human cancer tissues and cancer cell lines as compared to
normal tissues and non-transformed Hs578Bst and HME mammary cell lines,
respectively. This suggests an important nuclear function for UNC45A
during tumorigenesis. Microarray analysis of mRNA from Hs578T cells
showed that loss of UNC45A alters the expression of 121 genes, involved
in cancer and cellular development and growth networks. Relevant to cell
proliferation, we found that Nek7 gene was significantly repressed upon
silencing UNC45A, which was validated by RTqPCR and Western blot analyses
in multiple breast cancer cell lines. Nek7 is a member of the NIMA (never
in mitosis, gene A) family of serine/threonine kinases. It plays a key
role in centrosomal separation during mitosis. This correlates neatly
with our observation that loss of UNC45A causes a centrosomal separation
defect, cell proliferation arrest and death of breast cancer cell lines.
ChIP experiments showed that UNC45A binds to the promoter of the Nek7
gene, suggesting direct transcriptional regulation. Interestingly, the
UNC45A sequence contains four LxxLL motifs, which are thought to be
signatures for co-activator binding to nuclear receptors. Furthermore,
computational analysis identified two glucocorticoid response elements
(GRE) consensus sequences in the Nek7 promoter, suggesting its
transcriptional regulation by the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). This
hypothesis was further strengthened by a significant decrease in the mRNA
and protein levels of Nek7 upon silencing GR. Thus, our data suggest that
UNC45A functions as a GR co-activator to control Nek7 gene transcription.
Consistent with this, immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed that
UNC45A and GR form endogenous complexes, and treatment of Hs578T and MCF7
cell lines with dexamethasone upregulates Nek7 mRNA and protein levels.
In conclusion our data strongly support the premise that UNC45A promotes
Nek7 transcription through activation of GR, and thus controls
centrosomal separation and cancer cell proliferation.


