Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteome and transcriptome alterations in black endometrial cancer
patients correlate with poor disease outcome.


Objective: Black endometrial cancer patients are more than twice as
likely to die from their disease as White patients. This study sought to
identify alterations in the proteome and transcriptome of primary tumor
tissues from White and Black endometrioid endometrial cancer (EEC)
patients associated with differential outcome.

Methods: An integrated proteomic and transcriptomic analysis (LC-MS/MS
and RNA-seq) was performed on White (n=13) and Black (n=17) EEC patient
tissues. Significant and concordantly altered protein and transcript
candidates were validated against publicly available RNA-seq data (TCGA
UCEC) from White (n=216) and Black (n=49) EEC patients. Validated
candidates were further correlated with overall (OS, n=356 White and
Black patients) and progression-free survival (PFS, n=331 White and Black
patients) to identify candidates significantly associated with
differential disease outcome. Alterations of outcome-associated
candidates were validated in an independent cohort of White (n=115) and
Black (n=17) EEC patient transcript expression data.

Results: We identified and validated 89 proteins and transcripts
significantly altered between White vs Black EEC patients. Pathway
analyses revealed candidates elevated in White EEC patients correlated
with marked activation of molecular signaling pathways regulating viral
infection, but inhibition of those regulating cell death and necrosis.
Candidates elevated in Black EEC patients largely correlated with
activation of cell viability and nucleic acid metabolism, but inhibition
of cell death, glucose metabolism disorder and inflammatory signaling.
Correlation with patient outcome measures revealed 11 candidates
significantly associated with differential OS and 8 candidates with
differential PFS in EEC patients. All outcome-associated candidates
elevated in White patients significantly correlated with a low risk of
poor OS and poor PFS (Hazard Ratio (HR) Results: We identified and
validated 89 proteins and transcripts significantly altered between White
vs Black EEC patients. Pathway analyses revealed candidates elevated in
White EEC patients correlated with marked activation of molecular
signaling pathways regulating viral infection, but inhibition of those
regulating cell death and necrosis. Candidates elevated in Black EEC
patients largely correlated with activation of cell viability and nucleic
acid metabolism, but inhibition of cell death, glucose metabolism
disorder and inflammatory signaling. Correlation with patient outcome
measures revealed 11 candidates significantly associated with
differential OS and 8 candidates with differential PFS in EEC patients.
All outcome-associated candidates elevated in White patients
significantly correlated with a low risk of poor OS and poor PFS (Hazard
Ratio (HR) < 1, Wald p-value 1, Wald p-value 1, Wald p-value < 0.05).
Several OS (27%) and PFS (75%) candidates remained significant after
adjustment for disease stage and grade as well as myometrial invasion.
Alteration trends for several OS (27%) and PFS (25%) candidates were
validated in an independent cohort of White and Black EEC patients.

Conclusions: Our analyses identified and confirmed molecular alterations
between White and Black EEC patients, including outcome-associated
candidates largely supportive of better outcome in White patients, but
poor outcome in Black patients. These findings define molecular
alterations in White and Black EEC patients consistent with the historic
disparity of poor outcome for Black patients warranting further
investigation of these candidates in Black EEC disease pathology.


