Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SPOP mutant subclass prediction and its impact on prostate cancer
prognosis.


SPOP mutations define a distinct and key molecular class of prostate
cancer, but there is no signature to identify SPOP mutant subclass based
on transcriptional data, and its impact on prognosis and clinical
outcomes of prostate cancer patients is unknown.

We developed the SPOP mutant transcriptional signature with high
sensitivity and specificity based on transcriptional data. After we
predicted SPOP mutant subclass from a large cohort project with
transcriptional signature, we studied its association with
clinicopathologic variables and prognosis in prostate cancer patients. On
univariate analysis, SPOP mutant subclass was associated with lower
preoperative serum prostate-specific antigen, extraprostatic extension
and older patients (pWe developed the SPOP mutant transcriptional
signature with high sensitivity and specificity based on transcriptional
data. After we predicted SPOP mutant subclass from a large cohort project
with transcriptional signature, we studied its association with
clinicopathologic variables and prognosis in prostate cancer patients. On
univariate analysis, SPOP mutant subclass was associated with lower
preoperative serum prostate-specific antigen, extraprostatic extension
and older patients (p<0.05). On multivariate analysis, SPOP mutant
subclass was associated with metastasis (pWe developed the SPOP mutant
transcriptional signature with high sensitivity and specificity based on
transcriptional data. After we predicted SPOP mutant subclass from a
large cohort project with transcriptional signature, we studied its
association with clinicopathologic variables and prognosis in prostate
cancer patients. On univariate analysis, SPOP mutant subclass was
associated with lower preoperative serum prostate-specific antigen,
extraprostatic extension and older patients (p<0.05). On multivariate
analysis, SPOP mutant subclass was associated with metastasis (p<0.05).
Combined SPOP mutant status and CAPRA-S models have slightly better
prediction for metastasis. On Kaplan-Meier analysis, we found the
significant association of SPOP mutant subclass with better patient
outcomes of metastasis, and patients without radiation therapy with even
better metastatic outcomes.

The SPOP mutant subclass could be predicted by using our SPOP mutant
signature purely based on transcriptional data. Clinical and prognosis
difference were found among SPOP mutant subclass.


