Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-302b as adjuvant therapeutic tool to improve chemotherapy
efficacy in human triple-negative breast cancer.


Introduction: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 15-20% of
all breast cancer cases, with the worst outcome of all subtypes. For
TNBC, still lacking targeted therapies, the only therapeutic option is
currently chemotherapy, and despite a good initial response, patients
often develop drug resistance. MiRNAs can modulate chemoresistance by
affecting DNA repair, cell cycle progression, apoptosis and also tumor
microenvironment. Macrophages constitute a major component of the immune
microenvironment of cancer and pro-tumor M2 macrophages have been
associated with resistance to chemotherapeutic treatments. Our previous
data showed that miR-302b over-expression enhances sensitivity to
cisplatin in breast cancer cell lines by targeting directly E2F1 and
indirectly ATM.

Here, we investigated the potential of miR-302b as a therapeutic tool to
enhance cisplatin response in a TNBC mouse model and which pathways are
involved in this mechanism both in tumor cells and microenvironment.
Moreover, miR-302b prognostic value was assessed in a cohort of TNBC
patients with available clinical outcome . Finally, we evaluated if
miR-302b enhances the sensitivity to doxorubicin, another
chemotherapeutic agent used as first-line therapy in TNBC patients.

Material and method: MDA-MB-231 TNBC cells were injected into the mammary
fat pad of female SCID mice and then treated with lipid nanoparticles
containing miR-302b or cel-miR-67 control, alone or in combination with
cisplatin. Gene expression profile on collected tumors was performed by
microarray and tumor sections were stained with anti-arginase 1 (M2
marker) to evaluate the number of M2 macrophages. MiR-302b expression was
assessed in 39 TNBC treated with chemotherapy in adjuvant setting, and
associated with prognosis. Finally, MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected
with miR-302b precursor or control treated with doxorubicin for 24h and
then assessed for cell viability.

Results: Our results show that miR-302b combination with cisplatin
significantly impaired tumor growth in comparison with cel-67 control and
cisplatin (p= 0.03), and reduced the number of M2 macrophages in the
tumor microenvironment (p=0.005). Moreover, gene expression profile of
collected tumors confirm immune system modulation.

Notably, miR-302b expression was associated with disease-free survival
and overall survival in TNBC patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy.
Furthermore, we found that miR-302b also enhances sensitivity to
doxorubicin in vitro, affecting cell viability and cell cycle transition
through E2F1 regulation.

Conclusion: Our data demonstrate that miR-302b can be exploited as a new
therapeutic tool to improve the response to chemotherapy, modulating
tumor microenvironment. Moreover, this miRNA has prognostic significance
in TNBC patients, and might also represent an useful predictive biomarker
for response to chemotherapy.


