Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolomic pathway alterations in endometrial cancer.


Introduction: Endometrial cancer is the most frequent gynecological
cancer diagnosed in United States, accounting for 76,000 deaths every
year. Up to now, it has been broadly described the proteomic and the
transcriptomic profiles of endometrial cancer (EC). However, the
metabolomic content of EC tissues is largely unknown. In this work, we
aim to characterize the pathways dysregulated in EC tumorigenesis and the
changes that the metabolites experience along the progression of the
disease.

Methods: We performed an untargeted discovery using liquid chromatography
coupled with electro-spray quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometry
(UPLC-ESI-QTOF-MS). We analyzed the metabolomic and lipidomic profile of
a set of 56 tumor tissues, corresponding to 39 different stages of
endometrioid EC tumors (10 FIGO stages IA, 9 stages IB, 10 stages II and
10 stages III), and 17 benign endometrium tissues. Verification of
initiation and progression markers was performed by MS/MS. Furthermore
the dysregulated pathways were validated by Real Time quantitative PCR
(RTqPCR) and Immunohistochemistry (IHQ) in an independent cohort of 60
and 109 patients, respectively.

Results: A total of 8,146 features were detected in the positive and
7,558 in the negative electrospray ionization mode. Among those, a list
of 40 significant differentially expressed metabolites (FC>2) was
verified. The lipid metabolism appeared highly upregulated; with an
important number of PCs, PSs, PEs, PIs and PGs. Linoleic acid,
3-Deoxyvitamin D3, and UDP-N-acetyl-D-galactosamine were also upregulated
in EC. Differently, the peptide Glu Phe Arg Trp, some amides
(palmitamide, stearamide and oleamide), PA (18:0/18:1), PE (20:1/22:6),
PE (22:6/P-18:1), PG (19:0/22:4), inosine and picolinic acid were
downregulated in the tumor tissue. Regarding tumoral progression, we
showed a significant and non-gradual dysregulation of PC (16:0/20:5), the
PC (16:0/22:6), PE (16:0/22:6), PE (22:6/P-18:1) and PE (18:1/22:6) at
different stages of cancer progression. A significant decrease of the
levels of UDP-N-acetyl-D-galactosamine and Arachidonic acid at advanced
stages of the tumor was detected. We confirmed by RTqPCR and by IHQ the
downregulation of the 3 adenosine-to-inosine editing enzymes (ADAR1,
ADAR2 and ADARB3) in EC patients compared to the control group. We also
observed a higher expression of the enzymes in the most aggressive
(serous EC tumors) compared to the less aggressive tumors (endometrioid
EC tumors). We are currently performing studies to understand the role of
the RNA editing pathway in EC.

Conclusions: In this study we described the metabolome and lipidome of EC
initiation and progression. We verified and validated several metabolites
that are significantly differentially found in control subjects compared
to EC patients and along tumoral progression. These results also
depictured the metabolism of EC and deciphered, for the first time, an
alteration in the adenosine-to-inosine editing pathway in EC.


