Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput chemical screening for sensitization of bladder
cancer to gemcitabine and cisplatin chemotherapy.


Introduction and Objectives Gemcitabine and cisplatin chemotherapy (GC)
is the current standard regimen for locally advanced and metastatic
bladder cancer (BC). Despite a relatively high initial response rate,
some cases do not regress (intrinsic resistance) and the remaining cases
often show regrowth after initial shrinkage (acquired resistance). To
identify novel therapeutic agents for overcoming these resistances, we
applied a high-throughput screening of chemicals administered in
combination with GC.

Methods As a high-throughput screening, 2100 compounds were administered
alone or in combination with GC to human BC cell lines (J82, UMUC-3).
Cell viability was determined after 3-day incubation and chemicals that
enhanced inhibitory effect of GC were screened. The in vivo effect of
disulfiram (DSF) was studied in UMUC-3 cell xenografts, and western blot,
immunofluorescence, induced coupled plasma spectrometry and measurement
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) were done in vitro for mechanistic
exploration.

Results The initial screening identified 26 compounds and further
validation narrowed them into the most synergistic agent DSF, an
FDA-approved drug for alcoholism. Combination index assay showed
synergistic effects of DSF with cisplatin but not with gemcitabine in
J82, UMUC-3, T24, HT1197 and HT1376 cells. Co-administration of DSF
significantly increased DNA-platinum adducts by regulating cisplatin
efflux transporter ATP7A and enhanced apoptosis by GC treatment in UMUC-3
cells, with significant increase of ROS production. Use of DSF in
combination with GC (GCD) significantly inhibited tumor growth of UMUC-3
subcutaneous xenograft on athymic mice (by 39% compared with GC alone, p
= 0.02). GCD regimen was as tolerable as GC and no significant
differences were observed in body weight of treated mice between the two
regimens.

Conclusions Repositioning of DSF to a chemotherapy sensitizer is a
promising treatment strategy, which can be translated rapidly in the
future.


