Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of FABP5 antibodies in prostate.


FABP5, a member of a family of small proteins (~15 kDa) that transport
lipids, is emerging as an important biomarker because it is
differentially expressed in prostate cancers (PrCa) compared to
uninvolved prostate glands and lipids are important to the progression of
prostate cancer. This study was to select an antibody (Ab) for use in
immunostaining (IHC) FABP5 in formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE)
tissue and also an Ab for use in Western blotting (WB). A mouse
monoclonal antibody (mAb) clone A9 to FABP5 from Santa Cruz (SC)
Biotechnology, Inc. and a rabbit polyclonal antibody (pAb) to FABP5 from
Abcam (AB) (cat. # ab37267) were tested. Six prostate cell lines (PC3,
DU145, 22Rv1, MDA PCa 2b, LNCaP, and normal primary prostate epithelial
cells (NH Pri Pro) were used to study protein and mRNA levels of FABP5.
Protein expression of FABP5 was determined by WB of whole cell lysates as
well as cytoplasmic and nuclear lysates. GAPDH, a “housekeeping” gene
expressed at similar levels in most types of cells, was used as a loading
control for WB. Cells from the six prostate cells lines also were
embedded in HistoGel, processed to FFPE and immunostained. The prostate
cells were transfected with FABP5 siRNA for WB with aliquots of the
transfected prostate cells processed to FFPE. qrtPCR was performed to
measure mRNA levels. The expression of whole cell lysates on WB probed
with the AB pAb to FABP5 was NH Pri Pro > PC3 > DU145 > 22Rv1 >> MDA PCa
2b > LNCaP compared to NH-Pri Pro > PC3 > DU145 > 22Rv1 when probed with
the SC mAb. WB of the cytoplasmic fractions from each cell line has a
similar pattern. In HistoGel sections immunostained with AB pAb, the
FABP5 cytoplasmic expression was PC3 > DU145 > 22Rv1 > MDA PCa 2b > NH
Pri Pro >> LNCaP. These levels of expression among the cell lines
followed a similar trend in evaluation of immunostaining of cell
membranes, nuclear, and the perinuclear area. In HistoGel sections
immunostained with SC mAb, the FABP5 expression was PC3 > DU145 with weak
signals in 22Rv1 > MDA PCa 2b > NH Pri Pro >> LNCaP. A recombinant
blocking peptide (RBP) to FABP5 strongly inhibited the immunostaining
with the antibodies to FABP5 in FFPE sections from archival radical
prostatectomy specimens. This RBP is the same sequence as the peptide
used to produce the AB antibody. No RBP to FABP5 was available from SC.
Incubation with the RBP strongly inhibited the extent of immunostaining
with FABP5 SC mAb. Similarly, immunostaining of the 6 cell lines with the
AB pAb following incubation with RBP strongly inhibited staining. In
analysis of mRNA levels, the expression of FABP5 was PC3 > 22Rv1 > >
DU145 > MDA PCa 2b >> LNCaP. We demonstrated by siRNA and the use of a
RBP that both these antibodies are specific and sensitive for detecting
FABP5 by immunostaining but the AB Ab is more useful for WB. These
results are presented with the IHC of FABP5 in normal and uninvolved
prostate glands in PrCa.


