Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urinary metabolites are diagnostic biomarkers of liver cancer.


Liver cancer is third leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. A
tremendous burden of this disease is evident in that there is an
estimated rise in liver cancer incidence from 39,239 in 2016 to 95,374 by
2020. This bleak statistic serves as a motivation to search for early
diagnosis biomarkers, especially considering that the 5-year relative
survival rate for people with localized disease is ~30.5%, and for
regional stage is only 10.7%. Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC) is the most
common primary malignant tumor of the liver, and is considered to be the
third leading cause of all cancer-related deaths and fifth common cancer
worldwide. Hepatitis virus B and C infections, fatty and alcoholic liver
disease are established risk factors for developing HCC.
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is the second most common primary hepatic
malignancy. Liver fluke, a chronic parasitic disease of the bile ducts,
is a risk factor for developing CCA; otherwise not enough is known about
the etiology of this form of liver cancer. We initially conducted a pilot
study in the NCI-MD cohort comprising 98 HCC cases, 101 high risk
subjects and 95 controls, to evaluate whether previously identified
urinary metabolite biomarkers of lung cancer were also predictive of
liver cancer, given preliminary evidence that they were universally
elevated in several cancer types. Thus, we leveraged ultraperformance
liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass-spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS)
for quantitation of creatine riboside, N-acetylneuraminic acid, cortisol
sulfate, and a lipid molecule designated as 561+. This study resulted in
findings that all four aforementioned metabolites are significantly
increased in HCC cases compared to both, population controls and, more
importantly, high risk subjects. We next evaluated whether our previously
described findings from the NCI-MD liver case-control study validate in
the TIGER-LC cohort (n=370 cases, 471 high risk subjects, 251 controls),
where CCA is highly prevalent. We confirmed that indeed the four
metabolites were significantly increased in HCC cases compared to both,
controls and high risk subjects in TIGER-LC. Most importantly, we also
showed that these metabolites are also deregulated in CCA, as their
levels are significantly elevated in CCA cases when compared to both,
controls and high risk subjects. Furthermore, we showed in the Receiver
Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis a robust ability of the
four-metabolite profile to classify both, HCC (AUC=0.75) and CCA
(AUC=0.81) compared to high risk subjects. Additionally, the
four-metabolite profile performed better in classifying CCA than a
clinically utilized CCA tumor marker, CA19-9, and their combination led
to a significantly improved classifier (AUC=0.88, P=9.4E-7). Currently,
we are investigating a number of pesticides and herbicides used in the
areas of Thailand from where TIGER-LC subjects were recruited, to
investigate whether these putative carcinogens participate in the
etiology of CCA.


