Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of HCC-derived major HBV integration junctions in urine
and their implications for driver identification.


Chronic Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) infection is a major etiology of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), a leading cause of cancer mortality
worldwide. Integration of HBV DNA into the host genome occurs during the
course of chronic infection. Integrated HBV DNA is observed in most of
HBV-associated HCC. The integration junctions derived from the original
tumor cell become abundant (referred to as major integration junctions)
in the infected liver because of clonal expansion during tumor
development. Detection of circulating DNA containing these tumor-derived
integration junctions may therefore be useful for cancer detection. We
have adapted a method known as Primer Extension Capture (PEC) to enrich
integrated HBV DNA for next-generation sequencing (NGS). Our initial
studies using this approach to enrich the HBV DR1-2 region (a common site
for HBV integrated breakpoints) identified major integration junctions
from HBV-HCC tissue samples and matched urine. Further analysis revealed
that most recurrently targeted integrations from these HCC tumors have
previously reported involvement in cancer. This suggested that
identification of recurrently targeted genes is applicable for driver
identification. Interestingly, we show how HBV targets the TERT promoter
in a localized region even though no two TERT junctions examined are
identical. We have further developed this PEC to enrich for the entire
HBV genome and applied it to (i) liver tissue DNA from 20 matched HCC and
adjacent non-HCC samples, and (ii) DNA from urine of 20 hepatitis, 20
cirrhosis and 20 HCC patients. The HBV enriched libraries were sequenced
by NGS and the integration events were analyzed using the in-house
developed software. The complexity of HBV junction sites in HCC and
non-HCC tissue and urine derived circulating DNA is reported. Our
approach has potential to be used for liquid biopsies to study the
complexities of HBV integrations in chronic HBV infection and
carcinogenesis, and to identify HCC-related DNA modifications for early
detection and disease management.


