Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC13 induced NFҡB activation regulates metabolic reprograming by
promoting its crosstalk with GLUT-1 receptor.


Objective: Pancreatic cancer (PanCa) is the fourth most common cause of
cancer-related deaths in the US. MUC13, mucin is aberrantly expressed in
PanCa and promotes tumor growth and progression. Herein, we investigate
the fundamental role of MUC13 in glucose metabolism and delineate the
molecular interplay of various molecules governing MUC13 mediated
metabolic reprograming that may be involved in pancreatic tumor
maintenance.

Methods: MUC13 expressing (Panc-1) and knockdown PanCa cells (HPAF-II)
were generated for the study. Immunoblotting and qRT-PCR assays were
performed to assess the expression of protein and mRNA levels,
respectively, of key signaling molecules involved in glucose metabolism
of PanCa. MUC13 and Glut-1 interaction was studied using reciprocal
co-immunoprecipitation, immunofluorescence, proximity ligation, Western
blotting, co-capping assays in cell lines. Lactate and glucose assays
were performed using commercially available kits. In vitro functional
assays using wound healing scratch assay (migration), and cell Matrigel
assay (invasion) were performed in presence or absence of Lactate and 2DG
supplementation.

Results: Our results demonstrate that MUC13 expression leads to the
TNF-induced activation/nuclear translocation of NFҡB p-65 and
phosphorylation of IkB which in turn upregulates additional key proteins,
Glut-1, c-Myc, Bcl-2. This recruits the Glut-1 to MUC13, wherein MUC13
functionally interacts with Glut-1 and stabilizes it, initiating
downstream events that result in altered glucose metabolism. MUC13
expression in PanCa cells increases glucose uptake, lactate secretion
which is reduced upon MUC13 knockdown. Additionally, MUC13 mediates
increased cell migratory and invasion potential which can be potentiated
by supplementing the culture media with lactate, an end product of
aerobic glycolysis. However, treatment of cells with NFҡB inhibitor,
Sulfasalazine, inhibits the MUC13 and Glut-1 interaction and abrogates
all these events associated with glucose metabolism.

Conclusion: These outcomes from our study suggest that MUC13 plays an
important role in metabolic reprogramming of PanCa cells metabolism to
induce cancer growth and enhanced cellular invasion and motility. NFҡB
acts downstream of MUC13 to coordinate the events leading to its
interation with Glut-1 and metabolic reprogramming. Overall, these
findings illustrate mechanisms by which MUC13 coordinates the shift in
metabolism to sustain cancer growth and invasion in PanCa.


