Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell lines that genomically resemble high-grade serous ovarian
carcinomas display differences in growth and invasive capacities in an
orthometastatic nude mouse model.


Ovarian cancer (OC) is a complex disease that can be divided into various
histopathological subtypes. High-grade serous OC (HGSOC) is the most
abundant histotype, accounting for up to 70% of all OC cases. Whereas the
majority of patients are diagnosed when the disease is already
disseminated in the peritoneal cavity, orthometastatic mouse models of
peritoneal OC—needed to perform preclinical studies—are not well
developed. The human OC cell lines mostly studied for in vivo tumor
development in immunosuppressed mice have been implanted subcutaneously,
not intra-abdominally, thus not reflecting the tumor niche this disease
actually encounters when advanced. Furthermore, most studies utilize
cells which do not have the genetic fidelity of HGSOC. Thus, we set up a
study to track the development of intra-abdominal disease induced by 3
human OC cells lines with the genetic fidelity of HGSOC: OVCAR-4, OVSAHO,
and PEO14. The 3 cell lines showed abundant expression of ARID1A, PAX8
and mutant p53, with varied levels of expression of CA125 and WT1. We
contrasted among them, the time needed for the disease to develop, the
tissues being targeted, and the histopathological abnormalities detected.
We found that the elapsed time for the disease to develop for the 3 lines
ranged between 4 to 11 months. This result stands in stark contrast with
the less than 3 months it takes for the disease to evolve in the
peritoneal cavity when injecting cells of unlikely HGSOC genomic
fidelity, such as SKOV-3, IGROV-1, or A2780. Within the cell lines with
HGSOC genotype we found commonalities and differences in terms of their
in vivo behavior. Among the commonalities, all cells homed to the
omental-spleen-pancreatic area, the liver base, the mesentery, and the
diaphragm. Among the differences, PEO14 cells developed into sizable
masses not invading the parenchyma of the abdominal organs. OVSAHO cells
developed discrete masses closely surrounding the organs, while OVCAR-4
cells displayed full invasiveness into the parenchyma of several
abdominal organs in addition to developing micro-metastases within the
lung stroma. Whereas OVCAR-4 cells caused accumulation of large volume
bloody ascites carrying abundant multicellular structures (MCS), OVSAHO
and PEO14 cells led to the formation of low volume bloody ascites
carrying scarce MCS. These phenotypic heterogeneities were further
reflected in the different end-of-wellness endpoints criteria reached,
which were: the increase in the abdominal circumference caused by the
accumulation of ascites in animals carrying OVCAR-4 cells, the size of
the solid abdominal masses in animals carrying PEO14 cells, and the
dramatic weight loss in animals carrying OVSAHO cells. In conclusion, we
show that, despite having similar genetic fidelities, HGSOC cell lines
are heterogeneous in terms of their phenotypic behavior when
ortometastatically implanted in nude mice.


