Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transforming growth factor-beta regulation of cancer stem cell
dynamics at different stages of breast cancer progression.


Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a subpopulation of tumor cells that are
uniquely capable of initiating and sustaining tumorigenesis, and they
have also been implicated in driving disease recurrence after cancer
therapy. We have previously developed a novel lentiviral-based reporter
system for direct visualization, quantitation and isolation of cells with
CSC properties. The construct consists of a tandemly-repeated composite
SOX2-OCT4 response element (“SORE6”) driving expression of a
destabilized fluorescent protein reporter (Tang et al. Stem Cell Reports,
2015). TGF-βs are pleiotropic regulatory factors with complex roles in
tumorigenesis. We and others have hypothesized that TGF-β can regulate
the CSC population in breast cancer with stimulatory or inhibitory
effects depending the model and stage of cancer development. Using the
MCF10Ca1h and MCF7 breast cancer models, which retain tumor suppressor
responses to TGF-β, here we show that TGF-β treatment significantly
reduces the size of the CSC population in vitro. Although TGF-β had
relatively little effect on invasion and migration of the bulk population
in these models, it clearly inhibited migration and invasion of the CSCs,
suggesting that biological responses to TGF-β can vary depending on the
position of the cell in the differentiation hierarchy. Combining our stem
cell reporter with a TGF-β pathway reporter, we further show that CSCs
in the MCF10Ca1h model have higher endogenous activation of the TGF-β
pathway than does the bulk tumor cell population, and by time-lapse video
microscopy we find that CSCs with active TGF-β signaling are relatively
quiescent. Furthermore, neutralization of TGF-β in vivo leads to an
increased representation of CSCs in MCF10Ca1h and MCF7 tumors. Thus our
preliminary results suggest that in breast cancer models where TGF-β
acts as a tumor suppressor, TGF-β signaling is preferentially activated
in the CSC compartment and keeps a subpopulation of CSCs in a quiescent
and stationary state. These findings have important implications for the
clinical use of TGF-β pathway antagonists. In contrast, in the
metastatic breast cancer MDA-MB231 model, in which TGF-β acts as a
pro-progression factor, we show that TGF-β can increase the size of the
CSC population and enhance invasion. In this model, the CSCs are enriched
for the ability to form macroscopic lung metastases when compared with
non-CSCs, and we show that this effect is due in part to a selective
survival advantage of the CSCs in the first 24 hours after arrival at the
metastatic site. The role of TGF-β in this process is currently under
investigation.


