Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic deregulation of the Hippo pathway in muscle-derived
sarcomas.


Soft tissue sarcomas are an aggressive group of roughly 65 mesenchymal
malignancies diagnosed in 200,000 people worldwide annually. The
treatment approach for sarcomas has not changed significantly in 25
years. Furthermore, recent sequencing efforts have revealed that
consistent oncogenic mutations are rare in muscle cancers. As a result,
these tumors are not sensitive to most available targeted therapeutics,
which specifically interfere with the functions of mutant oncogenic
pathways. We are investigating the possibility that together with p53 or
RB1 mutation/loss, alterations in chromatin state and epigenetic
regulation rather than oncogenic mutation, are required for sarcoma
transformation. Based on our current findings we are testing the
hypothesis that epigenetic deregulation of Angiomotin (AMOT), a novel
tumor suppressor we have identified, is critical for sarcomagenesis. AMOT
is highly expressed in differentiated human muscle tissue but is silenced
in muscle-derived sarcomas including undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma
(UPS), a commonly diagnosed and aggressive subtype. Furthermore, ectopic
expression of the p130 isoform of AMOT significantly inhibits UPS
proliferation. This finding is consistent with the only known function of
AMOT in cancer cells, which is to sequester the Hippo pathway effector
YAP1 and facilitate its degradation. YAP1 is a pro-proliferation
transcriptional activator and deletion of Yap1 in the KrasG12D/+;
Trp53fl/fl autochthonous mouse model of UPS. Importantly, treatment of
sarcoma cells and tumors with the epigenetic inhibitors SAHA and JQ1
restores p130 AMOT expression, inhibits Yap1, and dramatically reduces
sarcomagenesis in vivo. Interestingly, SAHA/JQ1 treatment also induces
expression of muscle markers including MYOD and p57 suggesting that
epigenetic modulation promotes differentiation as well as inhibiting
proliferation. Gene expression studies of control and Yap1-deficient
tumors revealed that Yap1 controls NF-κB signaling. We have performed
H3K27Ac ChIP-seq and super-enhancer analysis of human UPS tumors to
determine whether NF-κB targets are important in human sarcomas. These
analyses revealed that NF-κB is the most transcriptionally active
pathway in UPS. Together these data suggest that persistent YAP1-mediated
NF-κB signaling promotes sarcomagenesis. In normal undifferentiated
muscle cells NF-κB signaling is essential for proliferation and
inhibition of differentiation. We have now shown that SAHA/JQ1-mediated
YAP1 inhibition subsequently decreases NF-κB activity, underscoring the
ability of epigenetic therapies to decrease tumorigenesis and enhance
differentiation. Our findings suggest that pharmacological modulation of
chromatin modifiers will allow us to regain epigenetic control over the
Hippo pathway and its downstream targets. Thus we have an opportunity to
finally change the treatment paradigm for these patients with novel
targeted therapeutics.


