Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinctions between the metabolic changes in glioblastoma cells
and glioma stem-like cells following irradiation.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common primary malignant brain
tumor in adults and, even with aggressive treatment that includes
surgical resection, radiation, and temozolomide administration, prognosis
is poor due to tumor recurrence. There is evidence that within GBMs a
small number of glioma stem- like cells (GSCs) exist, which are thought
to be radiation resistant and may be capable of repopulating a tumor
after treatment. Like most cancers, GBMs largely employ aerobic
glycolysis to create ATP, a phenomenon known as the Warburg effect.
Experiments have shown that the cellular metabolism of GSCs differs from
that of differentiated cells, making them an attractive target for novel
therapeutic approaches. Much work has been done to analyze the metabolic
profiles of GSCs with the goal of identifying potential therapeutic
targets, but little data exists linking metabolic changes to radiation
resistance. The purpose of this study is to characterize the metabolic
differences between glioma stem- like cells and traditional GBM tumor
cells with and without radiation treatment (IR).

To this end, we compared the metabolism of a human derived GSC line with
two commonly used GBM cell lines before and after IR. At baseline, we
find that glioma stem-like cells are more quiescent than GBM cells, which
have higher levels of both glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation. GBM
lines show higher levels of both basal and maximal respiration, as well
as basal glycolysis and glycolytic capacity than GSCs. They also express
higher levels of energy, glycolysis, and TCA cycle metabolites than GSCs.
Inversely, GSCs demonstrate metabolic signs of quiescence such as
decreased NEAA synthesis.

After IR, the radiation- sensitive GBM tumor cell line (U251) exhibits
increases in all metabolic pathways, whereas the levels of glycolytic and
oxidative metabolites in the GSCs remain unchanged. All cell lines show
an increase of ATP and NAD production following IR. These findings
indicate that the metabolism of GSCs undergoes different alterations than
that of GBM tumor cells after IR, making them an attractive target for
novel therapeutic approaches in conjunction with radiation therapy.
Additionally, differences in metabolic signatures between GSC lines could
be useful for non-invasive diagnostic modalities such as 13C MR
spectroscopy.


