Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of proinflammatory chemokine network between
adipocytes and triple negative breast cancer cells.


Obesity has become a global epidemic and causes a chronic low-grade
inflammation. This poses a large health burden because excess adiposity
can lead to chronic diseases such as type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular
disease and some cancers. Obese individuals get higher incidence,
progression and mortality of cancers compared to lean ones. Particularly,
breast cancer (BC) in women is closely associated with obesity. Despite
an epidemiological link between obesity and low cancer survival rates,
little is known about the molecular mechanisms by which obesity promotes
BC progression. Obesity-derived chronic low-grade inflammation involves
alteration of a chemokine network that may contribute to the cancer
progression and metastasis. Herein, we proposed the novel concept that
the chemokine network between obesity and BC builds an inflammatory
burden via proinflammatory chemokines to promote cancer progression. We
employed mesenchymal BC cell PY8119 and epithelial-like BC PY230 for
triple negative BC (TNBC) cell model, and mouse 3T3-L1 preadipocyte and
adipocyte conditioned media (CM) to mimic lean and obese conditions in
vitro. We examined the profiles of chemokine signature of PY8119 and
PY230 treated with preadipocytes and adipocytes CM using PCR array. Both
preadipocytes and adipocytes CM-treated PY8119 and PY230 cells absent or
low levels in chemokine receptors. On the other hand, the chemokines
CCL2, 5, 7 and CXCL10 showed higher expression in both preadipocyte and
adipocyte CM-treated PY8119. Interestingly, adipocyte CM-treated PY8119
cells dominantly expressed CXCL1-3 compared to preadipocyte CM-treated
cells. In addition, CCL2, 5, 7, 20, and CXCL1, 5, 10 were highly
expressed in both preadipocyte and adipocyte CM-treated PY230 cells.
Moreover, CXCL2 and 3 were significantly induced in PY230 cells after
treatment with adipocyte CM compared to preadipocyte CM. Taken together,
the results indicate that dominant chemokines CXCL1-3 expressed in
adipocyte CM-treated TNBC cells promote a pro-tumor inflammatory network.
Hence, these proinflammatory microenvironment augmented by adipocytes
might contribute to TNBC progression.


