Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analytical validation of clinical whole genome and transcriptome
sequencing of patient derived tumors: clinical application of whole
genome sequencing for reporting targetable variants in cancer.


Next Generation DNA Sequencing (NGS) technologies are currently being
applied in the clinical setting for the treatment of disease. The goal is
to use high-throughput sequencing to identify specific variants within
each tumor and recommend personalized treatment approaches or clinical
trials tailored to the individual’s disease and genomic profile. These
assays are comprised of either predefined sequencing panels, where a
handpicked set of clinically significant genes are examined within each
patient, or are cancer type specific targeted sequencing protocols or
whole exome platforms covering only the coding region of the patient’s
genome. Whole genome sequencing allows hypothesis-free interrogation of
both coding and non-coding regions of the genome revealing more potential
therapeutic options than examining a small set of genes or genomic loci.
The protocol eliminates sequence capture related bias observed in whole
exome or panel sequencing. The New York Genome Center therefore has
performed analytical validation of whole genome and transcriptome
sequencing (WGTS) of patient derived tumors and matched normals for the
purposes of clinical testing and have devised a clinical reporting
strategy of significant driver and therapeutic associated mutations. Many
clinical NGS guidelines are directed toward targeted panel or exome
sequencing validation. Here, we expanded on New York State’s Department
of Health NGS guidelines developing them into novel standards applicable
to WGTS for the purposes of clinical test validation. We first sequenced
a virtual tumor at very high coverage (300x) and downsampled to determine
the optimum depth of sequencing necessary for high confidence somatic
variant calling across the entire genome. We then validated whole genome
sequencing laboratory protocols for DNA and RNA sequencing on a total of
50 specimens derived from fresh frozen (FF) and formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor samples. We performed a series of
experiments to assess the accuracy and reliability of the results based
on our laboratory and bioinformatics protocols. We performed our
validation on the 50 tumor normal pairs, a subset of which had known
genomic profiles. Comparisons were also made for variant calling
concordance and reproducibility between matched FF and FFPE tumors. Here,
we present our validation results and clinical WGTS standards for depth
of sequencing, reproducibility, sensitivity, and present limit of
detection analysis for SNV calling, copy number identification and
structural variants. RNA sequencing is performed to call fusion or exon
skipping events and to confirm the DNA variants. The New York Genome
Center WGTS clinical assay is intended to provide a more comprehensive
patient variant discovery approach suitable for directed oncological
therapeutic applications.


