Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel anti-MUC1 CAR T cell drives immunity to pancreatic cancer.


Background: Pancreatic cancer is the 4th leading cause of cancer deaths
in the US with very poor prognosis. Treatment options are limited to
surgery and chemo/radiation that often times do not increase survival and
are associated with high toxicity. Targeted immune-based therapies have
shown some promise but needs further exploration. Mucin 1 (MUC1), a
glycoprotein expressed on the apical surface of epithelial cells of most
epithelial organs, undergoes hypoglycozylation in tumors. This tumor-form
of MUC1 (tMUC1) is over-expressed in 80% of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinomas (PDAC). tMUC1 therefore remains a promising target for
therapeutic intervention. We have developed a patented antibody (TAB004)
which specifically detects tMUC1 and spares normal MUC1. Using a novel
technology, functional fragments of TAB004 antibody (scFv) were
incorporated into the chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) construct and used
to genetically modify primary human T cells. ScFv domain which recognizes
tMUC1 is linked to the co-stimulatory molecules of T cells (CD28 and
CD3ζ). When the engineered T cells come in contact with tMUC1 expressing
tumor cells, multiple T cell signaling pathways are initiated leading to
fully activated cytotoxic T cells that lyse the tumor cells.

Methods: Retroviral based technique was used to deliver the CAR gene into
human PBMC derived primary T cells. A fluorescent tag (mKate) was fused
to the C-terminus of CAR molecules, in order to visualize CAR expression
on T cell membrane by fluorescent microscopy and potentially for in vivo
tracking. Cytotoxicity was evaluated using co-culture method with varying
T cell to target cell ratios followed by MTT assay. Intracellular IFNγ
was measured by flow cytometry.

Results: tMUC1-CAR-T cells show increased activation and proliferation
compared to normal T cells. These cells bind strongly to tMUC1 expressing
human pancreatic cancer cells forming immunologic synapse. Minimal
binding of the tMUC1-CAR T cells was observed to normal or low MUC1
expressing tumors cells suggesting high specificity of these CAR T cells
to tMUC1. CAR expression was distributed evenly on the cell surface of
the T cells. Engineered tMUC1-CAR T cells exhibit robust cytotoxicity
against a panel of PDA cell lines, associated with high IFNγ release.
Fortunately, the same CAR T cells display minimum toxicity against normal
epithelial cells. CAR T cell function will be evaluated in the
preclinical mouse model of PDA, as single treatment and also in
combination with checkpoint inhibitors and chemotherapy drugs.

Conclusion: Despite the remarkable successes reported using CAR T cells
in clinic, particularly CD19 CAR T for leukemia; some adverse effects
have been attributed to this treatment. This highlights the urgent need
for developing tumor-specific CAR T cells. This study demonstrates the
specificity and effectiveness of tMUC1-CAR T cells against pancreatic
cancer cells. Thus, tMUC1 CAR T cells have the potential to be further
developed for future clinical use.


