Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bridging the gap between NGS data and its usability: cancer gene
discovery through massive-scale transcriptomic analyses and development
of a powerful web-tool for dissemination of these findings.


Background: In a prior transcriptomic analysis focused on lncRNA
interrogation using some of these data, we discovered tens of thousands
of novel lncRNAs (Iyer and Niknafs et al, Nature Genetics, 2015).
Building on this analysis, we recently developed a markedly improved
bioinformatics tool for novel gene/isoform discovery from massive RNA-seq
datasets named TACO (Niknafs et al, Nature Methods, In press,
tacorna.github.io). TACO produces high-fidelity transcript structure
predictions from large RNA-seq datasets. We now set out to
comprehensively leverage both TACO and the publicly available RNA-seq
data for discovery of novel transcriptional cancer associations.
Additionally, in order to widely disseminate these findings in an
accessible manner, we have built a web-tool that provides the scientific
community access to these data and analyses.

Methods: We have downloaded, curated, and processed 23,623 RNA-seq
samples largely from the TCGA, ICGC, GTEx, and CCLE, comprising 37 tissue
types and over 35 cancer types. RNA-seq data processing was performed
using STAR, Cufflinks, Kallisto, and TACO. The web tool for visualization
and access to these data and analyses was built using a JavaScript-based
server infrastructure (Noje.js) and a relational PostgreSQL database.

Results: Generation of a consensus transcriptome from this large-scale
RNA-seq dataset via TACO resulted in the discovery of tens of thousands
of novel transcriptional elements, including intergenic non-coding RNAs
and novel splice isoforms of known genes. Such an expansive RNA-seq
cohort that includes many normal tissue samples enabled statistically
powerful cancer association expression analyses that revealed a myriad of
novel cancer genes, especially in tissues for which there was previously
little-to-no normal tissue RNA-seq data (e.g., brain and pancreas). Many
of these novel transcriptional elements discovered using TACO were also
found to be cancer associated. We have built a web-tool to facilitate
further analysis and discovery using these data and analyses by the
scientific community. The web-tool provides a powerful and intuitive
interface for researchers with little-to-no bioinformatics expertise to
leverage large-scale RNA-seq datasets.

Conclusion: Here we present the largest reported compendium of RNA-seq
data, and reveal many novel cancer gene associations. Using a new,
powerful gene discovery tool, TACO, we identify a multitude of novel
transcriptional elements that are also cancer associated. Despite the
abundance of publicly available RNA-seq data, necessary computing
resources, data storage, and bioinformatics expertise are barriers to
usability of these data by scientific community. Our RNA-seq expression
web-tool bridges this gap, and enables users to powerfully interrogate
cancer expression across dozens of tumor and tissue types.


