Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of patient-derived xenografts
of clear cell carcinoma of the ovary.


Background; The patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model is likely to
reflect original human cancer biology compared to cultured cell lines,
since tumor tissues are directly implanted into animals. PDX models of
ovarian cancer have been developed, but were not fully characterized at
the molecular level, especially for clear cell carcinoma (CCC), which is
more prevalent in Japan than western countries, exhibits chemoresistant
phenotype and poor survival. The development of new treatment strategies
and the better understanding of biology of CCC both depend on clinically
relevant animal models. In particular, molecular annotated PDX models are
useful for the preclinical investigation of anticancer drugs and
individualized anticancer therapy. Methods; We transplanted 19 parent
(primary or metastatic) tumors directly into NOG mice. The histologic
characteristics were compared between parental tumors and PDX ones. Among
CCC pairs, gene expression analysis, gene mutation analysis were
conducted on parental tumors and corresponding PDX tumors. Response to
chemotherapeutic agents was analyzed using PDX tumors of CCC, and
correlated with clinical outcome. Results; Six of nineteen (31.6%)
transplanted tumors could be passaged. Gene expression profiles revealed
that engrafted tumors expressed more proliferation-related genes than
those of non-englafted ones. Among six PDX models established, two were
found to be CCC. Two PDX tumors of CCC maintained the histologic
characteristics of parental CCC tumors. Gene expression profile revealed
similar results between primary CCC and PDX tumors of CCC except that
PDXs lost expression of immune-related genes.. Gene mutational analysis
showed similar pattern between primary CCC and PDX of CCC.
Drug-sensitivity test showed resistance to carboplatin in two PDX tumors
of CCC, which is consistent with their clinical outcomes. Conclusions.
PDXs of CCC were established and found to retain histologic and clinical
features of original tumors, and can be utilized to screen new target
drugs for platinum-resistant CCC.


