Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody against TIGIT (T cell immunoreceptor with Ig and ITIM
domains) induces anti-tumor immune response and generates long-term
immune memory.


T cell immunoreceptor with Ig and ITIM domains (TIGIT) is a co-inhibitory
molecule containing an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motif
(ITIM) within its cytoplasmic tail, and is highly expressed on regulatory
T cells and activated CD4+ T, CD8+ T, and NK cells. TIGIT competes with
CD226, which contains an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif
(ITAM) within its cytoplasmic tail for ligands poliovirus receptor (PVR)
and poliovirus receptor-related 2 (PVRL2), with higher affinity to PVR.
The ligands are expressed on the surface of antigen presenting cells and
at high levels on most tumors. Therefore, when TIGIT is present, the
ligands preferentially engage TIGIT rather than CD226, leading to cell
suppression. We have generated antibodies against TIGIT that blocks
ligand binding and inhibits TIGIT signaling. The clinical candidate,
OMP-313M32 binds human TIGIT but not rodent and non-human primate TIGIT.
Therefore, a surrogate antibody was generated for pre-clinical
assessments in mice. Antibody 313R12 is an anti-mouse TIGIT antibody that
can block mouse PVR ligand binding and inhibit TIGIT signaling in a
manner similar to the clinical candidate OMP-313M32. 313R12 inhibited the
growth of syngeneic colon and kidney tumors in immune competent mice. In
some cases, anti-TIGIT antibody 313R12 caused complete tumor regression
and a potent anti-tumor immune memory response as demonstrated by the
lack of tumor growth upon re-challenge of mice that remained tumor-free
after prior anti-TIGIT treatment. Mechanistically, anti-TIGIT antibody
313R12 was shown to induce a Th1 response and increase cytotoxic T
lymphocyte (CTL) activity. By in vivo depletion of T cell populations, we
have shown that CD8 T cell depletion completely abrogated the anti-TIGIT
therapeutic effect, whereas CD4 T cell depletion led to partial reversal
of efficacy of anti-TIGIT. Therefore, both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells are
critical for anti-TIGIT-mediated immune responses. Using mice
reconstituted with human hematopoietic stem cells, we also demonstrated
that the clinical candidate OMP-313M32 inhibits patient-derived melanoma
tumor growth. Taken together, these data demonstrate that anti-TIGIT
therapy suppresses tumor growth and generates long-term immunological
memory against multiple tumors.


