Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PARP inhibitors suppress growth of EGFR-mutant cancers by
targeting nuclear PKM2.


Poly(ADP-robose) polymerase-1 (PARP1) or ADP-ribosyltransferase
diphtheria toxin-like 1 (ARTD1) is the most abundant and the best
understood member of the 17 PARP family proteins. PARP1 binds to both
single strand breaks (SSBs) and double-strand breaks (DSBs) and
participates in the recognition, excision and repair of DNA damage. The
most extensively studied role of PARP1 is its involvement in base
excision repair (BER) and PARP inhibition induced-trapping of PARP1
during BER. Moreover, suppression of PARP1/2 leads to synthetic lethality
in BRCA1/2-defecient tumors, indicating that PARP1-dependent BER and
BRCA-dependent homologous repair pathway have overlapping and redundant
functions in DNA repair. Recent studies have also pointed to a broader
utility of PARP inhibitors beyond hereditary BRCA-deficient cancers.
Pyruvate kinase isoform M2 (PKM2) is a glycolysis enzyme that converts
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) into pyruvate. Up-regulation of PKM2 has been
shown recently to be an important feature of tumorigenesis. In tumor
cells, PKM2 forms a dimmer that is catalytically inactive as a glycolysis
enzyme, but provides advantage for tumor progression due to Warburg
effect. In this report, we demonstrated that poly-ADP-ribose (PAR) is
required for nuclear retention and nuclear function of PKM2. PKM2
translocates into nucleus and binds to PAR upon EGF stimulation. PARP
inhibition, or the PKM2-C/A mutant, which abolishes the PKM2/PAR
interaction, suppresses the nuclear function of PKM2. In addition, PARP
inhibition also diminishes the nuclear PKM2-dependent glycolysis and
tumor growth. Moreover, we showed that nuclear localization of PKM2
correlates with PAR expression in EGFR-mutant human lung cancer tissues.
Interestingly, PARP inhibition leads to growth suppression of some
EGFR-mutant lung cancer cells, which are resistant to EGFR inhibitor.
These data together support an unexpected function of PARP inhibition in
tumor suppression and indicate that nuclear PKM2 may serve as a promising
biomarker for the further development of PARP inhibitor-based therapies.


