Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring optimal targeted combination therapies with neratinib
for HER2+ breast cancer.


Activation by amplification or overexpression of the proto-oncogene HER2
(also known as ERBB2) is associated with the development and progression
of breast cancer. Neratinib is a novel, irreversible, pan-HER tyrosine
kinase inhibitor which selectively inhibits EGFR, HER2 and HER4. In this
preclinical study, we explored the efficacy of neratinib in combination
with other clinically relevant targeted agents for optimal treatment of
HER2-positive breast cancer in in vitro and in vivo models. Western blot
(WB) analysis of a panel of breast cancer cell lines showed that BT-474,
SKBR-3, and HCC-1954 cells displayed elevated HER2 expression levels
(here denoted as HER2+), while MDA-MB-361, MDA-MB-453, and CAMA-1 breast
cancer cells expressed relatively lower HER2 expression levels.
Interestingly, neratinib inhibition positively correlated with HER2
expression levels as assessed by cell survival assays. The IC50 of
neratinib in the HER2+ cell lines was in the 3.6 - 113nM range.
Consistent with the in vitro data, treatment of a HER2+ breast cancer PDX
model with neratinib single agent (p.o. 5 days/week) led to a significant
dose-dependent tumor growth inhibition with tumor regressions observed at
a low dose of 10 mg/kg (pActivation by amplification or overexpression of
the proto-oncogene HER2 (also known as ERBB2) is associated with the
development and progression of breast cancer. Neratinib is a novel,
irreversible, pan-HER tyrosine kinase inhibitor which selectively
inhibits EGFR, HER2 and HER4. In this preclinical study, we explored the
efficacy of neratinib in combination with other clinically relevant
targeted agents for optimal treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer in
in vitro and in vivo models. Western blot (WB) analysis of a panel of
breast cancer cell lines showed that BT-474, SKBR-3, and HCC-1954 cells
displayed elevated HER2 expression levels (here denoted as HER2+), while
MDA-MB-361, MDA-MB-453, and CAMA-1 breast cancer cells expressed
relatively lower HER2 expression levels. Interestingly, neratinib
inhibition positively correlated with HER2 expression levels as assessed
by cell survival assays. The IC50 of neratinib in the HER2+ cell lines
was in the 3.6 - 113nM range. Consistent with the in vitro data,
treatment of a HER2+ breast cancer PDX model with neratinib single agent
(p.o. 5 days/week) led to a significant dose-dependent tumor growth
inhibition with tumor regressions observed at a low dose of 10 mg/kg
(p<0.0001). The activity of neratinib in combination with other targeted
agents was then evaluated in vitro in the HER2+ breast tumor cell lines
using a Chou-Talalay method. Neratinib showed synergistic
anti-proliferative activity in combination with the PI3Kα inhibitor
BYL719 in all the HER2+ cell lines tested. By contrast, synergy with mTOR
inhibitors (everolimus and TAK228) and with the MEK inhibitor trametinib
was only observed in BT-474 and HCC-1954 cells. HCC-1954 cells had the
best response to neratinib combinations among all HER2+ cell lines
tested, with combination index values Activation by amplification or
overexpression of the proto-oncogene HER2 (also known as ERBB2) is
associated with the development and progression of breast cancer.
Neratinib is a novel, irreversible, pan-HER tyrosine kinase inhibitor
which selectively inhibits EGFR, HER2 and HER4. In this preclinical
study, we explored the efficacy of neratinib in combination with other
clinically relevant targeted agents for optimal treatment of
HER2-positive breast cancer in in vitro and in vivo models. Western blot
(WB) analysis of a panel of breast cancer cell lines showed that BT-474,
SKBR-3, and HCC-1954 cells displayed elevated HER2 expression levels
(here denoted as HER2+), while MDA-MB-361, MDA-MB-453, and CAMA-1 breast
cancer cells expressed relatively lower HER2 expression levels.
Interestingly, neratinib inhibition positively correlated with HER2
expression levels as assessed by cell survival assays. The IC50 of
neratinib in the HER2+ cell lines was in the 3.6 - 113nM range.
Consistent with the in vitro data, treatment of a HER2+ breast cancer PDX
model with neratinib single agent (p.o. 5 days/week) led to a significant
dose-dependent tumor growth inhibition with tumor regressions observed at
a low dose of 10 mg/kg (p<0.0001). The activity of neratinib in
combination with other targeted agents was then evaluated in vitro in the
HER2+ breast tumor cell lines using a Chou-Talalay method. Neratinib
showed synergistic anti-proliferative activity in combination with the
PI3Kα inhibitor BYL719 in all the HER2+ cell lines tested. By contrast,
synergy with mTOR inhibitors (everolimus and TAK228) and with the MEK
inhibitor trametinib was only observed in BT-474 and HCC-1954 cells.
HCC-1954 cells had the best response to neratinib combinations among all
HER2+ cell lines tested, with combination index values <0.5. Immunoblot
analysis demonstrated that neratinib treatment displayed complete
inhibition of HER2 phosphorylation in these cells. Substantial inhibition
of downstream signaling pathways following single agent neratinib
treatment was evident by reduced phosphorylation levels of AKT, S6K1, S6,
4EBP1, ERK1/2 and MEK1/2. Consistently with the cell viability data, the
combination of neratinib with PI3K/Akt/mTOR and MAPK inhibitors showed a
synergy on signaling blockage in these two downstream pathways
respectively. Taken together this data shows that neratinib has efficacy
as single agent in preclinical models of HER2+ breast tumors and its
anti-proliferative activity in vitro was enhanced when combined with
PI3K/Akt/mTOR and MAPK pathway inhibitors. Further studies of
neratinib-based combination treatments are underway in HER2+ breast
cancer xenograft and PDX models to further corroborate these findings.


