Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using cancer dependency data to discover tumor suppressive and
oncogenic functional modules.


Efforts to define protein complexes and their functional networks are
critical for systems-level understanding of the pathways involved in
human cancer. Current methods to catalog human protein complexes via
physical interaction are often unable to resolve functional differences
between complex members or infer relationships governed by
sub-stoichiometric interactions. While functional wiring maps in yeast
have been generated by measuring epistatic interactions between pairs of
genes, efforts to scale this concept in individual human cell lines have
been met with challenges and have only been able to characterize limited
numbers of genes at a time.

We have developed a scalable approach that can measure functional
similarity without the constraints of pairwise genetic interaction
experiments. Using data from genome-wide RNAi and CRISPR dropout screens
performed in hundreds of cancer cell lines, we leveraged the
heterogeneity of gene dependencies across cancer types to measure
functional similarity between thousands of genes at once, which in turn
allowed us to recreate known inter- and intra-complex functional
relationships and to uncover tumor suppressive and oncogenic functional
modules in cancer-relevant pathways such as proteolysis, metabolism and
transcription.

Applying these approaches to the mammalian SWI/SNF (BAF) chromatin
remodeling complex, which is mutated in over 20% of human cancer,
revealed three functional modules that arose separately during metazoan
evolution, one of which is entirely novel and uncharacterized. We then
performed biochemical experiments that fully support three specialized
complex configurations, each with distinct size, subunit composition, and
function. These data reorganize the BAF complex into previously
unrecognized modules that better explain mutational burden in human
cancer. Notably, we observe that that all known BAF-driven, highly
penetrant rare cancers and neurodevelopmental disorders involve
disruption within a single functional module we defined, underscoring the
value of evaluating disease genomics through the lens of functional
modularity.


