Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the role of EMT in breast cancer dormancy and metastasis
in vivo.


Breast cancer patients can develop metastases from dormant tumor cells
years after primary tumor resection and treatment. Despite the clinical
significance of metastatic latency, the exact cellular and molecular
events regulating tumor dormancy remains largely unknown due to
challenges in detecting single dormant tumor cells in vivo and
characterizing the dormant tumor microenvironment. A developmental
program termed Epithelial Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) has been shown to
play an important role in tumor cell dissemination, tumor dormancy, and
chemoresistance. During EMT, stationary epithelial cells lose their
epithelial characteristics, including adherent junctions and apical-basal
polarity, and acquire mesenchymal shape and properties. These cells gain
the ability to migrate into the circulation, lodge into a distant organ,
and form dormant tumor niches. We have previously shown that reversal of
EMT is a key driving force in dormant tumor cell proliferation and
macrometastasis formation in a skin carcinoma mouse model. Here, we
present a novel metastatic breast cancer mouse model in which HER2-driven
primary breast tumor cells are labelled with red fluorescent protein with
inducible EMT transcription factor TWIST1. We established this mouse
model by crossing the TetON-TWIST1 mice with the MMTV-rtTA mice to
generate the MMTV-rtTA/TetON-TWIST1 double transgenic mice. To generate
HER2-driven breast tumors in these mice, we administered concentrated
lentivirus that expresses both the HER2 gene and the tdTomato fluorescent
marker under one promoter via intraductal injection. This allows for
rapid and synchronized development of primary tumors which recapitulate
the formation of sporadic human breast cancer which arises in single
cells in otherwise normally developed breast tissue. TWIST1 expression in
the luminal layer of the mammary gland was then induced via oral
doxycycline. Upon expression of TWIST1, Her2-driven breast tumor cells
were found in circulation and in the lungs as micrometastases. We
determined that disseminated breast tumor cells mostly remained in
dormancy until TWIST expression was switched off by doxycycline
withdrawal. We showed that tumor dormancy is partly due to the inability
to reverse EMT and regain proliferative capacity. Lastly, using our mouse
model to track disseminated breast cancer cells, we will characterize the
associated dormant residing niche to further our understanding of tumor
dormancy in connection with EMT and immune escape.


