Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor Treating Fields (TTFields) plus anti-PD-1 therapy induce
immunogenic cell death resulting in enhanced antitumor efficacy.


Tumor Treating Fields (TTFields) are an effective anti-neoplastic
treatment modality delivered via noninvasive application of low
intensity, intermediate frequency, alternating electric fields. TTFields
is approved for the treatment of both newly diagnosed and recurrent
glioblastoma. TTFields interrupt cancer cell mitosis by disrupting
microtubules and septin filaments, which play key roles in mitosis. The
mitotic effects of TTFields include abnormal chromosome segregation and
ER stress, which trigger different forms of cell death.

We evaluated the in vitro and in vivo effects of TTFields combined with
an immune checkpoint inhibitor (anti-PD1) on immunogenic cell death.

Murine Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) and ovarian surface epithelial (MOSE)
cells were treated with TTFields using the inovitroTM system. Levels of
calreticulin (CRT) on the surface of treated cells and intracellular ATP
levels were evaluated using flow cytometry. High mobility group box 1
(HMGB1) secretion was measured using an ELISA assay. Mice were implanted
with LLC cells were treated with TTFields, anti-PD-1, or a combination of
the two modalities. Tumor volume was monitored; flow cytometry analysis
was performed for phenotypic characterization of infiltrating immune
cells.

TTFields induced elevated cell surface expression of CRT, decreased
intracellular ATP levels, and promoted HMGB1 secretion. In vivo, the
combined treatment of lung tumor-bearing mice with TTFields plus
anti-PD-1 led to a significant decrease in tumor volume compared to
anti-PD-1 alone or to the control group. Significant increases in CD45+
tumor infiltrating cells were observed in the TTFields plus anti-PD-1
group. Infiltrating cells demonstrated a significant upregulation of
surface PD-L1 expression. Both F4/80+CD11b+ cells and CS11c+ cells
exhibited higher tumor infiltration and elevated PD-L1 expression as
compared to infiltrating immune cell in the control group.

Our results demonstrate that TTFields treatment potentiates immunogenic
cell death in cancer cells. Combining TTFields with specific
immunotherapies such as anti-PD-1 may enhance antitumor immunity and
result in increased tumor control.


