Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative mass spectrometry imaging of erlotinib in skin rashes
of cancer patients receiving erlotinib.


Background

The development of rashes is the most common adverse event observed in
cancer patients treated with epidermal growth factor receptor-targeted
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) such as erlotinib. A significant
relationship exists between the severity of a rash and survival in
various cancers. However, whether erlotinib becomes distributed to the
skin and whether its concentration is higher in a rash than in normal
skin of treated cancer patients remains unknown. Here, using quantitative
mass spectrometry imaging (qMSI), we successfully visualized the
distribution of erlotinib in rashes and normal skin of patients with
advanced pancreatic cancer receiving this drug.

Methods

We studied five patients with advanced pancreatic cancer who developed
rashes after treatment with gemcitabine (1000 mg/m² by intravenous
infusion for 30 minutes on days 1, 8, and 15 every 4 weeks) and erlotinib
(given orally at 100 mg/day). We biopsied both rashes and normal skin,
and compared the distribution of erlotinib using matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI-MSI). The plasma
concentration of erlotinib was measured by liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

Results

Erlotinib concentrations in five patients were 2.55 ± 1.46 ng/mm3 in
normal skin and 3.18 ± 1.53 ng/mm3 (mean ± SD) in rashes (p=0.123). In
four out of five patients, the erlotinib concentration in rashes was
higher than that in normal skin. The epidermis showed the strongest
expression of EGFR in skin as judged by immunohistological staining.
Erlotinib showed a greater tendency for distribution to the epidermis
than subcutaneous

tissue. There was no correlation between erlotinib plasma concentrations
vs. concentrations in rashes or normal skin.

Conclusions

Using qMSI, we, for the first time, visualized the distribution of
erlotinib in skin tissue of pancreatic cancer patients receiving
erlotinib. We found a tendency for a higher concentration of erlotinib in
rashes than in normal skin. A greater distribution of erlotinib to the
epidermis than subcutaneous tissue suggests erlotinib may directly bind
EGFR expressed in the epidermis.


