Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSTP1 promoter methylation in in-vivo isolated CTCs from high-risk
prostate cancer patients.


Introduction: Glutathione S-transferase 1 (GSTP1) has been reported to
function as tumor suppressor gene in various types of human cancers.
GSTP1 inactivation is associated with CpG island promoter
hypermethylation in the majority of prostate cancers (PCs). The
initiation of minimal residual disease (MRD) and especially the detection
of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in patients’ peripheral blood
represents a negative prognostic parameter for recurrence-free survival.
The aim of the present study was to assess the methylation status of the
GSTP1 gene in CTCs that were isolated, using the CellCollector® (GILUPI,
GmbH), a novel clinical device designed for the in vivo isolation of
EpCAM-positive CTCs. Patients and methods: In-vivo isolation of CTCs was
performed by using CellCollector® from high-risk prostate cancer
patients (n=97) and 20 healthy volunteers. For all these patients, the Ab
coated region of the CellCollector® was washed in PBS , cut, and stored
in Trizol reagent till analysis and DNA was further prior to the analysis
isolated DNA was modified by sodium bisulfite (SB) and subjected to a
real time MSP assay specific for GSTP1 methylation. In all cases,
peripheral blood was also collected and used for CTC analysis by
Immunostaining and the CellSearch® system. Results: All DNA samples were
first checked for their quality. Based on the quality evaluation of all
available DNA samples, only 63 DNAs were further qualified for analysis.
GSTP1 promoter was found methylated in 12/63 (19%) the EpCAM positive
fraction of in-vivo isolated CTCs. Moreover, in 5/12 (41.7%) patients for
which GSTP1 promoter was found methylated, CTCs were also detected by the
CellSearch® and 7 /12 (58.3%) for which GSTP1 promoter was also found
positive, CTCs were also detected by the Immunostaining. Conclusion:
GSTP1 promoter is methylated in in-vivo isolated CTCs from high-risk
prostate cancer patients. GSTP1 promoter methylation in in-vivo isolated
CTCs should be prospectively validated as a novel tumor biomarker for
prostate cancer patients in a large cohort of patients. Acknowledgements:
This research has been co-financed by the European Union (European
Regional Development Fund - ERDF) and Greek national funds through the
Operational Program ‘‘Competitiveness and Entrepreneurship’’ of
the National Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF) - Research Funding
Program: “ERA-NET on Translational Cancer Research (TRANSCAN) Joint
Transnational Call for Proposals 2011 (JTC 2011) on: “Validation of
biomarkers for personalised cancer medicine


