Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nrf2 promotes esophageal cancer cell proliferation via metabolic
reprogramming and ROS detoxification.


Background: Cancer cells consume large amount of energy and maintain high
levels of anabolism to promote cell proliferation via metabolic
reprogramming. Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a
master transcription regulator of stress and promotes metabolic
reprogramming to support cell proliferation in various type of cancers.
In particular, esophageal cancer was regarded as one of the most
aggressive tumors of gastrointestinal cancer. However, the effect of
metabolic reprogramming in esophageal cancer tissues was not fully
understood. In this study, we investigated the prognostic significance of
Nrf2, impacts on metabolic reprogramming and reactive oxygen species
(ROS) detoxification in esophageal cancer.

Methods: We immunohistochemically evaluated the protein expression of
Nrf2 in the surgically resected specimens in 201 esophageal cancer
patients. By using esophageal cancer cell lines, we examined the change
of phenotype and the regulation of ROS, compared control cells with Nrf2
depletion cells. Moreover, we measured the levels of metabolites in the
esophageal cancer cell lines by using mass spectrometry and identified
the metabolic pathway Nrf2 promoted.

Results: We revealed that high expression of Nrf2 in esophageal cancer
was associated with tumor recurrence (P=0.0004) and poor prognosis
(PResults: We revealed that high expression of Nrf2 in esophageal cancer
was associated with tumor recurrence (P=0.0004) and poor prognosis
(P<0.0001) by immunohistochemical analysis using resected specimen. In
TE-11, the esophageal cancer cell line with high expression of Nrf2,
depletion of Nrf2 dramatically decreased cell growth and enhanced G1 cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis in vitro assay. In that situation, we showed
that ROS which was not removed by Nrf2 detoxification activated p38
mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway and promoted G1 cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis. Furthermore, metabolome analysis compared
control cells with Nrf2 depleted cells showed that Nrf2 can strongly
promoted metabolic reprogramming to glutathione metabolism, which
synthesized the essential fuels for cancer progression. The mechanism
Nrf2 promoted glutathione metabolism was that Nrf2 regulated the levels
of main enzymes (GCLM, GCLC, and xCT) catalyzing glutathione synthesis.

Conclusions: The expression of Nrf2 was up-regulated in some esophageal
cancer cell lines and resected tumor specimen. And, high expression of
Nrf2 in esophageal cancer was associated with poor prognosis. Our in
vitro assay revealed that Nrf2 appeared to promote esophageal cancer cell
proliferation via metabolic reprogramming and ROS detoxification.
Therefore, strategies to pharmacologically manipulate the level and / or
activity of Nrf2 may have potential to reduce tumor growth and improve
the prognosis of esophageal cancer patients.


