Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch pathway is overexpressed and is a therapeutic target in
clear cell renal cancer.


Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC) is an incurable malignancy in
advanced stages and needs newer therapeutic targets. We conducted a
transcriptomic analysis of CCRCCs and matched microdissected renal
tubular controls and observed an overexpression of NOTCH ligands
[JAGGED1, JAGGED2) and Delta like (DLL3) family of ligands] and receptors
(NOTCH1, NOTCH2, NOTCH3 and NOTCH4) in tumor tissues. Examination of the
TCGA RNA-Seq dataset also revealed widespread activation of NOTCH pathway
in a large cohort of CCRCC samples. Samples with NOTCH pathway activation
were also clinically distinct and were associated with better overall
survival.

Parallel high resolution DNA methylation and copy number analysis with
the HELP assay demonstrated that both genetic and epigenetic alterations
led to NOTCH pathway activation in CCRCC. NOTCH ligands, JAGGED1 was
overexpressed and associated with loss of methylation of its intronic
enhancer. The other NOTCH ligand, JAGGED2 was overexpressed in and
associated with gene amplification in distinct CCRCC samples.

To test the causality, we transgenically expressed the intracellular
domain of NOTCH1 in mice renal tubules with tubule specific deletion of
VHL. The Kspcre VHLf/f ICNotch1 mice exhibited dysplastic
hyperproliferation of tubular epithelial cells confirming the
procarcinogenic role of NOTCH in vivo. Alteration of cell cycle pathways
was seen in murine renal tubular cells with NOTCH overexpression and
molecular similarity to human tumors was observed, demonstrating that
human CCRCC recapitulates features and gene expression changes observed
in mice with transgenic overexpression of the Notch intracellular domain.

Finally, treatment with clinical, gamma secretase inhibitor, LY3039478,
led to inhibition of CCRCC cells in vitro and in vivo in CCRCC
xenografts. In summary, these data reveal the mechanistic basis of NOTCH
pathway activation in CCRCC and demonstrate this pathway to a potential
therapeutic target.


