Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MuScreenTM : A well-characterized syngeneic model platform for
rapid in vivo screening.


Background: Syngeneic tumor models, many shelved for decades, have been
revived as effective models for immunotherapy, accompanying the clinical
success of the immuno-checkpoint inhibitors (e.g. anti-CTLA4, anti-PD1,
anti-PD-L1 antibodies). In vitro cell-based screens that are frequently
used in oncology to quickly identify responsive cells and assess PD
effects, often fail in immuno-oncology, due to immunotherapeutics
targeting the complex host immune system. Alternatively, an in vivo
screen with a panel of models addresses many of these questions, e.g. PD
and efficacy, but may be cost prohibitive.

Material and methods: Leveraging in-house detailed profiling data on our
syngeneic models, including efficacy benchmarking with anti PD-1, PD-L1,
CTLA-4, OX-40, GITR , LAG3 and TIM3 antibodies, RNAseq data on tumor
samples, and FACS analysis on both baseline and post-treatment tumor
samples, we created a new in vivo screening tool for immune-oncology:
MuScreen. MuScreen includes up to 20 well-characterized syngeneic models
in a 3 month screening run. Both PD and efficacy may be determined in the
run, allowing researchers to make decisions based on results observed
from a large dataset. To address the cost issue, test agents from
multiple clients are pooled together for each run (sharing vehicle and
other common groups) providing a significant reduction in the number of
animals used and the associated costs.

Results: CrownBio has established the largest collection of syngeneic
models with well-characterized immunotherapy data. With the three
MuScreen runs, we have generated new data on common IO agents (e.g. aPD-1
antibody) and combinations treatments, with FACS analysis, IHC, and
efficacy data. Based on these data, a bioinformatics

analyses were further explored to identify the makers/pathways that could
be correlated with the efficacy or PD effect of the tested IO treatment.

Conclusions: MuScreen, the first in vivo screening tool for cancer
immunotherapeutics, provides detailed response data on a panel of
syngeneic models, and may help on biomarker discovery in a cost and time
efficient manner.


