Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DUOX1 silencing in lung cancer is associated with enhanced nuclear
EGFR localization.


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains to be one of the leading
causes of cancer-related mortalities worldwide. The NADPH oxidase
homolog, Dual Oxidase 1 (DUOX1), is an H2O2 producing enzyme located in
the airway epithelium with key roles in mucosal host defense and wound
repair mechanisms. Recent studies indicate that DUOX1 is epigenetically
silenced in many forms of NSCLC via hypermethylation of its promoter. We
previously demonstrated that DUOX1 silencing in lung cancer cells is
closely associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
enhanced tumor invasiveness and metastasis. However, the mechanism(s) by
which DUOX1 silencing promotes these outcomes are not understood.
Previous findings indicate that DUOX1-dependent epithelial host defense
pathways are mediated by redox-dependent activation of epithelial
signaling via the non-receptor tyrosine kinase, Src, and the receptor
tyrosine kinase, EGFR. We therefore hypothesized that loss of DUOX1 in
lung cancer may be associated with aberrant regulation of Src and/or
EGFR, tyrosine kinases that are frequently overexpressed and activated in
lung cancer and strongly contribute to tumor growth and survival. In
fact, recent studies have indicated that nuclear localization of EGFR in
cancer cells is associated with metastatic cell behavior and poor
clinical outcome, and the nuclear EGFR localization depends on
Src-dependent phosphorylation of EGFR at Y1101. We observed that
overexpression of DUOX1 in alveolar lung cancer A549 cells, which possess
EMT-like features and in which DUOX1 is normally silenced, results in
redistribution Src to the plasma membrane and decreased nuclear
accumulation. DUOX1 overexpression in A549 cells also suppressed
EGF-stimulated nuclear translocation of EGFR, which was associated with
reduced EGFR phosphorylation at Y1101. Conversely, RNAi-mediated
silencing of DUOX1 in the epithelial cancer cell line H292, which
normally expresses DUOX1 expression, was found to promote EGF-mediated
EGFR nuclear translocation and Y1101 phosphorylation. Since nuclear EGFR
is thought to enhance the transcription of target genes related to cell
cycle progression and proliferation (e.g. CDK1, Myc, others), we
evaluated gene expression of these target genes in our cell models.
Indeed, in cells lacking DUOX1, EGF stimulation significantly enhanced
mRNA levels of CDK1, Myc, and other target genes for nuclear EGFR,
whereas no such induction was seen in cells that express DUOX1. Our
findings indicate that DUOX1 silencing in lung cancer may be associated
with worse prognosis, partly due to altered spatiotemporal regulation of
EGFR and Src and increased nuclear targeting. Since both EGFR and Src are
subject to redox regulation by cysteine oxidation, we are currently
aiming to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which these mechanism are
affected by altered DUOX1 status.


