Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing anti-PD-1 immune blockade in melanoma through selective
inhibition of histone deacetylase 6.


Histone deacetylases (HDACs), were originally described in a limited
context as histone modifiers. New evidence has demonstrated that HDACs
are also involved in a diverse range of cellular processes that are not
restricted to the chromatin environment, such as the regulation of the
cell cycle/apoptosis and, more recently, a modulator of immune response.
However, much remains unknown about the mechanism of action of HDACs and
their roles in the immune-biology of cancer. The non-specific nature of
pan-HDAC inhibitors results in a narrow therapeutic window of use,
limiting the dose and duration due to toxicity. Our group has focused in
one specific HDAC, HDAC6, and shown that both the genetic abrogation and
pharmacological inhibition of this HDAC modulates the expression of a
variety of immune-regulatory proteins in the tumor microenvironment,
including PD-L1, PD-L2, MHC class I, B7-H4 and TRAIL-R1. In particular,
we have previously demonstrated that both pharmacological inhibition
and/or genetic abrogation of HDAC6 plays a critical role in the immune
check point blockade by down-regulating the expression of PD-L1 and other
check-point modulators such as PD-L2, B7-H4, etc. Moreover, we have also
observed that in vivo inhibition of HDAC6 reduces tumor growth in B16 and
SM1 murine melanoma models within syngeneic immunocompetent hosts.
Additionally, we have found that the combination of low doses of the
HDAC6i Nexturastat A and checkpoint immune blockade, including anti-PD-1
and anti-CTLA4, results in an important improvement in anti-tumor immune
responses as evidenced by the reduction of tumor growth when compared to
treatment with individual stand-alone agents. In these studies we also
evidenced an increased production of IFNγ and IL-2 in the stand-alone
check-point inhibitor treatments, which leads to an upregulation of PD-L1
and PD-L2. Similar levels of IFNγ and IL-2 were found in the combination
groups. However, the expression level of PD-L1 and PD-L2 were comparable
to the non-treated group. Taking all together, we have found that HDAC6i
could be used as a potential adjuvant in ongoing therapeutic options
involving immune check-point blockade.


