Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential exon usage in the HER2 subtype of breast cancer
identified with RNA-seq and proteomic data.


Background: Heterogeneity between different breast cancer tumors plays an
important role in patients’ survival outcomes, and such tumor
heterogeneity unveiled by transcriptome and proteome are often in
disagreement. We hypothesize that alternative splicing of mRNA could
explain heterogeneity within intrinsic breast cancer subtypes.

Methods: Cases used in this study were drawn from the Clinical Breast
Care Project where breast cancer patients were consented using an
IRB-approved protocol. Fifty breast tumors were selected and processed by
laser microdissection. RNA and protein were extracted from tissues using
the Illustra triplePrep kit (GE Healthcare). Paired-end mRNA sequencing
was performed using the Illumina HiSeq platform. Paired-end reads were
preprocessed using PRINSEQ and splice-aligned to the genome using GSNAP
software. Gene counts were measured using HTSeq while Exon counts used
the DEXSeq. Differential expression was called at 10% false discovery
rate. Proteome Discoverer with Byonic node was used for analyzing the
quantitative global proteomics dataset, and we were able to quantitate
8600 proteins. All other analyses were performed using Perl and R.

Results: The number of sequencing reads for the 50 cases ranged from 60
million to 410 million reads. After preprocessing, an average of 93% of
reads was mapped, and 36,700 genes were identified among 50 tumor
samples. PAM50 algorithm was used for intrinsic subtype calls, yielding
16 Basal, 8 Her2+, 19 Luminal A (LA) and 7 Luminal B tumors. Unsupervised
clustering of the 8 Her2+ cases using the PAM50 genes and highly varying
proteins resulted in different clustering patterns, with the latter
clustering 6 of the 8 Her2+ cases with two distinct 3-case sub-clusters.
Between these two sub-clusters, there were 10 differentially expressed
(DEX) genes and 25 DEX proteins, but none of the 25 proteins were mapped
to the 10 DEX genes. This motivated us to investigate the DEX exons, and
we found 7,076 DEX exons between the Her2+ sub-clusters, and 9 of the 25
DEX proteins were matched to genes bearing DEX exons. For comparison, we
performed the same analyses between similarly clustered Basal and LA
sub-clusters. Even though the number of DEX genes between Basal (8) and
LA (18) sub-clusters were comparable to that between the Her2+
sub-clusters, DEX exons were much lower for both subtypes (616 & 157),
and none of the DEX proteins (3 & 7) mapped to DEX exons or genes for
either subtype.

Conclusions: Our findings imply that there is more proteomic-level
heterogeneity in the Her2+ subtype than in Basal and LA subtypes, which
could be due to alternative usage of exons (alternative splicing). If
such heterogeneity is associated with patients’ survival outcomes then
our results will further stress the importance of alternative splicing in
breast cancer.

The views expressed in this article are those of the author and do not
reflect the official policy of the Department of Defense, or U.S.
Government.


