Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Environmental pollutants and breast cancer: 2006-2016
epidemiological studies designed to evaluate biological hypotheses
provide evidence of risk for certain pesticides, organic solvents, and
products of combustion.


Common environmental chemicals have plausible links to breast cancer
because they are mammary gland carcinogens in animal studies or are known
to activate relevant hormonal pathways or enhance susceptibility of the
mammary gland to carcinogenesis. An institute of Medicine report
prioritized human studies of these exposures. Yet the long latency and
multifactorial etiology of breast cancer make evaluation of these
chemicals in humans challenging, adding to the importance of study
designs that are well-suited to capture hypothesized breast-cancer
mechanisms. With this in mind, we updated Brody et al’s 2007 review in
Cancer to evaluate the strength of the epidemiologic evidence for several
classes of chemicals with widespread exposure.

We conducted a systematic search of the PubMed database for articles
published in 2006-2016 using 147 terms and the inclusion/exclusion
criteria defined in Brody et al’s 2007 review. We critically reviewed
articles identified by our search, including whether study designs were
suited to the biological evidence.

We identified 158 new articles since 2006. In the past 10 years, the
strength of evidence for an association between breast cancer and banned
but persistent endocrine disrupting chemicals polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) and organochlorine pesticides has increased, based on a unique
50-year cohort study that captured exposure during potentially critical
windows for breast development (in utero, adolescence, pregnancy) and at
the time when the chemicals were still in use. Studies that considered
early life exposure to organic solvents and/or exposure of long duration
also added to evidence for an association with breast cancer. Solvents
are used in dry cleaning, electronics manufacturing, leather and fur
processing, and metal, auto, textile, and some military work. Other
important reports included the U.S. Agricultural Health Study, which
provided the first evidence of an association between organophosphate
pesticides and breast cancer. Analyses from the Long Island Breast Cancer
Study Project showed higher risk associated with polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs, products of combustion) in women with certain genetic
variations. Consumer product chemicals, including BPA, phthalates, per
fluorinated compounds, and hair dyes were evaluated in a few studies with
inconsistent results; many of these studies had serious methodologic
limitations.

Animal and mechanistic evidence suggest that timing could be crucial to
carcinogenic actions of many environmental chemicals, however we found
that most epidemiologic studies in the past 10 years did not evaluate a
specific timeframe of exposure prior to diagnosis. Those that did
enhanced our understanding of relevant windows for biological activity of
certain classes of chemicals.


