Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The antitumor effect of a soluble recombinant human thrombomodulin
as growth suppression against gastrointestinal tumor in murine
peritonitis model.


Introduction:

Severe postoperative inflammatory response (PIR) with CARS increases the
risk of tumor recurrence after cancer surgery by Tregs suppressing
antitumor immunity. Also, cancer recruits Tregs into its tissue by
secreting CCL22 and TGF-beta that strengthen its survival.

We established a model to represent tumor dynamics undergo PIR by mice
that are performed cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) followed by
subcutaneous injection of cancer cells into the dorsum. In this model, we
previously revealed significant tumor growth and increase number of Tregs
both in tumor tissue and blood compared to the normal mice.

A soluble recombinant human thrombomodulin (rhTM) is developed as a
treatment drug against DIC. It has anti-inflammatory effect and several
reports showed that it prevents cancer metastasis.

We hypothesized that rhTM normalizes PIR and prevents cancer growth
caused by inflammation.

Method:

Ten-week-old C57BL/6 mice were divided in CLP/rhTM, CLP/normal saline
(NS), and control (simple laparotomy plus NS) groups. rhTM (3mg/kg/12hrs)
was injected subcutaneously for 7 consecutive days from the day before
CLP. CT26 cells (1×104) were implanted 4 hours after CLP. Mice were
sacrificed 28 days after CLP. Then, the tumor tissue and blood were
collected.

To analyze dynamics of Treg, peripheral blood leukocytes the tumor cells
were isolated. CD4, CD25 and Foxp3 were stained by fluorescent antibody
and stained cells underwent flow cytometric analysis. The quantity of
Tregs is measured by the rate of CD25+/Foxp3+ population in CD4+ T cells.

The level of CCL22 and TGF-beta were measured both in serum and tumor
tissue. The ELISA was used for analyzing serum samples. And for tumor
tissue, immunostaing by DAB was performed and positively stained areas
were calculated by image-editing software.

Results:

CLP/NS group mice exhibited significant enhanced tumor growth compared to
controls (6.0±1.9 g vs. 3.5±1.6 g, p=0.03), while CLP/rhTM group
produced significantly smaller tumors (2.2±1.1 g) than CLP/NS (p=0.01).

The Tregs in the blood stream was smaller in CLP/rhTM group compared to
CLP/NS group. Intratumoral Tregs showed significant difference between
CLP/rhTM group and CLP/NS group (8.89±3.5 % vs. 24.1±15.0 %, p=0.02).

We found significant elevation of serum TGF-beta level by CLP (4.7±1.2
pg/ml vs. 15.4±7.0 pg/ml, p=0.02) and relative reduction to 15.4±7.0
pg/ml by administration of rhTM (p=0.05). However, we did not recognize
any change of serum CCL22 level in this study.

Intratumoral rate of CCL22 positive areas increased by CLP (41% vs. 50%),
while rhTM made it decreased to 43%. We found little difference of
TGF-beta positive areas among three groups in this study.

Conclusion:

Acute inflammation induced by CLP enhances the growth of implanted
tumors, while administration of rhTM suppresses tumor growth by possibly
affecting dynamics Tregs via TGF-beta and CCL22.


