Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering a novel asymmetric head-to-tail 2+1 T-cell bispecific
(2+1 TCB) IgG antibody platform with superior T-cell killing compared to
1+1 asymmetric TCBs.


T cell bispecific antibodies that recruit and engage T cells for tumor
cell killing through binding to the T cell receptor (TCR) upon binding to
a tumor antigen (TA) and subsequent crosslinking have attracted broad
interest. Here, we describe a novel asymmetric head-to-tail 2+1 T cell
bispecific antibody (2+1 TCB) platform characterized by the fusion of a
flexible Fab fragment to the N-terminus of the CD3e Fab of a
heterodimeric asymmetric bispecific TA-CD3e IgG1 antibody in head-to-tail
geometry via a flexible linker. The resulting TCB is monovalent for CD3e
(KD 70-100 nM) and binds bivalently with avidity to the TA on the target
cell. Correct heavy chain pairing is enabled by knob-into-holes
technology, correct light chain pairing by CrossMAb technology or using a
common light chain. This enables production with standard processes in
CHO cells. To exclude FcgR-mediated unspecific TCR and FcgR co-activation
resulting in unspecific cytokine release, Fc- effector functions (ADCC,
ADCP, CDC) are abolished by introduction of P329G LALA mutations while
FcRn binding and IgG-like pharmacokinetic properties are retained as
shown in mouse and Cynomolgus. For comparative profiling, the following
TCBs were generated with specificity for the tumor antigens MCSP/CSPG4,
FOLR1/FRalpha, CD19 and CD20: 2+1 TCBCD3-inside, 2+1 TCBCD3-outside,
one-armed 1+1 TCBCD3-inside and a classical asymmetric 1+1 IgG TCB. In
vitro Jurkat-NFAT, T cell killing, activation and proliferation assays
show that both 2+1 TCB formats mediate superior potency of killing (for
CSPG4, FOLR1, CD19, CD20) and superior absolute killing (for CSPG4, CD19)
compared to the respective classical asymmetric 1+1 IgG TCB.
Surprisingly, the 2+1 TCBCD3-inside format was found to be superior in
potency compared to the 2+1 TCBCD3-outside format, although its binding
affinity for CD3e is reduced. These data confirm that TCBs mediate
extremely potent T cell killing with fM-pM EC50 values based on CD3e
antibodies with affinities of only 70-100 nM. Notably, for CD19 both, 2+1
TCBCD3-inside and one-armed 1+1 TCBCD3-inside, mediate comparable potency
and overall killing, and both were superior compared to the asymmetric
1+1 IgG TCB. These data underline the importance of the head-to-tail
geometry with two Fabs on one arm attached to each other via a flexible
G4S-linker. Finally, using 2+1 and 1+1 FOLR1 TCBs we demonstrate that
bivalent binding allows better differentiation in killing of cells with
high vs. low FOLR1 expression as compared to monovalent binding. Taken
together, we demonstrate that the 2+1 TCBCD3-inside is the most potent,
efficacious and versatile TCB design. Due to its orientation with the
CD3e Fab inside, it allows the conversion of existing antibodies into
potent TCBs without format restriction. Based on this platform, CEA CD3
TCB (RG7802, Phase I/Ib) and CD20 CD3 TCB (RG6026, Phase I) have entered
clinical trials.


