Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rho-associated kinase is a therapeutic target in neuroblastoma.


Background: Neuroblastoma is a peripheral neural system tumor that
originates from the neural crest and is the most common and deadly tumor
of infancy. The non-canonical Wnt/planar cell polarity (PCP) signaling
pathway regulates cytoskeletal organization, migration and maturation of
neural crest cells during neuritogenesis. Here we show that neuroblastoma
harbors frequent mutations of genes controlling the PCP signaling pathway
and Rac/Rho signaling cascade important for proper migration and
differentiation of neural crest cells during neuritogenesis. The majority
of these mutations were detected in GTPase activating proteins and
guanine nucleotide exchange factors genes, which may result in inhibition
of Rac and activation of Rho and was associated with aggressive
high-stage neuroblastomas.

Methods: We performed whole-exome sequencing of neuroblastoma samples of
all clinical subgroups to search for mutations and genetic aberrations.
Cytotoxic activity of Rho-associated kinases (ROCK) inhibitors was
studied in cell viability assays. Morphology and invasion were studied
with microscopy. The molecular mechanisms were characterized using cell-
and molecular biology techniques. In vivo studies (xenografts and the
transgenic mouse model TH-MYCN) in mice were carried out to validate the
therapeutic effects and toxicity.

Results: Exome sequencing detected frequent mutations and gene
aberrations in genes controlling the activity of PCP signaling. Analysis
of gene signatures and immunohistochemistry showed that high expression
of ROCK1 and ROCK2 correlated with poor patient survival. Several
mediators of Rac/Rho were differentially expressed in cell lines and
patient samples. Pharmacological or genetic inhibition of ROCK, a key
molecule in Rac/Rho signaling resulted in differentiation, inhibition of
neuroblastoma cell growth and migration and degradation of MYCN protein.
Finally, ROCK inhibition reduced the growth of established neuroblastoma
xenografts in nude mice and repressed tumor progression in a MYCN-driven
mouse model of neuroblastoma (T-MYCN)

Conclusions: These results provide evidence that inhibition of the
non-canonical/PCP signaling cascade using ROCK inhibitors suppress the
growth of neuroblastoma in preclinical models and suggest possibilities
for improved treatment of high-risk neuroblastomas.


