Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accelerating prediction of pediatric and rare cancer
vulnerabilities using next-generation cancer models.


Ongoing pre-clinical efforts aim to deploy genome-scale CRISPR/Cas9
technology and large collections of small molecules to catalog maps of
cancer vulnerabilities at scale. However, such efforts in pediatric and
rare cancers have lagged behind comparable efforts in more common cancer
types due to the dearth of cell models. Here, we present an update from
our “Cancer Cell Line Factory” project on efforts to overcome key
laboratory and biologistics challenges precluding progress in pediatric
and rare cancers. This effort, now in it’s 3rd year, represents an
industry scale pipeline aiming to generate, characterize and share novel
cancer models of many tumor types with the scientific community. Overall,
we have processed 1153 samples from 818 patients across over 16 cancer
types through this pipeline with a 28% success rate overall, including
over 350 patient samples from rare and pediatric cancers. To optimize
conditions for each tumor type, we have systematically compared published
methods including (1) next-generation 2-dimension, (2) organoid and (3)
standard approaches and have captured all information with a data
management system that should enhance the ability to predict optimal ex
vivo propagation conditions for future samples. Among the successful cell
models verified already as part of this effort, we have generated a
series of over 30 unique pediatric and rare cancer models, many of which
represent the first of their kind. We screened these and other models
against a library of highly annotated 440 small molecules that were
previously tested against 860 existing cancer cell lines. Our results
suggest that dependency data generated with novel next-generation cell
cultures is potentially backwards-compatible with existing small molecule
dependency datasets. Furthermore, we tested the novel Broad Institute
Drug Repurposing library consisting of 4100 approved therapeutics, or
those under investigation for any disease, against the first cell line
models of several of these rare next generation models including
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma and renal medullary carcinoma, leading
to several novel drug repurposing hypotheses for rare cancers. Given
these proof-of-concept studies, in partnership with the Rare Cancer
Research Foundation, we launched an online matchmaking platform to
connect patients with rare cancers to available research studies,
facilitate online consent and provide biologistics support to enable
fresh tissue donation to support cancer model generation from any
clinical site in the United States. We will present results from this
novel direct-to-patient approach to facilitate the generation of even
larger numbers of next generation models from rare and pediatric cancers,
propelling the generation of pre-clinical dependency maps of these tumors
for the scientific community.


