Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microfluidic vertical adhesion-suspension co-culture platform for
studying cancer stem cell-fibroblast interactions.


Considerable evidence suggests that cancer-stem-cells (CSCs) play
critical roles in tumorigenesis and metastasis .Although surface marker
expression or enzymatic activity of CSC has proven useful, variability of
expression highlights the need for the development of high throughput
functional CSC assays. One such approach utilizes the capability of
CSC’s to form single-cell-derived spheres in suspension environments
(functional CSCs). Microfluidic tools are suitable for handling and
monitoring a large number of single cells in suspension as well as for
examining the interaction of these cells with those in the tumor
micro-environment including cancer associated fibroblasts (CAF’s).In
order to accomplish this, we have developed a high-throughput
(10,000-well), simple-to-use, vertical platform for CSC/CAF co-culture.
The platform consists of a non-adherent substrate having 10,000 micro
wells for single-cell-derived sphere formation and a porous trans well
for CAF adherent co-culture. As predicted by Poisson’s distribution,
approximately 30% of micro wells capture single cells when T47D breast
cancer cells are loaded at a concentration of 200k/ml. After cell
seeding, trans wells containing CAFs are placed onto the substrate.
0.4µm pores on the trans well allow for secretion-based cellular
interaction while preventing direct CSC/CAF cell contact. This cell
separation facilitates sample cell retrieval without cell cross
contamination. Utilizing this device, we determined that co-culture of
tumor cells with CAF’s doubled the frequency of sphere formation.
Spheres derived from individual CSCs were then retrieved and dissociated
for single-cell transcriptome analysis utilizing RNA barcoding followed
by RNAseq. Molecular analysis revealed significant cellular heterogeneity
among sphere derived cells. In addition, principal component analysis of
single cell RNAseq, reveled significant differences in gene expression
between mono-cultured and CAF co-cultured cells isolated from tumor
spheres. These genes represent potential therapeutic targets for
interfering with CSC stromal cell interactions in the tumor
microenvironment. The vertical adhesion suspension co-culture platform
provides a system to identify and evaluate novel CSC targeted
therapeutics.


