Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Nek2 mitotic kinase drives centrosome amplification, mitotic
dysfunction, and invasion in mammary epithelial and breast cancer cells.


Despite findings reported by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) that the most
common human tumors have undergone at least one genomic doubling, the
roles of polyploidy and chromosome instability (CIN) in cancer are poorly
understood. Defective mitosis, and centrosome amplification (CA) are
major sources of CIN, which generally associates with poor prognosis of
patients. Prevalence of CA and CIN in hormone receptor negative
(ER-PR-Her2- or ER-PR-Her2+) breast cancer patients, who have the poorest
outcomes among all intrinsic subtypes, suggest that CA and CIN play major
roles in the disease. CA in breast cancers correlates with poor survival,
metastasis and high tumor grade, suggesting roles in tumor progression.
Our laboratory, using an inducible K-RasG12D transgenic mouse that
directed its expression to mammary epithelial cells, demonstrated CA
appeared in precancerous mammary epithelial lesions, suggesting a role in
tumor initiation. Despite these observations, the role of CA as cancer
driver or promoter has not been tested experimentally. To understand that
role, drivers of CA in cancer must be identified, and our laboratory
showed that dysregulated E2F1, E2F2 and E2F3a, and their mitotic targets,
including Nek2, TTK, and SgoI sustain CA and CIN in mammary epithelial
and breast cancer cells. In fact, orthotopic models of breast cancer
demonstrated that silencing of E2F3 leads to slow tumor growth that
correlates with reduced mitosis, CA and Nek2 levels. We find that
overexpression of the E2F target Nek2 in non-transformed mammary
epithelial cells results in large acinar structures, CA, CIN, and changes
in relevant EMT markers that include vimentin. Our findings indicate that
deregulated E2F pathway contribute to mammary tumorigenesis in part by
deregulating kinases that control mitosis, including Nek2, and in turn
these affect mitotic progression, CIN, EMT and invasion. Thus,
centrosome/kinases downstream of the E2F pathway may represent future
targets for intervention in highly-malignant HR- breast cancers.


