Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling miRNA induced silencing in breast cancer with PARADIGM.


Introduction: MicroRNAs play an important role in regulation of gene
expression and are known biomarkers for breast cancer as well as other
malignancies. PARADIGM is a pathway based algorithm that allows for
integration of multiple genomic data types with a curated pathway
database to make pathway activity predictions. We added a model of gene
silencing due to miRNA to the PARADIGM algorithm in order to study miRNA
expression in a pathway context.

Results: We curated a set of 7751 miRNA-mRNA interactions from the
intersection of 3 target prediction algorithms. These interactions
involved 66 miRNA and 2814 mRNA transcripts. We ran this model on global
DNA copy number, RNAseq and miRNAseq data from 697 patients in the TCGA
breast cancer cohort, and studied changes in the interactions between
miRNAs and their targets between different tumor subtypes. The median
activity of the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) predicted by our
model is significantly higher in Basal tumors than other subtypes. In
addition, RISC activity is significantly associated with overall survival
of patients with Luminal A tumors. The miRNA-target pairs with the
largest correlation changes between Basal and Luminal A subtypes were
enriched for putative oncogenes and oncomirs. The mRNA targets are
involved in a number of important signaling pathways including PI3K-AKT,
JAK-STAT, and Ras. Many of these highly differential links involved the
miR-16 family of miRNAs which are known tumor suppressors. miR-16 shows
significantly lower activity in basal tumors than other subtypes.

Conclusions: By looking at changes in miRNA-target links between tumor
subtypes, our algorithm was able to identify both miRNAs and target genes
involved in pathways relevant to breast cancer. Our predictions of
overall RNA-induced silencing activity show prognostic value in both
determining subtype and predicting overall survival within subtypes.


