Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paternal sub-optimal nutrition leads to programming of daughters'
breast cancer risk in a mouse model.


Background: Dietary patterns are known to induce epigenetic changes in
paternal sperm. Acquired epigenetic traits have been shown to be
transmitted from parents to offspring via the germ-line (eggs and sperm)
and modulate disease risk in offspring. We have shown before that
paternal overweight around the time of conception leads to reprogramming
of the mammary gland tissue and breast cancer risk in the offspring.
Here, we investigated whether paternal sub-optimal nutrition (low protein
diet) could epigenetically reprogram the father's germ-line and alter
daughters' likelihood of developing breast cancer, using a mouse model.

Methods: Male mice were fed control (Con) or low-protein (LP) diets from
weaning until sexual maturity; at this point, males were housed together
with female mice reared on control diet. Once a vaginal plug was
detected, males were euthanized for sperm collection. Pregnant dams were
fed the control diet throughout pregnancy and after giving birth. Pups
were fed the control diet throughout the experiment. A subset of female
offspring was euthanized for mammary tissue harvesting on post-natal day
(PND) 50, which was used for morphologic and molecular analyses. Another
sub-set of female offspring was treated with
9,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA) to induce mammary tumors.

Results: We found that male LP consumption alters the non-coding RNA
content and DNA methylation patterns of the sperm in agreement with
previous findings. We also observed that, compared to Con offspring, the
female offspring of LP fathers had lower birth weight (p=0.035). This
decrease in body weight persisted through sexual maturity when females
begun to gain more weight than their control counterparts (p>0.001). In
addition, mammary glands of LP offspring were larger(p=0.02) and had
increased epithelial density (p=0.001) when compared to Con on PND50. In
addition, we found that LP mammary glands had epigenetic alterations,
including in DNA methylation and the miRNA expression profiles. These
changes in normal mammary tissue were associated with higher rates of
DMBA-induced mammary tumor (p=0.04), increased tumor growth (p=0.03) and
reduced tumor latency in LP offspring (p=0.03). Mammary tumors of LP
offspring had lower rates of apoptosis, which may explain the increased
tumor growth in this group. However, the mechanisms mediating this effect
still needs to be elucidated.

Conclusion: Paternal sub-optimal nutrition programs the female offspring
mammary gland development and breast cancer risk. Whether this increase
in cancer risk is due to local mammary tissue changes or whether systemic
changes play a role remains to be investigated. It also remains to be
determined whether epigenetic changes in paternal sperm are functionally
linked to changes in mammary gland development and cancer risk.


