Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic signatures associated with patient outcome in thyroid
carcinoma.


BACKGROUND: Thyroid cancer (TC) is the most frequent endocrine neoplasia
composed essentially by well-differentiated tumors (90%). These tumors
generally are indolent and the patients show a favorable outcome.
However, a set of TC patients presents aggressive outcome. Global
deregulation of DNA methylation has been described as involved in thyroid
cancer (TC) development. In this study, DNA methylation profile was
performed aiming to identify a prognostic signature in TC.

PATIENTS AND METHODS: The methylation profile of 50 non-neoplastic
thyroid tissues (NT), 17 benign thyroid lesions and 74 TC (60 papillary,
8 follicular, 2 Hürthle cell, 1 poorly differentiated and 3 anaplastic
thyroid carcinomas) were investigated using the Methylation 450 Human
Infinium®BeadChip platform (Illumina). The data were normalized and
analyzed using SVA, wateRmelon and LIMMA packages. The threshold delta
beta of 0.2 and adjusted p-value PATIENTS AND METHODS: The methylation
profile of 50 non-neoplastic thyroid tissues (NT), 17 benign thyroid
lesions and 74 TC (60 papillary, 8 follicular, 2 Hürthle cell, 1 poorly
differentiated and 3 anaplastic thyroid carcinomas) were investigated
using the Methylation 450 Human Infinium®BeadChip platform (Illumina).
The data were normalized and analyzed using SVA, wateRmelon and LIMMA
packages. The threshold delta beta of 0.2 and adjusted p-value <0.05 were
used to identify differentially methylated probes among the histological
subtypes. The delta beta of 0.1 and adjusted p-value PATIENTS AND
METHODS: The methylation profile of 50 non-neoplastic thyroid tissues
(NT), 17 benign thyroid lesions and 74 TC (60 papillary, 8 follicular, 2
Hürthle cell, 1 poorly differentiated and 3 anaplastic thyroid
carcinomas) were investigated using the Methylation 450 Human
Infinium®BeadChip platform (Illumina). The data were normalized and
analyzed using SVA, wateRmelon and LIMMA packages. The threshold delta
beta of 0.2 and adjusted p-value <0.05 were used to identify
differentially methylated probes among the histological subtypes. The
delta beta of 0.1 and adjusted p-value <0.05 were used in the prognostic
features analysis in WDTC (well differentiated thyroid cancer) cases. An
epigenetic classifier according to WDTC was identified using diagonal
linear discriminant analysis. The results were compared with The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) database.

RESULTS: Methylation analyses revealed a specific epigenetic profile
according to the histological subtypes. A global hypermethylation was
observed in benign lesions and follicular carcinomas, while papillary and
undifferentiated carcinomas were widely hypomethylated compared with NT.
An epigenetic signature comprising 21 probes differentially methylated
(delta beta 0.1) was able to predict poor outcome in WDTC patients. This
classifier reveled 63% of sensitivity and 92% of specificity, which was
confirmed by TCGA database (64% of sensitivity and 88% of specificity).
Using the established signature, we were able to confirm the involvement
of poor prognosis markers with high-risk scores (multivariable analysis;
PRESULTS: Methylation analyses revealed a specific epigenetic profile
according to the histological subtypes. A global hypermethylation was
observed in benign lesions and follicular carcinomas, while papillary and
undifferentiated carcinomas were widely hypomethylated compared with NT.
An epigenetic signature comprising 21 probes differentially methylated
(delta beta 0.1) was able to predict poor outcome in WDTC patients. This
classifier reveled 63% of sensitivity and 92% of specificity, which was
confirmed by TCGA database (64% of sensitivity and 88% of specificity).
Using the established signature, we were able to confirm the involvement
of poor prognosis markers with high-risk scores (multivariable analysis;
P<0.001).

CONCLUSION: Thyroid tumors showed different methylation profile according
to the histological subtypes. Genes regulated by methylation in TC and
associated with the tumor development were identified and confirmed by
TCGA. In addition, a meaningful algorithm was designed and confirmed as
capable to predict recurrence in WDTC.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT: FAPESP (2015/20548-5) and National Institute of
Science and Technology in Oncogenomics (FAPESP 2008/57887-9 and CNPq
573589/08-9), CNPq (302606/2011-4).


