Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of proline isomerase Pin1 interrupts the function of
the androgen receptor N-terminal domain and suppresses
androgen-independent growth of prostate cancer cells.


Patients with advanced prostate cancer continue to develop lethal
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) despite hormone therapy and
maintaining castrate levels of serum androgen. Most CRPC appears to be
dependent on the androgen receptor (AR), but instead of the C-terminal
ligand-binding domain, it is the N-terminal domain (NTD) harboring a
powerful transactivation domain that drives AR transcriptional activity.
This was supported by the discovery of AR splice variants (ARv567es and
V7) which are constitutively active, do not encode a functional
ligand-binding domain, and correlate with poor patient outcome. The AR
NTD is intrinsically disordered, but it contains several putative binding
sites for Pin1, a proline isomerase specific for
phosphorylated-Ser/Thr-Pro motifs. Since the innate ability of the AR NTD
to adopt multiple transient structures is important for transactivation
of AR, we aimed to determine whether Pin1 regulates motifs within the AR
NTD.

We tested several known inhibitors of Pin1 in cell-based assays that
measure proliferation or transcription mediated by AR. Our results
demonstrated that inhibition of Pin1 interrupted the function of the AR
NTD. The Pin1 inhibitor juglone effectively and specifically blocked
transcription mediated by AR induced by androgen, as well as
transactivation of the AR NTD in the presence of IL-6. We found that Pin1
predominantly interacted with a specific region of the AR NTD containing
two Pin1 binding sites, and by inhibiting Pin1 the interactions between
endogenous AR and STAT3 became attenuated. Furthermore, Pin1 inhibitors
were more effective than second-generation anti-androgens in blocking
androgen-independent proliferation of LNCaP95 cells driven by AR variants.

Here we describe that Pin1 is a critical factor for transcription
mediated by AR, regardless of ligand, by regulating the AR NTD.
Understanding the molecular mechanisms that may promote AR signaling in
the absence of androgen will aid the development of more effective
therapies for CRPC.


