Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stemness and resistance: Napabucasin (BBI-608) sensitizes
stemness-high cancer cells to Paclitaxel by inhibiting the STAT3-MUC1
pathway.


Stemness-high cancer cells, or cancer stem cells (CSC) represent a
subpopulation of cancer cells with enhanced tumorigenic capacity,
metastasis-forming potential, and resistance to conventional chemotherapy
and radiation. One such key CSC pathway is regulated by STAT3, a
transcription factor that is downstream of several cytokines and growth
factor receptors which controls the expression of a broad range of target
genes and plays essential roles in CSC biology in many tumor types.
Cancer stemness inhibitor Napabucasin (BBI-608), a small molecule that
inhibits gene transcription driven by STAT3, can inhibit stemness gene
expression, block spherogenesis, and kill CSCs. In vivo, BBI-608
effectively blocks cancer relapse and metastasis in xenograft models
while sparing normal hematopoietic stem cells, suggesting that targeting
stemness-high cancer cells is a feasible approach for developing
next-generation cancer therapeutics to combat cancer recurrence.

SOX2 (sex-determining region Y-box protein 2), a transcription factor
that is essential for self-renewal and pluripotency, is amplified in
various cancer types and has been shown to be required for CSC
self-renewal and maintenance. Mucin 1 (MUC1), a glycoprotein normally
expressed at the apical surface of epithelial cells, is overexpressed in
most human epithelial cancers. MUC1 has been implicated in regulating
tumor proliferation, metabolism, invasion, angiogenesis, chemoresistance,
and inflammation.

Here, we generated a stemness-high culture system based on the reporter
activity of a SOX2-regulatory region construct in MKN28 gastric cancer
cells (MKN28 SOX2-reporter GFP+ cells). BBI-608 treatment inhibited the
STAT3-MUC1 pathway in stemness-high cells. High MUC1 status in
stemness-high cells was associated with Paclitaxel resistance.
Down-regulation of MUC1 sensitized stemness-high cells to Paclitaxel.
Moreover, BBI-608 synergized with Paclitaxel in inhibiting spherogenesis
of stemness-high cells. This study provides a new mechanism for the
association of cancer stemness with drug resistance. Our findings support
this combination therapy, which pairs a conventional chemotherapy
(Paclitaxel) with a cancer stemness inhibitor (BBI-608), as a promising
strategy to combat cancer.


