Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing the reproducibility of computer-aided nodule assessment
and risk yield (CANARY) method to characterize lung adenocarcinomas.


This study assessed the inter-user reproducibility of Computer-Aided
Nodule Assessment and Risk Yield (CANARY), a novel analytical tool that
risk stratifies lung adenocarcinomas (ADCs) according to defined computed
tomography (CT) structural characteristics. CANARY detects nine distinct
voxel signatures in ADCs based on standard CT imaging, thereby defining
nodule characteristics correlating with patient outcomes, and
corresponding to invasion or lepidic growth histologically. A software
user segments the borders of each ADC prior to voxel analysis,
introducing potential variability into the assessment. While CANARY is a
promising method, it requires validation of the analytical variability
between users and prediction of accuracy in an independent cohort. To
evaluate the reproducibility of CANARY analysis, three independent users
who are not part of the CANARY development team segmented and analyzed 50
biopsy-confirmed primary lung ADCs from Vanderbilt University Medical
Center. The CT scans of ADCs were selected retrospectively based on the
following criteria: ADC-histology proven on biopsy, diagnosed between
2009-2015, less than 3cm in greatest diameter, and stages IA-IV. Users
followed a standard operating procedure established at the Mayo Clinic,
and were blinded to clinical characteristics and patient outcomes.

Results: To measure inter-user variability of ADC voxel composition, the
intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) was calculated based upon the
percentage of each voxel subtype within the whole ADC. An ICC of 1
reflects high reproducibility between users. Amongst all 50 ADCs, the
average ICC for all nine voxel types was 0.828 (95% CI 0.76, 0.895). The
ICC of the four voxel types associated with invasive features on CT was
0.865 (95% CI 0.805, 0.924). ICCs were also calculated using a
logarithmic transformation for data normalization, generating an ICC of
0.745 (95% CI 0.663, 0.826) for all nine voxel types, and an ICC of 0.995
(95% CI 0.993, 0.997) for the four voxel types associated with invasion.
Conclusions: (1) CANARY analysis of lung ADC voxel signatures appears to
be reproducible amongst users, making it a reliable tool for the
evaluation of ADC voxel density. (2) Correlation of invasive signatures
associated with more aggressive ADCs was nearly perfect amongst users.
Additional validation metrics for CANARY with larger datasets are being
evaluated, including the accuracy of tumor prognostic predictions between
users and analysis of ADC datasets from other institutions.


