Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Set7 is a novel histone methyltransferase in Schizosaccharomyces
Pombe.


Dynamics and plasticity of chromatin regulation is mediated by a
molecular ballet of writers, readers and erasers of epigenetic marks on
both DNA and histones. The pattern of histone modifications may define a
histone code, which is part of intricate networks that ultimately
regulate transcriptional events. Dysfunction of histone methylation
affects chromatin regulation and is involved in an increasing number of
pathologies from cellular transformation to tumor progression and other
diseases. However, histone methyltransferase (HMTase) pathways remain to
be further explored and better understood.

Fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe) is an ideal model organism to
investigate the fundamental mechanisms of chromatin dynamics. Fission
yeast possesses 13 SET-containing proteins (Set1 to 13), several of which
methylate histones or ribosomes. The catalytic SET domain is highly
conserved across eukaryotes (e.g. Set2, a homologue of the oncoprotein
NSD2/MMSET/WHSC1 in human). Structure-function studies of HMTases are
essential from basic science to translational research. However,
full-length structures of fission yeast methyltransferases are still
scarce.

Here, in a bid to better understand histone methylation and to gain
insight for drug-design, we report the identification and structural
characterization of a novel histone methyltransferase Set7 (SPCC297.04c),
in Schizosaccharomyces Pombe. In this study, we investigated Sp.Set7’s
cellular localization and the effect of Sp.Set7 knock-out on the cell
cycle and sporulation. Next, we elucidated Sp.Set7’s Lysine substrate
specificity on histone H3 and H4 by biochemical assays and mass
spectrometry. Finally, we solved the X-ray structure of the apo Sp.Set7
at 2.0 Å resolution.

In summary, we report the biochemical and structural characterization of
a novel histone methyltransferase in fission yeast, which has
implications for better understanding the fundamental mechanism of
HMTases.


