Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel plate-based assay for screening autophagic activity in 2D
and 3D cell culture models.


The critical importance of autophagy in cell health and its proposed role
in disease-relevant biology, including cancer, inflammation, and
immunology, has increased the need for more effective assays to screen
for agents that modulate autophagic activity. Here we utilize NanoLuc
Binary Technology (NanoBiT) to develop a homogeneous plate-based assay to
measure autophagic flux in cell culture models. In this approach, an
exogenous LC3B (Atg8) fusion protein was tagged on its N-terminus with an
11 amino acid peptide (HiBiT) and stably expressed in mammalian cells,
including U2OS and HEK293. After exposure to various treatment
conditions, cellular levels of this novel autophagy reporter were
determined by addition of a lytic detection reagent containing Large BiT
(LgBiT). LgBiT rapidly associates with HiBiT in the cell lysate,
producing a bright, luminescent enzyme in the presence of the furimazine
substrate. The bright signal allows low levels of expression of the
reporter, maximizing the assay response, and the signal is stable,
allowing assay of multiple 96- or 384-well plates in the same experiment.
In response to autophagic stimuli, including nutrient deprivation and
various mTORC inhibitors (e.g., PP242 and rapamycin), autophagic
degradation of expressed LC3 reporter was evident by reduced assay
signal. In contrast, in response to both upstream (e.g., 3-MA and
wortmannin) and downstream (e.g., bafilomycin A1 and chloroquine)
inhibitors of the autophagy pathway, degradation of the autophagic
reporter was effectively blocked and assay signal was consistently
increased as predicted. Compound effects were time dependent and
stratified according to expected potency and efficacy of the test agents
employed. The use of a mutant reporter based on LC3G120A further
demonstrated the specificity of the wild-type LC3 reporter for the
detection of autophagic activity. When assayed in 384-well plates with
automation, HEK293 autophagy reporter cells produced Z’ values of ~0.7
in response to autophagy induction with PP242, while subsequent blockade
of autophagy with bafilomycin A1 resulted in Z’ values of ~0.8. This
data, and subsequent LOPAC library screening, indicates the potential
utility of this assay method for HTS applications. In addition, the
HEK293 autophagy reporter cells can be induced to form 3D cell spheroids,
thus allowing investigation of assay performance in this more complex
model. Autophagy reporter levels increased with increasing spheroid size
(up to 650 μm diameter tested) in a manner proportional to a surrogate
measure of viable cell number. Importantly, both induction and inhibition
of autophagic activity was easily detected following PP242 and
bafilomycin A1 treatment, respectively. Using this novel plate-based
assay system for the determination of autophagic flux, it is possible to
screen test agents and quantitatively determine both the potency and
efficacy of autophagy modulation.


