Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DREAMing as a simple and low cost alternative for the assessment
of methylation in ultra rare DNA.


Background: Current approaches for the assessment of methylation, such as
methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and next-generation bisulfite sequencing
(BS-Seq) are fundamentally limited in their ability to detect and assess
heterogeneous methylation patterns (epialleles) in ultra-rare
(Background: Current approaches for the assessment of methylation, such
as methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and next-generation bisulfite
sequencing (BS-Seq) are fundamentally limited in their ability to detect
and assess heterogeneous methylation patterns (epialleles) in ultra-rare
(<0.1%) DNA. These limitations critically compromise diagnostic utility
and render them ill suited for many emerging applications in cancer
diagnostics, such as the analysis of methylation heterogeneity in
cell-free DNA (cfDNA) and rare cell populations. We recently addressed
the need for a low cost alternative to the assessment of methylation of
ultra-rare DNA with the development of DREAMing (Discrimination of Rare
EpiAlleles by Melt), which uses semi-limiting dilution and precise melt
curve analysis to distinguish and enumerate individual copies of DNA at
single copy sensitivity and single-CpG-site resolution. Here, we seek to
demonstrate the advantages of the DREAMing method over conventional
approaches to methylation assessment.

Methods: We expand upon the underlying theory of DREAMing and provide
guidelines for the development of single-copy sensitive DREAMing assays.
We further elucidate methods for tailoring DREAMing assays to samples of
interest and compare the performance of these assays to commonly employed
techniques including quantitative MSP (qMSP) and BS-Seq.

Results: Development of single-copy sensitive DREAMing assays for a
number of loci associated with classic tumor-specific methylation such as
CHFR and RASSF1A as well as a candidate pan-cancer locus are reported.
These assays are then used to analyze methylation in cfDNA derived from
the plasma of cancer-positive and healthy patients. DREAM analysis
reveals that DREAMing can readily detect over an order of magnitude more
epialleles when directly compared to qMSP and BS-Seq assays of the same
locus. Some of the challenges associated with distinguishing potential
tumor-specific aberrant methylation from background methylation are then
discussed and proposed solutions are demonstrated. Lastly, methods for
optimizing DREAMing assays for specific sample types are discussed.

Conclusions: DREAMing is a recently introduced method for the assessment
of locus-specific methylation in samples containing ultra rare target
DNA. Its low cost and simplicity coupled with the ability to provide
enhanced, single-copy detection of heterogeneous methylation make
DREAMing an attractive option over traditional techniques for demanding
specimens such as cfDNA and rare cell populations. DREAMing has potential
utility in the evaluation of DNA methylation dynamics in cell
populations, prenatal testing, as well as clear use in early cancer
diagnostic, companion diagnostic and predictive applications.


