Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recoupling nitric oxide synthetase to normalize tumor vasculature
and enhance tumor radiosensitivity and anti-tumor drug uptake.


The aberrant nature of tumor vasculature results in uneven, heterogeneous
blood flow and leaky, hemorrhagic blood vessels. Due to the unusual
nature of tumor vessels, areas of hypoxia develop that contribute to
radioresistance and inefficiency of therapeutic drug delivery. Our
current studies examine the role of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) in tumor
vasculature. NOS has been demonstrated to be “uncoupled” in tumors
and isolated tumor cells due to reduced levels of tetrahydrobiopterin
(BH4), a necessary cofactor, resulting in superoxide and peroxynitrite
formation in lieu of NO (Rabender et al 2015 Molecular Cancer Research).
NO signaling is critical for vascular function and thus uncoupling of
eNOS in tumor endothelial cells may partly explain the poor vasculature
found within solid tumors. Having previously demonstrated that NOS can be
“recoupled” and NO production restored through treatment of tumor
cells with Sepiapterin (SP), a BH4 precursor, we examined whether SP
could normalize tumor vasculature, promoting radiosensitivity and
improving drug uptake. Multispectral optoacoustic tomography analysis of
both flank tumor xenografts and a spontaneous breast tumor model (MMTV)
demonstrate that SP given by oral gavage once a day for 7 days
significantly enhances tumor BH4 levels and the percent of oxyhemoglobin
in the tumor. Immunohistochemical analysis of tumors from mice treated
with SP showed a significant reduction in CD31 staining and a significant
increase in smooth muscle actin (SMA), both hallmarks of vascular
normalization. A significant decrease in pimonidazole staining and
concomitant increase in Hoescht staining in MMTV mice treated with SP
confirms the reduction in tumor hypoxia as well as increased tumor
perfusion. Increased tumor perfusion was also demonstrated through
enhanced doxorubicin uptake in tumors of mice treated with SP. Lastly,
the enhanced tumor oxygenation correlated with more than a 2-fold
increase in radiation induced cell killing measured by ex vivo clonogenic
assay. These preliminary data demonstrate the need for continued study of
NOS uncoupling in solid tumors, especially when we take into
consideration that SP has been demonstrated to be cytotoxic to both
breast and colon tumors. On-going studies are examining the consequences
of enhanced drug uptake on both normal and tumor tissue as well as the
mechanism behind the vascular normalization.


