Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DUOX2, a key player for chemopotentiation by low-dose fractionated
radiation therapy in gastric cancer cells.


One of the most conventional therapy for solid tumors is radiotherapy.
Still, this modality presents a challenge when it comes to managing
highly disseminated gastrointestinal cancers due to increased toxicity to
surrounding tissues. Recent laboratory and clinical data indicate that
Low Dose Fractionated Radiation Therapy (LDFRT) can potentiate systemic
chemotherapy and presents the possibility to revisit the concept of Whole
Abdominal Radiotherapy (WART) for disseminated intra-abdominal gastric
cancers. Earlier work considered LDFRT ineffective for tumor removal but
we now know that LDFRT induces hyper-radiosensitivity (HRS) in a number
of proliferating cells. We have recently shown that dual oxidase (DUOX2)
is a major contributor to induce HRS at radiation doses as low as 0.15 Gy
and sensitize human gastric cancer cells to chemotherapy. The aim of our
study is to determine the utility of DUOX2 as a potential biomarker for
the clinical application of chemopotentiation by LDFRT. First, we
performed immunohistochemistry (IHC) on 48 human gastric samples with
progressive grades. Our data indicate that only about 50% of human
gastric cancers are positive for DUOX2. The reason for DUOX2 variability
of expression is not clear but may be linked to inflammation since six of
the seven (86%) gastritis samples we examined expressed strong levels of
DUOX2 in the surface of epithelial cells. Our data also indicate that
expression of DUOX2 significantly increases the levels of macrophages
infiltration in tissue expressing DUOX2 as well as in the stroma
surrounded by cells expressing DUOX2. This suggests that expression of
DUOX2 could impact on the dynamic of the tumor microenvironment.
Expression of DUOX2 in response to LDFRT is conserved since we also
observed this in mice primary gastric cancer cells as well as cancer stem
cells. Furthermore, as a first step to develop DUOX2 as an accessible
biomarker, we studied DUOX2 activity by measuring the accumulation of
oxidative serum proteins in gastric cancer cells media. Our data indicate
that down regulation of DUOX2 significantly reduces the levels of serum
protein oxidation. Taken together these data suggest that DUOX2 could
potentially be used as a biomarker to stratify patients and follow the
efficiency of clinical application of chemopotentiation by LDFRT.


