Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemopreventive activities of a polyphenol rich purified extract
from olive oil processing on colon cancer cells.


Epidemiological studies showed that diet can play a relevant role in
reducing the risk of developing colon cancer (CC) and lower rate of CC
insurgence has been observed amongst populations living within the
Mediterranean basin. Olive oil, a major component of the Mediterranean
diet, is an abundant source of phenolic compounds. Olive oil production
is associated with the generation of waste material, termed ‘olive mill
wastewaters’ (OMWW), that have been reported to be enriched in
polyphenols as well. Given the beneficial activity of polyphenols on
human health, we investigated whether the use of different batches of
purified extracts from OMWW, termed A009, might be effective in exerting
chemopreventive activities in vitro and in vivo, on CC cell lines.

Cell proliferation and survival were evaluated on A009 treated cells by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay,
while the induction of apoptosis was assessed by flow cytometry. Further,
functional studies to investigate the ability of A009 to interfere with
CC cell line adhesion, migration, sprouting and invasion were performed.
Finally, the ability of A009 to interfere with CT-26 CRC tumour cell
growth was assessed in vivo. Purified hydroxytyrosol, the major component
in the A009 extracts, was used as a control.

A009 inhibited cell proliferation, migration, invasion, adhesion and
sprouting of CC cells along with the release of pro-angiogenic and pro-
inflammatory cytokines (VEGF, IL-8) similar to hydroxytyrosol alone. In
vivo, A009 inhibited CT-26 tumour growth in a significant manner over
that of hydroxytyrosol alone.

Our results show that A009 extracts exert promising chemopreventive
properties, suggesting that different polyphenols act synergistically,
improving their single component effects in CC cell lines. Finally, our
results support the idea of repositioning a waste derived material for
nutraceutical employment, with environmental and industrial cost
management benefits.


