Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of potent anti-tumor agents from the LOPAC library
using a unified 2D/3D cell culture screening approach.


Two-dimensional (2D) cultures of immortalized cancer cells have played a
significant role cancer drug discovery and development process for
decades. However, the limitations imposed by the long-term cultures of
cancer cell lines are becoming increasingly apparent only recently.
Therefore, there is a general shift towards three-dimensional (3D) cell
cultures, which effectively mimic tumor complexities, for lead
optimization and to accelerate translation research. 3D cell cultures not
only model the in vivo architecture of tumors, but 3D-derived cells also
retain numerous signatures of cancer stem cells compared to parental
cells in 2D.

In this study, using a unified 2D and 3D cell culture screening approach,
we screened the LOPAC library from Sigma-Aldrich as a proof-of-concept
study. The drug screening was performed using parental colorectal cancer
HCT116 cells as a model cell line. 3D-derived cultures were generated
from multicellular spheroids of HCT116 cells. Additionally, utilizing
lightsheet fluorescence microscopy (LSFM), we studied the tissue
penetration of drugs in spheroids of HCT116 and cells expressing
hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α).

We identified cc. 200 compounds from the LOPAC library that showed
increased activity in 3D-derived cultures. A dose–response relationship
study of top 20% compounds further confirmed the preferential activity of
these drugs in 3D than 2D cultures. Next, studies in spheroid cultures
resulted in the identification of five lead compounds with potent
spheroid-size reducing effects. Three of these compounds were kinase
inhibitors, one HIF-1α inhibitor, and one interestingly, a monoamine
oxidase inhibitor. LSFM studies in HCT116-HIF-1α spheroids showed that
two kinase inhibitors and the HIF-1α inhibitors significantly altered
spheroid hypoxia, and presumably spheroid growth. We believe that this
proof-of-concept study will further highlight the advantages of a
combined 2D/3D screening approach for drug discovery and development, and
consequently enable downstream testing at reduced cost.


