Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro modeling of patient derived bladder cancer cell lines in
3D culture systems.


Background: Drug screening is a key component for drug development and
optimizing anti-tumor therapies. Traditionally, in vitro drug testing has
been conducted in monolayer systems that are not capable of
recapitulating the tumor complexity. Recently, the field has witnessed
the rise of interest in 3D culture systems which are capable of
reproducing tumor complexity while circumventing the cost associated with
in vivo drug testing. Our access to fresh patient samples has enabled us
to establish a novel 3D culture system consisting of bladder cancer
patient derived cell lines. Using a wide range of matrices and co-culture
conditions with tumor associated stromal cells we were able to establish
a unique high throughput drug testing tool.

Methods: Matrigel and collagen based matrices were used to establish 3D
culture systems of bladder cancer patient derived cells. Tumor cells were
cultured in 3D conditions either alone or in coculture with tumor
associated stromal cells. Response to Cisplatin and PI3K pathway targeted
agents (i.e. LY LY3023414) was tested in both conditions. High throughput
imaging via Thermo ArrayScan XTI was used to assess the biological
behavior of spheroids as well as their response to therapies overtime.
Confocal microscopy was used to validate the biological mimicry of tumor
derived spheroids to the original patient tumors. Integration of RNA-seq
data from the patient-derived tumor cells with the biological behavior
and therapeutic response in 3D culture is ongoing for the purpose of
characterizing the 3D model

Results: In 3D culture conditions; bladder cancer derived cells were able
to re-express E-cadherin that was suppressed upon propagation in
monolayer. The re-expression of the epithelial marker (E-cadherin)
observed in 3D accurately mirrors the original tumors; which are of
epithelial origin. Phenotypic differences were observed across different
matrix conditions and also among different tumor derived cells. Bladder
3D organoids of luminal origin were more sensitive to both cisplatin and
PI3K pathway inhibitors as compared to those of basal origin. This drug
response profile was reminiscent of what we observed in vivo using
patient derived xenograft (PDX) models derived from the same tumors. The
phenotypic as well as the drug response variations observed in our 3D
culture correlated with variable gene expression profiles (luminal vs
basal) that were detected in our RNA-seq data.

Conclusion: As compared to monolayer, 3D culture is more capable of
recapitulating tumor complexity and accurately reflects the drug
resistance / sensitivity profiles that are observed in PDX models in
vivo. Therefore, a 3D culture system provides an invaluable tool for high
throughput screening of drugs in bladder cancer and providing a better
understanding of tumor biology in the search of more effective treatments
for bladder cancer patients.


