Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting human T regulatory cells with novel Interleukin 2 alpha
- IL2 complex-specific RNA aptamer.


Background: RNA aptamers are small RNA molecules that bind antigens like
antibodies and are currently being explored as alternatives to antibodies
for diagnosis and therapy. A potential merit of aptamers is that they can
be generated against native cellular antigens, such as those with unique
post-translational modifications or receptor-ligand complexes, for which
antibody generation can be difficult. Here, we report the use of a
cell-based systematic enrichment approach (SELEX) to develop a novel
Treg-binding RNA aptamer specific to IL2Rα-IL2 receptor-ligand complex.

Methods and Results:

A. Generation of Treg-binding aptamers:

We designed a cell-based SELEX strategy to generate RNA aptamers specific
to human T regulatory (Treg) cells. The starting library consisted of
random RNA aptamers with a structural diversity of ~1012. Aptamers
against common T cell antigens were pre-cleared using CD4+CD25- Teff
cells. Treg-binding aptamers were then positively selected using
CD4+CD25+ Tregs from the same donor. After amplification of Treg binders
by RT-PCR, the whole selection was repeated eight times, each time with T
cells from a different donor. At the end, SELEX-enriched aptamer pools
predominantly bound to Tregs, but not to Teff cells, which were then
sequenced. The most prevalent Treg-binder, Tr-1, showed 63,875-fold
enrichment by the end of SELEX (from 0.36 copies in the starting library
to 22,995 copies in the eighth round per million total reads).

B. Tr-1 binds to IL2Rα- IL2 complex

We tested if Tr-1 recognized human IL2Rα by measuring Tr-1 binding to
recombinant IL2Rα protein using RT-qPCR. Results indicated that Tr-1
bound to IL2Rα and showed ~3-fold higher binding to IL2Rα when IL2 was
added indicating that Tr-1 recognizes either the receptor-ligand complex
or a conformational change in IL2-bound IL2Rα. Binding of Tr-1 to IL2Rα
did not significantly alter its affinity to IL2.

C. Tr-1 inhibits Treg induction

Transformed B cells can induce Treg development in the tumor
microenvironment. Experimentally, this was evaluated by quantifying Tregs
generated from autologous CD4+ T cells co-cultured with Epstein-Barr
virus-transformed B (EBV-B) cells. Addition of Tr-1 resulted in ~30%
reduction in EBV-B-induced Tregs (p=0.017).

Conclusion: We used a Treg cell-based SELEX strategy to derive a novel
Treg-binding RNA aptamer (Tr-1) that preferentially binds to the
IL2Rα-IL2 complex. Tr-1 reduced Treg induction by transformed B cells
suggesting its potential as a therapeutic agent to reduce tumor-induced
immunosuppression. Ongoing studies are further exploring its use in Treg
inhibition and in targeting receptor-ligand complexes in cancer. While
aptamers recognizing cellular receptors exist, to our knowledge, this is
the first report of an aptamer recognizing a receptor-ligand complex. Our
approach to generating aptamers against receptor-ligand complexes could
have huge scientific impact.


