Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of six transmembrane epithelial antigen of the prostate 2
in hepatocellular carcinoma.


Introduction: The incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in
Hispanics is three times higher than non-Hispanic whites, and even higher
in South Texas (STX) Hispanics. This is attributed to a higher prevalence
of hepatitis C, diabetes, obesity and perhaps genetic and epigenetic
alterations. Knowledge regarding genetic alterations in Hispanics is
sparse as demonstrated by the lack of Hispanics with HCC in The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA). Therefore, our group sequenced paired adjacent liver
and HCC tumor samples from STX Hispanics, which highlighted a gene
over-expressed in tumors of Hispanics, called the Six Transmembrane
Epithelial Antigen of the Prostate 2 (STEAP2). STEAP2 is a
metalloreductase of iron and copper and is implicated in increased iron
and reactive oxygen species in the liver which can lead to the
progression of inflammation and cirrhosis. STEAP2 may play an important
oncogenic role in HCC, especially in the setting of obesity. We propose
to test the hypothesis that overexpression of STEAP2 will lead to
malignant property in HCC cells resulting in enhanced proliferation,
survival, invasiveness, and eventually development of HCC, especially in
obese hosts.

Methods: Hispanic paired tissue continues to be collected from our
institution for RNA sequencing and establishment of Hispanic HCC cell
lines. STEAP2 RNA and protein expression levels in Hispanic paired
samples versus Caucasian paired samples were evaluated by RT-PCR, Western
blot, and immunohistochemistry. Knockdown and overexpression of STEAP2
were established in HCC cell lines and in primary Hispanic HCC cell lines
to examine the effects on iron levels, oxidative stress, proliferation,
invasiveness, apoptosis and cell cycle in vitro.

Results: Hispanic HCC RNA sequencing data compared to TCGA HCC RNA
sequencing data (no Hispanics) demonstrated the overexpression of STEAP2
in HCC tumors in Hispanic patients, which were validated by RT-PCR data
and Western blot data. Lipid peroxidation product, 4-hydroxynonenal, and
copper levels were higher in HCC tumor versus adjacent tissue. Iron
levels were higher in adjacent tissue versus tumor tissue in Hispanics.
Knockdown of STEAP2 in SNU398 cells decreased proliferation and
migration, while in HUH7 cells STEAP2 knockdown only decreased migration.

Conclusions: STEAP2 is specifically overexpressed in HCC tumors in
Hispanics in comparison to HCC tumors in non-Hispanic whites and appears
to play a malignant-promoting role in HCC cells. Further studies to
establish the role of STEAP2 as a tumor promoter in HCC and the
mechanisms by which it promotes carcinogenesis are underway. The proposed
studies will likely yield mechanistic insights into the molecular
mechanisms that drive HCC development and progression in South Texas
Hispanics and potential therapeutic targets involving STEAP2-mediated
metal ion metabolism and oxidative stress.


