Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of ER-associated degradation in rhabdomyosarcoma.


Due to their higher proliferation rate, most cancers experience impaired
ATP generation, hypoxia, hypoglycemia, and increased genetic mutations
that may perturb cellular and protein homeostasis. Persistent stress
conditions induce the unfolded protein response (UPR) as well as
increased expression of molecular chaperones, such as Hsp70, to modulate
cell fate. Our recent studies demonstrate how perturbing cytosolic Hsp70
activity with a small molecule modulator, MAL3-101, induces
rhabdomyosarcoma cell (RMS13) death, patient-derived cells of one of the
most common soft-tissue cancers in children. MAL3-101 addition activates
PERK- and CHOP-dependent RMS13 cell death in a dose dependent manner
(Sabnis et al., PNAS, 2016). To identify the mechanism that links
UPR-triggered cell death and cytosolic Hsp70 inhibition, an isogenic
MAL3-101-resistant cell line was generated (MAR4C). Even though both
RMS13 and MAR4C cells were equally sensitive to a diverse panel of
therapeutic compounds, we now find that they have different efficiencies
of ER-associated degradation (ERAD), a quality control pathway that
degrades misfolded proteins in the secretory pathway and that lessens
proteotioxic stress. Specifically, MAR4C cells remove both soluble and
membrane associated ERAD substrates faster than RMS13 cells and possess
increased levels of ubiquitinated proteins upon proteasomal inhibition.
These data suggest that higher ERAD efficiency is required for MAR4C cell
survival upon Hsp70 inhibition and highlight an unexpected link between
cytosolic Hsp70 inhibition and the ERAD pathway in cancer cells.
Moreover, RNAseq analysis suggests that select redox-related ER quality
control chaperones are differentially expressed between MAR4C and RMS13
cells, and lower levels of the BiP and PDI chaperones and Peroxiredoxin 4
are found in MAR4C cells. Because new therapeutic agents as well as
reliable biomarkers are critically needed in rhabdomyosarcoma and other
cancers, this study sheds light on one mechanism of cancer pathogenesis
and suggests that different cancer subtypes modulate ER quality protein
quality uniquely.


