Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic reclassification of endometrial carcinoma predicts drug
response and facilitates refinement of current management based on
PDX-guided efficacy outcomes.


Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most common gynecological malignancy among
American women. Steadily increasing numbers of newly diagnosed cases and
deaths emphasize the necessity of improving current management
strategies. Rather than the commonly known two types of EC based on
histological classification, the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Research
Network recently reported a reclassification that categorizes EC into
four subtypes based on genomic characterization. Molecular similarities
between these subtypes and other cancers, including colorectal, ovarian,
and breast cancers, were identified. But to date, no prospective
validation has delivered an improved understanding on how to translate
these findings to the clinic in the form of treatments adapting genomic
guidance.

Objectives: To evaluate drug response according to TCGA classification
using a panel of twenty-seven established endometrial cancer
patient-derived xenografts (EC-PDXs).

Methods: Twenty-seven EC-PDXs representing various stages of disease and
histological subtypes were orthotopically transplanted and propagated
over multiple generations. Upon thorough characterization including
histology, metastatic status, and molecular features, EC-PDXs were
further categorized into the four TCGA molecular subtypes on the basis of
somatic copy number variations (CNV), microsatellite instability (MSI),
and POLE mutations. A PDX clinical trial (PCT) was performed to
re-evaluate current standard treatments in comparison to therapeutic
agents adopted from treatment regimens for other cancer types based on
their molecular similarities.

Results: EC-PDXs established from patients with recurrent disease
exhibited minimal activity to first-line chemotherapeutic drugs, as
expected, but remained sensitive to other second-line drugs. None of the
tested drugs exhibited sufficient activity in POLE EC-PDXs. MSI EC-PDXs
were found to be less sensitive to platinum-based treatment and resistant
to 5-FU as reported for MSI colorectal cancer. CNV-high EC-PDXs were more
sensitive to drugs adopted from current ovarian and breast cancer
treatment regimens.

Conclusions: This is the first study that demonstrates the utility of
TCGA classification for treatment guidance based on a PCT. Patients with
recurrent and persistent disease are in desperate need of new therapeutic
options. Our findings open up the possibility to utilize drugs which are
currently used in the treatment of other cancers for the treatment of EC
based on molecular similarities. In addition, this is the first study
that successfully demonstrated the use of molecular classification to
enable the prediction of drug response, and thus may facilitate the
refinement of current EC management in a more precise and personalized
way.


