Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GRP78 is neither expressed on ER-/PR-/Her2- human breast cancer
cell surface nor secreted in the culture media.


GRP78 (Mr78 kDa) is a glucose regulated protein. It is a member of the
heat-shock protein (HSP) family but located in the lumen of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Its function as ER chaperone translocating
protein across the ER membrane that needs to be glycosylated at the
asparagine residue present in the sequeon Asn-X-Ser/Thr (N-linked
glycosylation) is well recognized. This important biochemical event is
essential for glycoprotein folding and function. For example, when the
protein N-glycosylation is impaired with tunicamycin a protein
N-glycosylation inhibitor, angiogenesis, a hallmark for tumor progression
and metastasis is inhibited due to an induction of ER stress. Under such
condition, GRP78 is overexpressed in microvasculature and in tumor
tissue, concluding that GRP78 is a master regulator in ER stress induced
unfolded protein response (upr)-mediated apoptosis in tumor
microvasculature (J. Biol. Chem. 286, 29127-29138, 2011; Pure Appl. Chem.
84, 1907-1918, 2012). This contradicts the current dogma that supports
GRP78 expression on the tumor cell surface interfering with the
therapeutic(s) and making them as tumor promoters instead. To evaluate
the GRP78 localization, we have used ER-/PR-/Her2- (i.e., triple
negative) human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 (Caucasian) cultured
normally or without serum as well as before or after inducing the ER
stress. After establishing the expression of GRP78 mRNA by qPCR and
protein by western blotting, we focused on its cell surface expression.
Unfixed cells were stained with Concanavalin A (Con A; Specificity =
α-D-Mannose, α-D-Glucose, branched mannose), wheat germ agglutinin
(WGA; Specificity = (GlcNAc-β-(1,4)-GlcNAc)1-4>β-GlcNAc-NeuAc) as well
as with anti-GRP78 antibody followed by their detection by
immunofluorescence microscopy using either Rhodamin or Alexa-conjugated
secondary antibody. The fluorescence images were captured in a Zeiss
microscope with Axiocam camera. Con A and WGA staining provided images of
N-glycans on the cell surface and supported the intactness of the cell
membrane. On the other hand, GRP78 fluorescence was absent from the
surface of these cancer cells. Similar results were also obtained
irrespective of cells cultured in the absence of serum and/or in the
presence of 1µg/mL of tunicamycin. GRP78 fluorescence however was
detected in cells after either fixing them with ice-cold methanol or
after permeabilization with digitonin. In addition, western blotting also
failed to detect GRP78 in the culture media of MDA-MB-231 cells. We,
therefore, conclude that GRP78 is neither expressed on the outer-leaflet
of the cell surface of ER-/PR-/Her2- human breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231
nor secreted in the culture media. Supported in part by Susan G. Komen
for the Cure BCTR0600582 and NIH/NIMHD G12MD007583 (KB).


