Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a cancer stem cell-specific function for the
histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC7 in breast and ovarian cancer.


Tumors are comprised of a highly heterogeneous population of cells, of
which only a small subset of stem-like cells possess the ability to
regenerate tumors in vivo. These cancer-stem-cells (CSCs) represent a
significant clinical challenge as they are resistant to conventional
cancer therapies and play essential roles in metastasis and tumor
relapse. Multiple signaling pathways involved in the regulation of CSCs
have been identified. However, the regulation of CSCs is unlike the
reversible short-term changes in cellular phenotype induced by various
extracellular factors, or the permanent changes induced by mutations. The
hierarchical differentiation of CSCs to non-stem-tumor-cells (nsTCs) is
long-lasting over many cell generations but it is also reversible, that
is more akin to tissue differentiation, which suggests that epigenomic
factors such as histone modifications may also be involved in the
regulation of the CSC phenotype. Here, we present evidence that specific
histone deacetylases (HDACs) play essential roles in the breast and
ovarian CSC phenotype. HDACs are chromatin-modifying enzymes that are
involved in regulation of differentiation, autophagy, apoptosis,
migration, mitosis, and angiogenesis. Utilizing a novel breast CSC model
composed of isogenic BPLER (predominantly CSC) and HMLER (predominantly
nsTC) cell line pairs, along with conventional breast and ovarian cancer
cell lines, we discovered that among the 11 family members, HDAC1 and
HDAC7 are specifically over-expressed in FACS-sorted breast CSCs when
compared to unsorted cells. Furthermore, we found that HDAC1 and HDAC7
are necessary to maintain breast CSCs and that overexpression of HDAC7 is
sufficient to augment the CSC phenotype. We also demonstrate that members
of the benzamide class of HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) targeting HDAC1/2/3
enzymatic activity, such as MS275 and MGCD0103, can be used to
preferentially target breast and ovarian CSCs and we are now trying to
elucidate the molecular mechanisms behind the CSC-restricted
downregulation of HDAC7 and c-Myc transcript and protein levels found in
response to MS275 treatment. So far, limited clinical studies have been
completed with these HDACi, predominantly in Leukemia and Lymphomas. Our
results indicate that these drugs should be tested more extensively in
solid tumors. Furthermore, in standard trial design with cytostatic and
cytotoxic drugs, the reduction in tumor size has been one of the main
metrics for monitoring patient response. Since the CSC-specific actions
of MS275 and MGCD0103 were previously unknown, CSC biomarkers were not
used in patient selection or for monitoring therapy response. Our results
suggest that biomarkers such as HDAC1 and HDAC7 are particularly
compelling as a supplement to tumor size measurements. Therefore, it
would be feasible to use HDAC7 immunohistochemistry to stratify patients
in future clinical trials.


