Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitors of the enzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, overcome
the differentiation blockade in acute myeloid leukemia.


The prognosis for adults diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
remains poor, with a five-year survival of only 25%. This prognosis is
even more dismal in older patients who are not well enough to receive
standard induction chemotherapy. Speaking to the need for new therapies
is the fact that our therapeutic backbone - a combination of cytarabine
and an anthracycline - remains unchanged since 1973. The promise of
differentiation therapy was realized in the small subset of patients
diagnosed with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Here, treatment in the
form of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide inverted the
survival curve; where APL was once the worst form of myeloid leukemia, it
now carries the best prognosis, with a five-year survival exceeding 85%.
The goal of this study was thus to develop differentiation therapy for
patients with non-promyelocytic AML with the question: “Can we identify
small molecules that overcome myeloid differentiation arrest?” A
phenotypic differentiation screen in a HOXA9 driven leukemia model
followed by target deconvolution, identified DHODH as an unexpected
target for overcoming differentiation arrest in AML. We used 2 potent
small molecule inhibitors of DHODH to validate this initial finding:
Brequinar, a known DHODH inhibitor and an in house compound BAY DHODHi.
In several in vitro experiments we demonstrated induction of AML
differentiation in a dose dependent fashion. Interestingly, these effects
could be completely rescued by addition of uridine, confirming target
specificity. Treating mice in multiple genetically diverse AML in vivo
models with a DHODH inhibitor led to tumor growth reduction and AML
differentiation. Expression analysis of leukemia cells explanted from
mice xenografts treated with a DHODH inhibitor demonstrate an early onset
of differentiation markers indicating a direct role of DHODH with the
onset of differentiation in vivo. The mechanism for selective
vulnerability of leukemia cells to DHODH inhibition remains under
investigation. Despite the observation that DHODH is expressed in all
cells, normal and malignant, mice can tolerate DHODH inhibitor therapy
for more than 100 days without weight-loss or other concerning
side-effects. Thus, our pre-clinical studies point towards DHODH as a new
metabolic target in the differentiation treatment of AML. Hopefully,
small molecule DHODH inhibitors will provide a much-needed
differentiation therapy for patients with acute myeloid leukemia.


