Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of CD37 expression and binding of AGS67E, an
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) against CD37, on white blood cells (WBCs)
collected from phase I non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) patients.


AGS67E is an antibody drug conjugate (ADC) against CD37 conjugated to
monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE). CD37 is expressed on normal WBCs, but is
also highly expressed in NHL, CLL and AML (Pereira et al., 2015). A phase
I study is currently evaluating the safety, PK and anti-cancer activity
of AGS67E with or without growth factor (GF) in subjects with
relapsed/refractory NHL. To assess CD37 expression on WBCs, binding of
AGS67E, and potential pharmacodynamic effects, samples from subjects were
collected at pre-dose, D2, D8, and D15 and analyzed by flow cytometry.
CD37 expression on subject tumor samples was also evaluated by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Our results demonstrated that CD37 was highly
expressed in tumor samples and that AGS67E binds to WBCs causing
down-regulation of CD37, achieving saturation of binding at 24 hours
post-treatment (earliest time measured) at or above 0.9 mg/kg. A
dose-dependent decrease in the number of all cell types examined was
observed with a nadir occurring at D8, with partial or full recovery at
D15, except for neutrophils. NK and T cell counts appeared to be least
impacted while neutrophils were most affected. B cell counts were
extremely low pre-dose for some patients, presumably from prior
therapies. In patients treated at 0.9 mg/kg and higher without GF,
recovery of neutrophils was delayed beyond D15. At doses of 1.2 mg/kg and
higher, use of GF resulted in a significant recovery of neutrophils by
D15. The extent of cell count decreases did not correlate to the
proportion of cells expressing CD37. For example, decreases in NK cells,
monocytes, and, in some cases, T cells, were much greater than the
proportion of cells expressing CD37. Furthermore, mature WBCs are
unlikely to be affected by AGS67E. This raises the possibility that the
main effect of AGS67E may be on rapidly growing precursor cells and that
cells with low, or no, CD37 expression may be impacted by the membrane
permeable MMAE through a by-stander effect. The effect of AGS67E on
neutrophils was investigated in an in vitro assay where hematopoietic
stem cells were differentiated into neutrophils. Using this method, we
showed that when AGS67C antibody was conjugated to a non-cleavable,
membrane impermeable auristatin (mcMMAF) less cytotoxicity to
differentiating neutrophils was observed compared to AGS67E. Previously,
we have shown that neutrophils secrete proteases that can liberate MMAE
from ADCs (Zhao et al, 2016). These results suggest that AGS67E
contributes to neutropenia through a by-stander effect, in addition to
the CD37-mediated internalization of the ADC. In conclusion, the results
showed that AGS67E bound to its target CD37, modulated its expression,
achieved saturation of binding at doses at or above 0.9 mg/kg, and
reversibly depleted WBCs, with the exception of neutrophils for which GF
administration appeared to significantly improve recovery rate.


