Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune system pathway activation for prediction of the response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in triple-negative breast cancer.


Background: Triple-negative breast cancer patients (TNBCs) who receive
neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) generally show a response to NAC, but
about 5% experience progressive disease (PD). Although TNBCs that respond
to NAC have been well-studied, reports about TNBCs with PD during NAC are
absent. We aimed to compare kinase activity profiles of TNBCs of both
groups to identify a biological predictor of NAC non-responders.

Methods: Tyrosine kinase activity profiles of lysates of fresh frozen
cancer tissues from NAC non-responders and responders, the latter
represented by TNBCs who did not receive NAC, were determined with a
peptide microarray system (Cancer Res. 2009; 69(14):5987-95). Tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) were counted in these tissues.

Results: Among 740 TNBCs, 20 NAC non-responders were identified. For the
7 samples from PD confirmed patients and 10 TNBCs not receiving NAC, no
correlation was observed between NAC response and age, menopausal status,
tumor size or axillary lymph node status. Kinase activity measurements
showed large differences in overall tyrosine kinase activity between
responders and non-responders. 35 peptides had significantly (p Results:
Among 740 TNBCs, 20 NAC non-responders were identified. For the 7 samples
from PD confirmed patients and 10 TNBCs not receiving NAC, no correlation
was observed between NAC response and age, menopausal status, tumor size
or axillary lymph node status. Kinase activity measurements showed large
differences in overall tyrosine kinase activity between responders and
non-responders. 35 peptides had significantly (p < 0.05) higher
phosphorylation in the responder group. Kinases that phosphorylate these
peptides (upstream kinases) were identified from literature. Among
others, the immune related kinases Zap70, Syk and JAK2 were identified as
upstream kinases. Pathway analysis yielded evidence for increased
activity in the responder group in immune-related pathways and in
pathways involved in development and signal transduction. Responders had
a significantly higher (p = 0.0053) TILs count.

Conclusion: Kinases related to the immune system are less activated in
NAC non-responders. The low TILs count in the non-responders confirmed
that activation of the immune system in non-responders is lower than in
NAC responders. These data merit a further investigation of the use of
kinase activity profiling either alone or in combination with TIL scoring
for the prediction of the response to NAC in TNBC with a larger patient
cohort.


