Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antisense oligo nucleotide of Annexin A4 improved platinum
resistance in ovarian clear cell cancer.


Introduction: Ovarian cancer in Japan are classified as clear cell
carcinoma (CCC) more than 20 %, this percentage is higher than in Europe
and United States. Besides, it is well known that CCC of ovary is highly
resistant to cancer chemotherapy including carboplatin and paclitaxel
treatment. We reported that Annexin A4 protein was overexpressed in
ovarian CCC tissues by immunohistochemical analysis. Elevated Annexin A4
level has been detected in various epithelial cancer cell lines and have
reported associating with chemoresistance to platinum-based cancer drugs.
To overcome the platinum chemoresistance, we thought antisense
oligonucleotides (ASOs) to be a good therapeutic option in a way of
highly specific therapy for improving chemoresistance by suppressing the
expression of Annexin A4 in cancer cells.

Methods: We generated ASO targeting Annexin A4 with 2’, 4’-bridged
nucleic acid. And we analyzed suppression of Annexin A4 in
ASO-transfected RMG-I cell line (CCC) in vitro using real time PCR and
western blotting. In 16 types of ASOs targeting Annexin A4, 2 ASOs were
eligible. Cells were seeded in 96-well plates (2,000 cells per well).
Next day, cells were transfected with ASOs using lipofectamine 2000 and
were exposed to various concentrations of cisplatin (0 - 100 μM) for 72
hr. Then, drug concentrations resulting in a 50% inhibition of cell
growth (IC50 values) were calculated. Intracellular platinum accumulation
in Annexin A4 overexpressing cells was analyzed. To assess the
improvement of platinum resistance in vivo, we used ICR nu/nu mice
xenografted subcutaneously with RMG-I cells. Intraperitoneal injection of
cisplatin 3mg/kg after intratumoral administration of ASO 1mg/kg each
twice a week were given to xenograft mice.

Results: By realtime PCR analysis, among strong 16 types of ASOs
targeting Annexin A4, 2 ASOs showed strong knockdown efficiency (about
80% knockdown) compared to negative control ASOs. Western blotting
analysis showing knockdown of Annexin A4 expression was observed in
Annexin A4 ASO transfected cells compared to no treatment or control ASOs
in vitro. ASO-transfected RMG-I cells was less resistant to cisplatin
(IC50 = 3.3μM) compared with control cells (IC50 = 5.2μM) Same result
were obtained with carboplatin. Platinum resistance was significantly
improved in treated with Annexin A4 ASO and cisplatin compared to control
ASO and cisplatin treated group in vivo.

Conclusion: By transfection of ASOs targeting Annexin A4, platinum
resistance have improved in vivo and in vitro, Annexin A4 have associated
with efflux of platinum anti-tumor drug. In conclusion, antisense
oligonucleotides for Annexin A4 will be a therapeutic option for ovarian
clear cell carcinoma with chemoresistance to platinum antitumor drug.


