Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting inhibitors of apoptosis in combination with radiation
for the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.


Background and purpose:

Evasion of apoptosis contributes to radioresistance of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), calling for novel strategies to overcome
apoptotic resistance. Second mitochondria-derived activator of caspase
(SMAC) - mimetics are a class of targeted drugs that antagonize selected
inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) to block pro-survial signalling, and
eventually induce cell apoptosis. The present study was designed to
investigate the radiosensitizing effect of one SMAC mimetic, LCL161, in
HNSCC and the underlying mechanisms for radiosensitization.

Material and methods:

We analyzed the correlation between apoptotic molecules and HPV status in
HNSCC via mRNA expression using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database,
as well as protein expression in 6 HNSCC cell lines by immunoblotting. We
also examined cIAP1 expression on a tissue microarray (TMA) of HNSCC
tumors, and assessed its correlation with HPV status and patient outcome.
Clonogenic survival and WST-1 assays were carried out to explore the
potential of LCL161 as a radiosensitizer in HNSCC cell lines. Cell cycle
analysis, Annexin-V assays and immunoblotting were performed to
investigate effects of LCL161 on radiation induced cell apoptosis. Human
tumor xenografts were generated to explore the radiosensitization effect
of LCL161 on HPV[-] tumors in vivo.

Results:

TCGA database analysis and immunoblotting from HNSCC cells revealed that
expression of cIAP1, Survivin, DIABLO, p65, IK-b, TNF-α, BCL-XL,
Caspase-7, and Caspase-8 were elevated in HPV[-] compared to HPV[+] HNSCC
tumors. IHC staining showed cIAP1 expression was associated with HPV[-]
status (p=0.0239). In addition, cIAP1 expression was significantly higher
in HNSCC compared with adjacent normal tissue (p=0.0003). In univariate
analysis, cIAP1 was significantly associated with poor overall survival
(p=0.0359). LCL161 degraded cIAP1 at nanomolar concentrations but has
minimal single-agent cytotoxicity with IC50 range of 32 μM – 95 μM.
Interestingly, we found that LCL161 could induce radiosensitization only
in HPV[-], but not in HPV[+] HNSCC cells. Mechanistic studies showed
LCL161 mediated radiosensitisation was associated with increased cell
apoptosis, with enhanced activation of caspases-3, -7, -8, -9, and PARP.
Finally, in vivo data showed that LCL161 degraded cIAP1, activated
caspases, and profoundly radiosensitized two human HPV[-] HNSCC xenograft
models.

Conclusion:

Taken together, our results demonstrate for the first time that cIAP1 is
a potential prognostic and therapeutic biomarker for HNSCC patients.
Through targeting cIAP1 and other IAP family members, LCL161,
radiosensitizes HNSCC tumors, particularly HPV [-] tumors, via caspase
activation and apoptosis induction. Taken together, LCL161 holds promise
for future clinical development as a novel radiosensitizer in the
treatment of HPV[-] HNSCC tumors.


