Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk models for cancer screening cohorts assembled from electronic
health records: Application to calculating risks that underlie current
cervical cancer screening guidelines.


Introduction: We developed risk models for cancer screening cohorts
assembled from electronic health records. We applied them to a cohort of
1.4 million women undergoing cervical cancer screening with human
papillomavirus (HPV) and Pap “cotesting” at Kaiser Permanente
Northern California (KPNC) to develop risk estimates to inform screening
guidelines.

Methods: Cohorts assembled using electronic health records present 3
challenges that make it inappropriate to use Kaplan-Meier or Cox models.
First, the time of disease onset for an individual is unobserved, and
falls between screens (interval-censoring). Second, there is also
prevalent disease (left-censoring). Third, prevalent disease is not
always immediately diagnosed (e.g. in those with negative screening
results), and thus some incident disease is actually missed prevalent
disease. To address the challenges, we propose a “logistic-Weibull”
model that is a logistic regression for prevalent disease and a Weibull
survival regression for interval-censored incident disease. We also
propose a non-parametric method (no covariates) to check the assumptions
of the logistic-Weibull model. We calculate risks of cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia grade 3 and cancer (CIN3+) for each possible
abnormal cotesting result. As an illustrative example of the biases that
can occur in real data, we present the Kaplan-Meier, logistic-Weibull,
and non-parametric cumulative risk curves for 34,261 women at KPNC who
test Pap negative and HPV positive at enrollment.

Results: The non-parametric method estimates 1.99% prevalent risk of
CIN3+ and 5.68% 7-year cumulative risk of CIN3+ among women who are
Pap-negative/HPV-positive at enrollment. In contrast, the Kaplan-Meier
method estimates merely 0.18% prevalent risk of CIN3+, primarily because
of prevalent disease not diagnosed at baseline. Furthermore, the
Kaplan-Meier method overestimates 7-year cumulative risk as 7.37% because
it equates the time of onset with the time of diagnosis, and thus
overestimates the hazards of disease onset at later times. In contrast,
the logistic-Weibull estimates of 1.87% prevalent risk of CIN3+ and 5.84%
7-year cumulative risk of CIN3+ are close to the risk estimates from the
non-parametric method.

Discussion: The Kaplan-Meier method provided poor risk estimates while
logistic-Weibull model-based risks were close to the risk estimates from
the non-parametric method. Our findings support use of the
logistic-Weibull models over Kaplan-Meier methods for developing the risk
estimates that underlie current U.S. cervical cancer screening guidelines.


