Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isolation and characterization of a PRAME-specific TCR with high
avidity, potent antitumor efficacy and a favorable preclinical safety
profile.


Some of the challenges regarding adoptive T cell transfer as an
immunotherapeutic approach for the treatment of cancer patients include
the initial induction, isolation and later characterization of suitable
TCR candidates. In addition, the selection of appropriate target antigens
is important and complex as such antigens need to meet some critical
demands. Published data as well as in depth in silico analyses revealed
the tumor associated antigen PRAME a suitable candidate. Classified as
cancer/testis antigen, PRAME is highly expressed in tumors with only
limited or no expression in normal tissues, other than testis.

Here we describe the induction of PRAME-specific, HLA-A*02:01-restricted
CD8-positive T cells by using an in vitro priming approach. Mature
dendritic cells transfected with ivtRNA encoding full-length PRAME were
cocultured with autologous CD8-enriched PBL from a healthy,
HLA-A*02:01-positive blood donor. Initially primed T cells were expanded
for 2 weeks and T cells bearing TCRs specific for PRAME-derived epitopes
were identified by multimer staining and FACS analysis. Single cells were
sorted into 96 well plates and after an expansion period of another 2
weeks, growing clones were screened for specificity. TCR sequences of
specific clones were identified by using NGS and reconstructed in a
retroviral vector system enabling stable transduction of effector cells.
The resulting TCR-modified T cells were thoroughly analyzed and
characterized using a dedicated set of assays to evaluate multiple
parameters concerning safety and efficacy.

This characterization revealed TCR T4.8-1-29 to be highly specific for a
PRAME-derived epitope presented on HLA-A*02:01. Only epitope-positive
target cells expressing the appropriate HLA-restriction element induced
cytokine secretion by T4.8-1-29 expressing effector cells, leading to
recognition as well as specific lysis of these target cells. Recognition
and lysis, not just of peptide-loaded T2 cells, but also of
PRAME-transfected APC, transfected tumor cells as well as endogenously
PRAME-positive tumor cells was mediated by this TCR. T4.8-1-29-expressing
effectors show a high natural avidity for the target epitope without the
need of further manipulation, e.g. functional efficacy enhancement by
affinity maturation. In addition, the toxicity assessment using various
in vitro and in silico tools revealed a favorable preclinical safety
profile for this TCR.

In summary, by using an in vitro priming approach utilizing cells from
healthy donors, it was possible to generate a TCR recognizing a
PRAME-derived epitope with high natural avidity and specificity. The TCR
shows a favorable safety profile, demonstrating that this approach is
useful to generate TCRs potentially qualifying for evaluation in clinical
trials.


