Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A study of in vitro and in vivo effects of a novel peptide and
rhenium compounds on prostate cancer.


Emerging evidence suggests that acquisition of the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process that resembles the
genesis of cancer stem-like cells, contributes to tumor aggressiveness
and is mediated by deregulated expression of microRNAs (miRNAs), such as
miR-200 and let-7 family. Loss of miR-200 expression results in the
over-expression of Lin28B, which is prevalent in human Prostate Cancer(
PCa) . Lin28B is also known to block the processing of another miRNA
(pre-let-7 and pri-let-7), resulting in decreased mature let-7, thereby
leads to increased Suz12 and EZH2 expression, which are important
components of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). Thus, over-
expression of Lin28B and loss of miR-200 and let-7 appear to be
responsible for PCa aggressiveness. A group of novel rhenium compounds
have shown promising anti-cancer properties in various cancer cell lines
tested in our laboratories. Our current investigations show that
re-expression of miR-200b, miR-200c, and let-7 could be achieved by
treating cells with our newly developed rhenium compounds by
down-regulating the expression of Lin28B and EZH2. Based on our
preliminary results, we hypothesize that over-expression of Lin28B leads
to the acquisition of invasive and metastatic characteristics in PCa
cells (EMT-phenotype cells) via down-regulation of miR-200b and miR-200c,
resulting in increased expression of Suz12, ZEB1, and ZEB2. We also
hypothesize that over-expression of Lin28B represses the maturation of
let-7 family, leading to increased expression of EZH2, and these
processes can be attenuated by treatment of cells with novel rhenium
compounds in vitro. Our experiments were done on prostate cancer cell
lines derived from both Caucasian(CA) and African American (AA)patients
and also biopsy samples obtained from both CA and AA patients at Henry
Ford Hospital and Karmanos Cancer Center of Wayne State University,
Detroit, MI. We confirmed using gene expression studies by micro array
and Real-Time PCR and then data analysis by Ingenuity software systemthe
validity of our hypothesis and continued our research by testing one of
these rhenium compounds-RPR1 on prostate cancer model of nude mice at
Greenbaum Cancer Center(GCC) of University of Maryland at Baltimore. In
vitro studies by Real -Time PCR, Flow Cytometry, Western Blotting
,Smart-Flare technology, cell death and proliferation assays along with
inhibition of spheroid forming assays showed efficacy of these rhenium
compounds as anti cancer agents. In vivo studies also showed decrease of
tumor volume and mass ,no toxicity, thus efficacy of these novel drugs.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: Supported by NIH- 3R01CA164318-03S1 and
NIH-T-34-GM100831, a NSF-VESTEM award and NSF-LSAMP award .


