Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNMT1 expression is peripheral mononuclear cells is associated
with increased breast cancer risk.


Loss of global DNA methylation in peripheral tissue has been identified
as a biomarker of breast cancer susceptibility in several studies. DNA
methyl-transferases or DNMTs are the enzymes in charge of catalyzing the
addition of the methyl group to the DNA molecule. Of the different DNMTs
described in humans, only DNMT1 has been found to be in charge of adding
methyl groups to the newly synthesized DNA strand. Therefore, compromised
levels of this enzyme might lead to a loss of global DNA methylation and
concomitantly an increase in breast cancer risk. However, to date no
study has examined the association between peripheral levels of DNMT1 and
breast cancer. To investigate this relation, we conducted a case-control
study including sisters in the New York site of the Breast Cancer Family
Registry. We extracted mRNA from peripheral mononuclear cells (PMNC) in
196 sister sets, a total of 479 female participants, and assayed DNMT1
gene expression levels using Taqman expression assays. The results were
analyzed using generalized estimating equations (GEE). We found that
there were no large differences between the mean levels of DNMT1
expression levels of women with breast cancer and controls; mean level in
cases was 0.46 ± 0.71 versus 0.63 ± 1.42 in controls (p=0.10). When
examining expression levels as a continuous variable, there also were no
associations in GEE regression models adjusting for age at blood drawn
and smoking status Odds Ratio (OR) = 1.17 (95% confidence interval (CI) =
0.97 - 1.40 per one unit increase in expression levels), p=0.11).
However, when results were analyzed by categorizing DNMT1 expression in
tertiles, lower DNMT1 expression (≤ 0.17%) was associated with
statistically significantly higher odds of breast cancer (OR = 1.47
(95%CI = 1.02 - 2.10), p=0.04). If replicated in other studies, these
findings suggest that low DNMT1 expression in PBMC has the potential to
be used as a biomarker of breast cancer risk in women at high risk of the
disease.


