Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimization of prostate cancer organoid culture methods to grow
PDX and human biopsy tissue.


A major obstacle in the field of prostate cancer research is the limited
capacity to culture prostate cancer-derived cells in vitro. There are
relatively few established prostate cancer cell lines in use today. Those
that are available are amenable to in vitro drug assays and mechanistic
studies, but do not well-represent the genetic diversity of the disease,
nor do they accurately predict in vivo response. Recently, organoid
culture techniques have been developed for prostate cancer by the
laboratories of Hans Clevers and Charles Sawyers that have increased our
ability to grow metastatic tumor-derived prostate cancer cells in vitro.
This represents a great step forward, but we are still restricted by the
limited availability of biopsy tissue and the relatively low success rate
(~20%) in establishing new organoid lines. The LuCaP series of
patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) represents a well-characterized set of
prostate cancer specimens that is genetically diverse, reflective of a
range of treatment histories, and available to the research community. We
have modified the organoid culture technique based upon systematic
comparisons and analysis for organoid growth of the LuCaP PDXs. Our
modified conditions represent an improvement upon the original growth
conditions. We have successfully cultured 21 out of 24 LuCaPs attempted,
for at least one generation, and 16 out of 24 are able to grow long-term
over several generations. This includes 3 of the newest LuCaPs (167,
170.2, and 189.3) that we have genomically characterized. Comparison of
the PDX and various organoid generations showed significant conservation
of genomic changes ranging from 75-90% for nonsynonymous point mutations.
The modified organoid culture method immediately and significantly
increases the number of prostate cancer lines that are available by
making the LuCaP PDXs accessible to in vitro culture. In addition to the
PDXs, our method has improved the success for culturing metastatic
samples grown from biopsies. We show here that 2 out of 3 patient-derived
organoid lines that we have established, grow well in the modified
conditions but poorly in the original culture conditions, the third grows
equally well in both conditions.


