Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibrinogen-like protein 2 drives malignant tumor progression in
glioma.


Gliomas are the most common type of brain tumor in both children and
adults. Several low-grade gliomas (LGG) have the ability to progress into
more aggressive tumors -high-grade gliomas (HGG) including glioblastoma
(GB). Although patients harboring a LGG may survive for years, after the
tumor transforms to HGG, life expectancy rapidly declines to 12 to 15
months in adults and 40 months in children. Thus, inhibiting this process
of malignant transformation (MT) is an attractive therapeutic strategy
because of the more indolent course associated with LGGs. Immune response
plays a critical role in surveillance against malignant transformation.
Our previous study shows that fibrinogen-like protein 2 (FGL2) is a key
hub of tumor-mediated immune suppression. Hence, we investigated the role
of FGL2 in promoting tumor progression from LGG to HGG in glioma.
Analysis of TCGA expression data showed that increased FGL2 expression is
associated with poorer survival in LGG and GB patients. And there is a
positive correlation of expression level between FGL2 and mesenchymal
glioma marker CD44, and a negative correlation between FGL2 and proneural
glioma marker OLIG2. Engineered expression of FGL2 in a PDGFB-dependent
mouse model of oligodendroglioma, a common glioma subtype, yielded a
significantly higher rate of HGGs (72% vs 29%, p=0.034) and
poorer-symptom free survival (63 vs 90 days, p=0.003) than PDGFB
expression alone. And HGGs from FGL2 + PDGFB expressing mice
exhibited a distinct mesenchymal phenotype validating TCGA data. Further,
FGL2 induced high numbers of CD4+FoxP3+ cells from an early time point of
tumor formation underscoring its role in tumor progression. And FGL2
overexpression educated M2 skew in the tumors characterized by high
expression of Iba1 and Arginase1 in macrophages. Finally, treatment with
anti-FGL2 antibody significantly improves survival in mice, shifts the
phenotype from mesenchymal HGG to proneural LGG, and rescues M2
macrophage skewing. Our results show that FGL2 is critical for malignant
progression of glioma by inducing immunosuppression in tumor
microenvironment, and raise the potential of FGL2 to be a promising
target to suppress/reverse glioma progression and provide survival
benefit in clinical.


