Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Screening methodologies for the discovery of small molecule
melanoma therapeutics targeted at the ErbB4 receptor tyrosine kinase.


Introduction: Gain-of-function mutations in the ErbB4 receptor tyrosine
kinase have been found in a significant fraction of melanoma cell lines
that are dependent on ErbB4 for proliferation. However, there is a
scarcity of therapeutics for treating these ErbB4-dependent tumors.
Consequently, we have developed high-throughput screening assays to
identify small molecule ErbB4 antagonists that may hold promise as
targeted melanoma therapeutics. Our approach is based on the observation
that the Q43L mutant of the ErbB4 agonist Neuregulin 2beta (NRG2b)
functions as a partial agonist at ErbB4. NRG2b/Q43L stimulates ErbB4
tyrosine phosphorylation, fails to stimulate ErbB4-dependent cell
proliferation, and competitively antagonizes agonist stimulation of
ErbB4-dependent cell proliferation.

Experimental procedures: Therefore, we have developed three
high-throughput screening assays to identify ErbB4 partial agonists that
function as antagonists. The primary screen identifies molecules that
stimulate ErbB4 tyrosine phosphorylation. The secondary screen identifies
molecules that stimulate or fail to stimulate ErbB4-dependent cell
proliferation. The tertiary screen identifies molecules that antagonize
agonist stimulation of ErbB4-dependent cell proliferation.

Results: A phospho-ErbB4 sandwich ELISA assay identifies molecules that
stimulate ErbB4 tyrosine phosphorylation with high sensitivity and
fidelity (Z’ >0.5). IL3-independence assays in conjunction with MTT
assays using a cell line that displays ErbB4-dependent cell proliferation
distinguish between molecules that stimulate and fail to stimulate
ErbB4-dependent proliferation (Z’>0.5) and identify molecules that
antagonize agonist stimulation of ErbB4 dependent proliferation. These
assays have been used to identify small molecules that stimulate ErbB4
tyrosine phosphorylation. Efforts to determine whether these hits
function as ErbB4 full agonists or partial agonists (antagonists) are
underway and will be reported. Structures of these small molecule ErbB4
full and partial agonists may be reported, pending submission of a
provisional patent application.

Conclusions: We have validated an HTS strategy for identifying ErbB4
partial agonists that function as ErbB4 antagonists and deployment of
that strategy has led to the identification of several hits (~20 from the
primary screen). Such molecules may hold promise as targeted therapeutics
for melanoma and other ErbB4-dependent tumors.


