Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Creating faithful genetic zebrafish models of pediatric high grade
gliomas and MPNSTs.


Pediatric high-grade gliomas (HGGs) are the leading cause of
cancer-related death in children. Despite a slight improvement of patient
prognosis over the past decades pediatric HGGs remain largely incurable.
Thus, new experimental models are needed to understand the mechanisms of
the disease and find more effective treatment options. We previously
reported a model of HGGs and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors
(MPNSTs) which is based on the combined deficiencies in the tumor
suppressor genes tp53 and nf1. However, HGG penetrance is very low in
this line and most fish develop MPNSTs starting at about 3 months of age.
On top of the existing model we used CRISPR/Cas9 to incorporate knock-out
mutations in the tumor suppressor genes atrx or suz12 which are described
to be involved in pediatric HGG biology. Heterozygous atrx
loss-of-function (lof) did not impact tumor onset or penetrance of
neither HGGs nor MPNSTs. Since a total loss of atrx was lethal in
development, we re-injected effective atrx targeting gRNAs and Cas9 mRNA
into the atrx+/- line to create a mosaic atrx-/- genotype. Surprisingly,
despite a high mutation efficiency of the remaining atrx allele the
re-injection strategy still did not alter tumor onset and penetrance in
that model. This suggests that loss of atrx is only effective in HGGs in
cooperation with additional hits other than tp53 and nf1. In contrast,
loss of suz12 cooperated well with the tp53/nf1-deficient background. As
nf1, suz12 is duplicated in zebrafish (suz12a and suz12b) resulting in 4
alleles of each gene per cell. When at least 2 out of 4 alleles of either
suz12a or suz12b were lost, MPNST onset was accelerated. This effect was
much stronger in tp53-/-, nf1a+/-, nf1b-/- fish (5-7 weeks) compared to
tp53-/-, nf1a+/+, nf1b-/- siblings (3-4 weeks). This indicates that the
tumor supporting effect of suz12 lof increases the more nf1 levels
decrease. However, HGG onset still remained unchanged. We hypothesize
that efficient onset of HGGs in our model requires the presence of an
activated oncogene. Specific missense mutations in H3F3A are reported to
be implicated in HGG progression in children and young adults. Thus, we
overexpressed zebrafish h3f3a-K27M or -G34R mutant sequences in the
tp53/nf1/atrx/suz12-deficient line and are currently investigating
possible changes in tumor biology. Our zebrafish models of pediatric HGGs
and MPNSTs will be useful to dissect the mechanisms underlying the
cooperation among driver mutations and for small molecule screens to
identify specific inhibitors of cell growth and survival in these
malignancies.


