Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and validation of a breast cancer panel using
targeted next generation bisulfite sequencing (tNGBS).


Aberrant DNA methylation (e.g., global reduction in DNA methylation and
differential methylation of promoter regions) is a hallmark of cancer and
may function in various ways to influence transcription. We developed a
panel of bisulfite specific methylation sequencing assays in order to
assess the methylation status of large number of genes using
pyrosequencing. By combining these pyrosequencing assays into a targeted
NextGen bisulfite sequencing panel, we can screen both a large number of
genes and a large number of samples simultaneously. We first assembled
the 40 pyrosequencing assays and sensitivity and reproducibility were
analyzed on pilot DNA samples isolated from FFPE tissue. Assays were
specifically designed to work in highly fragmented and cross-linked DNA
from formalin-fixed, clinical samples. Initial pyrosequencing on these
pilot samples showed that 24 of the 40 assays gave quality validation and
sample results. Reasons that some assays were not successful may be due
to the A/T or G/C content within the amplicon, PCR Bias, low
amplification efficiency, or strong cross-linking from fixation within
the assay to name a few. The initial 40 assays were next assembled in a
combination of 7 multiplex PCRs in which gradient PCRs were performed and
analyzed for optimal multiplex amplification using a bioanalyzer. Final
assay multiplexing combinations were established and PCR bias testing was
performed by tNGBS on a sample set of high and low methylated DNA mixed
at different ratios. Assays with an R-square of less than 0.9 between the
expected and generated methylation from this mixing were removed, leaving
us with 21 validated assays in our panel (9 of 24 assays that were
previously validated in pyrosequencing and 12 of 19 assays that could not
be validated in pyrosequencing). In the present study we looked at DNA
methylation changes in breast cancer development using paired adjacent
normal, invasive and in situ tissue from a 30 patients with breast cancer
as well as 11 various normal tissues other than breast, and 12 cell lines
for a total of 83 samples in a panel of 21 genes. The results of the
tNGBS were compared with the pyrosequencing results. This process of
panel development, where small amounts of bisulfite treated DNA can be
amplified in a target specific manner, prior to sequencing, makes
investigating a large number of samples on a large panel of genes
possible in a small amount of time. We observed a high correlation
between the pyrosequencing and tNGBS sequencing results, and we show that
that there are several genes that are either hypermethylated or
hypomethylated in tumor tissue when compared to adjacent normal tissue.


