Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel theranostic strategy against scirrhous gastric cancer;
combination of chemotherapy and fluorescence oncolytic adenovirus.


Background: Gastric cancer is one of the most common cancers worldwide,
especially in Eastern Asia. Scirrhous gastric cancer (SGC), which is
characterized by poorly differentiated tumor cells that diffusely
infiltrate the gastric wall, accounts for 10% of all gastric cancers, and
often causes peritoneal metastasis. Peritoneal carcinomatosis shows the
worst prognosis among various metastatic patterns. Since it is difficult
to detect peritoneal micrometastasis preoperatively or intraoperatively,
SGC patients with peritoneal micrometastasis show the recurrence and
refractory to conventional systemic chemotherapy after surgery. In recent
year, intraperitoneal (i.p.) administration of paclitaxel (PTX) has been
shown to have therapeutic effects against ovarian cancer with peritoneal
metastasis. However, the effective treatment option to overcome
peritoneal metastasis of SGC has not been developed yet, although i.p.
administration of some chemotherapeutic agents has been attempted to SGC.
Therefore, a novel therapeutic strategy is required for the treatment of
peritoneal metastasis of SGC.

Methods: We previously developed a telomerase-dependent
replication-selective adenovirus OBP-401 (TelomeScan), which can
replicate within the tumor cells selectively and express green
fluorescent protein (GFP). Moreover, OBP-401 infection also induces
tumor-specific cell death in monotherapy or combination therapy with
chemotherapy. In this study, we assessed synergistic effects in
combination with novel theranostic agent OBP-401 and chemotherapeutic
agent paclitaxel (PTX) using human SGC cell lines (GCIY and KATO III). In
vitro experiment, SGC cells and normal human lung fibroblast (NHLF) cells
were infected with OBP-401 at various doses. PTX was administrated after
48 hours of virus infection. Twenty-four hours after PTX administration,
we evaluated the anti-tumor effect by XTT assay, and analyzed the
synergistic effect by CalcuSyn Software.

Results: SGC cells were visualized as GFP-positive cells selectively by
the infection of OBP-401, whereas NHLF cells were not visualized with
OBP-401. In both SGC cell lines, the suppression of cell viability
dose-dependently by administration of OBP-401 or PTX alone was confirmed.
OBP-401 synergistically suppressed the viability of SGC cells in
combination with PTX as compared to monotherapy.

Conclusions: These results suggest that OBP-401 has a promising potential
to detect peritoneal micrometastasis of SGC intraoperatively and
combination of OBP-401 and PTX would be a novel theranostic strategy for
the treatment of peritoneal metastasis of SGC.


