Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progesterone receptor regulation of interferon signaling in breast
cancer.


Breast cancer is an extremely heterogeneous disease that affects close to
two million women across the globe each year. Of these breast tumors,
approximately 70% express the progesterone receptor (PR), a nuclear
receptor that is activated in response to its ligand progesterone.
Compelling clinical trial data has suggested that progestins have a role
in breast cancer development, independent of the widely studied estrogen
receptor. The mechanism by which this occurs, however, is vastly
understudied.

Traditionally, PR exerts its effects following ligand activation by
translocating to the nucleus and binding to DNA where it affects the
transcription of a variety of genes involved in growth, survival and
proliferation. Our lab, using microarray data combined with Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis, has identified a novel subset of genes that have
altered expression following PR activation. These genes are primarily
involved in interferon signaling—a pathway normally utilized in
response to viral infection. Our data show that many genes that are
normally activated in response to interferon signaling (interferon
stimulated genes, ISGs) are repressed when PR is activated by its ligand.
Interestingly, this repression occurs even in the presence of interferon
alpha—the activating ligand of the interferon signaling cascade. Our
lab has also shown that when PR expression is transiently knocked down,
ISG transcriptional repression is lost, indicating that the repression of
these genes is PR dependent.

In attempting to elucidate a mechanism by which PR exerts this effect, we
have performed chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments following PR
activation and observed PR recruitment to ISG enhancer regions. This
suggests PR is potentially interfering with normal transcription of these
genes. We hypothesize that PR is functioning by either blocking normal
transcriptional machinery and co-activators or through the recruitment of
transcriptional co-repressors to these regions. Experiments to address
these models are currently underway.

Evasion of the immune system has recently been added to the list of
Hallmarks of Cancer and our preliminary data suggest a potential
mechanism by which breast cancer is able to accomplish this. Activation
of type I interferon signaling is an early step in marking tumors for
immune clearance. By repressing ISG protein expression, it is possible
that these tumors are able to avoid detection by host immune cells
leading to tumor establishment and subsequent progression. Our
preliminary data suggest that PR may be capable of aiding early breast
malignancies in evading immune recognition. This novel role of PR and
progestins offers insight that could aid in improving upon established
estrogen only-based therapies for prevention and treatment of hormone
dependent breast cancers.


