Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of gene expression during non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
(NASH)-related hepatocarcinogenesis is mediated by histone H4 lysine 16
deacetylation.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most aggressive human
cancers and the incidence is steadily increasing worldwide. The molecular
mechanisms leading to the development of HCC consist of genetic and
epigenetic aberrations, including changes in global and gene-specific DNA
methylation and altered expression of several classes of non-coding RNAs.
While changes in DNA methylation and microRNA expression during the
development of HCC are well-studied, the role of aberrant
post-translational histone modifications remains unexplored. Using a
mouse Stelic Animal Model (STAM) of NASH-associated liver carcinogenesis,
we have investigated alterations in hepatic histone modifications at
steatotic (6 weeks), fibrotic (12 weeks), and full-fledged HCC (20 weeks)
stages of the HCC development. NASH-related liver carcinogenesis was
characterized by a progressive decrease in the levels of histone H4
lysine 20 trimethylation (H4K20me3) and histone H4 lysine 16 acetylation
(H4K16ac), with the greatest decrease occurring in full-fledged tumors.
Mechanistically, the deacetylation of H4K16ac was associated with nuclear
protein 1 (Nupr1)-mediated inhibition of histone lysine acetyltransferase
KAT8. In addition to a global loss of hepatic H4K16ac, there was a
significant decrease of gene-specific H4K16ac, as indicated by a reduced
level of H4K16ac in 16 out of 25 critical cancer-related genes. More
importantly, the changes in the extent of gene-specific H4K16
deacetylation were positively correlated with the level of gene
transcription (r = 0.965, p Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the
most aggressive human cancers and the incidence is steadily increasing
worldwide. The molecular mechanisms leading to the development of HCC
consist of genetic and epigenetic aberrations, including changes in
global and gene-specific DNA methylation and altered expression of
several classes of non-coding RNAs. While changes in DNA methylation and
microRNA expression during the development of HCC are well-studied, the
role of aberrant post-translational histone modifications remains
unexplored. Using a mouse Stelic Animal Model (STAM) of NASH-associated
liver carcinogenesis, we have investigated alterations in hepatic histone
modifications at steatotic (6 weeks), fibrotic (12 weeks), and
full-fledged HCC (20 weeks) stages of the HCC development. NASH-related
liver carcinogenesis was characterized by a progressive decrease in the
levels of histone H4 lysine 20 trimethylation (H4K20me3) and histone H4
lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac), with the greatest decrease occurring in
full-fledged tumors. Mechanistically, the deacetylation of H4K16ac was
associated with nuclear protein 1 (Nupr1)-mediated inhibition of histone
lysine acetyltransferase KAT8. In addition to a global loss of hepatic
H4K16ac, there was a significant decrease of gene-specific H4K16ac, as
indicated by a reduced level of H4K16ac in 16 out of 25 critical
cancer-related genes. More importantly, the changes in the extent of
gene-specific H4K16 deacetylation were positively correlated with the
level of gene transcription (r = 0.965, p < 0.01). These results indicate
that a reduction of global and gene-specific of H4K16ac is a key
pathophysiological mechanism contributing to the development of
NAFLD-derived HCC.


