Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic potential of miR-195 in non-small cell lung cancer.


Introduction: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in nearly all
cellular physiological and pathological pathways. Dysregulated miRNAs
have been shown to contribute to the tumorigenesis of most cancers,
including lung cancer. We aim to modulate miRNA activity as a potential
therapeutic avenue either alone or in combination with other drugs.

Methods: A high throughput screen with a library of 1,239 miRNA mimics
was performed in NSCLC cells to identify miRNAs that both inhibit cancer
cell growth and sensitize cells to microtubule-targeting agents (MTAs).
The functions of candidate miRNA(s) were validated both in vitro and in
vivo.

Results: miR-195 causes G1 phase arrest by targeting CCND3. miR-195
induces apoptosis and senescence and represses migration and invasion of
NSCLC cells by targeting BIRC5. Conversely, over-expression of CCND3
compromises the inhibition of cell growth by miR-195; over-expression of
BIRC5 abrogates the inhibition of cell growth, migration and invasion by
miR-195. miR-195 also synergizes with MTAs paclitaxel and eribulin to
inhibit the growth of NSCLC cells by regulating CHEK1.

Lung tumors with miR-195 over-expression grow significantly slower and
respond better to eribulin treatment than tumors in control animals.
Induction of miR-195 expression after tumor initiation slows tumor growth
and that combination of doxycycline with eribulin shows stronger
inhibition on tumor growth than eribulin. In addition, miR-195 inhibits
lung tumor metastasis.

Analysis of miRNA and gene expression profiles from TCGA shows that
miR-195 expression is negatively correlated with that of BIRC5 and CHEK1.
Clinical data from TCGA show that miR-195 is significantly down-regulated
in lung tumors compared to adjacent normal tissues and that its
down-regulation in lung cancer patients is associated with worse
survival. TCGA data also show that BIRC5 and CHEK1 are significantly
up-regulated in lung tumors compared to adjacent normal tissues and that
their up-regulation is associated with worse survival.

Conclusions: We report the identification of miR-195 as a tumor
suppressor and chemotherapy sensitizer in NSCLC mediated by its
repression of CCND3, BIRC5 and CHEK1. Mouse xenografts with miR-195
over-expression or induced miR-195 expression indicate that tumors with
high miR-195 expression are more sensitive to drug treatment and that
induction of miR-195 in tumors represses tumor growth and sensitizes
tumors to eribulin treatment. These results highlight the potential use
of miR-195 expression level as a biomarker to predict patient response to
MTAs and of miR-195 mimics as a therapeutic agent or adjuvant to
chemotherapy.

This project was supported by NIH R01 CA129632 and CPRIT Training Grant
RP140105.


