Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of proliferation in multiple T-cell subsets in
the CT26 murine colon carcinoma model by multi-color flow cytometry.


The efficacy of immune-modulating anti-cancer therapeutic antibodies that
have been FDA-approved in recent years, such as anti-CTLA-4, anti-PD-1
and anti-PD-L1, has altered the paradigm of cancer treatment.
Subsequently, the growing interest in the development of new single agent
and combination therapies with immune-modulatory effects has generated a
need for more powerful immunophenotyping techniques capable of in-depth
cell characterization and proliferation assessment. To this end, using
the CT26 syngeneic murine colorectal cancer model we have developed an 8
color flow cytometry antibody panel that focuses on the identification of
lymphocyte subsets and analysis of proliferation within them utilizing
the high-throughput-capable 4-laser, 14-color Attune NxT Flow Cytometer
(Thermo Fisher Scientific). Splenocytes from tumor-naïve and CT26
tumor-bearing C57BL/6 mice were stained with CFSE (carboxyfluorescein
succinimidyl ester), an amine-reactive fluorescent dye which enables
generational tracking for up to seven rounds of cell division, allowing
for proliferation to be quantified. Splenocytes from these mice were then
stimulated with anti-CD3, anti-CD28, and IL-2. After stimulation for four
days, cells were stained with antibodies against CD45, CD3, CD19, CD49b,
CD335, CD4, CD8, and FoxP3. We were able to identify differential
proliferative capacity between naïve and tumor-bearing mice in CD4+
T-cell, CD8+ T-cell, regulatory T-cell, and B-cell populations. Finally,
we show that the accuracy of analysis is enhanced by the use of
fluorescence minus-one (FMO) controls to identify those markers that
generate dim signals, as well as a viability dye used to exclude dead
cells from analysis. Identification of potentially responsive immune
compartments, as well as characterizing proliferation, will facilitate
identification and development of potential combination therapies by
expanding the depth of our ability to provide mechanistic descriptions of
drug function and efficacy. Following this proof-of-concept work, we will
also present data from tumor-bearing mice treated with immune checkpoint
inhibitors in order to identify potential differences in proliferation
after treatment with immune-modulating agents.


