Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockage of Cdc7/CDK9 signaling sensitizes triple negative breast
cancer to EGFR-targeted therapy.


The treatment of Triple-Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) still represents a
profound clinical challenge, the disease being disproportionately
responsible for breast cancer-associated deaths. As a consequence, the
identification of targeted agents, which synergize with current
therapeutic options, is paramount. Resistance to EGFR-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs), despite frequent EGFR overexpression and reliance on
downstream signalling pathways in TNBC, remains endemic. Recent data has
also suggested that kinase-inhibition of EGFR in itself is insufficient,
given the kinase-independent functions of the protein in transcriptional
regulation and DNA-repair may permit prolonged EGFR-mediated signalling
in the presence of inhibitors. We performed a kinase inhibitor drug
screen (378 kinase inhibitors targeting ~40 different cancer-related
kinases) to identify synergistic activity with EGFR inhibition in TNBC.
We demonstrate that the dual cdc7/CDK9 inhibitor PHA-767491 synergizes
with multiple EGFR-TKIs (Erlotinib, Gefitinib and Lapatinib) in vitro to
overcome resistance to EGFR-targeted therapy in various TNBC cell lines.
Combined inhibition of EGFR and cdc7/CDK9 resulted in reduced cell
proliferation, accompanied by induction of apoptosis and G2-M cell
cycle-arrest. Combination therapy inhibited crucial components of the
DNA-replicative machinery and also proteins involved in CDK9-mediated
transcriptional elongation. Moreover, higher expression of cdc7 and
POLR2A was found to be significantly correlated with poorer survival
rates in breast cancer patients. Additionally, this synergistic
combination effectively inhibited the growth of cells isolated from
patient-derived TNBC xenografts under ex vivo culture conditions,
highlighting the utility of targeting common transcriptional nodes in
cancers addicted to growth factor-mediated signalling pathways.


