Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of long-term storage on commonly-measured serum
analyte levels.


Introduction: Cohort studies typically bank biospecimens for many years
prior to assay and the levels of analyte degradation is unknown. Long
storage times could cause degradation and produce measurement errors that
would bias estimation of the analyte effects on health outcomes. Such
effects could also produce confounding with other factors under study.

Methods: We collected control samples from 22 non-study participants
using the same enrollment criteria and specimen collection, processing,
and storage protocols as in The Sister Study, a large cohort study
conducted by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.
Samples were assayed for 21 analytes at collection and then six years
later. For each sample, the difference between the result at baseline and
at six years was calculated for each analyte. The difference, Yij =
result6 year - resultbaseline, was then modeled using a mixed-effects
model, with random effects for batch (bi) and a fixed effect for the
overall mean difference: Yij = u + bi + eij , where , bi ~ N(0, s2batch)
, i=1,2,3,5,6.

Results: Some of the analytes experienced a marked change in
concentration after six years of frozen storage, compared to their
baseline value. There were no significant changes in ten of the analytes.
Two of the analytes, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and sex hormone binding
globulin (SHBG), increased significantly in concentration over time. Two
analytes, HDL cholesterol and luteinizing hormone (LH), decreased
significantly but within the limits of the internal laboratory control
variance. Significant reductions in excess of the laboratory control
variance were found for 7 of the 21 analytes tested (aspartate
transaminase (AST), total cholesterol, estradiol, glucose, protein,
sodium, and triglycerides). Despite the evidence for systematic changes
over long-term storage, correlations between baseline and later measures
were high and there was little relation between the size of the
correlation and the estimated mean difference across the two time points.

Conclusion: We conclude there are differences in assay results after
long-term storage, although for most analytes the correlation
coefficients were high and percent change small. Biobanks or cohort
studies that bank samples should consider building in QC experiments
designed to assess the impact of long-term storage on anticipated
analytes of interest, when possible. By doing so, degradation could be
corrected for to control bias due to the associated measurement error.
Since not all cohorts were able to conduct these QC experiments, those
that have carried out such assessment should share their results so
others can use the data to evaluate the potential impact of measurement
error on their study findings.


