Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decreased expression of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine is associated with
grade of malignancy in lung cancer.


Purpose: The ten-eleven translocation (TET) proteins are critical
regulators in epigenetic modification. It is well known that TET proteins
catalyze the oxidation of 5-methylcytosine (5-mC) to generate
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC), and 5-hmC levels reflect diverse
functions of TET proteins. It has been reported that the expression of
5-hmC in cancer tissues is decreased compared with that in normal tissues
in several organs. However, 5-hmC expression in lung cancer has not been
fully analyzed. To examine whether or not 5-hmC was associated with
phenotypes or progression of lung cancer, we evaluated 5-hmC expression
in a variety of histological types of lung cancers.

Materials and methods: The expression of 5-hmC was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry in 109 paired specimens of lung cancer and adjacent
normal tissues obtained from the patients underwent operation at Shinshu
University Hospital. Eighty-nine adenocarcinomas, 17 squamous cell
carcinomas, two large cell carcinomas, and one small cell carcinoma were
analyzed in the study.

Results: 5-hmC expression in female was significantly lower than that in
male, and was lower in smokers than non-smokers. 5-hmC expression was
positive in 34.1±22.0% of lung cancer tissues and 69.4±18.8% of normal
tissues. The expression of 5-hmC was significantly decreased in the lung
cancer tissues compared with that in the adjacent normal tissues
(pResults: 5-hmC expression in female was significantly lower than that
in male, and was lower in smokers than non-smokers. 5-hmC expression was
positive in 34.1±22.0% of lung cancer tissues and 69.4±18.8% of normal
tissues. The expression of 5-hmC was significantly decreased in the lung
cancer tissues compared with that in the adjacent normal tissues
(p<0.001). With regard to the histological types, the positive ratios of
5-hmC expression were 36.0±21.7% in adenocarcinoma, 24.0±20.3% in
squamous cell carcinoma, 8.0±7.3% in large cell carcinoma, and 13.0% in
small cell carcinoma. Thus, the frequency of positive expression of 5-hmC
was decreased in accordance with the increase of grade of malignancy of
lung cancer, and a negative correlation between 5-hmC expression and the
grade of malignancy of lung cancer was observed. On the other hand, no
difference of the expression of 5-mC was observed between lung cancer
tissues and normal tissues.

Conclusions: Our results indicate a possibility that 5-hmC may be related
to carcinogenesis and progression or differentiation of lung cancer.


