Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDGFR-α induced stiffness abrogates mammary ductal development
and enhances tumorigenesis in vivo.


Breast cancer is a leading cause of mortality in women worldwide, in part
due to the tumor microenvironment which increases tumor heterogeneity and
abets tumor growth. Fibroblasts are cells of mesenchymal origin that are
an important component of normal and tumor stroma. Genetic alterations in
these cells were shown by several groups including our own to cause
fibroblast activation and fuel tumor progression giving rise to more
aggressive disease. Platelet-Derived Growth Factor Receptor (PDGFR) alpha
is a receptor tyrosine kinase that is chiefly expressed in mesenchymal
cells such as fibroblasts. Ligand binding (PDGFAA) activates this
receptor. PDGFRα signaling plays critical roles in development and
aberrant signaling is seen in several types of cancer, such as lung,
pancreas, GI and brain. The central goal of this study was to elucidate
the role of stromal PDGFRα in breast cancer development and metastasis,
where its role remains largely unknown. To address this goal, we
developed a genetic mouse model of stromal activation of PDGFRα in the
mammary gland by crossing an auto-activating Pdgfra mutant allele with a
mesenchymal specific Cre recombinase. We found that stromal PDGFRα
activation completely abrogated postnatal mammary gland ductal formation,
with significantly reduced terminal end bud formation. PDGFRα activation
also led to progressive fibrosis in the mouse mammary fat pad. As early
as four weeks of age, mammary collagen (trichrome staining; second
harmonic generation) and hyaluronan deposition (Alcian Blue) was greatly
increased in vivo. In fact, this increase in collagen and hyaluronan
deposition in mutant animals is believed to be responsible for the
observed increased in stiffness of mutant mammary tissue (atomic force
microscopy {AFM}). pFAK, which can be activated due to mechanical stress,
was increased in mammary epithelia of the mutant mice in vivo
corroborating the AFM results. Further, when tumor cells were injected
into the mammary glands of the PDGFRα mutants, tumors grew faster as
compared to controls. Importantly, we found that mRNA expression of
PDGFRA correlates with worsened patient outcomes in HER2+ disease, while
expression of both the ligand (PDGFA) and the receptor were found to
correlate with increased incidence of lung metastases. We further
discovered that in HER2+ patients, PDGFRA levels correlate with breast
density. Breast density is the third strongest risk factor for breast
cancer, and is directly related to collagen deposition and breast
stiffness, thus suggesting a novel predictive role of PDGFRA as a
molecular readout of stiffness and density. Studies are underway to
utilize mouse models of HER2+ breast cancer to study both primary tumor
growth and metastases. Taken together, our mouse studies and paralleling
human data analyses suggest that the stromal PDGFRα signaling provides a
novel theranostic window in breast cancer treatment and prognosis.


