Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of ENMD-2076 in combination with anti-PD1 in syngeneic
cancer models.


ENMD-2076 is a clinical stage compound with potent activity towards
Aurora A and angiogenic kinases. ENMD-2076 has shown promising activity
in multiple Phase 1 clinical trials, as well as in a Phase 2 trial in
advanced ovarian cancer. ENMD-2076 is currently the subject of several
ongoing Phase 2 clinical trials including fibrolamellar carcinoma,
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), advanced/metastatic soft tissue
sarcoma (STS), and advanced ovarian clear cell carcinomas (OCCC).
ENMD-2076 has been developed to date as a single agent, however ENMD-2076
inhibits a spectrum of targets including Aurora A, FAK, CSF1R, c-Kit, and
KDR, that are potentially involved in immune evasion mechanisms. These
kinases have been shown in published studies, when inhibited, to enhance
or augment the activity of immune checkpoint inhibitors such as anti-PD1.
A study was thereby conducted in syngeneic models to determine the
utility of ENMD-2076 combined with immune checkpoint inhibition as a
rational strategy for cancer therapy. The study evaluated the efficacy of
ENMD-2076 administered daily by oral gavage in the MC38 and CT26 colon
cancer models, alone and in combination with an anti-PD1 antibody.
Xenografts were established in the appropriate mouse strain (C57BL/6 and
BALBc, respectively) by the subcutaneous inoculation of MC38 or CT26
cells into the right flank of female mice. Treatment was initiated 7 days
following inoculation when tumor volumes had reached a mean volume of
approximately 85 mm3. All treatments were well tolerated, with no
significant body weight loss seen during either study. While CT26 tumors
were relatively refractory to single agent ENMD-2076, tumor regression
was observed in several MC38-bearing animals suggesting an immune
activating mechanism. In both models a trend was observed for an
augmentation of anti-tumor response in combination relative to single
agent ENMD-2076 and anti-PD1 alone. Further studies to evaluate mechanism
and an assessment of re-challenge experiments in animals exhibiting
complete regression of tumors will be discussed. These studies support
the further evaluation of ENMD-2076 in combination with immune checkpoint
inhibition as a strategy for cancer therapy.


