Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analytical performance of TruSight® Tumor 170 on small nucleotide
variations and gene amplifications using DNA from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) solid tumor samples.


Expanding the paradigm of solid tumor profiling from single-gene testing
to comprehensive panels presents many challenges. One such challenges is
the ability of these panels to detect genetic alterations from FFPE
samples, where the DNA is of low abundance and often heavily compromised.
Despite these challenges, next-generation sequencing (NGS) offers the
ability to assess multiple variants simultaneously in an ever-expanding
list of relevant tumor genes. To that end, Illumina developed a
comprehensive, hybrid capture-based NGS assay targeting 170 key cancer
genes that is FFPE optimized. The assay consists of a DNA workflow for
the identification of single and multiple nucleotide variants (SNVs,
MNVs), small insertions and deletions (indels), gene amplifications, as
well as a RNA workflow for the identification of splice variants and gene
fusions. Following sequencing on the NextSeq® or HiSeq® instruments,
the analytical pipeline initiates variant calling. The DNA aligner and
variant callers were first optimized against the simulated read data from
>40,000 COSMIC[1] mutations reported in the exons of the 170 genes. To
reduce false positive variant calling due to systematic errors, each
variant call was evaluated against its locus specific background error
distribution. This distribution was compiled from a panel of FFPE normal
samples and was also used to normalize against systematic bias in read
coverage to increase the accuracy of amplification calling. Furthermore,
gene amplification calling was improved by the addition of enhancer
probes to the hybrid capture pool. The analytical sensitivity and
specificity of TruSight® Tumor 170* was assessed on a large collection
of FFPE samples and reference material. A panel of 72 cancer samples,
including multiple tissue types, reference standards, and cell line and
FFPE mixes were used to evaluate the limit of detection. The samples
contained 533 SNVs, 80 indels including deletions up to 30 base pairs and
insertions up to 31 base pairs, 4 MNVs, and 31 gene amplifications,
characterized by orthogonal testing methods. Using 40 ng DNA input,
detection sensitivity of the >1000 variants (including replicates) tested
at variant allele frequencies down to ~5% was at 99.6%, while detection
sensitivity of gene amplifications as low as 1.45x to 2.2x was at 98%.
For limit of blank samples, a panel of 24 normal samples was used. Again
using 40 ng DNA input, we show >99% specificity for small variant calling
and >95% specificity for gene amplification calling. These data
demonstrates the TruSight® Tumor 170 is able to detect multiple variant
types within a single sample at low nucleic acid input, while exhibiting
high analytical sensitivity and specificity for low allele fraction
detection.

[1] Forbes, et al. (2015) *For Research Use Only. Not for use in
diagnostic procedures.


