Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical pharmacology of the PSMA-targeted thorium-227
conjugate PSMA-TTC: a novel targeted alpha therapeutic for the treatment
of prostate cancer.


Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA, FOLH1) is a type II
transmembrane glycoprotein of the M28 peptidase family that acts as a
glutamate carboxypeptidase on various substrates. PSMA is well
established as a target antigen in prostate cancer due to its high and
specific overexpression on the surface of prostate cancer cells at all
tumor stages, including metastatic and hormone-refractory disease.
Several PSMA targeting antibodies and ligands are currently in clinical
development or compassionate use therapeutically or as imaging agents.
Targeted alpha therapy (TAT) has an established clinical profile with the
successful transition of Ra223, an alpha-particle emitter, from bench to
bedside in prostate cancer. Thorium-227 is the immediate precursor for
Ra223 via alpha-particle emission. We herein describe the generation of a
novel TAT, a high energy, alpha-particle emitting PSMA-targeted
thorium-227 conjugate (PSMA-TTC). PSMA-TTC consists of a fully human PSMA
targeting IgG1 antibody covalently linked via an amide bond to a chelator
moiety (3,2 HOPO), enabling radiolabeling with thorium-227 (227Th).

PSMA-TTC was prepared in high radiochemical yield and purity and tested
for binding affinity to PSMA target (ELISA) as well as PSMA expressing
cell lines (FACS). In vitro cytotoxicity experiments were carried out on
prostate CA cell lines with different PSMA levels (from 3.000 to 150.000
mAbs bound/ cell). In vivo biodistribution and anti-tumor efficacy were
analyzed after i.v. injection of 100-500 kBq/kg at protein doses of 0.14
mg/kg to mice bearing s.c. prostate cancer xenograft models.
Additionally, anti-tumor efficacy was evaluated in a PSMA expressing
orthotopic bone xenograft model (LNCaP-Luc) monitored by bioluminescence
imaging, micro CT and x-ray.

PSMA-TTC retains binding affinities to PSMA target and PSMA positive
cancer cells similar to the PSMA antibody. Strong in vitro potency and
selectivity of PSMA-TTC was shown on different PSMA positive cells.
Biodistribution studies in C4-2 xenografts demonstrated specific tumor
uptake of PSMA-TTC with a maximum of 50 % of ID/g at t = 72h post dose
administration. Selective significant antitumor efficacy was shown for
PSMA-TTC in s.c. prostate CA xenograft models with high (C4-2) and
medium/low (22Rv1) PSMA protein levels at doses of 250 and 500 kBq/kg.
Furthermore, statistically significant prevention of tumor growth was
observed after treatment with PSMA-TTC at a dose of 100 kBq/kg in an
orthotopic bone xenograft model (LNCaP-Luc).

The promising preclinical antitumor activity of PSMA-TTC supports its
development for the treatment of patients with metastatic prostate cancer.


