Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the biological role of latexin in the normal and
malignant prostate.


The retinoid-inducible protein Latexin (LXN) acts as a stem cell
suppressor in normal murine hematopoiesis, and in human tumors where it
can influence both tumor cell migration and invasion (Liang et al, Nature
genetics 2007). We have shown that LXN is silenced in the stem cell
fraction of primary prostate epithelial cells, and that expression
increases as cells differentiate through the prostate basal epithelial
hierarchy towards mature luminal cells. Furthermore, transient knockdown
of LXN significantly increased clonogenic potential and promoted a more
invasive phenotype in primary prostate epithelia (Oldridge et al,
Oncogenesis 2013). LXN may therefore be involved in the differentiation
of prostate epithelial cells, but could act as a tumor suppressor in
Prostate Cancer (CaP), in addition to other tumours. In genome databases
LXN is described as an inhibitor for Carboxypeptidase A4, but despite
considerable molecular characterisation, the mechanism of action has
remained an enigma since perhaps paradoxically LXN appears to be able to
function independently of its classical CPA4 inhibitory role. To resolve
this, we adopted an unbiased approach to determine if targeted
re-expression of LXN or its binding partners could provide a viable novel
drug target for the treatment of CaP. Our preliminary studies had
revealed that LXN was an exclusively cytosolic protein in prostate
epithelial cells. However, subsequent live cell imaging of primary
prostate epithelial cells overexpressing YFP-LXN demonstrated for the
first time that, whilst predominantly cytosolic, LXN was also present
within the cell nucleus. To characterise the effects of LXN
overexpression on gene transcription after LXN-expressing lentiviral
transduction of primary prostate epithelial cells, we utilised Affymetrix
HTA2 gene arrays. Perhaps surprisingly, short-term overexpression of LXN
did not significantly effect global gene transcription compared to
controls (n=4 P=NS). Additionally, we used IP/MS to investigate the
potential interacting partners of LXN, using multiple approaches,
including both overexpression of HA-tagged and WT LXN, and endogenous LXN
as bait. These approaches failed to reveal any strong (and reproducible)
intracellular protein interactors of LXN. From these data, we
hypothesised that LXN may function as a secreted protein. We found that
LXN was present in not only the conditioned media of LXN+ prostate
epithelial cells, but also preliminary evidence that LXN is enriched in
extracellular exosomes. Therefore, LXN may perform its biological roles
extracellularly, or at the cell surface. Our current work is focusing on
determining the functional consequences of secreted LXN on prostate
epithelia and to establish potential protein: protein interactions of LXN
in the extracellular space. Full characterisation of LXN function
considering its potent biological effects on cancer cells will determine
its suitability as a therapeutic in CaP and other cancers.


