Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel network of miRNAs that regulate stemness
in colorectal cancer.


Background and Aims: Accumulating evidence suggests that a subset of
cancer cells also known as the “cancer stem cells” (CSCs) influence
various clinical outcomes in cancer, including tumor recurrence,
metastasis and resistance to chemotherapy. Recently stemness has been
recognized as a dynamic state governed by epigenetic modifiers including
miRNAs. Despite identification of several self-renewal associated miRNAs,
miRNA profile of CSCs remains unclear. Herein, we characterized miRNA
expression of CSCs with high vs. low CD44v6 expression through RNA-Seq.
Subsequently, we investigated the clinical significance of a novel miRNA
identified from this systematic discovery approach.

Methods: Colorectal CSCs from HCT116 and HT29 cells were grown as
spheroid-derived cancer stem cells (SDCSCs). CD44v6+ and CD44v6- CSCs
were subdivided by FACS and characterized by small RNA-Seq.
Differentially expressed miRNAs were subsequently confirmed in CD44v6+
CSCs and chemoresistant cells. The expression of one such candidate,
miR-1246, was assessed in a clinical cohort (n = 144) by qRT-PCR.

Results: MiRNA profiling identified a unique overall pattern of CD44v6+
SDCSCs indicative of high self-renewal capacity. We noted that a panel of
established self-renewal suppressive-miRNAs were downregulated (including
miR-34a, 101 and 200 family) in CD44v6+ CSCs, and discovered upregulation
of previously unreported miRNAs (miR-1246, 3605, 3182 and 4284). KEGG
pathway analysis indicated that these miRNAs regulate Akt-MAPK and Wnt
signaling pathways. Subsequently, we selected miR-1246 and validated its
expression in CD44v6+ SDCSCs and chemoresistant cells. Clinically, the
expression of miR-1246 was significantly elevated in CRC tissues compared
to corresponding normal mucosa, and this occurred in a stage-dependent
manner in primary CRCs. Furthermore, the expression of CD44v6 positively
correlated with miR-1246 in CRC tissues. High miR-1246 expression
resulted in poor disease free and overall survival.

Conclusion: Using a systematic and comprehensive approach, we have
identified a unique network of dysregulated miRNAs in CD44v6 CSCs
indicative of high degree of stemness features in cancer. In particular,
we identified miR-1246 to be frequently overexpressed in CSCs as well as
chemoresistant cells and its expression was associated with poor
prognosis in CRC patients. Collectively, we have identified a unique
group of previously unreported miRNAs which appear to have important
mechanistic roles in CSCs and could serve as a promising predictive
biomarkers for recurrence and prognosis in patients with CRC.


