Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ionizing radiation abrogates pro-tumorigenic effects from
cancer-associated fibroblasts in xenografts.


Non-malignant elements of tumors play fundamental roles in both cancer
sustainability and responses

to therapies. In the context of clinical radiotherapy (RT), all cells
that reside in the tumor mass receive

radiation, but the impact of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) to
treatment outcomes remains largely

unexplored. In this study, we have investigated the effects of radiation
on the natural pro-tumorigenic

actions of CAFs in animals. Ionizing radiation (IR) was delivered to CAFs
either as a single-high dose

or fractionated medium doses. Tumor development was compared in
xenografts after co-implantation

of A549 lung tumor cells with irradiated or non-irradiated human lung
CAFs. Quantitative histology

and immunohistochemistry was applied to investigate potential biological
mechanisms behind tumor

growth regulations. As expected, CAFs showed resistance to
radiation-induced cell death, however, the

enhanced tumorigenic effects observed with admixed non-irradiated CAFs
was nullified. Quantitative

determinations of parameters such as desmoplasia, angiogenesis,
inflammation, innate immunity or

tumor cell proliferation revealed enhanced blood vessel density in tumors
established with irradiated

CAFs. Experiments to ascertain fate of implanted CAFs showed that both
irradiated and non-irradiated

CAFs only reside at the implantation site during early stages, suggesting
that the regulatory functions of

admixed CAFs may take place during the initial phases of tumor formation.
In this study, we show that

CAFs receiving ionizing radiation lose their pro-tumorigenic potential in
vivo, affecting angiogenesis

and possibly other mechanisms related to tumor engraftment. This finding
represent a previously

unknown advantageous effect induced by radiotherapy, which adds to the
well-known direct cytotoxic

effects on transformed epithelial cells.


