Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diet and exercise-induced weight maintenance, alone and in
combination with a whole tumor cell vaccine, delays mammary tumor growth
and reduces MDSC accumulation.


Obesity and physical inactivity increase breast cancer risk, while the
prevention of weight gain by diet and exercise can be protective.
Numerous biological mechanism(s) have been proposed to explain the
beneficial effects of weight maintenance; however few studies have
examined the immune response to energy balance. We have previously shown
that diet and exercise-induced weight maintenance (WM) achieved via a 10%
restriction in calories and access to voluntary running wheels in
combination with a whole tumor cell vaccine (VAX) significantly reduced
mammary tumor growth and metastases in the 4T1 mammary tumor model. This
WM-induced reduction in tumor growth occurred concurrently with an
elevation in tumor specific IFN-γ production and a reduction in the
number of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs). However, because
tumor size is positively correlated with immune suppression, the goal of
the current study was to investigate if mice in the WM+VAX intervention
had enhanced anti-tumor immune responses and/or fewer MDSCs controlling
for tumor size. Female BALB/c mice were randomized into weight gain (WG)
and WM groups (n=8/group) and had access to voluntary running wheels or
standard cages, respectively. WG mice were fed ad libitum while WM mice
were energy-restricted by 10% to maintain a stable body weight. After 8
weeks on the intervention, all mice were orthotopically injected with
5x104 4T1.2 cells into the fourth mammary fat pad and continued on their
intervention. Once injected, both WG and WM mice were further randomized
into vaccination (VAX) and vehicle control (VEH) groups (n=4/gr) and
administered 1x106 irradiated 4T1.2 cells (VAX) or HBSS (VEH) at day 7
post-tumor implantation. Primary tumor growth was quantified, and mice
were sacrificed when tumor volume reached 0.1-0.2 cm3. WM mice weighed
significantly less than WG mice over the course of the study (pObesity
and physical inactivity increase breast cancer risk, while the prevention
of weight gain by diet and exercise can be protective. Numerous
biological mechanism(s) have been proposed to explain the beneficial
effects of weight maintenance; however few studies have examined the
immune response to energy balance. We have previously shown that diet and
exercise-induced weight maintenance (WM) achieved via a 10% restriction
in calories and access to voluntary running wheels in combination with a
whole tumor cell vaccine (VAX) significantly reduced mammary tumor growth
and metastases in the 4T1 mammary tumor model. This WM-induced reduction
in tumor growth occurred concurrently with an elevation in tumor specific
IFN-γ production and a reduction in the number of myeloid-derived
suppressor cells (MDSCs). However, because tumor size is positively
correlated with immune suppression, the goal of the current study was to
investigate if mice in the WM+VAX intervention had enhanced anti-tumor
immune responses and/or fewer MDSCs controlling for tumor size. Female
BALB/c mice were randomized into weight gain (WG) and WM groups
(n=8/group) and had access to voluntary running wheels or standard cages,
respectively. WG mice were fed ad libitum while WM mice were
energy-restricted by 10% to maintain a stable body weight. After 8 weeks
on the intervention, all mice were orthotopically injected with 5x104
4T1.2 cells into the fourth mammary fat pad and continued on their
intervention. Once injected, both WG and WM mice were further randomized
into vaccination (VAX) and vehicle control (VEH) groups (n=4/gr) and
administered 1x106 irradiated 4T1.2 cells (VAX) or HBSS (VEH) at day 7
post-tumor implantation. Primary tumor growth was quantified, and mice
were sacrificed when tumor volume reached 0.1-0.2 cm3. WM mice weighed
significantly less than WG mice over the course of the study (p<0.001).
Mice in both WM+VEH and WM+VAX groups took a significantly longer number
of days post tumor implantation to reach a tumor size of 0.1-0.2 cm3
(26.3 ± 3.3 d, p=0.003; 23.8 ± 0.5 d, p=0.039, respectively) compared
to the WG+VEH group (18.3 ± 2.5 d). Despite the fact that mice were
sacrificed when the tumor volumes were standardized at 0.1-0.2 cm3, the
combination of WM+VAX resulted in a significant reduction of splenic MDSC
accumulation (p=0.049) and enhanced CD4+ T cell proliferation ex vivo.
These results suggest that diet and exercise-induced WM was highly
effective in delaying primary mammary tumor growth. The combination of WM
and an allogenic whole tumor cell vaccine reduced pro-tumorigenic MDSC
accumulation and enhanced effector T cell function. Furthermore, these
data suggest that diet and exercise may be changing the tumor
microenvironment at an early stage of tumor growth favoring tumor
clearance. This work is supported by R21 CA209144; T32AI074551.


