Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug target mutations as a mechanism of acquired resistance to
small molecules activators of protein phosphatase 2a.


The sustainable activation of the RAS/MAPK and PI3K/AKT signaling
pathways in cancer is promoted by a reduction in the activity of the
tumor suppressor protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A). Therefore, a novel
therapeutic strategy consists of directly activating PP2A, leading to the
simultaneous inhibition of these oncogenic pathways. PP2A is a
heterotrimeric complex, consisting of a scaffolding A subunit, catalytic
C subunit, and one of many regulatory B subunits responsible for
substrate specificity. Our lab has successfully developed first-in-class
Small Molecule Activators of PP2A (SMAPs), which induce tumor growth
inhibition in both transgenic and patient derived xenograft mice models.
However, alterations to the drug binding site is one of the most common
mechanisms of acquired resistance, and we hypothesized that point
mutations of the drug binding amino acid residues of PP2A would lead to
decreased sensitivity to SMAP treatment. Determining potential mechanisms
responsible for the development of resistance to SMAPs would guide the
development of novel therapeutic strategies to improve patients’
prognosis. In silico docking calculations, photo affinity labeling, and
hydroxyl radical footprinting studies were used to identify K194, E197,
and L198 as the putative residues of PP2A-Aα that were interacting with
SMAPs. K194R, E197K, and L198V mutations were generated by site-directed
mutagenesis. H358, a KRAS-driven lung adenocarcinoma cell line, was used
to create isogenic cell lines stably overexpressing mutated and wild type
PP2A-Aα. These mutations did not affect the phosphatase activity or its
ability to form holoenzymes in a cell-free system. SMAP response was
investigated in vivo using a xenograft model of H358 isogenic cell lines
and it was determined that tumors harboring mutant K194R and L198V
PP2A-Aα were resistant to SMAPs treatment. Together, our results suggest
that residues K194 and L198 are required for drug binding and subsequent
target engagement. These findings shed light on possible mechanisms of
acquired resistance to SMAPs in patients and have potential to guide the
design of second-generation drugs.


