Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arginine deprivation-induced autophagy renders ASS1-deficient
sarcomas dependent on serine metabolism.


Objective: Argininosuccinate Synthetase 1 (ASS1) is silenced in ~90% of
sarcomas. Upon arginine starvation, ASS1 (-) sarcoma cells undergo
autophagy and growth arrest, but not cell death. In order to identify
potential synthetic lethal targets arising from the arginine deprivation,
mass spectroscopy was performed to determine the metabolic alterations
caused by short and long term arginine deprivation resulting from
treatment with pegylated arginine deiminase (ADI-PEG20). With recent
studies showing the importance of serine biology in cancer, as well as
recent generation of a small molecule inhibitor to the rate limiting
enzyme in serine biosynthesis, this newly identified synthetic lethality
proves to be an exploitable therapeutic option for ASS1 deficient
sarcomas.

Methods: The SKLMS1 cell line was cultured in normal culture conditions,
as well as with ADI-PEG20 for three days and subjected to metabolite
extraction and capillary electrophoresis mass spectrometry (CE-MS).
Similarly, additional samples were cultured for 2 days, with or without
ADI-PEG20, and subsequently treated with UC13 labeled glucose for an
additional 24 hours before being subjected to metabolite extraction.
CE-MS was performed on the samples to determine the abundance of 54
metabolites, and all respective isotopomers. Cell death was measured by
propidium iodide fluorescent activated cell sorting after inhibition of
serine metabolism by the small molecule inhibitor of PHGDH (CBR-5884)
with and without ADI-PEG20.

Results: Upon treatment with ADI-PEG20, the stable isotope labeled
glucose derived component of a vast majority of metabolites decreased
significantly. The pathway with the largest increase in metabolic flux
was serine biosynthesis, including subsequent conversion into glycine,
rendering LTAT lines significantly more susceptible to antifolate
metabolites. Significant changes in the enzyme responsible for the rate
limiting step of serine biosynthesis, phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase
(PHGDH) were observed upon short term arginine deprivation, with further
upregulation observed upon long term treatment. Cell death levels were
significantly higher in samples when inhibition of PHGDH was paired with
ADI-PEG20 treatment, with LTAT lines having even further susceptibility
to cell death induction upon PHGDH inhibition than short term ADI-PEG20
treated samples.

Conclusion: By determining the alterations in the fate of glucose in the
SKLMS1 cell line upon short and long term treatment with ADI-PEG20, we
were able to illustrate an increase in the level of serine biosynthesis.
Inhibition of this escape pathway by inhibition of PHGDH induced cell
death. LTAT lines were the most sensitive to treatment with the PHGDH
inhibitor as well as the commonly used antifolate metabolite,
methotrexate.


