Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the DNA repair as well as survival functions of MCL-1
enhances cancer cell killing.


MCL-1 is a a pro-survival BCL2 protein family member which is
over-expressed in drug resistant cancer cells. Our purpose was to assess
whether MCL-1 increases genomic instability along with its anti-apoptotic
function in cancer cells. Depletion of MCL-1 by treating human small cell
lung cancer (SCLC) lines with immunotoxin sensitizes these cells to
increased killing by BH3 mimetic - Navitoclax (ABT-263) both in vitro and
in mice xenograft models. These SCLC cell lines are resistant to both
single agent Immunotoxin or ABT-263. In addition, inhibition of NANOG or
NANOGP8 by lentivrus delivered shRNA depletes MCL-1 in human colorectal
cancer cells and sensitizes these cells to increased cell killing by
venetaclox (ABT-199). This increased killing depended on loss of MCL-1,
was caspase-dependent and reversed by re-expression of MCL-1. Depletion
of MCL-1 in cancer cells , increases cell sensitivity to ionizing
radiation (IR) induced death, which was reversed by expression of MCL-1.
In response to IR, MCL-1 depleted cells showed reduced survival even at
radiation doses less than 6 Gy, however an increase in caspases 3/7
activity was observed at 6 Gy and above, suggesting that apoptosis is
activated only when MCL-1 depleted cells are irradiated with higher IR
doses. In order to explain the decreased survival post- irradiation the
genomic instability and DNA repair pathways were analyzed in MCL-1
depleted cells. Post-irradiation MCL-1 depleted cells exhibited increased
genomic instability as measured by increase in chromosome aberrations at
different phases of the cell cycle. The increase in aberrations were
significantly higher in G2 and S- phases of the cell cycle suggesting
defect in Homologous recombination repair pathway (HR). Moreover, the
MCL-1 depleted cells show decreased gamma-H2AX foci at earlier time
points (30 and 90 minutes) post-irradiation indicating defect in DNA
Damage response (DDR) and higher residual foci at 360 minutes, indicating
defective DNA repair. These observations were further confirmed by
decreased phosphorylation of ATR suggesting defect in DNA Damage response
and higher levels of residual 53BP1 and RIF1 foci in MCL-1 depleted cells
, confirming DNA DSB repair by homologous recombination (HR) was
compromised. Consistent with this model, MCL-1 depleted cells exhibited a
reduced frequency of IR-induced MRE11, BRCA1, RPA and Rad51 foci
formation, decreased DNA end resection and decreased HR repair in the
DR-GFP DSB repair model. Similarly, after Hydoxyurea (HU) induction of
stalled replication forks in MCL-1 depleted cells there was a decreased
ability to subsequently restart DNA synthesis, which is normally
dependent upon HR mediated resolution of collapsed forks. In summary,
MCL-1 is an important therapeutic target in cancer cells and its
depletion increases cell killing by either increase in apoptosis or
suppression of HR and increased replication stress.


