Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor on gene expression
in MDM2 transfected prostate cancer cells.


Deacetylation of histone gives a tag for epigenetic repression and plays
an important role in transcriptional regulation, cell cycle progression,
and developmental events. HDACs catalyse the removal of the acetyl moiety
from the lysine residues of proteins including the core nucleosomal
histones. Through removal of critical acetyl groups from histones, HDACs
can create a chromatin conformation that can prevent the transcription of
genes that encode for proteins involved in cell cycle regulation. Thus
together with histone acetyltransferases (HATs), HDACs regulate the level
of acetylation and alter multitude of cellular functions and their
characteristics. Several alterations of HDAC and HAT levels and
activities have been found to be enacted by translocation, amplification,
overexpression, or mutation of the relevant genes in a variety of
cancers. In many cancer cell lines, overexpression or activation of the
HDAC enzymes result in histone hypo-acetylation and consequent promotion
of pro-cancerous mechanisms. Therefore, HDAC inhibitors represent a
potential new class of antitumor agents with cytotoxic activity and the
ability to regulate gene expression in tumor cells. In this study we
evaluated the effects of Vorinostat (suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid),
which is a potent inhibitor of HDAC activity, on cell cycle regulation in
MDM2 (mouse double minute 2 homolog) overexpressing cells. MDM2
amplification or overexpression is found in many tumors that eventually
lead to the inactivation of the cell cycle control and loss of
pro-apoptotic functions through both p53 dependent and independent
mechanisms. The PCR array, qRT-PCR, and western blot analysis of MDM2
overexpressing prostate cancer cells (LNCaP-MST), after treating with
Nutlin-3 (20 µm) and 17-AAG (10 µm), was able to trigger p21 expression
and down-regulation of BIRC5 (Baculoviral IAP Repeat Containing 5).
Similarly, when we treated the MDM2 transfected LNCaP-MST cells with
vorinostat (7.5 µm for 24 hrs), some of the above mentioned changes,
similar to Nutlin-3 treatment, were observed. As a result of HDAC
inhibition the mRNA levels of p21, p53 and TIMP-1 were significantly
elevated, while the levels of BIRC5 was significantly down-regulated.
Thus, treatment of MDM2 overexpressing cell lines with HDAC inhibitor
resulted in activation of p21 and consequent decrease in cell
proliferation due to resumption of cell cycle arrest. Our results with
LNCaP-MST cells offer convincing evidence to suggest that the inhibition
of HDAC can control cell proliferative signals in MDM2 overexpressing
prostate cancer cells. (The generous support from the Royal Dames of
Cancer Research Inc., Ft. Lauderdale, Florida is gratefully acknowledged).


