Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased expression of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) on
infiltrating immune cells of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues after
sorafenib treatment.


Background: PD-L1 expression in tumor microenvironment of HCC was
reported to associate with tumor aggressiveness and recurrence. The
impact of sorafenib treatment on PD-L1 expression on tumor cells (TC) or
tumor-infiltrating immune cells (IC) of HCC has been unclear.

Patients and Methods: We reviewed patients with HCC who had received
sorafenib for advanced diseases at National Taiwan University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. Patients with paired HCC tissues, obtained before and
after sorafenib treatment, were included. Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
assay with clone SP142 antibody (Spring Bioscience, Pleasanton, CA, USA)
was performed to analyze PD-L1 expression on TC and IC in paired
specimens obtained before and after sorafenib. PD-L1 expression was
scored as IHC 0, 1, 2, or 3 if Patients and Methods: We reviewed patients
with HCC who had received sorafenib for advanced diseases at National
Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. Patients with paired HCC
tissues, obtained before and after sorafenib treatment, were included.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) assay with clone SP142 antibody (Spring
Bioscience, Pleasanton, CA, USA) was performed to analyze PD-L1
expression on TC and IC in paired specimens obtained before and after
sorafenib. PD-L1 expression was scored as IHC 0, 1, 2, or 3 if <1%, ≥1%
but Patients and Methods: We reviewed patients with HCC who had received
sorafenib for advanced diseases at National Taiwan University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. Patients with paired HCC tissues, obtained before and
after sorafenib treatment, were included. Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
assay with clone SP142 antibody (Spring Bioscience, Pleasanton, CA, USA)
was performed to analyze PD-L1 expression on TC and IC in paired
specimens obtained before and after sorafenib. PD-L1 expression was
scored as IHC 0, 1, 2, or 3 if <1%, ≥1% but <5%, ≥5% but Patients and
Methods: We reviewed patients with HCC who had received sorafenib for
advanced diseases at National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
Patients with paired HCC tissues, obtained before and after sorafenib
treatment, were included. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) assay with clone
SP142 antibody (Spring Bioscience, Pleasanton, CA, USA) was performed to
analyze PD-L1 expression on TC and IC in paired specimens obtained before
and after sorafenib. PD-L1 expression was scored as IHC 0, 1, 2, or 3 if
<1%, ≥1% but <5%, ≥5% but <10%, or ≥10% of cells were PD-L1
positive, respectively. Further IHC assay was employed to characterize
the PD-L1-positive IC. Associations between the PD-L1 expression and
overall survival (OS) or duration of sorafenib treatment of the patients
were analyzed.

Results: Twenty-three advanced HCC patients (Male: Female= 20: 3, median
age of 64 years) with paired HCC tissues were included. All of the
post-sorafenib HCC tissues were obtained after disease progression. The
median duration of sorafenib treatment was 4.3 months (range: 1.3 to
18.7). The PD-L1 expression on IC was significantly increased in
post-sorafenib HCC tissues, compared with tissues obtained before
sorafenib (pre-sorafenib vs post-sorafenib IHC 0/1/2/3: 10/5/5/3 vs
5/5/2/11, p=0.046). However, the PD-L1 expression on TC was not
significantly different between pre- and post-sorafenib tissues (IHC
0/1/2/3: 19/2/0/2 vs 14/5/0/4, p=0.065). By using IHC staining of CD68,
CD66b, CD11b, and CD3 on the consecutive slides, we found the
PD-L1-expressing IC were mainly CD68-positive macrophages, but not
neutrophils or T lymphocytes. Neither the PD-L1 expression levels on IC
of pre-sorafenib or those of post-sorafenib tissues were associated with
OS or duration of sorafenib treatment.

Conclusions: The PD-L1 expression on IC, especially on macrophages, in
tumor microenvironment was significantly increased in post-sorafenib
progression HCC tissues. Whether this increased PD-L1 expression
contributes to treatment failure of sorafenib warrants further
investigation (This work was supported by the grants of NTUH 105-M3232
and MOST 105-2314-B-002-180).


