Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A computational model for integrating genomic data with public
datasets for molecular tumor board recommendations.


Recent genomic profiling studies in pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDA) have
revealed actionable mutations affecting multiple signaling pathways, but
in spite of these mutations, targeted inhibitors of these pathways have
low success rates. A possible reason for these failures is that
single-gene biomarkers (e.g. a KRAS mutation as an indicator of MEK
inhibitor sensitivity) fail to account for crosstalk within and between
dysregulated pathways. We have previously curated a knowledgebase of
published studies as evidence to support molecular tumor board
recommendations to cancer patients after multi-omic profiling. Here we
present a computational framework for integrating this knowledgebase with
drug response data from cancer cell lines to propose “actionable”
biomarkers based on a panel of pathways instead of targeting a single
gene mutation. We constructed a computational model encompassing a broad
range of cancer-related pathways, including RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK, PI3K/AKT,
cell cycle regulation, and DNA repair. The model consisted of a set of
ordinary differential equations (ODE) with protein interactions following
Hill-type kinetics and the rate of cell division and apoptosis modeled
dependent on key signaling nodes, including the level of phosphorylated
ERK and AKT. We integrated two sources of publicly available data: 1)
published studies correlating phosphoprotein measurements and resistance
pathways to targeted inhibitors in clinical development; and 2) mutation
data correlated with drug-specific response metrics (e.g. IC50 values),
such as CCLE and NCI-60. We systematically screened frequently observed
overlapping disrupted signaling pathways (i.e., combinations of
mutations) by simulating predicted IC50 values for targeted inhibitors.
Based on these simulations, we then simulated the effect of pairs of
drugs to explore which drug combinations may be best suited for
inhibiting tumor growth when tumors harbor multiple mutations. We present
two applications of this computational approach: a comparison of CDK4/6
inhibition in CDKN2A-mutated PDA vs. hormone receptor-positive breast
cancer and a comparison of PARP inhibition in BRCA1/2-mutated PDA and
ovarian cancer. The predictions generated by our simulations were
consistent with clinical observations in that fewer combinations of
mutations in PDA were sensitive to these inhibitors than in breast and
ovarian cancer, suggesting ways to refine biomarkers for sensitivity to
these drugs in PDA. The computational approach presented here takes into
account multiple datasets from a knowledgebase to provide a prioritized
list of treatments that match a patient’s molecular profile while also
providing the rationale for the recommendation. This represents a step
toward incorporation of systems biology in precision oncology.


