Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alternate translation initiation regulation of PRDX5 mRNA by
miR68553p in basallike breast cancer cells.


Human peroxiredoxins (PRDXs) are a superfamily of six thioldependent
peroxidases that are able to reduce hydrogen peroxide, alkyl
hydroperoxides and peroxynitrite. Apart from the classical, apparently
redundant function of mitochondrial and often peroxisomal peroxide
neutralization shared by other peroxiredoxins, PRDX5 was initially
discovered as a DNA binding transcriptional repressor regulating the
biosynthesis of cytotoxic Alu RNAs through a mitochondriallocalization
signaltruncated mature form (SPRDX5] of this protein that is accumulated
in the nucleus and binds to a 60 bp nucleotide sequence at the Alu gene
promoters. Our data suggest that SPRDX5 also binds to the
Alusequencecontaining BRCA2 gene silencer to prevent the binding of SLUG
at the silencer thus enhancing the BRCA2 gene expression leading to the
genotoxin and radiationresistance of aggressive SLUGhigh basallike breast
cancer cells. PRDX5 mRNA contains two inframe start codons (AUGs) that
are conditionally used as alternate translation initiation sites.
Translation from the first AUG would result in the synthesis of a larger
214residue protein (LPRDX5) whereas the use of the second AUG would
result in the production of a shorter 162residue polypeptide (SPRDX5).
Since SPRDX5 lacks the mitochondrial localization signal, it is
accumulated in the nucleus via its Cterminal bipartite nuclear
localization signal. We present evidence here that a miRNA, miR68553p,
binds the primary PRDX5 transcript between the two AUG codons and
prevents the translation of the mRNA from the first AUG codon but not
that from the second AUG codon thus favoring the initiation of
translation from the second AUG codon. To characterize the effect of
miR68553p on Prdx5 mRNA translation, we developed three different
PRDX5FLAG constructs in pCV3XFLAG14 (Sigma) that has Prdx5 ORF with or
without mutation on the first or second AUG codon. Transfection of these
constructs into BT549 cells followed by treatments with miR68553p mimic
or antagomiR and subcellular fractionation further supported our notion.
We propose here that miR68553p acts as a tsmiR by promoting the
biosynthesis of the transcriptional regulator protein SPRDX5 which
enhances the expression of the tumor suppressor protein BRCA2 leading to
the genotoxin and radiationresistance of aggressive SLUGhigh basallike
breast cancer cells. Supported in part by DOD-CDMRP IDEA Expansion Grant#
BC103645 and NIH/NCI grant 1R21CA181920 01 to GC and 1U54RR026140 to SM.


