Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Local and systemic tumor-immune dynamics in metastatic cancer.


Despite decades of effort, most disseminated cancers remain incurable,
and progression from localized to metastatic disease is largely
responsible for cancer-related mortality. In metastatic disease, an
ongoing battle between tumor and host occurs at each site;
tumor-associated antigens, stress proteins, and danger-associated
molecular patterns can both initiate and continually stimulate an immune
response against a tumor. Adding an additional layer of complexity,
locally activated cytotoxic T cells traffic through the host circulatory
system to also surveil metastasis elsewhere in the body. Thus, metastatic
tumors are highly interdependent; changes in the nonlinear tumor-immune
interactions in one tumor can perturb the systemic antitumor immune
response, potentially facilitating spontaneous regression or aggressive
outgrowth in distant sites. This can additionally influence the clinical
outcome of therapeutic intervention, which depends on therapy-induced
changes in tumor-immune dynamics both locally and systemically, as well
as patient-specific initial conditions of the global disease.

Using the tools of mathematical oncology we gain insights into this
complex interconnectivity between metastatic sites. ODE models have been
developed which incorporate both local tumor-immune interactions in each
tumor site and the trafficking of activated T cells systemically, and can
be parameterized by experimental and clinical investigations. Using four
primary tumor sites (lung, liver, breast, kidney) we simulate the growth
behavior of a primary site upon both seeding, growth, and treatment of a
secondary (or several) metastatic site(s).

In the presence of several metastatic sites, the dissemination of
activated T cells is not necessarily intuitive and depends on many
factors including the blood flow fraction to each organ and the tumor
volume to organ size ratio. Certain sites may experience inhibition of
growth, and other sites may be promoted upon seeding of an additional
site. We computationally analyze all combinations of metastatic sites,
and predict which sites are likely to benefit (tumor growth) and which to
suffer (tumor shrinkage) in each combination based upon known properties
of physiological blood flow and tumor volume at initial presentation.
This allows the identification of which sites in each combination would
be the optimal target for surgical therapy in order to induce the maximum
reduction in overall tumor burden. Furthermore, we can simulate local
radiation at each respective site, quantifying the difference in
model-predicted decrease in overall tumor burden between individual
targets.

The results facilitate an improved understanding of general disease
kinetics in the metastatic setting, emphasize that "local" therapy is
highly likely to have systemic effects, and support the case for a
paradigm shift in treatment target selection for metastatic disease.


