Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The metastasis suppressor NME1 is recruited to DNA double strand
breaks.


NME1 is a potent suppressor of metastasis, and reduced expression has
been associated with aggressive melanoma. The nucleoside diphosphate
kinase and 3’-5’ exonuclease (3’-5’ EXO) activities of NME1
protein both contribute to its metastasis suppressor activity. 3’-5’
exonucleases are important for proofreading during DNA repair and
synthesis, suggesting a potential role for NME1 in maintenance of genomic
stability in melanoma. Although impairment of DNA repair activity has
been implicated in melanoma risk, its contribution to melanoma initiation
and progression is not well understood. We have shown previously that
both enzymatic activities of NME1 are critical for repair of UV-induced
DNA damage via nucleotide excision repair. In the current study,
chromatin immunoprecipitation was used to demonstrate recruitment of NME1
to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), representing the first evidence of
direct recruitment of NME1 to sites of DNA damage. Induction of DSBs with
gamma irradiation (γ-IR) or bleomycin promoted rapid physical
association of NME1 with γH2AX, ATM, NBS1 and RAD50. In addition,
treatment of melanoma cells with γ-IR triggered a physical association
of NME1 with XRCC4, an effector of the non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ)
pathway. We are currently investigating whether knockout of NME1 induces
a switch from NHEJ to the homologous recombination (HR) pathway, a slower
but higher fidelity form of DSB repair, using plasmid repair assays. We
are also using plasmid rescue to study the role of NME1 on the fidelity
of NHEJ repair. Overall, our study indicates for the first time direct
participation of NME1 in a molecular mechanism of DSB repair in both
normal and transformed cells. In addition, these data suggest a novel
mechanism of metastasis suppressor function for NME1, with loss of NME
expression in tumor cells conferring genetic instability and enhanced
metastatic potential.


