Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the role of serine metabolism in pediatric sarcomas.


Sarcomas represent a diverse group of malignancies with unique molecular
and pathological characteristics. In order to improve sarcoma treatment,
a better understanding of the alterations associated with specific
sarcoma subtypes is critically important. Renewed interest in the altered
metabolic properties of cancer cells has led to an exploration of
targeting metabolic dependencies as a novel therapeutic strategy.
Metabolism of the amino acid serine is frequently altered in cancer,
supporting a number of critical biological processes, including protein,
lipid, and nucleotide synthesis, and redox balance. The first,
rate-limiting step in the serine synthesis pathway is catalyzed by the
enzyme 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH), which is overexpressed
in several cancers. Previous work has shown that PHGDH loss or inhibition
is selectively toxic to cancer cells with high PHGDH expression or
increased flux through the serine synthesis pathway. In this study, we
have characterized the dependency of pediatric sarcomas on serine
metabolism by examining expression of PHGDH in Ewing sarcoma and
rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines, and evaluating the effects of PHGDH
inhibition and serine deprivation on cellular proliferation and
bioenergetic properties. We show that PHGDH is highly expressed in
pediatric sarcoma cell lines, and that PHGDH knockdown resulted in
decreased proliferation, especially under conditions of serine
limitation. Moreover, pharmacological inhibition of PHGDH resulted in a
dose-dependent decrease in proliferation and mitochondrial bioenergetic
function. Furthermore, individual sarcoma cell lines were differentially
sensitive to serine deprivation, indicating that some sarcoma cells may
depend on extracellular serine in addition to de novo serine synthesis.
Our findings suggest that the dependency of pediatric sarcomas on serine
metabolism should be further investigated in order to identify
vulnerabilities that could be targeted for potential therapeutic benefit.


