Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isoprenylcysteine carboxylmethyltransferase (ICMT) function is
critical for epithelial malignant transformation by mutant-Ras.


Purpose Limited progress has been made in the development of direct
inhibitors of Ras. Therefore, targeting isoprenylcysteine
carboxylmethyltransferase (ICMT), the final enzyme in the prenylation
pathway for Ras and other proteins containing the so-called CaaX-motif,
remains an important strategy to inhibit Ras function in cancers. In this
study, we investigate the role ICMT plays in the initiation of human
epithelial cancers involving constitutively-active mutant Ras using
genetic manipulation strategies.

Methods Small T antigen and a shRNA against p53 (shp53) were sequentially
expressed in human mammary epithelial cells immortalized by hTERT
(HME1-hTERT) to create pre-malignant HME1-shp53 cells. All 4 isoforms of
wild-type or mutant Ras, namely H-Ras, N-Ras, K-Ras-4A and K-Ras-4B, were
independently introduced into HME1-shp53 cells to determine their
transforming ability. Using CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing technology,
ICMT-null HME1-shp53 cells were generated and mutant Ras isoforms were
subsequently introduced; tumor formation abilities of thus generated
cells were determined using soft-agar anchorage-independent colony
formation assay and subcutaneous xenografts in mice. ICMT knock-out was
also performed in MiaPaCa-2 and MDA-MB-231 cells, both expressing mutant
K-Ras, and subcutaneous xenograft tumor formation in mice was measured.

Results Pre-malignant HME1-shp53 cells can be transformed by all mutant
Ras isoforms but not by any wild-type Ras. ICMT loss-of-function
dramatically reduced anchorage-independent colony formation caused by all
mutant Ras isoforms in HME1-shp53 cells, and in vivo xenograft formation
was completely abolished. ICMT loss-of-function also dramatically reduced
in vivo xenograft formation for mutant K-Ras-expressing MiaPaCa-2 and
MDA-MB-231 naturally-occurring cancer cells.

Conclusion ICMT function is essential for the malignant transformation of
HME1 cells by all isoforms of Ras. Furthermore, ICMT function is also
crucial for the maintenance of the malignant phenotype in mutant
K-Ras-expresing cells such as MiaPaCa-2 and MDA-MB-231 cells.


