Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of exosome secretion in the survival of
enzalutamide-resistant prostate cancer cells: Syntaxin 6 as a novel
therapeutic target.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy in the
United States and remains the second leading cause of cancer deaths among
American men. PCa deaths are typically the result of metastatic
castration-resistant PCa (mCRPC). Recently, enzalutamide (Enz), an oral
AR inhibitor, was approved for treating patients with mCRPC, and has
significantly improved patient survival. But, invariably all PCa patients
eventually develop resistance against Enz and die from mCRPC. Therefore,
novel strategies aimed at overcoming Enz-resistance are urgently needed
to improve the survival of PCa patients. Exosomes (extracellular vesicle,
40-150 nm in size) have previously been shown to communicate oncogenic
signals and to promote growth and metastasis; however, their role in drug
resistance has not been fully elucidated. Therefore, we set out to better
understand exosomes role in the mechanism underlying Enz-resistance in
PCa cells. We isolated exosomes secreted by Enz-sensitive (S) and
-resistant (R) PCa cells by ultracentrifugation. Complete
characterization of these exosomes followed using nanoparticle tracking
analysis (NTA), transmission electron microscopy, proteomics, and western
blotting. MTT and trypan blue exclusion assays were used to evaluate cell
viability. Results showed that Enz-resistant C4-2B-R cells secreted
significantly higher amount (2.67 fold) of exosomes compared to sensitive
C4-2B-S cells, but without any significant change in exosome size.
Proteomics analysis revealed significantly lesser number and amounts of
proteins loaded in exosomes secreted by C4-2B-R cells compared to C4-2B-S
cells. Western blotting validated these results, and in general less
loading was observed for several exosomal biomarker proteins (e.g. CD63,
Lox, TSG101, and MMP9). Of note, AR-V7, a variant of the androgen
receptor, was upregulated in C4-2B-R cells as well in their exosomes. In
order to better understand the biological significance of increased
exosome production with concomitant decreased protein expression, we
administered C4-2B-R-derived exosomes to C4-2B-S cells. Interestingly,
exosomes from resistant cells significantly reduced the survival of
C4-2B-S cells . This suggested not only that the resistant cells were
utilizing exosomes to secrete Enz, but that these exosomes were being
taken up by the sensitive PCa cells, thus leading to enhanced sensitive
cell death. The inhibition of exosome biogenesis in C4-2B-R cells using
GW4869 (20 µM) and dimethyl amiloride (1 µg/mL) strongly decreased
their cell viability, and also increased their sensitivity towards Enz
treatment. We also observed strong upregulation of syntaxin 6 in
Enz-resistant C4-2B-R cells. Together, these results identified a unique
mechanism underlying drug-resistance, and also offer a novel target to
treat Enz-resistant CRPC.


