Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The HBP1 tumor suppressor is a negative epigenetic regulator of
MYCN driven neuroblastoma through interaction with the PRC2 complex.


MYCN is a key driver in initiation and progression of neuroblastoma (NB)
and represents a major target for novel drug strategies. We previously
reported that the MYC repressor gene HBP1 was down regulated by mutant
ALK via the PI3K-AKT-FOXO3 signaling axis1. Here, we further demonstrate
that HBP1 upregulation suppresses proliferation of neuroblastoma cells by
decreasing the MYCN signaling pathway. HBP1 levels were also shown to be
repressed in neuroblastoma cells through MYC/MYCN driven upregulation of
the miR-17~92 cluster, indicating that MYCN and mutant ALK both act to
inhibit HBP1 expression in NB. Next, we tested the green tea polyphenol
epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), known to upregulate HBP1, and the BET
inhibitor JQ1, which represses MYCN activity in neuroblastoma cells, and
showed in vitro and in vivo synergistic effects on cell viability and
tumor growth. Treatment with the PI3K/mTOR dual inhibitor BEZ-235
together with JQ1 also showed very strong synergistic effects. Further
dissection of the HBP1 regulome using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)
and iRegulon analysis (http://iregulon.aertslab.org) allowed
identification of the PRC2 component SUZ12 as a central node in HBP1
regulated signaling, mainly through controlling the repression of MYCN
regulated genes. In keeping with this finding, GSEA analysis of our HBP1
overexpression data set revealed also strong enrichment for genes that
are differentially expressed upon EZH2 inhibition in neuroblastoma cells.
Because HBP1 has previously been shown to interact with HDAC, we tested
the effects of the HDAC inhibitors vorinostat and panobinostat as single
agents and in combination with BEZ-235. Both combinations showed a strong
synergistic effect on cell viability. The molecular mechanism of this
synergism will be explored through RNAseq expression analysis. We
conclude that HBP1 is a crucial component in MYCN controlled repression
of gene activity through PRC2 interaction and demonstrate novel
opportunities for precision drugging of MYCN overexpressing NB cells.
1Lambertz et al. Clin Cancer Res. (2015)


