Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CircSarc: Disease monitoring by liquid biopsies in sarcomas.


The CircSarc study aims to provide new insights into the clinical utility
of liquid biopsies in soft tissue sarcomas. At present, mutational
profiles of solid tumours are obtained from tissue biopsies or surgical
specimens. Recent advances in technology now allows to use blood plasma
as a “liquid biopsy”, examining circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) shed
by the tumour cells into peripheral blood. ctDNA in plasma carries
tumour-specific alterations that can be used to monitor minimal residual
disease, response to therapy, tumour burden and evolution throughout the
course of the disease. In CircSarc, we have enrolled 30 high-grade soft
tissue sarcoma patients, with localised disease, that are being followed
throughout the course of their disease. Plasma from each patient is
collected longitudinally; before and after surgery, at each routine
control and before and after each treatment cycle. Patient’s tumour and
germline DNA were exome sequenced to identify tumour-specific mutations,
and ctDNA is being sequenced using a comprehensive 900 cancer gene panel.
The level of ctDNA in plasma, represented by the tumour-specific
biomarkers, are then monitored throughout the course of the treatment,
and acts as an indicator of tumour burden. In addition, we are analysing
plasma samples from 70 Gastro Intestinal Stroma Tumour samples using
targeted resequencing with Anchored Multiplex PCR. The levels of KIT and
PDGFRA mutations in ctDNA are being correlated with clinical and
pathological features. The established targeted resequencing protocols
for ctDNA provide different levels of complexity and sensitivity. In the
first screening, we have successfully detected somatic mutations in
plasma at time of surgery in 70% of the samples analysed. Mutations
present in the tumour at an allele frequency large than 20% can be
robustly identified in plasma. In addition, analysis of plasma samples
identified novel mutations not detected in the primary tumour, possibly
reflecting intra-tumour heterogeneity. These mutations are being followed
throughout the course of the disease to monitor tumour evolution and
resistance. In a proof-of-concept study, we have shown that that levels
of tumour-specific mutations in liquid biopsies correlated to clinical
manifestation of metastatic disease in aggressive sarcoma, and have the
potential to detect disease progression at an early stage. Our work
provides new insights into the clinical significance of ctDNA in
sarcomas. By repeated sampling of liquid biopsies, somatic mutations
identified in ctDNA can be used as unique non-invasive tumour-specific
biomarkers for monitoring tumour burden and disease evolution throughout
the course of the disease.


