Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predicting efficacy of c-Met targeting therapy in autocrine and
paracrine tumor cell lines.


Tumor cells frequently harbor abnormalities in signaling pathways,
leading to increased migration, invasion, survival, angiogenesis, and
proliferation. C-Met is one such commonly aberrant pathway. Because of
its effects on tumor cells, c-Met has been a target of interest for
anti-metastatic therapies. Clinical trials of c-Met inhibition select
patients based on total Met expression, or amplification of the Met gene.
However, c-Met inhibitors target the activated pathway. We therefore
predict that phospho-Met will be a better marker for patient sensitivity
to, and hence selection for, c-Met inhibitor trials. C-Met is activated
by the endogenous ligand Hepatocyte Growth Factor (HGF). In order to
mimic the paracrine signaling during in vitro experiments, many studies
add exogenous HGF at concentrations of 25-50 ng/mL. However, these
concentrations may not be representative of in vivo conditions. HGF serum
levels of healthy humans is 0.4 ng/mL. While HGF levels do rise in cancer
patients, it is unusual to see serum levels higher than 1 ng/mL.
Conditioned media from several cell lines (MDA-MB-231, PC-3, DU145,
LNCaP, OS156, OS521, U87, U118, RKO, KHT, SCC7, and RIF) was collected to
analyze for secretion of HGF in conditioned media. These cells were then
examined for basal phosphorylation of Met. The cell lines that secreted
HGF also had higher levels of phospho-Met in comparison to
non-HGF-secreting cell lines. Importantly, levels of total Met did not
predict for levels of phospho-Met. In migration and invasion assays, the
HGF-secreting cell line KHT was found to be sensitive to the c-Met
inhibitor BMS-777607.The non-HGF-secreting cell line DU145 only became
sensitive to the inhibitor when high, non-physiologic exogenous levels of
HGF (25-50 ng/mL) were added.These results suggest that autocrine
activation of the c-Met pathway may be a factor in predicting sensitivity
to c-Met inhibition. This may indicate the existence of a subset of
patients most likely respond to c-Met inhibition therapy. Furthermore,
consideration of exogenous HGF concentration should be considered when
conducting preclinical trials of c-Met inhibitors, as addition of
exogenous HGF may change the apparent efficacy of the inhibitor.


