Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDEF promote prostate cancer luminal/epithelial differentiation
and inhibit tumor progression.


Conventional therapies produce a high rate of cure for patients with
localized prostate cancer (PCa), but there is no effective treatment for
castration resistant metastatic PCa. Transcription factors by association
with enhancer and super-enhancer elements are key drivers of cell
identity. Our previous studies have shown that Sam Pointed Domain Ets
Transcription Factor a.k.a. Prostate Derived Ets Factor (SPDEF/PDEF),
inhibits cell migration, invasion and clonogenic activity in PCa cells
and there is a graded loss of PDEF with increasing Gleason Score in PCa
patient samples. PDEF has been reported to be one of the cell identity
transcription factors in LNCaP cells. We proposed that PDEF functions as
a putative tumor metastasis suppressor. Others have shown an increase in
Twist1, a bHLH transcription factor, was positively correlated with
Gleason Grading. Present study was designed to investigate the role of
PDEF and interplay between PDEF and Twist1 in PCa.

PC3 cells were stably transfected with PDEF/control PABABE vectors. Gene
expression changes were monitored by Affymetrix microarray. Microarray
was analyzed with GSEA. qRT-PCR was performed to confirm gene expression
and IHC, IF and IB analysis were performed to visualize protein
expression. Chip-seq data (SRP002475) was aligned with Bowtie. Peaks were
identified by MACS and visualized using IGB. PDEF/Twist1 expression data
was extracted from GSE16560. GraphPad was used to generate KM survival
analysis of PCa patients.

Our results show that PDEF expression is limited to epithelial/luminal
cells of the prostatic glands. We observed that expression of Twist1 was
down regulated in PC3 cells following PDEF expression. Analysis of gene
expression data from our microarray studies revealed that PDEF
re-expression was associated with negative enrichment of gene sets
involved with cell migration and positive enriched of gene sets involved
with epithelial/luminal differentiation. Chip-seq analysis revealed a
binding of PDEF to KRT8/18 promoter region. These data suggest that PDEF
inhibits core metastasis related genes through promoting a program of
luminal/epithelial differentiation. In clinical samples of PCa,
expression of PDEF was inversely associated, while expression of Twist1
was positively associated with Gleason grade. PDEF and Twist1 was able to
predict patient survival, moreover integrated PDEF and Twist1 expression
was able to better predict PCa patient survival as compared to PDEF or
Twist1 alone.

PDEF inhibits cell migration and metastasis in part by down-regulating
Twist1 level and promoting luminal/epithelial differentiation. Loss of
PDEF combined with gain of Twist1 expression may serve as a potential
biomarker set for distinguishing lethal PCa from an indolent disease.
Additional studies are underway to gain further insights into the role of
PDEF in PCa progression and metastasis.

Acknowledgement: FWCC support and Chair commitment funds (Koul H).


