Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AKT1 signaling negatively regulates invasion and metastasis of
non-small cell lung cancer cells carrying mutations in KRAS or EGFR.


Signaling driven by the phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K) and AKT/protein
kinase B (PKB) pathway plays an important role in cancer development and
progression, and thus this pathway is an attractive therapeutic target.
Although many different inhibitors targeting either PI3K or AKT have been
developed, the therapeutic benefit of these inhibitors in the clinic
remains elusive, in part because of the perplexing role of AKT signaling
in the regulation of cell motility, invasion and metastasis. AKT
activation is known to promote migration, invasion and metastasis;
however under certain circumstances and different cellular systems, it
also exhibits an inhibitory activity on these cellular processes and the
underlying cause of these conflicting results is unclear. Through
analysis of the Reverse Phase Protein Array (RPPA) performed on a series
of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) brain metastasis models generated
via intracardiac injection in mice, we identified AKT1 (one of three AKT
family members) as a critical negative regulator of A549 tumor
metastasis. AKT1 tyrosine phosphorylation (but not AKT2 or AKT3)
inversely correlated with the metastatic potential of A549 cells which
carry a KRAS mutation. Using AKT1 siRNAs, we demonstrated that inhibition
of AKT1 significantly enhanced migration and invasion of KRAS- or
EGFR-mutant NSCLC cells, but not wild type KRAS and EGFR cells.
Similarly, the AKT inhibitor MK-2206 also enhanced the migration and
invasion of KRAS- or EGFR-mutant NSCLC cells in vitro, and promoted
metastasis of KRAS-mutant A549 cells in vivo. The PI3K-AKT pathway is
downstream of both EGFR and KRAS, whose constitutive activation caused by
mutations likely alter the signal output of PI3K-AKT pathway and thus the
activity on cell invasiveness. Therefore, our results provide a sound
explanation that under certain genetic backgrounds (as we demonstrated
here with KRAS or EGFR mutations) the AKT signaling may switch from being
a promoter to an inhibitor of cell migration, invasion and metastasis.
This observation may have strong clinical implications for the
development of inhibitors of this pathway for cancer treatment.
Furthermore, we found that AKT1 blockade induced phosphorylation of
Myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate (MARCKS) and elevation of
Laminin subunit gamma-2 (LAMC2), which in turn inhibited AKT
phosphorylation and promoted cell invasiveness. In contrast, MARCKS or
LAMC2 knockdown abrogated the activities of migration and invasion
induced by AKT1 inhibition. This study unravels an anti-metastatic role
of AKT1 in NSCLC cells with KRAS or EGFR mutation, and provides
mechanistic insights for the understanding of the potentially contrasting
roles of AKT signaling in the regulation of cell invasiveness.


