Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VEGFA/NRP1 signal contributes to filopodia formation in breast
cancer cells.


Background and objective: Bevacizumab is an antibody of VEGF and
suppresses tumor angiogenesis. Bevacizumab has exhibited some therapeutic
efficacy for metastatic breast cancer in combination with chemotherapy,
but its impact on overall survival has not been proved. VEGF is a
multi-function molecule targeting cell members in tumor microenvironment.
We aimed to reveal VEGF-related molecular mechanisms on breast cancer
cells itself.

Methods and Results: VEGF-expressing breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231
cells (231 cells) were used. VEGFA of 231 cell was knocked out using
Crisper-Cas9 system (VEGFA-KO). VEGFA-KO 231 cells showed small and
rounded morphology. Migration assay demonstrated the impaired cell
migration of VEGFA-KO 231 cells. Bevacizumab treatment did not induce
this morphologic change and impaired migration. Exogenous VEGF addition
to VEGF-KO 231 cells recovered WT 231 cell like morphology and induced
cell migration. Next, we generated soluble neuropilin-1 (sNRP1)
overexpressed 231 cells. sNRP1 traps VEGFA to function as an antagonist.
sNRP1-231 cells exhibited small and rounded morphology and impaired cell
migration similar to that of VEGFA-KO 231 cells. Knock down of NRP1 by
using siRNA in 231 cells also caused impaired cell migration. We
evaluated the cell morphology using scanning electron microscope. It
revealed diminished filopodia formation in VEGF-KO 231 cells compared to
WT-231 cells. Exogenous rhVEGF addition to VEGF-KO 231 cells recovered
filopodia formation. Filopodia is a fingerlike protrusion that comes out
from the cell periphery by an actin polymerization. Filopodia is required
for cell development and functions such as cell migration. Our results
indicate, because of the absence of VEGF/NRP1 signaling, filopodia
formation is abrogated. As a result of diminished filopodia formation,
VEGFA-KO 231 cells showed small and rounded shape and reduced migration.
Bevacizumab and NRP1 bind VEGFA at amino acid motifs from exon 3-4 and
exon 7 of VEGFA, respectively. Thus, our findings suggested that VEGFA
could play a role in filopodia formation via NRP1 for 231 cells, and that
bevacizumab could not block the VEGFA/NRP1 signal.

Discussion NRP1 is a receptor of VEGF, Semaphorine and other growth
factors, and expressed in variety of cancer cells. Intracellular portion
of NRP1 lacks kinase domain. Previous study showed that the VEGF
stimulated to form a complex between NRP1 and GIPC1/Syx/RhoA, and
promoted tumor cell proliferation independently from VEGFRs (Yoshida et
al, 2015). However, the precise mechanisms regarding NRP1 signaling
remain unknown. In conclusion, inhibition of VEGFA/NRP1 signaling caused
rounded morphology with diminished filopodia formation, which impaired
cell migration of 231 cells. These findings would provide profound
insights regarding molecular mechanisms in resistance to bevacizumab
treatment.


