Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endothelial mTORC2 deficiency inhibits tumor angiogenesis, tumor
progression and metastasis in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).


Vascular endothelial cells (ECs) are specialized components of the tumor
microenvironment that orchestrates tumor growth and invasion. They form
tumor-associated blood vessels (angiogenic) that supply nutrients and
oxygen, remove waste products, and also provide an entry site for
tumorigenic cells to spread to secondary sites in various organs. One of
the major signaling events in tumor vessels is PI3K/PDK-AKT-mTOR
activation. mTOR is a serine/threonine kinase that functions in two
distinct complexes, mTORC1 and mTORC2,which regulate a diverse array of
cellular processes including cell growth, survival and metabolism.
Although mTORC1, and to lesser extent, mTORC2, has been broadly studied
in cancers and diseases, little is known regarding the relative
contributions of mTORC1 versus mTORC2 in tumor endothelium. Using mouse
model of endothelium-specific Rictor (a mTORC2 specific cofactor) gene
targeting, we discovered that endothelial Rictor deletion decreased tumor
neovascularization, suppressed tumor growth, and prevented metastasis in
vivo. Direct co-culture of endothelial cells and NSCLC tumor cells in
vitro showed that knockdown of endothelial Rictor inhibited tumor cell
proliferation while Raptor (a mTORC1 specific cofactor) depletion had a
modest effect. However, loss of endothelial Rictor or Raptor both
markedly decreased tumor cell extravasation in response to endothelial
cells, and also inhibited tumor spheroid formation in a direct co-culture
system. Furthermore, a screen of phospho-kinase arrays revealed that
Raptor or Rictor depletion in endothelial cells decreased various
phosphor-RTKs in tumor cells that were co-cultured with ECs, including
members of the Eph receptor family, Insulin receptor family and FGF
receptor family. Additionally, endothelial Rictor knockdown suppressed
phosphorylation levels of nerve growth factor receptors TrkB and TrkC in
tumor cells. Collectively, these data suggest that endothelial mTORC1 and
mTORC2 play critical roles in regulating tumor progression through
distinct signaling pathways.


