Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular spacer and co-stimulatory domains define target
sensitivity and persistence of CAR T cells for the treatment of PSCA+
bone metastatic prostate cancer.


Advancing chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-engineered adoptive T cells for
the treatment of solid cancers is a major focus in the field of
immunotherapy, given impressive recent clinical responses in
hematological malignancies. Prostate cancer should be amenable to
CAR-based immunotherapy given that several tumor antigens, including
prostate stem-cell antigen (PSCA), are widely over-expressed in
metastatic disease. The selectivity of CARs for solid cancers is crucial,
however, due to the absence of truly restricted tumor antigen expression
and potential safety concerns with “on-target off-tumor” activity.
Here, we show that optimized co-stimulatory signaling and extracellular
spacer domains are essential in defining a CAR’s selectivity towards
tumor cells that over-express the target antigen. The 4-1BB
co-stimulatory domain in PSCA-CARs confers enhanced tumor selectivity
with dampened yet dose-responsive cytokine production, reduced T cell
exhaustion phenotype, and equivalent tumor killing ability compared to
PSCA-CARs containing the CD28 co-stimulatory domain. CARs containing a
short extracellular spacer demonstrate the most selective killing of high
PSCA-expressing tumors but are unable to produce the inflammatory
cytokines important for a complete anti-tumor response. We show that
longer extracellular spacers in PSCA-CARs are necessary for both tumor
killing and cytokine production. PSCA-CARs exhibit robust in vivo
anti-tumor activity in subcutaneous and orthotopic bone-metastatic
patient-derived prostate cancer xenograft models, and 4-1BB-containing
CARs show superior persistence in controlling metastatic disease compared
with CD28-containing CARs. Our study demonstrates the critical impact of
CAR components in defining an optimized tumor-selective CAR T cell, and
also highlights the importance of clinically relevant animal models in
developing effective solid cancer CAR T cell therapies.


