Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations of calcium and dairy product intakes with colorectal
cancer risk among older women: the Iowa Women's Health Study.


Calcium has been consistently modestly associated with lower risk of
colorectal cancer, which remains the second leading cause of cancer
deaths among men and women combined in the United States. Dairy products,
a major source of dietary calcium, have also been consistently inversely
associated with colorectal cancer, although inconsistencies in relation
to high-fat dairy products have been noted. Limited evidence suggests
that dairy products may contain components other than calcium and fat,
such as insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), that may be independently
directly associated with risk of colorectal and other cancers.

Data from the Iowa Women’s Health Study, a prospective cohort study,
were used to investigate associations of calcium, dairy products, and the
non-calcium component of dairy products with colorectal cancer incidence.
Dietary data were collected using a semiquantitative food frequency
questionnaire (FFQ) mailed to 55 – 69 year-old women in 1986 who had a
valid Iowa driver’s license. Among participants with no history of
cancer at baseline and who satisfactorily completed their FFQ (n=35,221),
through follow up in 2012, 1,731 incident cases of colorectal cancer were
documented via the Iowa SEER registry. To investigate total dairy and
total, whole, and non-fat milks independent of their calcium components,
we used the residuals from linear regression models of their associations
with dietary calcium. Associations of the calcium and dairy product
variables with colorectal cancer incidence were estimated using
multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression.

For those in the highest relative to those in the lowest quintiles of
intakes, the adjusted hazards ratios and 95% confidence intervals (CI)
were 0.81 (CI 0.67-0.98; P-trend 0.004) for total calcium, 0.85 (CI
0.68-1.03; P-trend 0.07) for dietary calcium, and 0.85 (CI 0.68-1.06;
P-trend 0.16) for supplemental calcium. For total dairy and total milk,
the corresponding findings were 0.79 (CI 0.66-0.94; P-trend 0.01) and
0.82 (CI 0.69-0.96; P-trend 0.09), respectively. Low-fat dairy products,
non-fat milk, and residuals of total dairy products and total and non-fat
milk were not associated with colorectal cancer.

These results are consistent with previous findings of lower colorectal
cancer risk with higher intakes of calcium and dairy products, but
provide little support for the hypothesis that the non-calcium, non-fat
component of dairy products may be associated with colorectal cancer.


