Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic polymorphisms and human papillomavirus E6/E7
oncoproteins transfection: Induce ATM gene deletion11q22-23 and
chromosomal instability.


Persistent infections involving high-risk types 16 and 18 of Human
Papillomavirus (HPV) have been established as the etiological agent of
cervical cancer. Recent data indicate that several polymorphisms of key
regulators from the DNA damage repair pathways are associated with cancer
development susceptibility. The long arm of chromosome 11 has received
much attention as a high frequency of epigenetic deletions of various
sites, observed in HPV-long term infection that lead to cervical cancer,
indicating the presence of putative tumor suppressor genes and its
association with disease progression. To better understand the importance
of chromosome 11q22-23 region in the development of cervical cancer, we
investigated genetic and epigenetic alterations of the tumor suppressor
ATM gene in human keratinocytes transfected with HPV E6/E7 oncoproteins
(16-MT). In the present study we examined 16-MT cells for epigenetic
changes and chromosome imbalances, using FISH, and arrayCGH. We used
several FISH probes, mapping to region 11q22-23 where the ATM gene is
located. Our study revealed that the ATM gene located on chromosome 11q
is deleted, relating to chromosome deletions, that are recurrent
abnormalities in cervical cancer, implicating the loss of tumor
suppressor genes as a significant mechanism that drive cells to become
cancerous. This study was designed to investigate genetic instability
using HPV16 E6/E7 oncoproteins to better understand the importance of
chromosome 11q epigenetic changes. Deletion of 11q22-23 was observed in
all metaphases scored. With restricted areas of deletions, two
chromosomal regions of possible importance in cervical carcinomas could
be distinguished. The first region is D11S1325 and the second region is
D11S2179. The second region may contain part of the ATM gene. The results
indicate that a tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 11q22-23 may be
involved in the carcinogenesis of the cervix and the involvement of the
ATM gene, as the driving factor remains a possibility.


