Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A biophysical model for necrosis development in glioblastoma
informed by subject-specific MRI measurements.


Introduction

We have previously developed the means to use quantitative magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) data to initialize a biophysical model (Model 1)
of tumor growth which accurately predicts future tumor volume but fails
to capture the development of low-cellularity (or necrotic) regions in a
murine model of glioblastoma. In this work, we expand upon this
biophysical model (Model 2) to characterize necrosis by relating tissue
perfusion to cell death. We evaluate the accuracy of both models to in
vivo measurements of tumor growth.

Methods

To evaluate this model, rats (n = 4) with C6 gliomas were imaged with
dynamic contrast enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) and diffusion-weighted MRI
(DW-MRI) seven times over 10 days. DCE-MRI was used to identify tumor
regions and estimate tissue perfusion (as estimated by the parameter
Ktrans), while DW-MRI was used to estimate cell number. For both Models 1
and 2, parameters describing tumor proliferation, diffusion, and carrying
capacity were optimized from the first three imaging time points. For
Model 1, these parameters were then used in a forward evaluation of the
model to predict future tumor growth at the later days. For Model 2,
additional parameters describing cell death and sensitivity to Ktrans
were estimated from the all timepoints and used to simulate tumor growth
over the final four time points. Error was assessed between the model and
observed tumor growth by calculating the percent error in tumor volume,
percent error in voxel cell number, and the concordance correlation
coefficient (CCC) over the final four days.

Results

No statistically significant differences for percent error in tumor
volume were observed between Model 1 (6.49 ± 4.70%, mean and 95%
confidence interval) and Model 2 (6.77 ± 4.77%). Model 1 had 12.0 ±
0.3% error in voxel cell number in low cellularity regions (where
cellularity was between 60-80% of carrying capacity). Model 2, however,
exhibited a statistically significant decrease (P 0.90 in high
cellularity regions.

Conclusion

Incorporating a model of cell death informed by tissue perfusion improves
the overall tumor growth characterization by decreasing the error in
predicted cell number at the voxel level in the low cellularity (or
hypoxic) regions. The lack of a model for Ktrans in the current
implementation, however, requires a posteriori measurements to update
tissue perfusion. Further work is needed to develop a predictive model
for the spatial-temporal evolution of Ktrans.


