Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LOX expression,LINE 1 DNA methylation and prognosis in oesophageal
cancer.


Background:

In cancer cells, DNA methylation may be altered in two principle ways;
global DNA hypomethylation and site-specific CpG island promoter
hypermethylation. Since Long interspersed element-1 (LINE-1 or L1)
constitutes a substantial portion (approximately 17%) of the human
genome, the extent of LINE-1 methylation is regarded as a surrogate
marker of global DNA methylation. In previous studies, we demonstrated
that LINE-1 hypomethylation was strongly associated with a poor prognosis
in oesophageal cancer, supporting its potential role as a prognostic
marker. Lysyl oxidase (LOX) is an extracellular matrix remodelling enzyme
and its upregulation has been associated with poor prognosis in various
cancers since it has been reported to promote malignancy. We constructed
this study to examine the correlations between LOX expression, LINE-1
methylation and the clinical pathological features in patients with
oesophageal cancer.

Methods:

We examined LOX expression in 8 oesophageal cancer cell lines by
quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
Western blotting. The expression levels of LOX in 150 oesophageal cancer
tissues and adjacent normal mucosa was measured by RT-PCR and
immunostaining.

Results:

Our Gene Expression Microarray revealed that LINE-1 hypomethylated
oesophageal tumours presented higher expression level of LOX compared
with LINE-1 hypermethylated tumours. Similar results were observed in the
comprehensive analyses using public array data of oesophageal cancer cell
lines. In cell lines, LOX mRNA was expressed at a high level in TE-6,
TE-11, TE-14 and at a Low level in TE-1, TE-4 and KYSE 30 and similar
expression patterns for catalytically active LOX were observed in Western
blot analysis. In immunohistological study, LOX was predominantly
identified in the cytoplasm of oesophageal cancer cells. LOX expression
was significantly associated with LINE-1 methylation levels (P=0.034).
LOX expression was significantly associated with invasion depth, tumour
stage and venous invasion. Overall and cancer-specific survival rates of
high LOX expression group were significantly lower than those of low LOX
expression group (P = 0.015 and P = 0.008 respectively). In multivariate
analysis high LOX protein expression was an independent prognostic factor
in oesophageal cancer.

Conclusions:

The expression of LOX is up-regulated in oesophageal cancer cell lines
and resected tumour specimen and its controlled epigenetically. Our
findings suggest that LOX can serve as a useful prognostic biomarker in
oesophageal cancer patients and might be potential therapeutic target.


