Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dopamine signaling and therapeutic resistance in GBM.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most common and aggressive primary
brain tumor in adults, is characterized by aggressive recurrence after
conventional treatment, which include surgery followed by radiation and
chemotherapy. This recurrence reilies on GBM cells’ ability to promote
therapeutic resistance. The recently developed Cancer Stem Cell (CSC)
hypothesis argues that GBMs are driven by a rare subset of cells called
Glioma Stem Cells (GSCs). A significant corollary of the CSC hypothesis
is that GSCs have the ability to survive intensive radio- and
chemotherapy and give rise to recurrent disease. Recent studies from our
laboratory and others have shown a high degree of plasticity in GBM cells
that indicated normal GBM cells acquire a stem-like state during
anti-glioma therapy. Termed conversion, this molecular process increases
the frequency of therapy resistant GSCs and promotes disease recurrence.
We hypothesize that a drug capable of blocking tumor cell plasticity
would prevent the generation of therapy-resistant GSCs, thereby block GBM
recurrence. Based on this concept, we have developed a plasticity-based
high-throughput drug screening method for GSCs. Our initial screening has
identified several novel FDA-approved compounds that act as antagonists
of neurotransmitter receptors. Further investigation revealed that
treatment of patient-derived xenograft (PDX) GBM lines with temozolomide
(TMZ) led to the formation of a population of cells that express both
CD133, a marker of CSCs, and dopamine receptors 2 and 3 (DRDs) (control
mean CD133+/DRD2+: 19.7%, TMZ mean: 83.8%, p=.0001). PDX lines treated
with a dopamine receptor agonist exhibited increased expression of SOX2,
OCT4 and c-Myc, GSC-markers. However, this treatment did not increase the
expression of Ki67 in the GSC compartment, a marker for cell
proliferation (mean DMSO: 63.8%, mean TMZ: 57.4%). Thus, DRD signaling
may influence the plasticity driven GSC niche. Utilizing a CD133-reporter
cell line, we found that two anti-psychotics, chlorprothioxene and
loxapine, prevented the induction of CD133 expression caused by treatment
with TMZ. Finally, we treated PDX lines with chlorpromazine, a newer
version chlorprothioxene, in conjunction with TMZ, which resulted in
increased therapeutic effecacy (pGlioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most
common and aggressive primary brain tumor in adults, is characterized by
aggressive recurrence after conventional treatment, which include surgery
followed by radiation and chemotherapy. This recurrence reilies on GBM
cells’ ability to promote therapeutic resistance. The recently
developed Cancer Stem Cell (CSC) hypothesis argues that GBMs are driven
by a rare subset of cells called Glioma Stem Cells (GSCs). A significant
corollary of the CSC hypothesis is that GSCs have the ability to survive
intensive radio- and chemotherapy and give rise to recurrent disease.
Recent studies from our laboratory and others have shown a high degree of
plasticity in GBM cells that indicated normal GBM cells acquire a
stem-like state during anti-glioma therapy. Termed conversion, this
molecular process increases the frequency of therapy resistant GSCs and
promotes disease recurrence. We hypothesize that a drug capable of
blocking tumor cell plasticity would prevent the generation of
therapy-resistant GSCs, thereby block GBM recurrence. Based on this
concept, we have developed a plasticity-based high-throughput drug
screening method for GSCs. Our initial screening has identified several
novel FDA-approved compounds that act as antagonists of neurotransmitter
receptors. Further investigation revealed that treatment of
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) GBM lines with temozolomide (TMZ) led to
the formation of a population of cells that express both CD133, a marker
of CSCs, and dopamine receptors 2 and 3 (DRDs) (control mean
CD133+/DRD2+: 19.7%, TMZ mean: 83.8%, p=.0001). PDX lines treated with a
dopamine receptor agonist exhibited increased expression of SOX2, OCT4
and c-Myc, GSC-markers. However, this treatment did not increase the
expression of Ki67 in the GSC compartment, a marker for cell
proliferation (mean DMSO: 63.8%, mean TMZ: 57.4%). Thus, DRD signaling
may influence the plasticity driven GSC niche. Utilizing a CD133-reporter
cell line, we found that two anti-psychotics, chlorprothioxene and
loxapine, prevented the induction of CD133 expression caused by treatment
with TMZ. Finally, we treated PDX lines with chlorpromazine, a newer
version chlorprothioxene, in conjunction with TMZ, which resulted in
increased therapeutic effecacy (p<.0001 by MTT assay). Overall, these
data suggest that dopamine receptor signaling and stress-induced cellular
plasticity interact in GBM. We proposed that dopamine receptors represent
a strategy by which specific molecular changes induces by canonical
chemotherapeutic agents can be inhibited to prevent the induction of
resistance in surviving cells.


