Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The TRPA1 Ca2+-permeable channel mediates a non-canonical redox
adaptation in cancer cells.


Generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), a natural byproduct of
oxygen metabolism, occurs in all aerobic organisms at a controlled rate.
Cancer cells are subjected to numerous cellular insults, including
dysregulated oncogenes and dissociation from their natural extracellular
matrix (ECM) niches, leading to the generation of high levels of ROS.
Although cancer cells possess enhanced canonical antioxidant programs
that neutralize ROS, they nevertheless exhibit prominent ROS levels in
response to these insults, suggesting the existence of additional
programs that allow cancer cells to tolerate elevated ROS.

In this study, we provide evidence for an unconventional mechanism for
redox adaptation involving the ROS-activated, Ca2+-permeable TRPA1
channel, which normally functions as an irritant receptor in sensory
neurons but is highly upregulated in breast, lung, malignant neural
sheath, and other tumors. We found that TRPA1 overexpression enhances
survival and proliferation of MCF-10A cells under conditions of
matrix-detachment and this effect was dependent on TRPA1 activation by
ROS generated as loss of matrix anchorage. In MCF-10A acini, TRPA1
expression induced Ca2+ entry in ECM-deprived cells in the luminal space
and promoted their survival and proliferation. Conversely, TRPA1
knockdown inhibited Ca2+ responses to ROS generated through ECM
detachment and induced clearance of cells from the luminal space in
breast cancer spheroids. TRPA1 was also activated by ROS-inducing
chemotherapies and drove chemoresistance in breast, lung and malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor cells, and its downregulation suppressed
breast xenograft tumor growth and enhanced chemosensitivity. TRPA1
mediated these effects independent of antioxidant responses, but through
activation of cellular survival and anti-apoptotic programs involving the
RAS-ERK/AKT/mTOR pathways.

Together, our findings describe an unexpected mechanism whereby cancer
cells co-opt the neuronal TRPA1 channel in order to adapt to oxidative
environments. This TRPA1-induced response is distinct from canonical
redox adaptation mechanisms that rely on antioxidant program. As TRPA1
inhibitors are currently in clinical trials for pain and respiratory
therapies, these studies raise the possibility of using these inhibitors
as therapeutic chemosensitizers in TRPA1-enriched tumors.


