Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of TACC3 in the progression from ductal carcinoma in situ
to invasive breast cancer.


Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a non-invasive breast cancer with the
potential to become invasive/metastatic. The development of DCIS to
invasive breast cancer is an important aspect of breast tumor
aggressiveness, however, little is known about the genetic and molecular
alterations involved in this progression. Also, analysis of molecular
markers and genetic signatures of DCIS and invasive breast cancer have
failed to identify transition-specific biomarkers or pathways. Hence,
identifying the molecular mechanisms by which DCIS progresses to invasive
breast cancer is critical for the success of diagnosis, prognosis and
therapy of breast cancer. Members of the transforming acidic coiled-coil
(TACC) protein family are key players in the maintenance of centrosome
integrity, the regulation of microtubule assembly, and spindle stability
during mitosis. TACC3 has been shown to be involved in the regulation of
centrosome-microtubule dynamic networks, cell growth and differentiation,
and transcription/gene expression through interactions with other
molecules. Mounting evidence indicates that high levels of TACC3 may
contribute to breast cancer development. Here, we investigated the
significance of TACC3 in the transition of DCIS to invasive breast
cancer. First, we examined the expression of TACC3 in non-tumorigenic
human mammary epithelial MCF10A cells and MCF10DCIS.COM cells, which are
known to form DCIS-like lesions in mice and to progress to invasive
cancer, and found that the expression of TACC3 is elevated in
MCF10DCIS.COM cells compared to MCF10A cells. By analyzing tissue
microarray data, we found that expression of TACC3 gradually increased
from normal breast to DCIS, and further increased in invasive breast
cancer. In addition, ectopic expression of TACC3 in MCF10DCIS.COM cells
promoted cell proliferation, migratory and invasive capabilities as well
as the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like phenotype. Moreover,
MCF10DCIS.COM cells stably expressing TACC3 exhibited increased
expression of stemness markers. Interestingly, a small molecule inhibitor
of TACC3, KHS101 treatment in MCF10DCIS.COM cells significantly
suppressed cell proliferation and the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway while
having little effect on MCF10A cells. Our findings, therefore, suggest
that TACC3 may play an important role in the progression from DCIS to
invasive breast cancer and that targeting TACC3 could be a promising new
therapeutic strategy for DCIS patients.


