Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Advanced molecular characterization of severe autoimmune
toxicities associated with checkpoint inhibitor therapies.


Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have made a profound impact on the
treatment of a variety of cancers. However, as with any systemic
treatment, toxicities are inevitable. With most classes of cancer
therapies, toxicities are relatively predictable based on clinical trial
safety data and therefore can be handled with prophylactic or supportive
care measures. However, ICIs are unique in their ability to cause rare
but severe auto-immune toxicities. The molecular underpinnings of these
toxicities, as well as unique features of the patient, tumor, or affected
tissue, have not been extensively explored. We recently reported a small
case series of two patients with myocarditis resulting in death arising
following combination ICI therapy (Johnson et al, N Engl J Med, 2016).
High lymphocytic infiltration, coupled with PD-L1 expression was present
in the affected myocardium and skeletal muscle. Common T cell clones were
identified between the affected tissue and tumor, and abnormal expression
of muscle-specific transcripts was identified in the associated tumor,
suggesting release of peripheral tolerance to tumor-expressed
self-antigens.To expand upon our reported study, we collected healthy and
afflicted tissue from a series of cancer patients with immune-related
colitis, myocarditis (MC), and encephalopathy following ICI treatment. We
hypothesize that molecular analysis of these tissues will identify causal
factors in the etiology of these toxicities, and how to better predict,
prevent, and treat them. Thus, we performed molecular characterization of
the immune infiltrate and diseased tissue microenvironment. A total of 20
affected (colon, cardiac, brain) and non-diseased control specimens were
examined by spatial digital profiling (nanoString). This process
generates a spatial heatmap of digital counts of 20 selected immunology
and cellular markers and proteins across each specimen. Using this
technology, the landscape of inflammation in ICI-affected organs can be
resolved for insights into the mechanism whereby ICI-mediated
auto-immunity occurs. Targeted RNAseq for selected immuno-oncology mRNA
targets was also performed. In initial RNA sequencing analyses of MC
cases, affected myocardium, skeletal muscle, and patient-matched tumors
all demonstrated expression of immune activation markers (e.g.
interferon-gamma and granzyme B), expression of PD-L1, and
muscle-specific genes. In the expanded population, including colitis,
digital spatial profiling analyses and targeted NGS (RNAseq) are
underway. Although data analyses are incomplete at the time of this
abstract, this work will be the largest and most comprehensive analysis
of the molecular underpinnings of ICI-mediated auto-immune toxicity
reported to date. These data should offer clarity in the mechanisms and
features of these adverse events, how to prevent or predict them with
precision medicine, and how to treat them when they do occur.


