Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-associated neutrophils with antigen-presenting features in
early-stage human lung cancer.


To date there has been an increasing focus on the interactions between
inflammatory myeloid cells and T cells in the tumor microenvironment
because cytotoxic anti-tumoral T cells represent the chief effector
mechanism of anti-tumoral immunity. Tumor-associated neutrophils (TANs)
represent a significant portion of inflammatory cells in lung tumors;
however, whether specialized neutrophil subpopulations capable of
regulating T cell responses exist in human cancers is unknown. Our goal
was to identify subsets of TANs and determine their specific roles in the
regulation of T cell responses in patients with early stage lung cancer.
An extensive phenotypic analysis of 55 early-stage human lung tumors
revealed that TANs, defined as CD11b+Arg1+MPO+CD66b+CD15+ cells,
contained two major sub-populations. One subset of “canonical” TANs
expressed classic neutrophil markers. A second subset of TANs displayed a
combination of neutrophil markers plus markers (CD14+HLA-DR+CCR7+CD86+)
normally expressed on antigen-presenting cells (APC). We termed this
unique neutrophil population “APC-like hybrid TANs”. The frequency of
these hybrid TANs varied widely within lung cancers and ranged from
0.5-25% of all TANs. Interestingly, the frequency of this hybrid
population declined as tumors enlarged, and they were almost completely
absent in tumors greater than 5 cm in diameter. Mechanistically, we
determined that low doses of IFN-γ and GM-CSF in the tumors were
required for the development of APC-like hybrid neutrophils. The high
proportion of hybrid TANs (>10% of all TANs) directly correlated with the
presence of IFN-γ and GM-CSF in the autologous tumor tissue. Using bone
marrow-derived immature granulocytes, which were found to have prolonged
survival in vitro, we discovered that these APC-like hybrid neutrophils
originate from CD11b+CD15+CD10-CD16-/low/int neutrophil progenitors in
the presence of IFN-γ and GM-CSF or in tumor-conditioned media.
Functionally, the APC-like hybrid neutrophils are superior to canonical
neutrophils in their ability to: 1) stimulate antigen non-specific
autologous T cell responses 2) directly stimulate antigen-specific
autologous memory T cell responses, 4) augment NY-ESO-1 specific effector
T cell responses by providing a co-stimulatory signals through the OX40L,
4-1BBL CD86, CD54 molecules, and 5) cross present tumor-associated
antigen as IgG-immune complex. In summary, we provide the first evidence
of two subsets of TANs in lung cancer. All TANs had an activated
phenotype and could support (rather than inhibit) T cell functions to
some degree. However, we identified a subset of TAN in early-stage lung
tumors that can undergo a unique differentiation process resulting in
formation of specialized subset of APC-like hybrid neutrophils. These
hybrid neutrophils may provide new opportunities to boost the efficacy of
vaccines based on cytotoxic T lymphocyte induction


