Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting MHC class I molecules and immune checkpoints as key
immune evasion strategies in EBV-associated nasopharyngeal carcinoma.


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a distinct type of head and neck cancer
that is consistently associated with intensive lymphocytes infiltration
and Epstein-Barr virus infection. This study aims at elucidating the
mechanism contributing to immune evasion in NPC. During NPC
tumorigenesis, multiple intrinsic mechanisms are acquired to escape
cellular immune response for the tumor and viral antigens. By genome
sequencing, somatic alterations of multiple MHC class I genes including
NLRC5, HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C and B2M were detected in 30% of primary NPC.
Significant correlation of MHC class I gene alterations and poor survival
rate in the patients was also shown. The finding suggested that the
deficiency of antigen presentation mechanism represents a common strategy
for immune evasion in NPC and favors rapid tumor progression. Losses of
HLA-A, HLA-B and NLRC5 expression were validated in a panel of NPC tumor
lines and selected primary tumors. The role of NLRC5 as key transcription
regulator of HLA-A and HLA-B expression was demonstrated in the
nasopharyngeal epithelial cells. To further evaluate the mechanisms
contributed to immune evasion in NPC, we have elucidated
immunosuppressive molecules involved in immune surveillance in Epstein
Barr Virus (EBV)-associated NPC and its association with EBV-encoded LMP1
in an independent cohort of primary NPCs. By immunohistochemistry, the
expression of EBV-encoded LMP1, MHC class I genes and various
immunosuppressive molecules including PDL1, PDL2 and IDO1 was examined in
98 primary tumors. PDL1 and PDL2 were found to be over-expressed in 50%
and 33.7% of NPC cases while IDO1 was found to be expressed in 28.8% of
cases. Primary NPC cases expressing either PDL1 or PDL2 accounted for
64.3%. A significant association between LMP1 and PDL1 and PDL2
expression was also found. The correlation of PDL1, PDL2 and/or MHC class
I molecule expression with the outcome of the patients was determined.
The high incidence of MHC class I deficiencies and PDL1/PDL2
overexpression imply that EBV-associated NPC escape from the host immune
response by targeting both antigen presentation mechanisms and immune
checkpoints. Our findings also suggested that the expression of MHC class
I molecules and PDL1/PDL2 is a potential biomarker for immunotherapy in
NPC patients.


