Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FOXP1 suppresses immune cell migration in breast tumors.


Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) play an essential role in mediating
response to chemotherapy and improving clinical outcomes in breast cancer
(BC). Extensive TIL infiltration is characterized by their organized into
tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS). TIL infiltration and TLS formation
may be regulated, in part, by transcription factors (TF) controlling
cytokine/chemokine production within the tumor microenvironment. The
forkhead box protein 1 (FOXP1) is a TF shown to be abnormally expressed
in a variety of human tumors and play an important role in T cell
cytokine production. Therefore we aimed to study FOXP1-mediated
regulation of TIL in BC. Investigation of FOXP1 expression in public
microarray data from untreated BC patients, BC cell lines [Luminal A
(MCF7), HER2+ (BT474) and triple negative (TN; MDA-MB231)] and
prospectively collected formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) primary
breast tissues showed that FOXP1 is repressed at transcript and protein
level in HER2+ or TN breast tumors compared to estrogen receptor positive
tumors (Luminal A and B). Moreover HER2+ and TN subtypes, which showed
decreased FOXP1 levels, are 2 well known highly infiltrated BC. Based on
our hypothesis that FOXP1 could play a role on immune cell infiltration
in breast tumors, data analysis of the prospective BC cohort showed that
high FOXP1 (FOXP1hi) expression is significantly associated with a lower
percentage of TIL and number of TLS compared to FOXP1 low (FOXP1lo)
tumors. To investigate the impact on specific cytokines/chemokines
involved in TIL recruitment and/or TLS formation, FOXP1 was silenced in
MCF7 (FOXP1hi tumor cell line) or upregulated in MDA-MB-231 (FOXP1lo
tumor cell line) followed by gene expression analysis using a RT-qPCR
based human cytokine/chemokine array. FOXP1 repression upregulated major
T and B cell chemoattractant chemokines and overexpression repressed most
of these molecules in the cell line experiments. Next we analyzed major
chemoattractant molecule expression in FOXP1lo and FOXP1hi prospective
breast tumors and found that FOXP1hi tumors having a significant decrease
in CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL11, CXCL13, CX3CL, CCL20, IL2, and IL21. A
migration assay (Transwell chambers) done using healthy donor (HD) PBMC
showed a significant increase in total lymphocytes migrated towards FOXP1
repressed tumor conditioned media (TCM) of MCF7 compared to the TCM of
control or medium alone. Finally analysis of lymphocyte migration to
FOXP1lo and FOXP1hi tumor supernatants (SN) from primary tumors that we
consistently prepare without enzymatic digestion, showed that there was a
significant decrease in number of lymphocytes migrated towards FOXP1hi
tumor SN including the migration rates of individual T and B lymphocytes
populations compared to FOXP1lo tumor SN. These data suggest that FOXP1
could play a critical role in establishing effective anti-tumor immune
responses by negative regulation of TIL via suppression of
cytokine/chemokine expression in breast tumors.


