Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanobiology of epithelia on native basement membrane and
relevance for cancer invasion.


The onset of metastasis occurs when cancer cells invade and breach the
basement membrane (BM) that provides mechanical support to epithelial
tissues. Yet, it remains unclear what triggers cancer cells to breach the
BM, and how ‘triggered’ cells in fact breach the BM. We have
established an in vitro assay using native BM interface for culturing
epithelial cells. Using atomic force microscopy (AFM) with other
high-resolution microscopies and TER (trans-epithelial resistance), we
have correlated the mechano-cellular attributes of the BM/epithelium
interface to its biochemical and structural properties. We demonstrated
that the internal limiting membrane (ILM) isolated from human retinas
acts as a native substrate for culturing epithelial cells in terms of BM
composition, architecture and stiffness. These are required to act
jointly in order to achieve apico-basal polarity, tissue barrier
formation and stiffness properties of the epithelial layer similarly to
secretory epithelia in vivo. The native BM serves several advantageous
over reconstituted Matrigel, an ECM extracts that originates from mouse
tumor ascites. Besides variations in thickness and biochemical
composition, we find that Matrigel is mechanically 100-fold more
compliant (i.e., softer) than native BMs. When tumorigenic variants of
cells are used, we demonstrated that cancer cell invasion is associated
with a decrease in cellular stiffness correlated to changes in cell and
BM morphology. In addition, we showed that activation of ß1 integrin by
the stiffness and architecture of the native alpha - 5 laminin chain has
a key role, not only as previously thought for maintenance of cell
polarity but also for the establishment of a physiological
mechanophenotype. On the other hand it is well know that during cancer
progression in vivo, cancer cells can perforate the BM using proteolysis.
Whether stromal cells also play a role and what kind of role in this
process is unclear. Therefore, we asked if carcinoma‐associated
fibroblasts (CAFs) isolated from cancer patients promote cancer cell
invasion through a BM. In the presence of CAFs, moderately invasive
cancer cells invade in a matrix metalloproteinase‐independent manner.
Using live imaging and atomic force microscopy, we showed that CAFs
actively pull, stretch and soften the BM, forming gaps through which
cancer cells can migrate. By exerting contractile forces, CAFs alter the
organization and the physical properties of the BM, making it permissive
for cancer cell invasion. Finally, we propose that, in addition to
proteolysis, mechanical interactions between CAFs and BM represent an
alternative mechanism of BM breaching. Given their mechano-biological
relevance, native BMs allow us to further understand how mechanosignaling
occurs between the epithelia and the surrounding stromal layers at the BM
interface during cancer invasion and progression.


