Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of quantitative analysis of mouse cell contamination
and purification of human tumor cells in patient derived orthotopic
xenograft mouse models of pediatric brain tumors.


Background: Pediatric brain tumors continue to be among the most
difficult to cure and are the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in
children. Research investigating pediatric brain cancer is still impaired
by the lack of cancer models. We established a large panel of orthotopic
xenograft models as well as several paired permanent cell lines using in
vivo and in vitro culture techniques. However an inherent risk of
xenograft models is the contamination of isolates of human tumors with
host (mouse) cells. Therefor strategies to correctly and timely identify
the human/mouse ratio are essential. In this study we investigated
Prostaglandin Receptor EP2 (PTGER2) as a useful target to identifying
mouse cell contamination in PDOX models.

Method: Species specific primers based on Alcoster et al., 2011 were used
to detect PTGER2 in genomic DNA extracts of xenograft and cultured cells.
Real-time qPCR was carried out using a StepOnePlus™ Real-Time PCR
System. Reaction mix contained SYBR Green select master mix, respective
primers and 5 ng of total genomic DNA in a total reaction volume of 10
μL. The qPCR conditions were as follows: 50°C-2 min, 95°C-10 min, 40
cycles of (95°C-15 sec, 61°C-1 min). Primer specificity was controlled
in addition by analysis of amplified products on a 1.2% agarose gel. FACS
was used to isolate human cells according to anti-Human HLA-ABC Ab and
mouse-specific Ab cocktail surface staining and subjected to qPCR.

Results: Various models of pediatric brain cancer (PXA, MB, GBM, EPN,
ATRT, DIPG, PNET) established in our group were investigated for mouse
cell contamination. Cells from xenograft isolates as well as from
cultured xenografts were routinely analyzed. Our study confirms PTGER2 as
a useful target for accurately estimate mouse cell contamination in brain
cancer xenograft models. This further enabled us to improve detection and
characterization of HLA-ABC/mouse-cocktail double negative population as
seen in FACS.

Conclusion: In conclusion we have successfully implemented an easy
qRT-PCR approach to determine the human/mouse cell ration in any mixed
cell population. Particular for PDOX models it is paramount to have
reliable information on mouse cell contamination.


