Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted therapies to ERBB receptors downregulate expression of
PD-L1: implications in combination therapies.


Background: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is the most aggressive and
lethal form of primary breast cancer. Inflammatory signaling pathways are
active in IBC, but the function of the immune response remains elusive.
ErbB receptors play a role in IBC. ERBB2 is amplified in 50% of IBCs, and
ERBB3 is also mutated in IBC. Currently, Lapatinib, a dual ErbB
inhibitor, is used in IBC patients with ERBB2 amplification.

Although immune cell inflammatory signaling may promote IBC tumor growth
and metastasis, the presence of cytotoxic tumor-associated lymphocytes
has also been associated with a more favorable breast cancer prognosis.
The contradictory nature of the immune data highlights the need to
elucidate the relationship between the immune response and subsequent
treatments. Given the active IBC immune component and the recent clinical
benefit of immune checkpoint inhibitors in cancer treatment, IBC’s may
represent a clinically unique breast cancer population that may benefit
from immunomodulating agents.

Interestingly, Myc is a downstream effector of ErbB signaling, and Myc is
thought to regulate the expression of immune checkpoint proteins CD47 and
PD-L1. The presence of PD-L1-positive IBC immune infiltrate suggests that
IBC’s may benefit from therapies that disrupt PD-L1 signaling together
with ErbB inhibitors.

METHODS: IHC was used to examine immune checkpoint signaling and
characterize the tumor-immune infiltrate. Tumor tissues were also
characterized using an RNA-seq panel that examined the expression of 377
immune-related genes. Cell lines (BT474, SKR3, AU565, and SUM225) were
treated with Lapatinib and Neratinib to examine the relationship between
growth factor receptors and downstream immune signaling pathways.

RESULTS: RNA-seq revealed the expression of specific immunosuppressive
signaling pathways in tumors. Treatment of breast cancer cells with ErbB
inhibitors resulted in a decrease in the levels of PD-L1. Treatment with
Lapatinib and Neratinib diminished PD-L1 in all cell lines. Levels of
Phospho-Stat3 decreased in BT474 and Sum225 but not in SKBR3 and AU565,
implying that PD-L1 is regulated by another mechanism (ERK-MYC).

CONCLUSION: Our results provide mechanistic insight into ErbB receptor
activation and the expression of downstream signaling molecules (Stat3,
Myc, PD-L1, and others). In addition, our unique RNA-seq immune signature
reveals the expression of several genes that may serve as biomarkers of
inhibitory immune signaling pathways. Our laboratory is currently
examining the correlation between PD-L1 expression and the activation of
ErbB2 in model systems and clinical trials using ErbB inhibitors in
combination with PD-L1 inhibitors. Our immune panel gene signature may
serve as a useful diagnostic test that, in conjunction with traditional
ErbB testing, can identify patients that will benefit from combination
therapy of an ErbB inhibitor and an immune checkpoint inhibitor.


