Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pioglitazone prevents hepatocellular carcinoma development in a
rat model of cirrhosis.


Introduction: Advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a leading cause
of mortality worldwide with limited treatment options. There is a readily
identifiable cohort of cirrhosis patients at risk and they are ideal
candidates for chemoprevention. Anti-hyperglycemic agents have garnered
interest for their potential anti-fibrotic as well as chemo-preventive
effects. Pioglitazone, a selective PPAR-γ agonist, has been shown to
reduce non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), but its role as an
anti-fibrotic and chemopreventive agent has yet to be elucidated. The
hypothesis of this study is that Pioglitazone reduces cirrhosis and
subsequent HCC development in rats with diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced
cirrhosis.

Methods: Male Wistar received DEN 50mg/kg by intraperitoneal injection.
DEN injury reliably recapitulates histological and molecular features of
human HCC development with induction of hepatic fibrosis at 8 weeks,
cirrhosis at 12 weeks, and HCC by 18 weeks. DEN-injured rats were
randomized to receive oral gavage of pioglitazone at 3mg/kg/day (n=9) or
vehicle control (n=9). Initiation of pioglitazone coincided with the
development of liver fibrosis at 8 weeks. All animals were sacrificed at
18 weeks.

Results: As expected, repeated injections of DEN in rats resulted in
progressive fibrosis, cirrhosis, followed by HCC formation. Treatment
with pioglitazone resulted in a 56% reduction of surface nodules relative
to treatment with vehicle (7.4±4.9 vs. 17±7; pResults: As expected,
repeated injections of DEN in rats resulted in progressive fibrosis,
cirrhosis, followed by HCC formation. Treatment with pioglitazone
resulted in a 56% reduction of surface nodules relative to treatment with
vehicle (7.4±4.9 vs. 17±7; p<0.005). Liver sections were stained by
picrosirius red to assess fibrosis and pioglitazone significantly reduced
collagen deposition in DEN-injured rats (collagen proportional area =
3.2±1.8% vs. 9.2±2%; pResults: As expected, repeated injections of DEN
in rats resulted in progressive fibrosis, cirrhosis, followed by HCC
formation. Treatment with pioglitazone resulted in a 56% reduction of
surface nodules relative to treatment with vehicle (7.4±4.9 vs. 17±7;
p<0.005). Liver sections were stained by picrosirius red to assess
fibrosis and pioglitazone significantly reduced collagen deposition in
DEN-injured rats (collagen proportional area = 3.2±1.8% vs. 9.2±2%;
p<0.035). This histologic observation was further confirmed by gene
expression analysis with reductions in collagen-I, α-smooth muscle
actin, and transforming growth factor beta in rats treated with
pioglitazone. Finally, weekly injection of DEN also caused a significant
decrease in overall body weight in comparison to untreated rats
(398.1±60 vs. 598±46 grams; pResults: As expected, repeated injections
of DEN in rats resulted in progressive fibrosis, cirrhosis, followed by
HCC formation. Treatment with pioglitazone resulted in a 56% reduction of
surface nodules relative to treatment with vehicle (7.4±4.9 vs. 17±7;
p<0.005). Liver sections were stained by picrosirius red to assess
fibrosis and pioglitazone significantly reduced collagen deposition in
DEN-injured rats (collagen proportional area = 3.2±1.8% vs. 9.2±2%;
p<0.035). This histologic observation was further confirmed by gene
expression analysis with reductions in collagen-I, α-smooth muscle
actin, and transforming growth factor beta in rats treated with
pioglitazone. Finally, weekly injection of DEN also caused a significant
decrease in overall body weight in comparison to untreated rats
(398.1±60 vs. 598±46 grams; p<0.015), and pioglitazone treatment
resulted in a trend for better protection of body weight relative to
vehicle (398.1±60 vs. 427.5±56.3 grams).

Conclusion: Overall our data supports the hypothesis that the
anti-diabetic agent pioglitazone may be repurposed as a drug to reduce
fibrosis and prevent HCC. This could be beneficiary in patient management
given the low cost as well as minimal side effects.


