Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translational evidence of reactivated innate and adaptive immunity
with intratumoral IMO-2125 in combination with systemic checkpoint
inhibitors from a Phase I/II study in patients with anti-PD-1 refractory
metastatic melanoma.


Background: While checkpoint inhibitor (CPI) therapy has transformed
metastatic melanoma (MM) treatment, many patients remain refractory. We
reasoned that combining CPI with an agent that activates antigen
presenting cells and improves T-cell priming may result in improved
response. Our approach is to modulate the tumor microenvironment through
image-guided intratumoral (i.t.) injection of the TLR9 agonist, IMO-2125,
in combination with either ipilimumab (ipi) or pembrolizumab (pembro). We
hypothesize that this will result in dendritic cell (DC) activation and
induction of tumor-specific CD8+T-cells which will synergize with
ipilimumab or pembrolizumab to overcome immune-escape. Based on this
rationale we initiated a phase I/II clinical trial.

Study Design/Methods: Adults with refractory MM that have had prior PD-1
blockade therapy (with or without a BRAF inhibitor) are eligible.
IMO-2125, in doses escalating from 4mg to 32mg, is given i.t. weeks 1, 2,
3, 5, 8, and 11 along with standard doses of ipilimumab or pembrolizumab.
Primary endpoints are safety, tumor response, and PK. Multiple biopsies
are obtained in both the injected and distant tumor pre- and
on-treatment. Immune analyses include DC subsets and their activation
status as well as T cell activation, function and proliferation. T-cell
repertoire diversity is evaluated by high-throughput CDR3 sequencing and
changes in gene expression signatures are assessed by nanoString. Changes
in circulating cytokines are also being assessed during therapy.

Results: Enrollment is proceeding on both the IMO-ipilimumab and
IMO-pembrolizumab dose-escalation arms of the trial. Safety is acceptable
with no DLT recorded to date. Durable clinical responses (including 1 CR)
have been observed with IMO-ipilimumab in patients who were refractory to
PD-1 inhibitor. Fresh tumor biopsies show maturation (upregulation of
HLA-DR) of the myeloid DC1 subset (CD1c+CD303-), upregulation of PD-L1 by
malignant cells, as well as an IFNα response gene signature in the
IMO-2125 injected tumor lesion 24 hrs post-treatment compared to
pre-treatment biopsy. On-treatment biopsy results show a higher
expression of CD56+ and Ki67+ effector CD8+ T-cells in responding
patients. Initial CDR3 sequencing demonstrates increased diversity in the
injected lesions of all patients assessed and expansion of top clones
present in the distant lesion in a responding patient. Plasma analysis
showed an increase in IFNγ levels in the plasma of responding patients.

Conclusions: These results demonstrate that IMO-2125 with a checkpoint
inhibitor is a viable strategy to revive the immune response in tumors
that are refractory to PD-1 inhibitors. Further clinical evaluation of
both the IMO-ipilimumab and IMO-pembrolizumab combination is planned in a
Phase 2 expansion of the current trial.


