Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Double blockade of interacting CK2 and EGFR pathways by
tumor-targeting nanobioconjugates increases therapeutic efficacy against
glioblastoma multiforme.


Introduction: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) remains the deadliest brain
tumor in adults, and is notorious for drug and radiation resistance. To
inhibit GBMs more effectively, polymalic acid-based blood-brain barrier
crossing nanobioconjugates were synthesized that are delivered to the
cytoplasm of cancer cells and specifically inhibit the master regulator
serine/threonine protein kinase CK2 and the wild-type/mutated epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR/EGFRvIII), which are overexpressed in
gliomas according to The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) GBM database.

Methods and Results: The used nanobioconjugates are novel
nanotherapeutics where all moieties are covalently connected to
poly(β-L-malic acid) (PMLA). Our biodegradable and non-toxic nanodrugs
bind to the receptors enriched on tumor vasculature and cross the BBB by
transcytosis. They specifically bind to cancer cells and after
internalization exit to the tumor cell cytoplasm using pH-sensitive
endosomal disruption unit. Two xenogeneic mouse models bearing
intracranial human GBMs from cell lines LN229 and U87MG that expressed
both CK2 and EGFR were used. The knockdown of CK2α and EGFR/EGFRvIII
suppressed their downstream prosurvival signaling. Treatment also
markedly reduced the expression of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1), a
negative regulator of cytotoxic lymphocytes. Downregulation of CK2 and
EGFR also caused suppression of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90)
co-chaperone Cdc37, which may inhibit the activity of key cellular
kinases. Inhibition of either target was associated with downregulation
of the other target as well, which may underlie efficacy of the dual
nanobioconjugate that is directed against both CK2 and EGFR. Importantly,
the single nanodrugs, and especially the dual nanodrug, markedly
suppressed the expression of cancer stem cell markers c-Myc, CD133, and
nestin, which could contribute to the efficacy of these nanodrugs. In
both tumor models, the dually targeting nanobioconjugate significantly
increased (up to 2-fold) animal survival compared with the control group.

Conclusion: The versatile nanobioconjugates developed in this study, with
the ability of anti-cancer drug delivery across biobarriers and
inhibition of key tumor regulators, offer a promising nanotherapeutic
approach to treat GBMs and to potentially prevent drug resistance and
retard the brain tumor recurrence.

Support: NIH grants U01 CA151815, R01 CA136841, R01 CA188743, R01
CA209921, R01 EY013431


