Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bitter melon efficacy against human pancreatic cancer cells:
possible involvement of cellular stemness and metabolome targets.


Pancreatic cancer (PanC) has a dismal 5-year survival rate of Pancreatic
cancer (PanC) has a dismal 5-year survival rate of < 5%. Symptomless
progression, late diagnosis and rising drug resistance to leading
chemotherapeutic agents like gemcitabine, add to PanC severity. Hence,
there is a critical requirement for identifying alternative novel
non-toxic agents (dietary/non-dietary) aimed at effective management of
PanC with minimal patient distress. Bitter melon (Momordica charantia), a
dietary agent, is actively being investigated for its anti-cancer
potential against a variety of malignancies, including our work in PanC.
Recent studies by us have shown bitter melon juice (BMJ) efficacy against
a panel of human PanC cell lines in culture and tumor xenografts. For
mechanistic studies, here we evaluated the efficacy of BMJ against cancer
stem cells (CSCs) pool in PanC cells. Results indicated that BMJ
treatment (0.25-2% v/v) significantly decreased CSC enriched
(CD44+CD24+EpCAMhigh) PanC cell population. Successive
immunofluorescence/ immunohistochemical analysis of BMJ exposed cells,
spheroids and MiaPaCa2 xenograft tumors showed a significant reduction in
CSC markers/ regulatory molecules. Since cancer cell metabolism is an
important component to be targeted to control cancer growth and
progression, we next assessed BMJ efficacy in that direction. Indeed, BMJ
mediated its anti-PanC effect via activating the key metabolic regulator
AMPK. Concomitantly, to determine whether BMJ-effects were
nutrient/energy stress dependent, we next sought to determine the
cellular energy profile and major metabolic changes induced by BMJ. PanC
cell metabolome analysis was done, as a function of time, to determine
the shift in PanC cell metabolism on BMJ exposure. 1H-, 13C- and 31P-NMR
spectra of PanC cell monolayers treated with BMJ (2% v/v) at early ( 4h)
and late (72h) time points showed significantly altered energy status and
modulation of major metabolic pathways involved in PanC cell growth and
proliferation. A significant reduction in glucose uptake and cellular
energy levels (ATP/ADP) ratio was observed, but lactate export was
increased. BMJ also modulated nucleotides and aromatic amino acids
involved in protein precursors/synthesis for PanC growth and
proliferation. Total fatty acids and phosphatidylcholine levels (a
precursor of membrane lipids) were also downregulated by BMJ. Glutamine
and glutamate levels were constrained by BMJ, indicating that it could
potentially limit PanC cell ability for targeting an alternative energy
source. Furthermore, the cellular levels and membrane localization of
GLUT1 (major glucose transporter overexpressed in PanC) were also
suppressed after BMJ treatment. Collectively, these results suggest that
BMJ targets PanC CSCs and cellular metabolism in its efficacy against
this deadly malignancy (supported by CA195708).


