Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bcl-2 overexpression is a predictive biomarker for the combination
of ABT-199 with chemotherapy in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cell lines.


Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common subtype of
Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma. The anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein is expressed
in certain DLBCL subtypes such as “Double-Hit” where it mediates
resistance to chemotherapy. ABT-199 is a BH3-mimetic that specifically
targets Bcl-2, and has shown excellent clinical activity in several
hematological malignancies. The anti-apoptotic protein Mcl-1 mediates
resistance to ABT-199, and can be inhibited with chemotherapy. However,
despite variability in the Bcl-2 expression levels, current clinical
trials involving combinations of ABT-199 and chemotherapy for the
treatment of patients with DLBCL use a one-size-fits-all approach
regardless of Bcl-2 expression levels. We hypothesized that high Bcl-2
expression levels correlates with sensitivity to the combination of
ABT-199 and chemotherapy in DLBCL. We examined the activity of ABT-199 in
four DLBCL cell lines with varying Bcl-2 levels (CARNAVAL, OCI-ly18,
SU-DHL-4 and SU-DHL-8) as determined by cell viability (Cell Titer Glo
Assay) and apoptosis (Annexin-V/PI staining and FACS) analyses. CARNAVAL
and SU-DHL-8 have the highest and lowest Bcl-2 expression levels,
respectively, as revealed by immunoblotting. Of the four cell lines,
CARNAVAL displayed the highest sensitivity (IC50 = ~7 nM) while SU-DHL-8
was resistant (IC50 = >10 µM) with the other 2 cell lines exhibiting
intermediate sensitivity (45.9 nM for OCI-ly18 and 2.6 µM for SU-DHL-4).
We then selected CARNAVAL and SU-DHL-8 in order to further examine the
effect of the combination of ABT-199 with classic chemotherapy agents
(etoposide and doxorubicin) used in DLBCL treatment. In CARNAVAL cells,
the combination of either chemotherapy with ABT-199 led to a significant
decrease in cell viability at 48 hrs compared to each single agent alone.
This was associated with apoptosis induction as measured by Annexin-V/PI,
caspase-3 and PARP cleavage, an increase in γ-H2AX (associated with DNA
damage), and decrease in Mcl-1. Unlike CARNAVAL cells, ABT-199 did not
enhance the activity of chemotherapy in SU-DHL-8 cells that lack Bcl-2
expression. These preclinical results support the use of Bcl-2
overexpression as a predictive biomarker for selecting patients that are
likely to benefit from the combination of ABT-199 with chemotherapy in
DLBCL. Current efforts are investigating the mechanism of resistance to
the combination.


