Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-proliferative and cytotoxic effects of verteporfin in
endometrial cancer cells.


Endometrial cancer (EMCA) is the most prevalent gynecologic cancer in
women in the United States. The relatively poor prognosis and limited
therapeutic options in advanced endometrial cancer underscores the
urgency in developing new and more effective treatment modalities. On the
basis of clinical and histopathological features, EMCA is classified into
type I and type II disease groups. Type 1 is estrogen potentiated,
estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) positive, and
generally carries a favorable prognosis. Type 2 is ER/PR negative and
carries a much poorer prognosis. We investigated the therapeutic efficacy
and mechanism of action of Verteporfin (VP), a benzoporphyrin derivative
in EMCA. Treatment with VP resulted in a decrease in cell viability,
invasion and an increase in cytotoxicity of EMCA cells. Similarly, VP
treatment increased apoptosis in organoids, developed from
patient-derived xenografts. Since the half-life of verteporfin is very
short, we evaluated the longer duration efficacy of VP, encapsulated in
mPEG-PLGA polymers. Our results demonstrated that VP nanoparticles (NP)
decreased cell viability in both Type 1 (HEC-1-B) and Type 2 (ARK-1) EMCA
cell lines over a period of 4 days. We did not observe any lethal effects
of blank NP to the EMCA cells. In order to determine the efficacy of VP
in changing cellular transcriptome, we performed RNASeq of EMCA cells
after treatment with VP. RNASeq data analysis was carried out using
latest version of Kallisto and Sleuth software. Based on the global gene
expression whole transcriptome analysis, we observed that HEC-1-A VP
treated cells show 225 differentially expressed transcripts (out of 204
genes); whereas HEC-1-B VP treated cells show 12315 differentially
expressed transcripts (out of 7870 genes). There were 114 differentially
expressed transcripts (out of 105 genes) common to both the cell lines.
We observed that ATM, ATR, BRCA2, CDK4, ERBB2, JAK2, NF1, NOTCH and TET2
are some of the differentially expressed genes after VP treatment. To
test the efficacy of VP under in vivo conditions, we developed a
subcutaneous mouse model of EMCA using HEC-1-B-GFP cells. IP
administration of VP in this model achieved 21% tumor regression. To more
accurately simulate the results in vivo in a clinically relevant model,
we have developed an orthotopic tumor model with IV injection of VP.
Taken together, our results suggest that VP is a promising
chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment of endometrial cancer.


