Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug-tolerant persister cancer cells are vulnerable to GPX4
inhibition.


Acquired drug resistance prevents chemotherapy and targeted therapy from
achieving stable and complete responses. Emerging evidence implicates a
key role for nonmutational mechanisms during early stages of acquired
drug resistance. Drug-tolerant “persister” cells are a model of
nonmutational cancer drug resistance in which small fractions (Acquired
drug resistance prevents chemotherapy and targeted therapy from achieving
stable and complete responses. Emerging evidence implicates a key role
for nonmutational mechanisms during early stages of acquired drug
resistance. Drug-tolerant “persister” cells are a model of
nonmutational cancer drug resistance in which small fractions (<5%) of
cells within cancer cell lines survive cytotoxic drug exposure despite
lacking resistance-conferring mutations. These residual surviving cells
are quiescent, occupy a unique chromatin state, and exhibit reversible
drug resistance: removal of drug allows regrowth of cells which become
resensitized to drug treatment. Importantly, this phenomenon has been
observed across a wide range of cancer lineages with both chemotherapy
and targeted therapy. Persister cells remain quiescent for weeks to
months during constant drug exposure, however some persister cells
eventually regrow and acquire irreversible drug resistance-conferring
mutations that did not preexist. This model mirrors the common clinical
scenario in which tumor response is followed by relapse with acquired
resistance-conferring mutations. Targeting nonmutational resistance may
therefore present a therapeutic opportunity to eliminate residual
surviving tumor cells to prevent relapse. We have performed an unbiased
functional genomics analysis of HER2+ breast cancer persister cells which
survive HER2 targeted therapy. Utilizing RNAseq, pathway analysis, RNAi
screens and chemical inhibitor screens, we discovered that persister
cells undergo a switch to mesenchymal gene expression and are uniquely
susceptible to inhibition of the phospholipid hydroperoxidase GPX4. This
finding is not restricted to breast cancer, rather we have observed that
all persister cells tested including those derived from melanoma, lung,
ovarian and pancreatic cancer, from either targeted therapies or
chemotherapies, are each specifically sensitive to loss of GPX4 function.
Parental, drug naive cancer cells and normal human cells are insensitive
to GPX4 inhibition. Mechanistically, we found that GPX4 dependency in
persister cells is due to a disabled antioxidant program characterized by
global downregulation of antioxidant genes, decreased levels of reducing
cofactors glutathione and NADPH, and immediate ROS increase upon GPX4
inhibition. These findings point toward a GPX4 inhibition strategy to
prevent tumor relapse by inducing ferroptosis in the residual pool of
surviving persister cells.


