Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A commutable circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) reference material.


We developed and assessed a novel ctDNA reference material that was
designed with an emphasis on commutability. Possessing qualities that are
well-matched with clinical specimens is critical for a reference
material, however many existing methods of preparing ctDNA analogues
result in material that is not commutable for certain assays. For
example, sonication of genomic DNA yields fragments across a broad range
of sizes that must be used at greater input amounts relative to native
cell-free DNA (cfDNA) - even after enzymatic end-repair to reduce damage.
This can affect the utility of the reference material for assays that
depend on the ligation of adapters to double-stranded DNA, such as many
hybrid/capture-based Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) assays. If higher
input amounts are not used, then the LOD and precision of such an assay
may appear substantially poorer than expected. At the same time,
sonicated DNA has been shown to be acceptable for amplicon-based ctDNA
assays.

We created commutable ctDNA reference material by starting with genomic
DNA from GM24385 cells and mixing with synthetic variant-containing DNA
sequences at defined ratios. The use of GM24385 cells allows for the
comparison of detected variants against the NIST RM 8391 high confidence
variants. The use of synthetic DNA permits addition of large numbers of
different cancer-associated variants at defined allele frequencies.
Fragmentation was followed by size-selection in order to obtain
ctDNA-like sizes. Additional steps were performed to increase the amount
of output material from the size-selection step. The general method of
preparing the reference material is also compatible with native cfDNA,
such as that isolated from cancer patients.

The reference material was submitted to several testing laboratories
along with similar sonicated material. When tested using
hybrid/capture-based assays, variant detection was superior in the novel
reference material compared to sonicated DNA when similar amounts of
material were used as the input. We therefore conclude that our new
reference material has greatly improved commutability compared to
existing materials composed only of sonicated DNA.


