Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting membrane-bound carbonic anhydrases in breast cancer to
intervene in the metastatic phenotype.


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer related deaths among
women in the United States. Despite the tremendous progress that has been
made towards treating localized tumors, nearly 40,000 women die each
year, predominantly from metastatic drug resistance. The tumor
microenvironment plays a pivotal role in determining tumor growth,
invasion, metastasis, and therapeutic success or failure. Therefore, a
therapy targeting the tumor microenvironment is needed to sufficiently
preserve the quality of life of cancer patients, by inhibiting
metastasis. Elevated levels of Carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) expression in
primary breast cancers is a marker for highly aggressive and metastatic
tumors, especially of the triple negative subtype (TNBC). It is also
associated with hypoxia, extracellular acidification, and poor prognosis.
Low pH (values of ~6.5-6.8) is toxic to normal cells in the tumor
microenvironment while enhancing cancer cell proliferation and tumor
growth. Our goal was to compare the structure of a CAIX-mimic bound to
ureidosulfonamide inhibitors with the biological activity of these
inhibitors in triple negative and estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast
cancer cell lines. CAIX is a reversible enzyme and at low pH (high proton
concentration), the enzyme will consume protons, raising pH. Our
hypothesis is that CAIX inhibition, in the context of an acidic
microenvironment, will dysregulate its ability to maintain the acidic pH
preferred by cancer cells which favors their growth and migration. In
this study, we have shown the interaction of sulfonamide-based inhibitors
with a CAIX-mimic using X-ray crystallography. These structures show that
the inhibitors make multiple contacts within the active site cavity. This
is consistent with the inhibitor-induced decrease in CAIX activity and to
some extent expression. We have also investigated the effect of CA
inhibition on breast cancer cell growth, proliferation, activation of
cell death pathways and migration. This reveals that, although CA
inhibition with the sulfonamide-based compounds inhibits cell growth and
migration, it does not activate apoptotic pathways. In total, these
observations indicate that CAIX is a viable small molecular drug target
for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer.


