Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy promotes prometastatic changes in the
primary breast tumor microenvironment in mice and humans.


Chemotherapy induces influx of bone marrow-derived proangiogenic Tie2hi
monocytes in primary tumors. Tie2hi perivascular macrophages specifically
induce the prometastatic Mena isoforms in tumor cells and can assemble
specialized microanatomical sites called “tumor microenvironment of
metastasis” (TMEM), structures that may serve as doorways for
intravasation of tumor cells in mammary tumors. Both TMEM and MenaINV are
required for tumor cell intravasation and dissemination. Thus, we
hypothesized that chemotherapy may increase the density of TMEM sites and
MenaINV-expressing, intravasation-competent tumor cells, resulting in
increased tumor cell invasion and metastasis. We studied these potential
pro-metastatic effects of chemotherapy in a neoadjuvant setting (NAC) by
either administering paclitaxel or a combination of doxorubicin and
cyclophosphamide in several mammary carcinoma mouse and human breast
cancer models. As expected, chemotherapy delayed tumor growth, yet it
significantly increased the recruitment of TMEM-forming, perivascular
Tie2hi/Vegfhi macrophages and TMEM density. Using high-resolution
multiphoton intravital imaging in live tumor-bearing mice, we observed
that paclitaxel also increased the activity of TMEM sites, visualized as
endothelial cell tight-junction disruption around TMEM and subsequent
intravasation of the migratory cancer cell subpopulation. Indeed,
paclitaxel-treated mice have higher numbers of circulating tumor cells,
single cell seeding in lungs and incidence and number of micrometastatic
foci, all associated with increased TMEM activity, as demonstrated by
high-resolution imaging techniques. Tie2 inhibitors reversed
paclitaxel-induced pro-metastatic phenotypes without affecting the
assembly of TMEM, indicating that Tie2-mediated signaling is required for
paclitaxel-mediated cancer cell dissemination via TMEM. Paclitaxel also
caused a significant increase in the expression of MenaINV at both the
gene and protein levels. Furthermore, paclitaxel treatment in Mena-/-
breast tumor-bearing mice resulted in failure to assemble TMEM and to
increase circulating-tumor cells and cancer cell metastasis despite the
fact that Tie2hi macrophages are attracted to perivascular niches as a
result of paclitaxel treatment. This indicated that Mena is involved in
the paclitaxel-mediated increase in cancer cell dissemination but not
required for Tie2hi macrophage recruitment. These pre-clinical data are
further supported by findings from a cohort (N=20) of breast cancer
patients, who received pre-operative paclitaxel-based chemotherapy and
demonstrated significant increases in TMEM density and MenaINV
expression. Together, our data provide solid evidence that NAC leads to
metastasis in rodents via TMEM/ MenaINV-mediated mechanisms, and to
cancer cell dissemination in certain clinical scenarios in humans.


