Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic modulation of the tumor microenvironment enhances
vaccine induced T cell responses in a murine model of pancreatic cancer.


This project aims to test the hypothesis that epigenetic modulatory drugs
(EMD) and GVAX, a GM-CSF-secreting whole tumor cell vaccine, are capable
of altering the inflammatory environment of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and sensitizing it to checkpoint blocking agents.

Recently the use of antibody therapy targeting immune checkpoints, such
as CTLA-4 and PD-1, has become a major focus of cancer immunotherapy. In
responsive patients, these therapies have resulted in long-term control
of chemotherapy-resistant disease. The most compelling activity has been
seen in the minority of patients with immunogenic tumors where T cell
infiltration naturally occurs. These benefits are not observed in
non-immunogenic tumors, such as PDAC, with low expression of
tumor-associated antigens (TAA) and a lack of intrinsic T cell
infiltrates. Therapies that can alter the tumor microenvironment (TME)
and allow infiltration of effector T cells, decrease immunosuppressive
cells, and stimulate TAA expression may convert non-immunogenic tumors
into cancers sensitive to checkpoint inhibitors. Recent work with EMDs
has shown that they are capable of altering the immunogenicity of the TME
by inducing the expression of cancer testis antigens as well as
increasing tumor cell expression of MHC class II and decreasing Tregs in
the TME. Additionally, GVAX has been shown to induce tertiary lymphoid
aggregates within the TME of patients with PDAC.

We are testing the hypothesis that treatment with EMDs and GVAX can
sensitize the inflammatory environment of PDAC to checkpoint blockade
inhibition by evaluating changes in immune cell function within the TME
via flow cytometry, immunohistochemistry, and gene expression array. We
are using a murine model of hepatic metastases of pancreatic cancer which
involves injecting syngeneic pancreatic tumor cells into the spleen
followed by a hemisplenectomy, resulting in the consistent formation of
hepatic metastases that can be monitored by ultrasound. We have evaluated
entinostat, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, in combination with GVAX
which induces T cell responses, and demonstrated a significant increase
in survival when compared with either agent alone. Flow cytometric
analysis of the cells infiltrating the TME shows that the combination of
entinostat and GVAX causes a significant increase in CD4+ T cell
infiltration as well as a shift from an M-MDSC dominant to a more G-MDSC
dominant myeloid population. Current studies aim to elucidate the
functionality of the MDSC population as well as identify potential
changes in the T helper cell subsets via flow cytometry. Additionally,
future studies will evaluate changes within checkpoint blockade pathways
via flow cytometry and gene expression array to identify pathways that
require further modulation to enhance antitumor responses.


