Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cross talk between mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling
cascades and Wnt/β-catenin in HER2+ overexpressing breast cancer cells.


Introduction: The HER2-positive breast cancer is characterized by an
amplification of the HER2 gene, resulting in an increase in HER2 presence
on the surface of cells and magnification of downstream intracellular
signaling. Treatment of HER2+ breast cancer with trastuzumab decreases
tumor volume, reduces metastasis and increases overall survival.
Unfortunately, HER2-positive breast cancers develop resistance to
trastuzumab. The mechanism of resistance may involve the activation of
compensatory networks of different cell signaling pathways. The purpose
of the study is to examine the crosstalk between HER2/EGFR and Wnt
signaling in HER2-positive breast cancer cells.

Methods: In order to address this, a HER2-positive breast cancer cell
line (SKBR3) was used and induced with EGF. The phosphorylation of p38
and ERK1/2 was determined by Western blot analysis. The cellular
localization of proteins of interest was examined using biochemically
fractionated lysates followed by western blot analysis.

Results: Our data demonstrated an early and transient peak of phospho-p38
at 30min post EGF treatment. Interestingly, both phospho-p38 and
phospo-ERK1/2 were detected in the nuclear compartment at this time.
β-catenin, the major effector molecule in Wnt signaling, was stabilized
30min post EGF treatment. β-catenin protein levels remained higher in
EGF treated cells than untreated cells up to 4h post EGF treatment. It is
likely that a stabilized β-catenin following EGF treatment potently
modulates a subset of Wnt targets. We are assessing this possibility
using chromatin immunoprecipitation based experiments for H3K18ac,
H3K27ac, pol2 and β-catenin. Taken together, our data suggests that EGFR
signaling promotes Wnt signaling in HER2-positive breast cancer cells. We
hypothesize that this promotes cancer stem cell niche maintenance and an
EMT phenotype.


