Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutations in ATRX increase genetic instability and sensitivity to
PARP inhibitors in paediatric glioblastoma cells.


Paediatric glioblastomas (pGBM) are amongst the most common causes of
cancer-related deaths in children, and are defined by highly recurrent
mutations in H3 histones. Mutations affecting the chromatin remodeling
protein ATRX have been reported in 30% of pGBM cases, and are strongly
associated with the alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) phenotype,
but their precise interaction with histone mutations and their role in
tumorigenesis remain unclear.

We collected sequence data from 262 published and 64 unpublished cases of
pGBM and identified somatic ATRX mutations in 54/326 (17%) of cases. ATRX
mutations are mainly loss of function mutations, with the majority of
frameshift mutations (37/54, 68,5%) found upstream of the helicase domain
resulting in truncation of the main functional domain of ATRX. Missense
mutations (16/54, 29,6%) reside almost exclusively in the helicase domain
(11/54, 20,4%), whereas nonsense mutations are a less common event (7/54,
13%) but present in both the helicase (4/7, 57,1%) and ADD domains (3/7,
42,9%). ATRX mutations commonly co-segregate with H3.3 G34 (16/54) and
TP53 (42/54) mutations, and define a subgroup of patients with a longer
overall survival (16 months median overall survival in mutant ATRX cases
versus 11 months in wild-type ATRX cases, COXPH p = 0.079), though with a
greater number of somatic mutations (MWU p = 0.023) and copy number
alterations (MWU p = 0.0011) than wild-type cases.

We screened a series of 21 primary patient-derived pGBM cell cultures for
histone and ATRX mutation status in addition to ATRX protein expression
and ALT, and subjected the panel to a high-throughput in vitro cell
viability screen of >400 chemotherapeutics and small molecules. We
identified a specific genetic dependency for ATRX mutation and
sensitivity to distinct PARP inhibitor chemotypes, including olaparib and
rucaparib (PARP catalytic inhibitors), and talazoparib (PARP trapper
inhibitor). These data were validated using CRISPR-Cas9-engineered ATRX
knockout, targeting either the ADD or helicase domain, in SF188 pGBM
cells. Gene editing was confirmed by IonTorrent sequencing and Western
blot. ATRX mutant clones were also more sensitive to drugs targeting DNA
damage response pathways such as bleomycin and sapacitabine.

Gene expression analysis of ATRX mutant pGBM samples confirmed an intact
homologous recombination pathway and overexpression of PARP1, suggesting
an underlying mechanism distinct from that observed in BRCA-mutant breast
and ovarian cancers.

Ongoing work is aimed at unravelling the specific pathways involved, and
evaluating the utility of PARP inhibition in orthotopic pGBM xenografts
in vivo. These data suggest a synthetic lethality for PARP inhibitors in
ATRX-deficient pGBM cells, and may represent a novel therapeutic strategy
for these highly aggressive tumours in children.


