Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Studies on role of acyl-CoA cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT)
expression in ovarian/endometrial cancer progression - An invitro study.


INTRODUCTION: Cancer progression and tumorigenesis have been linked to
alterations in cellular metabolic pathways of lipid and cholesterol
synthesis in many cancers. Increased levels of cholesterol esters (CE)
have been reported in breast cancer, leukemia, glioma and prostate
cancer, but not exploited in detail in ovarian and endometrial cancers.
Inside cells, excess free cholesterol is esterified by acyl-CoA
cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT) and stored as cholesteryl ester (CE)
in lipid droplets (LDs). Cholesteryl ester accumulation may be a
consequence of loss of tumor suppressor PTEN and subsequent activation of
PI3K/AKT pathway as observed in pancreatic cancer. In the present study,
we focused on the role of ACAT and cholesterol esters in altered
cholesterol metabolism in ovarian/endometrial cancer cell lines.

METHODS: We studied the effect of abrogation of cholesterol
esterification either by an ACAT-1 inhibitor/shRNA knockdown or via
inhibition of PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways and subsequent effect on
ovarian/endometrial cancer cells proliferation, invasion, cell migration
and tumorigenesis. The expression of ACAT was studied at the protein and
mRNA levels in a panel of ovarian/ endometrial cancer cell lines and also
in normal and ovarian cancer clinical samples. ACAT expression was
assessed by western blotting, ELISA, quantitative RT-PCR and
immunostaining techniques.

RESULTS: Our results reveal an elevated expression of ACAT-1 at both
protein and mRNA levels in ovarian and endometrial cancer cell lines as
compared to primary cells. Our results also provide preliminary data on
involvement of ACAT and cholesterol esters in the progression and
metastasis of ovarian cancer.

CONCLUSION: These studies may aid in the development of new biomarkers or
treatment targets for ovarian/endometrial cancer.


