Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel oncogenic function of Notch4 in Hispanic lung cancer.


Background: Molecular drivers of ~40% of lung adenocarcinomas are still
unknown. We reasoned that since the frequencies of driver mutations have
been shown to be different between ethnic groups, comparison of targeted
exome sequencing data would identify genes with significant alteration
frequencies between White Non-Hispanics (WNH) and other racial/ethnic
groups. Notch signaling in cancer is context- and tissue-specific and may
be both oncogenic and tumor suppressive. The mechanisms of action and
genetic alterations involved in Notch oncogenesis have been studied for
Notch1 and Notch3; specifically in Non-Small Cell Carcinoma (NSCLC),
translocations in Notch3, and gain of function Notch1 mutations have been
found in 1 in 10 patients. Notch4 is a mammary oncogene, but little is
known about its role in NSCLC tumorigenesis. Truncations in Notch4 have
been reported in lung cancer cell lines, and in public databases the
frequency of Notch4 alterations in WNH adenocarcinoma is ~5.5%. However,
little is known about the mechanisms by which Notch4 acts in lung
oncogenesis.

Methods: Using data from the TCCTM protocol, we analyzed targeted
sequencing of 1,321 genes of interest to determine the mutations driving
lung cancer in Hispanic (H/L) patients. The functional relevance of the
Notch4 mutations was tested by cloning the intracellular domain (ICD) of
Notch4 containing one of the mutations identified in the ANK domain
(P1663Q) into pcDNA3.1. Plasmids expressing either the WT or a mutated
Notch 4 (P1663Q) were transfected into A549 cells and the effect of this
mutation tested on the ability to induce the expression of Notch4
expression genes.

Results: In our H/L cohort we see Notch4 altered in about 20% of our
samples, and 7/12 of the Notch4 single amino acid substitutions are in
the Negative Regulatory Region (NRR). PROVEAN protein analysis of the
Notch4 mutations shows that more than half of the mutations would disrupt
the NRR. Introduction of the P1663Q mutation in the ANK repeats of the
Notch4 ICD, which mediates binding to CSL and is essential for Notch
transcriptional activity, resulted in a shift in the amount of transcript
of known Notch4 target genes, such as Hes1 and Snai1. This effect is
specific, as it is not observed with other genes, previously reported to
be targets for other Notch paralogs such as Smad3 and Zeb1. A similar
effect of the P1663Q Notch4 mutation on Hes1 transcript levels was
observed in breast cancer cells, suggesting that this is not lung cancer
specific. Transcriptional activity of the Notch-responsive luciferase
construct (pHESLuc) was increased in the presence of Wt Notch4, and
reduced in the presence of the P1663Q Notch4 Mu.

Conclusion: The nature and high number of genetic alterations in Notch4
in H/L lung cancer patients, suggests that Notch4 may play a critical
role in NSCLC tumorigenesis. Our data suggests that mutations in the ANK
domain of Notch4 can interfere with its transcriptional activity and
function, and should be further characterized.


