Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lymphodepletion induces T cell homeostatic proliferation and
augments antitumor effects of PD-1/PD-L1 blockade therapy.


Programmed death receptor-1 (PD-1)/programmed death receptor ligand-1
(PD-L1) blockade therapy has demonstrated to enhance antitumor immunity.
Recent evidence has shown that anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapy restores the
function of exhausted effector T cells and augments antitumor immune
responses. The expression of PD-L1 has been best studied as a biomarker
for the anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapy. Because PD-L1 expression on tumor cells
is induced by IFN-γ which is mainly produced by effector T cells,
induction of antitumor effector T cells in cancer patients could be an
important for the anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapy. Indeed, previous studies have
suggested that the increase of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes is the
predictive biomarker for PD-1/PD-L1 blockade therapy. We and others have
demonstrated that lymphodepletive therapies, such as chemotherapy and
radiotherapy, induce tumor-specific effector T cells from naïve T cells.
Naïve T cells rapidly proliferate and elicit memory-like functions after
lymphodepletion (homeostatic proliferation). These findings indicate that
lymphodepletive regimens could augment the antitumor efficacies of the
anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapy. In the current study, we transferred naïve T
cells into mice after whole-body irradiation or chemotherapy. These mice
were inoculated s.c. with PD-L1+ B16F10 melanoma cells or PD-L1- MCA205
fibrosarcoma and then were treated with anti-PD-1 mAbs. Lymphodepletion
by whole body irradiation, but not cytotoxic agents following the
transfer of naïve T cells significantly enhanced antitumor immunity of
anti-PD-1 mAbs. This augmentation required both of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells,
but not NK cells. Further experiments revealed that immune cells
infiltrating MCA205 expressed PD-L1. Transfer of naïve T cells from
IFN-γ knockout mice abrogated the enhancement of antitumor effects of
anti-PD-1 mAb therapy by lymphodepletion. These results suggest that
lymphodepletion induces homeostatic proliferation of T cells and augments
antitumor effects of PD-1/PD-L1 blockade therapy.


