Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic analysis of therapeutic biomarkers in decalcified bone
metastases.


Introduction: Targeted therapies successful in treating primary tumors
are often ineffective against corresponding metastatic lesions. Tumors
and their bone metastases are biologically distinct, as reflected by
discordant biomarker status. Decalcification of bone destroys protein and
can preclude molecular analysis. A profiling method that does not depend
on tissue antigenicity or nucleic acid preservation could increase the
diagnostic value of decalcified bone samples. We assessed the effects of
decalcification on proteomic analysis of tumor tissue. We also quantified
27 therapeutically-relevant proteins in decalcified bone metastases of
cancer patients using mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis.

Methods: To examine the effects of decalcification on protein
quantification, we used 3 non-bone tissue specimens from lung
adenocarcinoma, lung squamous cell carcinoma, and colon medullary
carcinoma. Non-bone tumor tissue was expected to perform similarly in
proteomic analyses to bone tissue, which was not available. Tissue
specimens were processed without decalcification and with hydrochloric
acid-based Decal-Stat™ decalcification solution for 1, 3, 12, and 24
hours prior to paraffin embedding, tissue sectioning, and mass
spectrometric analysis. Proteomic analysis was also performed on 26
previously decalcified biopsies of metastatic bone lesions from patients
with cancers of the lung (n=7), breast (n=7), stomach (n=3) and 8 other
indications. Archived tumor tissue was microdissected and solubilized to
tryptic peptides. Target proteins in each liquefied tumor sample were
quantitated in triplicate with a multiplexed, selected reaction
monitoring mass spectrometry assay.

Results: In the non-bone tumors, non-decalcified & decalcified samples
yielded similar quantities of total protein (range: 19.2 - 24.1 µg) and
of all 20 protein biomarkers detected. The 26 bone metastases expressed
20 of the 27 protein targets tested. Of the 7 bone samples from lung
cancer patients, 5 expressed EGFR protein and 5 expressed hENT1 protein
(a marker of response to gemcitabine). A metastatic bone tumor from a
breast cancer patient expressed hENT1 (129 amol/µg) and overexpressed
HER2 (5750 amol/µg; this exceeds a level previously correlated with
increased survival in trastuzumab-treated patients). Bone lesions from
prostate & gynecologic cancers overexpressed AR, hENT1, EGFR and TOPO1
proteins.

Conclusions: A commonly used decalcifying solution had no discernable
effects on proteomic quantification of biomarker proteins in archived
tumor samples. Targeted proteomics can quantify an entire panel of
therapeutically-relevant proteins from a single decalcified bone biopsy
specimen. Proteomic analysis of bone metastases upon diagnosis of
metastasis or at relapse could inform treatment decisions, particularly
in patients who have disease progression only in bone lesions or whose
bone biomarkers are discordant from those of the primary tumor.


