Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pathway based drug selection for cancer precision medicine.


Background and Purpose:

Precision medicine tailors the right therapy to the right patient based
on his/her tumor molecular profiles. In clinic and ongoing clinical
trials, drug-targeted selection schemes depends more or less on drug
targets’ mutations or expression status. However, there is a lack of
systematic pathway based method to connect individual genomics
information with properly drug target and treatment in precision
medicine. The paper aims to integrate various knowledge-bases, including
cancer drugs, drug-targets and gene-gene regulatory pathway, to construct
a drug target and properly drug selection algorithm for individual
patient in precision medicine.

Materials and Methods:

In the drug selection algorithm, drug targets and properly drugs
recommendation are based on the patient specific molecular profile data,
including copy number variation, mutation, and gene expression. Our
target and drug selections are based on whether these drug targets act as
hub genes that either regulate or control the signaling pathways for many
other genes in the biological pathways. Only those patients whose
molecular profiles do not show targets, the usual chemotherapy treatment
will be recommended. This novel algorithm is applied to individual
Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma (PAAD) for drug target and drug selection. All
of patients’ genomic data obtained from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).
The pathway information is from Pathway Commons and FDA approved cancer
drugs and their targets is from DrugBank. The Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia (CCLE) 46 pancreases cancer cell line are used to validate
the algorithm result reliability.

Results:

Our algorithm identifies targets, such as ERBB2, CDK2, SRC, CDK9, SMAD2,
CDK4, HDAC1, PPP1CA, AKR1B1, EGFR, IGF1R, AKT and MEK, for pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cancer patients. In which, they cover the clinic first
line effective drug targets, such as Gemcitabine for the Akt-mTOR
signaling pathway (AKT) and CDK4/6 inhibitor and Erlotinib for HER2
Kinase Family (ERBB2, EGFR) activation inhibitor. In addition, new
inhibitors include Src inhibitors (dasatinib, saracatinib and bosutinib),
TGF beta inhibitor for target SMAD2 (galunisertib) and IGF-1R/insulin
receptor inhibitors (ceritinib, brigatinib) are recommended accordingly
and validated in pancreatic cancer cells.

Conclusion:

This novel algorithm might act as a better source for off-label drug
selection and further cell line validations may help in providing a
better treatment strategy in precision medicine.


