Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deregulated microRNAs in NF1 derived malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors (MPNST) and their role in carcinogenesis.


Background and aim: MPNSTs are rare and highly aggressive soft tissue
sarcomas that can occur spontaneously (sporadic MPNST) or from
pre-existing plexiform neurofibromas in neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1)
patients. MPNSTs are usually diagnosed relatively late, metastasize
easily, are resistant to therapeutic intervention and frequently fatal
for the patient. Diagnostic biomarkers that detect early malignant
transformation in the NF1 setting as well identification of putative
targets for treatment are urgently needed. In this context we
investigated the miRNA expression profiles in NF1-derived MPNST.
Materials and

Methods: Total RNA was isolated from sections of formalin fixed paraffin
embedded (FFPE) tumor samples. miRNA expression was determined using a
RT-PCR platform (TaqMan® Low Density Array Human MicroRNA Cards; Applied
Biosystems). The expression of selected miRNAs was transiently modulated
in neurofibroma and MPNST cell lines by transfection with miRNA mimics
(Dharmacon) or LNA™ based anti-miRs (Exiqon) and effects on cell
proliferation, invasion/migration and Wnt/β-catenin signaling were
studied.

Results: In order to identify miRNAs that are specifically deregulated in
MPNST we analyzed miRNA expression in a unique set paired tumor samples
(n=9) of plexiform neurofibroma and MPNST which were derived from the
same NF1 patient. At least 90 miRNAs were found to be differentially
expressed (FDR Results: In order to identify miRNAs that are specifically
deregulated in MPNST we analyzed miRNA expression in a unique set paired
tumor samples (n=9) of plexiform neurofibroma and MPNST which were
derived from the same NF1 patient. At least 90 miRNAs were found to be
differentially expressed (FDR <10%; pResults: In order to identify miRNAs
that are specifically deregulated in MPNST we analyzed miRNA expression
in a unique set paired tumor samples (n=9) of plexiform neurofibroma and
MPNST which were derived from the same NF1 patient. At least 90 miRNAs
were found to be differentially expressed (FDR <10%; p<0.025) between
neurofibromas and MPNST; the vast majority (82/90) of miRNAs being
downregulated in MPNST. Interestingly, and in contrast to reports in the
literature, sporadic MPNST samples (n=10) could be easily discriminated
from NF1-derived MPNST by their miRNA expression profiles. On the basis
of their statistical significance, fold difference and expression level,
we selected miRNAs to examine their role in MPNST pathogenesis. MiRNA
levels were modulated in MPNST (ST88-14, sNF96.2, 90-8TL) and
neurofibroma (Hs53.T) cell lines using miRNA mimics for let-7b, miR-16,
miR-26a, miR-29a, miR-139-5p, miR-146a and antisense inhibitors for
miR-889, miR-135b. The effects of miRNA expression levels on cellular
proliferation, invasion and migration were determined. As Wnt/β-catenin
signaling is considered a cancer related driver pathway in MPNST we also
investigated whether differentially expressed miRNAs could regulate this
pathway focusing on miRNA previously linked to Wnt regulation or
predicted to target Wnt signaling components. Using TOP/FOP luciferase
reporter assays we analyzed the effects of miR-135b, miR-30a, miR-139-5p
and miR-146a.

Conclusion: miRNAs specifically deregulated in MPNST may fulfil key
oncogenic roles and may be used as biomarker or for therapeutic purposes.


