Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic landscapes of pulmonary sclerosing hemangioma.


Pulmonary sclerosing hemangioma (PSH) is a benign tumor that usually
presents as a solitary, well-defined mass in the lung. The PSH
predominantly affects females with a higher incidence in the Far East.
Histologically, the tumor cells in PSH consist of two cell types
(cuboidal epithelial and polygonal stromal cells). Immunohistochemical
and ultrastructural studies have identified that both cells are derived
from undifferentiated respiratory epithelium that is the histologic
origin of lung adenocarcinoma as well. Previous studies have shown that
PSH and adenocarcinoma in the lung share some immunohistochemical and
genetic features. However, as for somatic mutations, whereas many driver
genes for lung adenocarcinomas have been identified, there have not been
any candidate driver mutations identified in PSHs, except for low
frequency mutations in β-catenin and TP53. Frequent somatic mutations
identified in lung adenocarcinomas such as KRAS and EGFR have not been
detected in PSH, suggesting that genomic alterations of these two lung
tumors might be different from each other. Also, there is no evidence of
PSH progression to lung cancers. These earlier data indicate that despite
the common cellular origin of PSH and lung adenocarcinoma, genetic
mechanisms for their development may be different. Based on the
established concept that PSH is a true tumor, we hypothesize that it may
harbor somatic mutations. In this study, we conducted whole exome
sequencing of 44 PSHs and identified recurrent somatic mutations of AKT1
(43.2%) and β-catenin (4.5%). We used a second subset of 24 PSHs to
confirm the high frequency of AKT1 mutations (overall 31/68, 45.6%;
p.E17K, 33.8%) and recurrent β-catenin mutations (overall 3/68, 4.4%).
Of the PSHs without AKT1 mutations, two exhibited AKT1 copy gain. AKT1
mutations existed in both epithelial and stromal cells. In two separate
PSHs from one patient, we observed two different AKT1 mutations,
indicating they were not disseminated but independent arising tumors.
Since the AKT1 mutations were not found to co-occur with β-catenin
mutations (or any other known driver alterations) in any of the PSHs
studied, we speculate that this may be a single most common driver
alteration to develop PSHs. Our study revealed genomic differences
between PSHs and lung adenocarcinomas including a high rate of AKT1
mutation in PSHs. These genomic features of PSH discovered in the present
study provide clues to understanding the biology of PSH and for
differential genomic diagnosis of lung tumors.


