Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying cancer susceptibility variants and genes using whole
exome and genome sequencing: a literature review.


The application of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies in
cancer research enabled the discovery of novel somatic mutations at an
unprecedented speed through efficient high-throughput profiling of DNA
variation in tumor samples. In contrast, the identification through NGS
studies of germline variation associated with cancer has been more
difficult and with limited consensus around best practices for study
design and analytical techniques. We performed a review of the 2005-2016
PubMed English literature for genome-wide germline sequencing studies
that were aimed at identifying new cancer susceptibility genes or
variants. We extracted and summarized the experimental and analytical
designs, methods and tools implemented in the selected literature
together with their degree of success and limitations in identifying
cancer susceptibility variants. About 80 in-scope publications were
identified and examined in depth. The most studied cancer types were
colorectal, breast, blood and lung and were investigated predominantly
via whole exome sequencing (primarily using Illumina HiSeq) in familial
cases of Caucasian ethnicity. Only 10 studies used whole genome
sequencing and 15 adopted a case control study design. A large fraction
of the familial studies was limited to 1 or 2 families and sequenced 2 or
less cases per family. Reporting of key data quality information (e.g.,
human sequence coverage) was inconsistent throughout the publications.
While the methods for sequence alignment and variant calling converged
towards those implemented in established bioinformatic tools (e.g., BWA,
GATK), there were no standard approaches for filtering or prioritizing of
variants. Most studies included some degree of technical validation,
often restricted to the top few variants or genes. About 60% of the
studies included replication in an independent group of cancer patients
and 55% functionally validated their findings to some extent. Our work
provides valuable data and insights to inform future sequencing studies
of cancer genetic susceptibility, and points to the need for improving
standardization and completeness in reporting of quality control metrics,
study design rationale and interpretation of findings.


