Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive detection of all major classes of MET deregulation
by Anchored Multiplex PCR and next-generation sequencing.


Introduction: Deregulation of the proto-oncogene, MET, confers an
aggressive phenotype in a variety of human cancers, promoting
proliferation, invasive growth and angiogenesis. MET deregulation can be
driven by gene amplification, overexpression, exon 14 skipping, gene
fusions and single nucleotide variants (SNVs), such as kinase-activating
point mutations. MET is a target of intensive drug development efforts,
although the various mutated forms of MET exhibit unique drug
sensitivities. Therefore, detection of these mutations has an important
role in the development of drugs targeting MET, and has the potential to
guide treatments for cancers driven by MET deregulation.

Next-generation sequencing (NGS) enables comprehensive detection of all
mutation types from whole genomes and transcriptomes. However, low
detection sensitivity, high input requirement and high costs render these
approaches impractical for routine detection of mutations from low-input
clinical sample types. We developed a targeted NGS assay based on
Anchored Multiplex PCR (AMP™) to detect all types of mutations driving
MET deregulation from a single sample.

Methods: AMP only requires a single gene-specific primer for
amplification, enabling open-ended capture of DNA and cDNA fragments for
NGS-based detection of known and unknown mutations. We developed
AMP-based Archer® VariantPlex™ and FusionPlex® library preparation
assays to detect mutations from DNA and RNA, respectively. AMP probes
were designed to cover the MET gene for detection of copy numbers
variants (CNVs) and SNVs from DNA, and known and novel fusions, exon
skipping and expression levels from RNA.

Results: We show that the VariantPlex assay enables NGS-based detection
of MET amplifications from DNA in concordance with FISH results. Further
NGS analysis of RNA from the same sample using the FusionPlex assay
revealed the resulting overexpression of MET. We also demonstrate that
AMP-enabled open-ended capture of cDNA fragments allows for reliable
detection of exon 14 skipping in FFPE samples and in cells, consistent
with RT-PCR results. Parallel analysis of DNA from the cell samples
revealed splice site mutations that have been previously reported to
drive exon 14 skipping. Furthermore, this open-ended capture also
permitted identification of a novel GTF2I:MET gene fusion in a
patient-derived xenograft model. Finally, we detected an
kinase-activating point mutation in MET, p.Y1253D, by analysis of genomic
DNA with the VariantPlex NGS assay.

Conclusions: These results show that AMP-based VariantPlex and FusionPlex
Assays enable comprehensive detection of multiple mutation types from
low-input clinical sample types, such as FFPE specimens. As MET
deregulation can be driven by many different genetic aberrations, this
allows for NGS-based characterization of MET deregulation from a single
sample.


