Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomal miR-3622a as prognostic marker in prostate cancer.


Loss of chromosome (chr) 8p21 is a frequent genomic alteration in
prostate cancer (PCa). Genomic deletions of this region increase
significantly with tumor grade and are associated with tumor progression
and poor prognosis. A common region of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) has
been mapped to the chr8p21 locus that primarily harbors prostate-specific
NKX3.1 homeobox gene. We recently demonstrated that this frequently
deleted locus is associated with a cluster of microRNA genes-
miR-3622a/b- that are lost in prostate cancer and play an important
mechanistic role in PCa progression and metastasis. MicroRNA expression
profiling in microdissected human PCa clinical tissues showed that
miR-3622a/b expression is widely downregulated and is correlated with
poor survival outcome in prostate cancer. Our analyses suggested that
miR-3622a has potential as a prognostic and diagnostic marker for
prostate cancer. Extending these findings, we explored the prognostic
potential of serum miR-3622a in prostate cancer patients. Since exosomes
provide an important source of non-invasive, circulating biomarkers and
represent an enriched source of microRNAs for biomarker profiling, we
profiled the microRNA content of exosomes derived from sera of prostate
cancer patients. In a pilot study, we profiled exosomal miRNAs from a
training cohort of individuals with benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH), an
indolent form of PCa or aggressive metastatic PCa. Exosomes were isolated
from sera of prostate cancer patients and integrity of exosomal
preparations was confirmed by nanoparticle tracking analysis and Western
blot analyses for exosomal markers. Expression analyses of exosomal
miR-3622a expression showed that this miRNA is enriched in exosomes.
Higher levels of miR-3622a were significantly associated with tumor stage
and lymph node metastasis in a cohort of prostate cancer clinical
specimens. Further, ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic) analyses
showed that exosomal miR-3622a expression can be a single significant
parameter to discriminate between BPH and prostate cancer. Overall, our
data suggests that exosomal miR-3622a is a promising prognostic biomarker
for prostate cancer. patients.


