Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deregulation of RNA N6-adenosine methylation contribute to liver
carcinogenesis.


Primary liver cancer, particularly the most common type hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC), is the third leading cause of cancer death worldwide.
Case is even worse in Asia due to extremely high prevalence of HBV/HCV
infection, which enhances the risk of HCC. However, the exact mechanism
of how HCC develops is still not clearly defined. Previous studies have
shown strong evidence for epigenetic alterations in human carcinogenesis,
which mainly focus on abnormal DNA methylation, histone modifications,
and chromatin remodeling. Recent studies suggest that diverse chemical
modifications on RNAs, also known as “epi-transcriptome”, constitute
another layer of gene expression regulation. N-6-methyladenosine (m6A) is
the most abundant modification on eukaryotic mRNA, which has been found
to functionally influence mRNA stability, alternative splicing, and
translation efficiency. However, the roles of m6A deregulation in human
carcinogenesis remain unclear. Through whole-transcriptome sequencing, we
identified that METTL3, the major component of m6A methyltransferase, was
significantly up-regulated in human HCC. Up-regulation of METTL3
negatively associated with poor patient overall and disease free
survival. Functionally knockdown/knockout of METTL3 dramatically
inhibited HCC proliferation, migration and colony formation abilities in
vitro and significantly suppressed in vivo tumorigenicity. In contrast,
overexpression of METTL3 using CRISPR/dCas9 SAM system modestly but
significantly enhanced HCC proliferation, migration,
anchorage-independent growth in vitro and tumor formation in vivo. In
order to find the downstream mechanisms which might attributed to METTL3
oncogenic function we performed RNA-Seq on two independent METTL3
knockdown cell lines to interrogated their transcriptome changes. Based
on RNA-Seq data, we identified a prominent tumor suppressor SOCS2 as a
potential down-stream target of METTL3. With m6A-RNA immunoprecipitation
(RIP) assay, we confirmed that SOCS2 mRNA was subject to m6A modification
in cancer cells. Inactivation of METTL3 by RNAi or treatment of
methylation inhibitor (DAA) impaired m6A mediated mRNA degradation and
thereby stabilized SOSC2 mRNA. We further confirm SOCS2 tumor suppressor
function in HCC. Downregulation of SOCS2 was associated with poor patient
overall survival and disease free survival of HCC patients. Knockdown of
SOCS2 significantly promoted HCC proliferation, migration in HCC cells.
In conclusion, our findings suggested that deregulation of METTL3 and its
associated m6A modification could contribute to human carcinogenesis by
imposing an epigenetic control on the stability and expressions of
critical tumor suppressor genes.


