Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The endonuclease Metnase promotes base excision repair of
Clustered abasic DNA lesions.


Metnase, a human SET-transposase fusion protein contains two functional
domains: a SET domain and transposase domain. Transposase domain exhibit
strand transfer and end joining activity while set domain is responsible
for histone lysine methyltransferase activity (KMT). Metnase also
increases the efficiency of double strand break repair by non-homologous
end joining (NHEJ); however, its role in the excision of clustered DNA
damage remains to be investigated. We hypothesize that 5’-3’
endonuclease activity of metnase could possibly substitute for APE1 in
BER and serve as an alternative initiator of BER in tumor cells lacking
APE1. In the present study, we examined in vitro endonuclease activity of
Metnase using abasic site containing artificial DNA, and describe its
activity in BER. Its unique 5’ endonuclease activity was selective only
for abasic lesions, but not other base modifications such as
8-oxoguanine, uracil, hypoxanthine or xanthenes. Metnase specifically
initiates removal of reduced abasic lesions from DNA, and allows
completion of short-patch or long-patch BER. APE1 has difficulty cleaving
5’ of clustered abasic lesions. This endonuclease that promotes BER in
clustered oxidative DNA damage is not known. Metnase also cleaves
multiple abasic lesions (clustered DNA damage) and facilitates the repair
of DNA if the multiple DNA damages are 3 or more nucleotides apart on the
opposing strands. However, repair of multiple DNA damages remains
inefficient if these are in close proximity of each other (Metnase, a
human SET-transposase fusion protein contains two functional domains: a
SET domain and transposase domain. Transposase domain exhibit strand
transfer and end joining activity while set domain is responsible for
histone lysine methyltransferase activity (KMT). Metnase also increases
the efficiency of double strand break repair by non-homologous end
joining (NHEJ); however, its role in the excision of clustered DNA damage
remains to be investigated. We hypothesize that 5’-3’ endonuclease
activity of metnase could possibly substitute for APE1 in BER and serve
as an alternative initiator of BER in tumor cells lacking APE1. In the
present study, we examined in vitro endonuclease activity of Metnase
using abasic site containing artificial DNA, and describe its activity in
BER. Its unique 5’ endonuclease activity was selective only for abasic
lesions, but not other base modifications such as 8-oxoguanine, uracil,
hypoxanthine or xanthenes. Metnase specifically initiates removal of
reduced abasic lesions from DNA, and allows completion of short-patch or
long-patch BER. APE1 has difficulty cleaving 5’ of clustered abasic
lesions. This endonuclease that promotes BER in clustered oxidative DNA
damage is not known. Metnase also cleaves multiple abasic lesions
(clustered DNA damage) and facilitates the repair of DNA if the multiple
DNA damages are 3 or more nucleotides apart on the opposing strands.
However, repair of multiple DNA damages remains inefficient if these are
in close proximity of each other (< 3nt apart on the opposing strands)
and results in DNA double strand break (DSB). These results suggest that
Metnase can promote BER of oxidative nucleotides, where APE1 is unable to
function.


