Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AZD1775 modulates kinetochore component Wee1-CDC2 and NF-κB
signaling as potential therapeutic targets in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.


Recent findings in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) analysis of head and
neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) revealed frequent alterations
affecting the cell cycle and NF-κB pathway, which are critically
involved in cancer cell proliferation and survival. We hypothesized that
common mechanism(s) could coordinate cell cycle and NF-κB cell survival
signaling in HNSCC. Recently, we established an NF-κB β−lactamase
reporter UM-SCC-1 cell line and performed genome-wide RNAi screening to
explore this hypothesis. We identified genes involved in the cell cycle
and related to components of the kinetochore that co-modulate NF-κB
activity. Among these targets, WEE1 kinase is currently under
investigation as a therapeutic target of inhibitor AZD1775 in HNSCC. We
found that WEE1-CDC2 axis protein levels were higher in a panel of HNSCC
lines than in normal human oral keratinocytes (HOK). To further
investigate the potential cross-talk between WEE1 cell cycle regulation
and NF-κB activation, we showed that treatment of HNSCC cells with
AZD1775 decreased NF-κB transcriptional activation and decreased
TNFα-induced phosphorylation of IKKs and RELA subunit. Furthermore,
AZD1775 inhibited NF-κB regulated proteins modulating the cell cycle and
survival, including p21, CyclinD1, BCL2 and BCL-XL. These changes also
correlate with alteration in cell cycle and survival detected by flow
cytometry, as tumor cells treated by AZD1775 exhibited increased G2/M
phase and sub-G0 fragmented DNA, and decease in G1/S phases. WEE1
inhibitor AZD1775 inhibited tumor cell proliferation and colony formation
in a dose-dependent manner, and exhibited combinatory effects with
cisplatin chemotherapy in tumor xenografts. Thus, we identified the novel
cross-talk between WEE1-CDC2 and NF-κB signaling, potentially
implicating decreased NF-κB prosurvival signaling in the anti-tumor
activity of Wee1 inhibitors. (Supported by NIDCD/NIH intramural projects
ZIA-DC-000016, 73, and 74; NIDCD core facility: advanced imaging, ZIC
DC000081).


