Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SHP2 inhibition restores sensitivity to ALK inhibition in
resistant ALK-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).


Despite development of highly potent and selective inhibitors (e.g.,
ceritinib, alectinib, lorlatinib) targeting anaplastic lymphoma kinase
(ALK), resistance invariably develops and limits the efficacy of these
inhibitors in the clinic. The major classes of resistance are on-target
genetic alterations (e.g., secondary ALK kinase domain mutations) and
activation of alternative or bypass signaling pathways. While most
patients are responsive to sequential treatment with two or more ALK
inhibitors, ALK-independent resistance eventually emerges and leads to
failure of further ALK-directed monotherapy. We used a synthetic lethal
pooled shRNA screen to discover loss-of-function events that could
sensitize resistant patient-derived cell lines to ALK inhibition. In
addition to identifying known bypass targets such as FGFR, EGFR and SRC,
we also identified PTPN11 (which encodes SHP2, a non-receptor protein
tyrosine phosphatase that modulates signaling downstream of growth factor
receptors) as a common hit shared by cell lines exhibiting different
mechanisms of bypass activation. In parallel with the shRNA screen, we
also performed a high throughput combination compound screen in the same
patient-derived models, and identified activation of the same bypass
signaling pathways. We showed that the highly potent and selective
small-molecule SHP2 inhibitor SHP099 could sensitize resistant cell lines
to ALK inhibition. In biochemical studies, co-targeting of ALK and SHP2
overcame resistance mediated by ALK-independent bypass mechanisms by
decreasing RAS-GTP loading potential of cells and inhibiting phospho-ERK
rebound. These results suggest that dual ALK and SHP2 inhibition may
represent a new therapeutic strategy for ALK-positive patients, whose
lung cancers have evolved ALK-independent mechanisms of resistance,
including activation of bypass signaling pathways.


