Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Xentuzumab, a humanized IGF-1 and IGF-2 ligand neutralizing
antibody, improves the antitumor efficacy of enzalutamide in preclinical
models of prostate cancer.


Background: The proliferative and pro-survival signals driven by the
insulin-like growth factor (IGF) ligands, IGF-1 and IGF-2, are
transmitted through their binding to the IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R). In
addition, IGF-2 activates the insulin receptor variant A (IR-A) that is
expressed during embryonic development as well as in many cancers. A
large body of preclinical evidence suggests that IGF signaling plays a
key role in cancer by driving therapy resistance, due to cross-talk with
other signaling networks such as androgen receptor signaling. The aim of
this study was to explore the potential of the IGF-1/-2 ligand blocking
antibody, xentuzumab (BI 836845[1]), to enhance the anti-tumor activity
of enzalutamide in prostate cancer cell lines and in a patient-derived
prostate cancer xenograft model.

Methods: Effects of enzalutamide, xentuzumab and combinations thereof on
in vitro proliferation, survival, cell cycle and signaling were evaluated
using the prostate cancer cell lines VCaP, DuCaP, MDA PCa 2b, and LNCaP.
The in vivo efficacy of enzalutamide, alone and in combination with
xentuzumab was investigated using LuCaP 96CR, a patient-derived xenograft
model of castration-resistant prostate cancer. Tumors were implanted s.c.
into castrate SCID mice. When tumors exceeded 150mm3 animals were
randomized into groups: 1) Control; 2) enzalutamide (50 mg/kg QD po), 3)
xentuzumab (BI 836845[1], 200 mg/kg QW ip) in combination with
enzalutamide.

Results: Cell viability was more effectively reduced by the combination
of enzalutamide and xentuzumab than either drug alone in three of four
cell lines expressing the IGF-1R and the androgen receptor (AR). In VCaP
cells, prolonged inhibition of IGF pathway signaling and enhanced
blockade of proliferation as well as induction of apoptosis was observed
after combination treatment. In vivo, enzalutamide monotherapy did not
show significant antitumor efficacy in the LuCaP 96CR model, however,
combined treatment with xentuzumab significantly inhibited progression of
LuCaP 96CR tumor growth (pResults: Cell viability was more effectively
reduced by the combination of enzalutamide and xentuzumab than either
drug alone in three of four cell lines expressing the IGF-1R and the
androgen receptor (AR). In VCaP cells, prolonged inhibition of IGF
pathway signaling and enhanced blockade of proliferation as well as
induction of apoptosis was observed after combination treatment. In vivo,
enzalutamide monotherapy did not show significant antitumor efficacy in
the LuCaP 96CR model, however, combined treatment with xentuzumab
significantly inhibited progression of LuCaP 96CR tumor growth (p<0.001
vs. enzalutamide alone). Reduced serum PSA levels were observed after
enzalutamide and combination treatment. Enzalutamide plus xentuzumab
inhibited tumor growth at tolerated doses and resulted in significant
improvements in survival.

Conclusions: These studies demonstrated that addition of the IGF-1/-2
neutralizing antibody xentuzumab to enzalutamide results in improved
anti-neoplastic activity in a subset of prostate cancer cell lines in
vitro, and to re-sensitization to enzalutamide in a patient-derived
xenograft model of CRPC.

Reference:

[1] Friedbichler K et al. (2014). Mol Cancer Ther 13(2):399-409.


