Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Network-driven discovery of cancer drivers and pathways using
2,500 whole cancer genomes.


Cancer driver genes exhibit unexpectedly high mutation rates in large
cancer genomic datasets. We hypothesize that driver mutations
specifically alter molecular interaction networks by disrupting “active
sites” - interaction interfaces in proteins and DNA. We present
ActiveDriverWGS, a novel computational method to discover cancer drivers
in whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data. ActiveDriverWGS finds genome
regions that are significantly enriched in somatic single nucleotide
variants (SNVs) and indels and ascertains whether these associate to
known active sites. Analysis of active sites allows us to predict the
mechanisms of mutation on three layers of the central dogma: regulatory
DNA with transcription factor (TF) binding sites (TFBS), mRNA with
microRNA binding sites in untranslated regions (UTRs), and
post-translational modification (PTM) sites in proteins. To discover
cancer driver genes and pathways, we analysed the WGS dataset of >2,500
samples from the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) Pan-Cancer
Analysis Working Group (PCAWG). We found 61 protein-coding candidates
with 34 known drivers (P=10-40), validating the high accuracy of our
method. 40 genes have significant mutations of PTM sites, suggesting that
rewiring of PTM signalling networks is a common oncogenic mechanism. For
example, the BRAF V600E SNV flanks two phosphorylation sites and one
ubiquitination site (FDR P=10-44), a novel interpretation and potential
avenue for precision therapies targeting the kinase and ubiquitin network
of BRAF. In the non-coding genome, we detected known lncRNAs (NEAT1,
MALAT1), promoters (TERT, WDR74) and novel candidates with mutation
enrichment. For example, an enhancer on chr6 has a mutation hotspot in 33
patients (FDR P=10-19), with 20 SNVs affecting binding motifs of
cancer-associated TFs FOXO3, SOX2, HMGA2 (FDR P=10-10). Thus our method
discovers non-coding drivers and their candidate mechanisms in a single
analysis. Our ActiveDriverPW method extends coding and non-coding
mutations to biological pathways. We found >600 mutation-enriched
pathways in the PCAWG pan-cancer dataset. Of these ~200 are also
significant when only non-coding mutations are analysed, showing that the
non-coding genome includes previously unstudied mutations in pathways.
The DNA double-strand break response pathway (FDR p=10-10) includes
non-coding SNVs in ~20 histones and chromatin modifiers, such as the
demethylase KDM4B with 46 SNVs in its promoter and enhancers.
ActiveDriverPW maps mutations of the long tail that affect genes in
hallmark cancer processes yet remain undiscovered in gene-focused
analyses. Our methods accurately capture known drivers in the ICGC-PCAWG
dataset and suggest specific mechanistic details. Our benchmarks also
emphasize the robust performance of our methods. ActiveDriverWGS and
ActiveDriverPW are valuable additions to the toolbox for cancer genome
analysis.


