Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of testicular cancer patient derived xenograft models
to test combination therapies targeting PI3K/Akt and MDM2.


Metastatic testicular cancer (TC) is highly sensitive to cisplatin-based
chemotherapy. However, patients with advanced disease in the poor
prognosis group only have a 50% 5-year survival resulting from
chemoresistance. Previous data showed that both the PI3K/Akt pathway and
the MDM2/p53 axis are involved in cisplatin resistance of TC cells. In
this study we aim to establish and characterize TC patient-derived
xenografts (PDX) in order to investigate PI3K/Akt and/or MDM2 inhibition
as possible treatment options for TC.

Excised and minced (8mm3) primary TC tissue was implanted subcutaneously
into male NSG mice to obtain a first generation PDX model (F1). Animals
were sacrificed when tumor volume exceeded 1500 mm3. The tumor was
harvested and minced. Small pieces (8mm3) were implanted in a second
generation (F2), as well as stored in FCS-5% DMSO to establish a biobank.
In a panel of TC cell lines, combination treatment of Akt inhibition with
or without cisplatin or Nutlin-3a was performed. Cleaved caspase-3
staining was assessed to measure apoptosis, and western blot was used to
determine the effect of different treatments on sub-cellular localization
and phosphorylation status of MDM2.

We have established 3 TC PDX models. Histology of the primary tumors
included the following subtypes: mixed germ cell tumors with embryonal-
and yolk sac carcinoma and teratoma components. Engraftment efficacy was
100% and tumor growth initiated within 4-5 weeks after implantation.
Interestingly, we successfully implanted a biopsy taken from a metastatic
lesion of a patient presenting with progressive refractory disease after
receiving standard chemotherapy. Histology of the different PDX
generations was comparable to the patient material, although a loss of
the teratoma component was observed. In our cell line panel, Akt
inhibition using MK2206 sensitized the acquired cisplatin resistant cell
line TeraCP towards cisplatin treatment, whereas an additive effect was
observed in other cell lines. Combination of Akt and MDM2 inhibition was
highly synergistic in apoptosis induction in all cell lines. No relation
was observed between the synergistic effect of Akt combined with MDM2
inhibition and sub-cellular localization or phosphorylation levels of
MDM2.

Taken together, we have successfully established 3 TC PDX models,
including a chemo-resistant model. The biobank is currently being
expanded. Combined Akt and MDM2 inhibition resulted in synergistic
induction of apoptosis, and these combinations or other novel therapies
will be tested in established TC PDX models.

Supported by Dutch Cancer Society grant RUG 2014-6691 and CONACYT grant
381543


