Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A computational framework for removing mouse contamination in
tumors sequenced from patient-derived xenografts.


Introduction: Using patient derived xenograft (PDX) models has become an
effective way for investigating response to standard or new therapeutics
in cancer. Human cancer cells injected in mice are allowed to establish
tumors and subjected to desired treatments. The PDX tumors are later
harvested and characterized, often by massive parallel sequencing.
However, a major challenge with analyzing these data is the presence of
stromal mouse genomic material, frequently resulting in artifacts in
downstream variant detection. We present a computational method to
eliminate mouse contamination in PDX.

Method: We used the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner to map reads obtained from
sequencing the PDX samples to a combined human and mouse reference genome
. We remove reads that are mapped to the mouse reference. The remaining
reads are then processed through standard mutation calling pipelines for
somatic mutation detection. To test the efficacy of our method, we
created in silico mixtures of human and mouse whole-exome sequencing
reads from a melanoma patient’s tumor and an immortalized mouse cell
line captured with human exome baits. We then carried out a sensitivity
analysis to examine how changing the mean target coverage of sequencing,
or mouse contamination levels affects our results. For each of the
computational experiments, we evaluated somatic mutations detected from
the synthetic samples in comparison to the original human sample.

Results: We calculated the sensitivity and specificity of detecting
somatic mutations to determine our algorithm’s performance. In all
instances, we found greater than 99% for both sensitivity and specificity.

Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that our method works accurately
towards removing mouse reads in PDX samples. This task could also be
applied to separating sequence reads from other species.


