Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progranulin/GP88 tumor tissue expression further stratifies
survival outcomes of patients classified by their Nottingham Prognostic
Index.


Background: The Nottingham Prognostic Index (NPI) combines nodal status,
tumor size and histological grade and is used to provide predictive value
information on survival for patients with primary breast cancer. Attempts
to improve the performance of NPI have been carried out by inclusion of
other factors, such as biomarker expression as well as addition of other
structural features such as vascular invasion. In the present study, we
investigated whether expression of the survival factor GP88
(progranulin), known to be overexpressed in breast cancer, would improve
NPI’s predictive value. GP88/Progranulin is an 88 kDa autocrine growth
and survival factor that is overexpressed in estrogen receptor positive
(ER+) invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) in association with resistance to
anti-estrogens and aromatase inhibitor while the cells remain ER+.
Previous training and validation pathological studies totaling 600 cases
of ER+ IDC had demonstrated that GP88/Progranulin tissue expression was
an independent prognostic marker od recurrence and mortality for early
stage ER+ IDC.

Methods: We examined by immunohistochemistry the GP88 tumor tissue
expression of 508 formalin fixed paraffin embedded cases of ER+ IDC with
known clinical outcomes and for which NPI had been determined. GP88 IHC
expression was scored by two board certified pathologists and classified
into two score groups of GP88 Methods: We examined by
immunohistochemistry the GP88 tumor tissue expression of 508 formalin
fixed paraffin embedded cases of ER+ IDC with known clinical outcomes and
for which NPI had been determined. GP88 IHC expression was scored by two
board certified pathologists and classified into two score groups of GP88
< 3+ (0, 1+, 2+) and GP88 = 3+. The correlation between GP88 scoring, NPI
and disease-free (DFS) and overall survival outcomes (OS) was then
examined by Kaplan Meier analysis, Cox proportional Hazard ratio and
Pearson’s Χ2 test.

Results: Patients were categorized into three NPI groups (5.4).
Kaplan-Meier survival graphs of cases categorized by their NPI scores and
GP88 expression showed that for each NPI subgroup, patients having tumors
with a high GP88 expression (GP88 IHC score of 3+) had a worse DFS than
patients within the same NPI subgroup with low GP88 expression (GP88 IHC
score 5.4). Kaplan-Meier survival graphs of cases categorized by their
NPI scores and GP88 expression showed that for each NPI subgroup,
patients having tumors with a high GP88 expression (GP88 IHC score of 3+)
had a worse DFS than patients within the same NPI subgroup with low GP88
expression (GP88 IHC score < 3+). When adjusted for NPI, high GP88 score
was highly significantly associated with recurrence. Its hazard ratio is
3.30 (95% CI 2.12 to 5.14).

Conclusions: These data suggest that the determination GP88 tumor
expression at time of diagnosis for early stage breast cancer patients
could provide additional survival information than the ones provided by
NPI alone that maybe useful for improving the risk management of patients.


