Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Platelet activation and heterotypic platelet leukocyte conjugate
formation in the blood of glioblastoma patients.


Objective

Glioblastoma patients (GBM) suffer from an increased incidence of
cardiovascular events. Platelets are well known as main player of the
primary hemostasis, but have a broad range of additional functions. The
formation of heterotypic conjugates between platelets and leukocytes
(PLC) represents a pro-inflammatory surrogate marker and is usually
increased after platelet activation. The aim of the present study was to
evaluate the platelet activation status and the rate of circulating PLC
in GBM.

Methods

Blood samples were drawn of consecutive patients before surgery for a
suspected glioblastoma. The formation of PLC and several parameters of
platelet activation were determined by flow cytometry before and after
stimulation with either ADP or the thrombin receptor-activating peptide
(TRAP) in vitro: expression of P-Selectin, CD63, CD40L and
fibrinogen-binding to the activated GPIIb/ IIIa. Blood samples from age
and gender matched healthy volunteers were used as controls. Statistical
analysis was done with the Mann-Whitney-Test.

Results

Final analysis included 22 patients with histopathological proven virgin
glioblastoma (9f, 13m, mean age 67.5 years, range from 55 to 86 years)
and their respective controls. Basal platelet activation and in vitro
platelet reactivity was increased in GBM. The difference got significant
in the basal expression of CD63 (2.8% versus 1.9%, p=0.008), the
Fibrinogen-binding after ADP-stimulation (110.3 MFI versus 63.1 MFI,
p=0.04) and the CD63 expression after TRAP-stimulation (38.4% versus
33.3%, p=0.04). Furthermore, a reduced number of circulating PLC and in
vitro PLC formation was seen in GBM without getting statistically
significant.

Conclusions

In this preliminary report, we show for the first time an increased level
of platelet activation and agonist-induced platelet reactivity in GBM.
Both could be a reflection of the pro-thrombotic status in these
patients. Interestingly, the formation of PLC was not increased, but in
tendency decreased. Whether this observation potentially mirrors the
intratumoral, anti-inflammatory microenviroment in GBM remains unclear.


