Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplexed analysis of fixed tumor tissues using imaging mass
cytometry.


Introduction: Comprehensive evaluation of the tumor microenvironment with
preservation of spatial context requires simultaneous in situ detection
of multiple targets. Current fluorescence-based methods can accommodate
up to 5-6 distinct markers and can be applied to formalin fixed, paraffin
embedded tissue (FFPE). Imaging mass cytometry uses metal-conjugated
antibodies and mass spectrometry to perform highly multiparametric,
quantitative measurement of protein targets within tissue sections
providing unprecedented detail of quantitative tissue labeling. To date,
the IMC technology has not been widely available and its performance has
not yet been compared with other validated methods.

Methods: Using multiplexed quantitative immunofluorescence (QIF,
AQUA/Genoptix) and imaging mass cytometry (IMC, Fluidigm) we validated
and optimized metal-conjugated assays to detect HER2 (29D8-CST, 176Yb),
CD3 (DAKO, 170Er), Ki-67 (B56-BD biosciences, 168Er), Histone H3
(D1H2-CST, 176Yb), pancytokeratin (C11-Biorad, 162Dy), Vimentin (RV202-BD
Pharmingen, 156Gd), LipoR (Fluidigm, 115In) and DNA/nuclei (DNA
intercalator, Fluidigm, 191/193Ir). The markers were applied to FFPE
samples from tumor cell lines, human tonsil, lymph node; and breast and
lung carcinomas represented in tissue microarray format. Data was
visualized using MCD viewer and ImageJ software and results from QIF and
IMC were compared.

Results: Metal conjugation did not affect the performance of the primary
antibodies studied here. The staining patterns of the epithelial/tumor
and stromal compartments evaluated using the IMC platform and QIF were
comparable. HER2 signal was higher in tumors and cell lines harboring
HER2 amplification by FISH/IHC. The CD3 signal was higher in T-cell
lymphoma cells and in the inter-follicular areas of human tonsil and
lymph nodes. Ki-67 signal was nuclear, co-localized with Histone H3 and
showed positivity in lymphoid germinal centers, cytokeratin-positive
carcinoma cells and CD3+ tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. Results obtained
using the IMC at different time points in serial tissue sections were
comparable (PResults: Metal conjugation did not affect the performance of
the primary antibodies studied here. The staining patterns of the
epithelial/tumor and stromal compartments evaluated using the IMC
platform and QIF were comparable. HER2 signal was higher in tumors and
cell lines harboring HER2 amplification by FISH/IHC. The CD3 signal was
higher in T-cell lymphoma cells and in the inter-follicular areas of
human tonsil and lymph nodes. Ki-67 signal was nuclear, co-localized with
Histone H3 and showed positivity in lymphoid germinal centers,
cytokeratin-positive carcinoma cells and CD3+ tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes. Results obtained using the IMC at different time points in
serial tissue sections were comparable (P<0.05).

Conclusion: Quantitative and reproducible measurement of immune and
non-immune targets with spatial resolution using the IMC platform is
feasible in FFPE breast and lung carcinomas and the results are
comparable to multiplexed QIF. Expansion of the current panel to include
>30 markers for immune cell phenotypes/function and tumor markers is
ongoing.


