Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unique modulation of estrogen-induced apoptosis with structural
analogues of endoxifen in long-term estrogen-deprived (LTED) breast
cancer cells.


Endoxifen, a non-steroidal anti-estrogen is the active hydroxylated
metabolite of N-desmethyltamoxifen. The structure is based on a synthetic
triphenylethylene-type angular estrogen. Endoxifen is in clinical trials
as a therapeutic agent to treat aromatase resistant breast cancer.
Paradoxically, LTED breast cancer is known to respond to synthetic and
natural estrogens through estrogen-induced apoptosis. A series of
synthetic endoxifen analogs, were used to modulate estrogen-induced
apoptosis in LTED breast cancer cells (MCF7:5C). X-ray crystallography
was performed on endoxifen, bisphenol, and diethylstillbestrol (DES),
bound to the ligand-binding domain (LBD) of the human estrogen receptor
(ER). Cellular studies established that (MCF-7:5C) of estrogen-induced
apoptosis was dependent on the LBD of the ER. Similarly, endoxifen
blocked estrogen-induced apoptosis in a concentration and time-dependent
manner. Apoptosis triggered by DES was blocked by endoxifen and was
ER-dependent. X-ray crystallography of both endoxifen and DES illustrate
the two extremes of estrogen-induced apoptosis, which is dependent upon
the closure of helix 12 over the LBD to generate estrogenic activity.
Despite the fact that bisphenol, an analog of endoxifen without the
anti-estrogenic monomethylamino ethyl side chain, is an estrogen that
causes breast cancer cell replication; bisphenol initially inhibits
estrogen-induced apoptosis, but triggers estrogen-induced apoptosis
itself after 7 days of treatment of LTED breast cancer cells. X-ray
crystallography demonstrates that bisphenol can produce a unique complex
with the ER:LBD, which is similar to the DES:LBD estrogenic complex. In
both cases, the ligands are sealed into the LBD by helix 12. This delay
in apoptosis caused by an analog of endoxifen, that is an angular
estrogen, possess unique biological features. We hypothesize that in LTED
cells the complex passes through an anti-estrogenic conformation to
evolve into an estrogenic complex with helix 12 sealing the LBD. We
describe a unique property of a ligand:receptor complex. For the first
time we demonstrate that a ligand:receptor complex is slowly activated
from an antagonist to an agonist complex over a period of days.


