Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adaptive feedback reactivates MAPK signaling in KRAS-mutant
cancers with inhibition of MEK, but not ERK.


Activating mutations in the KRAS oncogene occur in about 40% of
colorectal cancers (CRCs) and over 90% of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinomas (PDACs). Since development of small molecules capable of
inhibiting KRAS directly has proven difficult, alternative strategies
have instead focused on inhibiting downstream effector pathways, such as
the MAPK pathway. However, inhibition of the MAPK pathway alone with MEK
inhibitors, such as selumetinib and trametinib, produces only cytostatic
effects and is insufficient to kill KRAS-mutant cancer cells.

We hypothesized that inhibition of an additional kinase during MEK
inhibitor treatment could improve response. We performed a
kinase-targeting shRNA screen to find kinases whose knockdown would
cooperate with trametinib in KRAS-mutant CRC and PDAC cell lines. The
kinases found in this screen represent potential therapeutic targets to
inhibit in combination with MEK.

Interestingly, despite using a very high concentration of trametinib in
the screen to enrich for hits outside of the MAPK pathway, the most
highly ranked kinases in the screen were members of the MAPK pathway,
including ARAF, BRAF, CRAF, and MEK1. This suggests that even at high
concentration, trametinib produces suboptimal MAPK inhibition. Indeed, we
found that while MEK inhibitors produce robust inhibition of MAPK
signaling initially, pathway reactivation was observed by 48-96 hours
despite regular replenishment of drug. This feedback reactivation was
accompanied by marked increases in active CRAF and phosphorylated MEK. In
fact, experimental approaches that artificially increased upstream
signaling flux through the MAPK pathway led to a >10-fold reduction in
the ability of MEK inhibitors to inhibit the MAPK pathway.

Remarkably, despite triggering the same degree of adaptive upstream MAPK
signaling as seen with MEK inhibitor, we found that ERK inhibitors were
able to maintain MAPK pathway suppression. Importantly, these differences
in MAPK pathway suppression amount to differences in cell viability. Over
four weeks, ERK inhibitor treatment reduces the outgrowth of KRAS-mutant
cell lines compared to those treated with MEK inhibitors. Additionally,
as these inhibitors are not used as monotherapies, replacement of
trametinib with an ERK inhibitor in therapeutically relevant combination
treatments improved cell responses over four weeks.

Despite the feedback reactivation of the MAPK pathway, we find that ERK
inhibitors are less sensitive to this signaling than MEK inhibitors, and
can effectively maintain suppression of MAPK signaling. The findings of
our screen demonstrate that MAPK pathway targeting is key to successful
treatment of KRAS-mutant cancers, and that ERK inhibition provides
greater opportunity for inactivating MAPK. Further exploration into the
mechanisms of pathway feedback will be necessary to developing valuable
clinical combinations for KRAS-mutant cancers.


