Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-124 suppresses p62 and p65/NFkB to regulate autophagy,
inflammation and cell death in KRAS mutant mesenchymal NSCLC cells.


Background KRAS mutant non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) are
molecularly and histologically diverse. Epithelial-like cells are more
KRAS dependent, whereas mesenchymal-like cells are less KRAS dependent.
These two subtypes are designated KE (epithelial) and KM (mesenchymal),
respectively. A KE versus KM subtype transcriptional signature reveals
specific modes of KRAS dependent survival signaling in the KE subtype.
This KRAS dependency signature is significantly enriched with predicted
microRNA (miRNA) target genes of miR-205 and miR-34b/c. MiRNAs can
function as tumor suppressors by coordinately regulating multiple
oncogenic signaling pathways. The role of deregulated miRNA function in
mediating the survival of KM versus KE NSCLC cells has not been
investigated to date.

Methods Differential miRNA expression in KRAS mutant cell lines was
determined using Taqman low-density qPCR arrays (TLDA). Functional miRNA
reconstitution experiments of downregulated miRNAs were performed in a
panel of KM cell lines. Effects on apoptosis and autophagy were performed
by Western blotting, immunofluorescence and live cell microscopy and
caspase assays. The molecular targets of miR-124 were computationally
identified by TargetScan or miRWalk and experimentally verified using
3’UTR luciferase-based assays. Functional rescue of miRNA-dependent
cell viability defects was determined by ectopic predicted target gene
expression.

Results Comparison of KE to KM cells yielded a KE-KM miRNA subtype
classifier/signature. This signature revealed a number of silenced or
suppressed miRNAs in KM cell lines, including members of the miR-200
family. MiR-200 and miR-205 reconstitution in KM cells modulated
epithelial plasticity by Zeb1 protein suppression and increased
E-cadherin levels. Reconstitution of miR-124, miR-625 and miR-518-3p in
KM cells caused pronounced loss of cell viability. Furthermore, miR-124
caused autolysosome maturation defects. We identified SQSTM1/p62, TRAF6
and RELA/p65 as key predicted targets of miR-124. MiR-124 reconstitution
in KM cells caused decreased p62, TRAF6 and p65 protein levels. The
effect of miR-124 on p62 expression was verified using a
Luciferase-p62-3’UTR reporter construct. Overexpression of p62 in KM
cells rescued the cell viability defects caused by miR-124.

Conclusion These studies implicate miR-124 as a context-dependent tumor
suppressor miRNA in KM subtype cells. MiR-124 directly suppresses
expression of SQSTM1/p62 to promote defects in autolysosome maturation.
In parallel, miR-124 suppresses RELA/ p65 and in some cases, TRAF6, to
alter expression levels of several cytokines. Thus, miR-124 coordinately
regulates autophagy and inflammation to disrupt the finely-tuned balance
between pro and anti-inflammatory signals, resulting in cytotoxic effects
in a specific subtype of mesenchymal-like KRAS mutant NSCLC cells.


