Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of novel RACK1 binding
partners that may modulate the elongation phase of protein synthesis.


RACK1 (Receptor for Activated C Kinase 1) is a member of the
tryptophan-aspartate (WD-repeat) family of proteins. By functioning as a
scaffold protein, RACK1 is involved in regulating many different
signalling pathways in cells, including cell proliferation and cell
migration. Interestingly, RACK1 has been identified as a central
component of the ribosomal machinery, specifically located on the 40S
ribosomal subunit close to the mRNA exit channel where it makes contact
with other ribosomal proteins. Importantly, it is believed that in this
position, RACK1 can recruit a series of kinases and phosphatases as well
as functioning to regulate the translation and the synthesis of
particular cohorts of proteins. Moreover, RACK1 plays a central role in
influencing the location of the translation machinery.

Using 2D and 3D models of colon cancer cell lines, together with Click-IT
chemistry and Mass Spectrometry analysis, we were able to identify a
series of proteins, including newly synthesized proteins, that interact
with RACK1. We identified proteins involved in cell cycle control,
metabolism and protein synthesis. As expected, we have found a number of
proteins that are involved in cell migration and a number of proteins
that are mediators of the cell adhesion process. Interestingly, some of
the most highly scored interacting proteins were those involved in
protein synthesis. Of those, we identified several elongation factors as
being novel RACK1 binding partners. Elongation factors are a class of
proteins directly involved in the elongation phase of protein synthesis.
Along with this primary function, these factors have different important
roles in cells, such as influencing cytoskeleton remodelling and
activation of growth and proliferation pathways. Elongation factors have
been found to be upregulated in many different types of cancer.

We have confirmed the interaction between RACK1 and several of these
elongation factors and we have determined that many of these are
dysregulated in colon cancer. We have established that the activity of
these elongation factors is regulated by a combination of stress
conditions and growth factor stimulations. We have determined that RACK1
plays a central role in scaffolding these proteins to promote
proliferation and migration in our colon cancer cell models.
Collectively, these results provide a novel and interesting role for
RACK1 in the modulation of the elongation phase of protein synthesis.

We are now investigating the subcellular location of these factors in
response to different stimuli and asking how is RACK1 involved in their
localization downstream of IGF-I and integrin signalling. Characterizing
and mapping the interaction between these proteins and RACK1, both in
cells and tissue, may lead to the design of novel therapeutic approaches
in colon cancer.


