Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The development of an immunohistochemical digoxigenin-labeled
mouse on mouse single and double stain methodology.


Introduction

When a mouse or monoclonal antibody is desired for immunohistochemical
detection on mouse tissues, the anti-mouse secondary antibody will also
bind to endogenous mouse IgG in the tissue and may produce unwanted
background staining. In the past, mouse-on-mouse (MM) detection utilized
a biotinylated primary antibody or biotinylation kit. Tissues rich in
endogenous biotin such as kidney or liver made it difficult to use, as
streptavidin-horseradish peroxidase is required for detection. Attempts
to completely negate endogenous biotin are ineffective as avidin-biotin
blocking steps are unlikely to work acceptably in problematic tissues.
Therefore, the design of a digoxigenin-labeled detection system is
advantageous for MM detection as it would eliminate these issues. This
technology has broad application as it allows the use of a variety of
monoclonal antibodies reactive on mouse tissues.

Materials and Methods

Mouse tissues were formalin-fixed for 24 hours and embedded in paraffin
(FFPE). Sections were cut and dried on slides before deparaffinizing and
peroxidase blocking in the usual manner. Slides were then HIER in a
citrate-based buffer prior to application of antibody. Mouse antibody
concentrates were selected and mixed with a Digoxigenin Anti-Mouse Linker
and incubated at room temperature (RT) for 1 hour. An Absorption Reagent
is then added to the mixture, and further incubated for 30 minutes. The
mixture is then diluted in antibody diluent to the desired concentration
and applied to the mouse tissue for 60 minutes at RT, followed by a
rabbit anti-digoxigenin antibody for 15 minutes. Detection of
anti-digoxigenin is performed with an incubation in either a goat
anti-rabbit HRP or AP Polymer for 30 minutes. Visualization is
accomplished by using a DAB or Fast Red chromogen. For double stains, a
sequential DS method using two monoclonal antibodies was employed using a
heating step in retrieval solution after the first chromogenic reaction
followed by a second monoclonal antibody and detection with either a
rabbit-AP or HRP polymer. Visualization of the second antibody target is
accomplished by using Fast Red or a blue chromogen. Slides were
coverslipped with a permanent mounting medium and evaluated using
brightfield microscopy.

Results

MM single stains with a variety of antibodies were easily achieved with
specific, clean and biotin-free staining. Sequential DS techniques using
monoclonal antibodies were also achieved and visualized with DAB, Fast
Red or blue chromogens. Both manual and automated procedures were used.

Conclusion

The replacement of biotin-labeled MM technology with a digoxigenin MM
technology is a superior method that not only eliminates endogenous
biotin, but allows utilization of HRP and AP polymers for double stain
technology.


