Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel approach for targeting androgen receptor signaling axis in
prostate cancer.


Background and Objectives: The androgen receptor (AR) is a
ligand-activated transcription factor (TF) that plays critical oncogenic
roles. Medical castration therapy is the mainstay treatment for advanced
PrCa, but the AR signaling axis frequently remains active in
castration-resistant PrCa (CRPC). Despite advances in AR targeting with
abiraterone and enzalutamide, disease progression re-occurs in the form
of CRPCs that still express AR-dependent genes. This highlights the need
for novel approaches to block AR signaling and CRPC growth.

The GATA family of TFs contains six members in mammals, all of which bind
a consensus DNA sequence (A/T)GATA(A/G) to regulate gene expression.
GATA2 is the predominant family member in prostate luminal epithelial
cells. In a search for TFs that control AR expression, we found that
GATA2 induces AR gene expression as well as promotes the recruitment of
coactivators to the AR transcriptional complex. We found that GATA2
protein expression was strongly correlated with AR protein expression
(Spearman's correlation coefficient: 0.323, p-value The GATA family of
TFs contains six members in mammals, all of which bind a consensus DNA
sequence (A/T)GATA(A/G) to regulate gene expression. GATA2 is the
predominant family member in prostate luminal epithelial cells. In a
search for TFs that control AR expression, we found that GATA2 induces AR
gene expression as well as promotes the recruitment of coactivators to
the AR transcriptional complex. We found that GATA2 protein expression
was strongly correlated with AR protein expression (Spearman's
correlation coefficient: 0.323, p-value <0.0001) in our PrCa specimens
(n=383). The intensity of GATA2 immunostaining in our BCM patient cohort
positively correlated with Gleason score (R=0.37, p-value The GATA family
of TFs contains six members in mammals, all of which bind a consensus DNA
sequence (A/T)GATA(A/G) to regulate gene expression. GATA2 is the
predominant family member in prostate luminal epithelial cells. In a
search for TFs that control AR expression, we found that GATA2 induces AR
gene expression as well as promotes the recruitment of coactivators to
the AR transcriptional complex. We found that GATA2 protein expression
was strongly correlated with AR protein expression (Spearman's
correlation coefficient: 0.323, p-value <0.0001) in our PrCa specimens
(n=383). The intensity of GATA2 immunostaining in our BCM patient cohort
positively correlated with Gleason score (R=0.37, p-value <0.01) and was
a significant predictor of biochemical recurrence (p-value The GATA
family of TFs contains six members in mammals, all of which bind a
consensus DNA sequence (A/T)GATA(A/G) to regulate gene expression. GATA2
is the predominant family member in prostate luminal epithelial cells. In
a search for TFs that control AR expression, we found that GATA2 induces
AR gene expression as well as promotes the recruitment of coactivators to
the AR transcriptional complex. We found that GATA2 protein expression
was strongly correlated with AR protein expression (Spearman's
correlation coefficient: 0.323, p-value <0.0001) in our PrCa specimens
(n=383). The intensity of GATA2 immunostaining in our BCM patient cohort
positively correlated with Gleason score (R=0.37, p-value <0.01) and was
a significant predictor of biochemical recurrence (p-value <0.001). We
also demonstrated that GATA2 directly promotes expression of both
full-length and AR splice-variant, resulting in a strong positive
correlation between GATA2 and AR expression in both PrCa cell lines and
patient specimens. Conversely, GATA2 expression is repressed by androgen
and AR, suggesting a negative feedback regulatory loop that, upon
androgen deprivation, derepresses GATA2 to contribute to AR
overexpression in CRPC. Simultaneously, GATA2 is necessary for optimal
transcriptional activity of both full-length and AR splice-variants.
Using ChIP-Seq we found that GATA2 colocalizes with AR and Forkhead box
protein A1 (FOXA1) on chromatin to enhance recruitment of steroid
receptor coactivators (SRC1, SRC2, and SRC3) and formation of the
transcriptional holocomplex. Lastly, we identified a GATA2 small molecule
inhibitor (SMI) that can suppress the expression and transcriptional
function of both full-length and splice-variant AR and exerted potent
anticancer activity against PrCa cell lines. We propose that the
inhibition of GATA2 is a ‘first-in-field’ approach to target AR
expression and function, including ligand-independent AR, for the
treatment of CRPC.


