Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: microRNAs targeting EMT transcription factors may be associated to
lymph node metastasis in breast cancer tumors.


Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer-associated deaths in women.
Lymph node near to the primary breast tumor have a high chance of
developing a secondary tumor, representing one of the first signs of
metastasis in breast cancer. Metastasis is promoted by
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), process leaded by the
transcription factors SNAIL, SLUG, ZEB and TWIST. MicroRNAs are small
non-coding RNAs, whose expression has been demonstrated to be altered in
different cancer types. Because of their ability to regulate large sets
of genes involved in cancer growth and metastasis, microRNAs have emerged
as candidate molecular biomarkers and novel therapeutic targets. The aim
of this study is to identify microRNAs differentially expressed in breast
tumors in relation to EMT-transcription factor expression and lymph node
metastasis, and that are involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
For this purpose, we used microRNA microarray data from 50 fresh frozen
breast tumors with different tumor grades (1 to 3), 28 from patients with
lymph node metastasis. Microarray data analysis using RankProd (R
package) revealed approximately 40 microRNAS down-regulated in breast
tumors with expression of EMT-transcription factors (pBreast cancer is
the leading cause of cancer-associated deaths in women. Lymph node near
to the primary breast tumor have a high chance of developing a secondary
tumor, representing one of the first signs of metastasis in breast
cancer. Metastasis is promoted by epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), process leaded by the transcription factors SNAIL, SLUG, ZEB and
TWIST. MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs, whose expression has been
demonstrated to be altered in different cancer types. Because of their
ability to regulate large sets of genes involved in cancer growth and
metastasis, microRNAs have emerged as candidate molecular biomarkers and
novel therapeutic targets. The aim of this study is to identify microRNAs
differentially expressed in breast tumors in relation to
EMT-transcription factor expression and lymph node metastasis, and that
are involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition. For this purpose, we
used microRNA microarray data from 50 fresh frozen breast tumors with
different tumor grades (1 to 3), 28 from patients with lymph node
metastasis. Microarray data analysis using RankProd (R package) revealed
approximately 40 microRNAS down-regulated in breast tumors with
expression of EMT-transcription factors (p<0.05). Several of the
identified microRNAs have been previously described to regulate early
steps of metastasis in different cancer types, like members of the
miR-200 family (miR-200c and miR-141), miR-205 and miR-30a. In addition
we found other microRNAs not previously associated to metastasis. Our
results suggest that down regulation of specific microRNAs, and up
regulation of their targets, may induce a metastatic behavior of tumor
cells of the primary breast tumors, promoting invasion and colonization
of the lymph nodes. In this sense, the changes in the expression of
microRNAs may serve as biomarkers of breast cancer prognosis in patients.


