Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antigen presentation by tumor-infiltrating B cells associates with
CD4 T-cell phenotype and function in NSCLC patients.


Despite improvements in surgical techniques and combined chemotherapies,
the 5-year survival rate for all stages of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) is only 18%. The focus of immunotherapy has been on subsets of
CD8 and CD4 tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), however, tumor
infiltrating B cells (TIL-Bs) have been reported in tertiary lymphoid
structures (TLS) with CD4 TILs, and both TIL-Bs and TLS correlate with
NSCLC patient survival. While TIL-Bs have been identified in NSCLC
patients, their function in the tumor microenvironment has been
understudied with no focus on their role as antigen presenting cells
(APCs) and their influence on CD8 and CD4 TILs. We hypothesize that
TIL-Bs help generate potent, long-term immune responses against cancer by
presenting tumor antigens to CD4 TILs.

Using unmanipulated, primary human B cells from fresh tumor, tumor
adjacent and normal (cancer-free) lung tissue, we observed that the total
number of B cells at the site of the tumor versus the tumor-adjacent
tissue was increased compared to other immune subsets. We generated a
specific antigen presentation assay in vitro, and we observed three types
of CD4 TIL responses when TIL-Bs presented autologous tumor antigens.
There were activated CD4 TIL responses; CD4 TIL proliferated when
combined with TIL-Bs alone, which indicates stimulation with endogenous
tumor antigens. There were antigen-associated CD4 TIL responses that
required exogenous autologous tumor lysate to elicit a CD4 TIL response,
and there were patient CD4 TILs that did not respond to antigen
presentation by TIL-Bs. Within the activated and antigen-associated
responders, the TIL-B phenotype associated with the CD4 TIL phenotype; if
the TIL-Bs were activated (CD69+CD27+CD21+), the CD4 TILs were T helper
(antitumor) CD4 T cells and if the TIL-Bs were exhausted
(CD69-CD27-CD21-), the CD4 TILs were T regulatory cells (pro-tumor).
These data suggest that TIL-Bs influence the phenotype and function of
CD4 TILs in NSCLC patient tumors.

In conclusion, TIL-Bs are increased in NSCLC primary tumors, they can
present antigen to CD4 TILs and influence their overall phenotype.
Determining if TIL-Bs are activated or exhausted in NSCLC patients will
determine the extent of their anti-tumor function in the cancer.
Ultimately, results from this study will help predict how to target TIL-B
functions in future TIL-B-specific immunotherapies or in combination with
current immunotherapies for NSCLC patients like blockade of the
inhibitory receptor, PD-1.


