Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA repair increases sequencing accuracy without altering actual
mutation frequency in clinical samples.


Targeted cancer therapy based on genomic alterations can be remarkably
effective. Currently, cancer genome profiling using next generation
sequencing (NGS) is routinely applied in cancer care to guide
personalized treatment. The accuracy of this profiling directly impacts
therapeutic choices and the outcomes of patient care. We previously
showed that false positive variants are abundant and can account for a
major fraction of identified somatic variations in publicly available
datasets (doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/070334). These false positive
variants show signs of mutagenic DNA damage. We further demonstrated that
enzymatic DNA repair increases sequencing quality by lowering
damage-induced background noise. Therefore, enzymatic DNA repair has the
potential to improve sequencing accuracy, avoiding incorrect somatic
variant calls and consequently reducing incorrect diagnostic conclusions.
In this study, we investigated whether enzymatic DNA repair introduces
any bias to NGS libraries using analysis by droplet digital PCR (ddPCR)
and deep sequencing. DNA Reference Standards containing multiple common
cancer mutations (Horizon Discovery, Inc.) were spiked into
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) DNA isolated from tumor samples
from different tissue types at defined frequencies (0.5-10% quantified by
ddPCR). Genotyping of the FFPE DNA ensured that they were free of any of
the spiked-in mutations. After DNA repair and library preparation,
mutation frequencies were quantified by ddPCR, and compared to the
mutation levels in input DNA and control libraries without repair. Deep
sequencing of 151 cancer genes including these spike-ins showed no
difference in mutation frequency for the spiked-in mutations between the
control and repair groups. However, the number of false positive variant
calls was reduced in the repair group. Our data demonstrates that DNA
repair significantly increases sequencing accuracy without altering the
frequency of actual mutations in tumor samples.


