Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit 1A promotes tumorigenesis
and metastasis in Ewing sarcoma.


Background: Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a highly invasive and metastatic
pediatric soft tissue and bone tumor. Children with metastatic ES have a
cure rate of less than 30% (De loris MA et al, 2013). Novel and specific
therapeutic targets are urgently needed. ES is characterized by the
oncogenic fusions, mostly EWS/FLI, which functions as an aberrant
transcription factor to deregulate downstream targets and mediate ES
pathogenesis. By comparing genes dysregulated by EWS/FLI across multiple
model systems (Niedan S et al, 2014; Sankar S et al, 2013; Tirode F et
al, 2007), we identified protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit 1A
(PPP1R1A), a potent protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) inhibitor upon PKA
phosphorylation, as one of the core EWS/FLI targets (Luo W et al, 2016).

Objective: In the current study, we seek to define the role of PPP1R1A in
ES pathogenesis.

Methods: Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and
luciferase reporter assays were performed to investigate transcriptional
regulation of PPP1R1A by EWS/FLI. In vitro functional assays and
orthotopic injections in immune-deficient mice were conducted to
investigate the effect of PPP1R1A on ES oncogenic transformation and cell
migration, and tumorigenesis and metastasis, respectively.
High-throughput sequencing and functional annotation were utilized to
identify PPP1R1A regulated genes and cellular functions. Drug treatment
was performed to test the effect of PKA inhibitors on ES cell
proliferation and tumor development.

Results: We found that PPP1R1A is directly up-regulated by EWS/FLI via a
GGAA microsatellite enhancer element. Depletion of PPP1R1A caused a
significant decrease in oncogenic transformation (pResults: We found that
PPP1R1A is directly up-regulated by EWS/FLI via a GGAA microsatellite
enhancer element. Depletion of PPP1R1A caused a significant decrease in
oncogenic transformation (p<0.05) and cell migration (p=0.009) in vitro
and limited xenograft tumor growth (p=0.0009) and metastasis (p=0.009) in
vivo. We also discovered that PPP1R1A regulates genes involved in various
cellular processes including acting binding, cell adhesion, and
differentiation. Interestingly, PPP1R1A regulated gene set significantly
overlap with that of ZEB2 (p=2.67246E-33) and EWS (p=1.2559E-45), which
regulates metastasis and neuronal differentiation in ES, respectively.
Further, we demonstrated that PKA phosphorylation and activation of
PPP1R1A, and subsequent PP1 binding and inhibition by activated PPP1R1A,
is required for PPP1R1A mediated ES pathogenesis, likely by increasing
the phosphorylation level of various PP1 substrates, such as RB and CREB,
which are critical for fundamental cellular functions including
proliferation and differentiation. Consistently, we found that PKA
inhibitors impaired ES cell proliferation and xenograft tumor growth and
metastasis.

Conclusion: Collectively, we identified an essential kinase and
phosphatase pathway, PKA/PPP1R1A/PP1, that plays a critical role in ES
tumorigenesis and metastasis, and thus is a potential therapeutic target
in the treatment of primary and metastatic ES.


