Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a TK1 specific chimeric antigen receptor T-cell for
the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer.


Our current research explores the development and tumoricidal activity of
chimeric antigen receptor T-cells targeting a new immunotherapeutic
target, thymidine kinase 1 (TK1), against non-small lung cancer (NSCLC),
both in vitro and in vivo. There has been recent success utilizing CAR
T-cell therapy in clinical trials, but it has been mainly focused on the
treatment of haematological malignancies targeting CD19. Lung cancer is
the most common cause of cancer mortality globally and is responsible for
more than one million of deaths every year. Moreover, NSCLC comprises
approximately 85 % of all lung cancers. Clinical trials against NSCLC
using engineered T-cells targeting NY-ESO-1, VEGFR2, MAGE-A3, and
mesothelin are currently ongoing. In spite of efforts to find new
molecular targets, CAR T-cell therapy still faces several challenges in
the treatment of solid malignancies due to the lack of specific molecular
targets. We have previously reported the up-regulation of TK1 in multiple
malignant tissues including lung cancer tissues and the presence of TK1
on the cell surface of different NSCLC cell lines, such as H460 and A549.
Flow cytometry, scanning electron microscopy and confocal microscopy
showed evidence of TK1 on the surface of these cancer cells lines. We
have built third generation TK1-CARs with lentiviral and retroviral
vectors. The constructions include a single chain variable fragment for
TK1, a CD28 and 4-1BB moieties connected with a CD3ζ signaling domain.
Confirmation of the CAR expression on transduced human T cells was
performed by flow cytometry and confocal microscopy, and approximately 50
% of the transduced T-cells expressed TK1-CARs. Upon co-culturing TK1-CAR
T-cells there was a significant increase in T-cell activity and cancer
cell lysis elevated as high as 48% in comparison to negative controls.
Cytokine profiles revealed a significant increase of the levels of IL-2
and IFN-γ after 24 hrs of co-culturing, indicating T-cell activation.
TK1-CAR T-cells, untransduced T-cells, and transduced T-cells with empty
vectors were co-cultured with H460 cells and time-lapse videos were
recorded, every 5 minutes between 12 and 24 hrs post transduction.
Clustering of TK1-CAR T-cells around lung cancer cells and induction of
cell death after T-cell synapsis with target cells was observed.
Preliminary in vitro data has shown that TK1-CAR T-cells induce specific
cell lysis in NSCLC cells. In vivo experiments using xenografts models in
SNG mice will be performed. Statistical differences between survival
curves of mice treated with TK1 CAR T-cells, untransduced T-cells and
transduced T-cells with empty vectors are expected.


