Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer in childhood and molecular epidemiology - The KIKME
case-control study.


Treatment of first primary neoplasms (PN) in childhood with radiotherapy
or chemotherapy is an established risk factor for second primary
neoplasms (SN). In addition, there is growing evidence for this
association from observational studies on ionizing radiation and cancer
risk, in particular after radiation exposure in childhood. As only a
subgroup of the treated children suffers from SN, other risk modifying
factors (e.g. genetics) must be involved. We are conducting a
case-control study with 600 anticipated participants to evaluate
gene-radiation interactions and risk of SN (leukemia, thyroid or skin
cancer) as well as PN (leukemia, lymphoma or CNS) with a new
epidemiological design, in which we combine observational with
experimental elements by analyzing gene expression in irradiated cultured
human fibroblasts from skin biopsies.

In a first step, we examine the participation proportions of survivors of
childhood cancer with and without a SN and cancer free control patients
(CO) from the department of accident surgery and orthopaedics. In
addition to a skin biopsy of 3 mm and a saliva sample, we collect
detailed questionnaire information on lifetime exposure to medical
radiation and chemotherapy, socio-demographic factors, smoking, drinking,
physical activity, medical history and family history of cancer and other
diseases. Cases and controls will be matched by sex and age (1:1), and
additionally among the former childhood cancer patients by type of the PN
and year of first diagnosis (1 SN:3 PN). In explorative pilot
experiments, we estimate gene expression differences by RNA-Seq in
fibroblasts after low (0.05 Gy) and high (2 Gy) radiation doses at
different time points (0.25 h, 2 h, 24 h).

In the first recruitment drives of the ongoing study, we recruited 77
patients with SN and 95 matched patients with only one PN from 1975
eligible former childhood cancer patients at the German Childhood Cancer
Registry, as well as 22 CO patients. Until November 2016, 33% of the
contacted 231 SN patients, 20% of the 486 contacted PN patients and 69%
of the 32 contacted CO patients participated in our study. Two hours
after low and high in vitro radiation doses, the largest number of genes
were differentially expressed, some of them only after high doses, some
only after low doses and some after both.

To our knowledge, the KIKME study is the first epidemiological project
analyzing differential gene expression in primary fibroblasts before and
after radiation with high and low doses to evaluate the potential genetic
basis for emergence of a SN and a PN. However, the biological importance
of the suggested differential gene expression after high and low doses of
radiation has to be confirmed with the full study population. In
addition, the gene expression must be analyzed in detail by group (SN,
PN, CO) and will be combined with results from whole genome sequencing in
order to obtain a comprehensive view of the role of radiation in the
carcinogenesis of childhood cancer.


