Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ZEB1 is regulated by PKCα in breast cancer cell lines.


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in women.
Cytokine signals triggering kinase pathways play key roles in cancer
progression which regulate transcription factors such as ZEB1 or Snail.
Our goal is to uncover the role of PKC signaling pathway in the
regulation of the biological action of ZEB1. The protein expression of
ZEB1, PKC isoforms, epithelial-to mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers
were determined by Western Blotting (WB) in nine breast cancer cell
lines. PKCα and ZEB1 had a significant positive correlation (p≤0.05),
and both proteins were highly expressed in mammary cell lines with a more
aggressive phenotype (such as MDA-MB-231, BT-549 and MDA-MB-453).
Interestingly, silencing PKCα using siRNAi significantly reduced ZEB1
expression in MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-453 and BT-549 cells, as determined by
Western blot. Likewise, the pan-PKC inhibitor (GF109203) and the cPKC
inhibitor (Gö6976) reduced ZEB1 expression in breast cancer cells.
However, the EMT markers (E-cadherin, vimentin, ZO1 and N-cadherin) did
not change their expression. ZEB1 mRNA levels did not change
significantly in PKCα knockdown cells, suggesting that PKCα possibly
regulates ZEB1 expression by affecting its protein stability. In
addition, we found that the motile and invasive capacity of MDA-MB-231
cells was markedly affected in both PKCα and ZEB1 knockdown cells.
Interestingly, depletion of PKCα from MDA-MB-231 cells markedly reduced
the formation of ruffles and lamellipodia in response to serum, whereas
ZEB1 depletion did not. In summary, our results revealed that PKCα
regulates the expression of the EMT marker ZEB1 in basal-like breast
cancer cell lines, and that in addition PKCα is important for the
control of cell invasion and migration through regulation of ZEB1,
thereby arguing that it could be a potential target for breast cancer
metastasis. Our results also suggest that PKCα may control important
phenotypic responses both through ZEB1-dependent and ZEB-independent
mechanisms.


