Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome-wide association study identifies new prostate
cancer susceptibility genes in the OncoArray data.


Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified over 150 genomic
regions harboring risk variants for prostate cancer which explain one
third of all familial risk. However, with some notable exceptions, the
causal variants and target susceptibility genes at these risk loci have
yet to be identified. Recent work has shown a strong overlap between loci
associated with gene expression levels (eQTLs) in prostate tissue and
GWAS loci, which suggests that the causal mechanism at a significant
proportion of risk loci includes causal alleles that regulate expression
levels of nearby susceptibility genes. While overlapping eQTLs with GWAS
is a powerful method to prioritize susceptibility genes, it is often the
case that multiple eQTLs co-localize at the GWAS risk region (due to
linkage disequilibrium (LD) and correlations across transcript levels).
This prohibits the identification of the true susceptibility gene as
opposed to spurious co-localization at the same locus.

We recently leveraged gene expression imputation to perform
transcriptome-wide association studies (TWAS) as a principled approach to
measure the strength of association between gene expression and disease
status. Here, we use imputed expression to identify new susceptibility
genes for prostate cancer in the OncoArray GWAS data. We integrate gene
expression data from more than 44 tissues across ~4,000 individuals with
GWAS of prostate cancer from the OncoArray in ~140,000 individuals. Our
approach identified 118 susceptibility genes for prostate cancer that
reside in 90 independent loci across the genome. Of these, we report 7
genes located more than 0.5 Megabases away from any previously reported
GWAS loci for prostate cancer, thus providing new risk loci. Second, we
use TWAS to investigate genes previously reported as susceptibility genes
for prostate cancer through overlaps of eQTL and GWAS. We find 36 (out of
86 previously reported genes) to be significant in TWAS. Overall, our
findings highlight the power of integrating gene expression data with
GWAS and provide testable hypotheses for future functional validation of
prostate cancer risk.


