Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling by sera from
patients with lung adenocarcinoma.


Background: The objective of this study was to evaluate disease
stage-associated differences in receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling
in A549 cells using pretreatment sera from cases of
pathologically-confirmed lung adenocarcinoma or control cases derived
from a lung cancer screening study. This was accomplished as a means to
explore the hypothesis that circulating concentrations of decoy receptors
and/or ligands, as well as disease-specific ligand degradation all
regulate RTK signaling in vivo.

Methods: Pretreatment peripheral blood were prepared from either from
non-cancer control patients (n=30) or those with lung adenocarcinoma,
consisting of stage I (T1-2N0M0, n=25); locoregionally progressed
(T1-2N1-2M0, n=36) or disseminated, stage IV disease (n=43). All patients
were enrolled with written informed consent to our IRB-approved,
institutional biorepository. Confluent cultures of A549 cells were
stimulated for 10 minutes with patient sera diluted 1:1 in RPMI-1640
followed by immediate whole cell lysate preparation. After protein
determinations by BCA, 8.5 µg of each sample was interrogated using the
Human RTK (phosphoprotein) kit from MilliporeSigma according to
manufacturer’s instructions. After being normalized to the kit-supplied
(stimulated) HeLa cell lysates, all resulting data were evaluated by
one-way ANOVA (LSD and Tukey post-hoc) for categorical comparisons.

Results: The most commonly observed differences in RTK signaling was
noted upon comparing cohorts with locoregional (T1-2N1-2M0) progression
and disseminated (stage IV) disease. Levels of in c-Met and insulin
receptor (IR) signaling were higher in patients with stage IV disease
relative to those with locoregional disease by 24% and 10%, respectively
(both pResults: The most commonly observed differences in RTK signaling
was noted upon comparing cohorts with locoregional (T1-2N1-2M0)
progression and disseminated (stage IV) disease. Levels of in c-Met and
insulin receptor (IR) signaling were higher in patients with stage IV
disease relative to those with locoregional disease by 24% and 10%,
respectively (both p<0.01); whereas induction of c-Kit, VEGFR3, and Tie-1
were reduced by 12.8%, 6.67%, and 17.3%, respectively (all pResults: The
most commonly observed differences in RTK signaling was noted upon
comparing cohorts with locoregional (T1-2N1-2M0) progression and
disseminated (stage IV) disease. Levels of in c-Met and insulin receptor
(IR) signaling were higher in patients with stage IV disease relative to
those with locoregional disease by 24% and 10%, respectively (both
p<0.01); whereas induction of c-Kit, VEGFR3, and Tie-1 were reduced by
12.8%, 6.67%, and 17.3%, respectively (all p<0.05). Circulating levels of
HGF were previously observed by our group to be 25% higher in stage IV
patients relative to those with locoregional progression (p=0.005) -
agreeing with our observation in direction of change, though not scale.
This is in contrast to levels of VEGF-C and VEGF-D previously being
observed elevated 51% and 452% (both pResults: The most commonly observed
differences in RTK signaling was noted upon comparing cohorts with
locoregional (T1-2N1-2M0) progression and disseminated (stage IV)
disease. Levels of in c-Met and insulin receptor (IR) signaling were
higher in patients with stage IV disease relative to those with
locoregional disease by 24% and 10%, respectively (both p<0.01); whereas
induction of c-Kit, VEGFR3, and Tie-1 were reduced by 12.8%, 6.67%, and
17.3%, respectively (all p<0.05). Circulating levels of HGF were
previously observed by our group to be 25% higher in stage IV patients
relative to those with locoregional progression (p=0.005) - agreeing with
our observation in direction of change, though not scale. This is in
contrast to levels of VEGF-C and VEGF-D previously being observed
elevated 51% and 452% (both p<0.001) in these same cohorts. Also of note
was the 1.9 fold decrease in ability of sera from stage I patients to
stimulate IGF-1R signaling relative to control patients (p=0.002). We
have previously reported a 12% increase in IGF-1 levels between these
groups (p=0.002), though we observed no changes in IGF binding proteins
that could account for the observed differences in IGF-1R signaling.

Conclusions: We observed an apparent discoupling of certain circulating
ligands in patient sera to stimulate their respective RTKs in a disease
stage-specific manner. We are currently evaluating levels of circulating
ligands, potential disease stage-associated (partial) proteolytic
degradation, and decoy receptors to help explain these observations.


