Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined treatment by manuka honey and metformin inhibited growth
and inducted apoptosis in CD133+and CD90+ subpopulation hepatocellular
carcinoma cancer stem cells.


Manuka honey is well known for its anti-bacterial and wound healing
properties but its anticancer role against cancer stem cells (CSC) in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines and the underlying molecular
mechanisms remain uninvestigated. Recently, we identified a CSC
subpopulation in HCC cell lines characterized by their CD133+ and CD90+
phenotype. The CD133+/ CD90+cells demonstrated a more aggressive
phenotype than the CD133-/ CD90- counterpart and formed metastatic
lesions in the lung of immunodeficient mice. In order to evaluate the
effect of Manuka honey alone or in combined treatment with Metformin, a
biguanide that has been widely used to treat type 2 diabetes, on cell
viability and apoptosis induction in human HCC cell lines, isolated and
identified CD133+/ CD90+subpopulation CSC were used. Cell viability was
monitored using an MTT assay. In addition, apoptosis induction was
labeled by Annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate/propidium iodide and
measured using flow cytometry. Western blotting was used to examine the
protein expression of p53, Bcl-2, Bax, Bcl-2-associated death promoter
(Bad), Bcl-2 homologous antagonist/killer (Bak) and cleaved-caspases-3
and -9. The results of the present study revealed that Manuka honey alone
or in combined treatment with Metformin suppressed the cell viability of
CD133+/CD90+cells in a concentration-dependent manner and the maximum
effect was detected in combined treatment after 24 h. In addition, Manuka
honey alone or in combined treatment with Metformin induced a significant
apoptosis in the tested cells. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that
combined treatment increased the expression of proapoptotic proteins,
including p53, Bax, Bad and Bak, while it decreased the protein level of
antiapoptotic protein Bcl-2 compared to control, Manuka honey or
Metformin alone. Furthermore, the combined treatment strongly inhibited
stemness characteristics of CSC subpopulation, colony formation and
dramatically inhibited CD133+/CD90+tumor growth in vivo. Our data
demonstrated that combined treatment induced apoptosis in CD133+/CD90+
subpopulation through G1 arrest in the cell-cycle and regulating
p53/Bcl-2/caspase-3 signaling pathway. In conclusion, our results
suggested that Monuka honey alone or combined treatment with Metformin
may be a potential treatment for apoptosis induction in CSC and may
provide a novel therapeutic model for HCC.


