Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determination of microRNA profile in lung cancer cell line treated
with chemotherapy cisplatin (C), pemetrexed (P) or PC with bevacizumab
(B) and its implication in resistance.


Background: Cellular microRNAs (miRNAs) regulate gene expression through
modulation of messenger RNA transcription and are involved in epigenetic
regulation, metastasis and cancer immunity. They have prognostic and
therapeutic significance. The miRNAs associated with resistance in lung
cancer without EGFR mutation are not yet known. We sought to determine
the profile of miRNA of lung cancer cell lines without EGFR mutation
treated with chemotherapy.

Methods: lung cancer cell lines HTB177 were treated with PC or PCB
(0.05mg/mL Cisplatin, 0.05 mg/mL pemetrexed, 6.25 mg/mL Bevacizumab) for
24, 48, 72 and 144 hours. We obtained baseline miRNA prior to therapy and
after treatment to determine the changes in miRNA profile using RT PCR
technique. After 144 hours, we obtained miRNA profile of the cells that
survived treatment to assess change in the miRNA profile. We chose miRNA
that has been reported to influence on the outcome of lung cancer: Let 7
modulates RAS, miRNA 27 is involved as tumor suppressor gene, mir212
negatively regulates antiapoptotic protein PED, miR 375 down regulates
ASH1 a transcription factor. Mir21 targets anti-apoptotic genes including
PDCD4 and PTEN.

Results: We observed down regulation of these miRNA after 24h of
treatment with PC and these miRNA then became upregulated after 48 hours,
especially let 7f. In contrast, the treatment of PC with B caused
upregulation of these miRNA, especially miR 27b and let 7f at 24 h and
then decreased levels of upregulation at 48hours. These miRNA were not
upregulated at 72h for both groups. The expression of miRNA 21 is
upregulated 50 times in cells that survived treatment with PC or PCB at
144h.

Conclusions: The treatment using PC and PC with B in lung cancer cell
lines regulates change in the profile of miRNA at different time points.
There is a difference of the miRNA profile in these 2 treatment groups.
miRNA 21 is upregulated in cells resistant to therapy. miRNA could be
involved in the activity of chemotherapy and development of resistance.


