Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-8 signaling enhances TNBC growth and metastasis via crosstalk
with stromal components.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) as a metastatic disease is currently
incurable. Reliable and reproducible methods for testing drugs against
metastasis are not available. We have previously developed a robust
metastatic model in which mice are pretreated with tumor cell-conditioned
media (TCM) from human TNBC cells (MDA-MB-231 and SUM149) for 2 weeks
prior to tumor cell inoculation. In this model we found reproducible
spontaneous metastases in lymph nodes (LN) and lungs within 4-5 weeks
after orthotropic tumor inoculation. We have discovered that the TNBC
tumor cells secrete large amounts of interleukin-6 (IL-6) that
“educates” lymphatic endothelial cells (LEC) in the LN and lungs.
Stat3, a transcription factor, gets activated and induces the synthesis
of CCL5 and VEGF among other factors. CCL5 recruits the tumor cells to
the LN and lungs; VEGF helps build blood vessels in the LN to facilitate
tumor cell survival; VEGF produced in the lung helps the tumor cells
extravasate into the lung. We have confirmed the importance of these
factors by showing that inhibitors of these factors significantly inhibit
metastasis.

In this report, using a human antibody array, we identified factors
secreted by fibroblasts and macrophages upon induction by MDA-MB-231 TCM.
We ranked the expression level of each factor by real time qRT-PCR and
determined that interleukin 8 (IL-8) was the top candidate. We confirmed
by ELISA that IL-8 secreted from either fibroblasts or macrophages
treated with MDA-MB-231 TCM was upregulated compared to treatment with
serum free media (SFM). Our data showed that the proliferation of
MDA-MB-231 cells co-cultured with fibroblasts or macrophages was enhanced
compared to monoculture. Furthermore, MDA-MB-231 cell migration, a key
step in tumor metastasis, was promoted by CM from TCM-induced fibroblasts
or macrophages. Knockdown of CXCR2, IL-8 receptor, expression by
CRISPR-Cas9 system reduces MB231 cell proliferation and migration
compared to wild type. In a mouse xenograft tumor model, the tumor growth
of MB231-CXCR2-/- cell was significantly decreased. In addition, the
incidence of thoracic metastasis of MB231-CXCR2-/- tumor was reduced
compared to WT.

We found that the auto- and paracrine loop of IL-8 exists between TNBC
cells and stroma, which results in enhanced IL-8 secretion from the
stromal components. Significantly, inhibition of the IL-8 signaling
pathway by Reparixin, an inhibitor of the IL-8 receptor CXCR1/2,
abrogated MDA-MB-231 tumor growth and metastasis.

These findings implicate IL-8 signaling as a critical event in TNBC tumor
growth and metastasis via crosstalk with stromal components. Further,
these studies suggest that IL-8 acts as a key regulator orchestrating
TNBC metastatic breast cancer. Therefore, we have provided evidence that
supports the hypothesis that functional antagonism of the IL-8 signaling
pathway has the potential to circumvent TNBC breast cancer growth and
metastasis.


