Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone H3 lysine 9 methyltransferase SUV39H1 is associated with
clinical outcome of renal clear cell carcinoma patients.


Background: Epigenetic alternations have three important components
including DNA methylation, histione modifications, and non-coding RNA.
The epigenetic changes are highly dynamic and also reversible, which
regulate a variety of biological processes. Euchromatin which is a
loosely packed form of chromatin is highly associated with active gene
expression. In contrast, heterochromatin is associated with high histone
methylation and DNA methylation but low RNA transcription. SUV39H1
catalyzes the histone 3 lysine 9 trimethylation (H3K9me3) in
heterochromatin regions, which also mediates DNA methylation at
pericentric heterochromatin. Currently, the oncogenic role of SUV39H1 in
renal cell carcinoma (RCC) pathogenesis is poorly understood. To this
end, we assessed the role of SUV39H1 in renal RCC cells and association
with clinical outcome of RCC patients.

Results: In SUV39H1 knocked down cells, we observed global H3K9me3 level
reduction and cell growth inhibition. Proximal ligation assay was used to
determine the H3K9me3 and 5-methylcytosine (5mC) interaction in RCC
cells. Knocking down of SUV39H1 gene significantly reduced the
co-localization of H3K9me3 and 5mC in pericentric repetitive sequences.
Moreover, Southern blot demonstrated that expansion of a pentanucleotide
(GGAAT) repeats was associated with upregulation of SUV39H1, which is
linked to SUV39H1 function with microsatellite instability and
rearrangement. In The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database, we found that
SUV39H1 gene expression was upregulated in RCC tissues compared to normal
tissues, and high SUV39H1 expression predicted a worse overall survival
outcome (p = 0.002) in RCC patients.

Conclusion: SUV39H1 upregulation promotes cell proliferation and
microsatellite instability. SUV39H1 expression could serve as a
prognostic biomarker for RCC patients.


