Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of PD-L1 expression and microsatellite instability
status is a useful prognostic factor in gastric cancer.


Interaction of programmed death-1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1
(PD-L1) induces functional impairment of antigen-specific T cells, which
leads to immune evasion of tumors. Immune checkpoint therapy including
PD-1/PD-L1 blockade is an emerging treatment strategy which brings great
improvement in patient’s prognosis. Microsatellite instability (MSI) is
a condition of genomic instability caused by the loss of DNA mismatch
repair activity, which has recently received a lot of attention from the
standpoint of cancer immunotherapy. While the TNM classification system
is commonly used on various malignant tumors for prediction of prognosis
and planning of treatment strategy, establishment of prognostic factors
related to cancer immune system is considered important as cancer
immunotherapy has recently become more and more popular. Thus, we
investigated the usefulness of PD-L1 expression and MSI status in
addition to histological type as prognostic factors in gastric cancer. In
this study, 255 gastric cancer cases which had curative surgical
resection at Okayama University Hospital between 2002 and 2009 were
analyzed retrospectively. PD-L1 expression level was classified into 4
groups according to PD-L1 positive rate on tumors on immunohistochemical
staining (0: Interaction of programmed death-1 (PD-1) and programmed
death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) induces functional impairment of antigen-specific
T cells, which leads to immune evasion of tumors. Immune checkpoint
therapy including PD-1/PD-L1 blockade is an emerging treatment strategy
which brings great improvement in patient’s prognosis. Microsatellite
instability (MSI) is a condition of genomic instability caused by the
loss of DNA mismatch repair activity, which has recently received a lot
of attention from the standpoint of cancer immunotherapy. While the TNM
classification system is commonly used on various malignant tumors for
prediction of prognosis and planning of treatment strategy, establishment
of prognostic factors related to cancer immune system is considered
important as cancer immunotherapy has recently become more and more
popular. Thus, we investigated the usefulness of PD-L1 expression and MSI
status in addition to histological type as prognostic factors in gastric
cancer. In this study, 255 gastric cancer cases which had curative
surgical resection at Okayama University Hospital between 2002 and 2009
were analyzed retrospectively. PD-L1 expression level was classified into
4 groups according to PD-L1 positive rate on tumors on
immunohistochemical staining (0: < 1%, 1+: 1-5%, 2+: 5-10%, 3+: ≥10%),
and 2+ and 3+ were defined as PD-L1 positive. MSI status was analyzed by
PCR and classified into MSI-high (MSI-H), and MSI-low and Microsatellite
stability (non-MSI). Histological type was divided into intestinal and
diffuse according to the Lauren classification.PD-L1 positive rate was
15%, and PD-L1 positive was significantly correlated with advanced stage
and invasive status. Overall survival (p=0.0109) and disease-free
survival (p=0.0052) were significantly poor in PD-L1 positive group, and
a multivariate analysis revealed that PD-L1 expression was an independent
risk factor for recurrence after surgery (p=0.0160, odds ratio: 3.19).
MSI-H was detected in 7.5%, and more observed in PD-L1 positive cases
(p=0.0068). Although non-MSI, as a single factor, showed only a weak
tendency to have poor prognosis compared to MSI-H (p=0.1965), combination
of PD-L1 positive and non-MSI (PD-L1/non-MSI) showed significantly poor
prognosis (p=0.0010). Although other combinations also showed the
usefulness in detection of patients with poor prognosis, such as PD-L1
positive and diffuse type, and non-MSI and diffuse type, a multivariate
analysis revealed that PD-L1/non-MSI was the most useful combination
among them to predict poor prognosis (p=0.0009, hazard ratio: 3.88). In
conclusion, while PD-L1 expression is a useful prognostic factor and
predictive factor for recurrence after surgery as a single factor,
combination with MSI status can be more useful and attractive prognostic
factor in gastric cancer.


