Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deep sequencing-based microRNA expression signature in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma: dual strand of microRNA-150 acts as tumor
suppressors.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common
cancer in the world and ~500 000 cases are diagnosed every year. In spite
of considerable advances in multimodality therapy, including surgery,
radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the overall survival rate for patients
with HNSCC is ~50%. Patients with HNSCC are usually diagnosed at a late
stage and local tumor recurrence and distant metastasis occur after
conventional therapies. Application of genomic approaches might elucidate
novel molecular pathways underlying HNSCC and thereby improve therapeutic
approaches to the disease. The discovery of noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) in
the human genome was an important conceptual breakthrough for cancer
research in the post-genome sequencing era. Among ncRNAs, the microRNAs
(miRNAs) are small ncRNA molecules (18-25 nucleotides in length) that
regulate the expression of protein-coding/non-protein-coding genes by
repressing translation or cleaving RNA transcripts in a sequence-specific
manner. Accumulating evidence has demonstrated pivotal roles for miRNAs
in human cancer pathogenesis. To seek out differentially expressed miRNAs
in HNSCC cells, we newly constructed the deep-sequencing based miRNA
expression signature by using laryngeal and hypopharyngeal clinical
specimens. Our present data showed that a total of 160 miRNAs (44
upregulated and 116 downregulated) were identified as aberrantly
expressed miRNAs in cancer tissues. Based on the signature, we focused on
the dual strand of pre-miR-150, miR-150-5p and miR-150-3p in HNSCC
signature because of these miRNAs significantly reduced in cancer
tissues, suggesting these miRNAs act as antitumor miRNAs in this disease.
However, the role of these miRNAs on HNSCC cells is still ambiguous. In
miRNA biogenesis, it is the general consensus that processing of the
pre-miRNA through Dicer1 generates a miRNA duplex (a passenger strand and
a guide strand), and that the passenger strand has degradation and no
regulatory activity and disintegrates in cells. Our present data showed
that both miRNAs, miR-150-5p and miR-150-3p significantly suppressed
cancer cell migration and invasion. Moreover, gene expression data and in
silico database analysis showed that Integrin A3 (ITGA3), Integrin A6
(ITGA6) and Tenascin C (TNC) were direct regulation of both antitumor
miRNAs. A large number of cohort study by TCGA showed that overall
survival of high expression of ITGA3, ITGA6 and TNC groups were
significantly shorter than that of low expression of these expression
groups (p = 0.0177, p = 0.0237 and p = 0.026, respectively). These target
genes acted as oncogenes and deeply contributed to HNSCC pathogenesis.
Dual strand of miR-150 functioned as tumor suppressors based on the miRNA
expression signature of HNSCC. Identification of miRNA-mediated cancer
networks may provide novel molecular pathogenesis of the disease.


