Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genomic characterization of testicular germ cell tumor immune
microenvironment.


Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCT) are a histologically diverse set of
tumors and the most common cancer type in young men. As part of the TCGA
effort, we analyzed tumors from 133 patients including 4 patients with
asynchronous double primary TGCTs (137 primary tumors) by
histopathologic, genomic, epigenomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic
methods. We noted molecular signatures of various immune cells were
greater in seminomas than other histologies. Specifically, we find
seminomas show elevation of expression signatures for B-Cells, Cytotoxic
T-Cells, Th17 Cells, and T-regulatory cells. This increase in immune
cells were accompanied by high expression of specific cytokines and key
immune checkpoint molecules such as CTLA4, LAG3, and PD-L1. Strong
positive correlations were identified between immune cell signatures and
increases in T-Cell and B-Cell receptor diversity measures.
Interestingly, increases in receptor diversity also showed strong
positive associations to gene expression signatures for anti-tumor immune
responses. This indicates that anti-tumor immune responses in seminomas
may be polyclonal. We found no evidence for relationships between immune
cells and mutation load, neoantigen load, or detected viruses. We do
observe that seminomas have significantly high expression of the testis
specific antigens, yet the contribution of these antigens to the immune
response did not show strong or uniform statistical indications. Instead,
the strongest association between expanded immune cells populations in
seminomas were the presence of activating mutations in KIT accompanied by
elevation of gene expression of signatures associated with KIT and
expression of MHC class I and II genes. Together, these data describe the
immune microenvironment of seminomas and suggest alterations and events
in the kit pathway as being critical to the nature of the immune
microenvironment in seminomas.


