Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P73 isoforms regulate cellular survival and response to treatment
in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.


Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common subtype of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) and is curable in more than 60% of the
cases. Despite long-term remission achieved with current therapies,
relapse occurs in almost one-third of the cases. Rearrangements of
chromosome locus 1p36 with ensuing deletion or disruption of TP73, one of
the most distally located putative tumor suppressor genes, is frequent in
many NHL subtypes, including DLBCL, and confers inferior prognosis.
Recent reports in normal B-cells and lymphoma animal models suggest an
important role of p73 in B-cell lymphomas; however, the biological
significance of p73 isoforms in DLBCL is not clear. TP73 is a member of
the TP53 family that shares structural homology and hence is capable of
transactivating p53 target genes. We investigated the relationship
between rearrangements of chromosome locus 1p36 and p73 expression and
examined whether differential expression of p73 isoforms (TAp73 and
∆Np73) correlate with proliferation and apoptosis in DLBCL. We utilized
molecular techniques in conjunction with fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) in untreated histologically confirmed DLBCL patient
specimens. In our data set, the 1p36 chromosomal locus was disrupted
(mainly heterozygous deletion) in 35% of the cases and was significantly
associated with ∆Np73 expression. Subsequent immunohistochemical
analysis showed a significant positive correlation between TAp73 and
cleaved caspase-3 expression and between ∆Np73 and Ki-67 expression.
Additionally, we observed a negative correlation between TAp73 and the
anti-apoptotic molecules Bcl-2 and Bcl-6. We then performed in vitro
studies in DLBCL cells and modulated the expression of TAp73 and ∆Np73
using expression vectors and siRNA. TAp73-transfected cells were more
susceptible to serum deprivation and doxorubicin treatment, conversely
the ∆Np73-transfected cells were more resistant to serum deprivation
and doxorubicin treatment compared to control cells. Thus, rearrangements
of 1p36 consequently deregulates p73 isoform expression in DLBCL. Our
data emphasizes the importance of delineating the functional aspect of
genetic alterations and underscores the significant role of p73 isoforms
in DLBCL pathogenesis and treatment.


