Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Smad3 signaling with a TAT fusion peptide prevented
TGF-β-induced fibronectin expression and cell migration in malignant
gliomas.


Malignant primary brain tumors represent one of the most common causes of
cancer death in the world. Grade IV gliomas (glioblastoma multiform, GBM)
are routinely resistant to current chemoradiationchemo radiation therapy
with a median progression-free and overall survival for glioblastoma
following current chemoradiation of ~7 and 15 months, respectively. While
TGF-β functions as a growth inhibitor for most normal cell types, many
tumors (including GBMs) have lost this inhibitory response and TGF-β now
functions to promote tumor progression and/or dissemination. As aberrant
TGF-β signaling is often considered a hallmark of high-grade gliomas, we
examined whether inhibition of specific components would impact the
malignant phenotype of glioblastoma. The primary mediators of TGF-β
action are the Smad proteins (R-Smads), Smad2 and Smad3. Following
receptor activation and R-Smad phosphorylation, they translocate to the
nucleus to modulate gene expression. Since we previously determined that
a cell penetrating peptide conjugate of the HIV TAT protein fused to a 30
amino acid sequence from sorting nexin 9 (SNX9) prevented Smad3, but not
Smad2, nuclear import and target gene expression in models of organ
fibrosis, we further investigated whether it might similarly impact
aspects of GBM proliferation. To that end, twenty-one patient-derived
xenografts (PDXs) were examined for their responsiveness to TGF-β. Of
those, TGF-β stimulated migration and fibronectin expression in seven
(33%), which was prevented by inhibiting Smad3 signaling with the
TAT-SNX9 peptide but not a control peptide unable to block Smad3 action.
These findings indicate that the TGB-b/Smad3 axis is a potentially
important mediator of glioma cell invasion in a significant minority of
GBM models. specifically targeting Smad3 might be effective in a subset
of gliomas.

This work was supported by Public Health Service grants GM-055816 and
GM-054200 from the National Institutes of General Medical Sciences and
P50 CA-108961 Developmental Pilot Award from the National Cancer
Institute.


