Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical feasibility of chemotherapy monitoring for bone sarcoma
patients with diffuse optical spectroscopic imaging.


Background: Sarcomas account for almost 15% of all childhood cancers and
40-60% of these patients develop locally recurrent or metastatic disease.
Currently in many sarcomas, the only clinically accepted prognostic
marker in patients with localized disease is the percent of tumor
necrosis at the time of surgery. Diffuse Optical Spectroscopic Imaging
(DOSI) is an emerging near-infrared (NIR) imaging technique that
non-invasively measures quantitative functional information and may
provide a new means to monitor and predict chemotherapy response in
sarcoma which could impact treatment decisions. Here we evaluate the
feasibility of measuring pediatric sarcomas with DOSI.

Methods: Patients diagnosed with either Ewing’s Sarcoma or osteosarcoma
underwent DOSI measurement at multiple time points during their course of
neoadjuvant chemotherapy. A handheld probe was used to take point
measurements in a 1 cm spaced grid at tumor and contralateral normal
locations. The measurement area was approximately 6 x 7 cm and a single
point measurement typically took 15-30 s, which includes the time it
takes to position the probe, ensure good contact between the probe and
the skin, and acquire data. The optical properties, and absolute
concentrations of oxyhemoglobin (ctHbO2), deoxyhemoglobin (ctHb), water
(ctH2O), and lipids were compared between tumor and normal measurements.

Results: To date, one osteosarcoma and two Ewing’s sarcoma patients
have been measured. At baseline and early in treatment, all subjects had
a statistical difference in total hemoglobin concentration between the
affected and contralateral normal tissues (p Results: To date, one
osteosarcoma and two Ewing’s sarcoma patients have been measured. At
baseline and early in treatment, all subjects had a statistical
difference in total hemoglobin concentration between the affected and
contralateral normal tissues (p < 0.05 for Student’s t-test,
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, and Mann-Whitney rank test). Statistical
differences also appeared in oxyhemoglobin, deoxyhemoglobin, oxygen
saturation, water, lipids, scattering amplitude, and scattering power
although longitudinal trends varied across patients.

Conclusions: DOSI can be utilized to measure optical properties and to
obtain functional information in bone sarcoma patients. It can detect
differences between affected and normal tissue. A better understanding of
the optical properties in this patient population is needed. Larger data
sets are needed to characterize and quantify sarcoma optical properties
and treatment response dynamics, ideally finding a functional biomarker
associated with pathologic response. Additional accrual of primary bone
sarcoma patients and normal volunteers is ongoing.


