Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic activation of the RNA binding protein AGO2 in
hepatocellular carcinoma.


Global transcriptomic alterations of coding and non-coding RNAs are a
ubiquitous feature of cancers including Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Dysregulation of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), key regulators of RNA
processing such as RNA maturation and degradation, is one mechanism in
which cancer cells select to promote tumorigenesis. RBPs are highly
expressed in solid tumors and have been demonstrated to be drivers of
carcinogenesis, however, the underlying mechanisms in which RBPs regulate
the HCC transcriptome is unknown. We analysed genomic alterations amongst
a family of more than 800 mRNA RBPs (mRBPs) in 1,225 clinical specimens
from HCC patients and found that RBPs are significantly activated through
gene amplification in a subset of tumors with poor prognosis, suggesting
their potential oncogenic roles in HCC progression. Amongst the top
candidates, Argonaute 2 (AGO2) was further characterized for its
oncogenic role and effects on the HCC transcriptome. Elevated AGO2 mRNA
expression was highly correlated with elevated somatic copy number
alterations across five different cancer types including HCC. Moreover,
AGO2 expression was associated with overall survival in two independent
data sets (TCGA and the Liver Initiative Cancer), suggesting that AGO2
activation is oncogenic. While the activation of AGO2 induced an
oncogenic phenotype, the abrogation of AGO2 in HCC cells significantly
decreased cancer associated phenotypes such as cell proliferation,
migration/invasion and tumorigenicity in vivo. Further analyses revealed
that AGO2-associated genes were tumor-related, including c-Myc. Notably,
c-Myc amplification was also found in AGO2 high HCC cells, suggesting an
interplay between AGO2 and c-Myc. Our results demonstrate that oncogenic
activation of AGO2 is a novel mechanism that may contribute to global
transcriptome selective for the activation of c-Myc oncogenic. Our
current work suggests that therapies focused on targeting AGO2 may be
valuable for clinical treatment of many different tumors with activated
c-Myc signalling, including HCC


