Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic drug repurposing for faster cures of pediatric cancer
identifies that Digoxin prolongs survival in a PDOX model of group 4
medulloblastoma.


Background: Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant brain tumor
of childhood. While the current standard care for MB leads to long term
survival in approximately 75 % of patients; recurrent and refractory MB
continues to have dismal outcomes. In addition, long term survivors face
significant treatment-related sequelae especially poor neurocognitive
outcomes. Drug repositioning for known drugs is a promising potential
strategy not only for drug discovery but also for accelerated translation
into the clinical setting. To systematically explore thousands of known
drugs available, we integrated computational biology and empirical
biology methods to find old drugs for new indications in MB.

Results: A non-parametric, bootstrapping based simulated annealing
(NPBSA) algorithm was employed to identify driver signaling pathways for
over 1,800 patients with Group 3 and Group 4 MB through an integrative
analysis on their mRNA expression, DNA-copy number, DNA-methylation and
DNA-seq profiles. Then, drug functional networks were constructed based
on gene expression profiles under drug treatment as well as chemical
structures and were clustered into drug modules with potential mechanisms
of action. By evaluating targeted effects of 1,309 drugs from
connectivity map database within each drug module in driver signaling
pathways, we identified a group of known cardiac glycosides that top
ranked among the total drug candidates for the Group 3 and 4 MB subtypes.
In addition to traditional chemotherapeutic agents, members of the
cardiac aminoglycoside family were repeatedly identified as potential
therapeutic agents for MB. These findings were validated in multiple
MB-derived cell lines which showed high rates of growth inhibition by
cardiac aminoglycosides compared to controls. To evaluate if this growth
inhibition in vitro correlated to prolonged survival in vivo, an
extensively characterized patient-derived orthotopic-xenograft (PDOX)
model of Group 4 MB (ICb-1078MB) was treated with digoxin (2 mg/kg i.p.)
for 2 cycles of 14 days. Digoxin treatment significantly prolonged
survival to 113 days from a median of 92 days in untreated controls
(p=0.001). Histological evaluation of recurrent tumors following digoxin
treatment demonstrated changes in the pattern of tumor spread,
vascularity and necrosis compared to untreated controls.

Conclusions: Leveraging big data in the domains of pharmacogenomics and
the notion of drug functional networks and driver signaling pathways
represents a powerful tool to repurpose known drugs for new indications
in pediatric cancers. Using this integrative biology approach, we
identified the cardiac aminoglycosides family generally and Digoxin,
specifically, as potential novel agents in the treatment of pediatric
medulloblastoma


