Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acidic tumor microenvironment stimulation of GPR4 alters
cytoskeletal dynamics and migration of vascular endothelial cells.


The acidic tumor microenvironment results from aberrant vasculature,
insufficient oxygen delivery and aerobic glycolysis of cancer cells. As
cancer progresses, the acidic microenvironment can lead to structural
changes of endothelial cells (ECs) resulting in increased vascular
permeability which may increase metastasis. Extracellular acidification
can activate cellular signaling molecules, including G-protein coupled
receptor 4 (GPR4), which is prominently expressed in ECs. We have
previously reported that acidic activation of GPR4 induces the
transcription of several pro-inflammatory and ER-stress related genes in
ECs. The purpose of the study is to identify the functional response of
acidosis-induced GPR4 activity using Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial
Cells (HUVECs) as a model system. The expression of GPR4 was
overexpressed (HUVEC/GPR4) or knocked down (GPR4 shRNA) using several
genetic constructs. HUVECs were treated with media buffered to pH 6.4 or
to physiological pH 7.4. Permeability of a HUVEC cell monolayer was
assessed by quantifying gap formation as one indicator. Cell migration
was assessed through wound-healing assays. Cytoskeletal dynamics were
also investigated using Rhodamine Phalloidin to investigate actin stress
fiber formation and immunocytochemistry to investigate focal adhesion
dynamics. Our results showed acidic pH induced GPR4 activation changed
the cytoskeletal phenotype, decreased cellular migration, and
proliferation in HUVECs compared to the physiological pH treatment. There
was also a further increase in gap area of a HUVEC/GPR4 monolayer and
formation of actin stress fibers in response to acidic conditions.
Additionally, altering expression of phosphorylated paxillin and focal
adhesion kinase were observed under acidosis/GPR4 mediated stress. In
conclusion, the proton sensor GPR4 induces cytoskeletal variations,
reduces cellular migration, and proliferation in response to an acidic
tumor microenvironment.


