Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput drug combination screening in tumor spheroids
identifies context-dependent synthetic lethalities.


Monolayer, two-dimensional (2D) cell cultures have been a predominant in
vitro model in anticancer drug discovery and high-throughput screening
(HTS). However, 2D cultures of cancer cells lack numerous properties of
in vivo tumors, such as tissue-like structure, cell-cell interactions and
nutrient/oxygen gradients. Thus, in recent years there has been an
increased interest in 3D cell cultures, such as multicellular tumors
spheroids (MCTS), to address some of these limitations. Recently, we and
others have applied MCTS for HTS and identified oxidative phosphorylation
(OXPHOS) as a selective vulnerability of quiescent cancer cells
persisting in hypoxic and nutrient-deprived milieu. However, prolonged
continuous exposure to OXPHOS inhibitors is necessary for the cytotoxic
effect. Thus, there is a need to identify processes that could be
co-targeted for enhanced anticancer activity. Here, we present two
distinct HTS approaches to identify combination partner molecules for
OXPHOS inhibitors. Since we were interested in targeting non-dividing
nutrient-deprived cancer cells, we used quiescent MCTS (Q-MCTS), as an in
vitro model. Cells in Q-MCTS experience glucose concentrations and pH
similar to those observed in deep tumor parenchyma in vivo. In our first
screening approach, we have applied high-throughput gene-expression
profiling to study drug effects in MCTS at a large scale. Using L1000
Gene Expression Profiling method, we generated a dataset of over 1000
drug-induced gene-expression profiles and found that co-targeting of
OXPHOS and the mevalonate pathway results in selective synergistic
toxicity in quiescent cancer cells. In the other approach, we screened a
library of 1650 biologically active compounds, with or without addition
of the FDA-approved anthelmintic agent nitazoxanide (an OXPHOS inhibitor
with high drug repurposing potential). After the screen, we selected
molecules that demonstrated pronounced synergy when combined with
nitazoxanide, but not when used alone. Then, we validated the hits in an
extensive dose-response combination experiments in Q-MCTS and chose 14
compounds that demonstrated strong synergistic interaction with
nitazoxanide at broad range of concentrations. These included antifungal
agents, kinase inhibitors and others. In summary, we here report on novel
approaches, utilizing 3D cell cultures, to identify drug combinations
targeting quiescent cancer cells. By high-throughput gene-expression
profiling and large-scale combinatorial drug screens, we were able to
identify drug combinations preferentially toxic to quiescent cells. This
work also demonstrates how 3D cell cultures yield functional insights
that are not accessible through standard 2D cultures.


