Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlating the genomic and transcriptomic profiles of
pre-treatment cervical tumor biopsies with patient recurrence after
definitive chemoradiation.


Purpose: The purpose of this study was to identify genomic mutations that
correlate with patient recurrence after curative intent chemoradiation
therapy in advanced stage cervical cancer patients.

Methods: Pre-treatment cervical tumor biopsies and normal blood were
prospectively collected from patients treated at Washington University in
St. Louis. DNA and RNA was isolated from the fresh frozen tumor biopsies
and sent for next-generation sequencing and RNAseq respectively. Targeted
exome sequencing was done using a panel of 127 known cancer associated
genes, and an additional 8 genes previously reported to be mutated in
cervical cancer. Gene tiling was done to probe for 30 different HPV
subtypes.

Results: The mutational signatures of single nucleotide polymorphisms
were an APOBEC cytidine deaminase and CpG site cytidine deamination
mutagenesis pattern. The non-silent somatic mutations were analyzed by
online prediction algorithms to assess the mutation’s putative effect
on protein function. Univariate COX regression was used to correlate
patient recurrence with non-silent putatively functional mutations. In
our patient cohort 88% of samples were HPV positive, with 74% being the
high-risk HPV 16 and 18 subtypes. Patient’s with HPV positive tumors
had increased progression-free survival when compared to the HPV negative
patient tumors; and the HPV positive patients with HPV 16 had increased
progression-free survival over the other HPV subtypes. Complete gene
tiling of the HPV 16 and 18 subtypes allowed us to determine whether the
HPV DNA was integrated in the host genome or retained episomally. In our
patient cohort less than 30% of samples had integrated HPV DNA, and there
was no significant difference in progression-free survival between
patients with integrated or episomal HPV.

Conclusions: The genomic analysis of our advanced staged cervical cancer
patient cohort found that epigenetic modifiers were frequently mutated
and that cytidine deamination mutagenesis was primarily responsible for
the generation of the SNP mutations. Our study identified NSD1 mutations
as being correlated with tumor recurrence, indicating that histone
modifications and chromatin structure may play an important role in tumor
response to ionizing radiation therapy. Gene expression analysis is
currently ongoing.


