Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ormeloxifene suppresses the growth of prostate tumor via
inhibition of β-catenin induced AR signaling.


Background: Prostate cancer (PrCa) first manifests as an
androgen-dependent disease and can be treated with androgen-deprivation
therapy. Despite the initial success of androgen ablation therapy,
resistance to anti-androgen therapy displays by progression to hormone
refractory (androgen-independent) advanced stage PrCa which is primary
cause of patient’s death. Main underlying cause for the onset of
hormone refractory cancer is ligand independent activation of AR
signaling in PrCa cells. It has been shown that β-catenin acts as a
non-androgen activator of AR which enhances AR transactivation in PrCa
cells. Thus, identification of agents with excellent pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics parameters that can inhibit ligand independent
activation of AR signaling might be highly useful for the treatment of
advanced stage PrCa. Herein, we identified a synthetic molecule,
ormeloxifene (ORM), which efficiently represses β-catenin mediated
ligand independent activation of AR signaling, thus, inhibits growth and
metastatic features of PrCa cells.

Methods: Androgen-refractory but AR positive PrCa cell (C4-2) was used as
an in vitro and in vivo model systems. Effect of ORM on AR and PSA
protein levels was determined by Western blot analysis. Effect of ORM
treatment was analyzed on AR and PSA luciferase activities by transiently
transfecting the C4-2 cells by AR and PSA luciferase plasmids. Renilla
construct was used as an internal control. C4-2 cells nuclear and
cytoplasmic lysates were prepared using Active Motif kit.
Immunoprecipitation analysis was performed to determine if ORM inhibits
physical interaction of β-catenin with AR. Therapeutic efficacy of ORM
was evaluated in cell lines and PrCa xenograft mouse models.

Results: ORM dose-dependently (10, 15 and 20 µM) inhibited the protein
levels of AR and its downstream target protein PSA. ORM (10 and 20μM)
treatment also inhibited AR transactivation as determined by decreased
promoter activities of AR and its target gene PSA. ORM (10 and 20μM)
treatment inhibited protein levels of nuclear β-catenin and physical
interaction of β-catenin with AR in PrCa cells. ORM administration dose-
dependently (intra-peritoneal; 100 and/or 500µg/mouse; thrice/week)
significantly (PResults: ORM dose-dependently (10, 15 and 20 µM)
inhibited the protein levels of AR and its downstream target protein PSA.
ORM (10 and 20μM) treatment also inhibited AR transactivation as
determined by decreased promoter activities of AR and its target gene
PSA. ORM (10 and 20μM) treatment inhibited protein levels of nuclear
β-catenin and physical interaction of β-catenin with AR in PrCa cells.
ORM administration dose- dependently (intra-peritoneal; 100 and/or
500µg/mouse; thrice/week) significantly (P<0.01) inhibited growth of
C4-2 cells derived xenograft tumors in athymic nude mice. ORM treatment
significantly (PResults: ORM dose-dependently (10, 15 and 20 µM)
inhibited the protein levels of AR and its downstream target protein PSA.
ORM (10 and 20μM) treatment also inhibited AR transactivation as
determined by decreased promoter activities of AR and its target gene
PSA. ORM (10 and 20μM) treatment inhibited protein levels of nuclear
β-catenin and physical interaction of β-catenin with AR in PrCa cells.
ORM administration dose- dependently (intra-peritoneal; 100 and/or
500µg/mouse; thrice/week) significantly (P<0.01) inhibited growth of
C4-2 cells derived xenograft tumors in athymic nude mice. ORM treatment
significantly (P<0.01) inhibited the expressions of nuclear AR and
β-catenin expressions in xenograft tumor tissues. These ORM treated mice
did not show any apparent toxicity in our study.

Conclusion: Our study demonstrates that ORM is a potent inhibitor of
β-catenin-mediated activation of AR signaling. Based on its safety
profile, ORM might be an ideal candidate for repurposing to treat
advanced stage PrCa alone or in combination with other therapies.


