Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GCN5 regulates ATM mediated DNA repair responsible for onset of
acquired resistance in leukemia.


Abstract Introduction- Resistance to therapeutics targeting topoisomerase
2 is a major problem in the treatment of leukemia. Cells which survive
and give rise to relapsed leukemia are known to modulate different
pathways like downregulation of drug target, reduced drug accumulation,
and improved DNA repair; ultimately leading to survival of drug resistant
cells. Here, we wanted to identify the earliest detectable changes
occurring when cells become resistant to topoisomerase 2 inhibitors.

Methodology- We generated early and late stage drug (doxorubicin)
resistant leukemic sub cell line from K562 and THP-1 parent cells,
HL-60/MX2 resistant sub cell line of HL60 was also used for this study.
Molecular changes were analyzed by electron microscopy, quantitative PCR,
western blotting, immunofluorescence, flow cytometry, molecular
inhibitors and MTT assay. Results were further confirmed in blast cells
of AML (n=44) patient samples collected for this study. Furthermore,
meta-analysis for survival was done from microarray expression data of
221 patient samples using PrognoScan.

Results- We mapped molecular changes acquired by leukemic cells during
evolution from Early Drug Resistant Population (EDRP) to Late Drug
Resistant Population (LDRP). We found unlike LDRP, EDRP cells do not
possess known bona fide drug-resistance mechanisms namely limited drug
accumulation, reduced DNA damage or expression of drug target. Instead
they survive by acquiring ‘poised epigenetic state’ that enhanced
their DNA repair. Mechanistically, GCN5, a histone acetyl transferase get
selectively upregulated in EDRP cells mediating higher H4K16 acetylation
levels and consequent euchromatin state of EDRP. Upon Doxorubicin
treatment, H4K16ac facilitate higher ATM recruitment and activation
causing efficient activation of H2AX, NBS1, BRCA1, Chk2 and Mcl-1,
accelerating DNA repair and survival of EDRP cells. Inhibition of GCN5
with Doxorubicin treatment significantly reduces H4K16ac levels, ATM
recruitment and cell survival of EDRP cells. Similarly, ATM inhibition
along with Doxorubicin completely ablates EDRP but not LDRP. Furthermore,
baseline AML patient samples (n=44) showed significantly higher GCN5
expression in MRD positive compared to MRD negative samples.
Additionally, meta-analysis of 221 AML patients showed increased GCN5
expression associates with poor survival of AML patients.

Conclusion- We identify GCN5 expression as marker that defines onset of
resistance in leukemia and GCN5 mediated ATM activation via H4K16ac as a
novel non-genetic route facilitating EDRP cell survival with enhanced DNA
repair. These data also highlight the clinical relevance of targeting
GCN5 and ATM during early resistance to prevent emergence of difficult to
treat stable diverse resistance in leukemia.


