Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HDAC inhibitors regulate M2 tumor-associated macrophage function
through histone acetylation.


Macrophage tumor infiltration in metastatic prostate cancer is a
predictor of patient prognosis. Macrophages influence tumors in
contrasting ways depending on their polarization: M1 macrophages have
anti-tumor functions while M2 macrophages are pro-tumor. The external
stimuli influencing macrophage differentiation and M2 polarization have
been largely elucidated but the resulting downstream changes remain
unknown. There are a number of epigenetic differences between M1 and M2
macrophages that act as important functional determinants. Recent work
studying these epigenetic changes has implicated histone deacetylases
(HDACs), as critical regulators in macrophage differentiation and in
maintaining M1 or M2 function. Pan-HDAC inhibitors (HDIs) such as the
clinically utilized suberanilohydroxamic acid (SAHA) target a wide range
of HDACs and provide a means for manipulating macrophage histone
acetylation. Though HDIs have been found to attenuate inflammatory
functions in M1 macrophages, the field has yet to explore effects of
histone acetylation in M2 macrophages. Using M2 macrophages derived from
human CD14+ monocytes, we found that SAHA regulates M2 macrophage
polarization and function through alteration of histone acetylation. Work
is ongoing to test expression levels of canonical M2 markers such as the
mannose receptor CD206 and scavenger receptor CD163 in M2 macrophages
exposed to SAHA either during or after M2 polarization. Additionally,
investigation into the ability of these populations to secrete M2
cytokines such as IL-10 and VEG-FA and induce EMT in prostate cancer
cells is also being pursued. These results contribute to scientific
knowledge of epigenetic regulation in macrophage function and elucidate
strategies to decrease the pro-tumor function of tumor-infiltrating M2
macrophages. This work lays the foundation for using epigenetic
regulators to modulate the tumor microenvironment and advance cancer
medicine.


