Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel host-pathogen interactions of Helicobacter pylori and their
implications to gastric cancer.


About 20% of the cancer incidences worldwide have been estimated to be
associated with infections. There is a strong correlation of some
pathogens with various cancer types. Although presence of commensal
microbiome helps chemotherapy to be more effective, pathogenic microbiota
increases the cancer risk. Invading pathogens interact with the host
mainly through proteins. To subvert host defense, pathogens hijack host
pathways by mimicking the binding surfaces (interfaces) of host proteins.
This similarity in interfaces permits the pathogenic protein to compete
with host proteins to bind to a target protein, alter the physiological
signaling and cause persistent infections as well as cancer. Detection of
host-pathogen interactions (HPIs) and mapping the re-wired HPI network -
along with its structural details - is critical for in-depth
understanding of the underlying pathogenesis mechanisms of infections and
pathogen-triggered cancers, and developing efficient therapeutics. Here,
we developed a novel computational approach to identify novel HPIs by
employing “interface mimicry”, We applied this approach to
Helicobacter pylori, dominant species in gastric microbiome that greatly
increases the gastric cancer risk in order to understand how they
modulate host immunity and lead to tumorigenesis. We found that its
proteins interfere with the functioning of host apoptosis pathway,
cytokine and chemokine pathways, and also cell-cell adhesions. Our
results shed light on the molecular mechanisms of resistance to
apoptosis, immune evasion and loss of cell junctions that are seen in
Helicobacter pylori-infected host cells. In conclusion, HPIs can help us
unravel which human pathways are targeted by the pathogenic proteins and
how they contribute to pathogenesis of infections and pathogen-triggered
cancer. With a better grasp on immunomodulatory strategies of pathogens,
we can develop better therapies against them.


