Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A conserved E2F1-activated gene regulatory network encompassing
monocarboxylic acid transporter-1, its co-operating antisense lncRNA
SLC16A1-AS1 and their common downstream targets mediates bladder cancer
invasiveness.


AIM: The therapeutic arsenal against muscle-invasive bladder cancer (BC)
is poor, leading to fatal outcomes and necessitating next-generation
targeted therapeutics. A causative event of BC progression is activation
of the gene regulatory networks (GRN) of the transcription factor E2F1.
LncRNAs are emerging integral components of the E2F1-regulated GRNs, but
their implication in BC progression is unknown. Our study focuses on
lncRNAs that participate in E2F1-activated GRNs underlying BC progression
and the therapeutic exploitation thereof.

METHODS: We applied bioinformatics on BC patient cohorts to identify
clinically relevant lncRNAs upregulated in invasive stages. Of those, the
E2F1-responsive lncRNAs were defined by subjecting T24 clones inducibly
overexpressing E2F1 to HTA2.0 RNA arrays. Candidates in close proximity
to oncogenes/tumor-suppressors were further selected, based on an
emerging “guilt-by-association” rule of lncRNA biology. LncRNAs were
qPCR-validated and E2F1-transactivation was shown by ChIP and reporter
assays. The SLC16A1-AS1 lncRNA was functionally characterized by
CRISPR/Cas9 knockout in invasive BC cells, followed by
migration/invasion/metabolic assays, transcriptomics and mice in vivo
experimentation. SLC16A1-AS1 homologues across species were predicted by
comparative genomics.

RESULTS: Our pipeline unveiled SLC16A1-AS1 lncRNA located nearby and
antisense to SLC16A1 protein-coding gene. SLC16A1 synthesizes the
membrane-bound Monocarboxylic Acid Transporter-1 (MCT1), a key metabolic
regulator that mediates lactate uptake and glycolytic flux and favors BC
invasiveness; while SLC16A1-AS1 function was unknown to date. SLC16A1 and
SLC16A1-AS1 present a ‘head-to-head’ gene arrangement, with a
bidirectional E2F1-responsive promoter. This ‘operon-like’ gene
cluster is conserved across mammals, implying functional relevance of
MCT1/E2F1/SLC16A1-AS1. In invasive BC cells, E2F1 transactivates
SLC16A1-AS1, which remains in the nucleus exerting gene regulatory
functions, as well as MCT1, which localizes in the cytoplasm to control
lactate flux. SLC16A1-AS1 induces EMT-independent invasiveness by
regulating expression of downstream cell migration-related targets which
are co-modulated by MCT1.

CONCLUSIONS: MCT1 and SLC16A1-AS1 constitute a composite, E2F1-responsive
functional unit, co-operatively regulating common cell-migration related
downstream targets. Their conserved gene arrangement, which ensures
simultaneous transcription upon E2F1 upregulation, could facilitate
co-ordination between metabolism reprogramming and cell migration to
establish aggressive phenotypes. Combining SLC16A1-AS1 suppression with
formulated MCT1 inhibitors might provide a therapeutic basis against
progressive BC.


