Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Three-dimensional, 3-D, multiplex imaging of biomarkers in tumor
tissue.


Background: Obtaining high-resolution information from solid tumors,
while maintaining the spatial perspective needed to understand the
heterogeneous tumor microenvironment, represents a key challenge for
preclinical and clinical cancer applications.

Methods: We utilized a novel method CLARITY that has been shown to
transform intact rodent tissues into an optically transparent and
permeable hybridized-hydrogel form that can undergo immunostaining
followed by 3-D imaging of nucleic acids and proteins markers, without
the need to separately analyze hundreds of conventional FFPE thin
sections. In this study, human breast and lung cancer excision biopsy
samples were obtained commercially. Murine orthotopic MCF-7 xenograft and
patient-derived-xenograft (PDX) breast tumors were explanted and prepared
as fresh samples. The intact tissues were incubated in a mixture of 4%
paraformaldehyde/4% acrylamide/0.05% bis-acrylamide for 48 hours, and
polymerized in the presence of a thermal initiator, VA-044, for 3 hours
at 37°C to form an intact hydrogel/tissue matrix. The tissues were then
lipid-cleared in a solution of 0.2M borate buffer containing 8% SDS, pH
8.5 at 45-55°C from 5-35 days, depending on sample size. The cleared
tissues were then stained with two multiplex antibody panels that were
selected to highlight the microenvironment of the tissue including,
immune cells (CD-3 or CD-8), vasculature (Lectin-Texas Red or CD-31), and
tumor (cytokeratin [8+18] or PD-L1, directly conjugated to Alexa Fluor®
647). For non-directly conjugated antibodies, the tissues were then
subjected to a secondary goat anti-mouse or goat anti-rabbit antibody
conjugated to either Alexa Fluor® 568 or 700 followed by a nuclear
counterstain, Sytox Blue. Samples were then placed in an appropriate
refractive index solution for imaging on a laser scanning confocal
microscope.

Results: The tissues remained intact throughout the procedure and the
cellular morphology of the tissue was well preserved. The individual
components of the microenvironment could be identified, demonstrating
that the tissues could be successfully interrogated with a multiplex of
indirect and directly conjugated commercially available antibodies. These
preliminary studies, provide evidence for the use of this novel
technology for detecting the heterogeneity of biomarker expression within
the tumor microenvironment. Most notably, the analysis of a lymph node
from a patient with metastatic breast cancer revealed variation across
the tissue which may have implications for the detection of
micro-metastasis in patients with early stage disease when using
conventional thin section histological methods.

Conclusion: These results implicate CLARITY as a powerful next generation
tissue processing technology for profiling the intact tumor
microenvironment, eliminating the need to recapitulate this spatial and
quantitative information with standard thin section techniques.


