Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcomes AXL and Met mediated erlotinib/gefitinib cross
resistance in non-small cell lung cancer cells by Marsdenia tenacissima
extract.


Apart from EGFR T790M mutation, the bypass activation of c-Met and Axl
kinase also can lead to the resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) in NSCLC. Axl and c-Met share same downstream pathways with EGFR,
thus combined treatments of EGFR inhibitors with Axl or Met inhibitor are
promising to overcome acquired resistance of TKIs.

Our previous work showed that the water extract of Marsdenia tenacissima
(MTE), which used to treat cancer in clinics for decades, restored
gefitinib sensitivity in resistant NSCLC cells with EGFR T790M mutation
or K-ras mutations in vitro and in vivo. However, the potential effeicacy
of MTE on Axl and c-Met mediated resistance has not yet been fully
understood, and the related molecular mechanisms also need to be
elucidated.

The present study was performed on HCC827/ER cells, which was established
by exposing parental HCC827 cells to erlotinib. HCC827/ER cells are with
Axl activiation and c-Met amplification, and show dual-resistance to
erlotinib and gefitinib. We evaluated the effects of MTE to restore
erlotinib/gefitinib sensitivity with three different combinations. Cell
viability and cell apoptosis were determined by MTT and flow cytometry,
respectively. The c-Met amplification was assessed with TaqMan real-time
PCR. Signaling pathways were examined by Western blotting to reveal the
possible mechanisms. The in vivo effects of MTE combined with
erlotinib/gefitinib were tested on HCC827/ER xenograft mice, and tumor
tissues were subjected to immunohistochemistry analysis and Western
blotting.

Our results indicated the MTE→MTE+Erlotinib/Geftinib (M→M+E/G)
treatment was the most potent combinations. Compared with control group
and each single, M→M+E/G treatment induced significant apoptosis,
obviously inhibited EGF-induced phosphorylation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR and
ERK1/2, down-regulated HGF/c-Met activation in HCC827/ER cells. Axl is a
receptor tyrosine kinase which strongly associated with EMT phenotype.
The M→M+E/G treatments could not restrain Axl expressions but
remarkably reduced phospho-Axl levels and inhibited EMT phenotype in
HCC827/ER cells. Surprisingly, MTE alone caused prominent p-Axl
inhibition, along with up-regulated E-cadherin and decreased

mesenchymal markers. The mouse tumors were remarkably restrained by the
M→M+E/G combinations, and it was significant compared with each drug
alone (Pmesenchymal markers. The mouse tumors were remarkably restrained
by the M→M+E/G combinations, and it was significant compared with each
drug alone (P<0.05). Accordingly, cell apoptosis was extended, PCNA
expression and tumor angiogenesis (VEGF and CD105) were reduced and EMT
phenotype were regulated in tumor tissues. The p-Met and p-AXL were also
considerably suppressed by the combined treatments.

The present data revealed that MTE restored TKIs such as erlotinib and
gefitinib efficacy in resistant NSCLC cells with Axl activation and c-Met
amplification in vitro and in vivo. It suggests that the addition of MTE
may be a promising therapeutic strategy to overcome TKIs resistance in
NSCLC.


