Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel mechanism of metastasis: Extracellular ATP promotes
invasion and metastasis independent of purinergic receptor signaling.


Cancer is one of the top deadliest diseases in the US and worldwide.
Metastasis, the dissemination of cancer cells from the primary tumors to
distant organs, is responsible for 90% of solid tumor-related deaths.
Tumor invasion and metastasis is a multistep process in which loss of
cell-cell adhesion, increased proteolysis, and cell motility has been
shown to be critical steps. Extracellular ATP is potentially a very
important factor involved in tumor invasion and metastasis because both
cell detachment and migration require energy, which is known to be mainly
provided by ATP. Recent studies have indicated that the extracellular
microenvironment of tumors contains much higher concentrations of ATP
than normal tissues of the same cell origins. Our recent studies
demonstrated that extracellular ATP is taken up by cancer cells through
macropinocytosis and other endocytosis and promotes cancer cell growth,
survival, and drug resistance (1-3). Based on all these, we hypothesized
that extracellular ATP (eATP) plays critical roles in the regulation of
tumor cell detachment, motility, invasion and tumor metastasis
initiation. It was previously shown that ATP-induced purinergic receptor
(PR) signaling is involved in metastasis. Our hypothesis is different in
that eATP also mediates invasion and metastasis independent of PR
signaling. Various bioassays were used in human non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) A549 cells to test our hypothesis. Our results show that
eATP treatment led to a substantially increased number of floating cancer
cells, and these cells were viable and formed clones in a clonogenic
assay. This indicates that eATP induces cancer cell detachment. Moreover,
treatment of eATP also induces cell migration in cell wounding and
Transwell migration assays. In vitro invasion assay showed that eATP
induced a dose-and time-dependent increase in the invasive capacities of
the A549 cells. Western blot analysis indicates that eATP treatment
reduced the expression of cell-cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin. PR
inhibitors only slightly attenuated these effects. All these suggest
novel ATP mechanisms independent of the PR signaling that are unreported
before and imply novel targets for inhibiting/preventing metastasis.

References

1. Qian et al. Cancer Letters 351; 242-251 (2014).

2. Chen, Qian, and Wu. Free Radical Biol Med 79; 253-263 (2015)

3. Qian et al. Mol Cancer Res 14(11); 1087-1096 (2016)


