Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Salicylate sensitizes prostate cancer (PrCa) to radiotherapy;
activation of AMPK and suppression of lipogenesis.


Radiotherapy (RT) is a key therapeutic modality for PrCa that achieves
reasonable disease control rates in localized disease. However, this
requires dose-escalated RT, which is associated with increased toxicity
to surrounding tissues and leads to deterioration of patient quality of
life. Improving the therapeutic ratio in PrCa RT is of high clinical
importance. Aspirin has an established role in cancer prevention and
studies suggested association with improved PrCa outcomes. It was shown
that its metabolite salicylate (SAL) binds directly and activates the
metabolic stress sensor AMP-activated kinase (AMPK). This is likely
achieved through direct binding to the AMPK β1 subunit, leading to
enhanced AMPK activity through suppression of AMPK α-subunit T172
de-phosphorylation. In this study we examined the ability of SAL to
sensitize PrCa to RT. Hormone insensitive (PC3) and sensitive (LnCap)
human PrCa cells, as well as PC3 xenografts grown in immunocompromised
nude mice were subjected to SAL and RT treatments. SAL mediated a
dose-dependent inhibition of proliferation and clonogenic survival in
both PrCa cell lines and suppressed de novo lipogenesis (DNL). This was
detected at μM concentrations of the drug, which can be safely achieved
in human circulation. SAL (100-500 μM) radio-sensitized PC3 and LnCap
cells, and enhanced the ability of SAL to inhibit DNL. In animals treated
with conformal RT (10Gy) to the tumor xenografts, Salsalate feeding (chow
diet containing 2.5gr/kg) enhanced the cytotoxicity of RT detected as
reduced tumor growth kinetics and weight and volume at sacrifice.
Salicylate treatment of cells or salsalate feeding of mice led to
increased AMPK activity in cells and tumors, inhibitory phosphorylation
of Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase and reduction of AktThr308 phosphorylation.
These results indicate that SAL could improve radiation response in PrCa
through a mechanism involving the suppression of DNL. This is achieved at
clinically attainable doses of SAL. This work supports prospective
investigation of SAL as a radio-sensitizer in early phase clinical trials
of localized PrCa.


