Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual-specific T cells are highly effective in eradicating solid
tumors.


Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapy is a novel form of
adoptive cellular therapy and has recently generated remarkable effects
in patients with hematological cancers. However, the success against
solid cancers has been modest. The major challenges are the hostile tumor
microenvironment and the low efficiency of CAR T cells infiltrating the
tumor. Here, we present a major advancement in CAR T therapy that
eradicated large established solid cancers, some in excess of 150 mm2, in
immunocompetent mice.

We hypothesized that a vaccine composed of a recombinant poxvirus could
be used as an antigen delivery vehicle to specifically activate CAR T
cells through their T cell receptor (TCR) and simultaneously change the
tumor microenvironment, allowing the recruitment and activation of CAR T
cells. The approach involves adoptive cell transfer incorporating
vaccination (ACTIV) therapy. We generated dual-specific T cells
expressing a CAR specific for the tumor antigen Her2 and a TCR specific
for the melanocyte protein (gp100). Injection of T cells, together with
recombinant vaccinia virus expressing gp100, induced durable complete
remission of a variety of Her2+ tumors and established metastases, some
in excess of 150 mm2, in immunocompetent mice expressing Her2 in normal
tissues, including the breast and brain. Tumor destruction mediated by
dual-specific T cells occurred rapidly over a period of seven days and
was associated with an extensive proliferation and infiltration of the
dual-specific CAR T cells. Mice that had rejected tumors were resistant
to rechallenge with the same Her2+ tumor cells and partially resistant to
rechallenge with Her2- tumor cells, indicating the formation of immune
memory and epitope spreading. This mouse model study supports the view
that it is possible to design a highly effective CAR T cell therapy for
solid cancers and metastases, even when the target antigen is also
expressed in vital tissues.

To explore the translational potential for using the dual specific CAR T
cell strategy, we established methods to transduce the T cells from human
peripheral blood with both a TCR specific for gp100 and a CAR for Her2.
From as little as 1 ml of human buffy coat, we could generate more than
109 dual-specific CAR T cells, which is sufficient for a course of
treatment. The human dual-specific CAR T cells were functional in
secreting IFN-γ and killing human cancer cells when co-cultured with the
gp100 or Her2 expressing human cancer cells. The stimulation of gp100
through TCR enhanced the dual-specific CAR T cell proliferation,
secretion of IFN-γ and killing of Her2+ human cancer cells in vitro.
These characteristics were identified to be important for eradicating
tumors in the mouse models. Taken together, our data provide valuable
information for the development of CAR T cell therapies for patients with
solid cancers.


