Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A systematic investigation of the effect of scheduling of targeted
combination therapies on response and dynamics of relapse in triple
negative breast cancer cells.


Cancer treatment typically involves administration of combination of
targeted therapies, but initial response is often followed by disease
relapse. The efficacy of a treatment regimen depends on the complex
interplay between cancer growth dynamics, drug specificity and kinetics,
treatment dose and its scheduling. In standard high-throughput drug
screening assays, cells are treated with a single drug cocktail bolus and
cell viability is assessed after 2-3 days, thus not considering treatment
interactions and long-term effects. Recently we have reported a promising
synergistic combination of crizotinib (ALK/MET inhibitor) and ABT-263
(BCL2/BCL-XL inhibitor) against triple negative breast cancer cells. To
understand the effect of the sequence and combination doses of crizotnib
and ABT-263, we designed a comprehensive experimental plan that involved
a total of 567 treatment regimens by varying treatment duration with the
first drug (1, 2, or 3 days), followed by drug withdrawal and recovery
period (2, 5 or 10 days) and then by a second cycle of treatment and
recovery periods over a 26-day period. Cell viability was assessed by the
CellTiter-Glo luminescence assay. Interestingly, ABT-263 alone induced
higher cytotoxicity than an equivalent dose of crizotinib, but the
remaining viable cells recovered much faster after ABT-263 withdrawal
than cells after crizotinib withdrawal. Furthermore, cells exposed to
higher doses of ABT-263 eventually become less sensitive to crizotinib.
Among sequential regimens, crizotinib followed by ABT-263 was
significantly more effective than ABT-263 followed by crizotinib, and
combinations that included lower doses of ABT-263 were most effective.
Taken together, our results show a significant interaction between the
two targeted therapies, and suggest that it may be possible to select
treatment scheduling that can delay drug resistance and tumor relapse in
vivo.


