Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Target validation, antibody discovery and preclinical data
supporting ADAM9 as an antibody-drug conjugate therapeutic target for
solid tumors.


Introduction: A target-unbiased approach based on intact cell
immunizations with fetal progenitor cells and cancer stem cells, followed
by an immunohistochemistry (IHC) screen for cancer-specific candidates,
led to the identification of anti-ADAM9 (a disintegrin and
metalloproteinase) mAbs with highly differential tumor-versus-normal
tissue binding. ADAM9 is a cell surface protein over-expressed in
multiple tumors, with a possible role in promotion and progression of
cancer through multiple mechanisms, including modulation of adhesion and
migration as well as processing of tumorigenic and pro-angiogenic
factors. In this preclinical study, we performed target/mAb validation
and evaluated the therapeutic potential of anti-ADAM9 antibody-drug
conjugates (ADCs) toward ADAM9-expressing solid cancers.

Methods: IHC was performed with anti-ADAM9 mAbs to confirm and extend
available data of human normal and tumor tissue expression. Epitope
mapping studies were conducted to define epitope-specificity. mAbs were
also screened to identify those that efficiently internalized into tumor
cells. In vitro cellular processing studies were performed to further
evaluate the mAbs as ADC candidates. Selected mAbs were converted to ADCs
via chemical conjugation to potent anti-microtubule (DM4) or DNA
alkylating (DGN549) agents; in vitro cytotoxicity studies were conducted
with tumor cell lines representing human cancer types that overexpress
ADAM9. A lead mAb was then selected for humanization and affinity
maturation to yield a development candidate.

Results: Anti-ADAM9 mAbs exhibited strong reactivity toward the tumor
epithelium of solid cancers, including pancreatic, kidney, prostate,
bladder, breast, colon, lung, and ovarian cancer, but limited reactivity
toward normal tissues. Anti-ADAM9 mAbs were efficiently internalized and
processed by tumor cell lines, including lines with only modest ADAM9
expression. Anti-ADAM9 ADCs exhibited specific, dose-dependent
cytotoxicity toward ADAM9-positive cancer cell lines in vitro, with IC50
values in the sub-nanomolar range. Humanization and affinity maturation
of the lead mAb yielded a development candidate that retains potent
antitumor activity toward ADAM9-positive tumor cell lines and equivalent,
high affinity binding to both human and cynomolgus monkey ADAM9.

Conclusion: ADAM9 is a cell surface antigen that is over-expressed on a
wide range of solid cancers. Anti-ADAM9 mAbs that were strongly reactive
with representative tumors exhibited high affinity for the antigen and
were efficiently internalized and processed by ADAM9-bearing tumor cells.
Anti-ADAM9 ADCs demonstrated dose-dependent cytotoxicity in vitro toward
a panel of ADAM9-positive tumor cell lines. Our findings demonstrate that
an ADC targeting ADAM9 may serve as a potential therapeutic for
ADAM9-expressing solid tumors.


