Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockdown of the spindle assembly checkpoint gene Bub1b results in
increased cell death and cell cycle impairment in breast cancer.


Genomic instability is an enabling hallmark of cancer that provides
cancer cells a replicative advantage. Accumulation of genomic aberrations
can also compromise the genomic integrity and put cells under mitotic
stress. Maintaining balance between the instability that gives cancer
cells a replicative advantage and the instability that could lead them to
mitotic catastrophe is crucial for survival of cancer cells. Mitotic
catastrophe can be caused by rapid progression through mitosis before
crucial checkpoints are met, resulting in cell death. To overcome this
challenge, cancer cells may acquire overexpression of spindle assembly
checkpoint (SAC) genes, which can prevent mitotic catastrophe that would
occur if they undergo mitosis prematurely. Bub1b is an important part of
SAC and inhibits the onset of anaphase until all chromosomes are aligned
at the metaphase plate. Our analysis of clinical datasets show Bub1b
expression is elevated in breast cancer, compared to normal breast, and
is exemplified by a pattern of increasing overexpression in more
aggressive variants, such as triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). Bub1b
overexpression also correlates with decreased overall survival in
patients. Expression analysis of breast cancer cell lines corroborates
this clinical data. We hypothesize that the requirement for Bub1b
expression indicates a vulnerability of rapidly proliferating breast
cancers cells, and the inhibition of Bub1b will result in cell death
through mitotic catastrophe.

Using RNA interference with siRNAs we knocked down Bub1b expression in a
variety of breast cancer cells. This resulted in significant decrease in
cellular viability and clonogenicity in soft agar. Furthermore, analyses
of apoptosis using Annexin V and PI costaining showed that Bub1b
knockdown results in significantly increased apoptosis and cell death,
especially in the TNBC cell line MDA-MB-468. However, the viability and
apoptosis levels of the normal breast epithelial cell line, MCF12A, were
not affected. Bub1b knockdown resulted in silencing of SAC activity, as
measured by Cyclin B levels, and also significantly impaired cell cycle
progression in breast cancer cell lines. Additionally, knockdown of Bub1b
in breast cancer cell lines demonstrated an additive effect when combined
with DNA-damaging agents.

Our data support that Bub1b is a critical player in breast cancer cell
survival, by enabling them to overcome mitotic stress. We demonstrate
that impairment of Bub1b has detrimental effects on cell cycle and
progression of mitosis. Further investigation of the role of Bub1b in
promoting successful chromosome alignment and proliferation of breast
cancer cells with genomic instability could provide a novel pathway on
how cancer overcomes the mitotic stress caused by genomic instability.
These studies may also lead to novel therapeutic strategies that combine
SAC inhibitors with standard genotoxic treatments.


