Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FOXC1 promotes pancreatic cancer cell proliferation and metastasis.


BACKGROUD: Pancreatic cancer is one of the most aggressive cancers due to
ineffective treatment options and its high metastatic abilities. This
highlights the significance for the development of effective modalities
to treat this deadly disease. Dysregulation of IGF-1R signaling has been
shown to be involved in the invasive and metastatic potential of several
cancer types. Currently, the mechanism by which IGF-1R promotes
pancreatic cancer is not well understood. Our preliminary transcription
factor profiling array indicated that FOXC1 was regulated by IGF-1R.
Therefore, in the present study, we investigated the role of FOXC1 in
pancreatic carcinogenesis.

METHODS: Western blot and qRT-PCR analysis were done to measure the
expression levels of FOXC1 in a panel of pancreatic cancer cell lines
along with normal pancreatic cells. IHC analysis of the levels of FOXC1
by tumor stage in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma tissues and
normal pancreas tissue was performed using tissue microarray.
Immunofluorescence analysis was performed to compare the expression
levels of FOXC1 in normal and pancreatic cancer cells. To investigate the
role of FOXC1 on pancreatic cancer cell growth and metastasis, we used an
RNA interference approach to silence FOXC1 in HPAC pancreatic cancer
cells. MTS assay was performed to study the cell viability. Metastatic
capabilities of FOXC1 silenced HPAC cells were examined using matrigel
invasion, scratch assay, and soft agar colony forming assays. To further
confirm, Western blotting analysis was done to evaluate the key
intermediates involved in proliferation, epithelial mesenchymal
transition, and apoptosis. Exogenous expression of FOXC1 in MIAPaCa-2
cells was also used to understand the oncogenic role of FOXC1 in
pancreatic cancer. To further validate, xenograft studies with FOXC1
silenced HPAC cells were performed.

RESULTS: Expression of FOXC1 was upregulated in pancreatic cancer cell
lines. Silencing FOXC1 in HPAC cells drastically decreased the cell
viability; however, it did not alter the viability of normal pancreatic
cells. Furthermore, it also significantly reduced the invasive,
migratory, and colony forming abilities of pancreatic cancer cells.
Targeting FOXC1 significantly altered the key signaling molecules
involved in proliferation, EMT, and apoptosis of HPAC cells. Exogenous
overexpression of FOXC1 in MIAPaCa-2 cells also validated the oncogenic
role of FOXC1. HPAC xenograft models further demonstrated the therapeutic
role of FOXC1 in pancreatic cancer.

CONCLUSION: To conclude, our results suggest that silencing FOXC1
effectively targets pancreatic cancer cells suggesting that it could be a
potential novel therapeutic option.


