Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of STAT3 activation in human prostate cancer.


Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) were initially
associated with cytokine signal transduction pathways but are now also
recognized as key modulators of key survival processes in in various
cancers. Activation of STAT3 occurs by the binding of various cytokines
to its receptors leading to the activation of the JAK/ STAT3 signaling
pathway. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) has been implicated in regulating growth of
various malignant tumors. Activated IL-6 has also been shown to be
elevated in the sera from patients with metastatic prostate cancer, and
persistent activation of STAT3 is a common feature. To better
characterize the potential role of JAK/STAT3 as a therapeutic target for
advanced prostate cancer, we examined expression patterns of activated
STAT3 in 111 cases of localized prostate cancer from patients who
underwent radical prostatectomy. Association studies were conducted with
clinicopathological characteristics and biochemical recurrence. We also
analyzed the expression of IL-6/KAK/STAT3 genes from RNA-sequencing data
form the Cancer Genome Atlas Prostate Adenocarcinoma (TCGA-PRAD) data set
and its association to long-term outcomes. Immunohistochemical analysis
revealed that 11.7%, 42.3% and 45.9% of patients had high, moderate or
low/negative expression of phosphorylated-STAT3 (Tyr705). Cancerous
glands tended to have higher STAT3 expression compared to paired normal
adjacent tissue, P=0.088. No correlations were observed between STAT3
expression and clinicopathological parameters. Patients with
moderate-high p-STAT3 expression tended to experience shorter times to
biochemical recurrence (median time, 15 months) compared to patients with
low/negative STAT3 activity, (median time to recurrence not reached,
P=0.064). Cluster analysis suggested a trend for decreased disease-free
survival for patients with high IL-6/KAK/STAT3 gene expression signature.
Our data suggests an association between STAT3 signaling and prostate
cancer recurrence and provides clinical evidence to support JAK/STAT3 as
a potential therapeutic target for patients with advanced prostate cancer.


