Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of PARP1 in human cancer cells confers resistance to PARP
inhibition via activation of innate immune signaling.


Purpose: PARP inhibitors (PARPi) are FDA-approved for the treatment of
ovarian cancer and in clinical trials for the treatment of other
malignancies. PARPi block the catalytic site of PARP1, a poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase that catalyzes the repair of DNA single-strand breaks (SSBs)
and double-strand breaks (DSBs). Although cancer cells harboring defects
in Homologous Recombination (HR) are particularly sensitive to PARPi,
disease progression is eventually observed due to the emergence of
resistant cells. To address the mechanisms leading to PARPi resistance
and identify novel preventive strategies, we have generated and
characterized multiple human cancer cell lines genetically engineered to
acquire PARPi resistance via depletion of PARP1.

Experimental Procedures: We used CRISPR/Cas9D10A (“double nickase”)
to introduce DSBs within exon 2 of PARP1 in human cancer cell lines
HCT116 and HEK293T. After allowing for repair via endogenous error-prone
pathways, single cell-derived subclones were screened by immunoblotting
with an antibody to PARP1. PARP1 “knock out” (KO) clones were further
analyzed for proliferation, cell cycle distribution and sensitivity to
DNA damaging agents, including ionizing radiation (IR) and the PARPi
olaparib. Radiation response was assessed using proliferation and
clonogenic assays, immunofluorescence (IF) for γ-H2AX and immunoblotting
for ATM substrates phospho-KAP1 (Ser824) and phospho-CHK2 (Thr68).
Finally, differential gene expression between PARP1-proficient and
deficient HCT116 and HEK293T cells was analyzed by RNA-Seq.

Findings: Although genetic depletion of PARP1 initially led to
significant death of HCT116 and HEK293T mass cultures, surviving cells
could be isolated to establish stable PARP1 KO clones. Relative to
PARP1-proficient controls, HCT-116PARP1-/- and HEK293TPARP1-/- cells
exhibited decreased proliferation and clonogenic capacity in vitro and
decreased growth in vivo. In addition, loss of PARP1 led to
radiosensitivity and persistent activation of cell cycle checkpoints,
delayed kinetics of γ-H2AX foci resolution and persistent ATM signaling
after IR. In contrast, PARP1 loss induced resistance to the PARPi
olaparib in both lines. PARP1 reconstitution using either stable or
transient approaches resulted in only a partial rescue of these
phenotypes. RNA-Seq analyses revealed increased expression of innate
immune signaling and inflammatory cascades upon PARP1 loss, including
type I/III interferons and their inducible genes.

Conclusions: PARP1 KO human cancer cells may represent a valuable
preclinical model to investigate mechanisms underlying resistance to PARP
inhibitors observed in the clinical setting. Loss of PARP1 triggers
activation of “viral mimicry” in cancer cells, suggesting that drugs
targeting this pathway may synergize with PARPi to kill cancer cells and
prevent the emergence of resistance.


