Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A clinical pharmacodynamic biomarker assay that distinguishes
potentially repairable, cytotoxic drug-induced DNA double strand breaks
(DSBs) from DSBs associated with apoptotic cell death.


The effectiveness of certain classes of cytotoxic cancer therapeutics
likely depends on whether drug-induced DNA damage is successfully
repaired or not, with the latter situation leading to mutations and
strand breaks. However, double strand breaks (DSBs) also occur
independently of genotoxic insults during apoptotic cell death caused by
many drug classes, as well as natural biological processes. We have
developed an immunofluorescent confocal microscopy assay that uses a
biomarker profile suitable for individual cell analysis designed to
distinguish between DSBs caused by apoptosis and those caused by direct
DNA damage from cytotoxic drug action. γ-H2AX is an established
biomarker for DSBs and activated cleaved caspase 3 is an executioner
caspase important for apoptosis, which leads to nuclear condensation, DNA
fragmentation, plasma membrane blebbing, and subsequent cell death. Our
assay defines the DSBs of apoptosis by co-localized γ-H2AX and cleaved
caspase 3 in individual cells, while defining the DSBs from early drug
effects of DNA damaging chemotherapeutics by γ-H2AX induction in the
absence of cleaved caspase 3. Building on our published findings that
topotecan strongly induces γ-H2AX and DSBs within 1-4 hours in vitro and
in vivo, we observed exposure-dependent increases in γ-H2AX /cleaved
caspase 3 double positive cells at later time points, both in an HT29 in
vitro spheroid model and an MDA-MB-231 xenograft model. Fit-for-purpose
studies in the MDA-MB-231 xenograft model treated with birinipant, a SMAC
mimetic and IAP deregulator that does not directly produce lethal DSBs,
demonstrated a dose-dependent increase in cellular co-localization of
γ-H2AX/cleaved caspase 3 consistent with birinipant induced apoptosis
and the established mechanism of action of this compound. Clinical
feasibility was established in a canine clinical trial using
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) 18-gauge needle biopsies: two
novel indenoisoquinolines, indotecan (LMP400) and indimitecan (LMP776),
increased tumor cell co-localization of γ-H2AX/cleaved caspase 3 in
tumor samples obtained on day 5 of qdx5 treatment. This PD biomarker
assay of early and late DSB response to drug exposure could have
important applications for elucidation of mechanisms of action of
anticancer drugs and the development of investigational agents. Funded by
NCI Contract No. HHSN261200800001E.


