Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extreme telomere length was associated with gastric adenocarcinoma
risk: The Singapore Chinese Health Study.


Background: Evidence regarding extreme telomere length and increased
gastric cancer risk has been limited in retrospective case-control study
setting which was potentially subjected to selection bias and reverse
causality. We conducted a prospective analysis in an Eastern Asian
population to examine the hypothesis that extreme telomere length is
associated with increased risk of gastric adenocarcinoma.

Methods: Among 63,257 participants of the Singapore Chinese Health Study,
a population-based prospective cohort of Chinese men and women aged 45-74
years recruited between 1993 and 1998, 28,219 provided baseline blood
samples. We used quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method to
quantify relative telomere length determined by the ratio of telomere
repeat copy number (T) to single-copy gene for albumin (S) (i.e., TSR) on
all subjects. The present analysis included 24,846 subjects with valid
TSR values after excluding samples with insufficient DNA (n = 1,908)
and/or patients with prevalent cancer at baseline blood draw (n = 1,465).
As of December 31, 2014, 191 study participants who were free of cancer
developed gastric adenocarcinoma. The information on demographic and
lifestyle characteristics was collected using structured questionnaires
at baseline and two follow-up interviews. Cox proportional

hazard regression method was used to estimate hazard ratio (HR) and the
corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI) of developing gastric
adenocarcinoma for different levels of decile TSR. Restricted cubic
spline (RCS) analysis was applied to examine the nonlinear relationship
between TSR level and gastric adenocarcinoma risk.

Results: The RCS analysis revealed a U-shaped relationship between TSR
and gastric adenocarcinoma risk (p-value for non-linear
association=0.009). Compared with the 4th decile, HR (95% CI) for the
lowest and highest deciles of TSR 2.27 (1.17-4.40) and 1.98 (0.95-4.13),
respectively after adjusting for age, sex, education, interview year,
dialect group and smoking status.

Conclusions: This was the first prospective analysis of TSR and risk of
developing gastric adenocarcinoma in a general population. The study
demonstrates both extreme short and long telomere length to be associated
with significantly increased risk of gastric adenocarcinoma. These
results suggest a complex relationship between telomere length and
gastric cancer risk.


