Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nrf2 protects against chemotherapy-induced steatohepatitis and
peripheral neurotoxicity.


The indiscriminating protection of either normal or cancerous cells
against electrophilic stresses by nuclear factor E2-related factor 2
(Nrf2) has evoked continuous controversy over its Janus face in cancer.
However, both normal and cancerous cells co-exist in cancer patients, and
the outcome of therapy is determined by responses of both. Here we
systemically analyzed the correlation between Nrf2 expression in normal
cells and chemotherapy-associated myelosuppression, steatohepatitis and
peripheral neurotoxicity, and explored the possibility to predict and
prevent these adverse effects by targeting Nrf2 signaling. Firstly, the
toxicities of 22 clinically-used chemotherapeutic drugs were tested in
bone marrow cells, liver cells and embryonic fibroblasts derived from
either Nrf2 (-/-) or wild type mice, and the toxicities of drugs with
IC50 in wild type cells > 2 folds higher than their Nrf2(-/-)
counterparts are considered as significantly dependent on Nrf2. The
dependency of taxol-induced myelosuppression on Nrf2 was confirmed in
vivo, and the mRNA level of Nrf2 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
from cancer patients was reversely correlated to taxol-associated
myelosuppression. Then steatohepatitis induced by irinotecan (CPT-11) and
peripheral neurotoxicity induced by oxaliplatin were further
investigated. CPT-11 induced intestinal toxicity in wild type mice but no
significant steatohepatitis/liver toxicity was observed; however, CPT-11
treatment in Nrf2 (-/-) mice caused severer intestinal toxicity and
pronounced steatohepatitis, associated with dramatically elevated serum
biomarkers, accumulation of fat in liver cells, and altered liver
histology. Similar results were observed for oxaliplatin-induced
hepatotoxicity. Furthermore, Nrf2 deficiency significantly exaggerated
oxaliplatin-induced peripheral neurotoxicity, as indicated by Von Frey
test and cold plate assay. Interestingly, CDDO-Me was found to activate
Nrf2 signaling in both normal tissues and xenograft tumors, while
sulforaphane selectively activated Nrf2 in liver, bone marrow and
peripheral nerves but not in tumors. As expected, sulforaphane
significantly alleviated CPT-11-induced intestinal toxicity and
oxaliplatin-induced peripheral neurotoxicity, while did not impact the
therapeutic efficacy of drugs. Taken together, our results demonstrate
that the toxicities of some of chemotherapeutic drugs currently in clinic
usage are significantly affected by Nrf2, therefore it is possible to
personalize therapeutic regimens according to Nrf2 expression in tumors
and normal tissues. Specifically, CPT-11-induced steatohepatitis and
intestinal toxicity and oxaliplatin-induced peripheral neurotoxicity are
significantly determined by Nrf2, and Nrf2 could be selectively targeted
to prevent or treat chemotherapy-induced toxicities. The present works
were supported by the NSFC (No. 81272468, 91429305 and 81372266).


