Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tetravalent bispecific antibody AFM13 engages and primes
innate immune cells for anti-cancer immunity.


AFM13 is a tetravalent bispecific antibody with bivalent binding to both
CD30 and CD16A. It has been shown to engage NK-cells through CD16A with
high affinity and specificity, resulting in strong NK-cell cytotoxicity,
and is currently being tested in Phase 2 monotherapy and in combination
with pembrolizumab in Phase 1b clinical trials. We have previously shown
that AFM13-dependent activation of NK-cell cytotoxicity towards CD30+
tumor cells is more pronounced than that of anti-CD30 mAbs. In addition,
AFM13 enhances NK-cell sensitivity to low doses of IL-2 and IL-15,
leading to an increased NK-cell proliferative potential. Here, we have
extended the panel of phenotypic markers on NK-cells that are modulated
after exposure to CD30+ tumor cells in the presence of AFM13. Targeting
some of these markers may enable the development of novel combination
therapies. Moreover, we have analyzed the kinetics of NK-cell responses
to AFM13 exposure. Even though short-term exposure to AFM13 significantly
enhanced NK-cell cytotoxicity, long-term exposure led to a partial,
transient functionally exhausted phenotype in vitro, which could be fully
restored by cytokine stimulation for several days in the absence of
AFM13. Importantly, these recovered cells displayed high cytotoxicity
towards CD30+ target cells in the presence of AFM13. Interestingly, the
transient NK-cell exhaustion was not related to the expression of typical
exhaustion markers or insufficient levels of perforin and granzyme. These
data may warrant the development of novel metronomic application regimens
of AFM13. Further studies imply that immune cells other than NK-cells are
able to inhibit growth of CD30+ tumor cells in an AFM13-dependent manner.
This appears to be strictly dependent on CD16A and a specific cytokine
milieu. Taken together, AFM13 specifically enhances the cytotoxic,
proliferative and cytokine-producing potential of NK-cells, parameters
that can be utilized to monitor NK-cell responses during AFM13 therapy.
Moreover, based on our data, engagement of CD16A+ cells to the tumor site
might enable several innate immune effector functions within the tumor
microenvironment for synergistic anti-tumor activity.


