Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interpreting glioma MR imaging and somatic mutations in a cancer
hallmark context.


Extracting biologically relevant data from radiology images can enable
better monitoring of disease progression and therapy response. The field
of radiogenomics is providing new approaches for such genomic/radiology
correlations. However, there are several challenges in validation and
clinical translation in that few DNA mutations are shared between tumors
from different individuals and the differences in scale between imaging
and genomic features can limit interpretation of underlying mechanisms.
The goals of this work were to i) analyze correlations between low grade
glioma (LGG) DNA somatic mutations, using a novel DNA impact scoring
approach, and MRI derived imaging features; and ii) to interpret results
in context of cancer hallmarks1. Multi-parametric MRI and corresponding
DNA data from 32 LGG patients were extracted from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) and The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA). The cohort included 18
males (56%), with mean age of 44 years (range: 21-74 years). An expert
radiologist outlined the normal and tumor regions of interest using
ITK-Snap tool. The normal region was used as a reference to normalize
image intensities in the tumor region. Tumor mean intensity and mean
variance were computed from Apparent Diffusion Coefficient (ADC), T1
enhancement ratio (derived from T1 pre- and post- contract MRI), and
Fluid-Attenuated Inversion Recovery (FLAIR) images. A novel algorithm was
used to compute DNA impact scores for each somatic mutation. The score
represents the probability of a DNA variant being pathogenic vs.
nonpathogenic. First, the scoring algorithm computes a score for
nucleotide base insertions, deletions, or single base changes and then
computes the consequence of such changes on amino acid coding, binding
sites, splice sites and protein phosphorylation sites. An impact score
was then computed based on the individual DNA impact scores of mutations
within the gene. Finally, an average DNA impact score was computed at the
Cancer Hallmark level using a gene-cancer hallmark map. At gene level,
significant positive correlations were found between the ATRX (p=0.0002),
TP53 (p=0.02) and ADC mean intensity. At pathway level, regulation of
TP53 expression and degradation, and DNA damage response, signal
transduction by p53 class mediator, and DNA translocase activity were
found to be enriched with genes that correlated with ADC and FLAIR. These
pathways also contained genes that were enriched in the following cancer
hallmarks: replicative immortality, evading growth suppression and genome
instability. The ATRX gene is a member of all three hallmarks and TP53 a
member of two. Since ADC is a measure of water diffusion and hence an
indirect measure of cellularity, these findings demonstrate that
mutations in replication and repair pathways are contributing to imaging
features at the tumor level.1 Hanahan, D. and Weinberg, R.A. (2011).
Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell 144(5):646-74.


