Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of the receptor for advanced glycation end products by
estrogen receptor ligands in endometrial cancer.


Endometrial cancer has numerous established risk factors including
excessive unopposed estrogen exposure, tamoxifen, obesity and polycystic
ovary syndrome (PCOS). These risk factors may promote inflammation, an
important hallmark of cancer. Since the endometrium is a site of regular
and repeated inflammation during the menstrual cycle, the regulation of
inflammation may be involved in endometrial cancer. The receptor for
advanced glycation end products (RAGE) stimulates numerous inflammatory
signalling pathways and its expression is elevated in a number of
inflammatory pathologies including diabetes and more recently cancer.
This work aims to investigate the regulation of RAGE by estrogen receptor
ligands in endometrial cancer. RAGE and estogen receptor isoform protein
expression were examined in a patient cohort by immunohistochemistry.
RAGE and ER isoform expression was assessed following estrogen receptor
ligand exposure in both type I and type II endometrial cancer cell line
models. ERα, ERβ, p65 and ER co-regulator recruitment to the RAGE
promoter following ER ligand treatment was determined in vitro by
chromatin immunoprecipitation. Data revealed (i) RAGE and ER isoform
endometrial expression is altered in endometrial cancer patients and
patients receiving tamoxifen compared to postmenopausal women, (ii) RAGE
is expressed in type I and II endometrial cancer cell lines and its
expression can be modulated by estrogen and tamoxifen exposure, and (iii)
by chromatin immunoprecipitation, estrogen receptor ligands were shown to
alter ERα, ERβ and ER co-regulator binding at the RAGE promoter. To
conclude, results from this work suggest RAGE is associated with
endometrial cancer development. Once clinically validated, RAGE and
associated targets investigated in this study could be potentially used
as a panel of endometrial cancer biomarkers and may also be used to
indicate if patients are at risk of the adverse agonist action of
tamoxifen in the endometrium.


