Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A lung cancer risk classifier comprising genome maintenance genes
measured in normal bronchial epithelial cells.


Background: Annual low dose CT (LDCT) screening of individuals at high
demographic risk reduces lung cancer mortality by more than 20%. However,
subjects selected for screening based on demographic criteria typically
have less than a 10% lifetime risk for lung cancer. Thus, there is need
for a biomarker that better stratifies subjects for LDCT screening.
Toward this goal, we previously reported a lung cancer risk test (LCRT)
biomarker comprising 14 genome-maintenance (GM) pathway genes measured in
normal bronchial epithelial cells (NBEC) that accurately classified
cancer (CA) from non-cancer (NC) subjects. The primary goal of the
studies reported here was to optimize the LCRT biomarker for high
specificity and ease of clinical implementation.

Methods: Targeted competitive multiplex PCR amplicon libraries were
prepared for next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis of transcript
abundance at 68 sites among 33 GM target genes in NBEC specimens
collected from a retrospective cohort of 120 subjects, including 60 CA
cases and 60 NC controls. Genes were selected for analysis based on
contribution to the previously reported LCRT biomarker and/or prior
evidence for association with lung cancer risk. Linear discriminant
analysis was used to identify the most accurate classifier suitable to
stratify subjects for screening.

Results: The best classifier comprised 11 features including age and 10
transcript abundance assays representing nine genes; specifically,
CDKN1A, E2F1, ERCC5, GPX1, GSTP1, KEAP1, TP63, XPA, and XRCC1. After
cross-validation, the Receiver Operator Characteristic area under the
curve was 0.94 (95% CI: 0.92-0.96) and overall classification accuracy
was 88.3% (95% CI 82.4%-94.1%). Using a threshold set at 95% sensitivity,
specificity was > 70%.

Conclusions: The LCRT biomarker reported here displayed high specificity
and ease of implementation on a high throughput, quality-controlled
targeted NGS platform. As such, it is optimized for clinical validation
in specimens from the ongoing LCRT blinded prospective cohort study.
Following validation, the biomarker is expected to have clinical utility
by better stratifying subjects for annual lung cancer screening compared
to current demographic criteria alone.


