Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LHX9 is a novel oncogene bypassing KRAS addiction.


Background Oncogenic mutations of RAS are detected in approximately 30%
of human cancers. KRAS is highly mutated in pancreatic, colorectal and
lung cancers. Direct therapeutic targeting of Ras and its membrane
association has been challenging due to high affinity of GTP to Ras and
unexpected mechanism of alternative post-translational modification.
While few inhibitors of downstream RAS effectors - MAPK and PI3K pathways
- show some clinical efficacy, they are complicated by complex feedback
loops, and as single agents are not effective in KRAS-mutant cancers.
Combination therapies may be promising yet limited by narrow therapeutic
window. Identification of alternative strategies to directly inhibiting
RAS and MAPK/PI3K pathways is key to address this unmet need.

Methods To this end, we performed a genome-scale open reading frames
screen to identify genes capable of restoring viability to KRAS-dependent
cells following KRAS suppression. We tested the top 5-standard-deviation
hits in low-throughput manner. One of the top hits included LIM homeobox
9 (LHX9), a homeobox family transcription factor essential for mouse
gonad, limb, and brain development. While LHX9 is amplified in several
cancers, little is known regarding its roles in cancers. We used
hypothesis-driven as well as unbiased approaches including RNA-seq,
ChIP-seq, and IP-mass spectrometry to investigate the basis of
LHX9-mediated bypass of KRAS dependency.

Results We showed that LHX9 rescued KRAS suppression in multiple cell
lines as well as xenograft. LHX9 overexpression substituted for KRAS in
KRAS-driven xenograft. Moreover, in activated-MEK-overexpressing HA1E
cells, LHX9 formed tumors as robustly as myristoylated AKT. LHX9 rescued
KRAS suppression by both restoring KRAS-dependent pathways and activating
KRAS-independent pathways. First, LHX9 reactivated the main KRAS
effectors - MAPK and PI3K pathways and conferred resistance to MEK
inhibitor Trametinib. Second, using ChIP- and RNA-seq, we observed LHX9
binding to promoters/enhancers of genes whose expression was regulated by
KRAS, particularly YAP1. Third, LHX9 increased expression and activation
of KRAS-independent genes, including STAT3.

Conclusions Here, we identified LHX9 as a novel bypass of KRAS addiction.
Multiple unbiased approaches revealed at least three mechanisms by which
LHX9 rescued KRAS suppression. Our findings contribute to our
understanding of KRAS biology. Further investigation of downstream
effectors of LHX9 may highlight potentially novel therapeutic targets for
KRAS-dependent cancers.


