Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recapitulating mammary ductal carcinoma microenvironment in vitro
using sacrificial bioprinting.


American Cancer Society projects that 1,685,210 new cancer cases will be
diagnosed and 595,690 death will occur in 2016, corresponding to about
1,600 deaths per day. In 2016, an estimated 246,660 and 2,600 new cases
of invasive breast cancer (e.g. invasive ductal carcinoma) are expected
to be diagnosed in women and men in the U.S., respectively, along with
61,000 new cases of non-invasive (i.e., in situ) breast cancer for women.
Although tremendous improvements in breast cancer survival have been
achieved, current drug administration procedures relying on chemotherapy
followed by radiographic scans often lead to disparity in cancer care,
necessitating the development of predictive models that can achieve
personalized drug administration regimes. While patient-derived tumor
graft models have achieved some success, the genetic difference between
animal species and the human remains a critical barrier for accurate
prediction of patient responses, in addition to their overly high cost.
During the past few years, the organs-on-a-chip technologies have made
tremendous progress thanks to their capability in modeling the physiology
of the sophisticated human systems. Such capability has been further
enhanced by advancements in tissue engineering and bioprinting, making it
possible to recapitulate the architecture and functionality of tissues in
vitro. Here we have utilized a sacrificial bioprinting strategy to
generate biomimetic mammary duct-like structures within a hydrogel
matrix, to model the genesis and of ductal carcinoma and its invasion.
Sacrificial bioprinting has proved its utility in fabricating hydrogel
constructs containing hollow microchannels mimicking the tubular
structures in the human body. In a typical process we first deposit a
mold consisting of sacrificial microfibrous structures using Pluronic
from a computerized model and allow it to dry overnight; we subsequently
fill the mold with a mixture of gelatin methacryloyl (GelMA)/collagen I
solution and induce gelation using photocrosslinking; afterwards, the
Pluronic fillers are removed by immersing the entire construct in a cold
phosphate buffered saline to achieve hydrogel microchannels. These
bioprinted microchannels could then be populated with mammary ductal
carcinoma cells on their interior walls. The cells were able to
proliferate and populate the surface of the microchannels in 3 weeks,
followed by initiation of invasion from the microchannels into the
surrounding matrix in the 4th week of culture. In the meantime the cells
were observed to deposit basement membrane molecules such as collagen
type IV. This bioprinted mammary ductal carcinoma model provides a
proof-of-concept demonstration of using bioprinting technologies for
engineering biologically relevant cancer models, which can be readily
extended to other cancer types where duct-like structures are involved.


