Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of VENTANA BenchMark ULTRA and Roche cobas® z 480
analyzer for detection of EGFR mutations.


Research has shown non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most common
type of lung cancer, accounting for 85% cases. Exon 19 deletion and L858R
mutation in exon 21 account for approximately 90% of EGFR mutations in
adenocarcinoma NSCLC1. Accuracy and sensitivity in detection of these
markers aids the selection of patients with NSCLC for therapy with an
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI). This study demonstrates how
validated Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and real-time PCR testing can be
used to aid one another in detection of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) mutations in formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded biopsies in our
CAP/CLIA laboratory.

Evaluation of IHC detection was completed on the VENTANA BenchMark ULTRA
Automated IHC/ISH slide stainer and PCR testing was performed using the
Roche cobas® z 480 analyzer. The IHC diagnostic markers selected were
the two most common EGFR mutations, E746-A750del (SP111) and L858R
(SP125). Sample preparation and real-time PCR testing was done using the
cobas® DNA Sample Preparation Kit and cobas® EGFR Mutation Test v2
utilizing a custom, automated plate preparation program on the Perkin
Elmer NGS Express Platform.

Analytical data from the BenchMark ULTRA platform staining and the
cobas® z 480 analyzer correlated in the majority cases. Out of 32
specimens tested, we observed a 100% concordance between IHC and PCR for
L858R exon 21 mutation, whereas EGFR exon 19 deletion concordance between
IHC and PCR was 90%. This decrease in concordance was due to 3 specimens
with indeterminate IHC staining results with weak staining in a small
tumor area. Use of a custom automated workflow for PCR plate preparation
demonstrated successful facilitation of sample preparation and tracking.

Evaluation of results indicate that not only is >10% tumor content
important for detection of mutations via PCR (as directed by the IVD
package insert), but heterogeneity within the tumor can further decrease
sensitivity of PCR. However weak or low IHC staining in only small areas
of the tumor may prove to have less clinical relevance. For the most
comprehensive results, IHC staining in addition to molecular testing
provides better characterization of tumor profiles. Preliminary results
suggest that automated dissection of tumor with the Roche Automated
Dissection instrument prior to PCR increases sensitivity. In conclusion,
IHC and real-time PCR should be used together to detect not only the
array of mutation available in the PCR test, but also to confirm the two
most common mutations by IHC and increase sensitivity of testing which
may be strongly impacted by heterogeneity.

1. - Marc Ladanyi and William Pao: Lung adenocarcinoma: guiding
EGFR-targeted therapy and beyond. Modern Pathology (2008)21, S16-s22;
doi:10.1038/modpathol.3801018


