Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumor estradiol increment mediated by CtBP1/CYP19A1 decreases
the proliferation of androgen insensitive prostate tumor cells.


The normal growth and development of the prostate requires the action of
estrogens and estrogens receptors (ER) a and ß. Estrogen-related
pathways are clearly important in the development and progression of
hormone-dependent cancers such as prostate cancer (PCa), but the role of
ERß remains controversial. The production of estrogens from androgens is
mediated by the aromatase enzyme. Aberrant expression of aromatase plays
a critical role in PCa development and progression. Metabolic syndrome
(MeS) causes sex hormone imbalance and has been identified as a risk
factor for PCa. Recently, we found that C-terminal binding protein
(CtBP1), a transcriptional co-repressor of tumor suppressor genes, is a
novel molecular link between MeS and PCa. We developed a MeS mice model
that were inoculated with PC3 stable CtBP1 depleted or control cells. MeS
mice showed hormone imbalance and high levels of intratumor estradiol.
Interestingly, CtBP1 strongly repressed aromatase expression in these
xenografts. The aim of this study was to understand the transcriptional
regulation mechanism of aromatase mediated by CtBP1 in a MeS/PCa model.
To fulfill our aim, PC3 cells were co-transfected with a CtBP1 expression
plasmid and a panel of ten reporter vectors containing different lengths
(27-1,004 bp) of CYP19A1 promoter, cloning upstream to the luciferase
gene. CtBP1 significantly repressed the activity of all the studied
promoters. By chromatin inmunoprecipitation (ChIP) and RT-qPCR we
determined that CtBP1 associated to CYP19A1 promoter and repressed its
transcription. To identify possible CtBP1 partners in CYP19A1 expression
regulation we investigated several transcription cofactors. By ChIP, we
found that p300 (histone acetyl transferase) and ERß associated to
aromatase promoter in PC3 cells. Using gene reporter assays, we
established that CtBP1 and p300 synergistically repressed, while ER ß
activated, aromatase promoter activity. Interestingly, estradiol exposure
of PC3 cells, released CtBP1 from the aromatase promoter triggering its
expression. Furthermore, we found that estradiol dramatically increased
the viability and the S phase percentage of the androgen sensitive LNCaP
and, its derivative, C4-2 cells; dramatically reducing apoptosis.
Accordingly, estradiol decreased androgen insensitive PC3 cell viability
and G1 phase arrest. In summary, CtBP1 represses aromatase expression in
PCa. Nevertheless, MeS increases intratumor estradiol, which releases
CtBP1 from aromatase promoter activating aromatase expression, which in
turn, modulates prostate tumor cell proliferation.


