Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retrovirus insertion induces syncytin mediated exosomes delivery
in prostate cancer cells.


Activation of retroviruses in normal cells can induce tumors and a wide
array of cancers contains retrovirus-like particles. The potential role
of these endogenous retroviruses in the development and progression of
tumors has been discussed in many studies. However the effects of
retrovirus insertion into cancer cells have not yet been fully examined.
In this study, we explore genetic material transfer either between
retrovirus-transduced prostate cancer PC3 cells or between PC3 cells and
their host environment through extracellular vesicles (EV) and virus-like
particles. For these purposes, we transduced PC3 cells with either
GFP-encoding retrovirus or with m-cherry-encoding lentivirus.
Co-incubation of GFP-expressing cells with m-cherry-expressing cells for
72h yielded yellow PC3 cells. Yellow cells were also observed in the
experiments where lentiviral m-cherry expressing PC3 cells were cultured
with tissue culture medium from retrovirus GFP expressing PC3 cells.
These results indicated that horizontal genetic information transfer
involves neither fusion nor contact between the cells. Since incubation
of the retrovirus GFP-expressing PC3 cells with the medium from the
lentivirus m-cherry expressing PC3 cells, did not yield yellow cells the
genetic material transfer requires retrovirus insertion in PC3 cells.
Using Western blot and Q-PCR, we found the exosomes from the medium
generated by retrovirus GFP expressing PC3 cells to carry human
endogenous retroviral proteins syncytin 1 and 2 and contain RNAs encoding
these proteins. Exosomes from the lentivirus m-cherry expressing PC3
cells had lower protein expression of Syncytin 1&2 than exosomes from
retrovirus GFP expressing PC3 cells. Application of Syncytin 1 or 2
antibodies to the medium generated by or co-cultured retrovirus GFP
expressing PC3 and lentivirus m-cherry expressing PC3 cells suppressed
horizontal transfer of the genetic information from retrovirus GFP
expressing PC3 cells to other cells. The specific mechanisms by which
retroviral transduction and syncytins control the generation of a
GFP-encoding pseudotyped retrovirus or EV and the delivery of their
content, as well as the role of the virus/EV-mediated horizontal genetic
material transfer between prostate cancer cells and between prostate
cancer and their microenvironment remain to be clarified.


