Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of core 1 β1,3-galactosyltransferase (C1GALT1) in pancreatic
cancer leads to altered mucin glycosylation and increased tumor
aggressiveness.


Background: Aberrant expression of mucins underlie pancreatic cancer (PC)
progression and metastasis. Mucin-type O-glycosylation is the principal
post-translational modification on mucins and is regulated by myriad of
glycosyltransferases. Not much has been investigated about the specific
glycosyltransferases involved in increased PC aggressiveness. We found
that core 1 β1,3-galactosyltransferase (C1GALT1), which is essential for
O-glycosylation, is not expressed in some of the PC patients. C1GALT1
adds galactose in O-glycosylation pathway that forms core 1 structure,
which is usually elongated to several carbohydrate structures. Loss of
C1GALT1 is accompanied by incomplete O-glycosylation that results in
increased expression of truncated carbohydrate antigens (Tn and sTn).
Increased expression of these truncated carbohydrate antigens on mucins
has been associated with augmented aggressiveness in several
malignancies. Based on these results, we hypothesized that loss of
C1GALT1 in PC patients is associated with altered mucin O-glycosylation
and increased aggressiveness.

Methods: Expression of C1GALT1 was examined in HPNE (human pancreatic
nestin expressing cells) and oncogenic transformed HPNE cells. To
understand the role of C1GALT1 in PC, CRISPR/Cas9 mediated knockout of
CIGALT1 was performed in PC cells. Impact of C1GALT1 knockout on
glycosylation profile and mucin glycosylation was evaluated using lectin
blotting and lectin-pull down assay. Wound-healing assay was performed to
examine the effect of C1GALT1 knockout on migration. To gain mechanistic
insight, protein expression of signaling molecules involved in growth and
motility was evaluated using western blotting. Orthotopic implantation of
C1GALT1 knockout cells was carried in pancreas of nude mice to study its
role in tumor growth and metastasis. KPC mouse model (KrasG12D;
Trp53R172H/+; Pdx-1- Cre) of PC progression was crossed with C1galt1
floxed mice (resulted in KPCC mice) to study the involvement of C1galt1
in disease progression and metastasis in vivo.

Results: Oncogenic transformed HPNE cells showed decreased expression of
C1GALT1 as compared to untransformed HPNE cells. Knockout of C1GALT1 in
PC cells resulted in increased expression of truncated carbohydrate
antigens (Tn and sTn). Further, knockout cells displayed increased
cellular protrusions, which was associated with significantly increased
migration. Western blotting demonstrated increased expression of proteins
involved in growth and motility. Lectin-pull down assay revealed altered
MUC16 glycosylation in C1GALT1 knockout cells. In vivo studies using
orthotopic implantation and KPCC mouse model demonstrated increased tumor
weight and metastasis with knockout of C1GALT1.

Conclusion: Overall, our results indicate that loss of C1GALT1 in PC is
associated with altered MUC16 glycosylation and increased PC
aggressiveness.


