Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic correlations with clinical response to ASTX727 in patients
with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS).


DNA methyltransferase inhibitors (DNMTis) have been shown to alter the
natural history of MDS and reduce related complications; however, many
patients do not respond to DNMTi therapy or progress with limited
effective secondary options. Therefore, the ability to preselect which
patients are most likely to respond to DNMTis would be useful in
personalizing MDS therapy. Earlier reports noted a trend toward improved
response to therapy in the presence of somatic TET2 mutations (Bejar et
al, 2014), and lower response rates in patients with mutations in DNMT3A
(Ley et al, 2010).

Treatment with the DNMTi decitabine (DAC) requires 5 daily parenteral
doses every month administered in the clinic. An orally administered
DNMTi provides convenience with the potential for improved compliance,
and allows for exploration of different extended dosing schedules which
could produce alternative methylation of the genome and improve clinical
response. DAC is not readily orally bioavailable due to rapid clearance
by cytidine deaminase (CDA) present in the gut and liver. E7727, a novel
CDA inhibitor, is orally bioavailable with an excellent safety profile in
preclinical models. ASTX727 is a combination of E7727 and DAC, and has
completed phase 1 dose escalation of 44 MDS or CMML patients in which
pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) parameters of DAC were
replicated with the oral agent.

During the dose escalation portion of the Phase 1 trial of ASTX727, bone
marrow aspirates were obtained pre- and post- treatment from 28 patients
(13 clinical responders), and genomic DNA from marrow cells was isolated
for next-generation sequencing (NGS) with a panel of 37 myeloid
neoplasia-associated genes. Consistent with previous reports, DNMT3A
mutations were associated with poor response to ASTX727 (all 4 carriers
failed therapy, P = 0.028). Conversely, of the 10 patients with TET2
mutations, a majority responded to treatment (6/10, P=0.444). ASXL1
mutations showed a complex combinatorial effect, as all three
ASXL1-mutated patients with BCOR mutations, regardless of International
Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) risk category, were non-responders while
all 3 patients ASXL1 who also carried a TET2 mutation responded.

ASTX727 is an oral DNMTi that revealed responses in this dose escalation
Phase I study exhibiting a similar pharmacokinetic profile and achieving
AUC range of IV DAC. As previously observed with DAC, ASTX727 may lead to
improved responses in patients with specific gene mutations. This work
shows preliminary effects on mutational burden and allele frequency
concurrent with activity of ASTX727. Further analyses of patients treated
at the RP2D in the Phase 2 trial are ongoing.


