Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Baseline myeloid-derived suppressor cell and eosinophil cell
counts predict clinical efficacy in patients with non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) treated with nivolumab in second line.


The anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody nivolumab is clinically active in a
variety of tumor types including squamous (sq) and non-squamous (non-sq)
NSCLC in second-line, where randomized phase III trials have shown a
survival benefit. However, no predictive/prognostic or dynamic biomarkers
have been found so far to correlate with clinical benefit in patients
treated with anti-PD-1 antibodies. The aim of the present study is to
investigate the potential role of baseline peripheral blood cell counts
in relation to survival and response rate in NSCLC patients treated with
nivolumab in a second-line setting. From July to May 2016 we evaluated 45
patients with Sq (n = 10) and non-Sq (n = 35) NSCLC, previously treated
with first-line platinum-based chemotherapy, who received nivolumab 3
mg/kg IV on day 1 of each 2 week treatment cycle. Clinical
characteristics (T-Stage, lymph nodes involvement, M-Stage) were
assessed. Total numbers of white blood cells, myeloid-derived suppressor
cells (MDSCs, including both monocytic [Mo-MDSC]) and polymorphonuclear
[PMN-MDSC] types), regulatory T cells (T-regs), and serum lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) were assessed. Endpoints were correlations with
objective response rate (RR), progression-free survival (PFS, categorized
as ≤ 3 or > 3 months) and overall survival (OS). Tumor response was
assessed using RECIST criteria, version 1.1, at week 9 and every 6 weeks
thereafter until disease progression. Statistical investigations were
based on univariate analyses by the Wilcoxon rank test. The median PFS of
the overall study population was 3 months. Data about PMN-MDSCs
(identified by flow cytometry as Lin-CD15+CD14-CD11b+HLA-DRlow/-),
Mo-MDSCs (Lin-CD14-CD11b+HLA-DRlow/-) and absolute eosinophil count (AEC)
were available in 37/45 patients (82% of treated patients). Baseline
absolute numbers of PMN-MDSCs, Mo-MDSCs and AEC were greater in patients
with a good prognosis (PFS > 3 months) and a better RR. In particular,
among patients with shorter PFS and lower RR, the median numbers of
PMN-MDSCs, Mo-MDSCs and AEC were significantly lower than those detected
in patients with longer PFS (4 vs 13 cell/µl, p=0.01; 4 vs 21 cell/µl,
p=0.06; 55 vs 155 cell/µl; p=0.02, respectively). Our data suggest that
a baseline blood signature characterized by low levels of PMN-MDSCs,
Mo-MDSCs and AEC is associated with a poor clinical outcome (median PFS
≤ of 3 months and low RR) in 67.6% of patients treated with nivolumab.
In contrast, patients with high levels of these three biomarkers showed a
median PFS significantly longer than 3 months and a higher RR. The OS
analysis is ongoing, and further studies have been planned to understand
whether this signature has a biomarker potential also in
chemotherapy-naïve, first line NSCLC patients.


