Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Cancer Genome Collaboratory.


The Cancer Genome Collaboratory is an academic compute cloud designed to
enable computational research on the world’s largest and most
comprehensive cancer genome dataset, the International Cancer Genome
Consortium (ICGC). The ICGC is on target to categorize the genomes of
25,000 tumors by 2018. A subproject of ICGC, the PanCancer Analysis of
Whole Genomes (PCAWG) alone has generated over 800TB of harmonized
sequence alignments, variants and interpreted data from over 2,800 cancer
patients. A dataset of this size requires months to download and
significant resources to store and process. By making the ICGC data
available in cloud compute form in the Collaboratory, researchers can
bring their analysis methods to the cloud, yielding benefits from the
high availability, scalability and economy offered by cloud services,
avoiding a large investment in static compute resources and essentially
eliminating the time needed to download the data.

To facilitate the computational analysis on the ICGC data, the
Collaboratory has developed software solutions that are optimized for
typical cancer genomics workloads, including well tested and accurate
genome aligners and somatic variant calling pipelines. We have developed
a simple to use, but fast and secure, data transfer tool that imports
genomic data from cloud object storage into the user’s compute
instances. Because a growing number of cancer datasets have restrictions
on their storage locations, it is important to have software solutions
that are interoperable across multiple cloud environments. We have
successfully demonstrated interoperability across The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) dataset hosted at University of Chicago’s Bionimbus Protected
Data Cloud, the ICGC dataset hosted at the Collaboratory, and ICGC
datasets stored in the Amazon Web Services (AWS) S3 storage. Lastly, we
have developed a non-intrusive user authorization system that allows the
Collaboratory to authenticate against the ICGC Data Access Compliance
Office (DACO) when researchers require access to controlled tier data. We
anticipate that our software solutions will be implemented on additional
commercial and academic clouds.

The Collaboratory is actively growing, with a target hardware
infrastructure of over 3000 CPU cores and 15 petabytes of raw storage. As
of November 2016, the Collaboratory holds information on 2,000 ICGC PCAWG
donors (500TB total). We anticipate expanding the Collaboratory to host
the entire ICGC dataset of 25,000 donors (approximately 5PB) and to
extend its data management and analysis facilities across multiple
clouds. During the current closed beta phase, the Collaboratory has been
successfully utilized by multiple research groups, most notably PCAWG
project researchers who analyzed thousands of genomes at scale over a few
weeks’ time. The Collaboratory will open to the public during the
second quarter of 2017. We invite cancer researchers to learn more about
our cloud resources at cancercollaboratory.org, and apply for access to
the Collaboratory.


