Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of estrogen receptor specific signaling transcriptome
in epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) captured circulating tumor
cells from patients with breast cancer.


Background: Breast cancer (BC) is the second leading cause of cancer
related death in American women. There is a critical need for new
biomarkers to evaluate treatment response and emerging mechanisms of
resistance. The identification and characterization of new biomarkers
such as Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs) may be helpful tools for these
purposes as well as understanding the biology of metastatic BC.

Methods: Blood samples were processed with a Ficoll gradient to isolate
nucleated cells. CTCs were isolated from these samples using an
exclusion-based sample preparation technology known as the VERSA
(Versatile Exclusion-based Rare Sample Analysis) platform. EpCAM positive
CTCs were captured in the VERSA followed by mRNA extraction for gene
expression profiling for the estrogen receptor (ER) and other breast
cancer relevant targets. CTCs were defined as Hoechst positive,
CD45/CD11b/CD14 negative, and cytokeratin positive. Captured CTCs were
evaluated for ER protein staining intensity and localization.

Results: The VERSA platform was validated to capture and enumerate CTCs
from patients with breast cancer using EpCAM capture and
immunofluorescent staining for intact nucleus, ER, and cytokeratin while
negative for multiple immune markers (CD45, CD11b, CD14). The VERSA can
capture cells with >90% capture efficiency with EpCAM antibody in MCF7
and T47D cell lines. ER specific transcriptome analysis in BC patient
CTCs and cell lines was performed. We evaluated expression of ER
signaling pathway, prognostic, metastatic/EMT; stemness; epithelial
markers with concordant expression of RPLPO and HPRT1. We identified
expression of ER in 6 out of 7 BC samples. Expression of PR and HER2 in a
subset of samples confirms capture of breast cancer cells for further
molecular interrogation.

Conclusion: In conclusion, we report the expression profiles of ER
signaling genes in EpCAM captured CTCs from BC patients. These tools will
be used to compare subpopulations of CTCs from patients with BC as
predictive and pharmacodynamic biomarkers of response to targeted
therapies or chemotherapies.


