Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A critical role for c-Jun N-terminal kinase in autophagy and cell
survival of breast cancer cells.




Antiestrogen resistance is the major impediment to the eradication of
estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer. Approximately 30% of ER+
breast tumors initially responsive to antiestrogen therapy will acquire
resistance. One approach to reducing the occurrence of acquired
antiestrogen resistance is to identify and target key signaling nodes
that specifically attenuate the ability of antiestrogens to kill cancer
cells. Toward this goal, we identified MEK/MAPK1/2 as a key molecular
target based on the general inability of antiestrogens to effectively
block MEK1/MAPK1/2-mediated phosphorylation of BimEL in breast cancer
cells. BimEL is a pro-apoptotic member of the BH3 family of proteins that
is inactivated (degraded by the proteasome) when phosphorylated by
MAPK1/2. The combination of an antiestrogen and MEK1 inhibitor
robustly-induced BimEL-dependent breast cancer cell apoptosis
(Periyasamy-Thandavan et al., 2012). However, a subpopulation of breast
cancer cells survive this combined treatment via an autophagy-dependent
mechanism. Based on the key role of JNK in regulating autophagy in cancer
cells via BimEL phosphorylation, we hypothesized that JNK was a key
effector of autophagy in breast cancer cells surviving antiestrogen
treatment when used as a single agent or in combination with a MEK
inhibitor. To test this hypothesis, we utilized the selective JNK
inhibitor SP600125 as a single agent or in combination with estradiol
(E2), 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT), and/or U0126 (a selective MEK1
inhibitor). Treatments were conducted with the antiestrogen-sensitive
cell lines MCF-7 and T-47D and the antiestrogen resistant cell line TR5,
previously derived in our laboratory by a step-wise 4-OHT selection.
Effects on cell death (determination of apoptosis) and autophagy
(determination of autophagy levels and flux) were evaluated for the
various hormonal treatments conducted in the presence or absence of JNK
inhibition. These studies showed that: (1) targeting JNK in antiestrogen
sensitive breast cancer cells induces apoptosis with caspase-dependent
cleavage of PARP as a surrogate marker of apoptosis; (2) JNK activity is
elevated in antiestrogen resistant TR5 cells and JNK inhibition induces
TR5 cell death; and (3) antiestrogen sensitive and resistant breast
cancer cells dying as a result of JNK inhibition can show extensive
cytosolic vacuolization with the autophagy protein LC3 (ATG8) localized
to the aberrant vacuoles. Overall, our results support the conclusion
that JNK plays a key autophagy-dependent survival role in breast cancer
cells. Ongoing studies aim to identify the specific JNK protein(s) that
disrupt autophagy and enhance death of breast cancer cells toward the
goal of identifying specific molecular targets to block autophagy in
breast cancer cells.


