Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single-cell transcriptomics reveals differential DNA repair
signatures after chemotherapy in high-grade serous ovarian cancer.


Resistance to chemotherapy poses a major clinical problem in the
treatment of ovarian cancer. The efficacy of platinum- based chemotherapy
relies on defective DNA repair mechanisms, and increased expression of
homologous recombination (HR)/DNA repair genes in primary tumor samples
is associated with improved chemoresponse. However, the effects of
neo-adjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) on the expression DNA repair genes in
cancer cells are poorly understood. In addition, high-grade serous
ovarian cancers (HGSOCs) display significant inter- and intratumoral
heterogeneity, and the identification of mechanisms of drug resistance
has been hampered by the lack of data at the single cell resolution.

We collected 34 primary and 20 interval tumor samples from 15 patients
treated for HGSOC at the Turku University Hospital, Finland. Tumor tissue
total RNA was sequenced with Illumina HiSeq. For this study, we selected
363 genes selected due to their validated role in DNA repair pathways and
compared their expression profiles between primary and interval samples.
The treatment naïve primary tumor samples highly expressed genes related
to HR, such as BRCA2, RAD54, PARPBP, FANCD2, and POLQ. Whereas after NACT
the interval samples highly expressed genes regulating cell cycle,
inflammatory response, and the drug efflux pump ABCB1. Moreover, higher
expression of BRCA2 or POLQ in the interval samples correlated with poor
primary therapy outcome (pWe collected 34 primary and 20 interval tumor
samples from 15 patients treated for HGSOC at the Turku University
Hospital, Finland. Tumor tissue total RNA was sequenced with Illumina
HiSeq. For this study, we selected 363 genes selected due to their
validated role in DNA repair pathways and compared their expression
profiles between primary and interval samples. The treatment naïve
primary tumor samples highly expressed genes related to HR, such as
BRCA2, RAD54, PARPBP, FANCD2, and POLQ. Whereas after NACT the interval
samples highly expressed genes regulating cell cycle, inflammatory
response, and the drug efflux pump ABCB1. Moreover, higher expression of
BRCA2 or POLQ in the interval samples correlated with poor primary
therapy outcome (p<0.01).

To reveal the transcriptomics landscapes of treatment naïve and NACT
treated HGSOCs at the single cell level, we performed single cell mRNA
sequencing of primary and interval samples using the Fluidigm C1
Platform. Unsupervised clustering revealed eight distinct cell
subpopulations, of which two clusters were annotated HGSOC cells based on
enriched expression of cancer specific genes. In global gene expression
analysis of 98 HGSOC cells, the most differentially expressed genes in
primary HGSOC cells were heat shock proteins reflecting active protein
synthesis. By contrast, the cancer cells from interval samples highly
expressed genes regulating the cell cycle and immune response. Of the DNA
repair pathway genes, the interval samples expressed lower levels of
HES1, a transcription factor that is known to promote cancer progression
and stemness.

The herein elucidated DNA repair pathway transcriptomics landscape at
single-cell and whole tumor level provides novel targets for overcoming
chemoresistance in HGSOC.


