Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential metabolite requirements in breast cancer cells
correlate with ER/PR status and doubling time.


Metabolism in cancer cells is significantly altered as compared to their
normal counterparts. Metabolic rewiring can assist cancer cells to meet
their requirements for uncontrolled proliferation and survival. In
addition to their role in protein synthesis and energy generation,
metabolites also act as signaling molecules, antioxidants and perform
osmoregulatory functions. Differences in genetic makeup and phenotype of
cells can lead to differences in these metabolic needs. A detailed
analysis of metabolic signatures of different cancer cells can therefore
prove useful in understanding metabolic interactions with the phenotype
in cancer cells. This study aims at identifying these metabolic
differences among distinct breast cancer cell lines and gaining
mechanistic insights into possible reasons for differential abundance of
metabolites. We used nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy to
quantify intracellular metabolites in five breast cancer cell lines
having distinct genetic and phenotypic composition. We show that the
intracellular abundance of essential amino acids depends on cell type and
medium composition. We also show that myo-inositol abundance was
significantly higher in ER-/PR- than ER+/PR+ breast cancer cells due to
increased expression of inositol-3-phosphate synthase 1 expression.
Myo-inositol is an osmolyte and also a precursor of inositol phosphates
which participate in PI3K and calcium signaling pathways. Although the
reason ER-/PR- cells contain greater concentrations of myo-inositol than
ER+/PR+ cells is not yet known, increased myo-inositol abundance could
potentially serve as a marker of ER-/PR- breast cancer cells. We also
observed significant changes in phospholipid metabolism, specifically,
glycerophosohocholine (GPC) concentration correlated with doubling time.
We also found that reducing serum concentration in the growth medium
reduced the growth rate of MCF7 cells, which led to increased GPC
abundance in the cells. GPC is also an intracellular osmolyte and is a
degradation product of phosphatidylcholine (PtdCho). Phospholipid
metabolism has been shown to be significantly altered in breast cancer
cells and has been used as prognostic marker in breast cancer cells. A
positive correlation of doubling time with GPC irrespective of ER/PR
status may prove useful in deciding therapeutic options. Our results
highlight the differences in metabolic requirements in different breast
cancer cell lines and suggest potential for gaining mechanistic
understanding of these differences using metabolomics.


