Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of IDO1 with epacadostat enhances anti-tumor efficacy
of PD-1 blockade in a syngeneic glioblastoma (GBM) model.


Purpose: To determine if epacadostat, an oral indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase
(IDO1) inhibitor has therapeutic benefit against GBM when administered as
single agent and with PD-1 blocking antibody.

Methods: An initial survival experiment was performed to assess efficacy
and was followed by an identical repeat experiment for validation. 1X105
luciferized GL261 cells, a murine GBM tumor line derived from
intracerebral methylcholanthrene implantation, were stereotactically
implanted intracranially in albino syngeneic C57BL/6 mice. Mice with
increasing bioluminescence on days 3 and 6 were randomized (n=8/group) to
receive treatment beginning on day 6: anti-PD-1 (332.8H3, mouse IgG1; 500
μg intraperitoneal (IP) on day 6, 250 μg q 3 days X 7); epacadostat
(Incyte Corporation, orally dosed at 300 mg/kg/day for 5 days on/2days
off for 3 weeks); anti-PD-1 + epacadostat; and control therapy (isotype
IgG antibody IP and 0.5% methocel in water). Tumor response assessments
were performed by quantifying bioluminescence and survival. A
re-challenge experiment was performed in long-term survivors to assess
for tumor immune responses capable of preventing relapse. All long-term
surviving mice (defined as ≥ 100 days) from the efficacy experiment
were injected with 1X105 GL261 cells in the contralateral hemisphere and
followed for survival.

Results: In both preclinical efficacy experiments, median survival in the
epacadostat monotherapy group did not differ from controls (approximately
30 days). Four of 8 mice (50%) treated with anti-PD-1 were long-term
survivors in both efficacy experiments. In the epacadostat plus anti-PD-1
combination group, 81% of the mice were long-term survivors (7 of 8 in
experiment 1 and 6 of 8 in experiment 2). Of note, none of the long-term
surviving mice developed evidence of tumor; thus the median survival
among the anti-PD-1 and epacadostat plus anti-PD-1 combination groups
were both > 100 days. In the re-challenge study, all of the mice who
underwent GL261 re-inoculation survived > 100 more days with no evidence
of tumor recurrence.

Conclusions: IDO1 inhibition with epacadostat increased the eradication
rate of anti-PD-1 therapy in an orthotopic syngeneic GBM model and long
term survivors rejected tumor following orthotopic re-challenge. Further
combinatorial studies incorporating IDO inhibitor therapy for GBM,
including mechanistic studies, are warranted.


