Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Local intratumoral treatment with anti-mesothelin Immunotoxins
overcomes resistance to anti-CTLA-4 therapy.


Background: SS1P and RG7787 are immunotoxins composed of anti-mesothelin
antibody fused to a fragment from pseudomonas exotoxin A. We previously
observed delayed tumor responses in patients treated with SS1P leading us
to hypothesis that immunotoxins can provoke anti-tumor immunity. We
hypothesize that intra-tumoral injection of SS1P or RG7787 will produce
immunologic death and convert living tumors to a source of antigens and
boost the therapeutic effect of immune check point blockade.

Method: A BALB/c breast cancer cell line was transfected with human
mesothelin (66C14-M) and grown in BALB/c mice transgenic for human
mesothelin. SS1P or RG7787 was injected directly into established tumors
(80-100 mm3) and anti-CTLA-4 administered IP.

Results: We observed total tumor regressions in 23 out of 38 mice (60%)
treated with anti-CTLA-4 and either RG7787 or SS1P. No cure was achieved
when the drugs were given as a monotherapy supporting the case for
synergic anti-tumor activity. Pathologic evaluation of regressing tumors
showed a massive inflammation of admixed eosinophils and mononuclear
cells located in a collar surrounding the tumors. Tumor regression was
associated with increased number of CD8+ cells and was blocked when CD8+
cells were depleted by an antibody. In addition, cured mice were
resistant to re-implantation of 66C14 cells not expressing mesothelin
indicating that a long-term anti-tumor immunity was formed. To determine
if pathogen associated molecular patterns contributed to the response, we
combined anti-CTLA-4 with an inactive RG7787 and observed a major
reduction in anti-tumor activity (PResults: We observed total tumor
regressions in 23 out of 38 mice (60%) treated with anti-CTLA-4 and
either RG7787 or SS1P. No cure was achieved when the drugs were given as
a monotherapy supporting the case for synergic anti-tumor activity.
Pathologic evaluation of regressing tumors showed a massive inflammation
of admixed eosinophils and mononuclear cells located in a collar
surrounding the tumors. Tumor regression was associated with increased
number of CD8+ cells and was blocked when CD8+ cells were depleted by an
antibody. In addition, cured mice were resistant to re-implantation of
66C14 cells not expressing mesothelin indicating that a long-term
anti-tumor immunity was formed. To determine if pathogen associated
molecular patterns contributed to the response, we combined anti-CTLA-4
with an inactive RG7787 and observed a major reduction in anti-tumor
activity (P<0.01) indicating that the effect is not mediated by
recognition of a foreign bacterial protein.

Conclusions: We suggest that injecting immunotoxins into tumors is a
useful approach to boost the activity of anti-CTLA-4. Based on the
synergistic anti-tumor effect demonstrated in this study we believe that
there is a strong rational to explore such combination therapies in
patients.


