Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diverse non-FLT3 molecular mechanisms of crenolanib resistance.


FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) activating mutations are primary
molecular targets for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) due
to high prevalence and unfavorable prognosis. Several type II FLT3
inhibitors have shown clinical benefits but acquisition of secondary FLT3
mutations was reported as a common mechanism of resistance. Previous
studies showed that crenolanib, a type I FLT3 inhibitor, had clinical
activity without acquisition of secondary FLT3 mutations. To identify the
molecular mechanisms associated with crenolanib sensitivity and
resistance, we performed exome sequencing on crenolanib treated patients
with FLT3-mutant multiply relapsed or refractory AML. Baseline mutational
analysis revealed distinct mutational profiles in patients with prior
FLT3 inhibitor exposure, especially in the following pathways: NRAS,
IDH1, WT1 and RUNX1.

Further analysis of patients who had poor response to crenolanib showed
mutations in other cell signaling genes such as NRAS and PTPN11. Variant
allele frequency (VAF) analysis showed that these mutations sometimes
occurred in subclones independent of the FLT3 mutation-bearing clone or
sometimes were acquired by the FLT3 mutation-bearing clone. To
characterize the influence of these mutations on crenolanib sensitivity,
we transduced genes of interest into cell lines harboring FLT3 activating
mutations and treated these cells with crenolanib at various
concentrations. Significantly increased crenolanib IC50 and IC90 were
observed in NRAS G12V MOLM14 and PTPN11 A72D/FLT3 D835 Ba/F3 cells
relative to the respective control NRAS WT MOLM14 and PTPN11 WT/FLT3 D835
Ba/F3 cells. Notably, addition of trametinib restored crenolanib
sensitivity and demonstrated synergistic cytotoxic effects on cells with
FLT3 and NRAS or PTPN11 mutations.

In addition, increases in TET2 nonsense/frameshift mutations were
observed in patients who did not respond to crenolanib. VAF analysis
demonstrated that TET2 mutations co-occurred with FLT3 mutations. We also
observed that bone marrow cells from FLT3-ITD knock-in/TET2 knock-out
mice are resistant to crenolanib at low concentrations, but remain
sensitive to azacytidine at the same level as FLT3-ITD knock-in/TET2 WT
cells.

The remaining patients exhibited a diverse spectrum of secondary
mutations associated with chromatin modifiers, cohesion, spliceosomes and
transcription factors which mostly expanded during treatment, suggesting
an elaborate genetic/epigenetic mechanism of resistance to crenolanib.

Our data suggest that comprehensive sequencing should be carried out on
patient samples prior to treatment to identify and pre-emptively target
problematic clones. In addition, even with high VAF FLT3 mutations,
although FLT3 inhibitor monotherapy provide some clinical benefit,
combining agents targeting cooperative lesions will be imperative to
eradicate both the dominant clone and resistant subclones and improve
patient responses.


