Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: INCAGN1949, an anti-OX40 antibody with an optimal agonistic
profile and the ability to selectively deplete intratumoral regulatory T
cells.


OX40 is a T cell co-stimulatory receptor that can enhance the magnitude
and durability of T cell immune responses. Anti-OX40 agonist antibodies
have shown significant single agent tumoricidal activity in preclinical
models, and can combine effectively with other immunomodulatory
antibodies, targeted therapies and vaccines. OX40 agonists are able to
counteract the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment and promote
tumor-specific cellular immunity via at least two distinct mechanisms: 1)
promoting OX40 forward signaling in tumor-specific T cells; and 2)
co-engaging Fcγ receptors expressed by tumor-associated effector cells,
and facilitating the selective elimination of OX40high intratumoral
regulatory T cells. INCAGN1949, an anti-OX40 human IgG1 antibody, was
selected based on its ability to optimally enhance T cell responsiveness
under conditions of suboptimal T cell receptor stimulation. INCAGN1949
was shown to mediate effective apical OX40 clustering that is translated
into effective downstream activation of the NFκB pathway. Notably,
INCAGN1949 was shown to maintain a sigmoidal dose response curve across a
broad range of antibody concentrations. This suggests a wide therapeutic
window and may be advantageous for dosing considerations. By contrast,
evaluation of reference OX40 antibodies indicated an inverted U-shaped
dose response curve, leading to impaired T cell responses at high
concentrations. INCAGN1949 was selected for clinical development based on
its optimal agonist profile, further reinforced by its ability to combine
with other co-inhibitory and co-stimulatory antibodies to augment T cell
responsiveness. Prior to human testing, the pharmacology and tolerability
of INCAGN1949 was evaluated in non-human primates (NHPs). Pharmacokinetic
(PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) parameters were evaluated including
longitudinal measurements of serum cytokines, immune cell populations,
activation state and T cell-mediated immune responses to reporter vaccine
antigens. INCAGN1949 exhibited a linear PK profile and was well tolerated
at all doses tested, with no maximum tolerated dose established.
Co-administration of INCAGN1949 and vaccines in NHPs showed an
immune-based PD signature across a broad exposure range. These studies
were in line with in vitro findings and support a wide PD range for
INCAGN1949 in patients. An important secondary mechanism of INCAGN1949 is
the ability of its IgG1 Fc region to mediate selective depletion of
OX40high intratumoral regulatory T cells. Immunohistochemistry and flow
cytometry analyses support the validity of this regulatory T cell
depletion mechanism in a range of tumors. The functional in vitro and in
vivo attributes of INCAGN1949 make it suitable for clinical development.
It is currently under evaluation in a Phase 1/2 study in subjects with
advanced or metastatic tumors (NCT02923349).


