Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining the power of different profiling approaches to better
understand the activity of kinase inhibitor drugs.


Profiling of inhibitors for eventual therapeutic use is an essential part
of drug discovery and development. Evaluating the in vitro potency of
kinase inhibitors in a wide panel of enzyme assays is critical, not only
to guiding SAR knowledge for improving drug design, but also for
assessing selectivity, which has long-reaching consequences for both
biological activity and safety. Evaluation of the same inhibitors in
cellular models yields information on the activity of these inhibitors in
a more physiologically relevant environment. However, while some
selective kinase inhibitors show predictably selective profiles in cell
proliferation assays, others do not. Thus, the biological context in
which a kinase inhibitor functions, and the signaling networks influenced
by inhibition of both the desired target and off-target activities, help
to define how that inhibitor will work in a cellular setting and,
ultimately, in a therapeutic application. We demonstrate the power of
profiling several well-known kinase inhibitors in complementary panel
assays, to predict behavior that has implications for clinical activity.
The in vitro profiles of selective (trametinib, vemurafenib) and less
selective (dasatinib, sorafenib) kinase inhibitors are shown and
compared. With careful evaluation of their in vitro enzyme activity
profiles in Eurofins’ KinaseProfiler™ panel, cellular response
profiles in OncoPanel™, and predictive biomarker identification by
univariate genomic analysis, a fuller picture of these inhibitors’
biological activity can be generated, and may be applied to predicting
the therapeutic potential of such inhibitors. While, in some cases,
clinical response is seen as expected, this kind of comprehensive
analysis opens up the possibility for expanding clinical utility of an
asset by potential repurposing for other indications. Collectively, this
demonstrates not only the need to understand an inhibitor’s fundamental
activity(ies) at its designated target(s), but also the importance of
considering cellular context, when assessing its maximum potential
clinical utility.


