Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical impact of high serum hepatocyte growth factor in advanced
non-small cell lung cancer.


Activation of c-MET through hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) increases
tumorigenesis, induces resistance, and is associated with poor prognosis
in various solid tumors. We previously reported that lung cancer cell
lines had increased expression of c-MET due to gene amplification-induced
cytotoxic drug resistance, and that resistant cells paracrine HGF and
promote its resistance. However, the clinical significance of sHGF in
patients with advanced or recurrent NSCLC, especially in patients treated
with cytotoxic chemotherapy, is yet to be identified. Here, we present
sHGF may be useful to predict tumor response and PFS in patients with
advanced NSCLC. A total of 81 patients with 101 treatment regimens were
investigated; 53 patients received first-line therapy and 48 patients
received second-line therapy during the observation period. sHGF levels
were evaluated using ELISA at 4 time-points: at pre-treatment, at
response-evaluation (1-2 months after treatment initiation), at the best
tumor response, and at the disease progression. As a control biomarker,
serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was also evaluated. sHGF at
response-evaluation in patients with progressive disease was higher
compared with that of disease controls in both first-line and second-line
treatment (median value (MV): under the limited of detection (LOD) vs.
0.40; P=0.0086 and MV: under the LOD vs. 0.41; P=0.0035, respectively).
Positive-sHGF at response-evaluation predicts poor progression-free
survival (PFS) compared with negative-sHGF in both first-line (median,
153.5 vs. 288.0; P=0.047) and second-line treatment (87.0 vs. 219.5;
P=0.014). Lung adenocarcinoma subgroup analysis showed that in patients
receiving second cytotoxic chemotherapy, there were no significant
differences in PFS or HR between patients with low-CEA compared with
those with high-CEA, but positive-sHGF at pre-treatment or at
response-evaluation predicts poor PFS (35 vs. 132; P=0.0045, 50 vs. 215;
P=0.0047, respectively). Simple and repeatable markers for activation of
the HGF/c-MET pathway would provide rationale for future research
investigating the merit of sHGF as a potential clinical biomarker to
indicate administration of MET inhibitors.


