Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted characterization of tumor heterogeneity through RNA-Seq
analysis of phenotypically defined subpopulations.


Cancer progression and metastases have been linked to the complex
heterogeneity found within many solid tumors. In order to understand the
complexities within solid tumors there is a need for in-depth
characterization of the tumor and the surrounding microenvironment,
including the identification and measurement of the subpopulations found
within the diseased tissue.

Here we describe a method to interrogate the heterogeneity within patient
derived xenograft (PDX) derived solid tumors through tissue dissociation,
single cell flow sorting, and expression analysis of the resulting
subpopulations. Cell sorting enables the identification and capture of
phenotypically defined subpopulations within the tumor microenvironment
for additional downstream analysis. Whole transcriptome RNA-Seq was
performed on samples collected throughout the workflow to characterize
the expression changes in cells during the different steps of the
process. Expression differences were measured before and after tissue
dissociation, before and after incubation, and before and after cell
sorting. Expression differences were also measured between phenotypically
defined subpopulations sorted by the CD133 and CD49f surface markers.

Several significant differentially expressed gene combinations between
samples were observed. These differences involved unique pathway
characteristics between the different subpopulations sorted based on
expression of CD133 and CD49f markers. In contrast, changes induced by
the workflow process alone were restricted to a small and well-defined
gene subset of immediate early genes (IEGs). Within the workflow, these
changes were restricted to the tumor dissociation step and no changes
were detected after incubating and/or cell sorting the dissociated cells.

Our results indicate that solid tumor dissociation followed by flow
cytometric analysis and sorting enables the interrogation of
phenotypically defined subpopulations found within solid tumors. Since
workflow induced changes are minimal and defined, these methods reveal
biological differences between subpopulations within and between cancers.
Differential expression of numerous surface marker genes were identified
by our method allowing discovery of other candidate surface markers that
may extend the subpopulation structure. Once verified these additional
surface markers could serve to elucidate the dynamic changes cancer
tissue undergoes during progression as well as in response to selective
pressures such as drug therapy.


