Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure-function studies and drug design on the human histone
lysine methyltransferases NSD1, NSD2 and NSD3.


Chromatin dynamics are plastic processes controlled by epigenetic
modifications on the DNA and histone tails that play a critical role in
gene expression. Interestingly, DNA and histones modifications are also
under the influence of exogenous factors such as pollutants, smoking, sun
exposure, daily diet, alcohol consumption and environmental stress.
Departure from “normal” cellular homeostatic conditions is influenced
by aberrant accumulation of specific epigenetic patterns, which may
contribute to the onset of diseases ranging from diabetes to cancers and
neurological disorders. Moreover, epigenetic modifications appear to be
inheritable to some extend and affect gene expression in the offspring.

One of the key epigenetic modifications is histone methylation, which is
catalyzed by histone methyl transferases (HMTases). The nuclear receptor
binding SET domain proteins (NSDs) consist of a family of three HMTases,
NSD1, NSD2 and NSD3 all of which are bona fide oncoproteins. The NSD
HMTases are primarily responsible for methylation of H3K36 and H4K20 in
vivo. However, the outlines of the NSDs biological roles in normal and
pathological conditions remain unclear. Mutation, alteration or
overexpression of the NSD HMTases results in growth defects and is linked
to an increasing number of pathologies, carcinogenesis and is a maker for
tumor progression and prognosis. However, inhibition of HMTases and
especially NSDs by small molecules may offer therapeutic opportunities,
especially in cases with poor prognoses, such as multiple myeloma. To
date, few HMTase inhibitors exist and no inhibitors specific to the NSD
family have been identified. Therefore, a better understanding of the
structure-function relationship and the design of specific, selective and
bioavailable HMTase inhibitors is essential for novel cancer therapy.

In this study, we first we focused on understanding the substrate
specificity of the NSDs in vitro to get insight into the druggability of
the NSDs. Next, we performed virtual ligand screening and identified the
hit molecule LEM-07/14 with an IC50 value of 11.5 µM inhibition against
NSD2. LEM-07/14 derivatives resulted in a 45% methylation activity
reduction in vitro. Furthermore, we identified BIX-01294 as an NSD
inhibitor that differentially inhibits H3K36 methylation by NSD1, NSD2,
and NSD3 with IC50 values of 40~112 µM and investigated the molecular
basis of inhibition using docking studies on the NSD homology models.
Next, we present our X-ray crystallographic efforts on the NSDs and their
applications to selective and specific drug-design.


