Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying therapeutically relevant mouse and patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) models of human cancer using the mouse tumor biology
database (MTB) data resource.


The laboratory mouse is the foremost model organism for interrogating the
genetic and molecular basis of human cancer and is a powerful platform
for identifying therapeutically effective targets for prevention and
treatment of cancer. Research using genetically engineered mouse models
(GEMMs) have led to important advances in our understanding of the
genetic basis of cancer susceptibility, the function of tumor suppressors
and oncogenes, and therapy responses in preclinical and co-clinical
studies. Patient Derived Xenograft (PDX) models are an increasingly
important model system for in vivo studies of human cancer. These models
are created by implanting patient tumors into immunodeficient or
humanized mouse hosts and are a powerful translational research platform
for preclinical and co-clinical studies. The number of GEMM and PDX mouse
models increases significantly every year and the diverse cancer-related
data about human cancer models tend to be distributed in ways that makes
it difficult for researchers to integrate and interpret the information
to find the most relevant model for their research. The Mouse Tumor
Biology database (http://tumor.informatics.jax.org) is an expertly
curated resource for information and data about genetically defined mouse
strains and PDX models of human cancer. MTB provides query tools to
enable integrated searches and visualization of these varied data, thus
facilitating the assessment of novel mouse models of human cancer and
potential preventative and therapeutic treatments. Enforcement of
controlled vocabularies and standard gene, allele and strain nomenclature
within MTB facilitates precise and comprehensive queries of MTB for
pertinent mouse models. MTB contains data from spontaneous or
endogenously induced tumors from genetically defined mice including tumor
classification, incidence, Quantitative Trait Loci, pathology reports,
images and genetic changes in the tumor (somatic) and background strain
(germline) genomes. The PDX resource enables queries based on tumor type,
cancer diagnosis and genomic properties of the engrafted tumors.
Information in MTB is obtained from curation of peer-reviewed scientific
publications and direct data submissions from individual investigators
and large-scale programs. New features in MTB include the Faceted Tumor
Search Form and a Reported Mouse Models table linking the most common
fatal human cancers to reported equivalent mouse models. MTB contains
over 77,000 Tumor Frequencies and over 2,200 Pathology Reports with over
6,600 images from over 4,200 references. MTB provides access to detailed
clinical, pathological, expression and genomics data from over 400 PDX
models. Information in MTB is integrated with cancer models data from
other bioinformatics resources including PathBase, the Gene Expression
Omnibus and ArrayExpress. MTB is supported by NCI grant CA089713.


