Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual-targeting of IGF-1R and ErbB3 pathways in Ewing’s Sarcoma
cellular models with istiratumab (MM-141), a bispecific, tetravalent
monoclonal antibody.


Ewing’s sarcoma family tumors (ES) are aggressive tumors that often
present as metastatic in bone and soft tissue and predominantly affect
adolescents and younger adults. Current treatment for ES includes
surgical resection followed by loco-regional radiotherapy and
chemotherapy. Survival rates for patients with metastatic disease
continue to offer a particularly difficult clinical challenge, with a
five-year survival rate of 20-30% for these patients. ES is primarily a
genetic disease caused by fusion between the 5’ segment of the Ewing
sarcoma breakpoint region 1 gene (EWSR1) on chromosome 22 and the 3’
portion of Friend leukemia virus integration site 1 (FLI1) on chromosome
11. Fusions of EWSR1 and other ETS transcription factors result in
dis-regulated transcription factors which promote malignant progression
of ES tumors. Recent studies have shown that most ES cell lines and
clinical samples express IGF-1R. Importantly, an activated IGF-1R pathway
appears to be a prerequisite for malignant transformation by the EWS-FLI1
translocation, presumably via activation of the PI3K-AKT and MAPK
pathways. These findings have led to the preclinical and clinical
evaluation of multiple IGF-1R-targeted therapeutics with varying results.
Clinical experience with anti-IGF1R targeting therapies has demonstrated
striking anticancer activity in minor subsets of patients with ES.
Importantly, the paucity of a clinically useful biomarker to select
patients continues to hinder IGF-1R drug development in ES. Istiratumab
is an investigational, bi-specific, monoclonal antibody that acts as a
tetravalent inhibitor of PI3K/AKT/mTOR, a major pro-survival pathway
tumor cells use as a resistance mechanism to anticancer therapies.
Istiratumab is designed to interfere with this pathway by blocking
ligand-induced signaling through the IGF-1R and ErbB3 receptors, based on
findings that ErbB3 activation mediates resistance to the IGF-1R
blockade. We will present data in multiple ES models demonstrating the
importance of both IGF-1R and ErbB3 in this disease as a mechanism of
growth and resistance. Furthermore, preclinical xenograft studies
demonstrate that the combination of istiratumab with an irinotecan-based
chemotherapy regimen offers significant benefit over chemotherapy alone.
These studies suggest that clinical evaluation of istiratumab in ES is
warranted.


