Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High affinity interaction of K-Ras4B HVR with calmodulin.


Ras proteins promote cell proliferation and survival, controlling signal
transduction that involves two major pathways, such as Raf/MEK/ERK and
PI3K/Akt. K-Ras4B is the most abundant oncogenic isoform. In calcium- and
calmodulin (CaM)-rich environments, such as ductal tissues, it plays a
critical role in adenocarcinomas promoting PI3K/Akt signaling,
particularly in pancreatic, lung, and colorectal cancers. It was
suggested that in adenocarcinomas with elevated calcium levels, Ca2+/CaM
recruits PI3Kα through interaction with its n/cSH2 domains and
sequesters K-Ras4B from the membrane, organizing a CaM/K-Ras4B/PI3Kα
ternary complex. Ca2+/CaM can replace the missing receptor tyrosine
kinase (RTK) signal, acting to fully activate PI3Kα. Structural data
suggests that CaM uniquely binds GTP-bound K-Ras4B but not N-Ras or H-Ras
isoforms. Experimental evidence points to the farnesylated hypervariable
region (HVR) of K-Ras4B as a major binding domain for CaM. Here, using
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations we modeled K-Ras4B HVR interaction
with Ca2+/CaM. Initial contacts of K-Ras4B HVR with CaM were determined
by the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) chemical shift perturbation(CSP)
data, which guided major interacting residue pairs between the HVR and
CaM. In the simulations, two different topologies of Ca2+/CaM were
modeled: CaM with stretched and flexible linkers. CaM has N- and C-lobes
connected by a linker, and each lobe has its own hydrophobic pocket.
Thus, the hydrophobic farnesyl tail of the HVR can dock into either lobe
of CaM. We observed that the HVR strongly interacts with the linker of
CaM. The K-Ras4B HVR is highly polybasic with lysine-rich, while the
linker region of CaM is negatively charged. The docking of the farnesyl
group into the hydrophobic pocket additionally helps to stabilize the
HVR/CaM interaction. This added stabilization by the farnesyl is
significant in the K-Ras4B/CaM interaction even though the interaction
with the Ras catalytic domain is involved. K-Ras4B has only farnesyl
modification, while other isoforms bear farnesyl and palmitoyl groups.
The additional lipid modification in the HVR would obstruct CaM binding,
suggesting CaM's K-Ras4B-specific action. Our structural model of
K-Ras4B/CaM association provides plausible clues to the PI3Kα activation
involving the ternary complex. The abundant Ca2+/CaM can bind to the p85
domain of PI3Kα while binding to the K-Ras4B farnesylated HVR, releasing
catalytic kinase domain autoinhibition and allosterically leading to full
PI3Kα activation. Funded by Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer
Research, National Institutes of Health, under contract HHSN261200800001E.


