Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipid metabolic reprogramming drives resistance to PD1 blockage.


The mechanisms underlying immunosuppression and resistance to PD1
inhibitors in cancer are not well understood. We attempted to fill this
gap with an integrated analysis of mRNA, microRNA, and protein expression
in an anti-PD1-resistant lung adenocarcinoma mouse model. The model was
created by in vivo passage of 344SQ murine lung cancer cells
(p53R172HΔg/+K-rasLA1/+) in a syngeneic host repeatedly dosed with
anti-mouse PD1 antibodies. Anti-PD1-resistant 344SQ (344SQ_R) and 344SQ
parental (344SQ_P) cells were then inoculated into syngeneic 129Sv/ev
mice, which were then dosed twice with anti-PD1 or control IgG
antibodies. Tumor tissues were collected and analyzed as follows:
transcriptome with Affymetrix; protein levels by reverse phase protein
array analysis; signature enrichment by gene set enrichment analysis;
metabolome by mass spectrometry; and lipid content with fluorescent
probes Oil O rad and BODIPY. We also isolated tumor-infiltrating immune
cells for flow cytometry and gene expression analyses. We identified
lipid-related metabolic pathways as being the most highly enriched in
anti-PD1-resistant tumors (344SQ_R) vs. their 344SQ_P counterparts; the
resistant cells also had more lipid droplets than the 344SQ_P cells. The
anti-PD1-resistant tumors overexpressed several genes involved in
lipogenesis and fatty acid pathways (e.g., fatty acid binding proteins
[FABPs], fatty acid synthase, acetyl-coA-acyltransferase 2, fatty acid
elongases). Specifically, FABP overexpression promoted fatty acid uptake
and lipid-droplet accumulation in resistant tumors. Lipid-sensitive
targets linked to inflammation and insulin signaling (e.g,.
stress-activated kinases such as JNK and NFκB) were altered in 344SQ_R
vs. 344SQ_P tumors. Mechanistically, JNK downregulation by
NFκB-regulated microRNAs protected PD1-resistant tumors from
lipotoxicity caused by FABPs upregulation and fatty acid uptake. FABP
levels were higher in plasma from 344SQ_R than from 344SQ_P tumors.
Tumor-infiltrating macrophages from 344SQ_R tumors had 4 times the amount
of FABP mRNA than parental tumors and a correspondingly higher percentage
of M2-like macrophages. 344SQ_R tumors promoted immune suppressive cells
by upregulating FABPs expression in M2-like macrophages, marked by
increased fatty acid intake and fatty acid oxidation. Conversely,
percentages of CD4+ and CD8+ tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes were reduced
in the resistant tumors. These results suggest that lipid metabolic
rewiring drives resistance PD1 inhibitors supporting the accumulation of
immunosuppressive cells, including M2-like macrophages, preventing type I
immune responses elicited by T cells. Collectively, these findings reveal
new potential lipid-related targets for drug development or new
treatments combining inhibitors of these targets with anti-PD1 therapy.


