Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intravesical BCG induces CD4 T Cell expansion in an immune
competent model of bladder cancer.


Intravesical BCG Immunotherapy is the standard of care in treating
non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC), yet its mechanism of action
remains elusive. Both innate and adaptive immune responses have been
implicated in BCG activity. While prior research has indirectly
demonstrated the importance of T cells and shown a rise in CD4+ T cells
in bladder tissue after BCG, T cell subpopulations have not been fully
characterized. We investigated the relationship between effector and
regulatory T cells in an immune competent, clinically relevant rodent
model of bladder cancer. Fischer 344 rats aged 7 weeks received 1.5mg/kg
N-Nitroso-N-methylurea (MNU) every other week for 6 weeks (4 doses).
Bladder dysplasia began by week 8 and by week 16 the majority of rats had
a NMIBC phenotype. Beginning week 8 following the first MNU dose, rats
were intravesically administered 0.3ml of BCG (Tice), cisplatin (1mg/ml),
Mitomycin C (2mg/ml), MMC+ BCG, or saline (n=10 for all groups) weekly
for 6 total doses. Animals were sacrificed at week 16, and bladders were
processed for histopathology and digested into single cell suspensions
for flow cytometry. Whole transcriptome expression profiling was then
performed on sorted CD4 and CD8 cells of post-BCG tumors vs untreated
tumors to assess T cell differentiation after BCG. Our data demonstrate
that cancer progression in the MNU rat model of bladder cancer is
characterized by a decline in the CD8/FoxP3 ratio, consistent with
decreased adaptive immunity. By contrast, treatment with intravesical BCG
leads to a large, transient rise in the CD4+ T cell population in the
urothelium, and is both more effective and immunogenic compared to
intravesical chemotherapy. Interestingly, whole transcriptome expression
profiling of post-treatment intravesical CD4+ and CD8+ T cells revealed
minimal differences in gene expression after BCG treatment. Together, our
results suggest that while BCG induces T cell recruitment to the bladder,
the T cell phenotype does not markedly change, implying that combining T
cell activating agents with BCG might improve clinical activity.


