Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High throughput kinase inhibitor screen reveals novel inhibitor
combinations acting in synergy with TUBB3/βIII-tubulin suppression in
non-small cell lung cancer.


Background: Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) survival rates remain
dismal and this malignancy is poorly responsive to current therapy. The
mechanisms contributing to this resistance phenotype and aggressive
behavior of this disease are not well defined. TUBB3/βIII-tubulin is
aberrantly expressed in NSCLC and its expression correlates negatively
with disease free survival of patients. Our group has previously shown
that βIII-tubulin plays a functional role in chemotherapy resistance and
tumorigenesis in NSCLC via modulation of the PTEN/AKT signaling pathway1,
2. This study aimed to identify kinase inhibitors that synergize with
βIII-tubulin inhibition in NSCLC using a high-throughput cell-based
screen.

Methods: A high-throughput cell-based screen of a kinase inhibitor
library was performed against our previously described1, 2 NSCLC H460
cells, expressing either βIII-tubulin shRNA or control non-targeting
shRNA. The primary screen consisted of a total of 210 kinase inhibitors
tested at a single, fixed concentration and cell viability determined
using the Alamar blue assay. Secondary screens were performed using a
five point dose response. Further validation of the kinase inhibitors was
performed against two independent NSCLC, H460 and A549 expressing either
βIII-tubulin shRNA or control non-targeting shRNA.

Results: A number of kinase inhibitors that act on key signalling
cascades were identified to act in synergy with TUBB3/βIII-tubulin
knockdown to inhibit NSCLC cell growth. Interestingly, several different
inhibitors which target mTOR were identified as top candidates for acting
in combination with βIII-tubulin knockdown to inhibit NSCLC cell growth.
Treatment of cells with clinically approved mTOR inhibitors, Temsirolimus
and Rapamycin, resulted in a significant decrease in cell viability in
the βIII-tubulin knockdown cells compared to control. Notably, mTOR acts
downstream of AKT signalling and further highlights a potential
connection with βIII-tubulin and the AKT signal transduction cascade.
Other kinase inhibitors that act on key signaling cascades including
Amuvatinib-Multi Kinase Inhibitor (Flt3, Met, Kit, c-Ret & PDGFR);
Mubritinib-HER-2 inhibitor; and Neratinib HER2, EGFR, also acted in
combination with βIII-tubulin knockdown to inhibit NSCLC cell growth.

Conclusions: Our results suggest that clinically approved therapies
designed to target mTOR combined with inhibition of TUBB3/βIII-tubulin
may offer a novel therapeutic strategy for the treatment of NSCLC
patients.

References: 1 McCarroll et al. Cancer Research 2010; 70: 4995-5003. 2
McCarroll et al. Cancer Research 2015; 75: 415-425.


