Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blood-brain-barrier spheroids: Next-generation screening platform
for brain-penetrating agents.


The inability of most systemically delivered therapeutics to cross the
blood-brain-barrier (BBB) is considered a major barrier to effective
brain cancer treatment. In malignant glioma the tumor neovasculature is
known to be leaky, however invasive cells remain protected behind an
intact BBB, and continue to thrive within the brain, ultimately leading
to tumor regrowth and patient death. This leaves us with an urgent unmet
need for the development of next-generation therapeutics with improved
brain delivery. For the first time, we describe here the utility of 3D
multicellular BBB spheroids made of human brain endothelial cells (ECs),
pericytes and astrocytes as a screening tool for brain-penetrating
agents. We show that the outer surface of the spheroids, composed
primarily of ECs and pericytes, form a tight barrier which is
permeabilized in the presence of VEGF. The barrier is characterized by
the presence of intact tight junctions and efflux-pump activity (i.e.,
P-glycoprotein). Furthermore, we have used this model to successfully
demonstrate the transport of angiopep-2 (a well-known brain delivery
vector) and its conjugates (containing cargoes of various sizes such as
peptide, protein and affibody), thereby displaying the versatility of
this model to screen and study a wide range of therapeutic agents. We
demonstrate that this model is superior to the conventional transwell
model in maintaining essential BBB characteristics (i.e., tight/adherens
junctions and P-glycoprotein expression) and as a drug-screening tool. We
have utilized the spheroid model to screen a panel of cell-penetrating
peptides (CPPs) to identify several candidates with high
brain-penetration potential. We then verified the ability of the top 4
candidate CPPs to cross the BBB in mice. This high-throughput model can
lead to better design and analysis of first-in-class glioma therapeutics,
and improve prediction of drug penetration in a living model, paving the
way for breakthrough discoveries in brain cancer.


