Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3K/Akt activity regulates androgen receptor expression and
predicts poor clinical outcome in non-metastatic hormone-naïve prostate
cancer.


Activation of PI3K/Akt pathway is associated with adverse outcome and
aggressive disease in many cancers. In prostate cancer (PCa), the
activity of this pathway has been shown to promote disease progression
and metastasis. However, it is still controversial how PI3K/Akt regulates
androgen receptor (AR), a central signaling molecule in prostate
pathophysiology, and whether it has an active role in hormone naïve
non-metastatic PCa. Here, we show using immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
advanced quantitative multiplexed IHC that the expression of
phosphorylated-Akt(S473) and AR are highly correlated in clinical PCa,
even at the cellular level. Furthermore, we found that high expression of
p-Akt(S473) predicts poor clinical outcome in two independent
hormone-naïve non-metastatic PCa cohorts. To study whether PI3K/Akt
regulates AR expression, we performed an in vitro drug screen with 32
PI3K/Akt/mTOR inhibitors in PC346C, an AR expressing cell line derived
from a hormone-naïve primary tumor of prostate. We observed a strong
correlation between p-Akt(S473) and AR also in vitro in individual cells
independent of the inhibitor used. Although both PI3K and Akt specific
inhibition reduced cell viability, the response in nuclear expression of
AR was highly dependent on the target of inhibition: Akt specific
inhibition reduced AR nuclear expression and resulted in large,
spindle-shaped cells, whereas PI3K specific inhibition increased AR
nuclear expression and resulted in smaller, round-shaped cells. These
data suggest that PI3K and Akt have different roles in sustaining AR
activity in PCa as perturbations of the two components leads to
differential responses in terms of AR nuclear expression and cell
morphology. In conclusion, activated Akt associates with AR expression
and predicts poor clinical outcome in hormone-naïve non-metastatic PCa.
Furthermore, the differing roles of PI3K and Akt in AR regulation
warrants for further studies as it may have implications in the design of
PCa therapy targeting PI3K/Akt, especially when the inhibitors are
administered in combination with anti-androgens.


