Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Examining sociodemographic disparities in perceptions of cancer
risk from medical imaging radiation.


In the United States, ionizing radiation from medical imaging is
estimated to account for nearly half of the total radiation exposure
among the general population. While controversial, some estimates suggest
thousands of future cancer cases can be attributed to radiation from
medical imaging. With the advancement in medical technologies,
understanding the health risks of radiation from medical imaging has
become increasingly complex for the average cancer patient. This
complexity may shape the public’s perceptions of the potential cancer
risks of medical imaging tests, including as x-rays, mammography, and
radioactive dyes. Due to the enumerable, often misleading, sources of
information available to the average consumer regarding the effect of
radiation on general health, trends in risk perception need to be
assessed. To investigate the association between perceptions of radiation
exposure from medical imaging and cancer risk, we analyzed data from the
National Cancer Institute's Health Information National Trends Survey
(HINTS 4, Cycle 2). HINTS is a probability-based
nationally-representative survey which collects data on the American
public’s knowledge, perception, and use of cancer- and health-related
information since 2003. The data examined in the present study were
collected between October 2012 and January 2013; (response rate =
39.97%). Bivariate analyses reveal individuals who perceive medical
imaging radiation to be harmful to health are largely female, Hispanic,
non-Hispanic Black, or non-Hispanic Asian, with less education and lower
incomes. This perception is especially prevalent in individuals who
self-report having a poor or fair general health and less confidence in
their ability to take care of their own health. After adjusting for
sociodemographic and health care factors, a significantly increased odds
of believing radiation from medical imaging causes “some” or “a
lot” of harm to health was found among those who have had a previous
cancer diagnosis compared to those who did not (OR=1.67,
95%CI=1.18-2.35). Individuals who self-reported being Hispanic (OR=2.08,
95%CI=1.29-3.34), non-Hispanic Black (OR=1.54, 95%CI=1.09-2.19), and
non-Hispanic Asian (OR=4.66, 95%CI=2.05-10.62) had significantly higher
odds of perceiving “some” or ”a lot” of harm to health from
medical imaging compared to non-Hispanic white counterparts. Our data
reveal existing populations that perceive radiation from medical imaging
is harmful to health. These perceptions, particularly among women and
minorities, may affect the personal decisions of cancer care from
individual patients. Future analyses may be useful to identify whether
these perceptions alter health outcomes, especially related to frequency
of patients declining cancer radiation therapy. Overall, understanding
patient perceptions of radiation exposure and cancer risk may help guide
conversation and education for physicians with their patients.


