Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MKK4/JNK2 down-regulation in NSCLC suppresses tumor growth and
metastasis.


Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase-4 (MKK4) has been reported to
either enhance or suppress oncogenesis. Evidences of its pro-oncogenic
activities in breast, pancreatic, lung and skin cancer have been
reported. Although the mechanism of its possible tumorigenic role is
still unclear. Recent studies in glioblastoma and lung carcinoma have
suggested important roles for the constitutive activation of its
downstream substrate JNK2. JNKs require phosphorylation by both MKK4 and
MKK7 to be fully activated. The JNK2 isoform shows a unique propensity
among the JNKs to autophosphorylate in vitro. Here we show that JNK2
autophosphorylation contributes to the proliferation and migration of
NSCLC cells under conditions of low serum through an MKK4-dependent
mechanism. This suggests a pro-oncogenic role of MKK4 in NSCLC through a
JNK2 autophosphorylation-dependent pathway. Evidence in several cell
lines, including mouse embryonic stem cells lacking MKK4 or MKK7 suggests
that autophosphorylation alone activates JNK2 weakly in cells. However,
JNK2 autophosphorylates on Thr-183, to create a pool of JNK2 primed for
activation by MKK4, which phosphorylates JNK2 on Tyr-185 to activate it.
Under conditions of low serum the down-regulation/overexpression of MKK4
or JNK2 but not MKK7 or JNK1 suppresses/promotes proliferation of
multiple NSCLC cell lines, through STAT3. Under the same conditions, A549
cell migration is inhibited upon down regulation of either MKK4 or JNK2.
Further supporting the notion that active JNK2 results primarily from
autophosphorylation of Thr-183, pan-JNK ATP competitive inhibitors
(JNK-IN-8 and SP600125) showed a dose-dependent dephosphorylation of JNK2
in NSCLC cell lines and inhibited their proliferation under conditions of
low serum. Moreover, the downregulation of MKK4 or inhibition of JNK2
autophosphorylation by SP600125 inhibited nuclear localization of JNK2 in
A549 cells cultured in low serum. To further understand the pro-oncogenic
role of MKK4 in the A549 cell line, we investigated tumor growth and lung
metastasis in A549 Xenografts in which either JNK2 or MKK4 were stably
knocked down. Either JNK2 or MKK4 down regulation showed a similar
suppression of tumor growth and lung metastasis if compared to cells
expressing an shRNA control. Sequencing of MKK4 in the A549 cells
revealed no genomic deletion or somatic mutations. Taken together, the
data suggest that MKK4 may exhibit pro-oncogenic properties in NSCLC by
activating Thr-183-autophosphorylated JNK2. Targeting this pathway may
reduce or block lung tumor progression and/or metastasis.


