Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of cell line derived organoids to evaluate stroma
targeted therapies in pancreatic cancer.


Background: Most solid tumors have extensive stroma that not only
facilitates the tumor progression but also impedes the delivery of the
chemotherapeutic agents. Due to lack of any in-vitro system, presently it
is difficult to evaluate any stroma-targeted therapies. Therefore, we
developed an organoid system using labeled pancreatic cancer and stellate
cell lines.

Methods: Murine (FC 1295 and imPSCc-2) cell lines cultured in different
combinations were grown as an organoid system using matrigel. The
organoids, starting day four were treated with either gemcitabine or
EC359, a novel mifepristone derived steroidal cytotoxic agent that
targets tumor stroma, or both in combination. qRT-PCR analysis of
activated stroma signature genes was performed on the mRNA isolated from
different treatment groups. H&E, immunohistochemistry, and western blot
analysis were performed to further validate our findings.

Results: Histologically, these cell line derived organoids develop ductal
structures surrounded by fibroblast as seen in the pancreatic tumors.
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated alpha-SMA staining of imPSCc-2 while FC
1295 cells were stained positive for CK19 and Na/K-ATPase. Gemcitabine
treatment of the organoids resulted in 98% relative reduction in GFP
fluorescence while EC359 decreased the fluorescence by 46% as compared to
control. qRT-PCR demonstrated significant reduction (pResults:
Histologically, these cell line derived organoids develop ductal
structures surrounded by fibroblast as seen in the pancreatic tumors.
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated alpha-SMA staining of imPSCc-2 while FC
1295 cells were stained positive for CK19 and Na/K-ATPase. Gemcitabine
treatment of the organoids resulted in 98% relative reduction in GFP
fluorescence while EC359 decreased the fluorescence by 46% as compared to
control. qRT-PCR demonstrated significant reduction (p<0.01) in the
expression of activated stroma associated genes such as COL1A1, POSTN,
SPARC, COL3A1, COL5A2 and THBS2. However, there was a significant
increase in the expression of COL10A1, suggesting the differential
regulation of stroma associated genes to stroma-targeted therapies.
Further, western blot analysis demonstrated that EC359 reduced the
expression of markers of activated stroma including alpha-SMA, and
vimentin.

Conclusions: Our novel cell line derived organoid model can be utilized
for fast, and inexpensive evaluation of stroma-targeted therapies. Also,
our study demonstrates that gemcitabine and a novel
mifepristone-derivative can be used as combination therapy to
simultaneously target cancer cells and associated stroma for the
treatment of pancreatic cancer.


