Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: viGEN: An open source bioinformatics pipeline for viral RNA
detection and quantification in human tumor samples.


We present a novel pipeline for viral RNA detection and quantification in
human RNA-seq data. Our pipeline has been tested on the TCGA liver cancer
cohort, can not only detect the presence of a viral species, but also
provide gene level read counts for individual viral species and extract
viral-variants.

Introduction Approximately 20% of human cancer types are associated with
viral infection that is routinely detected in blood samples. However the
extent and biological significance of viral presence/infection in actual
tumor samples is generally unknown but could be measured using existing
Human RNA-seq data from tumor samples. We have developed a bioinformatics
pipeline viGEN combining existing and novel RNAseq tools that allows for
detection and quantification of viral RNA in human RNAseq data.

Methods The pipeline includes 4 major modules: The first module allows to
align and filter out human RNA sequences; second module maps and count
(remaining un-aligned) reads against reference genomes of all known and
sequenced human viruses; the third module calculates quantitate read
counts at the individual viral genes level thus allowing for downstream
differential expression analysis of viral genes between experimental and
controls groups. The fourth module calls variants in these viruses. To
the best of our knowledge there are no publicly available pipelines or
packages that would provide this type of complete analysis in one
package. Customized solutions have been reported in the literature
however were not made public.

Results We used this pipeline to examine viruses present in RNA-seq data
from 75 liver cancer patients in the TCGA data collection. Our pipeline
allows conducting quantitative analysis at the gene level for
visualization and detection of statistically significant differentially
expressed viral genes between groups of patients known to be infected
with both HBV and various subtypes of HCV. Once the viral genomes are
detected at the genome level, we examine the differences between
“Dead” and “Alive” samples at the viral-transcript level, and at
the viral-variant level.

Conclusion Our results show that it is possible to detect viral sequences
from whole-transcriptome (RNA-seq) data in humans. We were able to not
only quantify them at a viral-gene/CDS level, but also extract variants
from the 75-sample dataset from TCGA. The results presented here are in
correspondence with published literature and are a proof of concept of
our pipeline. This pipeline can be used on cancer and non-cancer human
RNA-seq or other NGS data to provide additional insights into the
biological significance of viral infection in complex diseases,
tumorigeneses and cancer immunology.


