Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct molecular effects of chemotherapeutic agents on choline
phospholipid metabolism of triple-negative breast cancer cells.


The magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS)-detected total choline (tCho)
signal is a promising non-invasive surrogate marker able to predict
chemotherapy response in breast cancer patients early on. However, the
molecular mechanisms by which common chemotherapeutic drugs affect the
tCho signal, which consists of glycerophosphocholine (GPC),
phosphocholine (PC), and free choline (Cho), are mostly unknown. Here we
have employed some widely used cancer chemotherapeutic drugs such as
doxorubicin, paclitaxel, and vinorelbine to treat triple-negative human
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells to elucidate their molecular effects on
choline phospholipid metabolism. High-resolution (HR) 1H MRS of
water-soluble cell extracts was employed to detect changes in cellular
choline metabolite profiles, and quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) to assess
the corresponding changes in the expression levels of
choline-metabolizing enzymes. After 48 hours of doxorubicin treatment,
the GPC levels in MDA-MB-231 cells significantly increased, while PC
level decreased, and the tCho concentration remained unchanged.
Vinorelbine treatment displayed a comparable effect to doxorubicin, but
the GPC increase and PC decrease occurred to a lesser extent. Paclitaxel
treatment caused an increased GPC level along with an unaltered PC level,
leading to a slightly increased tCho level. In all these cases, the
PC/GPC ratio decreased from 3.5 in the control to about 2.0 in
paclitaxel- or vinorelbine-treated samples, to about 1.0 in
doxorubicin-treated samples. qRT-PCR-detected mRNA expression levels
showed that GDPD6 and Chkα were downregulated by doxorubicin. GDPD5,
GDPD6, and Chkα genes displayed a reduced mRNA expression level
following vinorelbine treatment, while no significant change in these
three genes was detected after paclitaxel treatment. For comparison, the
known GDPD6 inhibitor dipyridamole significantly increased cellular GPC
levels, but, as expected, did not affect GDPD6 mRNA expression levels as
it acts as an enzyme inhibitor. Our study demonstrates that choline
containing metabolites change differently depending on the type of drug
used for breast cancer treatment. However, all tested chemotherapeutic
treatments resulted in metabolic alteration away from the ‘cholinic
phenotype’, which was caused in some cases by decreases in expression
of Chkα, GDPD6, and GDPD5 following drug treatment. The choline
metabolite concentrations of GPC and/or PC and/or the PC/GPC ratio may
serve as non-invasive surrogate makers of therapeutic response in
triple-negative breast cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy.


