Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD38 blockade overcomes the immune resistance to anti-PD-L1
therapy by boosting CD8 T cell response.


Although strategies incorporating immune checkpoint inhibition, e.g.
PD-1/PD-L1 blockade, are achieving unprecedented successes and
increasingly becoming incorporated into standard of care regimens for
cancer patients, high rates of resistance still limit the potential
efficacy. Therapeutic improvement requires a thorough understanding of
the biological process of resistance. To date there have been few studies
reporting mechanisms of resistance to PD-L1 blockade. We have explored
the resistance mechanisms to functional PD-L1 loss in preclinical lung
cancer models by using pharmacological and genetic approaches (PD-L1
blocking antibody treatment or CRISPR/Cas9-mediated deletion of PD-L1 on
tumor cells). The molecular and immune profiles of the tumor
microenvironment were evaluated in mutant K-ras/p53 (KP) GEM lung cancer
models and multiple immunocompetent syngeneic models (both KP and Lewis
lung cancer). Additionally, to determine the applicability of the results
to patients with lung cancer, we analyzed 259 patient tumor specimens
with IHC staining and evaluated the immune markers in TCGA datasets
(adenocarcinoma and squamous) and the MD Anderson PROSPECT dataset. We
observed that lung tumors gained resistance to anti-PD-L1 antibody
treatment over time, and that the up-regulation of CD38 on tumor cells
accounted for the treatment resistance. We also observed the same
resistance mechanism caused by CD38 up-regulation in PD-L1 KO mice
bearing PD-L1 KO Lewis lung tumors generated with the CRISPR/Cas9 system.
Manipulation of CD38 on a panel of lung cancer cell lines, demonstrated
that CD38 inhibits CD8+ T cell proliferation, antitumor cytokine
secretion, and tumor cell killing capability in vitro and in vivo.
Furthermore, to test whether CD38 blockade might be therapeutically
efficacious to counter anti-PD-L1 resistance, we applied the combination
therapy of anti-CD38 and anti-PD-L1 in lung cancer animal models and
demonstrated dramatic therapeutic benefit on primary tumor growth and
metastasis. Bioinformatic analyses of the patient tumor databases
revealed a strong correlation between CD38 expression and an immune
suppressive inflammatory signature. Finally, in 259 lung cancer
specimens, 18.5% of cases exhibited positive staining for CD38 on tumor
cells. Based upon our studies, we conclude that the up-regulation of CD38
on tumor cells is a major mechanism of resistance to anti-PD-L1 therapy,
and that CD38 is a novel immune checkpoint that inhibits CD8+ T cell
function. The blockade of CD38 and PD-L1 is a rational combination to
prevent immune resistance and increase the response rate for lung cancer
patients.


