Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined effects of chemotherapy to reduce metastasis caused by
insufficient hyperthermia.


Hyperthermia therapy is one of the most widely studied non-surgical
methods for breast tumors, which eliminates tumor by inducing acute
stress on tumor cells. However, it has been extensively known that the
viability of the tumor cells is highly influenced by the applied
temperature. Insufficient thermal stress during hyperthermia treatments
may alter tumor microenvironment by promoting epithelial to
mesenchymal-like transition (EMT) and as a result, enhancing the
outgrowth of residual tumor cells. Therefore, cells that have survived
from sublethal thermal stress and experienced EMT may cause substantial
clinical problems. In this case, hyperthermia requires additional therapy
in order to promote cell death of more invasive tumor cells that have
resisted to the thermal stimulus. In this study, we confirmed that the
co-treatment of chemotherapy with hyperthermia may overcome the
phenotypical transition caused by insufficient heat treatment. After
exposing breast cancer cells (MCF-7) into two different temperature
conditions (42°C and 47°C) for an hour, we have verified that 10.51 ±
1.71% and 18.27 ± 10.66% of cells experienced apoptosis or necrosis when
the cells were exposed to 42°C and 47°C, respectively. At the same
time, cancer cells showed higher invasiveness, spear-like morphology, and
enhanced migratory behaviors as the exposed temperature increases, which
is mainly shown among the cells that have experienced EMT. Further
western blot assay and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR) using mesenchymal marker (vimentin) and epithelial marker
(E-cadherin) also support that the mesenchymal-like phenotype has been
highly increased on the cells that have resisted to the thermal stress.
However, when chemotherapy was conducted after the heat treatment, cell
viability was highly reduced. Paclitaxel (11.7 nM), cisplatin (3.3 μM),
and combination of two anticancer drugs were treated for 24 hours on the
cells that have been exposed to different temperatures, respectively. As
a result, death rate of tumor cells has increased from 11.31 to 66.69%.
Especially, when paclitaxel and cisplatin were co-treated, the death rate
was up to 73.75 ± 4.37% after cells were exposed to 47°C. In
conclusion, cancer cells that have survived from insufficient
hyperthermia showed high potential to promote metastasis or recurrence
but additional chemotherapy can successfully reduce the side effects
induced by insufficient hyperthermia treatment.


