Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial superoxide inhibits autophagy and induces apoptosis
through SQSTM1-mediated mechanism.


Metastatic melanoma has a dismal survival rate for patients, despite
recent advances in targeted and immune-therapies. Recent studies show
that elevated autophagy and redox imbalance in melanoma cells contributes
to chemotherapeutic resistance, making these biological processes ideal
therapeutic targets. However, gaps still exist regarding the mechanism by
which pro-oxidant therapeutics affect autophagic signaling and the
ultimate impact on melanoma cell fate. We previously demonstrated that
pro-oxidant compound Nexrutine (NX) selectively inhibits melanoma cell
survival and autophagy through autophagy scaffolding protein SQSTM1/p62.
However, the mechanism by which NX-induced oxidative stress inhibits
autophagy through p62 remained unknown. Thus, the primary objective of
this study was to determine how p62 regulates cell fate during oxidative
damage. We used a panel of primary melanocyte and melanoma cells to
evaluate i) proteasomal degradation of p62 during oxidative
stress-induced autophagy blockade, ii) the requirement for p62 during
NX-induced apoptosis, iii) effect of NX-induced superoxide on autophagy
and cell survival, iv) association of p62 with caspase-8 during oxidative
damage, and v) subcellular localization of NX. Proteasomal degradation
was evaluated using MG132 and western blotting for p62 following NX. We
used genetic approaches (RNAi and overexpression using HA-p62) to
determine the role of p62 in cell fate as determined by survival,
apoptosis, and autophagy measurements. Fluorescence microscopy was used
to determine the subcellular localization of NX. Generation of superoxide
was determined using mitoSOX and mitoTEMPO pre-treatment was used to
determine specificity. We found that i) NX-induced ROS inhibits p62
protein by stimulating proteasomal degradation, ii) p62 mediates
apoptosis in response to high levels of oxidative damage through
caspase-8 iii) NX generates superoxide which inhibits autophagy and
melanoma cell survival, and iv) NX accumulates selectively in
mitochondria. Overall, we show that oxidative stress induced by NX occurs
upstream of its inhibitory effect on p62, autophagy and cell survival.
Further, we demonstrate that NX induces superoxide, which leads to
autophagy inhibition through increased p62 degradation, that ultimately
inhibits melanoma cell survival, while not affecting primary melanocytes.
We also show that p62 mediates apoptosis through increased association
with caspase-8 in melanoma cells during superoxide generated by NX. We
also demonstrate for the first time that NX localizes to mitochondria of
melanoma cells and results in membrane potential loss due to its
generation of high amounts of superoxide. This study demonstrates that
pro-oxidants like NX can successfully target two pro-survival melanoma
features simultaneously and may be useful melanoma therapeutic agents.
Supported by R21 CA125719 & ACRCF (RG); NIDCR T32 DE14318/COSTAR (HGH)


