Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing circulating tumor cells with a nanotechnology-based
capture system as a novel biomarker for treatment response and
surveillance in patients with oligometastatic solid tumors.


Purpose: To prospectively evaluate changes in circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) following definitive treatment in patients with oligometastatic
solid tumors using a novel nanotechnology-based biomimetric platform.

Experiment Procedures: Patients with biopsy proven oligometastatic
disease with up to three lesions were eligible if all sites of disease
were treated with definitive therapy. Definitive therapy could include
fractionated 3D conformal radiation, SBRT, IORT, surgical metastatectomy,
and ablative procedures including microwave ablation. Patients initially
presenting with oligometastatic disease were eligible if they had less
than 3 lesions including the primary tumor. At least one lesion had to be
treated with radiation. CTCs were enumerated from whole blood using the
Onco-Sense CTC capture system which utilizes E-selectin and dendrimers
functionalized with three cancer-specific antibodies (aEpCAM, aHER-2,
aEGFR). Whole blood was collected from patients prior to starting
treatment (baseline), mid-treatment, end of treatment, within 12 weeks of
finishing treatment, and then every 3 months in follow up. We then
assessed changes in CTCs with treatment and looked for associations
between baseline CTCs, changes during treatment, and post-treatment
changes with clinical outcomes.

Results: We have currently enrolled 24 patients. The majority of patients
(20) had a single site of disease treated with radiosurgery. Sites of
metastasis include bone, lung, and lymph nodes. Primary histologies
include lung, breast, melanoma, prostate, RCC, colorectal cancer, and SCC
of the head and neck. CTCs were detected in 100% of patients at baseline
and decreased with treatment from a mean of 45 CTCs/mL pretreatment
(range 3-99) to 14 CTCs/mL post-treatment (range 3-59). Post-treatment
CTCs are available for 14 patients with a median follow up of 10.3
months. Ten of 14 patients remain clinically NED and post-treatment CTCs
are lower than baseline in 13/14 of these patients. There have been 4
clinical failures and CTCs increased with or before radiographic
progression in all 4 patients. Three of the failures occurred at least 3
months after initial complete responses to treatment and CTCs increased
by a median 3.4-fold over post-treatment levels in these patients. One
patient progressed before the first post-treatment follow up and CTCs
increased from 7 to 22 CTCs/mL from baseline to post-treatment.

Conclusions: We showed here that we could enumerate CTCs in 100% of
patients with oligometastatic disease using a novel CTC capture system.
CTCs decreased with treatment and all clinical failures were preceded by
significant rises in CTCs. Our preliminary data suggest that enumeration
of CTCs by Onco-Sense may provide a novel biomarker for assessing
treatment response and/or post-treatment surveillance for patients with
oligometastatic solid tumors.


