Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the integrin αVβ3 improves the effect of
bexarotene in the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL).


CTCL are exposed to a complex paracrine and endocrine environment that
influence their progression from skin to visceral disease. One of the
most common treatments for CTCL is RXR agonists or “rexinoids” such
as bexarotene (BEX). The most prevalent side effect of rexinoids (~95% of
patients) is the development of hypothyroidism hence these patients are
prophylactically treated with thyroid hormone (TH). Paradoxically, we
recently found (PMID: 25488971) that TH can activate transcriptional
programs required for proliferation of CTCL. We also found that the
effects of TH on CTCL are mediated through the activation of two
different receptors, the classical nuclear TR and a membrane receptor
integrin αVβ3. Our aim was to study how the anti-lymphoma activity of
BEX is modified by the activation of TR and αVβ3 during the TH
replacement therapy, and unknown topic with clinical implications. We
first evaluate the cell viability of CTCL cells HuT78 and MJ treated with
BEX in presence and absence of physiological levels of TH. As expected,
BEX decreased the viability of CTCL cells, however in presence of TH both
effects decreased by 25-60% and 20-50% on HuT78 and MJ cells. However,
hypothyroidism is associated with a higher dissemination of TCL cells in
syngeneic mice. Thus, to evaluate the impact of TH replacement therapy in
BEX-treated mice, we implanted TCL EL-4 cells subcutaneously in C57BL/6
mice. When tumors reached ~75 mm3, mice were randomized in three groups:
vehicle, bexarotene alone (BEX) and bexarotene with T4 replacement (to
reach euthyroidism) (BEX-T4). Tumor growth significantly decreased in
both bexarotene arms (vs. vehicle). However, in contrast to mice
receiving BEX-T4, mice receiving BEX alone showed a decreased
infiltration of tumor-suppressive immune cells. Specifically, these
tumors had decreased NK and CD3+CD8+ cells due to BEX-induced
hypothyroidism. This indicates that although TH could decrease the effect
of BEX in CTCL cells, the hypothyroidism would impact in the local
antitumor response. Thus determine if the inhibition of the non-canonical
TH membrane receptor integrin αVβ3 would decrease the pro-survival
effect of TH on CTCL treated with BEX. We found that either, αVβ3
silencing or the pharmacological inhibitor Cilengitide, not only avoided
the pro-survival effect of TH but increased the anti-lymphoma activity of
BEX-T4 by 15-35% in CTCL cells. To evaluate the molecular program
underpinning these effects, we conducted RNA-sequencing in HuT78 cells
treated with BEX-T4 in presence of siRNA for TR, αVβ3 or controls.
Among the top pathways we identified genes involved in “apoptosis”,
“angiogenesis” and “IL6-JAK-STAT3 signaling” as differentially
expressed in si-αVβ3 vs. the others. These genes were independently
validated by using Cilengitide. Our data suggest that inhibition of the
non-canonical TH receptor, the integrin αVβ3, could be an effective
strategy to improve BEX treatment in CTCL


