Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Constitutive Nedd9 null genotype promotes lung cancer
aggressiveness.


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has a low survival rate, with
metastasis contributing to the vast majority of deaths. The NEDD9
(HEF1/Cas-L) protein has been reported to be elevated in expression and
to promote metastasis in a large subset of lung cancers and in other
malignancies. NEDD9 functions as a scaffold for multiple critical
effectors in integrin/FAK/SRC and receptor tyrosine kinase signaling
cascades, as well as for the mitotic kinase Aurora-A, with overexpression
thought to sustain signaling by these pro-oncogenic proteins. Previous
studies demonstrated depletion of NEDD9 by RNAi reduced the growth and
invasion of established lung cell lines and tumors, based on cell culture
and xenograft assays. We have now investigated the consequences of a null
genotype for Nedd9 from the earliest stages of tumor formation, crossing
Nedd9 null mice to a 129S/Sv-Krastm3Tyj/Trp53tm1Brn (KP) model in which
Kras mutation is induced specifically in lung tissue by inhalation of
adenovirus bearing the Cre gene. Unexpectedly, based on in vivo imaging,
the Nedd9 null genotype significantly accelerated tumor growth in KP
mice. Pathological examination of tissues indicated Nedd9 null genotype
also was associated with higher invasive capacity in vivo, including
direct invasion to the heart, as well as elevated proliferation rate,
decreased apoptotic activity, and changes in the expression of proteins
such as vimentin, associated with mesenchymal status. Although Nedd9
function has been implicated in immune cell activity, we found minimal
differences in tumor infiltration of myeloid cells or macrophages based
on Nedd9 genotype. Rather, use of Reverse Phase Protein Array (RPPA)
analysis to characterize signaling in isolated tumors suggested tumor
intrinsic changes in glycolytic and proliferative signaling pathways,
which were subsequently validated using direct functional assays. These
results for the first time imply that NSCLC tumor progression beyond
early stages in the absence of Nedd9 requires reprogramming of intrinsic
tumor signaling to compensate for the absence of this protein,
emphasizing activities distinct from those associated with elevated Nedd9
in late stage tumors.


