Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-scale omics integration using parallel heatmap clustering
for the systemic analysis and biomarker discovery of drug sensitivity in
lymphoma cell lines.


Background. Pharmacogenomics studies the role of genomics in drug
response. By measuring the individual genome, it is hoped that
pharmaceutical drug treatments can deviate from a "one-dose-fits-all"
approach to a more "personalized" treatment. To achieve this goal, we
need to explain which genomic differences cause the lack of response and
to be able to predict the response from baseline omics data, that is from
data available before starting treatment. Here, we present an integrated
omics approach to analyze drug sensitivity based on in vitro experiments.

Methods. We measured the drug response in 61 lymphoma cell lines for a
number of anti-cancer drugs using a standard MTT cell proliferation
assay. The baseline genomics of these cell lines were fully profiled for
gene expression, copy number and methylation. Pathway and gene set
signatures were computed using GO, KEGG, Biocarta and lymphoma databases
to provide gene set level features. Additionally, we computed high level
"biological concept" features. These multi-scale features were directly
correlated with drug sensitivity but also correlated between the multiple
data types. Using a novel parallel clustering approach, we integrated our
data for the different omics types and at different scales: gene, gene
set and concept level. Finally, a shortest path algorithm extracted the
most probable explanation between genotype and response phenotype.

Results. As a proof of concept, we first applied our method to the
classification of activated B- cell like (ABC) and germinal center B
(GCB) subtypes in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL). In accordance
to previous knowledge, our method showed the MYD88/CD40/NFKB axis as
strongly upregulated in the ABC, while, albeit less pronounced, the
PI3K/MTOR and NOTCH signalling pathways were more enriched in the GCB
subtype. We then applied our method to the drug sensitivity data of our
lymphoma cell line panel. The analysis showed that drug response was
largely driven by differential methylation rather than copy number
aberrations. We found that B cell receptor signaling (BCR) and CD40
signalling were among the most correlated to drug sensitivity in a
drug-specific manner. Genes in these pathways (such as SYK, SPIB and
CD79A) appeared as good biomarkers for drug-specific response in lymphoma.

Conclusion. Using an integrated analysis of multiple omics data at
multiple scales, we successfully identified functional modules related
with drug sensitivity in lymphoma cell lines. The same method can be
applied to study the sensitivity to other drugs in either hematological
and/or solid cancer types.


