Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Are callipers obsolute? A novel 3D scanning technology to measure
subcutaneous tumor volume.


Most preclinical oncology studies (xenograft, PDX, GEMMS) involve
monitoring tumour growth rates, measuring them with callipers, and
calculating the volume. Volume is calculated from the width and the
length to estimate a 3D volume and is directly used to assess treatment
efficacy. Although this technique is useful, it is unable to accurately
assess non-uniformly shaped or very small tumours and introduces a
systematic bias by assuming that tumours present with spheroid shape.
Furthermore callipers do not inform of the tumour condition, which is
dependent upon a visual estimation.

Here we describe the development and validation of a 3D scanner as an
alternative method to callipers to monitor tumour progression in rodents.
The resulting 3D scanner solution made up of hardware and software, has
the potential to impact on the 3Rs guiding principles underpinning the
humane use of animals in oncology research. The 3Rs benefits identified
are primarily through reduction of animals via improved data accuracy
allowing reduction in group sizes or the ability to include irregularly
shaped tumours to test. In addition the scanner system described will
make it possible to record tumour measurements in a rapid, minimally
invasive, morphology-independent, and human-bias-free way, removing
interoperator variability. This photo-based technique captures external
symptoms of redness, paleness, ulceration of tumours, etc., which could
ultimately be used to detect early toxicities of compounds or determine
scales of animal welfare.

We describe the development and early validation of the scanner system
within our laboratories. Using the 3D scanner alongside tumour callipers
to monitor tumour growth of Oncology tumour studies we demonstrated that
we can accurately measure tumour size parameters (length, width and
volume) in multiple mouse strains and across a range of tumour models. 3D
scanning tumour data is comparable to tumour measures generated from
tumour callipers If successful the introduction of this system to replace
tumour callipers could have a large impact for groups running oncology
in-vivo tumour studies.


