Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intake of tea and tea flavonoids, coffee and caffeine in relation
to risk of lung cancer - the Singapore Chinese Health Study.


Background: Coffee and tea are widely consumed beverages. Tea flavonoids
have been shown to inhibit lung tumorigenesis in in-vitro and animal
models. Conversely, coffee contains complex mixtures of biochemically
active compounds that may have genotoxic and mutagenic properties.
However, previous epidemiologic studies have shown inconsistent results
on tea and coffee in relation to lung cancer risk.

Methods: The association between intake of tea and coffee, and their
active compounds, and risk of lung cancer was investigated in the
Singapore Chinese Health Study, a population-based prospective cohort of
63,257 Singaporean Chinese men and women aged 45-74 years at enrollment
from 1993 through 1998. Information on demographic, lifestyle and
habitual diet was collected through in-person interviews using a
structured questionnaire which included a validated food-frequency
questionnaire. The intake of caffeine and tea flavonoids was estimated
for each participant based on the Singapore Food Composition Database,
which was developed for this cohort and provided 96 nutritional and
non-nutritional values per 100 grams of the edible portion for each of
165 surveyed foods and beverages specific for the study population.
Flavonoids predominantly from black tea included theaflavin, thearubigin,
theaflavin-3-3’-digallate, theaflavin-3’-gallate and
theaflavin-3-gallate while those predominantly from green tea included
catechin, epigallocatechin, epicatechin, epicatechin-3-gallate and
epigallocatechin-3-gallate. Incident lung cancer cases were identified
via record linkage with the nationwide cancer registry through 31
December 2013. Cox regression models were used to estimate hazard ratios
(HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the associations with
adjustment for potential confounders.

Results: Compared to non-daily coffee drinkers, HR (95% CI) of lung
cancer for those consuming 1 and 2 or more cups of coffee per day was
1.16 (1.00-1.34) and 1.29 (1.02-1.64), respectively (P for trend=0.029).
Among ever smokers, black tea was inversely associated with risk of lung
cancer (P for trend=0.037). HR (95% CI) was 0.83 (0.69-1.00) for the
highest third of consumers (average 1.5 cups/day) compared to non-black
tea drinkers. Consistently, flavonoids predominantly from black tea were
also inversely associated with lung cancer risk (P for trend=0.045). This
risk reduction with black tea and their major flavonoids was only
observed in ever smokers and not in never smokers. There was no
statistically significant association for lung cancer risk with total
caffeine, green tea or flavonoids predominantly from green tea,
regardless of smoking status.

Conclusions: Coffee may increase the risk of developing lung cancer, and
this effect does not seem to be mediated by its caffeine content.
Conversely, black tea and flavonoids found mainly in black tea may reduce
the risk of lung cancer among ever smokers.


