Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure-activity studies and biological evaluations of ERGi-USU,
a highly selective inhibitor for ERG-positive prostate cancer cells.


Introduction and objectives: While new prostate cancer (CaP) treatments
(Abiraterone and Enzalutamide) have improved survival in
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), their benefits are
short-lived and drug resistance develops likely due to numerous adaptive
mutations. Therefore it is a critical to develop effective novel
inhibitors to target other signaling pathways that promote or contribute
to prostate tumorigenesis. Accumulating evidence has established the
androgen regulated TMPRSS2-ERG fusion as a common oncogenic driver that
contributes to the early development and progression of over half of CaP.
Therefore, ERG oncoprotein and ERG dependent pathways are promising
targets for CaP therapy in early stages when cancer is most responsive to
treatment. We previously identified a small molecule inhibitor, ERGi-USU,
which selectively inhibits ERG protein and cell growth in ERG positive
tumor cell lines and mouse xenograft models. In an effort to further
develop ERGi-USU with enhanced efficacy we performed detailed
structure-activity relationship (SAR) evaluation of ERGi-USU core
structure and developed new derivatives.

Methods: Based on SAR of the core structure of ERGi-USU, 48 new
derivatives were designed and synthesized by substitutions with alkyl,
alkoxy, cycloalkyl, heterocycloalkyl, aryl, heteroaryl or hydroxyl
groups. The new ERGi-USU derivatives were evaluated for inhibition of
cell growth and ERG protein levels in the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion harboring
CaP cell line, VCaP. Four of these compounds have been selected for
evaluation of ERG selectivity by defining IC50 in ERG positive malignant
cells (VCaP, KG1, MOLT-4 and COLO320), ERG negative CaP cell line (LNCaP)
or ERG positive normal primary endothelium-derived cells (HUVEC).

Result: Like parental compound, four new ERGi-USU derivatives exhibited
inhibition of cell growth and ERG protein levels in ERG positive VCaP,
KG1, MOLT-4 and COLO320 cell lines, with no or minimal effects on LNCaP
and HUVEC cells. One of the new derivatives (ERGi-USU#6) showed increased
efficacy for cell growth inhibition (IC50=0.074µM) compared to the
parental ERGi-USU (IC50=0.200µM). Other three new compounds showed
similar IC50 as the ERGi-USU.

Conclusion: Comprehensive evaluation of ERGi-USU derivatives along with
parental compound has continued to underscore selective inhibition of ERG
positive tumor cells by these small molecules.


