Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Examination of ERCC1 status in circulating tumor cells as a
prognostic tool for patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma.


Investigation of the expression pattern of DNA-repair protein excision
repair cross-complementation group 1 (ERCC1) has been reported to allow
selection of patients with non-small cell lung cancer who are likely to
benefit from cisplatin-based therapy. Recent evidence suggests that ERCC1
expression may also find prognostic use in patients with nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (NPC). We evaluated ERCC1 expression and genotype from NPC
tissues and peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients with NPC.
ERCC1 expression was detected in 61/77 cases (79.2%) with varying
intensities, where high ERCC1 expression significantly associated with
worse relapse-free survival (RFS) (HR 2.34, 1.06-5.16, p=0.036). In
addition, the presence of ERCC1 C118T genotype was significantly
associated with favorable RFS and overall survival (OS) in a subgroup of
patients with undetectable post-treatment plasma EBV DNA. These findings
support a prognostic role for ERCC1 examination in NPC. However, the
invasive nature of obtaining biopsy samples for tumor marker studies is a
major hindrance of this approach. To facilitate the investigation of
ERCC1 expression in a noninvasive manner, we have developed a negative
selection immunomagnetic method for isolating circulating tumor cells
from patient blood. Cell line spike-in experiments reveal a mean recovery
rate of 66% for NPC cells with greater than 99% removal of non-targeted
blood cells. Specificity of CTC identification was confirmed by detection
of the expression of the Epstein-Barr virus encoded small RNA (EBER) in
the CTCs. This method also allowed the simultaneous analysis of the
expression of multiple protein markers including CD45, cytokeratin and
ERCC1. It is expected that the development of noninvasive methodologies
for tumor marker studies will facilitate their clinical application for
improved patient care and monitoring in the future.


