Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spatial genomic heterogeneity of multifocal bladder cancer.


Urothelial cancer (UC) is a well-known multifocal disease with frequent
recurrences. The clonal origin of spatially separated UC foci is
controversial. Here we propose to elucidate the multifocal UC genome by
next generation sequencing (NGS) and thereby identify novel clonal
heterogeneity among the lesions of a single bladder. Until now, all
experiments aimed at understanding the molecular heterogeneity were
generated mostly by candidate gene approach and older technologies. There
is a lack of comprehensive molecular information in these multifocal
lesions partly due to inadequate sample size for comprehensive molecular
studies. Identification of mutational status at the gene level in
different multifocal lesions will allow us to identify markers for
prognostic classification, and predictive classification of response to
UC therapies, as well as identify potential therapeutic targets.

To understand the molecular heterogeneity among the lesions of a single
bladder, we used The Ion AmpliSeq™ Comprehensive Cancer Panel (CCP)
(ThermoFisher). The Ion AmpliSeq™ CCP was designed to target all exons
of 409 key tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) and oncogenes most frequently
cited and mutated in cancer. We tested 41 lesions from 16 cystectomized
bladders. Among these lesions, we performed an initial analysis of a
total of 21 lesions and 8 germ line controls from 8 patients. We further
technically validated selected mutational events found by NGS by a
complementary approach, namely droplet digital PCR (ddPCR). We then
compared the intra- and inter-tumoral mutation profiles. Two separate
lesions were used for analysis in 3 patients and 3 lesions were taken
from each of the remaining 5 patients. Our initial analysis showed
mutational heterogeneity among the lesions of most of the samples.
Briefly, two of the patients had one clone found at all sites, while the
rest of the patients showed more variation amongst their lesions. For
instance, ARID2, TRRAP, PDGFB, and FBXW7 were mutated in two out of three
lesions in one of the patients, indicating hotspot for heterogeneous
mutational events. Three mutational events were confirmed by ddPCR,
denoting the accuracy of our NGS data analysis.

Our analysis demonstrates that targeted next generation sequencing is a
sensitive and reliable method for interrogating the molecular landscape
of bladder cancer, and indicates that both clonal and spontaneous events
can account for multifocal bladder cancer.

Our data suggests that sequencing of multiple lesions from an individual
patient is necessary to accurately elucidate the mutation profile and
tailor appropriate targeted treatment. Further analysis in an extended
number of samples is necessary to fully understand the molecular
heterogeneity at the mutational level in urothelial cancer.


