Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of mixed-cell spheroid as an in vitro model of
hepatocellular carcinoma for epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and
chemoresistance.


Interaction between cancer cells and stromal components in the tumor
microenvironment is well known for their significant roles in tumor
progression and subsequent treatment failure. Hepatic stellate cells
(HSCs), as a predominant cell type in the microenvironment of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), are involved in creating desmoplastic and
chemoresistance-inducing microenvironment. HSCs secrete various paracrine
factors that modify the HCC tumor microenvironment leading to tumor
growth, drug resistance and metastasis via promoting
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Although several studies
using 2D co-culture system have shown bidirectional cross-talk between
cancer cells and HSCs, data obtained remain limited in their clinical
relevance due to lack of in vivo tumor-like characteristics.

We developed a mixed-cell spheroid model which recapitulates direct 3D
tumor-HSCs interactions in paracrine and contact-mediated manners. Huh-7,
human HCC cells, were mixed co-cultured with LX-2 cells, immortalized
human HSC at 1:3 ratio using liquid overlay technique in 96-well plates.
Electron microscopy was used to examine subcellular structural changes.
Cellular distribution within spheroids was observed by labeling LX-2
cells with fluorescent tracer. The expression of pro-fibrotic and EMT
markers was detected by immunohistochemistry or immunofluorescence
staining on paraffin embedded sections. Invasion ability was determined
using migration assay into 3D matrigel matrix. Dose-response curve was
obtained by using APH assay and Ki-67 detection.

Mixed co-culture of Huh-7 and LX-2 cells showed a spontaneous
self-organization forming highly compact mixed-cell spheroids with
well-defined contour. Heterotypic cell-to-cell contact increased as shown
by gap junction and desmosomes in the mixed-cell spheroids. LX-2 cells
were uniformly distributed within the spheroids. Expression of
fibroblast-associated factors such as α-SMA, collagen I, TGF-β and CTGF
showed similar patterns of distribution to that of LX-2 cells, but at an
elevated level in the mixed-cell spheroids compared to that of cancer
cell-alone spheroids. An increased expression of EMT-related factors was
observed along with enhanced invasion into 3D matrix. Differential drug
sensitivity was shown; mixed-cell spheroids were sensitive to sorafenib
but not to other agents including oxaliplatin, gemcitabine, and 5-FU.
Based on these results, the mixed cell-spheroids of HCC cells-HSCs may be
proposed as a useful 3D model for in vitro therapeutic screening of
targets and agents as well as for the study of malignant progression in
HCC.


