Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of an ethnicity informed gene expression panel with
potential to improve prostate cancer diagnosis.


Introduction and Objectives: Prostate cancer (CaP) affects 1 in 7 men
throughout their life time. One of the major risk factors for the
development of CaP is race/ethnicity. African American (AA) men have
significantly higher incidence and mortality from CaP compared to
Caucasian American (CA) men. Emerging data including ours have described
significantly lower frequencies of alterations in the common CaP driver
genes (ERG and PTEN) in AA men as compared to CA men. We have also noted
that genes commonly overexpressed in CaP (ERG, AMACR and PCA3), and
currently used as diagnostic markers, exhibit much lower frequency and
more heterogeneity in AA men. The goal of this study was to define a
broader CaP marker panel that is overexpressed equally well in AA and CA
CaP.

Methods: Three platforms (RNASeq, NanoString and QRT-PCR) were used for
evaluation of CaP associated gene expression in CA and AA patients
(N=144). Candidate genes with robust tumor overexpression (over 4-fold)
in CaP in comparison of paired normal and tumor specimens from AA and CA
patients were selected from the Nanostring and RNASeq data for validation
by QRT-PCR (TaqMan) in laser microdissected (LCM) tumor and benign cells
of frozen tissue sections (50 CA and 35 AA). An assay protocol (gene
specific pooled RT and pre-amplification followed by TaqMan PCR) was set
up for the noninvasive early detection of candidate genes in regular
patient urine (non-DRE) using RNA derived from urinary exosomes.

Results: As expected tumor transcriptomes of CA patients revealed
consistently elevated expression of PCA3 and AMACR genes. However, these
genes had variable overexpression in AA cohort. The top genes that were
similarly over expressed in tumors of AA and CA patients were validated
by real time QRT-PCR (TaqMan) analysis in LCM dissected tumor and normal
epithelial cells (N=85). At least one gene of a six gene signature (DLX1,
HOXC4, NKX2-3, COL10A1, HOXC6 and PSGR) was overexpressed in tumor cells
of all AA and CA cases, providing a consistent ethnicity informed tumor
expression signature, which was further validated in silico in TCGA
RNASeq data. Urinary exosome based assay was developed and optimized for
PSGR, DLX1, HOXC4, NKX2-3, as well as PCA3 and ERG. Sensitivity and
specificity with optimal cutoff for the urine marker panel was 71% and
61% respectively (N=40). Evaluation of the assay performance in CA and AA
patients in a prospective independent cohort of 100 patients addressing
race specific performance is in progress.

Conclusions: A CaP tissue based gene expression marker panel has been
defined with potential diagnostic utility for both CA and AA men in the
context of urinary exosomes.


