Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular intersection of a 3-in-1 nanomedicine targeting
microtubules, ERK tyrosine kinases with profound nuclear modulations, and
quantum imaging for hepatocellular carcinoma therapy.


Hepatocellular carcinoma is the fifth malignant form of cancer worldwide
with poor survival rates. Despite advances in clinical diagnosis, surgery
and chemotherapy till date systemic treatment of solid tumour like
hepatocellular carcinoma has not been effective in most cases and its
clinical therapy is a major challenge. Hence, it is important to search
for innovative therapeutic modalities. Nanomedicines that can target both
microtubules and kinases may provide new avenues to treat hepatocellular
carcinoma. Small molecule inhibitors like docetaxel and sorafenib
represent one of them. Clinical trials have revealed unacceptable
toxicities such as neutropenia, severe hypersensitivity, anaphylactic
reaction, hypertension, dermatological toxicities and hand-foot skin
reaction, etc with these drugs in cancer patients. Other major drawbacks
are insolubility, poor bioavailability, short half-life and
non-specificity. To mitigate these issues, we developed a next generation
highly compact nanocarrier system, the 3-in-1 nanomedicine platform with
in-depth understanding of the intracellular machinery responsible for its
uptake and the molecular mechanisms for regulating the delivery efficacy.
Development of a 3-in-1 nanomedicine (100-200 nm) comprised of
microtubule inhibitor docetaxel, tyrosine kinase inhibitor sorafenib and
an imaging probe quantum dots encapsulated in a biocompatible polymer PLA
against human hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Monotherapy strategies in
cancer treatment fail due to several complex issues like narrow
therapeutic window, non-specificity, administration of higher, repetitive
doses, adverse clinical toxicities and resistance mechanisms of drugs.
The advantages of 3-in-1 nanomedicine strategy are delineated. The
real-time imaging of quantum dots in hepatocellular carcinoma cells
showed accelerated internalization. The 3-in-1 nanomedicine exhibited
potent inhibition in hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation,
clonogenicity, induced strong G2/M phase block and apoptosis induction in
comparison to single drug monotherapy. The 3-in-1 nanomedicine strongly
promoted the microtubule bundling via increased polymer tubulin
expression level, augmented multinucleation, aberrant mitosis, and
significantly inhibited downstream protein tyrosine kinase, ERK1/2
activation in hepatocellular carcinoma cells in comparison to single drug
monotherapy. These findings provide a significant insight into the
intrinsic molecular interplays of 3-in-1 nanomedicine in hepatocellular
carcinoma cells. The 3-in-1 nanomedicine integrates several avenues in a
single nanoscale-platform for dual-drug delivery, and high sensitivity
quantum dots imaging as well as diagnostics for hepatocellular carcinoma
therapy, holding high translational research potentials in the near
future.


