Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNAseq identified immune signatures associated with adverse
outcome in high-risk neuroblastoma.


Despite the success of multimodal therapies, the mortality and morbidity
remains substantial for patients with high-risk neuroblastoma (NBL).
Sequencing of paired tumor/normal DNA of NBL has revealed a low somatic
mutation burden and few recurrent somatically-mutated genes. Here we
hypothesize that whole transcriptome sequencing (WTS) in patients with
high-risk NBL tumor will yield valuable insights into the biology of this
disease. We performed deep WTS of 150 NBLs (129 high-risk stage 3 and 4;
and 21 stage 4S tumors) of which majority of them had whole genome
sequencing or whole exome sequencing of case-matched tumor/normal pairs
through the Therapeutically Applicable Research to Generate Effective
Treatments (TARGET) initiative. We identified correlations between gene
expression and clinical parameters of patients such as MYCN-amplification
and survival to provide understandings of high-risk NBL biology.

Consensus clustering using gene expression profiles of tumors revealed 4
subgroups with distinct survival probability (pConsensus clustering using
gene expression profiles of tumors revealed 4 subgroups with distinct
survival probability (p<0.01). Among them, the group with the best
outcome consisted of all stage 4S and 4S-like young patients; whereas the
worst survival group was made up mostly of high-risk patients with
MYCN-amplification. In order to identify the gene expression patterns
correlating with outcome in the high-risk patients without
MYCN-amplification, we further examined if any other known gene
expression signatures can further stratify these patients using Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA). Among several molecular signatures, a
previously reported 157-gene MYCN activation signature was significantly
correlated with the poor outcome in high-risk patients without
MYCN-amplification. Of note, we identified CD8, cytolytic, and activated
nature killer (NK) cell signatures that were significantly associated
with outcome in these patients. These findings were validated in an
independent dataset. Our data has an important clinical implication for a
subset of high-risk neuroblastoma patients without MYCN-amplification
that have an activated MYCN signature may benefit from immune-modulating
agents such as immune check point inhibitors which should be tested in
context of clinical trials.


