Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combining anti-Ang-2/VEGF-A therapy with radio- and chemotherapy
in glioma.


Angiogenesis is a biological hallmark of malignant gliomas, but
antiangiogenic strategies especially targeting the VEGF axis did not show
striking antitumor activities in the majority of patients so far. Other
pathways may be more relevant in selected tumor entities or patients.
Further, it remains unresolved which antiangiogenic combination regimen
with standard radio- and/or chemotherapy is most effective. Therefore, we
compared the therapeutic effects of anti-VEGF-A, anti-Ang-2, and
bispecific anti-Ang-2/VEGF-A antibodies, alone and in combination with
radio- or temozolomide (TMZ) chemotherapy in a malignant glioma model
using multi-parameter two-photon in vivo microscopy in mice. We
demonstrate that anti-Ang-2/VEGF-A leads to strongest vascular changes
including vascular normalization, both as monotherapy and when combined
with chemotherapy. The latter combination regimen was accompanied by most
effective chemotherapy-induced death of cancer cells independent of blood
vessel proximity, indicative of a better distribution of TMZ throughout
the tumor. Furthermore, the combination of anti-Ang-2/VEGF-A plus TMZ
consistently resulted in decreased tumor cell motility, and decreased
formation of resistance-associated tumor microtubes (TMs), which finally
lead to best tumor growth inhibition. Remarkably, all these parameters
were just reverted when radiotherapy was chosen as combination partner.
In contrast, when anti-VEGF-A was combined with radiotherapy, vascular
normalization was highest, and TM length, nuclear motility and tumor
growth were concordantly reduced. In conclusion, while TMZ chemotherapy
benefits most from combination with anti-Ang-2/VEGF-A, radiotherapy does
from anti-VEGF-A. The findings imply that unexpected, even divergent
effects can occur when a specific antiangiogenic therapy is added to
chemo- or radiotherapy in glioma, and that uninformed combination
regimens should be avoided.


