Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional pairing of immunomodulatory targets in anaplastic
thyroid cancer.


Thyroid cancer is the most common type of endocrine malignancy that has
an escalating global frequency. Although most well differentiated thyroid
cancers (WDTC) are manageable and respond to current therapeutic
modalities, undifferentiated anaplastic thyroid cancers (ATC) exhibit a
dramatically different clinical behavior and poor prognosis. With the
recent development of immunotherapies, targeted, well-defined treatment
plans can demonstrate promising treatment outcomes in ATC patients.
Precise immunological targets in ATCs with potential clinical relevance
are unknown. Major progress has been made in last 5 years toward
development of immune checkpoint inhibitors using anti-CTLA-4 and
anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies for cancer treatment which has made
immunotherapies one of the mainstream treatment choices. Few additional
members of the immunoglobulin superfamily of receptors, like LAG3, TIM3
and VISTA have recently been identified as potential checkpoint targets.
Interestingly some of these molecules including TIM3 and PD-L1 promote
tumor progression and immune escape. Identification of specific
immunotherapeutic targets requirs a better understanding of the immune
microenvironment in ATC. To this end we evaluated the expression of
prominent co-stimulatory and co-inhibitory cell surface molecules by
RT-PCR in three thyroid cancer cell lines - TPC-1 (papillary), CGTH-W-1
(follicular) and 8505C (anaplastic). We observed that many co-inhibitory
molecules were upregulated in all three tumor cell lines. CTLA4,
interestingly, had the highest expression in 8505C. Additionally we
observed differential expression of BTLA, LAIR1, TIM3 and VISTA between
TPC-1 and 8505C. LAG3, PD-1 and PD-L1 were also upregulated in 8505C
compared to TPC-1. Similar pattern was observed with the expression of
co-stimulatory molecules, CD40L and GITR . GITR has been shown to have a
tumor suppressor function in multiple myeloma. Another co-stimulatory
molecule OX40, which has shown promise in tumor recession when targeted,
was upregulated in all three cell lines and 8505C showed the highest
expression. Our findings suggest that the aggressive and less immunogenic
phenotype of ATC might be attributed to the differential expression of
these molecules. Targeting these immunomodulatory molecules in ATC
warrants a better understanding of the crosstalk between them and it
might provide an efficient means for the disease management.


