Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating anti-tumor activity of the human anti-PD-1 antibody
pembrolizumab using humanized mouse models.


Targeting immune checkpoints has proven to be an effective strategy for
reactivating the immune system to elicit potent anti-tumor activity. For
example, the anti-PD-1 antibody pembrolizumab has shown robust and
durable clinical activity in numerous malignancies including melanoma and
non-small cell lung cancer. Unfortunately, a subset of patients do not
benefit from pembrolizumab treatment. Ongoing molecular analyses of
patient samples are establishing gene signatures which aim to more
accurately predict which patients will benefit from immunotherapy.
However, there are currently no preclinical in vivo platforms that
comprehensively translate these clinical findings. Therefore, we have
explored the use of mice engineered with a human immune system to examine
the anti-tumor activity of pembrolizumab against a panel of human tumor
xenografts derived from both cultured cell lines as well as patient
tissue. Tumor models were selected based on parameters including PD-L1
expression and mutational load in order to closely mimic responder
patients in the ongoing pembrolizumab clinical trials. Our data confirm
that pembrolizumab can induce significant anti-tumor efficacy in
humanized mice inoculated with human tumor models derived from both
cancer cell lines and patient tumors. In responsive models, pembrolizumab
caused significant tumor growth inhibition and, in some instances, tumor
regressions. FACS analyses confirmed effective targeting of PD-1+ T cell
populations. Anti-tumor efficacy correlated with increased effector T
cell to regulatory T cell ratios as well as an elevated T cell infiltrate
presence. Nonresponsive models lacked robust immune infiltration
detectable by FACS or IHC, consistent with clinical data. Furthermore,
presence of cytolytic activity at baseline and T-cell inflamed
environment were evaluated using transcriptome analysis and subsequently
linked to pembrolizumab response and to somatic neoantigen burden of the
tumors. Together these studies validate the utility of humanized mice in
the preclinical development of novel cancer immunotherapies and may also
be beneficial in better defining the patient responder hypothesis and its
prognostic value. Additionally, humanized mice may help identify optimal
combination treatment regimens to provide more meaningful clinical
benefit to patients who do not respond to single-agent therapy with
pembrolizumab.


