Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Humanized single mouse trial: A preclinical platform feasible for
immune-oncology drug screening and translational biomarker development.


The field of cancer immunology is rapidly moving towards innovative
therapeutic strategies. As a consequence the need for robust and
predictive preclinical platforms arises just as well. The current project
aims to establish a drug screening workflow bridging between innovative
mouse models and clinical biomarker development. A total of 69 NOG
(NOD/Shi-scid/IL-2Rγnull) mice were engrafted with CD34+ hematopoietic
stem cells. Thereafter, tumor material from 11 different lung cancer
patient derived xenograft models (NSCLC PDX) was implanted
subcutaneously. Individual mice were treated with α-CTLA-4, α-PD-1 or
the combination thereof. With n=1 per treatment arm and model the study
design followed the screening approach of the single mouse trial (SMT).
Infiltration of human immune cells was detected by flow cytometry (FC)
and immunohistochemistry (IHC) in hematopoietic organs and tumor tissue.
A computerized analysis for digitized whole-slide images of the samples
was used to quantify the lymphocyte infiltration using color
classification and morphological image processing techniques. All 3
treatment arms displayed a discrete activity pattern throughout the PDX
panel. Tumor models with high tumor infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) rates
in the donor patient material tended to be more sensitive towards
checkpoint inhibitor treatment as models with low rates. Numbers of TILs
in the PDX detected by FC and IHC were significantly increased in the
treatment groups as compared to control vehicle. In parallel,
hematopoietic organs showed high (>25%) amounts of huCD45 cells in all
groups and models. PDX models being sensitive towards checkpoint
inhibitor treatment (responders) displayed a higher percentage of DAB+
nuclei in huCD45 IHC stains than non-responder models as determined by
image analysis. Irrespective thereof, in responders as well as
non-responders the treatment with checkpoint inhibitors enhanced the
percentage of DAB+ nuclei. Whole-slide image analysis of the H&E stains
revealed an increase of the stromal compartment proportion in the tumor
tissue under treatment with checkpoint inhibitors in responder models. In
non-responder models the ratio between tumor and stroma was not
influenced by drug treatment. The use of PDX based humanized mouse models
in a SMT format allows screening approaches in complex mouse models. The
combination with a comprehensive image analysis tool enables additional
read-outs to quantify antitumoral activity of immune modulatory
compounds. The latter can be used to identify possible biomarkers in the
preclinical setting. Moreover, the translation and validation of these
biomarker candidates in a clinical setting is self-evident as primary
material needed for these types of analyses is easily accessible.


