Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative genomic and pathway analysis of ovarian cancer, benign
tumors, and normal tissues detect alterations in several metabolic
programs in ovarian cancer.


Introduction: The high mortality rate of ovarian cancer is mainly due to
asymptomatic early stages of the disease. Currently used detection
markers lack high sensitivity and specificity and generate large number
of false positives from benign and normal subjects. Therefore
experimental approaches capable of distinguishing the signatures of
malignancy are required to improve the current states of biomarkers. This
study aims to identify genetic abnormalities in ovarian cancer that
contribute to cancer progression and developments.

Methodology: This study was conducted on 67 whole tissue microarrays
samples processed using Affymetrix HG-Focus chip, including 18 non
tumorous samples (N), 14 benign tumor samples (B), 30 malignant ovarian
samples (M), 3 borderline malignant samples, and 2 ovarian cancer cell
lines. Differential expression (DE) analysis was conducted through
Analysis of Variance methods (ANOVA) between malignant samples and
non-malignant samples (M vs. B and N). DE results were modified to False
Discovery Rate (FDR Methodology: This study was conducted on 67 whole
tissue microarrays samples processed using Affymetrix HG-Focus chip,
including 18 non tumorous samples (N), 14 benign tumor samples (B), 30
malignant ovarian samples (M), 3 borderline malignant samples, and 2
ovarian cancer cell lines. Differential expression (DE) analysis was
conducted through Analysis of Variance methods (ANOVA) between malignant
samples and non-malignant samples (M vs. B and N). DE results were
modified to False Discovery Rate (FDR < 0.05). Further pathways analysis
was conducted on DE genes to identify pathways with dysregulated
elements. Pathway identification was performed by enrichment analysis
method based on KEGG annotated pathways. P-values were calculated using
Chi-Square test (FDRMethodology: This study was conducted on 67 whole
tissue microarrays samples processed using Affymetrix HG-Focus chip,
including 18 non tumorous samples (N), 14 benign tumor samples (B), 30
malignant ovarian samples (M), 3 borderline malignant samples, and 2
ovarian cancer cell lines. Differential expression (DE) analysis was
conducted through Analysis of Variance methods (ANOVA) between malignant
samples and non-malignant samples (M vs. B and N). DE results were
modified to False Discovery Rate (FDR < 0.05). Further pathways analysis
was conducted on DE genes to identify pathways with dysregulated
elements. Pathway identification was performed by enrichment analysis
method based on KEGG annotated pathways. P-values were calculated using
Chi-Square test (FDR<0.05). Further enrichment analyses were performed by
MSigDB GSEA portal.

Results: 826 DE genes were found with fold change > 2. PDGFRA, TACSTD2,
ABCA8, STAR, and C7 exhibited the highest rates of fold change (more than
14 fold). Enrichment Analysis of Hallmarks reveals several hallmarks of
cancer related terms including EMT, G2M, E2F targets, P53 pathways, and
Apoptosis. Pathway analysis identifies 26 pathways with dysregulated
components many of which are categorized as metabolic pathways including
Ascorbate Metabolism, Metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome, Drug
metabolism cytochrome P450, and Glutathione Metabolism. Gene Ontology
Enrichments identify several significant enrichments including: Response
to Endogenous Stimulus, Regulation of Cell Proliferation, Tissue
Development, Regulation of Cell Death, and Cell Cycle Process.

Conclusions: DE analysis and Pathway can reveal dysregulated metabolic
programs in ovarian cancer and the results of GO, Pathway, and hallmarks
enrichment analysis are consistent with mechanistic differences between
malignant tumors and other types of pathology. The inclusion of benign
tumors and non-malignant ovarian tissues contribute to more accurate
identification of disease profile. As expected, our data support
mechanisms of P53 mutations in malignancy and tumor progression. These
results can be used to identify such mechanisms in more detail as the
detected DE genes can be used to generate hypothesis set for detection of
ovarian malignancy signatures.


