Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF-β type I receptor inhibitor (TEW-7197) diminishes myeloma
progression by multiple immunomodulatory mechanisms in combination with
ixazomib.


Background: Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable cancer of plasma cells.
MM thrives in the bone marrow tumor microenvironment (TME) where several
factors sustain MM growth and viability. TGF-β is a multi-functional
cytokine elaborated by MM cells and by cells in the bone marrow (BM) TME.
TGF-β stimulates MM progression through promotion of catabolic bone
remodeling, IL-6 secretion and Th17 T cell development, which act in
concert to induce osteolytic bone disease, immune suppression and myeloma
progression. Therefore, we evaluated the anti-MM therapeutic potential of
a small molecule inhibitor of the TGF-β type I receptor kinase (TβRI),
TEW-7197, in combination with the proteasome inhibitor, ixazomib.
Currently, TEW-7197 is being evaluated in phase I clinical trials in
patients with solid tumors, and exposure to this agent is associated with
an acceptable tolerability profile.

Methods: The preclinical immunocompetent 5T33MM model (C57BL/KaLwRij) was
used to characterize the role of TGF-β signaling in the BM TME. Mice
bearing 5T33MM cells expressing luciferase were treated with TEW-7197,
ixazomib and the combination of TEW-7197 plus ixazomib daily for 3 weeks,
and evaluated for MM growth by bioluminescence imaging (BLI). Cellular
and molecular assays were performed in human RPMI8226 and U266 as well as
murine 5T33MM cells via apoptosis, real-time PCR and Western blotting.
Immunological assays were performed via immunohistochemistry and FACS
analyses. Peripheral blood monoclonal protein concentration, M-spike, was
measured by ELISA.

Results: TEW-7197 attenuated the growth and viability of human and murine
MM cells by inducing apoptosis and it inhibited TGF-β-induced activation
of Smad2/3 in MM cells in vitro. In our 5T33MM preclinical model, oral
administeration of TEW-7197 as single agent inhibited MM progression as
measured by peripheral blood monoclonal protein concentration and BLI
before and after treatment. TEW-7197 also induced a decrease in mortality
and an increase in body weight of mice bearing MM. TEW-7197 alone or
combination with ixazomib also attenuated TGF-β activation of Smad2/3,
reduced the expansion of CD11b+Gr-1+ myeloid derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs) in BM TME, and diminished the population of Foxp3+ regulatory T
cells (Treg) in the spleen. Combination therapy of TEW-7197 plus ixazomib
prolonged survival and exhibited a synergistic anti-tumor effect when
compared to either TEW-7197 or ixazomib alone by significant a reduction
in both the M-spike and BLI.

Conclusion: Our data demonstrate that the small molecule inhibitor of the
TβRI, TEW-7197, effectively modulate the MM TME and is associated with a
potent anti-myeloma effect in an immunocompetent murine model of MM.
These data provide a rationale for clinical evaluation of the combination
therapy of ixazomib and TEW-7197 as a potential therapeutic strategy to
improve outcomes in patients with MM.


