Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heat shock protein 47 maintains cancer cell survival through its
inhibitory effect on ER stress sensor IRE1alpha activity.


Background and aims: Heat shock protein 47 (HSP47) is a collagen-specific
chaperone and is expressed in fibroblasts and stromal cells that
constitutively produce and secrete several types of collagens. In a tumor
microenvironment, HSP47 is also highly expressed in cancer-associated
fibroblasts, involving in the tumorigenesis through construction of the
extracellular matrix. Intriguingly, HSP47 is expressed in cancer cells in
which almost no collagen is synthesized, and its expression has been
reported to be associated with malignant grade of gliomas and poor
prognosis of breast cancer. However, the functional significance of HSP47
in cancer cells remains unclear. Thus, the purpose of the present study
was to clarify the molecular mechanism by which HSP47 maintains cancer
cell survival and to explore the possibility of HSP47 becoming a
therapeutic target for tumors.

Methods: Expression of HSP47, collagen type I and collagen type IV mRNAs
and proteins was examined in 13 human cancer cell lines by real-time PCR
and western blotting. After transfection of colorectal cancer cells with
HSP47 siRNA, cell proliferation, morphological features and apoptosis
were examined by flow cytometric analysis, transmission electron
microscopy and western blotting. To determine whether silencing of HSP47
expression suppresses tumorigenicity, an HSP47 siRNA-liposome complex was
intratumorally injected in colorectal tumor-bearing Balb/c nu/nu mice.

Results: HSP47 mRNA and protein, but not collagen type I and collagen
type IV, were expressed in 13 human cancer cell lines. Silencing of HSP47
in colorectal cancer cells markedly caused apoptosis. Electron
microscopic analysis revealed that dilation of the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) in colorectal cancer cells was induced by silencing of HSP47,
similar to that evoked by ER stress. Furthermore, activation of the ER
stress sensor inositol-requiring protein 1alpha (IRE1alpha)/apoptosis
signal-regulating kinase 1/Jun-N-terminal kinase signaling pathway was
responsible for apoptosis of colorectal cancer cells by silencing of
HSP47. Immunoprecipitation of HSP47 and IRE1alpha showed that HSP47 forms
a complex with IRE1alpha in colorectal cancer cells under a basal
condition. Persistent activation of IRE1alpha by silencing of HSP47
triggered an increase in reactive oxygen species in colorectal cancer
cells followed by activation of the other ER stress sensors PKR-like ER
kinase and activating transcription factor 6alpha, resulting in
activation of the subsequent apoptosis-associated signaling pathway.
Finally, treatment of colorectal cancer cell-bearing mice with HSP47
siRNA resulted in complete regression of colorectal tumors.

Conclusion: These results suggest that HSP47 sustains cancer cell
survival through its inhibitory effect on IRE1alpha activity and that
targeted disruption of HSP47 might become a therapeutic modality for
tumors.


