Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomal NM23 facilitates pro-angiogenic communication between
triple-negative breast cancer cells and their vascular targets.


Functional interactions between primary tumor cells and their vascular
targets orchestrate the formation of a metastatic milieu enriched with
oxygen and metabolic substrates. These interactions have been largely
attributed to the activation of VEGF receptor pathways through localized
tumor-mediated release of VEGF, in addition to indirect receptor
phosphorylation. However, pro-angiogenic events are known to occur in the
absence of VEGF and alternative pathways resulting in dual activation of
neovascularization and enhanced vascular permeability are of growing
interest. Our lab has previously shown that triple-negative human breast
cancer (MDA-MB-231) cells elaborate exosomes carrying NM23, a nucleoside
diphosphate kinase (eNDPK) that is suggested to act as an upstream
mediator of vasodilation and pro-angiogenic activity through its action
of elevating extracellular ADP/ATP levels. To further elucidate the role
of eNDPK in breast cancer signaling and metastasis, we show that
231-exosomes induce a pro-angiogenic phenotype in both human umbilical
vein and murine pulmonary endothelial cells. Treatment with an
NDPK-specific inhibitor and an antagonist to the ADP/ATP-activated P2Y1
receptor results in amelioration of pro-angiogenic characteristics.
Further, we report the development and application of a novel murine
implant model to demonstrate increased specificity of 231 exosome
targeting to pulmonary endothelial cells over unrelated cell lines. These
results suggest the involvement of exosomes and eNDPK in pro-angiogenic
communication between metastatic breast cancer cells and their vascular
targets. Exosomes elaborated by these cells specifically target pulmonary
endothelium in vivo, mirroring the organotropic nature of breast cancer
metastasis. Implication of eNDPK in angiogenesis and metastasis may
challenge current and invasive treatment methods in favor of developing
novel small molecule inhibitors of eNDPK signaling. Lastly, eNDPK can be
explored as a potential biomarker for early detection of metastatic
breast cancer as it uniquely appears in the serum of patients with breast
cancer and not in the serum of individuals with unrelated pathologies.


