Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An interactome analysis for personalized chemotherapy using
PDX/NOG models of non-small cell lung cancer.


Lung cancer is one of the most common malignant diseases in the world,
and its prognosis is generally poor. It is crucial to elucidate the
biological mechanisms underlying lung cancer and accelerate the
development of new treatment strategies. Xenografts derived from
engrafting fresh surgical specimens directly into immunodeficient mice
have recently enabled the development of more relevant in vivo models of
human cancers. These patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models, established
by the direct transfer of tumor tissue, retain similar morphologies,
heterogeneities, and molecular signatures as the original cancers, and,
thus, may be used in promising personalized medicine for cancer. We
previously reported the rapid and efficient establishment of PDXs using
super immunodeficient NOG mice (PDX/NOG model). In the present study, we
analyzed the gene expression and cancer-stroma interaction profiles of
PDXs established from NSCLC patients. We also discussed the possibility
of individual PDX/NOG model simulations for personalized cancer
chemotherapy. Ten NSCLC lines of PDX/NOG (Age 43-78 years; 8 men and 2
women; 7 adenocarcinoma, 1 adenosquamous carcinoma, 1 squamous carcinoma,
and 1 large cell carcinoma) were presented. In these cases, clinical
information regarding chemotherapy for donor patients was retrieved where
possible. Genome sequencing and comprehensive analyses of tumor-stroma
interactions (CAncer-STromal INteractome analysis, CASTIN) were performed
on mRNA. CASTIN showed tumor-stroma interactions in PDX/NOG
comprehensively and quantitatively at the gene expression level by
distinguishing gene arrangements in human tissue (Cancer) from mouse
tissue (Stroma) as signal strengths (ligand dependency (%) / receptor
dependency (%)). Interactions of EGF(cancer)-EGFR(stroma) were observed
from 1.2 (15%/0%) to 11.5 (94%/80%) as widely-distributed. Interactions
of VEGFA(cancer)-KDR(stroma) were observed from 49.1 (31%/51%) to 301.7
(83%/100%) as closely-distributed. These interactions of EGF-EGFR or
VEGFA-KDR in PDX/NOG closely reflected the clinical effectiveness of an
EGFR inhibitor (Cetuximab) or VEGF-A inhibitor (Bevacizumab). The CASTIN
results of PDX/NOG appear to be reliable for clinical simulations of
chemotherapy and will definitely assist in the selection of the most
sensitive anti-cancer drug. The fast and efficient establishment of
individual PDXs will contribute to personalized anti-cancer therapies.


