Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detecting resistance mechanisms in patients on EGFR TKI treatment
by liquid biopsy.


The rise of liquid biopsy, including the molecular analysis of
circulating cell-free tumor DNA (ctDNA), has enabled real-time follow up
of cancer patients who receive targeted therapy.

Here, we report the case of a lung cancer patient (adenocarcinoma),
initially harboring the activating EGFR L858R mutation. Blood and tissue
samples were collected during treatment with the EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) gefitinib, and during the appearance of resistance.
Analysis of the tissue biopsies consisted of EGFR mutational analysis by
high-resolution melting analysis (HRMA) (all tissue samples),
immunohistochemistry (IHC) of cMET (sample 2); FISH analysis of the cMET
gene (sample 1 and 3); and next-generation sequencing (NGS) (sample 3).
We performed digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) to detect EGFR mutations and
cMET amplification in both tissue and plasma samples. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first time that ddPCR is used to screen for cMET
amplification in ctDNA.

The HRMA analysis of the biopsy during progression under EGFR TKI
treatment revealed the EGFR T790M resistance mutation. Progression was
also seen by radiological examination and this resulted in
discontinuation of gefitinib treatment. As a third generation EGFR TKI
was not available by that time, the patient was retreated with
carboplatin plus pemetrexed, which resulted in a mixed response. In the
second biopsy, only the EGFR activating L858R mutation was detected by
HRMA. IHC analysis revealed a strong membrane positivity for cMET in 100%
of the tumor cells. After progression upon rechallenging the patient with
erlotinib, treatment with osimertinib (third generation EGFR TKI) was
initiated. This resulted in only a partial response, with some strongly
progressing lesions. NGS analysis of the third tissue biopsy indicated
the presence of both the EGFR L858R and T790M mutations, while ddPCR
analysis of the plasma sample only detected the EGFR L858R mutation. Due
to the fast progression, it was opted to also screen for cMET
amplification. DdPCR cMET analysis of the tissue and plasma resulted in a
copy number variation of 10.0 and 3.7, respectively. FISH analysis
confirmed the cMET amplification with a ratio of 3.1 and an average of
8.4 cMET-signals per nucleus.

The results of the ddPCR EGFR and cMET analysis of both the plasma and
tissue samples are now being processed to determine the course of the
mutational load and the best course of treatment.

As such, real-time follow-up of cancer patients is crucial to detect the
underlying mechanisms of resistance to targeted therapies. Correlation of
molecular analysis with the disease course is key. Our case study
highlights the potential of ctDNA analysis for detection of both the EGFR
T790M resistance mutation and cMET amplification. Hence, tissue biopsies
can be supplemented by liquid biopsies in the screening for resistance
mechanisms.


