Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting ANXA3 in combination with sorafenib for the treatment of
hepatocellular carcinoma.


Sorafenib is the only FDA-approved tyrosine kinase inhibitor for targeted
therapy in advanced HCC. Nevertheless, its efficacy is limited with only
a modest improvement in patient outcome, likely due to acquired
resistance. In-depth understanding of the molecular mechanism of
sorafenib resistance is warranted for the development of novel treatment
strategies. Recent studies by us and others have characterized liver
tumor-initiating cells (T-ICs) to be a possible source of resistant and
recurrent tumors and a plausible target for HCC treatment. Our group has
previously identified CD133 to be a functional marker of liver T-ICs and
found annexin a3 (ANXA3) to regulate cancer and stem cell-like properties
in this subset of cells. Interestingly, our recent observations also
found CD133+ liver T-ICs to be more resistant to sorafenib. Sorafenib
resistant clones, established in HepG2 and Huh7 cells by continuous
exposure to increasing concentrations of sorafenib, displayed enhanced
abilities to migrate, invade, self-renew, and initiate tumor formation in
immunodeficient mice, as well as higher expression of stemness associated
genes. These two sorafenib resistant cell lines and two other sorafenib
resistant HCC patient-derived xenografts established in a similar manner
were also found to be enriched for CD133 and ANXA3 expression. Sorafenib
resistant clones with ANXA3 stably suppressed were re-sensitized to
sorafenib treatment and had diminished ability to migrate, invade,
self-renew and initiate tumor growth in vivo, further substantiating the
role of ANXA3 in mediating sorafenib resistance in HCC. Mechanistically,
an activated PKC/ERK/FRA2 signaling axis was found to be responsible for
driving this phenomenon. Clinically, ANXA3 expression was also found to
have prognostic value as a higher ANXA3 expression in HCC patients who
have received sorafenib treatment was correlated with poor overall
survival. The combinatorial use of a homemade ANXA3 neutralizing antibody
and sorafenib on HCC patient derived xenografts is now being investigated
as a potential new treatment regimen for combating sorafenib resistance
in HCC.


