Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling tumor immuno-dynamics to predict patient survival and
immunotherapy efficacy.


State of the art models of cancer survival are increasingly utilizing
molecular data that feature the number of non-synonymous mutations, or a
network based stratification of mutations, as significant predictors. It
is widely hypothesized that this association between mutations and
survival is a result of neo-epitopes that induce a robust anti-tumor
immune response. Naively this implies that patient neo-epitope burden
should better predict survival than that of mutations alone, however this
has generally been difficult to prove. Indeed, mutations and predicted
neo-epitopes explain roughly the same survival variance, likely due to
the intertwined difficulties of neo-epitope prioritization and the often
immuno-suppressive tumor microenvironment.

Reasoning that integrating leading order immune response with novel
neo-epitope prioritization will lead to superior performance, we built a
statistical model to quantify the influence of tumor immune-dynamics on
patient survival. Neoepitopes (MHC-I/II) were predicted from mutations
and filtered on a self-ligandome. The clonal structure of these mutations
and the distribution of resulting epitopes were assessed as predictive
features. Additionally, the existing response to epitopes was assayed by
incorporating TCR and BCR sequence counts and entropy as a proxy for
clonal tumor infiltrating lymphocyte expansion.

Leveraging the cancer genome atlas (TCGA) for 9 major cancer types
including bladder (BLCA), breast (BRCA), colorectal (COAD/READ),
glioblastoma (GBM), liver (LIHC), lung (NSCLC), melanoma (SKCM),
pancreatic (PAAD), and uterine (UCEC) cancer, we obtained omics data for
a total of 2,866 patients. Random forest based recursive feature
elimination was used to determine which features were most likely to be
predictive while overfitting was controlled with k-fold cross validation.
A cox proportional hazard model of survival as a function of mutation
burden and functions of neoepitope and immune response predictors was
constructed using the selected features. Our results confirm that
neoepitope and immune response based predictors for survival often
significantly outperform mutation burden alone and simultaneously suggest
a quantitative classification of immunotherapy efficacy across cancer
subtypes.


