Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral Treg cell depletion by local administration of
IL-2-Diphteria toxin fusion protein E7777 induces a therapeutic and
memory anti-tumor immune response in preclinical models.


T regulatory (Treg) cells play an important role in maintaining
immunological tolerance to self-antigens, thus limiting immune responses
to tumor antigens. Therefore, depleting or suppressing Tregs is one
strategy by which anti-tumor immunity can be restored. The immunotoxin
ONTAK® is an IL-2-diphteria toxin fusion protein that has been shown to
diminish Tregs in patients and animal models of cancer in peripheral
blood using a systemic intravenous (i.v.) administration route. E7777 is
a new version of ONTAK®. In this study we tested the hypothesis that
locally-diminished Tregs by intratumoral (i.t.) administration of E7777
generate effective anti-tumor immune response at both local and systemic
levels. First, we showed superior anti-tumor activity and safety of E7777
i.t. over E7777 i.v., where i.t. administration resulted in complete
tumor regressions in both moderately immunogenic CT26 and non-immunogenic
B16F10 tumors with minimal animal body weight loss. In contrast, only
tumor growth delay was observed for E7777 i.v. with dose-limiting animal
body weight reduction in the same models. Immune phenotyping showed a 4
fold reduction of intratumoral Tregs in treated CT-26 tumors without
significant change of Tregs in the spleens of treated animals, confirming
a local Treg-depleting effect of E7777 i.t. In contrast, intratumoral
CD8+ T cells were not reduced. Second, E7777 i.t. enhanced overall
anti-tumor immune response, manifested by significantly increased numbers
of CD45+ hematopoietic cells, Granzyme B+ CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, and
ratios of cytotoxic T cells/Tregs in the treated tumors. Importantly,
E7777 i.t. also resulted in distant effects in the spleen characterized
by increased ratio of T lymphocytes to myeloid cells and increased
frequencies of both effector memory CD8+ T cells (CD8+CD62L-CD44+) and
central memory CD8+ T cells (CD8+CD62L+CD44+) indicative of systemic
immune activation. Consistent with the generation of immunological
memory, 60% of the tumor-free animals treated with E7777 i.t. rejected
completely and 40% displayed delayed tumor growth of B16F10 cell
challenge while all naïve control animals grew tumors. Taken together,
our results demonstrate that intratumoral Treg depletion by local
administration of E7777 leads to an effective local and memory anti-tumor
response in preclinical models and support further evaluation of local
E7777 delivery as a cancer immunotherapy.


