Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phospho-proteome analyses confirm the unique mode of action of
MP0274, an apoptosis inducing, biparatopic HER2-targeting DARPin® drug
candidate.


Background: HER2 is an important target for antitumor therapy in several
cancers, and while currently available HER2-targeting drugs provide a
great treatment improvement they rarely achieve full disease control. We
have developed a new HER2-targeting molecule with a unique pro-apoptotic
mode of action that may provide additional benefit to patients. The
DARPin® molecule MP0274 shows potency in several HER2-expressing PDX
models and has been shown to directly induce apoptosis in cells that are
addicted to HER2. Here we show through phospho-proteome analyses that
MP0274 not only potently inhibits HER2/HER3 downstream signaling, but
also shows a very distinct changes in the phospho-proteome pattern
compared to approved HER2-targeting drugs. This provides mechanistic
support to the unique mode of action of MP0274 that results in direct
tumor cell killing without the need of effector-functions like ADCC.

Methods: The effect of MP0274 on HER2 signaling was compared to
trastuzumab, pertuzumab and a combination of both in the HER2-addicted
cancer cell lines. Briefly, cells were incubated with drugs for 18 hours
and then lysed. Lysates were analyzed for changes in the total proteome
and phospho-proteome by Proteome Sciences’ proprietary SysQuant®
Global Phosphoproteomics workflow.

Results: Heat-maps of genes of interest indicate that MP0274 has a
differential mode of action compared to trastuzumab, pertuzumab or a
combination of both. On the total peptide and phospho-peptide level, the
samples cluster specifically, based on the cancer cells used as well as
drug treatment. Twenty nine unique global phosphorylation sites specific
to HER2, including C-terminal tyrosines which are reported to recruit
adaptor proteins starting signaling processes after auto-phosphorylation,
were identified for MP0274. Several proteins were identified which were
differentially expressed and phosphorylated after MP0274 treatment and
which are involved in three key downstream signaling pathways activated
by HER2/HER3 heterodimers: RAF/MAP kinase cascade, PI3K-induced AKT
signaling, and signaling by PLCG1.

Conclusions: MP0274 shows a unique and distinct inhibition of the HER2
signaling cascade, different from trastuzumab, pertuzumab and a
combination of both. It induces a more profound inhibition of downstream
signaling which provides mechanistic support to the finding that MP0274
direct cell killing by induction of apoptosis in HER2-addicted tumor
cells.

* DARPins are small repeat proteins, designed to bind targets with high
affinity and specificity, and which can be combined in a modular fashion
to produce multi-functional agents.


