Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disruption of TCF7L1 mediated transcriptional repression promotes
pancreatic tumorigenesis.


While phenotypic studies demonstrate Wnt/β-catenin signaling is critical
for the initiation and progression of pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDA),
the downstream transcriptional effectors tied to its effects are largely
unknown. Previous work from our group has identified differential
patterns of LEF/TCF expression linked to variations in Wnt activation and
function in PDA, including reduced TCF7L1 (aka TCF3) message and protein
levels in pancreatic tumors with elevated Wnt pathway activity.
Consistent with this observation, we found TCF7L1 protein levels rapidly
diminished in PDA lines after Wnt pathway activation mediated by either
Wnt3A ligand or GSK3β inhibitor. RNAi-mediated knockdown of TCF7L1 in
PDA lines phenocopied most of the pro-tumorigenic effects seen with Wnt3A
ligand treatment. Because TCF7L1 commonly represses transcription and is
rapidly downregulated in PDA upon Wnt activation, we explored its
transcriptional derepression as a potentially important mechanism through
which Wnt signaling promotes pancreatic tumorigenesis. Candidate genes
linked to TCF7L1-mediated transcriptional repression in PDA were
identified by RNA-sequencing of MiaPaCa-2 and PANC1 lines following
RNAi-mediated knockdown of TCF7L1. A total of 196 genes upregulated at
least 1.5-fold in both cell lines were identified, representing potential
direct targets of TCF7L1-mediated transcriptional repression. Gene
ontology analysis among these 196 upregulated genes revealed enrichment
of categories including small GTPase-mediated signal transduction, RAS
protein signal transduction, regulation of axon extension, and regulation
of synaptic plasticity. Among top upregulated genes was prostaglandin E
synthase (PTGES), an enzyme catalyzing the isomerization of prostaglandin
H2 to prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) as the final step in PGE2 synthesis from
arachidonic acid. Notably, PGE2 stimulates pancreatic cancer
proliferation, invasion, angiogenesis and metastasis. Validation
experiments in TCF7L1-expressing PDA lines confirmed PTGES message and
protein levels rapidly increased in response to TCF7L1 depletion and were
associated with a corresponding increase in PGE2 production as measured
by ELISA. PGE2 increased Wnt reporter activity in PDA cell lines, a
potentially important feedforward mechanism whereby Wnt signaling may be
reinforced upon its activation. In conclusion, TCF7L1 represses target
genes with known roles in PDA, while reduction in TCF7L1 through Wnt
pathway activation or alternative means is apparently tied to a program
of transcriptional derepression linked to the promotion of pancreatic
tumorigenesis.


