Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NOTCH1 regulates head and neck cancer cell growth and invasion.


Introduction: NOTCH1 has recently been identified as a frequently mutated
gene in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). However, its role
in HNSCC is poorly understood. Creation of genetic models investigating
the role of NOTCH1 in HNSCC behavior will be crucial to further
characterize its function, and to potentially modify treatment paradigms
in NOTCH1 mutant HNSCCs. To date, no syngeneic HNSCC cell line knockout
models of NOTCH1 have been created to specifically study the effects of
NOTCH1 in HNSCC phenotypes.

Methods: We transfected a NOTCH1 gRNA-CRISPR-Cas9 lentiviral construct
into a HNSCC cell line with wildtype NOTCH1 (UMSCC-49) and selected
knockout clones. Whole exome sequencing, qRT-PCR, and Western blotting
were performed to validate the cell line knockout. Invasion chamber and
growth assays were performed to assay for cell line phenotypes.
Immunofluorescence staining and proteomic analysis were performed to
study expression changes in various invasive markers.

Results: We successfully created a NOTCH1 knockout cell line
(UMSCC-49N1KO) with an otherwise identical genetic architecture as its
parent line (UMSCC-49). Knockout status was verified via exome
sequencing, qRT-PCR and Western blotting. Analysis of UMSCC-49N1KO
suggested an increased aggressive and invasive phenotype. Cell
proliferation assays demonstrated an increased cell proliferation in
UMSCC-49N1KO. Invasion chamber assays demonstrated increased invasion in
the NOTCH1 deficient cell line. Proteomic analysis demonstrated increased
expression of proteins associated with invasion and cell proliferation
and decreased expression of cell differentiation markers in UMSCC-49N1KO,
consistent with an aggressive and invasive phenotype in the NOTCH1
deficient line. These phenotypes were validated with subsequently
generated UMSCC-49 NOTCH1 knockout lines.

Conclusions: NOTCH1 acts as a key tumor suppressor gene in HNSCC and
regulates cell proliferation and invasion. We have created a useful
genetic model to study effects NOTCH1 in tumorigenesis, proliferation and
metastasis with a wildtype NOTCH1 parent (UM-SCC49) and mutant NOTCH1,
otherwise syngeneic cell line (UM-SCC49N1KO). NOTCH1 mutant status
correlates with worse outcome in HNSCC patients. Further characterization
of the role of NOTCH1 in cell proliferation, invasion and metastasis may
provide insight into treatment stratification paradigms, targetable
options and predictive biomarkers for patients with NOTCH1 mutant HNSCCs.


