Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: R-Ras is required for T cell trafficking in high endothelial
venues and implicated in anti-tumor immunity.


R-Ras belongs the RAS superfamily of small GTP-binding proteins
implicated in cell adhesion signaling. Unlike classical Ras proteins,
R-Ras is not activated by growth factor receptors. Rather, its GTPase
activity is modulated by molecules implicated in cell-cell adhesion
including semaphorins and notch. Using an R-Ras knockout mouse strain, we
have previously reported that R-Ras is required for murine Dendritic cell
functions. Further characterization of this mouse strain revealed reduced
cellularity of peripheral lymph nodes (PLNs) by 40% with T cell regions
in the paracortex in which high endothelial venules (HEV) resided were
less prominent when compared with wild-type (WT) mice. Consistently,
immunohistological analysis for MECA-79, a marker of mature HEV, showed a
3- to 4-fold decrease in staining intensity. This is correlated with a
30-40% reduction in the number of CD62L+ CD4 and CD8 T cells in PLNs.
Furthermore, R-Ras null T cells had reduced proliferative and homing
capacity when compared with WT. More importantly, we demonstrated for the
first time that the chemokine CCL21 was able to stimulate the GTP-loading
of R-Ras within 15 seconds of addition. Indeed, R-Ras null T-cells
displayed reduced binding to soluble ICAM-1 as well as to 2H-11
endothelial cells. To explore the role of R-Ras in anti-tumor immunity,
B16/F10 melanoma cells were injected subcutaneously to WT and R-Ras null
mice. In addition, a mouse breast tumor model was generated ineither WT
or R-Ras-null genetic background. Tumor development and the number of
infiltrating immune cells were analyzed to examine if R-Ras was involved
in either anti- or pro-tumor immune responses. This work was supported by
NIH CA78509 (AMC), MH59771 (AMC). MY was supported by Hong Kong PhD
Fellowship Scheme (PF12-13584) and AMC was supported by the Lo Kwee-Seong
Seed Fund, and a General Research Fund Grant, 14120915, from Hong Kong
University Grants Committee.


