Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel miRNA-based therapeutic approach to selectively target
mutant p53 in cancer.


Tumor suppressor p53, guardian of the genome, is frequently mutated or
functionally dysregulated in more than 50% of human tumors. p53 mutation
is a later event in tumorigenesis and a number of p53 mutants have
“Gain of Function” (GOF) properties that have been shown to promote
invasive and more aggressive phenotypes in cancer cells. Mutant p53 has
been an attractive and promising therapeutic target for advanced stages
of tumors. Yet, mutant p53 has proved to be one of the most undruggable
targets. Thus, there is continued interest in understanding the GOF
properties of mutant p53 and in designing novel strategies to target
mutant p53 and/or key GOF pathways. Mature MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are ~22 nt
endogenous, non-coding RNA sequences that bind to 3’UTR of their target
genes and inhibit their translation. miRNA mimics are emerging
therapeutics and attractive tools for mapping pathway networks. We
developed a novel functional high throughput screening (HTS) assay to
identify miRNAs that selectively target mutant p53-expressing cell lines.
The HTS was performed in isogenic TP53+/+ (wild-type), TP53-/- (null) and
TP53 R175H (mutant) HCT-116 colorectal cancer cell lines. Cell viability
was used as the HTS read-out of our functional screen. Of 2754 miRNA
mimics screened, we identified 56 miRNAs that selectively target TP53
R175H (mutant) cells. Our ongoing work is directed to further validating
and identifying which of these miRNA mimics selectively induce apoptosis
in mutant p53-expressing cells. We are also using reporter-based assays
to identify a fraction of the 56 miRNAs that can bind to the p53 3’UTR.
Our long-term goal is to selectively target mutant p53-expressing cells
using miRNA mimics as single agents or in combination with FDA-approved
or experimental therapeutics. Our strategy is may provide a unique
opportunity for development of targeted therapy for TP53 mutant tumors.


