Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimizing drug regimens in oncology by clinical trial
simulations: Why and how.


Introduction: In therapeutic research, the safety and efficacy of
pharmaceutical products are necessarily tested on humans via clinical
trials after a very long and expensive development period. Alternative
methodologies such as computer modeling and Clinical Trial Simulation
(CTS) are a valuable option to reduce animal and human assays. The
relevance of these methods is well recognized in pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics from the pre-clinical phase to post-marketing. However,
they are seldom used and are poorly regarded for drug approval, despite
FDA and EMA recommendations. We propose to discuss the principle behind,
and the interest of, CTS approaches in drug development in oncology. Our
work is based on a systematic review using two electronic literature
databases (Medline and Web of Science).

Key components of CTS: We will explain why and how to successfully
develop CTS.

Why developing CTS?

To obtain a better knowledge of pharmacology and/or better prediction of
safety and efficacy

To evaluate disease progression dynamics and to test the potential impact
of biomarkers

To analyze subpopulations and extend the post-marketing authorization to
help in the choice of the best outcome

To optimize experimental designs in order to better anticipate the
progress of the study

How to develop CTS?

CTS project must follow three steps:

1/The constitution of pharmacometricians team who elaborates clinical
model and simulation plan that must contain three components:

Input/output model: How do covariates impact outcomes?

Covariate distribution Model: How can we generate virtual patients?

Execution model: What can happen during the clinical trial?

2/Obtaining data for simulations. We will present the contribution of
machine learning for CTS

3/The use of specialized software to realize simulations

Limitations of CTS: We will present the features that can slow down or
accelerate the development of CTS. The generalization of CTS could be
greatly facilitated by the availability of software for modeling
biological systems, by the clinical trials studies and hospital
databases. Data-sharing and data-merging raise legal, policy and
technical issues that will need to be addressed.

CTS challenges and prospects: Development of future molecules will have
to use CTS for faster development and thus enable better patient
management. Drug activity modeling coupled with disease modeling, optimal
use of medical data and increase of the computing speed should allow this
leap forward. The realization of CTS requires not only the bioinformatics
tools to allow interconnection and global integration of all clinical
data, but also a universal legal framework to protect the privacy of
every patient. CTS will have to be used to provide quantitative support
for drug development decisions but will never replace real clinical
trials. This in silico medicine opens the way to the 4P medicine:
predictive, preventive, personalized and participatory.


