Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unraveling the oncogenic pathway of serrated polyposis syndrome
driven by RNF43 germline mutation.


Serrated polyps can arise in a sporadic or familial polyposis setting and
predispose to colorectal cancer (CRC). Recently, we have identified RNF43
germline mutation in a family with Serrated Polyposis Syndrome (Yan et
al, GUT 2016). The presence of second somatic hit in all serrated polyps
examined from members of this family further confirmed the pathogenicity
of RNF43 germline mutation. In an attempt to further delineate the global
genomic alterations in these serrated polyps, so as to understand the
RNF43 driven serrated neoplasia pathway for the development of colorectal
cancer, we performed whole exome sequencing (WES) on two sessile serrated
adenomas (SSAs) resected from an RNF43 germline mutation carrier,
together with the paired blood DNA. Consistent with the results from our
previous Sanger sequencing study, WES detected complete inactivation of
RNF43 through a 2nd hit somatic mutation, c.461 C>T P154L, or loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) in the two SSAs, respectively. We also identified 51
and 58 somatic mutations in the two SSAs, respectively. BRAFV600E
mutation was the only shared mutation between the two polyps.
Interestingly, each of the SSAs carried a truncating mutation in a
histone-methyltransferase gene, either PRDM9 or SETD1B, respectively.
Other truncating or deleterious mutations included chromatin modifiers
(CHD2, CHD4, TSPYL2) or other genes with methyltransferase activity
(TRMT2B, METTL12, METTL14, ECE2). In addition, we found few instances of
chromosomal aberration or LOH, apart from a region of LOH at chromosome
17 encompassing RNF43 in one of the SSAs.

Overall, we have revealed the genomic landscape of two sessile serrated
adenomas resected from a germline RNF43 mutation carrier. The results
confirmed somatic RNF43 2nd hit and BRAFV600E mutation as the key events,
along with putative roles for histone methyltransferase, as well as other
chromatin modifiers. These findings highlight the potentially important
role of an altered chromatin in the oncogenic pathway of serrated
neoplasia.


