Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming cisplatin resistance through the combination treatment
with CK2 inhibitor, CX-4945, in gastric cancer.


Platinum-based antineoplastic drugs are chemotherapeutic agents to
usually treat gastric cancer (GC) include cisplatin. However, the
majority of cancer patients will eventually relapse with
cisplatin-resistant disease. Especially, increased DNA repair is drug
targetable mechanism and useful in the treatment strategy of
cisplatin-resistant cancer. Casein kinase 2 (CK2) has critical role of
multiple cellular processes with DNA repair. For this reason, research
for CK2 expression correlated with DNA repair mechanism is important in
gastric cancer. Combination of cisplatin and CK2 inhibitor (CX-4945, also
known as Silmitasertib, Senhwa Biosciences, USA) may improve
cisplatin-induced DNA damage for GC treatment. In this study, we screened
sensitivity of cisplatin and CX-4945 in 49 GC cell lines by MTT assay.
For molecular profiling, we analyzed variants and gene expression using
whole exome sequencing and RNA sequencing. RNA and protein expression of
CK2 subunits (α/α’) using real-time RT-PCR and Western blot. Also,
activity of CK2α was measured by ELISA. Combination treatment performed
different schedules including concurrent and sequential. Synergistic
effect was analyzed by Bliss Independence model. As CK2 profiling,
CK2α’ mRNA expression was a tendency to correlated with CX-4945
sensitivity(p=0.0504). Moreover, CK2α’ protein expression was a
correlated with CX-4945 sensitivity(p=0.0252). Other molecular profiling
did not reveal any clear correlations. Twenty one (Group1: cisplatin
extremely resistant and CK2 high, Group2: cisplatin intermediate
resistant regardless of CK2 expression) cell lines were performed
combination treatment. Both YCC-21 and YCC-28 cell lines show synergistic
effect (+20% and +22%, respectively) in concurrent schedule. Only MKN-74
cell line show synergistic effect (+11%) in Pre-addition. The 4 cell
lines (YCC-18, YCC-38, SNU-1 and -216) were show synergistic effect
(+10%, +37%, +11% and +19%, respectively) in Post-addition. In
conclusion, early inhibition of CK2 shows synergistic effect in group 1,
because CK2 is high expression. In group 2, late inhibition of CK2
demonstrated synergistic effect. It means CK2-related DNA repair is
up-regulating for repair to cisplatin-induced DNA damage. Personalized
the treatment schedule for inhibit CK2-induced DNA repair is a new
strategy to restore cisplatin resistant in GC.


