Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depletion of SPECC1L inhibits colorectal cancer cell proliferation.


Introduction: Despite the numerous drugs available for patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC), median overall survival for this
group of patients remains at ~20-24 months, with no significant advances
in the last 7 years. In the US ~50,000 patients die each year from mCRC
refractory to systemic therapy. Inhibiting angiogenesis as a therapy has
led to a great deal of enthusiasm. However, the overall benefit of
classical-antiangiogenic therapy remains modest and has not lived up to
their expectations in treating CRC. Our recent studies suggest that VEGF
intracrine signaling, rather than autocrine/paracrine signaling,
regulates cell survival in CRC cells. Further studies to understand the
significance and mechanisms of this novel function have led us to
identify factors that intracellularly interact with VEGF. Our studies
further indicate that one such interacting protein, SPECC1L, may have a
significant role in CRC cell proliferation and may be a potential target
in mCRC therapy.

Methods: Lysates from CRC cells expressing Myc-tagged VEGF protein were
immunoprecipitated and analyzed by mass spectrometry to identify
VEGF-interacting protiens. SPECC1L was identified as a co-precipitated
protein with high level of confidence. SPECC1L was depleted using siRNA
and effects of such depletion on CRC cell growth and morphology were
measured by cell growth assays (MTT), microscopy, FACS and western blot
analyses. Localization of the protein and its interaction with
microtubules and actin were visualized by immunostaining of FLAG-tagged
recombinant SPECC1L protein.

Results: SPECC1L was identified as a protein that co-immunoprecipitated
with Myc-tagged VEGF in CRC cells using mass spectroscopy. Previous
literature suggests a role for SPECC1L in cell division. As a fraction of
VEGF overexpressing CRC cells have a large multinucleated phenotype,
likely arising due to defects in cell division, it was hypothesized that
a VEGF mediated regulation of SPECC1L may lead to such phenotype.
Depletion of SPECC1L by siRNAs in multiple CRC cell lines led to strong
defects in cell division. The effects of SPECC1L depletion were
manifested as accumulation of doublet-cells failing to complete
cytokinesis following mitosis and resulted in reduced cell proliferation.
Failure to complete cell division also led to the formation of
multinucleated cells and enhanced cell death.

Conclusions: Inhibition of SPECC1L strongly inhibits CRC cell
proliferation and enhances cell death. Thus targeting SPECC1L has the
potential for developing therapeutics that reduce viability of CRC cells
and improve survival of colorectal cancer patients.

*** These studies were supported by the Gillson-Longenbaugh Foundation.


