Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SUV39H2 inhibition enhances sensitivity of breast cancer cells to
doxorubicin through downregulation of γ-H2AX production.


Accumulating evidence has demonstrated the biological importance of
protein methyltransferases in human tumorigenesis, and several small
molecular inhibitors targeting these enzymes have been developed.
Moreover, inhibiting pathways involved in DNA repair has been shown to
enhance the cytotoxicity of DNA-damaging agents. Herein, we report the
development of a potent SUV39H2 inhibitor (OTS193320) that decreases
global histone H3 lysine 9 tri-methylation (H3K9me3) levels in cancer
cells and attenuates cancer cell proliferation, and suppresses the tumor
growth in mouse xenograft models. SUV39H2 (Suppressor of variegation 3-9
homolog 2), is a protein methyltransferase known to methylate histone H3
at lysine 9 (H3K9), and recently reported to methylate histone H2AX at
lysine 134, which enhances the accumulation of phosphorylated H2AX
(γ-H2AX) and regulates the DNA repair pathway in human cancer. SUV39H2
is highly expressed in many cancer types, including lung and breast
cancers, while its expression levels are restricted to testis in normal
adult tissues. Exposure of OTS193320 to two triple negative breast cancer
cell lines attenuated H3K9me3 levels in a dose-dependent manner and
triggered apoptotic cell death. Combination of OTS193320 and doxorubicin
(DOX) resulted in reduction of γ-H2AX levels compared to single agent
DOX, as visualized on western blot and immunocytochemical analysis.
Furthermore, combination therapy attenuated the levels of p53-binding
protein 1, which is reported to co-localize with γ-H2AX foci, compared
to single agent DOX. Cell viability assays demonstrated a significant
growth suppressive effect when OTS193320 was combined with DOX, compared
to single agent treatment of either drug, suggesting chemosensitization
to DOX. Importantly, in a mouse xenograft model of A549 lung cancer
cells, we observed a tumor growth inhibition of 60.8% at day 14 with
25mg/kg intravenous administration of the inhibitor, without significant
body weight loss or toxicity. Immunohistochemical staining of tumors
treated with the inhibitor demonstrated a significantly lower number of
Ki-67 positive cells and attenuated distribution patterns of H3K9me3
compared to the control tumors. Collectively, our results demonstrate
that SUV39H2 inhibition may be a promising approach to develop a novel
class of anti-cancer treatment.


