Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiRNA expression analysis in the tumor stroma predicts Tenascin C
to promote colorectal cancer liver metastasis.


Background: Liver is the most common site for colorectal cancer (CRC)
metastasis, and mechanisms underlying colorectal liver metastasis need to
be explored. The tumor microenvironment consists of many stromal cells
which are known to interact with cancer cells and to promote metastasis.
Recently many microRNAs (miRNAs) specifically expressed in the stroma is
receiving attention. In this study, we analyzed the differences in miRNA
expression profiles between peritumoral stroma of CRCs with and without
liver metastasis, and sought to identify liver metastasis-promoting
molecules that can be regulated by the altered expression of miRNAs in
the peritumoral stroma.

Materials and methods: The formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
specimens of primary CRCs from 8 patients without metastasis, 4 patients
with synchronous liver metastasis and 4 patients with metachronous liver
metastasis were used for miRNA array analysis. None of the patients had
received any treatment prior to surgery. Tumor stroma was isolated from
FFPE samples using laser capture microdissection without contamination of
cancer cells, and total RNAs were extracted. The quality of total RNA was
assessed, and miRNA expression was analyzed using TaqMan miRNA arrays.
Protein expression of Tenascin C (TNC) was immunohistochemically analyzed
in 139 primary CRCs.

Results: Unsupervised hierarchical clustering classified 16 samples
analyzed into two groups according to their miRNA expressions. CRCs with
synchronous liver metastasis showed differential miRNA expression
profiles from those without liver metastasis or with metachronous liver
metastasis. Top10 miRNAs up-regulated in CRCs with synchronous liver
metastasis vs. CRCs without liver metastasis or with metachronous liver
metastasis were hsa-miR-518b, 618, 186, 520f, 29c, 520e, 155, 30c, 518e
and 106b, and those down-regulated in CRCs with synchronous liver
metastasis were hsa-miR-302a, 551b, 627, 628-5p, 19a, 372, 302b, 384, 198
and 636. The predictive targets of the top 10 down-regulated miRNAs were
analyzed in silico using on-line data base such as .miRDB. TNC was
identified as a candidate for metastasis-promoting molecule which can be
upregulated in the peritumoral stroma followed by the downregulation of
miRNAs. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that protein expression of
TNC was higher in the stroma of primary CRCs with synchronous liver
metastasis compared with those without liver metastasis or with
metachronous liver metastasis. Furthermore, high expression of TNC
protein in the primary CRC stroma was correlated with shorter overall
survival and liver metastasis-free survival.

Conclusions: Alterations of miRNAs in the CRC stroma appear to create a
metastasis permissive environment in which TNC plays an important role.
Expression of TNC in primary CRC stroma has the potential to be a novel
biomarker to predict the risk of postoperative liver metastasis in CRC
patients.


