Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transformation from melanocytes or nevi into melanoma: models
based on a transcriptome meta-analysis.


Background

Melanoma is the most aggressive skin cancer due to its ability to rapidly
metastasize and resist radio- and chemotherapy. The frequency of this
disease has increased 400% worldwide in the last 30 years. There are 2
ways to develop melanoma: direct transformation of melanocytes into
melanoma and the nevus as an intermediary. Here, we used a computational
strategy based on transcriptome meta-analysis to identify the pathways
involved in the 2 possible ways by which cells may transform to melanoma.

Methods

Affymetrix HU 133A Plus 2.0 microarray files (50 in total) were collected
from the Gene Expression Omnibus database for the meta-analysis,
representing melanocytes, nevi and stage I, II, and III melanoma.
Differential expression was analyzed using linear models and the limma
library. The analysis focused on 3 comparisons: nevi vs. melanocytes;
melanoma vs. nevi; and melanoma vs. melanocytes. Transcripts with a log
fold change of 1 (B-statistic >3) were included in the study. Functional
enrichment analysis identified the most deregulated pathway. Genes
resulting from the intersection of the melanoma vs. nevi and melanoma vs.
melanocytes comparisons were used as possible biomarkers of
transformation and analyzed by IPA.

Gene signature identification

In melanoma vs. nevi comparison, 1881 expressed genes were differentially
expressed, of which only 888 were used to generate the transformation
model and to perform functional enrichment. Consistent with the
phenomenon of malignant transformation, we identified 3 pathways
associated with cell cycle checkpoint control that exhibited decreased
activity. Conversely, the pathways that exhibited increased activity,
Estrogen-mediated S-phase Entry and Cyclins and Cell Cycle Regulation,
promote cell cycle progression. In melanoma vs. Melanocytes comparison,
4112 expressed genes were differentially expressed (2310 downregulated
and 1802 upregulated), 1099 of which intersected with the nevi vs.
melanocytes comparison. The 682 genes intersecting the melanoma vs. nevi
comparison were removed. Thus, 2331 genes were used to perform enrichment
analysis. The main result was the decreased activity of the cAMP-mediated
signaling pathway. The intersection of both comparisons (682 genes), was
used to identify 22 genes upregulated whose product is a secreted
protein. Two of these genes were previously reported as potential
biomarkers in neoplasia, cytokines CXCL8 and CXCL16, supporting the
quality of our analysis.

Conclusions

Our analysis, in agreement with previously reported results, identify
CXCL8 as biomarker of melanoma, and also identified new biomarkers,
including CXCL16, MMP19, BIVM, and FAM60A. A better understanding of the
specific molecular alterations causally involved in this disease may lead
to new biomarkers and pathways involved in the transformation for this
currently incurable malignancy.


