Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiRNA-106a and LITAF are novel modulators of prostate cancer
radioresistance.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most prevalent cancer affecting men
worldwide, with radiotherapy being a primary treatment modality. PCa
recurrence is a major clinical problem with up to a 40% biochemical
recurrence rate at five years after external beam radiotherapy (ionizing
radiation, IR). Therefore, there is an unmet need to characterize
radioresistance in order to improve therapy and patient outcomes.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulate gene
expression. MiRNAs are aberrantly expressed in cancer, specifically,
miR-106a has been found to be overexpressed in various cancer types. The
purpose of this study is to determine whether miR-106a confers IR
resistance and tumor aggression in PCa.

Utilizing The Cancer Genome Atlas Data Portal, bioinformatics analysis
discovered that miR-106a was significantly overexpressed in PCa samples
relative to normal prostate. This suggests that miR-106a is involved in
prostate carcinogenesis. Clonogenic survival assays revealed that cells
overexpressing miR-106a had increased survival after IR treatment
compared to control cells. Proliferation assays showed that miR-106a
cells had a higher proliferation rate than control cells in both
unirradiated and IR-treated cells. Affymetrix gene array analysis was
used to identify possible targets of miR-106a. Combining results from the
gene array, in silico prediction algorithms, and in vitro analyses, we
identified lipopolysaccharide-induced TNFα factor (LITAF) as a target of
miR-106a. In addition, LITAF knockdown lead to increased proliferation
and clonogenic survival following IR, recapitulating the phenotype of
miR-106a overexpression. Cells were stained for β-galactosidase
expression following IR to assess senescence, as a mode of cell death. We
found that both miR-106a overexpression and LITAF knockdown resulted in
significantly fewer senescent cells post-IR. Upon examination of critical
DNA damage response genes, we found that miR-106a overexpression and
LITAF knockdown increased expression of ATM mRNA and protein.
Upregulation of ATM is associated with IR resistance, elucidating the
mechanism by which miR-106a overexpression and LITAF knockdown are
involved in radioresistance. Tumor xenograft experiments, using a PCa
cell line stably overexpressing miR-106a, confirmed that miR-106a
increases proliferation compared to control tumors before and after IR.

Thus, our results strongly suggest that miR-106a is involved in PCa
aggression and confers a radiation-resistant phenotype, by targeting the
novel radiation response gene LITAF.


