Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using liquid biopsies and NGS as tools to analyze mutation burden
and copy number variation in the blood of a patient with triple negative
breast cancer to better inform therapeutic targets.


The ability to characterize molecular features of cancer from liquid
biopsies is resulting in the development of innovative health care for
patients. Longitudinal changes in the mutational profiles of DNA isolated
from liquid biopsies are being used to better understand and monitor the
development, progression, and evolution of therapy resistance in cancer
patients. To define changes in the mutational landscape and predict drug
susceptibilities in Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) patients, we
used whole exome analysis to profile circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and
circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) from eight selected time points of a
patient enrolled in the Intensive Trial of OMics in Cancer clinical Trial
(ITOMIC-001). The patient initially received weekly cisplatin infusions
followed by additional targeted therapy. Peripheral blood samples were
collected at specific time points over a period of 272 days following
enrollment in the clinical trial. Our data indicates that the identified
mutations in genomic DNA isolated from CTCs and ctDNA can be used to
understand and mitigate the impact of tumor heterogeneity in addition to
identifying clinically relevant mutations at these selected time points.
To further increase the resolution of our analysis, we profiled ctDNA
from these samples to a higher depth targeting only clinically relevant
genes. These analyses increased the sensitivity of detection and
identified additional targets that could have been used for therapeutic
intervention. In addition to sequence variants, copy number variations
(CNVs) have also been significantly associated with the development of
metastasis and changes in CNVs have been used to monitor disease
progression. We performed a bioinformatics analysis of genomic
instability and CNVs across 32 different time points from ctDNA from the
same patient throughout the treatment period. The genomic instability
number (GIN) calculated for each of the 32 time points seems to mirror
the overall CTC burden in the patient at each time point tested. CNV
analysis is ongoing and these data sets are being further analyzed in
combination with TCGA data to define possible cancer driver genes for the
functional prediction of significant TNBC candidate alterations and the
results of these analyses will be presented.


