Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AZ’5576, a selective CDK9 inhibitor, demonstrates in vitro and
in vivo activity in diverse preclinical models of non-Hodgkin lymphoma.


Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9) is a serine/threonine kinase that
regulates elongation of transcription through phosphorylation of RNA
polymerase II at serine 2 (pSer2-RNAPII). Transient inhibition of Cdk9
results in modulation of genes with short-lived transcripts and labile
proteins, thereby representing a potential therapeutic opportunity in
tumors dependent upon oncogenes fitting these criteria. Mcl1, an
anti-apoptotic protein that has been linked to increased survival and
chemotherapy resistance in various cancers, and Myc, a proto-oncogenic
transcription factor that coordinates diverse transcription programs and
is over-expressed, amplified, or translocated in many cancers, are two
such oncogenes.

AZ’5576 is a potent, highly selective, and orally bioavailable
inhibitor of Cdk9 that inhibits Cdk9 enzyme activity with an IC50
AZ’5576 is a potent, highly selective, and orally bioavailable
inhibitor of Cdk9 that inhibits Cdk9 enzyme activity with an IC50 <5nM
and decreases phosphorylation of Ser2-RNAPII in cells with an IC50 of
96nM. In sensitive cell lines, short-term treatment with AZ’5576 led to
a rapid dose- and time-dependent decrease in pSer2-RNAPII with
concomitant loss of Mcl1 and Myc mRNA and protein, resulting in the
cleavage and activation of caspase 3 and loss of cell viability. Using
cell potency and magnitute of caspase activation to define sensitivity,
we previously reported that AZ’5576 demonstrates broad in vitro and in
vivo activity across hematological malignancies. Initially focusing on
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and multiple myeloma (MM), we have now
expanded our scope to encompass non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), which
includes diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), Burkitt’s lymphoma
(BL), mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), and Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia (WM).

In vitro screening assays reveal about half (19/35) of NHL cell lines
undergo cell death in response to AZ’5576, demonstrating a potency 55%
after 6 hour treatment. Combining AZ’5576 with a BTK inhibitor further
enhances cell death compared to that observed with either single agent
alone in BTK inhibitor-sensitive ABC-DLBCL cell lines. Consistent with
the in vitro data, significant anti-tumor activity was associated with
short-term reduction of pSer2-RNAPII tumor levels after intermittent
dosing of AZ’5576 in a mouse xenograft model of ABC-DLBCL cell line
OCILY10. Similarly, combining AZ’5576 with a BTK inhibitor in vivo
drove tumors into regression (combination=199% TGI) compared to the
partial TGI from either single agent alone (AZ’5576=79% TGI,
Acalabrutinib=58% TGI) in the OCILY10 xenograft model. Finally, in an
agressive Eµ-Myc transgenic mouse model of B-cell lymphoma, AZ’5576
treatment results in potent induction of apoptosis in vitro and a greater
than 50 day increase in median overall survival in vivo.

Together, these results highlight the therapeutic potential for selective
CDK9 inhibition in the treatment of patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma.


