Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel target discovery for glioblastoma using chemical biology
fingerprinting.


The most common adult brain tumor is Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM), an
extremely aggressive cancer with only scant treatment options. Even with
standard of care most patients present with a recurrence and the median
survival is only circa 15 months. The need, therefore, for new
therapeutic targets and treatment options is pressing. Here we describe
here a multipronged approach to identifying said targets. We present an
established methodology for the isolation and culture of patient derived
GBM samples that retain the “stem-like” fraction thought to underlie
resistance and recurrence. Furthermore we show genomically that these
samples represent specific subtypes of the disease yet still form
distinct groups in unbiased clustering analysis. Thus we have multiple
representative patient derived cultures that are suitable for our drug
discovery and chemical biology analyses. Using a process we term Chemical
Biology Fingerprinting (CBF) we utilize small focused, and clinically
relevant, chemical collections in order to identify patterns of
chemovulnerabilities across multiple samples. This allows an unbiased yet
cancer relevant sub-stratification and the identification of agents, and
therefore targets, which may be relevant for GBM patient subtypes. Indeed
our use of the highly annotated NCI CTD2 Informer Set of chemicals allows
ready drug-to-target mapping and facilitates data sharing across the CTD2
network. Moreover, already defined subgroups can be clustered to find
agents, or groups of agents, that show selective activity against
traditional classifications (e.g. proneural, mesenchymal etc.). Finally
our strategy is permissive for the identification of “exceptional
responders”. That is, individual patient samples that respond to a
specific drug whilst most samples are refractory. In sum we demonstrate
generation of patient derived models and identify specific, and novel,
drugs that may be relevant for specific GBM subtypes. Supported by NIH
U01CA168397


