Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IACS-010759, a novel inhibitor of complex I in Phase I clinical
development to target OXPHOS dependent tumors.


Tumor cells depend on both glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation
(OXPHOS) for energy and biomass production to support cell proliferation.
Recent data has demonstrated a dependence of various tumor types on
mitochondrial OXPHOS, which represents an exciting therapeutic
opportunity. Through an extensive medicinal chemistry campaign,
IACS-010759 was identified as a potent, selective inhibitor of complex I
of the electron transport chain, which is orally bioavailable and has
excellent PK and physicochemical properties in preclinical species. Our
group and others have demonstrated that AML, plus subsets of
glioblastoma, neuroblastoma, lymphoma, melanoma, triple negative breast
cancer (TNBC) and pancreatic cancer (PDAC) are highly dependent on OXPHOS
to meet energy and biomass demands. Treatment of multiple cell lines and
patient derived xenograft (PDX) models in several cancer types with
IACS-010759 led to a robust decrease in cell viability and often an
increase in apoptosis with EC50 values between 1 nM - 50 nM across
multiple lines. Through a series of mechanistic studies we established
that IACS-10759 blocks complex I of the electron transport at the quinone
binding site. Mechanistically, response to IACS-010759 was associated
with induction of a metabolic imbalances that negatively impacted energy
homeostasis, aspartate biosynthesis, and NTP production due to reduced
conversion of NADH to NAD+ by complex I, decreased ATP production, TCA
cycle flux and nucleotide biosynthesis. Tumor growth inhibition and
regression have been observed in molecularly defined subsets of TNBC and
PDAC PDX xenograft models treated with IACS-010759, indicating that
subsets of these indications are dependent on OXPHOS. Furthermore,
treating TNBC or PDAC PDX models post-chemotherapy with IACS-010759
extends progression free survival, consistent with IACS-010759 targeting
recently described metabolically adapted residual tumor cells. In
orthotopic xenograft models of primary AML cells, daily oral treatment
with 1-7.5 mg/kg IACS-010759 extended the median survival. Efficacy was
paralleled by robust modulation of OCR, aspartate, and a gene signature
levels. Therefore, these readouts (OCR, aspartate and a nanostring
geneset) have been validated for use as exploratory clinical biology of
response endpoints. In parallel, completion of preclinical chemistry,
manufacturing and control (CMC) as well as GLP safety and tolerability
studies with IACS-010759 in multiple species have enabled the selection
of a clinical entry dose. As a result of the robust response in multiple
cell lines, primary patient samples, and efficacy in PDX models, a Phase
I clinical trial in relapsed, refractory AML was initiated in October
2016, with a parallel trial in solid tumors expected to initiate in early
2017. Initial results from the on-going AML trial will be disclosed.


