Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: APOBEC mutagenesis: a link between innate immunity and cancer.


Introduction: Cytidine deaminase activity of APOBEC3 enzymes generates
mutations that restrict viral infection and eliminate tumor cells but
also contribute to viral and tumor evolution. For example, human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is hypermutated by APOBEC3G (A3G), and human
papilloma virus (HPV) can be hypermutated by APOBEC3s, including A3A and
A3B. In many human tumor types explored by The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA), C to T or G substitutions in the TCA or TCT motifs are
predominantly attributed to the activity of A3A and A3B enzymes. In
bladder tumors more than 60% of all exonic mutations are of the
APOBEC-signature type, with nearly 100% of all bladder tumors carrying
these mutations. Previously, we reported that two germline genetic
variants – a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs1014971 and a 30Kb
germline deletion that eliminates A3B and creates an A3AB chimera, are
the strongest factors associated with bladder and breast cancer risk,
expression of A3A and A3B, and APOBEC mutagenesis in human tumors. Other
factors affecting the source of APOBEC mutagenesis in human tissues are
not well understood. Because some APOBEC3s can be induced in the course
of antiviral response, we hypothesized that APOBEC mutagenesis might be a
misfired innate immune response.

Methods: We used TaqMan-based expression analysis for selected APOBECs
(A3A, A3B, and A3G) to explore expression in bladder (HT-1376, HTB-9, and
RT-4) and breast cancer (MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, and T-47D) cell lines
infected with Sendai virus (SeV). SeV is a murine RNA virus that results
in self-limiting infection in a wide range of human cells, efficiently
controlled by innate immune response of the host. The strong induction of
APOBEC3s in RT-4 and MDA-MB-231 was followed-up by global transcriptome
analysis with RNA-seq and pathway analysis. Cell lines were also treated
with IFN-α, IFN-γ, IFN-λ3 and IFN-λ4 and tested for induction of A3A,
A3B and A3G by TaqMan assays.

Results: A3A, A3B and A3G are interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) because
they were induced in the course of innate antiviral response to SeV
infection and by IFNs in some conditions. Specifically, A3A was most
strongly induced by SeV, with 32, 51 and 12,000-fold induction in 3
breast cancer cell lines, and 4, 5 and 167-fold induction in 3 bladder
cancer cell lines. A3B was also induced by SeV but only in the range of
1-5 fold in all cell lines tested.

Conclusion: APOBEC3s can be strongly induced in the course of innate
immune response even to transient and self-limiting viral infections. In
the presence of single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), the APOBEC3 substrate
generated by different cellular and environmental conditions, strong
induction of some nuclear APOBEC3s, such as A3A and A3B, may result in
mutation of human genomic DNA. In turn, accumulation of these mutations
can lead to tumor initiation and evolution, particularly in individuals
with germline APOBEC3 risk variants.


