Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell cycle-dependent front polarized cell migration requires
Aurora kinase A.


PROBLEM- Metastasis accounts for 90% of deaths from carcinomas.

BACKGROUND- To initiate migration, epithelial cells must front-rear
polarize and reorganize the microtubule cytoskeleton directed toward the
lamillipodia or leading edge. During mitosis, centrosome maturation,
duplication, spindle pole assembly and chromosome segregation require
Aurora kinase A (AURKA), which is optimally active when complexed with
TPX2. Accumulating evidences identify non-mitotic functions for AURKA,
such as cell migration and ciliary reorganization. Overexpression of
AURKA leads to tumorigenesis in breast cancer. Mechanisms that activate
non-mitotic AURKA and promote cell migration as well as metastasis are
yet to be uncovered.

RESULTS- In a large breast cancer tissue microarray (n= 3,175), the
abundance of phosphorylated RHAMM (a substrate of AURKA) predicted
overall and relapse-free survival in ER-negative, basal-subtype, and
triple negative breast tumors. We studied the AURKA-TPX2-RHAMM signaling
axis in mammary (MCF10A and nMUMG-FUCCI) and HeLa cells. In scratch wound
assays, migratory cells were found to have front-polarized centrosomes,
which correlated with G2 cell cycle phase, phosphorylated AURKA and
elevated microtubule nucleation at centrosomes. Small molecule inhibition
of Aurora kinase activity impaired centrosome polarity and retarded the
kinetics of cell migration. In parallel, silencing RHAMM altered TPX2
location as indicated by immunofluorescence and immuno-EM, which located
TPX2 to the nuclear envelope and nuclear pore basket. Nuclear import of
recombinant TPX2 was attenuated in RHAMM silenced cells and nuclear
envelope accumulation was elevated.

CONCLUSION- The AURKA-TPX2-RHAMM axis regulates centrosome polarity,
microtubule nucleation and directional cell migration while
phosphorylated RHAMM predicts survival in aggressive forms of breast
cancer.


