Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of anti-tumor efficacy of EC1456 in low-passage and
pre-treated patient-derived xenograft models of triple-negative breast
cancer.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients are insensitive to hormonal
or anti-HER2 therapy and have a higher recurrence rate among all breast
cancer subtypes. There is a lack of common therapeutic targets in TNBC
due to its six distinct molecular characteristics. Recently, ~50% of TNBC
cases were found to express the folate receptor alpha (FRα) on tumor
cells. FRα is a GPI-anchored membrane glycoprotein capable of bringing
folate-targeted small-molecule drug conjugates (SMDCs) inside the cell.
EC1456 is a folic acid-tubulysin B hydrazide (TubBH) SMDC that
specifically binds to the membrane FRα and is internalized by
endocytosis. While encapsulated within the early endosome, EC1456
releases TubBH into the cytosol where it inhibits the polymerization of
tubulin into microtubules, thus blocking spindle formation to arrest
cells in metaphase which ultimately induces apoptosis. EC1456 is
currently under Phase 1 clinical investigation in patients with common
solid tumors [IND# 118,859]. The purpose of this study is to evaluate
EC1456 activity in Champions TumorGraftTM TNBC patient-derived xenograft
(PDX) models to help guide our drug development strategies. These PDX
models were derived from patients who were treated with multiple lines of
standard-of-care agents. A total of six low-passage, FR-positive TNBC
models were tested against two different treatment regimens of EC1456
(once or twice a week for 2 weeks only). Plasma and tumor drug
concentrations were quantified by LC-MS/MS using satellite study animals.
The tumor-bearing animals were monitored for up to 60 days to assess both
short-term (i.e. % TGI) and long-term (%PR, CR, TFS) anti-tumor
responses. Using a stringent efficacy criteria (≥60% CR/TFS), 3 of the
6 TNBC models were found highly sensitive to EC1456 and 3 were found
resistant. To identify potential gene signatures of EC1456 response,
bioinformatics analysis was performed using existing RNA-seq data and
compared across a broad panel of TumorGraftTM TNBC models, regardless of
FR expression status. Specific biomarkers of interest were further
analyzed by qRT-PCR using control tumors from the current study.
Together, our analysis revealed potential resistance mechanisms
associated with microtubule dynamics as well as a cancer cell’s ability
to undergo apoptosis.


