Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated exome- and single cell RNA-sequencing reveals a clone's
genomic instability and multifaceted fitness.


DNA-damage therapy is the main line of defense against most cancers,
especially at advanced stages of progression. DNA-damage therapy damages
the cell’s DNA. We have identified that a cell’s cumulative extent of
DNA damage - even when successfully repaired - is an indicator for future
tolerance to new insults. This finding points to a quantitative measure
of genomic instability as biomarker of sensitivity to DNA-damaging
agents. However, quantifying genomic instability is difficult, especially
because each individual tumor harbors clones with their own distinct
genomic characteristics. Here we address the challenge of quantifying the
complex phenotype of genomic instability across the clonal subpopulations
that coexist within an individual tumor.

We identified coexisting clones from bulk-exome sequencing and calculated
the copy number profile of each clone’s genome. We integrated mutations
detected in both, single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) and exome
sequencing, to assign single cells to clones. Because cells in G2/M phase
of the cell cycle (further referred to as G2/M clones) have twice the
ploidy compared to cells in other cell cycle phases, their presence
represents an opportunity for validation. Using 15 gastric cancer cell
lines - each sorted by cell cycle phase - we validated: i) clone-specific
copy number and ii) assignment of single cells to clones. Here, the
predicted size of G2/M clones is an indicator of how correct we quantify
clone-specific copy number. The degree to which expression of cell cycle
genes is exclusive to G2/M clones is an indicator as to how correct we
assign single cells to clones. In addition to the dominant quiescent
clone and the G2/M clone, we identified other discrete subclones in a
subset of cell lines, suggesting that genetic intra-tumor heterogeneity
is sometimes maintained in-vitro. This approach identified clone-specific
markers that can be used for cytometry separation of cells of specific
clonal subpopulations.

Overall, we demonstrate the power of combining exome sequencing and
scRNA-seq to reveal how many clones are present in a tumor sample, how
genomically unstable each clone is and how fit is each clone. When
combined, these two techniques synergize into a powerful strategy to
investigate the relationship between genomic instability, clone fitness
and DNA-damage sensitivity.


