Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDGFRB gain-of-function mutations in multifocal infantile
myofibromatosis: Implications for diagnosis & therapy.


Myofibromas and infantile myofibromatosis are among the most prevalent
soft tissue tumors of infancy and childhood. They are characterized by
the presence of solitary or multiple nodules in the skin, subcutaneous
soft tissues, bones, muscles and viscera. Multifocal myofibromatosis with
visceral lesions is associated with a poor prognosis. The pathogenesis of
sporadic myofibromatosis is unknown. A few familial cases have been
linked to mutations in various genes including PDGFRB, which encodes a
receptor tyrosine kinase that is highly expressed in fibroblasts,
pericytes and other cells of mesenchymal origin. In the present study, we
investigated whether the sporadic form of the disease may also be
associated with PDGFRB mutations. We sequenced the whole coding sequence
of PDGFRB in 20 cases of myofibromatosis or solitary myofibroma using the
Ion AmpliSeq technology at high coverage (Life Technologies). Six
different mutations in the coding sequence of PDGFRB were identified in
seven patients, six of whom had the sporadic multicentric form of the
disease, with a median age at diagnosis of 13 months [range: 0 to 7
years]. Mutations were located in four different exons: the classical
hotspot exons 12 and 14, encoding the juxtamembrane and the kinase
domains, but also the exons 11 and 18, encoding the transmembrane domain
and the activation loop respectively. The percentage of mutated reads
varied between 4 and 33%, suggesting that the mutations were somatic,
except for one patient who had a germline R561C substitution and a
somatic second hit. Two patients had the same mutation in multiple
separated lesions, suggesting an early post-zygotic mutation in a
progenitor cell. By contrast, a third patient had three different PDGFRB
mutations in the three nodules analyzed. We showed that these mutations
constitutively activated receptor signaling in the absence of ligand and
stimulated fibroblast proliferation in vitro. Furthermore, the mutant
receptors were sensitive to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib,
except D850V, which was inhibited by dasatinib and ponatinib, suggesting
a treatment for severe myofibromatosis. In conclusion, we identified
activating PDGFRB mutations in 66% of sporadic multifocal infantile
myofibromatosis cases, shedding light on the mechanism of disease
development. Our results provide a genetic test to facilitate diagnosis,
and preclinical data for development of molecular therapies.


