Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ImmunoMap: a novel bioinformatics tool for immune cell repertoire
analysis.


Background: There has been a dramatic increase in T-cell Receptor (TCR)
sequencing spurred, in part, by the clinical demand in Immuno-oncology
and technological advances in TCR sequencing. However, there has been
little in the way of approaches to parse the data in a biologically
meaningful fashion. The ability to parse this data to understand the
T-cell repertoire in a structurally relevant manner has the potential to
open new discoveries about how the immune system responds to insults such
as cancer and infectious diseases.

Methods: Here we describe a novel method to visualize and quantify TCR
repertoire sequence diversity. This method includes metrics such as
visualization of repertoire with: 1) weighted phylogenetic trees that
display relatedness and frequency of the sequences; 2) dominant motif
analyses identifying clusters of highly homologous sequences that
contribute significantly to response and; 3) TCR diversity score
measuring the average relatedness (by sequence homology) of all TCR’s
in a sample. To demonstrate the power of the approach, we have applied it
to understanding the CD8 T Cell response to model self (TRP2) and foreign
(SIY) antigens in naïve and tumor-bearing (B16 melanoma) B6 mice.
Additionally, this method was applied to tumor infiltrating lymphocytes,
TIL, taken pre- and on-therapy, from patients undergoing Nivolumab
(α-PD1) therapy for metastatic melanoma.

Results: Analysis of the naïve CD8 response demonstrated a highly
conserved (measured by the TCR diversity score) and less clonal response
to SIY whereas the response to TRP2 was less conserved and highly clonal.
Dominant motif analysis demonstrated highly rich motifs consisting of
many homologous sequences in the SIY response but few sequences per motif
in the TRP2 response. This may reflect the outcome of tolerance
mechanisms to self-antigens. Presence of tumor demonstrated differential
immune pressure on the TRP2 vs SIY response. Tumor primed novel SIY
motifs but constricted the number of dominant motifs in the TRP2 response
while additionally altering the sequence of the motifs. In patients
undergoing α-PD1 therapy, we identified signatures in pre- and
post-therapy TCR repertoires that correlated with clinical outcome
response. Prior to therapy, patients whose dominant motifs were rich with
many sequences responded favorably to checkpoint inhibition over those
with less rich motifs. After four week on therapy, patients whose TCR
repertoires became more conserved responded more favorably to PD1
treatment while those who did not respond had no change in their TCR
diversity score.

Conclusions: In summary, we have developed and demonstrated a novel
method to meaningfully parse and interpret TCR repertoire data and have
applied it to yield a novel insight of CD8 T Cell responses to different
types of antigens in model systems as well as key characteristics of TIL
repertoires from patients who respond clinically to α-PD1 therapy.


