Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberration of (pro)renin receptor induces genomic instablity in
human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells.


Background: We have recently shown the potential contribution of
(pro)renin receptor ((P)RR) to tumorigenesis of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) through an activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling
pathway (Sci. Rep., 2015). We also found that significant (P)RR
expression was synchronized with an appearance of atypical nuclei in
PanIN-2 of PDAC tissues. Furthermore, (P)RR knockdown reduced a total of
DNA amount in human PDAC cell lines. Based on our findings, we have
hypothesized that an aberration of (P)RR leads to a failure of genome
homeostasis. Accordingly, we explored whether an aberrant expression of
(P)RR induces genomic instability in human pancreatic ductal epithelial
(HPDE) cells which are capable of developing to the PDAC.

Methods: HPDE cells transfected by episomal vector inserted with ATP6ap2
encoding (P)RR were established. HPDE cells transfected by vector without
the insertion of ATP6ap2 was noted as Mock. We also performed a comet
assay to evaluate the defects of DNA repair capacity, flow-FISH to
measure the length of telomere and western blotting to confirm the
activation of DNA damage pathway by measuring protein levels of γ- H2AX
and p53. Then, comparative analyses of human whole genome in Mock-
expressing and (P)RR-expressing HPDE cells were examined. Furthermore, we
implanted 14-passage HPDE cells expressed by either Mock or (P)RR into
the renal subcapsules of immunodeficient mice to investigate whether
(P)RR-expressing HPDE cells show a precancerous status in vivo.

Results: (P)RR overexpression led to inactivation of γ-H2AX and p53 as
the components of DNA damage pathway, which were associated with a
disappearance of comet tail and shorten telomere length. Substantial
structural variations, e.g., inter- and intra- chromosomal translocations
throughout all the chromosomes were observed in HPDE cells expressed by
(P)RR under the analysis by BreakDancer. Analyses with Bcftool showed
that the number of all the somatic mutations was approximately 2-fold
greater in HPDE cells expressed by (P)RR than those expressed by Mock
(Mock: 124,579 vs. (P)RR: 239,080). (P)RR overexpression also
significantly increased the number of somatic mutations in several genes
which were commonly detected in PDAC tissues. The area occupied by
(P)RR-expressing HPDE cell population remarkably expanded after the
implantation to renal subcapsules of all the immunodeficient mice.
However, there were no KRAS 12 codon mutations which are prevalent in
PDAC patients.

Conclusion: We have demonstrated that (P)RR overexpression induces
genomic instability on global genome level in HPDE cells. These data are
consistent with our hypothesis that (P)RR is essentially involved in the
early carcinogenesis of PDAC.


