Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ZAG promotes cachexia-associated white adipose tissue browning and
energy wastage.


Cancer cachexia is a complex condition of tissue wasting that affects up
to 80% of cancer patients. To date, there is no effective treatment for
cachexia due to the complex nature of this condition. Energy wasting in
cachexia is caused by excessive lipid and protein turnover in the body,
browning of white adipose tissue (WAT), and futile metabolic cycling such
as glucose recycling between the liver and tumor. Therefore, identifying
and inhibiting factors that promote WAT browning, and glucose and lipid
recycling can reduce energy wasting and ameliorate cachexia in cancer
patients. Zinc-α2-glycoprotein (ZAG), a lipid mobilizing factor secreted
by multiple cancers, has been shown to promote lipolysis and inhibit
lipogenesis in WAT. However, whether ZAG plays any role beyond lipolysis
and participates in other energy wasting mechanisms of cachexia such as
glucose and lipid recycling, and WAT browning has not been explored. Our
initial studies indicate that while ZAG is highly expressed in the heart,
kidney, and liver of wild-type mice, the basal expression of ZAG is very
low in WAT at both the mRNA and protein levels. To investigate the
metabolic functions of ZAG in vivo, ZAG-expressing 293 cells were
implanted subcutaneously in athymic nude mice, and analyzed them after 3
and 6 weeks. We detected a 3-fold increase in the circulating plasma
levels of ZAG. Importantly, the increase in ZAG levels was associated
with a decrease in body weight gain without any differences in food
consumption and physical activity. Morphological examination of eFAT pads
of ZAG-cell implanted mice showed smaller size compared to controls. In
addition, histological examination of eFAT showed cell shrinkage and
almost complete depletion of fat stores, suggesting enhanced lipolysis in
the WAT. Notably, ZAG induced the expression of beige, mitochondrial, and
thermogenesis genes at mRNA level in the eFAT. Moreover, the expression
of brown adipocyte-specific thermogenic genes such as Ebf2, Prdm16,
PGC1α, UCP1, SRC1 and IRF4 were strongly induced at the protein level in
eWAT of ZAG-cell implanted mice suggesting that ZAG causes WAT browning.
Furthermore, metabolic analysis revealed increased O2 consumption and
heat production in ZAG-cell implanted mice compared to controls
indicating increased total body energy expenditure. ZAG-cell implanted
mice also displayed reduced respiratory exchange ratio indicating
increased consumption of lipids. Overall, our findings suggest that ZAG
functions beyond lipolysis and causes significant energy wasting by
causing WAT browning and promoting glucose and lipid catabolism in the
beige cells. These findings suggest that ZAG plays a predominant role in
the development of cachexia, and thus, may represent a novel therapeutic
target to block energy wasting and delay or prevent cachexia in cancer
patients.


