Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stem-like clusters of CD44+ circulating tumor cells seed
metastases in breast cancer.


Background: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are cells shed from primary
tumor and circulate in the peripheral blood. They are considered the
seeds of metastasis. Compared to single CTCs, clusters of multiple CTCs
possess 50 times higher metastatic capacity in mouse breast cancer
models. However, the mechanisms underlying the metastatic promotion
effect of CTC clusters are unclear. In addition, whether clustered CTCs
have cancer stem cell (CSC) properties and what stem cell markers they
express have not been determined.

Methods: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used to detect CTCs in vascular
structures, and the stem cell markers in single and clustered CTCs. Lung
metastases were either monitored by bioluminescence imaging (BLI) or
visualized by fluorescence microscopy. Stem cell properties were examined
by mammosphere assays in vitro and tumorigenic assays in vivo. Clustering
assay was performed by culturing cells in Poly-HEMA coated plates (for
cell lines) or collagen-coated plates (for primary cells derived from
patient-derived breast tumor xenografts, PDXs), and then monitored by
IncuCyte live cell dynamic imaging.

Results: CD44+ enriched circulating tumor cell (CTC) clusters were found
in the lung/liver vascular structures in vivo in both metastatic breast
cancer patients and PDXs that develop spontaneous lung metastases.
Comparing to single CD44+ cells, clustered CD44+ cells formed more
mammospheres, increased tumorigenic potential, and promoted lung
colonization. Combining siRNA-mediated knockdown and CRISPR/Cas-based
knockdout, we found that CD44 is required for breast tumor cell cluster
formation and lung colonization upon tail vein seeding. During cluster
formation, EGFR was activated, which improved both stemness and survival
of clustered CTCs. Anti-EGFR antibody mimicked CD44 knockdown to inhibit
cluster formation of PDX-derived tumor cells. Administration of EGFR
inhibitor Erlotinib efficiently inhibited CD44+ cells-mediated
spontaneous metastases to the lungs without affecting primary tumor
growth.

Conclusions: Our data provide new insights into the cellular and
molecular mechanisms of stem-like clustered CD44+ cells-seeded
metastasis, and implicate that targeting CD44+ CTC clusters by inhibition
of EGFR activity could be a new therapeutic strategy to treat metastatic
breast cancer.


