Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Higher numbers of cancer stem cells in the peripheral blood of
children with B-ALL upon conventional chemotherapy.


Background: Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) is biologically and
clinically considered as a heterogeneous neoplasm of lymphoid progenitor
cells in the bone marrow (BM). 15- 20 % of children with ALL who achieve
an initial remission, will show relapse. One potential mechanism behind
this relapse could be the emergence of cancer stem cells (CSCs) which are
considered the driving force of tumourigenesis due to their ability of
self-renewal as well as the emergence of immune regulatory cells
including myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and regulatory T cells
(Treg).

Aim: the main aim of this study was to analyze the numbers of CSCs and
correlate these numbers with the numbers of blast cells, MDSCs and Treg
cells in children with B-ALL before and after induction of chemotherapy.

Materials and Methods: CSCs were defined as CD45dimCD19+CD10+CD34+CD38-,
MDSCs were defined as Lin-HLA-DR-CD33+CD11b+ and Treg cells were defined
as CD4+CD25+CD127-. The frequencies of these cells were analyzed in the
peripheral blood of B-ALL patients before (n= 10) and after (n= 10)
induction of chemotherapy using flow cytometry.

Results: Significant increases in the numbers of CSCs were shown in B-ALL
patients after induction of chemotherapy as compared to newly diagnosed
patients (7.6± 8.3 vs. 2.7± 2.4, PResults: Significant increases in the
numbers of CSCs were shown in B-ALL patients after induction of
chemotherapy as compared to newly diagnosed patients (7.6± 8.3 vs. 2.7±
2.4, P<0.05). The numbers of CSCs in ALL patents before and after
induction of chemotherapy inversely correlated with the numbers of the
blast cells. Additionally, the numbers of MDSCs and Treg cells were
higher and lower, respectively, in patients after induction of
chemotherapy as compared to before chemotherapy.

Conclusion: Our results indicate that chemotherapy of B-ALL patients
results in emergence of high numbers of CSCs and MDSCs which might be
contributing, respectively, to tumor relapse and creation of systemic
immune suppression. This pilot study opens a new avenue to investigate
the mechanism mediating the emergence of these cells on larger population
of B-ALL patients at different treatment stages.


