Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the LGR5 complex with BNC101 to improve checkpoint
inhibitor therapy in colorectal cancer.


LGR5 is a well characterised marker of intestinal stem cells found at the
base of intestinal crypts and a receptor for R-spondins, potent Wnt
signalling modulators and stem cell growth factors. Overexpression of
LGR5 in colorectal tumor cells has been shown to be a predicative marker
of higher relapse rates in CRC patients. BNC101 is a first-in-class high
affinity anti-LGR5 humanized monoclonal antibody currently in a Phase I
clinical trial in patients with recurrent metastatic CRC. BNC101 has been
shown pre-clinically to have anti-tumor activity in multiple CRC patient
derived xenografts and limiting dilution re-implantation assays
consistent with the hypothesis that LGR5 is a functional cancer stem cell
(CSC) target in CRC. Recent evidence suggests that CSCs or treatment
resistant cells, due to distinct gene and antigen expression profiles,
may share the same immune privilege that is afforded to normal stem
cells. Immunologic therapies with checkpoint inhibitors directed against
whole tumors are largely biased toward differentiated tumor cells which
form the bulk of the tumor. CSCs may also have an immunosuppressive
phenotype, allowing them to evade and dampen the anti-tumor host immune
response. The syngeneic murine MC38 colorectal cancer model was used to
explore the potential synergies of BNC101 and anti-PD-1 treatments. The
combination of murine versions of both antibodies drove a reduction (35%)
in tumoral Tregs (FoxP3+) when BNC101 and anti-PD-1 were used compared to
anti-PD-1 treatment alone. This is a significant finding and shows early
efficacy in keeping with the notion that CSCs create an immunosuppressive
environment which can be targeted in combination for a better
immunotherapeutic response. The activation of antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) was demonstrated using BNC101 treatment
of cells. Membrane dye tracked U-937 monocytes (which express FcR) were
able to specifically cross bind with CHO-LGR5 cells but only in the
presence of BNC101 (an IgG1). This potentially indicates a further
adaptive immune priming mechanism with the ability to complement the
action of checkpoint inhibitors. Understanding the role of CSCs in tumor
immunity will help guide future clinical applications of immune
checkpoint inhibitors in CSC-driven solid tumors. In addition,
combination of immune checkpoint therapies with CSC targeting agents may
improve the clinical utility of each approach. These findings support
clinical evaluation of BNC101 in combination with checkpoint inhibitors.
Releasing the immunosuppressive capabilities of CSC with BNC101 driven
targeting of the tumor may extend the reach of the immune system, whereby
checkpoint inhibitors are able to leverage greater therapeutic benefit to
a larger patient population and extend duration of response.


