Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic and epigenomic profiling of high-stage neuroblastoma.


Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common pediatric extracranial solid tumor
with a wide range of clinical phenotypes from spontaneous regression to
highly resistant to chemotherapy. Despite intense multi-modal therapy, NB
remains the second most common cause of cancer deaths among children.
MYCN amplification is the most prominent poor prognosis factor for NB,
however, certain subgroup of high stage tumor without MYCN amplification
also shows low survival rate in terms of long-term follow-up (10 years
survival rate was 51%, n=161). To elucidate the molecular basis of
malignant subtype of NB, integrated genomic and epigenomic analyses were
performed. Array CGH of 537 tumors indicated that genomic subgroups of
17q gain, with 1p loss and/or 11q loss, exhibited aggressive
characteristics even without MYCN amplification. Whole exome sequencing
of 92 high stage, MYCN-non-amplified primary tumors (SureSelect XT Human
All Exon V4, mean depth CDS:138, x20 coverage:96%) identified 1,735
non-silent somatic mutations, among which 53 were significant mutations
observed more than once in the sample set. Aggressive tumors (died of
disease, n=48) had several notable features, with mutations in chromatin
remodeling/modulating genes (27%, cf. ATRX), in DNA-damage response
(30%), in TP53 (28%) and RB (22%)-related gene networks, as well as with
high TERT expression (38%). By hierarchical clustering of methylome
signature (Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip), the 92 tumors were
subdivided into four clusters. Unfavorable cluster-2 and -4 exhibited
hyper-methylation phenotypes in CpG islands and the former was enriched
by MYCN-amplified tumors. These two clusters (53%) showed strong
correlation with patient prognosis (p=0.0055). Thus, these
prognosis-related genomic features could be useful markers for risk
classification and help understanding molecular mechanism for aggressive
phenotypes of MYCN-non-amplified NBs.


