Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A systematic approach toward gene annotation of the hallmarks of
cancer.


The hallmarks of cancer consist of ten categories that serve as an
organizing principle and framework for understanding neoplastic disease.
The ten hallmarks include activating invasion and metastasis, avoiding
immune destruction, deregulating cellular energetics, enabling
replicative immortality, evading growth suppressors, genome instability
and mutation, inducing angiogenesis, resisting cell death, sustaining
proliferative signaling, and tumor-promoting inflammation. In order to
facilitate the use of the hallmarks of cancer in genomic studies, we have
undertaken a systematic methodology to map genes to each individual
hallmark of cancer. Assignment of genes to the individual hallmarks was
performed leveraging gene ontology (GO) annotations. Specifically, for
each hallmark, a term list was generated by cancer research experts, with
biological terms associated with each hallmark. This term list was used
to search and identify matching GO terms. Matched terms were then mapped
to the highest, most specific, representative, non-redundant GO term in
the GO hierarchy. Genes for each term were restricted by selecting only
human taxon, and high confidence experimental evidence codes. For
specific GO terms, where present, the Regulation of ‘GO term’
category was included. The genes for each GO term for each hallmark were
combined in a non-redundant list of genes for each hallmark. In the case
of the evading growth suppressors category, a different strategy was
employed. In this instance, genes were identified through ‘tumor
suppressor’ gene/protein annotation in the DGIdb resource and UniProt.
Additionally, text-mining methods on biomedical research literature were
used to defined a high confidence list of genes for this hallmark. As an
example use case of the hallmarks we applied them to the analysis of the
TCGA Pan-Cancer RNAseq data set. Clustering across the individual
hallmarks led to interesting differences within particular tumor tissue
types, as well as shared hallmarks for other tumor types. For example,
use of the genome instability and mutation hallmark for Pan-Cancer
clustering, revealed a tight tissue-based cluster of low-grade gliomas
and GBMs. This result suggests the importance of this hallmark expression
in this tumor type. This high confidence mapping of genes to hallmarks of
cancer provides a unique dataset to facilitate analyses of cancer genome
data.


