Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antagonism of the co-inhibitory receptor BTLA enhances efficacy of
anti-PD-1 treatment in murine syngeneic tumor models.


Anti-PD1 therapies show a remarkable improvement in response over many
standard of care regimens, but there is a significant need to further
increase patient responses. Recent clinical studies show improved
response rate when combining anti-PD1 and anti-CTLA4 therapies. This
provides “proof of concept” that the combination of two
immunotherapies can enhance efficacy. The goal of our work was to
evaluate the anti-tumor efficacy of B and T lymphocyte attenuator (BTLA)
antagonism with anti-PD1 therapy in preclinical mouse tumor models. BTLA
is an inhibitory co-receptor that modulates T cell function and is a
marker of “exhausted” T cells. The inhibitory signal mediated by BTLA
is initiated following engagement with herpesvirus entry mediator (HVEM),
a ubiquitous receptor that is highly expressed on malignant cells. One of
the challenges to evaluating BTLA in mouse models is the presence of
strain-specific allelic polymorphisms. These sequence differences occur
adjacent to the HVEM binding sites and can interfere with the ability of
certain antibodies to recognize BTLA in different strains of mice or
block the HVEM-BTLA signaling. C57BL/6-specific and strain agnostic BTLA
binding antibodies are commercially available, but none antagonize HVEM
signaling through BTLA in BALB/c mice. To more comprehensively evaluate
the anti-BTLA/anti-PD1 combination regimen we generated a first-in-class
BALB/c strain polymorphism specific BTLA antagonist monoclonal antibody
(40E4) and identified clone PJ196 as a C57BL/6 strain polymorphism
specific antagonist. We show that 40E4 and PJ196 not only block BTLA:HVEM
interaction as measured by cell ELISA, but also reverse HVEM-mediated
suppression in primary T cells from the appropriate mouse strain. An
effector function reduced mouse IgG1 (D265A) chimeric form of 40E4 was
generated for in vivo use. In combination with anti-PD1 (mDX400), 40E4
mIgG1 (D265A) shows improved tumor growth inhibition (TGI) over mDX400
alone in preclinical subcutaneous mouse models of breast cancer (EMT6)
and colon cancer (CT26). To show that anti-BTLA enhancement of the
anti-tumor response to mDX400 is not unique to BALB/c mice, we tested the
combination of a C57BL/6 BTLA strain-polymorphism specific monoclonal
antibody (PJ196) with mDX400. Using the subcutaneous MB49 model of
bladder cancer, we show that treatment with PJ196 and mDX400
significantly improved TGI over mDX400 alone. This is the first report
evaluating a BTLA antagonist monoclonal antibody in preclinical mouse
tumor models and the first report to show BTLA antagonism enhances the
effect of anti-PD1 therapy.


