Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid autopsy programs: A systematic review.


A Rapid Autopsy Program (RAP) is an advanced method of biospecimen
procurement whereby autopsies are conducted within 2-6 hours postmortem
in order to obtain substantial amounts of high-quality, fresh tissue in
support of current and future research. Rapid autopsies were first
introduced in the late 1980’s and are still a relatively novel
approach, but growing in popularity as a viable alternative to
traditional tissue sampling methods for cancer research. In oncology,
primary tumour, metastatic, and normal tissue from uninvolved organ sites
are sampled and can be subsequently snap frozen in liquid nitrogen or
preserved in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded blocks. Fresh tissue can
also be distributed immediately to cancer researchers allowing for
analyses incompatible with archival frozen or fixed tissue. Tissue
degradation has been found to be minimized in different tissue types by
decreasing the postmortem interval ‒ the time between death and tissue
preservation. Institutions capable of executing the collection and
maintenance of such a repository of biospecimens are a monumental asset
to clinicians and researchers who are interested in investigating tumour
biology, metastatic disease, and treatment response. In addition to the
clear scientific benefits of RAPs, these programs offer a unique
opportunity for palliative cancer patients to donate their bodies to aid
cancer research. This systematic review was conducted to examine the
scope of impact of RAPs thus far on biomedical, translational, and
clinical research in the field of oncology, in hopes to inform best
practice for collection and use of biospecimen in oncology. Medline,
Embase, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Cochrane CENTRAL, and
Ovid MEDLINE will be searched with devised strategies and screened from
inception until present. In addition, grey literature will be reviewed.
Two independent reviewers will be responsible for study selection and
data extraction. The results of the systematic review are pending.


