Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear relocalization of NPM1c induces terminal differentiation
and cell growth arrest.


NPM1 mutated acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a distinct entity in the WHO
classification of hematopoietic cancers. It displays a specific phenotype
characterized by favorable prognosis and upregulation of HOX cluster
genes. NPM1 is a multifunctional nucleolar chaperone. Mutations in NPM1
result in cytoplasmic protein localization (NPM1c+) through the
acquisition of a nuclear export signal (NES) at the C-terminus. The most
frequent NPM1 mutation is a heterozygous 4bp insertion in exon 12 (mutA).

The role of NPM1 in leukemogenesis is still a matter of debate and there
is no direct proof that cytoplasmic localization of mutant NPM1 is
necessary for maintenance of leukemia. We recently developed a CRISPR
strategy for highly efficient gene editing in hematopoietic cells. We
hypothesized that NPM1 mutA could be specifically targeted due to its 4bp
insertion, avoiding the WT allele. Using an sgRNA spanning the insertion
site (NPM1c sgRNA), we aimed to introduce indels adjacent to the mutation
and disrupt the C-terminal NES. To test our hypothesis, we used the NPM1
mutated OCI-AML3 cell line.

After transfection of OCI-AML3 with NPM1c sgRNA, while NPM1mutA allele
showed 70-90% indel frequencies, the NPM1wt allele was intact. To
determine whether the novel edited alleles generated NPM1 that was
re-localized to the nucleus, we cloned the alleles into a GFP-NPM1 fusion
construct and observed nuclear localization after transfection.
Consistent with this finding, immunofluorescence revealed that edited
OCI-AML3 cells had lost nearly all cytoplasmic NPM1. Return of NPM1
protein to the nucleus was followed by terminal differentiation and cell
cycle arrest in G1 phase (controls 45±3%, NPM1c sgRNA 68±1.5%). Cell
growth (3.7-4 fold decrease in cell counts in NPM1c sgRNA samples),
colony forming ability (16-20 fold reduction in colonies in NPM1c sgRNA
samples) and engraftment in xenograft models (significant loss of indels
at NPM1mutA allele in engrafted cells) were also significantly impaired
after NPM1mutA targeting. Furthermore, RNA sequencing on
NPM1mutA-targeted and control OCI-AML3 cells revealed almost complete
loss of expression of the HOXA and HOXB cluster genes as well as MEIS1 in
treated cells (4.5 average fold reduction of HOXA9-A13; 5.6 average fold
reduction of HOXB7-B13; 5 fold reduction of MEIS1).

Allele-specific editing is a powerful tool to probe mechanistic aspects
of oncogene dependencies. By achieving nuclear re-localization of mutant
NPM1, we demonstrated that cytoplasmic localization of NPM1c+ is
necessary for OCI-AML3 cells to maintain their leukemic phenotype. Drugs
promoting mutant NPM1 nuclear localization such as CRM1 inhibitors are
attractive candidates for clinical success in NPM1-mutated AML.


