Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved indel detection in RNA-seq data via assembly based
re-alignment reveals expressed Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor indels in
Lung Adenocarcinoma.


Insertions and deletions in the transcriptome can potentially have
significant impact on function and can be clinically actionable. A number
of methods have recently been developed that improve indel detection in
DNA by utilizing realignment and/or localized assembly to aid in
discovering mutations that are more difficult to detect than single
nucleotide polymorphisms. While significant effort has been put into
these methods in the context of DNA discovery, RNA-Seq has not received
the same attention. For example, the widely used Genome Analysis Toolkit
(GATK) recommends removal of splice junctions from all reads prior to
proceeding with variant calling methods that are very similar to those
used for DNA. We hypothesize that utilizing splice junctions to augment
localized assembly across exon-exon boundaries can improve read
alignments resulting in improved variant detection in RNA-Seq data.

We have developed an update to the Assembly Based ReAligner (ABRA2) that
makes use of splice junction information to aid in realignment of reads.
We assessed indel detection performance using the BEERs RNA-Seq
simulator. Two million simulated reads of length 100nt were generated
across 1000 human genes. In order to test more complex indel detection,
the simulator was modified to generate an even distribution of 1391
indels of length 1 to 100. The simulated reads were aligned using STAR
and subsequently realigned using ABRA2. Freebayes and GATK were run
against the non-realigned STAR output resulting in indel detection
sensitivity of 15% and 18% with precision of 97% and 88% respectively.
Freebayes was then run against the ABRA2 realignments resulting in an
approximately 4 fold increase in indel detection sensitivity of 67% while
maintaining precision of 97%.

In frame deletions in Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) have
oncogenic potential, can be indicators for Gefitinib or Erlotinib
treatment, and are frequently detected in lung cancer via DNA sequencing.
Among 514 TCGA Lung Adenocarcinoma RNA-Seq samples, ABRA2 revealed 73 in
frame coding indels in EGFR ranging in length from 3 to 24 bases,
including 58 deletions in exon 19 of length 15 bases. This represents a 3
fold increase relative to what was initially reported from DNA by TCGA.
Further, in the absence of ABRA2, only 5 in frame coding indels are
detected in RNA, the largest of which is a 9 base deletion.

We have presented here ABRA2, a new version of the Assembly Based
ReAligner that is capable of accurately realigning RNA-Seq reads
containing variations that are currently not well handled by widely used
aligners and variant callers, thus improving accuracy of variant
detection in RNA-Seq.


