Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Beta-3 adrenergic antagonism can alleviate energy wasting
associated with cancer-induced cachexia.


Introduction: Cancer-associated cachexia (CAC) is a wasting syndrome
characterized by atrophy of adipose tissue and skeletal muscle as a
consequence of cancer. CAC has been shown to be responsible for
approximately 20% of cancer deaths alone and reduces tolerance to
treatment. The pathological mechanisms underlying this syndrome remains
elusive and the treatment options are scarce. One proposed mechanism is
the tumor-induced activation of brown adipose tissue (BAT); a thermogenic
organ that wastes energy by producing heat via activation of uncoupling
protein 1 (UCP1). β3 adrenergic signaling is a strong activator of BAT
and the browning of white adipose tissue (WAT). We hypothesized that
treatment with a specific β3 antagonist could alleviate CAC.

Method: To study cachexia, the LuCAP 32 xenograft model of human prostate
cancer was utilized in immunodeficient balb/ca nude mice. After two weeks
of tumor growth, treatment with the specific β3 antagonist SR59230A (SR)
was started using subcutaneous micro osmotic pumps. Vehicle substance and
nontumor bearing (NTB) mice were used as controls. The mice were
sacrificed after a treatment period of four weeks and tissues were
harvested for subsequent analysis. The PCR analysis was normalized to NTB
mice.

Results: The mice with tumor started losing weight 20 days after tumor
implantation while the nontumor bearing controls gained weight throughout
the experiment. The group treated with SR also lost weight but to a
significantly lesser degree than vehicle treated animals (-1.7 vs -3.2 g,
p=0.032). This was also seen when looking at individual fat depots. Whole
body composition, measured by echo MRI, showed that all groups equally
lost fat mass over time. However, lean mass in the vehicle group
decreased whereas the SR group gained lean mass (-0.41 vs 1.18 g,
p=0.036). With respect to total body weight this gain in lean mass was
counteracted by the loss of fat mass. PCR analysis of subcutaneous WAT
showed a significant decrease in expression of ATGL (2.84 vs 1.98 FC,
p=0,006), PPARγ (2.33 vs 1.45 FC, p=0.026) and CD36 (2.11 vs 1.3 FC,
p=0.008) for the SR group compared to vehicle, indicating a decreased
lipolysis and influx of fatty acids to WAT. The SR treated mice also had
a significantly lower expression of UCP1 in WAT compared to controls
(2.23 vs 0.58 FC, p=0.023), supporting the notion that the browning of
WAT is a driving force for CAC.

Conclusion: Our data show that treatment with a specific β3 adrenergic
antagonist alleviates CAC through decreased lipolysis of WAT and
decreases the expression of markers for WAT browning. This indicates a
correlation between decreased browning and severity of CAC. We also
provide evidence that β3 antagonism helps preserve muscle mass, which is
of major importance for treatment of CAC and something that few other
treatment options have been able to show.


