Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming host histocompatibility barrier to create a renewable
source of off-the-shelf effector lymphocytes for adoptive immunotherapy.


Encouraging clinical outcomes in autologous cellular immunotherapy have
garnered hope and excitement. However, limitations of patient-derived
cancer immunotherapies remain to be addressed to deliver reliable and
efficacious therapies with broader applicability. Induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs) are a unique, renewable source for the continuous
generation of cellular therapeutics and represent a highly promising
approach for overcoming many of the limitations of autologous therapy. To
advance the promise of iPSC technology as an “off-the-shelf” (OTS)
source of cellular therapeutics, several considerations need to be
addressed. Ensuring the persistence of allogeneic OTS therapies after
adoptive cell transfer across histocompatibility barriers is a key
requirement. Establishing a master cell line from genetically engineered
clonal iPSC lines with the capacity to continuously generate homogenous
populations of highly functional effector cells will also be necessary.
Here we demonstrate a comprehensive approach for the generation of immune
tolerant effector cells derived from a genetically engineered iPSC master
cell line. We successfully combined deletion of classical human leukocyte
antigen molecules with expression of immunosuppressive proteins to
generate clonal iPSC lines with the ability to escape immune rejection.
Utilizing in vitro quantitative live cell analysis we show that OTS-iPSCs
elicit a significantly decreased cytotoxic response from both peripheral
blood (PB)-NK cells (47.9 vs. 91.4% survival at 3:1 E:T ratio) and PB-T
cells (>2.7-fold greater number of OTS-iPSC derived cells remaining at 88
hrs). Additionally, mixed lymphocyte reactions employing unfractionated
PB mononuclear cells resulted in significantly decreased activation and
proliferation of CD8+ T cells (63.4 vs. 29.6%), CD4+ T cells (70.9 vs.
17.3%) and NK cells (46.8 vs. 11.6%). In preclinical mouse models we
demonstrate that OTS-iPSCs exhibit improved persistence in vivo.
Bilateral engraftments were established in non-conditioned, fully
immune-competent recipient mice using luciferized wildtype and OTS-iPSCs.
Daily bioluminescence imaging revealed a significant increase in
persistence of OTS-iPSCs during the 48-196 hour post injection window
(>5.5 fold greater luminescence at 96 hrs). Using our potent
chemically-defined stage-specific monolayer hematopoietic differentiation
platform, we demonstrate that OTS-iPSC derived CD34 expressing
hematopoietic cells are reproducibly scaled and readily give rise to
functional lymphocytes carrying the engineered targeted modality in a
homogenous manner (95 +/- 5%). The outlined preclinical data illustrate
that iPSCs are an ideal renewable source for OTS hematopoietic cell-based
immunotherapies and represent a potentially exponential advancement in
adoptive immunotherapy.


