Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel Cpa3-Cre; miR-9fl/fl mouse reveals a functional role for
miR-9 in promoting mast cell invasion via up-regulation of CMA1.


Introduction: Our laboratory previously demonstrated that miR-9 promotes
the invasive properties of normal and malignant mast cells and that
overexpression of miR-9 is associated with spontaneous metastasis in
canine mast cell tumors (MCTs), a well-established large animal model of
malignant mast cell disease. The purpose of this study was to further
investigate the biologic effect and mechanisms by which mir-9 enhances
normal mast cell invasion.

Methods: Bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs) were generated from
Cpa3-Cre; miR-9Δfl/Δfl, and Cpa3-Cre; miR-9Δfl/Δfl mice and Taqman
miRNA assays were used to quantify mature miR-9 expression. BMMCs were
evaluated for differences in proliferative capacity, the ability to
migrate through Matrigel, sensitivity to degranulation, and the
expression and release of growth factor expression and release following
chemical stimulation. RNA sequencing was performed by the OSUCCC Genomics
Resource and changes in protein and mRNA expression were validated with
Western blotting and quantitative PCR.

Results and Conclusions: We generated a transgenic mouse carrying a
floxed STOP-miR-9 transgene (miR-9Δfl/Δfl) in which expression of miR-9
occurs only after Cre-mediated recombination and crossed these mice with
Cpa3-Cre mice which express Cre recombinase under the control of the
carboxypeptidase A3 (Cpa3) promoter, restricting expression of miR-9 to
mast cells and basophils. Bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs) derived
from Cpa3-Cre;miR-9Δfl/Δfl mice significantly enhanced the invasive
phenotype of mast cells. Moreover, the enforced expression of miR-9 in
BMMCs markedly changed the production and release of cytokine and growth
factors in response to chemical stimulation, including substantial
up-regulation of IL-4, IL-13, and GM-CSF transcript and enhanced TGF-β1
release. RNA sequencing revealed a unique transcriptional profile
associated with miR-9 over-expression in the Cpa3-Cre;miR-9Δfl/Δfl
derived BMMCs and identified increased expression of several mast
cell-restricted proteases involved in extracellular matrix and tissue
remodeling including CMA1 and MCP-6. Furthermore, transduction of
Cpa3-Cre;miR-9Δfl/Δfl derived BMMCs with CMA1 shRNA abrogated
miR-9-dependent mast cell invasion. Studies are underway to investigate
the regulatory pathway mediated by miR-9 that contributes to CMA1
up-regulation and promotes the invasive phenotype. In summary, these data
provide evidence supporting a critical role for miR-9 in mast cell
invasion and suggest that dysregulation of miR-9 may contribute to
pathologic conditions involving mast cell-mediated tissue remodeling.


