Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of CCN1 signaling in solid tumor cells diminishes
response to a histone deacetylase inhibitor: A dark side of HDACIs.


Background and Objective: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are
clinically proven epigenetic-based drugs for hematological cancers.
However, the impact of these inhibitors on solid tumors is disappointing
and debatable. Recent studies have shown that the solid tumor cell lines
are less sensitive to a HDAC inhibitor Vorinostat (suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid; SAHA) as compared to hematological cell lines. However,
it remains elusive why solid tumor cell lines responded weakly to HDAC
inhibitors. Previously, it has been reported that CCN1/Cyr61 plays
critical role in invasive front and drug resistance in breast and
pancreatic cancer. Thus, our goal is to determine whether CCN1 signalling
impair activity of SAHA in breast and pancreatic cancer cells.

Methods: To test this objective, various breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7,
ZR-75-1, MDA-MB-231, HCC-70) and pancreatic cancer cell lines (BxPC-3,
AsPC-1 and Panc-1) were treated with SAHA with different does and times.
Levels of CCN1 and its downstream signalling molecules were determined in
SAHA-treated or untreated cell extracts using Western blotting. In
addition, cell viability, migration and sphere formation were examined in
parental and CCN1-depleted cells in the presence or absence of SAHA.

Results and Conclusions: Here we have shown that CCN1 was upregulated in
various breast and pancreatic cancer cell lines following SAHA treatment
via epigenetic mechanism. Distribution of CCN1 in the nucleus and
cytoplasm was also drastically altered in SAHA-treated cells. Normally,
CCN1 expression was detected in the cytoplasm. However, following SAHA
treatment, CCN1 expression was located predominantly in the nucleus.
Functionally, CCN1 had dual outcome in these cells. The cell viability
assay indicated that CCN1-positve breast cancer or pancreatic cancer
cells were more sensitive to SAHA as compared to CCN1-negative cells.
CCN1 ablation by neutralizing antibody treatment in MDA-MB-231 cells
significantly suppressed the inhibitory effect of SAHA in MDA-MB231
cells. However, aggressive phenotype such as migration towards SDF-1 and
sphere-formation were markedly elevated in SAHA treated cells as compared
to untreated cells. These effects of SAHA were rescued by CCN1-depletion.
Collectively, these studies indicat that CCN1 activation limits the
response to SAHA in solid tumor cells and thus suggesting that
combination therapy of SAHA and CCN1-inhibitor could be an ideal
therapeutic approach to make HADAC inhibitor sensitive to solid tumors.


