Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing a patient derived 3D co-culture model of prostate
organoids to examine biological mechanisms involved in prostate cancer
disparities.


The prostate is composed of a fibro-muscular stromal and glandular
epithelial cells. Cross-talk between these cell populations is essential
for normal prostate development and is involved in carcinogenesis. In the
past year, an estimated 220,800 new cases of prostate cancer (PCa) were
diagnosed and 27,540 died of PCa. PCa in African American men occurs more
frequently, develops at a much earlier age, and is more aggressive and
lethal compared to men of European descent. Both biological and
socioeconomic factors likely contribute to this disparity. There is
currently a paucity of relevant preclinical models in which to examine
biological mechanisms in African American PCa. Patient-derived organoids
are a recently developed in vitro preclinical model which facilitate
examination of underlying mechanisms of disease etiology. However,
current models of epithelial organoid growth lack the prostate stroma. To
address this unmet need, we began development of a 3D organoid model that
incorporated both primary human prostatic epithelial (PrE) and stromal
(PrS) cells to better mimic the microenvironment of the organ. Prostate
organoids were derived from cells collected from radical prostatectomy
tissues from patients (UIC IRBs: 2006-0679 (PI Behm), (2013-0341(PI
Nonn). Mixtures of single PrE-derived and single PrS-derived cells were
seeded in 3D in matrigel. Bright-field microscopy of live organoids and
histological examination of fixed organoids showed that the addition of
PrS cells to the culture altered the shape of the organoids compared to
the spherical phenotype observed in PrE only cultures. Immunofluorescent
analysis of the basal cell marker p63 showed increased epithelial
differentiation in the co-culture organoids. In summary, these data
suggest that inclusion of prostate stroma in co-culture organoid models
influences prostatic epithelial organoid development in vitro. Ongoing
studies are focused on molecular analysis or organoid phenotypes and
comparison of AA and EA-derived organoids.


