Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Brg1 plays a critical role in PanIN formation through regulating
Sox9 expression.


Background: Mutations of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes are one
of the hallmarks of human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA). Brahma
related gene 1 (Brg1) is a catalytic ATPase subunit of SWI/SNF complexes
and Brg1 is silenced in about 10% of human PDA. Recent study revealed
that Brg1 inhibits formation of intraductal pancreatic mucinous neoplasm
(IPMN) and IPMN-derived PDA in the context of oncogenic Kras and that
IPMNs originate from adult pancreatic ductal cells, demonstrating a tumor
suppressive role of Brg1. However, the role of Brg1 in the formation of
pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) from acinar cells and
PanIN-derived PDA is not fully understood.

Aim: To investigate the functional role of Brg1 in the formation of PanIN

Methods and Results: We generated Ptf1a-CreER; KrasG12D; Brg1f/f (KBC)
mice, in which Brg1 is deleted exclusively in adult pancreatic acinar
cells along with expression of oncogenic Kras upon tamoxifen induction of
Cre activity and assessed spontaneous acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM)
and PanIN formation. We found that ADM and PanIN formation was
significantly decreased in KBC mice compared with littermate controls.
Next, we induced caerulein-acute pancreatitis to KBC mice and assessed
for pancreatitis-induced tumorigenesis. We found that PanINs were
decreased in KBC mice compared with littermate controls, although
pancreatitis-induced ADMs were widely observed in KBC mice. Since Brg1 is
known to critical regulator of p53, mutant p53 allele was crossed with
KBC mice. Unexpectedly, even in the context of mutant p53, loss of Brg1
significantly deceased PanIN formation. These results suggest that Brg1
plays a tumor-supportive role in acinar cell-derived PanIN formation in
various contexts. Primary acinar cell culture experiments revealed that
ADM formation was markedly reduced in the absence of Brg1 and that Sox9
expression was downregulated in Brg1-depleted acinar cells. Furthermore,
we confirmed that Sox9 expression is downregulated in Brg1-depleted
ADMs/PanINs compared with Brg1-retained ADMs/PanINs by
immunohistochemistry. To determine the functional relationship between
Brg1 and Sox9, we generated Ptf1a-CreER; KrasG12D; Brg1f/f; Sox9OE mice,
in which Sox9 is constitutively overexpressed. Remarkably, Sox9
overexpression canceled the phenotype of decrease in PanIN formation by
Brg1 deletion. Furthermore, to investigate whether Brg1/Sox9 axis is
observed in human PanIN-derived PDAs, we performed immunohistochemistry
of Brg1 and Sox9 in human PanIN-derived PDAs. In 27 human PDAs, all of 5
PDAs with low Brg1 expression had low Sox9 expression.

Conclusions: Our results suggest that Brg1 plays a critical role in
acinar cell-derived PanIN formation in part through regulating Sox9
expression positively. Our data underscore a cell-type specific,
context-dependent role of Brg1 in the initiation of PDA formation.


