Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomere length and TERT promoter mutations in cutaneous melanoma.


Telomeres at chromosomal ends are comprised of multiple short repeat
sequences. In humans TTAGGG repeats account for telomere length ranging
10-15 kb. Telomere sequences are mainly double stranded that end in a
single stranded G-rich tail of 150-200 nucleotides. Telomeres in somatic
cells undergo gradual shortening due to inherent limitations of DNA
replication and limited levels of specialized enzyme telomerase that adds
the repeats at chromosomal ends to maintain homeostasis. We previously
reported somatic mutations in the core promoter of the telomerase reverse
transcriptase (TERT) gene that lead to increased transcription of
catalytic subunit and tumor specific telomerase reactivation. Telomere
length per se is associated with risk in different cancers. In this
study, we measured leukocyte telomere length using real-time PCR in 1469
melanoma patients and compared with that in 1158 matched healthy
controls. The melanoma patients had statistically significantly longer
telomeres than matched controls (t-test; P 6X10^-10). Mendelian
randomization, carried out using two polymorphisms represented by
rs1317082 and rs7726159 that associated with telomere length in genome
wide association studies, showed association between increased telomere
length and melanoma risk with an odds ratio of 2.3 (95% confidence
interval 1.8-2.8). When measured in blood tissues from a melanoma family
with the germline -57A>C TERT promoter mutation, the carriers had longer
telomeres (median 1.12) than the non-carriers (median 0.87). The TERT
promoter mutations create binding motifs for E-twenty six (ETS)
transcription factors and in stem cell the presence of the promoter
mutations resulted in continued TERT expression and telomerase activity
following differentiation into adult cells. Individuals with the germline
TERT promoter mutations develop melanoma with an early age of onset and
rapid progression to metastases; two individuals in the family who lived
past median age of onset developed several other malignancies, besides
melanoma. Thus, dysregulated telomerase leads to a severe phenotype. In
an analogy, we hypothesize that association of longer rather than shorter
telomeres with an increased risk of melanoma reflects stochastic
increased telomerase levels due to common genetic variation. In contrast,
the telomere length was shorter in tumors from unrelated melanoma
patients with (121) than without (170) somatic TERT promoter mutations (P
1X10^-5), which reflects the selection of the mutations at telomere
crisis. Thus, a dynamic but controlled system evolved around telomere
homeostasis when dysregulated leads to an increased cancer risk and
affects tumor progression.


