Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The primary study of the correlation between mRNA expression and
protein phosphorylation of epidermal growth factor receptor EGFR in
colorectal and breast cancer cell lines.


The EGFR family is a group of receptor tyrosine kinases that mediates
cell proliferation, migration, and differentiation. Activation of EGFR
signaling is triggered by ligand-binding induced receptor dimerization.
The dimerization activates the intracellular kinase domains of the
receptor, resulting in autophosphorylation of C-terminal tail and the
initiation of downstream signaling. EGFR overexpression is correlated
with more aggressive clinical indications in multiple types of cancer,
including colon, breast, lung, and head and neck carcinoma. Clinical
studies show that EGFR-directed therapeutic approaches improved better
outcomes of metastatic lung, colorectal, and head and neck cancers.
Predictive biomarkers are being developed to deliver personalized
therapies. Therefore, it is important to determine the protein as well as
molecular biomarker expression for selecting targeted therapies. Here we
present a panel cancer cell lines to examine EGFR expressions at a
molecular biomarker level (mRNA) as well as a protein level of
phosphorylated EGFR(pS1060). Colon cancer cell lines HT29, HCT116, SW620,
as well as the breast cancer cell line SKBR3, were cultured and processed
onto formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) CellMax pellets. Expression
levels of EGFR mRNA in the FFPE slides were examined with RNAScope
technology to visualize single RNA molecules per cell by using probes
specifically against EGFR. Expression of phosphorylated EGFR was examined
by the phosphospecific EGFR (pS1070) antibodies by using
immunohistochemistry (IHC). EGFR mRNA expression was detected in HT29 and
HCT 116 cells showing strong punctuated signals in the cytoplasm.
However, no EGFR mRNA signals were detected in SW620 cells. Breast cancer
cell line SKBR3 showed abundant EGFR mRNA expression. Phosphorylated EGFR
were found in the cell HT29, HCT 116 and SKBR3 cells with membrane
staining pattern. No phosphorylated EGFR was observed in SW620 cells
using Immunochemistry staining. Together, our results demonstrated that
the EGFR mRNA expression is correlated to the phosphorylation of EGFR in
these cancer cell lines. We concluded that the EGFR mRNA probes,
phosphorylated EGFR antibodies, and/or the cell lines can be served as
the control-references for clinical biomarker screening.


