Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulating insulin receptor splicing as a potential therapeutic
approach for rhabdomyosarcoma.


The insulin receptor (IN-R) is subject to alternative splicing to produce
two isoforms: the full-length IN-R B isoform and an isoform lacking exon
11 known as IN-R A which is the predominant isoform expressed in sarcoma
cells. This short exon encodes for 12 amino acids but the resulting
receptor has high affinity for a growth hormone called insulin-like
growth factor 2 (IGF2), which exquisitely responds to autocrine and
paracrine signaling. Increased IN-R A levels observed in rhabdomyosarcoma
(RMS) coupled with increased expression of IGF2, programs the tumor cell
for enhanced growth and angiogenesis, two important factors in
tumorigenesis. Furthermore, IGF2 can maintain angiogenesis through IN-R A
when the cognate receptor for IGF2, the IGF-1 receptor, is blocked.
Interestingly we have shown that hypoxia increases alternative splicing
to produce more IN-R A. This is an interesting finding since adaptation
to the hypoxic environment is a hallmark of the neoplastic phenotype.
Therefore, we hypothesize that expression of splicing factors is altered
under hypoxic conditions which leads to increased alternative splicing
and generation of IN-R A, allowing the cancer cells a growth advantage
which contributes to metastasis beyond the micrometastatic phase.

To characterize sequence elements and splicing factors involved in the
regulation of IN-R alternative splicing, we have developed a
hypoxia-inducible splicing system, which recapitulates the splicing
patterns observed in tumors. We have shown that sequence elements
preceding exon 11 are critical to the increased alternative splicing we
see under hypoxic conditions. As such, we have targeted these regions for
antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) development to increase full-length
splicing of IN-R, with the goal of restricting proliferative signaling by
IGF2 activation of IN-R A. We performed an ASO walk to target regions
important for exon inclusion or exclusion and have successfully targeted
a region known to be a binding site for the splicing factor CUGBP1.
RMS-derived cell lines almost exclusively express IN-R A but when treated
with our lead ASO compound we see a dramatic decrease in alternative
splicing resulting in increased levels of the full-length insulin
receptor. We have also shown that RMS-derived cells treated with our
splice modulating ASO exhibit reduced cell proliferation and migratory
properties. With these promising data we postulate that modulation of
IN-R splicing can be used in conjunction with already established
anti-IGF-1 receptor therapies in the treatment of RMS.


