Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphoproteome networks display consistent hyperactive kinase
activity in pancreatic cancer: evidence for new therapeutic options.


Introduction Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a highly lethal
disease due to its aggressive nature. Patients typically present with
distant metastases, at which point cytotoxic agents can extend life
expectancy by several months at most. Large-scale phosphoproteomics
complements our knowledge obtained from genomics and transcriptomics as
it provides information on which proteins and kinases are phosphorylated,
thereby implicating pathways that are activated. This approach in cancer
research may lead to improved patient selection for treatment with
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI). This study is the first to employ
phosphotyrosine-based phosphoproteomics on three different preclinical
PDAC models as well as patient tumor tissues to understand the aggressive
nature of this disease and identify new drug targets.

Approach We performed phosphoproteomics on a panel of 11 PDAC cell lines,
7 primary cell cultures, 10 patient-derived xenografts (PDX) and 16 fresh
frozen human tumor tissues. Tyrosine phosphopeptides were enriched via
immunoprecipitation and phosphopeptides were analyzed by high-resolution
nano-LC mass spectrometry.

Results Using phosphotyrosine-based phosphoproteomics, we identified a
total of 1723 tyrosine phosphorylated proteins and 138 phosphorylated
kinases, representing 27% of the kinome. The reproducibility of our
workflow was very high, with Pearson correlation coefficients of r =
0.937 for technical replicates of cell lines and r = 0.876 for biological
replicates of tumors. In our cell line panels, multiple kinases were
commonly highly phosphorylated (e.g. PTK2, EPHA2, EGFR and MET).
Functional testing of PTK2 by using TKI defactinib in primary cell lines
with high phosphorylation resulted in inhibition of proliferation and
migration in vitro. Inhibition of EPHA2 by shRNAs resulted in reduced
proliferation in vitro. To validate the relevance of these candidate
target proteins in vivo, the tyrosine phosphoproteome of PDXs and human
tumors was analyzed. In these tumors, kinase activity analysis based on
kinase phosphorylation levels and kinase-substrate networks validated
these common active nodes in the majority of these tumors.

Conclusion Our extensive tyrosine phosphoproteome analysis spanning a
wide range of PDAC models revealed high phosphorylation levels of
multiple kinases. Interestingly, the phosphorylated kinase profiles of
tumors and cell lines did not show as much heterogeneity as expected,
taken into account the existence of biological subtypes in PDAC
identified by others via transcriptomics. The aggressive biology of this
disease may be correlated with the consistent activation of multiple
pathways, some of which we have shown to be targetable in vitro. This
study prompts further validation and prognostic evaluation of the
identified active kinases to improve treatment of PDAC.


