Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early-onset colorectal cancer is distinct from traditional
colorectal cancer.


Background & Objective: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the fourth most
commonly diagnosed cancer worldwide, responsible for over 700,000 deaths
annually. Although CRC rates have declined 3.1%/year annually over the
past decade, annual incidence rates of CRC among patients between 20-49
years old have increased by more than 1.4% per year over the same time
period and these early-onset CRCs (E-CRC) now comprise 10-18% of newly
diagnosed cases.

Our hypothesis is that E-CRC represents a distinct subtype of CRC with
unique drivers. To examine this, we analyzed national data sources such
as the SEER database, the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey
(BRFSS), and the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) to characterize the
epidemiology and genetics differences between early onset CRC (E-CRC) and
typical CRC (T-CRC).

Methods: The SEER database was analyzed to characterize the clinical and
pathological differences between E-CRC patients (20-49 years) and T-CRC
group (> 50 years). We compared rates of age-adjusted CRC with known
lifestyle risk factors using population data from the BRFSS. Based on
differences in clinical presentation and anatomical location we
hypothesized that there are underlying molecular differences between
E-CRCs and T-CRC that may explain these differences. To investigate this
we analyzed the TCGA CRC dataset for genomic markers that can distinguish
between E-CRC and T-CRC tumors.

Results: E-CRC incidence has risen at an annual rate of 1.4% per year
from 2000-2011, whereas T-CRC incidence has declined by 3.1% per year
among patients 50 years or older during the same period.

Relative to T-CRC, E-CRC rates are significantly more prevalent in the
Black population than the White or Hispanic populations.

Anatomical location of E-CRC is significantly increased towards the
distal colon when compared to T-CRC locations suggesting a distinct
etiology.

Analysis of risk factors confirmed that U.S counties with high rates of
diabetes, obesity and smoking were significantly correlated with higher
T-CRC rates. However, no such correlations were observed for E-CRC rates.

Analysis of the limited number of E-CRC in the TCGA cohort identified a
number of known oncogenes that are suggestive of distinct E-CRC
tumorigenesis.

Conclusions: Our results suggest that E-CRC appears to be distinct from
T-CRC. Young patients with CRC represent a distinct patient group with
unique epidemiology and mechanisms of disease development. The increase
in left sided colon and rectal cancers is consistent with earlier reports
and although the underlying reasons are unknown, they are suggestive of
differences in tumor genesis and mutational characteristics. To follow up
on this hypothesis we are performing additional genetic and epigenetic
characterization of E-CRC and matching T-CRC samples collected at Weill
Cornell.


