Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional control of signaling pathways in T-cell
lymphoblastic leukemia by Ikaros tumor suppressor.


Cellular proliferation in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia is
regulated by multiple signaling pathways. The Phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)/AKT pathway is frequently dysregulated in T-ALL. Targeting the
PI3K pathway has shown promise as a novel therapeutic approach for T-ALL.
However, regulation of the PI3K pathway is still not well understood.
Here, we report that PI3K activity in T-ALL can be controlled by
transcriptional regulation of key members of this pathway, PIK3CD and
PIKFYVE. DNA binding analysis of primary T-ALL using qChIP revealed that
the tumor suppressor protein, Ikaros, binds the promoter regions of
PIK3CD and PIKFYVE. Since Ikaros acts as a regulator of transcription, we
tested whether Ikaros binding to PIK3CD and PIKFYVE affects their
expression. Overexpression of Ikaros results in reduced transcription of
PIK3CD and PIKFYVE in T-ALL. Targeting Ikaros with a specific shRNA,
resulted in increased transcription of PIK3CD and PIKFYVE in T-ALL.
Together, these results demonstrate that Ikaros functions as a
transcriptional repressor of both PIK3CD and PIKFYVE, and suggest that
Ikaros can regulate the PI3K pathway in T-ALL. It has been previously
shown that Ikaros function in B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia is
regulated by oncogenic Casein Kinase II (CK2). We tested whether Ikaros
ability to repress transcription of PIK3CD and PIKFYVE is regulated by
CK2. Inhibition of CK2 by a specific pharmacological inhibitor, CX-4945,
resulted in increased Ikaros binding to the promoters of PIK3CD and
PIKFYVE, as well as in transcriptional repression of both of these genes.
These results suggest that Ikaros function as a repressor of PIK3CD and
PIKFYVE transcription is impaired by CK2 in T-ALL. CK2 inhibition
restores Ikaros-mediated transcriptional repression of PIK3CD and
PIKFYVE, which results in downregulation of the PI3K pathway. In
conclusion, the presented data demonstrate that the PI3K signaling
pathway is regulated by transcriptional repression of PIK3CD and PIKFYVE
by Ikaros in T-ALL. Results reveal interplay between two signaling
pathways in T-ALL, CK2 and PI3K, where CK2 positively regulates the PI3K
pathway by inhibiting Ikaros function. These data reveal novel mechanisms
that regulate cellular proliferation in T-ALL.


