Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple acquired resistance mechanisms against third generation
EGFR-TKI osimeritinib in non-smal cell lung cancer cells.


Background Osimertinib (AZD9291; Tagrisso) is a third generation
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
known to be effective against the EGFR-T790M variant, which is accounts
for half of the acquired resistance mechanisms to the first generation
EGFR-TKIs. However, resistance to osimertinib is likely to progress and
the study of potential osimertinib-resistance mechanisms in advanced is
necessary. In this study, we investigated the molecular and cellular
profiles of the acquired resistance cells to osimertinib in EGFR-mutant
non-small cell lung cancers. Materials and Methods Five EGFR-mutant cell
lines were exposed to osimertinib by stepwise escalation or
high-concentration exposure methods, and resistant sublines to
osimertinib were established. The molecular profiles and cellular
phenotypes of these resistant sublines were characterized. Results
EGFR-C797S mutation which was reported to be a major mechanism of
resistance to osimertinib in clinical samples was not detected in
established resistance cells by using direct sequencing. Several
osimertinib-resistance cell lines displayed MET amplification, and some
of these cells were sensitive to the combination of osimertinib plus MET
inhibitor crizotinib. However, one cell line that displayed MET
amplification was not sensitive to this combination therapy. On the other
hand, several osimertinib-resistance cell lines displayed
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) features. The HCC827-derived
subline established by the high-concentration exposure method exhibited
not only EMT features but also cancer stem cell (CSC)-like properties,
including aldehyde dehydrogenase isoform 1 (ALDH1A1) and ATP binding
cassette subfamily B member 1 (ABCB1) overexpression. Conclusion We
established osimertinib-resistant cells and found that MET amplification,
EMT, and CSC -like features were observed. These findings may provide
clues to overcome acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs. In some cell lines,
however, the mechanisms of acquired resistance to osimertinib were not
revealed yet.


