Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A computational driven protocol of metronomic oral vinorelbine in
metastatic non small cell lung cancer.


Over the last decade, metronomic chemotherapy (MC) has emerged as an
alternative way to administrate chemotherapy. MC can be defined as
regular administration of low/less-toxic doses without extended drug-free
breaks. Because countless schedules are possible, testing them
empirically looks like an unachievable goal. Therefore, mathematical
modeling can be an effective tool to determine appropriate metronomic
strategies.

A phase Ia/Ib study based on a mathematical model of oral vinorelbine in
metastatic NSCLC and malignant pleural mesothelioma was designed to
confirm safety and evaluate efficacy of a new metronomic regimen
(Elharrar et al. 2016). The optimized schedule providing weekly Day1
(D1), D2 and D4 with respective doses of 60, 30 and 60 mg was suggested
by in silico simulations using a Pharmacokinetic-Pharmacodynamic (PKPD)
model taking into account vinorelbine PK, PD toxicities and PD efficacy
(Faivre et al. 2013). Trial recruitment will be two-staged, as 12
patients have been enrolled to confirm safety and consolidate the
calibration of model parameters. An extension phase on 20-extra patients
will be conducted to evaluate the efficacy of the optimized protocol.
Monolix 4.3.3 was used for population PKPD analysis.

A three-compartment model best described oral vinorelbine PK data. PK
analysis revealed a high inter-individual variability on drug exposure
(CV=73%). PD toxicity (neutropenia) was adequately described by a
modified Friberg model (Friberg et al. 2002), considering continuous
administrations of metronomic dosing regimen. On the 12 recruited
patients, 3 (25%) presented either a stable disease (SD) or a partial
response (PR). No direct link has been established between toxicity
(grade 4 neutropenia) and drug exposure. However, responders to treatment
were those presenting a higher vinorelbine area under the curve (p=0.02).
Tumor assessments were used to adjust efficacy parameters. The model was
used to simulate alternative metronomic scenarios targeting higher
efficacy with similar toxicity. Simulations showed that the initial
proposed schedule was the most appropriate in terms of efficacy/toxicity
balance. Its efficacy will be evaluated in the second part of the study.

This trial can be considered as a proof-of-concept study demonstrating
the feasibility to run a computational-driven protocol to ensure an
optimal efficacy/toxicity balance in cancer patients.


