Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor affects GLI activity by promoting
transcriptionally active states of GLI upon androgen stimulation.


Introduction: While “castration” therapies benefit metastatic
prostate cancer (PCa) patients, their effects are transient and
progression to castration resistant disease (CRPC) remains a vexing
clinical problem. Despite low levels of circulating androgens in treated
patients, CRPC typically remains dependent on androgen/androgen receptor
(AR) signaling for further growth. Previously we showed that Gli protein
binding to AR co-activates AR transcriptional activity and supports
androgen-independent growth. Here we show evidence that the interaction
of AR with Gli proteins, particularly Gli3, allows for a
“non-canonical” activation of Hedgehog signaling that contributes to
PCa cell growth and progression to CRPC. Methods: Androgen
growth-dependent (LNCaP) or -independent (LNCaP-AI, LN95) PCa cells were
transfected with a Gli-luciferase (Gli-luc) reporter and were treated
with R1881, enzalutamide (Enz), or a combination. Luciferase activity was
measured. R1-D567 (harboring a genomic deletion of AR) served as a
negative control. Knockdown of AR-FL with siRNA or overexpression of a
small decoy peptide from the Gli2 AR-binding domain (Gli-DP) was also
performed in above cells. Western blot and real-time PCR confirmed both
AR and Gli target gene/protein expressions in LNCaP and LNCaP-AI cells
(-/+ R1881). Sonic hedgehog (Shh) ligand-responsive 3T3-E1 cells were
transiently expressed with AR-FL to confirm the involvement of canonical
Shh-Gli activation pathway in AR co-activation of Gli transcription.
Co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) was performed to verify the blocking
efficiency of Gli-DP in AR-Gli3 interaction in LN95 cells and
AR-overexpressing 293FT. Results: Androgen (R1881) treatment strongly
induced Gli transcription activity in AR+ PCa cells while Enz reversed
this effect; AR-FL-specific knockdown or exogenous Gli-DP expression
suppressed androgen-induced Gli reporter expression as well as expression
of endogenous Gli-responsive genes. R1881 treatment promoted Gli2/3
protein processing to transcriptionally active states (Gli3-FullLength
and Gli2-Active) and enhanced the expression of Gli-target genes,
Gli1/Ptch1, at protein and/or mRNA levels. Co-IP revealed that exogenous
Gli-DP blocked the interaction between AR and transcriptionally active
Gli3-FL in PCa cells. Overexpression of AR in 3T3-E1 cells confirmed that
AR interaction with Gli stabilizes the active Gli3-FL form by suppressing
degradation of Gli3 in a manner independent of the canonical Shh-Gli
activation pathway. Conclusions: Our findings further identify the
importance of AR-Gli interaction in progression of PCa to CRPC and shows
that cooperative binding of AR to Gli proteins enhances both AR and
Hedgehog signaling in PCa cells. Interference with the AR-Gli interaction
using a decoy peptide provides a means to suppress AR activation of
Hedgehog in PCa cells.


