Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HMBD002, a novel neutralizing antibody targeting a specific
epitope on the co-inhibitory immune checkpoint receptor VISTA, displays
potent anti-tumor effects in pre-clinical models.


V-domain immunoglobulin (Ig)-containing suppressor of T-cell activation
(VISTA) also known as PD1 homolog (PD1H) is a co-inhibitory immune
checkpoint receptor. VISTA is predominantly expressed on hematopoietic
cells, particularly myeloid derived suppressor cells and antigen
presenting cells, and at lower levels on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and Foxp3
Tregs. Multiple studies have demonstrated VISTA can strongly suppress
human T-cell activation, and the presence of high VISTA expressing cells
in the tumor microenvironment has been postulated as playing a critical
role in tumorigenesis and resistance to immunotherapy. VISTA neutralizing
antibodies have been previously observed in pre-clinical models to
increase the abundance of tumor infiltrating effector T cells as well as
their effector functions, resulting in enhanced control of tumor growth,
even in the absence of detectable expression of VISTA on the tumor cells,
a potential advantage over PD1 or PDL1 blockade. There is an urgent need
to develop the most clinically effective anti-VISTA antibodies however
the limited characterization of the VISTA pathway and the uncertainty
around the cognate VISTA ligand has limited the extent to which in vitro
studies can support the selection of optimal antibodies for development.
Hummingbird Bioscience’s proprietary Rational Antibody Development
platform to the design of neutralizing antibodies against specific
epitopes on VISTA. Extensive in silico analyses of the VISTA structure
and comparative structural modeling against other B7 protein family
members has enabled the prediction of key binding sites where antibody
binding will inhibit function, while preserving necessary safety and
developability profiles. Subsequently, a directed evolution strategy was
used to isolate monoclonal antibodies specifically targeting these key
predicted functional domains on the native folded VISTA protein.
Hummingbird’s anti-VISTA antibodies bind human and murine VISTA protein
with high affinity (kD 60% inhibition of tumor growth (after 15 days)
with no observable toxicity. Further in vitro and in vivo validation
experiments in other cancer models are ongoing, both as monotherapy and
in combination with other immune therapies. The first in-human trial of
HMBD-002 is planned for 2018.


