Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thrombospondin-1 regulation by MDM2 in aggressive cancers.


MDM2 amplification, which is often seen in different cancer types,
indicates that its plays an important role in tumorigenesis and also in
cancer metastasis. Amplification of the MDM2 gene correlates with poor
prognosis, aggressive growth, and reoccurrence. Thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1)
that is expressed by THBS1 gene is a matricellular protein, and is known
to have differential expression in cancers. When TSP-1 activates
Transforming Growth Factor-β1 (TGF-β1) through latent cytokine
complexation, the activated TGF-β1 contributes to the Epithelial to
Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) which is known to impart stem-cell like
characteristics and drug resistance to the cancer cells. However, no
studies regarding MDM2’s role in THBS1 regulation have been carried out
so far. Therefore, the objective of this study was to determine the
correlation between MDM2 and THBS1 expression in MDM2 overexpressing
cancers. For this purpose the SJSA-1 osteosarcoma cells were cultured at
37 oC under humidified air/CO2 (19:1) in RPMI-1640 complete medium
supplemented with 10% FBS, 10,000 U/mL penicillin, 10,000 µg/mL
streptomycin, 1% (+)-L-glutamine, and 1% amphotericin B. The cells were
incubated in the presence of 20 µM of Nutlin-3 for 24 hrs, following
which, RNA and protein were extracted and subsequently purity and
concentration were determined. Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain
Reaction (RT-PCR) and western blotting were performed using specific
primers, primary and the secondary antibodies respectively. Interestingly
elevated levels of TSP-1 and TGFβ1 were observed in these SJSA-1 cells.
However, after treatment with Nutlin-3, an MDM2-p53 interaction
inhibitor, a significant increase in p53 was noted. However, contrary to
the existing literature, where studies have shown p53 to positively
regulate TSP-1 levels, we observed an opposite outcome. Despite the
Nutlin-3 induced elevation in p53 levels, a significant decrease in TSP-1
level was observed indicating that MDM2 may be regulating THBS1 gene
expression in a p53 independent manner, in MDM2 overexpressing SJSA-1
cells. The findings of this study suggest a novel, p53 independent role
for MDM2 in THBS1 regulation. Since MDM2 amplification can positively
induce TSP-1 levels, which is one of the natural activators of TGF-β1,
it is anticipated that stimulatory signal flowing through MDM2 - TSP-1 -
TGF-β1 axis may induce the cancer cells to undergo EMT, thereby
increasing their metastatic ability and promote cancer stem cell
characteristics. This novel MDM2-regulated pathway can very well serve as
a drug target and might play a biologically relevant role in the
treatment of cancer metastasis. Our future studies will include
validation of this correlation in multiple cancer cell lines, to further
elucidate the mechanism through which MDM2 is regulating THBS1 gene
expression. (This project was supported by The Royal Dames of Cancer
Research Inc., Ft. Lauderdale, Florida).


