Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SORBS1-AHNAK complex regulates metastatic properties of cancer.


Purpose: CAP encoded by SORBS1, Vinexin and ArgBP2 is participated in the
SoHo family of proteins. The SoHo protein interacts with different
signaling molecules and involves with cell migration, and has been
implicated in a variety of cellular processes including
insulin-stimulated glucose transport. CAP has specific role in the
stabilization of adhesion complexes and the consequent effect of cell
migration. It is possible that CAP or complex between CAP and other
proteins induces change of cancer cell characters. We assumed that SORBS1
has substantial role of cell proliferation, migration and interaction
with other subcellular proteins.

Methods and materials: To elucidate endogenous role of SORBS1, colorectal
cancer cell lines were manipulated by pcDNA, siRNA and shRNA in some
colorectal cancer cell lines. Function of SORBS1 as regulator of cancer
proliferation was demonstrated by cell cycle assay. And several methods
including western blotting, cell migration assay and immunoprecipitation
assay were performed for determining role of SORBS1 related other
metastatic properties.

Conclusion: Colony formation ability and proliferation were induced by
SORBS1-overexpression in HT29 cell line. In contrast, transient
suppression of SORBS1 inhibits cell proliferation. Moreover, when SORBS1
was constantly suppressed in HCT-116 and SNU-C4 cell line, cell migration
was impeded. According to immunoprecipitation data, we chose the AHNAK
protein as the convincing candidate protein related with SORBS1. An
interaction of SORBS1 and AHNAK was observed in both cytoplasm and
nucleus. Expression level of SORBS1 and AHNAK was also negative
correlation in extraction of cytoplasm and nucleus.

SORBS1 and AHNAK bind each other as form of protein complex, however,
AHNAK known as nucleoprotein is abundant in both cytoplasm and nucleus
when SORBS1 is suppressed. Consequently, these results indicate that
SORBS1 has a key role of cancer cell growth and invasiveness through
regulation of AHNAK expression and degradation.


