Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clonal evolution in uveal melanoma.


Introduction: Uveal melanoma is the most common primary cancer of the eye
and frequently gives rise to lethal metastatic disease. Uveal melanoma
can be divided into two prognostic subgroups based on gene expression
profiling: class 1 (low metastatic risk) and class 2 (high metastatic
risk). Uveal melanoma is also notable for a characteristic set of driver
mutations that cluster into two groups. The first group consists of
mutually exclusive gain-of-function mutations in members of the Gαq
signaling pathway (GNAQ, GNA11, CYSLTR2 and PLCB4), which are present in
almost all uveal melanomas. These mutations are not prognostic, and are
thought to represent initiating events that are insufficient alone to
cause full malignant transformation. The second group consists of
near-mutually exclusive mutations in BAP1, SF3B1, and EIF1AX. These are
thought to occur later in tumor progression and are prognostic of patient
outcome. These molecular features are associated with characteristic
chromosome copy number variations (CNV). The purpose of this study was to
investigate the life history of primary uveal melanomas by inferring the
intratumoral evolution of these genetic events.

Methods: Exome or whole genome sequencing data from 151 primary uveal
melanomas were evaluated with a new bioinformatic pipeline for calling
mutations and CNVs. Data from this analysis were used in downstream
subclonality algorithms to determine intratumor evolutionary patterns
within individual tumor samples.

Results: A Gαq mutation was found in 98.7% of tumors, which were all
mutually exclusive with each other. BAP1 mutations were found in 46%,
SF3B1 mutations in 23%, and EIF1AX mutations in 14% of tumors, all of
which were mutually exclusive with each other except for 4 cases. We
identified novel driver mutations in 20% of the remaining tumors. In most
samples that contained a BAP1 or SF3B1 mutation, this driver mutation and
associated CNVs were present in 100% of tumor cells. However, in 14% of
cases with BAP1 mutations, 100% of tumor cells exhibited monosomy 3, but
a BAP1 mutation was present in a smaller subclone, suggesting that the
BAP1 mutation occurred after the loss of chromosome 3. In tumors with
EIF1AX mutations, this mutation was consistently found in 100% of tumor
cells, with 6p gain being found in a smaller subclone in 45% of cases,
suggesting that 6p gain usually occurs after the EIF1AX mutation in this
subgroup of tumors.

Conclusions: The driver mutations and associated CNVs that are
characteristic of uveal melanoma occur very early in tumor evolution and
are followed by the accumulation of silent passenger mutations,
consistent with a punctuated evolution model in which an initial “big
bang” is followed by neutral non-Darwinian evolution. These unexpected
findings alter prevailing theories of uveal melanoma progression, and
could have a significant impact on patient management.


