Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficient targeting of BCMA-positive multiple myeloma cells by
antibody-coupled T-cell receptor (ACTR) engineered autologous T cells in
combination with an anti-BCMA antibody.


B cell maturation antigen (BCMA) has recently emerged as an attractive
therapeutic target in multiple myeloma. BCMA has restricted expression on
plasma cells with little to no expression on other normal tissues, but is
upregulated on the surface of multiple myeloma cells. BCMA can regulate
proliferation and survival of myeloma cells via binding to its ligands
APRIL and BAFF and induce downstream signaling pathways. Thus, several
approaches to target BCMA are currently under clinical investigation,
including chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapies, bispecific
antibodies and antibody drug conjugates.

The Antibody-Coupled T cell Receptor (ACTR) technology is a universal,
engineered T cell therapy consisting of the extracellular domain of human
CD16 and the intracellular T cell co-stimulatory and signaling domains.
ACTR is designed to engage the Fc domain of therapeutic antibodies
opsonized to target cells to mediate anti-tumor activity. Previous work
has demonstrated ACTR T cell activity in combination with rituximab,
trastuzumab, and hu14.18 K322A against CD20, Her2, and GD2 expressing
cell lines, respectively (Kudo et al. Cancer Res 2014; 74:93-103).
Currently ACTR is being evaluated in Phase I clinical trials with
rituximab to treat relapsed refractory B cell lymphoma.

Here we demonstrate a humanized afucosylated anti-BCMA antibody,
SEA-BCMA, binds to ACTR expressing T cells with high affinity and
mediates T cell activation, potent cytotoxicity, cytokine release and
proliferation across a wide range of BCMA expressing myeloma cells. ACTR
activity was specific to SEA-BCMA - opsonized target cells, dose
dependent and had no activity on BCMA negative tumor lines. Furthermore,
the SEA-BCMA antibody has additional properties that might contribute to
a therapeutic effect, including blocking the binding of ligands to BCMA
and driving natural killer cell mediated ADCC effects. These preclinical
studies demonstrate a promising multi-faceted activity of ACTR T cells in
combination with the anti-BCMA antibody, SEA-BCMA, for clinical
consideration in multiple myeloma patients.


