Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting mechanisms of anti-PD-1 therapy with massively parallel
single-cell RNA-sequencing.


Anti-PD-1 therapy is an important new treatment option for many different
types of malignancies, but overall response rates are less than 40%.
Limited understanding of how anti-PD-1 treatment changes the tumor immune
microenvironment is a barrier to identifying rational combination
therapies and understanding mechanisms of immunotherapy resistance. To
overcome this barrier, we set out to understand the mechanisms by which
anti-PD-1 therapy augments the anti-tumor immune response using
single-cell genomics. We have developed a massively parallel single-cell
RNA-sequencing platform (“Seq-Well”) that uses a fabricated chip with
nearly 100,000 nanowells into which barcoded beads and individual cells
are distributed prior to lysis and RNA capture. We used this platform to
comprehensively define the global expression profile of all major immune
lineages in the tumor microenvironment in a mouse tumor model of
immunotherapy. Mice were implanted with the B16F10 melanoma
transplantable model of cancer and treated with anti-PD-1 or control
antibodies. Tumors were harvested and CD45+ tumor-infiltrating leukocytes
isolated by FACS. In a single experiment we were able to sequence the
transcriptomes of over 600 individual cells, allowing us to clearly
distinguish different immune lineages within the tumor microenvironment.
We detect two transcriptionally distinct populations of CD8+ T cells, one
that is highly proliferative (as marked by Ki-67), and one that has
higher expression of cytotoxic markers (i.e. perforin). The Ki-67hi
population is enriched for a gene expression signature from terminally
exhausted CD8+ T cells in chronic viral infection, suggesting that this
is a more exhausted subset. Treatment with anti-PD-1 globally alters the
tumor microenvironment, including enriching for CD8+ T cells in the Prfhi
subpopulation compared with the Ki-67hi more terminally exhausted
population. Studies to understand changes in the immune infiltrate of
immunotherapy resistant tumors are currently ongoing. In conclusion,
massively parallel single-cell RNA-sequencing allows us to dissect the
mechanisms by which checkpoint blockade controls tumor growth, revealing
shifts in the differentiation state of exhausted CD8+ T cells induced by
checkpoint blockade.


