Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacodynamic biomarkers for anti-TIGIT treatment and prevalence
of TIGIT expression in multiple solid tumor types.


TIGIT (T cell immunoreceptor with Ig ITIM domain) is a co-inhibitory
receptor and its signaling axis inhibits T cell and Natural Killer (NK)
cell activity in the healthy immune system. In tumors TIGIT is highly
expressed on a subset of dysfunctional T and NK cells and of highly
suppressive regulatory T cells (Treg). Loss of TIGIT signaling enhances
NK cell activity, CD4+ T cell priming and CD8+ T cell effector functions,
suggesting a role in anti-tumor immunity. We have developed an anti-TIGIT
blocking antibody that shows potent antitumor efficacy in in multiple
syngeneic mouse models, including CT26WT colon, B16F10 melanoma and 4T1
breast cancer. Dose-dependent (12.5-0.1 mg/Kg) single agent efficacy was
demonstrated in established tumors, and pharmacodynamic (PD) biomarkers
in blood and in tumors were identified.

Consistent with TIGIT’s role as a co-inhibitory receptor, anti-TIGIT
promoted a dose-dependent increase in activation of CD8+ and CD4+ tumor
infiltrating leukocytes (TIL) and NK cells, as shown by increased
staining of IFN-γ and CD69 by flow cytometry, when compared to controls.
Anti-TIGIT also increased CD4 and CD8 T cell frequency in the tumor,
measured by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Furthermore, anti-TIGIT caused an
increase in splenic NK cell cytotoxicity, which correlated with dose and
efficacy.

To identify gene expression biomarkers in tumor and in blood, we used
microarray analysis, and found similar immune gene changes between the
two tissues. As expected, anti-TIGIT increased the expression of genes
associated with CD8+ T cells, CD4+ T cells, and NK cells. Markers
indicative of cytotoxic activity and Th1 response were also induced by
anti-TIGIT. The microarray data were validated by qRT-PCR and results
were consistent with flow cytometry and cytotoxicity results, and
underlie the mechanism of action of anti-TIGIT.

We have developed an IHC assay to evaluate TIGIT expression patterns in
tumor and the associated stroma and TILs. Using this assay, we profiled
17 tumor types to evaluate patterns of TIGIT expression. Expression was
high on immune cells in the stroma and on TILs in 8 tumor types, while it
was generally low on tumor cells. TIGIT expression was also low on tumor
cells in a panel of 27 PDX models. Consistent with the IHC results,
analysis of 33 tumor types in the TCGA by RNA-Seq showed a good
correlation of the expression levels of TIGIT and T cell markers,
suggesting that TIGIT is mostly expressed on immune cells in tumors.

In conclusion, we have identified PD biomarkers for anti-TIGIT in tumors
and in surrogate tissues in syngeneic mouse models. Analysis of the
biomarkers demonstrates activation of T cells and NK cells upon
inhibition of TIGIT signaling. These biomarkers can be used in the clinic
to demonstrate target engagement. In addition, we have profiled the
expression of TIGIT in multiple solid tumor types and characterized
prevalence of TIGIT-positive cells.


