Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of proteosome pathway and a novel serine threonine
kinase DCLK3: Potential therapeutic targets for innately radiation
resistant glioblastoma cells.


INTRODUCTION Glioblastoma resistance and recurrence is attributed to the
presence of innately Radiation Resistant (RR) cells present in the
heterogeneous parent tumour. However, targeting these cells has been
impossible due to inaccessibility of these cells.

METHODOLOGY We therefore recapitulated clinical scenario of resistance in
a cellular model developed from fresh primary GBM patient samples and
cell lines. The model allowed us to capture 1) Parent cells 2) innately
Radiation Resistant cells - less than 10% of the parent population and 3)
Relapse (R) cells. To identify the targetable proteins governing the
survival of RR cells, we performed iTRAQ based quantitative proteomic
analysis on all the three populations from GBM cell line (SF 268).

RESULTS The proteomic data analysis identified 34 proteins as
differentially present in RR population of which 22 were upregulated and
12 were downregulated. A GENE STRING analysis of all the differential
proteins in RR population revealed putative interaction of a novel serine
threonine kinase DCLK3 with 14-3-3 zeta. The increased expression of
DCLK3 and 14-3-3 zeta was confirmed by western blot in RR cells of two
GBM cell lines and 8 patient samples. Meta-analysis of 242 tumor samples
from COSMIC database showed DCLK3 overexpression in 232 tumors.
Furthermore, it harbours 8 missense deleterious mutations, 6 of which
were in the kinase domain, indicating towards an important kinase
function of this protein. We hypothesized that DCLK3 mediated interaction
and phosphorylation of 14-3-3 zeta modulated 14-3-3 zeta functions
facilitating RR cell survival. For this, first we wanted to see if DCLK3
and 14-3-3 zeta can interact together. In silico docking of DCLK3 with
14-3-3 zeta did show interaction of 14-3-3 zeta and the kinase domain of
DCLK3 kinase. This interaction was confirmed by in vitro
immunoprecipitation studies. Further studies are ongoing to understand
the importance of these proteins and their interaction in GBM recurrence.
Additionally, pathway analysis of differentially upregulated proteins in
RR cells revealed deregulation of the proteins involved in
Ubiquitin-Proteasome System. Indeed, proteasome activity assay showed
increased proteosome activity in the RR population of GBM cell lines and
Patient samples. Accordingly, Bortezomib, a proteosome inhibitor induced
significant apoptosis in the RR population at a concentration
significantly lower than that required for inducing apoptosis in the
parent cells.

SIGNIFICANCE In conclusion this is the first study to identify a proteome
signature of innately radiation resistant cells of GBM and identify
proteosome pathway and a novel serine-threonine kinase DCLK3 in RR cells
as a potential therapeutic target to inhibit GBM radioresistance and
recurrence.


