Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selectivity and specificity of engineered T cells expressing
KITE-585, a chimeric antigen receptor targeting B-cell maturation antigen
(BCMA).


Background: Immunotherapy has provided treatment options for cancers that
are otherwise refractory to standard approaches. One such technique is to
use adoptive transfer of engineered autologous T cells expressing a
chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) directed against a tumor antigen. The
efficacy of CAR T cells directed against hematological malignancies,
particularly CD19-expressing B cell leukemia and lymphomas, has been
demonstrated in multiple clinical studies. The success of this approach
has prompted development of CAR T cells directed to different tumor
antigens for other tumor types. To ensure the selectivity and specificity
of the CAR T cells against their intended target, screening methods need
to be employed. Multiple myeloma is an incurable malignancy of plasma
cells. B-cell maturation antigen (BCMA), also known as tumor necrosis
factor superfamily member 17 (TNFRSF17) is nearly ubiquitously expressed
on multiple myeloma cells, plasma cells and subsets of mature B cells.

Methods: In order to screen for the specificity of novel CAR T cells
directed against BCMA, we utilized a cell microarray platform developed
by Retrogenix. In this screen, approximately 4500 human plasma membrane
proteins (representing up to 75% of the human plasma membrane proteome)
are individually expressed in human HEK293 cells. Fluorescently labeled
CAR T cells, which showed cytolytic activity against MM cell lines
expressing BCMA, were applied to the cell microarray and specific binding
of the CAR T cells to target cells was determined.

Results: Primary hits were sequenced to confirm identity and secondary
specificity screens were performed on the identified hits. Specific
binding of both mock transduced and BCMA CAR transduced T cells were
confirmed for different plasma membrane proteins expressed from the
HEK293 cells. These included known T cell interactors, such as ICOSLG,
CD244 and CD86, where binding is proposed to be independent of CAR
expression. Subtracting the hits of the mock transduced T cells from the
BCMA CAR T cells demonstrated specific binding of the CAR T cells to
BCMA. Utilizing the fully human IgGs directed against BCMA from which the
single-chain variable fragments (scFvs) of the CARs were derived, we
further confirmed specific binding to BCMA in additional secondary
screens. Additionally, a lack of off-target binding of the fully human
IgGs to normal tissue was demonstrated in a tissue cross reactivity
screen.

Conclusions: These studies highlight the tractability of this cell
microarray approach for determining the specificity of novel CAR
constructs expressed in T cell. Demonstrating the selectivity and
specificity of anti-BMCA CAR T cells further supports the progression of
KITE-585 towards Phase 1 clinical studies in MM patients.


