Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-genome sequencing identified novel non-coding mutations
causal of oncogene activation in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.


There is growing evidence that non-coding sequences in human genome often
function as transcriptional regulatory elements of protein-coding genes.
In fact, germline polymorphisms and somatically acquired mutations within
regulatory DNA can profoundly alter chromatin structure and modify gene
transcription, directly contributing to tumorigenesis. However, there is
a paucity of unbiased genome-wide characterization of somatic non-coding
mutations in cancer. Using T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) as
a model disease, we herein report a systematic interrogation of driver
non-coding genomic alterations by paired whole-genome and transcriptome
sequencing of 31 children with T-ALL. To identify non-coding mutations
with potential regulatory impact in a genome-wide fashion, our analytical
pipeline consisted of 3 approaches: 1) the “hotspot analysis” for
recurring mutations at the nearby positions, 2) the “regional
recurrence analysis” for predefined regulatory regions with significant
enrichment of non-coding mutations, 3) the “transcriptional factor
analysis” for mutations that potentially result in gain/loss of
transcription factor binding sites and alter expression of adjacent
genes. Remarkably, T-ALL oncogenes LMO1 and TAL1 emerged as loci with the
most significant recurring non-coding mutations. At the LMO1 locus, 3
patients (9.7%) showed an identical single-nucleotide mutation proximal
to the transcription start site of the long isoform of LMO1. This
recurring mutation resulted in the gain of a canonical Myb binding site
(AACGG) and ~120-fold increase in LMO1 transcription compared to patients
with wildtype genotype. TAL1 overexpression was observed in 15 patients,
of whom 11 had intrachromosomal rearrangement (STIL-TAL1 fusion). The
remaining 4 patients had somatic insertion that created a MYB-mediated
super enhancer, consistent with recent reports. LMO1 enhancer mutation
was further confirmed in an independent validation cohort (N=26), in
which we additionally identified a novel intrachromosomal rearrangement
between MED17 and LMO1 resulting in transcriptional activation of the
latter. In a panel of T-ALL cell lines, LMO1 enhancer mutation was again
associated with dramatic overexpression of LMO1, an active enhancer
histone mark (H3K27ac), Dnase hypersensitivity, and allele-specific
binding of MYB. Interestingly, we also observed robust binding of TAL1,
CREBBP, RUNX1, ETS1, ELF1 and RNA Polymerase II at this site. Reporter
gene assay confirmed the MYB-mediated transcription activation effects of
this LMO1 enhancer mutation in vitro. In this genome-wide investigation
of non-coding mutations in T-ALL, we identified novel enhancer mutations
with drastic effects on oncogene activation. Our findings expand the
understanding of how genomic alterations in regulatory DNA contribute to
cancer pathogenesis.


