Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutations of SPOP, FOXA1 and IDH1 are associated with prostate
cancer metastasis and biochemical outcomes.


Recent genomic studies have shed light on cataloging genomic alterations
in prostate cancer. Mechanistic studies allow the use of this information
to subclassify the heterogeneous prostate tumors for optimized treatment
planning. Speckle-Type POZ Protein (SPOP), Forkhead Box Protein A1
(FOXA1) and Isocitrate Dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) are among the genes that
show frequent point mutations in primary prostate cancers. However, the
clinical significance of these gene mutations in cancer patients is less
clear. To determine the whether SPOP, FOXA1 and IDH1 mutations are
associated with clinical outcomes in prostate cancer, we pyro-sequenced
the three genes in prostate cancer patients and evaluated the clinical
and prognostic significance. 198 patients from the first hospital of
Xi’An Jiaotong University (China) were analyzed. All patients were
newly diagnosed with prostate cancer from January 2010 to December 2015.
No patient was lost to follow-up. The average follow-up time after the
primary diagnosis was 27 months. The Fisher’s exact tests were used to
compare categorical data. The risk of metastasis among patients with
SPOP, FOXA1 and IDH1 mutations was evaluated using univariate and
multivariate logistic regression models. The prognostic significance of
clinical and gene mutations was determined using multivariate Cox
regression analysis. SPOP mutations were found in 16 patients (8.1%),
with all of the mutations clustered in the substrate-binding MATH domain.
FOXA1 mutationswere found in nine patients (4.5%), and were clustered in
the Forkhead domain. IDH1 mutations were detected in three patients
(1.5%). Mutation frequencies of SPOP, FOXA1 and IDH1 were associated with
prostate-specific antigen (PSA), a biochemical marker of prostate tumor
presence/risk which is decided by Gleason Score, T stage and PSA level,
along with prostate cancer PSA failure and metastasis. Among patients
with SPOP mutation, 56.3% showed metastasis at the time of diagnosis of
primary cancer, compared to only 11.5% of patients with wild-type SPOP.
Similarly, the probabilities of FOXA1 and IDH1 mutations with metastasis
were

approximately 44.4% and 66.7% versus 13.8% and 14.4%, respectively,
comparing to their wild-type counterparts. The metastasis risk for
patients with SPOP mutation was 1.27 times of the SPOP wild-type patients
(P = 0.003). We also found that patients with SPOP (P approximately 44.4%
and 66.7% versus 13.8% and 14.4%, respectively, comparing to their
wild-type counterparts. The metastasis risk for patients with SPOP
mutation was 1.27 times of the SPOP wild-type patients (P = 0.003). We
also found that patients with SPOP (P < 0.0001) and FOXA1 (P = 0.0403)
mutations showed higher risk of PSA failure compared with wild-type. The
PSA failure risk for patients with SPOP mutation was 35.49 times of the
SPOP wild-type patients. In contrast, IDH1 mutation was not associated
with PSA failure (P = 0.054). Multivariate analyses demonstrate that SPOP
mutation is an independent factor that is associated with prostate cancer
metastasis and PSA failure recurrence. These findings underscore the
clinical significance for profiling SPOP, FOXA1 and IDH1.


