Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A next-gen animal model to Study PIK3CA-mTOR driven HPV-related
oral malignancies.


The rising incidence of HPV-associated malignancies, especially for head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), has highlighted the urgent need
to understand the role of HPV-16 E6/E7 oncogenes in cancer initiation and
progression. For that propose we decided to generate a doxycycline
inducible E6/E7 transgenic mouse targeting E6/E7 onco-proteins to the
basal epithelia layer, including the stem cell compartment, through a
doxycycline inducible cytokeratin 5 promoter (cK5-rtTA). This system
allows to turn on the expression of HPV genes after birth, minimizing the
negative effect that viral E6/E7 expression may have during embryonic
development, and mimicking the natural infection process that usually
happens in adults after initiation of sexual activities. Interestingly,
we found that after doxycycline induction, both E6 and E7 were highly
expressed, resulting in a clear increase in the number of proliferative
cells even in the suprabasal layers, which results in rapid epidermal
hyperplasia. However, in our animal mouse model HPV-16 E6/E7 expression
alone was not sufficient to induce spontaneous squamous carcinomas (SCC).
Due that we decided to challenge the oncogenic role of HPV using a
classical chemical carcinogenesis protocol (DMBA-TPA). These mice develop
SCC rapidly after a single exposure to a skin carcinogen, DMBA, which was
increased by the prolonged exposure to a tumor promoter, TPA. These data
suggest that only few oncogenic hits may be sufficient to induce cancer
in humans already infected with HPV-16 E6/E7. Then, we decided to
elucidate whether or not a few genomic alterations in combination with
HPV-16 expression may be sufficient to induce cancer. One of the most
frequent mutations in HNSCC, including HPV-associated cancers, are those
affecting the PI3K-mTOR pathway. Based on that, we engineered a
genetically defined mouse model combining HPV-16 E6/E7 and PIk3CAH1047R
expression under the control of a cytokeratin 14 promoter driven
tamoxifen-regulated Cre recombinase (cK14-CreERTM). Surprisingly, we
found that upon tamoxifen activation mice develop oral cancer in only few
weeks. Furthermore, our HPV-related cancer mouse models exhibited a
marker increase of mTOR activation which is a key oncogenic driver in
malignant progression to SCC. Remarkably, rapamycin, an mTOR inhibitor,
was able to block tumor development, supporting the potential clinical
use of direct and indirect mTOR inhibitors as a molecular targeted
approach for prevention of HPV-associated malignancies.


