Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Precision medicine approach: analysis of renal cancer
patient-derived cells with phenomics, genomics and drug sensitivity
profiling.


We have built up the precision medicine approach for solid tumors to
understand biological heterogeneity and driver signalling pathways in
cancer, to develop pharmacogenomic biomarkers and to ultimately tailor
effective treatments for patients. In addition to genetic profiling of
original tumor tissues, we have developed patient -derived tumor cell
(PDC) models, and characterized these models with genomics, image-based
phenotyping (phenomics) and high throughput drug profiling.

Here, we describe our approach for a clear cell renal cell carcinoma
(ccRCC) patient. PDC cultures were initiated using conditional
reprogramming method from fresh primary tumor, protrusion to vena cava,
and the benign tissue samples. The exome-sequencing of tissues and PDCs
showed that several copy number variations and somatic driver mutations
were shared between the cancer tissue and corresponding cell models,
including TSC2 and VHL mutations. Using image-based phenotyping, the PDCs
from the benign tissue were observed to be strongly positive to
cytokeratin 7 (CK7), while original tumor tissue and PDCs from tumor
tissue were predominantly CK7 negative. The PDCs expressed vimentin, a
mesenchymal marker, but the epithelial marker E-cadherin was
downregulated, suggesting for epithelial-mesenchymal transition. The PDCs
from primary tumor were exposed to drug sensitivity profiling with a
library of 525 approved and investigational oncology compounds in five
different concentrations and imaged for proliferation with Ki-67.
PI3K/mTOR pathway inhibitors were found to be among the drugs inhibiting
the cell proliferation, in agreement with detected somatic mutations
affecting these pathways. In addition, our image-based drug sensitivity
testing revealed the intra-sample heterogeneity in drug responses and
resistance, and we are now further investigating the mechanisms of most
potent drugs and their combinations in PDCs at single cell level.

As a conclusion, our results implicate the importance of comprehensive
characterization of PDCs and their drug responses in translational
research. We also foresee that these approaches may potentially improve
the translation of results back to clinic and support the design of
combination therapies in cancer.


