Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Project Survival: Prospective clinical study utilizing multiomics
and artificial intelligence to discover novel molecular markers for
detection, stratification, and outcome in pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is the third leading cause of cancer death and
has an extremely poor response to first line therapies. There is a
critical unmet need to discover and implement effective diagnostic panels
to stratify this disease and personalize treatment. Project Survival is a
prospective study designed to discover biomarkers for patient diagnosis,
stratification, and prognostics for pancreatic cancer. The multisite
study is in year 2 of enrolling subjects within 6 categories: healthy
volunteers with a relative with pancreatic cancer (N=50), pancreatitis
(N=50), pancreatic cystic neoplasm (N=50), suspicious pancreatic masses
with pathology other than pancreatic cancer (N=50), early stage (N=200)
and metastatic pancreatic cancer (N=200). The study analyzes matched
subject sera, plasma, buffy coat, saliva, urine, and tumor/adjacent
normal tissues and integrates them with full clinical annotation.
Multiple time points per subject per year are taken longitudinally over
the course of the six year timeline enabling dynamic modeling. Samples
are analyzed by Mass Spectrometry for the proteome, signaling lipidome,
structural lipidome, and metabolome. The BERG Interrogative Biology®
platform utilizes Artificial Intelligence to integrate multiomic profiles
with medical annotation and clinical endpoints. Utilizing the power of
the Bayesian Network learner, bAIcis™ (BERG Artificial Intelligence
Clinical Information System), multiomic profiles were aligned to the
longitudinal clinical information and subjected to the AI-algorithms that
inferred probabilistic cause-and-effect relationships among molecular and
clinical variables inferring markers of pancreatic cancer status and
defining the interconnectivity of molecular features with clinical
phenotype. Network features linking clinical endpoints and key network
pressure points will be identified as molecular drivers. The drivers of
clinical endpoints will be analyzed to rank potential biomarkers.


