Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting of a mesenchymal profile in order to sensitize
multitherapy resistant glioblastoma clones.


The overall aim of this study was to find ways to sensitize treatment
resistant glioma-initiating cell (GIC) clones to conventional therapy.
Heterogeneity is substantial in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and through
establishment of clonal GIC cultures from patient biopsies we have
demonstrated a wide variety in the responses to drugs and radiation. A
multitherapy resistance phenotype was linked to proneural-mesenchymal
transition (PMT) in the transcriptome. The variety in therapy response
was observed as a continuum of phenotypes. The distribution of phenotypes
resembled a normal distribution and multitherapy resistance was
associated with low DNA methylation grade in promoter regions of
mesenchymal master regulators (FOSL2, RUNX1). Our data thus implied that
the transition is bi-directional and epigenetically regulated (Segerman
et al, Cell Reports - accepted in principle).

To investigate if spontaneous changes in drug and radiation response
occur, we have derived subclones from a resistant clone. Both subclones
with higher and lower therapy resistance than the parental clone were
generated. Also molecularly the subclones largely reconstituted the
original clonal variation.

PMT shows similarities to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which
is induced by extrinsic factors. We therefore specifically analyzed the
gene expression data for signaling receptors differentially expressed in
resistant vs. sensitive clones as well as cognate ligands. To estimate
the importance of a particular signaling pathway, expression of
co-receptors and ligands was taken into account. We found several cases
of coherent upregulation of receptor and ligand indicative of autocrine
loops. Regarding pathways that appeared to be overactive in resistant vs.
sensitive clones, there was a prominent overlap with EMT. It was also
apparent that several pathways were activated concomitantly.

We are currently focusing on identifying combinations of drugs (and
antibodies) that sensitize resistant clones to conventional treatment
through modulation of cell signaling patterns. In the initial screen
temozolomide (TMZ) response is used as an indicator of achieved
sensitization. The strategy is to iteratively combine primarily
antagonists of signaling receptors connected to resistance. We are also
exploring the effect of stimulating pathways with apparently higher
activity in sensitive clones (e.g. addition of ligands).The concept of
sensitizing glioma and other types of cancer cells by targeting the
mesenchymal character through usage of e.g. signaling receptor inhibitors
is not new and has shown promise. Indeed, our preliminary data look
encouraging.

In conclusion, our data show that multitherapy resistance is connected to
a plastic cell-state. Also, receptors and ligands that are differentially
expressed in resistant and sensitive clones engage pathways regulating
EMT.


