Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mtTERT promoter as a target for treatment of glioblastoma.


Approximately 86% of GBM tumors exhibit mutation at -124 or -146 bases
upstream of the ATG start site in the transcription activating promoter
region of Human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT). Mutation in the
promoter region of hTERT impairs repression, leading to overexpression of
hTERT; inappropriate hTERT is associated with oncogenesis, tumor
maintenance, and resistance to apoptosis. We surveyed long-term glioma
cell lines and glioma PDX models for mt-hTERT; mRNA and protein
expression of hTERT were assessed by qPCR and western blot. The -124 and
-146 mutations are located in the major 5-12 G-quadruplex and result in
misfolding of the silencer element and consequent over-expression of
hTERT. Using a diverse small molecule library, we identified a small
drug-like pharmacological chaperone (pharmacoperone) molecule, TG-4260,
which binds to the 26 mer base-pair heteroduplex loop, which is the
nucleation site for cooperative folding of the major 5-12 G-quadruplex.
The chaperone effect of TG-4260 corrects DNA hTERT G-quadruplex
misfolding resulting from the somatic mutations and restores the silencer
function of the G-quadruplex thereby reducing hTERT activity. TG-4260
directly decreases the transcription activity of the WT and the −124,
−124/125, −138/139, and −146 mutants to a similar extent and
suppresses the downstream gene BCL2, which activates caspase-3 and
produces cell-cycle arrest, leading to cell death. Finally, TG-4260
significantly inhibits telomerase and shortens telomere length after five
days of treatment and induces a senescence-like phenotype. This is the
first example of the use of a pharmacoperone molecule to correct the
misfolding of a DNA G-quadruplex element resulting from mutations in an
early folding intermediate. Finally, we screened GBM cell models against
a novel small molecule inhibitor that interferes with mutated hTERT
promoter and demonstrated that TG-4260 selectively suppresses glioma cell
viability without affecting non-transformed normal human astrocytes.


