Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor aggregation is a key regulator of endoplasmic
reticulum stress and cell survival in ETS-related gene driven prostate
carcinogenesis.


Introduction and Objectives: Deregulated androgen receptor (AR) signaling
due to either mutations or altered expression of the AR and its cofactors
(activators or suppressors) has been identified as critical in prostate
cancer development and progression. AR regulated oncogenic activation of
Ets Related Gene (ERG) represents one of the most common and validated
prostate cancer driver gene. In our recent studies using prostate
specific ERG transgenic mouse prostate glands, we observed novel
morphological phenotypes of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Since AR
was the critical regulator of ERG expression through TMPRSS2 promoter in
human prostate cancer, the present study was aimed towards understanding
the post-translational interactions between ERG and AR in ER stress and
subsequent cell survival mechanisms in mouse and cell culture models.
Understanding such mechanistic insights will potentially have major
therapeutic implications.

Methods: Histological phenotype in the mouse prostate glands were
examined by light and electron microscopy. Cell culture models of LNCaP,
HEK293 and COS7 cells were utilized to examine the AR aggregations, Co-IP
and Proximal Ligation Assay in the presence and absence of ERG. Various
domain deletions of AR were utilized to identify specific AR domain
interactions with ERG and its contribution in AR aggregation. Luminal
cell surface markers on the isolated mouse prostate glands and
spontaneously immortalized mouse prostate epithelial cells from ERG
transgenic mouse (MoE1) were analyzed by FACS analysis.

Results: Co-expression of ERG and AR in LNCaP and COS-7 cells showed
significant aggregation of AR in filter assays. Co-IP experiments and PLA
assays in VCaP, LNCaP and HEK 293 cell revealed that ERG physically
interacts with AR. Epithelial cells of ERG-Tg mouse prostates showed ~70%
increase in CD49f (low) and Sca-1 (med) population with increased sphere
formation capability and resistance to radiation induced cell death. Both
epithelial cells grown into spheres and established MoE1 cells displayed
increased CD49f (low) and significant increase in the EpCAM negative
population.

Conclusions: Overall, our experiments demonstrate the mechanistic link
that the physical interactions between ERG and AR initiate the ER stress
in prostate epithelium through AR misfolding/aggregation. Our observation
of ERG induced AR aggregation is one of the initial events that lead to
ER stress to cell survival indicate a critical function for ERG in the
etiology of prostate cancer initiation and progression.

Funding: This research in part was supported by the National Cancer
Institute R01CA162383 (S. S.) and HU0001-10-2-0002 funds.


