Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic monitoring of immune response and reagent efficacy through
high throughput label-free impedance-based technology.


In vitro characterization of reagents efficacy in the context of cancer
immunotherapy is a necessary step before moving to more expensive animal
models and clinical studies. However, current in use in vitro assays like
Chromium-51, ATP-based luminescence or flow cytometry are either
difficult to implement in high throughput environment or are mainly based
on end point methodologies that are unable to capture the full dynamic of
the immune response. Here we present the adaptation of an impedance-based
platform to monitoring cytotoxic activity of immune cells activated
trough different means. Impedance technology detects cell death and
proliferation of adherent cells by measuring changes in conductance of
microelectrodes embedded in 96 and 384-wells cell culture plates. We
utilized adherent and B cell leukemia/lymphoma cell lines as well as
primary tumor cells as in vitro models for immunotherapy reagents
evaluation. We seeded the cells on electrodes coated 96-well plates and
monitored cell adhesion and proliferation for 24 hours. The following day
effector cells were added at multiple effector:target ratios in presence
of BiTEs antibodies and/or anti PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies. Impedance signal
was monitored for up to seven days. Control wells were set up with
effector cells only or with target plus effector cells but without
antibodies. We adapted such adhesion-based technology to monitor
non-adherent B-leukemia/lymphoma cells, by developing a strategy where
the wells are coated with an anti-CD40 antibody. The coating allows
specific adhesion and retention of B cells and measurement of changes in
impedance that are proportional to cell number. Using increasing
concentrations of EpCAM/CD3 BiTE we demonstrated the suitability of such
impedance-based approach to quantitatively monitor the efficacy of immune
cells-mediated cancer cell killing both under different effector:target
ratios and antibody concentrations. Combination treatments with
checkpoint reduced timing and increased amount of killed cancer cells.
Similar results were also obtained with engineered Car-T cells against
CD19 or NK cell lines, we were able to demonstrate specific killing of
tumor B cells at very low effector:target ratios. The results were also
confirmed by flow cytometry. Overall, our results demonstrate the value
of such approach in measuring the cytotoxic response across the temporal
scale, an aspect that is otherwise very difficult to assess with more
canonical end point assays. Furthermore, the availability of 384-wells
format and minimal sample handling place the technology in an ideal spot
for applications in large reagent validation screening or personalized
medicine, like therapeutic protocol validation directly on patient
samples.


