Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived xenograft models from peritoneal metastasis of
colorectal carcinoma as novel platform for biomarker analysis and drug
testing.


Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) is associated with high incidence and
mortality rate, particularly if metastasized to distant sites, such as
the peritoneum. At time of first diagnosis 4 to 7 percent of the patients
suffer from peritoneal metastasis (PM) of CRC. The PM is associated with
poor prognosis and limited therapeutic options. Therefore, availability
of adequate in vivo models for PM will promote the search for novel
prognostic or even predictive biomarkers as well as the evaluation of
chemosensitivity of PM towards standard, targeted and novel drugs. In
this regard such models could be employed for more individualized
concepts to improve the therapeutic outcome of PM patients. During the
last decade patient-derived xenograft (PDX) mouse models have gained
importance, since they closely resemble the molecular and biological
features of the original primary tumors. However, until now no PM PDX
models have been established from CRC. We therefore focused on the
establishment and characterization of a novel CRC PM panel of PDX as
useful platform for preclinical studies.

For the PDX establishment colorectal surgical specimens were
subcutaneously (s.c.) transplanted onto immunocompromized NOD scid gamma
(NSG) mice. The successfully engrafted tumors were transferred to NMRI
nu/nu mice for further passaging. Engrafted tumors were characterized by
histopathology, immunohistochemistry and gene expression analyses using
real-time RT-PCR. Chemosensitivity of PDX models was evaluated in vivo by
application of a panel of conventional chemotherapeutic and of targeted
drugs.

For PDX establishment 68 CRC surgical specimens were transplanted onto
NSG mice. From those, currently 22 PDX have engrafted and are stably
growing on NMRI nu/nu mice. From those, 13 models of 10 patients have
been analyzed. Their tumor doubling times ranged between 4 to 28 days.
The histopathological evaluation revealed maintenance of the original CRC
histology in the PDX. The chemosensitivity testing of conventional and of
targeted drugs in the 13 PM PDX models revealed the individual, diverging
response of the PDX, such as for 5-FU, irinotecan, oxaliplatin,
cetuximab, and erlotinib. For selected PDX, orthotopic transplantation
into the peritoneum revealed their potential to form disseminated tumors
in kidney, ovaries and abdominal diaphragm.

Our results demonstrate, that this novel panel of PDX maintains the
morphology of the patient tumor in early passages, reflect heterogeneous
response rates, and can be used as preclinical in vivo platform for
translational studies of potential clinical use. In conclusion, this PDX
panel of PM of the CRC can be used for further studies to evaluate new
biomarker and to test novel therapies or combinations for PM of CRC.


