Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reliable identification of mutations in bottom-up proteomics.


Knowledge of missense mutations is of significant biological importance
as it provides valuable insights into alterations of phenotype. While
identification of reference proteins is routinely performed in
proteomics, identification of mutations remains still fairly uncommon.
Well-established methods for reference peptides are generally
insufficient for altered ones; e.g., utilizing mutant-augmented database
search usually results in inadmissible proportion of false positives.
This undesirable situation is, however, rather natural consequence of
peptide fragmentation, its computational modelling and evaluation of
their correspondence. Often, there are many peptides having the same or
similar agreement with acquired spectrum, thereby preventing
agreement-based decision. These situations happen frequently in
identification of mutant peptides (e.g., homologous peptides with PTMs,
semi-specific peptides), therefore their reliable identification requires
additional treatment.

To deeper understand properties of identification, we have formally
studied generalized version of the identification problem and derived its
optimal solution under particular assumptions. In proteomics, the
selection of optimal solution can be always found in finite time;
moreover, the strategy is straightforward to implement, enables
parallelization and provides guarantees over claimed interpretations. The
solution utilizes almost exclusively spectral data of product ions
without additional LC/MS information. In practice, however, it is
beneficial to employ precursor isotopic distribution analysis for
correction of non-monoisotopic selection of precursor as that would
otherwise systematically result in artefacts.

The behaviour of proposed method was validated in a variety of scenarios
that could be broadly categorized as direct (known spectral content) and
indirect (partial knowledge of sample content). For direct validation,
synthetic combinatorial peptide library of 400 peptides (all coded amino
acids in 12. and 13. codon of KRAS peptide) was measured and interpreted;
the sensitivity and specificity obtained was 0.81 and 0.99 respectively.
Indirect validation was, at first, performed on in-house samples with
RNA-Seq data available (HCT116), giving 97 missense RNA-Seq supported
mutations. Similarly, the analysis was done on proteome data of NCI60
cell lines, resulting on average in 23 SNVs with maximum of 56 SNVs
(HCC-2998). Identified alterations correspond, in general, to highly
expressed genes. In summary, the approach was shown to reliably identify
missense mutations in a range of cancer cell lines; its wide
applicability enhances interpretation of standard bottom-up proteomics
data.


