Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral delivery of a P2A-linked bicistronic IL-12 construct
leads to high intratumoral expression and systemic anti-tumor response.


The use of immunomodulatory cytokines has been shown effective in
regressing a wide range of tumors. However, systemic delivery of
recombinant cytokines can result in serious adverse effects, often
life-threatening. DNA transfer via electroporation (EP) is a safe and
effective method of delivering cytokines to target tissues.

Intratumoral (IT) electroporation of Interleukin 12 (IL-12), a potent
immunomodulatory cytokine, is well tolerated with an acceptable safety
profile and objective response rates of 34-40% and 33% in Phase II
clinical trials in advanced melanoma and Merkel cell carcinoma,
respectively. We sought to improve the systemic anti-tumor response of IT
pIL-12-EP by improving IL-12p70 expression and electroporation
conditions, which were evaluated in vitro and in vivo with a two-tumor
syngeneic mouse model of melanoma. As functional IL-12 p70 is a
heterodimer, we compared different expression constructs to achieve high
levels of IL-12 protein expression. IL-12p70 protein expression from a
plasmid that incorporated a picornavirus-derived co-translational
cleavage site (P2A) was higher than constructs with an internal ribosomal
entry sequence (IRES) or a fusion of the p35 and p40 subunits. In
functional in vitro assays, pIL-12(P2A) was superior to pIL-12(IRES) and
the fusion protein. Using the murine B16.F10 tumor model, we show that IT
EP of pIL-12 (P2A) plasmid regresses the treated lesions in a
dose-dependent manner compared to control treatments. Systemic effects of
IT-expressed IL-12 was assessed by monitoring generation of an
antigen-specific CD8 T cell response and regression of B16.F10
contralateral (untreated) tumors following primary tumor electroporation.
IT-pIL12-EP treatment with the P2A-linked construct resulted in a
significant increase in antigen-specific CD8 T cells, as well as enhanced
contralateral tumor growth inhibition suggesting the induction of strong
systemic anti-tumor immune response.

* Contributed equally to this work


