Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the CCL-2 on lymphopenia-induced myeloid derived
suppressor cells.


The induction of lymphopenia prompts the expansion of CD11b+Ly6ChiLy6G-
monocytic MDSCs (M-MDSCs) and CD11b+Ly6C+Ly6G+ polymorphonuclear MDSCs
(PMN-MDSCs). Patients receiving adoptive cell therapy (ACT) require
nonmyeloablative chemotherapy to induce lymphopenia and support
anti-tumor immunity. However, the role of MDSCs in the setting of ACT is
not fully understood. As high levels of CCL-2 can be measured in
lymphopenic mice, in this study we investigate the role of CCL-2 in the
expansion and function of lymphopenia-induced MDSCs using CCR2KO mouse
models. Lymphopenia was induced in melanoma-bearing C57BL/6 (WT) and
CCR2KO mice by 600rad of total body irradiation or combination therapy
with cyclophosphamide and fludarabine. We first evaluated the percentages
of splenic MDSCs in WT and CCR2KO mice after the induction of
lymphopenia. At day 14, the expansion of total MDSCs were similar in WT
(279% of normal) and CCR2KO (241% of normal). However, the mean
percentages of M-MDSCs (3.5%) and PMN-MDSCs (30.3%) in CCR2KO mice were
altered compared to M-MDSCs (22.2%) and PMN-MDSCs (21.7%) in WT mice. In
addition, M-MDSCs in B16 tumors grown in CCR2KO mice were decreased
compared to intratumoral M-MDSCs in WT mice (pThe induction of
lymphopenia prompts the expansion of CD11b+Ly6ChiLy6G- monocytic MDSCs
(M-MDSCs) and CD11b+Ly6C+Ly6G+ polymorphonuclear MDSCs (PMN-MDSCs).
Patients receiving adoptive cell therapy (ACT) require nonmyeloablative
chemotherapy to induce lymphopenia and support anti-tumor immunity.
However, the role of MDSCs in the setting of ACT is not fully understood.
As high levels of CCL-2 can be measured in lymphopenic mice, in this
study we investigate the role of CCL-2 in the expansion and function of
lymphopenia-induced MDSCs using CCR2KO mouse models. Lymphopenia was
induced in melanoma-bearing C57BL/6 (WT) and CCR2KO mice by 600rad of
total body irradiation or combination therapy with cyclophosphamide and
fludarabine. We first evaluated the percentages of splenic MDSCs in WT
and CCR2KO mice after the induction of lymphopenia. At day 14, the
expansion of total MDSCs were similar in WT (279% of normal) and CCR2KO
(241% of normal). However, the mean percentages of M-MDSCs (3.5%) and
PMN-MDSCs (30.3%) in CCR2KO mice were altered compared to M-MDSCs (22.2%)
and PMN-MDSCs (21.7%) in WT mice. In addition, M-MDSCs in B16 tumors
grown in CCR2KO mice were decreased compared to intratumoral M-MDSCs in
WT mice (p<0.001). In contrast, the percentages of M-MDSCs and PMN-MDSCs
were unchanged in the bone marrow (BM). To investigate the suppressive
capacity of lymphopenia-induced MDSCs, OVA antigen-specific CD8+ T cells
were co-cultured with OVA peptide in the presence of MDSCs purified from
the spleens of CCR2KO and WT mice. Both CCR2KO and WT MDSCs potently
suppressed T cell proliferation as measured by 3H thymidine
incorporation. CCR2KO and WT MDSCs had significant arginase activity and
production of nitrites. To investigate the efficacy of ACT, B16
tumor-bearing CCR2KO and WT mice were lymphodepleted and gp100
antigen-specific Thy1.2+CD8+ T cells were adoptively transferred followed
by 3 days of IL-2 treatment. We found that donor T cell tumor
infiltration was similar and no difference in tumor growth was observed
between CCR2KO and WT mice. Collectively, these results suggest that the
role of CCL-2 is important for the egress of lymphopenia-induced M-MDSCs
from the BM, but has no effect on the expansion or function of PMN-MDSCs
in the setting of lymphopenia. These data suggest that factors besides
CCL-2 play an important role in the expansion and function of MDSCs after
the induction of lymphopenia.


