Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of NEFL in aggressive prostate cancer progression.


Introduction: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most prevalent cancer amongst
men and the second most common cause of cancer related-deaths in the US.
Prostate cancer has a heterogeneous spectrum of clinical outcomes with
phenotypes ranging from indolent asymptomatic cases to very aggressive
metastatic and lethal forms. The development of aggressive
castration-resistant prostate cancer and neuroendocrine prostate cancer,
which defy currently available treatments, represent the most challenging
aspect of this disease. Our long term objective is to identify the
molecules and characterize the mechanisms that are involved in PCa
disease transformation and progression to aggressive lethal disease. In
this study, we show that the over-expression of NEFL, a putative tumor
suppressor genes (TSG), correlates with aggressive phenotypes in a subset
of prostate cancers with aggressive neuroendocrine-like features.
Identifying and characterizing mechanisms by which NEFL modulates
progression of PCa will potentially allow for better discrimination of
aggressive neuroendocrine prostate cancers and provide targets for better
treatment and clinical management opportunities of the disease.

Methods: We have compared the mRNA and protein expression profiles of
NEFL prostate cancer cell lines and prostatectomy tissues with different
malignancy phenotypes. Validation of differential NEFL expression has
been done by Western blot, qRT-PCR, IHC and mass spectrometry. Functional
assays and oncogenic properties have been assessed after siRNA mediated
knockdown of NEFL gene aggressive prostate cancer cell lines.

Results: We demonstrate significant correlations between of NEFL
expression and the acquisition of aggressive PCa with neuroendocrine-like
phenotypes. This was validated by Western blot and qRT-PC. SiRNA
knockdown of NEFL suppresses the invasive and migratory capacity of PCa
cells and tumor colony formation in soft agar assays. The molecular
interactome of NEFL was characterized by LC/MS/MS. To our knowledge, this
study is the first to demonstrate that NEFL up-regulation correlates with
a subset of aggressive prostate cancer disease.

Conclusions: We demonstrate that NEFL is differentially expressed in PCa
cells lines and prostatectomy tissues with a significantly higher
abundance in cells with clinically aggressive and lethal
neuroendocrine-like malignancy phenotypes. These findings are currently
being validated using disease stratified tumor micro arrays. Further
studies are focusing on uncovering the mechanisms that are modulated by
NEFL and are responsible for PCa disease progression. These could assist
in the development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for the
disease.


