Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Forced reduction of DSS1, a member of TREX2 complex, highly
sensitizes chemotherapy to breast cancer cells in a BRCA2-independent
manner.


[Introduction] DSS1 (deleted in split-hand/split-foot malformation 1) was
originally identified as a BRCA2-associated/stabilizing protein. By
comparison of DSS1 mRNA level, we reported that the high DSS1 expression
groups in breast cancer patients showed worse prognosis in relapse-free
survival (RFS); however, DSS1 expression per se was not correlated with
other clinical parameters including cellular proliferation or tumor
grade, suggesting that the level of DSS1 affected the sensitivity of
DNA-damage agents in breast cancer cells (Rezano et al., 2013). It still
remains unclear why the expression level of DSS1 is associated with
chemosensitivity, because DSS1 has multifunctional properties regulating
homologous recombination and RNA-mediated genomic stability. In this
study, we investigated if the effect of DSS1 in chemosensitivity is
influenced by two representative DSS1-associated molecules, BRCA2 and
PCID2.

[Methods] We established MCF7 overexpressing DSS1 (MCF7/DSS1) by
retroviral transfection. DSS1, BRCA2, or PCID2 knockdown in MCF7 was
performed using siRNA transfection. The susceptibility to the cytotoxic
chemotherapy such as doxorubicin and paclitaxel in breast cancer cells
was evaluated by flow cytometry to detect apoptosis and colony assay. In
addition, we compared patient survival by dividing patients into high or
low expression group of BRCA2 or PCID2 using cohort studies.

[Results] BRCA2 depletion in MCF7/DSS1 did not alter the chemoresistance.
Although DSS1 knockdown induced the downregulation of BRCA2, direct
depletion of BRCA2 did not show marginal effect to chemosensitivity,
suggesting that the enhancement of chemosensitivity by DSS1 knockdown was
not related to BRCA2 expression. Importantly, over- and under-expression
of PCID2 induced similar effect to chemosensitivity compared to those of
DSS1. There was a trend that high PCID2 expression group in breast cancer
patients showed worse prognosis in RFS.

[Conclusion] DSS1 could be a molecular target to increase
chemosensitivity, which is independent of BRCA2 expression. Rather, the
transcription-coupled DNA damage induced by impaired TREX2 complex might
be associated with induction of chemosensitivity.


