Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the paracaspase MALT1: A potential therapy to overcome
ibrutinib resistance in relapsed/refractory MCL patients.


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive B cell malignancy that is not
yet curable. Ibrutinib was FDA-approved in 2013 to treat
relapsed/refractory MCL; however, ibrutinib resistance inevitably
develops. Once patients relapse after ibrutinib treatment, the 1-year
survival rate is only 22%; therefore, there is an urgent unmet need to
overcome ibrutinib resistance and to study alternative treatment options.
Constitutive NF-κB activation is the hallmark of MCL. Indeed, next
generation sequencing analysis of 110 MCL patient samples revealed that
genes in the NF-κB signaling pathway had the highest mutation rates
(28.8%), indicating the significant contribution of NF-κB signaling to
MCL malignancy. Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue transformation protein
(MALT1) plays a crucial role in NF-κB signaling. MALT1 is a unique
paracaspase within the human genome, and the proteolytic activity of
MALT1 has been found to be constitutively active in many MCL samples,
suggesting MALT1 may be a potential therapeutic target without
significant off-target side effects. MI-2 is a specific inhibitor of
MALT1 and its efficacy and safety are currently being evaluated in a
clinical trial with ABC-type diffuse large B cell lymphoma patients. Mice
treated with MI-2 did not have detectable physiological, histological or
biochemical signs of toxicity. However, whether MALT1 activity
contributes to ibrutinib resistance and whether targeting MALT1 can
overcome ibrutinib resistance in relapsed/refractory MCL patients remain
unclear. In this study, we found that both canonical and non-canonical
NF-κB signaling is activated in ibrutinib-resistant MCL cells, which
correlates with constitutive MALT1 activity. Interestingly, we found that
MALT1 is highly mutated in four clusters, including the death domain,
TRAF6-binding site, Caspase-like domain, and IKKγ-binding site in MCL
samples. Occurrence of L79P, K80R, E319D, L445P and N446S was also highly
correlated with ibrutinib resistance and disease progression, which
requires more detailed investigation. Treatment with MI-2 significantly
reduced cell viability in several MCL cell lines with nanomolar activity.
MI-2 treatment inhibited NF-κB activation, IL-6 production and its
downstream STAT3 activation. Combining MI-2 with ibrutinib resulted in
synergistic growth inhibition in both ibrutinib-resistant MCL cell lines
and primary MCL cells. These findings suggest that targeting MALT1
catalytic activity in MCL is a promising therapy to overcome ibrutinib
resistance in relapsed/refractory MCL patients. The effect of MI-2 in in
vivo PDX models is currently under investigation. This work and follow-up
in vitro and in vivo studies will provide strong evidence that targeting
MALT1 with MI-2 may be an effective novel therapeutic approach to
overcome ibrutinib resistance.


