Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bicalutamide-induced expression of T-type Ca2+ channels in
prostate cancer cells undergoing neuroendocrine differentiation in vitro.


The growth of prostate cancer cells depends on the activation of androgen
receptors. Anti-androgen therapies that inhibit androgen synthesis or
receptor activation are effective in limiting tumor growth. However,
prolonged treatment with anti-androgen therapies result in the transition
of prostate cancers into an androgen refractory state. Neuroendocrine
differentiation (NED) has been associated with the progression of
prostate cancers to an androgen resistant phenotype. In this work we
investigated the effect of the androgen receptor blocker bicalutamide in
promoting NED of LNCaP cells and whether it is accompanied by increased
T-type Ca2+ channel expression. The ability of bicalutamide to evoke
morphological and biochemical changes associated with NED was assessed by
PCR, western blot and immuno-histochemical analysis. Changes in the
Cav3.2 T-type Ca2+ channel subunit expression was studied using PCR
analysis, western blot and whole cell recordings. The role of T-type Ca2+
channels in promoting the differentiation of LNCaP cells was assessed by
a cell viability assay and changes in cell morphology, specifically the
development of neurite-like processes. PCR analysis of
bicalutamide-stimulated cells indicates no significant changes in Cav3.2
mRNA, yet results in Cav3.2 protein expression and functional channels.
Western blot and immuno-histochemical analysis of LNCaP cells simulated
with bicalutamide for 4-10 day reveals biochemical changes consistent
with NED including the expression of tubulin IIIbeta and neuron-specific
enolase. Pharmacological inhibition of T-type Ca2+ channel function with
nickel ions and NNC 33-0936 disrupts the morphological differentiation
and cell viability of LNCaP cells treated with bicalutamide. These
results suggest that bicalutamide treatment of LNCaP cells evokes
significant morphological and biochemical changes associated with NED and
results in increased expression of T-type Ca2+ channels, which can
significantly alter Ca2+ homeostasis.


