Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-clinical toxicology and safety of SH7139: The first of a new
class of targeted therapeutics for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and other
cancers.


Selective High Affinity Ligands (SHALs) are small molecules that can be
designed to bind selectively and with high affinity to any protein target
by linking together several ligands that recognize and bind to different
sites on the protein’s surface. SH7139, our first SHAL therapeutic for
treating advanced non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, has shown remarkable efficacy
in B-cell lymphoma xenograft models by providing permanent cures for up
to two-thirds of the animals at a human equivalent dose as low as 0.4
μg/kg. Functioning similar to an antibody-drug conjugate and a pro-drug,
SH7139 targets and binds to a unique structural epitope within the
antigen-binding pocket of HLA-DR10. HLA-DRs containing this epitope are
expressed in approximately 85% of B-cell lymphomas. Upon binding to its
HLA-DR target, SH7139 is carried into the cytoplasm where it is
concentrated and subsequently metabolized, releasing toxic metabolites
(derived from each of the linked ligands) that inhibit a series of
cellular activities required for tumor cell function. In preparation for
an IND application submission and advancing SH7139 into clinical trials,
acute dose range finding (i.v. bolus) and multiple dose (i.v. bolus on
days 1, 8, and 15) toxicology and safety studies have been conducted with
SH7139 in rats and beagle dogs. In the rat studies, doses up to 30 mg/kg
(NOAEL = 30 mg/kg, 11,854 fold higher than the efficacy dose), were well
tolerated with no findings associated with the drug. Beagle dogs were
found to be the most sensitive species (NOAEL = 0.3mg/kg, 395 fold higher
than the efficacy dose), with doses at 1 and 10mg/kg producing a
reversible allergic-type reaction. A maximum tolerated dose (MTD) was
reached in rats (100 mg/kg). No attempt was made to identify the MDT in
dogs. In vitro assays conducted to evaluate potential cardiac safety
showed SH7139 had no effect on potassium (hERG) and calcium (hCaV1.2) ion
channel function up to the highest concentration tested (25 μM). A
detectable effect above background was only observed with the sodium
channel hNaV1.5 at 25 μM, a plasma concentration that would only be
achieved in patients administered a dose ~2,000 fold higher than the
efficacy dose. SH7139 was found to be negative in inducing gene mutation
in five tester strains of Salmonella and E. coli (AMES assay). In a
CHO-K1 micronucleus assay, no genotoxicity was observed in the presence
of S9 over the entire concentration range tested. In the absence of S9, a
positive response (3.3 fold) just above the triggering threshold (3 fold)
of the assay was observed at the highest SH7139 concentration (500 μM).
Based on these results and others derived from mouse xenograft efficacy
studies, a maximum recommended Phase I trial starting dose has been
tentatively set at 0.5 μg/kg with a safety factor of 324. This research
was supported by the National Cancer Institute Phase II SBIR Award
R44CA159843.


