Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deep exome sequencing reveals recurrent somatic mutations in
Hodgkin's lymphoma.


High-throughput sequencing provides insights into cancer pathogenesis.
The application of genomics technologies to cancers characterized by rare
cell populations is a challenge. DNA extracted from bulk tumor samples is
a mixture of malignant and non-malignant cells. This is a problem in
cancers defined by rare cell populations because it complicates the task
of identifying true somatic mutations. Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) exemplifies
this challenge. The pathologic hallmark of HL is Hodgkin-Reed-Sternberg
(HRS) cells. HRS cells have a low abundance within an affected lymph node
(1-30% of tumor microenvironment). Because HRS cells are rare, a limited
number of studies have described characteristic genomic events. These
studies have examined HL cell lines, and, recently, a small number of
flow-sorted HRS-cells (Reichel et. al. 2015). We hypothesized that
recurrent somatic mutations can be identified in HRS cells using bulk HL
biopsies and ultra deep exome sequencing.

The Illumina HiSeq X,which can generate> 1.6 Tb of sequence data per run,
is a applicable tool for the discovery of somatic mutations in HL. Frozen
tumor (lymph node)/normal (skin) pairs from 31 patients with HL were
examined. Three KAPA libraries were constructed per sample. The libraries
were pooled, size selected, and captured using an IDT xGen capture
reagent. The pools were sequenced across eight lanes of a HiSeq X. A
total of 7.04 x 1012 bases were sequenced across all samples with an
average of 1.10 x 1011 bases per sample. The mean depth of coverage
achieved across all samples was 783.4x (425.9x - 1091.9x). Given the low
abundance of HRS cells we anticipated most somatic sites would have a VAF
of 1% -5%. Given the level of coverage we anticipate that most somatic
variants will have >5 reads of support.

Instrument data were processed using the McDonnell Genome Institute
somatic variant calling pipeline that includes 5 SNV callers and 3 indel
callers. We used these steps to filter variants: min. 50x coverage, max.
5000x coverage, min. 1% tumor VAF, max. 5%, normal VAF, and min. 5
variant reads in the tumor. Here we report preliminary data on mutations
in five pilot samples. The remaining 26 will be presented at the meeting.
We confirmed 7 previously identified recurrent mutations in HL (Reichel
et al. 2015). Within our pilot data 13 recurrently mutated genes were
found. The most interesting of our recurrent genes is TNFAIP3, which was
the second most frequently mutated gene in Reichel et al. 2015. These
data suggest that ultra deep sequencing of tumor samples containing rare
HRS cells can identify recurrent somatic mutations. Thus, ultra deep
exome sequencing may be a useful discovery tool for rare tumor
populations, and will improve our understanding of HL.


