Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tocopherols inhibit the estrogen-stimulated expansion of cancer
stem cells via down-regulation of OCT4 and NFκB.


Cancer stem cells have been suggested to play a role in tumor initiation,
maintenance, resistance, and metastasis. Breast cancer stem cells are
defined as CD44+/CD24- cell populations that have the properties of
tumor-initiating ability, self-renewal and differentiation. Although the
importance of estrogen in breast cancer is well established, the effects
of estrogen on breast cancer stem cells are not fully understood. Vitamin
E, which is consisted of different forms of tocopherols and tocotrienols,
has anti-tumor effects in various cancers, including breast cancer. In
the present study, we examined the effects of α-, γ-, and δ-tocopherol
against estrogen-stimulated expansion of cancer stem cells. To determine
the effects of tocopherols on breast cancer stem cells, the MCF-7
tumorsphere cell culture system, which enriches for mammary progenitor
cells and putative breast cancer stem cells, was utilized. Treatment of
MCF-7 tumorsphere with estrogen for four days resulted in an increase in
CD44+/CD24- stem cell populations in tumorspheres as well as the number
and size of tumorspheres. Tocopherols at 1 and 10 μM inhibited formation
of estrogen-induced stem cell enriched tumorspheres, indicating that
tocopherols reversed estrogen-induced expansion of breast cancer stem
cells. Tocopherols decreased the expression of estrogen-related genes
such as TFF/pS2, cathepsin D, progesterone receptor and SerpinA1 in
estrogen-stimulated tumorspheres. In addition, the mRNA levels of stem
cell markers, including OCT4, NFκB, SOX-2 and CD44, were upregulated by
estrogen, which were downregulated by the treatment with tocopherols. Our
results suggest that tocopherols repress the expansion of breast cancer
stem cell population by regulating OCT4 and NFκB signaling. Tocopherols
could be effective natural agents for the prevention and treatment of
estrogen-induced breast cancer. (This work was supported in part by the
National Institutes of Health grant R01 AT007036.)


