Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DBC1, a novel CBP-interacting protein, promotes p53 stability by
regulating CBP-dependent p53 polyubiquitination.


The acetyltransferase CBP, in conjunction with the E3 ubiquitin ligase
enzyme, Mdm2, maintains physiologic levels of the tumor suppressor
protein p53 in the absence of cellular stress, via a cytoplasmic, but not
nuclear, p53-directed E4 polyubiquitin activity. CBP also possesses
cytoplasmic, but not nuclear, E3 ubiquitin ligase, autoubiquitination
activity. To understand the mechanism by which the ubiquitin ligase
activities of CBP are compartmentalized in the cell, we have employed
Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology (MudPIT) to identify
cytoplasmic and nuclear CBP interacting proteins. MudPIT analysis
revealed that Cell Cycle and Apoptosis Regulator protein (CCAR2), also
known as Deleted in Breast Cancer 1 protein (DBC1), is a novel CBP-
interacting protein in both the nucleus and cytoplasm. The N-terminus of
DBC1 bound to multiple CBP domains, including the putative E3/E4 domain
of CBP located at the N-terminus. Interaction between DBC1 and CBP
suppressed the in vitro E3 autoubiquitination activity of CBP. Functional
studies demonstrated that DBC1 directly regulates the cellular
compartmentalization of CBP E3 and p53-directed E4 ubiquitin ligase
activities. Knockdown of DBC1 in U2OS cells stimulated normally absent
nuclear p53 polyubiquitination, and also caused a decrease in
p53-dependent and p53-independent apoptosis, rescued by CBP/DBC1 double
knockdown. Further, over-expression of DBC1 rescued the increase in
nuclear p53 polyubiquitination and decrease in p53 half-life observed in
DBC1 depleted cells. Together, these results identify DBC1 as a novel
binding partner of CBP and a critical regulator of CBP ubiquitin ligase
activities. Based on our data that DBC1 loss inactivates p53 function
through destabilization, we queried the TCGA database for co-occurrence
of DBC1 loss with maintenance of wild-type p53 status which showed that
33% of breast, 40% of lung, and 96% of prostate cancer cases with DBC1
alterations maintained wild-type p53 status. Therefore, by restoring DBC1
function, this work could lead to reactivation of p53 tumor suppressor
activity in tumors with DBC1 alterations maintaining wild-type p53 status.


