Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the transcriptional kinases CDK12 and CDK13 in breast
and ovarian cancer.


CDK12 and CDK13 regulate expression of large transcripts requiring
substantial processing to produce mature mRNA. This transcriptional
regulation includes coordinated phosphorylation of specific repeats
within the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II and association with
RNA processing factors (Chila, 2016). RNAi knockdown of CDK12 in cell
culture decreases expression of DNA damage response genes, including
BRCA1 and ATR, while enhancing sensitivity to DNA damaging agents
(Blazek, 2011; Liang, 2015). Recently THZ531, a selective covalent
inhibitor of CDK12 and CDK13, was shown to decrease expression of DNA
damage response genes in cell culture (Zhang, 2016). Here we present
further studies with THZ531 to guide our discovery program toward
molecules suitable for clinical development and to explore mechanistic
rationales for combining a CDK12/13 inhibitor with PARP inhibitors or DNA
damaging agents for difficult-to-treat cancers such as high-grade serous
ovarian cancer and triple-negative breast cancer. Using THZ531 as a
benchmark, we developed assays capable of discriminating sub-nM
inhibitors, including quantifying time-dependent covalent inhibition and
cell-based CDK occupancy. Since CDK7, like CDK12 and CDK13, contains a
cysteine residue proximal to the kinase active site, these approaches are
critical to understand covalent inhibitor selectivity. Furthermore, we
performed kinome paneling studies to better understand selectivity of
this scaffold in support of our ongoing efforts to optimize CDK12/13
potency and selectivity. To pharmacologically investigate the previously
reported effects of CDK12 RNAi, growth inhibition of a panel of ovarian
and breast cancer cell lines was assessed following treatment with THZ531
(OVA EC50 = 50-200 nM (n=6); BRCA EC50 400) to reveal relationships
between inhibitor sensitivity, mutation status, gene expression, and
potential oncology indications that may be addressed by these different
mechanisms. Finally THZ531 was synergistic with both PARP inhibitors and
DNA damaging agents in ovarian and breast cancer cell lines. These data
highlight cancer indications and combinations that may be particularly
amenable to treatment with CDK12/13 inhibitors. While the pharmacokinetic
properties of THZ531 preclude adequate target engagement in tumor tissue
at tolerated doses in mouse model systems, our ongoing medicinal
chemistry program is progressing to identify and optimize CDK12/13
inhibitors suitable for clinical evaluation.


