Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Parallel genome and transcriptome-wide profiling of PD-L1
expressing tumor and infiltrating immune single cells in NSCLC.


Introduction Targeting immune checkpoint has demonstrated contrasting
clinical response in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) due to the lack
of robust biomarkers for patients stratification. This is partially due
to a poor understanding of the role of the different cellular players
(tumor, stromal, infiltrating immune cells) within the tumor
microenvironment. Here we present an innovative workflow using the
DEPArray™ sorting system, to isolate different classes of epithelial
and hematopoietic viable single cells from fresh tissue biopsies for
integrated genome and transcriptome sequencing analysis.

Methods Freshly resected NSCLC tissue was dissociated mechanically and
enzymatically down to single cell suspension, and labelled with
immunofluorescent antibodies targeting PD-L1 (28-8), EpCAM, CD8, CD45
along with Hoechst 33342 for nuclei detection. Distinct pure single
cells, along with pools of precise number of cells were digitally
isolated using DEPArray™ platform based on marker expression. For each
cell recovery, mRNA was physically separated from genomic DNA and then
amplified using the Ampli1™ WTA Kit to generate a library of high
quality, full-length double stranded cDNA. Amplified cDNA is used for NGS
library preparation and sequencing on Illumina® MiSeq System. In
parallel, genomic DNA is collected with magnetic beads and eluted
directly into the reaction mixture for whole genome amplification by
Ampli1™ WGA kit. The WGA products were used to profile genome-wide
copy-number aberrations (CNA) using Ampli1™ LowPass kit.

Results As a first step, we identified two main cell populations, the
CD45+ infiltrating hematopoietic cells and the EpCAM+ epithelial cells.
The hematopoietic fraction was further investigated to evaluate the
presence of different subpopulations. Interestingly the PD-L1+
population, corresponding to immune suppressive hematopoietic cells,
represented 47% of the total CD45+ fraction while CD8+ cells
corresponding to cytotoxic T cells represented 9% of the total CD45. In
the EpCAM+ population the PD-L1+ fraction represented 29% of the cells.
Single viable cells along with matching pools of precise number of cells
from each population were digitally isolated with DEPArray™ system for
downstream analysis. Results of RNA-Seq and genomic DNA copy-number
aberrations profiling will be presented at the conference.

Conclusion We show here a new approach to isolate pure, single PD-L1+/-
tumor and tumor infiltrating hematopoietic cells from NSCLC tissue for
integrated genome and transcriptome sequencing. The direct comparison of
gene expression data to its corresponding genomic data in the same tumor
cell, along with the transcriptomic profiling of immune infiltrate and
stroma, may add a powerful tool to disentangle the tumor microenvironment
biology. This will potentially offer a novel tool to develop new
biomarkers and identify therapeutic leads.


