Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene methylation biomarkers in sputum as a classifier for lung
cancer risk.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death primarily because it is
often diagnosed at an advanced stage. Results from the National Lung
Screening Trial (NLST) showed that CT screening can reduce lung cancer
mortality by 20%, but the high number of false positives and need for
additional testing suggest that better risk classification of smokers
prior to screening could save more lives with less cost and improved
efficiency. Furthermore, eligibility criteria for NLST were restricted to
smokers ages of 55-74 with >30 pack-years of smoking and Lung cancer is
the leading cause of cancer death primarily because it is often diagnosed
at an advanced stage. Results from the National Lung Screening Trial
(NLST) showed that CT screening can reduce lung cancer mortality by 20%,
but the high number of false positives and need for additional testing
suggest that better risk classification of smokers prior to screening
could save more lives with less cost and improved efficiency.
Furthermore, eligibility criteria for NLST were restricted to smokers
ages of 55-74 with >30 pack-years of smoking and < 15y since smoking
cessation, which captures only ~40% of incident lung cancer cases.
Molecular biomarkers could augment current risk stratification used to
select smokers for screening. We have shown that gene specific promoter
hypermethylation detected in sputum provides an assessment of field
cancerization within the lungs of smokers that in turn predicts lung
cancer. The current study addressed whether our validated 8-gene
methylation panel could be extended to improve the existing risk
prediction model used to recommend people for a CT screen by evaluating
methylation in 487 resected Stage I lung cancer patients from the
ECOG-ACRIN5597 trial (field of injury remains), 1378 current and former
smokers from the Lovelace Smokers cohort (LSC) and 718 current and former
smokers from the PLuSS cohort. Our initial analysis was restricted to
individuals from each cohort who met NLST criteria for CT screening
(n=371 ECOG-ACRIN, n=466 LSC and n=597 PLuSS). The methylation prevalence
of all 8 genes was significantly increased in resected lung cancer
patients compared to cancer-free smokers (odds ratios 1.6 to 8.9). The
area under the receiver operator characteristic curve (AUC) was used to
evaluate classification accuracy of different logistic regression models.
Classification accuracy for clinical risk factors alone was 74-76%,
methylation alone, 82-86%; and clinical risk factors plus methylation,
87-90% (pLung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death primarily
because it is often diagnosed at an advanced stage. Results from the
National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) showed that CT screening can reduce
lung cancer mortality by 20%, but the high number of false positives and
need for additional testing suggest that better risk classification of
smokers prior to screening could save more lives with less cost and
improved efficiency. Furthermore, eligibility criteria for NLST were
restricted to smokers ages of 55-74 with >30 pack-years of smoking and <
15y since smoking cessation, which captures only ~40% of incident lung
cancer cases. Molecular biomarkers could augment current risk
stratification used to select smokers for screening. We have shown that
gene specific promoter hypermethylation detected in sputum provides an
assessment of field cancerization within the lungs of smokers that in
turn predicts lung cancer. The current study addressed whether our
validated 8-gene methylation panel could be extended to improve the
existing risk prediction model used to recommend people for a CT screen
by evaluating methylation in 487 resected Stage I lung cancer patients
from the ECOG-ACRIN5597 trial (field of injury remains), 1378 current and
former smokers from the Lovelace Smokers cohort (LSC) and 718 current and
former smokers from the PLuSS cohort. Our initial analysis was restricted
to individuals from each cohort who met NLST criteria for CT screening
(n=371 ECOG-ACRIN, n=466 LSC and n=597 PLuSS). The methylation prevalence
of all 8 genes was significantly increased in resected lung cancer
patients compared to cancer-free smokers (odds ratios 1.6 to 8.9). The
area under the receiver operator characteristic curve (AUC) was used to
evaluate classification accuracy of different logistic regression models.
Classification accuracy for clinical risk factors alone was 74-76%,
methylation alone, 82-86%; and clinical risk factors plus methylation,
87-90% (p<10-9 - 10-16). Setting the sensitivity at 95% improved
specificity from 25% to 54% with both methylation and clinical factors in
the model. Assessment of the performance of the gene methylation panel in
all of the cancer patients and smokers did not reduce classification
accuracy or increase specificity. Implementation of gene methylation
biomarkers for screening could be a paradigm shift for lung cancer
management by providing a much improved risk assessment model that will
allow for expanding the number of smokers considered for screening,
decreasing by one-third the actual number referred, and reducing
mortality through increasing the CT positive predictive value. (Supported
largely by R01 CA095568 and in part P30 CA118100)


