Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling the chromatin and transcriptional landscape of MYC and
MYCN driven neuroblastoma in zebrafish.


Elevated expression levels of MYC family genes are frequently observed in
human cancer cells and correlate with tumor aggressiveness and poor
prognosis. In neuroblastoma 40% of all cases are high-risk, of which 20%
harbor amplification of the MYCN proto-oncogene. In high-risk cases
lacking MYCN gene amplification, high expression levels of c-MYC (MYC)
are often present and are associated with unfavorable histology and a
poor survival. Unlike MYCN amplification, which is frequently observed in
the presence of segmental chromosomal aberrations, MYC overexpression is
not associated with genetic abnormalities or somatic mutations. In order
to study this newly defined subgroup, we have created a novel transgenic
zebrafish model in which overexpression of MYC alone in the peripheral
sympathetic nervous system (PSNS) drives early-onset neuroblastoma in
nearly every fish by seven weeks of age. The tumors resulting from MYC
overexpression arise in the interrenal gland, which is the fish
counterpart of the adrenal medulla, and are histologically identical to
human neuroblastoma. We next performed the Assay for Transposase
Accessible Chromatin (ATAC) sequencing and RNA-seq to identify open
chromatin regions that correlate with activation of gene transcription.
Lineage specific genes essential for neuronal precursor cell identity,
such as PHOX2B, HAND2, and TFAP2A are highly expressed in both
MYC-expressing and MYCN-amplified human neuroblastoma cell lines and are
actively transcribed in zebrafish models of MYC and MYCN driven
neuroblastoma. Furthermore, these studies reveal shared and differential
regulatory of effects of MYC relative to MYCN activity in maintaining the
malignant phenotype of neuroblastoma in vivo. Additional insight into the
mechanisms of aberrant transcriptional regulation will inform the future
design and use of therapeutic strategies targeting transcription in this
high-risk malignancy of childhood.


