Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PhAc-ALGP-Dox is a new tumor selective peptide prodrug of
doxorubicin that shows improved efficacy and systemic tolerance in triple
negative breast cancer models.


Use of traditional chemotherapeutic drugs is restricted by severe side
effects and lack of tumor specificity of these cytotoxic agents. Less
toxic prodrug that can be selectively activated in tumor tissue have been
explored in attempts to improve the therapeutic index. Some approaches to
the development of tumor activating prodrugs take advantage of inherent
properties of the tumor, for example, selective enzyme expression,
hypoxia, or low extracellular pH in the vicinity of the tumor. CoBioRes
makes use of capped, tetrapeptidic prodrug of existing chemotherapeutics.
Doxorubicin (Dox) was the first chemotherapeutic that was linked to the
tetrapeptide sequence and tested experimentally (PhAc-ALGP-Dox). This
approach makes the prodrug impermeable to cell membranes of both normal
and tumor cells. Furthermore, it remains stable in blood by the use of
the capping group on the amino-terminal group of the peptide that
prevents aspecific activation by circulating esopeptidases. The prodrug
as such is thus not active. The peptide sequences have been developed to
be sensitive to the hydrolytic action of a selected group of peptidases
that are released within the tumor microenvironment. These peptidases,
which accumulate in the tumors, also play an important role in cancer
cell invasion and metastasis. What makes this approach unique is that it
is not targeting a single enzyme, but requires, for its selectivity, a
two-step activation based on enzymes with an increasing selectivity. In
vivo activation starts when the tetrapeptide prodrug is exposed to
endonucleases (CD10 and THOP1) leading to the formation of intermediates
that are still inactive and poorly permeable through cell membranes. This
leads to a tissue distribution that is determined by the expression of
the endonucleases. Since these are known to be overexpressed in several
tumors, and only present at lower level in some normal tissues, the
prodrug will be preferentially located and activated in the vicinity of
tumors. The second step of the activation is the cleavage at the prolyl
by dipeptidases FAP and DPPIV, releasing the free doxorubicin. The
simultaneous expression of all the enzymes involved in the prodrug
activation was confirmed both in human triple negative breast cancer
biopsies and in experimental triple negative breast cancer models. In
vitro analysis of PhAc-ALGP-Dox reveals higher tumor cells tropism and
higher cytotoxicity in cancer cells than in normal cells. In vivo
PhAc-ALGP-Dox gives promising preliminary results in terms of systemic
tolerance even at high concentration, and in vivo efficacy in xenograft
mouse models compared to free doxorubicin. Taken together, these results
provide a strong rationale for further investigation aimed at unleashing
the potential clinical value of this compound.


