Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Precision cut cancer tissues slices as human model for the testing
of immuno-modulatory compounds.


The goal of personalized medicine is to stratify individual patients to
the appropriate treatment. This approach depends on extensive
characterization of individual tumors and their sensitivity to
therapeutics. In the context of the immunotherapy of cancer, information
on the localization, abundance and activation of immune cells within
individual tumors gained in importance. In this study, we showed that
viable tumors from colorectal cancer patients used within our drug
testing platform, exhibit different populations of infiltrating immune
cells. Analysis of immune cells was conducted on disaggregated, cells
from viable tumor slices. Disaggregation of precision cut cancer tissue
slices was performed using the GentleMACS from Miltenyi. Immune cell
subsets were analyzed by flow cytometric multiplexing of CD3, CD4, CD8
and CD45. Furthermore, we identified PD1 positive cells among the
CD45+/CD3+ lymphocyte population, indicating relevance for anti-PD1
targeted therapy in colorectal cancer. As a proof of principle, precision
cut cancer tissue slices were incubated for 24 hours with different
concentrations of Nivolumab (anti-PD1). The read out of treatment effects
was conducted in regard to cytokine secretions upon compound treatment as
well as immune cell composition. Cytokines were analyzed in supernatants
of tissue cultures using the proinflammatory panel from Mesoscale
Discovery. The results demonstrated that immune cell compositions were
stable and uniform within our precision cut cancer tissue slices both
pre- and post-cultivation, and pre- and post-treatment with Nivolumab. In
contrast, cytokine secretion had changed after treatment. This has been
observed for different cytokines, such as INF gamma, IL-2, IL-10 and TNF
alpha. A correlation to PD-1 expression on T-cells in different patients
has not been seen. In order to optimize preclinical testing of
immune-modulatory compounds, preclinical models, which reflect the
individual tumor, as well as the individual immune components of the
tumor, are mandatory. We have shown here that effects of treatments with
an immune-modulatory compound (Nivolumab) were detectable in this system.
Therefore, this drug testing platform represents a unique opportunity to
test immune-modulatory compounds in a fully human, patient derived model
that is close to in vivo situation. In the future, other
immune-modulatory classes of compounds have to be tested within the
system to more comprehensively elucidate the possibilities and limits of
this drug testing platform in regard to immunotherapy.


