Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive assessment of mouse contamination removal strategies
from patient-derived xenograft model sequencing data.


Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of human tumors are an important
and widely used platform for cancer research. Cancer drug development
relies on PDX models to screen drugs and characterize tumor biology for
potential drug targets. It has been well established that PDX models
maintain similar biology as their original tumors, including histological
patterning, gene expression, single-nucleotide variants, and copy number
alterations. Using short-read sequencing technology to profile and
characterize genomic alterations within PDX tumor models is becoming a
common practice in cancer research. Mouse read contamination is a
relevant source of noise in PDX tumor sequencing data and needs to be
addressed prior to downstream analyses. Therefore, a key consideration
for downstream analysis of PDX sequencing data, such as determining
variant calls or gene expression values, is effectively removing
contaminating mouse sequence. Removing contamination from PDX sequencing
data is necessary for accurate and reproducible downstream analyses. A
limited number of studies establishing best practices for handling PDX
sequencing data exist. Thus, we set out to compare different strategies
for removing mouse contamination from PDX tumor sequencing data for DNA
and RNA using a set of controlled experimental in silico datasets and
data from PDX tumors.

We designed a set of in silico experiments using these sequencing data to
assess a range of approaches for removing contaminating mouse reads from
human data. Our experiments used a set of publically available human and
mouse DNA and RNA sequencing data available at the SRA site. Subsets of
the raw human and mouse reads were mixed at different ratios and analyzed
with five different approaches: 1) raw alignment to the human reference
genome, 2) filtering with the Xenome algorithm followed by alignment to
the human genome, 3) alignment to the human reference genome followed by
filtering with the XenofilteR algorithm, 4) mouse-human hybrid reference
genome alignment, and 5) our novel NextCODE approach.

We assessed the sensitivity and specificity of each procedure for
removing mouse sequence and maintaining human sequence for downstream
analyses. We also assessed the effects of each filtering procedure on
gene expression quantification and variant calling.

Our results introduce a novel, improved method for removing mouse DNA,
facilitating better-quality data for downstream analysis.


