Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the role of GSK3 in the mitotic checkpoint.


Progression through the cell cycle is regulated by multiple checkpoints
that ensure genomic integrity and proper cell division. The spindle
assembly checkpoint (SAC) monitors bi-orientation of chromosomes on the
mitotic spindle, and signals assembly of the mitotic checkpoint complex
(MCC) at unattached kinetochores. This checkpoint prevents unequal
segregation of chromosomes and thus maintains genomic stability. Our data
shows a novel role for glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3β) in
regulation of the mitotic checkpoint. GSK3β is a ubiquitous
multifunctional Ser/Thr kinase with distinct roles in different types of
cancer. Following pretreatment with spindle toxins which arrest cells in
mitosis, GSK3 inhibitors, SB 415286 (SB), RO-81220 (RO) and LiCl, induce
mitotic exit in multiple cancer cell lines. GSK3β knockout mouse embryo
fibroblasts (MEFs) showed a similar decreased mitotic index in the
presence of spindle toxins. Similarly, the mitotic checkpoint was
weakened when we performed GSK3β knockout in HeLa cells using
transiently expressed CRISPR/Cas9. More detailed analysis showed
decreased kinetochore localization of checkpoint proteins Mad1, Mad2,
BubR1 and Bub1 in SB415286-treated Hela cells and gsk3-/- MEFs in the
presence of spindle toxins. The assembly of MCC also decreases in the
presence of GSK3 inhibition as witnessed by decreased Mad2 associated
with BubR1. Overexpression of GSK3β in Hela cells results in an increase
in mitotic index compared to untransfected cells, consistent with our
results with inhibitors and knockouts. GSK3β is a key kinase in the
Wnt-signaling pathway, the mis-regulation of which has been associated
with cancer. Our data shows an increase in taxol-induced mitotic arrest
in response to WNT-C59, a compound that disrupts processing of Wnt
ligands to inhibit Wnt signaling. This observation suggests that the
strength of the mitotic checkpoint can be modulated by external signaling
molecules.


