Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Technical variability in NGS immune gene expression and mutation
profiling has a nominal effect on tumor classification.


Background: A custom NGS cancer immune gene expression assay was
developed which measures the transcript level of >350 genes involved in
T-cell receptor signaling (TCRS), tumor infiltrating lymphocyte (TILs)
complement as well as other key targets expected to predict the
likelihood of patient response to checkpoint inhibitors (CPI). In
parallel to the gene expression assay, mutational profiling was carried
out using the 409 gene Comprehensive Cancer Panel (ThermoFisher). As
variability between runs is common when performing NGS assays a detailed
comparison of specific technical variations were assessed for their
ability to effect gene expression and mutation profiles of clinical FFPE
samples.

Methods: Studies were designed to characterize the analytical performance
of the immune response NGS assay using RNA and DNA from a subset of 300
FFPE tissues representing NSCLC, melanoma, renal cell carcinoma and
bladder cancer. As part of the study, we tested the impact of variability
in RNA and DNA input quantity at the library preparation step, sample
batch size which affects mapped reads/sample and depth of coverage, and
linearity of expression and sensitivity of mutation profiling through
serial dilutions of pico-molar (pM) input of normalized library. PCA and
unsupervised clustering was performed on samples with checkpoint
inhibition, TCRS and TILs genes as well as mutational profiling to reveal
sample groups with three distinct immune signatures (low, indeterminate
and high). Further correlation and over-representation analysis was
performed to determine impact of technical characteristics on these three
immune signatures.

Results: Immune signatures including mutation profiles and gene
expression levels were maintained throughout variable RNA/DNA input
amounts at the library generation level as well as with diminution of pM
levels of library pooled at the sequencing step. Increase in the number
of mapped reads and sequencing depth through decreasing the number of
batched samples per sequencing run also did not affect the gene
expression and mutation profile signatures of the FFPE derived samples.

Conclusion: The gene expression and mutation profiles responsible for
classifying FFPE samples using NGS are not affected by variation normally
introduced in the technical workflow commonly associated with these
platforms. The analytical assessment of input at the nucleic acid,
library, and sample size level has shown the plasticity available when
using amplicon based NGS technologies for classifying the immune gene
expression signature as well as mutational profiles of FFPE derived
clinical tumor samples. This flexibility increases the strength and
utility of NGS-base gene expression profiling and mutational analysis of
tumor samples for both basic research and clinical applications.


