Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Signaling pathways that regulate LMO2 oncogene expression in
pediatric high risk T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.


T-cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (T-ALL) accounts for about 15% of
pediatric ALL and is characterized as a high-risk disease with frequent
relapse, chemotherapy resistance, and a poorer prognosis. LIM domain only
protein 2 (LMO2) is a regulator of hematopoiesis and an oncogene that is
overexpressed in about 10% of T-ALL. The IKZF1 gene encodes a zinc finger
protein called Ikaros which is a master regulator of lymphoid development
and a tumor suppressor. In pediatric ALL, Ikaros alteration is considered
independent prognostic marker for poor outcome. Pro oncogenic Casein
Kinase II (CK2) is overexpressed in various malignancies including
leukemia. CK2 directly phosphorylates Ikaros in vivo and inhibits its
function as transcriptional regulator. Inhibition of CK2 restores Ikaros
tumor suppressor function and results in anti-leukemic effect. Objective
of this study is to understand the mechanisms of transcriptional
regulation of LMO2 in T-cell ALL. Global chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) coupled with the next-generation sequencing (ChIP-seq) studies in
primary human ALL cells and in cell lines, demonstrated Ikaros occupancy
of the promoter of LMO2 gene. We hypothesize that Ikaros negatively
regulates expression of LMO2 at transcriptional level and CK2 impairs
Ikaros mediated repression of LMO2 in T-cell ALL.

Results: qChIP in primary leukemia cells confirmed that Ikaros binds to
the promoter region of LMO2. Using gain-of-function and loss-of-function
experiments we dissected the role of Ikaros in regulation of LMO2
transcription in T-ALL. Ikaros silencing using shRNA transfection
revealed increase in LMO2 expression as measured by qRT PCR. Conversely,
overexpression of Ikaros was associated with strongly reduced
transcription of LMO2. T-ALL cells that are derived from Ikaros-knockout
mouse models express high level of LMO2. Retroviral transduction of these
cells with Ikaros, resulted in significant reduction of LMO2 expression.
Next we investigated how CK2 affects the regulatory functions of Ikaros
towards LMO2. Molecular and pharmacological inhibition of CK2 resulted in
reduced expression of LMO2 in primary human T-ALL. Ikaros binding at
promoter of LMO2 was noted to be significantly increased following CK2
inhibition. This effect was not seen when cell were subjected to CK2
inhibition after Ikaros silencing. Further, we analyzed changes in the
histone markers at the heterochromatin at the LMO2 promoter following
Increased Ikaros binding such as reduced histone H3K9ac and H3K4me3
markers. This suggests that Ikaros regulates LMO2 transcription via
chromatin remodeling.

Conclusion: This data reveals new regulatory mechanism for oncogene LMO2
in pediatric T-ALL. New evidence suggests that repression of LMO2
expression in T cell ALL via Ikaros can be potentiated using CK2
inhibitors. Findings provide the rationale for the use of CK2 inhibitors
in T-ALL with LMO2 overexpression.


