Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High target binding affinity with long lasting cellular target
engagement and high dose intermittent schedule of PI3K inhibitor
copanlisib contribute to the potent anti-tumor activity and good safety
profile.


Introduction: Several generations of PI3K inhibitors have been tested in
clinic. However, thus far, clinical activity has been moderate. Different
from other oral PI3K inhibitors dosed continuously, copanlisib (BAY
80-6946) is an intravenous PI3K inhibitor given intermittently to
patients. Copanlisib dosed once weekly demonstrated clinical benefit with
an improved safety profile, and therefore challenges the concept of
default continuous dosing of PI3K inhibitors. However, it is still
unclear if this concept can be generalized and whether
‘micropharmacokinetic parameters’ also contributed to the potent
anti-tumor profile of copanlisib. Here, we report the characterization of
binding kinetics for copanlisib, as well as the functional consequence in
vivo.

Methods: A set of PI3K inhibitors were characterized in 1) a kinetic
probe competition assay (kPCA); 2) a cellular nanoBRET target engagement
assay; 3) a cellular washout study with the assessment on pathway
engagement; and 4) in vivo pharmacokinetics analysis.

Results: Copanlisib showed nearly diffusion-controlled on- and relatively
slow off-rates with kon = 3.45E+7 [M-1*s-1] and koff = 1.67E-3 [s-1] to
PI3Kα. Consequently, it exhibited very high affinity to PI3Kα ( Ki ePCA
= 9.31E-11[M] and KD kPCA = 4.77E-11 [M]). In a cellular nanoBRET target
engagement assay, the apparent half-life (t1/2) of ca. 2 hours greatly
surpassed the 6.9 min measured using kPCA. The high affinity to PI3Kα
also translated into potent cellular pathway engagement demonstrated by
inhibition of p-AKT and p-PRAS40 in the PIK3CAmut KPL4 cell line. In a
cellular washout study, p-AKT and p-PRAS40 were assessed till 168 h after
incubation with copanlisib for 1 h followed by a washout step. A dose-
and time-dependent pathway engagement was observed even at 72 h post
washout. This result indicated that in cells, copanlisib engages PI3Kα
for an extremely long time, likely due to rebinding effects facilitated
by the fast equilibration kinetics of the compound and its
micropharmacokinetic properties. Interestingly, in vivo, BAY 80-6946
levels were approximately 100-fold higher in the tumor than in plasma at
48 hours and drug clearance from the tumor occurred more slowly than from
plasma. This high and prolonged tumor exposure might be explained, at
least in part, by the high expression of PI3Kα and long lasting target
occupancy of copanlisib in tumors.

Conclusion: Copanlisib demonstrated high affinity to PI3Kα with
protracted target engagement at cellular and in vivo levels. This
‘micropharmacokinetic feature’ not only supports intermittent dosing
but likely also explains the high exposure in tumors vs plasma, potent
anti-tumor activity and good safety profiles.


