Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effect of gemcitabine and a Dclk1 inhibitor on
pancreatic cancer cell survival.


Pancreatic cancer has the highest mortality rate of all major cancers and
is one of the most lethal malignancies. There is a constant upward trend
in the number of patients diagnosed with pancreatic cancer and the number
of deaths due to pancreatic cancer. Gemcitabine (GEM) is often used in
the treatment of pancreatic cancer (PDAC), but has limited effects.
Doublecortin-like kinase 1 (Dclk1) is important in the progression of
early pancreatic neoplastic lesions and PDAC. However, the functional
role of Dclk1 in PDAC is unknown. To identify the substrate protein
phosphorylated by Dclk1, we performed a protein microarray analysis on
Dclk1 knockdown cells. The results of this analysis directed our studies
toward Chk1, which is known to be a potential regulator of the cell cycle
and experiences upregulation of phosphorylation after GEM treatment. In
general, GEM treatment results in DNA damage to pancreatic cancer cells,
an increase in phosphorylated Chk1 (p-Chk1), and arrests the cell cycle
progression to repair the damaged DNA. On the basis of the preliminary
data, we hypothesized that the decrease in Chk1 phosphorylation by Dclk1
inhibition circumvents cell cycle arrest and impairs the subsequent DNA
repair. The aim of this study was to evaluate the synergistic effect of
Dclk1 inhibition and GEM treatment on pancreatic cancer cell survival. We
used the human pancreatic cancer cell line MIA PaCa-2 and LRRK2-IN-1
(LRRK) as the Dclk1 inhibitor for this study. First, we examined the
effects of GEM or the Dclk1 inhibitor or both on cancer cell
proliferation and the expression of p-Chk1. Significantly decreased cell
proliferation was observed on co-treatment of GEM and LRRK compared to
GEM treatment alone. In addition, the expression of p-Chk1 significantly
decreased on co-treatment compared to GEM treatment alone. Second, we
used flow cytometry to analyze the cell cycle after treatment with GEM
and/or LRRK. Almost all cancer cells treated with GEM alone were arrested
in the S phase of the cell cycle. The addition of LRRK allows the cell
cycle to proceed in the same manner as untreated control cancer cells do.
We also evaluated DNA damage by measuring the intensity of gamma-H2AX.
Cancer cells that were co-treated experienced more DNA damage than with
GEM treatment alone. The co-treatment induced apoptosis without the
repair of DNA damage in the cancer cells. In conclusion, the combined
treatment with GEM and a Dclk1 inhibitor decreased the cell survival rate
compared to treatment with GEM alone through the suppression of p-Chk1.
Targeting Dclk1 in combination with GEM might offer an excellent
opportunity for future pancreatic cancer treatments.


