Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical analyses of synergistic effect of eribulin and
paclitaxel for triple-negative breast cancer.


Purpose:

There is an urgent need to develop novel therapeutic strategies for
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). To explore the antitumor effect of
combination of eribulin (ERI) and paclitaxel (PTX) for TNBC, we conducted
preclinical experiments.

Materials & methods:

Combinational effects of ERI and PTX were analyzed both in vitro and in
vivo using two TNBC cell lines (MDA-MB-231, Hs578T).

Results:

When ERI was added simultaneously with PTX to TNBC cells, the sensitivity
to PTX was increased synergistically. On the other hand, synergistic
increase of sensitivity to ERI was observed in the presence of PTX. When
the TNBC cells were treated with each drug subsequently, pretreatment
with ERI for 96 hours enhanced the sensitivity to PTX administrated
subsequently. In contrast, pretreatment of TNBC cells with PTX enhanced
the sensitivity to the subsequently administrated ERI. When the TNBC
cells were treated with ERI, the expression of epithelial marker,
E-cadherin was increased, while the expression of mesenchymal markers,
pSmad2, ZEB1, Slug, and vimentin were decreased. In contrast, when the
cells were treated with PTX, the expressions of mesenchymal markers were
increased. When epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) was induced by
TGF-β in the TNBC cells, the sensitivity to ERI was enhanced, while
TGF-β receptor inhibitor (LY2157299) reduced the sensitivity to ERI.
Furthermore, knockdown of ZEB1 by small interfering RNA conferred
resistance to ERI in both TNBC cell lines. In the mouse xenograft model
bearing MDA-MB-231, ERI plus PTX combination therapy significantly
inhibited tumor growth compared with either PTX or ERI monotherapy.
Furthermore, prior treatment with ERI significantly enhanced the
antitumor activity of PTX in the mouse xenograft model.

Conclusions:

Our findings demonstrate an EMT-mediated synergistic antitumor effect by
combination of two tubulin inhibitors. This combination therapy may serve
as a novel therapeutic strategy for TNBC.


