Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing heterogeneity in DCE-MRI data of breast cancer to
predict treatment response.


Introduction: We investigate the ability of multi-parametric, voxel-based
characterizations of tumor heterogeneity from magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) to predict the response of breast cancer patients to neoadjuvant
therapy (NAT). In particular, we use high-dimensional analysis of the
longitudinal changes in the vascular and cellular characteristics
provided by quantitative dynamic contrast enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) to
predict response.

Methods: DCE-MRI data was acquired from 34 patients with stage II/III
breast cancer before initiating NAT (t1) and after one cycle of NAT (t2).
Pathological complete response (pCR) and non-pCR was defined at the time
of surgery. Non-pCR patients were further subdivided into partial
response (>30% decrease in tumor volume), progressive disease (PD, >20%
increase in tumor volume), and stable disease according to the Response
Evaluation in Solid Tumors (i.e., RECIST) criteria. For each tumor voxel,
DCE-MRI data was modeled to extract the extravascular, extracellular
volume fraction, ve, the plasma volume fraction, vp, and the volume
transfer coefficients, Ktrans and kep, which correspond to the rate of
wash-in and wash-out of contrast agent, respectively. Multi-parametric
voxel-based maps of physiological parameters Ktrans, kep, ve, and vp were
used to identify different tumor subpopulations. Dimension reduction was
completed using t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) and
subpopulations were identified using DBSCAN clustering. Using the t-SNE
generated low-dimensional maps, a subset subpopulations were analyzed
based on cluster differences between groups at t2. Based on MRI parameter
values, the selected voxel subpopulations fell into one of two
categories: high vascularity-high cellularity (HV-HC: high vp , Ktrans ,
kep values, low ve values) and low vascularity-low cellularity (LV-LC:
low vp , Ktrans , kep values, high ve values). The contribution of each
cluster to overall tumor volume was analyzed for each patient and
quantified as percent tumor volume.

Results: No differences were observed between patient groups at t1. At
t2, patients with pCR revealed increased percent tumor volumes containing
LV-LC subpopulations, compared to PD patients (p = 0.03). Furthermore, PD
patients demonstrated significant increase in percent tumor volumes with
HV-HC subpopulations, compared to pCR patients (p=0.01). Compared to pCR
patients, combined non-pCR patients showed decreased percent tumor
volumes of LV-LC subpopulations, trending toward significance (p=0.06).

Conclusion: The results indicate that analysis of high-dimensional
parameter maps derived from quantitative MRI can be utilized to
characterize intratumoral heterogeneity and identify subpopulations of
tumor response within patients. These characterizations can potentially
be used to define and model tumor habitats and ultimately predict patient
treatment response.


