Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the mechanism of action, pharmacodynamics and
preclinical safety of ADCT-402, a pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD)
dimer-containing antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) targeting CD19-expressing
hematological malignancies.


ADCT-402, currently in Phase I clinical trials for B-cell hematological
malignancies, is an ADC composed of a recombinant humanized IgG1 against
human CD19, stochastically conjugated via a cleavable linker to a PBD
dimer cytotoxin (DAR of 2.3). PBD dimers, DNA minor groove interstrand
cross-linking agents, are gaining increasing attention and are currently
being tested as the ADC warheads in several clinical trials. ADCT-402 has
potent and targeted cytotoxicity against a panel of human lymphoma and
leukemia cell lines in vitro. In vivo, ADCT-402 demonstrates
dose-dependent antitumor activity against Burkitt’s lymphoma xenograft
models. Moreover, ADCT-402 is markedly superior to maytansinoid- and
auristatin-based CD19-targeting ADCs in the Ramos xenograft model. In a
rat toxicology study, a single dose of ADCT-402 at 2 mg/kg is well
tolerated with a favorable PK profile and excellent stability in vivo.
The current study aimed to further define the mechanism of action (MOA)
of ADCT-402 and validate its pharmacology and preclinical safety for
clinical development. CD19 is a clinically validated target with
restricted normal tissue expression and a widespread expression in the
majority of B-cell malignancies. Importantly, we show here the consistent
expression of CD19 in matched samples (initial diagnosis and
relapsed/refractory) from panels of lymphoma patients, indicating that
relapsed/refractory patients are appropriate for treatment with ADCT-402.
ADCT-402 was shown to be efficiently internalized by CD19+ cells in
vitro. Moreover, in line with the PBD dimer MOA, following a 2 hour
exposure to ADCT-402, DNA interstrand cross-links reached a peak between
8 - 12 hours and persisted for up to 36 hours post-treatment. In
contrast, the peak of cross-link formation for the PBD dimer warhead
alone was observed immediately after 2 hour incubation, while a
non-targeted PBD-ADC did not yield any appreciable DNA cross-links. In
SCID mice s.c. implanted with Ramos cells, a single dose of ADCT-402 was
administered at 0.33 or 1 mg/kg. Twenty-four hours after treatment,
excised tumors showed a dose proportional increase in intensity of
staining by an anti-PBD payload antibody, as well as in DNA cross-linking
and in γ-H2AX formation. In contrast, no DNA cross-linking was observed
in matched lymphocyte samples. The toxicity of ADCT-402 was further
evaluated in a repeat dose cynomolgus monkey study. ADCT-402 was
clinically well tolerated with an acceptable off-target safety profile.
The PK of the ADC was consistent with normal antibody clearance with a
half-life of about 12 to 17 days. These data confirm the MOA of ADCT-402
and provide relevant pharmacodynamic assays and preclinical safety
assessment to guide the clinical development of this promising ADC in
B-cell malignancies.


