Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput clonal analysis of AML tumors with droplet
microfluidics.


Single cell analysis tools are crucial to better understand the role that
rare or heterogeneous cancer cells play in the evolution of tumor
progression. Although, it is now feasible to perform single-cell RNA-Seq
on thousands of, several challenges remain for high-throughput
single-cell DNA sequencing. To address these challenges and enable the
characterization of genetic diversity in cancer cell populations, we
developed a novel approach that barcodes amplified genomic DNA of
individual cells confined to microfluidic droplets. The barcodes are used
to reassemble the genetic profiles of individual cells from next
generation sequencing data. A key feature of our approach is the
“two-step” microfluidic workflow that releases genomic DNA from
cellular proteins prior to amplification. The microfluidic workflow first
encapsulates individual cells in droplets, lyses the cells and prepares
the lysate for genomic DNA amplification using proteases. Following this
lysate preparation step, the proteases are inactivated and droplets
containing the genomes of individual cells are then paired with molecular
barcodes and PCR reagents. We demonstrate that the two-step microfluidic
approach is vastly superior to workflows without the two-step process for
efficient DNA amplification on tens of thousands of individual cells per
run with high coverage uniformity and low allelic dropout of targeted
genomic regions. To apply our single-cell sequencing technology to the
study of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), we developed a targeted panel to
sequence genes frequently mutated in AML including TP53, DNMT3A, FLT3,
NPM1, NRAS, KRAS, JAK2, IDH1 and IDH2. Using this panel, we were able to
identify clonal populations from AML research samples; moreover, the
single-cell nature of our approach enabled the correlation of multiple
mutations within subclones and determination of whether the mutations
existed as as a homozygote or heterozygote. Collectively, our results
show a greater degree of heterogeneity in AML tumor samples than is
commonly appreciated with bulk sequencing methods.


