Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MyD88 and IL-17 have essential local and systemic functions in
promoting tumors on mouse skin.


NF-kB has been causally implicated with cancer-associated inflammation.
In the skin, ligands of the Toll-like receptor/IL-1 receptor superfamily
induce the recruitment of MyD88 (Myeloid differentiation primary response
gene 88), ultimately leading to NF-kB activation. We previously reported
that MyD88 is required for two stage chemical carcinogenesis on mouse
skin, and that MyD88 exerts a cell-intrinsic function in RAS-mediated
transformation of keratinocytes (Ras-keratinocytes). Now, we explore the
role of MyD88 during tumor promotion with
12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Epidermal hyperplasia is
reduced in MyD88 deficient mice relative to controls after multiple
applications of TPA. Furthermore, the upregulation of the chemokines
Cxcl1 and S100a8 in response to TPA was deficient in MyD88 null cultured
keratinocytes revealing a necessary role for MyD88 in the intrinsic
response of keratinocytes to phorbol ester. We also uncovered a systemic
requirement for MyD88 in carcinogenesis since lineage specific ablation
of MyD88 in T cells conferred significant resistance to skin
tumorigenesis and reduced infiltration of IL-17 positive T cells in TPA
treated MyD88 null mouse skin. IL-17 treatment of normal primary
keratinocytes increased their proliferation while reducing their response
to calcium-induced differentiation but had no effect on the proliferation
of RAS-keratinocytes. The atypical nuclear IkBzeta protein can act as an
activator of so-called secondary NF-kB response genes. IkBzeta deficiency
blocked the keratinocyte proliferative response to IL-17 but had no
effect on altered differentiation. Finally, both IL-17 and oncogenic RAS
required IkBzeta to upregulate the expression of S100a8, lipocalin2 and
Steap4 mRNAs. Collectively, these results demonstrate that MyD88 plays a
pro-tumorigenic function during tumor promotion in both epithelial and
T-cell compartments and that IL-17/IkBzeta could play a facilitating role
on keratinocytes during tumor promotion beyond its pro-inflammatory
activity.


