Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma xenografts display
conservation of primary tumor genomic heterogeneity.


Purpose: Patient derived xenograft (PDX) models represent a platform for
defining therapeutic opportunities based on their ability to maintain the
genomic and molecular features of their respective tumors. We used a
comprehensive genomics approach to analyze PDXs for oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC), which had not been previously described. This involved
confirming that the PDXs conserve the heterogeneous somatic landscape of
the primary tumors from which they were derived.

Methods: We established a large panel of OSCC PDX models by engrafting
fresh, primary tumor samples into NOD scid gamma (NSG) mice. We performed
whole genome sequencing (WGS; n=10), whole exome sequencing (WES; n=15),
and transcriptome sequencing (RNAseq; n=15) on matched primary and first
passage xenografts. Somatic events, including mutations, copy number
alterations (CNAs), loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) regions, and structural
variation (SV), were detected independently in tumors and PDXs.
Conservation was defined by the correlation of variant allele frequency
(VAF) distributions and gene expression patterns, presence of larger
somatic events, and predictions made about the subclonal architecture of
the tumor and xenograft.

Results: PDXs were established with an overall success rate of 47%
(56/118). The somatic landscape of primary tumors was representative of
the published genomic data on OSCC, including amplifications of CCND1 and
EGFR family members, inactivating mutations and loss of TP53 and CDKN2A,
and chromosome 3q amplification. These somatic events were also strongly
conserved in matched xenograft samples. Mutations that were detected in
either the xenograft or primary tumor, but not its matched sample,
consisted primarily of low-frequency mutations. The predicted clonal
architecture, however, revealed correlative subclonal heterogeneity
between matched xenograft and primary tumor. This includes maintenance of
founding clone mutations and consistent VAF distributions, indicating
that a heterogeneous tumor population engrafted.

Conclusions: This comprehensive approach establishes early-passage PDXs
as high fidelity models for OSCC. Their ability to maintain the genomic
heterogeneity detected in primary OSCC tumors presents a clinically
relevant platform for understanding tumor biology and identifying novel
therapeutic strategies.


