Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations of polyunsaturated fat, bile acids, and gut
microbiota on colorectal adenoma risk.


Background: Intestinal microbiota, and their metabolites are increasingly
recognized as important players in the genesis of colorectal adenomas and
cancer. Epidemiological studies have also shown that polyunsaturated fat
intake is associated with decreased risk of colorectal adenomas. This
study examined the association between adherent gut microbiota and
mucosal bile acids, and total polyunsaturated fat intake in relation to
colorectal adenomas in a case-control study.

Methods: Participants were 217 adenoma cases and 218 adenoma-free
controls who underwent screening colonoscopies and completed food
frequency questionnaires. The mucosal adherent microbiota was
characterized by bacterial 16S rRNA sequencing. Global metabolomics of
colonic mucosal tissue was conducted by gas chromatography and mass
spectrometry on a subset of samples. Genus level microbiota and bile
acids were compared between cases and controls using t-test with
correction for multiple comparison. Logistic regression and Pearson
correlations were used to estimate adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs), and correlation coefficients for the
association among microbiota abundance, bile acids concentration, and
total polyunsaturated fat intake.

Results: Adenoma subjects had a significantly higher bacterial abundance
of Sphingomonas, Marinomonas and Ralstonia, but lower abundance of
Adlercreutzia compared to controls. The concentration of eleven bile
acids (Chenodeoxycholate, Cholate, Deoxycholate, Glycochenodeoxycholate,
Glycocholenate sulfate, 7-ketodeoxycholate; 12-dehydrocholate,
Taurochenodeoxycholate, Taurocholate, Taurodeoxycholate,
Taurolithocholate 3-sulfate, and Tauroursodeoxycholate) were
significantly elevated in cases compared to controls. Subjects with
increased abundance of Sphingomonas and Ralstonia were significantly more
likely to have adenomas (OR 2.17, 95% CI 1.31-3.57; OR 1.19, 95% CI
1.02-1.38) respectively. Subjects with increased abundance of
Adlercreutzia were less likely to have adenomas (OR 0.44, 95% CI
0.21-0.93). The multivariable adjusted OR for those in the high relative
to the low level of total polyunsaturated fat intake was 0.46 (95% CI
0.27-0.80). The correlations between bacterial diversity and eleven bile
acids also significantly differed by case control status.

Conclusion: The interactions of the gut microbiota, bile acids and
consumption of polyunsaturated fat are associated with colorectal adenoma
risk.


