Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical characterization of a novel monoclonal antibody
targeting a neo-antigen expressed in ovarian and GI malignancies.


Objectives: We have developed a novel humanized IgG1 monocolonal
antibody, NEO-201, which targets a neoantigen expressed on ovarian and GI
malignancies. This antigen has homology to CEACAM; however, it has
specificity to tumor tissues and not normal tissues. Our aims were as
follows: (1) to evaluate the expression of this antigen on tumor cell
lines derived from various ovarian and GI cancers; and (2) to determine
the functionality of NEO-201.

Methods: Expression of the antigen was identified by western blot
analysis and flow cytometry. Functionality was determined by an antibody
dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) assay using the
antigen-expressing cell lines identified by western blot analysis. Cell
lines not expressing the antigen were used as negative controls. The
effector cells used in the ADCC assay were natural killer (NK) cells
isolated from PBMCs of normal donors and high-affinity activated NK
(haNK) cells. haNK cells are NK-92 cells genetically engineered to
express the high-affinity variant of human CD16 (FcgRIIIA-V158) and the
human IL-2 gene. haNK cells have little or no inhibitory expression of
killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors, a unique feature that may
optimize their highly cytotoxic activity against a broad range of
malignancies.

Results: Using western blot analysis, 2 of 5 ovarian cancer cell lines
(OV90 and PE01) and 1 of 2 colorectal cancer cell lines (LS174T) stained
positively for NEO-201. Flow cytometry analysis on ovarian, colorectal,
and pancreatic cancer cell lines confirmed the expression of the NEO-201
neoantigen on 1 of 2 ovarian cancer cell lines (OV90), 1 of 2 colorectal
cancer cell lines (LS174T), and 2 of 2 pancreatic cancer cell lines
(ASPC-1 and CFPAC-1). ADCC assay was performed using OV90 and ASPC-1
tumor cell lines. Cell lines not expressing the neoantigen were used as
negative controls. Killing of tumor cells expressing the neoantigen was
also observed with NEO-201 alone; however, the lysis was significantly
augmented when NK cells from the PBMCs of normal donors or haNK cells
were included in the ADCC assay.

Conclusions: These finding demonstrate that the NEO-201 neoantigen is
expressed on several tumor cell lines representing ovarian and GI
malignancies. NEO-201 can mediate ADCC activity in the presence of NK
cells and NK cell lines. In addition, NEO-201 can induce apoptosis in
tumor cell lines expressing the NEO-201 neoantigen. Furthermore,
preliminary studies demonstrated that this neoantigen is expressed in
numerous cancer types (not shown). In vivo studies as well as IND-related
studies are planned.


