Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of AMG 176, a novel, potent and selective
Mcl-1 inhibitor with robust anti-tumor activity in Mcl-1 dependent cancer
models.


Evasion of apoptosis represents an essential hallmark in the progression
of many cancers. The Bcl-2 family of proteins plays a central role in
regulating the apoptotic process. Targeting pro-survival Bcl-2 family
members like Mcl-1 with small molecule inhibitors represents a viable
therapeutic approach for the treatment of cancer. This study evaluated
the in vitro and in vivo activity of AMG 176, a potent and selective
Mcl-1 inhibitor currently in Phase I clinical development. AMG 176 binds
with high affinity and selectivity to the BH3-binding groove of Mcl-1. In
a cell based split-luciferase complementation assay, AMG 176 disrupted
the interaction between Mcl-1 and Bak, leading to downstream activation
of the intrinsic apoptosis pathway as measured by increased caspase
activity and subsequent effects on viability. Oral administration of AMG
176 to mice bearing OPM-2 multiple myeloma xenografts resulted in a
dose-dependent increase in activated Bak with a clear PK/PD relationship.
Dosing regimens (20-60 mg/kg PO, QD) evaluating discontinuous and
continuous administration of AMG 176 in established OPM2 xenografts
demonstrated robust tumor growth inhibition with complete tumor
regression at an elevated dose. Efficacy in this model was achieved at
doses in agreement with those eliciting induction of apoptotic markers.
Treatment of tumor cell lines with Compound A, a close structural analog
of AMG 176, revealed a dose- and time-dependent increase in Mcl-1 protein
levels that was reversible upon compound washout. Subsequent experiments
performed with cycloheximide suggested that elevations in Mcl-1 protein
levels were due to an increase in Mcl-1 protein half-life, likely driven
by the compounds ability to disrupt proteasome-mediated degradation.
Compound A was also used to characterize the kinetics of activating
apoptosis. These studies revealed a rapid induction of apoptosis and loss
of viability in Mcl-1 dependent multiple myeloma and AML cell lines. In
cell lines highly dependent on Mcl-1, treatment with Compound A for as
little as two hours was sufficient to achieve complete cell killing. Cell
line profiling studies (>200 lines) revealed robust effects on cell
viability in a subset of solid tumor cell lines and cell lines of
hematological origin, including multiple myeloma, acute myeloid leukemia
and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Subsequent association analysis with molecular
profiling endpoints identified an inverse correlation between BCLxL
expression and sensitivity to Mcl-1 inhibition. Combination screens with
Compound A revealed multiple highly synergistic combinations including
compounds targeting the MAPK pathway, standard of care chemotherapeutics
and agents targeting additional pro-survival members of the BCL-2 family.
In conclusion, AMG 176 is a potent and selective Mcl-1 inhibitor, with
significant in vitro and in vivo activity in Mcl-1 dependent cancer
models.


