Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel small molecule menin-MLL inhibitor for potential treatment
of MLL-rearranged leukemias.


Patients with MLL-rearranged leukemia typically have a poor prognosis.
With chemotherapy and stem cell transplantation as current standard of
care, the 5-year survival rate is estimated to be only about 35%. As the
leukemogenic activity of MLL fusion proteins has been shown to be
dependent on their direct interaction with menin, development of small
molecules that block the menin-MLL interaction is a promising therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of this disease. Although small molecule
menin-MLL inhibitors have been reported, previously published compounds
exhibited modest cellular potency and/or poor pharmacokinetic properties.
We now describe a novel, potent, and selective small molecule menin-MLL
inhibitor that effectively treats MLL leukemias in in vivo models and
demonstrate its potential clinical utility. The compound selectively
inhibits the growth of a panel of MLL-rearranged cell lines relative to
non MLL-rearranged cell lines, displays favorable pharmacokinetic
properties, and induces tumor regression in an MV4;11 subcutaneous
xenograft mouse model, with durable tumor suppression even after dosing
is discontinued. In both the MV4;11 and MOLM13 disseminated leukemia
models, the compound confers a prolonged survival benefit compared to an
untreated group when dosed orally once daily at doses that are
well-tolerated in the animals. We have used this potent and selective
menin inhibitor to investigate the functional cellular response of
MLL-rearranged cell lines to menin inhibition, assessing cell growth,
cell cycle and gene expression responses over time, and compared that
response to other epigenetic inhibitors and demonstrate significantly
increased apoptosis which correlates with tumor regression measured both
in early and long term readouts in xenograft and systemic leukemia
models. We describe a menin-MLL inhibitor with optimized drug-like
properties that demonstrates potential clinical utility in preclinical
models of MLL leukemias. The compound is currently under further
preclinical evaluation.


