Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Shedding light on the unknown of Ewing sarcoma: Single cell study
shows a co-expression pattern between TAPA-1 and EWSR1-FLI1.


Introduction: Ewing Sarcoma (ES) is the second most frequent bone cancer
found in children, and has the highest rate of recurrence among all
childhood cancers. This suggests the need for a better understanding of
heterogeneous cancer populations and rare cells that survive intensive
cytotoxic therapy and cause recurrence in patients. It is widely accepted
that ‘EWSR1-FLI1’ has a major role in determining ES survival and
proliferation, but the mechanism is unknown. Most studies in which
expression of ‘EWSR1-FLI1’ is correlated with the level of expression
of ‘EWSR1-FLI1’ regulated genes have been conducted on bulk
populations that ignore potential heterogeneity of ‘EWSR1-FLI1’ in
the cell population. To address this we have used single cell RNA-Seq
approaches.

Methods: The WaferGen iCell8 system was used to perform SMART whole
transcriptome amplification using EW-8 ES cells.We sequenced single-cell
RNA-Seq libraries prepared from over 1260 ES parental cells. We combined
computational analysis with stringent quality control filters to profile
candidate ES cells.We used EWSR1 expression profile to partition the
entire population into two clusters. A population of cells with TAPA-1
expression was distinguished and studied for their co-expression patterns
with EWSR1.

Results: Results revealed that ES cells show considerable heterogeneity
at the transcriptome level between seemingly identical EW-8 cells.

We identified a subpopulation of EW-8 ES cells with a positive
correlation between the expression of EWSR1 and Target of the
antiproliferative antibody 1 and tetraspanin-28 (TAPA-1/CD81). Our
preliminary data from 200 cells indicate that EWSR1 (0-18 unique
transcripts, median 1) and TAPA-1/Cd81 (0-8 unique transcripts, median 0)
were correlated (r= 0.32, PWe identified a subpopulation of EW-8 ES cells
with a positive correlation between the expression of EWSR1 and Target of
the antiproliferative antibody 1 and tetraspanin-28 (TAPA-1/CD81). Our
preliminary data from 200 cells indicate that EWSR1 (0-18 unique
transcripts, median 1) and TAPA-1/Cd81 (0-8 unique transcripts, median 0)
were correlated (r= 0.32, P<0.10). TAPA-1, a surface membrane protein,
most frequently associated with hematopoetic cells, that regulates cell
development, activation, growth and motility and has been implicated in
proliferation of many cancers.

Conclusions: Taken together, our results suggest that there are two
classes of cells with respect to the expression of TAPA-1 in EW-8 cells.
We also show the relationship between TAPA-1 with EWSR1-FLI1 expression
in a single cell level. This type of classification may lead us to
identify a rare population with a poor response rate to cytotoxic
treatments. Future studies will determine if EW-8 ES cells having
elevated TAPA-1 have differential sensitivity to cytotoxic agents
compared with populations with low level expression.


