Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of Minnelide as potential targeted therapy for triple
negative breast cancer.


Recent advances in diagnostics and better understanding of molecular
mechanism underlying breast cancer has let to the better therapeutic
options and disease outcome for majority of breast cancer patients.
However, ~10 - 20% of all breast cancers often referred to as “triple
negative” as they lack expression of the estrogen (ER), progesterone
(PR), and human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2) receptors convey a poor
prognosis due in part to a lack of targeted therapies. The aim of the
current study is to evaluate whether triptolide and its water soluble
analog Minnelide is effective against triple negative breast cancer
cells. We have previously shown that triptolide/Minnelide not only
reduces tumor growth in various cancer models but it also regulates
epithelial -mesenchymal transition (EMT), an important mechanism
underlying metastasis. In our preliminary findings using three triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, and
MDA-MB-157, we demonstrate that triptolide not only inhibits the
proliferation of TNBC cells but also regulates the protein levels of EMT
markers including β-Catenin and Vimentin. In order to elucidate the
mechanism underlying triptolide mediated inhibition of cellular
proliferation and regulation of EMT markers in TNBC cells, we identified
Src kinase and Aurora kinase A as two new targets for triptolide action
in TNBC cells. By targeting Src and Aurora kinase, triptolide disrupts
the integrity of focal adhesion structures and reduces cell spreading via
regulating FAK activity. Our preliminary findings regarding potential use
of triptolide/Minnelide in TNBC based on in vitro experiments are
promising. However, considering the complex pathophysiology of breast
cancer and other biological factors playing role in a disease setting,
in-vivo experiments to test the efficacy of Minnelide in relevant mouse
models for mammary cancers are currently underway.


