Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutation analysis of endometrial cancer in a population-based
study by targeted next-generation sequencing.


Endometrial carcinoma (EC), a malignancy that arises from the epithelial
lining of the uterus, is heterogeneous at histologic and molecular
levels. Risk factors and outcomes also differ by type. Though prior
studies characterized the genomic landscape of endometrial carcinoma, few
integrated histologic, clinical, and prospectively collected
epidemiologic data into the analysis. We collected formalin-fixed
paraffin embedded tumor tissue from women enrolled in the Nurses’
Health Study who were diagnosed with EC between 1976 and 2012. We
targeted 50 cancer related genes for high-throughput sequencing to
identify genetic variants in 37 ECs and correlate findings with
immunohistochemical, histologic, and epidemiologic data. Case selection
was designed to include maximal power to discover genetic changes
associated with p53 immunohistochemical status and clinical stage of
disease at diagnosis. Mutations most frequently occurred in TP53 (57%),
PTEN (46%), and PIK3CA (38%). TP53 mutations were seen in 83% of ECs that
immunostained positive for mutant p53, with the most frequent TP53
mutations occurring in R248. Well-differentiated endometrioid tumors had
elevated frequencies of PTEN and PIK3CA mutations compared to less
differentiated tumors (p Endometrial carcinoma (EC), a malignancy that
arises from the epithelial lining of the uterus, is heterogeneous at
histologic and molecular levels. Risk factors and outcomes also differ by
type. Though prior studies characterized the genomic landscape of
endometrial carcinoma, few integrated histologic, clinical, and
prospectively collected epidemiologic data into the analysis. We
collected formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tumor tissue from women
enrolled in the Nurses’ Health Study who were diagnosed with EC between
1976 and 2012. We targeted 50 cancer related genes for high-throughput
sequencing to identify genetic variants in 37 ECs and correlate findings
with immunohistochemical, histologic, and epidemiologic data. Case
selection was designed to include maximal power to discover genetic
changes associated with p53 immunohistochemical status and clinical stage
of disease at diagnosis. Mutations most frequently occurred in TP53
(57%), PTEN (46%), and PIK3CA (38%). TP53 mutations were seen in 83% of
ECs that immunostained positive for mutant p53, with the most frequent
TP53 mutations occurring in R248. Well-differentiated endometrioid tumors
had elevated frequencies of PTEN and PIK3CA mutations compared to less
differentiated tumors (p < 0.05). The mutation profiles of these samples
are consistent with previous studies, supporting the viability of
archival paraffin-embedded tissue in mutation detection. This study’s
interdisciplinary approach to tumor characterization may help inform
future development of personalized models for EC.


