Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel molecular interaction, targeted by
Metformin, between breast cancer and white adipose tissue progenitors.


The white adipose tissue (WAT) contains a resident population of
progenitors with mesenchymal- or endothelial-like phenotype, able to
promote breast cancer (BC) progression (Orecchioni et al., 2013). We
recently characterized a novel molecular axis underneath the interaction
between BC and WAT progenitors, possibly explaining the acquisition of a
cancer-associated phenotype by WAT progenitor cells and the establishment
of a permissive tumor microenvironment. GM-CSF balance was identified to
be the principal regulator of the transcriptional alteration occurring in
WAT progenitors exposed to BC: GM-CSF, produced by BC cells, dramatically
changed the secretion profile of progenitors, enhancing its own
production through a positive regulatory loop and inducing the expression
of several factors involved in inflammation (IL-1β), ECM remodeling and
angiogenesis (MMP9). IL-1β was strongly down-regulated by GM-CSF
neutralization in WAT progenitors in vitro and in preclinical models.
Induction of IL-1β by GM-CSF was able, in turn, to up-regulate MMP9 in
the same cells. The markedly increased expression of MMP9 was already
observed in BC-associated WAT progenitors, being addressed to increased
local and metastatic tumor growth in obese mice. GM-CSF production was
significalntly enhanced in the presence of concomitant obesity in
preclinical models of BC, both in orthotopic models (MMTV-neu/ErbB2; 4T1)
and in spontaneous tumor-bearing mice (MMTV-PyMT). GM-CSF neutralization
in several obese syngeneic models of BC significantly reduced
immunosuppressive cells in tumors and in the surrounding WAT, including
T-regs (CD4+CD25brightCD127low), Granulocytic myeloid-derived suppressor
cells (G-MDSCs, CD11b+Ly6C-Ly6G+), tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs,
F4/80+CD206+MCHIIlow) and tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs,
CD8+PD1+). Different BC types produce distinct amounts of GM-CSF: triple
negative BC (TNBC) expressed higher levels compared to hormone receptors
positive cells, correlating GM-CSF expression to higher tumor grade. In
the context of targeting WAT-BC interaction, Metformin was able to impair
tumor growth, metastasis and angiogenesis in preclinical models
(Orecchioni et al., 2015) and affecting immune cells, including T-regs,
TAMs and MDSCs. From our data, GM-CSF was identified to be a new target
of Metformin in both BC and WAT progenitors, suggesting a novel
inhibitory mechanism mediated by the drug. Metformin displayed the same
efficacy in reducing BC growth, metastatic spread and immune system
regulation, when compared to GM-CSF specific neutralization in obese
syngeneic models. Taken together, these results indicate GM-CSF as a new
molecular target of Metformin and support the role of this novel
mechanism in BC progression. Ongoing studies also suggest that this
pathway might be induced in WAT progenitors by other solid tumors,
including non-Hodgkin’s B-lymphoma.


