Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel approach to targeting the IDO/TDO pathway through
degradation of the immunosuppressive metabolite kynurenine.


Checkpoint inhibitors have become the cornerstone for new innovation in
immune-based oncology therapy. Several orthogonal immune pathways are
currently being investigated to relieve suppression or boost activity of
the innate and adaptive immune system. The IDO immune-metabolism pathway
was recently clinically validated in melanoma in combination with
checkpoint inhibition. This opens up a new approach to relieving
suppressive mediators and lends credence to the tumor microenvironment
containing small molecule metabolites that induce immune tolerance. Both
indoleamine-pyrrole 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) and Tryptophan
2,3-dioxygenase (TDO) enzymes metabolize tryptophan, forming Kynurenine
which binds the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) in multiple innate and
adaptive immune cell types causing a net immunosuppressive effect. Both
enzymes are upregulated across many tumor types, however, only the IDO1
enzyme has thus far been addressed in the clinic with small molecule
inhibitors. We have postulated that enzyme-mediated depletion of
Kynurenine into safe and immunologically inert metabolites can alleviate
tumor immunosuppression. We have cloned and characterized several
bacterial Kynureninases (KYNase) which preferentially degrade Kynurenine
with a >1,000 higher kcat/KM as opposed to mammalian enzymes that cleave
3-OH Kynurenine. We show that PEGylated bacterial KYNases can deplete
Kynurenine produced by IDO1+, TDO+ and IDO1/TDO+ dual positive human
cancer cells whereas, the IDO1 inhibitor epacadostat or TDO inhibitor
680C91 only selectively inhibited Kyn production in IDO1+ or TDO+ cells
respectively. In vivo, a single subcutaneous dose of KYNase in B16F10
tumor-bearing mice was able to deplete Kynurenine in both the plasma and
tumors and increase effector T-cells in the tumor. KYNase demonstrated
significant tumor growth inhibition and survival benefit either as a
single agent or in combination with checkpoint inhibitors (anti-PD1 or
anti-CTLA4) in B16F10, CT26 and 4T1 models. Interestingly, KYNase
combined with anti-PD1, showed greater efficacy than epacadostat /
anti-PD1 combination in CT26 tumor bearing mice. A pharmacologically
optimized human KYNase is currently moving toward clinical development
for the treatment of cancers where both IDO/TDO pathways play a
significant immunosuppressive role through kynurenine production.


