Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Measuring relative utilization of aerobic glycolysis in breast
cancer cells by positional isotopic discrimination.


Cancer deaths, including breast cancer, are caused by metastasis of the
malignant tumors to distant locations. However, current methods of
detection cannot distinguish pre-invasive breast cancer from noninvasive
breast tumor or benign breast disease. Population-wide mammographic
screenings have led to increased detection of ductal carcinoma in situ or
DCIS, noninvasive, proliferative cells contained by the basement membrane
of the terminal ductal lobular unit. DCIS is usually not associated with
metastasis and/or cancer death. Each year, in the US alone, about 1.5
million of women who have been diagnosed with DCIS or a suspicious
lump/lesion by mammography will require resection or breast biopsy after
diagnosis for further pathologic analysis. However, ~80-85% of biopsies
result in noninvasive breast disease or benign findings. As a result, a
considerable number of patients suffer from side effects caused by breast
biopsy and/or overtreatment. Therefore, there is an urgent need to find a
biomarker for pre-invasive breast cancer.

The ability of cancer cells to produce lactate through aerobic glycolysis
(the Warburg effect) is a consistent hallmark of cancer, including breast
cancer. Recent advancements in liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry
(LC-MS) technology have significantly improved the sensitivity of this
method compared to traditional NMR or GC-MS-based technologies, which
make it feasible to detect very low concentrations of small molecules or
metabolites. We have recently established a positional isotopic labeling
and LC-MS-based targeted metabolomics method that can directly measure
the conversion from [1-13C]glucose to [3-13C]lactate through glycolysis.
Our results show that metastatic breast cancer cells exhibit a
dramatically increased production of [3-13C]lactate from [1-13C]glucose
even under aerobic conditions as compared to low- or noninvasive breast
cancer cell lines. We found that the rate of aerobic glycolysis is
closely correlated with glucose uptake and lactate production in breast
cancer cells. We have also observed significantly elevated production of
[3-13C]lactate in serum samples of early stage metastatic mammary tumors
developed in mice. Since elevated levels of lactate are closely
correlated to increased tumor aggressiveness, these results suggest that
monitoring of lactate production from glycolysis by targeted metabolomics
may provide a biomarker for pre-invasive breast cancer. These results
will pave the way for further exploration of the elevated production of
lactate as a promising biomarker for pre-invasive breast cancer and for
assessment of therapeutic response in clinical trials.


