Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockdown ARID5A suppresses proliferation of LNCaP prostate cancer
cell through the inhibition of global protein synthesis.


AT-Rich Interaction Domain-containing protein 5a (ARID5A; also known as
Modulator Recognition Factor 1(MRF1) ) was first cloned in our laboratory
by screening a cDNA library of Tera-2 mRNA with an oligonucleotide probe
from the major immediate early gene of human cytomegalo virus. It has
been reported that ARID5A forms a complex with androgen receptor (AR) in
yeast two hybrid assays and is a cosuppressor of AR in transient
transfection assays. In this study, we report that the knockdown of
ARID5a expression inhibits proliferation of LNCaP cells on the contrary
to the expectation from the transient transfection assay. We found that
proliferation of cells stimulated by the treatment with
dihydro-testosterone (DHT) was suppressed when ARID5a expression was
down-regulated by siRNA technology. Androgen stimulates cell
proliferation through activation of mammalian target of rapamycin complex
1 (mTORC1). However, the suppression of ARID5a does not affect
androgen-activated mTOR activity. Furthermore, the expression of
androgen-inducible and androgen-suppressive genes were not affected by
suppression of ARID5a. We concluded that ARID5a is not a cosuppressor of
AR.

Meanwhile, flow cytometer analysis showed that DHT-stimulated cell cycle
was arrested at G1 phase after the knockdown of ARID5a expression. Oil
Red O staining assays showed that the inhibition of ARID5a expression led
to decreased DHT-induced lipid accumulation. Our data further proved that
the knockdown of ARID5a expression inhibited the protein expression of
DHT-induced sterol regulatory element binding transcription factor 1
(SREBP-1). In addition, Western blot analysis revealed that the
down-regulation of ARID5a decreased the expression of cell survival /
proliferation and cell cycle regulation proteins, such as hypoxia
inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF1a), cyclin D1 and cyclin D3. Real time PCR
data revealed that the knockdown of ARID5a expression did not affect the
steady level of HIF1a, cyclin D1 and cyclin D3 mRNA. These suggested that
knockdown of ARID5a expression affected protein expression at
translational and/or post-translational level. Our data suggested that
knockdown of ARID5a expression increased the phosphorylation of
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) which inhibited
translation initiation. S35 labeling assay confirmed that the knockdown
of ARID5a expression suppressed the global protein synthesis. We

showed that one of the four eIF2a kinases, general control
non-derepressible 2 (GCN2) was activated by the suppression of ARID5a
expression. We are currently studying on the mechanisms by which ARID5A
regulates GCN2 kinase.


