Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galectin-3 mediates tumor-stromal interaction by activating
pancreatic stellate cell through integrinβ1/ILK/NF-κB signaling.


Background: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a highly
aggressive tumor with poor survival in PDAC patients. Proinflammatory
cytokines/chemokines play an essential role in tumor microenvironments
associated with its invasive and aggressive phenotype. Galectin-3
(Gal-3), a member of a family of β-galactoside-specific lectins, has
been found to be involved in tumor progression and tissue fibrosis.
However, the precise molecular mechanisms of Gal-3 mediate tumor-stromal
interaction and abundant cytokine production is unknown.

Methods: The effects of Gal-3 on secretion of cytokines/chemokines from
stromal cells (HPSC) were assessed by cytokine array. HPSC proliferation
and invasion were assessed by the MTS and Matrigel invasion assays.
Co-culture and Conditional medium from PDAC tumor cells with genetic
alterations of Gal-3 levels were used to study the interaction between
tumor cell and stromal cells. IL-8 production in both tumor cells and
stromal cells was confirmed by ELISA. Transcriptional activities of
NF-κB and IL-8 were determined by transient transfection. An IKB mutant
construct (IKBM), Mutation of the IL-8 promoter at the NF-κB site, and
inhibitors of NF-κB (Bay11), ILK and neutral antibody of Integrinβ1
were used to determine the signaling pathways evoked by Gal-3.

Results: Gal-3 expression is in both tumor cells and stromal cells of
human and genetic mouse model. Secretion of cytokines such as IL-8,
GM-CSF, CXCL1, CCL2 and IL6 were significantly increased in HPSC cells
treated with rGal-3 which is concomitant with activation of HPSC.
Conditioned medium or co-culture from Panc-1 cells in which Gal-3 was
down-regulated inhibited the growth and invasion capacity of HPSC cells
compared with the vector controls. rGal-3 dramatically induced production
and secretion of IL-8 in HPSCs. Mechanistically, Gal-3 stimulates IL-8
secretion at the level of transcription and through Integrinβ1/ILK/NF-kB
signaling. rGal-3 strongly stimulated integrin β1 expression and NF-κB
transcriptional activity; and inhibitors of ILK inhibitor or NF-κB or
neutral antibody of integrin β1 blocked IL-8 transcriptional activity
and its secretion. NF-κB mutant construct IKBM or mutation of the NF-κB
site in the IL-8 promoter completely block the induction of IL-8 activity
by Gal-3. GEO data and our own patients’ cohort analysis of pancreatic
tumor samples demonstrated that the level of Gal-3, IL-8 and other
cytokines is significantly higher in tumor tissues than those of normal
and pancreatitis.

Conclusion: Collectively, these data suggest that Gal-3 secreted from
tumor cells activate HPSC cells and induce many inflammatory cytokines
including IL-8 production via Integrinβ1/ILK/NF-κB signaling. Thus,
Gal-3 may play a critical role in mediating tumor-stromal interaction and
remodeling tumor associated microenvironments.


