Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a mouse model of KRAS mutated colorectal cancer
tumorigenesis.


Introduction Development of a preclinical animal model that mimics KRAS
mutated colorectal cancer disease etiology is essential for validation of
new therapeutic interventions. Colorectal cancer patients with tumors
harboring KRAS mutation are excluded from receiving anti EGFR monoclonal
antibodies, and currently have no alternate FDA approved treatment
options available. Ongoing research requires validations of different
modalities on a robust preclinical study platform that will resemble the
disease phenotype and genetic profile. In this context we have developed
viable animal mouse model of colorectal cancer bearing KRAS mutation that
authentically serves as a model for the disease.

Methodology: The C57 BL/6 mice with truncated APC floxed allele was
crossed with heterozygous KRAS floxed outbred mice to generate APC f/f
KRAS +/f mouse colony. In another set of breeding APC floxed mice were
crossed with CDX2-Cre-ERT2 mice and selected for APCf/f CDX2-Cre-ERT2
after second round of inbreeding. The final model of the disease was
generated by the cross of the two aforementioned colonies when viable APC
f/f KRAS +/f CDX2-Cre-ERT2 were genotyped and characterized. The model
animals were tamoxifen induced to generate tumors. Micro-PET scan was
used to detect and measure tumor volume. H & E staining was done to
establish neoplasm and immunohistochemistry was performed to determine
histological similarities with human FFPE biopsies. The MSI/MSS status
was also determined.

Results Ø The newly developed animal model develops colonic tumors upon
induction with Tamoxifen. Ø The tumors were malignant as confirmed by H
and E staining. Ø The tumors showed a higher radioactive FDG uptake
(SUV) in micro-PET scan Ø The tumors resembled human colorectal cancer
tissue Ø Once tumor is generated the animals died of cachexia and rectal
bleeding

Conclusion: Heterozygous mutation of KRAS oncogene along with deletion
mutation of Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene is embryonically lethal
in animal models. We have successfully developed a viable animal model of
KRAS mutated colorectal cancer with tamoxifen inducible tumors harboring
KRAS and APC mutations. The tumors mimic the human disease type both
genetically and immunohistochemically. This model can serve as a robust
preclinical platform for understanding the disease mechanism at the
molecular level as well for evaluation of various therapeutic
interventions.


