Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene characterization of lung-tumorspheres for their usage as an
in vitro screening platform for testing new therapeutic strategies.


Background: Lung cancer features like treatment resistance or tumor
relapse have been linked to cancer stem cells (CSCs), a population of
cells with self-renewal properties, and the ability to grow forming
tumorspheres in non-adherent conditions. The aim of this study was to
isolate and characterize tumorspheres from lung cancer cell lines and
tumor tissue from resectable non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients
and to use them as an in vitro platform for drug screening.

Methods: This study was performed on cells from seven NSCLC tumor samples
and five cell lines (H1650, H1993, H1395, A549 and PC9) grown in
monolayer and as spheroids. The expression of 60 genes, including
CSC-markers, pluripotency inducers, cell cycle regulators, invasion
promoters and components of Notch, Wnt and Hedgehog pathways was analyzed
by RTqPCR. Drugs commonly used in clinical guidelines (Cisplatin,
Paclitaxel, Gefitinib, Erlotinib, Afatinib, Pemetrexed and Vinorelbine)
and specific inhibitors of Wnt and Hedgehog pathways (Iwp2, Xav939,
LDE225 and Vismodegib and Salynomicin) were tested in triplicates at 4
different concentrations. Cell viability was measured after 48h and 72h
using MTS Assay, normalized to the respective mock-treated control cells
and presented as percentage of control. Statistical analyses were
considered significant at pMethods: This study was performed on cells
from seven NSCLC tumor samples and five cell lines (H1650, H1993, H1395,
A549 and PC9) grown in monolayer and as spheroids. The expression of 60
genes, including CSC-markers, pluripotency inducers, cell cycle
regulators, invasion promoters and components of Notch, Wnt and Hedgehog
pathways was analyzed by RTqPCR. Drugs commonly used in clinical
guidelines (Cisplatin, Paclitaxel, Gefitinib, Erlotinib, Afatinib,
Pemetrexed and Vinorelbine) and specific inhibitors of Wnt and Hedgehog
pathways (Iwp2, Xav939, LDE225 and Vismodegib and Salynomicin) were
tested in triplicates at 4 different concentrations. Cell viability was
measured after 48h and 72h using MTS Assay, normalized to the respective
mock-treated control cells and presented as percentage of control.
Statistical analyses were considered significant at p<0.05.

Results: Lung tumorspheres had significant increased expression of
CSC-related genes EPCAM1, CD44, CCND1, KLF4 and CDKN1A, compared to their
paired-adherent cells. Likewise, epithelial to mesenquimal transition
(EMT) inducer SNAI1 and integrin ITGA6 were overexpressed in spheroids
too. Regarding stemness pathway, Notch pathway ligands JAG1 and DLL4 and
receptors NOTCH1, NOTCH2 and NOTCH3 showed higher expression in
lungspheres. In Wnt pathway, higher expression levels of WNT3, CTNNB1 and
GSK3B were found in tumorspheres. No significant differences were found
for the rest of genes. Drug screening showed classical anticancer drugs,
such as Cisplatin, Vinorelbine or Pemetrexed, had mild cytotoxic effects
on lungspheres, obtaining significant differences with the
adherent-cultured cells. In contrast, the stemness pathways inhibitors
IWP2, XAV939, Salinomycin and Vismodegib showed higher cytotoxic effects
on spheroids than in cells grown in monolayers.

Conclusions: Lung-tumorspheres derived from cancer cell lines and primary
tumor tissues show increased levels of CSC markers and components of
Notch and Wnt signaling pathways compared to the cells grown in
adherence. Spheroids showed resistance to classical anticancer drugs, and
a greater response to inhibitors from Notch, Wnt and Hedgehog pathways,
strengthening its possible use as a short-term culture platform for a
simple, and cost-effective screening to investigate novel therapeutic
approaches. Supported by grants RD12/0036/0025 from RTICC-FEDER,
PI12-02838/PI15-00753 from ISCIII and SEOM/2012.


