Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apoptosis pathway-focused gene expression profiling of a novel
VEGFR2 inhibitor.


Sprouting of the new blood vessel (angiogenesis) is fundamental to tumor
growth, invasion, and metastatic dissemination. Vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), an endothelial cell-specific mitogen, promotes cell
survival via opposing apoptosis. On the other hand, antagonizing VEGF
pathway suppresses endothelial cell overgrowth and promotes apoptotic
signals leading to the regression of the existing vasculature and
prevents neovascularization of the tumors. In this respect, a new
chemical entity, code named as F16, that was developed in our institute
can effectively stop VEGF-driven angiogenesis by selectively blocking
VEGFR2 and the downstream signals. Our previous studies have revealed
that human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) undergo apoptosis in
response to F16 treatment. However, in the present study, our main focus
was on investigating the status of the signal mediators of the apoptotic
pathway after treating the HUVECs with F16. This was expected to outline
the intracellular sequence of events involved in triggering apoptosis
following F16 treatment. For this purpose, we analyzed apoptosis
pathway-focused gene expression in HUVECs using the human apoptosis RT2
profiler which contains 84 key genes involved in regulation of programmed
cell death. Our experimental results clearly identified up-regulated
pro-apoptotic genes in response to F16 treatment which include tumor
necrosis factor -8 and -10A (TNF-8 and TNF-10A), tumor necrosis factor
superfamily member 9 (TNFRSF9), FAS cell surface receptor (FAS), FAS
ligand (FASLG), lymphotoxin alpha (LTA), caspase 5 (CASP5), and
cytochrome c (CYCS). Moreover, a few anti-apoptotic genes were also
up-regulated which include B-cell lymphoma 2 related protein A1 (BCL2A1),
caspase 14 (CASP14), Bcl2 associated athanogene 3 (BAG3), and interleukin
10 (IL-10). However, anti-apoptotic genes such as Bcl-2, Bcl-2 like 10
(BCL2L10), baculoviral IAP repeat containing -3 and -6 (BIRC-3, and
BIRC-6), CASP8 and FADD like apoptosis regulator (CFLAR), and insulin
like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) were found to be significantly
downregulated. Interestingly, no changes were found in the expression of
genes related to DNA damage and repair pathways such as TP53, ABL1,
CIDEA, and CIDEB. This indicates that F16 may not provoke DNA
damage-induced apoptosis instead, it stimulates the intrinsic or the
extrinsic pathway. In conclusion, the diverse gene expressions impacting
apoptosis related factors shows that F16 can induce apoptosis via
potentiation of TNF- and FAS- signaling. (This research was supported by
the generous funds provided by the Royal Dames of Cancer Research Inc.,
Ft. Lauderdale, Florida)


