Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Study on telomere shelterin component TPP1 in esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma.


Esophageal cancer (EC) is one of the most aggressive cancer and ranks the
sixth leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide, approximately
70% of global esophageal carcinoma cases occur in China and esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is the most frequent histological subtype
of EC. Lacking of reliable early diagnostic markers and efficient medical
and surgical treatment approaches, the five-year survival rate of ESCC is
only about 4.4%.Therefore exploration of the genetic basis and the
affiliated molecular mechanisms in ESCC could be beneficial to improve
the diagnosis, therapy, and prevention of this disease.

As an important telomere binding protein, TPP1 protects the ends of
telomeres and maintains the genomic stability and integrity of
chromosomes in eukaryotes. Previous investigation discovered that TPP1
might play an important role in the carcinogenesis and progression of
some cancers. However, whether and/or how TPP1 participates in ESCC
remains unclear. Here TPP1 was studied in 65 ESCC patients’ specimens
including tumor tissue, the adjacent tissue, and the peripheral blood
leukocytes, also the ESCC cell lines were employed to further explore the
molecular mechanisms of TPP1 involved in the tumorigenesis of ESCC.

In this study, TPP1 mRNA and protein were measured in the ESCC tissue
specimens, peripheral blood leukocytes and also in ESCC cell lines using
real time RT-PCR and Western Blot. The results showed that TPP1 mRNA
level was significantly higher in ESCC tumor tissues compared with the
adjacent tissues (PIn this study, TPP1 mRNA and protein were measured in
the ESCC tissue specimens, peripheral blood leukocytes and also in ESCC
cell lines using real time RT-PCR and Western Blot. The results showed
that TPP1 mRNA level was significantly higher in ESCC tumor tissues
compared with the adjacent tissues (P<0.05); the same trend was observed
in ESCC cells (Eca109, Kyse150) vs human esophageal epithelial cells
(HET-1A), respectively. However, in peripheral blood leukocytes, the
expression of TPP1 did not show any difference between the cancer
patients and the healthy controls. Among the 65 ESCC patients, TPP1
protein expression in 46 patients was obvious higher in tumor tissues
than that in the matched adjacent tissues, although there were 19
patients in exception. Moreover, the TPP1 expression was correlated with
the lymph nodes metastasis and CYF2, which is one of the potential tumor
markers for diagnosis of esophageal carcinoma.

To further explore the potential biological function of TPP1 in ESCC,
stably- transfecting shRNA-TPP1 (sh-TPP1) and shRNA-Negative Control
(sh-NC) expression constructs in ESCC cell lines were performed to study
TPP1’s roles in ESCC. The colongenic assay showed that depletion of
TPP1 decreased ESCC cells proliferation and cell growth, and the wound
healing experiment and cell invasion transwell chamber test demonstrated
that down-regulation of TPP1 suppressed the cell migration and invasion
capabilities in vitro.

Taken together, our findings revealed that TPP1 might play crucial roles
in the pathogenesis of ESCC and targeting TPP1 could be a valuable
potential for ESCC early diagnosis, intervention and therapeutics.


