Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peretinoin prevents the accumulation of somatic gene mutations and
reverts neoplastic lesions to normal liver-like in platelet-derived
growth factor-c transgenic mice.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) develops with progressive accumulation of
multiple genetic changes. An acyclic retinoid peretinoin is reported to
suppress the development of HCC, but the molecular mechanism in detail
remains to be obscure. Here we evaluated the effect of peretinoin on
preneoplastic nodules and HCC developed in platelet derived growth
factor-c (PDGF-C) transgenic mice liver by gadolinium ethoxybenzyl
diethylenetriamide pentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA)-enhanced magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and whole exome sequence analysis. We confirmed
the progressive accumulation of somatic mutations in hypervascular liver
cancer tissues compared with hypovascular precancerous tissues and
non-cancerous background liver tissues in PDGF-C transgenic mice.
Surprisingly, peretinoin treatment in HCC as well as preneoplastic
nodules resulted in the accumulation of less gene mutations compared with
vehicle. Gd-EOB-DTPA uptake capacity and its transporter OATP1 was
confirmed to be re-activated in peretinoin treated nodules in mice. Gene
and protein expression analysis indicated the inactivation of cell cycle
with low Ki-67 labeling indexes in peretinoin treated nodules. The
reversion of Gd-EOB-DTPA uptake capacity was confirmed in preneoplastic
nodules and a subset of classical hypervascular HCCs. Notably, peretinoin
supplementation induced the expression of OATP1B3 in mature
hepatocyte-like HCC cell lines in vitro, whereas supplementation of
tretinoin (all-trans retinoic acid) had no such effects and rather
suppressed OATP1B3. Taken together, our data suggested the utility of
peretinoin to revert the malignant transformation processes of
hepatocytes by preventing accumulation of gene mutations especially in
early stages of hepatocarcinogenesis. Peretinoin but not tretinoin can
induce the expression of a mature hepatocyte marker OATP1B3, suggesting
that peretinoin may exert its anti-tumor effect with hepatocytic
differentiation capacity independently of the activation of retinoic acid
signaling.


