Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of 3D tumoroid systems to define immune and cytotoxic
therapeutic responses based on tumoroid and tissue slice culture
molecular signatures.


Historically, the successful establishment of exponentially growing
viable in vitro tumor cell cultures has been found to occur from a
minority of tumor tissues following artificial selection of a
sub-population of tumor cells. Such limitations make it difficult to
model patient variability in drug responses in vitro. Moreover, the lack
of stromal cells that play a critical role in tumor viability, growth and
drug response in vivo make the prediction of tumor response of
immune-based therapeutics challenging. Through recent advances in
three-dimensional (3D) culture (“tumoroid”) methodologies some of
these hurdles are beginning to be addressed. However, it is currently
unclear to what extent such models can be engineered to retain important
phenotypic properties of infiltrating immune cells from the tumor tissue
of origin. To better understand these limitations, we have developed 3D
tumoroids and tumor slice in vitro cultures from tumors derived from
patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) to evaluate immune cell populations
infiltrating cultured CRC tissues. Furthermore, we have developed a
system whereby the patient’s immune cells are re-incorporated into
tumoroid in vitro cultures to evaluate the ability of the culture to
mimic an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (ITM). Here we
demonstrate the development of a propagating 3D epithelial tumoroid
culture system from resected CRC tissue where we assessed the response to
standard FDA approved therapy within weeks of surgical resection.
Interestingly, tumoroid cultures from a CRC patient were highly sensitive
to the thymidylate synthase inhibitor fluorouracil (adrucil) but less
sensitive to the combination of the nucleoside analog trifluridine and
the thymidine phosphorylase inhibitor tipiracil (Lonsurf). We isolated
approximately four (4) million immune cells using Percoll density
gradient centrifugation and flow cytometry. Re-introduction of isolated
immune cells derived from surrounding and infiltrating tumor tissue and
CD45+ tumor infiltrating hematopoietic cells displayed prolonged (>10
days) survival in co-culture. Moreover, established tumor slice cultures
contained both an outer epithelial and inner stromal cell compartment
mimicking tumor structure in vivo. Collectively, these data suggest that
CRC tumoroid in vitro assays can be used for the assessment of some
therapeutic responses. While further work is required to optimize this
system, 3D tumoroid and slice culture assays may represent a novel in
vitro approach to assess therapeutic efficacy of novel therapeutics and
evaluate mechanisms of therapy resistance in general as well as for
patient-specific response.


