Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of miR-15b-3p in mitoquinone induced autophagy of breast
cancer cells.


Mitoquinone, a redox-active mitochondrially targeted ubiquinone,
activates autophagy more potently in breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231)
than in normal breast cells (MCF-12A). Mitoquinone induces the production
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and a concomitant activation of the
Nrf2-dependent antioxidant response. MicroRNA are endogenous small double
stranded RNA that bind to the 3’ UTR of several target mRNAs and
function through translational repression or mRNA degradation. The goal
of this study was to evaluate microRNA as a link between oxidative stress
and autophagy signaling. We performed RNA sequencing analysis of the
microRNAs modulated by mitoquinone treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells. miRNAs
were identified using Illumina RNA sequencing. DEseq analysis revealed 97
miRNAs that were differentially expressed at an α Mitoquinone, a
redox-active mitochondrially targeted ubiquinone, activates autophagy
more potently in breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231) than in normal breast
cells (MCF-12A). Mitoquinone induces the production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and a concomitant activation of the Nrf2-dependent
antioxidant response. MicroRNA are endogenous small double stranded RNA
that bind to the 3’ UTR of several target mRNAs and function through
translational repression or mRNA degradation. The goal of this study was
to evaluate microRNA as a link between oxidative stress and autophagy
signaling. We performed RNA sequencing analysis of the microRNAs
modulated by mitoquinone treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells. miRNAs were
identified using Illumina RNA sequencing. DEseq analysis revealed 97
miRNAs that were differentially expressed at an α < 0.05. Within this
set, 15 miRNAs were down-regulated by stimulation with mitoquinone making
them attractive as potential autophagy inhibitors. We characterized the
role of a miR-15b-3p by transfecting the cells with miR-mimic and
anti-miR before inducing an autophagy response. Western blot analysis
showed a reduction in the expression of the autophagy marker LC3, the
autophagosome chaperon p62 and the transcription factor Nrf2 in presence
of the miR-15b-3p mimic. Conversely, miR-15b-3p mimic pre-treatment
increased the expression of the cell cycle inhibitor p27 both at the
basal level and after mitoquinone stimulation for 48 hrs. The
administration of the anti-miR-15b-3p did not change the expression level
of these proteins suggesting that miR-15b-3p may work with other miRs
toward regulating autophagy. Combining the action of miR-15b-3p mimic
with redox active chemotherapeutic drugs could represent a novel strategy
for breast cancer therapy by reducing survival signaling through
autophagy.


