Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mastl, a novel therapeutic target in colon cancer.


Combining chemoradiation with agents that modulate tumor-specific
pathways such as cell cycle checkpoints has shown immense promise in
preclinical and clinical studies. To ensure that only healthy cells
proliferate, checkpoints have evolved that induce cell-cycle arrest in
response to the detection of defects that may have arisen during DNA
replication or other steps leading to mitosis. The G2/M checkpoint Mastl
in mammals (and Greatwall in Xenopus and Drosophila) prevents cells from
premature entry into mitosis, and thus minimizes chromosome
mis-segregation. Our preliminary data demonstrate that Mastl not only
plays a key role in regulating cell cycle and mitosis but also regulates
key oncogenic signaling pathways and assists therapy resistance in cancer
cells. Interestingly, genetic elimination of Mastl expression in vivo
compromised survival in young mice, however, only mild alterations were
found when deleted in adult mice.

Here we show using two clinical and genomic databases using a total of
265 patient samples that Mastl expression increases in colon cancer
across all cancer stages compared with the normal colon tissue (P Here we
show using two clinical and genomic databases using a total of 265
patient samples that Mastl expression increases in colon cancer across
all cancer stages compared with the normal colon tissue (P < 0.001).
Moreover, high Mastl expression associates with high-risk colorectal
cancer patients and poor prognosis. Silencing of Mastl expression using
gene-specific shRNA, in two different colon cancer cells with high
endogenous expression of Mastl, induced cell death/apoptosis supporting
important role of Mastl in colon cancer cell survival. To further
determine molecular mechanism/s by which Mastl regulates cell survival,
we screened a panel of oncogenes. It was interesting that the knock-down
of Mastl expression sharply inhibited β-catenin/c-myc signaling, key
regulators of colon carcinogenesis, in both cell types. To further expand
the breadth of this investigation and to identify additional key players
in Mastl dependent regulation of colon cancer cell survival, we performed
an oncogenic array analysis using above cell lines with or without stable
inhibition of Mastl expression. Here, we observed robust effects of
inhibiting Mastl upon anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-xl and survivin.
Notably, c-myc regulates survivin and Bcl-xl expressions.

Additional studies, where colon cancer cells were subjected to 5-FU
treatment sharply induced Mastl expression and combinational therapy
using 5FU and (targeting) Mastl resulted in significantly increased death
among these cells (P>0.0025; versus control). Taken together, we here
report a novel and previously undescribed role of Mastl in colon cancer
progression, malignancy and therapy resistance potentially by regulating
cell survival in manners dependent on β-catenin/c-Myc/Survivin/Bcl-xl
signaling.


