Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of claudin-3 expression induces IL6/gp130/Stat3 signaling to
promote colon cancer malignancy.


Genetic and epigenetic aberrations drive the formation of a benign
colorectal adenoma and its progression to the full-blown carcinoma.
Hyperactivated Wnt/β-catenin signaling acts as a switch to induce EMT
and promote colorectal cancer. Additionally, IL-6/Stat-3 signaling,
activated by microbial translocation through the dysregulated mucosal
barrier in colon adenomas, facilitates the adenoma to adenocarcinomas
transition. However, inter-dependence between these signaling pathways in
their capacity to communicate with mucosal barrier to promote colon
cancer remains unclear. In current study, we have discovered, using a
comprehensive investigative regimen, a novel and tissue specific role of
claudin-3, tight junction integral protein, in inhibiting colon cancer
progression by serving as the common rheostat of Stat-3 and Wnt-signaling
activation. Notably, in our analysis, using mRNA and protein expression,
and utilizing samples from a large patient cohort (Genetic and epigenetic
aberrations drive the formation of a benign colorectal adenoma and its
progression to the full-blown carcinoma. Hyperactivated Wnt/β-catenin
signaling acts as a switch to induce EMT and promote colorectal cancer.
Additionally, IL-6/Stat-3 signaling, activated by microbial translocation
through the dysregulated mucosal barrier in colon adenomas, facilitates
the adenoma to adenocarcinomas transition. However, inter-dependence
between these signaling pathways in their capacity to communicate with
mucosal barrier to promote colon cancer remains unclear. In current
study, we have discovered, using a comprehensive investigative regimen, a
novel and tissue specific role of claudin-3, tight junction integral
protein, in inhibiting colon cancer progression by serving as the common
rheostat of Stat-3 and Wnt-signaling activation. Notably, in our
analysis, using mRNA and protein expression, and utilizing samples from a
large patient cohort (<250 CRC specimen), we found claudin-3 expression
to be significantly suppressed (pGenetic and epigenetic aberrations drive
the formation of a benign colorectal adenoma and its progression to the
full-blown carcinoma. Hyperactivated Wnt/β-catenin signaling acts as a
switch to induce EMT and promote colorectal cancer. Additionally,
IL-6/Stat-3 signaling, activated by microbial translocation through the
dysregulated mucosal barrier in colon adenomas, facilitates the adenoma
to adenocarcinomas transition. However, inter-dependence between these
signaling pathways in their capacity to communicate with mucosal barrier
to promote colon cancer remains unclear. In current study, we have
discovered, using a comprehensive investigative regimen, a novel and
tissue specific role of claudin-3, tight junction integral protein, in
inhibiting colon cancer progression by serving as the common rheostat of
Stat-3 and Wnt-signaling activation. Notably, in our analysis, using mRNA
and protein expression, and utilizing samples from a large patient cohort
(<250 CRC specimen), we found claudin-3 expression to be significantly
suppressed (p<0.001 versus normal) in cancer tissues versus normal
mucosa. The colon tissues from the established mouse models of colon
cancer (APCmin mice and Azoxymethane (AOM)-DSS-induced colon cancer)
demonstrated similar tumor specific decrease in claudin-3 expression.
Interestingly, claudin-3 negative tumors retained E-cadherin expression.
Most notably, we found a significant and positive correlation (pGenetic
and epigenetic aberrations drive the formation of a benign colorectal
adenoma and its progression to the full-blown carcinoma. Hyperactivated
Wnt/β-catenin signaling acts as a switch to induce EMT and promote
colorectal cancer. Additionally, IL-6/Stat-3 signaling, activated by
microbial translocation through the dysregulated mucosal barrier in colon
adenomas, facilitates the adenoma to adenocarcinomas transition. However,
inter-dependence between these signaling pathways in their capacity to
communicate with mucosal barrier to promote colon cancer remains unclear.
In current study, we have discovered, using a comprehensive investigative
regimen, a novel and tissue specific role of claudin-3, tight junction
integral protein, in inhibiting colon cancer progression by serving as
the common rheostat of Stat-3 and Wnt-signaling activation. Notably, in
our analysis, using mRNA and protein expression, and utilizing samples
from a large patient cohort (<250 CRC specimen), we found claudin-3
expression to be significantly suppressed (p<0.001 versus normal) in
cancer tissues versus normal mucosa. The colon tissues from the
established mouse models of colon cancer (APCmin mice and Azoxymethane
(AOM)-DSS-induced colon cancer) demonstrated similar tumor specific
decrease in claudin-3 expression. Interestingly, claudin-3 negative
tumors retained E-cadherin expression. Most notably, we found a
significant and positive correlation (p<0.05) of the greater levels of
claudin-3 expression with patient survival. These findings however
contrasted an upregulated claudin-3 expression in other cancer types and
implicated differential epigenetic regulation. In further studies, naïve
claudin-3-/- mice revealed dedifferentiated {significant down regulation
of P-27 (pGenetic and epigenetic aberrations drive the formation of a
benign colorectal adenoma and its progression to the full-blown
carcinoma. Hyperactivated Wnt/β-catenin signaling acts as a switch to
induce EMT and promote colorectal cancer. Additionally, IL-6/Stat-3
signaling, activated by microbial translocation through the dysregulated
mucosal barrier in colon adenomas, facilitates the adenoma to
adenocarcinomas transition. However, inter-dependence between these
signaling pathways in their capacity to communicate with mucosal barrier
to promote colon cancer remains unclear. In current study, we have
discovered, using a comprehensive investigative regimen, a novel and
tissue specific role of claudin-3, tight junction integral protein, in
inhibiting colon cancer progression by serving as the common rheostat of
Stat-3 and Wnt-signaling activation. Notably, in our analysis, using mRNA
and protein expression, and utilizing samples from a large patient cohort
(<250 CRC specimen), we found claudin-3 expression to be significantly
suppressed (p<0.001 versus normal) in cancer tissues versus normal
mucosa. The colon tissues from the established mouse models of colon
cancer (APCmin mice and Azoxymethane (AOM)-DSS-induced colon cancer)
demonstrated similar tumor specific decrease in claudin-3 expression.
Interestingly, claudin-3 negative tumors retained E-cadherin expression.
Most notably, we found a significant and positive correlation (p<0.05) of
the greater levels of claudin-3 expression with patient survival. These
findings however contrasted an upregulated claudin-3 expression in other
cancer types and implicated differential epigenetic regulation. In
further studies, naïve claudin-3-/- mice revealed dedifferentiated
{significant down regulation of P-27 (p<0.05) and vimentin expression
versus WT mice} and leaky colonic epithelium. Moreover, claudin-3-/- mice
demonstrated increased colon tumor burden and invasive adenocarcinoma
when subjected to colon cancer. Wnt-signaling hyperactivation, albeit in
GSK-3β independent manner, characterized colon cancer in claudin-3-/-
mice. Claudin-3 loss also upregulated the gp130/IL6/Stat3 signaling in
colonic epithelium potentially assisted by infiltrating immune
organization. Genetic and pharmacological studies confirmed that
claudin-3 loss induces Wnt/β-catenin activation in Stat-3-dependent
manner to promote colon cancer. Overall, these novel findings identify
claudin-3 as a therapeutic target for inhibiting overactivation of
Wnt-signaling to prevent CRC malignancy.


