Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Precise copy-number profiling of single cells isolated from FFPE
tissues by low-pass whole-genome sequencing.


Introduction

Chromosome instability (CIN) is a hallmark of cancer, acting by boosting
genetic alterations responsible of tumorigenesis, progression and
heterogeneity. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) protocols are established
methods for studying copy-number alterations (CNA) in single-cells,
following a necessary whole-genome amplification (WGA) step. We
previously presented a method for single-cell CNA profiling of CTCs based
on shallow WGS of LM-PCR based WGA products. Here for the first time, we
show that the same method may be employed even on single FFPE cells,
overcoming the challenges of DNA degradation and damage linked to this
type of samples.

Methods

Two 50μm thick FFPE sections from pancreas ductal adenocarcinoma with
Two 50μm thick FFPE sections from pancreas ductal adenocarcinoma with
<20% tumor content were processed following DEPArray™ sample
preparation protocol, including cell dissociation and staining with
vimentin, keratin and DAPI, and DNA quality was assessed using the
DEPArray FFPE QC kit (QC=0.7). Cell pools (n=15, range=6-213 cells) and
single-cells (n=11) from pure tumor and stromal populations were
recovered in separate tubes and lysed. A pool of 86 tumor cells and a
pool of 213 stromal cells were used for low-pass WGS on MiSeq, obtaining
≈2M paired-end reads on average. By contrast, other cell pools and
single cells were firstly whole-genome amplified using the Ampli1™ WGA
kit and then sequenced at shallow coverage using Ampli1 LowPass kit and
IonTorrent PGM, with ≈500k single-end reads as mean throughput per
library. The genome integrity (GI) of WGA samples was evaluated by Ampli1
QC, a PCR-assay based on 4 amplicons of different lengths.

Results

The purity of DEPArray sorting was confirmed by the large number of
chromosome alterations in sorted tumor and the parallel lack of gains and
losses in sorted stromal pools and single-cells. A titration test was
conducted measuring the consistency of CNA profiles of tumor WGA products
starting from different number of cells, ranging from 117 down to single
cells. For the purpose, we employed a Receiver Operating Characteristic
(ROC) curve using the non-amplified tumor population as reference.
Results showed an excellent performance level with a mean Area Under
Curve (AUC) equals to 0.93. Interestingly, lower AUCs (0.87) were
observed for single-cells, due to some level of inter-cell heterogeneity.
Moreover, the proposed low-pass WGS method demonstrated a high resiliency
to DNA degradation as quality of CNA profiles, measured by Derivative Log
Ratio Spread (DLRS), only showed a weak correlation with GI level, with
high-quality CNA profiles obtained also with the lowest GI value.

Conclusions

Presented approach for copy-number profiling of tumor single-cells
isolated by DEPArray digital sorter and processed with Ampli1 workflow
has proven to be a reliable and valuable application for the molecular
characterization of tumor clones in degraded samples as FFPE tissues.


