Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOX9 regulates cancer stem-like cells in non-small cell lung
cancer.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide in both men
and women, every year killing more people than breast, prostate and colon
cancers combined. Drug/radiation resistance and tumor relapse contribute
to low patient survival, which has largely been attributed to the
acquisition of stem-like cells (CSCs), or tumor initiating cells.
Moreover, conventional therapies are not effective against CSCs. This
signifies the need to identify mechanisms of CSC regulation which could
lead to the discovery of CSC-specific drug targets and the development of
more effective drug therapies. An embryonic transcription factor SOX9 has
been implicated in CSC regulation in a number of cancer types, but little
is known about its role in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We
demonstrated that high SOX9 expression correlates with poor survival in
lung cancer patients by analyzing The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data. We
hypothesized that SOX9 plays a key role in tumor progression and
chemoresistance by upregulating CSCs in NSCLC. To test this hypothesis,
SOX9 expression was stably or transiently knocked down in NSCLC cells,
and their effects on CSC formation and biomarkers, and on drug resistance
were investigated. Our results showed that SOX9 knockdown decreased the
number of tumor spheres in NSCLC cell lines. Furthermore, SOX9 knockdown
downregulated the expression and activity of stem cell marker ALDH1A1 as
determined by Western blot and flow cytometric assays. Consistent with
this finding, overexpression of SOX9 in non-cancer lung epithelial
Beas-2B cells elevated tumor sphere formation, supporting the role of
SOX9 in CSC regulation. Analysis of the soft agar colony formation assay
further showed that SOX9 knockdown inhibited anchorage-independent growth
in NSCLC cells. More importantly, SOX9 knockdown resulted in an increased
sensitivity of the cells to a chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin, whereas
SOX9 overexpression decreased it. Together, our results indicate an
important role of SOX9 in the regulation of CSCs in NSCLC and suggest its
potential utility as a drug target for chemoresistant lung cancer.


