Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TET2-loss modifies androgen signaling in prostate cancer.


Molecular markers for metastatic prostate cancer (PCa) can be identified
by sequencing metastatic tumor genomes. We recently identified cancer
gene mutations in a patient with metastatic disease using next generation
sequencing (NGS) of DNA from 5 metastatic tumors and blood. We
characterized a somatic non-conservative substitution in the
methylcytosine dioxygenase ten-eleven translocation 2 (TET2) in all
metastatic tumors but not the blood or primary adenocarcinoma. Analysis
of metastatic tumors from additional patients revealed frequent somatic
loss and sequence alteration of TET2, which was previously observed to be
altered in 5-15% of myeloid, kidney and colon cancer. Genome-wide
association studies previously identified non-coding risk variants
associated with PCa and melanoma, and rare germline missense variants are
observed in African-Americans with PCa. We sought to further investigate
the role of TET2 in PCa. We performed fine-mapping of PCa risk across the
TET2 locus using genotypes from the PEGASUS case-control cohort and
identify six new risk variants in introns 1 and 2. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays show two risk SNPs are bound by the transcription
factor octamer-binding protein 1 (Oct1). Full length TET2 (2002 aa) is
expressed in normal prostate and cancer tissue and is significantly
reduced in a subset of the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) PCa tumors that are
associated with metastatic disease and reduced disease-free survival.
TET2-loss drives a cancer phenotype as siRNA-mediated knockdown (KD)
significantly increases LNCaP and DU145 cell proliferation, and LNCaP
transwell migration and wound healing. Affinity chromatography, mass
spectrometry and co-immunoprecipitation confirm that endogenous TET2
binds the androgen receptor (AR) in LNCaP cell extracts. TET2 KD alters
the expression of a subset of androgen-responsive genes including
increased prostate-specific antigen (KLK3/PSA) expression, and published
data indicate TET-catalyzed hydroxymethylcytosine (hmC) and TET2 binding
sites proximal to KLK3. Analysis of TCGA PCa tumor RNA-seq reveals TET2
expression is co-regulated with the expression of genes encoding
functions metabolizing 2-oxoglutarate and succinate including the lysine
demethylase KDM6A, BRCA1-associated BAP1, and citric acid cycle enzymes
IDH1-2, SDHA-B and FH. Co-expression is conserved across all 31 TCGA
cancers examined. Examination of genomic locations associated with
TET2-binding and hmC, and gene expression changes during androgen
signaling indicate a putative role for TET2 as an energy sensor that
modifies androgen-AR signaling. Decreased TET2 mRNA expression in TCGA
PCa tumors that are associated with reduced patient survival indicates
TET2 expression may be an informative biomarker of PCa disease
progression.


