Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidation of the molecular mechanism of MenaINV expression,
invadopodium maturation and tumor cell intravasation during breast cancer
dissemination by TMEM.


Numerous clinical studies have identified Tumor MicroEnvironment of
Metastasis (TMEM) and MenaCalc as distinct but functionally interrelated
prognostic indicators of distant metastasis in breast cancer patients.
TMEM sites are the only sites where tumor cells intravasate in mammary
tumors. TMEM score is calculated histologically as the density of
tripartite microanatomical structures involving a perivascular
macrophage, a Mena-expressing tumor cell and an endothelial cell, all
three in direct physical contact. On the other hand, MenaCalc represents
the pattern of Mena splice-isoforms present in a tumor sample. MenaINV is
the key metastasis-promoting Mena splice-isoform driving tumor cell
migration toward blood vessels, intravasation and dissemination. However,
the precise molecular mechanisms relating TMEM formation and function and
MenaINV expression in these critical steps of the metastatic cascade have
not been elucidated.

Here we show that MenaINV promotes invadopodium-based proteolysis, which
is required for tumor cell invasion and transendothelial migration, by
preventing the localization of the phosphatase PTP1B to invadopodia.
Interestingly, PTP1B regulates invadopodium maturation by limiting
cortactin phosphorylation at a key residue (Y421) that is necessary for
actin polymerization during invadopodium maturation. Additionally, we
demonstrate that MenaINV expression, invadopodium activity, and
subsequent transendothelial migration are induced in tumor cells via
Notch1-mediated signaling induced by contact of tumor cells with
macrophages. Knock-down of MenaINV expression in tumor cells leads to a
proportional decrease in mature invadopodium formation. Complete
knock-out of Mena in mouse mammary tumors (PyMT-MMTV) abolishes TMEM
assembly and TMEM functions, including TMEM-dependent vascular
permeability, circulating tumor cells and lung metastases.

In summary, our work shows that macrophage contact of TMEM-associated
tumor cells during TMEM assembly stimulates Notch1 to drive expression of
MenaINV in tumor cells. MenaINV expression then inhibits PTP1B at
invadopodia to promote cortactin phosphorylation at invadopodium
precursors, driving invadopodium maturation and promoting
transendothelial migration. These findings provide, for the first time,
an integrative molecular mechanism for two clinically validated
prognostic indicators of metastatic risk, TMEM and MenaCalc, and identify
new drug targets for limiting the metastatic spread of breast cancer.


