Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation between PD-L1 expression and tumor clinicopathologic
characteristics in early stage breast cancer.


Background: Upregulation of Programmed Death-Ligand 1 (PD-L1) in tumor
cells results in the deactivation of cytotoxic T cells in the tumor
microenvironment and development of tolerance to the malignant cells. We
aimed to investigate the role of PD-L1 expression in early stage breast
cancer and its correlation with tumor characteristics as well as assess
the relationship between PD-L1 membrane protein and gene expression.

Methods: For this single center, retrospective study, women (age >18
years) with early stage breast cancer diagnosed between January 2005 and
December 2005 were enrolled. Key inclusion criteria for enrollment were
pathologic diagnosis of DCIS or invasive ductal/lobular carcinoma, stage
0-2, with local resection done in 2005. Patients had to have adequate
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor specimens for PD-L1 testing. We
hypothesized that higher levels of PD-L1 expression correlates with more
aggressive disease and worse prognosis. We used histopathological
analysis, medical chart review, and PD-L1 expression via
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) for data analysis. Chi Square and one way ANOVA
analyses were used to compare clinical and pathological characteristics
of patients with high and low PD-L1 expression.

Results In 2005, 368 women were diagnosed with breast cancer at
Providence-Providence Park Hospital of which 31 pathological specimens
were obtained for exploratory analysis. PD-L1 protein expression was
determined to be positive if more than 1% of the tumor cells showed
partial or complete membrane staining for PD-L1 by IHC. All patients with
DCIS (n=7) were negative for PDL-1 expression although 3 showed gene
expression by PCR. After excluding the DCIS specimens, 17% (4/24) of
early stage breast cancer was found to express PD-L1 protein. Seven of 24
specimens (excluding DCIS) were positive for PD-L1 RNA by RT-PCR. There
was no relationship between PD-L1 protein and mRNA expression (p=0.552).
75% of the PD-L1 positive specimens by IHC were also ER positive although
this was not statistically significant (p=0.312). There was a trend
toward larger tumors for those expressing PD-L1 on the cell surface (mean
size of 2.7 cm vs 1.7 cm, p= 0.07). All the PD-L1 positive specimens had
increased lymphocyte infiltration, although no statistical significance
was observed. At 10 years from initial diagnosis, all-cause mortality
rate was 29% (7/24). The rate of death in PD-L1 positive patients was 2/4
(50%) compared to 5/20 (25%) in PD-L1 negative group.

Conclusion: Expression of PD-L1 in early stage breast cancer could be an
important indicator for more aggressive disease and supports
investigating checkpoint inhibitors in this population. Further
investigation is needed to determine its applicability in clinical
decisions and effects on treatment.


