Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of epigenetic agents on methylation of DNA in vitro and in
vivo, as measured with stable isotopically labeled methionine.


Background: Modulation of cytidine methylation in DNA continues to be
actively investigated as a target for chemotherapy. The primary source of
methyl groups is methionine, via S-adenosyl-methionine (SAM) as the
direct methyl donor for DNA methyl transferases, e.g., DNMT1. Methods
were developed using stable isotopes and mass spec detection to examine
the flux of the DNMT reaction and modification to this flux by cytidine
analogs such as decitabine, an established hypomethylation agent, and
5-aza-4’-thio-2’-deoxy-cytidine (AzaTdC), currently under development
at NCI.

Methods: For in vitro studies; A549, H23, HCT116, H522, and OVCAR3 cell
lines grown in RPMI1640 media supplemented with 10% FBS were exposed to
D3-methionine(20uM) and either decitabine or AzaTdC (NSC77586) at 0 to
5uM in the media for 0 to 48hr. For in vivo studies; mice were maintained
under standard ACUC protocols and practices. Tumors were grown SC in the
flank area. Stable labeled methionine, decitabine and AzaTdC were
administered as an oral bolus. At set times, mice were sacrificed and
tumors, tissues and plasma samples collected. DNA was extracted and
purified from cells and tissues using PureLink Genomic DNA kits
(Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s instruction. The purified DNA
was digested to nucleosides for analysis. The isotopic enrichment in
5-methyl-deoxy-cytidine (mdC) was determined by analysis using HPLC
coupled to a QE mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

Results: D3-methionine was found to be an efficient precursor via SAM for
the methylation of cytidine in DNA. Fortification of basal media (100uM
methionine) with 20uM D3-methionine yielded D3-mdC enrichment of 5-15% in
24 hr, depending on cell line. All cell lines were found to have some
enrichment. Treatment of cells with either decitabine or AzaTdC caused a
concentration dependent reduction of the enrichment for mdC in DNA. In
mice, after an oral dose of D3-methionine, enrichment of methionine and
SAM in plasma peaked within 1hr and fell to 5% of peak levels within 5hr.
Methionine and SAM enrichment in tissues followed similar time curves. At
50mg/kg of D3-methionine, no perturbation was observed for endogenous
levels of either methionine or SAM. Enrichment of mdC in DNA was
detectable in 1hr, maximal in 5hr, and remained constant for up to 48hr.
When mice were treated with 1-2 mg/kg of either decitabine or AzaTdC
along with D3-methionine, the level of enrichment of mdC in DNA was
reduced by 20-70% in tumors, bone marrow and intestine.

Conclusions: Stable labeled methionine can be efficiently used to monitor
the flux of methyl groups into mdC in DNA, both in vitro and in vivo.
Changes in the flux of the methylation reaction can be used to assess the
extent and time course for inhibition caused by cytidine analogs. These
techniques may have relevance for improvement of doses and schedules to
produce epigenetic modulation. Funded by NCI Contract No.
HHSN261200800001E


