Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutant p53-driven metastasis explored utilizing a traceable,
conditional osteosarcoma model.


TP53 is the most frequently mutated gene in cancer and missense mutations
in particular account for the majority of mutations. Mutant p53 proteins
exert oncogenic Gain-of-Function (GOF) properties that contribute to
increased migration and invasion in culture and metastasis in vivo. To
elucidate how mutant p53 drives metastasis, we developed a traceable
somatic osteosarcoma model that initiates with a single p53 mutation
(p53R172H or p53R245W), or p53 loss specifically in osteoblasts using
Osx-cre. To mark tumor cells, we utilized the mTmG allele which expresses
membrane-targeted Tomato (mT) prior to Cre-mediated excision and
membrane-targeted green fluorescent protein (mG) after excision so the
tumor cells become GFP+ and the stromal cells remain RFP+. In this high
penetrant, short latency mouse model, tumor micro-metastasis can be
detected by GFP expression in the context of a normal stroma and immune
system. The cohort has developed osteosarcoma with complete penetrance
and an average survival of 304± 65 day. We observed metastasis in 55% of
p53 mutant osteosarcomas which was significantly higher than 26%
metastasis observed in p53 null tumors (pTP53 is the most frequently
mutated gene in cancer and missense mutations in particular account for
the majority of mutations. Mutant p53 proteins exert oncogenic
Gain-of-Function (GOF) properties that contribute to increased migration
and invasion in culture and metastasis in vivo. To elucidate how mutant
p53 drives metastasis, we developed a traceable somatic osteosarcoma
model that initiates with a single p53 mutation (p53R172H or p53R245W),
or p53 loss specifically in osteoblasts using Osx-cre. To mark tumor
cells, we utilized the mTmG allele which expresses membrane-targeted
Tomato (mT) prior to Cre-mediated excision and membrane-targeted green
fluorescent protein (mG) after excision so the tumor cells become GFP+
and the stromal cells remain RFP+. In this high penetrant, short latency
mouse model, tumor micro-metastasis can be detected by GFP expression in
the context of a normal stroma and immune system. The cohort has
developed osteosarcoma with complete penetrance and an average survival
of 304± 65 day. We observed metastasis in 55% of p53 mutant
osteosarcomas which was significantly higher than 26% metastasis observed
in p53 null tumors (p<0.01). In p53 mutant osteosarcomas, the metastasis
rate was found significantly associated with low p53 copy number.
Spectral karyotyping (SKY) on early passage cells derived from somatic
p53 mutant tumors exhibited marked aneuploidy with modal chromosome
numbers near tetraploid. To characterize the transcriptional profile
associated with mutant p53 GOF, we analyzed and compared the RNA-Seq
transcriptomes of eight tumors derived from p53R172H mutant mice with
eight p53 null tumors. Comparative analysis of gene expression identified
a signature of snRNA genes to be strongly associated with mutant p53 gain
of function. Functional annotation of upregulated genes in mutant tumors
was also highly enriched for chromatin modifying enzymes. These findings
contribute to our understanding of the role of mutant p53 GOF in
metastasis. Our long term goal is to study how tumor-stromal interactions
affect tumor development and metastasis. This understanding will have
broad translational significance in diagnosis and treatment of tumors
with mutant p53.


