Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A combination of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid and quinacrine is
an effective therapeutic approach in preclinical settings of upper
gastrointestinal cancers.


Background: Quinacrine (QC), an antimalarial drug, has been shown to
possess anticancer effects. Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA)
inhibits class I and class II HDACs and is approved for cancer therapy.
Developing novel approaches to overcome cancer drug resistance could
significantly enhance current therapeutic approaches and improve patient
care.

Methods: ATP-GLO, clonogenic survival, Annexin-V apoptosis assay, comet
assay and DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) kits were used. The mRNA and
protein levels were evaluated by quantitative real-time PCR and Western
blot analyses.

Results: A combination of QC/SAHA significantly increased cell death in
all cancer cell lines and had no effect on immortalized non-cancer cell
lines (HFE145, NIH-3T3 and EPC2) (PResults: A combination of QC/SAHA
significantly increased cell death in all cancer cell lines and had no
effect on immortalized non-cancer cell lines (HFE145, NIH-3T3 and EPC2)
(P<0.01). Clonogenic survival assay indicated that QC/SAHA co-treatment
led to significantly lower number of cancer cell colonies, as compared to
single agents and controls (PResults: A combination of QC/SAHA
significantly increased cell death in all cancer cell lines and had no
effect on immortalized non-cancer cell lines (HFE145, NIH-3T3 and EPC2)
(P<0.01). Clonogenic survival assay indicated that QC/SAHA co-treatment
led to significantly lower number of cancer cell colonies, as compared to
single agents and controls (P<0.01). Of note, the QC/SAHA combination led
to an increase in the the sub-G0 population in AGS (9-fold), MKN-28
(14-fold), FLO1 (5.6-fold), and SNU1 (4-fold) cells (PResults: A
combination of QC/SAHA significantly increased cell death in all cancer
cell lines and had no effect on immortalized non-cancer cell lines
(HFE145, NIH-3T3 and EPC2) (P<0.01). Clonogenic survival assay indicated
that QC/SAHA co-treatment led to significantly lower number of cancer
cell colonies, as compared to single agents and controls (P<0.01). Of
note, the QC/SAHA combination led to an increase in the the sub-G0
population in AGS (9-fold), MKN-28 (14-fold), FLO1 (5.6-fold), and SNU1
(4-fold) cells (P<0.01). These results were confirmed using the Annexin V
apoptosis induced significantly higher levels of apoptosis (10 - 20 fold)
as compared to single agent and control (P20 fold, P20 fold, P<0.01).
Comet assay data showed increased DNA damage compared with
vehicle-treated cells (8-fold, P20 fold, P<0.01). Comet assay data showed
increased DNA damage compared with vehicle-treated cells (8-fold,
P<0.01). Western blot analysis demonstrated a notable increase in
activation of PARP, caspases 3, 9 and γ-H2AX following QC/SAHA
co-treatment in all cancer cell lines. Interestingly, the combination of
QC/SAHA substantially decreased the protein levels of both wtP53 and
mutP53 in these cells. Tumor xenograft data confirmed that a combination
of QC/SAHA is more effective than a single agent in abrogating tumor
growth (P20 fold, P<0.01). Comet assay data showed increased DNA damage
compared with vehicle-treated cells (8-fold, P<0.01). Western blot
analysis demonstrated a notable increase in activation of PARP, caspases
3, 9 and γ-H2AX following QC/SAHA co-treatment in all cancer cell lines.
Interestingly, the combination of QC/SAHA substantially decreased the
protein levels of both wtP53 and mutP53 in these cells. Tumor xenograft
data confirmed that a combination of QC/SAHA is more effective than a
single agent in abrogating tumor growth (P<0.05).

Conclusion: Our novel findings show that QC and SAHA have a synergistic
effect on cancer cell death. The results provide compelling evidence that
increased DNA damage mediates the cytotoxic effect of combined QC/SAHA.
Such effect is likely related to mutP53 and wtP53 protein degradation
induced by QC/SAHA combination. Our findings provide a rationale for a
clinical evaluation of combined QC/SAHA therapy in gastro-esophageal
cancers. Ongoing studies are currently being undertaken to understand
mechanisms that regulate the degradation of wtp53 and mutp53 proteins.


