Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and characterization of novel antagonistic antibodies
that bind with high affinity to human, cynomolgus, and murine TIGIT, an
immune checkpoint receptor.


TIGIT is a recently identified coinhibitory immune checkpoint receptor
expressed on NK, effector T, and regulatory T cells. In the oncology
setting, TIGIT is upregulated on tumor infiltrating immune cells and is
co-expressed with exhaustion markers including PD-1, TIM-3 and LAG-3 on
infiltrates. TIGIT binds at least two ligands, CD155 and CD112, which are
expressed on antigen presenting cells and other tissues, including tumor
cells. These ligands also bind the activating receptor CD226, often
co-expressed with TIGIT, creating a network that modulates adaptive and
innate immune response in a manner analogous to the CD28-CTLA4-CD80-CD86
network. The absence of TIGIT signaling, resulting from genetic
deficiency or blockade, enhances anti-tumor immunity in murine models,
suggesting that disruption of TIGIT signaling may have clinical utility.
To explore this concept, yeast antibody display was used to identify
fully human, anti-TIGIT antibodies that block binding to ligands.
Multiple rounds of selection with human and mouse TIGIT protein were
performed to promote species cross-reactivity, diversity and affinity. A
pool of 695 unique clones were screened for binding to TIGIT protein; 65
clones were then selected for further evaluation. Of the 65, 63 competed
with CD155 for binding to TIGIT in a ForteBio screen. Fifty-three clones
bound cyno TIGIT and 25 bound TIGIT from all three species (human, cyno,
mouse). Antibodies bound endogenous TIGIT on primary T cells and blocked
binding of ligands to cell surface expressed TIGIT in a dose dependent
manner. Twelve clones showed functional activity in a TIGIT blockade
bioassay and showed synergy with anti-PD-1 antibody in a PD-1/TIGIT
combination bioassay. Activity in the bioassays correlated with affinity
for recombinant and cell surface expressed TIGIT. Based on species
cross-reactivity, binding affinity and activity in the bioassays, a lead
candidate antibody was selected and produced as mouse IgG1 and IgG2a
chimeras for testing in mouse tumor models. The chimeric antibodies
behaved similarly to the parent clone in vitro exhibiting high affinity
for TIGIT, competition with ligand for binding to TIGIT, and functional
blockade of CD155-TIGIT interaction. Evaluation of the chimeric
anti-TIGIT candidates alone and in combination with anti-PD-1 antibody in
mouse syngeneic tumor models is ongoing, and results will be reported at
the meeting. Antibody mediated blockade of coinhibitory immunoreceptors
has proven clinically efficacious and supports the development of
antibodies that target TIGIT. The unique human, non-human primate, and
murine cross-reactive TIGIT-specific antibodies described here offer a
simplified preclinical development path and the functional activity of
these molecules supports their consideration as candidates for
therapeutic development.


