Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential requirement of amino acids on cell survival of
ovarian cancer cells.


Amino acids (AAs) are traditionally classified into nutritionally
essential AAs (EAAs) or nonessential AAs (NEAAs) for animals and humans.
Recent studies have demonstrated that not only EAAs but also NEAAs play
important roles on energy metabolisms in cancer cells. However, which AAs
are indispensable for human cancer cell survival has not been fully
elucidated. The purposes of this study were 1) to determine the
indispensable AAs for ovarian cancer (OVC) cells and 2) to investigate
the relationship between the AAs synthetase and cancer cell survival.

Firstly, OVC cell lines were cultured with different medium in which each
AA was depleted and cancer cell survival was examined. Among 17 OVC cell
lines, EAAs were required in 12 cell lines, whereas others did not
require EAAs for cell survival. Interestingly, cancer cell lines which
required EAA also required at least one NEAAs, including arginine,
cystine, glutamine, serine and tyrosine. Although extracellular glutamine
has been known to be a critical factor for cancer cell survival and
growth, 3 OVC cell lines did not require extracellular glutamine. Hence,
we next examined glutamine synthetase (GS) gene, which is a critical
enzyme for production of endogenous glutamine from glutamate. In OVC cell
lines which did not require extracellular glutamine, GS expression level
was positively correlated with cell survival rate under
glutamine-depleted condition. Furthermore, we found that the expression
of GS protein was negative in 38 of 645 primary OV tumors (5.9 %). Taken
together, these results suggest that GS-down-regulated OVC cells require
extracellular glutamine for their survival. Therefore, uptake inhibition
of extracellular glutamine or reduction of extracellular glutamine level
may be a novel therapeutic strategy for patients with ovarian cancer with
“GS down-regulation”, as well as development of an AA-based precision
medicine of OVC.


