Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UTR analysis identifies Musashi1 as a translational regulator of
radiation-induced Golgi-related gene expression.


The cellular radioresponse is regulated by post-translational
modification of constitutively expressed proteins and by changes in gene
expression. Although the role of constitutively expressed proteins, such
as those involved in the DNA damage response and cell cycle checkpoints,
is well-understood in the context of the radioresponse, radiation-induced
changes in gene expression are not as clearly defined. We have previously
demonstrated that glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) alter their gene
expression at the translational level in response to ionizing radiation
(IR). In particular, the NSC11 GSC line demonstrated thousands of genes
differentially translated at one hour after a dose of 2 Gy, while
considerably fewer were modified at the transcriptome level. Furthermore,
there was little overlap between the transcriptome and the translatome.
Genes undergoing translational regulation in response to IR fell into
distinct functional categories, including mitochondrial structure and
function, Golgi function, and translational regulation. Here, we aimed to
elucidate the mechanism by which IR induces translational changes in the
NSC11 GSC line. NSC11 cells were either exposed to 2 Gy or mock
irradiated, and polysomes were isolated by sucrose gradient fractionation
one hour later. Polysome-bound mRNA was purified and analyzed by
microarray. The 5’ and 3’ untranslated regions (UTRs) of the top 75
up- and down-regulated genes were analyzed for the presence of regulatory
elements. The most frequently occurring element in the UTRs of both the
top up- and down-regulated genes was the Musashi1 binding site. Musashi1
is an RNA binding protein that typically binds to 3’ UTRs to regulate
mRNA translation. It is a neural stem cell marker, and its expression is
correlated with the grade of malignancy in glioma. GO term analysis of
known Musashi1 target genes that were translationally regulated in
response to IR revealed an enrichment of genes involved in Golgi function
and vesicular trafficking. Knockdown of Musashi1 prevented IR-induced
Golgi dispersal in NSC11 cells. Musashi1 knockdown also radiosensitized
NSC11 cells, indicating a role for the protein in the cellular
radioresponse. Together, these data demonstrate that in the NSC11 GSC
line, Musashi1 contributes to radiation-induced translational regulation,
specifically in the context of Golgi-related genes, and suggests that
Musashi1 is a novel target for radiosensitization.


