Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDK4/6 and autophagy inhibitors synergize to induce senescence in
cancers with an intact G1/S checkpoint.


Deregulation of the cell cycle machinery is a hallmark of most cancers.
The crucial role of the CDK4/6-CyclinD pathway in tumorigenesis has led
to the successful development and FDA approval (palbociclib) of CDK4/6
inhibitors for the treatment of advanced estrogen receptor positive
breast cancer. However, two major clinical challenges remain: i) lack of
a reliable biomarker to predict treatment response and ii) adverse events
leading to interruption or discontinuation of treatment which possibly
thus curtailing therapeutic benefit.

We found that treatment of ER+ breast cancer cell lines with the CDK4/6
inhibitor palbociclib resulted in a dose-dependent sustained growth
inhibition and senescence. Interestingly, breast cancer cells activate
autophagy in response to palbociclib, a stress response process that
promotes cancer cell survival. Genetic ablation of crucial autophagic
genes or pharmacological inhibition of autophagy increases the
sensitivity of ER+ breast cancer cells to palbociclib and the other
CDK4/6 inhibitors, ribociclib and abemaciclib. This was confirmed in
vivo, where the combination of palbociclib and autophagy inhibitor,
hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) resulted in a significantly improved and a
sustained tumor shrinkage. To identify biomarkers that predict response
to CDK4/6 inhibition, we examined the G1 checkpoint proteins and found
that knockdown of Rb or overexpression of the oncogenic low molecular
weight isoforms of Cyclin-E (LMW-E) mediates resistance to palbociclib
and its combination with autophagy inhibitor. More significantly,
immunohistochemically staining of pre-treatment biopsies from palbociclib
treated patients strengthened the correlation between palbociclib
efficacy and an intact G1/S checkpoint (Rb+ve /LMWE-ve), resulting in a
significantly longer progression free survival compared to the other
patient groups; thus solidifying Rb and LMW-E as reliable prognostic
biomarkers for palbociclib treatment. Finally, we examined the biomarker
driven synergy between CDK4/6 and autophagy inhibition in several other
cancer cell lines. Several solid tumors (ovarian, lung, pancreatic,
colon, prostate) and triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines
exhibited a synergistic response to palbociclib/HCQ combination treatment
dependent upon an intact G1/S transition (Rb+/LMWE-). This was also
verified in a TNBC patient derived xenograft (PDX) model.

Thus, this study addresses the aforementioned limitations and provides a
novel and promising biomarker-driven combination therapeutic strategy to
treat breast and other solid tumors. We predict that this combination of
CDK4/6 and autophagy inhibitors would be more beneficial than standard
dose palbociclib in patients, allowing us to lower the dose, minimize
palbociclib mediated toxicities and potentially improve overall patient
survival - a goal that has not yet been met with currently approved
treatment combinations.


