Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The HU177 collagen neo-epitope regulates nuclear YAP accumulation
and melanoma tumor growth and metastasis in vivo.


The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays a central role in controlling
cellular behavior and integrin receptors play key roles in this process.
Significant molecular insight is available on how structurally intact
forms of collagen regulate integrin-signaling, however unique collagen
neo-epitopes can be generated during tumor development and these
neo-epitopes may differentially bind to integrin receptors. These
findings raise an interesting question as to whether signaling initiated
by collagen neo-epitopes as compared to intact collagen, differentially
modify the final signaling out-put. Integrin A10B1 is a receptor for the
HU177 collagen neo-epitope, however, little is known about the down
stream signaling events stimulated by this receptor-ligand interaction.
We provide evidence that melanoma cell interaction with denatured
collagen results in enhanced adhesion and migration. Talin is a molecule
that facilitates integrin-associated linkages to the cytoskeleton and
helps govern adhesive cellular processes. Melanoma cell interactions with
denatured as compared to intact collagen, resulted in enhanced Talin
phosphorylation and surprisingly increased the levels of Cyclin Dependent
Kinase 5 (CDK5), a molecule implicated in Talin phosphorylation and
motility. Melanoma cell interactions with denatured collagen also led to
elevated nuclear accumulation of the Yes-associated protein YAP. Given
these results, we examined the effects of anti-HU177 antibody on adhesion
and migration. Targeting the HU177 neo-epitope inhibited cell adhesion
and migration on denatured collagen and also inhibited YAP nuclear
accumulation. Knocking down YAP in melanoma cells resulted in the
generation of cells that were resistant to the inhibitory effects of
anti-HU177 antibody, suggesting that part of the inhibitory activity of
anti-HU177 antibody may be associated with its ability to alter YAP
activity. We next examined the role of the HU177 neo-epitope and its
receptor, A10B1, on melanoma tumor growth and metastasis. Targeting the
HU177 neo-epitope inhibited tumor-angiogenesis, accumulation of ASMA
positive stromal cells in melanomas and tumor growth in vivo.
Importantly, knock down of A10B1, or direct targeting of the HU177
neo-epitope inhibited experimental metastasis of melanoma cells. Taken
together, these studies provide new insight into the role of the HU177
collagen neo-epitope in melanoma tumor growth and metastasis and provide
a novel strategy to inhibit melanoma progression through selective
targeting of a A10B1 ligand, rather than the integrin itself.


