Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A multiscale computational model for spatio-temporal tumor immune
response.


When the immune system responds to tumor development, patterns of immune
infiltrates emerge, highlighted by expression of immune
checkpoint-related molecules such as PD-L1 on cancer cells and its
receptor PD-1 on cytotoxic T cells. Pre-treatment tumor spatial
heterogeneity could bear information on intrinsic characteristics of the
tumor lesion for individual patient, and thus has the potential to
comprise biomarkers for anti-tumor therapeutics. We developed a systems
biology computational multiscale agent-based model to capture the
interactions between immune cells and cancer cells during tumor
progression. Cytotoxic T cells and cancer cells are modeled as
free-moving agents in a 3-dimensional grid, where each cell acts in
response to its local microenvironment and carries out functions such as
division, apoptosis, cytotoxic killing and switching between states with
different PD-1 or PD-L1 expression levels. Subsequently, we analyzed the
emergent behavior of tumor progression by looking at all these local
interactions as a whole. Using this model, we are able to reproduce
temporal dynamics of cytotoxic T cells and cancer cells during general
tumor progression, as well as 3-dimensional spatial distributions of
these cells over the time course of the simulation. By varying the
characteristics of the neoantigen profile of individual patients, such as
mutational burden and immunogenicity, a spectrum of pre-treatment spatial
patterns of PD-1/PD-L1 expression is generated in our simulations,
resembling immune-architectures obtained via immunohistochemistry from
patient biopsies. We evaluate potential prognostic biomarkers by
correlating these spatial characteristics with in silico treatment
results with immune checkpoint inhibitors. Simulation results demonstrate
that the percentage of PD-L1 positive cancer cells which are not in close
proximity of the tumor boundary or vasculature is more indicative of
successful anti-PD1/anti-PD-L1 treatment. Our findings suggest that tumor
spatial heterogeneity, especially its immune-architecture, reflects the
course of tumor progression as well as patient-specific properties, and
is thus likely to carry important information about tumor susceptibility
to treatment such as with immune checkpoint inhibitors. We demonstrated
how prognostic biomarkers could be realistically simulated in a general
cancer scenario. The model is further refined for use to predict
treatment/biomarker combinations in specific cancer types.


