Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diagnostic leukapheresis (DLA): Molecular characterisation and
organoid culture of circulating tumor cells (CTC) from metastatic
castration resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC).


Introduction: CTC count is an independent predictor of overall survival
in mCRPC. Isolation of CTC from peripheral blood (PB) for genomic and
functional analysis is challenging, especially in patients (pts) with low
CTC count. It has been shown that DLA increases CTC yield. However, it
has yet to be proven whether CTC isolation from DLA can be used in
complementary studies such as molecular characterization and growth of
organoid culture for drug sensitivity studies. Here we present
preliminary data of an on-going study, which evaluates DLA in mCRPC pts,
focusing on safety, CTC enrichment, molecular characterization and
feasibility for organoid culture. Methods: mCRPC pts considered for
clinical trials were selected according to performance status (ECOG 0-1)
and number of CTC found in 7.5ml PB (>20 cells/7.5mL). DLA products
(200x106 cells) were processed using the CellSearch CTC kit (Janssen
Diagnostics, LLC) according to manufacturer procedures. The contents of
CellSearch cartridges were sorted into single cell by fluorescence
activated cell sorting (FACS) and subsequently assessed by array
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) for copy number aberrations
(CNA). Enrichment of CTC for organoid culture was performed by density
gradient of mononuclear cells followed by positive selection using
magnetic beads. Results: Overall 12 mCRPC patients underwent DLA without
any complication or toxicity. The mean CTC count was 90 CTC/7.5 ml
peripheral blood (median = 31) and ranged from 20 to 324. CellSearch CTC
count in the DLA yielded a mean of 466 (median=203) and ranged from 60 to
2496 with an up to 40-fold increase (mean = 13, median = 6) in CTC count
separation when comparing 1mL of PB to 1mL of DLA. Molecular analyses of
FACS single CTC from the DLA by aCGH showed that these CTC genomic
profiles had the typical hallmarks of mCRPC with CNAs including AR and
MYC locus (8q) amplification, and PTEN, RB1, TP53, CHD1 loss.
Additionally, ex vivo culture of CTC-derived organoids was successfully
achieved. aCGH of these organoids matched the genomic profile that of the
CTC from the same patient. Conclusion: DLA from mCRPC pts was well
tolerated and yields higher CTC capture than PB and may provide an
alternative to tissue biopsy and routine blood volumes. Our strategy
allowed us to isolate genomic DNA with good quality for molecular
characterization and viable CTC for organoid culture and functional
studies.


