Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TERT promoter mutation in granulosa cell tumours of the ovary:
Prevalence and prognostic significance.


Granulosa cell tumours (GCTs) of the ovary account for 90% of sex
cord-stromal tumours and have a high recurrence rate up to 50%. A
missense mutation in the FOXL2 gene (c.402C>G; pC134W) is a defining
feature of GCT and is used as a robust marker for diagnosis. However,
other than the FOXL2 mutation the pathogenesis and the driving pathways
remain unknown. Determining secondary genetic events in GCTs is essential
to understanding and improving prognosis.

In a pilot study, we completed an analysis of whole genome sequencing of
ten GCTs and matched normal cases to generate a comprehensive catalogue
of coding and non-coding events. We identified a TERT promoter mutation
(c.228C>T) in 50% of these cases. TERT is normally inactivated in somatic
tissues; however, this promoter mutation has been shown to re-activate
transcription of TERT. We validated this TERT mutation in an
international cohort of 300 GCTs and found it was present in
approximately 25% of cases overall. These TERT promoter mutations have
been used to revise the molecular classification of other cancer types
such as gliomas. In GCT, we found that this TERT mutation was correlated
with a significantly worse survival outcome in patients with primary GCT
(pIn a pilot study, we completed an analysis of whole genome sequencing
of ten GCTs and matched normal cases to generate a comprehensive
catalogue of coding and non-coding events. We identified a TERT promoter
mutation (c.228C>T) in 50% of these cases. TERT is normally inactivated
in somatic tissues; however, this promoter mutation has been shown to
re-activate transcription of TERT. We validated this TERT mutation in an
international cohort of 300 GCTs and found it was present in
approximately 25% of cases overall. These TERT promoter mutations have
been used to revise the molecular classification of other cancer types
such as gliomas. In GCT, we found that this TERT mutation was correlated
with a significantly worse survival outcome in patients with primary GCT
(p<0.005). Further, we found that this TERT mutation was present in a
larger proportion of recurrent cases. Thus, this mutation may denote a
novel subtype of GCT with a worse prognosis.

Previous research has shown that TERT activation is evident in over 90%
of cancers and is a fundamental step in tumourigenesis that enables
unlimited proliferation. This TERT promoter mutation in GCT provides an
explanation of how granulosa cells escape atresia and attain immortality.
Thus, we hypothesize a mechanism in which the FOXL2 mutation prevents
apoptosis and the TERT mutation allows limitless proliferation for
oncogenes to transform granulosa cells. However, the current cell models
of GCT lack relevant functional pathways and do not recapitulate the
biology of these tumours. Therefore, we are developing more suitable cell
models to test our hypothesis. We believe that understanding the
interaction between these TERT and FOXL2 mutations may lead to novel
cancer cell-specific targeted therapies.


