Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressive role of ZFP36L1 by suppressing HIF1α and Cyclin
D1 in bladder and breast cancer.


AU-rich mRNAs are a class of mRNAs that contains AU-rich elements (AREs)
motifs in their 3’UTR. The half-life and turnover of AU-rich mRNAs are
tightly regulated by AREs-binding proteins, such as Zinc finger protein
36 C3H type-like 1 (ZFP36L1). ZFP36L1 is one of the RNA-binding proteins
(RBPs), which consists of two tandemly repeated zinc finger motifs that
specifically recognize AREs motifs and mediate mRNAs decay. However, our
knowledge on role of ZFP36L1 in breast and bladder cancers and its
downstream targets remains poorly elucidated. Here, we hypothesized that
ZFP36L1 might degrade oncogenic mRNAs transcripts, thus leading to
suppression of tumorigenesis. Our analysis of in silico data revealed
that ZFP36L1 is significantly mutated or downregulated in a variety of
cancers. The high proportion of inactivation mutation pattern as well as
the Mutsig result suggest that it may act as an unappreciated tumor
suppressor. Lower ZFP36L1 expression correlated with reduced survival in
patients. Forced expression of ZFP36L1 markedly reduced cellular
proliferation, invasiveness and migration in vitro, as well as tumor
growth in vivo. In addition, microarray and RNA-seq data analysis showed
that several important cancer-related candidates such as IL8 and HIF1α
were significantly downregulated. Overexpression of ZFP36L1 reduced
HIF1α mRNA and protein expression. Similarly, HIF1α forced expression
also inhibited ZFP36L1 mRNA and protein, suggesting a feedback loop of
HIF1α and ZFP36L1. Dual luciferase reporter assays and RNA
Electro-mobility Shift Assay (REMSA) showed that only wild type ZFP36L1,
but not different mutants of ZFP36L1, was able to bind directly and to
degrade a HIF1α 3’UTR construct that contains AU-rich regions.
Meanwhile, mRNA pull down assay demonstrated that ZFP36L1 protein
recognized cell-cycle related transcripts. Overexpression of ZFP36L1 led
to reduction of Cyclin D1 and phospho-Rb in protein expression.
Furthermore, SILAC data unveiled interesting binding partners of ZFP36L1.
Collectively, our findings propose that ZFP36L1 might have a critical
tumor suppressive role in breast and bladder cancer by negatively
regulating mRNA whose protein products cooperatively promote hypoxia and
transition into S phase of cell cycle. Augmenting ZFP36L1 function might
disable the cell cycle and proliferation of aggressive bladder tumors.


