Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MOSPD2, a newly characterized protein, promotes breast cancer
metastasis.


Introduction: We have previously described motile sperm domain-containing
protein 2 (MOSPD2), a protein which up until recently no function was
ascribed to, as a key regulator of monocyte migration in-vitro. In this
study, the role of MOSPD2 in promoting breast cancer migration and
metastasis in-vitro and in-vivo was assessed.

Experimental procedure: The prevalence of MOSPD2 was evaluated by IHC in
tissue microarray layered with cores, representing different stages of
invasiveness in breast cancer. MOSPD2 abundance was scored according to
the staining intensity on a scale from 0 to 3. MOSPD2 expression was
silenced in MDA-231 breast cancer cell line using lentiviral particles
for sh-RNA or CRISPR-CAS9 (CRISPR). Cells were then tested by a
trans-well assay for migration towards EGF in vitro as well as for lung
dissemination following orthotopic or systemic inoculation in vivo. For
mechanism studies, EGF-induced signaling events were analyzed.

Results: Within normal adjacent tissue (NAT), 82% of the samples had no
staining and the remaining 18% percent displayed an intensity of 1. In
the tissue cores with in-situ carcinoma pathology, 79% of the samples had
no staining intensity while the remaining 21% only scored 1 or 2.
However, analysis of invasive and metastatic cancer demonstrated higher
frequency in score of 2 and increased staining intensity up to score of 3
compared with NAT and in-situ carcinoma. Thus, the percent of combined
scores 2 and 3 for invasive lobular carcinoma, invasive ductal carcinoma
and metastatic invasive ductal carcinoma were 63%, 77% and 81%,
respectively. MOSPD2-silenced cells, either by sh-RNA or by CRISPR, were
severely impaired in their ability to migrate in-vitro towards EGF.
Following EGF activation of CRISPR-Control MDA-231 cells, all tested
proteins down-stream to the EGFR pathway, including AKT and p38, became
phosphorylated. However, in CRISPR-MOSPD2 silenced cells, phosphorylation
of all tested proteins excluding p38 were markedly inhibited. Moreover,
activation with IGF of CRISPR-MOSPD2 MDA-231 cells did not hinder AKT
phosphorylation. In vivo, SCID mice injected orthotopically or
systemically with CRISPR-MOSPD2 silenced MDA-231 cells displayed
significantly reduced number of metastases in the lungs relatively to
mice injected with CRISPR-Control treated cells.

Conclusions: We suggest that MOSPD2 promotes metastasis of breast cancer
cells and is a potential target for the treatment of metastatic breast
cancer.


