Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of radiation and EGFR inhibitor treatment on the expression
of immune susceptibility markers in human head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.


Treatment with radiation (RT) and/or molecular targeted therapies may
enhance tumor susceptibility to immune response. We previously
demonstrated a cooperative interaction between RT and various
immunotherapies in vivo. We subsequently demonstrated that there are
delayed, transcriptionally-mediated effects of RT on the expression of
tumor markers of immune susceptibility in murine and human melanoma. To
expand these findings and explore applications in other tumor types, we
investigated the effects of RT on immune susceptibility markers in human
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines. In addition, we
examined whether treatment with the anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody
cetuximab could further enhance these effects.

We used quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) to measure
RT-induced changes in gene expression of a variety of immune
susceptibility markers over time in HSCCC cell lines. We observed a
time-dependent increase in the expression of specific death receptors
(Fas, DR5), as well as T cell co-stimulatory/co-repressor ligands (PD-L1,
CD40). The timing of these changes correlated with tumor susceptibility
to ADCC immune response in vivo. Western blots confirmed RT-induced
changes in protein expression of selected markers consistent with the
observed changes in gene expression. To assess the effect of cetuximab on
the expression of immune susceptibility markers, we performed western
blots and qPCR to measure the effect of treatment with radiation,
cetuximab, or combination treatment on protein and gene expression of
immune susceptibility markers in HNSCC cells. We found that cetuximab
treatment enhanced RT-induced changes in gene expression of several
markers in both SCC6 and SCC1 cells, including MHC I-A, CD40, and OX40-L.
Similar enhancement of RT-induced changes in protein expression was
confirmed via western blotting. To validate that the effects of
combination treatment were specific to EGFR inhibition, we examined the
effects of RT on gene and protein expression of selected markers in cells
in which EGFR had been transiently knocked down via siRNA transfection.
Similar enhancement of RT-induced changes was observed with
EGFR-knockdown and treatment with cetuximab.

This study highlights the impact that treatment with RT and/or molecular
targeted therapies may have on tumor cell immunogenicity and suggests
opportunities to enhance anti-tumor response by combining
immunotherapeutic agents with RT or RT and EGFR inhibitors. These
findings suggest opportunities to further optimize clinical treatment
regimens by combining RT, molecular targeted therapies, and
immunotherapies in the treatment of patients with HNSCC.


