Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput patient-derived 3-dimensional organoid cultures as
personalized models to assess drug response and post-treatment residual
disease.


Cell lines grown in 2-dimensional (2D) plastic surfaces have historically
been the main models to identify cancer cell vulnerabilities. In
contrast, malignant tumors in vivo grow as 3-dimensional (3D) cellular
masses and manifest remarkably different drug-response patterns compared
to cell lines. We have shown that breast cancer (BrCa) cells in 3D
extracellular matrices acquire distinct phenotypic properties, compared
to the 2D counterparts. Notably, serum-free culture medium supplemented
with defined cocktails of developmental morphogens was sufficient to
support the growth of BrCa cell lines in 3D, but not in 2D conditions;
indicating a key role of 3D architecture in in vivo growth regulation.
CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing screens in BrCa cells indicated that
distinct gene subset govern the growth in 3D vs. 2D conditions. Using
similar culture conditions, we expanded several molecularly annotated
BrCa patient-derived 3D Organoids (3D PDOs), adapted them into a
high-throughput miniaturized drug screening platform, and interrogated
them against a panel of ~500 target-annotated kinase inhibitors and
FDA-approved anti-cancer agents. This pharmacological screen revealed
high sensitivity to distinct classes of agents (eg. PI3K inhibitors), but
also variable responses to others (eg. EGFR inhibitors); and provided
insight into potentially driver vs. passenger mutations in the respective
patients. Co-culture of PDOs with non-malignant stromal cells from bone
metastatic niche reduced sensitivity to some classes of drugs (eg. PLK
inhibitors). Importantly, long-term (up to 3-4 weeks) treatment of 3D
organoids did not eradicate the cells in culture (in contrast to
conventional 2D assays), but generated a cell subpopulation which
remained viable for the duration of the experiment, reminiscent of the
residual disease after initial clinical partial responses to a drug. This
residual disease phenotype was also confirmed in vivo, when the
respective PD-Xenografts were treated with the same agents. The majority
of transcripts with differential expression in residual PDX tumor cells
were also concordantly up- or down-regulated in the respective 3D PDO
model. These transcripts included canonical regulators of cell cycle,
chromatin signaling and epigenetic mechanisms, cytoskeletal function and
metabolic pathways; as well as other transcripts not previously linked to
drug resistance in conventional 2D models. To our knowledge this is the
first description of an in vitro personalized cancer model that simulates
both molecularly and phenotypically the post-treatment residual disease
in vivo. Our high-throughput functional platform can potentially
complement genomic approaches in personalized medicine and help discover
novel drugs that overcome tumor drug resistance.


