Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Splice expression variation analysis (SEVA) for differential gene
isoform usage in cancer.


Alternative splicing events (ASE) are a significant component of
expression alterations in cancer, and have been demonstrated to be
critically important in the development of malignant phenotypes in a
variety of tumors. These alternative gene isoforms alter cell-signaling
networks and serve as a hidden source of tumor-driving alterations not
identified in multi-omics analyses. Recent studies have demonstrated that
reads from RNA-seq data can infer gene isoforms expressed in a single
sample. Therefore, RNA-seq data of tumors offers the opportunity to
systematically evaluate expressed gene isoforms and identify splicing
events in cancer samples.

To characterize a cancer specific ASEs landscape, it is essential to
perform differential splice variant expression analysis to identify
isoform variants that are unique to tumor samples compared to normal
tissue. In spite of the breadth of ASE algorithms, few have been
validated in primary tumor samples. Current methods for differential
splice variant analysis compare mean expression of gene isoforms in
sample groups. Because these variants are tumor-specific, ASEs are
expected to have more variable exon junction expression than normal
samples. Therefore, current differential ASE analysis algorithms from
RNA-seq may not account for heterogeneous gene isoform usage in tumors.
To address this, we introduce Splice Expression Variability Analysis
(SEVA) to detect differential splice variation usage in tumor and normal
samples and accounts for tumor heterogeneity. This algorithm compares the
degree of variability of junction expression profiles within a population
of normal samples relative to that in tumor samples.

The performance of SEVA was compared with two existing algorithms, EBSeq
and DiffSplice, in simulated and real RNA-seq data. Simulated data
suggest that SEVA is robust and computationally efficient relative to
EBSeq and DiffSplice. In contrast to EBSeq and DiffSplice, SEVA was able
to identify alternative splicing events independent of overall gene
expression differences. Finally, additional validation was performed
using RNA-seq data for primary tumor data from HPV-positive oropharynx
squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) tumors and normal samples from both TCGA
and an independent tumor cohort of 46 OPSCC tumors and 25 normal samples.
In these tumor samples, SEVA finds cancer-specific ASEs in genes that are
independent of their differential expression status. Moreover, SEVA finds
approximately hundreds of splice variant candidates, manageable for
experimental validation in contrast to the thousands of candidates found
with EBSeq or DiffSplice. These candidates include experimentally
validated splice variants in HNSCC from a previous microarray study.
Based on performance in both simulated and real data, SEVA represents a
robust algorithm that is well suited for differential ASE analysis,
particularly in RNA-sequencing data from heterogeneous primary tumor
samples.


