Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDK4 inhibition enhances anti-melanoma effects of BRAF/MEK
inhibition.


Introduction: Targeted therapy against BRAF-mutated melanoma has shown
clinical efficacy. However, resistance to therapy often occurs. CDK4
(INK4)-retinoblastoma (RB) pathway controls cell cycle progression by
regulating the G1-S checkpoint. Defect in the p16INK4A: cycling D-CDK4/6:
RB pathway is also detected in melanoma. We study the effect of combining
CDK4-RB pathway inhibition with BRAF/MEK inhibition as a possible
strategy to overcome resistance to therapy.

Methods: Three BRAF wild-type and three BRAF-mutated melanoma cell lines
were selected. CDK4/6 inhibitor (PD0332991; PD), BRAF inhibitor (PLX4032;
PLX), MEK inhibitor (AZD6244; AZD), and PI3K/AKT inhibitor (XL765; XL)
were used alone or in combination. Cell proliferation assay was performed
using Cell Titer Blue assay. Cell migration assay was performed by
artificial wounding of melanoma cell monolayer and observing migration of
cells into the wound up to 48 hours. Western blotting was performed for
expression of pERK/ERK, pRB/RB, Cyclin D1, CDK4, and GAPDH. Data were
presented as means ± SD for triplicate experiments. For comparison
between groups, the student’s t test was used and pMethods: Three BRAF
wild-type and three BRAF-mutated melanoma cell lines were selected.
CDK4/6 inhibitor (PD0332991; PD), BRAF inhibitor (PLX4032; PLX), MEK
inhibitor (AZD6244; AZD), and PI3K/AKT inhibitor (XL765; XL) were used
alone or in combination. Cell proliferation assay was performed using
Cell Titer Blue assay. Cell migration assay was performed by artificial
wounding of melanoma cell monolayer and observing migration of cells into
the wound up to 48 hours. Western blotting was performed for expression
of pERK/ERK, pRB/RB, Cyclin D1, CDK4, and GAPDH. Data were presented as
means ± SD for triplicate experiments. For comparison between groups,
the student’s t test was used and p<0.05 was considered to be
statically significant.

Results: Variable inhibition of cell proliferation and migration was
observed in a dose- and time-dependent fashion. Enhanced inhibition of
melanoma proliferation and migration was observed with PD+AZD and PD+PLX
combination compared with single agent AZD or PLX. Differential
enhancement was observed in BRAF wild-type cell lines with PD+AZD and in
BRAF mutated cell lines with PD+PLX combination. Minimal change in tumor
proliferation and migration inhibition was noted with PD+XL combination
compared with PD or PLX alone. No correlation was observed between
expression of CDK4 and cyclin D1 and sensitivity to singe agent or the
combination. Inhibition of phosphorylated RB1 and ERK expression was
observed with exposure to single agent PD, PLX, XL, AZD. Enhancement of
pRB1 and pERK inhibition was noted with PD+PLX and PD+AZD combination but
not PD+XL.

Conclusion: CDK4 inhibition can enhance anti-proliferation and migration
effects of BRAF/ MEK inhibition in melanoma cells. The mechanism is via
augmented down-regulation of pRB expression.


