Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinatorial blockade of ERBB receptors in HER2 low breast cancer.


Large number of breast cancer patients clinically classified as HER2
negative, show low/moderate levels of HER2 along with other ERBB
receptors. Concomitant blockade of EGFR, ERBB2 and ERBB3 with specific
therapeutic antibodies (cetuximab, trastuzumab/pertuzumab and
lumretuzumab, respectively) appears as a beneficial approach to improve
survival of patients who have failed to previous treatment strategies.
Additionally, ERBB3 expression has been reported as a trastuzumab
resistance mechanism in HER2 positive subtypes.We have confirmed a
specific pattern of ERBB receptors expression in different breast cancer
subtypes. Individual and combined blockade of the receptors with
therapeutic antibodies has been tested in vitro using a metabolic
viability assay (Cell Titer Glo) and their effects in cell cycle status
measured by BrdU staining. All four therapeutic antibodies bind to the
respective extracellular domains inhibiting downstream signaling
pathways. Response to individual treatment is cell dependent and
correlates with EGFR expression in the triple negative MDA-MB-468 but not
in luminal T47D cancer cell line. Response of T47D cells to lumretuzumab
is higher when combined with pertuzumab or trastuzumab, suggesting
ERBB2/ERBB3 dimer as the most relevant one, an effect more evident upon
ectopic addition of NRG1 (only ligand for ERBB3). Long exposure of
MDA-MB468 cells to cetuximab induces ERBB3 expression and increases its
sensitivity to cetuximab when combined. As well as, in the HER2+ BT474
cancer cell line resistant to trastuzumab, higher levels of ERBB3 also
make cells more sensitive to alternative anti-ERBB therapies. To
establish the role of ERBB4 (no specific therapeutic antibody) in the
whole ERBB network, stable knock-down regulation (shRNA) has been
performed in T47D cells. Although treatment of HER2 overexpressing breast
tumors has been successful, targeting other ERBB members in a HER2
moderate/low scenario seems to be a promising approach in combinatorial
therapies; even in resistant cell lines. Thus, better characterization of
ERBB network should help to pave the way for a personalized treatment of
HER2 low breast cancer. [U.K.: Deceased March, 2016]


