Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinatorial effects of thymoquinone on the anticancer activity
of doxorubicin in adult T-cell leukemia.


Doxorubicin (Dox) is a clinically approved drug which suffers from drug
resistance and cardiotoxicity. Recent studies have shown that
thymoquinone (TQ) in combination with Dox can reduce Dox toxic side
effects in vitro as well as in vivo. Both TQ and Dox have shown promising
anticancer effects against aggressive adult T-cell leukemia (ATL),
however, the anticancer potential of TQ and Dox combination treatment has
never been tested against ATL. We hypothesized that co-treatment with TQ
could enable the use of lower doses of Dox to achieve similar or enhanced
anticancer activity. The effects of TQ and Dox combination on cell death
and cell cycle were evaluated by trypan blue and propidium iodide. TUNEL
assay was used to investigate the mode of cell death. The levels of
reactive species (ROS) were determined using DCFH assay, and
mitochondrial membrane potential was measured by rhodamine assay. The
regulation of key proteins involved in cell cycle regulation and cell
death was determined by Western blot. The results reveal that the human
T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV-1) positive HuT-102 cells are more resistant
to treatment with Dox alone, than the HTLV-1 negative Jurkat cells.
However, treatment with high doses of TQ and low doses of Dox
simultaneously, enhances cell death in both cancer cell lines as compared
to treatment with Dox alone. TUNEL assay on Jurkat and HuT-102 cells
further indicated that the combination of TQ and Dox caused cell death by
apoptosis. An increase in ROS production was noted in response to
treatment with TQ alone and

with TQ and Dox combination in both Jurkat and HuT-102 cells. The
oxidative stress; however, was only shown to play a role in the
disruption of the mitochondria of Jurkat cells. Similarly, caspase
activation was involved in the disruption of the mitochondria of Jurkat
cells. The expression levels of key regulatory proteins were modulated in
response to treatment with the combination. In conclusion, the
combination of TQ and Dox effectively inhibits ATL leukemic cancer cell
growth at lower doses of Dox which can potentially lower the side effects
of the drug. In vivo studies are still warranted to assess the adjuvant
chemotherapeutic potential of TQ in combination with Dox.


