Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aldo-keto reductase family 1 member b1 links glucose metabolism to
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.


Introduction: We performed a bioinformatic analysis to identify metabolic
genes connected with the process of epithelial-to-mesenchymal-transition
(EMT) and the results indicated a possible role for aldo-keto reductase
family 1 member B1 (AKR1B1). AKR1B1 is a member of the polyol pathway
responsible for catalyzing the reduction of numerous aldehydes, such as
glucose. Based on the importance of EMT during carcinogenesis and
metastatic progression and on the relevance of enhanced glycolytic rate
in cancer cells, we investigated a direct role for AKR1B1 during EMT and
tumor progression.

Experimental Procedure: The bioinformatic analysis was performed on
datasets from the NCI60 panel of cancer cell lines. Cancer cells from
lung, breast and ovarian origin have been investigated in vitro: changes
in EMT markers were monitored by western blotting as well as
immunofluorescence, growth assays were performed using the IncuCyte®
ZOOM, migration rate was tested by wound-healing assays. Changes in
stem-like properties were determined by western blotting, FACS and
sphere-formation assays. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on FFPE
specimens from lung cancer patients. Additionally, IHC was performed on
samples from a mouse model of AOM-induced colon tumorigenesis in mice
with an intestinal epithelial cell-specific p53 deletion (which were
shown to undergo EMT) and in the wildtype counterparts.

Results: AKR1B1 gene and protein expression was found significantly
higher (7-fold) in mesenchymal-like cells. ShRNA-mediated knockdown of
AKR1B1 lead to mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition in vitro and
suppressed EMT induced by TGF-β or by high glucose levels. Besides
reduced migration, AKR1B1-deficient cells displayed decreased
proliferation rate and colony-formation ability. Moreover, AKR1B1
knockdown or its inhibition with specific drugs diminished cancer stem
cells. The phenotypes observed with AKR1B1 knockdown could be obtained by
targeting sorbitol dehydrogenase (SORD), the second and last enzyme of
the polyol pathway. Suppression of each enzyme resulted in an impaired
glycolytic and oxidative metabolism and adding fructose, the end-product
of the polyol pathway, rescued the expression of EMT markers. IHC on
samples from the AOM-induced colon cancer model indicated a higher AKR1B1
expression in invasive tumors from p53ΔIEC mice as compared to both
p53-deficient non-invasive or wildtype tumors. Finally, AKR1B1 staining
of cancer tissues from a cohort of lung cancer patients confirmed a
significant correlation with EMT and a negative prognostic value.

Conclusion: In summary, we describe a glucose-related pathway with a
previously unknown role in regulating cancer plasticity and EMT, which
links altered glucose metabolism to growth and migratory ability, with
several potential implications. Targeting polyol pathway enzymes could be
a potentially effective therapeutic strategy to arrest cancer progression.


