Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FDG-PET imaging as a potential biomarker of mitochondrial
targeting by CPI-613, a novel inhibitor of mitochondrial metabolism.


CPI-613 is a lipoate analogue that has been shown to inhibit the pyruvate
dehydrogenase (PDH) and alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (KGDH)
complexes selectively in tumor cells (reviewed in Exp.Rev.Clin.Pharma. 7,
837). These two enzymes control the vast majority of carbon flow into the
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and play a central role in mitochondrial
metabolism. PDH converts pyruvate into acetyl-CoA, which in turn can
enter the TCA cycle for cellular respiration. Since pyruvate is the final
product of glycolysis, PDH serves to link glycolysis to the TCA cycle.
Early clinical trials with CPI-613 have demonstrated very promising
clinical responses in pancreatic cancer, leukemia, and lymphoma when used
in combination with standard chemotherapy. Moreover, apparently
homeostatic responses of tumor cells to CPI-613 inhibition of
mitochondrial metabolism include compensatory upregulation of glucose
uptake. Thus, we hypothesized that we can use 18F-Fludeoxyglucose
(FDG)-PET/CT, a translational imaging approach that measures cellular
glucose uptake, as a biomarker for CPI-613 cellular delivery and its
targeting of mitochondrial metabolism. Therefore, in this work we
evaluated the in vitro and in vivo glucose uptake in cancer cells and
tumor xenografts after treatment with CPI-613. To measure glucose uptake
in vitro we pulsed BxPc3 pancreatic cancer cells with 3H 2-deoxyglucose
for 15 or 60 minutes following 2 hours of treatment with CPI-613. We
observed a significant upregulation (~100% increase) of cellular
2-deoxyglucose uptake, consistent with a compensatory increase in glucose
uptake as a result of successful targeting of mitochondrial metabolism.
We therefore examined whether this upregulation occurs in vivo using
FDG-PET/CT. Mice bearing BxPc3 flank tumors were treated with 50mg/kg of
CPI-613 and underwent FDG-PET/CT scans 4 hours and 24 hours post-CPI-613
treatment. Similar to the in vitro response, tumors treated with CPI-613
exhibited a 75% increase in 18F-FDG uptake compared to untreated controls
at 4 hours post therapy. In the 24 hour post-therapy scans, tumor 18F-FDG
was significantly decreased, indicating tumor cell killing, which
corresponds to previously published data that demonstrated efficacy of
CPI-613 against BxPc3 tumor xenografts. These results indicate the
potential for using the initial FDG flare seen on PET imaging as a
biomarker to detect mitochondrial targeting by CPI-613 immediately after
CPI-613 treatment, a strategy that may be used, after further clinical
validation, to stratify responders to this novel mitochondrial inhibitor.


