Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of ALDH activity in neuroblastoma patient-derived
xenograft cells as a potential marker of neuroblastoma stem cells.


Neuroblastoma is a tumor derived from immature neuroblasts predestined to
form the sympathetic nervous system. Children with aggressive
neuroblastoma are at high-risk of disease relapse despite their initial
response to treatment. The molecular mechanisms underlying these relapses
are poorly understood, although clonal expansion and de novo mutations
have been suggested as potential mechanisms. An alternative hypothesis is
that neuroblastoma initiating capacity and resistance to chemotherapy
reside in a subpopulation of tumor initiating cells or cancer stem cells,
which are not genetically different from most tumor bulk cells but
through unknown mechanisms differ phenotypically and functionally. Here
we examine aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) expression and activity in
neuroblastoma patient-derived xenograft (PDX) cells, cultured under stem
cell-promoting conditions, as a potential marker for neuroblastoma stem
cells. We found that neuroblastoma PDX cells in general expressed higher
levels of various ALDH isoforms as compared to an aggressive classical
serum-grown neuroblastoma cell line. Also, a distinct subgroup with high
ALDH activity was observed in PDX cells but not in the serum-grown cell
line. Growing the PDX cells in serum induced neuronal differentiation
accompanied with lower expression of ALDH1 isoforms and reduced ALDH
activity. The change in ALDH expression and activity was reversible,
implying phenotypic plasticity. Re-analyzing cells initially sorted on
ALDH activity also confirmed an inter-conversion of cells with low and
high ALDH activity. Furthermore, in vitro clonogenic capacity was
significantly higher in cells with high ALDH activity. Serial in vivo
passaging of PDXs allowed us to compare PDX cells isolated from different
in vivo generations. Interestingly, cells derived from later in vivo
generations contained a higher frequency of cells with high ALDH
activity. Finally, orthotopic injection of cells with either low or high
ALDH activity showed that both subgroups led to tumor formation, however
a higher tumor take was observed when injecting cells with high ALDH
activity. In conclusion, our results suggest that ALDH activity is
associated with an immature phenotype, which is of clinical importance
since less differentiated tumors are more aggressive and associated with
poor prognosis. Also, cells with high ALDH activity showed higher in vivo
tumor initiating capacity. We are currently pursuing a more extensive
characterization of neuroblastoma cells with high ALDH activity.


