Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aspirin inhibits the carcinogenesis of esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma and enhances its responses to cisplatin.


Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is one of the most lethal
malignancies. Over 70% of ESCC cases occur in China. Unfortunately, the
treatment of ESCC has hardly been improved all these years. Several
studies suggested that aspirin (ASA) might decrease the risk of ESCC and
prolonged the survival of patients with ESCC. However, it is unclear if
ASA could prevent ESCC and/or enhance ESCC treatment by chemotherapy. In
this study, a N-nitroso-N-methylbenzylamine (NMBzA) - induced ESCC model
was employed to prove that aspirin could prevent the growth of esophageal
tumor. F344 rats were treated with NMBzA by subcutaneous injection with
or without ASA in drinking water (2mg/ml). After 35 week ASA-NMBzA or
NMBzA alone treatment, rats were killed and esophageal tumor development
were examined. The results showed that F344 rats treated with NMBzA and
receiving a daily intake of ASA developed much less tumors than F344 rats
treated with NMBA alone both in amount and in size (Tumor count: 2.40 ±
1.57 vs 10.85 ± 3.86 , P Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is
one of the most lethal malignancies. Over 70% of ESCC cases occur in
China. Unfortunately, the treatment of ESCC has hardly been improved all
these years. Several studies suggested that aspirin (ASA) might decrease
the risk of ESCC and prolonged the survival of patients with ESCC.
However, it is unclear if ASA could prevent ESCC and/or enhance ESCC
treatment by chemotherapy. In this study, a N-nitroso-N-methylbenzylamine
(NMBzA) - induced ESCC model was employed to prove that aspirin could
prevent the growth of esophageal tumor. F344 rats were treated with NMBzA
by subcutaneous injection with or without ASA in drinking water (2mg/ml).
After 35 week ASA-NMBzA or NMBzA alone treatment, rats were killed and
esophageal tumor development were examined. The results showed that F344
rats treated with NMBzA and receiving a daily intake of ASA developed
much less tumors than F344 rats treated with NMBA alone both in amount
and in size (Tumor count: 2.40 ± 1.57 vs 10.85 ± 3.86 , P < 0.001;
Tumor volume: 11.10 ± 13.38 mm3 vs 70.79 ± 41.65 mm3, P Esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is one of the most lethal malignancies.
Over 70% of ESCC cases occur in China. Unfortunately, the treatment of
ESCC has hardly been improved all these years. Several studies suggested
that aspirin (ASA) might decrease the risk of ESCC and prolonged the
survival of patients with ESCC. However, it is unclear if ASA could
prevent ESCC and/or enhance ESCC treatment by chemotherapy. In this
study, a N-nitroso-N-methylbenzylamine (NMBzA) - induced ESCC model was
employed to prove that aspirin could prevent the growth of esophageal
tumor. F344 rats were treated with NMBzA by subcutaneous injection with
or without ASA in drinking water (2mg/ml). After 35 week ASA-NMBzA or
NMBzA alone treatment, rats were killed and esophageal tumor development
were examined. The results showed that F344 rats treated with NMBzA and
receiving a daily intake of ASA developed much less tumors than F344 rats
treated with NMBA alone both in amount and in size (Tumor count: 2.40 ±
1.57 vs 10.85 ± 3.86 , P < 0.001; Tumor volume: 11.10 ± 13.38 mm3 vs
70.79 ± 41.65 mm3, P < 0.001). Immunohistochemical analysis indicated
that a higher rate of apoptosis was observed in the basal layer of
esophageal epithelium in ASA-NMBzA treated rats than in NMBzA alone
treated rats. These results indicated that ASA prevented development of
esophageal tumors in rats induced by NMBzA. Moreover, using in vitro
human ESCC cell culture and in vivo xenograft models, we showed that ASA
has strong beneficial effects on inhibition of ESCC cell proliferation
and colony formation, reduction of ESCC cancer stem cells and enhance of
ESCC cell cytotoxicity induced by cisplatin treatment. Biochemical
analysis revealed that these effects of ASA on human ESCC cells in vitro
and in vivo were due to inhibiting the repairing of DNA damage,
decreasing the efflux activity and ALDH1 activity of the tumor cells, and
blockades of PI3K/Akt pathway. Thus, our results demonstrated a positive
role of aspirin in the prevention and treatment of ESCC.


