Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor associated myeloid cell transcriptome signatures in an
inducible Kras-positive lung adenocarcinoma murine model.


Tumorigenesis is modified by dynamic activities in the tumor
microenvironment and mechanisms driving these alterations during tumor
progression may be tumor- and patient-specific. Of well-established
functions for tumor-associated stromal cells (e.g. angiogenesis,
chemotaxis) immune system regulation by the tumor microenvironment is
less well understood in their mechanism and effects. However, diminished
activity of antigen-specific T cell lymphocytes tumor cytotoxicity is
tumor promoting and recent cancer immunotherapy have targeted immune
inhibitory checkpoints (e.g. anti-PD-L1) to restore T cell activity.
Recent studies suggest that tumor-associated myeloid cells play a role in
immunosuppression in several human cancers, including lung cancer. We
hypothesize that early tumors of the lung promote changes in the
phenotype of tumor-proximal myeloid cells, establishing an
immunosuppressive microenvironment. As a component to observe this
immunosuppressive role for myeloid cells, we performed specific
transcriptome profiling of myeloid cells by immunomagnetic selection of
CD11b-positive cells from lung tumors of a murine inducible
Kras-positive, p53-negative cancer model. RNA sequencing of isolated
myeloid cells as a function of tumorigenesis duration (3-18 weeks)
establishes the kinetics of gene expression changes associated with
tumor-supporting and immune-suppressing functions. Genome-wide expression
analysis of myeloid cells between tumor-inducing adenovirus-Cre injected
and normal control subjects resulted in identifying 1,883 genes with
differential expression. Gene set enrichment analysis resulted in the
stratification of samples by well-established gene signatures and
tumor-promoting activity for angiogenesis (32 genes), lung tissue
remodeling (47 genes) and cell survival (11 genes). Interestingly, a
significant downregulated gene signature was observed in tumor-associated
myeloid cells for immune cell chemotaxis (12 genes) and positive
regulation of immune system activation (12 genes). These non-canonical
gene signatures may identify a myeloid phenotype for immunosuppressive
function with altered expression of genes such as L-selectin (Sell), C-C
chemokine receptor type 7 (Ccr7), C-C motif chemokine (Ccl20) and
CMRF35-like molecule 7 (CD300lb). The results shown are first steps in
our tasks to define the phenotypes and mechanisms linking myeloid cells
to tumor-associated immunosuppression in lung cancer.


