Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer: Relationship between GPC3 and EMT process.


Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a process whereby epithelial
cells acquire mesenchymal fibroblast-like properties and display reduced
intracellular adhesion and increased motility.

Glypican-3 (GPC3) is a heparan sulfate proteoglycan associated with
cancer. We have established that GPC3 regulates the EMT process underwent
by breast cancer cells. However, cellular and molecular events underlying
this modulation are not completely described.

At the present work we analyzed the effect of GPC3 on cell adhesion and
on the expression of molecules associated with this property. In
addition, molecular regulators of EMT were also studied. We employed a
murine breast cancer cell line (LM3: GPC3-) as well as human lines
(MDA-MB231: GPC3- and MCF-7: GPC3+). We have blocked GPC3 expression in
MCF-7 cells, while it was overexpressed in MDA-MB231 and LM3 ones.

It is know that EMT depends on a reduction in cell adhesion. We
determined that GPC3 overexpression induced an increase in the homotypic
adhesion of MDA-MB231 and LM3 cells, although GPC3 silencing did not lead
significant changes in the organization of MCF-7 spheroids. GPC3 was also
able to modulate the adhesion to extracellular matrix components. GPC3
overexpressing cells were more adherent to fibronectin than controls, but
no changes were observed in their adhesion to laminin.

E-Cadherin, a molecule involved in homotypic adhesion, is considered a
suppressor of invasion and growth of many epithelial cancers. Here, we
have corroborated by WB that GPC3 overexpression induces the E-Cadherin
upregulation in LM3 and MDA-MB231 cells, whereas GPC3 silencing inhibits
the expression of this epithelial marker in MCF-7 cells. We also
confirmed the called "cadherin switch", since N-Cadherin was
downregulated in GPC3 overexpressing cells and upregulated in GPC3
silenced ones.

β-Catenin is a key downstream effector in the Wnt pathway. We confirmed
that GPC3 expressing breast cancer cells exhibit a canonical Wnt
signaling inhibition. β-Catenin also activates Slug. Similar to Snail,
Slug binds to the E-Cadherin

promoter to repress transcription. By WB and qPCR we demonstrated that
GPC3 induces a decrease in Slug and Snail levels. Surprisingly, Twist
expression was higher in GPC3 expressing cells.

It was reported that Slug is able to represses integrins expression.
However, β1-Integrin levels were decreased in GPC3 overexpressing
MDA-MB231 cells, while they were increased in GPC3 blocked MCF-7 sublines.

Our results suggest the key role of GPC3 in the EMT regulation. GPC3
would modulate cell adhesion and expression of E-Cadherin, N-Cadherin and
β1-Integrin. In addition, GPC3 would regulate the expression of
different EMT molecules (as Slug, Snail and Twist) as well as signaling
pathways involved in that process (like canonical Wnt). The set and
balance of these regulations would result in the reversal of EMT,
reinforcing the function of GPC3 as an inhibitor of mammary tumor
progression.


