Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel polyamine sulfonamide with anti-leukemic activity.


The greatest challenge in treating Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) is
refractory disease. Although 60-80% of AML patients achieve complete
remission after induction chemotherapy, majority of these patients
relapse and die of progressive disease. New treatment options targeting
the vulnerabilities of AML biology are highly critical for disease
regression, in particular the chemo-resistant leukemia-initiating
population, to ensure relapse-free survival in patients. Identifying
novel druggable targets that are selective to AML despite their location
in the vascular niche is thus highly warranted. We developed an in vitro
co-culture model consisting of AML cells and Bone Marrow- derived
Endothelial Cells (BMECs), mimicking the protective effect of the
vascular niche in the bone marrow microenvironment. Using this unique
model, and taking advantage of combinatorial chemistry, we performed
high-throughput chemical-phenotypic screening of approximately 30 million
novel compounds and identified a novel polyamine sulfonamide 2470-51 that
can selectively kill AML cells by overcoming the protective effect of the
BMECs. In addition to AML blasts, 2470-51 also exhibited highly selective
activity against the leukemic stem and progenitor cell population while
sparing normal hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. In vivo studies
using patient-derived xenograft models indicated significant regression
in AML engraftment post 2470-51 treatment. Target identification
experiments involving unbiased label-free shotgun proteomic analysis in
combination with targeted Selected Ion Monitoring (SIM) revealed covalent
drug binding targets of 2470-51. By performing differential protein
expression analysis using ITRAQ analysis, we identified downstream
mechanisms that led to mitotic cell cycle arrest and cell death.
Collectively, our findings display the in vitro as well as in vivo
efficacy of a novel polyamine sulfonamide in eliminating AML, including
the leukemia initiating compartment. We also uncover a novel mechanism in
AML that can be taken advantage of for selective toxicity. Furthermore,
we establish the role of 2470-51 as a potential therapeutic agent in
treating AML.


