Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computational modeling to suggest patient-specific screening
schedules for early detection of gastric cancer.


Gastric cancer (GC) is often diagnosed at an advanced stage and
consequently remains the third most common cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. Early detection and surgical intervention has been found to
reduce GC-associated mortality, yet an efficient and cost-effective
screening program still does not exist.

Several proteins including Lgr5, CD44 and CD133 have been found to be
upregulated during the H. pylori-associated Correa pathway of
carcinogenesis, and have the potential to act as biomarkers for early
detection. The tools of mathematical oncology facilitate the development
of models capable of both reproducing and predicting the increase in
expression of these markers, and thus the patient-specific progression of
disease. These predictions can allow the identification of optimal
screening times to minimize the risk of undetected malignant
transformation. Here, we present a combined mathematical-statistical
approach to identifying such optimal screening times in a manner which is
both biomarker-independent and H.pylori status-independent, thus allowing
improved generalizability and the potential for broader application in
the clinical setting. Logistic regression models are developed for each
biomarker of interest (Lgr5, CD133, CD44) to determine the likelihood of
a patient being either early in the Correa pathway (gastritis or
metaplasia) or late in the pathway (dysplasia or carcinoma) based on
current age, sex and biomarker-positive cell fraction obtained from
immunohistochemical staining of biopsy tissue samples. Calibrated models
for all three biomarkers were able to accurately classify disease stage
as determined by pathology report in more than 85% of an initial cohort
of 59 patients.

Mathematical models describing the temporal evolution of the expression
of each marker of interest are then defined based on clinical data.
Coupled with the statistical tool for identifying the likelihood of being
at each stage of disease for all combination of input parameters, this
framework can forecast time to a clinically-significant endpoint such as
the development of dysplasia or adenocarcinoma for future patients,
allowing the suggestion of screening times at which the likelihood of
progression reaches a certain threshold. The results suggest that for 13
out of 16 patients in our initial test cohort (81%), models independently
developed using three different markers all recommend similar follow-up
screening times, showing promise for the general applicability and
robustness of such a tool.


