Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FAT1: A potential target of NFkB (RelA) in GBM.


FAT1 is a large transmembrane protein (502 kD), reportedly having dual
role in different human cancers. Our lab has reported oncogenic role of
FAT1 overexpression in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM, grade IV glioma)
increasing migration-invasion as well as tumor inflammation and HIF1α
activity. Morris et al. (2013), have reported that glioma patients with
low FAT1-expressing tumors have significantly (p=0.037) longer survival
(Rembrandt dataset), suggesting high FAT1 expression to have adverse
effect on GBM patient survival. Since NFκB is a major transcription
factor overexpressed in GBM and involve in regulating many oncognes at
transcriptional level. There are no reports available on FAT1 upstream
regulation. Therefore in this study we investigated the role of NFkB
(RelA) in regulating FAT1 expression in GBM. In-silico analysis of FAT1
promoter predicted binding sites for several transcription factors
including NFkB (RelA) having multiple binding motifs with high matrix
score. We assessed the mRNA expression correlation of FAT1 and NFκB
target gene (BCL2) in small cohort of GBM tumors (n=16). A significant
positive correlation (0.647, pFAT1 is a large transmembrane protein (502
kD), reportedly having dual role in different human cancers. Our lab has
reported oncogenic role of FAT1 overexpression in glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM, grade IV glioma) increasing migration-invasion as well as tumor
inflammation and HIF1α activity. Morris et al. (2013), have reported
that glioma patients with low FAT1-expressing tumors have significantly
(p=0.037) longer survival (Rembrandt dataset), suggesting high FAT1
expression to have adverse effect on GBM patient survival. Since NFκB is
a major transcription factor overexpressed in GBM and involve in
regulating many oncognes at transcriptional level. There are no reports
available on FAT1 upstream regulation. Therefore in this study we
investigated the role of NFkB (RelA) in regulating FAT1 expression in
GBM. In-silico analysis of FAT1 promoter predicted binding sites for
several transcription factors including NFkB (RelA) having multiple
binding motifs with high matrix score. We assessed the mRNA expression
correlation of FAT1 and NFκB target gene (BCL2) in small cohort of GBM
tumors (n=16). A significant positive correlation (0.647, p<0.01) was
established between FAT1 and BCL2 in GBM tumors compared to normal brain
(Clontech). In a sequential bioinformatics study, we analyzed TCGA GBM
dataset and found significantly elevated expression of FAT1, RelA, IKBKB
and RelA target genes (BCL2, MMP9 and Serpine) in GBM tumors (n=430) as
compared to normal brain (n=10). In survival analysis of TCGA dataset
{Grouped into high (n=100) and low FAT1 expression (n=100)}, low FAT1
expressing patients showed higher survival, corroborating the observation
of Morris et al 2013. The role of NFkB (RelA) in FAT1 expression
regulation was further analyzed in in-vitro in U87MG (GBM) cell line. We
overexpressed and chemically inhibited NFkB using RelApBABE expression
vector and PDTC respectively. There was increased FAT1expression in cells
overexpressing NFkB and this effect could be reversed on NFkB inhibition,
suggesting that RelA plays an important role in regulation of endogenous
FAT1 expression. Furthermore, to confirm the regulatory role of NFκB
(RelA) on FAT1 expression, 2-kb FAT1 promoter (pGLF2) and sequential 5’
deletion constructs (pGLF2A, pGLF2B, pGLF2C and pGLF2D) with different
RelA binding sites were cloned into luciferase basic vector (pGL3B) and
analyzed for their activity by in vitro luciferase assay. Among all
constructs, 5’ deletion construct (pGLF2C) containing single consensus
binding site for RelA and least no. of repressor sites, showed highest
luciferase activity in U87MG. Furthermore, site directed mutagenesis of
RelA consensus binding site decreased luciferase activities by three-fold
as compared to the wild type construct, pGLF2C. The endogenous binding of
RelA on FAT1 promoter was confirmed by ChIP
(chromatin-immunoprecipitation) assay. Conclusively, our study for the
first time identified NFkB (RelA) transcription factor as a potential
regulator of FAT1.


