Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A positive feedback loop prevents differentiation of endocrine
resistant luminal progenitor breast cancer cells.


Introduction: Treatment of breast cancer patients has advanced greatly
with the stratification of ER+, HER2+ and triple negative cohorts. ER+
breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed mammary malignancy and is
managed with anti-endocrine therapies. Therapy resistant disease emerges
in approximately one in three women. Within the ER+ cohort, breast cancer
remains a heterogeneous disease, particularly at the cellular level. For
example; ER+ breast cancer can range from 90 % ER+ cells within a tumor.
This study set out to define and target differences in cellular
heterogeneity between endocrine sensitive and resistant ER+ breast cancer.

Methods: A flow cytometry based cell surface protein (CSP) screen (37
proteins) identified changes in cellular heterogeneity between endocrine
sensitive and resistant ER+ models. FACS isolation and single cell
plating characterized the self-renewal and differentiation potential of
the identified sub-populations. Conditioned media experiments assayed
secretory activity of the endocrine resistant phenotype.

Results: The CSP screen identified FUT4+MUC1- cells as central to the
endocrine resistant phenotype. The endocrine sensitive model (MCF7) was
found to contain roughly equal proportions of FUT4+MUC1- (31.2 ± 1.6 %),
FUT4-MUC1- (38.5 ± 7.1 %) and FUT4-MUC1+ (23.0 ± 6.9 %) cells. While
two independent models of resistance were found to be dominated by
FUT4+MUC1- cells (LY2: 86.0 ± 5.5 %; TMR: 80.6 ± 6.5 %). Conventional
theory suggests that these resistant FUT4+MUC1- cells are the apex cancer
stem cells (CSCs). To test this hypothesis, single cell clonogenicity
assays were carried out on FUT4+MUC1- cells isolated from the endocrine
sensitive model. It was found that these FUT4+MUC1- cells were not apex
CSCs, but rather mid-tier progenitor cells, as they could not produce all
the cell types of the sensitive model. Paired conditioned media and
clonogenicity studies demonstrated that the resistant secretome is
sufficient to trap FUT4+MUC1- cells isolated from the sensitive model in
a self-renewing, resistant-like state (p-value: 0.011; Chi-Squared test).
Moreover, resistant cells which were removed from treatment conditions
for >8 weeks maintained the resistant FUT4+MUC1- phenotype. These data
indicate co-operation between cell- and treatment-driven mechanisms
creating a FUT4+MUC1- resistant phenotype.

Conclusions: Chronic tamoxifen therapy drives heterogeneity towards a
FUT4+MUC1- phenotype. Single cell self-renewal and differentiation
studies identify this cell type as a mid-tier progenitor cell rather than
an apex cancer stem cell. A positive feedback loop supplements the
treatment induced change, to maintain the resistant phenotype in the
absence of further tamoxifen treatment. Targeting this feedback loop or
its downstream effectors may allow for re-sensitization of endocrine
resistant disease.


