Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting tumor hypoxia with prodrug conjugates of potent
small-molecule inhibitors of tubulin polymerization.


Regions of pronounced hypoxia in malignant tumors represent an
opportunity for selectivity in drug activation, and hence targeting and
delivery. In this study, a series of bioreductively activatable prodrug
conjugates (BAPCs) of small-molecule inhibitors of tubulin polymerization
were synthesized and evaluated in biochemical and biological studies. The
BAPCs are designed to be biologically inert until selectively cleaved
under hypoxic conditions, by reductase enzymes found in the tumor, to
release potent effector anticancer agents. BAPCs were evaluated in the
following assays: (1) cytotoxicity using the regular sulforhodamine B
assay (normoxic conditions) to confirm their reduced cytotoxicity in
cancer cells in culture compared to the effector agents; (2) cleavage
under anoxic conditions by the reductase enzyme, NADPH cytochrome P450
oxidoreductase (POR), that is implicated in the bioreductive cleavage of
compounds with nitrothiophene and nitroimidazole triggers; and (3)
differential cytotoxicity under hypoxic versus normoxic conditions in
cancer cell lines with the established bioreductive compound tirapazamine
(TPZ) as the control. The POR assay was modified by the addition of
protocatechuate 3,4-dioxygenase to ensure anoxic conditions, and Triton
X-100 to facilitate solubilization of the BAPCs. A series of
unsubstituted, methyl, and gem-dimethyl nitrothiophene- and
nitroimidazole-triggered prodrug conjugates (BAPCs) of two experimental
anticancer agents (KGP03 and KGP18) were synthesized. KGP03 and KGP18
were inspired by the natural product combretastatin A-4 (CA4). A unique
attribute of the selected anticancer agents is that both bind tubulin at
the colchicine site, inhibit tubulin polymerization into microtubules,
and thus function as pronounced cytotoxic, anti-proliferative agents in
human cancer cell lines and as vascular disrupting agents (VDAs). The
assays were validated with a series of nitrothiophene analogues of CA4
(Thomson et al., Mol. Cancer Ther. 2006 5:2886). In our evaluation of
this series, the gem-dimethyl nitrothiophene analogue of CA4 was
efficiently cleaved by POR and gave an average differential hypoxia
cytotoxicity ratio (HCR: GI50 values of normoxic/hypoxic conditions) of
41 in the human A549 lung carcinoma cell line. The corresponding prodrug
of combretastatin A-1 had an HCR = 26. The monomethyl nitroimidazole
BAPCs of KGP03 and KGP18 produced positive HCRs in our initial assays. In
preliminary studies, the CA4 BAPC demonstrated antivascular activity in
an orthotopic syngeneic breast tumor mouse model (4T1/BALB/c). In the POR
assay, the gem-dimethyl nitrothiophene analogue of KGP03 was completely
cleaved in 24 h. Biological evaluation of these BAPCs indicates the
occurrence of selective, hypoxic activation resulting in release of the
potent inhibitors of tubulin polymerization (CA4, CA1, KGP03, KGP18).


