Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A dual and selective small molecule inhibitor of EGFR and PI3
kinase shows promising preclinical activity against KRAS and BRAF mutant
colorectal tumors.


Agents targeting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have met with
limited success in the clinical management of colorectal cancer (CRC).
Mutations in KRAS, BRAF, and PIK3CA are important drivers of resistance
to EGFR-targeted therapy. Conversely, EGFR-mediated feedback mechanisms
serve to mediate resistance to MEK inhibitor-based treatment of CRC by
reactivating MAP kinase signaling. Our central hypothesis is that a dual
small molecule inhibitor that potently and selectively targets only EGFR
and PI3KA, when combined with a MEK inhibitor, will be highly efficacious
against subpopulations of BRAF mutant or KRAS mutant colorectal cancers
that are dependent upon these kinase molecules to drive tumor
progression. Employing a computational modeling approach, we exploited
the known binding modes of structurally related ATP binding site
inhibitors of EGFR and PI3K to design small molecules that simultaneously
inhibit both kinases in a selective manner. To the best of our knowledge,
the lead compound MTX-211, whose binding mode is flipped in PI3K compared
to EGFR, represents a first in class selective inhibitor of these two
critical oncogenic kinases. MTX-211 exhibits a favorable pharmaceutical
and selectivity profile, possessing sub- to low nanomolar potency against
both targets, >70% oral bioavailability, strong pharmacodynamic
modulation of both EGFR and PI3K signaling, and strong in vivo single
agent efficacy against multiple BRAFmt and KRASmt colorectal cancer
models, as evidenced by T/C values of 29 to 36% after 10-14 days of oral
dosing of 50 mg/kg. A significantly higher degree of in vivo activity is
seen when MTX-211 is co-administered with the MEK inhibitor trametinib
(>400% increase in survival compared to single agent arms), lending
support for this polypharmacology approach over triple drug combination
strategies. Based on its promising therapeutic profile, MTX-211 is the
focus of an ongoing mouse trial of a large panel of patient-derived
xenograft BRAFmt and KRASmt CRC models to inform the design of future
human clinical trials.


