Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tunable Drug Conjugates: a differentiated drug conjugate (DC)
platform.


We have established a set of technologies called Tunable Drug Conjugates
(TDCs) that will differentiate from other DCs via a rapid payload
release/rapid systemic clearance approach intended to quickly drive high
toxic “payload” concentrations within tumor cells while minimizing
toxicities to patients. TDCs use proprietary Silicon-based linker
chemistries (SiLinkers) in novel Payload Cassettes (PCs) that enable the
rapid and uniform release of multiple and/or mixed payloads both in the
endosome after internalization and within the necrotic microenvironment
of tumors. PCs can incorporate multiple copies of the same payload or
optimal ratios of different therapeutic agents that work together
synergistically to kill cancer cells. A second technology - a Dual
variable Domain-Fab (DVD-Fab) targeting capability provides a proprietary
means of specifically targeting a broad array of cell surface proteins.
DVD-Fab containing TDCs should be cleared from the body within hours,
enabling better management of side-effects. Our Silinker system is
differentiated by the exquisite and tunable sensitivity of the linkers to
cleavage under the modestly acidic conditions encountered in the
endosomal and lysosomal compartments of a cell, and in the
microenvironment of solid tumors. Good stability at physiological pH (and
in human plasma) compares to rapid cleavage at relevant lower pHs as
demonstrated using model systems. SiLinkers exhibit good stability at
37°C in pH7.4 buffer (and plasma) and show rapid hydrolysis at pH ~5.5
to 6.5 (t1/2 = 15 - 120 min). Confocal microscopy studies with imaging
constructs demonstrate the translation of the in vitro data to cellular
systems. We assembled SiLinker based prototype TDCs to target the folate
receptor α (FAR) with folic acid as the targeting ligand and vinblastine
analogs as the payload(s). We used single and PC drug conjugates to show
cellular and in vivo proof-of-concept. We tested our TDCs in cell lines
overexpressing FAR and showed that cytotoxicity was blocked by excess
folic acid. Subsequent in vivo studies, using a nude mouse xenograft
model, showed good antitumor activity for these prototype TDCs. BB-01 (a
single payload construct) showed a clear dose response and had cures in 3
out of 5 mice after 24 days on a 3 μmol/kg TIW schedule. BB-03 (a triple
PC construct) shows essentially complete tumor regression compared to
modest inhibition by BB-01 at doses that deliver equivalent amounts of
payload, demonstrating the synergistic potential of the PC concept to
enhance the activity. We have also synthesized DVD-Fab TDCs. DVD-Fabs
contain a reactive chemical group for seamless connection with our
SiLinkers and PCs. We will describe conjugation chemistries and present
cellular and in vivo Xenograft data for prototype DVD-Fab TDCs.


