Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-clinical pharmacokinetics of XMT-1522, a HER2 targeting
auristatin-based antibody drug conjugate.


The ADC XMT-1522 consists of a novel human IgG1 anti-HER2 monoclonal
antibody and a novel, auristatin-based cytotoxic payload (Auristatin
F-hydroxypropylamide, AF-HPA). An average DAR of 12 AF-HPA molecules is
achieved via a biodegradable polymer conjugation platform. The
non-clinical DMPK properties of XMT-1522 have been characterized in vitro
in plasma and microsomal stability studies, and in vivo in plasma and
tissue disposition and excretion studies. Sample analysis for total
AF-HPA drug payload and released (free) AF-HPA and its metabolites was
performed by ESI+ LC/MS/MS; total antibody was determined by ELISA. The
half-life for AF-HPA release in plasma was found to be greater than 120
hours in all species tested. Microsomal stability studies showed that
AF-HPA was further converted to other metabolites including the
carboxylic acid auristatin F (AF), as well as monomethyl auristatin F-HPA
(MMAF-HPA) and MMAF. The pharmacokinetic profiles of XMT-1522 were
evaluated in mouse, rat and cynomolgus monkey. The antibody of XMT-1522
is cross-reactive with monkey, but not rodent, HER2. In mouse and rat,
XMT-1522 exposure was dose-proportional; exposure was slightly greater
than dose-proportional in monkey consistent with saturation of
target-mediated clearance. All species showed extended exposure to total
AF-HPA drug payload, with measured clearance and volume of distribution
similar for total AF-HPA and the antibody component of XMT-1522. Exposure
to free AF-HPA and AF was less than 1/1000th the exposure of total
AF-HPA. These data indicate the vast majority of AF-HPA in plasma is
antibody-conjugated, indicating high stability of the ADC in systemic
circulation. XMT-1522 tissue disposition was studied in NCI-N87
HER2-positive gastric cancer xenograft tumor bearing mice. After a single
3 mg/kg dose of XMT-1522, free AF-HPA and its metabolite AF were
measurable in tumor tissue until the last time point measured (2 weeks).
Total AF-HPA and free AF-HPA achieved peak tumor concentrations 48 hours
after dosing. In contrast, AF achieved peak tumor concentration 7 days
after dosing and showed only a slight decline in tumor concentration at
14 days, consistent with intracellular trapping of this poorly
cell-permeable metabolite. Exposure to free AF-HPA or AF in other tissues
was at least an order of magnitude lower than in tumor; in tissues with
measurable free drug, AF was the predominant species. XMT-1522 excretion
studies, conducted in rat, indicated that the AF-HPA payload was mainly
excreted by the gastrointestinal route. In the first 96 hours after
administration 33% of the AF-HPA dose was excreted in feces, compared to
3% excreted in urine. The major contributing metabolites both in feces
and urine were conjugated AF-HPA, AF, and free AF-HPA. In conclusion, the
plasma kinetics, tissue distribution and excretion profile of XMT-1522
are acceptable for clinical evaluation in cancer patients.


