Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translation of HPV mediated immortalization to cancer precision
medicine.


The E6/E7 oncogenes of the high-risk HPVs are both necessary and
sufficient to immortalize HFKs and their presence and expression is
required for the continued proliferation of HPV-positive cervical cancer
cells. We and others have shown previously that hTERT induced by E6 and
cytoskeleton alteration by E7 are critical. Both E6 and feeder cells
activate telomerase, while both E7 and Rock inhibitor (Y-27632) disrupt
the actin cytoskeleton and inactivate Rho. Feeders and Y-27632 to induce
unlimited cell proliferation of human keratinocytes. Unexpectedly, we
observed that feeders and Y-27632 could be used to establish both normal
and tumor cell cultures from non-keratinocyte tissues. This culture has
been termed as “conditional reprogramming”, since CR cultures stop
proliferating or terminally differentiate after its removal, depending on
culture conditions. The Combination of CR and Organoids ( (Matrigel,
air-liquid interface (ALI)) cultures represents next generation human
cancer models and functional diagnostics for cancer precision medicine as
described in August 2015 in the NCI precision medicine initiative and
three nature review articles (Nat Rev Cancer. 2015 Dec; Nat Rev Genet.
2015 Jul; Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014 Nov.). The technique is relatively
simple and has been reproduced in more than 50 laboratories (including an
original and independent article in Science from Massachusetts General
Hospital) (Science. 2014, 346(6216):1480-6.). Importantly, the CR
technology can generate 2x10The E6/E7 oncogenes of the high-risk HPVs are
both necessary and sufficient to immortalize HFKs and their presence and
expression is required for the continued proliferation of HPV-positive
cervical cancer cells. We and others have shown previously that hTERT
induced by E6 and cytoskeleton alteration by E7 are critical. Both E6 and
feeder cells activate telomerase, while both E7 and Rock inhibitor
(Y-27632) disrupt the actin cytoskeleton and inactivate Rho. Feeders and
Y-27632 to induce unlimited cell proliferation of human keratinocytes.
Unexpectedly, we observed that feeders and Y-27632 could be used to
establish both normal and tumor cell cultures from non-keratinocyte
tissues. This culture has been termed as “conditional reprogramming”,
since CR cultures stop proliferating or terminally differentiate after
its removal, depending on culture conditions. The Combination of CR and
Organoids ( (Matrigel, air-liquid interface (ALI)) cultures represents
next generation human cancer models and functional diagnostics for cancer
precision medicine as described in August 2015 in the NCI precision
medicine initiative and three nature review articles (Nat Rev Cancer.
2015 Dec; Nat Rev Genet. 2015 Jul; Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014 Nov.). The
technique is relatively simple and has been reproduced in more than 50
laboratories (including an original and independent article in Science
from Massachusetts General Hospital) (Science. 2014, 346(6216):1480-6.).
Importantly, the CR technology can generate 2x10<6cells in a week from
small biopsies, and can generate cultures from cryopreserved tissue and
small biopsies. We therefore initiated studies to examine whether CR
cultures reflected the biology and genotype of the original tumor and
whether cultures might be used to predict clinical responses. Moreover,
the epithelial cells can be propagated indefinitely in vitro, yet retain
the capacity to become fully differentiated when placed into conditions
that mimic their natural environment. Thus, the CR method significantly
advances applications for regenerative medicine.


