Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GANT61-induced cell death involves inhibition of transcription and
DNA licensing at GLI sites in the promoters of GLI-dependent target genes
in human colon carcinoma cells.


The GLI genes, GLI1 and GLI2, are transcriptional regulators of the
Hedgehog signaling response, binding at promoters to GACCACCCA-like
consensus sequences. From genetic and biochemical studies, GLI2 is the
primary mediator of HH signaling, which activates GLI1 to
transcriptionally regulate target genes. In cancers both GLI1 and GLI2
are oncogenes, aberrantly and constitutively activated by oncogene-driven
signaling pathways, in particular KRAS/BRAF in colon cancer. GANT61, a
specific GLI inhibitor, induced extensive cytotoxicity in human models of
colon cancer, indicating GLI to be a critical target in cancer cell
survival. We have determined FOXM1 to be a transcriptional target of GLI1
at a GCCCACCCA consensus sequence. In HT29 cells, inhibition of GLI
binding to the FOXM1 promoter by GANT61 led to inhibition of binding of
the pause-release factors DSIF, NELF, and p-TEFb in the region of the
TSS, with inhibition of binding of Pol II at both GLI and TSS sites. In
R-loop regions, RNA:DNA hybrid formation was reduced at both the GLI and
TSS sites in the FOXM1 promoter by GANT61, sensitive to RNaseH. Bisulfite
conversion/PCR also determined >50% reduction in ssDNA (C->T conversions)
in the GLI binding region in GANT61-treated cells. Data support
GANT61-induced inhibition of GLI-dependent transcription at the PIC
before R-loops are formed. Pretreatment of HT29 cells with α-amanitin
(Pol II inhibitor) reduced GANT61-induced γH2AX foci, indicating the
importance of transcription in GANT61-induced DNA damage. Co-localization
of GLI1 and BrdU foci, inhibited by GANT61, indicated GLI1 and DNA
replication were linked. By co-immunoprecipitation, GLI1 bound the DNA
replication licensing factors ORC4, CDT1, and MCM2, decreased in the
presence of GANT61. By confocal microscopy, significant co-localization
of GLI1 and ORC4 foci was inhibited by GANT61, and enrichment of ORC4
occurred at the GLI binding site in the FOXM1 promoter. In addition to
non-transcriptional mechanisms of interaction between GLI1 and DNA
licensing factors, CDT1 was found to be a transcription target of GLI1 at
a putative GACCACCCG consensus sequence in the promoter. ChIP analysis
determined significant enrichment of γH2AX at this site in
GANT61-treated HT29 cells. Overexpression of CDT1 in HT29 cells reduced
GANT61-induced cell death and cleavage of caspase-3, indicating a
significant role of DNA replication licensing in the mechanism of
induction of GANT61-induced cell death. In summary, we have demonstrated
inhibition of GLI-dependent transcription by GANT61 at the PIC during the
initiation of RNA synthesis, and the importance of inhibiting DNA
replication licensing at sites in promoter regions that bind the
transcription factor GLI1 by both non-transcriptional and transcriptional
mechanisms.

Supported by NCI Award 1 RO1 CA183921-01A1 and by Southern Research
Institute


