Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cross-platform integrative analysis of NSCLC reveals association
between PD-L1 expression patterns and tumor genetic profile .


Background: Immunotherapy with PD-1 inhibitors is associated with
increased survival in NSCLC. While PD-L1 expression enriches for clinical
benefit, additional predictive biomarkers are critically needed to
further define patient subsets associated with specific
response/resistance profiles and to develop optimal combination
strategies. We hypothesized that integration of pathology features
derived from H&E and PD-L1 immunohistochemistry with genetic/genomic data
from NSCLC could identify phenotypic/genotypic associations that
highlight specific immunosuppressive mechanisms. Towards that end, we
present data from an initial pilot analysis.

Methods: Twenty-nine NSCLC (23 adenocarcinoma; 6 squamous cell carcinoma)
were included. H&E-stained sections were scored for tumor grade (1-3),
relative proportion of tumor stroma (stroma score 1-3), percent necrosis
and intensity of chronic inflammatory infiltrate (1-3+). PD-L1
immunohistochemistry was performed using the DAKO 28-8 antibody. PD-L1
expression was scored in tumor cells by modified H-score and by the
predominant pattern observed - diffuse, heterogeneous, tumor-stroma
interface or negative, and in immune cells using a semi-quantitative
intensity scale (1-3+). DNA and RNA extracts from FFPE tissue were
subjected to whole exome sequencing and RNAseq from which mutation load,
oncogene/tumor suppressor genotypes and inflammation signatures were
derived.

Results: The highest PD-L1 H-scores were associated with diffuse
expression patterns and were observed in high grade tumors (Grade 3).
Deleterious mutations in TP53, STK11, KEAP1, KRAS, EGFR and MET occurred
at expected frequencies. These mutations occurred across multiple PD-L1
expression patterns except for STK11 which was restricted to PD-L1
negative tumors (p=0.077, Fisher exact test). STK11-mutant tumors also
displayed a lower PD-L1+ inflammation score (p=0.046, Fisher exact test).
Trends toward an increase in mutation load with increasing levels of
chronic inflammation on H&E stain as well as with PD-L1+ chronic immune
infiltrates were noted. Inflammation signatures derived from RNAseq
showed an association between diffuse PD-L1 expression by IHC and the
highest levels of inflammation mRNA signatures comprising T-cells (CD8,
Tregs), B-cells, macrophages and MDSCs.

Conclusions: The potential association between tumor grade, PD-L1
expression, intensity of the immune infiltrate and mutation load raise
the possibility that tumor morphology predicts mutation load and
associated immune response. The finding that STK11 mutation is restricted
to PD-L1 negative tumors suggests an immunosuppressive mechanism is
invoked in this setting. This dataset is currently being expanded to
establish the significance of these findings.


