Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translating CTCs for clinical use: melanoma patient-derived CTCs
evolution in xenografts.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are known to disseminate from
primary/metastatic tumors, survive in the circulation, and develop
competency to colonize distant organs. Dissecting CTC heterogeneity is
therefore crucial to provide improve prognostic and diagnostic tools
(concept of “liquid biopsy”). However, the clinical significance of
CTC heterogeneity is still unknown. We hypothesized that melanoma patient
blood-derived, lineage-negative cells (CD45-/CD34-/CD73-/CD90-/CD105-)
contain melanoma cell subpopulations (Melan A+, S100+, CD146+ and NG2+
CTCs) that evolve in vivo and achieve metastatic potency when reaching an
organ-specific niche. We enriched Lin-negative cells from peripheral
blood of melanoma patients clinically diagnosed with or without brain
metastasis (MBM) by multi-parametric flow cytometry; and analyzed CTC
heterogeneity in xenografts by longitudinal capturing and interrogation
at the single-cell level (DEPArrayTM platform). First, we evaluated the
presence of melanoma CTC subpopulations in Lin-negative cells and
developed Lin-negative murine xenograft models. Human-cell derived
melanoma metastasis in xenografts confirmed that CTCs require
metastasis-potentiating factors present in the Lin-negative population.
Second, we performed multi-parametric flow cytometry to isolate
human-derived HLA+/Melan A+/- CTCs/DTCs population from murine blood and
bone marrow at T0, Tmid and Tend phases of metastasis. We interrogated
the differential levels of CTCs/DTCs in HLA+/Melan A+ cell population and
established their neoplastic identity by genetic profiling and the
expression of melanoma markers at single-cell level. Third, we dissected
longitudinal transcriptional signatures of CTCs vs DTCs in association
with MBM onset. We assessed the comprehensive EMT scores of CTCs and DTCs
transcriptomics and identified the pathways associated with CTC/DTCs
dynamic functional states depending upon melanoma progression.
Collectively, this study provide important insights to identify novel
EMT-related biomarkers of MBM progression. Further elucidation of these
CTC biomarkers and properties may provide novel therapeutic strategies
that can be clinically useful in melanoma patients which are yet to
develop MBM.


