Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue density can create a carcinogenic microenvironment for
normal mammary epithelial cells.


Background Breast cancer is the most diagnosed cancer and the fourth
leading cause of cancer related mortality among females. Mammographic
density (MD) is defined by the amount of stromal and epithelial tissues
present in the breast tissue. Fifty percent of women have high MD and are
4-6 times more likely to develop breast cancer in their lifetime compared
to women with low MD. Additionally, mammograms often miss abnormal
lesions in high MD breast leading to late-stage diagnosis. The stromal
microenvironment is characterized by extracellular matrix (ECM)
reorganization and stiffness, and increase in ECM proteins including
collagen I and fibronectin, which drives proliferation, tumor cell
survival and migration. Expression of fibronectin and collagen are
significantly higher in women with high MD compared to women with low MD.
However, the mechanisms underlying the initiation and progression of
breast cancer associated with MD remains largely unknown. Therefore,
understanding the molecular pathways involved in the unique
transformation of normal mammary cells to cancer cells in a dense
microenvironment is an important step in finding diagnostic tools and
therapeutic targets for prevention and treatment of breast cancer.

We hypothesize that normal mammary epithelial cells behave like cancer
cells in an ECM protein-rich microenvironment by activating pathways
associated with tumor growth and survival and contributing to the
initiation and progression of breast cancer.

Methods We conducted an in vitro study, determining the effects of
different concentrations of ECM proteins on the activation of
pro-carcinogenic pathways including the MAPK pathway and the PI3 Kinase
pathway using Western blotting analysis. This study helps us understand
if there is a difference in the expression of ERK1/2 signaling and/or PI3
Kinase signaling in normal mammary cells (hTERT) seeded on culture dish
coated with ECM-proteins (collagen and fibronectin), compared to a
non-coated control. We also examined morphological changes that can occur
in a breast cancer cell line (HCC1806) that are seeded on ECM-rich
coating dishes compared to non-coated dishes.

Results We observed changes in the morphology of breast cancer cell lines
after cells were seeded on increasing concentration of extracellular
matrix coatings using light microscopy. We also observed an increase in
the expression of PI3 Kinase in normal mammary cell lines compared to
control after cells were stressed using hypoxia.

Conclusion Collagen and fibronectin-rich microenvironment can induce
desmoplastic-like phenotype and behavior for normal mammary cells, which
highlights the possible first steps in transformation of normal mammary
cells to desmoplastic cells. Given that high MD is one of the major risk
factors for breast cancer development, it is critical to decipher the
molecular mechanisms associated with the high risk.


