Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting the cellular expression and subcellular localization of
lncRNAs implicated as prognostic biomarkers in non-small cell lung
carcinomas by RNA ISH.


Background: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are involved in many
biological processes, including epigenetic modification, cell
differentiation, and apoptosis. More recently, lncRNAs have emerged as
unique biomarkers that may be associated with a physiological or diseased
state, and several lncRNAs have been identified as prognostic markers in
a wide variety of human cancers. Because lncRNAs do not translate into
protein, their discovery in the tumor is entirely dependent upon RNA
detection. The majority of lncRNAs are also expressed at very low levels
compared to mRNAs and may be more heterogeneously expressed than mRNAs.
Therefore, detection of lncRNAs in tumor biopsies requires a highly
sensitive and specific detection method that can discern single-cell and
subcellular localization of lncRNA expression.

Methods: Single-molecule RNA in situ hybridization (ISH) is a well-suited
method for the detection of lncRNAs in tumor biopsies because it allows
for the visualization of single RNA molecules with morphological context.
To interrogate the expression pattern of lncRNAs within the tumor and its
microenvironment, we performed RNA ISH using the RNAscope assay on FFPE
tissue microarrays consisting of archived tissue samples of 53 primary
non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) tumors and 4 adjacent normal lung
tissues. We examined the expression of 4 lncRNAs which have been
implicated as potential prognostic markers of lung cancer: AFAP-AS1,
ANRIL, HOTAIR, and UCA1.

Results: These lncRNAs were detected in approximately 40-60% of the 53
NSCLC tumor cores and in none of the 4 adjacent normal lung tissues.
Expression of these 4 lncRNAs was observed predominantly in tumor cells,
with little to no detection in the stroma. Some lncRNAs displayed a
heterogeneous expression pattern, with some tumor cell foci displaying
strong lncRNA signal while other foci in the same tumor did not display
signal. Furthermore, some lncRNAs displayed heterogeneous cell expression
in the same foci, with some cells expressing very high levels of lncRNA
while other cells in the same foci had little to no lncRNA expression. An
evaluation of each lncRNA in serial sections revealed that 6 of the 53
NSCLC tumors expressed all 4 lncRNAs in the same tumor foci. Lastly,
little to no signal was observed for the prostate cancer-specific lncRNA
PCA3 in the NSCLC tumors and no PCA3 expression was detected in adjacent
normal lung tissues.

Conclusions: These results demonstrate the ability of the RNAscope ISH
assay to detect potential lncRNA biomarkers in lung cancer samples in
situ, allowing for the identification of expression heterogeneity within
the tissue environment and precise tumor expression patterns of lncRNAs.
Identification of the subcellular localization and cell-to-cell
expression patterns of lncRNAs can facilitate greater understanding about
their specific biological roles in cancer and other diseases.


