Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progranulin promotes ubiquitination, sorting and lysosomal
degradation of sortilin in castration-resistant prostate cancer cells.


Introduction and Objective: Despite extensive clinical and experimental
studies over the past decades, the pathogenesis of prostate cancer
remains largely unknown. Furthermore, the mechanisms promoting the
castration-resistant stage of prostate cancer are still very poorly
understood. We recently demonstrated that progranulin acts as an
autocrine growth factor and promotes castration-resistant prostate cancer
cell motility, invasion and anchorage-independent growth. Progranulin was
also overexpressed in prostate cancer tissues vis-à-vis non-neoplastic
controls. Despite the strong connections with cancer, progranulin’s
mode of action is not well understood. Furthermore, proteins that
regulate early stages of progranulin signaling have not been identified.
Sortilin, a transmembrane protein of the Vps10 family, binds progranulin
and negatively regulates progranulin action by promoting progranulin
uptake and degradation. Significantly, castration-resistant DU145 and PC3
cells express very low sortilin levels, which were associated with high
progranulin production and enhanced motility, suggesting that mechanisms
regulating sortilin/progranulin levels may contribute to prostate cancer
progression.

Methods: Progranulin-mediated sortilin ubiquitination was assessed by
transient ubiquitination assays in PC3 and DU145 cells either expressing
or depleted of endogenous progranulin. Sortilin stability was assessed by
immunoblotting with or without protein synthesis inhibitors and
immunofluorescence microscopy with GFP-tagged sortilin.
Progranulin-dependent sortilin endocytosis and sorting for degradation
were evaluated by confocal microscopy and colocalization with specific
intracellular markers.

Results: Prolonged progranulin stimulation induced sortilin
ubiquitination in PC3 and DU145 cells, which was associated with enhanced
sortilin internalization through a clathrin-dependent pathway. Upon
progranulin stimulation, sortilin was then sorted into early endosomes
and subsequently targeted for degradation in the lysosomal compartment as
assessed by immunoblot and IF experiments in the presence or absence of
lysosomal inhibitors. Significantly, sortilin ubiquitination was
significantly inhibited in progranulin-depleted PC3 and DU145 cells,
which showed enhanced sortilin stability when compared to
progranulin-expressing control cells.

Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that progranulin activates a feedback
loop by inducing sortilin downregulation via the lysosomal pathway. This
novel regulatory mechanism would ensure the maintenance of progranulin
signaling in castration-resistant prostate cancer cells by limiting
sortilin-mediated progranulin uptake and degradation. Deciphering the
cross-talk between sortilin and progranulin signaling could provide
avenues to design novel therapeutic strategies in prostate tumors.


