Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a possible therapeutic candidate for multiple
myeloma based on dual inhibition of EZH1/EZH2.


Multiple myeloma (MM) is largely incurable as the disease eventually
relapses despite the recent development of novel therapies. Previous
reports show that side population (SP) cells comprise myeloma stem cells.
Therefore, targeting SP cells may be a promising strategy for preventing
and treating MM relapse. Polycomb repressive complexes 1 (PRC1) and 2
(PRC2) are important epigenetic regulators that maintain the
“stemness” of ES cells and other hematopoietic stem cells. Enhancer
of zeste homolog 1 and 2 (EZH1/2) are catalytic components of PRC2, which
trimethylate histone H3 at lysine 27 to repress transcription of target
genes. Mutation and overexpression of EZH2 are associated with many
cancers, including MM. Here, we found that SP cells expressed
significantly higher levels of EZH1/2 than non-SP cells. These results
suggest that overexpression of EZH1/2 is important for maintaining the
stemness of MM cells and that EZH1/2 could be a potential therapeutic
target. We developed a novel EZH1/2 dual inhibitor, OR-S1, and used it to
investigate the effect of pharmacologic inhibition of EZH1/2 on MM. OR-S1
suppressed the proliferation of almost all MM cell lines tested, with an
IC50 significantly lower than that of the specific EZH2 inhibitor,
GSK126. Furthermore, flow cytometry analysis revealed that OR-S1
significantly depleted the SP cell population. RNA-seq analysis revealed
that the transcriptional profiles of MM cell lines treated with OR-S1
were characterized by up-regulation of genes related to the Wnt pathway.
qRT-PCR confirmed that expression of Wnt, Frizzled, and Protein kinase C
family members increased markedly after exposure to OR-S1. Previous
studies show that increased activation of the canonical Wnt signaling
pathway down-regulates HSC self-renewal and differentiation. Therefore,
we generated β-catenin-overexpressing MM cells to examine the effects of
increased Wnt signaling on MM cells. Surprisingly, proliferation of these
cells was significantly lower than that of control cells. These results
suggested that PRC2 directly targets Wnt signaling, and that
over-activation induced by EZH1/2 dual inhibition was responsible for the
reduced proliferation of MM cells. Oral administration of OR-S1 to mice
bearing MM xenografts led to significant impairment of subcutaneous
tumors. Interestingly, long-term administration of the drug at lower
doses to mice bearing orthotopic xenografts resulted in complete
eradication of minimal residual disease from the bone marrow and complete
cure of MM without any serious side effects. Furthermore, OR-S1 treatment
of an orthotopic PDX model derived from a relapsed and heavily pretreated
MM patient led to a reduction in the levels of human immunoglobulins in
the serum. Taken together, these results strongly suggest that dual
inhibition of EZH1/2 is a promising therapeutic approach to eradicating
myeloma stem cells and could lead to important advances in the treatment
of MM.


