Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sphingolipids transfer proteins (GLTP and CPTP) regulate the
neoplastic progression of colon and breast cancer cells.


Sphingolipids have previously been shown to affect cancer progression by
regulating cell death (apoptosis) and survival (autophagy). While
apoptosis is promoted by elevations in sphingosine and ceramide,
increases in sphingosine-1-phosphate and ceramide-1-phosphate can tip the
balance toward survival. Changes in the expression of sphingolipid
transfer proteins such as GLTP (glycolipid transfer protein) and CPTP
(ceramide-1-phosphate transfer protein) have been shown to modulate cell
shape change and regulate pro-inflammatory cytokine release,
respectively, in human cancer epithelial cell lines. To gain a better
understanding of the situation, we investigated further. We discovered
that GLTP overexpression inhibits the growth of human colon carcinoma
cell lines (HT-29; HCT-116), but spares normal colonic epithelial cells
(HCEC) largely due to growth arrest at the G0/G1 cell cycle checkpoint.
Mechanistically, we found that GLTP overexpression modulated cell cycle
progression by upregulating Kip1/p27 and Cip1/p21 protein and mRNA
levels, while decreasing CDK2, CDK4, cyclin E and cyclin D1 protein
levels. The cell cycle arrest and growth inhibition induced by GLTP
overexpression led to apoptotic cell death of HT-29 cells. Neither GLTP
nor CPTP overexpression induced apoptosis in breast cancer cell lines
(T47D and HTB-126). However, depletion of CPTP, but not GLTP, induced
autophagy as indicated by increased LC3 transcript and autophagosome
levels (GFP-LC3-II puncta). In the breast cancer cell lines, increased
transcript levels of cPLA2 and CERK were detected consistent with the
earlier pro-inflammatory effect reported for CPTP depletion in A549 lung
epithelial carcinoma cells. Our findings shed light on the mechanistic
ways by which GLTP and CPTP affect apoptosis and autophagy to impact
cancer progression. Future in vivo studies are planned to ascertain the
role(s) of these new players in cancer development and therapy.

[Support: NIH GM45928, HL-125353, Paint-the-Town-Pink (PTTP) Cancer
Funds, Hormel Fdn]


