Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic mechanisms of disease progression in pediatric medullary
thyroid cancer (MTC).


Background: Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia (MEN) 2B is a rare hereditary
disorder characterized by medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) in early
childhood, pheochromocytoma, and mucosal neuromas. Patients with advanced
MTC are treated with rearranged during transfection (RET) targeting
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as vandetanib. Despite initial
responses, many patients progress on TKI therapy and mechanisms of
resistance are yet to be elucidated. We analyzed tumor samples from seven
children with MEN2B and MTC enrolled in a natural history study
(NCT01660984).

Methods: DNA samples from tumor and adjacent normal tissue from paraffin
embedded blocks or unstained slides were analyzed by a custom capture
next-generation sequencing panel. Bioinformatics analyses identified
point mutations, insertions, deletions and copy number variations.

Results: Seven patients (median age at study enrollment 14 years, range
11-17 years) with the RET p.Met918Thr germline mutation were included in
analysis. Tumor samples were available for three patients pre-TKI (four
samples), two patients at progression on TKI (three samples), and two
patients both, pre-TKI and at progression (five samples). Pre-TKI samples
exhibited few tumor specific mutations or copy number variations and 4/5
patients had loss of chromosome 1p. Progression for one patient was
associated with acquisition of a previously unidentified p.Leu790Phe
mutation within the kinase domain of the RET gene. Loss of heterozygosity
and increase in copy number variations were noted in 4/5 samples at tumor
progression. Two patients had copy number loss of chromosome 14 and three
had copy number gain of chromosome 1q. Recurrent, somatic, non-synonymous
mutations were not identified in the sample set.

Conclusion: In children with MEN2B and MTC, we identified increase in
copy number variations and a somatic mutation within the RET gene as
potential mechanisms of drug resistance. Our data imply that a common
genetic mechanism for progression on TKI may not exist within this small
sample set and highlight the need for serial collection of tumor tissue.
Further, whole genome aneuploidy may provide rationale for the evaluation
of cytotoxic chemotherapy in patients who experience progressive disease
on TKI therapy. Analysis of additional samples and whole exome DNA and
RNA sequencing are ongoing.


