Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical pharmacokinetics of CASC-578, a novel, selective,
potent, and orally bioavailable small molecule checkpoint kinase 1
inhibitor.


Introduction: Checkpoint kinase 1 (Chk1) is a serine/threonine protein
kinase that regulates cell division in response to genotoxic stress by
arresting cell cycle progression in the S & G2 phases. Pharmacological
inhibition of Chk1 is proposed to selectively uncouple the completion of
DNA replication from G2/M phase transition in tumor cells that have
impaired DNA damage response networks, resulting in mitotic catastrophe
and cell death. CASC-578 is a novel small molecule inhibitor of Chk1 that
is selective, highly potent and orally bioavailable in multiple
preclinical species.

Methods: The in vitro ADME properties of CASC-578 were evaluated,
including in vitro intrinsic microsomal clearance, Caco2 permeability,
plasma protein binding and stability, blood to plasma partitioning,
cytochrome P450 inhibition and induction, and transporter inhibition.
Pharmacokinetic studies of CASC-578 were conducted in mice, rats, and
cynomolgus monkeys as either single dose (IV and/or PO) or repeat dose
(PO only). Multiple oral dose pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in
mice, rats and cynomolgus monkeys for 5-7 days.

Results: CASC-578 is highly bound in plasma protein across all species.
The apparent permeability is high in Caco2 bi-directional transport study
and correlated well with a rapid absorption profile observed in vivo.
CASC-578 is not a substrate of P-glycoporotein (efflux =1). There was no
direct nor time dependent inhibition on human CYP450 enzymes, and only a
slight induction of CYP3A4 was seen at 10 uM drug concentration in a
transporter cell-based induction assay. In all animal species, CASC-578
exhibited species-dependent systemic clearance resulting from both phase
I and phase II metabolism, and a moderate to high volume of distribution.
The elimination kinetics appeared to be monophasic. Oral bioavailability
was high in all species studied (>60% F). There was no significant
difference in the pharmacokinetics of the drug between genders. Maximal
plasma concentration and total drug exposure (AUC) appeared to be
proportional from repeat dose studies. Overall, CASC-578 has very
desirable drug-like properties and ideal pharmacokinetics for an oral
once daily drug, and represents a suitable candidate for clinical
development as a novel potential therapeutic approach for the treatment
of solid and hematological malignancies


