Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interferon-gamma induces PD-L1 expression via IFNGR-JAK-STAT
pathway in ovarian cancer.


The purpose of this study is to investigate underlying mechanism of how
cytokine interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) regulates PD-L1 expression in ovarian
cancer cells. We treated a panel of human and mouse ovarian cancer cell
lines with recombinant human/mouse IFN-γ. Our data showed that IFN-γ
up-regulated mRNA and protein expression of PD-L1 significantly in a
majority of ovarian cancer cells. The functional IFN-γ receptor is
comprised of two ligand-binding IFNGR1 chains associated with two
signal-transducing IFNGR2 chains and associated signaling machinery. Here
we found that the mRNA expression levels of IFNGR1 and IFNGR2 were
abundant in all human ovarian cancer cell lines being tested, while their
expressions were not affected by IFN-γ treatment. After knocking down
the expression levels of IFNGR1 and IFNGR2 in a ovarian cancer cell line
by target gene-specific siRNA, our data showed that the IFN-γ-mediated
induction of PD-L1 were diminished in the ovarian cancer cells when
compared to those with non-targeting scrambled siRNA controls, indicating
the induction of PD-L1 by IFN-γ is dependent on the presence of IFN-γ
receptors in the ovarian cancer cells. Although abundant expression of
IFNGR1 and IFNGR2 were found in all human ovarian cancer cell lines being
tested, the IFN-γ-mediated induction of PD-L1 was not detected in a few
of the human ovarian cancer cell lines (namely IGROV-1, TOV21G and
SKOV3). We further investigated the integrity of IFN-γ signaling in the
human ovarian cancer cell lines by examining activation of STAT1 protein
and induction of IRF-1 gene in human ovarian cancer cell lines after
IFN-γ treatment. Our data showed that phosphorylated-STAT1 protein and
IRF-1 gene expression were up-regulated significantly in a majority of
human ovarian cancer cells after IFN-γ treatment, except IGROV-1 and
TOV21G cells. These results suggested that IGROV-1 and TOV21G cells might
harbor defects in intracellular JAK-STAT1 signaling. We then examined the
presence of JAK1 truncating mutations in human ovarian cancer cell lines
by Sanger sequencing, and confirmed that IGROV-1 and TOV21G cells, but
not the others, have JAK1 truncating mutations. Since our data showed
that SKOV3 cells have wild type JAK1, we further investigated other
possible defects in IFN-γ signaling in SKOV3 cells. We investigated the
IFN-γ-induced STAT3 protein activation in human ovarian cancer cell
lines, and defects were found in Y705 STAT3 phosphorylation in SKOV3 as
well as in IGROV-1 and TOV21G cells. To summarize, our results showed
that IFN-γ induces PD-L1 expression in ovarian cancer cells via
IFNGR-JAK-STAT pathway. The failure of IFN-γ-mediated induction of PD-L1
in a minority group of human ovarian cancer cell lines is due to
defective IFN-γ signaling, including JAK1 truncating mutations and
impaired STAT3 activation. This work is supported by Hong Kong Research
Grants Council General Research Fund (467713 and 14109515).


