Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the p27kip1/cdk4/cdk2/Rb axis in breast cancer using a
peptidomimetic of Brk’s SH3 domain.


Purpose: Cyclin D-cdk4 (DK4) has been a highly sought after therapeutic
target because it drives cancer proliferation in a majority of human
tumors. We have explored the clinical utility of a recently discovered
mechanism of cell cycle control exerted on DK4 by p27Kip1 and its
activator, the Breast tumor Related Kinase (Brk), in predicting
responsiveness to therapy and as a new target for treatment. Although
known as a DK4 assembly factor and cdk2 inhibitor, p27 also acts as a DK4
ON/OFF “switch.” Tyrosine (Y) phosphorylation of p27 (pY) by Brk
gatekeeps both ATP binding and CAK phosphorylation of cdk4’s T loop,
essential for DK4 activation. This function is restricted to cdk4:
p27’s association with cdk2, whether Y phosphorylated or not, appears
to be inhibitory. However, in vivo Y phosphorylated p27 is a target for
cdk2-dependent ubiquitin-mediated degradation, reducing p27’s
association with cdk2, indirectly activating this complex. We showed that
blocking p27 pY inactivates cdk4 directly AND cdk2 indirectly, and thus
represents a novel way to block cancer cell proliferation. pY also serves
as a predictive biomarker of cdk4 activity and tumor response.

Methods: We used a small peptide, ALT, which contains a portion of
Brk’s SH3 domain. ALT binds to p27, blocks Brk’s association and
ability to phosphorylate p27, inhibiting cdk4 and increasing p27’s
ability to inhibit cdk2. We engineered a lipid-based nanoparticle
delivery vehicle (NP-ALT), permitting us to test ALT as a first
generation therapeutic in breast cancer cell lines that were both
responsive and non-responsive to cdk4i therapy. ALT was also used with
Palbociclib to determine if combination therapy reduced drug resistance.
We developed a dual IHC assay for p27 and pY, which we used to analyze
paraffin-embedded, archival human tumor samples, to determine whether we
could pinpoint patients who would have responded to cdk4 inhibition
therapy.

Results: NP-ALT blocks pY, cdk4 and cdk2 activity, and proliferation in
both Palbociclib sensitive and resistant cell lines. As a dual therapy,
ALT treatment synergized with Palbociclib to arrest cells for >30 days,
increased senescence, and in animal models caused tumor regression
instead of just slowing tumor growth as seen with Palbociclib alone.
Analysis of human cancer, obtained from archival sources, demonstrated
that pY is never detected in quiescent benign mammary tissue, but is
detected in about half of the advanced ER/PR+/Her2- tumors analyzed, and
using explant culture techniques, we were able to stratify pY with
Palbociclib response.

Conclusion: Use of an Brk SH3 based peptide (NP-ALT) has proven effective
in blocking p27 pY, inhibiting both cdk2 and cdk4, inducing senescence
and increased durability. pY levels correlate with Palbociclib
sensitivity in low, moderate and non-responders, suggesting that this may
be a biomarker highlighting responsiveness to cdk4i therapy.


