Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination efficacy of HDAC inhibitor vorinostat and CDK-4/6 dual
inhibitor palbociclib against therapy-resistant mantle cell lymphoma.


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive B-cell lymphoma accounting
for about 7% of all non-Hodgkins lymphoma. While multiple therapy
regimens are available to treat MCL patients, ultimately relapse from
therapy-resistant MCL, making MCL carry the worst prognosis of all B cell
lymphomas. Emerging evidence suggest that, dysregulated histone
deacetylases (HDACs) and the key molecules of cell cycle regulator
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) have been shown to be commonly associated
with many lymphomas including MCL, and are considered as promising
targets for relapsed lymphoma therapy. Several inhibitors of these target
pathways/molecules are in clinical trials as monotherapies or in
combination with other anticancer agents. Therefore, in this study, we
investigated the single agent and combination efficacies of the HDACs
inhibitor vorinostat, and CDK-4/6 dual inhibitor palbociclib on MCL cell
growth/survival and underlying molecular mechanism(s) using different MCL
cell lines (Granta 519, Jeko-1 and JVM-2) including therapy-resistant MCL
cell lines derived from Granta-519 (GRL, GRK and GRR). We used MTT assay
to measure the survival and proliferation, agar colony formation assay to
determine the effects of these inhibitors on the anchorage independent
growth, Annexin-V analyses to examine the cells undergoing apoptosis
following treatments and western blot analyses to determine the
expression levels of target molecules including pRb, histone acetylation,
cyclin-D1 and Bcl-2. The concentration of these inhibitors used in this
study were similar to the published literature including sub-IC50 levels
determined in our laboratory. Our results showed that both inhibitors as
single agents or combined, significantly suppressed the cell growth, and
induced apoptosis in therapy-resistant and other MCL lines in vitro. The
single agent and combined anti-lymphoma efficacies of these inhibitors
were further confirmed with the colony formation ability of the MCL cells
grown in 0.3% agar semisolid media. In addition, combination of
vorinostat and palbociclib treatment significantly inhibited the
activation of phosphorylated-retinoblastoma (pRb) protein, a key molecule
of cell cycle and increased the expression of acetylated-Histone H3
(H3-Ac) as determined by western blot analyses. Subsequently, the
expression of Cyclin D1 (proliferation, MCL hallmark) and anti-apoptotic
Bcl-2 proteins were also downregulated by these inhibitors. Together, our
findings suggest that combination of vorinostat and palbociclib showed a
significant synergistic anti-MCL activity by targeting associated
pathways/molecules. This targeted approach warrants further preclinical
evaluation for translation to the clinic.


