Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RORα activation opposes MYCN signaling and restores the circadian
clock in neuroblastoma.


Background. MYCN activation is a hallmark of advanced tumor stage in
neuroblastoma (NB), characterizing high-risk patients prone to resistant
disease. MYCN is also a potent regulator of metabolic reprogramming that
favors NB adaptation to its microenvironment. The retinoic acid
receptor-related orphan receptor α (RORα) is a key regulator of cell
metabolism, immunity, as well as the circadian rhythm. Importantly, RORα
activates the transcriptio of BMAL1, a master circadian transcription
factor frequently deregulated in human cancers. Moreover, synthetic
ligands RORα agonists (i.e. SR1078) have been recently optimized with
great therapeutic potential.

Methods. Multivariate logistic regression analysis identified low levels
of RORα as independent predictors of EFS and OS survival in large NB
patients’ cohorts (n=890 patients). MYCN inducible over-expression and
knock-down NB lines were generated and Q-PCR assays used to assess
MYCN-mediated disruption of central components of the clock machinery.
Growth-suppressive and pro-apoptotic effects of genetic RORα
over-expression and RORα activation (via SR1078) were tested in a panel
of MYCN-amplified and non-amplified lines, as well as in MYCN-inducible
MYCN-3 cells (Tet-ON). MYCN-amplified xenografts were used to test in
vivo therapeutic response to SR1078.

Results. Ectopic MYCN expression upregulates the circadian repressor
REV-ERBα and suppresses the circadian activator RORα and the central
clock BMAL1. In contrast, MYCN silencing effectively restores their
expression levels. Interestingly, the expression of the main regulators
of the clock machinery (RORα, REV-ERBα, and BMAL1) are also profoundly
altered in MYCN-amplified NB patient samples. Specifically, RORα and
BMAL1 are uniformly repressed in MYCN-amplified NB and their reduced
levels independently correlate with poor survival in large patients’
cohorts (n=890 patients total, pResults. Ectopic MYCN expression
upregulates the circadian repressor REV-ERBα and suppresses the
circadian activator RORα and the central clock BMAL1. In contrast, MYCN
silencing effectively restores their expression levels. Interestingly,
the expression of the main regulators of the clock machinery (RORα,
REV-ERBα, and BMAL1) are also profoundly altered in MYCN-amplified NB
patient samples. Specifically, RORα and BMAL1 are uniformly repressed in
MYCN-amplified NB and their reduced levels independently correlate with
poor survival in large patients’ cohorts (n=890 patients total,
p<0.0001). Importantly, re-activation of RORα (via SR1078) strongly
suppresses MYCN transcription and restores BMAL1 levels, inhibiting cell
survival. Moreover, SR1078 reduces cell viability and induces apoptotic
cell death to a higher extent in MYCN-amplified compared to MYCN-non
amplified lines. Lastly, both SR1078 treatment and inducible RORα
over-expression significantly (p=0.020) inhibit tumor growth in MYCN NB
xenografts. Together, our data suggest that RORα loss promotes
MYCN-induced disruption of molecular clock, contributing to NB
tumorigenesis. Restoration of RORα opposes these MYCN functions,
representing an effective strategy for MYCN-amplified NB.


