Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of neo-antigens driving melanoma response to immune
checkpoint blockers via in vivo screening.


Immune checkpoint blockers (ICBs) have rendered unprecedented, durable
responses in metastatic melanoma, but the heterogeneous response among
patients continues to be the major obstacle for their therapeutic
development. It is generally hypothesized that neoantigens derived from
mutated genes are involved in tumor response to ICBs, since the latter is
correlated witt mutational loads of tumors. However, direct experimental
evidence showing that threshold quantity or specific properties of
neoantigens drive ICB response are mostly lacking. To identify and
characterize neoantigens implicated in ICB response, we have generated
two UV-induced melanoma models based on the BrafV600E/Pten-knockout
(Braf/PKO) and Hgf-transgenic (Hgf-tg) mouse, which displayed intrinsic
resistance and high sensitivity to an anti-CTLA-4 antibody, respectively.
Exome sequencing identified 216 and 291 non-synonymous mutations in the
Braf/PKO and UV-Hgf melanoma cell lines, respectively. By RNA sequencing,
74 (34%) and 121 (42%) of these mutated genes were found to be expressed
in each model, respectively, and there were no overlapping mutations
between them. The mutations found in the “sensitive” UV-Hgf melanoma
were analyzed in silico for their binding affinity to MHC-I and/or
MHC-II, thus characterizing putative neoantigens. A “neo-epitope”
library was generated by cloning the DNA sequences flanking
non-synonymous mutations in frame with the eGFP gene in a lentiviral
vector. We further showed that such eGFP-fused epitopes can be presented
by the cells to induce specific T cell responses. The library will be
transduced into the “resistant” Braf/PKO melanoma, which will be
treated with anti-CTLA-4 in mice to identify the neoantigens required for
the response. To prevent immunity against eGFP expressed by tumors, the
library-transduced melanoma cells will be transplanted into the
eGFP-tolerant “glowing head mice”. The results will be used to
determine if one, or more, of our candidate neo-epitopes can induce a
response to anti-CTLA-4. We will also analyze if the response to this ICB
is an epitope-specific reaction or require multiple epitopes, which will
help to identify resistance mechanisms. We anticipate that our results
will provide insight into the role of neoantigens in ICB response.
Moreover, our models will serve as a platform to study the specific
contribution and predictive value of neoantigens for melanoma response to
immunotherapy, which could help improve therapeutic strategies involving
ICBs.


