Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Esophageal stenting in resource-limited settings.


Background: Esophageal cancer is the 6th leading cause of cancer death
globally, with geographical high-risk areas in Asia, the Middle East, and
eastern and southern Africa. Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is
the more common variant in Africa. In Kenya, its incidence is 2nd in men
after prostate cancer and 3rd in women after breast and cervix-uteri
cancers. Late presentation is a common occurrence in developing countries
and is multifactorial due to challenges in access to health care, low
socioeconomic status and delayed or missed diagnosis. A large percentage
of these tumors are thus unresectable and are only eligible for
palliative care via stenting. Our hospital is a 300-bed referral center
in southwestern Kenya, which is a hotspot for ESCC, and we see over 400
cases of ESCC annually.

Methods: We have developed a technique for placement of esophageal
self-expanding metallic stents (SEMS) without fluoroscopy that is safe
and easily reproducible. This is an outpatient procedure, with the
majority done under conscious sedation, and routine followup is not
necessary. The tumor margins are noted at time of video endoscopy, a
guidewire is placed, and dilation done with Savary dilators as required.
The SEMS are then loaded on the stent delivery device and deployed into
the proper position based on measurements, and placement is subsequently
confirmed via endoscopic visualization.

Results: A total of 3000 SEMS have been placed to date at our hospital,
without using fluoroscopy. The male: female ratio has been 1.5:1, and the
average age has been 60.4 years. The distribution of tumor locations was
67% in the middle and distal third. The most common complications were
tumor overgrowth with obstruction and stent migration. Procedure related
mortality was 0.3%. Post-procedure improvement in dysphagia score was
seen in over 80% , and patient satisfaction was high. Initial data puts
our post stent survival time around 8 months/ 250 days

Conclusions: Placement of SEMS for ESCC, without fluoroscopy, is a safe
and reproducible procedure which has a low rate of adverse events. This
procedure results in effective palliation of a difficult disease and can
easily be done in resource-limited settings which have endoscopy
capabilities. Current efforts are ongoing to increase opportunities for
training endoscopists in this procedure and for provision of affordable
stents in Africa.


