Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A real-time annexin V method for monitoring programmed cell death.


Efficacious and durable anti-cancer responses are driven by both the
selective death of malignant cells and the induction of immunostimulatory
activities. Limited but promising clinical evidence suggests that
provocation of an unknown balance of inflammatory- and non-inflammatory
cell death may be key for orchestrating these positive outcomes.
Therefore, identifying and characterizing new clinically useful small
molecules and biologic inducers (or combinations thereof) which promote a
spectrum of programmed cell death in in vitro screening environments
remains critically important. Unfortunately, current screening methods
are either insufficiently robust, cost- or resource-prohibitive, or
provide no means for initial characterization of the kinetics of
programmed cell death. To address this unmet need, we developed a
real-time, live cell assay method that utilizes a fully homogeneous,
bioluminescent annexin V reagent. The method does not require laborious
washing and sample preparation steps associated with traditional annexin
methods and is fully compatible with plate-based multimodal signal
detection systems. The system contains two annexin proteins which have
been engineered to contain separate and distinct complementing domains of
a binary luciferase. Additionally, the system contains a novel
time-released luciferase substrate and a cell impermeable, fluorogenic
DNA dye for monitoring necrosis. Because the annexin-luciferase fusion
pairs have only modest affinity for each other, luminescence remains low
until phosphatidylserine exposure, a hallmark of the programmed cell
death phenotype, brings annexin monomers into close proximity
facilitating complementation of the luciferase sensor. The assay reagent
can be applied at dosing for real-time measurement of the dose-dependency
and magnitude of programmed cell death progression. This work describes
our efforts to characterize and validate the performance of the
bioluminescent annexin assay using relevant cell death induction models.
First, the assay was shown to be functionally concordant with a flow
cytometry annexin method in a dose-response model with bortezomib at
exposure periods known to produce both early and late-apoptosis (with
necrosis) phenotypes. Next, we assessed the performance of the assay
using a limited training set of small molecule and biologic inducers of
programmed cell death that utilize different mechanisms of action (i.e.,
apoptosis and necroptosis) and by using a number of diverse but
representative cancer cell lines. We conclude that the bioluminescent
annexin method provides a new kinetic approach to efficient and effective
detection of programmed cell death mechanisms in real time in a
convenient homogeneous format.


