Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epinephrine-induced gamma-secretase/Notch signaling in pancreatic
cancer stem cells.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading cause of
cancer deaths with 5-year survivals below 10%. Cancer stem cells
represent a small population of cells in PDAC and are thought to drive
the development, progression, metastasis and drug resistance of this
cancer. The Notch pathway regulates the self-renewal of pancreatic cancer
stem cells as well as angiogenesis and drug resistance. Gamma-secretase
cleaves the Notch-1 receptor, resulting in release of the Notch
intracellular domain (NICD) that then translocates to the nucleus and
activates the transcription of target genes. Aberrant Notch signaling
activated by γ-secretase activity is associated with progression,
angiogenesis and drug resistance of PDAC and is being explored as a
target for PDAC therapy. Smoking and psychological stress are risk
factors for PDAC. However, the potential modulation of γ-secretase/Notch
by these risk factors has not been investigated to date. Nicotine and
psychological stress both cause hyperactivity of the sympathetic nervous
system and adrenal glands, resulting in increased blood and organ levels
of the stress neurotransmitters norepinephrine (NOR) and epinephrine
(EPI), which are the physiological agonists of beta-adrenergic receptors
(β-ARs). In turn, β-ARs are coupled to the stimulatory G-protein Gαs
that stimulates the formation of intracellular cAMP, which activates
multiple signaling pathways in a cell type-specific manner. Using
spheroid formation assays and Western blotting, our data show, -for the
first time,- that the stress neurotransmitter Epi significantly increases
the self-renewal of pancreatic cancer stem cells by increasing the
expression of the activated forms (c-terminal) of the γ-secretase
component presenilin1 and of Notch1 (NICD). These responses were
inhibited by the β-AR antagonist (beta-blocker) propranolol and by the
inhibitory neurotransmitter γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) that inhibits
cAMP formation via activation of Gαi-coupled GABAB receptors. These
findings suggest that the γ-sexretasesecretase/Notch pathway in
pancreatic cancer stem cells is under regulatory control by
neurotransmitters, with Epi as stimulator and GABA as inhibitor. These
data could open up new avenues for the prevention and therapy of PDAC.
Additional experiments are currently underway to further investigate
mechanistic aspects of this novel concept. Supported by RO1CA042829 with
NIH.


