Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) in abdominal cavity have
supportive roles on postoperative development of peritoneal metastasis.


Background: Peritoneal lavages just after abdominal surgery contain many
immune cells which consist mainly of granulocytes. Recent studies have
demonstrated that neutrophil extracellular traps(NETs) play important
roles not only on capture of pathogenic microbes but also on autoimmune
disease, thrombus formation and tumor metastasis. Here, in this study,
examined the NET forming capacity of granulocytes in postoperative
peritoneal washings and assessed the possible role of the NETs on
metastasis formation on peritoneum.

Method: In patients who underwent laparotomy due to digestive
malignancies, abdominal cavity were washed with 1000 ml of normal saline
at the timing of laparotomy (Preoperative) and just before wound closure
(Postoperative). Cells recovered from the peritoneal washings were
centrifuged on Ficoll-Hypaque solution and cultured at 37c in 5
percentage CO2 condition for 24 hour. Then, extracellular ds-DNA were
stained with membrane impermeable dye, SYTOX. Also, the granulocytes were
immunostained with mAbs against CD66b, histone, myeloperoxidase (MPO),
neutrophil elastase (NE) and Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9, and NETs
structures were observed under fluorescein microscopy. In adhesion
experiments, human gastric cancer cells were stained by PKH-26 and mixed
with the granulocyte culture for 5 min and gently washed.

Results: 1. After Ficoll separation, CD66b (+) granulocytes were
contained both in polymorophonuclear (PMN) and mononuclear cell (PBMC)
layers, which are considered to be normo-density granulocytes (NDG) and
low density granulocytes (LDG), respectively. The percentage of LDG in
PBMC layer was markedly elevated in postoperative as compared
preoperative lavages (Pre: M=0.71%, 0~8.9% vs Post: M=61.3%, 3~86.7%
n=39, pResults: 1. After Ficoll separation, CD66b (+) granulocytes were
contained both in polymorophonuclear (PMN) and mononuclear cell (PBMC)
layers, which are considered to be normo-density granulocytes (NDG) and
low density granulocytes (LDG), respectively. The percentage of LDG in
PBMC layer was markedly elevated in postoperative as compared
preoperative lavages (Pre: M=0.71%, 0~8.9% vs Post: M=61.3%, 3~86.7%
n=39, p<0.001) The LDG in postoperative sample showed multinuclear
morphology. 2. The short term culture of the postoperative peritoneal
LDG, but not preoperative or peripheral blood granulocytes, many SYTOX
(+) fibrous structures were observed, suggesting the vigorous NETs
formation. The NETs appeared several min after the incubation, peaked at
2 hour and gradually decreased thereafter. Immunostaining showed that
histone and MPO were co-localized on the NETs, while NE or MMP-9 were
less clear on NETs. 3. After 5 min co-incubation, human gastric cancer
cell, OCUM-1 and MKN45, were selectively attached on the NETs. 4. Similar
SYTOX (+) NETs-like structure were clearly detected on the surface of
human omental tissue resected by abdominal surgery.

Conclusion: After laparotomy, many LDG appear in human abdominal cavity
which produce large amounts of NETs on peritoneal surface. The NETs
efficiently trap the floating tumor cells, which may have positive roles
on peritoneal recurrence in advanced cancer.


