Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Precision therapeutic combinations are synergistic against triple
negative breast cancer using compensatory pathways.


Introduction: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 15% of
all breast cancer cases in the United States, and despite its lower
incidence, contributes to a disproportionately higher rate of morbidity
and mortality compared to other breast cancer subtypes. No FDA-approved
targeted therapies are currently available. It has been hypothesized that
drug combinations could potentially be chosen based on a tumor harboring
two or more druggable genomic mutations. However, previously published
data has noted that single agent treatment can change the genomic
landscape and may be responsible for the lack of synergy of dual genomic
drug targeting. Herein we show that targeting a compensatory pathway
after treatment with a genomically-directed agent, results in synergistic
combinations and can outperform choosing two drugs a priori based on
genomic mutations.

Methods: Nine TNBC cell lines were chosen based on the presence of two or
more clinically actionable genomics targets. Drug combinations based on
targeting two genomic mutations were chosen using DNA-seq data from CCLE
and a board consisting of oncologists and researchers. Compensatory
therapies were found using RNA-seq data from untreated versus
single-agent treated TNBC cell lines. The merged transcript RPKMs were
transformed and analyzed for differential expression. Statistically
significant genes were imported into Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) to
identify therapeutics based on compensatory targets using the Causal
Network Analysis and Upstream Regulator functions. Cell viability was
assessed via Celltiter-Fluor. Synergy of the combinations was calculated
using the Chou-Talalay method.

Results: Using two-drug combinations based on genomic mutations alone in
all nine cell lines resulted only in additive or antagonistic responses.
However, using RNA-seq data of each cell line treated with one
genomically-directed agent, IPA analysis identified several compensatory
targets that were upregulated or activated. Treating each cell line in
combination with one genomically-directed agent plus one compensatory
agent resulted in a striking increase in synergy. To understand why
targeting compensatory pathways was superior to targeting two genomic
mutations, we re-evaluated the RNA-seq data. This analysis revealed that
treatment with the first genomically-directed agent, in many cases,
resulted in down-regulation or inactivation of the second genomic-target.
This may explain the lack of synergy when targeting cells with two drugs
based only on genomic mutations.

Conclusion: Targeting TNBC cell lines based on drug combinations informed
by compensatory pathways results in significant synergy and is superior
to choosing drug combinations based on genomic alterations alone.


