Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Flubendazole targets cancer stem-like properties and the HER2/Akt
signaling pathway in HER2-positive breast cancer with trastuzumab
resistance.


Background and Propose: HER2-positive breast cancers are associated with
an aggressive phenotype and trastuzumab resistance leading to poor
clinical outcomes. Flubendazole (FLU) is a potent anthelmintic agent that
inhibits microtubule polymerization, and also exhibits anticancer
activity in several cancer types. The objective of the present study was
to investigate the effect of FLU on apoptosis, HER2/Akt signaling
pathway, cancer stem cell (CSC)-like properties and
trastuzumab-resistance in HER2-positive breast cancer cells. Methods:
FLU-induced antitumor effects were characterized by MTS assay, Sub-G1 and
G2/M-phase arrest population, Annexin-V analysis, ALDH1 activity assay,
Western blotting and immunofluorescence. For in vivo study,
trastuzumab-resistant JIMT1 cells were injected into the mammary fat pads
of BALB/c nude mice. We then determined the tumor growth and CSC-like
properties. Results and conclusion: FLU significantly reduced cell
viability and induced apoptosis with accompanied by activation of
caspase-3, -7, and -8, as well as PARP cleavage in HER2-positive cell
lines (MDA-MB-453, SKBR3 and BT474). FLU-induced apoptosis is associated
with significant decreases in expression levels of HER2, p-HER2
(Tyr1221/1222), HER3, and p-HER3 (Tyr1289). FLU treatment also resulted
in G2/M-phase arrest of the cell cycle, as evidenced by a marked
downregulation of phospho-Histone H3 expression. These results were
closely related to the decline of CSC-like properties, coinciding with
the suppression of ALDH1 activity. These effects were also observed in
trastuzumab-resistant JIMT-1 cells, and significant reductions in tumor
growth and ALDH1A1 downregulation were observed in xenograft models
together with downregulation of HER2 expression in vivo. Our findings
suggest that FLU may be potentially effective for the treatment of
HER2-positive breast cancer with trastuzumab resistance.


