Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting PI3 pathway in ibrutinib resistant diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma.


Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common subtype of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) and approximately 30% of patients with DLBCL
develop relapsed/refractory disease that becomes a major cause of
mortality and morbidity. The Bruton kinase (BTK) inhibitor ibrutinib
successfully blocks B-cell receptor signaling and shows clinical benefit
in leukemia and lymphomas, including mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) and
DLBCL. Ibrutinib elicits overall desirable response rate with
relapsed/refractory MCL and ABC DLBCL. However, in spite of these
encouraging results, responses are variable and generally incomplete,
acquired resistance is common, and recurrence and persistence of lymphoma
is a problem. We undertook a study of factors underlying acquired
ibrutinib resistance (IR) in initially ibrutinib-sensitive DLBCL cell
lines. In this study, IR DLBCL cell lines were generated by continuous
culturing of parental (PT) cell lines in increasing concentrations of
ibrutinib. Once established, IR cell lines were removed from ibrutinib,
expanded, and cultured under the same conditions as the PT cell lines for
further experiments. Of 5 ABC DLBCL cell lines tested, two (OCI-LY3,
U2932) were initially resistant to ibrutinib (IC50>10µM).Three (TMD8,
OCI-LY10, HBL1) were sensitive (IC50 Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) is the most common subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) and
approximately 30% of patients with DLBCL develop relapsed/refractory
disease that becomes a major cause of mortality and morbidity. The Bruton
kinase (BTK) inhibitor ibrutinib successfully blocks B-cell receptor
signaling and shows clinical benefit in leukemia and lymphomas, including
mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) and DLBCL. Ibrutinib elicits overall desirable
response rate with relapsed/refractory MCL and ABC DLBCL. However, in
spite of these encouraging results, responses are variable and generally
incomplete, acquired resistance is common, and recurrence and persistence
of lymphoma is a problem. We undertook a study of factors underlying
acquired ibrutinib resistance (IR) in initially ibrutinib-sensitive DLBCL
cell lines. In this study, IR DLBCL cell lines were generated by
continuous culturing of parental (PT) cell lines in increasing
concentrations of ibrutinib. Once established, IR cell lines were removed
from ibrutinib, expanded, and cultured under the same conditions as the
PT cell lines for further experiments. Of 5 ABC DLBCL cell lines tested,
two (OCI-LY3, U2932) were initially resistant to ibrutinib
(IC50>10µM).Three (TMD8, OCI-LY10, HBL1) were sensitive (IC50 < 10 nM).
In comparison to PT versions of these cell lines, IR cells did not form
clumps in suspension cultures, displayed irregular cell morphology,
showed elevated colony formation ability in methylcellulose matrix, and
had a higher proliferation rate. Western blots and gene expression
profile analysis showed increased expression by IR cell lines of
inhibitors of apoptosis (IAP) family members, survivin, cIAP2, and
oncogenic BCL2 and BCL6. The DNA damage repair pathway was found to be
elevated with enhanced expression of CHK1 kinase. IR cell lines had
reduced BTK expression without acquiring mutations, and downstream
enhanced PI3K-Akt signaling. Analysis of PI3K isoforms revealed
up-regulation of PI3Kα and PI3Kβ with decreased expression of PI3Kδ
and PTEN (PI3K negative regulator). Given the enhanced PI3K isoform
expression with IR, we treated IR cell lines with the PI3Kβ/δ
isoform-targeting drug KA2237 and observed reduced metabolic activity
(survival) of PT cell lines and further reduction of surviving IR cell
lines. In conclusion, this study highlights how changes in a regulator
(PTEN) and mediator (p110β) of PI3K/AKT signaling have important roles
in the development of ibrutinib resistance in DLBCL. Treatment with
KA2237 may provide a better outcome for ibrutinib-resistant DLBCL.


