Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral micro biome enhances stemness in oral cancer cells by
activating Toll like receptor signaling.


Background: The resistance and progression of cancers after chemotherapy
to invasive and metastatic stages accounts for the overwhelming majority
of cancer deaths. Recent studies suggest, microbiomes can induce a
cascade of host events to either support or inhibit tumor growth.
Specially, in oral cancer, chemotherapy treatment may alter the oral
microbial flora, which may favor or inhibit tumor growth. Hence, it is
importantl to develop novel experimental approaches to study the role of
oral microbial flora in oral cancer stemness (self-renewal and
undifferntiated state of cancer stem cells). Importantly, patients in
developing area, including Assam, where KaviKrishna laboratory is
located, may have distinct oral microbial flora that could favor oral
cancer growth. Hence, it is important to include patients from developing
countries for such studies. Our previous research showed that
chemotherapy ehances stemenss in many cancer cell types, including oral
squamous cell carcinoma cell line SSC-25. The stemness switch is
characterized by enhanced expression of stemness associated genes
including Nanog, Lin28A/B, Oct-4, MYC, HIF-2alpha and inflammation
associated genes including Toll like receptor (TLR) 2/4. Here we
investigated the role of oral microbiomes in the TLR mediated stemness
switch of oral cancer cells.

Methods: SCC-25 oral cancer cell line was treated with bacterial product
lipopoly saccharide (LPS), and the stemness switch evaluated by isolation
of ABCG2+ cells and expression of stemness associated genes by these
cells. Capacity of interaction of tumor stromal cells with mesenchymal
stem cells was also evaluated. Additionally, we obtained sputum from oral
cancer subjects undergoing chemotherapy. The patients were from the
Kamrup district of Assam, where KaviKrishna laboratory is located. The
sputum was processed and then added to the culture medium of SCC-25
cells. These post-sputum treated SCC-25 cells were subjected to
phenotypic stemness switch analysis.

Results: We found, LPS and sputum treatment led to the enhanced stemness
of ABCG2+ cells, including the high expression of TLR2/4, MYC, Nanog,
Sox-2, and HIF-2alpha. Importantly, sputum derived from oral cancer
subjects under remission showed inhibitory activity on ABCG2+ cell
self-renewal. In contrast, sputum obtained from oral cancer subjects with
relapse showed enhanced stemness of ABCG2+ cells, and also increased
tumorigenic potential. The post-sputum treated ABCG2+ cells exhibited
high expression of TLR2/4 and associated increase of HIF-2alpha and MYC
transcriptional activity. The sputum treated with broad spectrum
antibiotic ciprofloxacin did not enhance the stemness and TLR2/4
signaling of SCC-25 cells.

Conclusion: These results indicate that oral microbiomes may
differentially influence the stemness of oral cancer cells. We also
conclude that live bacteria present in the sputum may be required to
enhance stemness in a TLR2/4 dependent manner.


