Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterizing the in vitro and in vivo effects of the PIM kinase
inhibitor HS140 in triple-negative human breast cancer.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) lacks expression of the estrogen
receptor (ER), the progesterone receptor (PR) and the ERBB2 (also known
as HER2) receptor, making it the worse subtype of all breast cancers.
Currently, there are no molecular targeted therapies for this cancer and
chemotherapy is only successful in a limited number of patients. Recent
studies suggest that members of the oncogenic PIM kinase family,
especially PIM-1, play a significant role in the growth of TNBC. However,
there is very limited information on the role other PIM family members
have in the growth and development of TNBCs. As an attempt to address
this concern, we treated a panel of TNBC cell lines with HS140, a PIM-2
kinase inhibitor developed in the laboratory. Using cytotoxicity assays,
we were able to demonstrate a decrease in anchorage-dependent growth of
cell lines at different concentrations of HS140. Also, a triple negative
breast cancer GEMM (C3TAg) was used for an efficacy study. Mice (FVB/N
background) have C(3)SV40 T-antigen resulting in inactivation of p53 and
Rb. Nine mice received HS140 treatment (80mg/kg BIW IP) and 14 left
untreated for control (non-treatment [NT]). All mice were monitored for
weight loss and timespan to tumor development 5 times weekly. Tumor
volumes at 21 days were significantly (Mann-Whitney, p=0.0002) reduced in
the treated cohort with a mean of 109mm3 (range of 0-5000) compared to
untreated 1393mm3 (0-239). We observed no toxicities with body mass
stable at the treatment dose of 80mg/kg. Additionally, three mice from
untreated and three mice from treated cohorts were chosen for blood
sampling pre- and post-treatment via a submandibular bleed; no
significant differences were noted in WBC, RBC, PLT, or HGB between
untreated and treated cohorts. Overall, these results suggest that other
members of the PIM kinase family, including PIM-2, have an important
function in the growth and development of TNBC and may serve as a
potential molecular target for future therapeutics.


