Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing the in vivo detection of cancer by manipulating magnetic
fields applied to tumor targeting superparamagnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles.


Superparamagnetic Relaxometry (SPMR) is combination technology for the
early detection of cancer. Conceptually, PEGylated superparamagnetic iron
oxide (Fe3O4) nanoparticles (NPs) coupled with a tumor targeting
monoclonal antibody are systemically administered and target solid tumors
by both passive (EPR) and active (receptor targeting) mechanisms. Once
bound to the target cells, the NPs are magnetized by a brief, low field
magnetic pulse to create macroscopic magnetization. Once the field is
removed, the particle’s magnetization decays and is measurable by
superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) detectors. The
pattern of decay, known as Néel relaxation, exhibits a difference in
latency specific to bound nanoparticles and differs from the Brownian
decay exhibited by free/unbound particles. As a proof of concept, we
developed PEGylated NPs that are covalently bound to an anti-Her-2
monoclonal antibody. In vitro, the nanoconstruct exhibits specific
binding to the Her-2 overexpressing BT-474 breast cancer cells, with
little to no binding to Her-2 negative MCF-7cells. Similar patterns of
selective targeting were observed in vivo.

To improve the specific detection of SPMR signals in tumors we developed
a novel system that selectively enhances the magnetic signal at tumor
sites and reduces the contribution of similar signals at off target sites
such as the liver and spleen. For these studies, we created phantoms of
varying strength to mimic tumor and non-specific signals. We observed
that by creating non-homogenous excitation magnetic field patterns, we
reduced the contribution of the non-specific signals by an order of
magnitude, effectively increasing the signal to noise ratio of the tumor
signal. These results are clinically relevant and support the use of SPMR
in the detection of small tumors in cancer patients.


