Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the novel therapeutic target pregnancy associated
plasma protein A (PAPP-A) in Ewing sarcoma enhances efficacy of IGF1R
targeting in vivo.


Background: Despite intensive treatment regimens, Ewing sarcoma (EWS)
patients with metastatic or relapsed disease still face a 5-year overall
survival of less than 20%, indicating a clear need for novel targeted
therapies. Utilizing ribosomal depleted RNA sequencing of 122 EWS samples
(49 cell lines and 73 tumor samples) and 96 normal samples of variable
tissues, we previously reported PAPP-A as one of the top 5 genes
overexpressed in EWS (> than 4-fold) compared to normal tissue. Notably,
PAPP-A showed substantial expression in tumors (median log2FPKM = 3.933,
n=122) and minimal expression in normal tissue (median log2FPKM = -1.564,
n=96). Pregnancy Associated Plasma Protein A (PAPP-A) is a secreted zinc
metalloproteinase, that anchors to cell surface of heparan sulfate
proteoglycans and enhances local IGF signaling. Through the release of
IGFs from IGFBP-4, IGFBP-2 and IGFBP-5, free, bioactive IGF is being
increased in close proximity to its receptors. In pregnancy PAPP-A is
highly expressed by placental trophoblasts and represents a key regulator
of fetal growth. The impact of IGF signaling in EWS is illustrated by the
modest activity of IGF-1R inhibition as a single agent treatment in
clinical trials, an approach that is limited by the rapid development of
resistance.

Methods: In an attempt to investigate the role of PAPP-A in Ewing
sarcoma, we used CRISPR/Cas9 technology to target the PAPP-A locus in EWS
cell lines and generated PAPP-A knockout clones (EW8, TC32) for further
investigation in vitro and in vivo. Additionally, we tested inhibition of
PAPP-A proteolytic function in a xenograft NSG mouse model, as a single
agent treatment as well as in conjunction with IGF1R inhibition.

Results: Knockout of PAPP-A in EWS cell lines utilizing CRISPR/Cas9
technology completely abrogated PAPP-A secretion and metalloproteinase
activity in single cell clones, resulting in significantly increased
complexed IGFBP-4 and diminished bioactive IGF-1, together with decreased
cell growth in vitro. This phenotype could be rescued by recombinant,
soluble PAPP-A. In vivo experiments showed that treatment with a
monoclonal PAPP-A neutralizing antibody that inhibits the IGFBP-4
proteolytic activity of PAPP-A delays tumor growth of xenografted EWS
tumor cells (EW8) in NSG mice. Furthermore, in conjunction with IGF1R
inhibition (mAB h7C10), PAPP-A neutralization significantly decreased
tumor growth and resulted in prolonged survival of mice
(p=0.021).Conclusions: PAPP-A is a novel biologically relevant and highly
tumor specific cell surface target in Ewing sarcoma. Our data suggest
that neutralization of PAPP-A is a new therapeutic option that merits
further evaluation for the treatment of Ewing's Sarcoma.


