Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct pools of ShcA coupled tyrosine kinase signaling
influences breast tumor heterogeneity and therapeutic responsiveness.


Phospho-tyrosine (pTyr) signaling networks are frequently activated in
breast cancers (BrCa) and are considered to be major oncogenic drivers of
tumor progression. Therapeutic interventions, such as the tyrosine kinase
(TK) inhibitor Trastuzumab, focus on targeting TK activity and downstream
effectors. Although successful for early stage tumors, a subset of
patients experience relapse due to intrinsic or acquired resistance. This
includes activation of alternative receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) and/or
cytoplasmic TKs, many of which require recruitment of the adaptor
protein, ShcA. ShcA is a key convergence point downstream of RTKs and
serves to integrate multiple signal transduction pathways dysregulated in
BrCa. Specifically, ShcA contains two pTyr binding motifs including an
amino-terminal PTB domain and a carboxy-terminal SH2 domain which
facilitate its interactions with TKs including ErbB2 and Src Family
Kinases (SFK), respectively. The CH-1 domain houses three tyrosine
phosphorylation sites at residues 239/240 and 317 which transduce
Ras-dependent and independent signals. Using a well characterized
transgenic mouse model of BrCa where ShcA can no longer engage the
transforming oncogene through its PTB domain, we demonstrate that loss of
PTB-driven ShcA (ShcA-PTBMut) signaling delays mammary tumor onset.
However, once formed, the growth and angiogenic potential of these tumors
is significantly increased relative to control mice. Increased growth
potential of ShcA-PTBMut tumors is associated with the hyper-activation
of the c-Src tyrosine kinase. Deletion of c-Src in ShcA-PTBMut breast
tumor cells significantly delays tumor onset but is dispensable for the
growth of tumors that retain an intact ShcA PTB domain. These data
suggest that the ShcA PTB domain can recruit negative regulators that
limit the activation of downstream tumorigenic signaling networks.
Interestingly, tumors expressing ShcA-PTBMut debilitated in SH2 driven
pTyr interactions (SH2Mut), are significantly delayed in tumor onset
relative to ShcA-PTBMut controls. Paradoxically, deletion of c-Src in the
context of ShcA-PTBMut-SH2Mut further accelerates tumor growth which is
attributed to increased levels of Fyn and Lyn. These observations support
the high dependence of intracellular ShcA pools on other SFK family
members to retain tumorigenic potential when adapting to low levels
and/or activity of c-Src. We demonstrate that uncoupling of PTB-driven
ShcA signaling from upstream RTKs can potentiate ShcA signaling from
intracellular pools to hyper-activate SFKs. This data is clinically
relevant as c-Src is frequently hyper-activated in Trastuzumab-resistant
BrCa. This is the first study to identify a tumor suppressive role of the
ShcA PTB domain and to characterize an intrinsic ShcA SH2 domain-SFK
dependent resistance mechanism downstream of activated RTKs in mammary
tumorigenesis.


