Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of copy number aberrations (CNAs) between plasma cell
free DNA (cfDNA) and tissue DNA in metastatic castrate resistant prostate
cancer (mCRPC).


Background: Circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) analysis is emerging as a
less invasive approach to assessing tumor genomic alterations in cancer
patients. Although high concordance has been reported between tumor
tissue NGS and cfDNA in studies investigating specific genetic
alterations, the fidelity of cfDNA to tumor tissue DNA in the global
genomic scale is largely unknown. In a correlative study of a prospective
clinical trial (NCT# 01953640) conducted in mCRPC stage patients treated
with abiraterone acetate/prednisone (A/P), we evaluated correlation of
genomic CNA in tumor DNA obtained from biopsy of metastatic lesions and
matched plasma cfDNA.

Methods: mCRPC patients (pts) underwent two image-guided core biopsies of
metastases prior to initiation of A/P (visit 1, V1) and 12 weeks after
treatment (visit 2, V2). At both time points plasma was obtained at the
time of the core biopsies and cfDNA was extracted using DNA Blood Mini
Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). High coverage (for tumor tissue) and low
coverage (for cfDNA) whole genome sequencing reads were first mapped to
the human genome hg19. Read counts (RC) from the mapped sequence files
were then binned into 1Mb windows. The RC ratio in each genomic bin was
calculated by comparing tumor tissue DNA to lymphocyte gDNA derived from
the same patient, and was further log2 transformed, corrected for GC
content, and normalized by CGHnormaliter. The fully normalized log2
ratios data was subjected to segmentation using DNAcopy algorithm.

Results: Between 05/2013 and 09/2015, 92 patients (pts) were enrolled of
which tissue and plasma NGS data both visits was available for 18 pts.
The correlation of CNAs between tumor tissue and its cfDNA counterpart
ranges from 0.013 to 0.83 for V1 samples, and -0.05 to 0.9 for V2
samples. The decreased correlation in some pairs of samples is largely
due to low tumor content and heterogeneity in the cfDNA. Although there
is a wide range of correlation, commonly shared CNAs were identified in
multiple chromosomal regions, including loss in 8p, gain in 8q and
chromosome 5 and X. On the other hand, several genomic regions show
inconsistent CNAs between tumor tissue and cfDNA among 15 pairs of
samples in which cfDNA have large tumor content. These include: loss in
6q, 1p, 2p, 9q, 11q, 13p, 15p, 20p and gain in 8q and 10p in cfDNA but
not in tumor tissue; marked loss in chromosome 22 and gain in p arm of X
chromosome in tumor tissue but much less evident in cfDNA.

Conclusion: High concordance of CNAs between cfDNA and tumor tissue DNA
can be achieved given sufficient tumor content of cfDNA. However, more
CNAs can be identified in cfDNA than its tumor tissue counterpart. Our
result suggests that cfDNA NGS is a useful tool to investigate clonal
evolution associated with cancer progression.


