Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FAM83B: A novel regulator of cell plasticity in breast cancer.


Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important process in
both metastasis and cancer stem cell (CSC) enrichment. Recent studies
suggest that instead of simply transitioning from one cell state to
another, cancer cells exist along a continuum of epithelial and
mesenchymal cell states. Identifying novel regulators of tumor cell
plasticity will be critical to fully understand this continuum and to
target metastasis and CSC phenotypes in the future. FAM83B is a novel
oncogene identified by the Jackson Laboratory in a forward genetic screen
for drivers of Human Mammary Epithelial Cell (HMEC) transformation.
Previous work showed that FAM83B expression is elevated in triple
negative breast cancers and that FAM83B also activates key cell signaling
pathways (EGFR, MAPK, and PI3K) in breast cancers. Here, we implicate
FAM83B as a novel regulator of epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity using a
HMEC transformation model. Transformation of primary HMEC by expressing
shp16, shp53, c-Myc, and RAS results in the generation of two distinct
transformed cell populations. One population retains epithelial
characteristics, while an emergent population spontaneously acquires a
mesenchymal morphology and a CD24LOCD44HI (CSC) cell surface marker
profile. Moreover, isolation of epithelial, CD24HICD44LO cells (non-CSC)
and exposure to Oncostatin M (OSM), an EMT-inducing cytokine, can also
generate cells with a mesenchymal/CSC phenotype. Interestingly, FAM83B
expression was significantly elevated in the epithelial/non-CSC
population compared to the mesenchymal/CSC population. Moreover,
treatment of purified epithelial/non-CSC cells with OSM resulted in
decreased FAM83B expression levels, indicating FAM83B expression is
suppressed as the cells move through EMT. FAM83B expression also
correlated with an epithelial phenotype in a panel of breast cancer cell
lines. shRNA-mediated knock-down of FAM83B from epithelial/non-CSC
resulted in increased spontaneous EMT, concomitant with elevated
expression of the mesenchymal marker Vimentin and master EMT
transcription factor Zeb1. Following treatment with OSM, sh83B cells
maintain prolonged, elevated p-Stat3 and p-ERK signaling, known
contributors to the mesenchymal/CSC phenotype. Conversely, OSM-induced
EMT was blunted in epithelial/non-CSC expressing exogenous FAM83B. Thus,
FAM83B expression is a determinant in maintaining an epithelial
phenotype, while suppression of FAM83B is important during EMT. Future
work will seek to define novel FAM83B-mediated signaling pathways
important for regulating cellular plasticity.


