Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spatially resolved, multiplexed digital characterization of
protein and mRNA distribution and abundance in formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue sections based on NanoString’s Digital
Spatial Profiling (DSP) technology: applications to immuno-oncology (IO)
and tumor heterogeneity.


Introduction: As intra-tumoral heterogeneity has emerged as a challenge
in development of targeted cancer therapeutics, the tissue context of
biomarker levels and colocalization of key immunoregulatory proteins has
become an increasingly important aspect for understanding tumor immune
responses, patient classification, and stratification. Historically,
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization have been used to assess
spatial heterogeneity of targets in clinical samples. These approaches,
however, have limited multiplexing capacity and dynamic range. Here, we
use DSP technology, a spatially resolved approach for quantifying up to
800 protein or RNA targets with over 5 logs of dynamic range in a single
FFPE slide to overcome these limits.

Methods: The technology uses DNA oligo tags for either protein or RNA
detection. For protein detection, a cocktail of 30+ primary antibodies
(Abs), each with a unique, photocleavable oligo tag, and 1-3
fluorescently (FL) labeled Abs was applied to a slide-mounted FFPE tissue
section. Regions of interest (ROI), selected based on a FL imaging scan
of the entire tissue, were illuminated sequentially with focused UV light
to release the oligos. Following each UV cycle, eluent was collected from
the local ROI, moved to a microtiter plate, hybridized to NanoString®
barcodes, and then analyzed with an nCounter® Analysis System. The
resulting digital counts corresponded to the abundance of each targeted
protein in the ROI. For RNA detection, a cocktail of multiple
UV-cleavable in situ hybridization probes were used in a similar manner.

Results: We demonstrate multiplexed detection from discrete ROIs within a
tumor and adjacent normal tissue, enabling systematic interrogation of a
heterogeneous tumor microenvironment. In control samples, we found
expected levels of protein and RNA targets. We further demonstrate that
this approach enables analysis of target abundance from individually
selected cells, both contiguous and non-contiguous with the same
phenotype, and enables multiplexed detection of key IO targets. Finally,
we demonstrate detection of key IO RNA targets using direct hybridization
of oligo-labeled probes.

Conclusions: With further development, our novel DSP approach to capture
the spatial context of protein and RNA levels will have many applications
in biomarker and translational research. The ability to digitally measure
RNA and protein at up to 800-plex from FFPE tissues could facilitate drug
mechanism-of-action and response studies within the tumor
microenvironment. Quantitative, high-plex data should also greatly
accelerate the discovery of IO biomarkers in tumors and the development
of companion diagnostics for targeted therapies.


