Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Forecasting novel therapies by understanding the role BRD4 in
regulating the Notch3 signaling in ovarian cancer.


Advances in cancer research have led to the rapid development of novel
drug therapies designed for optimal personalized patient care. Despite
this surge of treatments, there is still a challenge in accurately
predicting the most effective targeted therapy for a specific cancer.
Additionally, the potential of systematically identifying and
re-purposing currently existing therapeutics designed for one specific
cancer to treat other malignancies remains understudied. To address this
problem, our group has developed an integrative computational
therapy-forecasting algorithm. This algorithm incorporates data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) as well as molecular and survival correlations
to identify candidate anti-tumor drugs that can be re-purposed for other
malignancies by targeting novel pathways. Our computational analysis
predicted that bromodomain inhibitors, which inhibit
bromodomain-containing proteins such as BRD4, would target the Notch3
pathway in high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSC). Upregulation of
Notch3 plays a crucial role in HGSC tumorigenesis and is associated with
worse patient survival. Current Notch3 targeted therapies are not
effective, thus designing therapeutic strategies to target Notch3 are
critical for HGSC. We hypothesize that inhibition of BRD4 is an effective
therapeutic target in HGSC by downregulating the Notch3 pathway. Current
in vitro results demonstrated that BRD4 inhibition either by using
chemical inhibitors or siRNA results in a decrease in HGSC cell viability
by both MTT and 2-D colony formation assays. Furthermore, inhibition of
BRD4 resulted in a decrease in both Notch3 transcription and protein
levels. Given that BRD4 regulates gene transcription, we performed
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and observed that BRD4 was present
in the Notch3 gene promoter. These findings suggest that by inhibiting
BRD4 in HGSC, we can target Notch3 and biologically validates our initial
in sillico analysis. The successful completion of this project could have
major implications for development of personalized therapies not only for
HGSC but for other cancers as well.


