Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low-pass whole genome sequencing detects copy number variations in
circulating tumor DNA.


Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) is released from necrotic/apoptotic tumor
cells into the bloodstream. Recent studies have demonstrated the value of
using ctDNA as biomarkers in cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and drug
resistance. Unlike local tissue biopsy, ctDNA collection and analysis is
non-invasive, allows continuous monitoring of clonal evolution, and
provides an overview of tumor heterogeneity. Copy number variations
(CNVs) play an important role in cancer biology. However, traditional CNV
analyses of ctDNA using droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) and SNP arrays can
only assess a small number of genes due to the low abundance of ctDNA in
the majority of patient samples. Next generation sequencing (NGS) offers
a more efficient and high-throughput way to study CNVs in ctDNA.

Here, we evaluated the use of low-pass whole genome sequencing (WGS) in
determining CNVs in ctDNA. In this work, cell-free DNA was isolated from
1-5 ml of plasma from phase II clinical trial patients with metastatic
breast cancer and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) using the QIAamp
Circulating Nucleic Acid Kit (QIAGEN). DNA yield was determined by ddPCR,
with a range from 2-4000 ng. Sequencing libraries were prepared using
2-10 ng DNA by the ThruPLEX Plasma-Seq Kit (Rubicon Genomics). WGS at
0.1x, 0.25x, 0.5x, and 1x coverage was performed on Illumina NextSeq, and
data was analyzed using Nexus Copy Number software (BioDiscovery). As a
reference, we sequenced DNA from peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) of 20 healthy donors at the same coverage. Low-pass WGS was also
performed on a subset of matched tumor tissue samples as comparisons.

Our results showed that WGS of ctDNA at 0.5x coverage was efficient to
identify CNVs. CNVs were detected in ctDNA from about half of the
patients analyzed, and in general CNVs identified in ctDNA matched the
ones found in tumor tissue from the same patient. We also found that CNV
patterns from different time points of the same patients clustered
together. With this promising system, we will present CNV analysis in
ctDNA from breast cancer and NSCLC patients enrolled in phase II clinical
trials of the PI3K inhibitor pictilisib. We will evaluate the ability of
the method to classify patients into different subgroups, monitor tumor
progression, and identify drug resistance mechanisms.


