Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression and functions of ASH1L in liver cancer.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a common cancer and ranks the third
lethal cancer worldwide. However, the detail molecular mechanisms
underlying the initiation and progression of HCC remain poorly
understood. Liver carcinogenesis is a multistep process that is driven by
the accumulation of genetic and epigenetic alterations. Mutational
landscape and driver mutations have recently been delineated by
high-throughput sequencing studies. On the other hand, our current
knowledge about epigenetic deregulation in human HCC is limited. Histone
modification is a major component of epigenetic regulation, and
deregulation of histone medication could alter local chromatin structure
and gene expression. We hypothesized that deregulation of histone
methyltransferases might contribute to HCC development. In this study, we
showed that trithorax-group protein ASH1L was frequently up-regulated in
human HCC. Overexpression of ASH1L was detected in 40% of primary HCCs
and significantly associated with larger tumor size, present of venous
invasion and tumor microsatellite formation. Up-regulation of ASH1L also
correlated with increased Ki67 expression. ASH1L is a histone
methyltransferase specific for catalyzing transcriptional-active H3K4 and
H3K36 methylation. We showed that stable knockdown of ASH1L significantly
suppressed HCC cell proliferation and colony formation. We further
demonstrated that knockdown of ASH1L inhibited HCC cell migration. In
addition, we investigated the underlying mechanisms contribute to ASH1L
up-regulation. We showed that up-regulation of ASH1L in human HCC was
contributed by chromosome amplification at chromosome 1q22. Furthermore,
we showed that ASH1L was negatively regulated by miR-142. Therefore,
down-regulation of miR-142 contributed to ASH1L up-regulation in HCC. In
summary, our findings suggested that ASH1L was frequently up-regulated in
human HCC due to chromosome amplification and miRNA deregulation.


