Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide association study of energy intake and its
relationship to prostate cancer.


Background/Objectives: Previous studies suggested that high energy intake
may increase the risk of prostate cancer. However, the mechanisms remain
unclear. No genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been conducted to
detect the genetic variations in total energy intake. We aimed to
identify genetic variants associated with total energy intake in men and
women, and to determine the association between previously identified
prostate cancer susceptibility loci and total energy intake.

Methods: We conducted a genome-wide study using combined GWAS data from
12,031 European-ancestry women and 6,743 European-ancestry men from the
Nurses’ Health Study, Nurses’ Health Study II, Health Professionals
Follow-up Study, and Physician’s Health Study. Total energy intake was
measured through validated food-frequency questionnaires. Missing
genotypes were imputed using MACH with 1000 Genomes Project ALL Phase I
Integrated Release Version 3 Haplotypes as the reference panel. We
stratified by sex and adjusted for age, weight, height, physical activity
and three principal components accounting for subpopulation structure.
Meta-analysis based on p-values across sex was implemented. SNP set
analyses, including a weighted fixed-effects (Mendelian randomization,
MR) and an unweighted random-effects approach (METASOFT), were used to
test the association between prostate cancer risk loci and total energy
intake using summary statistics of total energy intake from the combined
GWAS and the summary statistics for genome-wide significant SNPs (NSNPs =
104) from a GWAS of prostate cancer in 43,303 cases and 43,737 controls
[Al Olama (2014) Nat Genet].

Results: Three SNPs near gene ANKRD33 were genome-wide significantly (P
Results: Three SNPs near gene ANKRD33 were genome-wide significantly (P <
5.0×10-8) associated with the increase in total energy intake among men
(rs10876214 [P = 5.81×10-10], rs9669605 [P = 1.46×10-8], and rs10783478
[P = 2.42×10-8]). No significant genome-wide association was found in
women or the meta-analysis combining men and women. SNP set analyses did
not find a statistically significant association between established
prostate cancer SNPs and energy intake (PMR = 0.11 and PMETASOFT = 0.09,
respectively).

Conclusions: We identified three significant SNPs near gene ANKRD33
associated with increased total energy intake among men. Genetic alleles
related to risk of prostate cancer were not associated with total energy
intake. Larger GWAS studies of total energy intake are warranted to
explore the genetic basis of energy intake, including possible
differences between men and women, and the association between total
energy intake, prostate cancer, and other cancers and chronic diseases.


