Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyploid tumor cells: a chemoresistant cell type in
triple-negative breast cancer.


Background: Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) are associated with an
extremely poor prognosis due to their aggressive behavior and rapid
resistance to chemotherapy. Chemotherapy may select for resistant
subclones and lead to tumor recurrence. Although, DNA aneuploidy has been
a long known prognostic biomarker in breast cancer, the biological role
of aneuploid or polyploid cancer cells in tumorigenesis and
chemoresistance is largely undefined. Polyploid cells arise due to
repeated rounds of DNA duplication in the absence of mitosis.
Chemotherapeutic DNA-damaging agents or mitotic inhibitors can also
induce formation of polyploid cells and subsequent senescence. However,
recent reports indicate that polyploid cells represent a viable and
proliferating subpopulation within a tumor that may escape chemotherapy
and contribute to tumor recurrence.

Methods: In this study, we examined the prevalence and functional
significance of polyploidy occurring de novo or induced by chemotherapy
in TNBC cell lines. DNA ploidy was analyzed in Hoechst 33342 stained
cells using FACS. Cells with greater than 4N DNA content were defined as
polyploid. Live-cell imaging was done to observe cell division patters in
polyploid cells using IncuCyte Zoom. Cell proliferation was assessed in
the absence and presence of chemotherapy drugs with distinct modes of
action (docetaxel and paclitaxel: mitotic inhibitors, cisplatin: DNA
cross-linking agent, and etoposide or VP16: topoisomerase inhibitor).
RNAseq was performed to compare gene expression profiles between
treatment-naive diploid and polyploid cells.

Results: Hoechst 33342 staining determined the prevalence of polyploid
cells in HCC1395(6.7%) and HCC1937 (5.8%) cells lines. Live-cell imaging
in polyploid cells showed formation of mitotic structures suggesting
multi-polar cell division. Cell proliferation assay revealed that
polyploid cells grow slower than diploid cells and show reduced
sensitivity to all four chemotherapy drugs. Docetaxel treatment resulted
in induction of polyploidy and drug-induced senescence in parental TNBC
cells. Drug-induced polyploid cells were resistant to subsequent
docetaxel treatment. Time-lapse imaging showed budding of small daughter
cells from polyploid senescent cells. Majority of senescent cells died,
some cells survived and regenerated the diploid and polyploid
subpopulations similar to those present in parental cells. RNAseq
identified differentially expressed genes involved in G1-S and G2-M
checkpoint pathways (BRCA1/2, RAD51), cell proliferation (Aurora kinase
A/B) and apoptosis (BIM, BIRC3).

Conclusions: Above findings indicate that there are molecular and
functional differences between diploid and polyploid cells that are both
naturally occurring or induced by chemotherapy. In our future studies, we
will examine combinatorial approaches to overcome polyploidy-associated
chemoresistance.


