Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spherical nucleic acids targeting toll-like receptor 9 enhance
antitumor activity in combination with anti-PD-1 antibody in mouse tumor
models.


Of the several immunotherapy approaches being developed, checkpoint
inhibitors (CPI) represent a breakthrough for the treatment of cancer. A
T cell-inflamed tumor microenvironment (TME) is required for antitumor
efficacy of CPI. However, the evidence suggests that 70% of tumors do not
possess T cell-inflamed TME limiting the potential of CPI treatments to a
smaller population of cancer patients. Immunotherapies that enable CPI
effectiveness in patients with non-T cell-inflamed phenotype are being
studied. Oligonucleotide-based TLR9 agonists induce potent CD8+ T cell
and plasmacytoid dendritic cell activation and limit immune suppressor
cell phenotypes in TME. Therefore, the combination of TLR9 agonists with
CPI would be a rational approach for achieving higher rates of success in
cancer treatment. However, TLR9 agonists were unsuccessful in previous
cancer clinical trials.

Spherical Nucleic Acids (SNAs) are a novel class of agents with
oligonucleotides densely packed and radially oriented around spherical
liposomal nanoparticles. SNAs overcome limitations of therapeutic
oligonucleotides through increased uptake and nuclease stability. We have
evaluated a TLR9 targeted SNA for anticancer activity as a monotherapy
and in combination with an anti-PD-1 (a-PD-1) antibody in both a-PD-1
sensitive and insensitive mouse tumor models.

Mice bearing a-PD-1 sensitive MC38 tumors were treated with intratumoral
dosing of TLR9 agonist SNA, intraperitoneal (IP) dosing of a-PD-1 or the
combination of both agents when average tumor volume was 100 mm3, with
twice weekly dosing for a total of 5 doses. SNA alone showed
dose-dependent tumor growth inhibition (TGI) of up to 87% and increased
survival of mice. The combination of SNA and a-PD-1 greatly enhanced TGI
(92% vs SNA, 74% or a-PD-1, 77%) and mice survival compared with either
monotherapy. Moreover, once weekly dosing of SNA showed similar TGI
compared with twice weekly dosing.

In a-PD-1 insensitive EMT-6 model, mice were treated with intravenous
dosing of TLR9 agonist SNA, IP dosing of a-PD-1 or the combination of
both agents starting on day 3 following subcutaneous tumor cell
inoculation. SNA alone showed potent dose-dependent TGI of up to 80% and
increased mice survival. The combination of SNA and a-PD-1 showed a
synergistic TGI (86% vs SNA, 64% or a-PD-1, no effect) and increased mice
survival. Further, no tumor growth was observed in surviving mice after
subsequent challenge with EMT-6 cells, suggesting development of
tumor-specific memory responses in SNA treated animals.

These data demonstrate that the TLR9 agonist SNA studied herein induces
innate and adaptive immune responses in tumor-bearing mice and shows
synergistic TGI with a-PD-1 in both a-PD-1 sensitive and insensitive
tumor models. A TLR9 agonist SNA, AST-008, is currently in clinical
development.


