Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel feature selection strategies for enhanced predictive
modeling and deep learning in the biosciences.


Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the single most transformative technology
in human history. Advancements in personalized medicine depend upon
significantly furthering our current understanding of how genetic
variation and somatic mutation regulate aberrant gene activity and
subsequent disease biology, including the myriad of dysregulated
molecular mechanisms of cancer. To this end, we have built a robust AI
method to precisely assess pathogenicity for all genomic missense
variants. Coupled with our advanced deepCODE feature selection strategy
for constructing deep learning models, we can quantitatively integrate a
priori pathway-based biological knowledge with multiple types of
high-throughput omics data. This approach significantly improves
performance of established classification methods via enhanced semantic
interoperability for mapping between multiple biomedical ontologies and
the subsequent identification of genes and molecular pathways more highly
predictive of cancer type etiology. Specifically, our deepCODE AI methods
greatly improve tumor subtype and drug-response classification accuracies
by combining tumor DNA- and RNA-seq data. Our results indicate
classification of human breast and lung cancer subtypes with 96% and
greater than 99% accuracy, respectively. Our novel multinomial
statistical-learning method, which was validated with 6 cancer type
patient-derived tumor xenograft (PDTX) mouse models, achieved greater
than 95% accuracy across 10,000 human tumors within the collection of 28
TCGA cancer types. Finally, our stepwise deepCODE drug target discovery
approach systematically integrates our deep learning classification
strategy with advanced Bayesian Network modeling to identify causative
driver genes, representing probable novel drug targets. This stepwise
machine learning approach also serves as a unique means to assess drug
efficacy. Taken together, our advanced deepCODE AI tools greatly expand
the means to fully understand the underlying molecular determinants of
human cancer. We have developed user-friendly decision support and
research tools for in-depth tumor analysis and large-scale case-control
methods that afford investigators access to our deepCODE variant
annotation algorithms.


