Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Ewing sarcoma cell growth by targeting Sp1 and
survivin with the small molecule clotam.


Ewing sarcoma (ES) is the most common soft tissue and bone tumor in
adolescents and young adults. The survival rate of patients with
metastatic disease is poor suggesting an urgent need for the development
of more effective therapeutic options. Our aim was to investigate novel
targets and identify less toxic agents to improve therapeutic efficacy in
ES patients. Specificity protein 1 (Sp1) transcription factor regulates
critical genes involved in cell proliferation. Sp1 also mediates the
expression of survivin, an inhibitor of apoptosis protein. Overexpression
of Sp1 and survivin is linked to aggressiveness and poor prognosis in
several cancers; however, their precise association is not adequately
evaluated in ES. Previously, we showed that tolfenamic acid (TA) inhibits
leukemia, medulloblastoma and neuroblastoma cell proliferation by
targeting Sp1. In this study, we investigated the anti-cancer activity of
this small molecule using human ES cell lines. CHLA-9 and TC-32 cells
were treated with vehicle (DMSO) or TA (2.5-20 µg/ml) and cell viability
was measured at 24, 48 and 72 h post-treatment using CellTiter Glo kit.
ES cells were treated with vehicle or TA (15 µg/ml) for 48 h. The mRNA
and protein expression of Sp1 and survivin was determined by quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and Western blot analysis respectively.
Flow cytometry was used to measure apoptotic cell population using
Annexin-V staining and cell cycle phase distribution with propidium
iodide. Markers of apoptosis (caspase 3/7 activity using caspase Glo kit
and cleaved PARP by Western blot) and cell cycle arrest (Cyclin D1 and
p21 expression by Western blot) were also determined. Sp1 DNA-binding was
evaluated by gel shift assay. TA treatment inhibited ES cell viability in
a dose and time-dependent manner which is accompanied by the inhibition
of Sp1 and survivin protein expression and a 2-3 fold increase in
apoptotic markers, caspase 3/7 activity, Annexin-V staining, and c-PARP
expression. Interestingly, TA inhibited mRNA expression of survivin but
not Sp1, suggesting it has post-translational effects, perhaps
proteasome-dependent degradation of Sp1. Gel shift assay revealed a
decrease in Sp1 DNA-binding, indicating that TA could directly disrupt
the binding of Sp1 with its consensus binding site in the promoter of
target genes. Cyclin D1 is crucial for moving the cells from G0/G1 to
next phases and induction of p21 is known to inhibit Cyclin D1. In this
study, TA up-regulated p21, reduced Cyclin D1 expression and accumulated
cells in G0/G1 phase. These results demonstrate that TA induces apoptosis
and causes cell cycle arrest in ES cells by targeting Sp1 and survivin.


