Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemoprevention of rat oral carcinogenesis by black raspberry
phytochemicals.


It is expected that in 2016, there will be an estimated 48,330 new cases
and 9,570 deaths due to oral cancer in the US, which is about one person
every hour every day. Due to the epithelial field defects associated with
oral carcinogenesis, tumor recurrence and second primary tumor incidence
are common. Recently conducted Phase I Clinical trials demonstrate the
ability of black raspberries (BRBs) to modulate inflammatory biomarkers
of molecular efficacy that supports a chemopreventive strategy against
oral cancer. From these human trials we have established a molecular
signature of BRB responsive biomarkers. However, it is essential that a
preclinical animal model of BRB chemoprevention which recapitulates the
fundamental features of human oral carcinogenesis be developed, so that
we can evaluate potential mechanisms of action and validate molecular
biomarkers of BRB efficacy. We therefore established the ability of BRB
to inhibit oral lesion formation in a rat model of 4-nitroquinoline
1-oxide (4NQO) induced oral carcinogenesis and examined molecular
efficacy using a clinically relevant transcriptional signature. Oral
cancer was induced in F344 rats using 4NQO in drinking water for 10 weeks
followed by regular drinking water for 16 weeks. Rats were administered a
diet containing 5 or 10 percent lyophilized BRBs. Tongue tissues were
examined for lesion multiplicity, incidence and histopathological
features. Clinically derived pro-inflammatory and pro-survival molecular
biomarkers were also determined by real-time PCR and ELISA. Dietary
administration of 5 and 10 percent BRBs reduced combined lesion incidence
and multiplicity by -39.3% and -28.6% respectively. Histopathological
analyses of tongue sections further demonstrate the chemopreventive
ability of dietary BRB administration in the rat model. Pro-survival and
pro-inflammatory biomarkers were downregulated in BRB administered 4NQO
induced rats compared to untreated 4NQO induced rats. Our study shows
that dietary administration of BRB inhibits oral carcinogenesis in the
rat 4NQO model. The rat 4NQO model is suitable for interrogating
mechanisms of action of BRB-mediated oral cancer chemoprevention.


