Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increase in protein expression and copy number drives the
activation of NPY/Y5R pro-survival loop in chemotherapy-treated
neuroblastoma.


Neuroblastoma (NB) is a tumor derived from neural crest cells, primitive
progenitors of sympathetic ganglia. It accounts for 6-10% of all
pediatric cancers with approximately 700 new cases per year throughout
the US. Although there are highly effective therapies for patients with
low-risk and intermediate-risk disease who have local relapses, recurrent
disease in patients with high-risk NB is mostly refractory to therapy.
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a sympathetic neurotransmitter highly expressed
in NB. Its elevated release from tumor tissue is associated with
unfavorable clinical outcome. NPY, acting via its Y5 receptor (Y5R),
stimulates NB cell survival and chemoresistance, however the mechanisms
underlying NPY/Y5R axis activation in these tumors remain unclear. The
aim of this work was to investigate the correlation between the
expression of NPY and NPY5R proteins and the copy number status of the
NPY and NPY5R genes in pre- and post-chemotherapy NB. Eighty-five tissue
samples, including specimens from the primary tumors, distant metastases
and local relapses, pre- and post-chemotherapy, were collected from the
Hospital Pequeno Principe, Parana, Brazil. Protein expression was
investigated by immunohistochemistry. Copy number alterations (CNAs) for
NPY and NPY5R genes were determined using TaqMan copy number assay.
Additionally, FISH analysis was performed to assess MYCN amplification
status, a genetic marker of high risk NB. Our results show that elevated
extracellular NPY staining, which reflects peptide release, correlates
with patients’ age above 18 months, relapse and poor clinical outcome.
Moreover, the intensity of NPY staining was increased in
chemotherapy-treated NBs, as compared to tumors at diagnosis. However,
the differences in NPY CNAs between these samples were not statistically
significant. Thus, chemotherapy-induced increase in NPY levels observed
in post-treatment NB is driven by its elevated expression rather than
genomic changes. For NPY5R, significantly higher level of CNAs was
observed in the post-chemotherapy samples (PNeuroblastoma (NB) is a tumor
derived from neural crest cells, primitive progenitors of sympathetic
ganglia. It accounts for 6-10% of all pediatric cancers with
approximately 700 new cases per year throughout the US. Although there
are highly effective therapies for patients with low-risk and
intermediate-risk disease who have local relapses, recurrent disease in
patients with high-risk NB is mostly refractory to therapy. Neuropeptide
Y (NPY) is a sympathetic neurotransmitter highly expressed in NB. Its
elevated release from tumor tissue is associated with unfavorable
clinical outcome. NPY, acting via its Y5 receptor (Y5R), stimulates NB
cell survival and chemoresistance, however the mechanisms underlying
NPY/Y5R axis activation in these tumors remain unclear. The aim of this
work was to investigate the correlation between the expression of NPY and
NPY5R proteins and the copy number status of the NPY and NPY5R genes in
pre- and post-chemotherapy NB. Eighty-five tissue samples, including
specimens from the primary tumors, distant metastases and local relapses,
pre- and post-chemotherapy, were collected from the Hospital Pequeno
Principe, Parana, Brazil. Protein expression was investigated by
immunohistochemistry. Copy number alterations (CNAs) for NPY and NPY5R
genes were determined using TaqMan copy number assay. Additionally, FISH
analysis was performed to assess MYCN amplification status, a genetic
marker of high risk NB. Our results show that elevated extracellular NPY
staining, which reflects peptide release, correlates with patients’ age
above 18 months, relapse and poor clinical outcome. Moreover, the
intensity of NPY staining was increased in chemotherapy-treated NBs, as
compared to tumors at diagnosis. However, the differences in NPY CNAs
between these samples were not statistically significant. Thus,
chemotherapy-induced increase in NPY levels observed in post-treatment NB
is driven by its elevated expression rather than genomic changes. For
NPY5R, significantly higher level of CNAs was observed in the
post-chemotherapy samples (P<0.05), independently of the MYCN status.
These findings are in line with previous studies reporting elevated NPY5R
expression in chemotherapy-treated NB tumors and cell lines. Therefore,
for this receptor genomic changes may play an important role in
conferring chemotherapy-driven Y5R up-regulation. Altogether, our results
confirm activation of NPY/Y5R pro-survival loop in chemotherapy-treated
NB tumors. However, these coordinated increases in the NPY and NPY5R
expression levels are driven by different molecular mechanisms.


