Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-cancer effects of retinoic acid in CRC occurs via decreased
growth of ALDH+ cancer stem cells and increased differentiation of stem
cells to neuroendocrine cells.


Our studies on tissues from colon cancer patients show that in the
development of colorectal cancer (CRC), stem cell (SC) overpopulation
underlies tumor initiation and progression. Because aldehyde
dehydrogenase (ALDH) is a marker for SCs in several tissues and is a key
enzyme in retinoid acid (RA) signaling, we investigated the role of RA
signaling in normal and malignant colonic SCs. Our overall hypothesis is
that RA signaling regulates growth and differentiation of ALDH+ colonic
SCs and dysregulation of RA signaling contributes to SC overpopulation in
CRC development. To begin to investigate underlying mechanisms, we
analyzed CRC cell lines/tissues to see if retinoid receptors RXR and RAR
are exclusively expressed in ALDH+ SCs and if the RA pathway components
change during CRC development. We determined whether RA signaling
influences SC proliferation, differentiation, self-renewal, and SC
population size. RXR & RAR were selectively expressed in ALDH+ colonic
SCs, but not in MCM2+ proliferative cells, suggesting that RA signaling
mainly occurs in SCs. Western blotting/immunostaining of CRCs revealed
that RA signaling components, including RAR and RXR, become overexpressed
in parallel with ALDH overexpression, which coincides with the known
overpopulation of ALDH+ SCs that occurs during CRC development. Treatment
of cells with RA ligands (ATRA, 9-cis RA) inhibited proliferation,
reduced sphere formation, decreased ALDH+ SC population size, and induced
differentiation along the neuroendocrine cell (NEC) lineage. Taken
together, our findings indicate that: (1) retinoid signaling, by
regulating ALDH+ colonic SCs, reduces SC proliferation, self-renewal and
SC population size, and promotes SC differentiation to NECs, and (2)
dysregulation of RA signaling in colonic SCs likely contributes to
overpopulation of ALDH+ SCs and CRC growth. Thus, RA signaling, by
inducing increased differentiation of the SC population, suggests a novel
therapeutic target.


