Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic activation of macrophages by CpG stimulates anti-tumor
activity and overcomes CD47-independent inhibition by tumor cells in
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.


Macrophages dominate the immune infiltrate present in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Although tumor-infiltrating macrophages have the
potential to mediate anti-tumor activity, they most commonly acquire an
immunosuppressive role in cancer. We have found that CpG oligonucleotides
- containing unmethylated cytosine-guanine motifs - potently induce
macrophages to phagocytose PDAC cells and mediate anti-tumor effects.
When delivered in vivo, in a fully immunocompetent murine model of PDAC,
CpG increased the presence of macrophages within PDAC tumors and
suppressed tumor outgrowth in a macrophage-dependent manner. Though CpG
did not polarize macrophages toward classical anti-tumor (M1) or
pro-tumor (M2) phenotypes, CpG treatment increased the basal rate of
oxygen consumption in macrophages. Reversing this metabolic shift by
inhibiting fatty acid oxidation abolished pro-phagocytic and anti-tumor
effects by macrophages in vitro and in vivo. We investigated the impact
of CpG in overcoming anti-phagocytic signals from CD47, a membrane
protein overexpressed in multiple malignancies, including PDAC. While
targeted knockout of CD47 in PDAC cells was not sufficient to activate in
vitro phagocytosis by macrophages or anti-tumor effects in vivo, delivery
of CpG potentiated anti-tumor and phagocytic activity that was
independent of CD47 expression by tumor cells. However, the combination
of CD47 loss in tumor cells and systemic CpG treatment enhanced the
survival of tumor-bearing mice, indicating that disruption of CD47 can
sensitize tumors to macrophage-directed immunotherapy. Together, our
findings demonstrate a key role for cellular metabolism in directing the
anti-tumor functions of macrophages and overcoming negative regulatory
signals imposed by malignant cells.


