Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rab GTPase 3C promotes colon cancer metastasis via regulation of
IL-6 secretion and STAT3 signaling pathway.


RAB GTPases is involved in membrane trafficking vesicle formation and
cell motility. Recently, exocytotic RABs received growing attention in
cancer research. However, the molecular mechanism of exocytotic RABs in
colorectal tumorigenicity remains unclear. In this study, we found RAB
GTPase 3C (RAB3C) has the most significant association with higher
pathological stage, tumor recurrence, frequent distant metastasis, and
poor prognosis in 215 colorectal adenocarcinoma cohort using tissue
microarray (TMA) analysis. In multivariate analyses, high RAB3C
expression retained its independently prognostic significance for both
overall survival (p=0.001) and disease-free survival (p RAB GTPases is
involved in membrane trafficking vesicle formation and cell motility.
Recently, exocytotic RABs received growing attention in cancer research.
However, the molecular mechanism of exocytotic RABs in colorectal
tumorigenicity remains unclear. In this study, we found RAB GTPase 3C
(RAB3C) has the most significant association with higher pathological
stage, tumor recurrence, frequent distant metastasis, and poor prognosis
in 215 colorectal adenocarcinoma cohort using tissue microarray (TMA)
analysis. In multivariate analyses, high RAB3C expression retained its
independently prognostic significance for both overall survival (p=0.001)
and disease-free survival (p < 0.001). Further experimental results
showed increased migration and invasion ability in RAB3C overexpressing
colon cancer cells compared with control group in vitro and in vivo. The
cell culture medium collected from RAB3C overexpressing model could
promote parental colon cancer cells further indicated that the
metastasis-promoting role of RAB3C is exocytosis dependent. We then
integrated the results from previously microarray and proteomics datasets
and discovered that increased production of multiple cytokines in RAB3C
overexpressing cell lines. Of these cytokines, IL-6 pathway is the top
pathway corresponding to gene expression changes after RAB3C
overexpression. Blocking of IL-6 function with IL-6 antibody or IL-6
knockdown significantly reduced the migration ability in RAB3C
overexpressing colon cancer cells. Furthermore, secretion of IL-6 after
RAB3C overexpression promoted the JAK2-STAT3 signaling with increased
STAT3 phosphorylation levels to promote migration. In addition,
Ruxolitinib, a JAK2 inhibitor, was found to significantly inhibited RAB3C
induced colon cancer cell migration through blocking STAT3
phosphorylation. In conclusion, our study showed that RAB3C
overexpression promoted tumor metastasis and is associated with poor
prognosis of colon cancer patients through modulating the IL6 exocytosis
of cancer cells to activate JAK2-STAT3 pathway. These findings suggest a
new therapeutic strategy through the inhibition of STAT3 signaling
pathway in RAB3C-IL-6 axis by Ruxolitinib to prevent metastasis of colon
cancer.


