Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro characterization and clinical correlation of BRCAness as
a personalized biomarker for radiosensitization with homologous
recombination-directed therapies.


Introduction: BRCA1 and BRCA2 are involved in double-strand break (DSBs)
repair via homologous recombination (HR). Clinically, BRCA1/2 mutant
tumors show sensitivity to cisplatin, a cross-linking agent, but only
mild sensitivity to ionizing radiation (IR). The addition of cisplatin to
IR has been one of the largest advances in improving patient outcomes
with radiotherapy in the past 50 years. Recently, BRCAness has been
described wherein sporadic deficits in HR are observed in the absence of
germline BRCA1/2 mutations. We hypothesize that BRCAness tumors also
exhibit sensitivity to the combination of cisplatin + IR, and are a
significant driver of the observed clinical benefit of combination
therapy.

Methods: Sensitivity to cisplatin + IR was examined in vitro and
correlated with clinical data. Functional HR deficiency (HRD) was
assessed in isogenic BRCA1 (H1299; lung) and BRCA2 (DLD1; colon) knockout
pairs using 3 assays: the Rad51 foci assay, a flow-based DRGFP assay (DSB
reporter assay) and clonogenic survival assays (CSA) with cisplatin +/-
IR. Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) data was used to identify breast
cancer cell lines with sporadic, non-BRCA1/2 mutations. Functional HRD in
4 breast cancer cell lines was assessed with the same 3 assays used for
the BRCA1/2 isogenic pairs. We also examined 14 triple-negative breast
cancer (TNBC) patients treated with neoadjuvant cisplatin + IR. Nine of
the 14 had available tissue, which was stained for Rad51 foci.

Results: Functional HRD is observed in the BRCA1/2 isogenic pairs, as
demonstrated by the Rad51 foci and DRGFP assay results. Increased
sensitivity to cisplatin + IR is observed in the BRCA1/2 knockout lines
in CSA results compared to isogenic controls. A genomic scar score, LST
(large scale transition), was generated for each line based on CCLE data,
with higher LST scores suggesting increased genomic instability and
therefore HRD. Four cell lines were selected for further study. Similar
functional HRD and cisplatin + IR sensitivity is observed in 2 breast
cancer cell lines with high LST scores, as compared to 2 with low LST
scores. Epistasis was observed upon siBRCA1 knockdown in the 2 cell lines
with high LST scores. Half of the 14 TNBC patients demonstrated
pathological complete response to neoadjuvant cisplatin + IR. Nine of the
14 patients had available tissue, of which 4 demonstrated functional HRD
by the Rad51 foci assay.

Conclusions: Multiple in vitro assays suggest that HRD tumors are much
more sensitive to the widely used combination of cisplatin + IR as
compared with HR proficient tumors. Data from our small cohort of
triple-negative breast cancer patients appear concordant with these
findings. Reliable determination of “BRCAness” tumors should identify
a subpopulation of non-germline BRCA1/2-mutated breast cancer patients
who may benefit from targeted therapy with cisplatin + IR.


