Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of the co-expression of RANTES and IL-6 on the transformed
phenotype of breast cancer cells.


Introduction: Cells of the tumor microenvironment play an important role
in the progression of breast cancer through their interaction with cancer
cells. In this regard, mesenchymal stem cells greatly increased the
metastatic potential of breast cancer cells through the secretion of the
chemokine CCL5/RANTES. In addition, we demonstrated that breast cancer
cells migrate in response to either recombinant RANTES or interleukin-6
(IL-6). Starting from this observation, we analyzed whether the
co-expression of RANTES and IL-6 induced a more aggressive phenotype in
breast cancer cells.

Methods: MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells were transfected with
expression vectors coding for human RANTES and IL-6. XMAP Bio-Plex
Cytokine arrays were employed to measure the levels of secreted RANTES
and IL-6. To evaluate the proliferation of stable clones,
anchorage-independent growth assays were used. Migration and invasion
were analyzed using commercially available kits. Tumor growth in vivo was
determined after injection of transfected cells in the mammary fat pad of
nude mice.

Results: MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 clones that stably overexpressed RANTES
and/or IL-6 were isolated after selection with appropriate antibiotics.
Stable transfectants produced higher levels of secreted RANTES and IL-6
than control cells trasfected with mock vectors. To evaluate whether
RANTES and IL-6 induced a more aggressive phenotype in breast cancer
cells, we analyzed the proliferation, migration and invasive ability of
stable clones. MCF-7 cells co-expressing RANTES and IL-6 had a greater
ability to form colonies in soft agar, compared to cells overexpressing
RANTES or IL-6. In addition, both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 clones
co-expressing RANTES+IL6 showed a significantly higher ability to migrate
through a fibronectin-coated and to invade through a matrigel-coated
matrix. The analysis of phosphorylated ERK1/2, AKT and STAT3 signal
transduction proteins revealed that in cells overexpressing both RANTES
and IL-6 more signaling pathways are simultaneously activated as compared
with cells overexpressing a single factor. Finally, MCF-7 cells
overexpressing RANTES+IL6 showed a significant increase in in vivo tumor
growth when clones were injected in the mammary fat pad of nude mice.

Conclusions: Taken together, our data suggest that the simultaneous
expression of IL-6 and RANTES produce a more aggressive phenotype in
breast cancer cells. This observation might be useful for the
identification of potential targets for novel therapeutic strategies
aimed to prevent breast cancer progression through the blockade of the
tumor-stroma interaction.


