Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variations in cancer-related significantly mutated genes
and lung cancer susceptibility.


Cancer initiation and development are driven by key mutations in driver
genes. Applying high-throughput sequencing technologies and
bioinformatics analyses, The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project has
recently identified panels of genetic mutations that contributed to or
associated with the etiology of various cancers. However, there are few
studies investigating the germline genetic variations in these highly
mutated genes and lung cancer susceptibility. In this multi-phase study,
we aimed to comprehensively evaluate the 1655 tagSNPs located in the 127
significantly mutated genes (SMGs) identified by TCGA, and test their
association with risk of lung cancer in a total of 7355 patients and 7301
healthy controls. We found that 11 SNPs in 8 genes showed consistent
association (PCancer initiation and development are driven by key
mutations in driver genes. Applying high-throughput sequencing
technologies and bioinformatics analyses, The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
project has recently identified panels of genetic mutations that
contributed to or associated with the etiology of various cancers.
However, there are few studies investigating the germline genetic
variations in these highly mutated genes and lung cancer susceptibility.
In this multi-phase study, we aimed to comprehensively evaluate the 1655
tagSNPs located in the 127 significantly mutated genes (SMGs) identified
by TCGA, and test their association with risk of lung cancer in a total
of 7355 patients and 7301 healthy controls. We found that 11 SNPs in 8
genes showed consistent association (P<0.1) and 8 SNPs significantly
associated with lung cancer risk (PCancer initiation and development are
driven by key mutations in driver genes. Applying high-throughput
sequencing technologies and bioinformatics analyses, The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) project has recently identified panels of genetic mutations
that contributed to or associated with the etiology of various cancers.
However, there are few studies investigating the germline genetic
variations in these highly mutated genes and lung cancer susceptibility.
In this multi-phase study, we aimed to comprehensively evaluate the 1655
tagSNPs located in the 127 significantly mutated genes (SMGs) identified
by TCGA, and test their association with risk of lung cancer in a total
of 7355 patients and 7301 healthy controls. We found that 11 SNPs in 8
genes showed consistent association (P<0.1) and 8 SNPs significantly
associated with lung cancer risk (P<0.05) in both discovery and
validation phases. The most significant SNP A was associated with a
decreased risk of lung cancer (OR=0.91, 95%CI: 0.87-0.96, P=2.3×10-4).
Cumulative analysis of the 11 SNPs showed consistently elevated risk with
increasing number of unfavorable genotypes (P for trend=1.2×10-10). In
stratified analyses, the association of SNP A and lung cancer risk
appeared stronger among population of younger age at diagnosis and never
smokers. The eQTL-analysis indicated that genotypes of four SNPs
significantly correlated with the expression of their genes respectively.
From TCGA data, expression of the identified genes were significantly
different in lung tumors compared with normal tissues, and the genes’
highest mutation frequency was found in lung cancers. Integrative pathway
analysis (IPA) indicated the identified genes were mainly involved in
major cell cycle regulatory pathway suggesting the underlying biological
processes. In summary, this study revealed novel genetic variants in SMGs
associated with lung cancer risk, which might contribute to elucidating
the biological network involved in lung cancer development.


