Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering Mesenchymal Stem Cells (MSCs) to support
tumor-targeted delivery of exosome-encapsulated microRNA-379.


Mesenchymal Stem Cells (MSCs) are multipotent stromal cells known to
migrate specifically to the sites of tumors and metastases, raising
potential as tumor-targeted delivery vehicles for therapeutic agents.
MSCs secrete exosomes containing genetic material including microRNAs
(miRs), that are effectively taken up by cells. Previous work has shown
miR-379 to be significantly reduced in breast tumor tissue, highlighting
a potential tumor suppressor role. This study aimed to establish a
mechanism of action for miR-379, and to engineer MSCs to secrete exosomes
enriched with the miR for tumor-targeted delivery. Methods: RNA was
isolated from breast tumors and matching lymph node metastases from the
same patients, and miR-379 expression quantified by RQ-PCR. HCC1954
breast cancer cells were transduced with lentivirus to express elevated
miR-379 (HCC-379) or a control sequence (HCC-NTC). Cells were implanted
into the mammary fat pad (MFP) of mice and tumor progression monitored.
Subsequently, MSCs were transduced to generate MSC-379 and MSC-NTC.
MSC-secreted exosomes were isolated by differential centrifugation,
microfiltration and ultracentrifugation. The morphology, size and number
of isolated exosomes was characterized using Transmission Electron
Microscopy, Western Blot and Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis respectively.
Exosomal miRs were analysed by RQ-PCR. MFP tumors were established using
HCC1954-luciferase cells, followed by IV injection of MSC-379 or MSC-NTC
cells, or sequential doses of exosomes derived from either cell
population. Results: miR-379 expression was significantly reduced in
lymph node metastases compared to primary tumors from the same patients
(p=0.009), supporting a tumor suppressor role. Analysis of HCC-379 and
HCC-NTC tumor growth In Vivo showed no difference in tumor size, however
an increase in tumour necrosis (5-50%) and decrease in lymph node
invasion was observed in HCC-379 tumors. Investigation of a potential
role for miR-379 in regulating COX-2, revealed an inverse relationship (r
= -0.48, p=0.02) at a mRNA level, further confirmed at a protein level.
MSC-379 cells showed no significant change in migratory or proliferative
capacity In Vitro. MSC-secreted exosomes were confirmed to be the correct
morphology and size (30-120nm), and to express the exosome-associated
protein CD63. An increase in miR-379 (>5 fold) was observed in exosomes
secreted by MSC-379 compared to MSC-NTC cells. Administration of MSC-379
or MSC-NTC cells, or exosomes derived from either cell population, was
well tolerated In Vivo with no adverse effects observed. Monitoring tumor
response to therapy using IVIS is ongoing. Conclusion: The data presented
supports miR-379 as a potent tumor suppressor in breast cancer, mediated
in part through regulation of COX-2. Engineering tumor-targeted MSCs to
secrete exosomes enriched with miR-379 holds exciting potential as a
novel therapy for breast cancer.


