Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen promotes proliferation and apoptosis of endometrial
carcinoma cell lines Ishikawa and HEC1A via endometrial stromal cells.


Endometrial carcinoma is the leading malignancies of women in Western
countries and the second leading cancer of female in China. As
endometrial stromal cells (ESCs) are sharply decreased in endometrial
carcinoma (EC) compared to normal endometrium, it is interested to
explore the roll of ESCs in the tumorigenesis of endometrium. Unopposed
estrogen is considered as the etiology of endometrioid carcinoma, but the
underlying mechanism is needed to further explore. This study is to
determine the biological effects of primary cultured ESCs on two
endometrial cancer cell lines-Ishikawa and HEC1A. ESCs from normal,
atypical hyperplastic and malignant endometrial specimens were collected,
validated by immunohistochemistry and cultured in vitro, which were
maintained in a medium containing 10 nM estradiol (E2) for three months
to simulate the unopposed estrogen stimulation of EC patients. Microarray
were performed to detect the alteration of gene expression, which were
then confirmed by real time RT-PCR. Co-culture of ESC and EC cell lines
were performed by Transwell plate. Cell proliferation was analyzed by
CCK8 assay. Apoptosis was analyzed by flow cytometry based on PI/Anexin V
staining. Our results showed E2 promoted the proliferation of three types
of ESCs. E2 has no direct effect on cancer cell lines Ishikawa and HEC1A,
but when they co-cultured with ESCs, which were stimulated by E2, the
proliferation of cancer cells was promoted by all three type of ESCs.
Moor interestedly, we found that the much obvious promoted effects were
occurred by the ESCs that extracted from malignant samples. Estrogen
could also reduce the apoptosis of both cancer cell lines when
co-culturing with ESCs from normal specimen. Gene microarray and real
time RT-PCR indicated that collagen 9 were up-regulated 2.3 times when
ESCs cells treated by E2. In conclusion, Estrogen altered the
microenvironment of stromal cells, which could lead to the proliferation
of endometrial carcinoma cells via paracrine function. The alteration of
collagen synthesis by ESCs might contribute to this communication between
the epithelial and mesenchymal cells.


