Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer whole genomes link homologous recombination
deficiency (HRD) with therapeutic outcomes.


Background: Homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) is common in cancer
- germline BRCA1 & BRCA2 mutations account for 5-10% of breast cancers
and confer 85% lifetime risk. HRD cancers exhibit genomic instability and
sensitivity to platinum-based therapy and PARP inhibitors. While not all
causes of HRD are known, recent sequencing efforts have revealed
genome-wide somatic mutation signatures that characterize the HRD genomic
instability phenotype, also known as “BRCA-ness”. This provides a
promising new assay to predict sensitivity to platinum-based therapy.
Here, we integrate two whole-genome sequencing metrics to assess their
association with therapeutic outcomes in a breast cancer cohort.

Methods: Whole-genome sequencing of 47 breast cancer tumors (100x
coverage) and matched normals (60x) was performed on an Illumina HiSeq.
Alignment, assembly, SNV calling, and loss of heterozygosity (LOH)
detection were performed with BWA, ABySS, Strelka, and APOLLOH
respectively. SNV signatures were deciphered by non-negative matrix
factorization with Monte Carlo resampling. An HRD score comprised of LOH,
telomeric allelic imbalance (TAI), and large scale transition (LST)
counts was computed. Clinical endpoints were obtained by retrospective
review of treatment and imaging reports. Analysis is ongoing in an
independent validation cohort of 62 sequenced cases.

Results: The HRD-linked SNV signature was significantly associated with
radiographic clinical response (CR) to platinum-based therapy (p=0.015).
Logistic regression demonstrated a 59% improved odds of CR to
platinum-based therapy per 1000 somatic SNVs attributed to HRD (odds
ratio 1.16-2.50). Tumors carried up to 10,246 such SNVs and all patients
with CR were among the top quartile. The LOH-TAI-LST score was correlated
with SNV signature (r=0.6, p=7×10-6) and associated with CR (p=0.025).
Notably, elevated HRD signatures associated with CR were identified in
tumors with wild-type BRCA1/BRCA2 or variants of unknown significance.
Tumors with above median HRD signatures were associated with a 69-day
longer time to treatment failure and an 18% daily decreased probability
of treatment failure per 1000 HRD-attributed SNVs (hazard ratio
0.71-0.95, p = 0.007).

Discussion: We found that HRD mutation signatures are associated with
clinical response and longer time to treatment failure with
platinum-based therapy. While similar benefits were observed in patients
with somatic bi-allelic loss of BRCA1/BRCA2, such cases are less common
(8% of our cohort) compared to those with elevated HRD signature. Thus,
mutation signature methods may identify patients who stand to benefit
from platinum-based therapy missed by BRCA screening alone.


