Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-exome sequencing identifies a high frequency of germline
deleterious variants in cancer predisposition genes in individuals with
osteosarcoma.


In children and adolescents, osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common
malignant bone tumor. OS occurs in certain cancer predisposition
syndromes at a higher than expected frequency. However, outside of these
rare syndromes, OS is significantly more common and its genetic etiology
remains poorly understood. We conducted an evaluation of rare exonic
variants in 545 unselected OS cases compared with 1061 cancer-free
controls using whole-exome sequencing of blood or buccal cell DNA to
estimate the prevalence and burden of rare deleterious germline variants.

We assessed potentially pathogenic rare variants in 126 established
cancer predisposing genes (CPG) and known somatically mutated genes. We
also surveyed the exome for genes with a higher burden of rare variants
in 342 EUR cases with 994 EUR controls sequenced at the same time. Rare
genetic variants, defined by a MAF We assessed potentially pathogenic
rare variants in 126 established cancer predisposing genes (CPG) and
known somatically mutated genes. We also surveyed the exome for genes
with a higher burden of rare variants in 342 EUR cases with 994 EUR
controls sequenced at the same time. Rare genetic variants, defined by a
MAF <0.01 in 1000G, ESP or ExAC, that passed quality control filters were
classified based on well-annotated databases (IARC-TP53, Telomerase
Database, ARUP, BIC, Insight and COSMIC-hotspots), variant databases
(e.g. Clinvar, HGMD and LOVD), and in silico predictions (Sift, Polyphen,
Mutation assessor, MutationTaster, FATHMM and LTR). Rare variants
matching known pathogenic variants, or inexact matches at the same
residue, in selected well-annotated databases were labeled as putative
pathogenic variants. High impact variants (frameshift, stop gain/loss, or
known splice sites) not matching a previously identified pathogenic
variant in the selected databases were categorized as probably
pathogenic. Predictions based solely on in silico predictions were
categorized as possibly pathogenic, uncertain or likely benign.

A total of 14.5% of cases had a predicted pathogenic or high impact
variant in an autosomal dominant CPG. A significantly higher pathogenic
rare variant burden was present in EUR cases compared with EUR controls
(Pburden=3.7x10-05). TP53 had the highest prevalence of pathogenic
mutations (5% of EUR cases; Pburden=1.05x10-09). CDKN2A, MEN1, MLH1,
MUTYH, PALB2 and VHL had a significantly higher rare variant burden in
the EUR cases. 7.5% of cases had a predicted pathogenic or probably
pathogenic variant in an autosomal recessive CPG (Pburden=5.4x10-03).
Additionally, two males had a pathogenic variant in the X-linked genes,
DKC1 and GPC3. In total, 21% of cases had a predicted pathogenic or high
impact variant in a CPG (Pburden=2.4x10-07). Exome-wide analysis
identified two novel genes with significantly higher rare variant burdens
in the cases compared to controls.

In conclusion, several CPGs and two novel genes, not previously
associated with OS, had an enrichment of rare variants in OS and warrant
further follow-up. Our results indicate that a clinically significant
fraction of OS cases may harbor one or more mutations worthy of
consideration for further investigation and genetic counseling.


