Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HOXB13 collaborates with AR to alter the cellular phenotype of
prostate epithelial cells through cytokeratin 14 upregulation.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is a commonly diagnosed disease with one of the
highest heritability estimates among cancers. Among germline variations
that account for PCa heritability, a recurrent mutation (G84E) in HOXB13
is associated with a 3 to 6 fold increase in PCa risk. HOXB13 is a
prostate-specific transcription factor that plays a role in prostate
development. Other mutations in HOXB13 in PCa patients have further
implicated HOXB13 in PCa biology. The goal of this study is to generate
HOXB13 cell line models of normal prostate to examine the role of HOXB13
in driving cellular differentiation and/or transformation. To this end,
we utilized 957E/hTERT, a cell line derived from a radical prostatectomy
specimen, as a model for normal prostate epithelial cells. HOXB13 WT or
G84E was stably expressed in 957E/hTERT with a lentivirus system in the
presence and absence of exogenous AR. HOXB13 caused a morphology change
whereby an epithelial morphology transitioned to a fibroblastic-like
structure. Cells adopted elongated bodies with a frequent appearance of
lamellipodia. The morphologic conversion was transient in AR- cells but
was maintained in AR+ cells. Analyses of epithelial cell markers using
qPCR revealed a change in the epithelial cell marker profile (AR-: no
change p63, CD49f↓, K5↓, K14↑, K18↓; AR+: no change p63, CD49f,
K5, K14↑, K18↓). K14 upregulation was striking with a >10 fold
increase. AR alone could upregulate K14 to a level comparable to
HOXB13-induced K14 in AR- cells, which was surprising since AR mainly
functions in luminal cells where K14 expression is turned off.
Coexpression of HOXB13 and AR had a synergistic effect in K14
upregulation. Despite the morphology change suggestive of EMT, vimentin
was downregulated by HOXB13 in AR- and AR+ cells. In vitro growth assays
showed that HOXB13 reduced the proliferation rate of AR+ cells but not
AR- cells. Gap closure assays revealed that HOXB13 does not induce a
qualitative change in migration. Similar results were obtained with G84E
models. Our study demonstrates that HOXB13 may have a potential function
in dictating a cell fate in the epithelial lineage as evidenced by a
change in the epithelial cell marker profile. Conclusively, HOXB13 and AR
can drive K14 by themselves and in collaboration. This finding is
exciting in light of the recent discovery (Cheung KJ et al. 2016) that
K14 is not merely a basal cell marker but a major mediator of collective
invasion in breast cancer. During breast development, K14 is expressed in
the cap cells at the growing tips of mammary ducts invading into the fat
pad. K14 driven by HOXB13 in collaboration with AR may regulate prostate
epithelial budding into the surrounding mesenchyme during development.
Hypothetical dysregulation of this embryonic programming by HOXB13
mutation could predispose a carrier to PCa. This study warrants the need
for HOXB13 mouse models to test these fundamental questions.


