Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacologic modulation of Sigma1 induces autophagic degradation
of programmed death-ligand 1 in cancer cells.


Emerging evidence suggests that Sigma1 (also known as sigma1 receptor) is
a unique ligand-operated integral membrane chaperone or scaffolding
protein that contributes to cellular protein homeostasis. Previously, we
found that treatment of various cancer cell lines with some prototypic
small molecule modulators of Sigma1 can engage endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
associated protein homeostasis pathways including the unfolded protein
response and autophagy. Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) is a type 1
integral membrane glycoprotein that is processed and transported through
the ER and secretory pathway of tumor cells. PD-L1 expressed at the
surface of tumor cells can act as a T-cell inhibitory checkpoint molecule
that inactivates tumor infiltrating immune cells that express PD-1, its
cognate receptor. Here, we show that Sigma1 physically associates with
PD-L1. In triple negative breast and androgen-independent prostate cancer
cells, PD-L1 protein levels are suppressed by both RNAi mediated
knockdown of Sigma1 and pharmacological modulation of Sigma1. We observe
decreased cell surface and intracellular levels of PD-L1 by flow
cytometry and biochemical subcellular fractionation respectively, which
corresponds with a dose-responsive decrease in functional PD-L1/PD-1
interaction in a co-culture of cancer cells and T-cells. Inhibitors of
autophagy block this suppression of PD-L1 protein levels, suggesting
PD-L1 is degraded away by autophagy after Sigma1 modulation. Through
confocal microscopy, we show that Sigma1 modulation results in
colocalization of PD-L1 and GFP-LC3, a marker of autophagosomes. From
these conclusions, we hypothesize that autophagic degradation of nascent
PD-L1 after Sigma1 modulation plays a key role in preventing the
transport of functional PD-L1 to the plasma membrane. Together, these
data demonstrate that Sigma1 modulators have the potential to act as
novel therapeutic agents in PD-1/PD-L1 blockade strategies.


