Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging tumor heterogeneity after multikinase inhibitor therapy in
rat hepatocellular carcinoma.


Purpose To assess tumor tissue perfusion and vascular permeability
through multiparametric functional imaging, and to evaluate their
correspondence with histopathologic parameters of necrosis and hypoxia in
a rat model of hepatocellular carcinoma treated with a multikinase
inhibitor.

Materials and Methods Rat hepatoma McA-RH7777 cells were implanted in the
left liver lobe of nineteen male Buffalo rats. Exactly 2 weeks after
tumor inoculation, the animals were randomly assigned to remain untreated
(n=10) or to receive a daily dose of 7.5 mg/kg sorafenib by oral gavage
(n=9) for 2 additional weeks. T2-weighted spin-echo magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE) and contrast-enhanced
ultrasound (CEUS) were performed weekly. All tumors were harvested 4
weeks post-implantation >90 minutes after injecting 60mg/kg pimonidazole.
Tissue sections were stained for hematoxylin-eosin and pimonidazole for
quantitative assessment of necrosis and hypoxia, respectively.
Differences between treatment groups were assessed using the Mann-Whitney
test, and the correlation of imaging and histopathology parameters was
determined by Spearman correlation analysis.

Results In spite of the relatively low dose and short treatment duration,
the response to sorafenib therapy was characterized by a significantly
higher median tumor necrosis (60 vs 15%, P Results In spite of the
relatively low dose and short treatment duration, the response to
sorafenib therapy was characterized by a significantly higher median
tumor necrosis (60 vs 15%, P < 0.0001) and increased tumor tissue hypoxia
(35 vs 18.5% pimonidazole binding, P Results In spite of the relatively
low dose and short treatment duration, the response to sorafenib therapy
was characterized by a significantly higher median tumor necrosis (60 vs
15%, P < 0.0001) and increased tumor tissue hypoxia (35 vs 18.5%
pimonidazole binding, P < 0.0001). Similarly, the sorafenib regimen
caused a substantial decrease in vascular permeability, measured by
DCE-MRI Ktrans (P = 0.002) as well as reduction in tumor perfusion
evaluated by CEUS peak enhancement (PE) (P =0.043). Our findings show a
strong correlation between the two histopathologic parameters we
assessed, tumor tissue necrosis and hypoxia (r = 0.645, P=0.002).
Furthermore, our results demonstrate significant correlation of
functional imaging parameters of vascular permeability, namely DCE-MRI
Ktrans and DCE-MRI normalized initial area under the curve (NIAUC), with
histopathologic tissue hypoxia (r=-0.663, P= 0.002, and r= -0.512,
P=0.029, respectively). In contrast, histopathologic tumor necrosis
appears more strongly correlated with a functional imaging parameter of
tumor perfusion, specifically, CEUS PE (r = -0.547, P = 0.028).

Conclusion Tumors exhibited wide heterogeneity in vascular perfusion and
hypoxia after treatment. Interestingly, functional MRI parameters appear
to correlate more strongly with tissue oxygenation, whereas functional
CEUS parameters correlate with tumor viability. Novel predictive imaging
biomarkers of treatment response may be developed through further
analyses of spatial tumor heterogeneity in our animal model.


