Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of mutations and expression change of mitochondrial function
related nuclear genes in oral gingivobuccal squamous cell carcinoma.


Background: Mitochondria have long been suspected to have contribution in
progression and sustenance of cancer. But mitochondria related nuclear
genes have not been well-studied in oral cancer. The aim of this study is
deciphering the impact of somatic mutations and expression deregulation
of mitochondria related nuclear genes in oral gingivobuccal squamous cell
carcinoma (GBSCC).

Methods: Nuclear-encoded genes which are functionally involved with
mitochondria were enlisted from Mitocarta 2.0 and IMPI databases. Whole
exome sequencing was performed with 12 paired cancer-normal GBSCC samples
and somatic mutations in mitochondria related nuclear genes were
extracted from the data. Expression deregulation of mitochondria related
nuclear genes were quantified from whole transcriptome data of 12 paired
cancer-normal GBSCC samples. Expression was re-validated in another set
of 12 cancer-normal paired samples. 5 cancer-normal paired samples with
whole transcriptome data were also used for reduced representation
bisulfite sequencing (RRBS). Probable impact of non-synonymous somatic
mutations were predicted using SIFT and POLYPHEN2 tools. Genes with
possible damaging mutations and expression deregulation were taken for
literature search and KEGG pathway analysis to understand their
contribution in the function of mitochondria in GBSCC.

Result: Total 1561 mitochondria related nuclear genes were identified
from two databases and included in the study. A total of 977 somatic
mutations were identified in 583 such genes in 12 oral GBSCC samples.
These mutations were distributed in exonic (346 mutations), intronic (288
mutations), splicing (4 mutations), UTR3’ (270 mutations) and UTR5’
(69 mutations) regions. Ten recurrently mutated genes (AK3, AK4, ATP10D,
CASP8, ERBB4, MRPL10, NT5DC3, RYR3, SMURF1and TP53) were identified in at
least 25% (3/12) of samples. Significant expression deregulation in 147
mitochondrial related nuclear genes was found from whole transcriptome
data. Differential methylation was found in some of these 147 genes in 5
oral GBSCC samples. Thirty-seven genes were selected from 147 genes for
expression re-validation by qPCR and expressions of 32 genes were
re-validated in another set of 12 GBSCC samples. Somatically mutated and
expression deregulated genes were different except two genes, ACADM and
NNT, which were mutated and deregulated. Literature survey and KEGG
pathway analysis revealed that most of the mutated or deregulated genes
were functionally involved with biological pathways like mitochondrial
metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation, apoptosis and molecular transport.
It indicates possible disruption of these pathways in oral GBSCC.

Conclusion: Mitochondrial function related nuclear genes may have
significant impact on oral GBSCC in maintenance and progression, but
needs to be validated in larger set of samples.


