Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ELTD1/ADGRL4, a novel adhesion GPCR regulator of tumour
angiogenesis, suppresses lipid metabolism in endothelial cells, and is
upregulated in breast cancer endothelium and epithelium.


Background: We identified ELTD1/ADGRL4, an orphan GPCR belonging to the
adhesion GPCR family (aGPCR), as a novel regulator of angiogenesis and a
potential anti-cancer therapeutic target. ELTD1 is normally expressed in
both endothelial cells & vascular smooth muscle cells. Expression in the
tumour vasculature is significantly increased. Our aims were to analyse
ELTD1’s function in endothelial cells & its role in breast cancer.

Method: After ELTD1 silencing, mRNA array profiling was performed on
primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) & validated with
qPCR & confocal microscopy. We investigated ELTD1 signalling by applying
the aGPCR ‘Stinger/tethered-agonist Hypothesis’. For this, truncated
forms of ELTD1 & peptides analogous to the proposed tethered agonist
region were designed. FRET-based 2nd messenger (Cisbio IP-1; cAMP) &
luciferase-reporter assays (NFAT; NFKB; SRE; SRF-RE; CREB) were performed
to establish canonical GPCR activation. To investigate ELTD1 in breast
cancer, a panel of cell lines representative of all molecular subtypes
were qPCR screened. Furthermore, primary human breast cancers (n=245) &
matched primary & nodal secondary breast cancers (n=79) were stained for
ELTD1 expression. Staining intensity was then scored & compared with
survival.

Results: HUVEC mRNA expression profiling after ELTD1 silencing showed
upregulation of SLC24A1, which transports citrate from the mitochondria
to the cytoplasm & ACLY, which converts cytoplasmic citrate to Acetyl
CoA, feeding fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis, and acetylation. We
validated this at RNA & protein expression level & showed that ELTD1
inhibited lipid droplet formation. Signalling experiments revealed that
unlike other aGPCRs, ELTD1 does not couple to any canonical GPCR pathways
(Gαi; Gαs; Gαq; Gα12/13). In breast cancer, we found that no
representative cell line screened expressed ELTD1. Breast cancer
immunohistochemistry revealed higher intensity vascular ELTD1 staining
within the tumour stroma contrasted to normal stroma & expression within
tumour epithelial cells (15%). Higher ELTD1 expression in both the tumour
stroma vasculature (n=241; HR=0.68; p=0.04) & within the subset of tumour
positive cases (n=24; HR=0.3; p=0.02) correlated with improved relapse
free survival (RFS).

Conclusion: ELTD1’s regulation of lipid synthesis through suppression
of ACLY & SLC25A1 highlights ELTD1’s role as a novel regulator of
endothelial metabolism. Unlike other aGPCRs, ELTD1 does not signal
through canonical G protein pathways. The good prognosis of ELTD1
expression may be related to inducing a quiescent endothelial population.
It will be of interest to relate this to activity of anti-angiogenic
therapy. Nevertheless, a relevant fraction of patients expressing ELTD1
still relapsed & this may be a suitable target for this population.


