Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired platinum resistance enhances tumour angiogenesis through
activation of vascular mimicry.


Introduction:

Platinum resistant High Grade Serous Ovarian Cancer (HGSOC) has a poor
outcome with limited treatment options. Angiogenesis is a key
pathological feature of ovarian cancer and anti-angiogenics have
dominated the field of drug development in EOC, particularly in the
second-line setting (Marachini et al 2013). In this study we asked if
platinum resistance could be associated with an improved response to
anti-angiogenic agents.

Method:

A review of phase III anti-angiogenic clinical trials was used to
investigate the association between platinum resistance and response to
anti-angiogenic agents. To investigate the effect of chemotherapy on
predefined ovarian cancer molecular subgroups (Gourley, et al. J Clin
Oncol 32:5s, 2014), we analysed 35 matched pre- and post-chemotherapy
samples by gene expression. Novel isogenic cisplatin-resistant HGSOC cell
lines were established to study the mechanisms of cisplatin section
pressure and shift to an angiogenic phenotype. This was further validated
in novel ascites-derived primary cell lines from HGSOC patients with
known outcomes following platinum-based chemotherapy.

Results:

Critical review of 22 phase III anti-angiogenic trials suggested that
there was a better response to anti-angiogenics following previous
platinum-based chemotherapy. Our analysis demonstrated that 67% of
treatment naïve tumours that were initially classified as non-angiogenic
shifted to an angiogenic biology, which was associated with platinum
resistance. Additionally we found that cisplatin resistant cancer cell
lines demonstrated hallmarks of vascular mimicry and an associated
increase in vessel density using an angiogenesis Matrigel plug assay in
Athymic nude mice (p-value=Critical review of 22 phase III
anti-angiogenic trials suggested that there was a better response to
anti-angiogenics following previous platinum-based chemotherapy. Our
analysis demonstrated that 67% of treatment naïve tumours that were
initially classified as non-angiogenic shifted to an angiogenic biology,
which was associated with platinum resistance. Additionally we found that
cisplatin resistant cancer cell lines demonstrated hallmarks of vascular
mimicry and an associated increase in vessel density using an
angiogenesis Matrigel plug assay in Athymic nude mice (p-value=<0.0001).
In addition, cell lines established from platinum-resistant patients as
well as cell lines made platinum resistant in-vitro, demonstrated
overexpression of VEGFa which would be expected to stimulate angiogenesis.

Conclusion:

We have demonstrated that platinum-resistance in HGSOC is associated with
angiogenic biology supporting the use of anti-angiogenic agents in this
setting.


