Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of estrogen receptor beta signaling reduces stemness
and promotes differentiation of glioma stem cells.


Glioblastoma (GBM) are the most common and deadliest tumors of the
central nervous system. GBM have poor prognosis due to tumor recurrence
and resistance to current therapies. Glioma Stem Cells (GSCs) are
implicated in the tumor initiation and therapy resistance of GBM. Agents
that can specifically reduce stemness of GSCs are urgently needed for the
effective treatment of GBM. Estrogen play a crucial role during brain
development, differentiation and in neuroprotection. However, its role in
promoting differentiation of GSCs remain unknown. Estrogen effects are
mediated by two estrogen receptors (ESR1 and ESR2) and ESR2 functions as
a tissue-specific tumor suppressor. Our recent studies discovered that
GSCs preferably express ESR2 with low or undetectable levels of ESR1. The
objective of this study is to test whether ESR2 agonists modulate
stemness of GSCs and to determine their mechanism(s) of action. We have
tested the hypothesis using GSCs isolated from established and patient
derived GBM cells using stem cell markers CD133 and CD15. Knockout of
ESR2 using CRISPR/Cas9 system increased the CD133 positive GSCs and
overexpression of ESR2 reduces the CD133-positive population in GBM
cells. Treatment of GSCs with ESR2 agonists (Liquiritigenin and LY500307)
significantly inhibited the neurosphere formation, self-renewal ability
and proliferation. Further ESR2 agonist treatment resulted in the loss of
stemness and induction of differentiation and apoptosis of GSCs. Western
blot analysis and RT-qPCR analysis revealed reduced expression of
stemness markers such as Nestin and Sox-2 and increased expression of
differentiation markers GFAP and tuj-1 in GSCs. RNA sequencing analysis
of ESR2 agonist treated and untreated GSCs revealed modulation of
pathways related to apoptosis, cell cycle, stemness and differentiation.
Further, ESR2 agonists treatment significantly reduced the GSCs mediated
tumor growth in orthotopic models and improved the mice overall survival.
Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated that ESR2 agonists reduces the
expression of proliferation of marker Ki67 and induced the apoptosis in
tumors. Together, our results established ESR2 agonists liquiritigenin
and LY500307 as novel therapeutic agents for elimination of GSCs. Since
ESR2 agonists has good blood-brain barrier permeability and less neuronal
toxicity, they can be readily transferred to clinical use with current
radiation and chemotherapies, thereby providing an additional tool for
enhancing survival in GBM patients.


