Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated system-level analyses of androgen receptor variant
networks to identify novel prostate cancer-relevant genes.


Unbiased high-throughput approaches provide a global view of the massive
genetic and transcriptomic changes that occur in and potentially drive
cancer. Such approaches permit the discovery of novel markers and
therapeutic targets. Current treatments for advanced prostate cancer (PC)
focus on inhibiting the androgen receptor (AR). However, PC inevitably
progresses to a stage termed castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC),
which is incurable. In CRPC, C-terminal truncated, constitutively active
AR splice variants (such as AR-V7) play key transcription-regulatory
roles resulting in treatment resistance and disease progression. However,
designing high-affinity drugs to target the amino terminus of AR and AR
variants is a major challenge due to the intrinsic disorganized structure
of this region. Thus there is an imperative need to identify novel AR-V7
hub genes in PC that may serve as therapeutic targets. We performed an
extensive and highly robust gene expression meta-analysis on PC patient
samples. We defined gene modules correlated with disease progression
using a powerful systems biology approach termed Weighted
Gene-Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA). Further, we mapped the AR-V7
interactome for the first time using a novel high-throughput synthetic
genetic array screening in yeast, known as Yeast Augmented Network
Analysis (YANA). YANA was performed by crossing yeast expressing AR-V7
with a large collection of yeast strains lacking non-essential genes, and
identifying those genes that caused a change in yeast growth (fitness).
Human orthologs of the identified yeast genes were used to build an AR-V7
functional gene network. Finally, we combined the results from our
independent system-level analyses with experimental data to identify hub
genes that are upregulated in PC patients, regulated by AR-V7, and also
functionally interact with AR-V7. The identified genes not only include
select genes previously linked to PC, such as members of the cyclin and
topoisomerase families, but also genes that have not been previously
linked to AR-V7 activity or PC progression. Moreover, our gene expression
signature predicts a higher risk of PC recurrence after primary treatment
in patients. In sum, we show here an unbiased and novel gene discovery
strategy using bioinformatics in concert with experimental approaches to
identify new candidate genes in CRPC that may lead to prognostic markers
and future targeted therapies.


