Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RelA regulates CXCR5/CXCL13 transcription and associated immune
response in breast cancer.


It is evident from research outcomes that metastases-associated deaths
are predominant in breast cancer. Recent developments on early diagnosis
using mammographic screening and the implementation of adjuvant therapies
may have reduced breast cancer associated deaths in decent numbers,
although new markers for prognosis are of utmost importance for patients
with higher risk of developing metastases or recurrence.

Chemokines are the key messenger of cellular immune response and can be
targeted to reduce the intratumoral regulatory T cells (Treg) for
antitumor immunity. Targeting either specific immunomodulators and/or
intervening molecular mechanisms is thought to be a potential therapeutic
option. In our previous study, we have found that co-expression of CXCR5
and CXCL13 is significantly associated with epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) of cells and lymph node metastasis (LNM) during breast
cancer progression. In this study, we are aiming to investigate how the
transcriptional regulation of this receptor-ligand pair directs the
process of disease development. Interestingly, it was found that RelA
(p65), a subunit of NFkB protein, promoted the transcription of both
CXCR5 and CXCL13. The putative RelA binding sites were validated using
sequential deletion of respective promoter regions of CXCR5 and CXCL13.
We observed that expression of CXCR5 significantly (pChemokines are the
key messenger of cellular immune response and can be targeted to reduce
the intratumoral regulatory T cells (Treg) for antitumor immunity.
Targeting either specific immunomodulators and/or intervening molecular
mechanisms is thought to be a potential therapeutic option. In our
previous study, we have found that co-expression of CXCR5 and CXCL13 is
significantly associated with epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)
of cells and lymph node metastasis (LNM) during breast cancer
progression. In this study, we are aiming to investigate how the
transcriptional regulation of this receptor-ligand pair directs the
process of disease development. Interestingly, it was found that RelA
(p65), a subunit of NFkB protein, promoted the transcription of both
CXCR5 and CXCL13. The putative RelA binding sites were validated using
sequential deletion of respective promoter regions of CXCR5 and CXCL13.
We observed that expression of CXCR5 significantly (p<0.05) increased
with RelA and Nrf2 overexpression and CXCL13 co-stimulation in MDA-MB-231
cell line. RelA was also found to induce the expression of CXCL13 in
T-47D and MDA-MB-231 cell line. Significantly, SNAIL, a key EMT
regulatory element, was found to be highly expressed in RelA-transfected
MDA-MB-231 cell line with or without CXCR5 and CXCL13 co-stimulation. We
also observed CXCR5+ T follicular helper (Tfh) and Treg sub-population
within the tumor microenvironment, although numbers varied with stages
and molecular subtypes. In chemotaxis assay, CXCR5+ Treg cells were found
to be predominant among migratory T-cell subsets against RelA
overexpression and/or CXCL13 stimulation. Simultaneously, CCL2, a
pro-inflammatory chemokine, induced macrophages to secrete CCL22, which
in turn, might attract CXCR5+ Treg and Th2 cells into the tumor
microenvironment. Study in 4T1-BALB/c breast cancer mouse model
demonstrated significant (pChemokines are the key messenger of cellular
immune response and can be targeted to reduce the intratumoral regulatory
T cells (Treg) for antitumor immunity. Targeting either specific
immunomodulators and/or intervening molecular mechanisms is thought to be
a potential therapeutic option. In our previous study, we have found that
co-expression of CXCR5 and CXCL13 is significantly associated with
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) of cells and lymph node
metastasis (LNM) during breast cancer progression. In this study, we are
aiming to investigate how the transcriptional regulation of this
receptor-ligand pair directs the process of disease development.
Interestingly, it was found that RelA (p65), a subunit of NFkB protein,
promoted the transcription of both CXCR5 and CXCL13. The putative RelA
binding sites were validated using sequential deletion of respective
promoter regions of CXCR5 and CXCL13. We observed that expression of
CXCR5 significantly (p<0.05) increased with RelA and Nrf2 overexpression
and CXCL13 co-stimulation in MDA-MB-231 cell line. RelA was also found to
induce the expression of CXCL13 in T-47D and MDA-MB-231 cell line.
Significantly, SNAIL, a key EMT regulatory element, was found to be
highly expressed in RelA-transfected MDA-MB-231 cell line with or without
CXCR5 and CXCL13 co-stimulation. We also observed CXCR5+ T follicular
helper (Tfh) and Treg sub-population within the tumor microenvironment,
although numbers varied with stages and molecular subtypes. In chemotaxis
assay, CXCR5+ Treg cells were found to be predominant among migratory
T-cell subsets against RelA overexpression and/or CXCL13 stimulation.
Simultaneously, CCL2, a pro-inflammatory chemokine, induced macrophages
to secrete CCL22, which in turn, might attract CXCR5+ Treg and Th2 cells
into the tumor microenvironment. Study in 4T1-BALB/c breast cancer mouse
model demonstrated significant (p<0.05) increase in CXCR5 and CXCL13
expression levels upon immunostimulation.

The study may help to understand the prognosis value of CXCR5 and CXCL13
considering the impact of this receptor-ligand pair on the regulation of
Tfh/Treg ratio, EMT and LNM. We believe that this investigation may lead
to a comprehensive prediction of the tumor fate as well as to explore
possible markers for breast cancer prognosis and future chemotherapy with
more precision.


