Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and in vivo evaluation of WAC-224, a novel quinolone
class of topoisomerase II inhibitor for cancer therapy.


Introduction: DNA topoisomerases (Topo) are classical but still
attractive targets for drug therapy in multiple types of cancers. Topo
inhibitors, such as Etoposide and Daunorubicin, have been effectively
used; however, their clinical use is often limited by drug resistance in
cancer cell population. Therefore, the development of a novel chemical
class of Topo inhibitors has been desired to overcome drug resistance.
Recently, Vosaroxin (QINPREZO) is identified as a first-in-class
anti-cancer quinolone derivative targeting Topo II, which is under
development for relapsed or refractory acute myeloid leukemia (AML). In
this study, we evaluated the in vitro and in vivo activities of WAC-224,
a novel quinolone derivative for Topo II inhibition, for various cancer
cell lines including multi-drug resistant cells and in mouse xenograft
models, respectively.

Materials and Methods: In vitro anti-proliferative activities against
over 20 cell lines were determined using WST cell proliferation reagent.
Apoptosis was measured by Annexin-V staining. In vivo anti-tumor activity
was determined in immunodeficient mice bearing multi-drug resistant human
uterine sarcoma MES-SA/DX5.

Results: WAC-224 accomplished extensive anti-proliferative activities for
cancer cell lines including multi-drug resistant ones with the EC50 range
of 0.001 to 1 microM. Especially, in MV4-11 AML cell line, WAC-224 showed
a potent and superior anti-proliferative activity compared with
Doxorubicin (EC50: 1.4 nM for WAC-224 v.s. 2.5 nM for Doxorubicin).
Molecular and cellular mechanisms of WAC-224 were defined as inhibition
of human Topo II, induction of G2/M phase cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis. Additionally, significant antitumor effects of WAC-224 were
confirmed in mouse xenograft models. Furthermore, WAC-224 showed no toxic
effect on small intestinal crypts in mice.

Conclusion: This study demonstrated that WAC-224 has strong in vitro
activities against broad cancer cell types along with the potent in vivo
efficacy and well tolerability, without gastrointestinal toxicity. These
results indicate that WAC-224 is promised to provide a new therapeutic
option for various cancers including multi-drug resistant and
hematological ones.


