Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell-penetrating doxorubicin released from Elastin-like
polypeptide kills doxorubicin-resistant cancer cells.


A drug-releasing system facilitated by external stimuli could be used to
deliver cytotoxic chemotherapy agents to tumor sites selectively and
safely. Among many suggested strategies, elastin-like polypeptide (ELP)
exploits its characteristic of phase transitioning in response to changes
in ambient temperature. This unique property permits selective targeting
of the polymer to hyperthermic tumors by aggregating as it transitions.
ELP therefore can be used as a thermosensitive vector for the delivery of
chemotherapy agents and therapeutic peptides, resulting in a rise in drug
concentration exclusively in tumors. This novel strategy introduces
unprecedented options for treating cancer, with fewer concerns about
indiscriminate side effects from the chemotherapy.

In this study, the ELP-drug conjugate was further modified with
incorporation of an enzyme-specific cleavable linker in order to trigger
drug release within tumors. The suggested system is composed of ELP, a
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) substrate, a cell penetrating peptide
(CPP), and 6-maleimidocaproyl amide derivative of doxorubicin (Dox).
Rationale for this design is that this construct may be initially
targeted to the tumor site by local application of mild heat. When the
construct reaches tumor site, it is cleaved by MMP, releasing CPP
conjugated Dox, which is able to more efficiently infiltrate tumor
tissues and penetrate cancer cell membranes. This strategy shows up to
4-fold increase in cell penetration up to four times and results more
cell death in breast cancer cells than the ELP-doxorubicin complex. Even
in doxorubicin-resistant cancer cells (NCI/ADR and MES/ADR),
ELP-released, cell-penetrating doxorubicin demonstrated better membrane
penetration (two fold), leading to at least twice killing of the
resistant cancer cells than ELP-Dox and free Dox.


