Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spatial-temporal delivery of OX40 agonist and PD-1 inhibitor using
nanoparticles improves therapeutic efficacy of cancer immunotherapy.


Background: Cancer immunotherapy is an exciting new approach to cancer
treatment and there is strong interest in strategies to improve the
long-term durable response rates of cancer immunotherapy. One approach is
to combine checkpoint inhibitors such as aPD-1 with T cell activator such
as OX40 agonist to further increase immune activation. We hypothesized
that we can improve the therapeutic efficacy of this approach by
temporally control the activation of OX40 and inhibition of PD-1
pathways. To accomplish this, we utilized nanoparticles that can deliver
anti-OX40 and anti-PD1 antibodies simultaneously to T cells.

Methods: Agonist antibody (anti-OX40) and antagonist antibody (anti-PD1)
were conjugated to PLGA-PEG-Maleimide nanoparticles (AANPs) with precise
ratio control and quantified by ELISA. Their specific binding to the
target proteins was shown in vitro by flow cytometry. The tumor
inhibition efficiency was assessed on mice bearing different tumor
models. Two tumors were inoculated subcutaneously (105 B16F10 cells) or
on fourth mammary fat pad (105 4T1 cells) on both flanks of mice. One
side of tumor was irradiated once and AANPs were injected twice every 3
days. In vivo depletion experiments were tested on C56Bl6 mice and
CD11b/c mice. Different populations of T cells in tumor and spleen were
analyzed by flow cytometry and by fluorescent IHC staining. T cell
killing assay and IFN-γ ELISpot were studied. Co-localization was
demonstrated with fluorescent labeled antibodies and the corresponding
AANPs.

Results: AANPs showed a 30% cure rate, compared to 10% of free
antibodies, 0% of anti-PD1 conjugated NPs, and 0% of anti-OX40 conjugated
NPs in B16F10 melanoma model. We then re-challenged the cured mice with
2×105 B16F10 cells and none of the mice developed another tumor. In 4T1
breast cancer model, the survival rate on day 39 was 50% with AANPs
treatment, compared to 22% in the mixture of anti-PD1 conjugated
nanoparticles and anti-OX40 conjugated nanoparticles, and 0% of free
antibodies. We demonstrated that AANPs led to a higher medium TCD8+/Treg
ratio in tumors. The therapeutic effect was mediated by CD8+ T cells as
elimination of these cells abrogated the therapeutic effects. In vitro
study confirmed that AANPs were able to improve T cell stimulation
compared to free antibodies by increasing IFN-γ excretion (2x). We
further confirmed co-localization of antibodies with AANPs on tumor
infiltration T cells in vivo. Our data demonstrated that spatial-temporal
delivery of agonist and antagonist could improve T cell activation and
cancer immunotherapy.

Conclusions: Our data demonstrates that spatial-temporal delivery of
agonist and antagonist can improve T cell activation and cancer
immunotherapy.


