Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoformulated Talazoparib and Olaparib for enhanced delivery.


Introduction: PARP inhibitors such as Talazoparib and Olaparib exploit
deficiencies in DNA repair pathways, making them attractive candidates
for treatment of a number of different cancers. These drugs are
particularly effective when used in combination with other DNA damaging
agents such as chemotherapeutics and radiation therapy. Combination
trials, however, have resulted in severe toxicities, necessitating either
dose reduction or delay. Dose reduction leads to suboptimal dosing and
provides little therapeutic benefit compared to monotherapy. Systemically
administered nanoparticles offer a more effective way to selectively
accumulate drugs in tumors and bypass toxicities associated with oral
delivery. We have developed nanoparticle delivery systems for both
Olaparib and Talazoparib in order to improve tumor accumulation while
bypassing the toxicity associated with oral administration.

Methods: Lipid nanoformulations of Olaparib and Talazoparib have been
developed and characterized in regard to size, surface charge, drug
loading, release, and stability. NanoTalazoparib has been tested in vitro
in breast cancer cell lines including W0069, W780, and HCC1937 which
exhibit BRCA1 and 2 mutations, and NanoOlaparib in the lung cancer cell
line Calu-6 which also has a defective FA-BRCA pathway. Mice have been
treated with NanoOlaparib and NanoTalazoparib alone and in combination
with radiation or temozolomide in order to evaluate toxicity. Therapeutic
efficacy studies are currently underway.

Results: The nanoformulations have been formulated to encapsulate a
clinically relevant dose of either Talazoparib or Olaparib and release at
37°C over a period of days, while remaining stable during storage at
4°C. In vitro, both nanoformulations show the same activity as free drug
with IC50s in the nanomolar range for these cell lines with varying
deficiencies in the BRCA pathway. Mice have shown no appreciable weight
loss during treatment with either nanoformulation alone or in combination
with other treatment modalities.

Conclusion: Nanoformulations of Talazoparib and Olaparib have been
developed and characterized to demonstrate activity in vitro and
tolerable doses in vivo. We have found that mice tolerate NanoTalazoparib
at higher doses when combined with Temozolomide than when given oral
Talazoparib. The sustained release from the nanoparticles allows for the
nanoformulation to be administered less often than the daily
administration for oral drug and the improved tolerability opens the door
for combination therapy with both chemotherapeutics and radiation
therapy. Therapeutic efficacy studies are underway and we expect that as
a monotherapy NanoTalazoparib will be more effective at lower doses than
oral Talazoparib, based on the longer circulation time and more selective
accumulation in tumors. We also anticipate that combination therapy will
be more effective with the nanoformulation, as the maximum tolerated dose
is higher than that of the oral drug.


