Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic analysis of recurrent ovarian cancer in patient-derived
xenografts treated with platinum and taxane chemotherapy.


Introduction: Many women with advanced ovarian cancer (OC) are initially
sensitive to platinum and taxane chemotherapy, but subsequently develop
recurrent disease which is often incurable. OC chemotherapy resistance
mechanisms are incompletely understood. We used patient-derived
xenografts (PDX) to model OC recurrence following chemotherapy and to
analyze genomic evolution of recurrent tumors.

Approach: We leveraged PDX derived from human OC ascites that accurately
represent high-grade serous OC. We used two PDX models: PDX-A derived
from a chemotherapy-naive patient with WT BRCA1/2; PDX-B derived from a
chemotherapy-resistant patient with a BRCA1 mutation. Using
luciferase-labeled tumor cells, we generated intraperitoneal disease in
multiple recipients. We treated cohorts of 5-10 animals with vehicle,
carboplatin, paclitaxel, or carboplatin + paclitaxel (C/T) for 3 cycles
followed by observation with bioluminescence imaging of tumor burden.

Results: While vehicle- and paclitaxel-treated animals exhibited rapid
disease outgrowth, carboplatin- and C/T-treated animals showed disease
regression, followed by recurrence after 90-300 days. Median survival was
significantly increased in carboplatin- and C/T-treated animals.
Recurrent tumors were histologically similar to vehicle-treated tumors.
We performed whole-exome sequencing and whole-transcriptome sequencing on
ascites cells from 4 animals in each treatment group. We used a
decontamination algorithm to remove stromal mouse reads from our tumor
samples, resulting in a highly pure (over 99%) human tumor sequence data.
Mutations, insertions/deletions, and copy number alterations were
identified and compared among treatment groups. Known TP53 mutations were
present at 100% frequency across samples. Average mutation frequencies
were similar across all groups. We identified several mutations and copy
number variants present in the carboplatin or C/T recurrent tumors that
were distinct from the vehicle groups, including putative alterations in
chemoresistance pathways such as DNA repair (BRCA1/2), apoptosis
(BCL2L1), drug transport (ABC transporters), and PI3K signaling (EEF2K).
In model PDX-A, all four carboplatin and one C/T treated recurrent tumors
exhibited a similar copy-number profile, suggestive of subclonal
expansion, which included an increase in WT copies of PTEN relative to
the vehicle tumors. Phylogenetic analysis and whole-transcriptome
analysis are ongoing.

Conclusions: Our study models recurrent ovarian cancer in PDX and
identifies potential features of in vivo chemotherapy resistance.


