Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LSTRA cell line as a model for large granular lymphocytic leukemia
in drug screening.


Large granular lymphocytic (LGL) leukemia is a rare form of leukemia that
is caused by the increase in cytotoxic T-lymphocytes or natural killer
(NK) cells. A subcategory of T-LGL leukemia that co-expresses T and NK
cell surface markers is very aggressive and has a very poor prognosis.
Current treatment of aggressive T-LGL is based on non-specific
immunosuppressive therapy. Lack of model cell lines contributes to slow
progress in designing targeted therapy and clinical trials. Our recent
studies demonstrate that the mouse T-leukemic cell line LSTRA reproduces
some important characteristics of aggressive T-LGL leukemia. This is the
first report of a cell line model mimicking the deadly human leukemia and
has great potentials for drug screening in treating T-LGL leukemia.

Bortezomib is one of the drugs that show promising results in treating
LGL leukemia patients in clinical trials. Bortezomib is the first
FDA-approved reversible proteasome inhibitor in treating multiple myeloma
and mantle cell lymphoma patients. One of the major concerns in using
single-agent bortezomib is that patients develop resistance during the
course of treatment and cancers relapse. Therefore, it is important to
develop novel strategies in overcoming LGL leukemic cells’ resistance
to bortezomib and its derivatives.

In our current study, we showed that bortezomib inhibited cell
proliferation and induced apoptosis in LSTRA leukemic cells. Partial
reversion after 48-72 hr of bortezomib treatment suggested development of
resistance to bortezomib. We further established bortezomib-resistant
LSTRA cells that tolerated significantly higher levels of bortezomib.
Both carfilzomib (FDA-approved second generation irreversible proteasome
inhibitor) and MLN 4924 (proteasome pathway upstream inhibitor) failed to
overcome bortezomib resistance. Only luteolin, a common flavonoid found
in plants, can effectively overcome bortezomib resistance.

Metabolic reprogramming has been linked to drug resistance in cancer
cells. Indeed, We found that bortezomib-resistant LSTRA cells had smaller
cell size as well as reduced rate of glucose uptake, lactate secretion,
and mitochondrial respiration. These results suggest that reduced
mitochondrial activity may be an important molecular marker for LSTRA
cell’s resistance to bortezomib. All together, we identified luteolin
as a potential small molecule in overcoming LGL leukemia’s resistance
to proteasome inhibitor therapy. Altered mitochondrial activity and cell
metabolism in bortezomib-resistant cells provide additional targets in
developing novel combined chemotherapy for cancer patients.


