Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular and clinical analyses of patients with gynecologic
malignancies treated with PD-1 directed immunotherapy.


Long term responses are seldom seen in treatments of advanced or
recurrent gynecologic cancers. In contrast, immunotherapeutic strategies
targeting immune checkpoints such as programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) are
currently in active development in platinum resistant gynecologic
malignancies with promising durable responses observed in subset of
patients.

We analyzed all 14 patients with gynecology malignancies that were
treated with PD-1 directed immunotherapy, nivolumab or pembrolizumab at
the developmental therapeutics program (DTP) clinic in Northwestern
University during 2015 till 2016. Seven patients had
ovarian/fallopian/peritoneal cancer; six, endometrial cancer; 1, squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC) of cervix that are refractory to standard-of-care
chemotherapies. Comprehensive genomic profiling including microsatellite
instability (MSI) status and tumor mutational burden (TMB) analyses was
performed using next generation sequencing (NGS) (FoundationOne).

Among 7 patients with ovarian/fallopian/peritoneal cancer (median age, 62
years), objective response rate (ORR) was 20%. One patient had partial
response (PR), another one had stable disease (SD), and 3, progressive
disease (PD). Two patients were uable to be evaluated. In a patient with
PR, CA 125 level normalized from 426.2 to 10.8 U/mL. Her tumor had very
low TMB (1/Mbp). In all patients, TMB level varied from very low to low
(1-5 mut/Mbp) with MSI status being stable. Progression free survival
(PFS) ranged from 14 to 196 days; overall survival (OS) varied from 60 to
199 days.

Among 6 patients with endometrial cancer (median age, 68 years), ORR was
20%. One patient had PR while four experienced PD. One patient whose
disease could not be assessed due to early death from an event unrelated
to treatment had a remarkable chemical response with a decrease in CA125
level from 5,889 to 182.1 U/mL after one single dose. Her tumor had
MSI-stable status and intermediate TMB (6 mut/Mbp). In a patient with PR,
CA125 level decreased from 1,216 to 226.5 U/mL. Her tumor had MSI-high
status with unknown TMB. Of note, one of four patients with PD had
MSI-high status and intermediate level of TMB. Other patients had tumor
with MSI-stable status and low level of TMB (3-4 mut/MB). PFS ranged from
23 to 258 days; OS varied from 73 to 265 days.

One patient with HPV positive SCC of cervix (34 year old) experienced PD.
Her tumor had MSI-stable status with unknown TMB. PFS was 88 days; OS,
132 days.

In summary, patients with ovarian and endometrial cancer treated with
PD-1 directed immunotherapy demonstrated ORR of 20%. One additional
patient with endometrial cancer had an exceptional chemical response.
None of the tumors had high TMB (>6/Mbp). No clear associations between
genomic traits including TMB and MSI staus and responses were found.
Further larger prospecitve studies are warranted to explore potential
biomarkers for response with immunotherapy in gynecologic malignancies.


