Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of omega-3 fatty acid supplementation on
obesity-induced inflammatory signaling within the breast tumor
microenvironment.


The Impact of Omega-3 Fatty Acid Supplementation on Obesity-induced
Inflammatory Signaling within in the Breast Tumor Microenvironnment.
Obesity is associated with a worsened prognosis in breast cancer. This is
in part due to the role of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) in the
obesity-inflammation-aromatase axis. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
(PUFAs) have demonstrated anti-cancer effects through multiple pathways,
including suppression of the pro-inflammatory COX2-PGE2 pathway. In order
to determine if supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids can effectively
suppress PGE2 production in obese postmenopausal women, we conducted a 30
day non-interventional study with correlative biomarker endpoints. Forty
(40) postmenopausal women were provided oral daily supplements of 1500mg
of docosahexaoic acid (DHA) and 2500mg eicosapentanoic acid (EPA). Serum
samples were collected prior to and on day 29 of taking the supplement
and analyzed for PGE2 levels. Fifty-five percent (55%) of the subjects
demonstrated a significant suppression of PGE2 levels. To test if
response could be based upon the ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids
on inflammatory signaling within the breast, pre-clinical studies were
performed on different cell types found in the tumor microenvironment.
Macrophages, breast cancer epithelial cells and pre-adipocytes were
exposed to omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids at ratios of 46:1, 20:1, 10:1
and 1.3:1 for 24 hours. While breast cancer epithelial cells demonstrated
limited response to PUFA concentrations, the macrophage and adipocyte
cells produced high levels of PGE2 when exposed to higher ratios of
omega-6 fatty acids, which was effectively suppressed in a dose-dependent
manner with increasing levels of omega-3 fatty acids. These data suggest
that obese breast cancer patients may have a particular benefit to
omega-3 fatty acid supplementation. Ongoing studies will assess how
PUFA-modulated changes in inflammatory signaling from different cells
within the microenvironment impact breast cancer cell proliferation,
therapeutic resistance, and migration as measures of breast cancer
progression. These mechanistic studies, in combination with our on-going
NCI-funded prospective clinical study in newly diagnosed breast cancer
patients, will significantly contribute to understanding how ratios of
omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids can modulate inflammatory signaling within
the tumor microenvironment, and if this can be used to improve
therapeutic response in the obese breast cancer population.


