Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Filamin A interacting protein 1-like is a marker of prognosis,
progression and chemosensitivity in ovarian cancer.


Purpose: The WNT/β-catenin pathway and the resulting
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) play a key role in ovarian
cancer progression and chemoresistance. Filamin A interacting protein
1-like (FILIP1L) enhances β-catenin degradation, thereby inhibiting
canonical WNT signaling and EMT. FILIP1L is a tumor suppressor whose
expression is down-regulated by promoter hyper-methylation in ovarian
cancer. FILIP1L down-regulation is inversely correlated with the invasive
potential of ovarian cancer cells. However, the clinical relevance of
FILIP1L down-regulation in ovarian cancer progression has yet to be
addressed.

Experimental design: To study the clinical implications of FILIP1L in
regulating the WNT/β-catenin pathway and chemoresistance, the expression
of FILIP1L, β-catenin, SNAIL and SLUG was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays of 369 ovarian samples ranging
from normal to metastatic. Their expression was evaluated with
clinicopathological characteristics including FIGO stage and
chemosensitivity, and correlated with overall and disease-free survival
by Kaplan-Meier plots and Cox proportional hazards model.

Results: We demonstrated that FILIP1L expression decreased with tumor
progression, resulting in a significant difference between primary and
metastatic ovarian cancer samples. In contrast, levels of β-catenin and
SLUG increased with tumor progression. Furthermore, tumors that were
resistant to platinum/paclitaxel combination therapy showed a significant
reduction in FILIP1L expression when compared to sensitive tumors,
contrary to SLUG expression, which was significantly higher. The
expression of FILIP1L was negatively correlated with the expression of
β-catenin and SLUG, whereas β-catenin expression was positively
correlated with SLUG expression, suggesting a link between FILIP1L and
the WNT/β-catenin pathway in ovarian cancer. Moreover, patients with low
FILIP1L expression showed a median overall survival and disease-free
survival of 60 and 19 months, respectively, whereas patients with high
FILIP1L expression had not yet reached median overall and disease-free
survival at their 120 month follow-up. Notably, low FILIP1L expression
was independent negative prognostic factor with respect to overall and
disease-free survival.

Conclusions: Our study provides the first clinical relevance of FILIP1L
in human cancer, and suggests that FILIP1L may be a novel biomarker for
good prognosis and lower probability of recurrence in ovarian cancer
patients.


