Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TrkB-mediated signaling contributes to malignant phenotypes of
gallbladder cancer.


Background:

Brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)/ Tropomyosin-related kinase B
(TrkB) signaling has been shown to be associated with aggressive
phenotype in some cancers. However, the contribution of BDNF/TrkB
signaling to gallbladder cancer (GBC), one of refractory malignancies,
still remains unclear. This study aims to analyze the biological
significance of BDNF/TrkB signaling in GBC.

Methods:

1) Clinical experiment: 69 patients with primary GBC who underwent
curative surgical resection were enrolled in this study. We investigated
TrkB expression by immunohistochemistry and analyzed the correlation
between TrkB expression and clinicopathological findings.

2) In vitro experiment: BDNF/TrkB signaling was inhibited using k252a or
siRNA, and was activated by recombinant human BDNF (rhBDNF). Then,
whether BDNF/TrkB signaling contributes to the biological function was
estimated by proliferation assay and Matrigel invasion assay, using
TrkB-expressing 5 GBC cell lines (NOZ, TGBC2TKB, GBd15, TYGBK-1,
TYGBK-8). Furthermore, we determined the mechanisms of invasion in terms
of epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) and matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs). We also examined the relationship between TrkB expression and the
level of vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs) and

hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) in GBC.

3) In vivo experiment: Tumorigenesis and tumor growth of TrkB
siRNA-transfected GBC cells were analyzed, using xenograft mice model.

Results:

1) Clinical results; TrkB expression was detected in 63 (91.3%) GBC
specimens. TrkB expression in the invasive front correlated with T factor
(p=0.0391) and clinical staging (p=0.0391). Overall survival was lower in
patients with high TrkB expression in the invasive front than in those
with low TrkB expression (p=0.0363).

2) In vitro results; Proliferation was unaffected by rhBDNF treatment;
however, K252a treatment and TrkB siRNA transfection decreased
proliferation. rhBDNF treatment increased invasiveness by inducing EMT
and activating MMP-2/MMP-9, whereas

K252a treatment abrogated these effects. TrkB or BDNF siRNA transfection
suppressed invasiveness. TrkB siRNA transfection decreased HIF-1α,
VEGF-A, and VEGF-C/-D expressions.

3) In vivo results; TrkB siRNA transfection decreased tumorigenicity and
tumor growth in NOZ and TYGBK-1.

Conclusion:

These findings demonstrate that TrkB-mediated signaling contributes to
the induction of malignant phenotypes (proliferation, invasiveness,
angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, and tumorigenesis) in GBC.


