Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome directed diagnosis informs clinical cancer care.


Cancer treatment is primarily guided by the organ of origin, which
despite extensive histopathological and clinical evaluation, remains
ambiguous in many cases and may be inaccurate in cases of occult primary.
We determine the extent to which routine prospective tumour sequencing,
combined with conventional histopathology, can be used to infer the tumor
type and thereby direct clinical decisions.

Characteristic patterns of somatic mutations, broad and focal copy number
alterations, structural rearrangements, mutational signatures, and other
facets acquired from prospective tumor sequencing can inform the tissue
of origin classification of patient disease. Such prospective sequencing
of active cancer patients presents an opportunity to guide diagnosis and
therapy beyond the identification of individual biomarkers of treatment
response. Probabilistic classification allows for systematic combination
of genome-directed diagnosis with conventional histopathology and
clinical history in the course of disease management.

Using more than 10,000 tumors collected from advanced cancer patients at
our institution and sequenced using a comprehensive cancer panel
(MSK-IMPACT) encompassing 341 genes, we have developed a probabilistic
classifier that infers the tumor type from nine broad categories of
genomic aberrations. Scores from a RandomForest classifier are calibrated
to correspond to the probability for each of the 22 interrogated tumor
types. In 18% of all cases, a prediction is made with very high
confidence (greater than 99%), of which just over 99% agree with the
existing diagnosis. The classifier has been used to guide clinical
decision making, including re-diagnoses that distinguish between a
recurrence and a new primary, spare or encourage surgery, facilitate
access to FDA-approved molecularly targeted drugs and prompt germline
genetic testing.

We demonstrate that genome-directed diagnosis, based on alterations
routinely identified from prospective sequencing, can inform clinical
cancer care with the potential to improve patient outcomes.


