Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Melatonin suppresses hepatocellular carcinoma progression via
lncRNA-CPS1-IT-mediated HIF-1α inactivation.


Background: Melatonin, the main pineal hormone that relays light/dark
cycle information to the circadian system, was recently reported to have
intrinsic antitumor activity in various cancers. However, the detailed
regulatory mechanisms associated with antitumor activity of melatonin are
not well understood yet. Moreover, limited studies have addressed the
role of melatonin in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the major
life-threatening malignancy for both sexes in Taiwan. Hence, in this
study, we investigated the antitumor activity of melatonin on HCC and
explored its regulatory mechanism.

Methods: Human hepatoma cell lines HepG2 and Huh7 were treated with
melatonin followed by functional assays to dissect antitumor effect of
melatonin in HCC. The whole transcriptome sequence analysis was performed
to explore the long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) involved in the anti-HCC
activity of melatonin. Further, quantitative RT-PCR, western blot,
immunohistochemistry assays, and in vivo animal model experiments were
performed to elucidate the regulatory mechanism of lncRNAs in
melatonin-mediated HCC suppression.

Results: Melatonin significantly inhibited cell proliferation, migration,
and invasion capacity of HCC cell lines, while the expression of
transcription factor FOXA2 was significantly induced in cells treated
with melatonin. The increase in expression of FOXA2 resulted in
upregulation of lncRNA-CPS1-IT1 expression, which in turn reduced binding
and activation of Hsp90 with HIF-1α. The inactivation of HIF-1α
resulted in the suppression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
progression and HCC metastasis. Furthermore, the results of the in vivo
animal model experiments also validated the tumor-suppressor role of
melatonin via a reduction in tumor growth.

Conclusions: Taken together, our findings suggested that melatonin
inhibited HCC progression by modulating lncRNA-CPS1-IT1-mediated EMT
suppression and further supported melatonin as a promising therapeutic
agent for the treatment of HCC.


