Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic alternative mRNA splicing signature in non-small cell
lung cancer.


Alternative splicing provides a major mechanism to generate protein
diversity. Increasing evidence suggests a link of dysregulation of
splicing associated with cancer. However, alternative splicing in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is largely unstudied. In this study,
seven types of alternative splicing were profiled in 491 lung
adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and 471 lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC)
patients in TCGA using RNA sequencing data. Prognostic predictors for
LUAD, LUSC and merged NSCLC patients were built by integrated survival
analysis. Gene network and splicing correlation network analyses were
also conducted. Overall, we detected 45,062 and 50,732 alternative
splicing events in LUAD and LUSC, respectively, almost half of them were
exon skipping events. A total of 3,691 and 2,403 alternative splicing
events were significantly associated with patient survival in LUAD and
LUSC, respectively. Gene network analysis uncovered important hub genes
or nodes such as EGFR, CD44, PIK3C3, RRAS2, MAPKAP1 and FGFR2. The area
under the curve (AUC) of the receiver-operator characteristic (ROC) curve
for prognostic predictors in LUAD and LUSC were 0.960 and 0.940 at 2000
days of overall survival. Most relevant for clinical application, we also
built the prognostic predictor for NSCLC patients with high performance.
The AUC of ROC curve in NSCLC was 0.817 which were also over 0.8 in LUAD
and LUSC, separately. Moreover, expression of 49 and 9 survival
associated splicing factors were significantly correlated with 75
survival associated alternative splicing events in LUAD and LUSC,
respectively. Interestingly, splicing correlation networks uncovered that
“oncogenic“ splicing factors were up-regulated in LUAD while “tumor
suppressor” splicing factors were down-regulated in LUSC. Survival
associated splice factors might have opposite roles in the regulation of
RNA splicing in LUAD and LUSC. In conclusion, we created prognostic
predictors based on alternative splicing events with high performances
for risk stratification in NSCLC patients and uncovered interesting
splicing networks in LUAD and LUSC which could be underlying mechanisms.


