Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving data quality in oncology immunotherapy clinical research
by big data analytics and data visualization.


Flow cytometric assessment of cellular and intracellular biomarkers
facilitates the development of new classes of cancer immunotherapy
therapeutics. This powerful tool has multiple applications including 1)
detecting PD1, PDL-1 and caspase-3 for apoptosis, 2) isolating, defining,
and quantifying dendritic cells and their intracellular cytokine profile,
3) immunophenotyping subpopulations of B, T, NK, regulatory T, and helper
T cells, and, 4) using tetramer analysis to detect and monitor the
frequency of antigen-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL). However,
lack of knowledge of normal distributions and standard ranges for the
esoteric reportables generated by flow cytometry is one of the most
challenging problems in this promising field.

Here we describe a new method to improve data quality in clinical
research by big data analytics and data visualization. Each data point
was tagged. By applying a simple statistical analysis, a self-defined
range allowed all of the outlier numbers to be identified. By repeating
this process, clear patterns emerged, and all questionable data points
were marked. In addition, the system can differentiate biodiversity in
subjects from a more homogenous population, which can be exploited
further for the purpose of personal and precision medicine. Other
benefits of the new system are to predict the outcome of the clinical
study and to generate new clues in the understanding of the underlying
biological mechanisms.

Big data analytics and data visualization show unparalleled advantages in
oncology studies through simultaneously monitoring unlimited data points
related to surface and intracellular biomarkers. It opens a new avenue in
cost saving for long, time-consuming clinical trials by using all
available data to detect a status change of the immune system. With the
improvement of data quality, big data analytics has become an essential
tool and an integrated part of cancer immunotherapy and the development
of cancer vaccines.


