Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted delivery of pro-apoptotic peptide using ELP-based carrier
for effective cancer therapy in various cancer model.


Therapeutic peptides classified as biopharmaceuticals have gained
attention as a new generation of cancer therapeutics with enhanced
efficiency and diminished toxicity. They often fail to have sufficient
effects due to their unsatisfactory pharmacokinetic profiles, which
include poor bioavailability, low stability, short half-life, and poor
penetration across the biological membrane. Elastin-like polypeptide
(ELP)-based drug delivery has been utilized for various applications
including cancer therapies for many years. Genetic incorporation of
internalization ligands and cell targeting peptides along with ELP
polymer enhanced tumor accumulation and retention time as well as
stability and activities of the drug conjugates. Herein, we described a
unique delivery system comprised of genetically engineered ELP
incorporated with multiple copies of IL-4 receptor targeting peptide
(AP1) periodically and proapoptotic peptide (KLAKLAK)2 referred to as
AP1-ELP-KLAK. It triggered thermal responsive self-assembly into a
nanoparticle-like structure at physiological body temperature and
stabilized its helical conformation, which is critical for its membrane
disrupting activities. Increased IL-4 receptor specific cellular
internalization was associated with the enhanced cytotoxic effect of
(KLAKLAK)2 peptide. Additionally, multivalent presentation of targeting
ligands by AP1-ELP-KLAK significantly enhanced intratumoral localization
and prolonged the retention time compared to ELP-KLAK, non-targeted
control. Systemic administration of AP1-ELP-KLAK significantly inhibited
tumor growth by provoking cell apoptosis in MDA-MB231 breast cancer and
B16F10 melanoma tumor xenograft models without any specific organ
toxicity. Thus, our newly designed AP1-ELP-KLAK polymer nanoparticle is a
promising candidate for effective cancer therapy and due to the simple
preparative procedures of ELPs, this platform can be used as a good
carrier for tumor-specific delivery of other therapeutics.


