Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disseminated tumor cell clearance by the immune system.


The classical model of metastasis suggests that the tumor cell
dissemination occurs late in tumor development, however accumulating
evidence coming from mouse studies and clinical data provide striking
evidence that tumor cells start to disseminate during the initial steps
of tumor development. However, the dissemination from the primary area
does not always result in metastasis. Due to the non-permissive nature of
microenvironment in distant sites, these early disseminated tumor cells
might be cleared or maintained in a non-proliferative/dormant state. The
mechanism by which some early disseminated tumor cells colonize and
generate metastatic growth while some remain dormant is not well known.
In order to understand the underlying factors that may contribute to the
metastatic growth, we performed time course experiments by utilizing
murine mammary tumors (4T1 as metastatic and EMT6 as less metastatic) in
a syngeneic mouse model. Luciferase expressing 4T1 or EMT6 tumor cells
were orthotopically implanted into the fat pads and tumor cell
dissemination was analyzed over 3-week time points. We determined that
both 4T1 and EMT tumors disseminated as early as one to two-week post
implantation, however only 4T1 tumor develop metastasis in distant
organs. Moreover, we also resected primary tumors 1, 2 and 3-week post
implantation of EMT6-Luci or 4T1-Luci tumors and observed distant
metastasis via optical imaging of luciferase expression in live animals.
Although the majority of 4T1 tumor-bearing mice (>80%) develop pulmonary
metastasis when 4T1 tumors resected 2 and 3 weeks post-implantation only
10% of mice develop metastasis when primary tumor resected one-week post
implantation. In contrast, EMT6 tumors following resection only relapsed
in the primary tumor site but failed to develop metastasis. Furthermore,
EMT6 tumor-bearing mice efficiently cleared tail vein injected EMT6-luci
cells in the lungs. We investigated the possible mechanism by which EMT6
tumor-bearing mice clears disseminated tumor cells in the lung. We
provide evidence that pulmonary infiltrated mMDSCs mediate tumor cell
killing via secretion of high levels of cytotoxic granules, granzyme A,
granzyme B, perforin. This was confirmed by mouse transcriptome and qPCR
analyses as well as biochemistry using in vivo samples and in vitro
co-culture samples. Our studies provide a new paradigm in the
understanding of the fate of disseminated tumor cells in secondary organs
and the role of the immune system in this process.


