Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduced argininosuccinate synthetase expression in refractory
sarcomas: impacts on therapeutic potential and drug resistance.


Introduction: Treating drug-resistant sarcomas remain a major challenge.
The present study aimed to identify a novel therapy for drug-resistant
sarcomas based on a metabolic errors involving argininosuccinate
synthetase1 (ASS1).

Methods: We assessed the expression of ASS1 and P-glycoprotein (P-gp) in
osteosarcoma (KHOS), doxorubicin (Dox)-resistant osteosarcoma (KHOSR2),
epithelioid sarcomas (ES-X and VAESBJ), alveolar soft part sarcoma
(ASPS-KY), and each clinical specimen. Each cell was cultured in
arginine-containing and arginine-free media. Cell growth was assessed
using an XTT assay and flow cytometry. We analyzed the induction of
autophagy in arginine-free medium. Moreover, we assessed the expression
of P-gp in after suppressing ASS1 in Dox-sensitive cells (MCF-7, KHOS)
and in after transfecting the ASS1 into Dox-resistant cells (ES-X,
VAESBJ, ASPS-KY and KHOSR2).

Results: The expression of ASS1 was reduced in Dox-resistant sarcoma
cells. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and real-time PCR showed that there was
interestingly an inverse relationship between the expression of ASS1 and
the expression of P-gp. The inhibition of cellular proliferation with
G1-arrest was shown to lead to autophagy with arginine deprivation. In
addition, the combination of autophagy inhibitor plus arginine
deprivation was more effective than arginine deprivation alone. In cells
in which the expression of ASS1 was suppressed, the expression of P-gp
was upregulated in comparison to negative controls.

Discussion: These results indicate that the reduced expression of ASS1
expression in Dox-resistant sarcomas may contribute to drug resistance.
ASS1 deficiency is a potential target for novel drug therapies. The
combination of arginine deprivation therapy and an autophagy inhibitor
may have anti-tumor effects in refractory sarcomas.

Significance: As the induction of autophagy by the deprivation arginine
may have a pro-survival role in patients with ASS1-deficient sarcomas,
the combination of arginine deprivation therapy with autophagy modulators
might potentiate anti-tumor effects in patients with drug-resistant
sarcomas.


