Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IND-Enabling GLP study to support a clinical trial of dual
adoptive cell therapy combining stem cells and T cells engineered with an
NY-ESO-1 TCR.


T cell receptor (TCR) engineered adoptive T cell transfer (ACT) has shown
remarkable antitumor efficacy in several clinical trials. However, low
persistence of modified cells limits long-term clinical responses. To
overcome this hurdle, we propose a clinical trial co-administering
genetically modified T cells and stem cells both expressing an NY-ESO-1
TCR such that the engrafted stem cells generate a source for constant
renewal of modified T cells. Here we report a pre-clinical IND-enabling
study performed at UCLA under Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) compliance
to assess whether co-administration impacts (I) safety; (II) engraftment
and cell lineage differentiation of gene modified stem cells; and (III)
persistence of adoptively transferred T cells and stem cell-derived
progeny.

We performed 12 optimization studies to define the optimal conditions for
TCR gene modified ACT and TCR gene modified hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
bone marrow transplantation (BMT). Sixty-four HLA-A2/kb transgenic mice
were myelodepleted and received syngeneic BMT with Lineage depleted bone
marrow (Lin-) cells transduced with the LV-NYESO-1 TCR/sr39TK and ACT
with T cells transduced with the RV-NYESO-1 TCR. Control groups were as
follows: untreated mice, mice receiving mock transduced Lin- cells and T
cells, mice receiving transduced Lin- cells and mock transduced T cells,
and mice receiving mock transduced Lin- cells and transduced T cells (n =
16 per group). Overall survival at 3 months was 87.5%; no significant
differences in survival were observed among cohorts. After BMT we
observed a decrease in body weight, elevation in creatinine kinase and
transaminases, and gonadal germ cell ablation in all cohorts. Three
months after BMT, all blood cell lineages were reconstituted in surviving
mice. Using digital droplet PCR and flow cytometry, we confirmed that
transduced stem cells engrafted and their progeny persisted long term. In
the bone marrow, NY-ESO-1 TCR was expressed intracellularly among
progenitor cells (Lin-, LSK and HSC) as well as all hematopoietic cell
lineages within the spleen (CD8+ T cells, CD4+ T cells, NKT cells, B
cells and granulocytes). Co-administration with gene modified T cells and
stem cells did not affect engraftment, cell lineage differentiation or
persistence of the gene modified stem cells. Moreover, co-administration
with stem cells did not affect persistence of adoptively transferred T
cells.

These data demonstrate that 1) NY-ESO-1 TCR genetically modified stem
cells engraft and differentiate into all hematopoietic cell lineage
progeny, which persists at 3 months; 2) adoptively transferred NY-ESO-1
TCR T cells persist at 3 months; 3) co-administration of stem cells and T
cells genetically modified to express an NY-ESO-1 TCR is safe and does
not negatively impact stem cell engraftment, lineage differentiation and
progeny persistence or T cell persistence.


