Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The KIT-V654A second site mutation confers perinatal lethality and
increased oncogenesis in a mouse model of GIST.


Tyrosine kinase inhibitors have revolutionized the treatment of
gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), which are mostly driven by
mutations in the receptor tyrosine kinase KIT. However, resistance
commonly develops, which is associated with second site mutations in KIT.
Here, we created the first genetically engineered mouse model of the most
common second site mutation, KIT-V654A (mouse KIT-V653A), to study in
vivo its oncogenic properties and mechanisms of resistance in order to
develop next-generation GIST therapies.

The knock-in strategy consisted of inserting into the endogenous murine
Kit locus a targeting vector containing both the KitV558Δ exon 11
mutation and the KitV653A exon 13 mutation under the control of a floxed
neomycin-resistance gene-expression cassette which acts similar to a
loxP-STOP-loxP cassette. Treatments included imatinib 45 mg/kg i.p.,
sunitinib 40 mg/kg p.o., and cabozantinib 60 mg/kg p.o. Tumors were
assessed by histology, immunohistochemistry, and western blot.

In contrast to our previously published GIST model with a single mutant
KitV558Δ allele, the double knock-in KitV558Δ; V653A-neo allele caused
perinatal lethality when activated in pre-implantation embryos with a
germline EIIa-Cre approach. We therefore sought to restrict the induction
of the KitV558Δ;V653A double mutation to the interstitial cells of Cajal
(ICC), the cell of origin of GIST, via the essential ICC lineage survival
factor ETV1. The KitV558Δ; V653A-neo/+ mouse was crossed with the
Etv1Cre-ERT2/+ mouse expressing Cre recombinase under the Etv1-specific
promoter. Systemic administration of tamoxifen at birth in KitV558Δ;
V653A-neo/+; Etv1Cre-ERT2/+ mice resulted in cecal GIST development with
full penetrance. The tumors were histologically similar to human GIST,
stained positive for KIT, and displayed active p-KIT signaling. As
expected, high-dose imatinib treatment did not inhibit p-KIT Y719 in
these GISTs and did not induce a histologic response. Sunitinib and
cabozantinib each had significant anti-tumor effects, as assessed by
decreased Ki67 index and increased histologic response. Compared to
single mutant KitV558Δ-neo/+; Etv1Cre-ERT2/+ mice, double mutant
KitV558Δ; V653A-neo/+; Etv1Cre-ERT2/+ mice developed larger cecal GISTs
and had decreased survival.

The KitV558Δ; V653A-neo/+; Etv1Cre-ERT2/+ mouse is the first in vivo
model of the most common secondary mutation in GIST and the first in vivo
demonstration that cell-autonomous expression of mutant KIT in the ICC
lineage gives rise to GIST. We have found cabozantinib, an FDA-approved
drug, to be an effective therapy in GISTs harboring the V653A mutation.
Furthermore, our results suggest the addition of the KIT-V653A second
site mutation leads to increased oncogenesis.


