Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-150 as a predictor of hematopoietic reconstitution after
myeloablation.


The identification of biomarkers that allow evaluation of myeloablation
and hematopoietic reconstitution time frame is important for tailoring
the radiation or chemo therapy in cancer patients. The fate of
hematopoietic cells is regulated at multiple stages by various genes and
regulatory microRNAs. In this context, miR-150 has been demonstrated as a
major regulator of lymphoid lineage differentiation and development. Our
mouse model studies shows a novel role of miR-150 in imparting radiation
resistance. We observed a prolonged survival benefit in mice where both
the copies of miR-150 genes are deleted in comparison to that of wildtype
mice in the same C57BL/6 background (pThe identification of biomarkers
that allow evaluation of myeloablation and hematopoietic reconstitution
time frame is important for tailoring the radiation or chemo therapy in
cancer patients. The fate of hematopoietic cells is regulated at multiple
stages by various genes and regulatory microRNAs. In this context,
miR-150 has been demonstrated as a major regulator of lymphoid lineage
differentiation and development. Our mouse model studies shows a novel
role of miR-150 in imparting radiation resistance. We observed a
prolonged survival benefit in mice where both the copies of miR-150 genes
are deleted in comparison to that of wildtype mice in the same C57BL/6
background (p<0.05). The survival benefit after total body irradiation
was found to be associated with lower apoptosis and early reconstitution
in hematopoietic stem cells (lin-ckit+sca1+/-) in bone marrow.
Furthermore, the recovery kinetics at sub lethal dose (6Gy) showed that
HSCs in miR-150-/- mice recovers faster. Myeloid (Mac1+Gr1+) and lymphoid
(CD45+CD19+) lineage cells reconstitutes within 14 days after radiation
in KO mice compared to 21 days or more in WT mice. We observed a
statistically significant upregulation in myeloid cells in KO mice which
implicates an early recovery from radiation induced neutropenia and hence
more survivability. In addition, the enhanced bone marrow reconstitution
was reflected in peripheral blood counts where a noticeable difference
(pThe identification of biomarkers that allow evaluation of myeloablation
and hematopoietic reconstitution time frame is important for tailoring
the radiation or chemo therapy in cancer patients. The fate of
hematopoietic cells is regulated at multiple stages by various genes and
regulatory microRNAs. In this context, miR-150 has been demonstrated as a
major regulator of lymphoid lineage differentiation and development. Our
mouse model studies shows a novel role of miR-150 in imparting radiation
resistance. We observed a prolonged survival benefit in mice where both
the copies of miR-150 genes are deleted in comparison to that of wildtype
mice in the same C57BL/6 background (p<0.05). The survival benefit after
total body irradiation was found to be associated with lower apoptosis
and early reconstitution in hematopoietic stem cells (lin-ckit+sca1+/-)
in bone marrow. Furthermore, the recovery kinetics at sub lethal dose
(6Gy) showed that HSCs in miR-150-/- mice recovers faster. Myeloid
(Mac1+Gr1+) and lymphoid (CD45+CD19+) lineage cells reconstitutes within
14 days after radiation in KO mice compared to 21 days or more in WT
mice. We observed a statistically significant upregulation in myeloid
cells in KO mice which implicates an early recovery from radiation
induced neutropenia and hence more survivability. In addition, the
enhanced bone marrow reconstitution was reflected in peripheral blood
counts where a noticeable difference (p<0.05) in blood RBCs lymphocytes,
monocytes, neutrophils, and basophiles were noted when compared sub
lethally irradiated KO with WT mice. Altogether we demonstrate that the
level of miR-150 regulates the bone marrow cells distribution and hence
could be targeted for achieving accelerated hematopoietic recovery after
myeloablation. These findings may be translated to human cancer patients
for therapy guiding based on miR-150 expression level. Besides its use in
prediction of reconstitution, miR-150 in the circulating system could
provide a direct readout of functional marrow and hence hematological
acute radiation syndrome (H-ARS).


