Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TH17: mediators of metastatic growth acceleration after surgery.


Surgery is known to accelerate the growth and progression of metastases
in patients undergoing oncological resections with 50-60% patients having
recurrent metastasis after resection making it a major reason for
treatment failure. This impedes the efficacy of adjuvant chemotherapy and
overall prognosis of the patient. Studies have proved that inflammatory
cascade initiated by surgery that increases metastatic growth and
progression is mediated through a specific mechanism of neutrophil cell
death called Neutrophil Extracellular Traps (NETs). We investigated the
mechanism of how NET formation after surgical stress increases metastatic
growth by influencing a pro-tumor microenvironment in order to
specifically identify targets for perioperative therapy to keep
metastases dormant and improve the effect of chemotherapy and overall
prognosis. 12 week old male C57BL/6J mice (WT) and mice in which NET
formation was inhibited, ie, WT mice injected with DNAse and global
homozygous knockout of peptidyl arginine deaminase 4 (PAD4), an essential
nuclear protein for NET formation, underwent splenic injection of 100,000
cells of the murine colorectal cancer cell line, MC-38, followed with
either 70% hepatic ischemia-reperfusion (IR) for 60 minutes after 7 days
or no IR. Livers were harvested at multiple time points and assessed for
changes in both innate and adaptive immune cell populations by flow
cytometry. On gross examination, the livers of the NET deficient mice had
fewer tumors as compared to the WT mice. Mice, which underwent IR after
tumor cell injection in both groups showed an increase in nodules
formation versus those with just tumor cell injection, however were still
more in WT than NET deficient mice. Flow cytometry revealed a decrease in
both TH17 (0.36% of T cells in no IR mice vs 0.0036% in IR mice) and CD8
cells (71% of T cells in no IR mice vs 34.8% in IR mice) in mice
subjected to IR versus those with only tumor injection. We found that
increased tumors after surgical stress, which were mediated by NET
formation, were caused due to a decrease in anti-tumor activity of CD8
cells regulated via TH17 cells. If controlled in the perioperative
period, it may reduce acceleration in metastatic foci and improve the
overall prognosis. We are further investigating the mechanism of NETs
influencing the tumor immune environment.


