Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCL2/CCR2-driven monocyte recruitment to the tumor following
radiotherapy influences the outcome of the treatment of head and neck
cancer.


Local radiotherapy is the major treatment to control locally advanced
head and neck cancer. Evidence supporting the importance of immune
response in the response to radiation therapy is growing and the
possibility to potentiate the effects of radiotherapy by modulating the
function of the immune system offers new exciting therapeutic
perspectives. Preclinical findings suggest that immunomodulatory agents
may synergize with radiotherapy, increasing local response rates and
inducing sustained systemic responses. The role of monocytes/macrophages
in the response to radiotherapy is under extensive investigation. Among
the many cytokines secreted by tumor cells, CCL2 is involved in
inflammatory monocyte recruitment from bone marrow to the inflammatory
site. We have recently developed a model of human papillomavirus
(HPV)-related head and neck cancer using immunocompetent mice and
validated its usefulness to evaluate the tumor response to radiotherapy.
Using the same model, based on the injection of TC1/luciferase cells in
the inner lip of C57Bl/6 mice, we show that local radiotherapy induces an
increase of CCL2 levels in the bloodstream and intratumorally accompanied
by a neo-infiltration of monocytes in the tumor that subsequently
differentiate into tumor-associated macrophages (TAM). When TC1/Luc cells
were engrafted in CCL2-/- or CCR2-/- mice, the tumor response to
radiotherapy and survival were improved. This was accompanied by an
impaired infiltration of inflammatory monocytes, and a subsequent
decrease of TAM levels at later time points. In vitro, exposure to
ionizing radiation increased the secretion of CCL2 by TC1/Luc cells, and
such increase was significantly enhanced when tumor cells were
co-cultured with irradiated RAW 264.7 macrophage-derived cells. This data
suggests interplay between tumor and TAM that can amplify the effects of
radiotherapy on the immune system. We propose that reducing
radiation-induced monocyte recruitment may yield improved results in the
treatment of HPV-related head and neck squamous cell carcinomas by
radiotherapy. Immunologically-augmented radiotherapy could allow
reduction of the delivered radiation dose, thus minimizing the risk of
treatment sequelae while maintaining optimal tumor control.


