Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Asymmetric cell division regulator prevents hyperproliferation in
glioma cell-of-origin.


In the past, we demonstrated that adult oligodendrocyte progenitor cells
(OPC) undergo asymmetric cell division (ACD) to self-renew and generate
functional cells by unequally distributing active EGFR and the
OPC-specific marker NG2. Moreover, premalignant OPC switch from an
asymmetric to symmetric, self-renewing division mode at premalignant
stages, and exhibit aberrant proliferation and impaired differentiation
(Sugiarto S et al Cancer Cell 2011). OPC are the cell-of-origin of glioma
in genetically engineered mouse models (Persson A et al Cancer Cell 2010)
and OPC-like glioma cells have high tumor-initiating potential in some
glioma types. These data contribute to the emerging evidence that
asymmetric cell division (ACD) has tumor suppressive activity. Whether
the loss of ACD directly promotes tumor initiation is unclear, because
the detailed mechanisms of mammalian ACD have not been elucidated
(Gomez-Lopez S et al. Cell Mol Life Sci 2014). Lethal giant larvae 1
(Lgl1) was initially identified as a tumor suppressor in Drosophila and
has been implicated in the asymmetric localization of cell fate
determinants in mammalian neural progenitor cells (Klezovitch et al.,
Genes Dev, 2004). Others have shown also that human Lgl1 is inhibited by
PTEN loss, which is common in glioblastoma, and Lgl1 depletion in human
glioblastoma cells increases their invasive properties (Gont et al,
Oncotarget, 2013 and 2014). Whether Lgl1 restricts proliferation,
promotes differentiation and prevents neoplastic transformation of OPC,
by regulating their asymmetric division, is unknown. We developed a flow
cytometry method to isolate proliferative and differentiation-committed
OPC (COP) and showed that Lgl1 expression is elevated in differentiation.
Using a Cre-conditional knock-out allele (Klezovitch et al., Genes Dev,
2004), we show that Lgl1 knockout OPC proliferate more and differentiate
less when compared with Lgl1 wildtype OPC. Lgl1 depletion increases
symmetric, self-renewing divisions and reduces the frequency of ACD. Lgl1
appears to control the expression of several conserved ACD regulators, as
revealed by comparative Taqman expression analyses of Lgl1 knockout
versus control OPC. Ongoing studies are aimed to investigate the link of
Lgl1 depletion, altered ACD regulator expression and observed OPC
phenotypes. Data derived from this work are expected to provide further
insights into the extent to which defective ACD contributes to neoplastic
transformation in all cancers.


