Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD19 - a potential target for Amanitin-based ADCs.


Background

ATACs (antibody-targeted Amanitin conjugates) comprise a new class of
antibody-drug conjugates using amanitin as toxic payload. Amanitin binds
to the eukaryotic RNA pol II and thereby inhibits the cellular
transcription process at very low concentrations. In the current study,
in vitro and in vivo data of new ATACs targeting CD19 (also known as B4,
CVID3) are presented. CD19, a class I transmembrane glycoprotein with no
significant homology to any known protein, is expressed in B cells and
B-cell malignancies like in B-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia (B-ALL) and
B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL). Therefore it is an ideal
target for Amanitin based ADCs.

Material and methods

Cell lines: Raji (Burkitt Lymphoma), Nalm-6 (B-ALL) and HL-60
(CD19-negative cell line).

Antibody: anti-CD19 Thiomab (licensed from the German Cancer Research
Center; Heidelberg, Germany).

Synthesis of CD19-Thiomab-ATACs: Maleimide amanitin compounds were
conjugated site specifically to engineered cysteine residues of the
anti-CD19 Thiomab.

Cell proliferation assay: Quantitative determination of cytotoxicity was
performed by CellTiter Glo 2.0 assay (Promega) or WST-1 assay (Roche).

Animal models: Mouse xenograft tumor models were performed. Tolerability
was assessed in mice and non-human primates (NHP).

Results

CD19-Thiomab-ATACs showed in vitro cytotoxicity on CD19+ cell lines in
picomolar range, whereas no cytotoxic activity on CD19- cells was
observed.

In mouse xenograft models, CD19 showed dose-dependent tumor regression
and complete remission after single dose i.v. of 2mg/kg and 4mg/kg. In a
disseminating Raji xenograft model, median survival was increased from 6
days (vehicle control) to 105 days (CD19-Thiomab-30.2115 treated group at
6mg/kg, single dose). On day 154, 4 animals were still alive and in good
overall condition.

Safety profiling in Cynomolgus monkey revealed a good tolerability after
sequentially applied doses of 0.3, 1.0, 3.0 and 5.0 mg/kg. Hematology and
clinical chemistry data show minor alterations: transient increase in
liver enzymes (ALT and AST) in combination with a transient increase in
LDH. The half-life of the ADC in serum is 7-11 days; the free toxin is
detectable at serum levels close to the lower limit of quantification
only (LLOQ = 1.2 nM).

Conclusions

In the current study, in vitro and in vivo data of Amanitin-ADCs
targeting CD19 are presented. CD19 is expressed on cells of the B cell
lineage, ranging from the pre-B cells until the terminal differentiation
to plasma cells. It is expressed in most acute lymphoblastic leukemias
(ALL), chronic lymphocytic leukemias (CLL) and B cell lymphomas (Kemeng
et al. (2012); Exp Hematol Oncol 1: 36). The preclinical data show high
cytotoxicity in picomolar range, very good efficacy in tumor xenograft
models and tolerability in an exploratory tolerability study in NHP. The
positive findings of these initial experiments encourage Heidelberg
Pharma to further proceed with anti-CD19-Amanitin-based ADCs towards
clinics.


