Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of an in vitro 3D glioblastoma model system for
patient-specific drug response profiling.


Glioblastoma (GBM) has a median survival of less than 2 years due to
intra-tumoral and inter-patient heterogeneity, diffuse infiltration of
adjacent brain tissue, and absence of effective therapies. Development of
more efficacious therapies will require better GBM models for the testing
and identification of novel agents; traditional 2D cell culture lacks
biologic and clinical fidelity and orthotopic xenograft models are
costly, low throughput, and time consuming. We have developed a complex,
patient-specific 3D cultured GBM model to assay drug response that
combines high-throughput drug response determination with neurosphere
formation and next-generation sequencing (NGS). Neurosphere formation and
the presence/quality of glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs) has been validate
through limited dilution growth in vivo. Our 3D model system has been
validated against the primary patient GBM tissue and/or patient-derived
xenografts (PDX) and consists of histology, epigenetic and mRNA
expression analysis, and comparison of in vivo drug response. This
strategy enabled examination of MGMT methylation in relation to
temozolomide response, and possible actionable genetic mutations with
candidate targeted therapies. Using our 3D model, we have observed
EGFR-amplified GBM sensitivity to the EGFR inhibitor afatanib, and PTEN
mutant GBM sensitivity to dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor dactolisib. These data
suggest validation of clinical and molecular correlation with this new in
vitro, patient-derived 3D GBM model for drug response profiling. Our data
supports the further development and use of complex 3D models,
neurosphere formation, and NGS profiling for patient-specific GBM
analysis. This model system is currently being considered for preclinical
assessment of novel therapies and may be a useful adjunct in future
precision medicine applications to improve patient outcomes.


