Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fusobacterium nucleatum and tumor immunity status according to
microsatellite instability in colorectal cancer.


Objective: Fusobacterium nucleatum (F. nucleatum) is a microbial pathogen
that contributes to the initiation and progression of colorectal cancer.
Although evidence points to its immunosuppressive effects in colorectal
cancer, F. nucleatum has been associated with high-level microsatellite
instability (MSI) which is characterized by intense immune response. We
hypothesized that the association of F. nucleatum with local
immunosuppression might be stronger in tumors with high-level MSI or a
high neoantigen load, which is a direct consequence of MSI that
influences tumor-immune interactions.

Design: We utilized molecular pathological epidemiology database of 1,027
colon and rectal cancer cases in the Nurses’ Health Study and the
Health Professionals Follow-up Study. We assessed the association of F.
nucleatum (negative, low, or high) with tumor immunity status in strata
of MSl status. We measured F. nucleatum DNA in tumor tissue using
quantitative PCR. As immunity status, we evaluated hystopathological
lymphocytic reaction (tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes [TIL], intratumoral
periglandular reaction, peritumoral lymphocytic reaction, or Crohn's-like
lymphoid reaction) and measured T cell densities (CD3+, CD8+, CD45RO
[PTPRC]+ or FOXP3+ cells) using immunohistochemistry and
computer-assisted image analysis. Logistic regression model was used to
adjust for potential confounders, including CpG island methylator
phenotype, LINE-1 methylation level, and KRAS, BRAF, and PIK3CA
mutations. Using whole-exome sequencing data (N = 586), we conducted
secondary analyses to assess the interaction of F. nucleatum with a
neoantigen load.

Results: The association between F. nucleatum and TIL differed by MSI
status (P for interaction = 0.0017; with the adjusted α level of 0.006).
Compared with F. nucleaum-negative cases, F. nucleatum-positive cases
were associated with low-level TIL in MSI-high tumors (odds ratio, 0.40
[95% confidence interval, 0.14-1.08] and 0.40 [95% confidence interval,
0.17-0.97] for F. nucleaum low and high cases, respectively), but not in
microsatellite stable/MSI-low tumors. We did not find any interaction
between F. nucleatum and MSI status in T cell subsets. The association
between F. nucleatum and TIL did not differ significantly by levels of a
neoantigen load (P for interaction = 0.015).

Conclusions: The association of F. nucleatum with the immunosuppressive
microenvironment may be stronger in colorectal cancer with high-level
MSI. Our findings suggest the interplay between F. nucleatum and MSI
status in host immune response to the tumor.


