Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MET exon 14 skipping mutations in advanced non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) are not associated with MET amplification and
overexpression.


Background: Activating alterations of the mesenchymal epithelial
transition (MET) oncogene in NSCLC are potentially actionable with
targeted MET inhibitors. MET exon 14 skipping mutations have been
described in 3% of patients (p) in NSCLC,.Fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) are currently used
for detecting MET amplification and overexpression, respectively, but are
not useful to detect MET splicing variants. On the other hand, the
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) technique has
the potential to detect this actionable alteration.

Methods: We designed and validated a custom set of 5´and 3´ primers to
detect the MET exon 14 splicing variant by RT-PCR. RNA isolation from
FFPE samples was performed with Roche High Pure FFPET RNA isolation kit
and M-MLV Reverse Transcriptase enzyme was used in the RT-PCR. A panel of
cell lines was initially employed to assess the performance of the
technique. Subsequently, a total of 232 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) samples from advanced NSCLC patients were analyzed. Of them, 15
were positive by RT-PCR (n=209) for the MET exon 14 variant. The bands
corresponding to the splicing variant were submitted to Sanger sequencing.

Results were compared with FISH (ZytoVision Dual Color probe Z-2087-200)
and IHC (Ventana CONFIRM anti-Total c-MET (SP44)). Results: A total of
232 EGFR-wt advanced NSCLC p were analyzed by IHC and 42 (18.1%) were
considered as positive (cut-off 3+≥ 50%). Regarding FISH, MET
amplification was detected in 13 out of 58 p (22.4%) evaluable while the
MET exon 14 skipping variant was detected in 15 (7.2%) out of 209 p .
Unexpectedly, only three (21.4%) of the positive MET exon 14 skipping p
by RT-PCR were positive for IHC. Finally, of the 15 MET exon 14 positive
p, 5 were evaluable for FISH and none of them were positive for MET
amplification.

Conclusion: In our cohort of 232 EGFR-wt, advanced NSCLC p, the MET exon
14 skipping mutation had an incidence of 7.2% No correlation was found
between the presence of the MET exon 14 variant by RT-PCR and MET
overexpression or amplification. Detection of MET exon 14 alterations
poses a challenge for diagnostic testing.


