Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High fat diet increases development of hepatocellular carcinoma in
glycine N-methyltransferase deficient mice.


Introduction: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause
of cancer deaths worldwide. HCC typically arises in patients with chronic
liver disease or cirrhosis, yet it is increasingly associated with
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), specifically nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH) in the absence of cirrhosis. NAFLD is associated
with obesity, metabolic syndrome, and/or patients with type II diabetes.
Our previous studies have shown that high fat diet induced hepatic
steatosis increases proliferation of hepatocytes and the growth of
malignant tumors in a murine model. Glycine N-MethylTransferase (GNMT)
expression is lost in over 95% of HCC, and mice deficient in GNMT develop
spontaneous HCC by 6 months of age. We hypothesized that GNMT deficient
mice would have an increased susceptibility for the development and
growth of HCC when a fed high fat diet.

Methods: Wildtype and GNMT deficient mice were placed on lean diet (LD,
13% calories from fat) or high fat diet (HFD, 42% calories from fat) at
eight weeks of age. An initial cohort of mice were sacrificed after 3
months on diet (6 months of age) to assess for early tumor burden. A
second cohort of mice was analyzed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
after 6 months on diet (9 months of age) and then sacrificed to assess
for late stage disease. All mice were assessed for body weight, liver
weight, pancreatic weight, and proliferative index (Ki67).

Results: GNMT deficient mice failed to gain weight when placed on HFD,
which remained at levels equivalent to wildtype LD mice. At three months
of age, wildtype mice on HFD had significantly enlarged livers due to
hepatic steatosis. HFD fed GNMT deficient mouse livers were nearly 50%
the size of wildtype livers and contained only minimal fatty deposits.
Further, livers from HFD and LD fed GNMT mice were equivalent after 3
months, yet they were larger than wildtype mice fed LD. After six months
on diet, MRI analysis showed significantly larger livers in HFD fed GNMT
mice compared to LD fed GNMT mice due to extensive tumor burden. All
wildtype mice lacked any tumors after six months regardless of diet.
Histological analysis revealed a heightened cellular proliferation via
Ki67 staining in GNMT deficient livers compared to wildtype livers. In
comparison, GNMT silencing also occurs in pancreatic cancer, yet none of
the GNMT deficient mice developed pancreatic tumors. However, small focal
areas of pancreatitis were detected regardless of diet. Additionally,
pancreatic weight was significantly decreased in HFD fed GNMT deficient
mice compared the LD GNMT deficient mice.

Conclusions: While high fat diet did not induce obesity in GNMT deficient
mice, it significantly increased cellular proliferation and primary tumor
growth in the liver. Understanding dietary factors that impact the
microenvironment of the liver and contribute to HCC development and
progression is vital to finding new therapeutics for this malignancy.


