Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chimeric antigen receptor macrophages (CARMA) for adoptive
cellular immunotherapy of solid tumors.


Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell immunotherapy has demonstrated
profound results in hematologic malignancies but clinical efficacy in the
solid tumor setting has not been observed. Barriers to T cell entry and
function may partially explain this observation. As solid tumors actively
recruit myeloid cells, we hypothesized that macrophages have the
potential to be a powerful cellular immunotherapeutic agent in this
setting if properly activated and redirected. We here describe the
development of CAR macrophages (CARMA), demonstrating the feasibility,
mechanism, and efficacy of this platform. To examine the function of CARs
in macrophages, first generation anti-CD19, anti-mesothelin, or anti-HER2
CARs with a CD3ζ intracellular domain were introduced into the THP1
macrophage model. In vitro function was assessed via quantitative
phagocytosis and luciferase-based specific killing assays. CARMA
selectively phagocytosed and cleared cognate antigen-bearing tumor cells.
To demonstrate the requirement for CAR-mediated intracellular signaling
for activity, a CD3ζ-null CAR construct was tested in vitro. The
deletion of CD3ζ significantly reduced the phagocytic and killing
capacity (p70% CAR expression). Ad5f35 transduction polarized human
macrophages toward a durable immunostimulatory M1 phenotype and rendered
CARMA resistant to subversion toward the immunosuppressive M2 phenotype,
as defined by surface markers and metabolomics. CARMA enhanced the
proliferative capacity of CD8+ T cells in phytohemagglutinin activation
assays and secreted factors that activated by-stander macrophages.
Primary human anti-HER2 CARMA demonstrated targeted phagocytosis and
killing of HER2 expressing ovarian and breast cancer cell lines, and
exhibited a six-fold higher luciferase-based killing capacity of SKOV3
cells compared to trastuzumab in vitro (p=0.002). Anti-HER2 CARMA was
evaluated in vivo in an intraperitoneal (IP) SKOV3 ovarian cancer
xenograft model. Mice that received IP CARMA had a decrease in tumor
burden of approximately two orders of magnitude and had a 30-day survival
benefit relative to untreated or control macrophage treated mice
(p=0.018). In a systemically disseminated SKOV3 model, a single dose of
IV CARMA led to a durable anti-tumor response (38-fold reduction relative
to control on day 31 post-treatment; p=0.016) Lastly, we demonstrated
that the blockade of the anti-phagocytic CD47/SIRPα axis enhanced the
phagocytic capacity of CARMA. In summary, we here demonstrate that human
macrophages engineered with a CAR exhibit targeted anti-tumor function in
both in vitro and in vivo preclinical models. This novel cellular
immunotherapeutic approach has a clear translational potential for the
treatment of solid tumors.


