Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Miswired super enhancer logic driving childhood sarcoma.


Super enhancers (SEs) are regulatory regions with unusually large
deposits of active histone marks, chromatin regulators and
transcriptional coactivators. Chromosomal rearrangements allowing SEs to
drive oncogene expression is an emerging mechanism in tumor biology. An
aggressive myoblastic cancer of childhood, alveolar (fusion-positive)
rhabdomyosarcoma (FP-RMS), universally possesses a chromosomal
translocation, involving most commonly PAX3 and FOXO1, more rarely
PAX7-FOXO1, and in exceptional cases novel PAX3-INO80D and PAX3-NCOA1
fusions. Patients with a PAX3-fusion frequently relapse and have low
survival rates. PAX3 initiates specification of the muscle lineage, but
is shut off during myogenic differentiation, which is in turn dominated
by master regulators MYOD and finally MYOG. FP-RMS has the master
regulators needed to trigger muscle differentiation, but are halted in an
early myoblastic and thus more proliferative epigenetic state. We
hypothesized that the translocations miswires regulation of the fusion
oncoprotein in FP-RMS by hijacking SEs and creating new topologically
associated domains (TADs) which allow for continued expression of PAX
fusions, thus circumventing normal myogenic enhancer logic. Thus, we
recently completed the first epigenetic landscape of FP-RMS and uncovered
a strong dependence on SEs for tumor survival, with PAX3-FOXO1 being a
chief determinant of SE formation in collaboration with MYOD and MYOG,
and oncogene MYCN. Importantly, we discovered a key SE 300 kb distal of
FOXO1 which was occupied by all four of these master regulators. Further,
we found that PAX3-FOXO1 is driven by this novel translocated SE forming
a key TAD structure which was necessary to directly influence PAX3 upon
translocation, with CTCF analysis in FP-RMS cells confirming the
predicted boundaries. The CTCF motif orientation was found to be
antiparallel after the translocation event, permitting chromatin loop
extrusion. We demonstrate these elements to physically interact only in
the presence of the translocation by chromatin conformation followed by
sequencing (4C-seq). Exon-level expression via RNAseq in primary tumors
revealed that the final exon of PAX3, not involved in the translocation,
was unexpressed, indicating that only the allele influenced by the FOXO1
SE is activated in patients. Finally, CRISPR/Cas9 technologies were
employed to functionally interrogate the relative contributions of the
enhancer elements and CTCF looping sites at TAD boundaries. Together
these data suggest that these newly juxtaposed enhancer elements initiate
and continually drive PAX3-FOXO1 expression, implicating that enhancer
miswiring is at the heart of the oncogenic process in FP-RMS. Thus, late
myogenic factors (MYOG/MYOD) are contributing to drive an early factor
(PAX3), changing a “progressive” enhancer logic into an “infinite
loop” enhancer logic.


