Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PHLDA1/2 contribute to tumor suppression in breast and lung cancer
as downstream targets of oncogenic HER2 signaling


PHLDA1 (pleckstrin homology-like domain, family A, member 1) has been
reported to act as a tumor suppressor gene in multiple cancers such as
melanoma and breast cancer but appears to contribute to intestinal
tumorigenesis. PHLDA2 is located in a cluster of imprinted genes on
chromosome 11p15.5, an important tumor suppressor gene region.
Alterations in this region may be associated with multiple cancers. Loss
of imprinting of PHLDA2 was found to mediate placental growth
retardation. The pleckstrin homology-like domain (PH domain) mediates
protein recruitment to cellular membranes, which is of paramount
importance for signal transduction. AKT and ERK are important protein
kinases that play key roles in multiple cellular processes such as cell
proliferation, apoptosis, transcription and cell migration. Activation
and phosphorylation of AKT require binding to PIP through its PH domain.
Another family member, PHLDA3 recently has been reported to be a major
negative regulator of AKT signaling analogous to PTEN and it was shown
that it functions as a negative AKT regulator by the quenching of
membrane-bound phosphatidyl-inositol molecules. In our microarray studies
of oncogenic EGFR and ErbB2 signaling using erlotinib-treated HCC827,
CL-387,785-treated H1975 as well as lapatinib-treated Calu-3 and SKBR-3
cells, PHLDA1 and PHLDA2 were consistently identified as immediately
downregulated genes upon oncogenic HER signaling inhibition and this was
confirmed using quantitative RT-PCR as well as Western blotting studies.
The regulation of PHLDA1/2 by HER signaling inhibition has not been
investigated in detail previously. Our results show that the PI3K
inhibitor, LY294002 significantly induces PHLDA1 expression but inhibits
PHLDA2 expression in a time-dependent manner. Transient transfection
mediated PHLDA1 over-expression in SKBR3 inhibited AKT activation and
siRNA-mediated suppression of PHLDA2 in Calu3 cells dramatically induced
ERK activation. Stable transfection mediated PHLDA1 over-expression in
breast cancer cells inhibited both anchorage-dependent and independent
cell growth in vitro. MTS cell proliferation studies showed that siRNA
mediated suppression of PHLDA2 stimulated Calu3 cell growth. Studies are
ongoing to test the potential role of PHLDA1/2 on inhibiting the direct
activation of AKT by detailed PIP3 quantification studies. Our results
provide strong evidence that PHLDA1/2 are downstream targets of HER2
signaling and suggest complex regulation of PHLDA1 and 2 by ERK and PI3K
pathways. Our studies also suggest significant growth inhibitory effects
for PHLDA1/2 and suggest that they might potentially act competitively
with AKT and ERK to perform tumor suppression function. Our studies
identify PHLDA1/2 as novel targets for therapeutic modulation in EGFR and
ErbB2-driven cancers.

