Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of KLF5 on cell cycle progression depends upon p53
status


Background: p53 mutation is one of the most common genetic events in
esophageal squamous cell cancer (ESCC), and loss of Krppel-like factor 5
(KLF5) in the context of p53 mutation transforms primary esophageal
squamous epithelial cells. Interestingly, while KLF5 promotes
proliferation in non-transformed esophageal squamous epithelial cells,
KLF5 is growth inhibitory in ESCC. The mechanisms of this context
dependent effect of KLF5 on cell Hypothesis: We hypothesized that the
effect of KLF5 on cell cycle progression is dependent on p53 status.
Methods: Human primary esophageal keratinocytes with or without either
wild type or mutant p53R175H were transduced with lentivirus expressing
inducible KLF5 shRNA or control. We investigated cell proliferation by
MTT assay and cell cycle progression by flow cytometry. The expression of
the cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases were assessed by quantitave PCR.
p21waf/cip1 activity was determined using a luciferase reporter. Results:
In the context of wild-type p53, KLF5 suppression decreased cell
proliferation and produced growth arrest at G2/M, with decreases in
cyclin A2 and cyclin E1expression. In contrast, KLF5 loss in human
primary keratinocytes harboring the common human p53 mutation p53R175H
accelerated the cell cycle with more cells in G1/S and increased cyclin
D1 expression. Interestingly, KLF5 directly bound within the p53 response
elements in the regulatory region of p21waf/cip1 and activated its
promoter activity only in cell with mutant p53. In addition, KLF5
suppression diminished p21waf/cip1 responsiveness to UV irradiation and
growth factor depletion only in p53 mutant cells. Conclusions: Here, we
identify a novel mechanism for context dependent effects of KLF5 on cell
cycle via p53. These findings, in combination with the
previously-established effects of KLF5 and p53 loss on cellular
transformation, suggest that KLF5 is an important brake on the cell cycle
and may function as a tumor suppressor in esophageal squamous cell cancer.

