Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sarilumab (REGN88), a fully-human anti-IL6R antibody, inhibits
tumor growth in preclinical models, as a single agent and in combination
with the VEGF blocker aflibercept


IL6 is a pro-inflammatory cytokine that is expressed in multiple cancer
types. Clinical studies have shown that increased serum IL6 levels are
associated with worse patient outcomes. Elevated expression of IL6 can
result from the activation of oncogenic signaling pathways and/or as a
consequence of chronic inflammation, which has long been associated with
the development of cancer. IL6 signals through its heterodimeric receptor
IL6R/gp130 to activate the JAK/STAT and Ras signaling pathways. In
particular, IL6 strongly activates STAT3, which has been shown to promote
tumor cell proliferation, invasion and survival. Inhibition of IL6
signaling with monoclonal antibodies directed against IL6 or IL6R has
been shown to inhibit tumor growth in preclinical models of prostate
carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and myeloma, suggesting that the IL6
pathway is an attractive therapeutic target for cancer. Sarilumab
(REGN88) is a monoclonal antibody that binds human IL6R and prevents
binding of IL6, thereby inhibiting activation of downstream signaling
pathways. Positive results from a Phase 2 trial of sarilumab in
rheumatoid arthritis have recently been reported. Given the proposed role
of IL6 in cancer, we tested the effects of sarilumab in human tumor
xenograft models. Sarilumab provided partial growth inhibition of a
subset of the tumor cell lines tested, e.g., DU145 (prostate), Calu3
(lung) and A549 (lung). An inhibitory effect of sarilumab on tumor growth
was observed only in cell lines that exhibit autocrine IL6/STAT3
signaling in vitro, i.e., basal STAT3 phosphorylation that can be blocked
by sarilumab. Histological analysis of sarilumab-treated tumors revealed
an increase in tumor cell apoptosis, suggesting that IL6 provides a
survival signal to tumor cells. Since REGN88 does not block IL6R on mouse
stromal cells, these findings indicate that IL6 can promote tumor growth
via direct actions on human tumor cells. Combination treatment with
sarilumab plus the potent VEGF blocker aflibercept provided better
inhibition of tumor growth than either single agent in several tumor
models, including an aflibercept-resistant variant of A431 epidermoid
carcinoma that expresses higher levels of IL6 (6-fold) than the parental
A431 cells. Interestingly, sarilumab monotherapy did not inhibit the
growth of the A431 variant tumor line at all, yet sarilumab potentiated
the effect of aflibercept, suggesting that IL6 signaling may be
particularly important under conditions where tumor cells are stressed.
In summary, sarilumab inhibits the growth of tumors with active IL6/STAT3
signaling, both as a single agent and in combination with aflibercept,
suggesting that it is a potential candidate for the treatment of multiple
types of cancer.

