Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AC electrokinetic isolation of cell free high molecular weight DNA
(CF-HMW DNA) from serum


Recent reports of CF-HMW DNA in a variety of diseases has led to interest
in its use as a prognostic biomarker, a diagnostic or screening tool for
cancer. Apoptotic DNA (500bp) that is then trafficked into circulation.
Dielectrophoresis, or DEP (movement of particles in a non-uniform AC
electric field), based electrokinetic techniques have been used for
protein biomarker screening, cell separation, and DNA manipulation. Using
specific DEP frequencies, analytes are moved to known locations (high or
low field region) based on their inherent dielectric properties. The
process allows specific nano-sized particles to be highly concentrated
into high field regions, while micron-size cells are held weakly in low
field regions. With fluidic washing, cells can be removed while
nano-sized particles are held in high field regions. This method can
effectively act as a CF-HMW DNA enrichment process for biological fluids.
Unfortunately, DEP does not work well in (high conductance) physiological
buffers, requiring significant dilution of the sample and, as a result,
the target analyte concentration. Here, we describe a novel AC
electrokinetic (ACE) technique using a custom microelectrode array and AC
parameters to isolate and analyze CF-HMW DNA from high conductance serum.
DNA from normal serum samples and the A549 cell line were isolated using
Qiagen kits to determine initial DNA quantities. Normal sera were spiked
with A549 cell line DNA at concentrations from 0 to 500 ng/ml and
subjected to a 20 minute ACE protocol. DNA isolation was visualized in
situ using SYBR Green I fluorescence and then eluted for use in secondary
analyses. Results showed minimal fluorescence from samples without spike
whereas A549 DNA spiked samples showed concentration-dependent
fluorescence on the microelectrodes. After elution, levels of DNA were
quantitated using ALU-sequence based qPCR and K-ras mutational status was
confirmed by ABI CastPCR. Future experiments will compare CF-HMW DNA
levels from normal and cancer patients across a variety of solid tumors.
The ACE technique enables rapid isolation and detection of CF-HMW DNA
directly from biological fluids without prior sample prep and has broad
utility for diagnosis and monitoring of cancer and other diseases in
which CF-HMW DNA may be used as a marker.

