Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crosstalk between Notch and MAPK signaling regulates proliferation
in papillary thyroid cancer


Background: RET/PTC, RAS and BRAF are present in about two thirds of
papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC), activating constitutively the mitogen
activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway. There is practically
no overlap between RET/PTC, RAS and BRAF mutations in PTC, the lack of
concordance for these mutations provides compelling genetic evidence for
the requirement of this signaling system for transformation to PTC.
However, the effect of these genetic alterations in other signaling
pathways remains unclear, which could, at least in part, cooperates in
transformation. Recently, Notch signaling has been implicated in
tumorigenesis in other cancer types. In this study, we test the
hypothesis that RET/PTC and BRAFT1799A oncogenes crosstalks and regulates
Notch pathway. Methods: TPC-1 and BCPAP (human PTC cells harboring
RET/PTC1 rearrangement and BRAFT1799A mutation, respectively) were
treated with gamma secretase inhibitor (GSI) and proliferation was
analyzed by MTT assay and growth curve; cell cycle and apoptosis were
analyzed by flow cytometry. PCCL3 cells harboring Doxycycline-inducible
RET/PTC3 and BRAFT1799A (PC-BRAF) were used to analyze protein and gene
expression by Western blotting and real-time PCR, respectively. Notch1
protein expression was analyzed in transgenic mice (Tg-BRAF) which harbor
targeted expression of BRAFT1799A restricted to thyroid gland. Results:
PTC cells treated with GSI decreased the percentage of viable cell in a
dose-dependent manner and reduced the growth rate. Cell cycle analysis in
PTC cells showed enhancement of DNA fragmentation and increased apoptotic
cells. Furthermore, the GSI treatment in PTC cells modulates cell cycle
related genes, increasing CDKN1A and CDKN1B gene expression and reducing
CCND1, MCM6, CKS2, and MADL2 expression. Conditional activation of
RET/PTC3 and BRAFT1799A in PTC3-5 and PC-BRAF cells, respectively, showed
a sustained enhancement in pERK protein expression, increased Notch1
protein and gene expression and Hes1 gene expression, the target gene of
Notch signaling. Furthermore, transgenic mice Tg-BRAF showed a stronger
stain for Notch1 in follicular and stromal cells. Treating PTC cells with
MEK inhibitors, U0126 or PD96059, reduces NOTCH1 and HES1 gene
expression. The combination of GSI with MEK inhibitor enhances the growth
suppression promote by MAPK signaling inhibition in PTC cell
proliferation. CONCLUSION: Taken together, targeting Notch signaling
resulted in anti-proliferative effect, suggesting an important role of
Notch signaling in tumorigenesis of MAPK-induced PTC and our results
indentify Notch signaling as a potential therapeutic target in thyroid
cancer.

