Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mouse keratinocyte side-population plays an important role during
malignant progression to skin squamous cell carcinomas


A subset of cells, termed side-population (SP), with characteristics of
adult stem cells (SC) has been identified in several tissues, cell lines,
as well as human and experimental tumors. The main feature of these
putative stem cells is the high efflux capability for antimitotic drugs.
The role of this SP in tumorigenesis is controversial; though, a role as
cancer stem cells has been reported. Here, we have investigated whether a
functionally equivalent SP exists in cell lines derived from mouse
epidermis and skin tumors in order to define the extent of which the
presence of SP is associated with tumor progression. We observed
increased percentage of the SP in cell lines derived from skin squamous
cell carcinomas (SCCs; cell lines CH72 and JWF2) compared with those
arose from skin papillomas (308 and MT1/2) and mouse epidermis (C50).
Side populations were isolated by the high capability to efflux Hoechst
upon FACS analysis. Interestingly, qRT-PCR analysis of SP and non-SP
shows elevated expression of the ABCG2/BCRP1 transporter -which
participates in the dye efflux- in SP; while the expression of the hair
follicle stem cell markers keratin 15 (K15), CD34 and Lgr6 were similar
between SP and non-SP. These results suggest that the SP is not related
to the well characterized stem cells from the bulge region of the hair
follicle (BuSC). Importantly, the relevant correlation among the SP size
and tumor progression suggests that these cells are positively selected
during tumor progression. In order to localize the SP in mouse epidermis
and tumors, we performed immunofluorescence analysis of skin papillomas
and SCCs generated through the two-stage carcinogenesis protocol. We
identified the ABCG2 transporter in a region near and above the BuSC
area. Notably, this region was also positive for the thymic epithelial
progenitor marker MTS24 which defines a keratinocyte population with
characteristic of stem cells. Importantly, the ABCG2 transporter and
MTS24 were localized in patches of cells on the proliferative basal cell
layer of skin papillomas. Furthermore, we observed an elevated number of
putative stem cells expressing ABCG2 and MTS24 in tumors from our
previously published K5CDK4 mouse which showed increased malignant
progression to SCC. Collectivelly, our results suggest that a putative
stem cell population different from the BuSCs, play an important role
during the malignant progression SCC. Supported by NIH grant CA116328.

