Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intersectin 1 is required for neuroblastoma tumorigenesis


Neuroblastoma (NB) is a malignant tumor deriving from the neural crest
and is responsible for 13% of cancer-related deaths in children.
Phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) play a central role in NB
tumorigenesis. PI3Ks activate AKT, which regulates survival and
stabilizes the MYCN oncogene. Both MYCN and AKT are markers for poor
prognosis in NBs. Inhibiting PI3Ks with pan-inhibitors blocks malignant
progression in vivo; however, these inhibitors have high toxicity that
limits their use in NB treatment. Though there are three classes of
PI3Ks, only Class I isoforms have been implicated in NB tumorigenesis. We
have previously found that the scaffold protein intersectin 1 (ITSN1)
interacts with PI3KC2 and regulates its activation as well as AKT
activation in neuronal cell lines. In addition, ITSN1 overexpression is
transforming in rodent fibroblasts. Thus, we examined the role of the
ITSN1-PI3KC2 pathway in human NB tumorigenesis. ITSN1 and PI3KC2 are
highly expressed in primary human neuroblastoma tumors of varying stage
and MYCN amplification status. In addition, both ITSN1 and PI3KC2 are
expressed in NB tumor cell lines derived from high grade NB tumors.
Silencing ITSN1 dramatically inhibited the anchorage-independent growth
of NB tumor cells in vitro and tumor formation in xenograft assays in
vivo independent of MYCN status. Conversely, heterologous overexpression
of ITSN1 increased the formation of soft agar colonies. These results
suggest that ITSN1 functions as an oncogene in NB cells. Furthermore,
PI3KC2 overexpression restores anchorage-independent growth of
ITSN1-depleted NB cells demonstrating that PI3KC2 mediates ITSN1's
tumorigenic properties. This study reveals a new pathway, i.e.,
ITSN1-PI3KC2, involved in regulating the pathogenesis of NBs and suggests
that this pathway may represent a new target for therapeutic intervention
in the treatment of NB patients.

