Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-induced immunological changes in peripheral blood of
untreated stage IV non-squamous NSCLC patients


Background Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer mortality world
wide. The five-year survival rate of stage III and IV non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) is poor with 16%. There is growing evidence that the
immune system plays a paradoxical role in the development and progression
of lung cancer. It influences tumor incidence, tumor growth, response to
therapy, and the prognosis of the disease. Mouse models show that
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) play a role in these processes.
MDSCs are a heterogeneous population of immature myeloid cells and
myeloid progenitor cells, which are present in the tumor
micro-environment and the peripheral circulation of cancer patients.
These cells are able to suppress features of immune responses, like
T-cell proliferation and cytokine production. Aim In the present study we
want to determine the role of pivotal immunological populations such as
CD4+ T-cells, CD8+ T-cells, and MDSCs. Methods Fresh blood of 60 stage IV
non-squamous-NSCLC patients and 15 healthy controls (HC) was studied.
Mononuclear cells were purified from peripheral blood by density gradient
centrifugation and analysed by flowcytometry. MDSCs were characterized as
CD11b, CD15 CD33 positive and low expression of HLA-DR and CD16 cells.
Suppressive activity of MDSCs was measured by CD3-chain expression
assays, and reactive-oxygen species (ROS) production using flowcytometry.
Also T-cell proliferation assays were performed, in which sorted MDSCs
were co-cultured with activated CD8-T-cells to investigate whether the
MDSCs could inhibit the T-cell proliferation. Results All patients had a
significantly increased MDSC population compared to healthy controls (p =
0.0009). Peripheral blood fractions possessed strong immunosuppressive
functions, as shown by a high ROS production by MDSC, a decreased
CD3-chain expression in T cells compared to HC. In addition, the CD8+
T-cells showed no proliferation when co-cultured with MDSCs, indicating
that MDSCs could block CD8+ -T cell proliferation. The populations of
CD4+ T-cells and CD8+ T-cells were significantly decreased in lung cancer
patients compared to healthy controls (p = 0.01 and p = 0.0024,
respectively). Conclusion Circulating MDSCs are significantly increased,
while CD4+ T-cells and CD8+ T-cells are significantly decreased in stage
IV non-squamous-NSCLC patients compared to controls. MDSCs suppress the
immune system by ROS production, down regulating the CD3-chain expression
and thereby inhibiting T-cell proliferation. This suggests that MDSCs may
play an important role in disease progression and overall survival.
Therefore, further investigation is warranted.

