Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mTERT genetic vaccine chemotherapy combination augment
antigen-specific immune response and confer tumor protection in time
dependent fashion


Successful cancer chemotherapy relies on the comprehensive elimination of
tumor cells. However, at clinically tolerated doses, chemotherapeutic
drugs usually fail to kill all tumor cells in vivo. Theoretically, to
achieve complete eradication, partial tumor killing by chemotherapy
should be accompanied by a bystander effect in which the immune system
recognizes, attacks, and eradicates residual tumor cells. Doxorubicin) is
an anthracycline antibiotic that intercalates with DNA, inhibiting its
replication. It has been shown that treatment of dendritic cells with
Doxorubicin increases their ability to present antigen to Ag-specific T
cells in vitro and it is accompanied by upregulation of the Ag-processing
machinery (APM) proteins and costimulatory molecules. The telomerase
reverse transcriptase, TERT, is an attractive target antigen for cancer
vaccine because its expression is reactivated in a conspicuous fraction
of human tumors. Critical to the success of combination therapy using
TERT vaccine and chemotherapy drugs is a positive (synergistic)
interaction between chemotherapy drugs and immune effectors mechanisms.
Indeed, activation of antitumor immune responses by vaccine could be
antagonized by chemotherapy, if the selected drug exerts immune
antagonistic effects. Understanding the dose and the schedule of
administration of Doxil (pegylated Doxorubicin) is critical for the
design of rational combinations of vaccine and chemotherapy. To test the
interactions between TERT vaccine and Doxil we performed a series of
experiment using six different therapeutic schedules of Doxil/TERT
administration. Interestingly, only two of the Doxil/TERT vaccine
combinations resulted in a significant tumor growth inhibition delay
which was also accompanied by increase in anti-TERT T cell response. This
data unveil new facets of Chemo immune adjuvancy of Doxorubicin, and
demonstrate how the in vivo efficacy of this combination is impacted by
the dosing schedule

