Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of gene expression profiling of primary and
metastatic melanoma: Possible implications from BRAF mutant and wild-type
cell lines


Metastatic melanoma is largely refractory to existing therapies and has a
very poor prognosis. Despite the recent development of new therapies, the
median survival rate is only 6-9 months and 5-year survival is less than
5%. Better understanding of melanoma biology, specifically the gene
expression profile between primary and metastatic melanoma, may provide
useful information for developing new therapeutic approaches to this
disease. The gene expression profile from 89 primary and metastatic
melanoma tissues was investigated by cDNA microarray. 8261 differentially
expressed genes were identified between primary and metastatic melanoma
at a statistical level p Metastatic melanoma is largely refractory to
existing therapies and has a very poor prognosis. Despite the recent
development of new therapies, the median survival rate is only 6-9 months
and 5-year survival is less than 5%. Better understanding of melanoma
biology, specifically the gene expression profile between primary and
metastatic melanoma, may provide useful information for developing new
therapeutic approaches to this disease. The gene expression profile from
89 primary and metastatic melanoma tissues was investigated by cDNA
microarray. 8261 differentially expressed genes were identified between
primary and metastatic melanoma at a statistical level p <0.01 and false
discovery rate (FDR) of 5%. Panther Pathway Classification showed that
the 8261 differentially expressed genes were enriched with genes which
were involved in cytoskeletal regulation by Rho GTPase, inflammation
mediated by chemokine and cytokine signaling pathways, Notch signalling
pathways, p53 and angiogenesis pathways. The primary melanoma microarrays
were analyzed according to the thickness of tumour. Group A: the
thickness of a tumour less than 2.0 mm, 20 microarrays. Group B: the
thickness of a tumour was equal or more than 2.0 mm, 11 microarrays. 981
genes were identified as differentially expressed between Group A and
Group B at statistical level pMetastatic melanoma is largely refractory
to existing therapies and has a very poor prognosis. Despite the recent
development of new therapies, the median survival rate is only 6-9 months
and 5-year survival is less than 5%. Better understanding of melanoma
biology, specifically the gene expression profile between primary and
metastatic melanoma, may provide useful information for developing new
therapeutic approaches to this disease. The gene expression profile from
89 primary and metastatic melanoma tissues was investigated by cDNA
microarray. 8261 differentially expressed genes were identified between
primary and metastatic melanoma at a statistical level p <0.01 and false
discovery rate (FDR) of 5%. Panther Pathway Classification showed that
the 8261 differentially expressed genes were enriched with genes which
were involved in cytoskeletal regulation by Rho GTPase, inflammation
mediated by chemokine and cytokine signaling pathways, Notch signalling
pathways, p53 and angiogenesis pathways. The primary melanoma microarrays
were analyzed according to the thickness of tumour. Group A: the
thickness of a tumour less than 2.0 mm, 20 microarrays. Group B: the
thickness of a tumour was equal or more than 2.0 mm, 11 microarrays. 981
genes were identified as differentially expressed between Group A and
Group B at statistical level p<0.01 and FDR=5%. 657 out of 981
differentially expressed genes were shared with the 8261 differentially
expressed genes. We believed these 657 genes were related to malignant
potential of melanoma; they were enriched with genes which were involved
in apoptosis, cell adhesion, cell cycle regulation and immune system
processing. 218 out of the 657 genes overlapped with a published gene
list (308 genes) which have been implicated in melanoma metastases. We
further evaluated the expression of the transcription factor gene: ETV1.
Ets variant 1 (ETV1) gene expression was significantly increased in
metastatic melanoma and in primary melanoma with tumour thickness equal
or more than 2.0 mm. We investigated the ETV1 expression in human
melanoma cell lines. ETV1 mRNA level in 7 BRAF inhibitor sensitive cell
lines was significantly lower than that in 6 BRAF inhibitor resistant
cell lines (0.2300.057 vs 0.9270.6, pMetastatic melanoma is largely
refractory to existing therapies and has a very poor prognosis. Despite
the recent development of new therapies, the median survival rate is only
6-9 months and 5-year survival is less than 5%. Better understanding of
melanoma biology, specifically the gene expression profile between
primary and metastatic melanoma, may provide useful information for
developing new therapeutic approaches to this disease. The gene
expression profile from 89 primary and metastatic melanoma tissues was
investigated by cDNA microarray. 8261 differentially expressed genes were
identified between primary and metastatic melanoma at a statistical level
p <0.01 and false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%. Panther Pathway
Classification showed that the 8261 differentially expressed genes were
enriched with genes which were involved in cytoskeletal regulation by Rho
GTPase, inflammation mediated by chemokine and cytokine signaling
pathways, Notch signalling pathways, p53 and angiogenesis pathways. The
primary melanoma microarrays were analyzed according to the thickness of
tumour. Group A: the thickness of a tumour less than 2.0 mm, 20
microarrays. Group B: the thickness of a tumour was equal or more than
2.0 mm, 11 microarrays. 981 genes were identified as differentially
expressed between Group A and Group B at statistical level p<0.01 and
FDR=5%. 657 out of 981 differentially expressed genes were shared with
the 8261 differentially expressed genes. We believed these 657 genes were
related to malignant potential of melanoma; they were enriched with genes
which were involved in apoptosis, cell adhesion, cell cycle regulation
and immune system processing. 218 out of the 657 genes overlapped with a
published gene list (308 genes) which have been implicated in melanoma
metastases. We further evaluated the expression of the transcription
factor gene: ETV1. Ets variant 1 (ETV1) gene expression was significantly
increased in metastatic melanoma and in primary melanoma with tumour
thickness equal or more than 2.0 mm. We investigated the ETV1 expression
in human melanoma cell lines. ETV1 mRNA level in 7 BRAF inhibitor
sensitive cell lines was significantly lower than that in 6 BRAF
inhibitor resistant cell lines (0.2300.057 vs 0.9270.6, p<0.0001). The
ETV1 expression in BRAF-induced resistant melanoma cell lines was
significantly (pMetastatic melanoma is largely refractory to existing
therapies and has a very poor prognosis. Despite the recent development
of new therapies, the median survival rate is only 6-9 months and 5-year
survival is less than 5%. Better understanding of melanoma biology,
specifically the gene expression profile between primary and metastatic
melanoma, may provide useful information for developing new therapeutic
approaches to this disease. The gene expression profile from 89 primary
and metastatic melanoma tissues was investigated by cDNA microarray. 8261
differentially expressed genes were identified between primary and
metastatic melanoma at a statistical level p <0.01 and false discovery
rate (FDR) of 5%. Panther Pathway Classification showed that the 8261
differentially expressed genes were enriched with genes which were
involved in cytoskeletal regulation by Rho GTPase, inflammation mediated
by chemokine and cytokine signaling pathways, Notch signalling pathways,
p53 and angiogenesis pathways. The primary melanoma microarrays were
analyzed according to the thickness of tumour. Group A: the thickness of
a tumour less than 2.0 mm, 20 microarrays. Group B: the thickness of a
tumour was equal or more than 2.0 mm, 11 microarrays. 981 genes were
identified as differentially expressed between Group A and Group B at
statistical level p<0.01 and FDR=5%. 657 out of 981 differentially
expressed genes were shared with the 8261 differentially expressed genes.
We believed these 657 genes were related to malignant potential of
melanoma; they were enriched with genes which were involved in apoptosis,
cell adhesion, cell cycle regulation and immune system processing. 218
out of the 657 genes overlapped with a published gene list (308 genes)
which have been implicated in melanoma metastases. We further evaluated
the expression of the transcription factor gene: ETV1. Ets variant 1
(ETV1) gene expression was significantly increased in metastatic melanoma
and in primary melanoma with tumour thickness equal or more than 2.0 mm.
We investigated the ETV1 expression in human melanoma cell lines. ETV1
mRNA level in 7 BRAF inhibitor sensitive cell lines was significantly
lower than that in 6 BRAF inhibitor resistant cell lines (0.2300.057 vs
0.9270.6, p<0.0001). The ETV1 expression in BRAF-induced resistant
melanoma cell lines was significantly (p<0.05) higher than in their
parental cell lines. While a variety of genes are differentially
expressed in primary and metastatic melanoma, the transcription
factorETV1 gene may be an important target for study and as a therapeutic
target as its expression may be associated with BRAF inhibitor resistance
in melanoma cells.

