Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FBXO15 is an F-box protein in E3 ligase complex for P-glycoprotein


P-glycoprotein (P-gp), which is encoded by the multidrug resistance gene
1 (MDR1, also known as ABCB1), is one of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC)
transporter superfamily that consists of two symmetrical halves each
containing an ATP-binding domain and a transmembrane domain. P-gp pumps
out a variety of physiological substances and anticancer agents,
including anthracyclines, Vinca alkaloids and taxanes, from the cell.
P-gp is widely expressed in normal human tissues, including the adrenal
gland, colon, kidney, liver, angioendothelial cells and hematopoietic
precursor cells and protects such tissues and cells from toxicity and
biological effects of extraneous and physiological substances. In some
cancers, the expression of P-gp confers resistance to the substrate
anticancer agents. To reverse the resistance, control of the P-gp
activity is important for cancer chemotherapy in patients, and it is
therefore needed to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying P-gp
expression and function. P-gp is expressed on cell surface after several
modifications including glycosylation and phosphorylation. We have
previously reported that inhibition of the mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) pathway by specific inhibitors or siRNAs down-regulates
P-gp expression. Here, we aimed to clarify the molecular mechanism
underlying P-gp degradation. A MEK inhibitor U0126 decreased P-gp
expression as well as the previous report, but a proteasome inhibitor
MG132 restored the low P-gp expression in a dose-dependent manner. MG132
simultaneously recovered the MEK activity inhibited by U0126, and the
restoration of P-gp expression was well correlated with the recovery of
MEK activity. Treatment of cells with MG132 or lactacystin (another
proteasome inhibitor) alone increased intracellular P-gp expression
within 8 hours and cell surface P-gp at 24 hours compared with vehicle
control, but bafilomycin A1, a specific inhibitor of autolysosome, could
not until 12 hours. P-gp was co-immunoprecipitated with ubiquitin, and
MG132 enhanced the polyubiquitinated P-gp in immunoprecipitation-western
blot analyses. To identify the molecules regulating the ubiquitination of
P-gp, binding proteins to the C-terminal intracellular domain of P-gp
were searched by IP-MALDI-TOF/MS technique, and 22 candidates were found.
Among the candidates, we focused on FBXO15 because it had been reported
to be a subunit of E3 ligase complex with Skp1, Cul1 and Rbx1. FBXO15
knockdown by the siRNA enhanced cell surface P-gp expression in HCT-15,
HEK293 and A498 cells which express endogenous P-gp. The FBXO15 cDNA
transfection enhanced the ubiquitination of P-gp in HEK293 cells, and the
co-transfection with FBXO15 siRNA suppressed the ubiquitination. These
results suggest that P-gp expression is partly regulated by the ubiquitin
proteasome system mediated by FBXO15. Involvement of the MAPK pathway in
this system is to be explored.

