Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel cell models of ovarian cancer for target discovery and
validation obtained through stem cell culturing technology


Introduction: Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death from
gynecological malignancies with greater than 50% of patients succumbing
to the disease within 5 years of initial diagnosis. Contributors to the
overall poor survival rate include late diagnosis, development of drug
resistance and persistence of cancer stem cell (CSC) populations. With
increasing evidence that CSC drive tumor initiation and metastases,
development of model systems to better characterize such populations are
needed. We recently reported use of stem cell culturing conditions to
generate cancer stem like cells (CSLC) from colon and lung cancer that
exhibit CSC properties (1-2). Here we apply a similar approach to ovarian
cancer. Methodology: Freshly resected ovarian cancer tissue was obtained,
processed and cultured using serum-free defined culture media evolved
from conditions previously employed to culture tissue-specific progenitor
stem cells. Expanded cell lines were characterized for their tumor
initiating properties in NSG mice upon implantation under the sub-renal
capsule. Xenografts were analyzed by H&E and immunostaining with ovarian
cancer associated markers. Cell surface protein profile was examined by
flow cytometry using mAbs against putative CSC markers and with those
generated through de novo whole cell immunization of the putative ovarian
cancer stem cell lines. Results: Ovarian CSLC were successfully cultured
from independent serous ovarian tumor specimens. These lines can be
indefinitely passaged in vitro while retaining ability to form tumors
that faithfully recapitulate original patient tumor morphology and
metastasize. The CSLC express EpCAM consistent with their epithelial
origin and both CD44 and CD133. Analyses of mAbs generated from whole
cell immunization identified B7-H3 as an additional target expressed on
the ovarian CSLC. IHC analyses demonstrated B7-H3 expression also on
primary and metastatic ovarian CSLC xenografts consistent with expression
observed on patient derived specimens. Conclusion: Ovarian cancer cell
lines have been generated using conditions previously established for
tissue stem cells. These lines, which can be maintained indefinitely in
vitro while retaining cancer stem cell properties, provide opportunity to
identify and characterize novel ovarian cancer targeting strategies such
as those designed against B7-H3. References: 1: Roberts (2011) AACR
Abstract #5211; 2: Young (2011) AACR Abstract #502.

