Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyaluronan synthase 2 promotes breast cancer bone metastasis by
stimulating interaction of cancer stem-like cells with tumor-associated
macrophage


The molecular mechanism of metastatic progression, particularly the roles
of microenvironment of the metastasized organs, is as yet poorly
understood. In this study, we have isolated cancer stem cell-like cells
(CSC) from human breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB231, MDA231BoM and
MDA231BrM. CSC were isolated from each line using surface markers (CD24-,
CD44+, ESA+) and their tumor initiating abilities were tested in animal.
We then performed an analysis of global expression profile for these CSCs
using the Affymetrix expression array and found that among all
up-regulated genes, two genes (HAS2 and MMP1) were significantly
correlated with overall- and metastasis-free survival when they were
cross-examined in GEO database. To further examine the role of HAS2 in
tumor metastasis in vivo, we prepared CSC from MDA231BoM with or without
carrying a shRNA expression vector for HAS2. The CSC were then implanted
into nude mice by intra-cardiac injection followed by oral administration
of 4MU, a specific inhibitor of HAS genes. We found that the injection of
CSC of MDA231BoM which expresses shRNA to HAS2 significantly improved the
survival rate of animals. In addition, administration of 4MU
significantly suppressed tumor metastasis of CSC, suggesting that
inhibition of HAS2 can indeed reduce the incidence of metastasis in vivo.
We also examined the effect of tumor associated macrophage (TAM) on
growth of CSC in animals by injecting CSC of MDA231-BoM with or without
TAM into the tibial bone. We found that co-injection of TAM with CSC
significantly augmented the growth of tumor in their legs. Moreover, the
interaction between cancer cell and TAMs enhanced secretion of PDGF-BB
from TAMs which then activated stromal cells and in turn enhanced
self-renewal of CSCs by secretion of FGF9 and FGF7. We also found that
treatment of bone marrow stem cell (BMSC) with PDGF followed by
co-culture of CSC significantly promoted proliferation of CSC.
Collectively, our results suggest that TAM and BMSC promote self-renewal
of CSC in bone microenvironment via direct interaction between hyaluronan
and CD44. Our results also provide strong rationale to target HAS2 by
using 4MU in order to block the metastatic progression of CSC in breast
cancer.

