Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of CD22, a late B lymphoid antigen, does not
distinguish leukemia stem cells from the bulk population in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia cases


Introduction: Pediatric ALL is still fatal in 20% of cases, motivating
development and clinical trials of novel antineoplastic agents in
recurrent ALL such as CD22 monoclonal antibody and immunotoxins. CD22 is
expressed on most ALL cases, but not every cell in every ALL case is
detectably CD22+. In normal B lymphocyte development, CD22 is first
expressed on the cell membrane at the early B to proB cell stage, at the
time of D-J gene rearrangement. Taken together, these 2 facts beg the
question of whether most or all of the presumed earliest cells in ALL
cases, the leukemia stem cells, might be CD22-; if so, CD22 monoclonal
antibody treatment might miss ALL stem cells. We therefore investigated
CD22 expression on pediatric ALL stem cells. Methods: Studies were
performed using secondary xenotransplants of five cases of pediatric
precursor-B ALL. Cells (>90% human leukemia cells from spleens of
immunodeficient mice) were stained with monoclonal antibodies and
fluorescence-activated cell sorted (FACS). Titered doses of human ALL
cells (100 -100000 cells/mouse; n=5 mice/group) from (1) unsorted, (2)
mock sorted, (3) CD22high, and (4) CD22low populations, excluding
non-viable and mouse cells, were separately transplanted by intravenous
injection into NSG (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ) mice. NSG mice lack
functional T, B cells, and NK cells, and are also deficient in innate
immunity. Time to leukemia was determined from injection to onset of
clinical signs of leukemia. Leukemia was confirmed by autopsy
(splenomegaly) and FACS-analysis for human ALL. Pre- and post-sorted and
pre- and post-transplanted cells were evaluated via multicolor
FACS-analysis, using CD22, a viability dye, lymphoid (CD10, CD19),
myeloid (CD13, CD33), stem-progenitor (CD34), and mouse cell (mouse CD45)
markers. Results: Time to leukemia decreased in an inverse transplanted
cell dose dependent manner in all 4 experimental groups (CD22high,
CD22low, unsorted and mock sorted populations of each case), but was not
statistically different among the four groups in any of the tested ALL
cases. LSC quantitation is ongoing, based on frequency of mice with
leukemias at the lowest transplanted cell doses. The heterogeneity of
antigen expression in the leukemia cell populations was not different in
cells analyzed before versus after NSG transplantation. Discussion: In
these five cases of pediatric precursor-B ALL, the level of expression of
CD22 did not, in evidence obtained to date, distinguish leukemia stem
cells (as defined by NSG mouse-engrafting capacity) from the bulk
population of ALL cells. Specifically, there is no suggestion from our
data that leukemia stem cells were enriched in the CD22low populations,
which provides further evidence against a hierarchical model of ALL
stemness. Furthermore, targeting CD22 would not be predicted to
differentially spare leukemia stem cells.

