Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SENP1 regulates OCT4 under hypoxia: effect of its sumoylation on
protein stability and drug susceptibility of human pluripotent germ cell
tumors


Well-differentiated testicular germ cell tumors (TGCTs) are more drug
insensitive and have a poorer prognosis than pluripotent germ cell
tumors. However, the mechanism underlying the differentiation regulation
of pluripotent seminomas/embryonal carcinomas (ECs) still remains largely
unknown. Herein, we demonstrated an important role of SUMO1/sentrin
specific peptidase 1 (SENP1) in the sumoylation and stability of the OCT4
protein in the drug sensitivity of hypoxic ECs. Hypoxia decreased the
OCT4 protein level, but not the messenger RNA level, in pluripotent ECs.
Hypoxic challenge and SUMO1 overexpression increased OCT4 sumoylation and
protein instability. A further mutation at the specific OCT4 lysine 123
(HA-OCT4-K123R) effectively suppressed OCT4 sumoylation and protein
instability, demonstrating the important role of the specific sumoylation
of lysine 123 in OCT4 protein stability under hypoxia. Consistently,
overexpression of SUMO1 decreased the endogenous OCT4 half-life in
hypoxic NCCIT cells. The band-shift of endogenous sumoylated OCT4 in
hypoxic NCCIT cells was demonstrated using Western blot analysis. SENP1
effectively suppressed OCT4 sumoylation and increased OCT4 stability and
drug sensitivity in hypoxic NCCIT cells in vitro. Furthermore,
overexpression of SENP1 in hypoxic NCCIT cells increased the drug
sensitivity in a nude mice model, demonstrating the upstream regulation
of SENP1 in OCT4 sumoylation, protein stability, and the drug
susceptibility of NCCIT cells. In summary, we demonstrated that the
sumoylation regulator, SENP1, positively regulates OCT4 stability and
drug sensitivity of pluripotent EC cells through sumoylation. Findings of
this study provide insights into the regulation by sumoylation of
pluripotent TGCTs differentiation, which has the potential for
pharmacological development of effective therapeutic targeting.

