Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired resistance of pancreatic cancers to combination therapy
with lapatinib plus the MEK 1/2 inhibitor GSK1120212: Using a murine
orthotopic xenograft model to identify resistance pathways


Background: The high incidence of KRAS mutations in human pancreatic
cancers has driven the testing of MEK1/2 inhibitors (e.g. GSK1120212) in
clinical trials for pancreatic cancer. We have recently shown that human
patient-derived tumors expressing activated epidermal growth factor
(EGF)/HER2 receptors exhibit enhanced response to combination therapy
with GSK1120212 and lapatinib, using a mouse xenograft model. A phase I
clinical trial of GSK1120212 plus lapatinib is now underway. We report
here the analysis of tumors that have acquired resistance to this therapy
in the setting of the mouse xenograft model with the goal of identifying
additional effective combination therapies and improved strategies for
treatment of patients with resistant disease. Methods: Three
patient-derived pancreatic cancer xenografts expressing either mutant or
wild type KRAS and activated EGF/HER2 receptors were implanted
orthotopically in nude mice and treated with combination lapatinib
(EGFR/HER2 inhibitor) and GSK1120212 (MEK1/2 inhibitor). Tumor volume was
assessed by sequential MRI. Following treatment, tumors were reimplanted
in second and third generation mice and retreated to generate
therapy-resistant tumors. Drug-resistant and drug-nave tumors were
compared using gene expression profiling, protein kinase arrays and
Western blotting analysis. Results: Acquired resistance developed in all
three tumor xenografts. Gene expression profiling identified multiple
genes whose expression changed in response to drug treatment. Western
blot analysis of tumor lysates from resistant and naive tumors revealed
examples of select resistant tumors with either sustained activation of
ERK1/2 or inactivation of ERK1/2 in the presence of inhibitor. Individual
resistant tumors exhibiting inactivation of ERK1/2 exhibited increased
activity of alternate survival signaling pathways including increased
pAkt, pp38, pJNK, and pGSK3 levels relative to drug nave control tumors.
Phospho-RTK array analysis revealed increased pFGFR1 and pVEGFR1 levels
in select resistant tumors suggesting a possible role for up-regulated
RTK signaling in acquired resistance. Conclusions: Using an orthotopic
murine model bearing patient-derived pancreatic cancer xenografts, we
have developed a model of acquired resistance to lapatinib plus
GSK1120212. Interrogation of comparative gene expression and
phospho-protein studies revealed alterations in signaling pathways that
may contribute to drug resistance. Current studies aim to exploit these
pathways to 1) derive strategies for treatment of drug-resistant tumors,
and 2) develop additional rational combinatorial therapies.

