Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional genetic screens to find modulators of sensitivity to
inhibitors of the PI3K/mTOR pathway


The PI3K/mTOR pathway is an important signaling pathway which is often
hyperactivated in breast cancer by genetic events. Inhibitors of several
PI3K pathway members have been developed in recent years. Clear
improvements in survival have not been demonstrated in most cancer
patients, including breast cancer patients. Clearly, additional targets
for combination therapies and biomarkers of resistance are needed. We
performed siRNA based screens, to find genes that can modulate the
sensitivity of breast cancer cells to PI3K and mTOR inhibitors.
Resistance screens: We screened the retroviral NKI hairpin library,
consisting of 21,000 hairpins against 8,000 genes, in four breast cancer
cell lines, using rapamycin (an inhibitor of mTORC1), AZ4 (a small
molecule inhibitor of mTORC1 and 2) and the dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitors
PI103 and NVP-BEZ235. Common hits identified in these resistance screens
and validated in multiple cell lines were PTEN, GSK3A/B and ARID1A. PTEN
and GSK3A/B are known members of the PI3K pathway; resistance by PTEN
loss is most likely caused by hyperactivation of PI3K signaling, whereas
GSK3A/B knockdown probably leads to decreased degradation of Cyclin D
(published previously). Knockdown of the SWI/SNF complex component ARID1A
could also induce resistance against PI3K and mTOR inhibition in various
cell lines. Similar to PTEN knockdown, ARID1A downregulation caused
hyperactivation of PI3K signaling. Further studies should elucidate which
SWI/SNF transcriptional targets are responsible for this induction of
PI3K signaling. Synthetic lethal screens: We screened the Dharmacon
kinome and druggable genome siRNA libraries (over 8,000 genes) in HCC1954
breast cancer cells, to find genes whose knockdown enhances the toxicity
of mTOR inhibitors. Few genes could reproducibly enhance the sensitivity
of breast cancer cells to mTOR inhibition; most of these genes, such as
RHEB and PIK3CA, are important members of the PI3K/mTOR pathway. We found
knockdown of the anti-apoptotic MCL1 gene to increase sensitivity to PI3K
and mTOR inhibition by causing an increase in apoptosis. Although not
clearly established as a specific PI3K pathway member, MCL1 expression
may be regulated by downstream proteins in the PI3K/mTOR pathway.
Knockdown of the integrin /vitronectin receptor ITGAV had a sensitizing
effect on PI3K/mTOR inhibition in HCC1954 and SKBR3 breast cancer cells.
The mechanism of this interaction is still under investigation but may
involve upregulation of integrin function in response to PI3K/mTOR
inhibition. In conclusion, most of the genes that can modulate the
sensitivity of breast cancer cells to PI3K/mTOR inhibition are known
members of the PI3K pathway, however ARID1A and ITGAV are new modulators
of sensitivity to PI3K pathway inhibition.

