Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing a molecular understanding of non small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) resistance to platin-taxane chemotherapy


Purpose: While chemotherapy has improved lung cancer patient survival,
relapse rates after neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy (minimal
residual disease settings) are high. This could be due to cancer cells
acquiring resistance to therapy or selective survival of pre-existing
resistant cells. The molecular basis for primary or acquired resistance
to standard platinum doublet chemotherapies are unknown and their
elucidation is necessary for developing curative therapy that can be
personalized for each patient. Methods: 3 complementary approaches were
used to explore mechanisms underlying NSCLC resistance to platin-taxane
chemotherapy: A) NSCLC lines were exposed in vitro to cycles of
paclitaxel + carboplatin to mimic clinical treatment and resistance
validated with cell viability and colony formation assays. Genome wide
mRNA expression profiles of resistant and parental lines were compared
using Illumina arrays and qRT-PCR. B) A large dataset of clinically and
molecularly annotated NSCLC tumor specimens obtained after no
chemotherapy or neoadjuvant platin-taxane chemotherapy were subjected to
mRNA microarray analysis. C) Lung cancer xenografts were treated with
chemotherapy in vivo in mice and profiled for mRNA expression.
Biostatistical and bioinformatics approaches were used to identify genes
that are differentially expressed in resistant cells in these three
settings, and their function studied using over-expression or shRNA
mediated knockdown. Results: NSCLC lines H1299 and H1355 were treated in
vitro with paclitaxel + carboplatin and showed progressive increases in
resistance to chemotherapy (after 5 to 15 cycles) ultimately achieving 30
(H1299) or 60 fold (H1355) differences compared to parental cells. In
addition, multiple single cell clones also demonstrated chemotherapy
resistance. Resistant NSCLC strains were also resistant to
platin+docetaxel and platin+pemetrexed combinations. Expression profiles
revealed upregulation of ABCB1/MDR1, down regulation of
epithelial-specific genes suggesting EMT, differences in expression of
epigenetic modulators as well as cancer testis family of GAGE genes and
many of these genes had expression correlated with recurrence after
neoadjuvant chemotherapy and with poor survival. Resistance was only
partially reversed by verapamil indicating that it can be only partly
explained by MDR mechanisms. Mechanistic studies of genes identified by
these three approaches provide opportunities for overcoming chemotherapy
resistance and developing novel therapies for NSCLC. Grant support:
UT-Lung SPORE (5 P50 CA70907-11) and DoD PROSPECT (W81XWH-07-1-0306)

