Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tid1, a tumor suppressor, regulating the cancer initiation
properties of HNSCC


Background: Tid1, a DNAJ/Hsp40 family protein, functions as a tumor
suppressor in different types of cancer including HNSCC and influences
many signaling pathway in cancer cells. Expression of Tid1 protein is
negatively associated with the malignancy of HNSCC cells and tumor
tissues. In addition, it has been shown that Tid1 interacts with P53,
which exerts negative regulation of Nanog, one of the transcriptional
factors to maintain the cellular stemness properties.
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process by which epithelial
cells lose their polarity and later acquire a migratory mesenchymal
phenotype, is one of the crucial processes that induce tumor invasion and
metastasis. Further, gain of EMT could promote stem cells (SCs)
properties. Accumulating data support the hierarchical model of cancer
initiating cells (CICs) or cancer stem cells (CSCs) in that each tumor
formation is governed by a rare subpopulation of cells with self-renewal
capacity. CICs have been demonstrated to have capacities of promoting
tumor growth, tumor regeneration and metastatic progression. Methods:
Cancer cells with Tid1 knockdown or overexpression were generated to
evaluate the different properties of stemness and tumorigenicity in vitro
and in vivo. Further, the differential gene expression profile of EMT
signature and stemness of cancer cell with Tid1 upregulation or
downregulation were examined. Results: We observed that Tid1 knockdown
enhanced expression of EMT-activator, Snail, and stemness marker Grp78,
Nanog, and also exhibited higher ability of migration, invasion,
anchorage-independent and sphere formation. In addition, Tid1
overexpression cells decreased cell mobility, sphere formation ability
and displayed loss of EMT-activator and stemness marker. Conclusion:
Overall, we proved that expression of Tid1 is negatively correlated with
EMT and cancer initiation properties in HNSCC. Tid1 potentially could be
a key regulator involved in differentiation of cancer cell. Further,
therapeutic strategies on target Tid1 mediated malignant properties will
be an alternative treatment on for HNSCC.

