Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and molecular cloning of novel splicing variants of
BCL2L12, a new member of the BCL2 family, and their expression analysis
in breast, prostate, and colon cancer cells


BCL2L12 is a recently discovered member of the apoptosis-related BCL2
family, most members of which are subjected to alternative splicing.
Currently, three distinct BCL2L12 variants are known. Alternative
splicing may contribute to the etiology of many diseases including
cancer, since novel protein isoforms that arise often contain additional
functional domains or lack some of the structural motifs of the classical
isoform. Hence they acquire new properties or lose some of them,
respectively. From a clinical point of view, splicing variants are
particularly important in oncology, since they provide selective drug
targets or may even serve as a multifactorial marker set for cancer
diagnosis and/or prognosis. The aim of the present study was to identify
novel spliced variants of the BCL2L12 gene and to study their expression
profile in breast, prostate, and colon cancer cell lines. We firstly
identified in silico all EST clones displaying homology with the
classical BCL2L12 variant. Next, total RNA was extracted from breast,
prostate, and colon cancer cells, and first-strand cDNA was synthesized.
PCR was carried out using a pair of gene-specific primers for the
amplification of the complete coding region plus a small part of the
5-UTR of the BCL2L12 mRNA transcripts. All PCR products were
electrophorized, bands were excised and purified, and PCR amplicons were
sequenced directly or after being subcloned. We also performed nested PCR
with newly designed variant-specific anti-sense primers, in order to
analyze their expression in human cancer cell lines. We identified and
cloned ten novel BCL2L12 splicing variants, seven out of which are
predicted to encode new protein isoforms, including BH3-only proteins.
The remaining three novel splicing variants of BCL2L12 are
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) candidates. More importantly, notable
variations in expression of each BCL2L12 transcript were observed between
cancer cell lines, even those originating from the same tissue or organ.
For instance, breast cancer BT-20 and BT-474 cell lines present a very
similar expression profile of BCL2L12 splicing variants; still, this is
very different from the one of the MCF7 cells. Furthermore, great
similarities were observed in BCL2L12 expression profiles of colon cancer
cells (DLD-1, HT-29 and HCT 116), with the exception of Caco-2 cells,
which show a moderate expression of BCL2L12 transcript variant 13. In
conclusion, ten novel splicing variants of BCL2L12 were cloned.
Subsequent expression analysis in cancer cell lines revealed remarkable
differences between their expression profiles.Acknowledgements: This work
was supported by a THALIS grant (#224), co-funded by the European Union
(European Social Fund) and National Resources (NSRF 2007-2013,
Operational Programme Education and Lifelong Learning).

