Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endocytosis of EGFR and resistance to gefitinib in NSCLC cells
with wild-type EGFR


Gefitinib is an oral active, selective epidermal growth factor
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) and results in clinical
benefit in NSCLC patients with EGFR mutations, but objective clinical
responses were hardly seen in the majority of NSCLC patients with
wild-type EGFR (wtEGFR). However, approximately 10-20% patients with
wtEGFR remain responsive to EGFR TKIs, implying that the existence of
unexplored mechanisms contribute to susceptibility to gefitinib.
Therefore, in this study, we aimed to identify potential mechanism which
can predict the response of gefitinib in NSCLC with wtEGFR. Six NSCLC
cells (H358, Calu-3, H1703, Calu-1, H441 and H522) with wtEGFR were
selected and tested for sensitivity to gefitinib. MTT and cell counting
assay revealed that H358 and Calu-3 cells were more sensitive to
gefitinib than H1703, Calu-1, H441 and H522 cells. In addition, light
microscopy and wound healing assay showed cell morphology change and
suppression of motility by gefitinib treatment in the gefitinib-sensitive
cells, but not in the gefitinib-resistant cells. Next, changes in
phsosphorylation of EGFR and downstream pathway after gefitinib treatment
were examined by Western blot assay in the cells with different gefitinib
sensitivity. Interestingly, gefitinib inhibited EGF-induced
phosphorylation of EGFR and downstream mediators (AKT and ERK) in both
gefitinib-sensitive and -resistant cells. EGFR phosphorylation array
confirmed decreased activation of multiple phophorylation sites of EGFR
in gefitinib-resistant cells, implying that inhibition of tyrosine kinase
activity might not a determinant of gefitinib sensitivity in NSCLC with
wtEGFR. Since intracellular activity of EGFR has been reported to be
important in cell proliferation, we examined whether intracellular
distribution of EGFR after gefitinib treatment had different patterns in
between gefitinib-sensitive and -resistant cells. Immunofluorescence
microscopy assay revealed that EGFR was internalized from cell surface to
intracellular region and then formed dot complex after EGF stimulation in
both gefitinib-senstive and -resistant cells. Gefitinib treatment
inhibited the EGF-induced internalization of EGFR in gefitinib-sensitive
cells, but not in gefitinib-resistant cells. Further flowcytometric
analysis using fluorescence labeled EGF and EGFR confirmed
internalization of EGFR after genfitinib treatment in gefitinib-sensitive
cells. Moreover, internalization inhibitors (dynasore and dynole 34.2)
significantly decreased cell viability of gefitinib-resistant cells when
combined with gefitinib. In conclusion, our results suggest that
endocytosis of EGFR might be one of the contributing factors of gefitinib
sensitivity in NSCLC with wtEGFR. (This study was supported by a grant of
the Korea Healthcare Technology R&D Project, Ministry of Health & Welfare
and family Affairs, Republic of Korea (A111218-11-GM04)).

