Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic radiation induces an epigenetic DNA methylation
response


Therapeutic radiation results in a cascade of cellular events culminating
either in repair of DNA damage and cell survival, or failure to repair
damage and cell death. Gene expression is partially under epigenetic
control in the form of DNA methylation. We investigated whole genome DNA
methylation profiles of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells following
therapeutic radiation to determine genes and pathways that are
differentially methylated. MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with a single
dose of 0, 2, or 6 Gy and incubated at 1, 2 4, 8, 24, 48, and 72 hrs
before obtaining DNA extracts. DNA was subjected to whole genome DNA
methylation profile analysis using an Infinium BeadArray which has the
ability to determine CpG methylation at 450,000 genomic sites and
covering all genes. Compared to unirradiated cells, 2 and 6 Gy irradiated
cells showed 419-1661 CpG sites with decreased methylation and 514-2657
CpG sites with increased methylation, depending on time and dose. The
number of hypomethylated genes in 2 Gy irradiated cells increased over
time while the number of hypermethylated genes decreased in the first 8
hrs and then increased to a maximum at 72 hrs. In 6 Gy irradiated cells,
no pattern was detected, although there was overall more DNA methylation
changes than in 2 Gy irradiated cells, indicated a dose effect. Gene
ontology analysis using Genomatix Genome Analyzer showed significant
changes in DNA repair, cell cycle, apoptosis, and cell survival pathway
gene methylation. DNA repair genes were differentially methylated as
early as 1 hr after irradiation and sustained through 72 hrs. Epigenetic
changes persisted after DNA repair, as shown by gamma-H2AX
immunofluorescence, had taken place. Cell cycle, cyclin-dependent kinase,
and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor genes were differentially
methylated 4-24 hrs post-irradiation, correlating with a G2 cell cycle
arrest as determined by flow cytometry. These data suggest that
epigenetic regulation in the form of DNA methylation is integrated with
the cellular response to radiation.

