Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interrogating cell heterogeneity and dormancy in prostate cancer
disseminated tumor cells


Dissemination of tumor cells to the bone is an early event in prostate
cancer (PCa) and is often insufficient by itself for the development of
metastases; while PCa cells may be present in bone marrow, not all
patients develop tumors in the bone. Therefore, the characterization of
disseminated tumor cells (DTC) in bone marrow is important. We
hypothesize that profiling gene expression in DTC could identify
molecular cues that determine why some DTC are dormant, which dormant
cells have the potential to reactivate, and which DTC will remain
dormant. Our objectives were: (1) to develop a method to profile the
transcriptome of individual PCa cells, (2) use the method to profile
tumor cell heterogeneity and markers of dormancy in individual DTC from
patients, and (3) use LuCaP xenograft lines to examine tumor cell
heterogeneity and dormancy in vitro. We have demonstrated previously that
we can obtain 15,441 positive probes from one PCa cell using a high
stringency cut off on Agilent 44K oligonucleotide arrays. Furthermore,
using the same high stringency cut off, the sensitivity and specificity
between 1 and 10 cells was 0.640 and 0.946 respectively, demonstrating a
very low false positive rate. Using this methodology, we are comparing
the gene expression profile of 10 individual DTC from each of 5 patients
with no evidence of disease four years after radical prostatectomy and 10
individual DTC from each of 5 patients with advanced metastatic disease.
Additionally, our laboratory has developed 24 LuCaP PCa xenografts that
do not proliferate in typical in vitro cell culture conditions. However,
we have developed a technique using reactive bone marrow stroma that
allows for in vitro culture and proliferation of these xenografts. Thus,
we are comparing individual LuCaP cells in three cellular states in vitro
(1) dormant, (2) activated, and (3) inactivated to interrogate tumor cell
heterogeneity and identify markers of tumor cell dormancy. Using this new
technique for in vitro culture of xenografts, we show that cell contact,
not only to the underlying stroma but also to other tumor cells, is
required for proliferation of LuCaP cells in vitro. Furthermore, we show
that proliferating, active LuCaP cells can be induced to enter a dormant,
inactive state through lack of cell-cell contact. In conclusion, our
studies will address the heterogeneity of single DTC isolated from the
bone marrow of patients with PCa, and using both clinical and
experimental specimens, identify potential genes associated with dormancy
in PCa.

