Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Chicago Colorectal Cancer Consortium (CCCC) experience:
Understanding colorectal cancer disparities


Colorectal cancer (CRC) affects disproportionally African Americans (AAs)
who have a 20% higher incidence and a 40% higher mortality than
Caucasians. Very few studies have specifically addressed CRC in AAs. In
order to uncover the factors that underlie this disparity we set up the
CCCC, a large, robust and well-characterized database and biorepository
of CRC patients from the Chicago metropolitan area that is highly
enriched with AAs. The project enrolls newly diagnosed CRCs, polyps at
different stages, and cancer/polyp-free controls in 5 large hospitals.
Extensive clinical, family history, demographic, dietary, toxic exposure
data is collected along with tumor and uninvolved mucosa as well as
plasma, serum, and paraffin-embedded samples. Tumors are molecularly
characterized and germline DNA is used to assess genetic factors
implicated in CRC development. The primary goal of the project is to
study how genetic and environmental factors as well as their interaction
contribute to CRC development and which factors make AAs more prone to
develop this cancer. We will also assess specific factors that may
contribute to the worse prognosis in AAs. Results: A total of 205 CRCs,
(58% AAs), 86 patients with high-risk adenomas, 75 mild-risk adenomas,
and 173 controls have been recruited so far. The mean age at diagnosis
was 60.2 for AAs and 61.8 for whites (P=0.08), in both cases
significantly lower than the mean age reported for the US CRCs in general
(68-70). There was a significantly higher number of AA patients younger
than age 50 at diagnosis (19.5% vs. 7.1% whites; P=0.043). In AA patients
tumors were more often on the right side of the colon (43.3% vs. 22.7%;
P=0.02) and more were undifferentiated (19.1% vs. 3.5%; P=0.03). Both
groups had a similar number of colonoscopies before cancer diagnosis
(60.2% for AAs vs. 68.3% for whites; P=0.11). While there was no
significant difference among AA cases and controls regarding high tobacco
use (>20 pack/years)(16.9% cases vs. 17.1% controls), more whites with
CRC were heavy smokers (45.7% cases vs. 29.7 controls). Less AA patients
reported family history of CRC than whites (16.4% vs. 35.2%; P0.02) or
family history of polyps (21.7% vs. 44%). Conclusions: In our urban
cohort both AA and white patients present CRC significantly earlier than
expected. Very important differences are seen between AAs and whites that
may have significant implications when considering CRC screening
approaches, such as the high percentage of AA patients diagnosed before
age 50 or the much higher number of right-sided tumors. Heavy tobacco use
seems to associate with CRC in whites but not in AAs. Altogether points
towards important biological differences that need to be further
assessed. As we are ascertaining toxic and dietary exposure and
molecularly characterizing all tumors, eventually we should be able to
explain the biological basis of the significant disparity in CRC

