Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Calcitonin receptor increases invasion of prostate cancer cells by
activating cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) and promoting
phosphorylation of tight junction proteins


The role of calcitonin (CT) and its receptor (CTR) in epithelial cancer
progression is an emerging concept with great clinical potential.
Expression of CT and CTR is frequently elevated in prostate cancers (PCs)
and activation of CT-CTR axis in non-invasive PC cells induces an
invasive phenotype. Invasive phenotype is acquired by the EMT, a process
involving the loss of cell-cell adhesion and cytoskeletal rearrangement.
Tight (TJs) and adherens junctions (AJs) are shown to play an important
role in this process. Present studies focused on the actions of
CTR-mediated intracellular events associated with TJ functionality and
the induction of EMT. We have recently identified a type 1 PDZ-binding
motif in CTR-C tail, and showed that CTR-C PDZ-binding motif interacts
with the PDZ3 domain of ZO-1, a critical scaffolding protein of TJs.
CTR-ZO-1 interaction is critical for proinvasive actions CTR on PC cells,
and deletion of either CTR-C PDZ-binding motif abolishes the ability of
PC cells to form distant metastases in orthotopic xenograft model.
Therefore, we first examined the kinetics of CTR-ZO-1 interaction and the
effect of CTR on TJ assembly. PC3 cells expressing either CTRwt or CTRPDZ
were acutely treated with CT, and subcellular distribution of TJ proteins
was examined by immunocytochemistry and immunoblotting. Since CTR is
coupled to stimulatory G protein, we examined effect of PKA inhibitors on
CTR actions. Next, we tested whether CTR phosphorylates TJ proteins.
Finally, we generated novel peptides and delivered them intracellularly
to attenuate CTR-ZO-1 interaction. The results have shown that CTR-ZO-1
interaction occurs rapidly and peaks within 30 seconds of CT stimulus;
this is rapidly followed by TJ disassembly and endocytosis of TJ
proteins. Endocytosis of ZO-1 occurs first, which is followed with the
endocytosis of occludin and claudin 3. We then identified that
CTR-mediated TJ disassembly requires PKA-mediated phosphorylation of
claudin 3 and ZO-1, and this phosphorylation may cause conformational
changes and lead to TJ disassembly. Next, we demonstrated that
CTR-mediated PKA phosphorylation must occur within TJ complex, and this
spatio-temporal specificity of PKA activation is provided by the CTR-ZO-1
interaction. Finally, we have shown that CTR-ZO-1 interaction as well as
CTR-stimulated invasion of PC cells can be attenuated by novel synthetic
peptides that we have generated. For the first time, we report here the
chain of PKA-mediated events that lead to the disassembly of tight
junctions, loss of cell-cell adhesion, induction of EMT, invasion and
metastasis of PC cells. We also provide a novel translational approach to
generate synthetic peptides to attenuate these events.

