Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A physiologically relevant 3D cell culture model for screening
anti-cancer compounds


Background: Traditional drug screening strategies have used single layer
of cells grown on plastics (monolayer (2D) cell cultures), which is
architecturally and biochemically different from the natural
physiological environment of cells as they exist in tumors. Cells in a
tumor microenvironment exhibit complex cell-to-cell interactions between
tumor cells as well as with other cell types (fibroblasts, endothelial
cells, inflammatory cells). As these interactions are deficient in 2D
cell cultures, testing compounds using such a minimalistic approach could
result in physiologically irrelevant drug responses and misidentification
of compounds which are subsequently less efficacious when tested in
animal models. Therefore in vitro screens based on 2D cell cultures have
a low predictability and poor translatability to in vivo efficacy thus
making them physiologically irrelevant for screening. Recently, based on
the recognition that 3D cell cultures are a physiologically-relevant
alternative to 2D monolayer cultures, a number of approaches have been
used to generate 3D cell culture models for cancer study. These include
the use of synthetic scaffolds, microcarrier beads and hanging drop
cultures. Methods: In this study we use a levitation system to promote
aggregation and growth of tumor cells into multicellular tumor spheroids
(MTS) that are amenable for high throughput screening. We have used the
system to culture established cancer cell lines, such as (MDA-MB-231,
A549, PC-3), as well as primary cells. Since the tumor microenvironment
is a critical factor that promotes tumor growth, we have also used the
system to develop an in vitro co-culture model in which mammary
epithelial tumor cells and fibroblasts grow together to simulate the
tumor microenvironment. Fibroblasts are a critical component of the tumor
stroma influencing tumor initiation, progression and metastasis. We
validate our system using a combination of approaches including
immunofluorescence, high content imaging and flow cytometry to
demonstrate that our 3D culture model has characteristics of in vivo
tumors. Key features that distinguish our system from other currently
available 3D systems available are: 1) the dynamic environment wherein
the cells aggregate and grow into mini tumors mimicking tumors in an in
vivo setting; 2) ease of co-culturing the tumors with other cell types;
3) amenability to high throughput screening; 4) long-lasting cell
viability, facilitating long-term culture; 5) ability to enrich for
tumors that have stem-cell like features. We expect that our model will
be useful to not only derive physiological responses from compound
treatments, but will also have potential applications in studying drug
penetration and resistance.

