Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short-term cytolytic assays are not predictive of chimeric antigen
receptor anti-tumor activity mediated by some T cell subsets


Clinical trials of T cells genetically engineered to express chimeric
antigen receptors (CAR) are currently underway for multiple malignancies
with encouraging results. However, much work remains to be done to
optimize CAR T cell therapy with a pressing need to define those elements
that result in durable antitumor effects. We have been studying a CAR
consisting of a scFv directed against CD19, TCRzeta, and the CD28
co-stimulatory domain, against pre-B acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL).
Whereas CD8+ CD19-CAR T cells readily induce cytotoxicity against CD19+
leukemias in vitro and in xenograft models, other CD19-CAR expressing
subsets show antitumor effects that are not predicted by short term
cytotoxicity assays. Unselected PBMC, as well as immunomagnetically
enriched CD8+ and CD4+ CD19-CAR T cells were generated by retroviral
transduction of anti-CD3/CD28 bead activated T cells in the presence of
IL-2. In a 4-hour 51Cr release assay, both unselected PBMC and enriched
CD8+ CAR T-cells demonstrated similar potent cytotoxicity, while CD4+ T
cells mediated no significant cytotoxicity in this assay. CD19-CAR
expressing enriched PBMC, CD8+ and CD4+ T cells were then administered to
NOG mice 3 days after inoculation with NALM6-GL (human ALL cell line
modified to express GFP and firefly luciferase). As demonstrated using
bioluminescent imaging, mice receiving the same numbers of CD8+ CAR T
cells, CD8:CD4 50:50 mix, and CD4+ CAR T cells eliminated NALM6-GL within
2, 3, and 4 days, respectively, demonstrating unexpected clearance of ALL
by CD4+ CAR T cells alone. This result demonstrates that CD4+ CAR T cells
mediate significant leukemic killing in vivo but that this occurs with
slower kinetics than for CD8+ CAR T cells and is not captured by short
term in vitro assays. We postulate that CD4+ CD19-CAR mediated lysis
involves non-granule mediated killing, and we are currently investigating
these mechanisms. Similarly, CD19 CAR T cells expressing CD45RA and CD62L
have equivalent cytotoxicity to CD19-CAR T cells bearing a typical
effector cell phenotype in a 4hr 51Cr release assay against multiple ALL
cell lines. However, in prolonged co-cultures with ALL cell lines up to 4
weeks CD45RA+CD62L+ CD19-CAR T cells failed to eliminate CD19+ leukemic
cells even at high E:T ratios, while effector cell phenotype CAR T cells
effectively cleared targets in this long term assay. We conclude that a
more complete picture of CAR based antitumor effects can be gleaned in
preclinical models by utilization of both short and long-term killing
assays involving in vitro and in vivo models and that investigators
should not solely rely on short term 51Cr release assays to predict
clinical activity of these exciting new therapies.

