Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-invasive determination of in vivo myeloperoxidase activity in
ovarian cancer mouse model


Myeloperoxidase (MPO) is an inflammatory heme protein present in myeloid
cells- neutrophils, microglia, and macrophages. The enzyme activity of
MPO utilizes hydrogen peroxide in the process of reactive oxygen species
generation. Myeloperoxidase has been suggested recently as a likely
marker in ovarian carcinoma. This relationship between the MPO and
ovarian cancer however was deduced primarily from data obtained from in
vitro studies using cancer cell lines and from immunostaining of ovarian
carcinoma paraffin blocks. Therefore, a real-time determination of in
vivo MPO activity in the tumor and during the progression of ovarian
cancer will be valuable to assess the role of innate immune process in
ovarian cancer progression, in cancer treatment, and the proper
management of current therapies. Here, we developed non invasive
methodologies to determine the MPO activity in intraperitoneal ovarian
cancer tumor mouse model. Tri-modal non invasive imaging of the
metastatic ovarian cancer in athymic mice model were performed to obtain
fluorescence, luminescence, and X-ray images at different time points
during the progression of the intraperitoneal tumor metastasis.
Progression of the tumor metastasis was monitored using fluorescence;
simultaneously MPO activity was obtained by luminescence imaging. The MPO
activity was detected by i.p injection of Luminol
(5-amino-2,3-dihydro-1,4-phthalazine-dione) in physiological buffered
saline (5 mg / 25gm mice). Luminol a redox-sensitive compound emits blue
luminescence upon exposure to oxidizing agents, and in vivo, and has been
established to have unique specificity to MPO activity. The fluorescence
and luminescence images were overlaid on planar X-ray images for
anatomical coregistration. The results show a robust increase in MPO
activity in the mouse with the tumor development as compared to the
control mice of the same cohort. Increase in MPO activity as a result of
neutrophil activation was observed in the early phase of the ovarian
cancer progression, and this increase subsides in the latter stages.
However, the lumiscence signal intensities vary between the tumors, and
near negligible MPO activity was observed in some tumors indicating a
differential tumor microenvironment within the mouse. Further, the
activity is far greater, at least in the initial stages, at the lung,
nasal and other distal regions when compared to the intraperitoneal
tumors. These real-time monitoring methodologies of MPO activity by in
vivo imaging will greatly enhance the understanding of the tumor
microenvironment during ovarian cancer progression, and contribute
significantly in the development of better cancer treatments.

