Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of bone marrow angiogenesis by CXCL12 in the leukemia
tumor microenvironment


While it is well established that angiogenesis is essential for the
progression of solid tumors, its role in hematological tumors is more
recently becoming fully appreciated. In the current study we have
investigated the potential role of leukemic cells in regulating local
angiogenesis as well as the modulation of tumor cell CXCL12 expression
subsequent to interaction with bone marrow derived osteoblasts as one
mechanism by which local vascular rich niches may be created. Human REH
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL; ATCC #CRL-8286) increased vessel
density when placed on the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay.
Conditioned media from these same tumor cells increased human brain
microvessel endothelial cell (HBMEC) motility and tube formation
suggesting leukemia cell influence on surrounding vasculature.
Strikingly, while REH cells express negligible CXCL12 at baseline, the
chemokine is consistently induced to easily detectable levels upon
co-culture with human osteoblasts indicating one mechanism by which tumor
cells within the bone marrow microenvironment may be poised to enhance
vascular cell recruitment even more robustly than leukemic cells alone.
Preliminary evaluation of primary, patient-derived ALL leukophoresis
samples demonstrated a comparable increase in tumor cell CXCL12
indicating this modulation is not limited to an established tumor cell
line. Increased expression of CXCL12 by REH leukemic cells was consistent
with enhanced chemotaxis of HUVECs toward the co-culture of tumor and
osteoblasts when compared to either cell type alone. The inclusion of
5-Aza-deoxycytidine (Aza-C) to REH cells alone resulted in expression of
CXCL12 in the absence of osteoblast co-culture, suggesting methylation
may play a regulatory role in the suppression of this chemokine. As a
site in which metastatic disease is often refractory to standard therapy,
in addition to the anatomical niche in which hematopoietic malignancies
initiate and most frequently relapse, regulation of local angiogenesis in
the bone marrow microenvironment requires further investigation. Our
preliminary observations suggest CXCL12 may play an important role in
regulating leukemic cell niche angiogenesis, and targeting it could
potentially represent a novel application of antagonists currently in
clinical trials in an effort to treat refractory leukemia.

