Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncolytic reovirus synergizes with bortezomib and dexamethasone in
overcoming therapy resistance of multiple myeloma


Introduction: Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable hematologic
malignancy that accounts for 10% of hematopoietic neoplasms. Recently we
have demonstrated the potential of reovirus as novel therapeutic agent
for a majority of MM cell lines and ex vivo patient tumor. However,
therapy resistant disease still remains a problem. In the present study
we demonstrate that reovirus acts synergistically with bortezomib and/or
dexamethasone in oncolysis of therapy resistant MM cell lines. Methods:
The MM cell lines RPMI 8226, U266, NCIH929, U266, INA-6, KMS11 and OPM2
were incubated with live (LV) or UV-inactivated (DV) reovirus at a
multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 40 for 24, 48, and 72 hours
respectively and cell death was assessed via the WST assay. Reovirus
resistant OPM2 and moderately sensitive KMS-11 that are also resistant to
bortezomib and dexamethasone were selected for combination therapy and
treated with reovirus and drugs at various concentrations to evaluate
Effective Dose 50% (ED50) values. ED50 values for each drug and reovirus
was combined in various concentrations but with consistent ratios and
percent toxicity was determined. Using Calcusyn software, combination
index (CI) values were generated and synergism determined as per
Chou-Talalay method. Results: Highly synergistic cytotoxicity was
observed with reovirus and bortezomib in both reovirus and drug resistant
cell lines OPM2 and KMS-11 at all drug combination ratios. Dexamethasone
and reovirus treatment induced synergy in OPM2 cells. Conclusion: Not all
MM cell lines are amenable to reovirus mediated cell death. This has
important implications for the future use of reovirus as a therapeutic
agent for cancer as phase II clinical trials for MM are underway. This
study highlights the importance of preclinical studies in evaluating
effective reovirus drug combinations for future use that could be
extrapolated to a clinical setting. Currently we are evaluating the
effects of these drug combinations under in vivo conditions in a mouse
model that represents the clinical course of MM. The underlying mechanism
of reovirus and drug induced cytotoxicity is also being investigated at
present. Understanding the signalling pathways of resistant tumor will
help develop a more personalized approach of reovirus therapy for cancer
patients in the future.

