Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Marked sensitivity to mRNA targeting by LNA antisense in tumor
cells without a delivery system: Lessons learned and potential
translation to the clinic


Background: Unlike siRNAs, single-stranded locked nucleic acid-based
antisense oligonucleotides (LNA-ONs) have shown the ability to down
regulate mRNAs in vitro and in vivo without any delivery systems such as
transfection reagents or liposomes. Hence, LNA-ONs may have significant
advantages as a therapeutic compared to siRNAs. Investigation of LNA-ONs
that target HIF-1, survivin, or androgen receptor in cancer patients is
ongoing. EZN-3920, a LNA-ON to HER3, down regulates HER3 mRNA over a
large concentration range (IC50 = 0.1-10 M) when multiple cancer cell
lines are evaluated (Zhang et al, 2011 Gene Therapy. 18:326). We assess
here 1) the generality of down-regulation efficiency using two additional
LNA-ONs in multiple cell lines and in cells prepared directly from
patient tumors, and 2) the correlation of target down-regulation, growth
inhibition, and LNA-ON concentration observed in vitro with in vivo
xenograft models. Methods: LNA-ONs were either added to tissue culture
media (i.e. no transfection) in vitro or prepared in saline and given IV
in vivo. Endpoints were measured by qRT-PCR, MTT, Western Blot analysis,
and tumor size. Gene Expression Profiling was performed by Asuragen, Inc.
Concentration of LNA-ONs in tissues was measured by LC/MS/MS. Results:
LNA-ONs targeting PI3KCA p110 (EZN-4150) or -catenin (EZN-3892) potently
down regulated the target mRNA in 50% of tumor cell lines, thereby
confirming the observations made with EZN-3920. Diverse sensitivity of
the HER3-directed LNA-ON was also observed in cells derived from over 40
primary tumors. Cell lines that were highly sensitive to LNA-ONs in
proliferation assay were also responsive in xenograft tumor models. When
anti-tumor efficacy of the LNA-ONs was achieved, the concentration of the
drug within the tumor matched the concentration required to effectively
down regulate the target in vitro. To understand the mechanisms
underlying the resistance to LNA-ONs-mediated down-modulation, several
cell lines were made highly resistant to LNA-ONs in vitro by chronic
exposure to the agent over several months. Tumors from such cell lines
were also resistant to LNA-ONs in xenograft models and can be
cross-resistant to multiple LNA-ONs. We are currently identifying common
genetic differences in the sensitive and resistant cell. Conclusion: We
have shown that LNA-ONs, given without any delivery systems, have broad
utility in many cancer cell lines including primary tumor cells in which
the intended target is a driver for growth. Furthermore, those cell lines
sensitive to LNA-ONs in vitro or ex vivo may help identify tumors in
animal models that will be responsive to LNA-ONs. Lastly, mechanistic
studies on resistant cells may provide an understanding of the diverse
response of tumors to LNA-ONs that could ultimately be used to select
patients who might preferentially respond to therapy with LNA-ONs.

