Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple cytokeratin-19 positive stem cells contribute to the
clonal origin of colonic tumors in mice


Introduction: The clonal origin of tumors is not well understood.
Previous studies using chimeric mice have suggested that the origin of
tumors in the mammalian small intestine may be polyclonal, with 2 or more
progenitor cells contributing to intestinal adenomas. In the intestine,
tissue stem cells are believed to be present in small numbers, and either
quiescent or actively dividing, as previously shown with Lgr-5+ cells.
Cytokeratin 19 (K19) is a potential progenitor marker expressed in the
intestinal isthmus. Using the K19 gene promoter to drive Cre recombinase
expression, we tracked the lineage of K19+ cells in an inducible fashion.
Here, we used K19-CreERT2;ROSA26rLacZ mice to examine whether K19+ cells
contribute to colonic tumor formation. Methods: In order to recapitulate
the endogenous expression pattern of K19, we used a BAC strategy and
generated a transgenic mouse with a Tamoxifen inducible Cre under the
control of the K19 promoter (K19-BAC-Cre-ERT2). K19CreERT2 mice were
crossed to ROSA26rLacZ (or GFP) reporter mice and treated with tamoxifen
(6 mg/ day p.o. for 3 days) to assess K19+ lineage tracing by X-gal or
GFP staining. To examine the contribution of the K19+ cells to colonic
tumorigenesis, we used the AOM/DSS inflammation-associated model of
colonic carcinogenesis. Mice were sacrificed 20 weeks following AOM
induction and X-gal staining performed to stain for the K19+ cell
lineage. Results: Treatment of control K19CreERT2/Rosa26r mice with
tamoxifen resulted in the stochastic labelling of about 20-50% of colonic
and intestinal glands, respectively. Consistent with the labeling of stem
cells, marked glands stained positive beyond 52 weeks following tamoxifen
induction. K19CreERT2/Rosa26r mice treated with AOM or DSS alone
following tamoxifen labelling of K19+ glands displayed evidence of K19+
cell expansion and crypt fission, as determined by increased labelling of
contiguous X-gal positive glands. K19CreERT2/Rosa26r mice were then
treated with a single dose of AOM followed by DSS. When K19+ cells were
labelled by tamoxifen administration prior to AOM, we observed that 10%
tumors were entirely X-gal positive, suggesting derivation from a single
K19+ cell. Interestingly, when K19+ cells were labelled by tamoxifen
shortly after tumor initiation with AOM, some tumors were derived from
both K19 recombined and non-recombined cells in a clonal fashion,
suggesting a model whereby a K19+ cell gives rise to multiple K19+
daughter cells that each contribute to the tumor. Conclusions. Using
K19CreERT2/Rosa26r mice, we show that K19 marks stem cells within the
intestinal isthmus of the small intestine and colon. Using a carcinogen
induced model of inflammation-associated carcinogenesis, we demonstrate
that K19 expressing cells contribute to tumor formation in a manner
consistent with tumor initiation following division of K19+ cells.

