Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paired tumor and normal whole genome and transcriptome sequencing
of transitional cell carcinoma of the upper urinary tract


Background: Transitional cell carcinoma of the upper urinary tract (UUT)
is a rare urothelial cancer, which most often affects males ages 50-70.
Previous studies have shown some overlap with genetic alterations
frequently observed in bladder cancer, however complete molecular
characterization of UUT tumors is currently limited. A 20-year-old woman
with treated acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in remission for 13
years, presented with present with numerous metastatic lesions involving
bone, adrenal, retrocaval lymph node, and kidney. Biopsy confirmed a
second primary carcinoma originating from the ureter or kidney. After two
lines of systemic chemotherapy, the patient enrolled in a whole-genome
(WGS) and whole transcriptome sequencing (WTS) pilot study. Methods:
Tumor DNA and RNA was isolated from fresh-frozen tissue obtained by
needle core biopsy of the right kidney tumor. Germline DNA was isolated
from the patient's whole blood. Commercial benign ureter tissue was used
for normal RNA comparison. Whole-genome paired-end library and
transcriptome sequencing were done on Illumina's HiSeq 2000 platform.
Burrows-Wheeler Transform algorithm was used in alignment to human
reference genome (build 36). Several short nucleotide variants (SNVs)
were selected for further validation with Sanger sequencing. Quantitative
PCR with specific primers to either amplified or deleted genomic regions
and Ct method were used to validate chromosomal copy number
abnormalities. Results: WGS yielded 46X and 55X uniquely mappable reads
for the tumor and normal samples, respectively. Seventy-one damaging
somatic SNVs and a number of chromosomal aberrations were identified in
regions of cancer relevant genes. Most notably, truncating mutations were
found in p53 and KDM6A (oncogenic histone demethylase) genes as well as a
damaging mutation in E2F8 transcription factor. KDM6A and E2F8 mutations
were confirmed with bi-directional Sanger sequencing. A homozygous
deletion encompassing the tumor suppressor p16 and a prominent focal 2MB
high-level amplification at 7p11.2 that includes the EGFR oncogene were
also detected. WTS produced 1006 reads for each sample. Expression
analysis revealed loss-of-heterozygosity in p53 wild-type locus and a
significant upregulation of EGFR. Additionally, a number of genes (MKI67,
AURKA, TOP2A, BUB, FOXM, and PLK1) associated with cell cycle progression
had >4-fold tumor overexpression. Genomic qPCR confirmed a 10-fold
reduction in p16 while EGFR was amplified >40 times. Conclusion: Through
WGS and WTS, a number of common oncogenic targets to be deregulated in
this UUT, including p53 mutation, EGFR and MYC amplifications, and p16
deletion. These targets have previously been implicated in urothelial
cancers, most notably in bladder. Given, negative KRAS mutation status,
EGFR targeted therapy may be a reasonable treatment option for this
patient.

