Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of AV-203, a humanized
anti-ERBB3 antibody


ERBB3 is widely expressed in human carcinomas, and its over expression is
associated with poor prognosis in patients with various carcinomas,
(i.e., breast, ovarian, prostate, colorectal, pancreatic, gastric, and
head and neck cancers). The presence of ERBB3 correlates with local to
distal metastasis in lung, gastric, and colorectal cancers as well as
bone invasion in prostate cancer. Activation of ERBB3 is also implicated
in the development of resistance to current cancer treatments. Due to its
lack of kinase activity, the activation of the ERBB3 receptor is
dependent on heterodimerization with active receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTKs). The recruitment of ERBB3 into active, heterodimer complexes is
mediated by its ligand Neuregulin-1 (NRG-1) or by amplified, over
expressed RTKs in a ligand independent manner. Therefore, ERBB3 can
crosstalk with most major receptors involved in cancer development and
maintenance such as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), and c-MET. AV-203 is a potent,
humanized anti-ERBB3 antibody that inhibits both ligand-dependent and
independent activation of ERBB3 both in vitro and in vivo.
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of AV-203 were characterized in
mice using the A549 non-small cell lung cancer xenograft model. AV-203
administered IV in mice exhibits acceptable pharmacokinetics supporting
preclinical efficacy studies. AV-203 administered IV in A549 NSCLC
xenograft tumor bearing mice had lower serum AUC than nave mice,
demonstrating that the presence of human ErbB3 may alter the PK
parameters of AV-203. In evaluating pharmacodynamics in vivo, AV-203 was
able to down regulate total ERBB3 and ERBB3 signaling in A549 tumors in a
time-dependent manner. Inhibition of ERBB3 signaling correlated with
significant dose-dependent tumor growth inhibition in the A549 xenograft
model. Dose scheduling studies with the constant AV-203 dose of 2.5 mg/kg
revealed that the most efficacious schedule is the more frequent dosing
at Q3D. In comparing the total dose of 10 mg/kg per 14 day cycle, at
varying dose per injection and frequency, AV-203 resulted in significant
tumor growth inhibition at all dose schedules. These data conclude that
the efficacy of AV-203 is driven by total drug exposure and that AV-203
is not dependent on Cmax for its antitumor activity.

