Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical development of a Pim kinase inhibitor for cancer
treatment


Pim kinases were identified as the crucial downstream effectors various
important oncogenes like Jak, FLT3 or Ras kinases. Multiple targets
phosphorylated by Pim kinases, such as 4EBP1, p21Waf, p27KIP1, c-Myc or
CXCR4 play important roles in intracellular signaling and contribute to
pathways involved in cell survival, proliferation, stress response and
cellular motility. Moreover, the significance and relevance of Pim
kinases as valid therapeutic targets is further confirmed by their
expression levels in variety of cancer types, especially in various types
of lymphomas, leukemias or myelomas. For example Pim kinase
overexpression contributes to the development of diffuse large B cell
lymphoma, mantle cell lymphoma, B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia and
FLT3-mediated acute myelogenous leukemia. As members of the family,
Pim-1, Pim-2 and Pim-3 were shown to be prevent apoptosis, promote
protein translation and cell survival thereby enhancing proliferation of
malignant cells, Pim kinases emerged as a novel and interesting target
with significant potential for therapeutic intervention in cancer. In the
current study we are reporting the results of a second generation small
molecule Pim kinase inhibitors that were developed by Selvita and results
for the best characterized potent Pim kinase inhibitor developed so far.
The small molecule inhibitors exert high potency in vitro both on all
three Pim kinases as well as on a large panel of cancer cell lines.
Mechanism of action for selected compounds was confirmed both in vitro in
variety of cell lines and in vivo in xenograft models by downregulation
of c-Myc and 4EBP1 phosphorylation inhibition. Selected compounds were
tested in a range of combinations with standard anti-cancer therapeutics
in both leukemias and solid tumor cell lines and showed potent
synergistic effects. Strong synergies were observed particularly in
combination with targeted therapies like the PI3K/Akt pathway inhibitors
or Jak kinase inhibitors. Data will be presented on in vivo efficacy of
lead compounds examined in xenograft models. Additionally, the results of
safety assessment of the lead compound will be presented revealing
preferable safety profile with no effect on ion channel mediated
cardiotoxicity and favorable pharmacokinetic profile. Taken together,
presented data will further support the rationale of using Pim kinase
inhibition as a novel approach to standalone cancer therapy, and in
combination with other targeted and cytotoxic therapies, especially to
overcome developing drug resistance.

