Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Soy food intake and risk of lung cancer: Evidence from the
Shanghai Women's Health Study and a meta-analysis


Background: Recent large-scale clinical trials raised concerns regarding
increased risk of aggressive lung cancer and lung cancer mortality among
users of postmenopausal estrogen therapy. Soy and its phytoestrogens have
been shown to act as a natural estrogen antagonist and have
cancer-inhibitory activities in experimental studies. Objective: We
prospectively evaluated the association of soy food intake with lung
cancer risk, overall and by tumor aggressiveness, and perform a
meta-analysis of published data. Methods: Included in this analysis were
71,550 women recruited in the Shanghai Women's Health Study, a
population-based cohort study. Usual soy food intake was assessed at
baseline and re-assessed during follow-up through in-person interviews.
Previous studies were identified through a MEDLINE search. Results:
During a mean follow-up of 9.1 years, 370 incident lung cancer cases were
identified; 340 were lifetime never smokers. After adjustment for
potential confounders, soy food intake was inversely associated with
subsequent risk of lung cancer; the hazard ratio (HR) for the highest
compared with lowest quintile of intake was 0.63 (95% CI: 0.44 - 0.90; P
trend = 0.004). This inverse association appeared predominately among
women with a later age at menopause (P interaction = 0.01) and varied by
tumor aggressiveness as defined by length of survival (Background: Recent
large-scale clinical trials raised concerns regarding increased risk of
aggressive lung cancer and lung cancer mortality among users of
postmenopausal estrogen therapy. Soy and its phytoestrogens have been
shown to act as a natural estrogen antagonist and have cancer-inhibitory
activities in experimental studies. Objective: We prospectively evaluated
the association of soy food intake with lung cancer risk, overall and by
tumor aggressiveness, and perform a meta-analysis of published data.
Methods: Included in this analysis were 71,550 women recruited in the
Shanghai Women's Health Study, a population-based cohort study. Usual soy
food intake was assessed at baseline and re-assessed during follow-up
through in-person interviews. Previous studies were identified through a
MEDLINE search. Results: During a mean follow-up of 9.1 years, 370
incident lung cancer cases were identified; 340 were lifetime never
smokers. After adjustment for potential confounders, soy food intake was
inversely associated with subsequent risk of lung cancer; the hazard
ratio (HR) for the highest compared with lowest quintile of intake was
0.63 (95% CI: 0.44 - 0.90; P trend = 0.004). This inverse association
appeared predominately among women with a later age at menopause (P
interaction = 0.01) and varied by tumor aggressiveness as defined by
length of survival (<12 versus 12 months), with corresponding HR of 0.49
for more aggressive lung cancer versus 0.76 for less aggressive lung
cancer (P heterogeneity = 0.057). Similar inverse associations were
observed for isoflavone intake. A meta-analysis of seven studies
conducted among never smokers found a summary odds ratio of 0.59 (95% CI:
0.49 - 0.71) for the highest versus lowest categories of soy or
isoflavone intake. Conclusion: This study suggests that soy food
consumption may reduce lung cancer risk in nonsmoking women, particularly
for aggressive lung cancer, and its effect may be modified by endogenous
estrogens.

