Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of neuregulins in the regulation of EGFR in breast cancer
cell lines


The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a member of the ERBB
family of oncoproteins which consist of four related receptors:
EGFR/ErbB1, ErbB2, ErbB3 and ErbB4. Overexpression of EGFR and other
members of ERBB family were found to induce erroneous development and
unrestricted proliferation in human malignancies including breast cancer.
Neuregulins (NRG) are signaling proteins that produce cell-cell
interactions and can bind to the extracellular domain of ErbB3 or ErbB4,
activating signaling pathways leading to cellular responses that include
stimulation or inhibition of proliferation, apoptosis, and gene
regulation. Previous studies showed that constitutive expression of
neuregulin 1-beta (NRG-1) in MCF-7 cells decreased the levels of estrogen
receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR), which may contribute to the
transformation from estrogen-responsive into a hormone-independent
phenotype. An inverse correlation between expression of ER and EGFR has
been demonstrated. Our hypothesis is that EGFR levels are regulated by
neuregulins in breast cancer cell lines. We treated the breast cancer
cell lines ZR-75-1 and MDA-MB-231 with NRG-1 or NRG-1 at different
concentrations for 4 hours. In addition, both cells lines were treated
with selected concentrations of NRG-1 or NRG-1 at different time points.
Isolated mRNA was used to measure EGFR expression using
reverse-transcriptase real-time PCR and levels of protein were determined
by western blot analysis. Our results show that EGFR mRNA levels
increased when ZR-75-1 cells were treated with increasing concentrations
of neuregulins. In this regard, treatment with 100 ng/mL of NRG-1
increased EGFR expression by 10-fold in ZR-75-1 cells. However, when
MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with NRG-1 or NRG-1, the expression of EGFR
mRNA levels did not change. Western blots analysis of ZR-75-1 cells
treated with NRG-1 shows activated ErbB3, confirming that this activation
is related to the increase in EGFR mRNA levels. Our data suggest a role
for neuregulins in the EGFR up-regulation. One of the mechanisms related
to ErbB3 activation is the activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases
(PI3K) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), thus current efforts
are directed towards elucidating the role of these pathways in the
NRG-upregulation of EGFR. Supported by NIH/NIGMS Grant #SC2GM084789,
NIH-RCMI Grant #G12 RR 03051.

