Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protective effects of phenylaminoethyl selenide (PAESe) on
doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity in vitro and in vivo


Anthracyclines are potent anticancer agents that are effective in the
treatment of acute leukemia, non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, breast, ovarian and
lung cancers, but their clinical use is hampered by dose-limiting
cardiotoxicity mediated by free radicals generation. We determined the
ability of phenyl-2-aminoethyl selenide (PAESe), a novel antioxidant, to
reduce doxorubicin (DOX)-induced cardiotoxicity. Growth inhibitory
effects of PAESe on human breast carcinoma (BT-474) and prostate
adenocarcinoma (PC-3) cells were determined alone and in combination with
two clinically used anticancer agents, DOX, a topoisomerase-2 antagonist
known to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS), and vincristine (a
tubulin binding agent) and a known oxidant, tert-butylhydroperoxide
(TBHP). Conventional growth inhibitory assays, i.e., sulforhodamine B
(SRB) and 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium-bromide
(MTT) staining, were used to determine in vitro activity. Treatment
effect on intracellular formation of ROS was also determined by
quantifying the oxidation of a cell-permeant indicator H2DCFDA. The
effect of PAESe on cardiomyocytes was determined in NCr (nu/nu) mice with
DOX (5 mg/kg), PAESe (10 mg/kg), concomitant (DOX & PAESe) therapy, and
saline controls were administered by tail vein injections weekly over 12
weeks. Histopathological examination was performed to look for evidence
of cardiotoxicity. PAESe did not alter the growth of BT-474 or PC-3 cells
up to 10 uM. However, co-administration of PAESe decreased the
oxidative-mediated cytotoxicity of TBHP in a dose-dependent manner, but
had limited to no effect on vincristine or DOX antitumor activity.
Further, PAESe decreased the formation of intracellular ROS from TBHP and
DOX in a dose-dependent manner. Histological examination showed PAESe
decreased short-term DOX-mediated infiltration of neutrophils and
macrophages into the myocardium and more chronic evidence of necrotic
foci, suggesting PAESe decreased early and late myocardial damage
following initial and prolonged DOX treatments, unlike other
antioxidants. Concomitant administration of PAESe did not alter the
antitumor activity of DOX in vivo, nor did it reduce treatment mediated
weight-loss associated with DOX. These data suggest that PAESe may be
used in combination with DOX to preserve its antitumor activity, but
decrease free radical generation and cardiotoxicity associated with use
of anthracyclines.

