Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vorinostat abrogates ridaforolimus-induced activation of Akt in
synovial sarcoma cells: A possible rationale for their synergism


Background: Curative treatments for patients with metastatic synovial
sarcoma (SS) do not exist and such patients have a poor prognosis.
Previously, we demonstrated that the combination of the mTOR inhibitor
ridaforolimus and the HDAC inhibitor vorinostat exhibited synergism in a
variety of cell lines. Here, we explore whether the Akt pathway is
potentially involved in mediating the synergistic effects of
ridaforolimus and vorinostat. Methods: Two SS cell lines (HS-SY-II and
SYO-I) were treated with the single agents or with combinations of
ridaforolimus and vorinostat. After 72 hours, cell viability was measured
using the cell proliferation assay (MTS). Combination Indices (CI) were
calculated to determine whether each combination was synergistic,
additive, or antagonistic. Western Blot analysis assessed alterations in
total and phospho-Akt protein levels in response to drug treatment.
Results: Ridaforolimus IC50 was 10.9nM in HS-SY-II and 23.1nM in SYO-I;
vorinostat IC50 was 440nM in HS-SY-II and 561nM in SYO-I. CI were 0.28
and 0.63 in HS-SY-II and SYO-I, respectively, indicating synergism
between the two agents. The ridaforolimus/vorinostat combination was
assessed in other tumor types, including osteosarcoma (U2OS), metastatic
melanoma (Stew1 and Stew2), pancreatic cancer (Panc1 and BxPC3), and lung
cancer (A549). The combination was synergistic in all cell lines: CI
ranged from 0.37 to 0.77, except in Panc1, where it was additive
(CI=0.92). As previously observed with other mTOR inhibitors,
ridaforolimus alone increased pAkt-ser473 levels in SS cell lines; this
effect was abrogated by the addition of vorinostat. Conclusions: The
combination of ridaforolimus and vorinostat demonstrates in vitro
synergism in SS as well as in a variety of other tumor types. The
addition of vorinostat prevented ridaforolimus-induced Akt activation, a
possible mechanism of resistance to mTOR inhibition. Adding HDAC
inhibition to mTOR inhibitors may be a route to circumvent Akt-mediated
resistance to mTOR inhibitors. Our results also indicate that this
combination may demonstrate broad anti-neoplastic activity.

