Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Age of menarche and height as adolescent growth in relation to
breast cancer risk


Age of menarche as well as height is known to be associated with breast
cancer risk. Adult height is associated with age at menarche, which may
explain that growth in height accelerates driven by hormone changes
during adolescence. The authors evaluated associations between the age of
menarche and height as the adolescent growth indicator and breast cancer
risk among 3,725 cases and 3,748 controls enrolled in a multicenter,
case-control study in Korea, Seoul Breast Cancer Study (2001-2007).
Logistic regression models were used to estimate odds ratios (ORs) of age
at menarche (Age of menarche as well as height is known to be associated
with breast cancer risk. Adult height is associated with age at menarche,
which may explain that growth in height accelerates driven by hormone
changes during adolescence. The authors evaluated associations between
the age of menarche and height as the adolescent growth indicator and
breast cancer risk among 3,725 cases and 3,748 controls enrolled in a
multicenter, case-control study in Korea, Seoul Breast Cancer Study
(2001-2007). Logistic regression models were used to estimate odds ratios
(ORs) of age at menarche (<=13, 14-15, and 16+ years) and quintile of
height calculated in each 10-year age group based on total participants
for breast cancer risk. The associations were assessed in overall and in
strata of menopausal status, birth year group (median, 1957) and hormone
receptor status. Early menarche and taller height increased risk of
breast cancer as expected; for both premenopausal and postmenopausal
women, those starting menarche at 13 years or younger had 1.3-fold (95%
CI: 1.1-1.6 for premenopausal women and 1.0-1.7 for postmenopausal women,
respectively) comparing to women starting menarche at 16 years or older.
In contrast, the association between height and breast cancer risk was
different between menopausal status; women with 5th quintile in each age
group had 2.1-fold (95% CI: 1.6-2.7) comparing to women with 1st quintile
among postmenopausal women, however, associations were absent among
premenopausal women. Age at menarche, height and birth year were highly
correlated with each other; age at menarche and height increased as the
birth year increased significantly. The associations of age at menarche
and height on breast cancer in the strata of birth year group were
similar with the associations in the menopausal status. Although cases
with hormone receptor positive increased as the birth year increased, the
ORs of age at menarche and height did not vary significantly by hormone
receptor status. These findings suggest that age at menarche and adult
height is associated with breast cancer overall, particularly among
postmenopausal women or women born prior to 1957. This may result from
the chronological changes of adolescent growth in Korea.

