Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SN-38 attenuates the chemoresistance acquired by colon cancer
cells under hypoxic condition, via inhibition of hypoxia inducible factor
(HIF) 1


Introduction: Hypoxia is a common feature of rapidly growing solid
tumors. Under hypoxic condition, cancer cells acquire the resistance to
chemotherapeutic agents. Accumulation of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1
in cancer cells plays important physiological roles, including resistance
the therapy, through various mechanisms, including anti-apoptotic effects
and the induction of G1 cell cycle arrest. Here, we aimed to clarify the
mechanisms underlying the hypoxia-induced chemoresistance of colon cancer
cells to 5-fluorouraacil (5-FU), oxaliplatin, and SN-38 (active
metabolite of irinotecan), the standard agents for the chemotherapy of
colorectal cancer. Methods: Human colon cancer cells, namely HT29 and
SW480, were cultured under hypoxic condition (1% O2), and treated with
the appropriate doses of the chemotherapeutics. The proliferative ability
was analyzed by reading the fluorescence intensity of calcein-stained
cells, and by counting the trypan blue-stained cells. Apoptosis was
quantified by flow-cytometry after double-staining of the cells with
AnnexinV/propidium iodide (PI). The cell cycle was evaluated by
flow-cytometry after staining of cells with PI. HIF-1 expression was
evaluated by Western blot analysis. Results: Under hypoxic condition, the
proliferative ability of both HT29 and SW480 cells was significantly
decreased compared with cells cultured under normoxia. Cells cultured
under hypoxia were less responsive to 5-FU and oxaliplatin, compared to
those cultured under normoxic condition, but were inhibited by SN-38 at
the similar levels compared normoxia. Under hypoxia, a strong arrest of
the cells to the G0/G1 phase was observed and, as a consequence, the
typical changes of the cell cycle distribution, i.e., the intra-S arrest
induced by 5FU and the G2/M arrest induced by oxaliplatin, were not
identified after the treatment with the chemoterapeutics. By the
treatment with SN-38, an increase of the fraction of sub-G1 phase cells
was observed, which was confirmed to be dependent on the induction of
apoptosis by the flow-cytometric analysis of AnnexinV-stained cells.
SN-38 induced apoptosis of colon cancer cells at the similar rates under
hypoxia and normoxia. Contrarily, the apoptosis rate induced by 5-FU and
oxaliplatin was significantly reduced under hypoxia. Interestingly, SN-38
significantly reduced the expression of HIF-1 in colon cancer cells
cultured under hypoxia, whereas neither 5-FU nor oxaliplatin affected its
expression. Conclusion: Our findings suggest that SN-38 can inhibit the
expression of HIF-1 in colon cancer cells under hypoxic condition,
consequently overcoming the chemoresistance to this agent.

