Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Krppel-like factor 4 null mouse embryonic fibroblasts exhibit DNA
repair defects post exposure to gamma-irradiation


BACKGROUND: Krppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) is a zinc finger transcription
factor that exerts a potent inhibitory effect on cell cycle progression.
KLF4 functions as a tumor suppressor in colorectal cancer and is involved
in regulating centrosome duplication. Abnormal amplification of
centrosomes has been shown to contribute to genetic instability by
increasing the frequency of mitotic defects. AIM: To determine whether
KLF4 is involved in maintaining genetic stability during cell division.
METHODS: Mice heterozygous for the Klf4 alleles (Klf4+/) on a C57BL/6
background were crossbred. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) that are
wild type (Klf4+/+), heterozygous (Klf4+/) or null (Klf4/) for the Klf4
alleles were derived from day-13.5 embryos. Post-senescence MEFs were
derived by passing cells to senescence and maintaining them in culture
until they spontaneously regained proliferative. Immuno-detection of
histone variant -H2AX was performed to assess chromosome integrity. The
levels of cell cycle regulators such as Cdk2, Cyclin E, and Cyclin D were
determined by Western blotting. The presence of double strand breaks
(DSB) was determined by western blot and immunofluorescence for histone
variant -H2AX contains nuclear foci. Flow cytometry has been used to
determine the level of DNA damage in both wildtype and klf4 null cells
following gamma-irradiation. Furthermore, Expression profiles of
fibroblasts isolated from mouse embryos wild type or null for the Klf4
alleles were examined by DNA microarrays. RESULTS: Cells that exhibits
DSBs in their DNA can develop genomic instability, which can result in
cancer formation. Compared to Klf4+/+ and Klf4/ MEFs exposed to
-irradiation showed time-dependent increase in levels of histone variant
-H2AX that persisted for up to 48 hours after the -irradiation. On the
other hand, Klf4+/+ halt cell cycle progression to allow repair of DNA
damage. Western blot analysis showed that Cdk2, Cyclin E, Cyclin D and
histone variant -H2AX expression were high in Klf4/ MEFs. Furthermore, we
found many of the down-regulated genes in Klf4-null MEFs encode DNA
repair, and antioxidant genes. CONCLUSIONS: Results of this study
demonstrate that Klf4 null mouse embryonic fibroblasts exhibit an
impaired DNA damage response post gamma irradiation, when compared to
wild-type cells. This data strongly suggest that the role for Klf4 in DNA
damage repair in mouse embryonic fibroblast cells. These results indicate
that KLF4 plays a crucial role in maintaining genetic stability and
support the previous findings that KLF4 is a tumor suppressor.

