Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of current and novel biomarkers of bladder cancer


Bladder cancer is one of the most common cancers in industrialized
countries. It is reported that 3.51 billion dollars are spent each year
on bladder cancer treatment making it the most expensive cancer to treat
on a per patient basis. Approximately 80% of bladder cancer patients have
at least one reported recurrence thereby prompting meticulous lifetime
screening and surveillance by health care professionals. Therefore,
careful evaluation of our institution's current fluorescent in situ
hybridization surveillance tools in addition to investigation of novel
biomarkers is imperative. Our investigation of novel biomarkers focused
on apoptosis regulating genes which are often unbalanced in cancerous
tissues. Our institution recently adopted BioView, an automated FISH
capture/analysis system, to replace the manual protocol. Validation and
assessment of the automated system for fluorescent in situ hybridization
(FISH) interpretation to detect urothelial cancer was determined using
patient cases to evaluate concordance, overall positivity, interpretative
time spent, sensitivity, and specificity. To evaluate novel biomarkers,
mRNA from patient samples was reversed transcribed to cDNA then utilized
for biomarker quantification by RT-PCR. In addition, immunohistochemistry
was performed on the most promising gene to further confirm its clinical
usefulness. The automated BioView capture/ detection system does prove to
be more time efficient and accurate when addressing all parameters
described. In evaluation of novel biomarkers, API5, BIRC3, BIRC4,
SURVIVIN, and BFAR provided the most promising data with sensitivity and
specificity percentages all ranging from 83% to 97%. From this study of
bladder cancer markers, we focused on API5 and its role in bladder cancer
initiation and progression. API5 is strongly expressed early in
tumorigenesis. Our data confirm that the automated FISH capture/detection
system improves laboratory efficiency and accuracy. Furthermore, our data
indicate that apoptotic regulators are promising biomarkers for clinical
use. In addition, API5 is expressed early in tumorigenesis, which makes
it an ideal early diagnostic marker. We have noticed increase in the
level of API5 protein associated with tumor grade and stage which also
suggest that API5 might be a potential prognostic marker for bladder
cancer. In conclusion, detection of apoptosis regulating genes is a
promising diagnostic and prognostic approach to aid our screening and
surveillance tools.

