Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein kinase c cooperates with Pten deficiency in prostate
cancer progression


Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the second
leading cause of cancer-related deaths among men. Protein kinase C
epsilon (PKC), a member of the PKC family of phorbol ester/diacylglycerol
receptors, has been shown to be up-regulated in human prostate cancer
specimens. We recently demonstrated that mice that specifically
overexpress PKC in prostate under the control of the probasin promoter
(PB-PKC) develop hyperplasia and PIN lesions. However, PKC overexpression
was insufficient to drive neoplastic changes in the mouse prostate. In
the present study our goal was to determine whether PKC overexpression
can cooperate with Pten deficiency, one of the most common genetic
alterations in human prostate cancer. We stably overexpressed PKC in two
pairs of isogenic mouse prostate epithelial lines that are either
heterozygous (P2, P8) or homozygous (CaP2, CaP8) for Pten deletion. PKC
overexpression led to significant enhancement in cell proliferation
compared to the respective control cells and this effect is more
pronounced in CaP2 or CaP8 cells. Moreover, assays of colony formation in
liquid medium revealed that anchorage-dependent growth was augmented in
PKC-overexpressing cells relative to control cells. A significant
elevation in phospho-Akt levels was observed in PKC overexpressing cells
relative to respective controls. To further elucidate the cooperativity
between PKC overexpression and Pten loss we intercrossed the PB-PKC
transgenic mice and Pten+/ mice. Strikingly, the resulting compound
mutant mice overexpressing PKC and haploinsufficient for Pten (PB-PKC;
Pten+/) developed fully invasive adenocarcinoma at 12 months of age. Very
strong phospho-Akt, phospho-S6 and phospho mTOR staining could be
detected in adenocarcinomas from PB-PKC; Pten+/ mice. Furthermore, we
detected enhanced p-Erk, Cox-2, STAT3, NF-B and cyclin D1 signaling in
adenocarcinomas from PB-PKC;Pten+/ mice than in lesions from each
monogenic model. These data thus suggest that PKC overexpression
cooperates with a defined oncogenic input to promote prostate
tumorigenesis. These findings also suggest a crucial role of PKC in
survival.

