Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A chromosome engineering mouse model to identify mechanisms by
which duplication of 8q24 promotes human breast cancer


The early latency and poor prognosis of human breast cancer is often
associated with the gain of extra copy of 8q24 locus containing the c-Myc
oncogene. Evaluation of aberrations at the 8q24 locus by high-resolution
SNP array identified a 2.1 Mb region which only includes the c-Myc, Pvt1,
and Gsdmc genes. Interestingly, the transgenic c-myc mouse has shown that
the overexpression of c-myc alone is not sufficient to develop the
mammary adenocarcinoma, suggesting that the overexpression of c-myc may
not truly reflect breast cancer patients who were diagnosed with low
copy-number gain of 8q24. It also implies that the Pvt1 or Gsdmc may play
an important role with the c-Myc during tumor progression. However,
functional analysis of this 2.1 Mb interval of 8q24 has been limited by a
lack of suitable mouse models. Here, we report a novel mouse model,
namely c-myc-gsdmcdp/+ (3N), containing the extra copy-number gain of 2.1
Mb interval as observed in breast cancer patients. To demonstrate the
effect of the 3N gain, we have performed in vitro mammary epithelium
experiments and in vivo mammary gland analyses in female virgin mice at 6
and 10 weeks of age. Interestingly, the mouse mammary epithelium with the
3N gain displays above 3 fold expression of c-Myc and Pvt-1 and
significantly larger acinar structures in three-dimensional (3D) culture
compared to the wild type (wt). Moreover, we found that mammary glands
from 3N mice show excessive side-branching as early as 6 weeks. In 10
weeks, mammary glands from 3N mice display not only excessive
side-branching but also precocious lobulo-alveolar development and
contain numerous epithelial cells that are hyperproliferative as
demonstrated by BrdU incorporation analysis when compared to wt. Using
combined stem cell markers, the mammary stem cells (MaSCs)/progenitor
cells-enriched population was expanded in mammary tissue from 3N mice,
suggesting that a higher number of MaSCs deregulates a branching network
between ducts and lobulo-alveolar structures similarly to other
premalignant mouse models. Strikingly, further molecular mechanistic
investigation shows that increased expression of c-myc and pvt1 promotes
upregulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers in mammary
glands from 3N mice. Previous studies have reported that 40% of HER2+
breast cancers have a low copy-number gain of 8q24. Therefore, we crossed
our 3N mice with MMTVneu transgenic mice. In these double-mutation mice,
we observed accelerated malignant properties in 3D culture and migratory
analyses. These results suggest that low copy number-gain of 8q24 may
collaborate with Her2 oncogenic pathway to accelerate malignant
transformation. Thus, our 3N mouse model establishes a new milestone in
explaining how the low copy-number gain of 8q24 participates breast
carcinogenesis and will be further analyzed to determine how aggressive
tumor phenotypes are linked to poor clinical outcomes.

