Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyphenolic phytochemical curcumin suppresses HER-2 protein
phosphorylation and gene expression in breast cancer cells


Curcumin (diferuloylmethane) is the major pigment ingredient of turmeric,
a plant native to South Asia, belonging to ginger family. Turmeric is
used in Oriental cuisine and is believed to exert anti-inflammatory,
anti-oxidant and anti-carcinogenic properties. Curcumin has apoptotic
activity against different types of cancer, including colon cancer,
stomach and skin tumors, breast cancer and prostate cancer, and has been
the subject of several clinical studies. Curcumin disrupts different
stages of carcinogenesis, including cell proliferation, survival,
angiogenesis and metastasis in preclinical models. In order to understand
the mechanism of action of curcumin in HER-2 positive breast cancer, we
investigated the effects of different concentrations of curcumin on
SK-BR-3, an HER-2 positive human breast cancer cell line. Curcumin
inhibited the growth of SK-BR-3 cells in a concentration- and
time-dependent manner, with an IC50 value of 5 1 g. A significant 80%
cells underwent apoptosis in the presence of 25 M curcumin at the 24 hour
of treatment, as determined by APO-BRDU assay. At 25 M concentration,
curcumin suppressed the expression of HER-2 gene by a significant 70% (P
0.005, compared to untreated control) at 24 hours of treatment, as
measured by real-time qPCR assay. In addition, curcumin suppressed the
expression of cyclin A, cyclin B1, cyclin D1 and cyclin E by 30 to 70%.
In contrast, 10, 25 and 50 M concentrations of curcumin increased the
expression of p21 by 4-, 3-, and 2-fold, respectively, at 16 hours of
treatment. Comparable increase in p21 level was evident at 24 hours of
treatment also. Curcumin arrested cells in the G2/M phase (38 3% compared
to 22 2 % control at the same time point; P Curcumin (diferuloylmethane)
is the major pigment ingredient of turmeric, a plant native to South
Asia, belonging to ginger family. Turmeric is used in Oriental cuisine
and is believed to exert anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant and
anti-carcinogenic properties. Curcumin has apoptotic activity against
different types of cancer, including colon cancer, stomach and skin
tumors, breast cancer and prostate cancer, and has been the subject of
several clinical studies. Curcumin disrupts different stages of
carcinogenesis, including cell proliferation, survival, angiogenesis and
metastasis in preclinical models. In order to understand the mechanism of
action of curcumin in HER-2 positive breast cancer, we investigated the
effects of different concentrations of curcumin on SK-BR-3, an HER-2
positive human breast cancer cell line. Curcumin inhibited the growth of
SK-BR-3 cells in a concentration- and time-dependent manner, with an IC50
value of 5 1 g. A significant 80% cells underwent apoptosis in the
presence of 25 M curcumin at the 24 hour of treatment, as determined by
APO-BRDU assay. At 25 M concentration, curcumin suppressed the expression
of HER-2 gene by a significant 70% (P 0.005, compared to untreated
control) at 24 hours of treatment, as measured by real-time qPCR assay.
In addition, curcumin suppressed the expression of cyclin A, cyclin B1,
cyclin D1 and cyclin E by 30 to 70%. In contrast, 10, 25 and 50 M
concentrations of curcumin increased the expression of p21 by 4-, 3-, and
2-fold, respectively, at 16 hours of treatment. Comparable increase in
p21 level was evident at 24 hours of treatment also. Curcumin arrested
cells in the G2/M phase (38 3% compared to 22 2 % control at the same
time point; P < 0.001; n = 3). Curcumin suppressed HER-2 phosphorylation
in a concentration- and time-dependent manner, suggesting a possible
mechanism of action. Pre-treatment of cells with an anti-oxidant,
glutathione partially reversed apoptosis induced by curcumin, and
restored HER-2 and cyclin D1 protein levels. These results suggest the
involvement of redox pathway also in the action of curcumin. Taken
together, our data indicate multiple pathways in the mechanism of action
of curcumin in HER-2 positive breast cancer cells, and suggest possible
preventive strategies with this natural plant product.

