Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of BRCA1 mutations in patients with triple negative
breast cancer


Background: Triple negative (TN) breast cancer is characterized by
aggressive behavior and poor prognosis and until recently targeted
treatments were not available. Ongoing trials of PARP inhibitors, which
exploit defects in the DNA repair pathway caused by mutations in BRCA1,
may offer the first tailored treatment for patients with TN disease,
however, whether PARP inhibitors in both patients with and without BRCA1
mutations, remains to be determined. The prevalence and nature of BRCA1
mutations in a population of women with TN breast cancer with and without
significant family history was thus evaluated. Methods: The Clinical
Breast Care Project database was queried to identify all female patients
with TN tumors with and without significant family histories defined as
being diagnosed Background: Triple negative (TN) breast cancer is
characterized by aggressive behavior and poor prognosis and until
recently targeted treatments were not available. Ongoing trials of PARP
inhibitors, which exploit defects in the DNA repair pathway caused by
mutations in BRCA1, may offer the first tailored treatment for patients
with TN disease, however, whether PARP inhibitors in both patients with
and without BRCA1 mutations, remains to be determined. The prevalence and
nature of BRCA1 mutations in a population of women with TN breast cancer
with and without significant family history was thus evaluated. Methods:
The Clinical Breast Care Project database was queried to identify all
female patients with TN tumors with and without significant family
histories defined as being diagnosed <35 years, diagnosed Background:
Triple negative (TN) breast cancer is characterized by aggressive
behavior and poor prognosis and until recently targeted treatments were
not available. Ongoing trials of PARP inhibitors, which exploit defects
in the DNA repair pathway caused by mutations in BRCA1, may offer the
first tailored treatment for patients with TN disease, however, whether
PARP inhibitors in both patients with and without BRCA1 mutations,
remains to be determined. The prevalence and nature of BRCA1 mutations in
a population of women with TN breast cancer with and without significant
family history was thus evaluated. Methods: The Clinical Breast Care
Project database was queried to identify all female patients with TN
tumors with and without significant family histories defined as being
diagnosed <35 years, diagnosed <50 years with at least one primary family
member with breast and/or ovarian cancer, or diagnosed Background: Triple
negative (TN) breast cancer is characterized by aggressive behavior and
poor prognosis and until recently targeted treatments were not available.
Ongoing trials of PARP inhibitors, which exploit defects in the DNA
repair pathway caused by mutations in BRCA1, may offer the first tailored
treatment for patients with TN disease, however, whether PARP inhibitors
in both patients with and without BRCA1 mutations, remains to be
determined. The prevalence and nature of BRCA1 mutations in a population
of women with TN breast cancer with and without significant family
history was thus evaluated. Methods: The Clinical Breast Care Project
database was queried to identify all female patients with TN tumors with
and without significant family histories defined as being diagnosed <35
years, diagnosed <50 years with at least one primary family member with
breast and/or ovarian cancer, or diagnosed <50 years with at least two
secondary family members from the same parental branch from two
generations diagnosed with breast and/or ovarian cancer. Genomic DNA was
isolated from blood and exonic regions of the BRCA1 genes were amplified
and sequenced on an ABI3730xl. Sequence data was analyzed using
Sequencher 4.10.1. Results: Of the 162 women with TN tumors, genomic DNA
was available for 154. Twenty-seven of these women had a significant
family history of breast cancer, of which nine had clinically relevant
mutations, including the C61G mutation in two Caucasian women, and the
943ins10 West African founder mutation in one African American woman. An
additional two African American women with family histories harbored the
2090A/G and R841W variants of unknown clinical significance, while in the
remaining 14 (52%) of women with significant family histories of breast
cancer BRCA1 mutations were not detected. Of the 128 women without
significant family history, five had clinically relevant mutations,
including one Caucasian woman with the C61G mutation diagnosed at age 57,
15 had variants of unknown significance and 107 (84%) had no detectable
mutations. Of the women without BRCA1 mutations, intrinsic subtype was
determined for 37; 33 of which were basal-like. Conclusion: The majority
of TN tumors are not driven by germline BRCA1 mutations with only 9% and
11% of the overall TN population harboring clinically relevant mutations
and variants of unknown significance, respectively. In addition, given
the different genetic backgrounds of heritable compared to sporadic TN
tumors not all TN tumors may respond in the same way to PARP inhibitors.
Finally, the presence of BRCA1 mutations in TN patients without
significant family histories and/or diagnosed at a later age and absence
in patients with significant family histories suggests that current
criteria for identifying patients likely to harbor BRCA1 mutations may
need to be reevaluated in the triple negative patient populations.

