Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of post surgical inflammation in tumor progression in
breast cancer


Introduction The process of chronic inflammation inducing malignant
transformation is well known and recognized in several disease states,
including ulcerative colitis (colorectal carcinoma), chronic wounds
(squamous cell carcinoma), and hepatitis B infection (hepatocellular
carcinoma) as common examples. Recent evidence suggests that this process
may be relevant in other tumor types and may be influenced by
inflammation arising secondary to interventional procedures. The purpose
of this study is to investigate the potential role of inflammatory
mediators resulting from the post-surgical healing process on tumor
proliferation and progression to metastasis in breast cancer. Methods We
used MMTV-PyV MT female mice (transgenic mice expressing the middle T
antigen of the polyomavirus under the control of the MMTV
promoter/enhancer) as a mouse model of human epidermal breast cancer.
Mice underwent a surgical punch biopsy (2 mm) in the center of the tumor,
or underwent the same procedure (transient anesthesia) without biopsy.
Mice were paired according to the tumor size at the time of biopsy. Mice
were then euthanized 8 days after biopsy, and lungs were harvested and
histologically examined for the presence of micrometastases. To further
evaluate the effect of inflammation in the development of metastases, a
separate subset of mice were treated with ibuprofen versus vehicle
(placebo control) for three days after biopsy. Results No substantial
difference in the primary tumor growth was observed after biopsy between
the various groups. However, a greater number of metastases were found in
the lungs of mice that underwent biopsy relative to the number in mice
that did not receive biopsy. The number of metastases was reduced in the
set of mice receiving ibuprofen treatment following the biopsy procedure
(9.3 vs. 25 pIntroduction The process of chronic inflammation inducing
malignant transformation is well known and recognized in several disease
states, including ulcerative colitis (colorectal carcinoma), chronic
wounds (squamous cell carcinoma), and hepatitis B infection
(hepatocellular carcinoma) as common examples. Recent evidence suggests
that this process may be relevant in other tumor types and may be
influenced by inflammation arising secondary to interventional
procedures. The purpose of this study is to investigate the potential
role of inflammatory mediators resulting from the post-surgical healing
process on tumor proliferation and progression to metastasis in breast
cancer. Methods We used MMTV-PyV MT female mice (transgenic mice
expressing the middle T antigen of the polyomavirus under the control of
the MMTV promoter/enhancer) as a mouse model of human epidermal breast
cancer. Mice underwent a surgical punch biopsy (2 mm) in the center of
the tumor, or underwent the same procedure (transient anesthesia) without
biopsy. Mice were paired according to the tumor size at the time of
biopsy. Mice were then euthanized 8 days after biopsy, and lungs were
harvested and histologically examined for the presence of
micrometastases. To further evaluate the effect of inflammation in the
development of metastases, a separate subset of mice were treated with
ibuprofen versus vehicle (placebo control) for three days after biopsy.
Results No substantial difference in the primary tumor growth was
observed after biopsy between the various groups. However, a greater
number of metastases were found in the lungs of mice that underwent
biopsy relative to the number in mice that did not receive biopsy. The
number of metastases was reduced in the set of mice receiving ibuprofen
treatment following the biopsy procedure (9.3 vs. 25 p<0.05). Conclusion
Our study provides evidence to suggest that inflammatory mediators
arising secondary to the healing process may stimulate tumor
proliferation and metastasis. These findings may hold significance for
the timing of breast cancer treatment following diagnostic needle biopsy,
as well as for the potential impact of excisional biopsy on the outcome
of patients with breast cancer. Further research into the mechanisms of
this interaction may help to increase our understanding of breast cancer
biology and may yield new strategies (e.g. anti-inflammatory medication)
to optimize treatment and outcome.

