Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of the association of Notch pathway genes with ID4 and
Ikaros gene expression in leukemia


The Notch signal pathway plays an important role in several cellular
processes in a variety of tissues. In the hematopoiesis Notch expression
is involved in various aspects of cellular regulation and aberrant Notch
signaling components have been associated with malignant transformation.
Hes1 (hairy/enhancer of split 1) gene is a Notch target gene coding for a
transcriptional repressor that is necessary to maintain progenitor cell
populations. HES1 can bind promoter regions of the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitors and repress their expression. Hes-1 expression can be
stimulated by growth factors The Hey family of transcriptional repressors
are canonical direct targets of Notch and function as downstream
effectors of Notch signaling. Expression of HES1 and HEY proteins can
vary in different cell types suggesting an additional mechanism of
transcription regulation. Ikaros is a member of the Kruppel transcription
factor family. Expression of Ikaros down-regulates expression of the
Notch target genes. Deregulation of Ikaros and Notch signalling cooperate
to promote leukemogenesis, providing evidence that they function in
converging pathways. The ID4 (inhibitor of differentiation 4) gene is a
member of the family of ID helix-loop-helix proteins that function as
dominant negative regulators of basic transcription factors. In certain
cancer types downregulation of the ID4 gene has been reported resulting
in low or no expression of the ID4 protein. In the current study the
expression of the Hes1, Hey1, Ikaros and ID4 genes was investigated in
110 patients with acute and chronic leukemias and 32 healthy controls by
real time PCR using the Ct method. Both Hes1 and Hey1 expression levels
were significantly increased in the patients in all disease groups. ID4
expression was significantly decreased in % 86.4 of the patients.
Expression of these genes was strongly associated. Expression of the
Ikaros gene decreased only in the subgroup of patients with CML while it
increased in patients with acute leukemias and CLL. Our data suggest that
the Notch pathway genes Hes1 and Hey1 are activated in leukemias and may
contribute to the disease development while the ID4 gene is supressed,
possibly by methylation.

