Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nature's pharmacy: eburnamonine and its derivative as therapeutics
against brain tumors


Brain tumors are highly aggressive and often afflict younger patients. In
2011 there were 22,340 estimated new cases of brain tumors in the United
States with 40% arising from metastatic lesions originating mostly from
lung, breast, and melanoma tumors. Treatment options remain limited and
include steroids, whole brain radiation, and surgery. Because of
difficulty penetrating the blood-brain barrier (BBB), chemotherapy is
usually not a viable option. Therefore, any intervention that can block
the malignant colonization of the brain and/or eliminate symptomatic and
occult brain lesions will significantly improve both quality of life and
survival. To target brain tumors, a successful therapy has to meet the
following criteria: 1) penetrate the BBB; 2) exhibit specificity for the
tumor cells; and 3) have minimal off-target effects. Here we investigate
a Periwinkle minor derived natural product, eburnamonine (EBN), and its
structural analog, 15-methylene-(-)-eburnamonine (15-M-EBN), as
therapeutic agents against brain lesions from glioblastoma multiforme and
metastatic breast cancer. The two common subtypes of breast tumors giving
rise to brain metastases are triple negative and Her2 positive primary
tumors. Potency of EBN and 15-M-EBN was evaluated in cultures of
chemosensitive (U87) and chemoresistant (SF767) glioma cell lines and
brain-seeking metastatic breast cancer cells, MDA-MB-231BR (triple
negative) and MDA-MB-231BR-Her2 (Her2 positive). To test whether our
compounds can overcome the environment-mediated drug resistance (EM-DR)
cells were treated in the context of extracellular matrix (ECM)
(hyaluronic acid, collagen IV/laminin, and collagens I and
IV/laminin/fibronectin to reconstruct the brain, mammary gland, and bone
marrow microenvironments respectively). The off-target toxicity of EBN
and 15-M-EBN was tested on normal neuronal cells, bone marrow stromal
cells, and non-malignant mammary epithelial cells. To evaluate the
capacity of EBN and 15-M-EBN to penetrate the BBB, we utilized a
transwell model with hCMEC/D3 cell monolayer mimicking the BBB. We
demonstrate that EBN and 15-M-EBN are cytotoxic against glioma and
brain-seeking metastatic breast cancer cells (LC50=42 micromolar and 14
micromolar respectively) with minimal toxicity against non-malignant
cells. Moreover, 15-M-EBN is active in the tumor environment and
predicted to cross the BBB and have anti-cancer stem cell activity. Our
preclinical data establish that 15-M-EBN meets the major criteria for a
successful therapeutic agent to target brain lesions, both primary and
metastatic, due to its ability to: 1) exhibit specificity for the tumor
cells; 2) have minimal neurotoxicity and off-target effects; and 3)
penetrate the BBB. In vivo studies are in progress to establish a
pro-drug strategy to increase water solubility and bioavailability of
15-M-EBN for further clinical development.

