Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral mutual exclusivity of dual amplified receptor
tyrosine kinase genes in glioblastoma


Cancer heterogeneity presents a major barrier for the development of
effective treatment strategies aimed at combating the disease. Within
glioblastoma, this intratumoral heterogeneity may refer to the concurrent
observation of multiple cellular morphologies, differential patterns of
vascular proliferation, discrete transcript and/or protein expression
patterns, and genetic variegation. DNA copy number profiling has
demonstrated that multiple amplifications may frequently be found in the
same glioblastoma specimens. Although tumour clonality would imply that
these events would be present in all neoplastic cells, we and others have
previously noted through detailed FISH/CISH experiments on pathological
specimens that not all cells harbour individual amplification events. In
order to explore these concepts more thoroughly, tissue microarrays
comprising 342 high grade glioma samples were screened by FISH for cells
amplified for genes encoding either EGFR or PDGFRA. A total of 18 cases
(8%) contained both gene amplifications in at least one cell of the TMA
core. We utilised two-colour FISH with differential labelling of probes
specific to EGFR and PDGFRA on whole sections from these samples, and
assessed the relative copy numbers per cell of each gene. The most common
pattern comprised mutual exclusivity of gene amplification within
adjacent glioblastoma cells. To quantify the extent to which these
patterns were reflected across the tumour, we carefully mapped the
relative copy numbers of EGFR and PDGFRA in cells from throughout the
pathology specimen of all dual-amplified glioblastoma cases. By counting
signals in 41,997 cells from 190 distinct loci across 17 samples, we
noted a startling heterogeneity of amplification patterns both across and
within tumour specimens, with approximately three-quarters of cells
harbouring amplification of only one or other of the genes. In only one
case did the single-cell co-amplification model represent more than 15%
of the sample as a whole. Within an individual sample, cells harbouring
one, both, or neither amplification could be found in highly variable
frequencies, either presenting as a mosaic of genetically distinct cells,
or forming foci where one event would strongly predominate. We observed
that these PDGFRA-restricted cells tended to be present close to
endothelial cells, whilst poorly vascularised areas were largely the
domain of EGFR-amplified tumour cells. EGFR amplification was
significantly linked with areas of glioblastoma containing large numbers
of giant cells and/or small cells, whereas all high frequency
PDGFRA-amplified cells were found in areas of fibrillary histology. These
data have profound implications for designing efficacious therapeutic
regimens, as the relative contributions of cell populations harbouring
one or other gene amplification to disease propagation, and the
implications for targeted therapies, are not known.

