Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Atg13 in response to radiotherapy in cervical cancer
cells


Introduction The role of autophagy protecting cancer cells against
anti-cancer therapy, especially via the Beclin-1 axis, has become more
clear. In cervical cancer, functionality of the Beclin-1 axis can be
questioned, since promoter methylation and silencing of two components of
this axis, C13ORF18 (Rubicon-like) and DAPK, is frequently observed. The
involvement of another autophagy pathway, the ULK1 axis is less well
studied in this tumor type. The ULK1 axis, consisting of ULK1, Atg13 and
FIP200 is under control of mTOR. Here, we investigated the role of the
essential component of the ULK1 complex, Atg13 in the response to
(chemo)radiation in cervical cancer. Methods and Results Using
immunohistochemistry we first analyzed expression of Atg13 in a large
cohort of 375 pretreatment tissue samples of advantaged stage cervical
cancer patients primarily treated with (chemo)radiation. Positive
expression of Atg13 was more frequently observed in adenocarcinoma, known
to have a poor response to chemoradiation, compared to squamous carcinoma
(75% versus 56 % positive tumors, pIntroduction The role of autophagy
protecting cancer cells against anti-cancer therapy, especially via the
Beclin-1 axis, has become more clear. In cervical cancer, functionality
of the Beclin-1 axis can be questioned, since promoter methylation and
silencing of two components of this axis, C13ORF18 (Rubicon-like) and
DAPK, is frequently observed. The involvement of another autophagy
pathway, the ULK1 axis is less well studied in this tumor type. The ULK1
axis, consisting of ULK1, Atg13 and FIP200 is under control of mTOR.
Here, we investigated the role of the essential component of the ULK1
complex, Atg13 in the response to (chemo)radiation in cervical cancer.
Methods and Results Using immunohistochemistry we first analyzed
expression of Atg13 in a large cohort of 375 pretreatment tissue samples
of advantaged stage cervical cancer patients primarily treated with
(chemo)radiation. Positive expression of Atg13 was more frequently
observed in adenocarcinoma, known to have a poor response to
chemoradiation, compared to squamous carcinoma (75% versus 56 % positive
tumors, p< 0.03). Transient overexpression of GFP-tagged Atg13 in HEK293T
kidney cells increased radiotherapy resistance (1.5-2 fold). Western blot
showed that Atg13 was expressed in several cervical cancer cell lines,
including the adenocarcinoma model HeLa. Downregulation of Atg13
expression with siRNA, resulted in a 2-fold increase in radiotherapy
sensitivity in HeLa cells as determined with clonogenic assays. In
HeLa-GFP-LC3 cells, we found that irradiation caused a strong increase in
LC-3 containing autophagosomes, which co-localized with Atg13. The
autophagy inhibitor bafilomycin A1 blocks the conversion of
autophagosomes into autolysosomes. Bafilomycin A1 treatment indeed
resulted in an accumulation of radiation-induced autophagosomes,
demonstrating that autophagy was occurring after irradiation. In
addition, HeLa cells were sensitized to irradiation, when autophagy was
inhibited with bafilomycin A1. These results were confirmed using the
less specific autophagy inhibitor 3-methyladenine and the autophagy
inducer rapamycin (an mTOR inhibitor). Conclusion We showed that the
Atg13 expression is related to the presence of cervical adenocarcinoma.
Our in-vitro results indicate that the autophagic ULK1 pathway plays an
important role in protecting cervical cancer cells to irradiation. Thus,
inhibition of autophagy may be an interesting strategy to sensitize
cervical adenocarcinoma to radiotherapy.

