Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilization of TumorGraft technology for personalized breast
cancer treatment


Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women with over 280,000 new
annual cases and 40,000 deaths in the US alone. While hormonal-dependent
breast cancer is correlated with good prognosis, an adequate solution for
hormonal-independent tumors remains an unmet medical need, largely due to
a significant heterogeneity within tumors and their makeover. Various
personalized oncology approaches aim at tailoring the optimal regimen for
these patients by better understanding their tumor distinctiveness.
Champions Oncology focuses on personalizing cancer treatment through the
generation of TumorGraft models form the patient's own tumor. The current
study is focused on the attempt to identify a personalized solution for a
patient with HER2-amplified metastatic breast cancer whose disease
progressed on Trastuzimab (Herceptin). Using Champions novel and
cutting-edge TumorGraft technology, the challenge was confronted
empirically by preforming a personalized clinical trial in vivo. Tumor
fragments, obtained from both the primary breast tumor and lung
metastasis, were implanted in immune-deficient mice in a manner that
preserves the biological properties of the original tumor and its
supporting stroma. Once the TumorGraft models were established, panel of
drugs and drug combinations were evaluated to help identify treatment
regimens that are likely to be most effective for the patient clinically.
The drug study encompassed 7 different treatment groups including
FDA-approved, as well as investigational agents. Of the 7 treatment arms,
3 demonstrated a significant anti-tumor response with tumor growth
inhibition values of 80, 93 and 97% for Lapatinib+Capecitabine,
Gemcitabine+Carboplatin and Ixabepilone+Capecitabine, respectively.
Molecular analysis of the tumor revealed a truncated HER2 (p95) and a
robust HER2 translocation to the nucleus. Additional molecular
characterization is ongoing to determine other potential signatures of
response. Results from the TumorGraft study were recommended to the
patient and her medical oncologist and new lines of treatment were
commenced subsequently. Herein, we describe the data from the TumorGraft
drug study, the molecular exploration and the pathway analysis of the
primary and the metastatic tumor and the consequences correlation to the
clinical outcome.

