Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo efficiency and biodistribution of TNF-alpha expressing
small-sized vector DNA after intratumoral nonviral jet-injection


Nonviral gene therapy is gaining growing importance and has been applied
in numerous studies to treat cancer. Plasmid vectors are still used in
the majority of cancer gene therapy approaches. However, it is broadly
accepted, that plasmid-vectors need significant improvements to enhance
their safety and efficiencies. In this context small-sized vectors are
attractive alternatives. The MIDGE-platform (Mologen, Berlin, Germany)
represents such small vector system harboring the essential expression
cassette in a double-stranded linear DNA molecule and end-sealing
oligonucleotide loops. We used the MIDGE-vector for the expression of the
human TNF-alpha. Here we show, that this MIDGE-CMVhTNF system permits
significantly improved in vivo TNF-alpha expression in the A375 and MeWo
human melanoma xenotransplant model after intratumoral in vivo
jet-injection gene transfer in nude mice. The comparison to the
respective plasmid-vector revealed an up to 22-fold increase of the
MIDGE-CMVhTNF mediated intratumoral TNF-alpha expression. Apart from
these efficiency studies the safe use of such minimal-size vector is
essential. We therefore analyzed the biodistribution and clearance of the
MIDGE-CMVhTNF vector after jet-injection in A375 melanoma bearing nude
mice. For this, the animals received 5 jet-injections through the skin
into the tumor at a pressure of 2.8 Bar. Each jet-injection delivered
0.01 mL MIDGE-DNA at a concentration of 1mg/mL. The intratumoral
MIDGE-DNA load was analyzed 5, 10, 20, 40 minutes and 3, 6, 24, 48, 72
hours as well as 7 days after jet-injection by quantitative real-time
PCR. For the same time points the systemic dissemination of the MIDGE-DNA
was quantitatively analyzed by real-time PCR in the blood, liver, lung,
spleen, kidney, ovary, heart and brain. The analyses show high DNA-load
of up to 12 ng vector-DNA / 250 ng tumor DNA and a clearance of this DNA
in the tumors within 3 to 7 days. This is paralleled with the decline of
TNF-alpha expression. Regarding systemic biodistribution MIDGE-DNA levels
in blood samples are peaking at 30 minutes after jet-injection, followed
by the rapid drop within 60 minutes after DNA application. The
MDGE-vector DNA was also detected in liver, lung, spleen, kidney, brain,
ovary and heart at varying pg-levels for up to 3 hours after
jet-injection. This was followed by the clearance of this DNA within 6 to
24 hours after gene transfer. More importantly, in none of these organs
TNF-alpha mRNA expression was detected by real-time RT-PCR at any time
point. In summary these data indicate, that the MIDGE-CMVhTNF vector
leads to improved in vivo transgene expression and shows only limited
systemic biodistribution after intratumoral jet-injection, associated
with its rapid clearance. These parameters are of importance for the
potential clinical use of this vector.

