Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of head and neck cancer reveals recurrent copy number
aberrations and molecular subtypes exhibiting distinct expression
patterns of known oncogenes in the chr3q amplicon


Background: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a
heterogeneous disease whose underlying etiology is unknown. Chung et al.
(Cancer Cell 2004; 5: 489 - 500) detected HNSCC gene expression (GE)
subtypes, but to our knowledge these subtypes have not been discovered in
other HNSCC datasets. Moreover, we are not aware of any HNSCC studies
that have examined recurrent DNA copy number (CN) aberrations in the
context of GE subtypes. Numerous studies have shown that HNSCC exhibits
recurrent copy number gains in chr3q26-28, a region that contains the
known oncogenes SOX2, PIK3CA, and TP63. Bass et al. (Nature Genetics
2009; 41(11): 1238 - 1242) suggest that SOX2 plays a fundamental role in
the development of esophageal SCC. However, it does not appear that the
expression patterns of SOX2, PIK3CA, and TP63 have been investigated in
HNSCC. Techniques: After receiving informed consent, we obtained tumor
samples from an incident surgical series of HNSCC patients at the
University of North Carolina Hospital. CN and GE assays were performed
using Affymetrix Genome-Wide SNP6.0 and Agilent 44K Gene Expression
platforms, respectively. GE subtypes were discovered using
ConsensusClusterPlus, and their statistical significance was assessed
with SigClust. DiNAMIC was used to detect recurrent CN aberrations.
Results: Tumor samples from 169 patients were obtained, making this the
largest genomic HNSCC series ever reported to our knowledge. After
passing quality control on both platforms, GE data was available for 138
patients, while CN data was available for 110 patients; GE and CN data
was available for 82 patients. Four GE subtypes were found, and all
pairwise comparisons of these subtypes were statistically significant
after adjusting for multiple testing. Nearest centroid methods show that
our GE subtypes correspond to those of Chung et al.; three of our four GE
subtypes show strong similarities to those found in lung squamous cell
carcinoma. Overall, recurrent CN gains were discovered in chr3q27,
chr11q13, and chr8q23; recurrent CN losses were found in chr3p21,
chr9p21, and chr8p23. All of these regions harbor known oncogenes.
Distinct patterns of recurrent gains and losses were noted when CN data
from each GE subtype was examined, and different patterns of gain and
loss were found when we examined CN data from each tumor site. Although
the expression subtypes exhibit similar CN values in the chr3q26-28
amplicon, the expression patterns of SOX2, PIK3CA, and TP63 differ
considerably. Conclusion: Integrated genomic analysis reveals HNSCC GE
subtypes, some of which are present in lung cancer. The existence of
distinct patterns of CN gain and loss in the GE subtypes suggests the
presence of multiple biological pathways that play fundamental roles in
the development of HNSCC.

