Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA aptamers as highly specific inhibitors of three human RTKs
including Axl, EGFR and PDGFR


Aptamers are single-stranded oligonucleotides able to bind with high
affinity to specific protein or non-protein targets by folding into
complex tertiary structures. They have proven useful as reagents for
identifying cell surface proteins and for cell typing. Further, their
high specificity and low toxicity render them a valid alternative to
antibodies for in vivo targeted recognition as therapeutics or delivery
agents for nanoparticles, small interfering RNAs, chemotherapeutics and
molecular imaging probes. We have generated aptamers as biologically
active ligands for cancer cell surface proteins. The approach has been
applied to different tumor systems with the generation of different
2fluoro-pyrimidines containing RNA aptamers that specifically bind to the
ectodomain of human receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). Three of these
aptamers (named GL21, CL4 and M4) bind at high affinity and high
specificity to Axl, EGFR and PDGFR, respectively. Following binding, the
aptamers hamper ligand-dependent receptor dimerization and
autophosphorylation. All the selected aptamers bind to the correspondent
protein target with Kd values in the order of 10 nM and show excellent
correlation between cell surface binding and the expression of the target
on the cell surface. The anti-Axl GL21 aptamer strongly inhibits cell
migration and invasion in vitro, reduces the number of colonies in soft
agar colony formation assay and interferes with spheroid formation by
malignant glioma U87MG cells. Furthermore, it strongly inhibits tumor
growth in mouse xenograft models of human cancer. The anti-EGFR CL4
aptamer strongly induces apoptosis of EGFR-positive cells and at low
doses it works even on cells that are resistant to the most frequently
used EGFR-inhibitors, as gefitinib and cetuximab. In addition, the
combined treatment of cetuximab with the aptamer shows clear synergy in
vitro and in vivo. Moreover, we demonstrated that GL21 and M4 aptamer not
only bind to Axl and PDGFR, respectively, but also internalize within the
target cell thus they can be used as cargoes for tissue specific
internalization. The generation of RNA-chimeras (aptamer/miRNA) is on
going in our laboratory.

