Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of PI3K pathway genes in bladder cancer


Bladder cancer is the most common cancer of the urinary tract and is the
ninth the most common cancer among men. Its incidence directly increases
with age, it rarely occurs before the age of 50 and it is three to four
times more common in men compared to women. Although there is now
exclusive information on bladder cancer genetics, epigenetics and gene
expression, several questions remain unanswered. Global profiling via
expression and genomic microarray technologies may provide answers to
some of the outstanding questions. Many studies have assessed the status
of known oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes and have investigated
common chromosomal alterations to identify novel genomic events in
bladder cancer. The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling
pathway plays critical role in cell growth, proliferation, and apoptosis.
As a result of genomic alterations and loss of some tumor suppressor
genes signaling through this pathway is commonly altered in many types of
cancer including bladder. In the present study, our interest was focused
on the expression analysis of some critical genes in this pathway. For
this purpose, expression of seven genes (mTOR, KRAS, PIK3CA, TSC1, STK11,
Rheb, PTEN and AKT1) acting in this pathway was analyzed in 35 matched
bladder tumor and non-cancerous tissue samples by quantitative RT-PCR.
Expression of all genes except PIK3CA and PTEN were similar for the
normal bladder and tumor tissue. We observed downregulated expression of
PTEN and PIK3CA genes in bladder tumors. The median PTEN mRNA levels in
non-cancerous and tumor tissue samples were 2.11 and 0.35, respectively
and the difference between the two groups was statistically significant
(p=0.00). PIK3CA was also downregulated in the tumor tissues. Tumor
tissue samples displayed 6.62 fold decrease in PIK3CA expression compared
to normal tissue samples (p=0.002). On the other hand, slightly decreased
Rheb mRNA expression was also observed in tumor tissue compared to the
non-cancerous tissue. However, the difference expression levels of Rheb
between two groups was not statistically significant. Our result indicate
that, PI3K pathway has an important function in bladder cancer
progression with the contribution of more than one gene in this pathway.

