Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of SEL120: An orally available dual inhibitors
of Haspin/CDK9, for standalone and combination therapy with AuroraB
inhibitors in solid tumors and hematopoietic malignancies


The mitotic machinery is a validated target for potential drug therapies
in cancer. However, anti-mitotic agents are not without complications
from various side effects, notably neurological and hematological
toxicities. There is much interest in identifying new drug targets in
mitosis which could lead to safer and more efficacious treatments of
cancer. Recently, Haspin has been identified as another important kinase
involved in mitosis. Similar to other mitotic kinases such as Polo-like
kinase-1 and the Aurora kinases, inhibition of Haspin represents a novel
approach in anti-mitotic cancer therapeutics. In this study we report the
development of SEL120, series of novel ATP competitive inhibitors of
Haspin kinase. These compounds have binding affinities towards Haspin
kinase in the low nM range. Several compounds in the series exerted
significant activity on CDK9 (selectively over other CDK kinases), a part
of positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) involved in the
expression of survival proteins during progression of cancer. SEL120
inhibited proliferation and clonogenic survival of a number of tumor cell
lines with particularly good cytostatic activity in colon, lung (NSCLS)
and B cell lymphoma cell lines. The only substrate of Haspin reported in
literature to date is histone H3. During mitosis Haspin targets a single
site in this protein, namely threonine at position T3 (H3T3ph). By using
siRNA, we have confirmed that Thr3 phosphorylation of histone H3 could be
completely repressed by the knockdown of Haspin in HCT116 colon and A549
(NSCLC) lung cancer cell lines. We also consistently observed decreased
phosphorylation of histone H3 (Thr3) in both synchronized and
asynchronous cell lines treated with SEL120 inhibitor. In addition
SEL120-1 treatment decreased levels of CDK9 biomarkers- phosphorylation
of pol II CTD (Ser2) and expression of the pro-survival protein Mcl-1
Treatment with SEL120 consistently resulted in mitotic cell cycle arrest
in A549 cell line confirming inhibition of Haspin as the mechanism of
action. Remarkably, inhibitory activity on CDK9 correlated with levels of
cell death. Furthermore, co-administration of SEL120 with an AuroraB
inhibitors, resulted in strong synergistic cytostatic effects. Treatment
with both compounds increased the number of cells arrested in mitosis,
notably without any signs of polyploidy typically observed after
inhibition of AuroraB. Oral administration of SEL120 (25mg/kg BID)
revealed excellent potency in colon and B-cell lymphoma xenograft models.
Analysis of pharamcokinetic, ADMET and histopathological parameters
afforded encouraging results towards potential development of new
therapeutics emerging from our SEL120 program.

