Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ingenol mebutate induces an early and inflammatory wound healing
response in a human in vitro 3-D skin model


Ingenol mebutate (IM, ingenol-3-angelate, PEP005) is a promising new
agent for topical treatment of actinic keratosis (AK), a pre-malignant
condition that if left untreated can develop into squamous cell
carcinoma. A dual mechanism of action of IM has been suggested; this
involves direct lesional cell death and PKC activation dependent, immune
modulatory effects. The aim of this study was to investigate the mode of
action of IM. We have previously compared IM's penetration through normal
skin to a 3-D reconstructed human skin (RHS) model (EpiDermFT, MatTek). A
10-fold higher permeability was found in RHS, which likely reflects the
increased permeability of AK lesions. Therefore, we studied the effects
of 0.05% IM gel in this model at different time points (0.5, 6, 24, and
96 h). The response parameters measured included cytotoxicity (MTT
assay), cytokine secretion, as well as global transcriptomic profiling
(Affymetrix GeneChip Human Gene 1.0 ST arrays). Multivariate analysis,
including principal component analysis, unsupervised hierarchical
clustering, and gene ontology enrichment, revealed that the major effects
of IM comprised: cell death, inflammation and a wound healing response.
This was indicated by differential expression of e.g. CASP14, HAS2,
several MMPs, SERPINs, ILs, and CCL20. We also observed regulation of
many skin-specific genes, related both to epidermis development, such as
keratinocyte differentiation, and to fibroblasts in dermis, reflecting
the nature of the RHS. Furthermore, a transcription factor binding site
(TFBS) analysis suggested ERK2 and PKC as relevant targets for IM. This
is in accord with the drug's transient immune modulatory effect. Indeed,
a specific, inflammatory response was observed already after 30 min
treatment, and several genes, including MMP10 and IL1R2, displayed a
time-dependent increase in expression, reaching a maximum at 24h
returning to normal at 96h. A sustained effect was observed for more than
300 genes, most of which were down-regulated following IM treatment. In
conclusion, IM displays pleiotropic effects, of which many are regulated
on a transcriptional level. Our data suggest transient activation of in
particular PKC and ERK2, with a link to cytokine release and wound
healing response. The inflammatory reaction may subsequently contribute
to the cell death observed after 24h treatment with IM.

