Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implication of cytokines released from gingival fibroblasts
exposed by areca nut extract in carcinogenesis


Oral Submucous Fibrosis (OSF) is a premalignant fibrotic disease occurred
due to chewing habit of Areca nut consumption. We hypothesize that Areca
nut exposure induces submucosal fibroblasts to secrete cytokines, by
which they contribute to the malignant transformation of overlying
epithelium through DNA damage. This study aims to find out these
cytokines and to elucidate their role in carcinogenesis in OSF. For this
study, normal gingival fibroblasts (hNOF), immortalized gingival
fibroblast (hTERT-hNOF), and immortalized oral keratinocytes (IHOK) were
utilized. Aqueous Areca nut extract (ANE) was used to stimulate hNOF and
hTERT-hNOF. Conditioned media from ANE treated fibroblasts were screened
using a cytokine antibody array. ELISA, RT-PCR and immunofluorescence
were used for further analysis of the secretory cytokines. For evaluating
DNA damage of IHOK by cytokine treatment, phospho-Histone H2A.X and
8-oxodG were utilized by immunofluorescence staining and FACS. DNA
aneuploidy was measured by FACS. ROS production by cytokine treatment was
also detected by immunofluorescence staining and FACS using H2DCFDA.
Morphologic change of IHOK by long-term treatment of cytokines was also
observed. Human tissues obtained from OSF patients were assessed by
immunohistochemistry for the cytokine expressions and the detection of
DNA damage. Increased expressions of GRO-, IL-6, and IL-8 were found in
ANE-stimulated hNOF and hTERT-hNOF. Long term ANE exposure of hTERT-hNOF
caused senescent features, showing increased secretion of GRO-, IL-6, and
IL-8. Cytokine (GRO-, IL-6, IL-8) treated IHOK caused increased aneuploid
cell population. It also showed these cytokines produce ROS in IHOK
causing oxidative DNA damage as well as DNA double strand breaks.
Treatment of Glutathione and neutralizing antibodies reduced DNA damage
in IHOK. OSF tissues also were evident of cytokine expression, oxidative
DNA damage and DNA double strand breaks in the epithelium. Cytokines
induced high motility in IHOK and long-term treatment of cytokines
induced epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) in IHOK. Taken together,
ANE stimulates gingival fibroblasts to secrete increase GRO-, IL-6, and
IL-8, by which they caused oxidative DNA damage via ROS production in
IHOK. In addition, these cytokines induced DNA aneuploidy and EMT in
IHOK. These results may provide insights to understand a contributory
mechanism responsible for malignant transformation of OSF epithelium and
to develop novel preventive modalities inhibiting their transforming
routes. This work was supported by the Priority Research Centers Program
through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the
Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2009-0094028) and
(2010-0029702)

