Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new IGF-1-integrated Child-Pugh score to risk-stratify patients
with hepatocellular carcinoma


Purpose The Child-Pugh (CP) system is the major tool for assessing the
underlying liver condition and guiding therapy decisions in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients. It is itself relatively
quantitative and uses five empirically selected variables, including
hepatic encephalopathy and ascites, which are clinically difficult to
grade and may vary in severity according to medical management of
patients. Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) is produced predominantly
in the liver, and hence reflects its synthetic function. Our study
objective was to build a new CP score by integrating plasma IGF-1 level
into the CP parameters to refine its prognostic stratification ability.
Patients and Methods We prospectively collected plasma samples and
clinical data from 310 individuals with HCC. IGF-1 levels were measured
by ELISA and recursive partitioning was used to identify optimal cut
points and IGF-1 ranges, using training and validation sets, and
established the cut-off values of IGF-1 arranged so as to define the
three distinct groups of IGF-1 with increasing liver function severity;
A=1, B=2, and C=3. We then constructed the new score by replacing points
from ascites and encephalopathy with plasma IGF-1 points; the new score
points = 4-11. Finally, we performed log rank test for both systems, and
also compared their prognostic abilities using concordance index
(c-index). Results Compared with CP system, the new system (c -index =
0.608) improves the capacity in predicting OS and refined the
stratification of all classes of the original CP (c-index = 0.573), (p
value = 0.0029). Conclusion Replacing ascites and encephalopathy by
plasma IGF-1 significantly improved prediction of OS and prognostic
stratification of the conventional CP system. After external validation,
the new scoring system may become the standard of care in guiding therapy
decisions and stratifying HCC patients in clinical trials.

