Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel blood plasma protein test for diagnosis of
lung cancer


Background: A blood test for detection of lung cancer (LC) could provide
survival benefits in high-risk populations. We conducted a retrospective
study as the next step of our effort to develop a test for diagnosis of
non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC), the most common form of LC, by
measuring levels of protein biomarkers in plasma. Materials and Methods:
We quantified levels of 106 proteinaceous biomarkers using multiplexed
immunoassays of subjects a) diagnosed with stage I/II NSCLC, b) normal
non-smoking controls, and c) normal heavy smoking controls (> 10 p.y.).
All groups consisted of Caucasian men and women (93 subjects each, ages
range 45-87, Ave 59). The specimens were randomized and tested in a
blinded manner. A support vector machine (SVM) algorithm, developed and
tested in a pilot study, was used to identify differentially expressed
biomarkers in the disease and control groups taking into account patients
gender. Pathway analysis was applied to characterize pathology- and
gender-specific patterns of biomarker expression. Results: In a recent
pilot study we developed SVM models that classified subjects to NSCLC or
normal using 59 plasma markers or subsets thereof, for both genders
combined or separately. When data for both genders were analyzed
together, SVM classified subjects to NSCLC or normal and identified 4
differentially expressed markers: EGF, sCD40 ligand, IL-8 and MMP-8;
sensitivity (SE) 0.93 (95% CI: 0.88-0.96), specificity (SP) 0.87 (95% CI:
0.80-0.92). Considering the sexes separately, the differentially
expressed best subset of markers for men (EGF, IL-8, sFAS, MMP-9 and
PAI-1) had both SE and SP of 1.0. For women, the best subset of markers
(EGF, sCD40 ligand and IL-8) also yielded SE and SP of 1.0. The present
study has further confirmed and refined our earlier findings and expanded
panels of diagnostic biomarkers for NSCLC with comparable sensitivities
and specificities. Analysis of cellular pathways represented by the
discriminatory biomarker signatures suggested a role of sex
hormone-driven differences of NSCLC plasma biomarkers. Conclusions: The
set of diagnostic biomarkers for NSCLC identified in this study holds
significant promise for use in the early diagnosis of lung cancer and
warrants validation of findings in other ethnic groups and for
potentially confounding diseases in clinical studies.

