Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel selective EZH2 inhibitor exhibits anti-tumor activity in
lymphoma with EZH2 activating mutations


EZH2 is the catalytic subunit of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2)
responsible for methylating histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27) and
repressing transcription of target genes. Dysregulation of H3K27
methylation is implicated in tumorigenesis in both solid and
hematopoietic tumors and occurs through multiple mechanisms including
elevation of EZH2 due to loss of regulating miRNAs; inactivating
mutations in UTX, an H3K27 demethylase which acts in opposition to EZH2;
and somatic mutations in EZH2. Point mutations identified in EZH2 in both
follicular lymphoma (FL) and GCB diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
exhibit increased H3K27 tri-methylation due to an altered histone
substrate preference. This suggests that inhibitors of EZH2 activity may
be effective in treating lymphomas carrying activating mutations in EZH2.
We have identified first-in-class inhibitors of EZH2 which are
highly-potent, reversible, SAM competitive, selective and equipotent
against both WT and mutant EZH2. Cellular mechanistic studies demonstrate
that inhibition of EZH2 decreases global H3K27me3 in both WT and EZH2
mutant cell lines; however, the cell proliferation response is quite
different. Overall, DLBCL cell lines harboring activating mutations in
EZH2 are highly sensitive to EZH2 inhibition, while DLBCL cell lines with
WT EZH2 are moderately sensitive or resistant. Transcriptional and
ChIP-seq studies reveal differences in the transcriptional response of
EZH2 target genes and methylation patterns among cell lines providing
insight into the mechanism of sensitivity. In a mouse model bearing EZH2
mutant DLBCL tumor xenografts, inhibition of EZH2 methyltransferase
activity reduces global H3K27me3, increases expression of EZH2 target
genes and inhibits the growth of tumors in a dose dependent manner.
Together, these data demonstrate for the first time that direct
inhibition of EZH2 methyltransferase activity is effective at inhibiting
tumor growth and suggests a promising path forward in the clinic for the
treatment of EZH2 mutant lymphoma.

