Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DPC4 loss results in the activation of alternative oncogenic
pathways in pancreatic cancer


Introduction: Pancreatic cancer remains one of the most lethal forms of
cancer, with a five-year survival rate of less than five percent. Many of
these patients succumb to complications from metastasis. We have shown
that genetic inactivation of DPC4, a major factor in TGF- signaling, is
significantly correlated with widespread metastasis in pancreatic cancer
patients at autopsy. We hypothesize that DPC4 loss may be driving
pancreatic cancer metastasis by forcing the TGF- signal down an
alternative pathway. Methods: DPC4 was stably restored into three cell
lines that harbor a homozygous deletion of the locus (A2.1, A6L, and
BxPC3), forming isogenic pairs of DPC4/ and DPC4+ cells. Matched DPC4/
and DPC4+ cells were treated with TGF-1 for 24 hours prior to protein
extraction. Immunoblotting was performed for total and phospho Akt (Pi3K
pathway), p44-42 (ERK pathway), and Stat3 (JAK-Stat pathway), as well as
nuclear and cytoplasmic p65 (NFB pathway), as these networks have
previously been identified as being activated by TGF-.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on 50 surgically resected pancreatic
cancers for pAkt. Results: DPC4 was successfully introduced into DPC4/
cells, as evidenced by semi-quantitative PCR for DPC4, as well as a TGF-
luciferase assay. DPC4+ cells displayed characteristic differences in
cell behavior, such as decreased proliferation, migration, and invasion,
compared to DPC4/ cells. Western blot analysis of Smad-independent TGF-
pathways in three sets of DPC4-complemented pancreatic cancer cell lines
revealed patterns of preferential activation of the Pi3K and ERK
signaling pathways in cells lacking DPC4. In surgically-resected
pancreatic cancers, activation of Pi3K was associated with the presence
of lymph node metastases (p=0.03), while concomitant DPC4 loss and Pi3K
pathway activity was associated with poor survival in pancreatic cancer
patients (p=0.02). Conclusions: Restoration of DPC4 into DPC4/ cells
results in the abrogation of Pi3K and ERK signaling, and simultaneous
DPC4 loss and Pi3K activation correlates to a poor prognosis of
pancreatic cancer patients at surgery. Further studies will confirm
whether genotype-specific activation of the ERK and Pi3K pathways plays a
role in pancreatic cancer cell behavior, particularly those processes
that directly impact metastasis (i.e. migration and invasion).
Nevertheless, it is intriguing to consider the Pi3K and ERK pathways as
therapeutic targets in pancreatic cancer patients with loss of DPC4.

