Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of cellular senescence checkpoint functions reveals the
oncogene characteristics of Notch1 in squamous cell carcinomas


Introduction: Notch signaling regulates cell fates that are dependent
upon the CSL transcription factor. Both tumor suppressor and oncogenic
roles of Notch have been implicated in the pathogenesis of squamous cell
carcinomas (SCCs). We investigated the functional consequences of Notch
activation in head and neck as well as esophageal SCCs (HNSCC and ESCC).
Methods: Primary tumor tissues annotated with known clinical outcomes
were analyzed. Human esophageal cells immortalized with telomerase or
human papilloma virus E6/E7 genes, their derivatives expressing mutant
p53 and ESCC cell lines were stably transduced with ICN1, an active form
of Notch1 in a regulatable manner (Tet-On system). Notch was inhibited by
dominant negative mastermind-like1 (DNMAML1), a genetic pan-Notch
inhibitor or -secretase inhibitors (GSI). 8xCSL-luciferase reporter was
used to assess Notch-mediated transcriptional activity. RNA interference
was done targeting either CSL or p16INK4A. Senescence was determined by
cell growth inhibition and senescence-associated -galactosidase assays.
Cell growth was tested in soft agar and immunodeficient mice. Gene
expression was determined by quantitative RT-PCR, Western blotting and
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Results: In primary tumors, the active form
of Notch1 (ICN1Val1744) was detected as intense nuclear staining of tumor
cells in the invasive fronts in 29% of HNSCC (n=17) and 56% of ESCC
(n=171). Nuclear ICN1Val1744 was significantly associated with a poor
5-year survival in postsurgical ESCC patients (n=115). In culture, ICN1
induced cellular senescence through CSL-dependent p16INK4A induction,
which was antagonized by DNMAML1 or knockdown of either CSL or p16INK4A.
Moreover, ICN1 failed to induce senescence in immortalized cells
expressing E6/E7 or ESCC cells with a deleted INK4 locus. However, p53
mutation did not prevent ICN1-induced senescence. In soft agar and
xenograft transplantation, ICN1 stimulated colony formation and tumor
growth of ESCC cells that negated senescence. Histology revealed an
increased number of less-differentiated tumor cells upon ICN1 induction.
Moreover, GSI treatment of mice with xenografted ESCC cells resulted in
tumor necrosis. Conclusions: These data indicate that Notch activation
contributes to disease progression in ESCC. While ICN1 induces
senescence, loss of p16INK4A-mediated senescence checkpoint point
functions may be required in ICN1-mediated malignant transformation, thus
providing a novel mechanistic insight into how Notch signaling may
contribute to the pathogenesis of SCCs.

