Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Restoration of fibronectin matrix assembly impedes invasion and
reduces tumor-stromal cell affinity in prostate cancer


Cell-cell and cell-ECM interactions are important regulators of cohesion,
a property previously demonstrated to mediate malignant invasion.
Intermixing of the epithelial and stromal compartments is often
associated with increased invasive capacity and poor prognosis. The
studies reported here propose a novel role for 51 integrin, the principle
mediator of fibronectin matrix assembly (FNMA), as an invasion suppressor
in prostate cancer cells. Employing a combination of biophysical and cell
biological techniques we explore the relationship between cohesion,
invasion, FNMA and tumor-stromal interactions, using a well-characterized
prostate cancer model. We show that cohesion is inversely proportional to
invasive capacity. We also show that the most invasive cells are
deficient in FNMA and express reduced levels of 51 integrin. We generated
cells over-expressing either wild-type 5 integrin or a non-functional 5
in which the cytoplasmic domain was replaced with that of 2. We show that
only wild-type 5 was able to increase cohesion and reduce the
invasiveness of aggressive cells. In order to further explore the
influence of FNMA on tumor-stromal cell interaction we employed a liquid
miscibility model in which interactions between tumor and stroma are
rooted in the same thermodynamic principles that govern the mixing of
simple fluids. In this model, whether tumor and stromal cells segregate
or intermix depends on the ratio of the strength of self-cohesion to
cross-adhesion; a high ratio corresponds with segregation, whereas a
lower ratio denotes intermixing. We hypothesized that segregation between
tumor and stroma can be promoted by increasing the strength of tumor cell
cohesion. To test this hypothesis, we first showed that aggressive
prostate cancer cells intermix with prostate fibroblasts. We then treated
the cancer cells with MEK inhibitors (MEKi) and showed that treatment
restored FNMA, leading to increased cell-cell cohesion. When mixed with
prostate stromal cells, MEKi-treated cells segregated, suggesting that
increasing cohesion between tumor cells is sufficient to reduce their
affinity for stromal cells. These data suggest that by increasing tumor
cell cohesion through a fibronectin matrix mediated adhesion mechanism,
it may be possible to effectively reduce affinity of tumor cells for
stroma, thus inhibiting invasion.

