Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Photodynamic therapy using PMB polymer as a new nanotransporter of
verteporfin for the treatment of lymph node metastasis in breast cancer


[Introduction] Although axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) has been
part of breast cancer surgery, the impact of ALND on survival of breast
cancer is still to be elucidated. At the same time ALND is associated
with several complications such as lymphedema, seroma formation and
shoulder dysfunction. Therefore, the development of minimally invasive
procedure alternative to ALND is necessary. Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is
a noninvasive optical therapeutic method in which the topical or systemic
delivery of photosensitizer is followed by irradiation with broadband red
light. Despite advantages such as longer wave length and a short
photosensitivity period, verteporfin, a hydrophobic photosensitizer, has
not yet been applied in cancer treatment. Previously, we have reported
that PMB polymer forms a stable aggregate in water that can enhance the
solubility of verteporfin, and PDT using a PMB-verteporfin complex is a
promising anticancer therapy (Cancer Biotherapy and Radiopharmaceuticals
2011, Epub ahead of print). In this study, the efficacy of PDT using PMB
polymer as a new nanotransporter of verteporfin for the treatment of
lymph node metastasis was evaluated.[Materials and Methods]To develop a
murine lymph node metastasis model, 5x105 human epithelial carcinoma A431
cells with stable expression of GFP were injected to the forearm of
BALB/c nude mice. PMB polymer and verteporfin were mixed at the ratio of
25:1, and sonicated to make the PMB-verteporfin aggregate. Seven days
after inoculation of cancer cells, PMB-verteporfin aggregate or PMB
polymer alone was injected to the forearm of BALB/c nude mice. The
concentation of verteporfin in lymph node was determined by measuring the
fluorescence emitted at 700 nm (with excitation at 430 nm) using a
microplate reader (BioTek, Vermont, USA). One hour after injection of
aggregate or PMB alone, 75 J of light energy was delivered using a 640 nm
diode laser for a total treatment time of 1 minute. Mice were randomly
assigned to the combination of PMB-verteporfin inpjection and light
exposure, light exposure alone, PMB-verteporfin injection alone, and PMB
injection alone. Ten days after PDT, lymph nodes were harvested to
evaluate metastasis by stereoscopic fluorescence microscope. [Results]
Concentration of verteporfin was 23.9g/g tissue in brachial and 9.5g/g
tissue in axillary lymph node. Lymph node metastasis rates of combination
of PMB-verteporfin injection and light exposure group, light exposure
group, PMB-verteporfin injection group, and PMB injection group were
12.5%, 57.1%, 33.3% and 56.3%, respectively. [Conclusion] These data
suggested that PDT using PMB polymer as a new nanotransporter of
verteporfin could be a minimally invasive treatment of lymph node
metastasis in breast cancer.

