Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I study of azacitidine and cisplatin in patients with
advanced head and neck or non-small cell lung cancer


Background: DNA hypomethylation agents such as azacitidine may be used
for epigenetic sensitization of cisplatin treatment, and therefore
leading to improvement of treatment outcome. We conducted a phase I study
of azacitidine and cisplatin to determine safety, toxicity, and effect of
global DNA methylation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Methods:
Azacitidine was given as subcutaneous injection daily from day 1 to day
5, and cisplatin was given at 75 mg/m2 IV on day 8. The treatment was
repeated every 28 days. Four patients received azacitidine 37 mg/m2 daily
from day 1 to day 5 on dose level 1. Two patients were treated on dose
level 2, and received azacitidine 60 mg/m2 daily from day 1 to day 5.
Peripheral blood samples were collected before and after azacitidine
treatment. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear cells, and
subjected to gas chromatography/mass spectrometry to measure the level of
global DNA methylation, as reflected by the ratio of 5-methylcytosine to
the sum of 5-methylcytosine and cytosine. Results: No patient had
dose-limiting toxicities. Four patients completed at least 2 cycles of
treatment, and were evaluated for clinical response by CT scan and DNA
methylation effect. One partial response was noted in patient with
metastatic tongue cancer after 2 cycles of treatment on dose level 1 of
azacitidine. This patient received total 3 cycles of treatment and
achieved free of progression for about 15 months on chemotherapy holiday.
One patient with recurrent salivary gland cancer achieved stable disease
after 2 cycles of treatment on dose level 2, and maintained in free of
progression for more than 6 months after 4 cycles of treatment. There was
inhibition of global DNA methylation after azacitidine treatment ranging
from 12 to 36% in all 4 patients. Furthermore, the inhibition of global
DNA methylation was associated with the increase of fetal hemoglobin in
patients peripheral blood. Conclusion: Sequential administration of
azacitidine followed by cisplatin is well tolerated, and demonstrates
encouraging activity in patients with advanced head and neck cancer. This
combination deserves further clinical investigation to study the
correlation between clinical response and biological effects.

