Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation between genomic aberrations and the DNA damage
response in bladder cancer


Carcinogenesis is paralleled by ongoing insults to tumor genome
integrity, commonly sensed and reacted to by the DNA damage response
(DDR). The DDR is thought to act as an inducible barrier against early
tumor development, but, if compromised, may allow tumor progression and
rampant genomic instability. However, the interplay between the DDR,
genomic integrity, and tumor development is still poorly understood. To
extend current knowledge of these issues, we analyzed 45 human bladder
tumors from 22 patients using a combination of Affymetrix Genome-Wide
Human SNP Arrays 6.0 and immunohistochemistry (IHC). This allowed us to
characterize genomic aberrations at high resolution, and determine the
tissue expression patterns of several DDR components in the context of
the underlying genomic complexity. The complexity of individual
SNP-profiles varied considerably and widespread aberrations included
novel features such as 151 copy neutral loss of heterozygosity (LOH)
regions. Some of these were of potential functional relevance because
they spanned mutated FGFR3 and PIK3CA alleles, in addition to a
homozygous deletion involving the p16 tumor suppressor locus at chr9p22.
In fact, most (34/60) homozygous deletions identified were confined to
this region. The SNP-profiles also showed that metachronous tumors
generally had several aberrations in common, thus suggesting a clonal
relationship. We partitioned tumor-derived SNP-profiles into three groups
of increasing complexity, likely to reflect histories of varying genomic
instability, and compared these to IHC results. DDR tissue staining
patterns using phospho-specific antibodies against p53, H2AX, ATR, and
ATM, indicative of an activated DDR, were not correlated to the total sum
of accumulated DNA damage. Rather, the most complex tumor genomes were
associated with absence of p16 expression, a high Ki67-proliferation
index, and abundant expression of the multifunctional DDR protein
Timeless. Tipin, an important interaction partner of Timeless, was
expressed without any association to Timeless staining patterns and
genomic integrity. Interestingly, in a large cohort of more than 250
non-muscle invasive bladder tumors, Timeless expression was associated
with risk of progression to muscle-invasive disease (pCarcinogenesis is
paralleled by ongoing insults to tumor genome integrity, commonly sensed
and reacted to by the DNA damage response (DDR). The DDR is thought to
act as an inducible barrier against early tumor development, but, if
compromised, may allow tumor progression and rampant genomic instability.
However, the interplay between the DDR, genomic integrity, and tumor
development is still poorly understood. To extend current knowledge of
these issues, we analyzed 45 human bladder tumors from 22 patients using
a combination of Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Arrays 6.0 and
immunohistochemistry (IHC). This allowed us to characterize genomic
aberrations at high resolution, and determine the tissue expression
patterns of several DDR components in the context of the underlying
genomic complexity. The complexity of individual SNP-profiles varied
considerably and widespread aberrations included novel features such as
151 copy neutral loss of heterozygosity (LOH) regions. Some of these were
of potential functional relevance because they spanned mutated FGFR3 and
PIK3CA alleles, in addition to a homozygous deletion involving the p16
tumor suppressor locus at chr9p22. In fact, most (34/60) homozygous
deletions identified were confined to this region. The SNP-profiles also
showed that metachronous tumors generally had several aberrations in
common, thus suggesting a clonal relationship. We partitioned
tumor-derived SNP-profiles into three groups of increasing complexity,
likely to reflect histories of varying genomic instability, and compared
these to IHC results. DDR tissue staining patterns using phospho-specific
antibodies against p53, H2AX, ATR, and ATM, indicative of an activated
DDR, were not correlated to the total sum of accumulated DNA damage.
Rather, the most complex tumor genomes were associated with absence of
p16 expression, a high Ki67-proliferation index, and abundant expression
of the multifunctional DDR protein Timeless. Tipin, an important
interaction partner of Timeless, was expressed without any association to
Timeless staining patterns and genomic integrity. Interestingly, in a
large cohort of more than 250 non-muscle invasive bladder tumors,
Timeless expression was associated with risk of progression to
muscle-invasive disease (p<0.001; HR, 2.4; 95% CI, 1.6-3.8). In
conclusion, we generated a high-resolution analysis of bladder tumor
genomes and identified novel regions of potential functional relevance,
including several copy neutral LOH regions. Moreover, we showed that the
overall complexity of tumor genomes is not closely associated to common
phosphorylation events within the DDR but instead involves p16 loss, high
Ki67 index, and abundant Timeless expression. Finally, evaluation of
Timeless expression by IHC may improve current approaches to estimate
risk of progression in non-muscle invasive bladder tumors based on
established histopathological variables.

