Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting hypoxia for the identification of novel biomarkers for
prostate cancer


Tumor-associated hypoxia has been associated with malignant progression,
metastasis, resistance to therapy, and poor clinical outcome in prostate
cancer (CaP). Prompted by the evidence that hypoxia affects CaP, we
studied global gene expression in 100 CaP tissues and 71 samples of
adjacent benign tissues. RNA was extracted from cancer cells isolated by
laser-capture microdissection (LCM) or without isolation (bulk tissue).
We found 24 hypoxia-associated genes significantly overexpressed in CaP
(p0.02), both in bulk tissue and LCM. Among hypoxia-associated genes, the
disc large (drosophila) homolog-associated protein 5 (DLG7),
hyaluronan-mediated motility receptor (HMMR) and cyclin B1 (CCNB1) were
associated with Gleason score and systemic progression. Since the
products of HMMR and CCNB1 have been recently identified as molecular
markers of CaP progression, we postulated that DLG7 has prognostic value
also. To test this hypothesis we measured transcript levels for DLG7 in a
150-pair case-control cohort. The cases (progression to systemic disease
within five years of surgery) and controls (no progression within seven
years) were matched for clinical and pathologic prognostic variables,
including grade, stage, and preoperative serum levels of PSA. The overall
prognostic ability of DLG7, as tested in receiver operating
characteristic analysis was of 0.74 (95% CL, 0.68 to 0.8), independent of
the for ERG status. Overall, our data indicate that DLG7, a
hypoxia-controlled gene have a prognostic value in high-risk CaP. To
better define the value of DLG7 as a molecular predictor of CaP
progression, we are currently assessing DLG7 protein levels by
immunohistochemistry. Then we will analyze the association of DLG7 levels
with clinical parameters. Introduction of oxygen tension as a variable
may constitute a tool for the identification of novel biomarkers for CaP.
Present address CRG: University of Mississippi Cancer Institute, Jackson,
MS, USA. Support: DOD PC094680 (CRG), PCF Creativity Award (CRG), Mayo
Clinic Prostate SPORE 5P50CA091956 (SV-P); Mrs. Adelyn L. Luther, Singer
Island, Florida and Mayo Clinic Cancer Center (SV-P).

