Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor microenvironment contributes to RAF-inhibitor resistance
through HGF secretion


Drug resistance remains a vexing problem in the treatment of cancer
patients. While many studies have focused on cell autonomous mechanisms
of drug resistance, we hypothesized that the tumor microenvironment may
confer innate resistance to therapy. We employed a novel co-culture assay
to systematically assay the ability of 23 stromal cell types to influence
the sensitivity of 45 cancer cell lines to 35 anti-cancer drugs testing
more than 15,000 cancer-stroma-drug combinations. We found that
stroma-mediated resistance is surprisingly common - particularly to
targeted chemotherapies. We decided to further characterize the
stroma-mediated resistance of BRAF-mutant melanoma to RAF inhibition
because most patients exhibit some degree of innate resistance. Proteomic
analysis showed that stromal secretion of the growth factor hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF) resulted in activation of the HGF receptor MET,
reactivation of the MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways, and immediate resistance
to RAF inhibition. Immunohistochemistry confirmed tumor stromal HGF
expression in 11 out of 15 patients with BRAF-mutant melanoma. Among
these patients, only one experienced a complete response, and that
patient was negative for stromal HGF, consistent with our prediction of
HGF-mediated RAF-inhibitor resistance. In contrast, of 6 evaluable
patients with stable disease 4 had particularly high levels of stromal
HGF expression. Dual inhibition of RAF and MET in BRAF-mutant melanoma
cell lines resulted in reversal of drug resistance, suggesting RAF/MET
combination therapy as a potential therapeutic strategy for BRAF-mutant
melanoma. A similar resistance mechanism was uncovered in a subset of
BRAF-mutant colorectal and glioblastoma cell lines. Interestingly, the
activation of MET in these cell lines was cell autonomous, caused, for
example, by autocrine secretion of HGF and resulting in complete
resistance to RAF inhibitors even in the absence of stromal cells.
Treatment with a MET inhibitor re-sensitized these cell lines to RAF
inhibitors suggesting the same RAF/MET combination therapy for
non-melanoma BRAF mutant cancers as well. More generally, these studies
indicate that the systematic dissection of tumor-microenvironment
interactions may reveal important mechanisms underlying drug resistance.

