Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long non-coding RNA signatures for melanoma detection in humans


Melanoma, an aggressive carcinoma that originates in the basal layer of
human epidermis, has the highest mortality rate of skin cancers in
industrialized countries. Unfortunately, current treatments for
metastatic melanoma provide mostly palliative benefits to only a small
proportion of patients. Despite the obvious need for improvement in
assessment and treatment of metastatic melanoma, the intricate mechanisms
underlying melanoma transformation remain unresolved and poorly
understood. Thus, there is considerable interest in understanding the
molecular basis of initiation and progression of human melanomas. Recent
evidence indicates that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), a subclass of
noncoding RNA (ncRNA), are associated with carcinogenesis in melanoma as
well as several other human cancers. The elucidation of the molecular
function of these RNA species promises to bridge gaps in our knowledge of
melanoma development in humans. The expression of selected lncRNAs
(CR618740 and AF091731) in a panel of melanoma cell lines (pigmented and
non-pigmented), melanocytes, and keratinocytes were assayed by DNA
microarray (Ncode arrays from Lifetechnologies) and further confirmed by
real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Next, cell lines results
were tested with patient samples. Our results indicate that the
differential expression of lncRNAs is an indicator of the development of
melanoma, and dysregulated expression of these markers may be involved in
the transition of melanocytes to melanoma. Furthermore, the presence of
significant correlation between melanoma cell line characteristics
(stage, cell phenotype, types of mutations and others) and lncRNA
expression data may imply novel causal connection between lncRNA
expression and melanoma development. Importantly, this work will
investigate the new possibility that lncRNAs play an essential role in
cellular regulation and represent a potential platform for melanoma
progression. Thus, unraveling the differential lncRNA expression in
melanoma could initiate novel understanding of melanocyte homeostasis,
tissue organization, and melanoma genesis in humans.

