Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigation of stem-cell markers in pleomorphic adenoma:
Immunohistochemical and molecular study


Background: Salivary gland neoplasms are originated from the various
salivary gland compartments and are histologically related to these
structures. Several protein and molecular markers are employed in
research and diagnosis in order to classify and understand histogenesis
and other aspects of salivary gland neoplastic lesions. Pleomorphic
adenoma is a benign salivary gland neoplasm composed by epithelial and
myoepithelial cells and a complex stroma. Its varied structural and
architectural aspects suggest the participation of stem cells in its
composition. Additionally, pleomorphic adenoma originates from
intercalated duct of salivary glands, a region reputed to host the
regenerative/ stem-cell compartment of these glands. The present work
investigated stem-cell markers (CD24, CD44) in pleomorphic adenoma and in
specimens of developing human salivary glands using immunohistochemistry
and real-time RT-PCR. Material and Methods: 101 cases of pleomorphic
adenomas were used - 55 cases were FFPE and 60 specimens were fresh
frozen tissue. From the total, 14 were pared (FFPE and frozen tissue).
Salivary gland specimens dissected from 20 human foetuses were also
included. Results: All cases of pleomorphic adenomas were positive for
the stem-cell markers studied. Neoplastic luminal structures were
positive for CD24. Modified myoepithelial cells were positive for CD44.
In foetal salivary glands, these markers were restricted to the
intercalated duct region. Increased expression of CD44 stem-cell marker
was observed in pleomorphic adenoma specimens using real-time RT-PCR
technique when compared to normal salivary gland controls. An specific
expression pattern was not observed for CD24 when compared to the normal
salivary gland tissue - in some cases of pleomorphic adenoma there was an
increased expression of the protein, whilst in other cases the expression
was decreased or normal-like. Conclusion: Pleomorphic adenoma cells share
similar markers with stem-cells; it is not possible to confirm that
neoplastic cells bear the same characteristics of multipotency.

