Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Opposite effect of ECM features in breast carcinoma progression
according to tumor cell differentiation


Our own recent analysis of extracellular matrix (ECM) gene expression
profiles in breast carcinomas identified four different subgroups of
breast tumors (ECM1, 2, 3 and 4) proposing a link between stroma
composition and cancer progression (Bergamaschi et al. J. Pathol, 2008).
Here, we further investigated the characteristics of ECM signature and
its impact on tumor progression. The unsupervised clustering of 6
independent datasets, including more than 600 breast tumor samples,
revealed that ECM3 was a robust cluster, presenting a homogeneous gene
pattern that consistently allowed the identification of an independent
group of tumors in all tested datasets. ECM3 is characterized by highly
correlated over expression of 58 ECM genes encoding mainly structural
proteins. From 26 to 41% of cases were ECM3-enriched and were mainly
estrogen receptor-positive and low grade. Both tumor and stromal cells
took part in the expression of ECM3 genes, and the hormonal and TGF
stimuli appeared to highly contribute to ECM3 signature. Multivariate
analysis of distant metastasis free survival (DMFS) in untreated breast
carcinoma patients evidenced a statistically significant interaction
between ECM3 and grade (p=0.0010), that is a different clinical
significance in the subgroups grade I+II and grade III. Cox models
estimated separately in the two groups indicated that ECM3 is strongly
and significantly associated with worse survival probability only in
grade III tumors (HR=3.0, 95% CI = 1.3 - 7.0, p=0.0098). It is noteworthy
that the probability of developing metastases in a 10-year follow-up was
14% for ECM3 differentiated tumors (grade I+II) as compared to 61% for
the ECM3 grade III carcinomas and about 25% for all non-ECM3 tumors.
Moreover analysis of a data set of patients treated neoadjuvantly with
chemotherapy revealed that, among the grade III tumors, pathological
complete response was reached by 9% of ECM3 versus 74% of non-ECM3 tumors
(p=0.04). In differentiated tumors no response difference was observed
according to ECM. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) according to tumor
cells differentiation revealed that among grade III, non-ECM3 tumors were
enriched for genes representative of NK, T and B cells, and involved in
cell cycle progression, while EMT, TGF and hypoxia genes were
significantly up-modulated in ECM3 tumors, suggesting that aggressiveness
of ECM3 grade III tumors may reflect the lack of immune cell engagement
and an increased invasive phenotype. Our results provide evidence that
breast carcinoma progression and response to therapy are influenced by
the interaction between tumor and stromal characteristics. (Partially
supported by AIRC)

