Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DIM regulates anoikis through sonic hedgehog in ovarian cancer
cells


Ovarian cancer is the second leading gynecological cancer with poor
prognosis. By the time of detection, it usually metastasizes to
peritoneum or organs such as stomach and liver. Detachment of a cell from
extracellular matrix (ECM) allows the cells to travel and lodge at
metastatic site. Anoikis is an emerging form of cell death that is
associated with the apoptosis of cells detached from ECM. Normal or
immortal epithelial cells are sensitive to anoikis. However, carcinomas
are generally associated with resistance to anoikis. Hence, induction of
anoikis is an important step in preventing metastasis. We have recently
shown that diindolylmethane (DIM), a compound present in cruciferous
vegetables reduces the survival of ovarian cancer cells by inducing
apoptosis. Here, we evaluated the effect of DIM in inducing anoikis in
ovarian cancer cells. A2780, SKOV-3 and OVCAR-429 cells were grown on low
attachment plates and treated with various concentrations of DIM for 24
hours and analyzed. Our results show that DIM treatment resulted in the
concentration-dependent anoikis in all the cell lines. For example,
anoikis induction was approximately 50-70% in all the cell lines treated
with 75M DIM. Furthermore, Integrin Linked Kinase 1 (ILK-1), an important
regulator of anoikis was significantly down-regulated by DIM treatment.
Western blotting revealed cleavage of caspase-3 and PARP by DIM
treatment, confirming anoikis induction in our model. Few recent studies
showed that Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) pathway is activated in ovarian tumors.
Shh pathway is also associated with metastasis of various cancers. We
therefore next determined whether Shh pathway was involved in anoikis
induction by DIM. Our results demonstrated that DIM treatment reduced the
expression of Shh and Gli1 in a concentration-dependent manner. Moreover,
Shh secretion as well was reduced by DIM treatment in ovarian cancer
cells. Importantly, Shh pretreatment significantly inhibited DIM-induced
anoikis in A2780 ovarian cancer cells. Treatment of cells with Shh also
reduced the cleavage of caspase-3 or PARP induced by DIM treatment
indicating the involvement of Shh pathway in anoikis. Taken together,
these results suggest that DIM induces anoikis in ovarian cancer cells by
regulating sonic hedgehog signaling. Further in-depth mechanistic studies
are in progress to establish anoikis induction by DIM and to validate it
in an in vivo model. [Supported in part by R01 grants CA 1065953 and CA
129038 awarded to S.K.S by National Cancer Institute, NIH]

