Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A Phase II randomized trial of lycopene-rich tomato extract among
men with high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN)


Evidence from observational epidemiology, animal models and cell culture
experiments suggest that tomato foods or other sources of lycopene might
inhibit the development of prostate cancer. Clinical trial data, however,
is thus far sparse, especially in relation to effects on benign prostate
tissue. We conducted a 6-month repeat biopsy trial in men with HGPIN who
were randomly assigned to consume either placebo or capsules of
Lyco-Mato, a tomato oleoresin containing 30 mg/day of lycopene. All
participants were encouraged to avoid lycopene containing foods and
supplements while on-study. Here we report results for serum lycopene,
PSA and IGF proteins, and initial results for immunohistochemical
analysis of markers for proliferation (minichromosome maintenance protein
2, MCM-2) and cell cycle inhibition (p27). Biopsy slides were stained
using monoclonal antibodies for both markers and scoring was performed
using an Aperio whole-slide digital microscope and scoring algorithms
plus Genie pattern recognition software for defining the epithelial
compartment. Serum lycopene was determined by LC-MS-MS; PSA, IGF-1 and
IGFBP3 were measured by enzyme immunoassay. Primary analyses compared
treatment groups using a paired t test for the change in each endpoint. A
total of 58 men completed the trial (26 active, 32 placebo); assignment
groups were equivalent at baseline in terms of age, race, serum lycopene,
PSA, IGF-1 and IGFBP3. Serum lycopene increased by 0.550 mol/L (77%) in
the active treatment group and declined by 0.288 mol/L (19%) in the
placebo group. We observed no meaningful differences in serum PSA, IGF-1
or IGFBP3 concentrations between groups. There were also no differences
between groups in the percentages of epithelial nuclei expressing MCM-2
or the scoring index combining percentage with nuclear stain intensity.
Similar null results were seen for staining with the CDK2 inhibitor p27.
We conclude that despite a large difference in serum lycopene
concentrations following intervention, no effects were apparent at 6
months on PSA or IGF proteins. The IHC results, although preliminary,
suggest that treatment had no effect on epithelial cell proliferation or
cell cycle inhibition via p27. Further analyses, including analysis of
additional IHC markers, are currently underway.

