Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylated gene marker levels in stool: effects of demographic,
drug, and body mass and other patient characteristics


Aberrantly methylated genes represent attractive and broadly informative
markers for colorectal cancer (CRC). As demographics, numerous
ingestants, environmental exposures, and obesity variably influence both
gene methylation rates and CRC incidence, it is important to understand
the effects of such covariates on the clinical performance of CRC
screening tests that incorporate assay of methylated gene markers. Based
on a recent multicenter study (Ahlquist et al. Gastroenterology 2012 (in
press)), stool assay of carefully selected methylated gene marker
candidates (NDRG4, BMP3, vimentin, TFPI2), alone or in combination, yield
high detection rates of both CRC and large adenomas. Aim: To assess the
impact of demographic, exposure, body mass, and other patient variables
on stool levels of the above 4 methylated gene markers. Methods: We
studied buffered stools collected within 3 years of a normal colonoscopy
from 500 patients undergoing average-risk screening or polyp surveillance
(median age 64 (range 44-85); 53% women). Upon receipt, stools were
promptly homogenized, aliquoted, and frozen at 80C. On supernatants from
thawed/spun aliquots, target genes were purified by hybrid capture,
bisulfite treated, and assayed using the analytically-sensitive QuARTS
method (quantitative allele-specific real-time target and signal
amplification), as described (above citation). The reference gene -actin
was assayed along with methylation of NDRG4, BMP3, vimentin, TFPI2.
Log-converted data were normalized to allow comparison of effects between
markers, and effect size was expressed as % change relative to standard
deviation for each marker (standardized relative change (SR)). Results:
The only patient characteristic that significantly influenced all
methylated marker levels in stool was age (pAberrantly methylated genes
represent attractive and broadly informative markers for colorectal
cancer (CRC). As demographics, numerous ingestants, environmental
exposures, and obesity variably influence both gene methylation rates and
CRC incidence, it is important to understand the effects of such
covariates on the clinical performance of CRC screening tests that
incorporate assay of methylated gene markers. Based on a recent
multicenter study (Ahlquist et al. Gastroenterology 2012 (in press)),
stool assay of carefully selected methylated gene marker candidates
(NDRG4, BMP3, vimentin, TFPI2), alone or in combination, yield high
detection rates of both CRC and large adenomas. Aim: To assess the impact
of demographic, exposure, body mass, and other patient variables on stool
levels of the above 4 methylated gene markers. Methods: We studied
buffered stools collected within 3 years of a normal colonoscopy from 500
patients undergoing average-risk screening or polyp surveillance (median
age 64 (range 44-85); 53% women). Upon receipt, stools were promptly
homogenized, aliquoted, and frozen at 80C. On supernatants from
thawed/spun aliquots, target genes were purified by hybrid capture,
bisulfite treated, and assayed using the analytically-sensitive QuARTS
method (quantitative allele-specific real-time target and signal
amplification), as described (above citation). The reference gene -actin
was assayed along with methylation of NDRG4, BMP3, vimentin, TFPI2.
Log-converted data were normalized to allow comparison of effects between
markers, and effect size was expressed as % change relative to standard
deviation for each marker (standardized relative change (SR)). Results:
The only patient characteristic that significantly influenced all
methylated marker levels in stool was age (p<0.0001 for each marker); SR
was greatest with TFPI2 at +91.3 (pAberrantly methylated genes represent
attractive and broadly informative markers for colorectal cancer (CRC).
As demographics, numerous ingestants, environmental exposures, and
obesity variably influence both gene methylation rates and CRC incidence,
it is important to understand the effects of such covariates on the
clinical performance of CRC screening tests that incorporate assay of
methylated gene markers. Based on a recent multicenter study (Ahlquist et
al. Gastroenterology 2012 (in press)), stool assay of carefully selected
methylated gene marker candidates (NDRG4, BMP3, vimentin, TFPI2), alone
or in combination, yield high detection rates of both CRC and large
adenomas. Aim: To assess the impact of demographic, exposure, body mass,
and other patient variables on stool levels of the above 4 methylated
gene markers. Methods: We studied buffered stools collected within 3
years of a normal colonoscopy from 500 patients undergoing average-risk
screening or polyp surveillance (median age 64 (range 44-85); 53% women).
Upon receipt, stools were promptly homogenized, aliquoted, and frozen at
80C. On supernatants from thawed/spun aliquots, target genes were
purified by hybrid capture, bisulfite treated, and assayed using the
analytically-sensitive QuARTS method (quantitative allele-specific
real-time target and signal amplification), as described (above
citation). The reference gene -actin was assayed along with methylation
of NDRG4, BMP3, vimentin, TFPI2. Log-converted data were normalized to
allow comparison of effects between markers, and effect size was
expressed as % change relative to standard deviation for each marker
(standardized relative change (SR)). Results: The only patient
characteristic that significantly influenced all methylated marker levels
in stool was age (p<0.0001 for each marker); SR was greatest with TFPI2
at +91.3 (p<0.001 vs other markers), least with BMP3 at +29.7
(pAberrantly methylated genes represent attractive and broadly
informative markers for colorectal cancer (CRC). As demographics,
numerous ingestants, environmental exposures, and obesity variably
influence both gene methylation rates and CRC incidence, it is important
to understand the effects of such covariates on the clinical performance
of CRC screening tests that incorporate assay of methylated gene markers.
Based on a recent multicenter study (Ahlquist et al. Gastroenterology
2012 (in press)), stool assay of carefully selected methylated gene
marker candidates (NDRG4, BMP3, vimentin, TFPI2), alone or in
combination, yield high detection rates of both CRC and large adenomas.
Aim: To assess the impact of demographic, exposure, body mass, and other
patient variables on stool levels of the above 4 methylated gene markers.
Methods: We studied buffered stools collected within 3 years of a normal
colonoscopy from 500 patients undergoing average-risk screening or polyp
surveillance (median age 64 (range 44-85); 53% women). Upon receipt,
stools were promptly homogenized, aliquoted, and frozen at 80C. On
supernatants from thawed/spun aliquots, target genes were purified by
hybrid capture, bisulfite treated, and assayed using the
analytically-sensitive QuARTS method (quantitative allele-specific
real-time target and signal amplification), as described (above
citation). The reference gene -actin was assayed along with methylation
of NDRG4, BMP3, vimentin, TFPI2. Log-converted data were normalized to
allow comparison of effects between markers, and effect size was
expressed as % change relative to standard deviation for each marker
(standardized relative change (SR)). Results: The only patient
characteristic that significantly influenced all methylated marker levels
in stool was age (p<0.0001 for each marker); SR was greatest with TFPI2
at +91.3 (p<0.001 vs other markers), least with BMP3 at +29.7 (p<0.001 vs
others), and intermediate with vimentin at +46.0 and NDRG4 at +45.1. In
contrast to methylation markers, levels of -actin did not change across
age. The other demographic variables of sex, race, and geographic
residence had no effect on methylation markers. Marker levels were also
not affected by exposure variables (smoking, alcohol consumption, or
analgesic use), by family history of CRC or polyps, or by personal
history of polyps. Finally, neither overweight status (n=176) nor obesity
(n=148) had an effect on marker levels. Conclusions: Age significantly
affects stool levels of tumor-associated methylated gene markers in
colonoscopy-normal patients, and the degree of this age effect differs
across markers. In contrast, other key patient variables had no effect on
stool marker levels. Comment: Optimal use of these methylation markers
for stool screening of CRC may require age-adjustment of normal cutoff
levels to maximize test specificity.

