Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recruitment of Tie2-expressing monocytes is associated with the
heightened invasive phenotype of gliomas after antiangiogenic therapies


Gliomas are highly vascularized tumors, and preclinical data have
suggested that glioma growth critically depends on the generation of
tumor associated blood vessels. Among multiple factors controlling the
complex process of angiogenesis, VEGF (Vascular Endothelial Growth
Factor) and its associated signaling cascade are considered of central
importance. Glioma cells are a major source of VEGF, and high levels of
VEGF generation have been reported to correlate with high grade
malignancy and poor prognosis. Antiangiogenic therapy has been recently
added to the battery of treatments to newly diagnosed malignant gliomas.
However, preclinical data from our laboratory and others, as some
clinical results, shown concomitantly elicit tumor adaptation and
progression to stages of greater malignancy, with heightened
invasiveness. These results warrant preclinical investigation. Here, we
present evidence of accumulation of Tie2-expressing monocytes (TEMs) in
the brain tumor/normal interphase regions in tumor-bearing animals
treated with anti-VEGF agents. Immunohistochemistry using F4/80 or Iba1
antibodies revealed an increase number of microglia/macrophages in
central and peripheral tumoral areas after antiangiogenesis treatment.
Moreover, the recruitment of these tumor-associated microglia/macrophages
(TAMs) was associated with an overrepresentation of TEMs. Almost 50% of
Tie2-positive cells co-localized with microglia/macrophages after
bevacizumab or prolonged VEGF-Trap/Aflibercept therapies. To determine
the role of TEMs in the invasive phenotype of gliomas upon antiangiogenic
therapies, we use monocytes isolated from buffy coats and sorted
positively for Tie2 expression, and monocytic cultures polarized to M2
phenotype and forced to express Tie2. We found that TEMs express high
level of MMP2, MMP9, CD44, and CXCR4, molecules related with
extracellular matrix remodeling, using q-PCR, ELISA, FACS analysis and
double immunofluorescence. Gelatin zymography, as well as collagenase
assay confirmed the upregulation of MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity. Of
interest, knocking down Tie2 by siRNA suppresses MMP9 activity emphasizes
a role of Tie2 signaling in the regulation of MMP9. Additionally, in
vitro invasion assay showed a pivotal role of TEMs in development of an
invasive phenotype in glioma cells. Together, our results suggest a novel
mechanism of escape of GBMs to anti-VEGF therapies and the necessity of
targeting the TEM population in combination with anti-VEGF therapies to
improve clinical outcome.

