Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Racial and ethnic differences in survival after cancer diagnosis


Introduction: Racial differences in cancer survival have been well
established based on national and independent cancer registries. Multiple
extrinsic factors including stage, socioeconomic status (SES) and
treatment have been postulated as causative, questioning whether race is
a significant independent predictor of cancer survival. The purpose of
this study was to evaluate racial differences in overall cancer survival
rates in a diverse NY population. Methods: Study population included
18,556 patients (28% White, 31% African American (AA), 27% Hispanic)
diagnosed and/or treated for primary cancer from 1/1/2000 through
1/1/2007 at Montefiore Medical Center (MMC), identified through MMC's
Cancer Registry. Demographics, clinical information and survival were
obtained through the Cancer Registry. SES was determined using census
tract data. Kaplan-Meier survival curves and Cox proportional hazards
regression were used to compare overall survival by race. Results: White
patients were older (67.6 vs. 60.9 & 58.7) and of higher SES than AA and
Hispanic patients, with similar rates of stage III/IV cancer and surgical
treatment. Unadjusted analysis revealed that Whites had a significantly
higher risk of death compared to all other patients (HR 1.29, 95%CI
1.23-1.35). Adjusting for age, sex, stage at diagnosis, surgical
treatment and SES in all cancer types combined, revealed a significantly
higher risk of death compared to all other patients (HR 1.14, 95%CI
1.06-1.21). However, race was no longer a significant predictor of cancer
survival in multivariate models stratified by cancer type. Conclusion:
Contrary to published literature, White patients had significantly lower
survival rates than AA and Hispanic patients in unadjusted models. Racial
differences in cancer survival diminished in adjusted models, and were
absent when stratifying by cancer type. These results suggest that racial
disparities in cancer survival may be better explained by variables such
as age, stage at presentation, SES, treatment.


