Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid and efficient large-scale somatic mutation validation
approaches for cancer genome sequencing


The landscape of somatic alterations in cancer is being rapidly uncovered
by large-scale cancer genome sequencing projects in individual
laboratories as well as consortia such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
and the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC). The decreasing
cost of sequencing has resulted in an increase in the number of cancer
genomes that are being sequenced, and thus the numbers of candidate
somatic mutations being identified are rapidly expanding. A single cancer
genome from a cancer with an average mutation background rate, such as
ovarian or breast cancer, will have 3000-6000 mutations. A high mutation
rate cancer such as melanoma or colon cancer can have as many as 100,000
mutations/genome. Multiplying these numbers by the dozens of sequenced
genomes and hundreds of sequenced exomes across a wide spectrum of tumor
types yields a staggering number of candidate mutations. However,
approaches for rapidly validating these findings at scale have been
lagging behind. Current approaches, such as custom designed hybrid
capture arrays followed by sequencing, can take months to complete and
cannot begin until the initial sequencing is complete and mutations are
called. This can lead to long delays in the interpretation and
publication of biological findings. Here we describe the results of
several approaches for rapid and efficient validation on large-scale
projects, such as TCGA. We will share our approach and results using
Fluidigm and PacBio sequencing for validation and sample extension at a
small scale with rapid turnaround where we have validated PIK3CA and TP53
mutations in breast cancer samples of varying purity as well as
significantly mutated genes in medulloblastoma. Ideally one could
validate mutations and gene fusions concurrent with their discovery. To
that end, we will also describe our validation results using RNA-Seq
data, commonly produced concurrently with genome and exome sequencing, in
lung squamous and renal cancer. Finally, we will explore an approach for
instant-validation through simultaneous sequencing of barcoded discovery
and cross-validation libraries.

