Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mother-daughter communication and breast cancer prevention
knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors between Hispanic and non-Hispanic
college women


Background: Although breast cancer prevention programs focus primarily on
women ages 40 and older, little is known about breast cancer prevention
awareness among young women. Cancer communication is essential for early
detection and treatment for Hispanic and non-Hispanic women. Data trends
show Hispanic women are more likely to be diagnosed with more advanced
stages of breast cancer at an early age. Aim: The purpose of this
exploratory study is to examine mother-daughter communication and breast
cancer prevention knowledge, attitudes, and breast self-examination (BSE)
behaviors between Hispanic and non-Hispanic college women. Method: Using
a cross sectional study design, a convenience sample of college women
ages 18 and older were surveyed in Fall 2010 at a southwestern
university. Survey items were developed using the Health Belief Model
framework. An open-ended item was included to elicit descriptions of
breast cancer prevention advice received from their mothers. Results:
Self-reported data were obtained from 71 college women (44% Hispanic and
56% non-Hispanic) ages 18 to 49 with a mean age of 22.6 (SD = 5.6).
Overall, 33% received mother-daughter communication about breast cancer
prevention, 80% received a provider's recommendation to conduct BSE, and
62% conducted BSE. Nearly 74% knew someone with breast cancer. Bivariate
analysis revealed no significant differences for mother-daughter
communication, knowledge, and self-efficacy for breast cancer prevention.
In content analysis, only non-Hispanic college women received advice from
their mothers about modifiable risk factors for breast cancer prevention.
Hispanic college women (84%) were more likely compared to non-Hispanic
women (63%) to have friends who supported BSE (p=.023). In addition,
Hispanic college women (61%) were more likely compared to non-Hispanic
women (38%) to seek online breast cancer information (p=.023).
Conclusion: Our preliminary findings support the need for college
educational breast cancer prevention programs including risk factors.
Future research is suggested with a larger sample size to validate
findings as well as to explore Internet use to seek quality online health
information with an emphasis on breast cancer prevention information.

