Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in the
maintenance of stemness in neural and glioma stem cells


Despite advances in treatment, Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) continues to
carry a horrible prognosis with an average overall survival of only 14
months [Stupp et al, 2005]. GBMs are heterogeneous tumors that contain a
subpopulation of stem-cell like cells called glioblastoma stem cells
(GSCs). GSCs appear to be chemotherapy- and radiation-resistant and are
thought to be responsible for GBM progression [Kang et al, 2007; Bao et
al, 2006]. More effective GBM therapies must target GSCs, underscoring
the importance of understanding GSC biology. Our study examines the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and its converse, the
mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET), in the context of GSCs and
neural stem cells (NSCs). We hypothesize that the zinc-finger enhancer
binding transcription factor (ZEB)/miR-200 feedback loop is relevant in
the context of GSCs and is modulated by TGF- and BMP. We have found that
ZEB1 and miR-200 define divergent glioma cell populations: qRT-PCR shows
differential expression of ZEB1 and miR-200 in mature human astrocytes,
human fetal NSC, and human GSCs (GliNS1). In GSCs, BMP antagonism
(noggin) or TGF- stimulation results in increased ZEB1 expression.
Conversely, BMP4 stimulation increases miR-200b/c, while noggin or TGF-
treatment decrease miR-200b/c expression. BrdU proliferation studies show
increased proliferation with TGF- stimulation and decreased proliferation
with BMP treatment in three GSC lines. TGF- signaling also confers an
invasive phenotype in GSCs while BMP4 treatment decreases invasion,
suggesting a role for TGF- and BMP parallel to that seen in EMT and MET.
Western blot analysis reveals that treatment of GSCs with TGF- induces
phosphorylation of Stat3, which has been shown to be a driver of EMT
[Carro MS, 2010]. Interestingly, BMP and TGF- treatment does not change
Sox2 protein expression, suggesting that the GliNS1 GSCs retain their
stem cell identity. However, Bmi1 increases with BMP stimulation and
decreases with TGF- treatment, while ID1 increases with BMP treatment,
suggesting that the stem-ness in GSCs is modulated by these cytokines. In
conclusion, BMP and TGF- control the ZEB1/miR-200 feedback loop in GSCs
and affect cell proliferation and invasive capability. We are continuing
studies to determine the relevance of TGF- and BMP signaling to patients
with GBM.

