Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular imaging of urothelial cancer using EGFR-binding peptides


INTRODUCTION White light cystoscopy (WLC), the current standard for
bladder cancer diagnosis, has recognized shortcomings in differentiating
non-papillary urothelial carcinoma from inflammation. Confocal laser
endomicroscopy (CLE) with fluorescein (a non-specific contrast agent) can
provide in vivo microscopy of the bladder as an adjunct to WLC. Targeted
CLE with fluorescently labeled peptides against tumor surface markers may
further enhance the utility of CLE for real time endoscopic imaging.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is over-expressed in most bladder
cancer cells, but absent in the superficial layer of normal urothelium,
making it an attractive target for cancer-specific imaging. We report our
efforts to identify a non-activating, EGFR-binding peptide labeled with
FITC as a cancer-specific contrast agent for ex vivo bladder imaging with
CLE. METHODS To screen for EGFR binding peptides, fragments of the
EGFR-binding motif of human EGF (EGF14) were displayed on phage surface.
Binding affinity of the phage to recombinant EGFR and EGFR-expressing
bladder cancer cell line was measured by ELISA. Peptides with the highest
EGFR affinity were chemically synthesized and FITC labeled. Potential for
activation of EGFR by the peptides was assessed in two EGFR-expressing
cell lines by Western blot. For ex vivo imaging of urothelial cancer,
fresh human bladder (n=1) or ureter (n=2) specimens were instilled and
incubated with FITC-EGFR binding peptide, or a random sequence negative
control peptide. Excess peptide was drained, specimens were opened and
suspicious and normal appearing mucosa were imaged with CLE. Imaged
tissue sections were excised for histopathologic comparison. The bladder
and one ureter were first imaged with negative control peptide followed
by imaging with the EGF peptide. RESULTS All phage displaying EGF
peptides showed greater affinity to recombinant EGFR and EGFR-expressing
cells compared to wild type phage. The two phage with highest affinity
for EGFR in both ELISA assays were synthesized. Cell stimulation with
both peptides did not induce phosphorylation of EGFR or downstream
signaling molecules. In bladder and ureter specimens, greater
fluorescence intensity was detected in areas of tumor compared to normal
urothelium on CLE with EGF4-FITC. Histopathology confirmed that the
suspicious regions of the bladder and ureter imaged were urothelial
carcinoma. The random peptide showed minimal fluorescent signal on both
normal and tumor areas imaged, and subsequent imaging of the same areas
with EGF4-FITC demonstrated abundant fluorescent signal in tumor areas
only. CONCLUSION We identified peptides derived from the EGF sequence
that specifically bind, but do not activate EGFR. Ex vivo imaging of
urothelial cancer with EGF4 peptide suggests that it can be used for
cancer-specific molecular imaging. Future studies will be aimed at in
vivo validation of EGF4 peptide on animal models for urothelial cancer.

