Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delphinidin: A dual tyrosine kinase inhibitor of EGFR and VEGFR-2
reduces cell proliferation and induces apoptosis of non-small-cell lung
cancer cells


Lung cancer has proven difficult to control with conventional therapeutic
and surgical approaches, and the prognosis is poor with an overall 5-year
survival rate of only 15% for non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in the
USA. Over the last decade, the notions of targeting tyrosine kinase
receptors for prevention and treatment of cancers have gained
considerable attention. The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) have emerged as
two clinically validated targets for NSCLC. Dual specific tyrosine kinase
receptor inhibitors, which target two different classes of growth factor
receptors, represent an elegant way to avoid multiple treatment
modalities when used alone and in combination with various anti-signaling
agents. The development of dietary agents with combined EGFR/VEGFR-2
inhibitory activities in the same molecule may be a step forward to
improve antitumor efficacy and to broaden application possibilities. In
our pursuit for identification of non-toxic dietary ingredients for
prevention and treatment of cancer, we found that delphinidin, an
anthocyanidin, present in pigmented fruits (such as pomegranate, berries,
and dark grapes) and vegetables (such as egg plant, tomato, carrot and
red onion), is a potent inhibitor of EGFR and VEGFR-2 in NSCLC cells.
Employing EGFR and VEGFR-2 over expressing NSCLC cells (NCI-H441 and
SK-MES-1); we evaluated the effect of delphinidin on EGFR/VEGFR-2
downstream signaling pathways. Delphinidin (5-60 M) treatment of both
NCI-H441 and SK-MES-1 cells inhibited the (i) activation of PI3K, and
(ii) phosphorylation of AKT and mitogen activated protein kinases (such
as ERK1/2, JNK1/2 and p38). We next determined whether inhibition of
EGFR/VEGFR-2 signaling pathways by delphinidin exhibits growth inhibitory
effect. We observed that delphinidin treatment of NCI-H441, SK-MES-1 and
A-549 cells resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of cell growth
without having any substantial effect on normal human bronchial
epithelial cells as assessed by an MTT assay. Treatment of NCI-H441 and
SK-MES-1 cells with delphindin (5-60 M) resulted in (i) cleavage of PARP
protein, (ii) activation of caspase-3 and-9, (iii) downregulation of
anti-apoptotic proteins (Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and Mcl-1), (iv) upregulation of
pro-apoptotic proteins (Bax, Bid and Bak), and (v) decrease expression of
PCNA and cyclin D1. In addition, we found that delphinidin was effective
in reducing the invasive potential of NSCLC cells. This study identifies
an abundant fruits and vegetables based anthocyanidin delphinidin as an
effective blocker of EGFR and VEGFR-2 in lung cancer cells. Based on
these observations, we suggest that delphinidin, alone or as an adjuvant
to current therapies, could be useful for the management of NSCLC.

