Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The exomes of the NCI60 and their implications for cancer
pharmacogenomics


Acquired and constitutional genetic variations in cancers have a
substantial influence on response to therapy. The NCI60 panel of cell
lines provides a unique opportunity to investigate this problem. These 60
human tumor cell lines represent 9 cancer types, and are richly
characterized as the result of many previous studies which have collected
various biochemical and genomics data [1]. In addition, there exists a
comprehensive dataset of sensitivity and resistance profiles of over
100,000 compounds with potential antineoplastic activity. However,
characterization of coding region DNA sequence variants has been lacking.
In this study, we sequenced the whole exomes of the NCI60 cell lines and
identified single nucleotide variants and short insertions/deletions.
Variants found by sequencing were in excellent agreement with variants
previously identified by SNP analysis or targeted capillary sequencing.
Even though most cell lines displayed similar mutation counts, cell lines
with microsatellite instability displayed a hypermutator phenotype. In
addition, observation from ti/tv ratio and nature of base changes
revealed preservation of possible carcinogen specific DNA mutation
signatures. Deleterious variants were identified at higher frequency in
known cancer genes while TP53 mutations where the most frequent event
among the NCI60. Finally, notable instances of correlation between
gene/pathway mutations with sensitivity to certain drug/compounds was
identified. For example, sensitivity to vemurafenib was highly correlated
with BRAF mutation. This comprehensive dataset enhances the value of cell
lines widely used as disease models in many laboratories by adding depth
to the existing genomic data. Our analysis identifies a large number of
genomic variants correlated with drug responsiveness, including a number
of genes known to be targeted by specific agents as well as numerous
candidates for future investigation. 1. Shankavaram, U.T., et al.,
CellMiner: a relational database and query tool for the NCI-60 cancer
cell lines. BMC Genomics, 2009. 10: p. 277.

