Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive epitope mapping of antibodies against CXCR4 and
Claudin-4 by Shotgun Mutagenesis


Identifying antibody epitopes on membrane proteins can help differentiate
antibody binding mechanisms, identify immunodominant structures,
distinguish and classify antibodies, and identify cancer state-specific
antigens, providing valuable information for therapeutic and diagnostic
applications. However, membrane proteins represent challenging targets
for epitope mapping studies using conventional methodologies such as
X-ray crystallography or peptide scanning. We have developed a
technology, Shotgun Mutagenesis Epitope Mapping for rapidly mapping
antibody epitopes on structurally-intact proteins expressed in mammalian
cells. Here, we applied Shotgun Mutagenesis to create a comprehensive
mutation library for CXCR4, a GPCR associated with tumor metastasis. The
CXCR4 mutation library, which comprised >700 clones with 2.7x coverage of
each of the 352 residues, was screened in triplicate with 5 different
anti-CXCR4 MAbs to identify their epitopes. Our analysis revealed that
all CXCR4 MAb epitopes were conformational and showed a requirement for
charged residues located on the second extracellular loop. CXCR4 MAb
epitopes were mapped onto the crystal structure to visualize and identify
common structural features. Using epitope information, we generated point
mutations in CXCR4 at positions of critical contact residues,
incorporated them into virus-like particles (Lipoparticles) and measured
their binding kinetics. These approaches helped define the electrostatic
contribution of individual amino acid residues on CXCR4 to the
association rate, dissociation rate, and overall binding interaction with
CXCR4 MAbs. Taking the same approach, we generated a comprehensive
mutation library for the biomarker Claudin-4, a tight junction protein
upregulated in epithelial cancers. The Claudin-4 mutation library, which
comprised >400 clones with complete coverage of each of the 209 residues,
was screened with a panel of 7 different anti-Claudin-4 antibodies to map
their epitopes. We identified several distinct conformational epitopes
that all map exclusively to the large first extracellular loop,
identifying this domain as an immunodominant region of claudin-4.

