Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-17 production by tumor-infiltrating Th17 cells favors
inflammation and promotes survival in human colorectal cancer


Background and aims: Evidence from experimental models suggests that
IL-17 and T helper (Th)-17 cells may contribute to anti-tumor immune
responses. The role played by IL-17 in human cancers remains however, to
be clarified. We have investigated phenotypes and prognostic significance
of IL-17-producing and IL-17-responsive cells in human colorectal cancer
(CRC). Methods: Expression of IL-17 and IL-17 receptors (IL-17R) A and C
was investigated on freshly isolated CRC specimens by flow cytometry, in
combination with surface molecules identifying specific cell populations.
IL-17 and IL-17RA expression was also evaluated by immunohistochemistry
on a tissue micro-array (TMA) including 1420 cases of primary CRC with
full clinico-pathological data. IL-17R-expressing cell populations were
tested for their responsiveness to IL-17 in vitro. In particular,
proliferation rates were measured by 3H-thymidine incorporation and
production of inflammatory cytokine/chemokines was evaluated at gene and
protein level by real-time PCR and ELISA. Results: CRC-infiltrating
IL-17-producing cells were exclusively comprised within the lymphocyte
population and expressed CD4, but not CD8, and surprisingly, Foxp3
molecules. In contrast, no NK, NKT, gamma-delta T and lymphoid
tissue-inducer-like cells were found within the IL-17+ fraction. High
infiltration by IL-17 producing cells significantly correlated with low T
and N stages, and, most importantly, in the group of mismatch repair
(MMR)-proficient CRCs, with prolonged survival time. Interestingly,
infiltration by IL-17+ cells was found to be significantly associated to
that of CD16+ myeloid cells. On primary CRCs and established cell lines,
IL-17RA and C were found to be expressed only on a subpopulation of tumor
cells. In contrast, all tumor-associated stromal cells expressed IL-17RC
at high levels, and at lower extent, IL-17RA. Conversely,
tumor-infiltrating CD16+ myeloid cells exhibited high expression of
IL-17RA, but did not express IL-17RC. Prognostic significance of IL-17R
expression on primary CRCs is currently being evaluated. In vitro
exposure of CRC cells to IL-17 did not significantly enhance tumor cell
proliferation, neither promoted the release of inflammatory cytokines,
but strongly induced the expression of CXCL1, XCL1 and CXCL16 chemokines.
On CD16+ myeloid cells, IL-17 promoted the release of IL-6 and the
expression of chemotactic factors, including CXCL1, XCL1, CXCL10, CXCL11,
CCL2, CCL3, and CCL20. Finally, IL-17 markedly enhanced IL-6 production
by stromal cells. Conclusions: Tumor-infiltrating Th17 cells appear to
play a beneficial role in human CRC, possibly by inducing the expression
of inflammatory and chemotactic factors by tumor-associated stromal and
myeloid cells.

