Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lysophosphatidylcholine induces apoptosis via suppressing STAT3
and HDAC3 activities and binding to the Bcl-xL promoter in K562 chronic
myelogenous leukemia cells


Lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) is a class of chemical compound which are
derived from phosphatidylcholines usually isolated from the surface of
wheat starch granules. In the present study, we investigated the
molecular mechanisms responsible for LPC-induced apoptosis in chronic
myeloid leukemia K562 cells. LPC exerted the inhibitory effect on the
viability of K562 cells as well as other leukemic cell lines HL-60 and
U937. Nonetheless, LPC significantly increased the acetylation of histone
H3 at K18, 9 and 23 in K562 cells, but not in HL-60 and U937 cells.
Consistently, LPC reduced histone deacetylase (HDAC) transcriptional
activity and the expression of HDAC3 at protein level. LPC suppressed
phosphorylation of mTOR and AKT, the upstream kinases of HDACs and
induced p27 expression. We also found that LPC mediated inactivation of
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)-related
signaling pathway in K562 cells, but not HL-60 and U937. LPC
significantly inhibited phosphorylation and the DNA binding activity of
STAT3, phosphorylation of Src and Janus activated kinase 2 (JAK2) as well
as the expression of STAT3 target genes Cyclin D1, Cyclin E, Bcl-xL,
Bcl-2, and Survivin at both protein and mRNA levels. LPC stimulated
protein tyrosin phosphatases Src homology 2 domain-containing phosphatase
1 (SHP-1), but not SHP-2, SOCS-1 and PTEN. Blocking SHP-1 using sodium
pervanadate or SHP-1 specific siRNA reversed LPC-mediated inactivation of
STAT3 and HDAC and induction of apoptosis. Of importance, LPC blocked the
nuclear translocation and interaction of HDAC3 and STAT3 as well as their
binding onto the Bcl-xL promoter. Overall, our findings demonstrate that
LPC has a potent anti-cancer activity through inducing apoptosis by
suppressing HDAC3/STAT3 activation and binding to the Bcl-xL promoter in
K562 cells.

