Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -Tocotrienol inhibits HGF-dependent mitogenesis and Met activation
in highly malignant mammary tumor cells


Met is a receptor tyrosine kinase that plays a role in regulating
numerous biological functions including mitogenesis, motogenesis,
migration, invasion, and eventual metastasis. Met is activated by its
natural ligand the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). It is now
well-established that aberrant Met signaling is associated with
aggressive cancer phenotypes characterized by highly invasive and
metastatic growth. -Tocotrienol, a member of the vitamin E family of
compounds, displays potent antiproliferative and apoptotic activity
against tumor cells. Previous studies have shown that -tocotrienol
inhibits EGF-dependent growth of +SA murine mammary epithelial cells by
suppressing ErbB3 receptor activity and subsequent reduction in the
PI3K/Akt signaling. Initial studies have shown that combined treatment
with relatively low doses of -tocotrienol and the tyrosine kinase
inhibitors erlotinib or gefitinib significantly inhibited +SA mammary
cell growth. Therefore, the goal of the present study was to investigate
the effects of -tocotrienol treatment on the Met expression and
activation in +SA mammary epithelial tumor cells and to evaluate the
effect of combination treatment of -tocotrienol and the novel Met
inhibitor SU11274. In these experiments, neoplastic +SA mammary
epithelial cells were maintained in serum-free defined media containing
10 ng/mL of HGF as the mitogen. Cell culturing studies measuring cell
viability were determined by the colorimetric MTT assay, whereas protein
expression was determined by Western blotting. Immunofluorescent staining
was used to determine treatment effects on Met receptors level and
activation. Results showed that treatment with -tocotrienol or SU11274,
significantly inhibited HGF-dependent proliferation of neoplastic +SA
cells in a dose-responsive manner. Western blot analysis showed that
treatment with a growth inhibitory dose of -tocotrienol (4 M) caused a
large relative reduction in total Met receptor levels, and a
corresponding reduction in HGF-induced Met autophosphorylation in +SA
mammary tumor cells. In contrast, similar treatment with growth
inhibiting doses of SU11274 (5.5 M) inhibited HGF-induced Met
autophosphorylation, but had no effect on total Met levels. Combined
treatment with subeffective doses of -tocotrienol (2 M) and SU11274 (3 M)
resulted in a significant inhibition of +SA cell growth as compared to
treatment of individual agents alone, and this effect was found to be
cytostatic, not cytotoxic. These findings show for the first time the
inhibitory effects of -tocotrienol on Met expression and activation, and
strongly suggest that -tocotrienol treatment may provide significant
health benefit in the prevention and/or treatment of breast cancer in
women with deregulated HGF/Met signaling. This study was supported by a
grant from First Tech International Ltd., and the Malaysian Palm Oil
Council.

