Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Label-free diagnosis of lung cancer subtypes with
three-dimensional molecular vibrational imaging


For over 50 years, lung cancer has been viewed as an overwhelmingly fatal
disease for which radiologic screening was of unproven utility and the
pathologist had a limited role differentiating small cell from non-small
cell carcinoma and staging resection specimens. The 21st century has
given birth to a revolution in the treatment and classification of lung
cancer that promises to radically enhance survival of patients.
Particularly, the advent of molecular targeted therapies makes
identification of the various histologic subtypes, especially
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, more important. However, the
majorities of lung carcinomas are not resected and are diagnosed using
small biopsies or cytology specimens. Such a small biopsied tissue sample
is likely to be restricted to only one or two histological tests and
could take days because of the time taken for tissue processing,
sectioning and staining. The ability to rapidly recognize lung cancer
subtypes, with minimal tissue consumption, will thus not only facilitate
the diagnostic process, but also enable maximum preservation of tissue
samples for subsequent molecular testing for targeted therapy. Hereby, we
focus on developing a label-free molecular imaging platform that enables
diagnostic imaging of non-small cell lung carcinomas. Mouse lung cancer
models were developed by injecting human lung cancer cell lines,
including adenocarcinoma (A549) and squamous cell carcinoma (NCI-H226),
into the lungs of nude mice (15 mice in each group). Coherent anti-Stokes
Raman scattering (CARS) microscopy was used to acquire lung tissue images
using intrinsic molecular contrast from symmetric CH2 bonds, thus
avoiding tissue consumption or staining. CARS images showed cell nuclei
as dark roughly ellipsoidal structures surrounded by brighter
extracellular tissues richer in CH2 structures, and were in good
correlation with H&E results. By stacking multiple image slices from one
z-stack (multiple images acquired at the same field of view but different
imaging depths) into a single data structure, 3-D volumes were
reconstructed. A computer algorithm was subsequently developed to perform
3-D nuclear segmentation and measurements on these volumes of such
disease-related features like nuclear volume, cell-cell distance, etc.
The algorithm was developed using superpixel context with artificial
neural networks. The measured features were used to develop a
classification system for separation of adenocarcinoma from squamous cell
carcinoma. Our results showed greater than 97% accuracy and specificity.
Therefore, this study shows that the developed 3-D label-free molecular
diagnostic platform can accurately delineate cellular structures for
classification of non-small cell carcinomas, thus holding substantial
potential to provide fast diagnosis while effectively preserving
specimens for followed molecular tests.

