Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GX15-070 induces cell death in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
cells by regulating cellular cholesterol metabolism


Introduction: With the improvement of treatment outcome in pediatric
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), about 80% of the patients can be
cured. However, around 10% of patients have poor outcome due to drug
resistance which calls for novel drugs such as BH3-mimetics. We have
previously demonstrated that GX15-070 (GX), a BH3-mimetic, could
effectively induce cell death. In this study, we investigate the
mechanisms of GX induced cell death in ALL cells. Method: Seven ALL cell
lines were used in this study. Cell viability was determined by MTS assay
(Promega). Western blot was used to detect protein expression level.
Cholesterol (CHO) level was measured by Amplex Red Cholesterol Assay Kit
(Promega). RT-PCR was done by Roche Light Cycler using SYBR Green.
Results: There was a dose-dependent cell death induced in all 7 ALL cell
lines after treatment with GX. Interestingly, genes that are involved in
the CHO synthesis pathway such as LDLR, HMGCR, HMGSC1 and SQLE were
upregulated after GX treatment. Furthermore, GX mediated reduction in
cellular CHO levels was observed. To verify that CHO depletion could
induce cell death in ALL cells, Lovastatin was applied. Our results
showed that Lovastatin not only induced a dose-dependent cell death in
all 7 ALL cell lines but also upregulated the genes mentioned above.
Co-treatment of 0.1M GX and 25M Lovastatin could enhance the cell death
by further decreasing CHO level. In addition, GX-induced cell death could
also be enhanced by 10mM 2-Deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) co-treatment. 2-DG is
an inhibitor of glycolysis which provides metabolites for CHO metabolism.
Next, to mimic a culture condition whereby CHO is depleted, we incubated
the cells in HBSS without Fetal bovine serum (FBS) for 24h. This CHO
depleted condition decreased the cellular CHO level to 46% compared to
the cells that were cultured in 10% FBS and RPMI medium. After incubation
in HBSS for 24h, 0.1M GX could eliminate more cells (80%) compared to the
same dose of GX in serum supplemented RPMI medium (20%). Both HBSS
incubation and GX treatment caused a decrease in anti-apoptotic protein
Mcl-1 expression levels, while pro-apoptotic protein BIM and cleaved-PARP
protein levels were upregulated. The two treatments did not alter the
protein levels of other Bcl-2 family members. These results indicate that
Mcl-1 expression is tightly controlled by cellular metabolism and CHO
depletion can result in cell death. The mechanism of GX induced cell
death may entail the suppression of Mcl-1 expression, hence sensitizing
ALL cells to apoptosis. Conclusion: GX can regulate CHO metabolism to
induce cell death in ALL cells which are normally dependent on aerobic
glycolysis. This highlights the possibility of manipulating CHO
metabolism to provide a specific way to treat leukemic cells. The
administration of GX in the clinic, alone or in combination, may improve
the treatment outcome of leukemia.

