Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated platform for quantifying gene expression in
co-cultured cells


The quantification of mRNA is a ubiquitous and critical tool for
understanding cellular mechanisms in cancer. While RT-PCR is often the
endpoint, the success of the analysis depends not only on the PCR
reaction, but also on an entire process flow linking living cells to the
PCR endpoint. For cultured cells, this process flow includes the culture
itself, cell lysis, mRNA extraction and purification, and RT-PCR. While
much research has been targeted to streamlining and increasing throughput
of the PCR process, the remainder of the process flow has largely been
neglected. In this study, we link a new mechanism for purifying mRNA,
Immiscible Filtration Assisted by Surface Tension (IFAST), with cell
culture on a single platform. IFAST uses an immiscible liquid barrier
(e.g., oil) to separate the cell culture / lysis region from an elution
buffer. Using paramagnetic particles (PMPs) that selectively bind mRNA,
we extracted mRNA from the lysate by using a magnet to draw the
PMP-captured mRNA through the immiscible phase. This process, which takes
only seconds, replaces multiple washing steps required by current mRNA
isolation protocols, which typically take 15-60 minutes to complete. The
simplicity of IFAST enables facile integration of culture and mRNA
extraction on an easy-to-use chip that requires only a micropipette and
magnet to operate. Once proof-of-concept was demonstrated with a single
cell type, the platform was expanded to incorporate co-culture of two
cell types, with breast cancer cells and stromal cells in separate
compartments connected via diffusion ports to allow cytokine exchange.
Each compartment has an IFAST device, such that mRNA can be collected
independently from each side. RT-PCR expression levels from the
integrated culture / IFAST platform had less variance than similar
experiments with independent culture and mRNA purification components,
possibly due to the elimination of error during transfer. mRNA purified
with the integrated device had a yield and purity similar to gold
standard kits. Breast cancer cells co-cultured with bone marrow stromal
cells showed increased proliferation and morphological changes relative
to breast cancer cells cultured alone. Additionally, mRNA extracted from
these cells using the integrated device showed transcriptional changes
consistent with estrogen response, even in hormone-independent
conditions. We have developed a new platform linking compartmentalized
cell co-culture with NA isolation. This technology simplifies and
accelerates two processes ubiquitous in cancer biology, enabling the
collection of additional endpoints with finite resources while reducing
error associated with manipulation. Furthermore, co-cultures of breast
cancer with stroma from a metastatic site induced proliferation and
transcriptional signaling associated with pro-growth conditions,
illustrating the utility of this platform for studying the metastatic
microenvironment.

