Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression and role of BORIS/CTCFL in human cancer stem cells


The existence of CSCs, a small population that drives the tumors
development, progression, metastasis and drug resistance, could explain
the failure of several anti-cancer therapy. The discovery of the genes
responsible for the CSCs phenotype would point out to the development of
new target for the cancer therapy. To date, many tumor markers have been
identified but almost none of them are specific to target the CSCs
population. The cancer testis gene BORIS/CTCFL was shown to be
exclusively expressed in germ cells in normal tissues and was involved in
epigenetic reprogramming. BORIS is slightly activated in a wide variety
of tumors. It is not clear if this expression is due to basal expression
in almost all tumor cells or rather to the expression in a restricted
population of cells, as in the CSC. To date, there is no validated
antibody against BORIS. Therefore, to analyze BORIS expression in vivo,
we developed a molecular beacon (MB) imaging technology to detect BORIS
mRNA gene expression. BORIS MB binds to its specific target and produced
fluorescence signal at 37C in vitro, as well as in vivo in the cells
expressing high level of BORIS mRNA. BORIS was found to be expressed only
in Side Population cells (Hoechst negative cells) in different tumor cell
lines (HeLa, HT29, Raji, MB-MDA-231). Our data indicates that
BORIS-positive cells are present at low frequency (0.01% is the estimated
frequency) in tumor cell lines. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis revealed a
significantly higher expression level of BORIS in SP sorted cells (10-20
fold) compared to that from non-SP cells, similar resultswere obtained in
colon spheres (40 fold) compared to adherent cells. This result indicates
that BORIS is overexpressed in CSCs enriched population of tumor cells.
To define the potential role of BORIS in CSCs, we performed shRNA
knockdown experiments in several tumor cell lines. We found that BORIS
mRNA inhibition could allow decreasing cancer cell survival in studied
tumor cell lines, supporting the hypothesis that BORIS could be critical
for the survival and self-renewal of tumors. In conclusion, our study
provides evidence that BORIS/CTCFL is a promising marker of CSCs that
could also play a critical role in the maintenance of self-renewal
capacity of the tumor initiating cells and as a consequence, of tumor
survival. Therefore, due to its restricted expression in normal tissues
and its reexpression in a wide variety of tumors, BORIS/CTCFL could
become a good target for cancer therapy.

