Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lapatinib and other tyrosine kinase inhibitors greatly potentiate
doxorubicin-induced damage to cardiac myocytes


Lapatinib (Tykerb) is dual tyrosine kinase inhibitor targeting the HER2
(ERBB2) and EGFR (ERBB1, HER1) pathways. Lapatinib has been shown in a
clinical trial to produce low levels of cardiotoxicity that is
reversible. Using a neonatal rat cardiac myocyte model we have
investigated the ability of lapatinib alone, and in combination with
doxorubicin, to damage myocytes. Lapatinib alone at pharmacological
concentrations only slightly induced myocyte damage. However,
doxorubicin-induced myocyte damage was greatly potentiated by the
addition of low nanomolar lapatinib concentrations. Because trastuzumab
also targets ERBB2 receptors, the lapatinib/doxorubicin combination also
provides a good model to probe the mechanism of the increased
cardiotoxicity caused by the concurrent use of trastuzumab and
doxorubicin. Lapatinib treatment alone had little or no effect on myocyte
mitochondrial membrane potential, on oxidation of intracellular DCF
(dichlorofluorescein), on intracellular ATP levels, or on caspase 3/7
induction. While the doxorubicin cardioprotective agent dexrazoxane was
able to greatly reduce doxorubicin-induced myocyte damage, it could only
partially reduce the increase in myocyte damage produced by the
lapatinib/doxorubicin treatment. Lapatinib alone had little effect on the
phosphorylation status of ACC (acetyl-coenzyme A carboxylase) and AKT.
Lapatinib alone decreased phosphorylated ERK (MAPK), which may have, in
part, contributed to the increased doxorubicin-mediated myocyte damage.
As measured by flow cytometry lapatinib-treated myocytes demonstrated an
increased accumulation of doxorubicin. As lapatinib is a strong inhibitor
of several ATP-dependent ABC-type efflux transporters, this likely
occurred because lapatinib blocked doxorubicin efflux, thereby increasing
intracellular doxorubicin concentrations. These results suggest that the
clinical use of concurrent doxorubicin and lapatinib should be approached
with care due to the possibility of lapatinib increasing doxorubicin
cardiotoxicity. Several other kinase inhibitors (imatinib, dasatinib,
sorafenib, sunitinib, gefitinib, pazopanib, nilotinib, erlotinib,
vandetanib and canertinib) were also examined for their ability to
potentiate doxorubicin-induced myocyte damage and induce an increase in
intracellular doxorubicin levels. Support: CIHR and a Canada Research
Chair in Drug Development to BBH.

