Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A simple biological imaging system for detecting adenovirus
receptor expression in tumor cells using a telomerase-specific
replication-competent adenovirus


Adenovirus serotype 5 (Ad5) is frequently used as an effective vector for
induction of therapeutic transgenes in cancer gene therapy or of tumor
cell lysis in oncolytic virotherapy. Ad5 can infect target cells through
binding with the coxsackie and adenovirus receptor (CAR). Thus, the
infectious ability of Ad5-based vectors depends on the CAR expression
level in target cells. There are conventional methods to evaluate the CAR
expression level in human target cells, including flow cytometry, western
blotting and immunocytochemistry. We recently generated a green
fluorescent protein (GFP)-expressing telomerase-specific
replication-competent adenovirus OBP-401, which induces ectopic GFP
expression in tumor cells, but not in normal cells. In this study, we
evaluated whether induction of GFP expression by OBP-401 infection is
associated with CAR expression in tumor cells. OBP-401-mediated GFP
induction was further examined in xenograft tumor tissues that have
different levels of CAR expression and in surrounding normal tissues. We
used six human sarcoma cell lines that have different levels of CAR
expression and CAR-positive normal human lung fibroblasts (NHLF). Flow
cytometry analysis confirmed that cells of four of the sarcoma cell lines
(OST, U2OS, NOS-10 and MNNG/HOS) as well as the NHLF cells showed
detectable CAR expression, whereas cells of the NMFH-1 and OUMS-27
sarcoma cell lines had no detectable CAR expression. To determine
suitable conditions for OBP-401 infection, all tumor and normal cells was
infected with OBP-401 at multiplicity of infections of 1, 10 and 100
plaque forming units/cell. OBP-401 infection induced detectable GFP
expression in CAR-expressing tumor cells, but not in CAR-negative tumor
cells, nor in CAR-positive normal fibroblasts, 24 hours after infection.
OBP-401-mediated GFP expression was significantly associated with CAR
expression in tumor cells. OBP-401 infection detected tumor cells with
low CAR expression more efficiently than conventional methods. We further
examined the potential of the OBP-401-mediated method for the detection
of CAR expression in tumor and normal tissues, we used this method to
analyze CAR expression of human xenograft tumor tissues. OBP-401
infection induced GFP expression in OST tumor tissues, but not in OUMS-27
tumor tissues or in normal muscle tissue. OBP-401 also distinguished
CAR-positive tumor tissues from CAR-negative tumor and normal tissues in
biopsy samples. These results suggest that GFP-expressing
telomerase-specific replication-competent adenovirus is a very potent
diagnostic tool for assessment of functional CAR expression in tumor
cells for Ad5-based antitumor therapy.

