Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyacetal-based immunoconjugates: Next-generation ADCs with high
drug loading, alternative payloads, and alternative protein recognition
scaffolds


Antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) are rapidly establishing themselves as an
important class of chemotherapeutic agents, with impressive therapeutic
potential both in hematological malignancies and in solid tumors, as
evidenced by SGN-035 and T-DM1. Despite these impressive results,
limitations in the current technologies remain. Current ADCs are
typically limited to the use of full-size mAbs, providing excellent
target recognition and pharmacokinetics (PK), but tolerating the
conjugation of only 3-4 payload molecules. This limitation in payload
capacity necessitates the use of extremely toxic drugs such as the
auristatins and maytansinoids to maximize the therapeutic effect while
maintaining the drug load at a low stoichiometric ratio. The vast
majority of less potent but often more specific agents with proven
anti-cancer activity are largely excluded from incorporation in ADCs.
Similarly, a diversity of smaller (alternative) protein recognition
scaffolds, such as scFvs, Fabs, diabodies, minibodies etc. are not
readily utilized for ADCs (because of their smaller size, they are often
associated with poor PK, and even lower capacity for direct drug
conjugation. We wish to report our results with a novel,
biodegradable-polymer based conjugation system, which provides several
advantages for next-generation ADCs, including: 1) significant drug
loading of diverse classes of anti-cancer agents; 2) excellent
physicochemical and PK properties; and 3) flexibility for use with
full-sized mAbs as well as mAb alternatives such as Fabs. The basis of
this new conjugation system is a hydrophilic, fully biodegradable
polyacetal carrier (PHF or poly(1-hydroxymethylethylene
hydroxymethylformal)) covalently linked via separate, optimized linkers
to a targeting moiety (mAb or alternative) and 10-40 molecules of drug
payload. The optimized stability of the linker employed for conjugation
of the polymer-drug conjugate to the targeting molecule ensures stability
in the circulation, while the enzymatically cleavable linker utilized for
drug-polymer conjugation provides a controllable, predictable pattern of
intracellular drug release. Employing well characterized mAbs and mAb Fab
fragments in combination with diverse cytotoxic agents as well as kinase
inhibitors, we have demonstrated that this new ADC conjugation system
provides several potential advantages over existing approaches. For
example, trastuzumab was efficiently conjugated to a PHF-vinca polymer
conjugate, with a ratio of 16-20 small molecules per antibody. Clear
evidence of in vivo activity was demonstrated in multiple xenograft
models. Pharmacokinetic and tissue disposition studies conducted in these
models confirmed extended plasma ADC exposure (T1/2 of 3-4 days) and
significant drug intratumoral accumulation, correlating well with the
high ADC efficacy observed.

