Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MAP4K4 (HGK) plays a key role in tumor progression


MAP4K4/HGK is an STE kinase that was identified in an siRNA screen for
modulators of tumor cell motility and in a five-gene signature predicting
metastasis and survival in colon cancer. Interestingly, its catalytic
function is required for anchorage-independent growth in 3D soft agar
(but not in 2D monolayers) of 3T3 fibroblasts and rat intestinal
epithelial cells. The aim of the present study was to evaluate MAP4K4
expression in a range of human tumor cell lines and further explore its
role in cell motility and invasion. Using western blotting analysis,
MAP4K4 protein expression was measured in a panel of approximately 50
human tumor cell lines and 3 non-transformed cell lines. Selected
high-expressing MAP4K4 cell lines were used for genetic manipulation.
Lentiviral shRNA inducible (TRIPZ-RFP) and stable (GIPZ-GFP) knockdowns
(KD) permitted the selection of isogenic cell lines for functional
studies. Novel high-throughput 96-well plate-based 3D assays were used to
analyze: (i) 3D spheroid growth, (ii) tumor cell dissemination over
gelatin or collagen type I and (iii) invasion into Matrigel. A fully
automated image analysis system was validated against standard
microscopy-based methods and applied to these studies. Cell viability was
assessed in 2D and 3D by the Cell Titer Glo assay. Pharmacodynamic
biomarkers were analyzed in KD and control cells to correlate MAP4K4
expression to the activation/inhibition status of putative downstream
signalling pathways. MAP4K4 protein expression levels were high to
moderate in 60% of the cell lines tested (including glioma,
neuroblastoma, hepatocellular, prostate, colorectal, ovarian, squamous
and breast carcinomas) and undetectable in PNT2 and MCF10A
non-transformed prostate and breast epithelial cells. It was also
expressed in activated human endothelial cells. The SF188 pediatric
glioma cell line was prioritized for further study based on its strong
expression of MAP4K4 (and activated downstream signalling pathways), the
ability to generate reproducible tumor spheroids and the highly invasive
nature of this cancer type. Additional confirmatory studies utilized the
metastatic triple-negative human breast cancer cell line MDA MB 231. Both
stable and inducible KD were achieved as described above. Functional
studies showed that MAP4K4 KD induced between 30-50% inhibition of cell
viability, motility and/or invasion. Inhibition of MAP4K4 expression in
SF188 cells also down-regulated key downstream signalling molecules such
as pJNK, pSTAT3, pTAK1 and MMP2. In MDA MB 231, MAP4K4 was upregulated
when cells were cultured in 3D spheroids and again, stable knockdown
inhibited 3D migration by 50%. Conclusions: In the present study we
provide evidence that MAP4K4 plays an important role in functions
associated with tumor progression (ability to grow in 3D, migration and
invasion) in two cancer types where invasion and/or metastasis contribute
to their notoriously poor prognosis.

