Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer chemopreventive activity of a novel amide derivative
of sulindac involves inhibition of PDE5, activation of PKG, and
attenuation of Wnt/-catenin signaling


The nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and cyclooxygenase-2
(COX2) inhibitors demonstrate promising chemopreventive activity against
a number of cancer types, including breast cancer. Unfortunately,
potentially fatal toxicities associated with COX inhibition have
precluded the development of these drugs for such indications. However,
some studies suggest that their anticancer activity may be due to
COX-independent mechanisms, suggesting the ability to target such
mechanisms for the development of potentially safer and more effective
chemopreventive agents. Here we describe a novel amide derivative of the
NSAID sulindac sulfide (SS), termed sulindac sulfide amide (SSA). SSA
lacked the ability to inhibit either COX1 or COX2 but demonstrated as
much as a twenty-fold increase in potency to inhibit growth and induce
apoptosis of breast tumor cells compared to SS. Moreover, SSA was
selective for tumor cells, having no measurable effect on apoptosis of
nontumorigenic mammary epithelial cells. As we have shown previously with
SS, SSA inhibited the cGMP specific phosphodiesterase 5 (PDE5) enzyme.
This resulted in accumulation of intracellular cGMP and activation of
cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG) at concentrations comparable to those
that induced breast tumor cell apoptosis. Mirroring the effects on PKG,
SSA also resulted in decreased Wnt/-catenin signaling, including
decreased expression of the Tcf/Lef controlled proteins, cyclin D1 and
survivin. Furthermore, SSA caused a 50% reduction in the incidence and a
30% reduction in the multiplicity of mammary tumors using the MNU model
of mammary carcinogenesis. Interestingly, mammary tumors induced by MNU
displayed high levels of PDE5 expression. These findings further
demonstrate the COX-independent nature of the anticancer activity of
certain NSAIDs, provide additional evidence that PDE5 may serve as an
effective target for breast cancer chemoprevention, and reveal the
utility of chemically modifying the NSAIDs to remove COX inhibitory
activity while enhancing anticancer activity in order to produce safer
and more effective chemopreventive agents.

