Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 2-Methoxyestradiol targets RON kinase and FLIP to inhibit
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in prostate cancer


Prostate Cancer (PCA) is the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths among men in the United States. Despite significant progress in
our understanding of prostate biology, early detection and treatment, the
five-year survival for hormone refractory metastatic prostate cancer
(HRPCA) patients is less than 30%. Current therapies targeting PCA are
not effective against the metastatic stage. 2-Methoxyestradiol (2-ME2) is
a metabolic product of 17--estradiol and is found in trace amounts in the
body; it has shown anti-tumorigenic properties in multiple cancer models.
Previous studies from our lab have shown that 2-ME2 can induce apoptosis
in PCA cells by blocking cell cycle progression, and also inhibits PCA
growth and progression in TRAMP mice. However, the precise mechanism of
action of 2-ME2 has not yet been elucidated. In order to classify the
mechanism behind PCA inhibition by 2-ME2, we tested its effectiveness on
an array containing genes associated with epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). We identified Recepteur d'Origine Nantais (RON) as one
of the most significantly downregulated genes in response to 2-ME2
treatment. RON has been shown to promote cell invasiveness, migration,
survivability, and proliferation in many cancers such as breast, colon,
lung, and pancreatic. However, very little is known about RON's signaling
mechanism in PCA. We've found RON to be highly increased in advanced
stage PCA cell lines. RON knockdown shows a concomitant decrease in the
expression of FLICE-like inhibitory protein (FLIP). FLIP is an
anti-apoptotic protein which prevents death receptor-induced apoptotic
signaling. FLIP has been found to promote EMT as well as
androgen-independent PCA growth. Stimulation with the RON ligand HGF
yielded elevated expression of RON and FLIP in PCA cell lines while
treatment with 2-ME2 caused downregulation. Immunoprecipitation
experiments showed RON to be associated with the androgen-induced
proliferation inhibitor (APRIN) in PCA cells. Our data suggest that
RON/FLIP crosstalk plays a role in prostate cancer. Therefore, targeting
RON/FLIP signaling could have potential therapeutic benefit for
metastatic PCA. Supported by NIH CA 135451 (APK).

