Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The lichen compound usnic acid disturbs mitochondrial and
lysosomal function by proton shuttling


Differential intracellular pH plays an important role in organelle
function and intracellular transport. The intracellular distribution of
cancer drugs is also influenced by pH gradients. A wide range of
biological activities has been described for the lichen compund usnic
acid (UA) e.g., anti-inflammatory, anti-viral and anti-bacterial
activity. UA has also been shown to reduce ATP production by liver cell
mitochondria and inhibit growth and proliferation of several cancer
cells. UA is a proton shuttle, and therefore we investigated its effects
on the function of two pH-sensitive organelles, mitochondria and
lysosomes, in several cancer cell lines and normal human fibroblasts.
JC-1 staining was used to test for changes in inner mitochondrial
membrane potential and ATP levels were determined by luminescence
measurements. Western blotting was used to detect AMPkinase
phosphorylation and degradation of the autophagosomal cargo p62 were
assayed by Western blotting. Formation of autophagosomes was assessed by
electron microscopy (EM) and immunostaining for the autophagosomal marker
LC3. Lysosomal formation was estimated using lysotracker, a pH-sensitive
lysosomal marker, and immunostaining for Lamp2. Further testing for
autophagosomal-lysosomal fusion and acidification was performed using a
tandem-tagged mRFP-GFP-LC3 fusion construct. A drop in inner membrane
mitochondrial potential was demonstrated and reduced levels of ATP and
AMPk activation were observed in UA-treated cancer cells. Clear signs of
autophagy were seen after treatment with UA, observed by EM and an
increased number of LC3-positive autophagosomes. Degradation of p62 was
not detected. Staining with lysotracker revealed very marked effects in
UA-treated cells, which have been interpreted as evidence of formation of
large lysosomal aggregates by fusion. However, immunostaining for the
lysosomal membrane protein Lamp2 revealed a different pattern of
speckles. This may indicate that the lysotracker dye is found outside
lysosomes. The retention of the dye is pH-dependent implying that
intra-lysosomal pH may be affected by treatment with UA. Using cells
containing the mRFP-GFP-LC3 fusion construct confirmed that acidification
in the autophago-lysosomes was reduced following treatment with UA.
Results indicate that UA disturbs the pH balance in cells and its effects
on organelle function are mediated through its ability to shuttle protons
across membranes. Clear signs of autophagy are seen after treatment with
UA, but degradation of p62 does not occur and therefore no metabolic
substrates are provided for the cell. UA has the potential to serve as a
candidate for drug interaction along with other cancer drugs.

