Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plk2 loss and mTOR signaling in advanced colorectal cancer


Background: Dysregulated cell growth and proliferation can promote
tumorigenesis. Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a central promotor
of cell growth and proliferation, is inhibited by Tuberous Sclerosis
Complex 1 (TSC1) protein. Polo-like kinases (Plk) 1 & 2 are downstream
molecules in the p53 pathway. TSC1 is known to interact with Plk1 in a
cell cycle-regulated, phosphorylation-dependent manner. Recently we found
that Plk2 impacts mTOR signaling in the same manner as TSC1, and human
lung tumor cells deficient in Plk2 grew significantly larger than control
tumor cells. We hypothesized that Plk2 functions as a tumor suppressor
protein and seek to investigate Plk2 function as it relates to mTOR
signaling and tumor suppression. Design: This is a pilot study. Archived
pathology specimens from 6 advanced colorectal adenocarcinomas (stages
III & IV) were retrieved, and immunohistochemical staining for
phosphorylated mTOR (serine 2448), phosphorylated ribosomal S6 (Serine
235/236), Plk2, p53, Ki67, and glucose transporter 1 (Glut1) were
performed. The staining pattern was analyzed. Results: Plk2 is expressed
in normal colon epithelium, with a punctate staining pattern in the
supranuclear region. In colorectal adenocarcinoma, Plk2 demonstrates
partial loss of expression, complete loss of expression, or disrupted
expression manifested as irregular or abnormal localization. Loss of Plk2
expression is more pronounced in the invasive front in some cases. mTOR
shows strong expression in the invasive front, which is presumed to be
less hypoxic. Phosphorylated S6 and Glut1 expression partially correlate
with phosphorylated mTOR expression but appears more diffuse in some
cases. p53 and Ki67 expression is diffuse, rather than specific to the
tumor invasive front in the subset of cases examined. Conclusion: Our
results support the hypothesis that Plk2 functions as a tumor suppressor
molecule. Loss of Plk2 expression along with accentuated expression of
phosphorylated mTOR, phosphorylated S6, and Glut1 at the invasive front
at least in some advanced colorectal carcinomas suggest that interaction
between Plk2 and TSC1 / mTOR signaling molecules plays a role in tumor
progression during hypoxic condition. Further study with a larger number
of tumor samples and tumor cell lines is needed to confirm the above
findings.

