Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amplification of mouse chromosome 4 in chemically induced and
invasive mouse lung adenocarcinoma


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States and
is ranked second only to bladder cancer in proportion of cases due to
past occupational exposures. Though the genetic changes associated with
lung cancer are not well understood, the pattern of mutations observed in
lung adenocarcinoma from tobacco exposed patients is distinct from that
of lung adenocarcinoma from unexposed patients. We used Spectral
Karyotyping (SKY), mapping with fluorescently labeled genomic clones
(FISH), comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), expression array, real
time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot to analyze 15 primary
adenocarcinoma and 9 pairs of high and low invasive cell cultures to
detect molecular changes. The medial portion of chromosome 4 was deleted
in 67% of all of the cell strains. Duplication of the proximal region of
chromosome 4 occurred in 22% of the spontaneously-occurring high-invasive
cells strains and 83% of the chemically-induced high-invasive cell
cultures. Mouse chromosome 1 and 15 were amplified in 90% of the
high-invasive cell strains. FISH mapping further narrowed the region of
deletion of chromosome 4 to 39.6 centimorgans (cM) and the region of
duplication to 10-35 cM. Expression array and real time PCR analysis
demonstrated increased expression of the cell cycle inhibitory factor p16
and the apoptotic factor Cathepsin D in all of the tumor cell strains.
The expression of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2), Kruppel like factor-4 (KLF4),
Cyclin E and c-myc was significantly higher in the high-invasive cells
strains compared to the low-invasive cell strains. Western blotting
showed increased Cox-2, Cyclin E, KLF4 and c-myc proteins and decreased
expression of Cathepsin D. In addition, the KLF4 protein was higher in
the chemically-induced cell strains compared to the
spontaneously-occurring cell strains while COX-2 was higher in the
spontaneously-occurring cell strains. The KLF4 protein was identified in
the tumor cell strains at the expected size of 55 KD as well as a smaller
45 KD form. Coordinated expression of KLF4 and c-myc is important in the
induction of a stem cell phenotype and may be important in chemical
carcinogenesis. The higher COX-2 in the spontaneous tumors indicates the
importance of inflammation in spontaneous tumor induction. The homologous
linkage groups on human chromosomes 9p21, 1p36, 9q and 8q are altered in
asbestos-induced human lung adenocarcinoma. Alteration in copy number and
expression of these genes may play a functional role in lung cancer
development.

