Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Select epidithiodiketopiperazine (ETP) compounds disrupt the
HIF-1/p300 interaction and HIF-mediated transcription


As solid tumors grow, regions in the tumor become hypoxic because of
increased metabolism, heterogeneous and abnormal vasculature delivering
oxygen within the tumor, and greater size. In order for the tumor to
continue to grow, it depends on survival mechanisms to overcome this
hypoxic state, including up-regulation in glycolysis, invasion and
metastasis, and angiogenesis, or the growth of new blood vessels. The
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) transcription factor complex is a major
mediator of the cell's response to a hypoxic state and a tumor's survival
mechanism under hypoxia. The complex is composed of the hypoxia-dependent
HIF-1 subunit and a constitutively expressed HIF-1 subunit, and it
requires the co-activator protein p300 to function. In the presence of
oxygen, HIF-1 is rapidly degraded. Under hypoxia, HIF-1 forms a complex
with HIF-1 and p300 in the nucleus to up-regulate transcription of
pro-survival and angiogenic genes. Targeting this transcription factor
complex in tumors could circumvent the tumor's hypoxia survival mechanism
and lead to growth arrest and cell death. The compounds chetomin,
chaetocin, and gliotoxin, members of the epidithiodiketopiperazine (ETP)
family of fungal metabolites, have been shown to disrupt the HIF-1/p300
interaction in an over-expression system. In the following experiments,
we sought to validate the disruption of the HIF-1 /p300 transcription
factor complex in cells, and to determine the associated downstream
cellular effects. By co-immunoprecipitation of the complex from prostate
cancer cells, we were able to show that treatment with those select ETPs
under hypoxic conditions disrupted the HIF-1/p300 complex. We performed
an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to determine the effect of
ETPs on levels of secreted vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a
major target of HIF transcription. We observed a decrease in VEGF
concentration that correlated with ETP treatment under hypoxia.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was performed
to examine the transcription levels of other HIF target genes to validate
that disruption of the HIF-1/p300 complex by select ETP treatments indeed
affects HIF-mediated transcription. In order to determine the
antiangiogenic effects of these agents in vivo, ongoing animal studies in
our lab are testing the efficacy of these ETPs in reducing tumor growth
and determining feasibility of pre-clinical development. Targeting the
HIF complex could circumvent a tumor's survival mechanism under hypoxia,
and would be a new treatment strategy in solid tumors.

