Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new model for macrophage transdifferentiation into lymphatic
endothelial cell progenitors


Background: Macrophage-derived lymphatic endothelial cell progenitors
(M-LECPs) contribute to tumor and inflammatory lymphangiogenesis, but the
mechanisms regulating their recruitment, differentiation, and function in
vivo are largely unknown. The main challenge to better understanding of
M-LECP biology is their low (2-5%) frequency in vivo and lack of models
allowing in-depth analyses in vitro. Our goal was two-fold: 1) to
establish a cell-based model that recapitulates macrophage-LECP
transdifferentiation; and 2) to characterize this model under controlled
conditions. Methodology/Results: M-LECPs have been identified in an
inflammatory peritonitis model in situ by dual expression of myeloid
(CD11b and Ly6C) and lymphatic-specific (VEGFR-3, LYVE-1, and podoplanin)
markers. The model was induced by i.p. injections of lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) that mobilized CD11b+ macrophages and induced their incorporation
into diaphragm lymphatic vessels. To reconstruct the emergence of this
sub-population in vitro, a mouse macrophage cell line, RAW264.7, was
treated by LPS following by analyses of expression profile and functional
assays. RT-qPCR showed significant overlap (>67%) in the LPS-induced
expression of lymphatic-specific genes in endogenous CD11b+/VEGFR-3+
cells from LPS-treated mice and RAW264.7 macrophages in vitro. LPS
treatment of RAW264.7 cells coincidently increased VEGFR-3 and VEGF-C
expression by respectively 20- and 40-folds. This activated an autocrine
loop shown by a time-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of VEGFR-3 that
was abolished by a VEGF-C-blocking agent. To monitor the functional
behavior in vivo, GFP-tagged RAW264.7 cells (RAW-GFP) were injected into
either saline- or LPS-treated mice. Diaphragms were harvested seven days
later and stained for GFP, myeloid and lymphatic markers. The results
showed that RAW-GFP cells were massively recruited to the diaphragms in
LPS- but not in saline-treated mice. The lymphangiogenic potential of
GFP-labeled RAW264.7 macrophages was indicated not only by their
widespread incorporation into pre-existing lymphatic vessels but also by
their ability to form new LYVE-1+ structures both inside and outside of
the diaphragm tissues. Conclusions/Significance: We found that
LPS-treated RAW264.7 macrophages can serve a model of macrophage
transdifferentiation into LECPs. Using this novel model, we established
for the time, that this inflammation-induced process requires transient
expression of VEGFR-3 followed by VEGF-C-mediated autocrine signaling and
de novo expression of a broad panel of lymphatic-specific genes. In
contrast to endogenous M-LECPs, RAW264.7 cells comprise homogeneous
population, are available in unlimited amount, and amendable to genetic
manipulations. We, therefore, believe that the RAW model can serve as a
great vehicle for detailed molecular studies of LECP biology at
inflammatory and tumor sites.

