Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aurora-A kinase is required for rapid establishment of the mitotic
checkpoint


Aurora-A (AurA) is a conserved Serine/Threonine kinase and is mainly
involved in multiple key steps in cell division. A high level of AurA is
frequently detected in different human cancer types and is used as a poor
prognostic biomarker. AurA inhibitors as potential anti-cancer drugs are
widely being tested in clinical trials. To explore the mechanism(s) of
possible efficacy, the roles of AurA in mitosis should be fully
elucidated. AurA is known to be required for centrosome separation,
spindle formation and kinetochore-microtubule attachment. However, the
mechanism by which AurA is involved in regulation of the mitotic
checkpoint is unclear. Most studies have used RNA interference, which
does not abolish AurA activity, or inhibitors, which often target both
AurA and AurB. In this study, we sought to dissect the role of AurA in
checkpoint regulation by using cells derived from genetically engineered
mice conditionally null for AurA, as well as a new selective AurA
inhibitor. Upon deletion of AurA in mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEFs),
65% of cells formed monopolar spindles and exited mitosis without
dividing. However, the average duration of mitosis in these cells was 88
minutes, significantly shorter than the 192 minutes in cells with
monopolar spindles induced by Eg5 kinesin inhibition, in which checkpoint
is fully functional. Previous work in our lab showed AurA is dispensable
for checkpoint signaling in APC/C inhibition. Hence, we tested whether
the truncated arrest in AurA-/- cells was due to defective checkpoint
engagement and/or because of attenuated AurB mediated error correction,
which reactivates checkpoint. Using live cell imaging followed by
immunofluorescence, we found the recruitment of Mad2 to kinetochores at
the start of mitosis was markedly delayed in AurA-/- MEFs. Mad2 levels at
kinetochores were reduced to 28% of that in wild-type cells in the
absence of microtubules. In addition, without AurA, AurB was not able to
accumulate at the centromere at early prometa-phase. This observation may
indicate that error correction is compromised, resulting in the abnormal
acceleration of checkpoint satisfaction. Similar results were obtained
using human immortalized RPE cells treated with a selective AurA
inhibitor-MLN8237. Thus, preliminary data suggest AurA disruption causes
delays in rapid establishment of a robust checkpoint and an effective
error correction pathway at early mitosis. These defects accelerate
mitotic exit in the presence of an aberrant spindle, leading to aneuploid
progeny. Currently, we are assessing the dynamics of the checkpoint
signaling on kinetochores throughout mitosis. We are also investigating
whether AurA function in checkpoint regulation is directly through
activation of AurB at centromere. This study is expected to further
elucidate basic mechanisms of mitotic regulation and will provide
important implications for the application of AurA kinase inhibitors in
clinical trials.

