Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Massively parallel sequencing of cancer FFPE specimens matches
diagnostic accuracy of methods in current clinical use and reveals
additional actionable mutations


As genomic data accumulate at an ever-increasing rate, it is becoming
evident that a comprehensive description of molecular aberrations that
define individual patients tumors will prove useful to determine optimal
therapeutic strategies. Several platforms are currently in use for
clinical molecular diagnostics testing, including PCR, Sanger sequencing,
restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis, and mass spectrometric
genotyping (Sequenom). Massively parallel sequencing (MPS) technology has
the potential to expand upon Sequenom genotyping because it allows for
the identification of mutations across entire exons (rather than single
base pairs) as well as copy gains, losses and gene fusions. However, for
MPS to be considered a viable clinical strategy, it must first be shown
to be compatible with formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue
across a range of tumor types, sizes, and cellularities. Also, it must
exhibit high concordance with mutation profiles derived using the current
best diagnostic methods available. To explore the clinical utility of
MPS, we selected 71 surgically resected FFPE tumors that had previously
been tested for approximately 100 oncogenic mutations in 8 oncogenes by
Sequenom genotyping and subjected them to targeted DNA sequencing of 189
cancer-related genes. DNA was extracted from four 10-micron unstained
sections from the diagnostic FFPE block (yielding a minimum of 250
nanograms per case), followed by sequencing library construction and
hybridization-based capture of 3230 exons and 37 intronic intervals. Deep
sequencing was performed, yielding an average coverage of >750X for
uniquely-mapping reads. Sequence data were analyzed for single nucleotide
variants and small insertions and deletions. High concordance was noted
between Sequenom and MPS: 62 and 65 mutations were called by the two
technologies, respectively, at mutually tested sites, with 60 mutation
calls in common. Notably, mutant allele frequencies in these concordant
calls ranged as low as 4% by MPS, highlighting the sensitivity of
detection enabled by both approaches. The few discordant mutation calls
exhibited no or weak evidence in the other dataset, possibly due to local
tumor heterogeneity. Further, MPS revealed 73 sequence variants at
additional sites of known recurrent somatic mutations and 30
loss-of-function variants in key tumor suppressor genes not tested by
Sequenom. Many of these variants represent plausibly actionable mutations
that could influence treatment decisions. Thus, we conclude that: (1) MPS
exhibits high concordance with current best methods and is a viable
strategy for clinical diagnostics, and (2) MPS captures additional
variants not typically interrogated in the current clinical setting but
with potential implications for the selection of approved and/or
experimental targeted therapies.

