Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation and targeting of Fyn in cutaneous squamous cell
carcinoma


Over 700,000 cases of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) occur in
the United States every year. Despite this high rate of diagnosis no
therapies currently exist that target the molecular mechanism of
tumorigenesis. Between 20 and 60% of these tumors contain mutated Ras;
however targeting Ras with therapeutics has been unsuccessful in clinical
trials. Expression of active H-Ras (G12V) in HaCaT cells (immortalized,
non-transformed keratinocytes) results in upregulated expression of Fyn,
a Src family kinase that is active in many malignancies and is involved
in the elevated invasion/migration of Ras-transformed HaCaT cells. The
specific objectives of this project include exploring the mechanism
through which Ras activation increases Fyn levels and determining how
high levels of Fyn promote cancer cell migration and survival. Using
RT-qPCR we verified that Fyn expression is selectively elevated in cells
with increased Ras activity, but levels of other Src family kinases (eg
Src, Lyn, Yes, Blk, Lck) are not altered. To explore the transcriptional
regulation of Fyn in Ras-transformed HaCaT cells we subcloned segments (2
kb to 50 bp) of the human Fyn promoter in front of firefly luciferase and
transfected the reporter constructs into HaCaT and HaCaT-Ras cells
(transformed by constitutively active H-Ras). We identified a region 100
to 50 base pairs upstream of the transcription start site that is
necessary for Fyn upregulation in HaCaT-Ras cells. The 80 to 65 region of
the Fyn promoter contains putative GATA-1, GATA-2, GATA-3, CP2 or TATA
transcription factor binding sites. We have also targeted Fyn in
Ras-transformed cells using the Src family kinase inhibitor Dasatinib.
Already used to treat chronic myelogenous leukemia and Philadelphia
chromosome positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Dasatinib is also in
clinical trials to treat solid tumors. Treatment with varying
concentrations of Dasatinib did not reveal greater changes in cell
viability, cell cycle progression, apoptosis or autophagy in transformed
HaCaT-Ras cells as compared to HaCaT cells. However, upon Dasatinib
exposure HaCaT-Ras cells change dramatically in morphology, enhancing
cell-cell contacts and reverting from a stellate appearance to the
rounded morphology of untransformed HaCaT cells. Due to previous work
verifying Fyn's role in promoting the invasion and migration of
transformed keratinocytes, we propose that Fyn inhibition in
keratinocytes with increased Ras activity will restore cell to cell
contacts and provide a potential therapeutic target in the treatment of
cSCCs.

