Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid discovery of novel antiangiogenic drugs using a phenotypic
profiling platform with high predictive value for preclinical models of
cancer


Deregulation of angiogenesis plays a major role in a number of human
diseases, most notably cancer. While angiogenesis inhibitors are
promising anticancer drug candidates, existing FDA approved therapeutics
have shown limited efficacy in the clinic. The majority of angiogenesis
inhibitors under clinical development have been designed with the help of
high-throughput screening techniques targeting single molecular moieties.
These methods have proven effective but it has been long recognized that
they lack correlation with activity in preclinical models of cancer which
results in high levels of attrition during early stages of drug discovery
and phase II clinical trials. We propose that multi-parameter analysis
discovery methods are required to capture and translate the tumor
angiogenesis complexity into the drug discovery process. Here we
introduce a novel high-content cell-specific fluorescence platform for
discovery of antiangiogenic agents with highly predictive value for
preclinical end points. We have validated this technology by screening
the 1970 small molecules of the NCI Developmental Therapeutics Program
Diversity Set. This platform features a primary screening based on high
content growth and tube formation assays using VEGFR2-nonexpressing,
fluorescent-reporter endothelial cells. Over 30 morphological parameters
were quantitatively assessed in the tube formation assays in an automated
fashion with the newly developed image analysis software
AngioApplication. 2.3% (46) of all the small molecules in the library
showed growth inhibitory activity, 3.5% (70) significantly blocked tube
formation and 0.5% (11) demonstrated both activities. None of the lead
compounds were found to interfere with tubulin polymerization or
inhibited receptor tyrosine kinase activity. Seven lead compounds were
evaluated in a leiomyosarcoma xenograft model of angiogenesis. All showed
anti-tumor activity, and two of the compounds (CID 5458317 and CID
429599) blocked tumor growth with comparable efficacy as bevacizumab. An
antiangiogenic score computed based on tube formation assessment and gene
expression profiling was highly predictive of tumor growth inhibition in
vivo. The antiangiogenic mechanism of action of these compounds was
validated using tumor onplants on chicken chorioallantoic assays which
consistently tracked observations in xenograft models. Intravital
microscopy assessment of xenograft tumors treated with CID 5458317 showed
massive leakiness and vascular regression of tumor vasculature but not in
adjacent normal vasculature. In conclusion, we have developed a drug
discovery phenotypic screening platform which shows high predictive value
for preclinical models of cancer. Using this platform, several small
molecules with novel antiangiogenic mechanisms of action have been
identified.

