Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Repression of transcriptional activity by the retinoid target gene
G0S2


Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cases that express the PML/RAR fusion
protein block maturation of myeloid precursors. All-trans retinoic acid
(RA)-based differentiation therapy of these APL cases causes clinical
remissions. Yet, clinical use of RA is associated with toxicities and
drug resistance. In the search for RA target genes that can serve as
alternative therapeutic targets in APL, G0S2 was found as one of the most
rapidly and prominently RA-induced species. G0S2 is a 103 amino acid
protein without apparent homology domains to other species. It was
recently shown to inhibit adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL) activity,
leading to repression of lipolysis. G0S2 is abundantly expressed in
adipose tissues, which is consistent with its role in regulating
lipolysis. It is also induced in response to inflammatory stimuli in
other cell types, indicating it has additional roles beyond fat storage.
Here, we report a new G0S2 function uncovered after its transient
transfection that led to substantial repression of reporter activities of
multiple constructs (including RA-regulated species RAR, UBE1L and G0S2
itself). This repression was antagonized by siRNA-mediated G0S2
knockdown. Notably, an engineered form of G0S2 that lacked the internal
hydrophobic domain did not exhibit these repressive effects. Inhibitors
of either the proteasomal or lysosomal pathways did not overcome this
suppression by G0S2. Thus, these repressive activities were unlikely due
to enhanced proteasome or lysosome activities. The reported inhibition of
ATGL activity by G0S2 causes an increase in lipid droplet size, which can
also be achieved by treating cells with the neutral lipid oleic acid.
Yet, this treatment did not impact reporter activity, indicating that
changes in lipid droplet size did not affect this transcriptional
repression. Intriguingly, G0S2 expression did not reduce endogenous
expression of RAR, UBE1L or G0S2 (each RA-regulated species), indicating
that only exogenous genes were affected by G0S2 transient transfection.
Subcellular localization of endogenous G0S2 was examined in RA-treated
NB4 APL cells and G0S2 was markedly expressed in the cytosol and
membranes of these cells. Transiently transfected G0S2 protein was also
detected in the cytoplasm. In summary, we report a previously
unrecognized function for the RA target gene G0S2: it repressed exogenous
reporter activity, but not endogenous gene expression. Both endogenous
and exogenous G0S2 proteins were detected in the cytoplasm. Mechanistic
studies that engage this G0S2 repressive effect are now underway.

