Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PhScN peptide as a highly potent inhibitor of basement
membrane invasion in vitro and lung colonization in nude mice by
metastatic human prostate cancer cells


Surgery and radiation can cure localized prostate cancer, but not
metastatic disease. Our research has shown that activated 51 integrin
fibronectin receptors mediate metastatic invasion by human prostate
cancer cell lines, DU 145 and PC-3, as well as angiogenic invasion by
human microvascular endothelial cells (hmvec). Thus, activated 51
receptors are key to metastatic progression. To inhibit metastatic
invasion, we devised the Ac-PHSCN-NH2 peptide, PHSCN, licensed as
ATN-161. Systemic ATN-161 monotherapy was well tolerated in Phase I
trial, and halted metastatic progression for 4-14 months in 35% of
patients; however, it was not potent enough for easy administration.
Thus, there are some major difficulties with ATN-161 as a drug. Also,
PHSCN can be degraded by endoproteinases, enzymes that cleave between its
linked L-amino acids. Since tumors secrete abundant endoproteinases, we
devised a potent, exo- and endoproteinase-resistant, 51targeted invasion
inhibitor, the Ac-PhScN-NH2 peptide (PhScN). Because it contains mirror
image D-isomers of His (h) and Cys (c) separating L-isomers of Pro, Ser,
and Asn, is resistant to endoproteolytic degradation. Our results suggest
that PhScN is 27,000 to 340,000-fold more potent than PHSCN at blocking
51-mediated, serum-induced, or serum-free PHSRN peptide-induced invasion
in vitro by metastatic human DU 145 and PC-3 prostate cancer cells. Our
results also indicate that a single pretreatment of suspended DU 145 and
PC-3 cells with varying concentrations of the PhScN peptide prior to
intravenous injection reduces lung colony formation in athymic, nude mice
by 100,000 to 300,000-fold, relative to lung metastasis inhibition by the
parental PHSCN peptide. Because 51 integrin also supports survival, we
determined the effects of elevated PhScN concentrations on clonogenic DU
145 and PC-3 survival in vitro. We found that PhScN has no appreciable
effect on clonogenic survival, suggesting that its potent anti-metastatic
activity is due to invasion inhibition in lung microvasculature.
Consistent with this hypothesis, our preliminary results suggest that
PhScN pretreatment is also significantly more potent method for
preventing extravasation into lung tissue than pretreatment with the
parental PHSCN peptide. Since our published results show that the PHSCN
polylysine dendrimer (PHSCNGGK-MAP) is 100-fold more potent than the
PHSCN peptide at inhibiting DU 145 and PC-3 lung colonization, the
results presented here suggest that D-amino acid substitution in the
PHSCN sequence, thereby forming the PhScN peptide or dendrimer
(PhScNGGK-MAP) may be an excellent strategy for the synthesis of highly
potent 51-targeted inhibitors of metastatic invasion and lung
colonization.

