Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single center phase II study of yttrium-90 radioactive resin
microspheres in the treatment of liver predominant metastatic colorectal
adenocarcinoma after failure of 1st-line combination chemotherapy


Background: Colorectal cancer is the fourth most commonly diagnosed
cancer and the second leading cause of cancer death. Liver metastases
develop in half of all the colorectal cancer (CRC) cases and cause death
in 90% of patients. We are evaluating the treatment of liver metastases
through the incorporation of selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT)
using Yttrium-90 radioactive microspheres for subjects with liver
progressive disease following failure of first-line FOLFOX (
bevacizumab). We are presenting our preliminary data for the phase II
study evaluating the tumor response rates, PFS, and long-term safety and
toxicity to SIRT following FOLFOX ( bevacizumab) prior to FOLFIRI.
Methods: Subjects with predominantly hepatic metastatic CRC whose disease
progressed on first-line FOLFOX ( bevacizumab) based therapy are
eligible. Interventional radiology and nuclear medicine assess the liver
lesions and the subject receives their SIRT treatment(s) followed by
second-line FOLFIRI based therapy 4-6 weeks after the final SIRT
treatment. Optimal timing for microsphere treatment relative to
chemotherapy is not clearly established. Results: To date, 9 metastatic
CRC subjects have been treated and 11 subjects enrolled (goal 30
subjects). One subject was withdrawn due to progressive lung metastases.
Four of 8 subjects (50%) achieved PFS at 6 months and average TTP is 6.7
months (0.7-17.3 months). Overall treatment has been well tolerated, but
one possible study related SAE of liver failure occurred (Subject 8). The
OS endpoint has not been achieved. Conclusions: Historically, second-line
FOLFIRI has achieved a 2.5 months median PFS. In 8 subjects with
predominant liver metastatic CRC, we have observed 50% PFS at 6 months.
These encouraging results demonstrate the utility of an innovative direct
approach to metastatic CRC after failure of first-line combination
chemotherapy.


