Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer effect and mechanism of prostaglandin E2 receptor EP4
antagonist


Molecular studies reveal that over-expression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
is a prominent feature of premalignant and malignant neoplasms. The
increased COX-2-mediated prostaglandin-E2 (PGE2) production has a strong
association with various cancers, by promoting cell survival, cell
growth, migration, invasion, angiogenesis, and immunotolerance. The use
of COX-2 selective inhibitors has shown promise in the prevention and
treatment of various cancers, however, the chronic use of COX-2
inhibitors is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular adverse
effects. Therefore, there is an urgent need to further understanding of
the downstream mechanisms by which PGE2 promotes tumorigenesis and more
effective strategies for the treatment of cancer. There are four PGE2
receptors, i.e., EP1, EP2, EP3, and EP4, involved in the pharmacology of
PGE2. Accumulating evidences suggest that EP4 is the responsible receptor
for PGE2 / COX-2-mediated tumorigenic signals in cancer cells and cancer
microenvironment. On the other hands, signals from other prostaglandin
receptors, e.g. IP and EP1, are reported to inhibit cancer proliferation
or metastasis. These evidences suggest that selective blockade of EP4
would offer anti-cancer efficacy and safety advantages over COX-2
inhibition as cancer therapy. We have developed novel plural EP4
antagonists, with pA2 values of nanomolar range which are selective
against other EP receptors. EP4 antagonists inhibited the PGE2-dependent
productions of key molecules for cancer promotion i.e. VEGF, IL-23, and
IL-6 in macrophages, dendritic cells, and PBMC, respectively. At the same
time EP4 antagonist reversed PGE2 -induced TNF and IL-12 suppression in
human whole blood. As a consequence, EP4 antagonists exhibited
anti-cancer activity in lung, GI, and prostate cancer models. These
results indicate that selective EP4 antagonists show anti-cancer effect
mediated by multifaceted mechanisms, and represent an attractive medicine
for anti-cancer therapy.

