Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: H2AX foci formation in lymphocytes in vivo is increased one hour
after very low dose X-radiation in three young children


Objective: Computer tomography (CT) involves ionizing X-irradiation which
can cause DNA damage from free radicals. CT use has risen dramatically
due to its high speed and diagnostic value but it leads to an estimated
lifetime cancer risk of up to 4% with highest risk for children. Double
strand breaks, the most serious DNA damage caused by X-rays and other
types of ionizing radiation, leads to histone H2AX phosphorylation which
causes recruitment of repair proteins to DNA damage sites. H2AX foci
therefore represent quantitatively double strand breaks and can be
assayed by a fluorescent immunostaining procedure. This H2AX assay has
been shown to be useful as a reliable biodosimeter for X-irradiation in
vitro, in animals, and in adults. Recently also children who received
cardiac catheterization procedures involving fluoroscopy with
intermediate X-irradiation doses showed a dose response in this assay. We
tested whether the H2AX assay can detect changes when children receive
X-irradiation at very low doses (Objective: Computer tomography (CT)
involves ionizing X-irradiation which can cause DNA damage from free
radicals. CT use has risen dramatically due to its high speed and
diagnostic value but it leads to an estimated lifetime cancer risk of up
to 4% with highest risk for children. Double strand breaks, the most
serious DNA damage caused by X-rays and other types of ionizing
radiation, leads to histone H2AX phosphorylation which causes recruitment
of repair proteins to DNA damage sites. H2AX foci therefore represent
quantitatively double strand breaks and can be assayed by a fluorescent
immunostaining procedure. This H2AX assay has been shown to be useful as
a reliable biodosimeter for X-irradiation in vitro, in animals, and in
adults. Recently also children who received cardiac catheterization
procedures involving fluoroscopy with intermediate X-irradiation doses
showed a dose response in this assay. We tested whether the H2AX assay
can detect changes when children receive X-irradiation at very low doses
(<3 mSv) from CT scans. Methods: For this pilot study, three children
aged 3 to 21 months and scheduled for a medically indicated CT were
recruited through the emergency department at Kapi'olani Medical Center
(Honolulu, Hawaii). These children donated blood immediately before and 1
hour after their CT exam (1.57- 2.86 mSv). Blood was immediately
processed after the second blood draw and lymphocytes were isolated and
fixed. For a blind analysis, the samples were coded in duplicate and
shipped to Columbia University, New York, where the lymphocytes were
immunolabeled with an anti-human H2AX monoclonal antibody. The average
number of H2AX foci per cell nucleus was determined for each of the
duplicate samples. Results: The H2AX assay showed that the fluorescent
frequencies were dose dependently higher in all patients 1 hour after CT
exposure as compared to before CT (p=0.046 by paired t-test). Conclusion:
In this pilot study we observed a significant induction of H2AX foci in
lymphocytes after very low dose ionizing X-irradiation (1-3 mSv) in vivo
in children one hour after CT.

