Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The MAPK and PI3K signaling pathways in breast cancer: Crosstalk
mechanisms and the effect on cell proliferation


The purpose of the current study is to assess crosstalk between the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K) pathways in breast cancer. More specifically, the goal is
to investigate the interaction between the extracellular signal regulated
kinases 1/2 and 5 (ERK1/2 and ERK5) and Akt and how these kinases act in
concert to promote sustained proliferation in a breast cancer model. The
MAPK and PI3K pathways mediate numerous cellular processes, including
differentiation, growth, proliferation, and survival. To date, most
related studies have focused on assessment of the crosstalk mechanisms
between ERK1/2 and Akt, while the interplay of ERK5 has remained largely
unstudied. Breast cancer patients with increased levels of ERK5 have been
found to have a poorer prognosis than patients with lower levels,
warranting further investigation of this kinase. The interaction between
ERK5 and ERK1/2, as well as between ERK5 and Akt, and how these signaling
mechanisms act in conjunction to promote cell proliferation in breast
cancer cells remains to be elucidated. The BT-474 (ER+/PR+/HER2+) and
MDA-MB-231 (ER-/PR-/HER2-) human breast cancer cell lines were utilized
to examine ERK1/2, ERK5 and Akt activation following treatment with ERK
and Akt inhibitors or siRNA for these kinases, respectively. Western blot
analysis was performed to determine expression and activation of the
kinases. An MTT assay was used to assess changes in cell proliferation
following kinase inhibition for 12, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours. In vivo
studies utilizing the transgenic MMTV-neu mouse model were also
performed. In the BT-474 cell line, inhibition of Akt resulted in
increased ERK1/2 and ERK5 expression and activation. Interestingly, the
increases in both total and phosphorylated ERK1/2 and ERK5 following
Akt-inhibition were dose-dependent, meriting further study. Excised
mammary tumors from our animal model demonstrated an age-dependent
increase in both ERK1/2 and ERK5. Notably, an age-dependent decrease in
Akt was also observed, supporting the hypothesis that crosstalk between
these pathways may exist. Future studies involving dual kinase inhibition
are planned to further assess crosstalk and proliferation. The data
obtained from these studies indicate the presence of crosstalk between
the ERK1/2, ERK5 and Akt pathways. A better understanding of this
crosstalk may lead to patient-specific drug regimens to decrease the
cytotoxic effects of chemotherapeutics and improve patient mortality.

