Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional significance of tyrosine phosphorylation of galectin-3
in prostate cancer progression


Galectin-3 is a carbohydrate binding chimeric lectin, which interacts
with intracellular glycoproteins, cell surface molecules and
extracellular matrix proteins based on its intra and extracellular
distribution. Galectin-3 is one of the most studied galectins in the
family and affects various biological phenomena such as cell growth,
adhesion, angiogenesis, apoptosis, motility and metastasis. This protein
is widely expressed in various tumor cells and its expression is
correlated with tumorigenesis, tumor progression and metastasis. The
functions of galectin-3 are dependent on its binding partners, its
localization and can change as a result of post-translational
modifications such as cleavage and phosphorylation. Recently, we
demonstrated that gal-3 can be phosphorylated by c-Abl at Tyr 79, 107 and
118; Tyr107 is the major phosphorylation site. It was also shown that
galectin-3 can be cleaved by prostate specific antigen, chymotrypsin-like
serine protease, after Tyr 107 and this cleavage destroys galectin-3
multivalency while preserving its carbohydrate-binding activity. In
solution, galectin-3 largely occurs as a monomer. It can also form
homodimer by self-association through its CRDs in the absence of its
binding ligands. However, in the presence of its carbohydrate binding
ligands, galectin-3 can polymerize up to pentamers through its N-terminal
domain. Oligomerization is a unique feature of secreted galectin-3, which
allows its function by forming ordered galectin-glycan structures, also
called lattices, on the cell surface or through direct engagement of
specific cell surface glycoconjugates by traditional ligand-receptor
interactions. We suggest that phosphorylation on Tyr 107 may block the
cleavage of galectin-3 by PSA. Our experiments confirm this hypothesis
and we suggest a model describing the role of galectin-3 in prostate
cells with increased activity of c-Abl and Arg kinase. We demonstrate
that PSA resistant intact galectin-3 may exert biological activities
through ligand cross-linking to boost the tumorigenesis and progression
of prostate cancer, while the protein cleaved after Tyr 107 cannot. The
effect of cleaved galectin-3 on angiogenesis, chemotaxis and cell
motility was significantly lower compare to full-length galectin-3. We
posit that post-translational modifications of galectin-3 in the cells
are but one component of a constellation of factors contributing to
cancer disease prevalence and severity. In conclusion, the data show that
galectin-3 phosphorylated on Tyr 107 can be associated with metastasis,
cell growth, and tumorigenicity of prostate cancer cells and thus might
used as a marker for prognosis of prostate cancer and a therapeutic
target for the treatment of prostate cancer.

