Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanocoated brachytherapy spacers eluting radiosensitizers for
biological in situ image-guided radiation therapy of prostate cancer


The overall goal of this project is to develop means to locally
radio-sensitize the prostate to enable prostate cancer (PCa) cure with
the use of lower radiation doses, thereby leading to less rectal
toxicity. This new approach for chemoradiation therapy (CRT), termed
Biological In-Situ Image Guided Radiation Therapy BIS-IGRT, involves the
coating of spacers routinely used during prostate I-125-based
brachytherapy with radiosensitizing drugs (e.g. docetaxel DTX for PCa).
This approach provides localized in-situ delivery of the sensitizer to
the tumor and avoids the toxicity associated with current systemic
delivery of radiosensitizers. BIS-IGRT adds radiosensitization capability
to the standard brachytherapy procedure and with minimal additional
inconvenience to the patient. Current CRT with adjuvant systemic
chemotherapy does not provide the sustained delivery and drug
concentration needed for efficient radiosensitization. Thereby BIS-IGRT
improves the therapeutic ratio of radiation therapy without introducing
additional patient interventions over current brachytherapy procedures.
We have established the following: 1. We have shown through modeling that
drug distributions can be achieved that can lead to increased efficiency
of image-guided brachytherapy (drug-coated spacers) or image guided
external beam therapy (drug-coated fiducials). 2. Doxorubicine-coated
fiducials (Dox/PLGA-PEG/CHIT) show release characteristics over 40 days
in aqueous media, which is tailored to the time scales required for
BIS-IGRT. The cytotoxicity of Dox/ PLGA-PEG NP is comparable to that of
free Dox, so that there is no reduction of activity upon encapsulation in
the NP. 3. Localized bolus injection of dye-loaded PLGA-PEG nanoparticles
(NPs) distributes within 24 hours throughout the tumor, indicating that
the sustained release from coated brachytherapy spacers has the potential
to achieve the desired biological dose-painting of the tumor. BIS-IGRT
could proffer radiation oncologists and medical physicists with a new
treatment option for substantially enhancing therapeutic ratio and
boosting cure rate for the hundreds of thousands of Americans diagnosed
with prostate cancer each year. This new treatment approach would be of
crucial benefit for patients with local relapse who require salvage
radiotherapy but have reached their radiotherapy normal tissue dose
limits. BIS-IGRT can still be accompanied by IV administration of
chemotherapeutics, particularly for micro-metastasis, so that existing
therapeutic approaches are not compromised. In addition BIS-IGRT could
potentially become a mainstream treatment for patients newly diagnosed
with prostate or other cancers, where radiation therapy is a common
treatment modality.

