Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blocking the Notch pathway inhibits the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) status in lung cancer and alters chemoresistance


Background: The Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) is a key
developmental program that is often activated during cancer invasion and
metastasis. EMT cells have stem cells properties and possess the
characteristics of cell motility, invasiveness and chemotherapy
resistance. EMT expression profile correlates with poor outcome in
multiple tumors and there is evidence suggesting an integral role of
Notch pathway in mediating EMT. In this study, we investigated Notch
activity and EMT status and the correlation with chemoressitance in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Results: Transduction of multiple
NSCLC cell lines, NCI-H1299, NCI-H460, NCI-H358, NCI-H441 with a Notch
GFP-reporter construct identified a subset of cells with high Notch
activity (GFP-pos). We compared the tumor invasivness capacity of GFP-pos
and GFP-neg cells utilizing a transwell invasion assay. Cells with high
Notch activity, as evidenced by GFP expression, had multiple fold higher
invasion capability compared to GFP-neg cells (p=0.0001). To evaluate
whether Notch activity correlates with resistance to chemotherapy, we
treated GFP-pos and GFP-neg cells with docetaxel or cisplatin and
assessed Annexin V expression using flow cytometry. GFP-pos cells had
five fold less apoptotic cells as compared to GFP-neg cells indicating
resistance of GFP-pos cells to chemotherapy. When GFP-pos cells were
exposed to a Notch signaling inhibitor inhibitor, gamma secretase
inhibitor (GSI), these cells were rendered sensitive to cisplatin and
docetaxel. RNA microarray analysis and RT-PCR analysis revealed an
increased expression of EMT related genes (Vimentin, N-Cadherin,
Snail-1,.) in GFP-pos cells as compared to GFP-neg cells. Furthermore,
NOD/SCID mice with subcutaneous lung tumor xenografts treated with GSI
showed decreased expression of downstream effectors of Notch as well as
vimentin. This combination of GSI and docetaxel reduced tumor grwoth in
mouse xenographs compared to GSI and docetaxel as single agents.
Conclusion: These studies suggest that the Notch pathway is an important
regulator of EMT status and that its inhibition may alter EMT
chemo-resistance properties. The addition of a Notch inhibitor may
enhance the efficacy of chemotherapy in the treatment of NSCLC.

