Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mesodissection system for accurate, rapid, and economical
recovery of tissue from slide mounted tissue sections


We have developed a prototype system for slide mounted tissue dissection
capable of resolution between manual methods (i.e. scraping tissue off of
microscope slides) and laser capture microdissection (LCM); here we test
the performance of this system. The mesodissection instrument employs a
specialized milling tip that simultaneously dispenses and aspirates
liquid in order to capture tissue fragments displaced from the slide
surface. The accompanying software is capable of transferring
electronically indicated target regions between neighboring tissue
sections to guide the dissection process. Resolution and accuracy of the
system were accessed by microscopic inspection of the dissected region;
resolution is the smallest recoverable area and accuracy is the
difference between the actual dissected region and the desired region.
Purity is defined as the percentage of desired tissue retrieved from a
FFPE tissue block made from a human tumor xenografted into mouse, and
accessed using real-time PCR amplification of species-specific repetitive
DNA elements, as well as unique genomic regions. Efficiency is defined as
total DNA recovered relative to manual methods, as quantified by
PicoGreen fluorescence. Currently, the system is capable of 0.3 mm
resolution and accuracy better than 0.1 mm compared to a desired
boundary. Purity is greater than 90% at 0.1mm from the mouse-human tissue
boundary. Efficiency is comparable to manual methods when virtually all
tissue is recovered from the region of interest. Improvements to the
current prototype are ongoing with the goal of less than 0.1 mm
resolution. The mesodissection system provides an inexpensive alternative
to the limited resolution of manual dissection methods and the high cost
and low recovery efficiency of LCM. Digitally targeted dissection using
tissue sections derived from adjacent portions of a tissue block allow
for determination of a region of interest from a slide optimized for
visualization and recovery from a slide optimized for dissection.

