Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down-regulation of UTX contributes to lung cancer progression


Smoking, the main risk factor leading to lung cancer, causes both genetic
and epigenetic changes resulting in aberrant gene expression. UTX is a
histone demethylase that has been implicated in many cancers and has been
shown to regulate both cell cycle and differentiation genes. However, the
role of UTX has not been elucidated in lung cancer. We hypothesized that
smoking injury leads to a down regulation in UTX expression. This results
in an inability of repairing airway epithelial cells to differentiate,
resulting in premalignant lesions and ultimately invasive lung cancer.
Examination of published lung cancer data sets revealed a down-regulation
of Utx gene expression in patients with poorer prognosis, tumor grade,
tumor recurrence and in smokers. To assess the involvement of UTX protein
expression in lung cancer we stained a lung cancer tissue microarray and
found a significant correlation between down-regulation of UTX protein
expression and poorer prognosis in metastasis (p=0.0005) and smokers (p=
0.02). UTX expression was found to be significantly lower in squamous
cell carcinoma compared to adenocarcinoma, linking down-regulation of UTX
in a diseased caused solely by smoking. To test if smoking directly
affects Utx expression we treated mouse airway epithelial cells at
air-liquid interface with media infused with cigarette smoke for 9 days.
After this short time point of acute smoke exposure there was a
significant down regulation of Utx gene expression (p=0.03). We carried
out UTX overexpression studies to assess the role of UTX in lung cancer
cells lines and found up-regulation of UTX results in up-regulation of
genes involved in lung development and differentiation, including Nrf2,
FoxJ2 and FZD4. Our finding support the hypothesis that smoking causes a
reduction in UTX that affects the proliferation and differentiation of
airway epithelial cells contributing to lung cancer progression.
Re-activation of UTX therefore may be a potential therapeutic target for
the prevention of lung cancer progression.

