Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a novel monoclonal antibody to Glia maturation
factor-beta showing significant clinical utility in the identification of
breast carcinoma


Background: Glia maturation factor beta (GMF-beta) is a growth and
differentiation factor of brain cells, stimulation of neural degeneration
and inhibition of proliferation of tumor cells. It was recently found to
involve in the progression of serous ovarian carcinoma. In the present
study, we generated a novel antibody against human GMF-beta and
investigated the potential of GMF-beta as a biomarker in breast cancer.
Methods and findings: We generated a novel monoclonal antibody (mAb),
AB-GMF-beta using hybridoma technology and native protein as an
immunogen. This mAb is of IgG1 (kappa) type. It specifically recognized
both native and denatured human GMF-beta protein and displayed high
affinity as assessed by ELISA, immunohistochemistry assay, western blot
and flow cytometry applications. Using this mAb in competitive ELISA, we
showed for the first time that soluble GMF-beta level is significantly
increased in metastatic breast cancer patients plasma which directly
correlated with GMF-beta expression pattern in metastatic breast cancer
tissues. Tissue expression of GMF-beta was determined by using
immunohistochemical techniques. Seventy normal and 241 breast cancer
tissues were included which consist of 194 ductal and 47 lobular
carcinoma samples. Most of normal tissues showed negative or weak nuclear
staining, while different levels of nuclear, and diffuse and weak
cytoplasmic staining were observed in cancer sections. To evaluate the
immunoreactivity of GMF-beta associated with tumor histological types,
the staining intensity in nucleus were scored as 0, 1+, 2+ and 3+. Grade
0 and 1+ were defined as negative and 2+ and 3+ as positive. Forty four
percent of ductal carcinomas showed strong staining whereas it is
significantly increased to 72.3% in lobular tumors (pBackground: Glia
maturation factor beta (GMF-beta) is a growth and differentiation factor
of brain cells, stimulation of neural degeneration and inhibition of
proliferation of tumor cells. It was recently found to involve in the
progression of serous ovarian carcinoma. In the present study, we
generated a novel antibody against human GMF-beta and investigated the
potential of GMF-beta as a biomarker in breast cancer. Methods and
findings: We generated a novel monoclonal antibody (mAb), AB-GMF-beta
using hybridoma technology and native protein as an immunogen. This mAb
is of IgG1 (kappa) type. It specifically recognized both native and
denatured human GMF-beta protein and displayed high affinity as assessed
by ELISA, immunohistochemistry assay, western blot and flow cytometry
applications. Using this mAb in competitive ELISA, we showed for the
first time that soluble GMF-beta level is significantly increased in
metastatic breast cancer patients plasma which directly correlated with
GMF-beta expression pattern in metastatic breast cancer tissues. Tissue
expression of GMF-beta was determined by using immunohistochemical
techniques. Seventy normal and 241 breast cancer tissues were included
which consist of 194 ductal and 47 lobular carcinoma samples. Most of
normal tissues showed negative or weak nuclear staining, while different
levels of nuclear, and diffuse and weak cytoplasmic staining were
observed in cancer sections. To evaluate the immunoreactivity of GMF-beta
associated with tumor histological types, the staining intensity in
nucleus were scored as 0, 1+, 2+ and 3+. Grade 0 and 1+ were defined as
negative and 2+ and 3+ as positive. Forty four percent of ductal
carcinomas showed strong staining whereas it is significantly increased
to 72.3% in lobular tumors (p<0.001). Conclusion: The novel AB-GMF-beta
mAb showed high performance in blood and tissue assays. The circulating
GMF-beta levels and expressions in breast tissues are significantly
increased in breast cancer patients in comparison of normal controls. The
increased tissue expressions in breast carcinoma associate with
histological tumor types. Our data suggest the potential clinical use of
GMF-beta as a biomarker for diagnosis and prognosis in blood and tissue
as well as a therapeutic target.

