Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell death and growth arrest pathways mediating the actions of
stilbene 5C in HCT-116 colon cancer cells


The stilbene derivative, cis-3, 4, 5-trimethoxy-3-aminostilbene (stilbene
5c), is a potentially potent antitumor agent that acts via binding to the
colchicine-binding pocket in microtubules. Earlier studies have shown
that stilbene 5c induces cell death in ovarian cancer cells and leukemic
cells (Lee RM et al, 2008; Lee RM et al, 2008). The present study was
designed to investigate the effectiveness of this microtubule poison
against the HCT-116 human colon cancer cell line and its mechanisms of
action. Time course studies demonstrated that stilbene 5c produces a
biphasic decrease in cell viability. The capacity of the cells to
proliferate was not restored upon removal of the drug after 6 days of
exposure. Consistent with the results of the time course studies,
-galactosidase staining indicated that treatment with stilbene 5c also
promotes senescence. In addition to senescence, stilbene 5c-treated
HCT-116 cells displayed formation of autophagic vesicles by acridine
orange staining, which was supported by fluorescence-activated cell
sorting (FACS). Further evidence of autophagy was derived from treatment
of HCT116 cells carrying an RFP-LC3 construct with stilbene 5c, in which
LC3 puncta formation increased in a time-dependent manner. DAPI staining,
TUNEL, and Annexin 5 staining indicated that apoptosis is also occurring
in stilbene 5c-treated HCT-116 cells. Cell cycle analysis demonstrated
growth arrest at both G1 and G2/M, and an increase in the subG1
population at days 3 and 5, which correspond to senescence and apoptosis
respectively. Interestingly, DAPI and Hoechst staining revealed
morphological changes in the cell nuclei (binucleated and micronucleated
cells), which suggest that mitotic catastrophe may also serve as a mode
of cell death after treatment with stilbene 5c. Consistent with previous
studies in other experimental cancer models, this work indicates that
stilbene 5c could potentially be effective against colon cancer through
the promotion of multiple modes of cell death.

