Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A characterization of pathway aberrations across human cancers


The development of cancer is driven by the acquisition of somatic genetic
mutations, which provide cancer cells a selective advantage by altering
biochemical pathways in various ways. Recent cancer genomics databases
have made vast amounts of tumor characterization data available for the
scientific community. These data, in combination with pathway databases
and statistical computing, can be used to infer the aberrant pathways in
each individual tumor. Identification and comparison of these pathways
can provide insights into emergence and progression of cancer, and
suggest potential therapeutic strategies. In this study, we investigate
the degree of pathway alterations in multiple human cancers based on
microarray expression data and an ensemble of pathways derived from
various databases. By studying a sufficiently large collection of tumor
samples, we aim to create a comprehensive catalogue of consistently
altered pathways in each cancer. We first obtained all the gene
expression data from cancers that have been characterized by The Cancer
Genome Atlas project. Then, we downloaded pathway data from several
pathway databases, totaling over 2500 unique signaling or metabolic
pathways, gene sets, or gene categories. The pathways were combined into
a compatible form by re-mapping the identifiers to official symbols. We
computed gene set enrichment scores for each of the 1994 pathways of
suitable size in each sample across all tumor types. The scores within
each cancer type were first investigated to identify any putative
functional subtypes, and then merged to produce a pathway level portrait
of the disease. The pathway enrichment frequency profiles of all the
tumor types were markedly uniform: categories such as cell-cell adhesion
and immune response were the most frequently enriched in all tumor types.
However, within many frequently altered pathways, the particular set of
genes whose expression differences induced the significant enrichment
scores varied notably. These instances may represent mutually exclusive
mechanisms to alter the function of a pathway towards a similar endpoint.
We also identified several pathways that were altered very frequently
within a cancer type and rarely in other types of cancer. These pathways
can give rise to the observed differences in physiological and phenotypic
properties across cancers. Following large multi-institutional efforts to
map cancer genomes, this study represents an attempt to extend the
current genomic characterizations towards comparative and pathway level
descriptions across the whole cancer family. In our study, many cancer
types were represented by relatively few samples and others by none;
therefore, further efforts will be needed to fully paint the landscape of
aberrant pathways. Importantly, however, we were already able to provide
a vast number of functional hypotheses that remain to be experimentally
validated.

