Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of antibody-mediated EGF-receptor inhibition on ERK 1/2
isoform phosphorylation in organoid cultures


Inhibition of the EGF-receptor activity has been widely integrated into
clinical practice for different tumor entities, e.g. non small lung
cancer and colorectal cancer. Besides the application of tyrosine kinase
inhibitors, anti-EGF-receptor treatment is mainly based on the
application of therapeutic antibodies. As a standard procedure, patients
are tested for KRAS mutation and only those without mutation are selected
for anti-EGF-receptor therapy. Although KRAS testing is used to guide
colorectal cancer treatment, clear heterogeneity in responses to
treatment has been observed. The molecular mechanisms responsible for
this heterogenity are still not fully understood, In the present study,
we used a preclinical model based on tumor tissue slices for a more
detailed evaluation of antibody-mediated EGF-receptor inhibition. In
previous experiments, the diffusion of antibodies into organoid cultures
and the detection of their functional effects had been successfully
shown. Tumor tissue slices from five colorectal cancer patients have been
treated with an anti-EGF-receptor antibody for 48 hours. Using
immunohistochemical staining, one patient showed a strong expression of
the EGF-receptor, one was weak positive and three displayed a moderate
staining. As readout of treatment effects, the expression and
phosphorylation levels of selected key proteins from two EGF-receptor
downstream pathways, the MAPK-pathway and Akt-pathway, were measured
using the multiplex technology platform from Meso Scale Discovery. For a
more detailed view, we have integrated the NanoPro technology in our
pathway analysis approach. This new method enables the identification of
distinct isoform phosphorylations and thus is able to display the complex
regulation of phosphorylation patterns in detail. By using both methods,
we observed a dose-dependent regulation of total- and phospho-ERK in the
organoid cultures after anti-EGF-receptor treatment. Deeper analysis
using the NanoPro technology showed that the regulation of isoform
phosphorylation patterns of ERK1/2 differed among patients, representing
the heterogeneity of individual responses among patients. In summary, the
combination of the organoid drug testing platform and the NanoPro
technology can potentially be useful to identify predictive
phosphorylation patterns of tumor cells within their natural tumor
microenvironment. This may facilitate the discovery of predictive
biomarker for the response to anti-EGF-receptor treatment and further
improve personalized medicine.

