Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inactivation of the putative tumor suppressor gene AGTR1 by
promoter hypermethylation in primary human cancer


Introduction: Primary human cancers are thought to arise from genetic and
epigenetic alterations of tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes.
Transcriptional and DNA copy-number studies have improved our
understanding and classification of solid tumors. Recent studies have
established that like mutation, methylation-mediated gene silencing often
leads to tumorigenesis. The aim of this study was to comprehensively
explore the ovarian cancer methylome and to validate the novel
methylation marker AGTR1 in a large independent series of ovarian cancer
samples. Patients and methods: Fifteen ovarian cancer samples and 10
normal ovarian surface epithelium brushings were hybridized to Affymetrix
U133 plus 2.0 arrays. Furthermore, 3 normal ovarian and 3 isogenic
(resistant and sensitive to chemotherapy) ovarian cancer cell lines, with
or without treatment with a demethylating agent were hybridized to the
same array. Selection of cancer specific methylated genes was based on
differential expression between normal and cancer samples, with cancer
samples having lower expression than normal samples, and upregulation in
cancer cell lines after treatment with a demethylating agent. A number of
selected genes that showed low or no expression in primary cancer tissues
and re-expressed after treatment with a demethylating agent were then
tested for promoter methylation by bisulfite sequencing. Quantitative
methylation specific PCR (QMSP) was developed for the AGRT1 gene and
tested in a total of 353 ovarian cancer, 17 ovarian cystadenoma and 16
ovarian borderline tumor samples. Results: Fourteen primary ovarian tumor
DNA samples were available from the samples that were hybridized for
expression array analysis. Twelve out of 14 samples were methylated for
AGRT1 which is inversely correlated with expression from our array
analysis. We then tested 13 normal ovarian epithelium samples and no
methylation was detected in any of the samples. Validation in a large
independent set of samples confirmed that ovarian cancer samples
(207/353, 53%) were more frequently methylated than ovarian cystadenoma
(3/17, 18%; P=0.004). Conclusion: We have identified a set of potential
tumor suppressor genes by a comprehensive discovery approach to uncover
the cancer methylome. Among these genes, AGTR1 methylation was identified
as a potential cancer specific methylated gene that may hold promise for
further studies to establish it as a biomarker. Functional studies are
warranted to evaluate the biologic role of AGTR1 methylation in the
carcinogenic process of solid tumors.

