Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HIF-143, a novel inhibitor of complex III, inhibits pancreatic
cancer growth by suppressing reactive oxygen species production and
epidermal growth factor signal


Reactive oxygen species have been considered as a therapeutic target for
cancer treatment. In this study, we characterized the anticancer activity
of novel small molecule inhibitor of cytochrome bc1, HIF-143, in
pancreatic cancer. HIF-143 shares common structural moiety with known
cytochrome bc1 Qo inhibitors including azoxystrobin and
E--methoxyacrylate-stilbene. HIF-143 inhibits reduction of cytochrome c
by purified mitochondria in the presence of rotenone and induction of
reactive oxygen species by hypoxia or epidermal growth factor in cellular
context. HIF-143 also suppresses activation of EGFR and downstream ERK
and AKT induced by EGF treatment. EGF-induced transcription was also
inhibited by HIF-143. Interestingly, these effects were synergistic when
combined with EGFR inhibitor such as Erlotinib and Gefitinib. Cell
proliferation, survival, and anchorage-independent growth were also
synergistically inhibited by HIF-143 and Erlotinib. HIF-143 also
inhibited pancreatic tumor growth in BxPC-3 human pancreatic cancer
xenograft model. The inhibition of tumor growth was much higher when
animals were treated with both HIF-143 and Erlotinib than individual
treatment, suggesting synergistic anticancer activity in vivo. In
addition, when HIF-143 was combined with Erlotinib and Gemcitabine,
anticancer efficacy was increased without the increase of sign of
toxicity, showing addition of HIF-143 can give clinical benefit to
pancreatic cancer patients. Toxicological study showed that combination
of HIF-143 and Erlotinib is safe enough with safety margin higher than
6-fold. These findings suggest that pharmacological targeting of complex
III might be a promising approach to treat pancreatic cancer. These
results provide scientific rational for testing of HIF-143 in the
clinical trial to develop as a novel anticancer drug.

