Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MethyMeter - A quantitative, bisulfite-free DNA methylation assay
for improved clinical diagnostic and prognostic analysis of glioma
biomarkers in FFPE tumor samples


This presentation describes the clinical diagnostic use of a novel
Bisulfite-free, Abscription-Based DNA methylation assay, MethylMeter, for
analysis of grade 2, 3, & 4 gliomas. The proprietary 9 gene CpG-Island
Methylation Phenotype (CIMP) profile was validated with bisulfite based
MS-PCR and was then licensed by Castle Biosciences for commercialization
as the DecisionDx-LGG Test. Very few CIMP assays have been transposed
successfully into clinical diagnostic assays, since they depend on
bisulfite-based technologies (MS-PCR or pyrosequencing). Bisulfite
methods are not well suited to clinical applications which utilize
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues because of the large
amount of sample that is required and the poor level of reproducibility
that is inherent in bisulfite assays. We describe a more sensitive and
quantitative alternative to MS-PCR for detection of the DecisionDx-LGG
CIMP profile in FFPE tumors. The method, MethylMeter, combines affinity
separation of methylated and unmethylated DNA with a new target and
signal amplification technology called CAP (Coupled Abscription-PCR).
Data will be presented demonstrating that MethylMeter was able to
successfully detect the appropriate DNA methylation patterns in FFPE
patient samples for the 9 biomarkers utilized in the DecisionDx-LGG
assay. Gliomas are stratified by histological grade, which is an
indication of malignant potential and response to treatment. However,
there is up to a 40% inter- and intra-observer histological grade
variance rate in grading 2, 3, & 4 gliomas which is clinically signicant
as histological grade determines treatment plan. A DecisionDx-LGG CIMP
positive result is associated with significantly longer survival in
patients with grade 2, 3, & 4 gliomas enabling improved treatment
planning.I Initial attempts at CIMP profile analysis of glioma tumors
using MS-PCR yielded clinically unacceptable results, substitution of the
CAP-based MethylMeter assay enabled appropriate and clinically relevant
analysis of CpG Island methylation levels in all 9 glioma tumor
biomarkers. The MethylMeter assay results showed 100% concordance with
the previous MS-PCR results. In contrast to the bisulfite-based assay,
MethylMeter worked efficiently and reproducibly in FFPE patient samples,
yielded increased levels of sensitivity, and was significantly faster.
Data will also be presented showing that the quantitative data output
provided by Abscription-based CAP assays provides a quantifiable readout
of methylation levels that will enable future patient stratification, in
contrast to the plus/minus readout provided by bisulfite assays. The data
presented will be highly significant in paving the way for new
MethylMeter-based CIMP pattern assays to be developed for diagnostic,
theranostic, and companion diagnostic purposes.

