Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ambient exposure to air pollutants and risk of neuroblastoma


Background: Some reports have linked neuroblastoma to parental
occupational exposure to hydrocarbons and other chemicals. Our aim was to
assess the association between neuroblastoma and exposure in pregnancy
and early life to criteria air pollutants (CO, O3, PM10, PM2.5, and NOx)
and to certain air toxics which are established or suspected carcinogens
(benzene, 1,3 butadiene, PAHs, xylenes, carbon tetrachloride, and
others). Of the criteria air pollutants, CO and NOx arise primarily from
motor vehicle exhaust and thus best represent traffic-related pollution,
while O3 and PM arise from a variety of sources and should be considered
as markers of regionally distributed background air pollution. Methods:
The Air Pollution and Childhood Cancers study ascertained all cancers
diagnosed 1988-2007 in the California Cancer Registry among children less
than 6 years of age; we were able to match 89% to a California birth
certificate. Controls were frequency-matched by year of birth and
selected at random from California birthrolls. The final analysis
included 1073 neuroblastoma cases and 209,700 controls. Home addresses,
as listed on birth certificates, were geocoded and linked to the nearest
California Air Resources Board air pollution monitor. For those living
within 5 miles of an air pollution monitor, average measurements of
criteria air pollutants and air toxics were determined for each trimester
of pregnancy and for the first year of life. Multivariate regression
models were used to assess the relation between air pollutants and
neuroblastoma, with adjustment for maternal race, socioeconomic status,
and birth year. Odds ratios compare children in the highest quartile of
exposure to those in the lowest exposure group. Results: Exposure to
ozone in the 1st (OR =1.27, 95% CI 1.01, 1.60) and 2nd (OR=1.30, 95% CI
1.02, 1.64) trimesters was associated with an increased risk of
neuroblastoma (n cases=565 within 5 miles of a monitor). Neuroblastoma
was also associated with exposure to carbon tetrachloride in the first
trimester (OR=2.62, 95% CI 1.06, 6.46), although this result was based
upon 60 cases living within 5 miles of an air toxics monitor. We found no
evidence of associations between neuroblastoma and other criteria air
pollutants nor other air toxics, including no evidence of associations
with traffic-related pollution. Conclusions: This is the first study to
suggest a relation between neuroblastoma and ambient levels of air
pollution.

