Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53 as a guardian of genomic junk: A novel role for p53 in
epigenetic silencing of retroelements


Demethylating agents have been reported to be more toxic to p53-deficient
cells than wild type (WT) cells in several models. To elucidate the
mechanism underlying this phenomenon, we performed microarray-based
global gene expression profiling of mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) from
p53-WT and p53-null mice with or without 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC)
treatment. This analysis revealed two major findings. First, all
protein-coding transcripts induced by 5-aza-dC treatment in WT cells were
highly expressed and irresponsive to the demethylating agent in untreated
p53-deficient cells. This observation defines p53 as a major driver of
DNA methylation-dependent gene silencing. Second, death of p53-null cells
treated with 5-aza-dC is preceded by strong activation of transcription
of interferon (IFN)-responsive genes driven by IFN induction. Since no
obvious candidates for the role of IFN-inducing factors were found among
the genes represented on the microarray, we carried out high-throughput
sequencing (HTS) of the entire transcriptome of p53-WT and p53-null MEFs,
treated or untreated with 5-aza-dC. The HTS results revealed striking
transcriptional upregulation of numerous genetic elements belonging to
various classes of retrotransposons and non-coding RNAs in p53-null, but
not in p53-WT cells, treated with 5-aza-dC. We named this phenomenon of
massive induction of transcription of retroelements, which are normally
repressed by p53, RETROSIS. Retrosis is likely to be the trigger of the
observed IFN response and the mediator of toxicity in p53-null cells
treated with 5-aza-dC. These findings define a novel role for p53, acting
along with DNA methylation, in regulation of epigenetic silencing of the
large proportion of the genome that consists of retroelements and suggest
a new evolutionary role for this tumor suppressor. The impact of retrosis
in tumor cells deficient in p53 and implications of this phenomenon for
the tumor suppressor function of p53 will be discussed.

