Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ASP3026, a selective ALK inhibitor, induces tumor regression in a
crizotinib-refractory model and prolongs survival in an intrapleurally
xenograft model


EML4-ALK translocation has been validated as a therapeutic target in a
subset of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. In clinical
settings, crizotinib has shown promising response rates in patients with
EML4-ALK positive NSCLC, while disease relapse has been observed in
several sites, including the lungs. Our previous studies found that
ASP3026, a selective ALK inhibitor, had higher kinase selectivity than
crizotinib and induced regression of tumors expressing EML4-ALK with a
gate-keeper mutation that confers resistance to crizotinib. Here, we
evaluated the antitumor activity of ASP3026 and crizotinib against
orthotopic lung and intrapleural tumors in mice using
luciferase-expressing NCI-H2228, a human NSCLC tumor cell line
endogenously expressing EML4-ALK. In an orthotopic lung model, implanted
cells were monitored using bioluminescent imaging (BLI) of the chest
area. ASP3026 and crizotinib were administered orally at once daily doses
ranging from 3 to 30 mg/kg (starting after confirmation of tumor growth).
ASP3026 at 30 mg/kg induced tumor regression by 27 days after the start
of administration; in contrast, crizotinib at 30 mg/kg induced regression
during the first 7 days of administration, although tumors subsequently
regrew despite continuous drug administration. After tumor regrowth had
been established by the first cycle treatment of crizotinib, substantial
regression was achieved by subsequent administration of ASP3026 at 30
mg/kg against the crizotinib-refractory tumors. In an intrapleural
xenograft model, disease-related mortality was observed in tested
animals, with a median survival time (MST) of 39 days in vehicle-treated
control mice and 71 days in crizotinib-treated animals at 30 mg/kg. In
contrast, no mice receiving ASP3026 treatment at 30 mg/kg died during the
experimental period (90 days). These effects were accompanied by change
in the bioluminescent emissions, with crizotinib-treated mice showing
increased emissions following the initial reduction, while
ASP3026-induced reduction continuing throughout the experimental period.
The mean bioluminescent emission in the group treated with ASP3026 was
significantly lower than in the crizotinib-treated group, indicating that
ASP3026-treated animals exhibited lower tumor burden than
crizotinib-treated ones.Taken together, these results suggest that
ASP3026 is effective in producing shrinkage of tumors refractory to
crizotinib and shows superior efficacy to crizotinib against intrapleural
metastatic tumors with respect to prolonging survival.

