Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of Adeno-associated virus like particles (AAVLP)
coupled with HER-2 mimotopes as novel carrier system for anti-tumor
vaccines


Background & Aims: Cancer is a major public health problems in western
societies, leading to every 4th case of death. To date, passive
immunotherapy with monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) is a well-established
option in clinical oncology. In contrast, anti-cancer vaccines are less
advanced. The development of therapeutic vaccines is still a great
challenge mostly due to the self-nature of tumor antigens. Mimotopes,
small peptides from 6-38 amino acids, resembling B-cell epitopes do not
need consensus sequence with the natural antigen, because molecular
mimicry via e.g. amino acid charges is sufficient to shape an electron
cloud specifically recognized by the immune system. As they are similar,
but not identical to the original tumor antigen, vaccination with
mimotopes may overcome tumor tolerance. Adeno-associated virus like
particles (AAVLP) could serve as novel vectors for displaying mimotopes
to the immune system. We suggest that cancer vaccines will especially
open up new treatment options in minimal residual disease and early stage
disease. Methods & Results: Adeno-associated viruses (AAV) are ssDNA
viruses being replication defective in the absence of Adenovirus. Their
surface consists of 60 capsomers, which can be exploited for display of
recombinant peptides. AAV-like particles (AAVLP) can be generated via
assembling recombinant AAV-2 capsid fusion proteins. In this study
different HER-2 derived linear B-cell epitopes, generated in a biopanning
with the clinically used anti-HER-2 antibody trastuzumab, were inserted
into AAV-2. Mimotope candidates were screened for trastuzumab binding in
ELISA. Appropriate candidates, preliminary as AAVs, were employed for
immunization of BALB/c mice. Immune response was monitored measuring
circulating levels of Abs reactive to recombinant HER-2. Molecular
mimicry was also proved in immunofluorescence on human HER-2
overexpressing murine mammary carcinoma D2F2-E2 cells. Sera of mice
displaying highest HER-2 specific antibody levels were exploited for Ab
purification and purified antibodies were tested for their tumoristatic
properties in a tetrazolium based cell viability assay. In this assay
HER-2 overexpressing human mammary carcinoma cells mBT474 showed
significant growth reduction even after 24h of antibody incubation with
purified antibodies of clone DMD1. This effect increased at consecutive
measurements after 48 and 72h. Conclusion: In this study we could
demonstrate that AAV and probably AAVLP are suitable vectors for mimotope
based cancer vaccines. In our system mimotope immunized BALBc mice
developed anti-HER-2 antibodies with similar biological properties to the
clinically used mAb trastuzumab. Due to their easy application and
economic advantages, cancer vaccines might become important supplementary
therapy options in cancer treatment, especially in the minimal residual
disease setting.

