Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic biochemical tissue analysis of selectin ligands present on
tissue derived from solid tumors


Identification and characterization of molecular markers on cancerous
tissue can lead to novel diagnostics and prognostics for cancer. Markers
of interest include sialofucosylated molecules such as sialyl Lewis X and
sialyl Lewis A (CA19-9), which are expressed on both lipids and proteins,
and are often upregulated on certain cancerous tissues. Mounting evidence
suggests that circulating cancer cells use these molecules to bind E-, P-
and L- selectin (adhesion molecules present on leukocytes, platelets, and
endothelial cells), to facilitate dissemination indicating that the
presence of selectin ligands may correlate with metastatic potential. The
hallmark of selectin-mediated binding is rolling, i.e. adhesion governed
by the unique kinetic and tensile properties of selectin-selectin ligand
bonds occurring under dynamic (flow) conditions. At present, the analysis
of pathological tissue (e.g. immunohistochemistry) is performed under
static conditions that only reveal high affinity interactions between the
probing molecule and the tissue. Traditional biochemical tissue analysis
is woefully inadequate for investigating selectin ligands on cancerous
tissue, as it does not allow a detailed exploration of ligand chemistry
in situ under biophysical conditions fit for selectin binding. Recently,
we established a new assay for probing tissue, termed dynamic biochemical
tissue analysis (DBTA), in which the probing molecule is conjugated to
microspheres that are contacted with tissue samples under fluid shear. In
our current investigation, E-, P- and L-selectin microspheres rolled on
colon cancer tissue microarrays in DBTA. The adhesive interactions
appeared to be specific, as the microspheres were released from the
tissue samples and no further adhesion events were observed when EDTA was
perfused through the system. Additionally, the adhesion of the
microspheres with a given tissue section was dependent on the selectin.
E-selectin microspheres were the most promiscuous, binding at high levels
to many of the tissue samples, while the adhesion of the P- and
L-selectin microspheres was more select. For a given type of selectin
microsphere, the observed adhesion was not homogeneous; it was localized
on discrete regions of the tissue sample. Notably, HECA-452 staining (an
antibody that recognizes sialyl Lewis X and related moieties) in
conjunction with selectin microsphere rolling revealed that HECA-452
reactivity only partially correlated with selectin binding. This
observation strongly suggests that DBTA yields tissue characterization
that is distinct compared to a high affinity immunohistochemistry assay.
In conclusion, DBTA provides a controlled environment in which the
shear-dependent selectin-selectin ligand interactions may be observed,
providing a unique characterization of cancerous tissue applicable to
developing novel diagnostic and prognostic strategies.

