Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin shifts prostate cancer metabolism towards a less
malignant phenotype


Introduction Excess nutrient metabolic states such as obesity and
hyperinsulinemia are associated with prostate cancer progression.
Metformin is the most widely prescribed oral antidiabetic agent and has
recently been shown to reduce the risk and mortality of multiple cancer
types. Current evidence suggests that on a cellular level, this effect is
achieved by an inhibition of mitochondrial Complex I with subsequent
activation of AMPK, a central regulator of energy homeostasis. As cancer
energetics are adapted to the metabolic requirements of rapidly growing
cells, we aimed to assess whether metformin is able to induce a less
malignant phenotype in prostate cancer cell lines. Methods Experiments
were performed in 3 prostate cancer cell lines (PC3, LNCaP, DU145)
treated with 0.5-2.5mM metformin. 13C flux analysis allowed to assess of
glucose and glutamine utilization and metabolic pathway activity.
Extracellular fluxes were performed to determine O2 consumption, glucose
uptake and lactate secretion. Proliferation was assessed with cell counts
and protein expression with Western blots. Results Metformin increased
glucose uptake and lactate secretion while reducing oxygen consumption in
a dose-dependent manner, suggesting a shift form respiratory energy
production to fermentation. Accordingly, cell lines that strongly relied
on respiration were most sensitive to metformin. Flux analysis revealed
that in untreated cells, glucose was directed towards the TCA cycle and
constituted the major carbon source for fatty acid synthesis. Metformin
inhibited glucose fueling of the TCA cycle, and glutamine was funneled
into the TCA cycle and used for fatty acid synthesis instead. Flux
analysis showed that this switch was achieved by a partial reversal of
the TCA cycle from the usual oxidative metabolism to a reductive flux. In
order to further elucidate the effect of metformin on glutamine
catabolism, we determined the expression of Sirtuin 4, which in known to
downregulate glutamate dehydrogenase, thereby inhibiting the diversion of
glutamine into the TCA cycle. Sirtuin 4 expression was decreased under
metformin, whereas LNCAP cells in which Sirtuin 4 was knocked down were
less sensitive to Metformin and showed a decreased secretion of
glutamate. Finally, allosteric inhibition of glutaminase, an enzyme
required for mitochondrial glutamine usage, showed a synergistic,
anti-proliferative effect with metformin. Conclusion Metformin induced a
profound rearrangement of central metabolism in prostate cancer cell
lines. Cells shifted ATP synthesis from respiration to less efficient
fermentation and resorted to a reductive TCA cycle to uphold biosynthetic
processes. Inhibition of this secondary bioenergetic pathway with a
glutaminase inhibitor achieved a synergistic anti-tumor effect with
metformin. These observed alterations of metabolic fluxes may ultimately
provide new targets for cancer therapy.

