Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elafin, a serine protease inhibitor, is deregulated during breast
cancer progression


Deregulated protease activity promotes diverse aspects of tumorigenesis,
including tumor growth, invasion, inflammation, and angiogenesis. Elafin
is an endogenous inhibitor of the serine protease, Neutrophil Elastase
(NE). Imbalance between NE and its inhibitors is implicated in the
pathogenesis of many chronic inflammatory diseases. We hypothesize that
elafin is deregulated during breast cancer progression, resulting in
increased NE activity, accelerated tumor progression, and overall poor
patient outcome. To test this hypothesis, we examined elafin expression
by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in normal breast tissue from reduction
mammoplasty, pre-malignant Ductal Carcinoma In Situ (DCIS), and invasive
breast carcinoma (n>1000, using Tissue Microarray [TMA]). We observed
that elafin is intracellularly (predominate nuclear localization)
expressed in normal breast tissue. In the majority (>80%) of DCIS cases,
intracellular elafin is expressed in a manner consistent with normal
breast tissue. However, in cases of invasive breast cancer, intracellular
elafin is largely downregulated (>80% of cases) suggesting elafin loss
may have a role in progression to invasive carcinoma. Interestingly,
examination of elafin expression in invasive breast cancer also revealed
a subset (10-20%) of tumors with robust cytoplasmic overexpression of
elafin, correlating with poor outcome. Similar results were seen in TMAs
of high-grade ovarian carcinoma (n>200). Examination of publically
available microarray data (TCGA) demonstrates that elafin measured at the
mRNA level is correlates with poor outcome in ovarian cancer, consistent
with our IHC results, and good outcome in breast cancer, incompatible
with our IHC results. To further investigate the expression of elafin in
breast cancer we examined by IHC a patient cohort (>200 patients) for
whom full sections (not TMA) were available. Using these patient samples
we found a unique subset of breast cancer patients that demonstrate
high-level secretion of elafin into the tumor stroma, significantly
correlating with increased survival especially in ER negative patients.
Collectively, these data suggest that the prognostic role of
extracellular elafin is related to the well-characterized ability of
elafin to modulate inflammation and immunity.

