Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interplay between cancer and the immune system: Beneficial role of
TILs and mechanisms of tumor immune escape in GBM patients


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most malignant brain cancer and
despite advances in present treatment regimen, the patients survival
remains low, emphasizing importance of continued research to develop
novel therapies. One of the promising treatment strategies is
immunotherapy. However, detailed studies of the immune status of GBM
patients are required to design appropriate immunotherapy tailored to
these patients. Our preliminary characterization of 63 GBM patients
biopsies using IHC staining for CD3, CD4 and CD8 markers revealed a great
heterogeneity in the amounts of T-cell infiltrates between and within the
patients tumors. The amounts of CD3+, CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells were
quantified and correlated with patients survival outcomes. Reduced CD3+
T-cell infiltration into the tumor (5% T-cells (p=0.0029). Similarly,
significant (p=0.0062) positive correlation of the level of CD8+ cells
infiltration with longer patients survival was observed. In further
studies we focused on detailed characterization of tumor infiltrating and
peripheral blood lymphocytes and based on these results we propose
several mechanisms impairing the patients immune system. Within the tumor
microenvironment immunosuppression is driven by increased expression of
CD39 and CD73 molecules that leads to high levels of extracellular
adenosine resulting in T-cell suppression. Additionally, we observed
modulation of Fas expression on tumor cells and FasL concentration in
patients plasma dependent on the immune cells status. This may result in
either tumor's escape from Fas-mediated cytotoxicity or apoptosis of the
immune cells. A subpopulation of the patients had elevated CD8+
regulatory T-cells that are known to suppress APCs - a major immune cell
population infiltrating the tumor. However, in contrast to other
published reports, we didn't detect CD4+ Tregs among TILs. In addition,
we demonstrated a systemic immunosuppression due to decreased numbers of
T-helper cells in the peripheral blood compared to healthy donors
(p=0.0391) and their up-regulated expression of the inhibitory receptor
CD152 (p=0.0039). Moreover, increased concentration of IL-10 (p=0.0039)
and decreased concentration of IL-2 and IL-12 in patients plasma
comparing to healthy donors indicates that the immune response balance is
shifted towards Th2 anti-inflammatory response.In conclusion, our
preliminary results showing that the increased T-cells infiltration to
the tumor correlates with patients longer survival, suggest that there is
a potential for developing immunotherapies against GBM. However, further
studies revealed a large repertoire of immunosuppressive mechanisms
developed by the tumor that need to be taken into consideration when
designing an immunotherapy tailored to GBM patients.

