Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of MUC13 in colon cancer progression


Colon cancer is the third most commonly diagnosed and second leading
cause of cancer related deaths in the United States. Mucin 13 (MUC13), a
high molecular weight glycoprotein, is a recently identified
transmembrane mucin. While MUC13 is known to be over expressed in gastric
and ovarian cancers, limited information about MUC13 is available in
colon cancer progression. Therefore, our aim is to investigate the
expression profile, potential role and possible regulatory pathways of
MUC13 in colon cancer progression. We performed immunohistochemical
analysis using MUC13 monoclonal antibody (ppz0020) to determine
expression profile and aberrant localization of MUC13 in colon cancer
cells. Our results indicate that MUC13 is over expressed in colon cancer
predominantly at the apical surface. MUC13 is also aberrantly localized
(cytoplasmic and nuclear) in metastasized colon cancer and in liver
metastasis. We also correlated MUC13 expression levels with
clinico-pathological parameters of patients. Increased MUC13 expression
correlated with increased tumor size and poorly differentiated colon
cancer. To determine the functional roles of MUC13 we generated stable
MUC13 over expressing and MUC13 knock down cells and performed functional
assays. Our results demonstrate that MUC13 increased cell proliferation,
colony formation, cell migration and cell invasion characteristics of
colon cancer cells. In order to investigate proteins that are affected by
MUC13, we performed immunoblot assays. Immunoblot analysis revealed that
MUC13 increased expression of several proteins that are associated with
colon cancer progression and metastasis such as Bmi-1(B cell specific
lymphoma moloney murine leukemia integration site-1), TERT (telomerase
reverse transcriptase), Shh (sonic hedgehog) and GATA1 (GATA binding
protein 1). We also examined potential signaling pathways that may be
associated with MUC13 colon carcinogenesis. We found that MUC13 increased
expression of mitogen activated kinase (MAPK) pathway members such as
ERK-1 and phospho ERK-1. In order to determine potential transcriptions
factors that may regulate MUC13 expression, we screened expression of
various transcription factors by real time PCR. Significantly high
expression of STAT5B (signal transducers and activators of transcription
factor 5B) was detected in cell lines expressing endogenously high levels
of MUC13. In order to confirm transcription factor STAT5B binding sites
in the MUC13 promotor, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (CHIP).
CHIP analysis revealed that STAT5B binds to the promoter of MUC13. In
summary, our study revealed that MUC13 is over expressed in colon cancer
and aberrantly localized in metastasis. Over expression of MUC13
increases cell proliferation, colony formation, cell migration, cell
invasion and expression of metastasis associated proteins partly via MAPK
pathway. MUC13 expression may be regulated through binding of STAT5B to
the MUC13 promoter.

