Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gemcitabine induced lytic EBV replication and confers ganciclovir
susceptibility to EBV-positive gastric cancer


Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a dsDNA human gamma herpes virus which
infects more than 90% of human populations. It is associated with the
development of malignancies such as Burkitt's lymphoma, nasopharyngeal
carcinoma, and EBV-associated gastric carcinoma. Gastric cancer is the
second most common cancer in the world and the highest incidence is in
Korea. The constant presence of the viral genome in EBV associated
gastric cancer tissue offers the potential for novel EBV targeted
therapies using antiviral nucleoside drug. Ganciclovir (GCV) is the drug
of choice in herpes virus infection, however, GCV alone have been
unsuccessful in the treatment of EBV associated malignancies because the
virus maintains a latent state of replication in tumor, and thymidine
kinase (BXLF1) and protein transferase (BGLF4), express only during lytic
state of replication. In recent years, novel treatment strategies are
being investigated where in lytic replication of the virus in EBV
associated cancer is induced prior to the use of GCV. We investigate
Gemcitabine (Gem), which is one of newly discovered potential lytic
inducers found from FDA approved drug library screen using BZLF1 promoter
reporter system. We examined whether the combination of GCV and Gem is
more effective than Gem alone for killing EBV-positive gastric cancer
cells. We found GCV significantly enhanced the ability of Gem to kill
EBV-positive, but not EBV negative, gastric carcinoma cells in vitro.
Also we found that low dose (2.5ng/ml) and short term exposures (24hr) of
the EBV positive gastric cancer cell line SNU719 to Gem induced
expression of the EBV lytic phase proteins. Viral kinases were also
induced by short term and low dose exposure. Short term and low dose
exposure to Gem in combination with GCV induced tumor cell death and cell
proliferation inhibition. In conclusion, pharmacologic induction of the
lytic viral kinases in tumor cells using Gem, followed by treatment with
GCV is useful in EBV associated gastric cancer in vitro. And this
virus-targeted antitumor strategy may provide a new therapeutic approach
to EBV-associated gastric cancer.

