Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A discriminatory set of transcripts, suitable for differentiation
of normal, colorectal cancer and adenoma cases from both fresh frozen
biopsy and formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples -
potential biomarkers of colorectal dyplasia-carcinoma transition


Background and aims: Though histopathology is still the gold standard for
differentiating stages of colorectal disease progression, the cut slide
may represent only a fragment of the whole sample and disease features,
such as dysplastic areas of flat adenomas, may remain hidden due to
inappropriate sampling or tissue orientation. The early molecular
detection of the colorectal dysplasia-carcinoma transition may enhance
the strenght of diagnosis from colonic biopsies. Using high-throughput
microarray-based biomarker screening low cost diagnostic array real-time
PCR panels may be developed. We aimed to determine molecular markers for
enhancing the differentiation of high-grade dysplasia from colorectal
carcinoma (CRC) and to analyze the applicability of FFPE tissue samples.
Material and Methods: Discriminatory transcript set was identified using
HGU133plus2 microarrays (Affymetrix Inc.) on 53 biopsy samples (22 CRC,
20 adenoma, 11 normal). For testing the classificatory power of the
discriminatory genes, 94 independent biopsies (27 CRC, 29 adenoma, 38
normal) were analyzed on microarrays. Array real-time PCR validation was
done on 68 independent samples (24 CRC, 24 adenoma, 20 normal) using
LightCycler480 system (Roche) and RealTime ready assays. Reverse
transcription was done using Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit
(Roche). For testing the applicability of FFPE tissues, total RNA was
isolated from 10um-thick slides of 5 CRC and 2 adjacent normal samples
using High Pure RNA Paraffin Kit (Roche). The same cDNA synthesis and
real-time PCR conditions were applied as in case of fresh frozen samples.
Results: A set of 11 transcripts was determined which could correctly
discriminate between not only the normal, adenoma and CRC samples, but
between high-grade dysplastic adenoma and CRC samples by 100% sensitivity
and 88.9% specificity. The discriminatory power of the marker set was
proved to be high on independent fresh frozen biopsy samples in both
microarray and RT-PCR analyses. 95.6% of original and 94.1% of
cross-validated samples were correctly classified in discriminant
analysis. According to the RT-PCR results for the set of 11 markers,
tumorous and normal FFPE tissue samples could be distinguished by 100%
sensitivity and specificity. Conclusion: The identified transcripts could
correctly characterize the dysplasia-carcinoma transition in colonic
tissue samples, also on a large independent sample set and on FFPE tissue
samples. These markers can establish the basis of gene expression based
diagnostic classification of colorectal cancer. Diagnostic panels can
become part of the automated routine procedure.

