Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth hormone activates ERK via EGFR, not IGF-IR, to potentiate
estrogen-dependent breast cancer cell proliferation


Estrogen receptor (ER) and insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR)
interact and activate one another in breast cancer cells, and ER can
up-regulate components of the IGF-I signaling pathway. Therapeutic
strategies co-targeting ER and IGF-IR in ER-positive breast tumors have
been developed, yet clinical trials of anti-IGF-IR therapies have not
been as successful as had been hoped. Although growth hormone (GH) is
implicated in having a role in breast cancer, its effects are often
attributed to the actions of IGF-I. Since inhibition of IGF-IR can cause
an increase in circulating levels of GH, we considered the possibility
that GH may act directly on the tumor itself thus explaining the limited
efficacy of anti-IGF-IR therapy in breast cancer. Therefore, we sought to
determine whether GH has direct, IGF-I-independent effects on breast
cancer. We demonstrate in T47D human breast cancer cells that while GH
alone only weakly stimulates cell proliferation, it significantly
enhances estradiol (E2)-stimulated proliferation. Inhibition of IGF-IR
reduced E2-stimulated proliferation, confirming previous findings.
Remarkably, GH+E2 overcame the IGF-IR blockade to promote proliferation.
This indicates that GH not only acts in an IGF-I-independent manner, but
can bypass IGF-IR inhibitors to restore E2 action on proliferation.
Furthermore, we found that both epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
and ERK were required for proliferation stimulated by GH and E2, and that
GH uses EGFR to activate ERK even in the presence of the IGF-IR
inhibitor. Expression of proliferation genes up-regulated by GH+E2
treatment was abrogated by the EGFR and MEK inhibitors, but not by the
IGF-IR inhibitor. Thus, we propose that while E2-stimulated proliferation
requires IGF-IR, EGFR, and ERK, the presence of GH allows E2 to bypass
the requirement for IGF-IR while remaining dependent on EGFR and ERK.
Furthermore, we have found that GH can potentiate E2 stimulation of ER
target gene transcription and this is dependent on ERK, but not on
IGF-IR. Taken together, these findings indicate that GH not only can act
directly on breast cancer cells independently of IGF-I, but can bypass
IGF-IR blockade to stimulate ERK and potentiate E2 activity on
proliferation and gene regulation. A better understanding of the
interactions between GH and E2 will contribute to the development of
novel drugs or improved combination therapies targeting the GH/IGF/E2
axis in breast cancer.

