Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathways of tumorigenesis promoted by the growth factor
progranulin in SW-13 adrenocortical carcinoma cells


Adrenocortical carcinomas are highly malignant cancers, with a very low 5
year survival rate. The SW-13 cell line originated from a stage IV
adrenocortical carcinoma, but is only poorly tumorigenic in mice. It can,
however, be made highly tumorigenic in vivo if it is engineered to
express a limited number of growth factors including progranulin (PGRN,
also called PCDGF, granulin epithelin precursor, or proepithelin) and
secreted FGFs. This provides a model system to study the transition of an
adrenocortical carcinoma from low to a high malignant potential. PGRN is
a secreted glycoprotein growth factor that is over produced by many
cancers including those of the breast, ovary, endometrium, prostate,
bladder, and liver. It acts on cancer growth by increasing mitosis,
decreasing apoptosis and stimulating invasion. In addition, PGRN has been
implicated as a stimulator of tumor stroma growth in breast cancer. We
examined the expression of PGRN in SW-13 cells at different stages of the
cell cycle. Cells were synchronized using two independent agents,
L-Mimosine and aphidicolin to arrest cell division. Washout of the drugs
released the SW-13 cells into the cell cycles with slow (L-Mimosine) or
rapid (aphidicolin) kinetics, and PGRN expression increased in parallel
with the increased proportion of cells in active cell division. Depleting
PGRN mRNA levels slowed reentry into the cell cycle following drug
removal. Inhibition of MEK1/2, phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K),
protein kinase C (PKC) and phospholipase-C- (PLC) impairs proliferation
of SW-13 cells carrying only empty vector (SW-13V) with differential
effects on mitosis and apoptosis. In cells with elevated PGRN, (SW-13P),
the anti-proliferative effects of inhibiting MEK1/2, PI3K and PKC, but
not PLC, are attenuated. Inhibition of the stress kinase p38 increases
proliferation of SW-13V, but not SW-13P cells, suggesting that PGRN and
p38 have opposing effects on proliferation. Inhibition of p38 enhances
the phosphorylation of MEK1/2 in SW-13V cells, while inhibiting PKC
decreases it, suggesting that PKC and p38 pathways interact with the
PGRN-regulated MEK1/2 signaling cascade. Transcriptional profiling
indicated that expression of PGRN modulated levels of proteins in the Wnt
and Notch-signaling pathways. These results suggest that PGRN expression
may be coordinated with the cell cycle, and, may promote tumorigenesis by
intervening in several signaling pathways.

