Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural insights into the regulation and the recognition of
histone marks by the SET domain of histone lysine HMTase NSD1,
NSD2/MMSET/WHSC1, and NSD3/WHSC1L1


Background: The nuclear receptor binding SET domain (NSD) protein is a
family of three histone-lysine N-methyltransferase (HMTase), NSD1,
NSD2/MMSET/WHSC1, and NSD3/WHSC1L1 that are critical in maintaining the
chromatin integrity. NSD1 methylates H3K36 and H4K20 and is associated
with acute myeloid leukemia, multiple myeloma, and lung cancer. The
NSD1-NUP98 translocation plays a significant role in childhood acute
myeloid leukemia with NUP98-NSD1 being an active H3K36 methylase. NSD1 is
amplified in multiple myeloma, lung cancer, neuroblastomas and
glioblastomas. NSD2 methylates H3K36 and is linked to prostate cancer and
multiple myeloma. Over expression of NSD2 in myeloma cells leads to
aberrantly high levels of H3K36 di-methylation, accompanied by a decrease
in H3K27 methylation. NSD2 is found over expressed in fifteen different
cancers and is associated with tumor aggressiveness or prognosis in most
types of cancers. NSD3 methylates H3K36 and is associated with both lung
and breast cancers along with the acute myeloid leukemia. The
amplification of either NSD1 or NSD2 triggers the cellular
transformation. NSD3 is found amplified in breast cancer cell lines and
primary breast carcinomas. Reducing NSDs activity through specific and
selective lysine-HMTase inhibitors appears promising to help suppressing
cancer growth. Little is known about the NSD pathways and our
understanding of the histone Lysine-HMTase mechanism is partial. The SET
domain of NSD1 has specific mechanisms to recognize histone marks unlike
other HMTase. The precise catalytic activities of the NSDs are obscure
and discrepancies exist hindering progress in understanding their exact
biological functions and pathways in cancer pathogenesis. In this study,
we explored the in vitro catalytic activities on histone substrates to
understand the substrate recognition and to pave the way for the design
of selective and specific NSD inhibitors usable in cancer therapies.
Methods: We used both biochemical and computational methods to understand
the substrates recognition by the NSDs and to investigate the structural
mechanisms happening in the SET domain during the binding of histone
tails. Results: A key regulatory and a recognition mechanism is driven by
the flexibility of a loop at the interface of the SET and postSET region
who rotates 45 and translated 7 opening the SET domain for the binding of
the peptide ligand. This regulatory loop acts as a seat belt for the
ligand and contributes to the discrimination and the substrate
specificity. In vitro, The SET domain of the NSDs favor H3 recognition
and are able to methylate a range of substrate. To reconcile with the in
vivo activities previously reported on H3K36 and H4K20, we propose a
cross-talk mechanism controlling the substrate recognition.

