Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Usefulness of sensitive digital PCR assay to quantify
microRNA-34b/c methylation in the circulating serum DNA of malignant
mesothelioma patients


. Background: Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is an aggressive tumor but it
can sometimes be cured if its clinical stage is not advanced. It is very
expected to establish a useful screening test for early detection of MM.
Recently we have found that DNA methylation of microRNA-34bc (miR34b/c)
plays a dismal role on pathogenesis of MM and is frequently observed in
MM. Circulating DNA from malignant tumors is known to be found in the
serum of the patient. Digital polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a high
sensitive quantitative assay using real time PCR assay. In order to
establish a new early detection system for MM, we quantify the extent of
DNA methylation of miR-34b/c using a digital PCR assay in the circulating
serum DNA from MM. Material and methods: We collected serum samples from
30 MM patients, 22 patients with benign asbestos pleurisy (BAP), and 10
healthy volunteers (HV) at Okayama Rosai Hospital, NHO Yamaguchi Ube
Medical Center and our institute during January 2006 to August 2009. The
circulating serum DNA was extracted using QIAamp Circulating Nucleic Acid
Kit (Qiagen) followed by bisulfite conversion using EpiTect Bisulfite
Kits (Qiagen) according to manufactural protocols. The real time PCR
assay of methylation-specific PCR (MSP) for miR-34b/c was performed using
SYBR Green method. In addition, the digital PCR of real time MSP assay
was explored for 40 wells per each sample with a suitable dilution to aim
the increase of sensitivity of PCR reaction, and we quantified the extent
of methylation in each sample by counting the number of positive well of
PCR reaction per sample. As positive and negative controls, the
supernatant cultured medium of NCI-H290 harboring heavy methylation of
miR-34b/c and water blank was used, respectively. Results: By melting
curve analysis, we distinguished the miR-34b/c methylated wells from
unmethylated wells based on the temperatures of PCR products of them
(78.2 degree on methylated samples vs. 76.2 degree on un-methylated
samples). Using the criteria above, each 40 wells per sample was defined
as positive or negative for miR-34b/c methylation. The miR-34b/c
methylated samples were defined as having more than three positive wells
by ROC curve analyses. Finally, we found that the number of positive
wells was significantly higher in MMs than that in other groups, and the
miR-34b/c methylated samples was observed in 87% of MM patients, 45% of
the patients with BAP, and 10% of HV, respectively, indicating that the
miR-34b/c methylation in MM patients were significantly frequent than
that in others (P . Background: Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is an
aggressive tumor but it can sometimes be cured if its clinical stage is
not advanced. It is very expected to establish a useful screening test
for early detection of MM. Recently we have found that DNA methylation of
microRNA-34bc (miR34b/c) plays a dismal role on pathogenesis of MM and is
frequently observed in MM. Circulating DNA from malignant tumors is known
to be found in the serum of the patient. Digital polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) is a high sensitive quantitative assay using real time PCR
assay. In order to establish a new early detection system for MM, we
quantify the extent of DNA methylation of miR-34b/c using a digital PCR
assay in the circulating serum DNA from MM. Material and methods: We
collected serum samples from 30 MM patients, 22 patients with benign
asbestos pleurisy (BAP), and 10 healthy volunteers (HV) at Okayama Rosai
Hospital, NHO Yamaguchi Ube Medical Center and our institute during
January 2006 to August 2009. The circulating serum DNA was extracted
using QIAamp Circulating Nucleic Acid Kit (Qiagen) followed by bisulfite
conversion using EpiTect Bisulfite Kits (Qiagen) according to
manufactural protocols. The real time PCR assay of methylation-specific
PCR (MSP) for miR-34b/c was performed using SYBR Green method. In
addition, the digital PCR of real time MSP assay was explored for 40
wells per each sample with a suitable dilution to aim the increase of
sensitivity of PCR reaction, and we quantified the extent of methylation
in each sample by counting the number of positive well of PCR reaction
per sample. As positive and negative controls, the supernatant cultured
medium of NCI-H290 harboring heavy methylation of miR-34b/c and water
blank was used, respectively. Results: By melting curve analysis, we
distinguished the miR-34b/c methylated wells from unmethylated wells
based on the temperatures of PCR products of them (78.2 degree on
methylated samples vs. 76.2 degree on un-methylated samples). Using the
criteria above, each 40 wells per sample was defined as positive or
negative for miR-34b/c methylation. The miR-34b/c methylated samples were
defined as having more than three positive wells by ROC curve analyses.
Finally, we found that the number of positive wells was significantly
higher in MMs than that in other groups, and the miR-34b/c methylated
samples was observed in 87% of MM patients, 45% of the patients with BAP,
and 10% of HV, respectively, indicating that the miR-34b/c methylation in
MM patients were significantly frequent than that in others (P <0.0001).
Conclusion: The digital PCR assay can detect miR-34b/c methylation in the
circulation serum DNA of MM patients to find that miR-34b/c methylation
is more frequent in MM than in BAP, suggesting that it may become a
useful high-sensitive screening test to distinguish MM patients from the
patients with BAP.

