Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo effects of decitabine on global gene expression profiles
in tumors from patients with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer


Deoxycytosine methylation of CpG islands within promoter regions of tumor
suppressor genes (TSGs) plays a prominent role in the development and
progression of drug-resistant epithelial ovarian cancer (OC). Recently,
in a phase I/II trial of the DNA methylation inhibitor decitabine in
combination with carboplatin in platinum-resistant OC patients
(NCT00477386), we demonstrated that decitabine-altered DNA methylation
resulted in platinum resensitization and significant clinical activity,
with a response rate of 35% and median PFS of 10 months (ASCO abstract
#79158). The objective of the current study was to investigate the
molecular basis underlying the clinical response observed. For this, we
compared differential gene expression in paired tumor biopsies and
ascitic fluid collected before and one week after decitabine treatment.
Of the 17 patients enrolled in NCT00477386, samples evaluable from 14
patients were subjected to global gene expression profiling using
GeneChip Human Gene 1.0 St arrays, and selected genes were validated by
quantitative RT-PCR. Data analysis was performed using significance of
microarray analysis (SAM), clustering, functional pathway prediction
using DAVID, gene ontology (GO), and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA).
In the patients with progression free survival (PFS) greater than six
months (n=6), 274 genes were uniquely upregulated by decitabine. Enriched
signaling pathways included Hedgehog, focal adhesion, and gap junction.
Specifically, genes upregulated (fold change >1.2, P 6 months compared to
patients with PFS 6 months and decreased in patients with PFS 6 months
and decreased in patients with PFS < 6 months (-1.2 fold-change).
Furthermore, 394 genes were downregulated (FC 6 months and decreased in
patients with PFS < 6 months (-1.2 fold-change). Furthermore, 394 genes
were downregulated (FC < 1.2, P 6 months, including 33 genes of the
stemness and chemoresistance-associated Wnt pathway. Notably,
underexpression of those 33 genes has been correlated with prolonged
survival in previous ovarian cancer studies. In summary, these findings
show that repetitive low-dose decitabine reactivates silenced genes and
restores sensitivity to carboplatin, providing strong clinical and
biological support for further study of hypomethylating agents in heavily
pre-treated, platinum-resistant ovarian cancer patients.

