Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel roles of CCN6 in mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) and
loss of stem cell properties of breast cancer cells


Background: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and its reverse
process, mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET), play key roles in
regulating embryogenesis. Recent studies have shown that aberrant EMT
activation contributes to cancer progression and metastasis. Links
between EMT and the gain of stem cell properties have been suggested in
physiological and pathological situations. CCN family protein 6
(CCN6/WISP3) is a novel tumor suppressor that regulates diverse cellular
functions. Our previous studies have shown the blockade of CCN6 by short
hairpin RNA triggers EMT program in benign breast epithelial cells, with
decreased expression of epithelial marker E-cadherin and increased
activation of corresponding transcriptional repressor, Zeb1 and Snail.
Moreover, loss of CCN6 expression also endows benign breast epithelial
cells with growth factor-independent properties, such as cell survival
and anoikis resistance. However, little is known regarding the functions
of CCN6 overexpression in breast cancer progression. Methods: We
overexpressed CCN6 in breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB-231 and SUM-159,
which are aggressive, have mesenchymal-like features and low levels of
endogenous CCN6. CCN6 provoked functions were studied in vitro by
proliferation, motility and invasion assays. Aldehyde dehydrogenase
(ALDH1) was used to identify and investigate CCN6 roles in human breast
cancer stem cells. Results: We showed that overexpression of CCN6
inhibits cell proliferation, motility and invasion. Importantly, CCN6
overexpression in these cells led to phenotypic changes towards
mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET), characterized by loss of
mesenchymal cell marker Vimentin and downregulation of transcriptional
factor, Zeb1. CCN6 overexpression significantly reduced the stem cell
population of MDA-MB-231 and SUM-159 breast cancer cells. Conclusions:
Our data suggest a novel function of CCN6 in regulating MET and reducing
the stem cell population of aggressive breast cancer cells.

