Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective inhibitors of nuclear export (SINE) activate multiple
tumor suppressor pathways and kill prostate cancer cells across multiple
genotypes in vitro and in vivo


CRM1 (Xpo1) is a key nuclear export protein which controls the nuclear
export of multiple tumor suppressor proteins (TSP) and cell proliferation
pathways including p53, p21, FOXO, PI3K/AKT, Wnt/-catenin and NF-B.
Mislocalization of TSP can abrogate their functions as well as render
chemotherapies ineffective. Induction of nuclear expression of TSP and
chemotherapy targets, by CRM1 inhibition can restore their tumor
suppressor functions and increase drug sensitivity. We have developed
orally active, small molecule SINE that irreversibly and potently inhibit
CRM1 mediated nuclear export of multiple TSP and other cargoes (IC50 CRM1
(Xpo1) is a key nuclear export protein which controls the nuclear export
of multiple tumor suppressor proteins (TSP) and cell proliferation
pathways including p53, p21, FOXO, PI3K/AKT, Wnt/-catenin and NF-B.
Mislocalization of TSP can abrogate their functions as well as render
chemotherapies ineffective. Induction of nuclear expression of TSP and
chemotherapy targets, by CRM1 inhibition can restore their tumor
suppressor functions and increase drug sensitivity. We have developed
orally active, small molecule SINE that irreversibly and potently inhibit
CRM1 mediated nuclear export of multiple TSP and other cargoes (IC50 <
100 nM). Here, we describe in vitro results using SINE compounds, KPT-185
in vitro and KPT-251 in vitro and in vivo on seven prostate cancer (PrCa)
cell lines representing distinct differentiation/progression states of
disease and genotypes: LAPC-4 (Androgen receptor [AR] positive, androgen
dependent with low Akt/mTOR activities, p53 wt); LnCaP (AR positive,
androgen dependent with high Akt/mTOR activities, p53 wt); LnCaP-C81 and
LnCaP-C4-2B (AR positive, androgen independent with high Akt/mTOR
activities, p53 wt); 22rv1 (AR positive, androgen independent with low
Akt/mTOR activities, p53 wt); PC3 (AR negative, with high Akt/mTOR
activites and no p53 function (p53 del) and DU145 (AR negative, with low
Akt/mTOR activites and mutant p53). Benign prostatic hyperplasia line
(BPH1) and Prostatic epithelial line (EPN) were used as non-neoplastic
controls. We show that SINE block CRM1 mediated nuclear export of FOXO
and p53 with a IC50 values 5-20 M). SINE cytotoxic effects are
independent of p53 status, and induce caspase-3 activation. SINE display
synergistic effects in combination with cisplatin and docetaxel in vitro
with combination indices between 0.3 and 0.8. In vivo results indicate
that KPT-251 show a dose-dependent inhibition of tumor growth. KPT251 was
also synergistic when administered at 30mg/kg/5 days/week per os with
docetaxel and cisplatin by using the aggressive p53 wt 22rv1 xenografts.
Taken together, CRM1 inhibition represents a completely novel,
neoplasia-selective and well- tolerated target for use as single agent or
in combination with chemotherapy for PrCa.

