Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activating the prostaglandin I2-IP signaling suppresses metastasis
in lung cancer


Background: The mechanism by which bone marrow (BM)-derived cells might
contribute to tumor metastasis and angiogenesis is controversial. We have
reported that bone marrow derived angiogenic progenitor cells (Lin- cKit+
Flk-1+ cells) express prostaglandin I2 (PGI2) specific receptor; IP, and
the PGI2-IP system is necessary for vascular remodeling and angiogenesis.
Additionally, we have reported that the specific knockdown of IP in bone
marrow derived cells (BMDCs) increases tumor metastasis in mouse models.
Objectives: The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that
activating the PGI2-IP signaling suppresses tumor metastasis. Materials &
Methods: We employed both a mouse lung metastatic model and a mouse bone
marrow transplanted model. Mouse-derived Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) cells
labeled with DsRed were used for a mouse lung metastatic model to
distinguish cancer cells from BMDCs. The LLCs were injected into the tail
vein of mice (c57BL/6J), which bone marrow cells were transplanted from
GFP-labeled mice. Beraprost sodium (BPS; IP receptor agonist) or PBS
control was continuously administered for 3 weeks by subcutaneous osmotic
pumps. Tumor metastasis to lung was assessed by using hematoxylin-eosin
staining. The a-SMA as a pericyte marker and the CD31 as an endothelial
cell marker were studied by immunofluorescence to evaluate angiogenesis
in metastatic lung tumors. Results: The size and number of tumor
metastasis were significantly decreased in BPS group compared with in PBS
control group assessed by the mice lung metastasis model.
Immunofluorescence analysis revealed that the pericytes derived from bone
marrow were scattered within tumors in PBS control group, while those
were observed along with tumor micro vessels by supporting the
endothelial cells within tumors in BPS group. Conclusions: The present
study demonstrated that activating the PGI2-IP signaling suppresses
metastasis in lung cancer. These results also suggested that the
maturation of tumor angiogenesis by pericytes may decrease tumor
metastasis. Finally, we propose that PGI2-IP system would be a novel
therapeutic target in lung metastasis.

