Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanog promotes PI3K/Akt and mTOR-mediated invasion in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) affects nearly 40,000 new
patients annually in the United States with approximately 50% of these
patients having a poor prognosis. Frequent metastasis of the primary
tumor to nearby cervical lymph nodes and local critical structures poses
a major problem in the treatment of HNSCC. To date, several molecular
mediators of invasion and metastasis in HNSCC have been studied; however,
with the emergence of the cancer stem cell hypothesis, other genes
normally associated with self-renewal and pluripotency in stem cells
would also need to be evaluated for their role in tumor invasion and
metastasis. In the present study, we used various functional assays to
determine the role of Nanog in HNSCC invasion and metastasis as well as
identify the underlying pathway through which Nanog acts to regulate
invasion and metastasis. We observed that Nanog overexpression increased
invasion and cell migration in two cell lines (UMSCC-10B and UMSCC-22B)
while Nanog knockdown using siRNA decreased invasion and cell migration
in both cell lines and in a putative HNSCC cancer stem cell culture which
expressed high levels of Nanog. Treatment with LY294002 or Rapamycin
using doses that did not significantly affect cell viability and
proliferation dramatically reversed both invasion and migration conferred
by Nanog overexpression, indicating the effect is most likely dependent
upon the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway. By western blot, we found that
Nanog-overexpressing cells expressed higher levels of p-Akt and p-mTOR
compared to control cells or Nanog-knockdown cells, confirming regulation
of Akt by Nanog. In addition, Nanog overexpression resulted in the
induction of MMP-2/MMP-9 as well as EMT genes Snail, Vimentin, and Twist.
This enhanced expression of EMT was consistent with the observed
increased migration as demonstrated by a wound healing assay. Nanog
regulation in a mouse model is currently under way to confirm our results
in vivo. The results of our study support the possibility of screening
for Nanog expression as a prognostic tool. Meanwhile, further efforts
aimed at elucidating the signaling pathway between Nanog and Akt may
reveal novel treatment targets.

