Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stage specific inhibitory effect and associated mechanisms of
insositol hexaphosphate on tumor progression and angiogenesis in TRAMP
model


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in
elderly men in US; ACS statistical estimates for 2011 report 240,890 new
PCa cases and 33,720 associated deaths. In recent years, transgenic
adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) has been the most frequently
employed PCa model to evaluate chemopreventive efficacy of various
agents. This model closely mimics human form of the disease, wherein
prostate carcinogenesis progresses in a step-wise manner with the age of
the mouse. The well defined stages of prostate tumor growth, progression
and angiogenesis in TRAMP model provide unique opportunity to assess
stage specific preventive efficacy of an agent. Accordingly, employing
TRAMP model, here we assessed stage-specific efficacy of inositol
hexaphosphate (IP6) feeding on PCa initiation and growth, progression and
angiogenesis, and elucidated the molecular events involved in IP6 effects
during these stages. Different groups of male TRAMP mice starting at 4,
12, 20 and 30 weeks of age were fed with regular drinking water or 2% IP6
in regular drinking water for 8-10 weeks. At the end of the study,
histopathological analysis of prostate showed that all the mice fed with
IP6 at different time-points display less severe prostatic lesions
compared to non-IP6 fed positive control mice. During early stages of
prostate tumor development, IP6 mediated its chemopreventive effect
mostly via anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic mechanisms. Feeding of
IP6 to animals burdened with higher stages of prostate tumor
significantly decreased tumor grade via anti-proliferative effect and
inhibition of angiogenesis as evidenced by decreased expression of
platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1/CD-31), vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) and
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). These effects of IP6 also
correlated with an alteration of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
as was evidenced by a decreased expression of mesenchymal markers Snail-1
in the prostatic tissue and retention of epithelial characteristics
determined by localization of E-cadherin. Together, the findings in the
present study are both novel and highly significant in establishing the
dual efficacy of IP6, where it inhibits initiation and progression of
primary prostatic tumor and also exerts protective efficacy against
angiogenesis. These effects of IP6 should have potential implications to
control PCa growth and improve the morbidity and survival time in PCa
patients.

