Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of soy exposure in different ages on the mammary tumor
development of the MMTV-ErbB-2 transgenic mice


Objective:To investigate the effect of different soy exposure timings on
the mammary tumor development using MMTV-erbB-2 transgenic mice.
Furthermore, the underlying mechanisms were also examined. Methods:120
MMTV-erbB-2 transgenic female mice were randomly divided into four
groups:control group, early exposure group, late exposure group and
lifelong exposure group. The control group mice were treated with soy
free diet from week 3 to week 60, the experiment groups mice were treated
with soy diet between week 3 to week 12, week 20 to week 60, week 3 to
week 60, respectively. Then, the body weight change of each mice, the
latency period, and the growth speed of mammary tumor were recorded.
Furthermore, the mammary gland morphology was examined by whole mount at
5 weeks. In order to understand the underlying mechanisms of the mammary
tumor development, the signal pathways of c-Fos, erbB2 and p-ERK were
also examined in breast cancer tissue using immunohistochemistry.
Results:We found that the weight in the four groups had no significant
difference. Compared with the control group, the TEB numbers and the
growth speed of tumors in the early exposure group and the lifelong
exposure group were significantly decreased and the tumor latency periods
were significantly prolonged (PObjective:To investigate the effect of
different soy exposure timings on the mammary tumor development using
MMTV-erbB-2 transgenic mice. Furthermore, the underlying mechanisms were
also examined. Methods:120 MMTV-erbB-2 transgenic female mice were
randomly divided into four groups:control group, early exposure group,
late exposure group and lifelong exposure group. The control group mice
were treated with soy free diet from week 3 to week 60, the experiment
groups mice were treated with soy diet between week 3 to week 12, week 20
to week 60, week 3 to week 60, respectively. Then, the body weight change
of each mice, the latency period, and the growth speed of mammary tumor
were recorded. Furthermore, the mammary gland morphology was examined by
whole mount at 5 weeks. In order to understand the underlying mechanisms
of the mammary tumor development, the signal pathways of c-Fos, erbB2 and
p-ERK were also examined in breast cancer tissue using
immunohistochemistry. Results:We found that the weight in the four groups
had no significant difference. Compared with the control group, the TEB
numbers and the growth speed of tumors in the early exposure group and
the lifelong exposure group were significantly decreased and the tumor
latency periods were significantly prolonged (P<0.05). Furthermore,
immunohistochemistry showed that the mice in the early exposure group and
the lifelong exposure group displayed decreased expression of c-Fos and
p-ERK (P0.05). Conclusion: Early or lifelong soy exposure affects the
morphological development of mammary gland of MMTV-erbB-2 transgenic
mice. Soy may display a preventive effect on the initiation of breast
cancer. These obersveration may serve as a guide for soy use in the early
prevention of the breast cancer. The c-Fos and and p-ERK may be involved
in the development of mammary tumor in the MMTV-erbB-2 transgenic mice.
The underlying mechanism warrants further studies.

