Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decrease in expression of Gadd45 is associated with gemcitabine
and hydroxyurea resistance in human head and neck squamous-cell carcinoma


Gemcitabine (2, 2-difluorodeoxycytidine) is a new nucleoside analogue to
block DNA replication. Another target of gemcitabine is the enzyme
ribonucleotide reductase (RNR). The diphosphate analogue binds to RNR
active site and inactivates the enzyme irreversibly. Hydroxyurea can also
decrease production of deoxyribonucleotides via inhibition of the enzyme
ribonucleotide reductase by scavenging tyrosyl free radicals as they are
involved in the reduction NDPs. Gemcitabine and hydroxyurea have
demonstrated a broad spectrum anti-tumor and favorable toxicity profile.
In 2006, we conducted a small phase-2 study to evaluate the therapeutic
effect of the combination of gemcitabine and hydroxyurea on 14 patients
with recurrent locally persistent squamous-cell carcinoma of head and
neck cancers (SCCHN). The outcomes of this trial demonstrated that 4 of
patients displayed a complete/partial remission and/or stable diseases
and 10 of progressive diseases. Since, the molecular mechanisms for the
drug-resistant of this combinational treatment in advanced head and neck
patients were poorly understood; therefore, we investigated difference in
the gene expression profile between stable and progressive diseases.
According to their clinical response to the treatments, patients were
sorted into either stable disease or progressive disease group. Total RNA
was extracted from biopsies of pre-treated patients of these two groups,
and then subjected to cDNA microarray analysis. The cDNA microarray
analysis indicated that a set of 116 gene transcripts were significant
different between stable and progressive diseases. We focused on genes in
the set with known roles in drug-resistant of gemcitabine and hydroxyurea
such as two subunits of RNR: RRM1 and RRM2, and also on these genes,
which are involved in DNA synthesis and DNA damage repair such as, Fos,
BNIP3, PITX1, GADD45-alpha and GADD45-gamma. Q-PCR analysis showed that
mRNA of FOS, BNIP3 and PITX1 were significantly higher in progressive
diseases than that in stable diseases, whereas GADD45-alpha and
GADD45-gamma were significantly decreased in stable group than in
progressive group. Immunohistochemistry analysis further identified a
significant decrease of GADD45-alpha and GADD45-gamma staining and
increase of RRM1 and RRM2 staining in tissues of progressive diseases.
Our data indicates that, beside increase of RRM1/M2, decrease of
GADD45-alpha and GADD45-gamma in SCCHN may be also associated with
drug-resistant of gemcitabine and hydroxyurea. Moreover, statistic
algorithm indicates that these top-10 genes in the 116-gene list may be
sufficient for accurately predicting the outcome of stable and
progressive diseases of SCCHN, if patients are subjected to gemcitabine
and hydroxyurea treatment.

