Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Erythropoietin promotes mammary tumor development in MMTV-erbB-2
transgenic mice


Erythropoietin (EPO), a cytokine that stimulates erythropoiesis, is
frequently used to treat anemia in cancer patients. Recent clinical
studies indicate that EPO administration might be associated with tumor
progression and reduced overall survival rate. However, the mechanisms of
EPO associated risk in cancer patients remain poorly understood. In
particular, a spontaneous tumor model that allows us to test the effects
of EPO on tumor development/progression and provide mechanistic insights
into multifactoral interactions in a physiological context has not been
established. In this study, we used the MMTV-erbB-2 transgenic mouse
model to test the specific effect of EPO on erbB-2 overexpressing breast
cancers and aimed to establish a spontaneous tumor model for relevant
studies. Female erbB-2 transgenic mice were injected with EPO? at 2000
U/Kg body weight, twice a week for three weeks (between week 20 and 22).
We found that EPO treatment during the premalignant risk window not only
increased hemoglobin levels but also significantly promoted mammary tumor
development. In contrast to a 36-week mean latency of tumor development
in control group, the mean latency for EPO exposed mice was 30 weeks.
Moreover, EPO exposure resulted in increased pulmonary metastasis. Whole
mount analysis of mammary gland at 23 weeks showed that EPO exposure
induced ductal branching and alveolar outgrowth, which was consistent
with increased BrdU incorporation in EPO exposed mammary tissues.
Molecular analysis of mammary tissues at 23 weeks showed that the protein
levels of p-Jak2, p-erbB-2, p-Erk and p-Akt1 were significantly
increased, which was accompanied by increased expression of EGFR, erbB-3,
IGFR, Bcl-2, cyclin D1 and VEGF. These data suggest that EPO exposure
induced the activation of both EPOR/Jak2 and erbB-2/EGFR/erbB-3 pathways,
and had a broad impact on signal transduction and gene expression in
mammary tissues. Although the difference in signal transduction and gene
expression of tumor tissues between control and EPO exposed groups was
less significant, tumors from EPO treated mice showed increased
microvessel density as compared to controls, suggesting EPO exposure
induced a long lasting proangiogenic effect. Consistently, conditioned
medium extracted from EPO treated mammary tissues at 23 weeks
significantly increased tube formation of endothelial cells. Taken
together, our results demonstrate that EPO treatment promotes the
development and metastasis of erbB-2 overexpressing mammary tumors and
established the MMTV-erbB-2 mouse model for the studies of EPO associated
cancer risk. The underlying mechanisms involve enhanced activation of
erbB-2 pathway through EPOR/Jak2 activation and increased proangiogenic
activities in EPO exposed mammary tissues. Since erbB-2 is overexpressed
in about 30% of human breast cancers, these data will have significant
impact on safe use of EPO in breast cancer patients with anemia.

