Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NetGestalt: A web application for the integration of
multidimensional omics data within a network context


Advancements in high-throughput omics technologies are revolutionizing
the field of cancer studies. As a prime example, The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) project will generate multiple types of genomic data from 500
cases of human cancer for each of the 25 selected tumor types by 2014.
Until computational tools are available for biologists and clinicians to
independently interpret the vast amount of interconnected data, the
potential of this type of large collaborative projects will not be fully
realized. To fill the gap between data generation and investigators
ability to interpret the data, we have developed NetGestalt, a web-based
application that enables the integration of multidimensional omics data
within the context of a protein interaction network. Because molecular
alterations at DNA, RNA, and protein levels exert their effects primarily
through changing the activity of proteins and their participating
networks, protein-protein interaction network has become a powerful model
for the visualization and integration of different types of molecular
data. However, the standard graph-based network visualization becomes
inadequate as network size and data complexity increase. We address this
challenge through exploiting the inherent hierarchical architecture of
the protein interaction network. By using only the horizontal dimension
of a webpage to layout genes according to the hierarchical network
architecture, it allows users to simultaneously compare and correlate
information from experimental data, network modules, and existing
knowledge rendered as tracks along the vertical dimension of the webpage,
similar to the widely used genome browsers. However, without constraining
the system to genomic sequence-based coordinates, NetGestalt is able to
reveal functional relationship between different genes as encoded in the
network. We also employed efficient software architecture to enable fast
track rendering process and smooth navigation between different
resolution scales from individual genes to the whole network. The
potential of NetGestalt was demonstrated using the recently published
TCGA ovarian cancer data with multiple types of genomic measurements on
around 500 tumor samples and corresponding normal controls. In summary,
we have developed NetGestalt, a novel data integration framework that
allows simultaneous presentation of large scale experimental and
annotation data from various sources in the context of a biological
network to facilitate data visualization, analysis, interpretation and
hypothesis generation. A NetGestalt-based TCGA data browser can
facilitate biologists and clinicians to translate the vast amount of data
into novel biological discoveries and better cancer therapeutics.

