Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic instability of the breast tumor microenvironment: Stromal
alterations or technological artifact


Introduction: The breast tumor microenvironment plays an active role in
tumorigenesis. Molecular alterations, including epigenetic modifications
to DNA, and changes in RNA and protein expression have been identified in
tumor-associated stroma; however, there is considerable debate as to
whether the stroma is characterized by genomic instability or whether
detection of chromosomal alterations in the breast stroma is a reflection
of technological artifact rather than the true genomic content of the
tumor microenvironment. Methods: Surgically-removed breast stroma
specimens from 112 women undergoing reductive mammoplasty (n=7),
prophylactic mastectomy (N=6) or mastectomy for a diagnosis of breast
disease (n=99) were frozen in optimal cutting temperature medium. Allelic
imbalance analysis was performed in 484 stromal specimens from 98 women
using a panel of 52 microsatellite markers; SNP data was generated from a
subset of 86 stromal specimens using 250K SNP arrays (Affymetrix). Copy
number alterations were identified using Partek Genomics Suite. Results:
AI was not detected in 93% (444/484) of stroma specimens. When compared
to AI generated from 77 FFPE stroma specimens, 32 (42%) of which harbored
at least one detectable AI event, the frequency of AI in the FFPE
specimens (4.62%) was significantly higher (PIntroduction: The breast
tumor microenvironment plays an active role in tumorigenesis. Molecular
alterations, including epigenetic modifications to DNA, and changes in
RNA and protein expression have been identified in tumor-associated
stroma; however, there is considerable debate as to whether the stroma is
characterized by genomic instability or whether detection of chromosomal
alterations in the breast stroma is a reflection of technological
artifact rather than the true genomic content of the tumor
microenvironment. Methods: Surgically-removed breast stroma specimens
from 112 women undergoing reductive mammoplasty (n=7), prophylactic
mastectomy (N=6) or mastectomy for a diagnosis of breast disease (n=99)
were frozen in optimal cutting temperature medium. Allelic imbalance
analysis was performed in 484 stromal specimens from 98 women using a
panel of 52 microsatellite markers; SNP data was generated from a subset
of 86 stromal specimens using 250K SNP arrays (Affymetrix). Copy number
alterations were identified using Partek Genomics Suite. Results: AI was
not detected in 93% (444/484) of stroma specimens. When compared to AI
generated from 77 FFPE stroma specimens, 32 (42%) of which harbored at
least one detectable AI event, the frequency of AI in the FFPE specimens
(4.62%) was significantly higher (P<0.0001) than that found in frozen
specimens (0.45%). Of the stroma specimens assayed using SNP arrays 95%
(82/86) had no detectable alterations and the 11 copy number changes were
small and not shared between specimens. Conclusions: The data presented
here support a model in which the tumor microenvironment is genetically
stable. The direct comparison of copy number alterations between FFPE and
frozen research-grade specimens using identical methodologies suggests
that past reports of significant AI/LOH in breast stroma, both adjacent
to and distant from the tumor, reflects artifact in the archival
specimens caused by formalin-fixation, paraffin-embedding and tissue
storage.

