Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The DNA methylome of castration-resistant prostate cancer


Lethal prostate cancer is predominantly a castrate-resistant disease.
However, castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is clinically
heterogeneous and a classification that is predictive of outcome and
response to therapies is lacking. Previous epigenetic profiling studies
in CRPC have been limited to a small number of genes or sequences and
therefore we explored the DNA methylome of CRPC and its capacity to
classify the disease. We performed methylated CpG island amplification
microarrays (MCAMs) using a panel of xenografts derived from 24 patients
with CRPC tumors, 8 prostate tumors, 1 local recurrence, 5 liver
metastases, 3 pleural fluid samples, 2 adrenal gland metastases and 1
each of the following: bone, subcutaneous tissue, retroperitoneal lymph
node, ascitic fluid and brain. The xenograft morphology consisted of 15
adenocarcinomas, 11 small cell carcinomas, 3 large cell neuroendocrine
carcinomas, 1 squamous cell carcinoma, 2 mixed morphologies and 2
unknown. The Lowess-normalized M values were used for analysis and the
MCAM results were validated by pyrosequencing of 20 sequences associated
with 12 genes with a sensitivity of 61.9%, a specificity of 84.3%, a
positive predictive value of 73.6% and a negative predictive value of
75.7%. An unsupervised hierarchal clustering analysis using M values for
probes located in CpG islands was performed and these results were
compared with the clinicopathological features of the tissues. We
observed that, different xenograft sublines derived from the same donor
tumor clustered together suggesting that the DNA methylome is homogenous
throughout a given tumor mass, despite the presence of histological
heterogeneity, and that it is maintained through serial passages in mice.
Unsupervised hierarchal clustering classified the xenografts into 3
groups, which showed trend towards distinct clinicopathological features
including overall survival and androgen receptor (AR) status. In summary,
we found that DNA methylation is a frequent event in CRPC and well
preserved in xenograft tumors. Furthermore, the methylation profile of
CRPC may represent a marker of clinicopathological subgroups with
differential survival and AR status.

