Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The regulation of anoikis by carcinoma-associated fibroblasts in
breast cancer cells


The initial step of the metastatic cascade in most carcinomas occurs when
tumor cells break through the basement membrane and invade locally into
the surrounding microenvironment. This microenvironment is now
appreciated to be an active participant in driving the oncogenic behavior
of cancer cells. In particular, evidence is mounting that
carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in the microenvironment are a
critical player in the promotion of tumor progression and metastasis.
However, the precise mechanisms utilized by CAFs to enhance malignancy
are only beginning to be understood. Given the importance of CAFs in
promoting tumor progression and the fact that cancer cells lack normal
extracellular matrix (ECM) attachment after breaking through the basement
membrane, we hypothesized that CAFs may be actively involved in the
inhibition of anoikis (ECM-detachment-induced cell death). To investigate
this question, we utilized NIH-3T3 mouse fibroblasts lacking the
caveolin-1 gene (KO 3T3s), a cell line that has previously been
demonstrated to share many similarities to human CAFs. Interestingly, the
addition of media conditioned by KO 3T3s led to robust anoikis inhibition
in detached MCF-10A cells, suggesting that factors secreted by CAFs can
block anoikis. We validated these findings by demonstrating that factors
secreted from patient-derived human CAFs can inhibit anoikis to a similar
degree. Moreover, the ability of CAF-conditioned media to block anoikis
was not limited to MCF-10A cells as we obtained similar results in two
additional non-tumorigenic cell lines: BPH-1 and HMEC. In addition, when
investigating the mechanism by which CAFs block anoikis, we discovered
that the release of mitochondrial cytochrome c into the cytosol was
robustly inhibited by CAF-conditioned media in MCF-10A cells.
Surprisingly, this inhibition was independent of signaling through PI(3)K
or MAPK and did not involve alterations in Bim protein levels. To examine
if the observed differences in anoikis induction caused by secreted
factors from CAFs manifest in a more physiologically relevant context, we
employed a 3-dimensional (3D) cell culture model of mammary acinus
development. MCF-10A acini exposed to secreted factors from CAFs were
more prone to have filled lumen suggesting that factors secreted by CAFs
can promote the survival of ECM-detached cells in the luminal space. In
aggregate, these data identify a novel mechanism by which CAFs contribute
to tumorigenesis (the inhibition of anoikis) and suggest that targeting
factors secreted from CAFs could be a novel therapeutic approach to
eliminate ECM-detached cells through the selective induction of anoikis.

