Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The SOCS-1 derived peptides inhibit tumor development


Introduction: Melanoma is the most aggressive form of skin cancer and its
incidence has increased dramatically over the years. The murine B16F10
melanoma in syngeneic C57Bl/6 mice has been used as a highly aggressive
model to investigate tumor development. In our previous work, we
demonstrate in the B16F10-Nex2 subclone that silencing of SOCS-1, a
negative regulator of Jak/Stat pathway, leads to reversal of the
tumorigenic phenotype and inhibition of melanoma cell metastasis. SOCS-1
silencing with shRNA affected tumor growth, cell cycle regulation with
arrest at the S phase with large-sized nuclei, reduced cell motility and
decreased melanoma cell invasion through Matrigel. In vivo, silencing of
SOCS- 1 inhibited subcutaneous tumor growth and metastatic development in
the lungs. Objectives: Since SOCS-1 is expressed in most melanoma cell
lines and bears a relation with tumor invasion, thickness and stage of
disease, we synthetized five SOCS-1 peptides based hydrophilic regions
suggest regulating protein can be a target of cancer therapy. Suppressor
of cytokine signalling 1 (SOCS 1) proteins are negative feedback
regulators of several pathways involved in immune response, particularly
the JAK/STAT (Janus kinase/Signal Transducer and Activator of
Transcription. Results: No effect was found directly on B16F10 Nex 2 in
vitro. In this work we hypothesized that SOCS-1 mimetic peptides should
act on immune cells. Murine splenocytes from challenged animals and
peptide treated was stimulated whole B16F10 Nex 2 lysate and supernatant
was measure for ELISA to IFN-gama, IL-6, TNF-alfa and IL-10.The peptides
increased the production of IFN-gama, IL-6, TNF-alfa and reduced IL-10
cytokine levels. Moreover, macrophages was stimulated and activation
assay was performed. In vivo, the peptides are able to reduced
significantly melanoma gorwth in metastatic and subcutaneous
model.Additionally, mice knockout IFN- and CD1d revealed a inhibition of
melanoma cell growth and metastasis. In the present study SOCS-1 derived
peptides can be a target of cancer therapy.

