Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual blockade of HER2 in HER2-overexpressing tumor cells does not
eliminate HER3 function completely: Clinical implications


There is mounting evidence that the most efficacious approach to treat
HER2+ breast cancer is dual blockade with HER2 inhibitors such as the
monoclonal antibody trastuzumab and the tyrosine kinase inhibitor
lapatinib. We examined what effect dual blockade had on HER3 protein
levels. The combination of lapatinib and trastuzumab treatment increased
both cell-surface and total HER3 protein levels in BT474, SKBR3, and
MDA453 cells. Treatment with the HER3 neutralizing antibody U3-1287
decreased HER3 levels starting at 1 h and continuing through 24 h in
these cell lines. Moreover, adding U3-1287 to lapatinib and trastuzumab
reversed the upregulation of cell surface and total HER3. Addition of the
HER3 antibody to lapatinib and trastuzumab treatment improved the action
of lapatinib and trastuzumab as assessed by the TUNEL apoptosis assay,
three-dimensional matrigel growth and two-dimensional crystal violet
growth assays. We next examined the effect of dual blockade of HER2 in
combination with the HER3 antibody in cells with acquired resistance to
trastuzumab. Treatment with U3-1287 blocked the upregulation of HER3 that
followed therapy with lapatinib and trastuzumab. In mice bearing
trastuzumab resistant xenografts, there was a reduction in tumor volume
of mice treated with U3-1287 and trastuzumab compared to mice treated
with single agent trastuzumab, U3-1287, or vehicle. We next hypothesized
that inhibition of HER3 combined with dual HER2 blockade would result in
decreased tumor recurrence in vivo. Mice bearing BT474 xenografts were
treated with either lapatinib and trastuzumab (L+T) or lapatinib,
trastuzumab and U3-1287 (L+T+U) for 3 weeks. After 3 weeks of treatment
mice from both groups exhibited almost complete tumor regressions. At 7
weeks post-treatment 5 of 10 mice (50%) in the L+T group exhibited tumor
re-growth (defined as a tumor larger than 200 mm3), whereas only 1 of 12
mice (8.3%) in the L+T+U group did so (p= 0.043, fisher's exact test). We
are additionally performing studies in a transgenic mouse model with
conditional ablation of HER3 to further examine if lapatinib and
trastuzumab do not completely eliminate HER3 function. Finally we are
comparing genetic inhibition of HER3 via stable inducible shRNA to
pharmacological inhibition of HER3 to determine the most efficacious
approach to inhibit HER3. In summary, a HER3 inhibitor prevents the
upregulation of HER3 observed with lapatinib and trastuzumab treatment
and sensitizes breast cancer cells to lapatinib and trastuzumab.
Moreover, lapatinib and trastuzumab in combination with a HER3 inhibitor
prevent tumor recurrence better than lapatinib and trastuzumab. These
data suggest dual blockade of HER2 may only be partially effective in
some instances due to maintenance of active HER3

