Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel role for Gi proteins in differentially regulating
activation of RTK-mediated signaling


The activation of the extracellular-signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK)
pathway and the PI3K/Akt/mTORC pathway by growth factors is mediated by
the receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), and plays a crucial role in
physiological and pathological processes including cell proliferation,
growth, survival, migration, tumorigenesis and metastasis. We previously
reported that the activation of the PI3K/Akt/mTORC1 in mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) by epidermal growth factor (EGF) and its family growth
factors is mediated by the heterotrimeric G protein alpha inhibitory
(Gi). Herein we demonstrated that Gi proteins are able to differentially
regulate RTKs-mediated activation of the ERK and the Akt/mTORC1 pathways.
Loss of Gi proteins in MEFs impaired activation of the ERK pathway by
EGF, insulin-like growth factor (IGF) and Insulin, but not basic
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). Intriguingly, while activation of the
Akt/mTORC1 pathway by EGF and bFGF was severely defective in Gi protein
deficient cells, this activation was only slightly reduced in response to
insulin and IGF. Also, Gi proteins were able to alter activation of the
Akt/mTORC1 and the ERK pathways by serum and platelet-derived growth
factor (PDGF) in a dose dependent manner. To further understand that how
Gi proteins differentially regulate RTK-mediated activation of the
Akt/mTORC1 and ERK pathways, we performed an immuno-precipitation study.
Our results showed that growth factors were able to induce the
association of Gi proteins with growth factor receptors and their
downstream adaptor proteins. Loss of Gi proteins in MEFs impaired the
association of growth factor receptors with their adaptor proteins
indicating that Gi proteins act downstream of RTKs but upstream of the
adaptor proteins. Finally, we examined a role of Gi proteins in cancer
biology. Similar to results obtained from Gi deficient MEFs, knockdown of
Gi proteins in several human cancer cell lines diminished activation of
the Akt/mTORC1 and the ERK pathways by growth factors. As a result, Gi
protein deficiency inhibited cancer cell growth and migration. Given the
fact that growth factors and their receptor pathways play pivotal roles
in tumorigenesis and metastasis of cancer, our findings may promote
further understanding the molecular mechanism underline RTK signaling
regulation in cancer biology and may have implications for cancer
therapy. Supported by Department of Defense, Leukemia and Lymphoma
Society and NIH.

