Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylseleninic acid, a novel potent and selective
mutant-p53-rescue drug, reactivates mutant p53 by thiol modification


Mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor gene constitute the most frequent
genetic alteration known in human cancers. The vast majority (80%) of the
mutations is missense mutations, and the DNA-binding domain is the most
frequently mutable region of p53. p53 mutation leads to checkpoint
defects, genomic instability, and propagation of cells with genetic
damage. Developing therapeutic agents that could directly bind to the
mutant p53 and reconstitute p53 function has been intensively pursued and
proven to be feasible. However, the challenge remains to develop a drug
that specifically reactivates mutant p53 without activating the
pro-apoptotic function of wild-type p53 in normal tissues. In the present
study, we show that a small-molecule drug, methylseleninic acid
(CH3SeO2H, MSA), can selectively reactivate mutant p53 to induce
apoptosis in cancer cells. MSA can be used at a concentration at least
one order of magnitude lower than that of other mutant-p53-rescue agents
to achieve the same p53-reactivating and growth-inhibitory effects. MSA
reduces redox-active free thiols in mutant p53 without the requirement of
other proteins, potentially through forming adducts with thiols in mutant
p53. The modification restores wild-type conformation to mutant p53,
leading to increased DNA binding and transactivation as well as
expression of growth-suppressive and pro-apoptotic target genes in both
cultured cancer cells and an orthotopic tumor model. Although MSA also
redox modifies recombinant wild-type p53, the modification does not lead
to the induction of growth-suppressive or pro-apoptotic target genes in
normal fibroblasts. Instead, the expression of p53-regulated DNA-repair
genes is significantly induced in normal fibroblasts, suggesting that MSA
may selectively modify p53 for DNA repair or apoptosis depending on the
level of endogenous or exogenous DNA damage. Our findings, therefore,
demonstrate the effectiveness and selectivity of MSA as a novel potent
mutant-p53-rescue drug.

