Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of patient primary colorectal tumor xenograft models
for test of anticancer agents


BACKGROUND Human xenograft tumor models established by transplantation of
human tumor cell lines into immunodifficient mice have been routinely
used for preclinical test of anticancer agents. But tumor cell lines have
a relatively low transplantability, which resulted a limited number of
tumor models available for test of novel anticancer agents. Recently, we
have developed a large number of patients primary colorectal tumor
xenograft models by transplanting human fresh colorectal tumor tissues
into nude mice, which have been employed for preclinical test of standard
clinically used drugs and novel anticancer agents for their
chemosensitivity screening. METHODS The fresh colorectal tumor samples
were collected from local hospitals. The tumor fragments of 2-3 mm were
subcutaneously implanted in the flanks of nude mice by trocar needle.
Sixteen tumor fragments were grafted into four mice from one patient
tumor tissue (passage 1). The clinically used drugs included 5-FU,
irinotecan, oxaliplatin, and avastin. The histology and gene sequensing
of the established primary tumor models were analyzed and compared with
patients original tumors. RESULTS A total of 120 patients colorectal
tumor samples were implanted into nude mice; and 65 primary tumor models
have been established with a tumor taking rates of 54% for the first
passage. The tumor taking rates were higher in the later passages ranged
from approximately 80-100%. The test anticancer drugs therapeutic
efficacy was consistent with their clinical findings. The patients
primary colorectal tumor xenografts from 5 passages retained a similarity
in architecture, histopathological morphology, and genomic mutation
status to their patients original tumors. CONCLUSIONS The patient primary
tumor model system can provide a larger number of models for selection of
right models for preclinically testing novel agents based on their
anticancer mechanism. The primary tumor models retain a similarity in
histology and genomic mutation status to their patients original tumors.
They may predict more relevant clinical response rate and higher
correlation with clinical findings than use of traditional xenograft
models established from long-term cultured cancer cell lines. Especially,
they have advantages for test of target-oriented therapeutics in new
drugs development programs.

