Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pomegranate components modulate distinct pathways in prostate
cancer cells


Pomegranate juice, when provided as whole juice, modulates specific
pathways in prostate cancer cells that are not reflected when its major
constituents were tested independently. In order to identify these
bioactive components of pomegranate, the peel (P) and arils (J) were
isolated, juiced separately and extracted with 80% methanol (PE and JE).
The components were enriched using a SPE C18 cartridge and, eluted as
fraction I (P-I and J-I - contains mostly polar compounds) and fraction
II (P-II and J-II - contains mostly non-polar compounds). Analysis by
HPLC-PDA and by direct infusion analysis of these fractions by FTICR-MS
revealed the J-I consisted of mostly phenolics including the three
anthocyanins in its mono- and di-glycoside forms. P-I consisted mostly of
punicalin and, the punicalagins A and B, while P-II and J-II consisted
mostly of ellagitannins and free ellagic acid. The ORAC values as Trolox
equivalent for the various fractions at 10 g/ml were: Total peel extract
(PE) - 1.64 compared with 2.74 for P-I and 4.01 for P-II, while for the
total juice extract (JE) it was 2.62 compared with 7.01 for J-I and 5.47
for J-II. To identify the molecular mechanisms, the individual fractions
of peel and juice were tested in prostate cancer cell lines, LNCaP and
PC3 and analyzed by Cancer/Apoptosis Phospho Antibody Array and western
blot analysis. In LNCaP cell line, BCL-2, PTEN, Cdc25A, p53 and STAT6
were hyper-phosphorylated by J-II, while they were unaltered by J-I.
Similarly, GSK3 alpha and beta were hyper-phosphorylated by J-I and
unmodified by J-II. When peel fractions were tested, Cdc25C, BCL-2, CREB
and JAK were hypo-phosphorylated by P-II, whereas they were unaltered by
P-I. Other molecules, such as IRS-1, MAP Kinase, PTEN, STAT3 and JAK2
were hypo-phosphorylated by P-II, and were hyper-phosphorylated by P-I.
In PC3 cell line, BCL-2, p53 and CREB were hypo-phosphorylated by J-II,
while they were unaltered by J-I. However, PTEN and p70 were
hypo-phosphorylated by J-II and hyper-phosphorylated by J-I, while, CDK2,
STATs 1, 3 and 6 were hypo-phosphorylated by P-II, they were unaltered by
P-I fraction. Thus the components of peel and juice fractions demonstrate
unique properties and the ability to modulate distinct pathways in
androgen-dependent and independent prostate cancer cells providing a rich
set of potential therapy or adjuvant applications. This work is supported
by NCI grant CA143676.

