Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using metabolomic flux to uncover new targets for the modulation
of breast cancer metastasis


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is the most deadly breast cancer because
of its ability to rapidly metastasize, often before the primary lesion is
detected. To better understand what drives this highly aggressive form of
cancer, we studied central carbon metabolism in IBC. The Warburg effect,
which is characterized by high rates of glucose uptake and glycolysis
even under aerobic conditions, occurs in most cancer cells and plays an
important role in the tumorigenic capacity of breast cancer.
Specifically, we examined metabolic changes that occur when breast cancer
cells switch from a proliferating phenotype to a highly motile phenotype.
In primary tumor formation rapid proliferation is crucial, while in
metastasis motility to new sites is critical. We hypothesize that
alterations in the regulation of metabolic pathways leads to the
direction of energy from proliferation to motility, and that this change
is important in the progression of breast cancer towards metastases.
Understanding if a coincident metabolic shift occurs when malignant cells
switch from a proliferative to a more aggressive motile form may help
identify new therapeutics for highly aggressive breast cancers. For our
studies, we are using normal-like MCF-10A breast cells, which proliferate
quickly and move slower than cancer cells, and two highly metastatic
breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231 and the IBC-derived line SUM 149),
which have the ability to move quickly and proliferate relatively slowly.
Using these cell lines as a model, we have examined metabolic changes as
cancer progresses. We are conducting targeted metabolomic studies to
determine relative concentrations of metabolites in the glycolysis,
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, and mevalonate pathway. In addition, we
are using 13C-labeled pyruvate and glucose to measure the transient and
steady state flux through these metabolic pathways. Our preliminary
results indicate interesting and unexpected changes in both the transient
and steady state metabolic fluxes across the different cell lines. In
addition, the metabolic flux through the TCA cycle is very active in the
metastatic cancer cells despite an increase in glycolysis. In agreement
with flux studies of other cancer cell lines, our results suggest that
the cancer cells are likely using intermediates from the TCA cycle to
generate nucleotides and fatty acids needed for replication. The results
from this work, once validated, can be used to identify new therapeutic
metabolic targets to modulate breast cancer metastasis.

