Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulatory role of ROBO-1, a novel tumor suppressor on Androgen
receptor and Wnt signaling during castration-resistant prostate cancer
development: A novel molecular target for gene therapy


Introduction and Objectives: Prostatic epithelial cells while progressing
from premalignant stages to malignant stages (hormone-sensitive and
castration-resistance phenotypes) undergo a lot of phenotypical changes
which include increased clonal expansion; and modulation in cytoskeleton
and cell adhesion characteristics. During organogenesis, the Roundabout-1
(ROBO-1) regulates cell proliferation, migration and adhesion. We for the
first time (1) established the mechanismbased role of ROBO1 tumor
suppressor gene in the development of castrationresistant CaP (CRPC) and
(2) determined its significance as potential target for gene therapy.
Methods: Immunoblot analysis, real time PCR and immunohistochemistry was
used to analyze human prostatic tissues and cell lines for ROBO1. ROBO1
was (i) overexpressed by transfecting ROBO1expressing plasmid (ii)
knocked down by employing vectorbased shRNA. ROBO1suppressed and
ROBO1overexpressing cells were tested for proliferation, clonogenicity,
sensitivity towards chemotherapeutic agents, androgen receptor (AR)
binding to target genes, AR and Tcftranscriptional activities by
employing 3[H]thymidine uptake, softagar, luciferase reporter and ChIP
assays. Results: We provide evidence that mRNA and protein levels of
ROBO1 are lost in (i) CRPC cells, ii) prostatic tissues of NKx3.1/Pten
mouse model and (ii) human prostatic tissues during the progression of
disease from early stage (low) to late stage (highGleason score). We show
that Loss of ROBO-1 was observed to increase (i) AR transcriptional
activity, (ii)Tcf-transcriptional activity (marker of Wnt signaling)
(iii) accumulation of -catenin and (iv) Akt activity and (v)
proliferation of CRPC cells. Importantly, CRPC cells (which survived
therapy) exhibited high potential to proliferate after repopulation when
ROBO-1 was silenced. We provide compelling evidence that under ablation
conditions ROBO1 is lost in some malignant CaP cells which results in a
subtype that is castration-resistant. We show that ROBO-1 is inactivated
due to epigenetic changes in CRPC cells under castration-conditions.
ROBO-1-deficient CRPC cells were more chemoresistant and exhibited
increased AR-activity than ROBO-1-expressing counterparts.
ROBO1expressing CRPC cells exhibited reduced tumorigenicity as compared
to ROBO-1-silenced CRPC cells. Finally, reactivation of ROBO-1 by gene
therapy resulted in decreased AR/Wnt signaling and sensitization of CRPC
cells to chemotherapy. Conclusions: We suggest that inactivation of ROBO1
during androgen ablation treatment could be one of the possible
mechanisms involved in the recurrence of disease in CaP patients.
Therefore ROBO-1 offers a potential to be exploited as a molecular target
for gene therapy to treat CRPC condition in humans.

