Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capture and molecular characterization of CTC in metastatic
breast, prostate, colorectal, and renal cancer


The most important determinant of prognosis and management of cancer is
the incidence of metastasis. As a result, circulating tumor cell (CTC)
detection and enumeration has been demonstrated to be a useful tool in
assessing prognosis and monitoring therapeutic response. Current
approaches to CTC detection largely depend on the antibody-mediated
magnetic capture of the CTC using antibodies against the epithelial cell
adhesion molecule (EpCAM), a feature which can be exploited in only a
select few malignancies, and even in these cases, CTC capture is directly
impacted by the variable expression of EpCAM. Responding to these issues,
we have developed a novel parylene-based microfilter device for the
capture, enumeration, and molecular characterization of CTC by exploiting
size differences between larger epithelial tumor cells and smaller
non-tumor blood cells. Our size-based approach, in contrast to
immunoaffinity-based platforms, is antigen expression-agnostic; allowing
analysis of diverse CTC populations and CTC from tumor types lacking
target capture antigens. In the present study, the prospective collection
of 500 blood samples from patients being treated at the Cleveland
Clinic-Taussig Cancer Institute in Cleveland, OH is currently underway:
450 with advanced breast (BC), prostate (PC), and colorectal cancer (CRC)
(150 from each disease site), and 50 with advanced renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) and melanoma (25 from each disease site). To date, we have analyzed
28 patient blood samples by the microfilter device, of which 26 (92.8%)
where positive for CTC (total at primary disease site, % samples
positive, range of CTC detected) - BC: 1, 100%, 48; PC: 13, 84.6%, 1 to
144; CRC: 7, 100%, 18 to >500; RCC: 7, 100%, 1-128.* Further analysis
demonstrates a number of interesting molecular characteristics on CTC,
including heterogeneity in intensity of cytokeratin (CK) expression,
differential patterns of CK staining on CTC (filamentous vs granular),
and the occurrence of CTC as individual events or in clusters. Further,
our data in blood samples from RCC demonstrate an ability to analyze CTC
from non-EpCAM expressing tumor types, an area of study where many
platforms have limited utility. With the ability to perform multiple,
repeated sample analyses to detect recurrent disease early and enable
drug response surveillance, we believe our technology has the potential
to provide a faster, more efficient alternative to currently available
methods for CTC analysis. The molecular characteristics on CTC we have
identified herein could have critical biological relevance and
implications for predicting aggressiveness of CTC and improving
therapeutic monitoring. In ongoing studies, we are investigating the
correlation of CTC enumeration, morphology, and clustering, with tumor
type and treatment efficacy. *Data to be updated prior to presentation

