Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells by inhibiting CSF-1
receptor overcomes tumor regrowth after radiotherapy


Radiotherapy is one of the major frontline treatments for prostate cancer
(PCa). However, a large proportion of patients suffer from tumor
recurrence after radiotherapy. Tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells (TIMs),
including CD11b+F4/80+ tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) and CD11b+Gr-1+
myeloid-derived suppressive cells (MDSCs), play critical roles in
promoting tumoral angiogenesis, tissue remodeling and immunosuppression.
Recently several reports suggested that TIMs might play a critical role
in mediating tumor regrowth after radiation therapy. Here, we showed that
there is enhanced recruitment of both TAMs and MDSCs after 5 days of 3 Gy
radiation treatment in subcutaneously implanted RM-1 syngeneic PCa model.
Infiltration of two MDSC subsets, CD11b+Gr-1loLy6Chi mononuclear-MDSC
(MO-MDSC) and CD11b+Gr-1hiLy6Clo polymorphnuclear-MDSC (PMN-MDSC), are
both increased. Although treatment is localized to the tumor site, the
effects of radiation are systematic. Dramatic increases of MDSCs and TAMs
were also observed in the spleen, lymph nodes and peripheral blood. To
better understand the mechanism of enhanced recruitment of myeloid cells
to tumors, we performed RT-PCR analysis on tumor tissues for commonly
known factors that mediate the recruitment of myeloid cells. Indeed, we
found that macrophage colony stimulating factor 1 (M-CSF-1 or CSF-1)
increases by 2 fold in irradiated tumors compared to non-irradiated
tumors. In vitro migration assays using conditioned medium from
irradiated tumor cells increases migration of RAW246.7 macrophages by 4
fold, and this increase is completely blocked by the very selective CSF1R
inhibitor, GW2580. Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed the induction
of TAMs and MDSC recruitment to tumors, and the effectiveness of GW2580
in blocking their infiltration. Most importantly, combination therapy
using GW2580 with radiation synergistically suppressed tumor growth and
recurrence. This data highlights the importance of CSF1/CSF1R signaling
in the recruitment of TIMs post-radiation treatment and their significant
role in promoting tumor re-growth. Moreover, our data could potentially
provide a more effective and durable treatment strategy for PCa patients.

