Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GenomeSpace: An environment for frictionless bioinformatics


Over the past several years, cancer genome characterization initiatives
such as The Cancer Genome Atlas and the Tumor Sequencing Project have
produced an explosion of genomic data. The pace of data production has
recently increased with the adoption of next-generation sequencing
technologies and large-scale data production efforts to discover the
breadth of genomic variation in humans. Comprehensive analysis of these
datasets requires the coordinated use of Web-based applications and data
repositories, desktop analysis tools and visualizers, and single-purpose
algorithms. However, the effort required to transfer data between tools,
convert between data formats, and manage results often prevents
researchers from utilizing the wealth of methods available to them. Many
integrative genomics and translational bench to bedside discoveries are
possible with combinations of existing tools, but the necessary
transitions between them puts them out of the reach of most researchers.
GenomeSpace, http://www.genomespace.org, is an environment that brings
together diverse computational tools, enabling scientists without
programming skills to easily combine their capabilities. It aims to offer
a common space to create, manipulate and share an ever-growing range of
genomic analysis tools. GenomeSpace features support for cloud-based data
storage and analysis, multi-tool analytic workflows, automatic conversion
of data formats, and ease of connecting new tools to the environment. A
set of six GenomeSpace-enabled seed tools developed by collaborating
organizations provides a comprehensive platform for the analysis of
cancer data: Cytoscape (UCSD), Galaxy (Penn State University),
GenePattern (Broad Institute), Genomica (Weitzmann Institute),
Integrative Genomics Viewer (Broad Institute), and the UCSC Genome
Browser (UCSC). We show how researchers can use GenomeSpace to
effortlessly combine the capabilities of all of these tools in several
cancer research scenarios.

