Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of serum tumor markers in patients with
esophageal cancer


Background: Esophageal cancer is still a disease with a high degree of
fatality despite resent advances in surgical techniques and various
therapies. Several serum tumor markers have been applied to diagnose and
to follow-up in patients with esophageal cancer in clinical practice in
Japan. The aim of this study was to investigate the diagnostic and
prognostic significance of various serum tumor markers in patients with
esophageal cancer. Methods: Eighty one patients with esophageal cancer
were recruited for this study. Serum level of tumor markers, squamous
cell carcinoma antigen(SCC-Ag), p53 antibody(p53-Ab) carcinoembryonic
antigen(CEA), and CYFRA 21-1, were measured in subjects before treatment.
The results of these tumor markers were compared with the
clinicopathological findings of the subjects. Results: The positive rates
of SCC-Ag, p53-Ab, CEA and CYFRA 21-1 were 44%, 34%, 17%, and 16%
patients with esophageal cancer, respectively. SCC-Ag and p53-Ab showed
positive with a relatively high frequency in cases of early stage
esophageal cancer or superficial invasion, while CEA and CYFRA 21-1 could
rarely be detected in such cases. Positive for SCC-Ag was significantly
higher in patients with tumor invading into or through the musclaris
propria than the patients within the submucosal layer. Substantially, the
positive rate of SCC-Ag was associated with an advanced stage of disease.
Values of p53-Ab in serum virtually demonstrated gradual decrease after
treatment, not rapid depletion. All negative cases for p53-Ab before
treatment showed negative at any point of treatment or follow-up on a
consistent basis. CYFRA 21-1 showed positive in cases with distant
metastasis. Conclusion: Each tumor marker for esophageal cancer presented
different features in a clinicopathological analysis. The use of several
combination of serum tumor markers seems to be most important for the
detection and follow-up for of esophageal cancer at present.

