Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression profiling of microRNA and mRNA on hepatic inflammation
in high-fat induced murine model


The inflammation has been identified as a risk factor for cancer and even
as a means to prognose/diagnoses cancer at the inception of the
inflammatory process. Therefore, it is necessary to discover novel
molecules that might play a critical role in the regulation of
inflammation, which can be the target of anti-inflammation. Recent
reports indicate that microRNAs (miRNAs) have a significant role in the
mechanism of inflammation in chronic inflammatory diseases. The goal of
this study was to identify and characterize of miRNA in the regulation of
inflammatory responses of high-fat induced inflammation mouse model. In
this study, we established a mouse model of high-fat-diet-induced
inflammation to gain understanding on the biological functions
deregulated by aberrant gene expression based on miRNA and mRNA
expression profiling analysis. And then we looked for direct miRNA
targets by performing pair-wise correlation coefficient analysis on
expression levels of mRNAs and by comparing these results with predicted
miRNA targets from TargetScan5.1. We used quantitative PCR technology to
evaluate the expression of miRNAs and mRNA on liver tissue. Inflammatory
foci were observed over 6 months after high-fat induced inflammation
mouse. In cDNA microarray analysis, total 2287 genes were differentially
expressed between high-fat induced inflammatory group and normal group.
Among those genes, the genes related-metabolic pathway were up-regulated
at 3 months while those related inflammatory response were up-regulated
at late stage of over 6 months in high-fat induced inflammation mouse
model. Furthermore, we identified 15 new miRNAs in high-fat induced
inflammation model by bioinformatics analysis and further confirmed their
expression by stem-loop RT-PCR. GO analysis indicated that many of the
identified miRNA targets may function in high-fat induced inflammation
model. For three miRNAs (miR-34a, miR-21 and miR-1224), correlated genes
were concordant with predicted targets. A gene set enrichment analysis on
these genes demonstrated significant enrichment in biological processes
related to lipid and glucose metabolism and inflammation. This study
represents, to the best of our knowledge, the first integrated analysis
of miRNA and mRNA expression in high-fat induced inflammation model. We
identified a distinct profile of miRNAs of which expression differed
between inflammation and normal, making these miRNAs candidate markers.
Supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded
by the Korea government (MEST) (No. 2011-0014620).

