Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of 14C-Labeled
tivantinib (ARQ 197) in healthy male subjects


Background: Tivantinib (ARQ 197), a selective, oral, non-ATP-competitive,
small-molecule inhibitor of c-MET receptor tyrosine kinase, is being
evaluated in combination with other agents in non-small cell lung cancer,
colorectal cancer, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and as a
single-agent in HCC. This study assessed the absorption, distribution,
metabolism, and excretion of tivantinib in healthy subjects. Methods: A
phase 1, open-label study was conducted in healthy, male, nonsmoking
subjects (age, 18 to 45 years; body mass index, 19 to 29 kg/m2). A single
360-mg oral dose of 14C-tivantinib (250 Ci) was administered 5 min after
consumption of a standard high-fat meal. Blood, feces, and urine samples
were collected for tivantinib and radioactivity analysis for a maximum of
16 days postdose. Study endpoints included pharmacokinetic parameters
associated with total radioactivity in blood and plasma and tivantinib in
plasma, mass balance (rate and extent of excretion) of total 14C
radioactivity in urine and feces, and adverse events (AEs). Plasma,
urine, and fecal samples were also analyzed for metabolite
identification. Results: Six subjects (all CYP2C19 extensive
metabolizers) participated in this study. Median time to maximal
concentration (tmax) for tivantinib in plasma and total radioactivity in
plasma and whole blood were 4, 6, and 6 hours, respectively. Mean
terminal half-life (t1/2) for tivantinib in plasma and total
radioactivity in plasma and whole blood were 11.7, 20.7, and 13.6 hours,
respectively. Based on area under the curve (AUC), tivantinib constituted
12% of total radioactivity in plasma, indicating the existence of
substantial amounts of circulating tivantinib metabolite(s). Eight
tivantinib metabolites were identified in plasma, and 4 were considered
major metabolites based on their relative plasma exposure. The mean whole
blood to plasma AUCinf ratio (AUCb:AUCp) was 0.609, indicating that most
of the total radioactivity resided in plasma and was not highly
associated with red blood cells. Mean SD recovery of radioactivity in
feces and urine was 87.2% (feces = 68.2% 3.80%; urine = 19.0% 2.42%).
Parent tivantinib was not detected in urine and trace amounts were
detected in feces. Urinary and fecal metabolites were oxidative and
subsequently conjugated molecules. Three subjects (50%) experienced 12
treatment-emergent adverse events; were mild in severity and none
resulted in treatment discontinuation. Conclusions: Tivantinib was
rapidly absorbed and metabolized after oral administration, and 87% of
total radioactivity was recovered in urine and feces. Parent tivantinib
was not detected in urine and only trace amounts were detected in feces.
The fact that all the urinary and fecal metabolites are oxidative and
subsequent conjugated molecules suggests near complete absorption of
tivantinib when administered under fed conditions.

