Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased oxidative DNA damage in human prostate cancer and its
relationship to GSTP1 expression


The pi-class glutathione S-transferase (GSTP1) has been described as a
caretaker gene, as it actively protects the cell from oxidative genome
damage mediated by carcinogens and electrophilic compounds. Loss of GSTP1
expression via promoter hypermethylation is one of the most common
epigenetic alterations observed in human prostate cancer. Silencing of
GSTP1 can increase prostate epithelial cells more vulnerable to both
oxidant and electrophile carcinogens and causes genetic aberrations
leading to increased risk of tumor progression. Observations suggest that
increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) causes DNA damage in cells, as
measured by 8-hydroxy-2-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG), contribute to increased
incidence of prostate cancer. However there are no studies which
demonstrate correlation between GSTP1 protein/activity and DNA damage in
prostate cancer. We took a panel of 24 human prostate specimens obtained
after surgery which comprised of matched primary tumor and adjacent
nontumorous (benign) prostate tissues. Oxidative DNA damage, GSTP1
protein expression and its activity, and GSTP1 promoter methylation was
assessed. The 8-OHdG levels in DNA of prostate cancer tissues ranged from
0.307 to 0.609ng/g DNA, whereas the levels in benign tissue range from
0.156 to 0.322ng/g DNA, respectively. 8-OHdG and GSTP1 promoter
methylation levels were higher in adenocarcinoma compared to their benign
counterparts, which positively correlated with the loss of GSTP1
activity. The GSTP1 protein activity of prostate cancer tissues ranged
from 738.2 to 1754.4ng/mg protein, whereas the levels in benign tissue
range from 1728.6 to 2580.4ng/mg protein. The loss of GSTP1 expression in
cells might increase their vulnerability to cytotoxicity and reactive
oxygen species (ROS)-mediated DNA damage. In further experiments, human
prostate carcinoma LNCaP cells, which contains a silenced GSTP1 gene, was
genetically modified to constitutively express high levels of GSTP1.
Introduction of GSTP1 lowered endogenous ROS levels in LNCaP cells;
treatment with H2O2 significantly reduced ROS and 8-OHdG in LNCaP-GSTP1
cells, compared to parental cell line. Furthermore, treatment with green
tea polyphenols to LNCaP cells caused re-expression of GSTP1 which
protected the cells from H2O2-mediated DNA damage compared to pretreated
cells. These results suggest that oxidative stress-induced DNA damage may
be an important measure for primary prevention of prostate cancer.

