Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting N-glycosylation of tyrosine kinase receptors for
preventing tumorigenesis and malignant transformation of
neurofibromatosis type I


Neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) is a dominantly inherited disease
affecting 1 in every 2,500 to 3,000 individuals, representing the most
common familial cancer predisposition syndrome. The hallmark of clinical
manifestation of NF1 is the development of multiple neurofibromas, which
are highly heterotypic benign tumors of peripheral nerve sheath mainly
composed of immature Schwann cells, fibroblasts, perineurial and
inflammatory matrix. NF1 patients are also at high risk for the
development of certain maligancies such as pheochromocytomas, childhood
myeloid leukemias, neuroblastomas, rhabdomyosarcomas, and malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs). Because of the potential
involvement of underlying nerves and blood vessels, surgical removal of
tumors is not always an option. Once progressing to MPNSTs, although the
resection is possible, most patients will eventually relapse locally or
systemically. There is no effective treatment for NF1, nor effective
approaches for predicting or preventing the occurrence of devastating
complications. Thus, to develop agents for preventing or reversing the
tumorigenesis and malignant transformation of NF1 are critically needed.
In this report, we found HGF, c-MET, EGF and EGFR are aberrantly
expressed in clinical specimens of neurofibromas and MPNSTs with NF and
that autocrine and/or paracrine HGF/c-MET and EGF/EGFR loops promote
MPSNT cell migration and invasion in vitro (Fig1). We also found that the
loss of Nf1 in neurofibromas and MPNSTs results in hyperactive of Ras
(Fig2). Compared with normal Schwann cells, MPNST cells express more
N-glycoproteins and display different N-glycoprotein signatures (Fig3).
In order to confirm our hypothesis, we treated cells with Tunicamycin, or
2-DG (N-glycosylation inhibitors) respectively in variable doses for
different time. We found that both Tunicamycin and 2-DG inhibited the
proliferation and promoted apoptosis of MPNST cell lines but had no
effect on normal human Schwann cells (Fig4); inhibited the glycosylation
and phosphorylation of EGFR and c-MET and impaired receptor-mediated
MEK-ERK1/2 and PI3K-AKT signaling in a dose-dependent manner (Fig5).
Moreover, 2-DG inhibited the maturation of c-MET as demonstrated by the
intact premature chain, failing to cleave into one mature -chain and
another mature -chain. In addition, 2-DG inhibited the translocation of
the receptors from the cytoplasm onto the cell surface and retained
receptors in the ER and Golgi apparatus (Fig6). To date, 2-DG inhibition
of N-glycosylation and phosphorylation of tyrosine kinase receptors has
not been reported. These novel findings prompted us to explore whether
2-DG disrupts Ras-directed N-glycosylation of tyrosine receptors in
Schwann cell progenitors and tumor cells and to evaluate its roles in
preventing the tumorigenesis and malignant transformation of NF1.

