Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of androgen receptor-mediated expression of prostate
derived ets transcription factor (PDEF) induces a loss of prostate cancer
cell differentiation


While inhibition of androgen signaling has shown to extend the lives of
many patients, there is a growing concern in the field that androgen
ablation may select for a more aggressive and lethal phenotype of
prostate cancer. It has long been known that androgen receptor (AR)
mediates growth and cellular differentiation. Therefore, inhibition of AR
may stem cancer growth, but concurrently cause cells to de-differentiate
and gain migratory and invasive properties. Prostate derived ets
transcription factor (PDEF) is an AR target gene highly expressed in
normal prostate tissue and has shown to be sufficient to mediate terminal
epithelial cellular differentiation in the lung and colon. Previous
studies in our lab have demonstrated, through retrospective IHC staining
of FFPE radical prostatectomy specimens, loss of PDEF expression
significantly associated with increased incidence and patients shorter
metastatic free survival time with early stage prostate cancer.
Furthermore, previous studies in the literature have detected the PDEF
promoter sequence through AR ChIP-Sequencing and ChIP-on-ChIP
experiments. We therefore studied the regulation of PDEF expression by AR
as a potential mediator of prostate epithelial cellular differentiation.
Our data indicated that anti-androgens, androgen starvation or AR shRNA
was sufficient to abrogate PDEF protein and mRNA expression. Stable
expression of AR shRNA or PDEF shRNA by lentiviral infection displayed a
coordinate decrease in e-cadherin expression and an increase in vimentin
expression, indicating a potential shift to a mesenchymal-like phenotype.
This epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition was also observed in cells
acutely treated with anti-androgens bicalutamide or finasteride.
Together, these results demonstrate that androgen ablation therapy may
directly drive cells to de-differentiate and gain migratory/invasive
capabilities, and therefore should only be indicated for those patients
with a very short life expectancy or co-existing morbidities.

