Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of ablating ADF/cofilin pathway during skin homeostasis
and tumorigenesis


Proteins of the cofilin pathway are key regulators of actin dynamics.
There are three cofilin isoforms encoded by human and mice. Of these,
ADF-cofilin(ADF) and cofilin1(COF) are expressed in most epithelial
tissues while muscle-cofilin is not. Recent data has indicated that
components of the cofilin pathway(ADF, COF) are frequently mis-regulated
in cancer cells, but there are conflicting reports on how these cofilins
and the upstream regulatory LIM kinases contribute to the malignant
phenotype by their over-expression, or suppression. The data suggest that
it is the balance of the cofilin pathway regulators, and the cofilin
pathway output which determines the invasiveness of tumor cells. The
cofilin pathway must therefore be considered as a whole. Therefore, we
will address the role of the cofilin pathway in skin homeostasis and
cancer by deletion of ADF and COF in the skin. We generated
K14-Cre-ER/ADF(-/-)/COF(fl/fl) mice, which are nullizygous for ADF and
have floxed COF under control of keratin14 Cre recombinase, as ubiquitous
cofilin deletion is embryonic lethal. After 4-OHT-induced COF deletion,
we examined the effects on skin homeostasis and skin tumorigenesis.
However, the homozygous ADF and COF knockout mice died within a few days
following induction of Cre. There was a thickening of the epidermis due
to hyperplasia of the spinous layer of cells. A marked increase in
apoptosis of epithelial cells was also evident, predominantly affecting
cells of the basal layer, resulting in ulceration of the skin and oral
mucosa. These animals become acutely sick due to the oral ulceration
leading to reduced food and water intake. Immunohistochemical analysis
showed that the stress inducible keratin6, which is usually observed in
hyperproliferative conditions, was aberrantly expressed in the epidermis
of the homozygous ADF and COF knock out mice. Both in vitro and in vivo
experiments indicated that E-cadherin was lost from cell-cell contacts in
double ADF/COF knockout keratinocytes. In addition, the double ADF/COF
knockout keratinocytes migrated in a mesenchymal manner and their
movement was 4 times faster than wild type keratinocytes, which retained
cell-cell contacts and moved in collective manner. All these data
indicate that the output of the cofilin pathway is likely to be involved
in cancer cell processes, including migration, proliferation,
differentiation and apoptosis. We are currently generating tumor-derived
cell lines from invasive squamous cell carcinomas in which both ADF and
COF have been deleted and analyzing cancer-associated behaviour both in
vitro and in vivo.

