Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gender bias in rat models of colorectal cancer is owing to male
hormone promotion, not female hormone protection


Several large human colonoscopy screening cohort studies have found a
significant sex and age-specific prevalence of advanced adenomas and
colorectal cancer in males, with females showing a delayed onset and
decreased incidence of advanced lesions. It has been postulated that
women are protected from colorectal cancer owing to a protective effect
of estrogen and progesterone, or that males are exposed to higher levels
of environmental toxins. We find in both a genetic and a
carcinogen-induced model of colorectal cancer in rats that male hormones
are responsible for the male-specific enhancement of colon cancer. We
have reported that the Polyposis in the rat colon (Pirc) rat shows a
strong gender bias, with females having a later onset and reduced tumor
burden compared to males. We have next investigated the role of hormones
through ovariectomy and hormone replacement in female rats. F344-Pirc rat
litters were divided and either underwent surgical ovariectomy or sham
ovariectomy between 35 and 40 days of age. At the time of surgery,
females received subcutaneous slow release (90 day) pellets with the
following treatments: placebo; 17-beta estradiol (E2);
medroxypregesterone (MPA); or a combination of E2 and MPA, renewed after
90 days, and sacrificed 180 days post ovariectomy. The controls were
cohorts of females that did not receive surgical treatment (n=10), and
sham ovariectomized females (n=10). Females that underwent ovariectomy
and received either E2 (n=10) or the combination of E2 and MPA (n=10) had
reduced body weight and were observed to be much leaner than animals
treated with MPA alone (n=10, p=0.006) or placebo (n=8, p=0.005).
Importantly, tumor multiplicities did not significantly differ among all
female groups, but were significantly lower than those observed in intact
males (n=32, mean 39.4, p=4.7e-14). We postulated that the difference of
tumor susceptibility between sexes is due to the effect of male hormones.
At weaning (30-35 days) half of the F344-Pirc males underwent
orchidectomy. Males that underwent castration (n=16) had a significantly
lower tumor multiplicity (mean=16.9) compared to all other males (n=32,
mean= 39.4, p=1.3e-6). Males that underwent castration were
indisguishable from all Pirc female cohorts, treated or not, strongly
suggesting that male gonadal hormones are the significant hormones
controlling the multiplicity of colonic adenomas. To determine if this
response was specific to our genetic model, cohorts of F344 male rats
either underwent orchidectomy or sham operation, and were then treated
with the carcinogen azoxymethane. The orchidectomized cohort had a
significantly lower number of aberrant crypt foci compared to the sham
treated males (p=0.01). We are testing, through DHT replacement in the
Pirc rat, whether testosterone is directly promoting the earlier onset
and increased severity of colorectal cancer.

