Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The small molecule tolfenamic acid inhibits neuroblastoma cell
growth through inducing apoptosis and causing cell cycle arrest
potentially targeting Sp1 and survivin


Neuroblastoma is an embryonal tumor of the peripheral sympathetic nervous
system found in infants and children. Despite intensive therapy, the
mortality rate of this malignancy remains more than 50%. The side effects
of standard therapy can cause acute and long term damage and toxicity in
various biological functions and can lead to the development of secondary
tumors. Therefore there is an urgent need in identifying novel strategies
in neuroblastoma that improve out come with less toxicity. Specificity
proteins (Sp) regulate several important genes associated with
neuroblastoma including MYCN and TrkA. Our aim was to exploit the
strategy of targeting Sp proteins using TA in the treatment of
neuroblastoma. In this study, we examined the anti-proliferative activity
of TA using 7 neuroblastoma cell lines and evaluated the ability of TA to
induce apoptosis, and cell cycle arrest using selected cell lines.
Apoptosis in mammalian cells primarily takes place through extrinsic and
intrinsic pathways. Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors
regulate several genes involved in cell proliferation, survival and
angiogenesis. Tolfenamic acid (TA), a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drug, is known to induce the degradation of Sp proteins and may serve as
a novel anti-cancer agent. The objective of this investigation was to
examine the anti-cancer activity of TA using established human
neuroblastoma cell lines. We tested the anti-proliferative effect of TA
using 7 human neuroblastoma cell lines. Cells were treated with TA
(0/25/50/100M) and cell viability was measured at 24, 48, and 72 h
post-treatment. Selected neuroblastoma cell lines, LA1 55n and SH-SY5Y
were treated with 50 M TA for 24 and 48 h and tested for cell apoptosis
using Annexin-V staining. Caspase activity was measured with caspase 3/7
Glo kit. Cell lysates were prepared and the expression of Sp1, survivin
and c-PARP were evaluated through Western blot analysis. TA significantly
inhibited the growth of neuroblastoma cells in a dose/time-dependent
manner and significantly decreased Sp1 and survivin expression. Apart
from cell cycle (G0/G1) arrest, TA caused significant increase in the
apoptotic cell population, caspase 3/7 activity and c-PARP expression.
These results show that TA effectively inhibits neuroblastoma cell growth
potentially through suppressing mitosis, Sp1 and survivin expression, and
inducing apoptosis. These results represent a novel strategy for using
small molecules for the treatment of neuroblastoma.(Financial assistance:
This study is supported by MD Anderson Cancer Center Orlando (RB); Run
Way to Hope and Hyundai Hope on Wheels Scholar grant awarded to DE).

