Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting FGFR system in a model of HCC


Activation of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGF/FGFR) system has
been reported in a large number of human cancers including human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Furthermore, expression of FGFR2 has been
associated with aggressive tumor growth and poor prognosis in this tumor
entity. Moreover, HCC is known to be a hypervascularized tumor and
activation of the FGF/FGFR system is a crucial event in tumor
angiogenesis. Hence, we addressed the issue of targeting the FGFR system
in HCC (Huh-7, HepG2) and stromal cells (endothelial cells (EC), vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMC), hepatic stellate cells (HSC)). The FGFR
inhibitor BGJ398 (Novartis Oncology, Basel, Switzerland) was used to
inhibit FGFR activation. Effects of targeting FGFR on growth of cells
were determined by MTT assays. Inhibition of constitutive and growth
factor induced cell motility was investigated in modified Boyden Chamber
assays. Activation of signaling pathways upon treatment with BGJ398 was
assessed by Western Blot analyses whereas effects on mediators of tumor
angiogenesis (VEGF-A, PDGF-B) where measured by RT-PCR and ELISA,
respectively. Results show that inhibition of the FGF/FGFR system with
BGJ398 led to dose-dependent inhibition of growth in tumor cells and ECs
whereas only minor effects were observed on VSMC and HSCs. Moreover,
motility of tumor and stromal cells (ECs, VSMCs, HSCs) was significantly
impaired upon constitutive conditions (PActivation of the fibroblast
growth factor receptor (FGF/FGFR) system has been reported in a large
number of human cancers including human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Furthermore, expression of FGFR2 has been associated with aggressive
tumor growth and poor prognosis in this tumor entity. Moreover, HCC is
known to be a hypervascularized tumor and activation of the FGF/FGFR
system is a crucial event in tumor angiogenesis. Hence, we addressed the
issue of targeting the FGFR system in HCC (Huh-7, HepG2) and stromal
cells (endothelial cells (EC), vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC),
hepatic stellate cells (HSC)). The FGFR inhibitor BGJ398 (Novartis
Oncology, Basel, Switzerland) was used to inhibit FGFR activation.
Effects of targeting FGFR on growth of cells were determined by MTT
assays. Inhibition of constitutive and growth factor induced cell
motility was investigated in modified Boyden Chamber assays. Activation
of signaling pathways upon treatment with BGJ398 was assessed by Western
Blot analyses whereas effects on mediators of tumor angiogenesis (VEGF-A,
PDGF-B) where measured by RT-PCR and ELISA, respectively. Results show
that inhibition of the FGF/FGFR system with BGJ398 led to dose-dependent
inhibition of growth in tumor cells and ECs whereas only minor effects
were observed on VSMC and HSCs. Moreover, motility of tumor and stromal
cells (ECs, VSMCs, HSCs) was significantly impaired upon constitutive
conditions (P<0.05 for all). In addition, FGFR inhibition led to decrease
in HSC motility even when cell were incubated with conditioned media from
cancer cells (PActivation of the fibroblast growth factor receptor
(FGF/FGFR) system has been reported in a large number of human cancers
including human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Furthermore, expression
of FGFR2 has been associated with aggressive tumor growth and poor
prognosis in this tumor entity. Moreover, HCC is known to be a
hypervascularized tumor and activation of the FGF/FGFR system is a
crucial event in tumor angiogenesis. Hence, we addressed the issue of
targeting the FGFR system in HCC (Huh-7, HepG2) and stromal cells
(endothelial cells (EC), vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC), hepatic
stellate cells (HSC)). The FGFR inhibitor BGJ398 (Novartis Oncology,
Basel, Switzerland) was used to inhibit FGFR activation. Effects of
targeting FGFR on growth of cells were determined by MTT assays.
Inhibition of constitutive and growth factor induced cell motility was
investigated in modified Boyden Chamber assays. Activation of signaling
pathways upon treatment with BGJ398 was assessed by Western Blot analyses
whereas effects on mediators of tumor angiogenesis (VEGF-A, PDGF-B) where
measured by RT-PCR and ELISA, respectively. Results show that inhibition
of the FGF/FGFR system with BGJ398 led to dose-dependent inhibition of
growth in tumor cells and ECs whereas only minor effects were observed on
VSMC and HSCs. Moreover, motility of tumor and stromal cells (ECs, VSMCs,
HSCs) was significantly impaired upon constitutive conditions (P<0.05 for
all). In addition, FGFR inhibition led to decrease in HSC motility even
when cell were incubated with conditioned media from cancer cells
(P<0.05). With regards to activation of signaling intermediates, FGFR
inhibition impaired constitutive and growth factor induced
phosphorylation of Akt and ERK in HCC cell lines, ECs and HSCs whereas
only minor effect was observed in VSMCs. Moreover, treatment with BGJ398
led to inhibition of c-Myc expression and significantly reduced VEGF-A
production from cancer cells, as determined by Western blotting and
ELISA, respectively. Evaluation of effectiveness of BGJ398 in animal
models is currently ongoing. However, results so far indicate that
targeting FGFR impairs angiogenic signaling and motility in HCC cell
lines and stromal cells. Therefore, inhibition of FGFR warrants further
evaluation and might be an interesting novel approach for anti-neoplastic
treatment protocols in human HCC.

