Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significance of angiotensin targeting on treatment of liver
metastasis in colorectal cancer patients with diabetes


We examined the effects of hyperglycemic conditions on liver metastasis
of colorectal cancer (CRC). Angiotensin (AT)-II increased growth,
invasion, and anti-apoptotic survival in HT29 and CT26 cells. In
contrast, angiotensinogen (ATG) increased these features in HT29 cells
but not in CT26 cells. HT29 cells expressed AT-II type 1 receptor,
chymase, and rennin, whereas CT26 cells did not express renin. Renin
expression and ATG-induced cell growth, invasion, and survival induced
and increased as glucose concentration increased in HT29 cells and also
CT26 cells. An inhibitor of renin or chymase abrogated A-II production in
both cells. Reduction of hepatic ATG production by knockdown suppressed
liver metastasis of HT29 cells. An examination of 121 CRC patients showed
that diabetes in CRC cases was associated with higher blood HbA1c, higher
renin and AT-II concentrations in the primary tumors, and higher
incidence of liver metastasis than in nondiabetic cases. These results
suggest that diabetes-associated AT activation enhances liver metastasis
of CRC. We then examined an antimetastatic therapy by anti-AT treatments
in CRC. In a streptozotocin-induced BALB/c mouse diabetes model that was
fed a high-calorie diet, the blood sugar level increased and was
associated with enhanced CT26 liver metastases. In this diabetic mouse
model, liver metastasis of CT26 cells was suppressed by anti-AT treatment
with a chymase inhibitor, a renin inhibitor, and an AT-II receptor
blocker. Moreover, concurrent hypoglycemic and anti-AT treatments showed
a synergistic inhibitory effect on CT26 cell liver metastasis. These
results suggest that AT activation ability associated with diabetic
conditions enhances liver metastasis of colon cancer. Therefore,
treatment with anti-AT and hypoglycemic agents might be relevant for
suppressing liver metastasis. This scheme should be examined in a
clinical setting.

