Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Active recruitment of immune effector cells mediates in vivo tumor
growth inhibition by enavatuzumab, an antibody to human TWEAK receptor


Enavatuzumab (PDL192) is a humanized anti-TWEAK receptor antibody
currently under clinical evaluation for the treatment of solid
malignancies. Enavatuzumab is postulated to exert its potent anti-tumor
activity in xenograft models through two distinct mechanisms of action:
direct inhibition of tumor cell growth and Fc-mediated function. The goal
of this study was to elucidate the role of immune effector cells in
Fc-mediated function. The initial evidence for a role of effector cells
was obtained in a subset of tumor xenograft mouse models which responded
to enavatuzumab but did not respond to a version of enavatuzumab
containing a mutation in the FcRIII binding region. Subsequent analysis
of circulating effector cells showed increased expression of activation
markers DX5 and CD27 on monocyte-like cells (CD45+CD11bHigh) and DX5 on
NK-like cells (CD45+CD11bLow) after enavatuzumab treatment in xenograft
models dependent on Fc-FcR interactions for enavatuzumab efficacy. The
involvement of effector cells was further confirmed by
immunohistochemistry, which revealed strong infiltration of CD45+
effector cells into tumor xenografts in responding models, but minimal
infiltration in non-responders. Consistent with the in vivo xenograft
studies, human effector cells migrated towards enavatuzumab-treated tumor
cells in vitro. Effector cells preferentially migrated toward in vivo
responsive tumor cells, and the majority of migratory cells were
monocytes and NK cells. Conditioned media from enavatuzumab-treated tumor
cells also induced migration, and contained elevated levels of
cytokines/chemokines, including IL8 and MCP-1. The presence of an
anti-MCP-1 neutralizing antibody in enavatuzumab-treated tumor cell
conditioned medium significantly blocked effector cell migration,
suggesting that MCP-1 might be responsible for effector cell migration
triggered by enavatuzumab. We also observed elevated levels of human
MCP-1 in the serum of both enavatuzumab-treated xenograft mouse models
and in a subset of patients from the enavatuzumab Phase I clinical study.
In summary, in vivo and in vitro studies suggest that enavatuzumab exerts
its potent anti-tumor activity, in part, by actively recruiting effector
cells and activating effectors to kill tumor cells. In addition,
enavatuzumab-induced chemokines may be potential pharmacodynamic
biomarkers and warrant further evaluation in clinical studies.

