Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Kinase activity of tumor-derived exosomes as a potential biomarker
for response to treatment


Introduction Exosomes are nanometer-sized vesicles secreted by tumor
cells after fusion of multivesicular bodies with the plasma membrane that
reflect tumor cell biology. Exosomes contain distinct classes of
molecules including mRNA, miRNA and proteins. Because they can be
isolated from blood they are promising candidate biomarkers. Diagnostic
biomarkers for selection of patients for treatment with tyrosine kinase
inhibitors are urgently warranted. We hypothesize that exosomes contain
tumor derived kinases that may serve as biomarkers for treatment with
kinase inhibitors. Methods The U87 glioma cell line with or without
EGFRvIII (U87EGFR) was used as an in vitro model in this study. Cell
viability was studied with the MTT-assay. Exosomes were isolated from 32h
conditioned media either serum-free or containing 10% exosome-deprived
serum and from 5-9mL of fresh human serum from 3 cancer patients. The
isolation procedure consisted of subsequent centrifugation at 500G,
2000G, 10.000G and 100.000G. The exosome pellet was treated with
proteases for 1h at 37C to digest soluble proteins, washed in PBS and
lysed. Western blots for phospho-EGFR (y1068), EGFR, phospho-AKT, AKT,
phospho-ERK, ERK, Alpha-Tubulin and exosome markers CD63, ALIX and CD81
were performed. Results The sensitivity of U87EGFR to erlotinib (ERL) was
significantly higher compared to parental U87 cells with IC50s of 1M and
5.4M (pIntroduction Exosomes are nanometer-sized vesicles secreted by
tumor cells after fusion of multivesicular bodies with the plasma
membrane that reflect tumor cell biology. Exosomes contain distinct
classes of molecules including mRNA, miRNA and proteins. Because they can
be isolated from blood they are promising candidate biomarkers.
Diagnostic biomarkers for selection of patients for treatment with
tyrosine kinase inhibitors are urgently warranted. We hypothesize that
exosomes contain tumor derived kinases that may serve as biomarkers for
treatment with kinase inhibitors. Methods The U87 glioma cell line with
or without EGFRvIII (U87EGFR) was used as an in vitro model in this
study. Cell viability was studied with the MTT-assay. Exosomes were
isolated from 32h conditioned media either serum-free or containing 10%
exosome-deprived serum and from 5-9mL of fresh human serum from 3 cancer
patients. The isolation procedure consisted of subsequent centrifugation
at 500G, 2000G, 10.000G and 100.000G. The exosome pellet was treated with
proteases for 1h at 37C to digest soluble proteins, washed in PBS and
lysed. Western blots for phospho-EGFR (y1068), EGFR, phospho-AKT, AKT,
phospho-ERK, ERK, Alpha-Tubulin and exosome markers CD63, ALIX and CD81
were performed. Results The sensitivity of U87EGFR to erlotinib (ERL) was
significantly higher compared to parental U87 cells with IC50s of 1M and
5.4M (p<0.001), respectively. Treatment with 1 M ERL resulted in reduced
phosphorylation of EGFR, AKT and ERK in U87EGFR, but not in U87 cells.
The overexpression of constitutively active EGFRvIII mutant increased the
phosphorylation of EGFR and downstream AKT and ERK in cells as well as in
exosomes. Trypsin treatment only affected membrane proteins, where AKT
and ERK levels were not altered. Exosomes from U87EGFR cells treated with
0, 1 and 10M ERL reflected the phosphorylation patterns of the cells with
dose-dependent effects on AKT and ERK. Phosphorylated AKT and ERK could
also be detected in exosomes from the cancer patients. Conclusion We here
show that kinase activity and treatment response are reflected by
exosomes derived from tumor cells in vitro. In addition we found that
phosphorylated proteins can be detected in exosomes derived from blood of
patients with cancer. Our aim is to further develop exosomal kinase
activity analysis as an early biomarker for treatment response.

