Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncoprotein PMLRAR directly suppresses Fas-mediated apoptosis
through forming an apoptotic inhibitory complex with c-FLIP in vivo


Objective: Many genotoxic therapies, including radiation, depend on
intact Fas signaling to eradicate cancer cells. Defective Fas signaling
is an important cause of cancer resistance to therapy. Restoring Fas
apoptosis or sensitizing cancer cells to Fas-mediated apoptosis would
improve the efficacy of many cancer therapies. To elucidate a role for
specific regulators of Fas signaling in cancer cells, we sought to
identify potential modulators of Fas expressed in cancers and target them
to selectively sensitize cancer cells to Fas-mediated apoptosis as a
component of chemotherapy. Methods: Liquid chromatography tandem mass
spectrometry was used to identify Fas-associated proteins;
co-immunoprecipitation and Western blot were used to detect interactions
of PMLRAR, PML, c-FLIP and Fas, and to examine the components of
death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) and caspase-8 cleavage.
Deletional mutagenesis was used to map the interaction domains. PML shRNA
lentivirus and As2O3 were used to knock down PML and PMLRAR. Flow
cytometry analysis of propidium iodide- and Annexin-V-stained cells was
used to detect apoptosis. Mice were transfected with PMLRAR, monitored
for survival, and tissues were analyzed for apoptosis by staining for
cleaved caspase-3 and TUNEL. Results: We identified promyelocytic
leukemia protein (PML) as a Fas-interacting protein using mass
spectrometry analysis. The function of PML is blocked by its
dominant-negative form PMLRAR. We found PMLRAR interaction with Fas in
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)-derived cells and APL primary cells,
and PML-Fas complexes in normal tissues. Binding of PMLRAR to Fas was
mapped to the B-box domain of PML moiety and death domain of Fas. PMLRAR
blockage of Fas apoptosis was demonstrated in U937/PR9 cells, human APL
cells and transgenic mouse APL cells, in which PMLRAR recruited c-FLIPL/S
and excluded procaspase-8 from Fas death signaling complex. PMLRAR
expression in mice protected the mice against a lethal dose of agonistic
anti-Fas antibody (PObjective: Many genotoxic therapies, including
radiation, depend on intact Fas signaling to eradicate cancer cells.
Defective Fas signaling is an important cause of cancer resistance to
therapy. Restoring Fas apoptosis or sensitizing cancer cells to
Fas-mediated apoptosis would improve the efficacy of many cancer
therapies. To elucidate a role for specific regulators of Fas signaling
in cancer cells, we sought to identify potential modulators of Fas
expressed in cancers and target them to selectively sensitize cancer
cells to Fas-mediated apoptosis as a component of chemotherapy. Methods:
Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry was used to identify
Fas-associated proteins; co-immunoprecipitation and Western blot were
used to detect interactions of PMLRAR, PML, c-FLIP and Fas, and to
examine the components of death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) and
caspase-8 cleavage. Deletional mutagenesis was used to map the
interaction domains. PML shRNA lentivirus and As2O3 were used to knock
down PML and PMLRAR. Flow cytometry analysis of propidium iodide- and
Annexin-V-stained cells was used to detect apoptosis. Mice were
transfected with PMLRAR, monitored for survival, and tissues were
analyzed for apoptosis by staining for cleaved caspase-3 and TUNEL.
Results: We identified promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) as a
Fas-interacting protein using mass spectrometry analysis. The function of
PML is blocked by its dominant-negative form PMLRAR. We found PMLRAR
interaction with Fas in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)-derived cells
and APL primary cells, and PML-Fas complexes in normal tissues. Binding
of PMLRAR to Fas was mapped to the B-box domain of PML moiety and death
domain of Fas. PMLRAR blockage of Fas apoptosis was demonstrated in
U937/PR9 cells, human APL cells and transgenic mouse APL cells, in which
PMLRAR recruited c-FLIPL/S and excluded procaspase-8 from Fas death
signaling complex. PMLRAR expression in mice protected the mice against a
lethal dose of agonistic anti-Fas antibody (P<.001) and the protected
tissues contained Fas-PMLRAR-cFLIP complexes. Livers from
PMLRAR-transfected mice contained fewer cleaved caspase-3
positive/apoptotic cells when compared with control vector-transfected
mice. Conclusions: PMLRAR binds to Fas and blocks Fas-mediated apoptosis
in APL by forming an apoptotic inhibitory complex with c-FLIP. These data
suggest that PMLRAR is a cancer specific Fas-binding inhibitor of
Fas-mediated apoptosis and thus, can contribute to cancer development and
resistance to therapy. The newly discovered PMLRAR-Fas and PML-Fas
complexes can be sites for modulation of apoptosis. By neutralizing the
effect of death receptor inhibitors, such as PMLRAR, we can improve
responses to many chemotherapeutic treatments that depend on activation
of death receptors for effective elimination of cancer cells.

