Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overlapping high pro- and anti-angiogenic VEGF-A isoform ratio
between pediatric pilocytic astrocytoma and adult glioblastoma suggests
possibilities for anti-angiogenic therapy in pilocytic astrocytoma


Introduction. Pilocytic astrocytoma (WHO grade I), the most frequent
brain tumor in children, showed a critical overlap with the angiogenic
profile and vessel immaturity/instability of glioblastoma (WHO grade IV).
However, the highly vascular pilocytic astrocytoma had fewer but wider
vessels compared with glioblastoma,(Sie et al. NAN 2010) possibly due to
different VEGF-A isoform expression. So this study aimed to analyze
VEGF-A isoforms in correlation with tumor vasculature in pilocytic
astrocytoma and glioblastoma. As it is hypothesized that tumors with
relatively higher pro- (VEGF-AXXXa) than anti-angiogenic (VEGF-AXXXb)
isoform expression will be more sensitive to anti-angiogenic therapy,
because VEGF-AXXXb inhibits the effect of anti-VEGF-A antibodies like
bevacizumab, we secondly aimed to determine the VEGF-AXXXa: VEGF-AXXXb
ratio. Materials and methods. VEGF-A isoforms were analyzed in tumor
tissue of 15 pediatric pilocytic astrocytoma and 12 adult glioblastoma
patients using Real Time RT-PCR. Microvessel density, vessel maturity in
terms of basement membrane and pericyte coverage, and endothelial and
tumor cell turnover were evaluated in immunohistochemically stained
slides with CD34, collagen IV, smooth muscle actin, Ki67/CD34 and
caspase-3/CD34 respectively. The angiopoietin-1/-2 balance as indicator
for vessel stability was assessed using Real Time RT-PCR. Results. All
pro-angiogenic VEGF-A isoforms (VEGF-A121a, 145, 148, 165, 183, 189) were
lower expressed in pilocytic astrocytoma compared with glioblastoma.
However, analyzing these isoforms relative to VEGF-A121a as it is
expressed by normal cells, no significant differences were found between
both tumors. Pilocytic astrocytoma showed an association between
VEGF-A165a and their dilatated vessels, while VEGF-A189a was associated
with the characteristic small blood vessels in glioblastoma. In both
tumors, VEGF-A189a was correlated with less vessel immaturity (r: 0.621,
P = 0.024; r: 0.697, P = 0.025). Surprisingly, pilocytic astrocytoma and
glioblastoma showed an overlapping VEGF-AXXXa: VEGF-AXXXb ratio with
relatively higher VEGF-A165a and VEGF-A189a expression (P = 0.486; P =
0.456). Conclusion(s). This study showed that VEGF-A isoforms were
associated with the different vessel architecture in pilocytic
astrocytoma and glioblastoma. Interestingly, a clear overlap was found
between both tumors in the VEGF-A isoform ratios with relatively high
VEGF-A165a and VEGF-A189a expression. These findings suggest encouraging
possibilities for anti-angiogenic therapy, for instance with bevacizumab,
in pilocytic astrocytoma, especially for those children with unresectable
tumors.

