Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing a new concept for specific targeting of cancer cells


The purpose of this work is to demonstrate the feasibility for 100%
specific killing of cancer cells and virtually zero killing of normal
cells. This is an obvious goal that seems to have been lost in most of
the current targeting strategies for treating cancer. For instance, one
well-known strategy employs drugs that kill or inhibit cancer cells
through their generally higher metabolic rate and uptake of nutrients. A
second strategy uses drug conjugates and/or carrier systems that target
cell surface receptors or antigens. Another strategy now gaining rapid
acceptance is using cancer genomics and/or proteomics to more
specifically inhibit various up-regulated metabolic targets in cancer
cells. The use of inhibitors and/or the current limitations of toxic
drugs result in incomplete killing of the cancer, which frequently
results in resistance. Another purpose of this work is to redirect some
of the massive resources of industry and academia back to the harder task
of specifically killing cancer instead of just inhibiting it. If all
cancer cells are killed during treatment, there is no opportunity for
resistant cells to grow back. Therefore, the ideal goal is to produce a
drug and/or drug delivery system that is virtually 100% specific for
killing cancer. This 100% specificity must be based on properties that
only cancer cells possess. This eliminates normal cell surface receptors
or metabolic pathways that are simply up-regulated or down-regulated
compared to normal cells. Cancer is caused by one or more mutations in
DNA. Therefore, all cancers have at least one or more mutations that are
not found in normal cells. These unique mutations are the truly specific
targets that should be used for killing cancer cells. The methods in this
work identify mutations inside live cancer cells through specific binding
to mutated DNA, (or the resulting mutated proteins). By employing a
unique delivery system, a highly toxic compound is released into the
cancer cell only when specific binding occurs. This feasibility study
will show that nearly 100% of cancer cells can be killed through
cancer-specific, intracellular targets while normal cells are not.

