Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical implications of family history of prostate cancer in an
active surveillance cohort


Background Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the most heritable cancers and
a positive family history (FH) of PCa increases risk to 1st degree
relatives by over 2 fold. The search for causative genetic variants has
led to genome-wide association studies, which have so far identified over
45 susceptibility loci associated with PCa. However, the clinical utility
of FH status or PCa risk SNP profiles to predict disease progression or
aggression is yet undefined. We explore their potential prognostic role
in patients undergoing Active Surveillance (AS). Methods Those enrolled
in the Royal Marsden Hospital AS study were eligible. FH was obtained
using questionnaires. For those with missing/incomplete data, hospital
records were used. Patients with positive FH were further stratified
according to the involvement of 1st and/or 2nd degree relatives. For risk
score analyses, DNA was genotyped using the Sequenom MassARRAY iPLEX
platform and Taqman assays. The cumulative risk scores for each patient
were calculated by summing risk alleles for each loci using the weighted
effect as estimated in previous studies. FH status and the SNP risk
scores were analysed separately against defined adverse outcomes in AS,
including adverse histology on repeat biopsy and time to treatment, to
determine their prognostic value. Results 439 patients were eligible for
FH analyses. 31% of those have since undergone treatment and 13% have
histological upgrade on repeat biopsies. On univariate analysis, there
was no significant relationship between FH of PCa in any degree of
relation, and biopsy upgrade or time to treatment. For risk score
analyses, 391 patients DNA were studied. There was also no relationship
between the calculated genetic risk scores and biopsy upgrade or time to
treatment (p=0.57 and p=0.83 respectively). When analysing differences
between the higher and lower genetic risk groups (defined as the top 25%
and lowest 25% of the genetic risk distribution), there was again no
relationship (p=0.85 and p=0.91 respectively). Conclusion FH status or
currently known PCa SNP profile risk scores have not been shown to be
prognostic factors and should not be used to influence decisions in AS.
This is the first study analysing the implications of PCa risk SNPs in AS.

