Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCN6 knockdown-induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition and
invasion is mediated through upregulation of TGF type III receptor


Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important event during
tumor invasion and metastasis. EMT is regulated by extracellular matrix
components and soluble growth factors (reviewed in Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
7:131-42, 2006). Secreted protein CCN6 is a multimodular matricellular
regulatory protein, reported to be lost in 80% cases of highly aggressive
inflammatory breast cancer subtype and 60% cases of all invasive breast
carcinomas. Our previous studies showed that CCN6 regulates epithelial
differentiation and its loss triggers EMT in human mammary epithelial
cells (HME) through loss of E-cadherin by inducing Snail and Zeb1 (Am J
Pathol 172(4):893-04, 2008). However the mechanism is not known. TGF
signaling is known to cause EMT and invasion at advance stages of tumor
progression by inducing Zeb1 (reviewed in J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia
15(2):169-90, 2010). Since, the structure of CCN6 predicts binding sites
for TGF, we hypothesized that CCN6 loss induced EMT and invasion is
mediated through deregulation of TGF signaling. HME cells with lentivirus
mediated knockdown (KD) of CCN6 were characterized by 3 dimensional
cultures. TGF-Smad response was examined in serum starved cells in a dose
and time dependent manner. Growth, invasion, EMT and Smad-response were
tested in control and CCN6 KD cells with siRNA or lentivirus mediated
inhibition of TGF type III receptor (TR III); and in CCN6 overexpressing
human metastatic MDAMB231 cells (which have low protein levels of CCN6)
in vitro and in vivo. We found that the CCN6 KD cells present a very
malignant phenotype with loss of alpha 6 integrin. Associated with this,
we observed an upregulaton of transcript (40 fold, *) and protein levels
of TR III, and enhanced activation of Smad2 in response to
TGF1/TGF2/TGF3. Inhibition of upregulated TR III blunted invasion and
growth by reducing pSmad2 levels. The CCN6/TR III double KD cells showed
mesenchymal to epithelial transition with re-expression of E-cadherin and
reversion of the malignant phenotype into polarized acini. Strengthening
our findings CCN6 overexpression in MDAMB231 cells reduced invasion and
growth by reducing pSmad2 levels. In vivo, CCN6 overexpressing mammary
tumors showed dramatic decrease in tumor volume (70% at 7 weeks of
injection, *, n=15 mice/group) and prolonged metastasis free survival
with the primary tumors and mets showing more epithelial phenotype,
unlike the EMT-like phenotype of controls. Further, treating CCN6 KD
cells with 500 ng/ml of recombinant human CCN6 reduced transcript levels
of TR III while no effect was observed on control cells. Conclusively,
CCN6 loss induced EMT is mediated through upregulation of TR III. CCN6
can maintain the epithelial phenotype by regulating E-cadherin through
modulation of TR III. Thus, CCN6 emerges as a therapeutic target that can
suppress tumor progression by modulating TGF signaling.

