Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The APC tumor suppressor controls epithelial polarization and
morphogenesis


Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) is a multifunctional tumor suppressor
that is frequently mutated or lost in most epithelial-derived tumor
types, including colorectal, breast and renal cancer. We have previously
demonstrated that germline heterozygous Apc mutation disrupts mammary
epithelial integrity. In addition, Apc mutation advances polyoma middle T
antigen (PyMT)-mediated mammary tumorigenesis. Interestingly, in both of
these models, the effect of Apc mutation was independent of Wnt/-catenin
pathway activation. The objective of the present study was to extend
these observations to in vitro models and identify the molecular
mechanism by which APC exerts its tumor suppressive function through
regulation of epithelial polarity and morphogenesis. Using
lentiviral-mediated RNA interference, APC was stably suppressed in
non-transformed HC11 mammary and MDCK kidney epithelial cells. Although
the APC-knockdown cells did not show any significant morphological or
growth differences compared to control vector-only or scrambled
shRNA-infected cells on plastic, they showed a dramatic multi-layering
phenotype when cultured on permeable supports. Moreover, the polarized
localization of basolateral markers, such as Dlg and Scrib tumor
suppressor proteins, and apical proteins, including MUC1, was severely
disrupted. When the cells were cultured under three-dimensional
conditions and compared to controls, the APC-knockdown epithelial cells
formed enlarged, non-spherical acini and cysts with filled-in lumens,
many of which were invasive into the surrounding matrix. Remarkably, in
the MDCK APC-knockdown cells, inverted polarity was observed with the
apical marker gp135 localized to the periphery of the cysts. Similar to
our previous in vivo studies, these polarization defects associated with
APC loss did not appear to require activation of the Wnt signaling
pathway but likely involve dysregulation of APC-associated cytoskeletal
and polarity complex components. These data indicate that APC is a potent
regulator of epithelial polarization and morphogenesis and suggest that
one mechanism by which APC loss promotes tumorigenesis is by disrupting
epithelial architecture to subsequently drive tumor cell growth, survival
and invasion.

