Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GRP78 regulates clusterin stability, retrotranslocation, and
mitochondrial localization under ER stress in prostate cancer


Expression of clusterin (CLU) closely correlates with regulation of
apoptosis in cancer. While endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-induced
up-regulation and retro-translocation of cytoplasmic CLU (cCLU)(also
termed as presecretory and secreted forms, psCLU and sCLU) has been
linked to its anti-apoptotic properties, the mechanism mediating these
processes remain undefined. Here, we show that GRP78 (Bip) associates
with cCLU to facilitate its retro-translocation and redistribution to the
mitochondria in human prostate cancer cells. We found that ER stress
inducers, such as TG or MG132, increased expression levels of both cCLU
and GRP78 proteins and led to the association of these two proteins.
Furthermore, GRP78 overexpression resulted in increased cCLU but reduced
sCLU levels secreted into the culture media. GRP78 stabilized cCLU
protein and its hypo-glycosylated forms, in particular after paclitaxel
treatment. Moreover, subcellular fractionation studies indicated GRP78
increased stress-induced cCLU retro-translocation from the ER with
redistribution to the mitochondria. Live cell imaging revealed that a
CLUGFP localized directly to highly mobile mitochondria. Co-expression of
both GRP78 and CLU in LNCaP cells led to increased CLUGFP -mitochondria
co-localization and reduced apoptosis by cooperatively stabilizing
mitochondrial membrane integrity. Transient depletion of GRP78 reduced
cCLU protein but not mRNA transcript levels, accompanied by cell cycle
arrest at G0/G1 with down-regulation of both phospho-Rb and cyclin D1,
and synergistic increases in paclitaxel-induced cell apoptosis. Taken
together, our findings reveal a novel role of GRP78 in the regulation of
CLU retro-translocation and its redistribution to the mitochondria,
suggesting that GRP78 and CLU cooperatively promote survival during ER
stress in prostate cancer.

