Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ARHI downregulates PI3K and Ras-MAP signaling and induces
autophagy by promoting integrin and EGFR membrane protein degradation


Autophagy selectively degrades cellular proteins, protein aggregates and
organelles, providing energy in a nutrient-deprived environment. We have
reported that autophagy can be induced by re-expression of ARHI (DIRAS3),
a maternally imprinted Ras-related tumor suppressor gene that is down
regulated in more than 60% of ovarian cancers. Whereas prolonged
expression of ARHI in cultured cells induces autophagic cell death, ARHI
expression in xenografts sustains dormant cancer cell survival for weeks.
When ARHI levels were reduced in dormant cells, xenografts grew rapidly.
Inhibition of ARHI-induced autophagy with chloroquine dramatically
reduces regrowth of xenografts, suggesting that autophagy contributes to
the survival of dormant cells. Re-expression of ARHI inhibits both PI3K
and Ras-MAPK signaling. Growth factors (VEGF, IL-8, IGF) and ECM
components (fibronectin) found in the cancer microenvironment can rescue
ovarian cancer cells from ARHI-induced autophagic cell death in culture,
associated with partial reversal of ARHI-mediated inhibition of PI3K
signaling. Consequently, we have hypothesized that autophagy together
with growth factors and ECM in the microenvironment are all required to
maintain dormancy, where autophagy provides energy for xenografts and
survival factors prevent autophagic death by partially reversing
inhibition of PI3K-AKT signaling. The mechanism by which ARHI regulates
PI3K and Ras-MAPK signaling has not been fully elucidated. Here, we show
that re-expression of ARHI in SKOv3 ovarian cancer cells inhibits
expression of integrin 1 and EGFR. ARHI expression enhanced EGF-mediated
receptor endocytosis and colocalization of EGFR with Rab11 and Rab7,
markers for multivesicular endosomes and lysosomes, respectively. Our
results suggest that ARHI enhances membrane receptor turnover, in part,
by facilitating the internalization and association of membrane receptors
with vesicular trafficking proteins targeted for degradation in the
lysosome. ARHI-mediated downregulation of membrane receptors reduces both
PI3K-AKT and Ras-MAPK signaling, ultimately contributing to the
inhibition of tumor growth.

