Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of prostate cancer bone metastases by the dickkopf-1
neutralizing antibody BHQ880


Advanced prostate carcinoma (PCa) is usually complicated by the presence
of bone metastases. Current therapies targeting bone metastases are
suboptimal as the metastases progress in spite of therapy. Accordingly,
novel therapeutics are needed to target these lesions. The Wnt inhibitor
Dickkopf-1 (DKK-1) appears to play an important role in progression of
PCa bone metastases. Overexpression of DKK-1 by PCa promotes tumor growth
and bone lysis in laboratory studies and DKK1 is present in clinical PCa
bone metastases. Development of a fully humanized anti-DKK-1 neutralizing
antibody, BHQ880 (Novartis), provides a potential therapeutic strategy to
target PCa bone metastases. The goal of this study was to test if BHQ880
could impact PCa bone metastases. PC-3-luc cells (2.5x105) were injected
intratibially into mice. Treatment with anti-DKK-1 or isotype control
antibody (n=12 mice per group) was initiated 0, 7, or 14 days post-tumor
injection. Mice were treated three times weekly by intraperitoneal
injection with 200 g/mouse (approximately 10 mg/kg) Tumor growth and bone
lysis were assessed by weekly bioluminescence and bi-weekly radiography,
respectively. All mice were euthanized 31 days post-tumor injection,
tumor bearing limbs were formalin fixed and serum was obtained. Tumor
bearing limbs were analyzed by dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA)
and histology. Serum was assayed for the bone turnover biomarkers
alkaline phosphatase (ALP), osteocalcin (OC), and tartate-resistant acid
phosphatase 5b (TRAP5b). BHQ880 was well tolerated with no significant
side effects observed. Significant inhibition of tumor growth was
observed in mice where treatment was initiated 7 or 14 days post-tumor
challenge when established tumors were present. Two mice from the 14-day
treatment group had tumor regressions after treatment with BHQ880.
Treatment with BHQ880 resulted in decreased bone lysis as determined
using DEXA. Furthermore, increased serum concentrations of ALP and OC in
mice treated with BHQ880 suggest increased bone production; no
significant difference in TRAP5b concentration between treated and
untreated mice was found. Treatment with the DKK-1 neutralizing antibody
BHQ880 was found to inhibit tumor growth, tumor-induced osteolysis and
increase serum bone remodeling markers associated with increased bone
production in a murine model of PCa bone metastasis. These data suggest
that anti-DKK-1 treatment is a plausible mechanism for inhibition of
progression of PCa bone metastases. These data suggest that inhibition of
DKK-1 may be an effective strategy to inhibit PCa growth in bone.

