Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Promoter methylation of SNFP4 gene as potential diagnosis
biomarker in cervical cancer: Exploratory study phase I


BACKGROUND: Cervical cancer (CC) is the second most prevalent neoplasia
in women and fifth cause of death by cancer in this population worldwide.
Pap smear and HPV infection test have been the most widely used tools to
detect cytological abnormalities and women's risk of developing cancer.
However, they cannot distinguish between lesions that will progress to an
invasive carcinoma and those that will not. Methylation biomarkers could
be useful in early detection and progression for cervical carcinoma.
Thus, the aim of this study was evaluate the promoter methylation status
of a selected gene as possible biomarker for early detection and
progression of cervical carcinogenesis in women in the South of Chile.
METHODS: DNA isolated from 12 normal samples and 7 cervical cancers was
enriched with Methylated DNA Immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) and hybridized
to Nimblegen 385K CpG Islands plus Promoter arrays. Bioinformatics
strategies were used for background correction, array normalization and
data analysis of differentially methylated genomic regions between tumor
and normal tissue. The promoter methylation status of selected gene was
validated by Methylation Specific PCR (MSP) in biopsies samples of the
cervix: 44 normal, 22 Low Grade Lesions (LSIL), 22 High Grade Lesions
(HSIL) and 45 cervical cancers (CC). The associations between methylation
status of selected gene and different stages of progression of cervical
cancer were analyzed using a Chi-square test. FINDINGS: SPRP4 gene was
selected from microarray as potential biomarker, because it showed a high
score of methylation in cancer, according to bioinformatic analysis. The
methylation frequency of SPRP4 through MSP was 0% in normal samples, 50%
in LSIL, 27% in HSIL and 100% in tumor samples. Thus, promoter
methylation of SPRP4 was associated to cervical cancer and related
lesions (pBACKGROUND: Cervical cancer (CC) is the second most prevalent
neoplasia in women and fifth cause of death by cancer in this population
worldwide. Pap smear and HPV infection test have been the most widely
used tools to detect cytological abnormalities and women's risk of
developing cancer. However, they cannot distinguish between lesions that
will progress to an invasive carcinoma and those that will not.
Methylation biomarkers could be useful in early detection and progression
for cervical carcinoma. Thus, the aim of this study was evaluate the
promoter methylation status of a selected gene as possible biomarker for
early detection and progression of cervical carcinogenesis in women in
the South of Chile. METHODS: DNA isolated from 12 normal samples and 7
cervical cancers was enriched with Methylated DNA Immunoprecipitation
(MeDIP) and hybridized to Nimblegen 385K CpG Islands plus Promoter
arrays. Bioinformatics strategies were used for background correction,
array normalization and data analysis of differentially methylated
genomic regions between tumor and normal tissue. The promoter methylation
status of selected gene was validated by Methylation Specific PCR (MSP)
in biopsies samples of the cervix: 44 normal, 22 Low Grade Lesions
(LSIL), 22 High Grade Lesions (HSIL) and 45 cervical cancers (CC). The
associations between methylation status of selected gene and different
stages of progression of cervical cancer were analyzed using a Chi-square
test. FINDINGS: SPRP4 gene was selected from microarray as potential
biomarker, because it showed a high score of methylation in cancer,
according to bioinformatic analysis. The methylation frequency of SPRP4
through MSP was 0% in normal samples, 50% in LSIL, 27% in HSIL and 100%
in tumor samples. Thus, promoter methylation of SPRP4 was associated to
cervical cancer and related lesions (p<0.05). INTERPRETATION: The
promoter methylation status of SFRP4 has potential use as a biomarker for
diagnosis of cervical cancer. Therefore, the validation of this marker in
a case-control cohort is warranted. FUNDING: National Cancer Institute
grant U01-CA84986; Oncomethylome Sciences, SA, Comisin Nacional de
Ciencia y Tecnologa (CONICYT; Chile, Becas Chile; Conicyt No24090095;
CORFO 07CN13PBT-222). Postdoctoral Fondecyt Research Project 3120141.

