Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiosensitization by the Dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235


The PI3K/Akt pathway has been implicated in cancer progression and in the
survival of cancer cells following DNA damage induced by radiation.
Hence, we chose to study the radiosensitizing ability of the Novartis
compound, NVP-BEZ235, a dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor. Clonogenic cell
survival assays following ionizing radiation, cell cycle analysis,
immunofluorescence for -H2AX foci, and Western blotting were performed
using standard protocols.Treatment of SQ20B head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma cells and U251 glioblastoma cells with NVP-BEZ235 led to a
decrease in phosphorylation of Akt at serine 473 and of S6 and 4E-BP1,
both of which are downstream markers of mTOR activation. Pre-treatment
with the drug (25-50 nM) led to radiosensitization of these cell lines
with a dose enhancement ratio (DER) ranging from 1.32 - 1.72. Knockdown
of Akt1, p110alpha, or mTOR in these cell lines, also resulted in
radiosensitization, but not to the same extent as with NVP-BEZ235. Of
note, treatment with rapamycin led to minimal radiosensitization of these
cells. Reduced survival with NVP-BEZ235 does not result from cell cycle
redistribution during the treatment intervals tested, although combining
NVP-BEZ235 with radiation enhances the G2/M delay seen after radiation.
We examined how cells died after radiation and found no suggestion of
increased apoptosis or necrosis. We did find evidence of increased
conversion of microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 (LC3)-I to
LC3-II, suggestive of autophagy. In split course experiments, in which
cells were either irradiated with a single dose of radiation or with two
half-doses separated by time, as the interval between doses increased, so
did clonogenic survival. This increase in survival was abolished by
pre-treatment with NVP-BEZ235, suggesting that the drug interfered with
DNA damage repair. This was confirmed by assessing levels of gamma-H2AX
after ionizing radiation. Initial post-radiation levels of gamma-H2AX
foci were similar in NVP-BEZ235-pretreated and control cells; however,
the resolution of these foci was significantly delayed in the
BEZ235-treated cells. We then examined DNA-PKcs, a protein important for
DNA damage repair, and found that the drug abrogated the increased
phosphorylation normally seen after radiation. These results indicate
that NVP-BEZ235 is a potent radiosensitizer of HNC cells in vitro. As
siRNA against either p110alpha or mTOR leads to radiosensization, both of
these targets of NVP-BEZ235 may be critical mediators of its to
radiosensitizing ability; however, a second mechanism involved, may be
via delayed repair of DNA damage following radiation, via interference of
DNA-PKcs phosphorylation.

