Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthetic lethal interaction between EGFR and PARP inhibition


Purpose: Dysregulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
family is a hallmark of many cancers. Although targeting of EGFR family
has improved outcomes, many patients ultimately fail this therapy. PARP
inhibitors (PARPi) have gained recent attention due to their unique
selectivity in killing homologous recombination (HR)-deficient tumors
while maintaining minimal toxicity in normal tissues. We have previously
shown that EGFR inhibition induces synthetic lethality with PARPi in head
and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) in vitro by attenuating DNA
repair pathways. In this study, we validated these observations in vivo
in HNSCCs xenografts. Importantly, we also tested this strategy in other
EGFR dysregulated cancers. Methods: Cervical, breast, and head and neck
cancer cell lines were used in this study. DNA damage and repair were
assessed by immunofluorescence staining of cells for -H2AX, Rad51, and
DNA-Pk foci and/or chromosomally integrated HR and nonhomologous
end-joining based GFP reporter assays. Cell viability was determined via
colony formation and ATPlite assays. Tumor growth delay was assessed in
mice bearing tumor xenografts. Results: Combined EGFR and PARP inhibition
resulted in the greatest tumor growth delay versus either agent alone in
mice bearing head and neck tumor xenografts (9 week tumor growth delay
when compared to PARPi alone, 3 week tumor growth delay when compared to
EGFR inhibitor alone). This correlated with persistent -H2AX foci
indicative of unresolved DNA damage. Interestingly, this combination was
also effective in other EGFR dysregulated tumors. Human cervical and
breast cancer cells exhibited enhanced cytotoxicity with EGFR and PARP
inhibition compared to either agent alone (80-99% cytotoxicity with
combination vs 0-20% with either agent alone). Similar to head and neck
cancer, susceptibility to PARPi induced by EGFR inhibition was associated
with deficient NHEJ- and HR-mediated DNA repair and subsequent
persistence of DNA damage. Conclusions: Thus, by generating a DNA repair
deficit, EGFR inhibition can induce synthetic lethality with PARP
inhibition. This can be an innovative treatment strategy for tumors with
dysregulated EGFR signaling.

