Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of Stat3 deletion or activation on keratinocyte
stem/progenitor cells


STATs play crucial roles in a wide variety of biological functions,
including development, proliferation, differentiation and migration.
Stat3 in particular plays a major role in cancer development. In the
present study, we examined the impact of Stat3 deletion or activation on
behavior of keratinocytes, including keratinocyte stem cells (KSCs)
behavior in vivo. Initially, K5.Stat3C transgenic (Tg) mice which express
a constitutively active/dimerized form of Stat3 called Stat3C via the
bovine keratin 5 (K5) promoter were studied. The K5 promoter targets
expression of Stat3C in the basal layer of the epidermis as well as in
the bulge region KSCs. The number of CD34+ve/ alpha 6 integrin +ve cells
was significantly reduced in Tg mice as compared to non-transgenic (NTg)
littermates. There was a concomitant increase in the progenitor
populations (Lgr-6, Lrig-1 and Sca-1) in the Tg mice vs. the stem cell
population (CD34 and Keratin15). Activation of Stat3 in bulge region KSCs
appeared to induce exit of these cells from this compartment. We also
examined the effect of constitutive overexpression of Stat3 on the
expression of classical differentiation markers (K1, K10, Loricrin and
Involucrin) in the interfollicular epidermis as well as the hair
follicle. Stat3C overexpression did not appear to alter expression of
differentiation genes in the interfollicular epidermis. To investigate
the mechanism underlying the increase in the progenitor population at the
expense of bulge region KSCs we decided to examine if Stat3C
overexpression was involved in inducing migration of the bulge region
KSCs. Earlier work from our lab demonstrated that overexpression of
Stat3C leads to upregulation of Twist in the epidermis, which suggests
that Stat3 may be affecting migration in the BK5.Stat3C Tg mice. In
addition, there was also increased -catenin and decreased 6-integrin
expression in the hair follicles of Tg mice, which may contribute to
reduced adhesive interactions between the epithelial cells and the
basement membrane also facilitating migration out of the niche. To
further study the effect of Stat3 on differentiation of epidermal as well
as stem cells we analyzed the epidermal keratinocytes in K5.Cre X
Stat3fl/fl mice where Stat3 is deleted in the basal epidermis and the
outer root sheath of the hair follicle. There was an increase in the
expression of epidermal differentiation markers in the Stat3 knockout
mice. Also, there was an increase in the progenitor (Lgr-6, Lrig-1 and
Sca-1) gene expression levels after TPA treatment in the Stat3 knockout
mice. These data suggest that deletion of Stat3 in the epidermis and hair
follicle induced differentiation in these cells. Overall, these data
suggest that Stat3 plays an important role in differentiation as well as
migration of keratinocytes and that these effects may play a role during
epithelial carcinogenesis. Supported by NIH Grant CA76520.

