Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KCNJ2 comprises a marker of poor prognosis and a therapeutic
target in non-WNT/non-SHH medulloblastoma


Medulloblastoma comprises the most common malignant brain tumor in
childhood. Recently, integrated genomic approaches revealed four major
biological disease variants: WNT (wingless), SHH (sonic hedgehog), group
3, and group 4. Treatment failure mainly occurs in children harboring
metastatic tumors, which typically carry an isochromosome 17 or gain of
17q, a common hallmark of intermediate and high-risk non-WNT/non-SHH
medulloblastoma. Thus, novel therapeutic options for these patients are
urgently warranted. Through mRNA expression profiling of 64 primary tumor
samples, we identified potassium inwardly-rectifying channel J2 (KCNJ2)
as one of the most upregulated genes on chromosome 17q in tumors with 17q
gain. Notably, recent reports have linked deregulation of
voltage-dependent ion channels to the development of other types of
cancer. We first validated our microarray findings on KCNJ2 transcript
levels using quantitative real-time PCR. High KCNJ2 transcript levels
were significantly associated with non-WNT/non-SHH grouping, anaplastic
histology, metastatic dissemination, and poor clinical outcome. KCNJ2
protein expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry in a large cohort
of patients (n=199), and high protein expression levels were found to be
strongly correlated with 17q gain, metastatic dissemination, and inferior
overall and progression-free survival (pMedulloblastoma comprises the
most common malignant brain tumor in childhood. Recently, integrated
genomic approaches revealed four major biological disease variants: WNT
(wingless), SHH (sonic hedgehog), group 3, and group 4. Treatment failure
mainly occurs in children harboring metastatic tumors, which typically
carry an isochromosome 17 or gain of 17q, a common hallmark of
intermediate and high-risk non-WNT/non-SHH medulloblastoma. Thus, novel
therapeutic options for these patients are urgently warranted. Through
mRNA expression profiling of 64 primary tumor samples, we identified
potassium inwardly-rectifying channel J2 (KCNJ2) as one of the most
upregulated genes on chromosome 17q in tumors with 17q gain. Notably,
recent reports have linked deregulation of voltage-dependent ion channels
to the development of other types of cancer. We first validated our
microarray findings on KCNJ2 transcript levels using quantitative
real-time PCR. High KCNJ2 transcript levels were significantly associated
with non-WNT/non-SHH grouping, anaplastic histology, metastatic
dissemination, and poor clinical outcome. KCNJ2 protein expression was
analyzed by immunohistochemistry in a large cohort of patients (n=199),
and high protein expression levels were found to be strongly correlated
with 17q gain, metastatic dissemination, and inferior overall and
progression-free survival (p<0.0001). To functionally validate the
potential role of KCNJ2 in medulloblastoma biology, we performed
knockdown experiments by small interfering RNA-mediated silencing in two
well characterized medulloblastoma cell lines. Knockdown of KCNJ2
resulted in a reduced proliferation rate and induction of apoptosis.
Furthermore, treatment of the medulloblastoma cell lines with Amiodarone
and SR 59230A, two inhibitors of this class of Kir channels, phenocopied
these promising anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects in a time-
and dose-dependent manner. Whole cell patch clamp results revealed a
remarkable current reduction upon inhibitor treatment with SR 59230A. In
summary, we could delineate KCNJ2 immunopositivity as an independent
biomarker for medulloblastoma with dismal prognosis. Thus,
pharmacological inhibition of this candidate gene may constitute a new
therapeutic option for patients with high-risk medulloblastomas.

