Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leveraging the molecular heterogeneity of patient-derived tumor
samples to simulate clinical trial settings and model combination
treatments


Combination therapy, with rare exception, is a requirement for
successfully treating cancer patients. Advances in genetic
characterization coupled with a growing understanding of tumor
heterogeneity are poised to revolutionize future strategies for
combination treatments. Historically, working out the best combinations
has been challenging and largely through iterative cycles of clinical
trial and error due to gross limitations of preclinical models to
accurately predict activity. Current strategies for developing new
anticancer drugs rely heavily on preclinical testing in cancer cell lines
and their derived in vivo xenograft models. These models are fraught with
significant limitations including highly passaged cancer cell lines grown
on plastic that ignores the microenvironment and tempered representation
of the complex heterogeneity of cancer. Tumor cell microenvironment has
significant impact on growth kinetics, cell signaling and response to
drug treatments. 3D models attempt to recapitulate elements of the
microenvironment, are more biologically relevant models compared to 2D
models and have gained preference among cancer researchers and drug
developers. The purpose of this study is to investigate the utility of
molecularly characterized patient derived lung tumor cells (PTCs) for
steering decisions for effective combination treatments in the clinical
setting. We have established preclinical lung cancer models using PTCs
grown in a 3D culture system. Here we present a retrospective study in
lung PTCs evaluating single agents and combinations of molecularly
targeted as well as cytotoxic agents including erlotinib, crizotinib,
etoposide, cisplatin, carboplatin, gemcitabine, paclitaxel, vinorelbine,
topotecan and irinotecan. We utilized a range of methods (PCR, FISH, IF,
WB) to determine the genetic and molecular features of the PTCs prior to
performing drug treatments. We used high content imaging to evaluate
subpopulations within PTCs, colony morphology and proliferative
endpoints. Our results identified responder and non-responder populations
and emphasize the need to base combination treatment strategies on
subpopulation analysis of the tumor. Patient-derived tumor cell models
grown in 3D culture conditions coupled with molecular characterization
are essential for conducting hypothesis driven studies. This approach
offers an informed starting point for subsequent in vivo studies from
which data can guide personalized medicine decisions toward true
translation in the clinic.

