Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The interaction between chronic alcohol consumption and melanoma
skews the iNKT cell cytokine profile towards IL-4 dominance


Despite the growing evidence that alcohol consumption is associated with
the incidence of many different types of cancer, there is little research
regarding the effect of continued alcohol consumption on growth,
progression and subsequent survival of cancer patients. Using a
well-established mouse model we previously found that chronic alcohol
consumption impairs the anti-melanoma functions of CD8+T cells and NK
cells, and this leads to decreased survival of melanoma-bearing mice. The
underlying mechanism for these effects is not known. Herein we examined
the relationship of NKT cells to regulation of anti-tumor responses in
alcohol consuming mice since NKT cells play important roles in the
regulation of the anti-tumor immune response. The phenotype and function
of invariant (i)NKT cells were examined in female B16BL6-bearing C57BL6
mice given 20% alcohol for three months. We found that alcohol
consumption increased iNKT cells in the liver of mice not inoculated with
melanoma, but did not alter iNKT cells in other organs. iNKT cells were
dramatically increased in the blood and liver of chronic alcohol
consuming, melanoma-bearing mice; however, these cells were not increased
in the spleen or draining lymph nodes. Immature NK1.1- iNKT cells
decreased 2-4 fold in the blood, spleen and liver of the
alcohol-consuming, melanoma-bearing mice, suggesting that alcohol
interacting with the melanoma tumors stimulates iNKT cells maturation.
Upon activation, fewer iNKT cells produced IFN-gamma in these mice
compared to water-drinking, melanoma-bearing mice. The ratio of
IL-4:IFN-gamma-producing iNKT cells increased 2-fold as a result of the
alcohol/tumor interaction, thus skewing the cytokine profile toward Th2
dominance. The Th2 dominant cytokine profile could negatively regulate
the anti-tumor activities of CD8+ T cell and NK cells as well as increase
myeloid derived suppressor cells, which we previously reported.
Collectively, these data support an important role for iNKT cells in
regulation of melanoma progression. (Supported by NIH grants R01AA07293
and K05AA017149, and WSU Alcohol and Drug Abuse Research Program grant
13B-2957-1246).

