Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting B-catenin/CBP interaction in basal like breast cancer
and breast cancer stem cells


Background: Aberrant regulation of the Wnt signaling pathway has been
shown to be associated with the development of aggressive types of breast
cancer. We hypothesize that increased co-activator interaction of CBP
with nuclear -catenin is associated with epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in breast cancer with stem-cell (basal) phenotype,
disease progression, drug resistance, relapse and metastasis. We further
hypothesize that pharmacologic disruption of this complex leads to forced
differentiation of cancer stem cells and re-sensitization to conventional
therapies. Material/Methods: We have previously developed the small
molecule ICG-001 that specifically disrupts the CBP/-catenin interaction.
Several breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231,-468,-435) were treated with
ICG-001 and investigated for changes in proliferation, invasive potential
and changes in sensitivity to chemotherapy. RNA sequencing and qRT-PCR
were used to evaluate gene-expression and alternative splicing events.
CoIP and ChIP were used to demonstrate CBP/-catenin disruption and
differential co-activator usage at specific gene promoters. Protein
expression levels were assessed by western blot and FACS analysis.
Viability assays were performed to determine drug-sensitization. Several
stem cell assays were used to study the effect of ICG-001 on cancer stem
cell populations. In a human primary breast cancer xenograft model in NSG
mice we investigated the in vivo effect of ICG-001. Results: CoIP
demonstrated global disruption of the CBP/-catenin interaction under
treatment with ICG-001. Significant down-regulation of EMT related genes
(e.g. S100A4, vimentin, CDH2) and up-regulation of epithelial genes (e.g.
CD24), in basal-like breast cancer, resulting in a reversal of the stem
cell phenotype (CD44+/CD24- to CD24+). ChIP experiments showed
re-expression of CD24 being dependent on the usage of the co-activator
p300. Re-expression of epithelial splice factors and alternative gene
splicing were observed. Cancer stem cell assays revealed that ICG-001
eradicates cancer stem cell-like populations and causes down-regulation
of stemness related genes (e.g. nestin, PROCR). An in-vitro invasion
assay demonstrated loss of invasive potential. Treatment with ICG-001
resulted in the down-regulation of cell cycle related genes (e.g. Aurora
kinases, Cyclins, CDK's) and anti-apoptotic genes (e.g. survivin). Marked
inhibition of cancer cell proliferation was observed in vitro. Treatment
with ICG-001 re-sensitized hormone receptor-negative cell lines to
tamoxifen. In-vivo studies using primary human xenografts in a NSG mouse
model suggested similar effects in-vivo. Conclusion: Antagonizing
CBP/-catenin signaling using a small molecule inhibitor should be an
attractive strategy for the treatment of drug-resistant aggressive
stem-like breast cancer and the eradication of breast cancer stem cells.

