Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNAs regulate breast cancer stem cells and spontaneous
metastases in orthotopic xenograft models


To examine the role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in breast cancer progression,
we profiled miRNA and gene expression in both clinical breast tumors and
human-in-mouse breast tumor models, where breast cancer stem cells
(BCSCs) contribute to spontaneous metastasis. CD44+ cells from both
primary tumors and lung metastases were highly enriched for tumor
initiating cells. Based on the miRNA profile analyses, we identified a
limited number of miRNAs that are differentially expressed in metastatic
triple-negative breast tumors and regulate BCSCs and tumor invasion in
vitro. To facilitate miRNA functional studies in vivo, we also developed
tumor imaging approaches by transducing BCSCs with optical reporter
fusion genes (Luc2-eGFP or -tdTomato), which enabled both bioluminescence
imaging (BLI) and FACS-based analysis and sorting. With non-invasive BLI
approaches, as few as 10 cells of stably labeled BCSCs can be tracked in
vivo. When optical reporters are expressed along with miRNA precursors or
inhibitors, the effects of introduced miRNA candidates can be evaluated
by selective imaging of labeled tumor cells, thereby eliminating the
noise of unlabeled cells. Using this model system and imaging technology,
we have screened and identified miRNAs that regulate BCSCs and metastatic
CSCs (MCSCs) by targeting polycomb repressors (BMI1 and the PC2
components) and cytoskeleton genes (TWF1 and VIM). Clinical studies
demonstrated that the expression of candidate miRNAs was associated with
and regulated by GATA3, suggesting a transcriptional regulation of
aberrantly expressed miRNAs in breast tumors. The GATA3-miRNA-target
genes signaling pathway was also strongly associated with relapse-free
survival of breast cancer patients, indicating the clinical importance of
the miRNA-gene network in breast cancer. Supported in part by the
University of Chicago Women's Board Fellowship (J.B.), NIH T90 Fellowship
DK070103-05, DOD Postdoctoral Fellowship W81XWH-09-1-0331, and Chicago
Fellows Program and CTSA UL1 RR024999 at The University of Chicago
(H.L.), University of Chicago Cancer Research Center Pilot Research Fund,
UCMC/Northshore Collaborative Research Award and the Virginia and D.K.
Ludwig Fund (G.L.G and H.L). NIH R01 and Breast Cancer Research
Foundation (M.F.C. and H.L.).

