Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue accumulation and release of platinum from a novel
chitosan-hybrid gel after intraperitoneal drug delivery


Gynecological malignancies such as cervical, endometrial and ovarian
cancer still are the leading causes of death for women worldwide.
However, standard therapies such as surgical cytoreduction and systemic
chemotherapy combined with radiation have shown limited-efficacy by
accessibility as well as nonspecific toxicity. To overcome those
limitations, we previously reported about the development of a
muco-adhesive, chitosan-hybrid gel (CS(BCDDP)) embedded with alginate
beads containing cisplatin (CDDP) for a local, intraperitoneal
application (# 3232, AACR 2011). Here we report the results of CDDP
release from the (CS(BCDDP)), its cellular activity in vitro and CDDP
accumulation to genomic DNA (gDNA) of tissues in vivo. To determine the
amount of CDDP released from (CS(BCDDP)) in vitro, we used a colorimetric
SnCl2 assay following the incubation in 0.9% NaCl solution for 24 hrs.
(CS(BCDDP)) demonstrated successful release of 90% CDDP within 2 hrs and
consistent CDDP-release could be maintained for up to 24 hrs. To test
activity of CDDP released from (CS(BCDDP)), clonogenic assay was
performed with Hela (human cervical adenocarcinoma) cells. Cells treated
with (CS(BCDDP)) demonstrated a significantly low number of colonies,
generating 9 ( 6) colonies per 500 cells seeded compared with 233 ( 10)
colonies per 500 cells treated with an empty, no drug containing control
gel (CS). To further assess CDDP accumulation to gDNA of tissues in vivo,
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) was performed with
tissue samples obtained from the left peritoneal sidewall of female nude
mice following treatment with a control gel mixed with CDDP (CSCDDP),
(CS(BCDDP)), and intravenously (i.v.) CDDP(CDDPIV). The results
demonstrated a greater than three-time enhancement of CDDP-accumulation
to the gDNA from (CS(BCDDP)) when compared to CDDPIV. Moreover,
(CS(BCDDP)) also demonstrated higher accumulation of CDDP to gDNA when
compared with CSCDDP. Relative values were 3.2 (0.9) for (CS(BCDDP)) and
1.3 ( 0.4) for CSCDDP compared to values obtained from CDDPIV. Our in
vitro and in vivo results, strongly suggest the feasibility of applying
this hybrid gel locally to mucosal surfaces of the female reproductive
tract and its advantage for intraperitoneal drug accumulation. Currently
ongoing experiments are evaluating the efficacy and safety of our hybrid
gel/CDDP in orthotopic endometrial, ovarian and cervical cancer animal
models.

