Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitizing resistant ovarian cancer to chemotherapy through
inhibition of small GTPases


Platinum- or paclitaxel-resistance is a major problem in women with
advanced ovarian cancer (OVCA) and that confers a poor prognosis for
patients. Consequently there is a great need to identify new drugs and
drug targets for the management of residual and recurrent metastatic
OVCA. About 90% of OVCA starts on the ovarian surface epithelium, but
individual cells or multicellular aggregates (MCAs) shed into the
peritoneal cavity and contribute to OVCA's metastasis into adjacent
organs. These MCAs are resistant to apoptosis and to radio- and
chemo-therapy. In OVCA, resistance to chemotherapy and apoptosis has been
linked to the small GTPases, Rac1 and Cdc42, and their downstream
effectors. Identifying compounds that disperse MCAs through disrupting
adhesions would sensitize this resistant subpopulation to chemotherapy.
We hypothesize that inhibition of one or both of these GTPases disrupts
MCAs and sensitizes drug-resistant OVCA cells to respond to
chemotherapeutic agents. We assessed if chemical inhibition of Rac1 or
Cdc42 would sensitize drug-resistant OVCA monolayers and in vitro MCAs to
cisplatin's cytotoxicity. The OVCA cell lines evaluated were OVCA 429 and
SKOV-3ip. The inhibitors we used included: (1) NSC 23766, a Rac1-specific
inhibitor, (2) ML141, a Cdc42-specific inhibitor, (3) Toxin B, an
inhibitor of Rac, Cdc42 and Rho, and (4) R-naproxen, an inhibitor of Rac1
and Cdc42 (based on our data). We found that Rac1 and Cdc42 inhibitors
disperse MCAs in a liquid overlay assay. Furthermore, these inhibitors
sensitized OVCA cells to cisplatin's cytotoxic effect. Finding drugs that
increase efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents against resistant OVCA cell
populations is of particular importance. Thus far, GTPases have not been
extensively examined as therapeutic targets, but they offer new
opportunities for OVCA therapy. Our findings indicate that Rac1 and Cdc42
inhibitors disperse MCAs and improve their response to chemotherapeutic
agents. This could increase the effectiveness of intraperitoneal
chemotherapy and improve patient outcomes and survival. Since one of
these inhibitors is R-Naproxen (an FDA approved off-patent drug), it has
potential for rapid clinical application.

