Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel chip-based parallel transfection assay to evaluate
paracrine cell interactions


Introduction: The analysis of how genes are regulating interactions
between different cell types is of highest importance for the
understanding of physiologic and pathologic processes in multi-cellular
organisms. We present a novel method for the highly parallel analysis of
gene functions in paracrine interactions between different cell types at
the microarray level on a chip. The basic idea was to apply a mixture of
two different cell types to the technique of reverse transfection with
expression plasmids spotted in an ordered array on chips. The goal was to
establish conditions that exclusively result in the transfection of one
cell type (effector cells) and to use the other cell type as the
indicator cells to determine paracrine gene effects (either directly
exerted by the secreted product of the transfected gene or induced by the
transfected gene). Methods: Reverse transfection was carried out spotting
plasmid DNA in Lipofectamine 2000 and 0.2% gelatin on a slide.
Subsequently, HEK 293T cells (effector cells) alone or in a mixture with
different indicator cells (human fibroblasts, HUVEC, HaCaT, HT29, WiDr)
were seeded. After 5 h a pre-warmed diffusion restricting matrix was
gently poured onto the slides. The slides were further incubated for 43 h
at 37 C. Then, the matrix was removed, and the slides were washed gently
and subjected to immunofluorescence analysis. Results: We successfully
solved the two key problems required for this approach: (1) exclusive,
differential transfection of the effector cells and not the indicator
cells and (2) restriction of diffusion to localize gene effects to the
specific transfection area. With the established methodology presented in
our study, 192 parallel tests of paracrine gene activations can be
conducted on a single chip. Demonstrating the broad applicability of the
method, we used different indicator cells such as human primary
fibroblasts (of relevance for inflammatory tissue reconstruction and
invasion), endothelial cells (of relevance for angiogenesis research),
keratinocytes (of relevance for wound healing research) and two different
colorectal cancer cell lines (of relevance for cancer research). In
addition, we used different indicator genes such as GBP-1 (indicates
IFN-gamma like activation), COX-2 (of relevance for tumor research),
ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 (of relevance for angiogenesis and inflammation
research) and different paracrine inducers by including IFN-, TNF- and
IFN-. Discussion: Our method provides a significant improvement over
current methodologies for the analysis of paracrine gene functions. It is
highly relevant to systematically investigate single and combination
effects of disease-associated gene clusters in intercellular
communication in many different research applications including cancer,
inflammation, angiogenesis and infectious diseases research.

