Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrin 64 upregulates EGFR ligands in pancreatic cancer cells


Because of late diagnosis and lack of effective treatments, pancreatic
cancer is the 4th leading cause of cancer death in the US, with a death
to incidence ratio that is nearly equal. In an effort to improve patient
survival, there needs to be a focus on molecular mechanisms that confer a
metastatic phenotype. The integrin 64 is overexpressed in pancreatic
carcinoma and plays a role in cancer progression by promoting tumor
invasion and metastasis as well as cell survival. We find that integrin
64 overexpression leads to upregulation of cancer promoting genes such as
amphiregulin and epiregulin, ligands of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR). The purpose of this study is to address how integrin 64
upregulates these ligands. We have identified large CpG islands within
the amphiregulin and epiregulin promoters (-1500 to +500 bp from TSS)
using CpG plot and CpG Island searcher. This provides a potential site
for epigenetic modifications, which are essentially reversible, and
therefore an ideal target for treatment. To test whether integrin 64
contributes to this regulation through DNA methylation pancreatic cancer
cells expressing low levels of 64 were treated with DNA methyltransferase
inhibitor 5-aza-2deoxycitidine. Using Q-PCR, our results show that
inhibition of DNA methyltransferase increases amphiregulin and epiregulin
expression at the mRNA level. In contrast, when cells with high levels of
integrin 64 were treated with the hypermethylating agent,
S-adenosylmethionine, it leads to a decrease in amphiregulin and
epiregulin expression. This implicates 64 as a regulator of this process
allowing us insight into how this pathway might be regulated. Using
ELISA, we also provide evidence that integrin 64 promotes increased
autocrine secretion of amphiregulin after promoter demethylation. This is
of particular interest to our lab because autocrine secretion of
amphiregulin and epiregulin make it possible for cancer cells to both
produce and respond to their own growth factors, promoting cellular
invasion and metastasis. This study indicates that overexpression of
integrin 64 in pancreatic cancer is associated with the hypomethylation
of amphiregulin and epiregulin promoters, which may play an important
role in the development of a malignant phenotype.

