Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BCL11B is a critical EWS/FLI up-regulated target in Ewing's sarcoma


Objective: Ewing's sarcoma is a highly aggressive tumor of the bone and
soft tissue that affects the pediatric and young adult population, and is
characterized by the EWS/FLI chromosomal translocation. This fusion
protein acts as an oncogenic transcription factor to dysregulate the
expression of a number of genes that contribute to the transformed
phenotype. One challenge is to define which of these dysregulated genes
are important for the oncogenic phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma. To address
this issue, we used a proteomics approach to identify new protein-protein
interactions among target genes of EWS/FLI. This screen identified
BCL11B, which had previously been identified in genome-wide
transcriptional profiling studies by our group, and others, as an
up-regulated target of EWS/FLI. Methods: To define the function of BCL11B
in Ewing's sarcoma, we used retroviral mediated shRNA knock-down of
EWS/FLI, followed by re-expression of the EWS/FLI cDNA, to verify that
BCL11B expression is modulated by the fusion protein. Anchorage
independent growth assays assessed the oncogenic potential of patient
derived Ewing's sarcoma cell lines in which BCL11B had been knocked-down
with shRNA. Luciferase assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation
techniques were used to interrogate BCL11B regulation by EWS/FLI.
Results: Our results show that BCL11B is up-regulated by EWS/FLI and is
necessary for oncogenic transformation in patient derived Ewing's sarcoma
cell lines. Our work addressing the mechanism of BCL11B regulation by
EWS/FLI is on-going, but preliminary data suggests that BCL11B may be a
direct target of EWS/FLI. Conclusion: This work identified BCL11B as an
EWS/FLI up-regulated target that contributes to transformation in Ewing's
sarcoma. It also provides a setting in which we can broaden our knowledge
regarding the mechanisms used by EWS/FLI to up-regulate critical target
genes.

