Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated approach for isolating CTCs to enable the
interrogation of cellular heterogeneity using IFAST


Background: The isolation of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from whole
blood is enabling for the study of malignant cells from patients with
metastatic disease through a minimally invasive procedure. The analytical
methods following the isolation of CTCs can be used to gain information
about the disease, but require a highly purified population of cells that
are minimally disturbed from the isolation procedures. While enumeration
of CTCs during therapy has been shown to predict overall survival in men
with metastatic prostate cancer, current methodology is limited in its
ability to obtain information about these cells beyond count. Recent
findings also suggest that CTC populations are heterogeneous (e.g. EMT,
stem cell markers), and enumeration of CTCs based solely on EpCAM surface
expression does not permit evaluation of CTC subpopulations. Therefore,
methods that can isolate these cells based on their heterogeneity and
further evaluate surface markers in an integrated platform will be
beneficial in progressing the clinical relevance of CTC collection.
Method: We present a method to sequentially isolate cells from a single
input sample by cellular surface markers. Using immiscible filtration
assisted by surface tension (IFAST) technology, we have demonstrated the
ability to purify cells from a mixed cell population while maintaining
the viability of these cells. The principle of the technology is that a
high interfacial energy between the cell sample and oil creates a barrier
that is normally impassable due to surface tension. Magnetic beads are
added that have antibodies specific to a cellular surface marker and bind
to the cells. A magnetic force is then applied to move the cells to and
across the interface between the fluid and the oil, leaving anything
unbound to the beads behind, thus isolating the cells of interest. CTC
isolation is challenging due to potential cell loss in pipette transfer
and wash steps. Using the IFAST device, we are able to add whole
buffycoat into the input of the device and sequentially isolate, stain,
and image CTCs without any pipette transfer or wash steps. Results: We
have demonstrated the ability to have a single source solution in which
two unique cell populations are present representing a basal and luminal
cell type (DU145s, LNCaPs) and demonstrate the ability to individually
isolate each of the two populations using a cellular surface antibody
unique to one of the cell types (DU145 - CD44, LNCaPs - EpCAM) from a
buffycoat containing high background PBMCs with greater than 80% of the
resulting cells being the cell of interest in each situation, and
demonstrate immunostaining of the isolated cell population (vimentin,
HLA-A2). Conclusions: IFAST technology can be used to isolate multiple
fractions from a single buffycoat solution using sequential bead
additions and pull-throughs, demonstrating an advantage of this
technology in the assessment of CTC heterogeneity.

