Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The prognostic marker SHP-1 promoter 2 hypermethylation can detect
lymph node micrometastases in early stage NSCLC


Introduction; Despite adequate surgical management of stage I non-small
cell lung cancer, many patients still relapse and die of their disease.
Micrometastases within lymph nodes might not be detected by standard H&E
method. The authors conducted the study of epithelial methylation marker,
SHP-1 Promoter 2 (SHP1P2) methylation as a potential molecular marker to
determine its association with a high risk of disease relapse in stage I
resectable non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Method; Lymph nodes from
resectable NSCLC stage II-IIIA were examined as a test set. All study
participants had stage I NSCLC and underwent curative resection during
2001-2007 and had follow-up at The King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital,
Bangkok, Thailand. No adjuvant treatment was given. Recurrence of disease
within 40 months after resection was defined as high risk. Results: In
stage II-IIIA, 75 lymph nodes were analyzed. SHP1P2 methylation was
significantly higher in lymph nodes containing H&E detectable metastasis
compared with histologically negative nodes (p=0.008). One hundred and
ninety-eight lymph nodes from 23 patients with stage I non-small cell
lung cancer were analyzed in this study. Seven patients (30%) relapsed
within 40 months. Median follow-up period from surgery to relapsed of
disease or censored if no relapse of disease was 56 months (range 6-109
months). All clinical/pathologic features were similar except for a
larger primary tumor size in the early relapse group. Median tumor size
is 5 cms (range 2-11.5) vs 2.5 cms (range 1.5-5.7) in high and low risk
group respectively. Multivariate logistic-regression analyses included
demographic data (sex, age, staging, tumor grading, size, type of surgery
and number of resected lymph node) and SHP1P2 methylation status were
done. A high absolute level of SHP1P2 methylation (>58%) in analyzed
resected lymph node was associated with early relapse, sensitivity 71%
and specificity 99% (HR 0.43-1.04; p=0.07 (univariate); p=.002
(multivariate) with an odds ratio of recurrent cancer of 32). Conclusion:
SHP1P2 methylation of resected lymph node of stage I NSCLC treated with
curative intent of surgery is associated with early relapsed of disease.

