Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential roles of uPAR in peritoneal ovarian carcinomatosis:
the inflammatory link


Epithelial Ovarian cancer is the 4th leading cause of death from
gynecologic malignancies in the United States. More than 75% of patients
are diagnosed at late stages, with the solid tumor masses growing either
as peritoneal implants, or floating within the ascitic fluid, a condition
known as peritoneal ovarian carcinomatosis (POC). Despite aggressive
surgical treatment debulking recurrence, with acquired chemo- and
radio-resistance are frequent with poor 5-year survival rate. Efforts to
improve survival rates are hindered by suboptimal compliance with
strategies that can detect, and effectively treat ovarian cancer in its
early stages. A number of factors have been implicated as mediators POC,
including integrins, growth factors, and proteases. The urokinase
plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) which is multifunctional receptor
involved in a myriad of tumor cell processes, including invasion, ECM
remodeling, adhesion, migration, angiogenesis, and metastasis. However
the role of uPAR in modulating the inflammatory ovarian cancer
microenvironment is still elusive. To define the potential
pro-inflammatory role of uPAR in ovarian cancer, first, we characterized
its expression in human ovarian cancer tissue microarray and found the
expression of tumor as well as stromal uPAR is significantly upregulated
as a function of tumor grade and stage. Second, using a syngeneic murine
model of POC injecting ID8 cells intraperitoneally in uPAR knockout mice,
we found that genetic ablation of uPAR restrained tumor take, peritoneal
implants and prolonged the survival of uPAR knockout mice compared to
their wild type counterparts. Ascitic fluid accumulation was
significantly decreased in uPAR knockout mice with significantly lower
levels of soluble pro-inflammatory cytokines/chemokines and bioactive
lipids (8-isoprostane and PGE2) compared to the wildtypes. In addition,
absence of uPAR was associated with decreased tumor infiltrating and
associated macrophages. Third, in vitro mechanistic studies revealed that
both OvCa cell- and macrophage-uPAR contributed to OvCa cell invasiveness
and secretion of inflammatory mediators. In summary, our studies
indicated that uPAR plays a significant role in ovarian cancer
cell-macrophage crosstalk and contributes to the inflammatory ovarian
cancer microenvironment. This provides a rationale for targeting the uPAR
with either specific neutralizing antibodies or targeting its downstream
inflammatory effectors in patients with ovarian cancer.

