Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Response biomarkers to IGF1R and mTOR inhibitor combination
therapy in ovarian carcinoma


Ovarian cancer, the sixth most frequent cause of cancer death among women
in the developed world, is a heterogeneous disease characterized by a
diverse set of genetic alterations. These factors underscore the need for
more effective treatment options accompanied by biomarker strategies to
identify patients who will have a greater likelihood to respond to novel
therapy. A combination strategy to target the PI3K pathway with the mTOR
inhibitor ridaforolimus and anti-IGF1R antibody dalotuzumab is currently
undergoing clinical development. Previous translational work has
suggested that low RAS activity, as determined by a RAS gene expression
signature score, and high levels of IGF1R pathway activation may enrich
for response to this combination therapy. Ranking of tumors in the
Moffitt tumor database with a low RAS and high IGF profile suggested that
ER+ breast and ovarian cancers are enriched for these putative response
biomarkers. Consistent with these observations, clinical responses were
noted for several ER+ breast or ovarian cancer patients in a Phase I
trial for ridaforolimus and dalotuzumab combination therapy. To provide
further support for low RAS and high IGF as response biomarkers, the
anti-tumor activity of ridaforolimus and dalotuzumab was assessed in 12
patient derived primary ovarian cancer xenograft models developed at
START. These models have been extensively characterized by the South
Texas Accelerated Research and Therapeutics (START) group for response to
standard of care drugs, and the status of many commonly mutated genes in
ovarian cancer. Molecular analyses of these tumors suggest that they
represent a diverse cross section of ovarian cancer. Similarly, responses
to ridaforolimus and dalotuzumab combination therapy ranged from minimal
to significant regression. Importantly, the responsive tumor models were
associated with a low RAS gene signature and a moderate to high IGF
expression level. Tumors with KRAS mutations or a high RAS gene score
were generally resistant to therapy. These results support the further
development of low RAS and high IGF as enrichment biomarkers for
ridaforolimus and dalotuzumab combination therapy in ovarian carcinoma.

