Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole genome sequencing of low-input fresh frozen prostate cancer
biopsies


Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy among men in
the United States. Due to an aging population, prostate cancer incidence
has been increasing, with an estimated 200,000 men being diagnosed in
2010 and more than 32,000 deaths resulting from this disease. Better
predictors of patient prognosis and treatment outcome are required to
individualize prostate cancer treatment. High-throughput genomic
sequence-based approaches offer a unique opportunity to identify
biomarkers of disease-progression, thereby enabling more individualized
therapy. The Canadian Prostate Cancer Genome Network (CPC-GENE) is an
outcomes-based initiative that will sequence 500 specimens from 350
prostate cancer patients over a 5-year time span. Previously, whole
genome sequencing efforts from biopsy specimens have been hindered by
insufficient quantities of extracted DNA required as input for sequencing
library construction. As a proof of concept to demonstrate the ability to
sequence low input amounts of DNA from prostate biopsies, whole genome
sequencing has been initiated for 50 prostate tumor biopsy samples along
with their matched blood-derived reference sample. An on-bead sample
preparation protocol was optimized using decreasing quantities of input
DNA and used to construct sequencing libraries from as low as 100ng of
DNA derived from macrodissected fresh frozen prostate biopsies (>70%
cellularity). Sequencing is performed on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform
to generate coverage depths of 50x for tumor samples and 30x for
reference samples. Following alignment using NovoAlign and
variant-calling using GATK, we compared our results to genotyping-array
results generated using the Affymetrix OncoScan platform.
Single-nucleotide variants detected using arrays were validated >99% of
the time by sequence data, confirming that the use of a low-input library
did not hinder mutation detection. Sequencing does not exhibit
significant genome-wide coverage biases, and CNV calls were compared
between the genotyping arrays and the next-generation sequencing data.
Outcomes from the sequencing and analysis of the initial 50 sample sets
will similarly be applied over a 5-year period to characterize an
additional 450 prostate specimens. The ability to whole genome sequence
specimens where minimal amounts of extracted DNA exist presents new
opportunities to sequence many samples previously deemed unusable, while
also providing encouraging prospects for whole genome sequencing
applications for future studies using biopsy specimens.

