Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Re-irradiation for recurrent malignant glioma by boron neutron
capture therapy


OBJECTIVE: Boron neutron capture therapy (BNCT) is based upon the nuclear
reaction that occur when non-radioactive boron-10 (10B) is irradiated
with low energy neutrons to produce high energy a particles (10B[n,
alpha] 7Li). In order for BNCT to be successful, a sufficient amount of
10B and neutrons must be delivered to the tumor. We have applied tumor
selective particle radiation known as boron neutron capture therapy
(BNCT) to malignant brain tumors. As there has been no standard treatment
for recurrent gliomas so far, it has been difficult to evaluate the
results of BNCT for recurrent malignant gliomas. Here we introduce the
survival benefit of BNCT for recurrent malignant glioma patients, with
special reference to new RPA classification recurrent malignant gliomas
advocated by New Approaches to Brain Tumor Therapy CNS Consortium (NABTT,
JCO 2007). METHODS: Since 2002, we have treated 27 cases of recurrent
malignant gliomas with BNCT. All cases had been treated by standard
treatment including radiotherapy mainly by XRT prior to BNCT. After BNCT,
patients were followed by MRI and F-BPA (amino acid)-PET. Cause of death
was estimated by these modalities. Also overall survival was evaluated
with special reference to RPA classes advocated by NABTT as above.
RESULTS: All cases showed radiographical improvement at once. The median
survival time (MST) of BNCT-treated recurrent gliomas was 10 months,
while that of total NABTT cases (N=333) was 7 months. MST of NABTT RPA
classes were 25.7, 17.2, 3.8, 10.4, 5.6, 6.4 and 4.9 months for classes 1
to 7, respectively. The MST of BNCT-treated cases were 33, 24, 10, 9, 9,
12 and 11, for classes 1 to 7, respectively. BNCT showed good survival
benefit especially for the most poor prognostic group (RPA class 3+7)
from 4.4 months (NABTT) to 9.6 months. Conclusion: BNCT could prolong the
survival of patients with recurrent gliomas not only for the good
prognosis group but also for the poor prognosis group. Some of the
prognostic factors of malignant glioma, such as KPS, tumor location,
extent of surgery, are not independent factor each other. BNCT seems to
have the survival benefits for such situations due to its tumor cell
selectivity.

