Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction of carbon nanotubes with macrophages in tumor
microenvironment


Macrophages take on different phenotypes and play different roles in
tumor progress as well as anti-tumor therapy depending on the
environmental signals that they receive. We have previously reported that
subcutaneously injected oxidized multiwalled carbon nanotubes (o-MWCNTs)
in normal BABL/c mice were largely engulfed by resident macrophages
around the injection site, inducing complement activation and short-term
upregulation of inflammatory cytokines [Jie Meng, Man Yang, Zhen Xu,
Fumin Jia, Hua Kong, and Haiyan Xu. Immune responses of BALB/c mice to
subcutaneously injected multi-walled carbon nanotubes. Nanotoxicology,
2010, DOI:10.3109/17435390.2010.523483]; subcutaneous injection of
o-MWCNTs in tumor bearing BALB/c mice upregulated the expression of
GM-CSF and IL12p70 in the serum over 2-fold increase and inhibited the
tumor progression to a certain extent [Jie Meng, Man Yang, Fumin Jia, Hua
Kong, Weiqi Zhang, ChaoyingWang, Jianmin Xing, Sishen Xie and Haiyan Xu.
Subcutaneous injection of water-soluble multi-walled carbon nanotubes in
tumor-bearing mice boosts the host immune activity. Nanotechnology 2010;
21: 145104]. When o-MWCNTs were used as a carrier of tumor lysate,
subcutaneous injection of this conjugate in tumor-bearing mice
effectively increased cytotoxicity of the lymphocytes to the tumor cells
[Jie Meng, Jie Meng, Jinhong Duan, Hua Kong, Chen Wang, Sishen Xie,
Shuchang Chen, Haiyan Xu and Xian-Da Yang. Carbon Nanotubes Conjugated to
Tumor Lysate Protein Enhance the Efficacy of an Anti-tumor Immunotherapy.
Small 2008; 4(9): 1364-1370]. These findings imply that the inhibitory
effect of o-MWCNTs on tumor progression may be associated with their
interactions with macrophages. The present work focused on the effect of
o-MWCNTs on macrophages phenotypes and functions in the tumor
environment. The o-MWCNTs were physicochemically characterized with SEM,
DLS, FTIR, TGA, and UV-vis-NIR spectroscopy; and the effects on RWA 264.7
cell line or macrophages in breast cancer tumor-bearing mice were
investigated using MTS assay, flow cytometry analysis, and histological
and immunohistochemical observations. Experimental results showed that
subcutaneously injected o-MWCNTs not only attracted resident macrophages
in tissue and induced phagocytosis, but also competitively recruited
macrophages from circulating monocytes, which led to reduction of
macrophages and vessel density around the tumor mass and inhibition of
tumor progression and metastasis in the lung. Additionally, o-MWCNTs
inhibited the ability of alternatively activated RAW macrophages to
promote tumor cells migration as well as decreased their proliferation
rate. Acknowledgement: This work was supported by National Key Scientific
Projects of China (2011CB933504, 2010CB934002) and Beijing Municipal
Natural Science Foundation (2011022).

