Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sonic hedgehog signaling and Androgens are linked in tumor-stromal
interaction through Epithelial-Mesenchymal transition (EMT) in prostate
cancer progression


Backgrounds: Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is known to relate to cancer
progression but the detail about how to correlate and link with another
signaling is debating. The purpose of this study is to investigate the
link between Shh signaling, androgens and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in prostate tumor-stroma interaction during prostate
cancer (PCa) progression. Materials and Methods: We investigated cell
proliferation in LNCaP PCa cells, Normal Prostate Fibroblasts (NPF), and
Cancer-associated Prostate Fibroblasts (CPF) in the presence of
representative androgen, dihydrotestosterone (DHT) and/or Shh signaling
inhibitor, cyclopamine (Cyc). With these stimulators or inhibitors, real
time RT-PCR was performed to investigate downstream transcriptional
factors of Shh signaling, Gli-1, EMT markers (E-cadherin, N-cadherin, and
Vimentin), and Osteonectin (ON), a possible Shh target gene shown in our
previous work. Expression levels of AR, Gli-1, Ki-67, Shh, and ON in
specimens from PCa patients were measured by immunohistochemical (IHC)
staining and correlated with clinical data. Results: While significant
cell proliferation was induced by DHT in LNCaP, NPF, and CPF, Cyc
inhibited these enhanced growths. CPF tended to react to DHT more but
less to Cyc than LNCaP or NPF. RT-PCR results showed Shh induced EMT and
DHT induced the expression of Gli-1, ON and EMT, and those inductions
were blocked by Cyc. IHC staining showed that Stromal ON (ONstr) had
significant correlation with serum PSA (p=0.031), high Gleason Scores had
significant correlation with Ki-67, and PSA recurrence was related
significantly to Gli-1 expression and lower expression of ONstr,
suggesting PCa recurrence had a significant correlation with Shh-Gli-1
signaling. Conclusions: Shh signaling is involved in tumor-stromal
interaction through a link with Androgens and EMT, and thus plays a
pivotal role in PCa progression. Cyclopamine may therefore be a possible
therapeutic agent for blocking PCa progression.

