Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity, p53 and increased oxidative stress: The role of TXNIP


Background: Although epidemiological studies show a strong association
between increased BMI and heightened risk of postmenopausal breast
cancer, the underlying mechanisms by which obesity influences breast
cancer susceptibility are multivariate and poorly characterized. One
potential mechanism by which obesity contributes to breast cancer
initiation is through induction of oxidative stress. Oxidative burden is
strongly implicated in tumor initiating events through induction of
chromosome instability, dysregulation of proapoptotic signaling, and
redox modulation of the tumor suppressor gene, TP53. Obesity and p53
mutations are both associated with development of aggressive, ER-negative
disease in younger women. Therefore, the goal of this study was to
identify genes that link obesity to p53 and oxidative stress. Results: We
isolated mRNA from the mammary fat pads of obese p53 +/+ and obese +/
mice. Using a qPCR array, we measured the expression of 85 genes related
to oxidative stress and screened for transcripts that were altered by at
least 2 fold. Expression of the gene thioredoxin-interacting protein
(TXNIP) was increased by almost 30 fold in MFP of sedentary, obese p53 +/
mice compared to sedentary, obese p53 +/+ mice (n=3). We validated this
finding using 6 mice from each group and found that Txnip mRNA was
significantly increased by almost 3 fold in the MFP of obese p53 +/ mice
compared to obese p53 +/+ mice (pBackground: Although epidemiological
studies show a strong association between increased BMI and heightened
risk of postmenopausal breast cancer, the underlying mechanisms by which
obesity influences breast cancer susceptibility are multivariate and
poorly characterized. One potential mechanism by which obesity
contributes to breast cancer initiation is through induction of oxidative
stress. Oxidative burden is strongly implicated in tumor initiating
events through induction of chromosome instability, dysregulation of
proapoptotic signaling, and redox modulation of the tumor suppressor
gene, TP53. Obesity and p53 mutations are both associated with
development of aggressive, ER-negative disease in younger women.
Therefore, the goal of this study was to identify genes that link obesity
to p53 and oxidative stress. Results: We isolated mRNA from the mammary
fat pads of obese p53 +/+ and obese +/ mice. Using a qPCR array, we
measured the expression of 85 genes related to oxidative stress and
screened for transcripts that were altered by at least 2 fold. Expression
of the gene thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) was increased by
almost 30 fold in MFP of sedentary, obese p53 +/ mice compared to
sedentary, obese p53 +/+ mice (n=3). We validated this finding using 6
mice from each group and found that Txnip mRNA was significantly
increased by almost 3 fold in the MFP of obese p53 +/ mice compared to
obese p53 +/+ mice (p<0.001). Interestingly, TXNIP expression is
increased in response to high glucose flux, can mediate apoptosis through
modulation of ROS, and is lost in many cancers, including breast. To
further elucidate the function of TXNIP in breast cancer cells, MCF-7
cells were stably transfected with shRNA targeting TXNIP, p53, or both.
Cells were incubated overnight in either serum-free media (SFM), 2% FBS,
2% serum from obese mice, or 2% serum from control mice. Cells were then
assayed for ROS production, DNA damage, and apoptosis. Cells transfected
with control shRNA exhibited a 7-fold increase in ROS when incubated in
obese serum compared to cells incubated in SFM, 2%FBS, or 2% control
serum. Increased production of ROS was abrogated by knockdown of TXNIP or
p53. However, knockdown of both TXNIP and p53 resulted in a 35-fold
increase in ROS levels. The significant increase in ROS production was
associated with intense nuclear H2AX immunufluorescent staining. Despite
high levels of oxidative stress and DNA damage, there was a 25% reduction
in apoptosis. Conclusion: TXNIP expression is increased by obesity and
p53-deficiency in the mouse mammary fat pad. In human breast cancer
cells, TXNIP regulates ROS levels and reduces chronic oxidative stress
associated with obesity by mediating an apoptotic response to excessive
DNA damage.

