Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential effects of dimerization on B-Raf and C-Raf function
revealed by mutational analysis and peptide inhibitors that target the
Raf dimer interface


Normal cellular function is dependent upon proper regulation of the Raf
kinases, mutation of which can result in human cancer and certain
developmental disorders. Inhibitors to the high activity, oncogenic
V600E-B-Raf are currently in clinical use; however, caution must be
taken, given that the use of these inhibitors in cells lacking
V600E-B-Raf can promote heterodimerization of B-Raf and C-Raf, resulting
in paradoxical pathway activation instead of inhibition. Thus, a full
understanding of the Raf activation process is critical for the
development of effective therapeutic strategies. Toward this end, we
investigated the importance of dimerization in Raf activation and
identified novel differences between B-Raf and C-Raf. In the context of
normal cellular signaling, we find that growth factor stimulation induces
strong B-Raf/C-Raf heterodimerization as well as some Raf
homodimerization, and increases the kinase activity of both B-Raf and
C-Raf. In contrast, growth factor stimulation has little effect on A-Raf.
To further explore the B-Raf and C-Raf interactions, we utilized protein
mutations in the dimer interface that either enhance (E586K-B-Raf and
E478K-C-Raf) or prevent (R509H-B-Raf and R401H-C-Raf) Raf dimerization.
Interestingly, these mutations had only a modest effect on the kinase
activity of B-Raf; however, the E-K mutation greatly enhanced C-Raf
activity and the R-H mutation completely abolished C-Raf kinase activity.
In addition, knockdown of C-Raf was found to have little effect on growth
factor-mediated B-Raf activation, whereas knockdown of B-Raf dramatically
inhibited C-Raf activation following stimulation, highlighting the
dependence of C-Raf activation on B-Raf. Next, we examined the effects of
dimerization on mutationally-activated B-Raf and C-Raf proteins that are
associated with human disease. Strikingly, we found that although
alterations in the dimer interface had an impact on the ability of all
the mutant proteins to heterodimerize, these alterations only affected
the biological activity (as measured in focus forming assays) of B-Raf
and C-Raf proteins with moderate to low kinase activity, but not B-Raf
proteins possessing high kinase activity. Based on the amino acid
sequence of the dimer interface region, a Raf-Dimer-Interface (RDI)
peptide was designed. The RDI peptide was found to bind both B-Raf and
C-Raf and could disrupt Raf heterodimerization in response to growth
factor stimulation and inhibit the biological activity of mutant Raf
proteins with moderate to low kinase activity. Together these data
indicate that dimerization is important for Raf function under normal
signaling conditions and in certain mutational settings. Moreover,
targeting the Raf dimer interface represents a new inhibitor strategy
with therapeutic potential.

