Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment of disseminated HER-2 carcinomas with a HER-2-retargeted
oncolytic herpes virus


Oncolytic viruses hold the promise to spare normal cells and to
selectively seek and destroy tumor cells within the body. Until now
numerous viruses where successfully engineered to confer or enhance tumor
selectivity, however the effective targeting of disseminated tumor cells
in vivo remains a major hurdle. We have retargeted herpes simpex virus
(HSV) through the replacement of key gD sequences with sequences encoding
a HER-2-specific single chain antibody derived from trastuzumab. The
HER-2 retargeted virus (designated here as HER2-HSV) did not bind HSV
natural receptors (HVEM and nectin-1), and exclusively infected and
killed tumor cells expressing high levels of human HER-2 oncoprotein p185
(PNAS, 106: 9039, 2009). Intratumor injection of HER2-HSV inhibited the
growth of HER-2+ human ovarian and breast carcinomas in immunodeficient
mice. The aim of the present work was to assess the curative potential of
HER2-HSV against disseminated tumors in realistic mouse models reflecting
tumor spread in human patients. Human ovarian carcinoma SK-OV-3 cells
implanted intraperitoneally in immunodeficient Rag2/;Il2rg/ mice give
rise to a progressive peritoneal carcinomatosis similar to the fatal
condition developing in advanced human patients. Intraperitoneal (i.p.)
administrations of HER2-HSV (108 pfu weekly for 4 weeks) strongly
inhibited carcinomatosis resulting in 60% of mice free from peritoneal
diffusion, and 95% reduction in the total weight of neoplastic nodules.
Visceral organs are a common target of metastatic spread of breast
cancer, therefore we studied whether HER2-HSV administred i.p. could
treat visceral metastases of HER-2+ MDA-MB-453 breast carcinomas in
Rag2/;Il2rg/ mice. The incidence of ovarian metastases was reduced from
89% to 30% by HER2-HSV treatment. Interestingly, the antimetastatic
activity of HER2-HSV was not confined to the peritoneal cavity. In the
same mice we found also a significant reduction in brain metastases but
not in bone marrow infiltration. In practice, HER2-HSV administered i.p.
inhibited both visceral (ovary) and distant (brain) HER-2+ breast cancer
metastases, presumably reflecting both intraperitoneal diffusion of the
virus and the neurotropism of herpesviruses. We are currently studying
whether the intravenous administration of HER2-HSV could achieve a more
widespread control of metastatic growth.In conclusion, the results show
that a HER-2-redirected oncolytic herpesvirus could effectively target
disseminated ovarian and breast carcinomas.

