Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tolerance of oral lipoid acid and hydroxycitrate combination in
cancer patients: first approach of the cancer metabolism research group


Introduction: our previous publications demonstrate that lipoc acid (ALA)
and hydroxycitrate (HCA) combination decreases the tumor growth in mice
with either lung cancer, bladder cancer or melanoma. ALA is a well known
treatment of the diabetic neuropathy but its interest in cancer is
growing. In fact, ALA is a cofactor in mitochondrial energy metabolism
and a potent regulator of the cell's redox status with effects on P13K
and AMPK signaling and related transcriptional pathways. These mechanisms
increase its interest in cancer and aging relative diseases. HCA
(garcinia extract) a weight loss supplement, a derivated citric acid,
could act by competitively inhibiting the enzyme adenosine triphosphate
citrate lyase. This could also be a way to inhibit tumor cells growth as
other evoked mechanisms (increase of serotonin in the brain, inhibition
of pancreatic alpha amylase and intestinal alpha glucosidase leading to a
reduction in carbohydrate metabolism. So, both molecules target the
abnormal metabolic pathways such as seen in cancer. There combination
appears in mice to be more effective than their use alone. We report here
the early clinical tolerance evaluation of a daily metabolic combination
in humans associated with chemotherapy. Methods and patients(p.) Italian
experience: median duration of 14,5 months (4 to 20 m),4 p.: 3 F, 1 M,
median age 57 years (37 - 81 y), 1 breast cancer, 1 nasopharyngeal
carcinoma, a pancreatic adenocarcinoma, a glioblastoma. Doses of ALA 1,2
g/d, HCA 1,2 g/d orally. AlL but one p. had concomitant chemotherapy.
French experience: Jan 08 to Nov 11, 13 p. with local relapse and/or
metastatic cancer with a combination of ALA -HCA, 7 M, 6 F, median age 45
y (28 74) 2 colon, 1 lung, 1 hepatocarcinoma, 5 sarcomas, 1
neuro-endocrine. HCA was administered orally, 3 g / d (1 g x3/d). ALA 1,8
g /D (600 m g x3/d) and from Oct 11 increased to 6 g /d for 3 last 6 p.
Median duration: 3 months (15 d - 5 m, 1 pt 20m). Results: This
association was well tolerated with few clinical disturbances: vomiting,
nausea, 5 patients had a gastric protective treatment and 2 because of
corticotherapy. The increased dose of ALA was well tolerated. No hepatic
toxicity found, no weight loss, no hypoglycemia. A problem was the bad
and discontinued observance for patients in relation with the cost of
these medicines, the difficulty to buy them (only by online pharmacy for
ALA in France).The tolerance of HCA was mild because of gastric pain but
patients continue the treatment. Conclusion: ALA - HCA a combination well
tolerated is a promising treatment in cancer patients. The switch to IV
ALA will permit to obtain higher blood peaks and better observance.
Randomized clinical trials are necessary to evaluate the efficacy on
tumor progression in correlation with pharmacologic studies.

