Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Missense mutations in the p53 DNA-binding motifs (DBMs) are
associated with shorter time to progression (TTP) in erlotinib-treated,
EGFR-mutated patients


Background: Advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations has an average time to
progression (TTP) of 14 months (mo) and overall survival of 27 mo when
treated with erlotinib. However, EGFR mutations can only imperfectly
predict outcome. In NSCLC cell lines, tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)
induce p53 translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus and subsequent
up-regulation of Fas and caspase activation leading to apoptosis. This
mechanism was defective in p53-null cells. We tested whether mutations in
the TP53 gene influence outcome to erlotinib in EGFR-mutated patients
(p). Expression levels of the p53 repressor MDM2 were also examined.
Methods: We assesed p53 status in pretreatment paraffin-embedded tumor
samples from 93 erlotinib-treated, EGFR mutated advanced NSCLC p.
Mutations in exons 5, 6, 7 and 8 were screened by High Resolution Melting
analysis (HRM) followed by sequencing of the amplified products with
non-wild type melt curves. All mutant samples were re-confirmed by
standard PCR and sequencing. Expression levels of MDM2 mRNA were
determined by quantitative RT-PCR. Results: Mutations in exons 5-8 of the
TP53 gene were detected in 26 of 93 p (28%). We found an unusually high
frequency of in-frame and frameshift deletions (23% of mutations),
indicating that the spectrum of p53 mutations might be different in
EGFR-mutated NSCLC. Mutations in the TP53 gene were not associated with
sex, age, smoking status, histology, exon 19 vs. 21 mutation, or
response, but, within the study population, were significantly less
frequent in p with ECOG 2 or above. The mutations were also associated
with the presence of the pretreatment T790M mutation. 14 p had mutations
in one of the p53 DNA binding motifs (DBMs), and showed TTP to erlotinib
of only 9 mo, compared to 19 months for wt p and 27 mo for those carrying
a non-DBM mutation. Survival was 24 mo vs. 31 mo, and not-reached,
respectively. Finally, MDM2 mRNA levels were significantly lower in
tumors with p53 mutations, especially when these affected DBMs. In the
case of wt p, high MDM2 expression correlated with a better TTP and
survival. Conclusions: TP53 mutations co-exist with EGFR mutations in a
significant number of p; and those in the DBMs are associated with poorer
response to erlotinib. This finding paves the way for the possibility of
combining erlotinib with a drug restoring p53 function in those p
harboring DBM mutations in the TP53 gene.

