Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blocking ATP delivery to hexokinase II in glioblastoma is a
promising therapeutic strategy


Glioblastoma has a 5-year survival of less than 5% and is responsible for
more years of life lost than any other malignancy, making it a
challenging therapeutic problem. Healthy cells mainly rely on oxidative
phosphorylation to catabolize glucose, while glioblastoma cells use
aerobic glycolysis. The first step in glycolysis, conversion of glucose
to glucose-6-phosphate using ATP, is catalyzed by hexokinase and
glioblastoma tumors employ an isoform (HKII) that is bound to
mitochondria via interaction with the outer-membrane voltage dependent
anion channel. The prevailing theory is that this localization affords
HKII preferential access to the mitochondrial ATP via inner-membrane
adenine nucleotide translocase (ANT) to rapidly phosphorylate and trap
glucose, thus initiating glycolysis across the cell cytosol. We have
tested this hypothesis using a novel water-soluble organoarsenical,
PENAO, to inactivate ANT (1). Treatment of glioblastoma cell lines and
primary glioma initiating cells with PENAO inhibited acid (lactate)
production, a measure of cancer cell glycolysis, at a half-maximal
inhibitory concentration (IC50) of 1.5 M, which supports the hypothesis.
Proper functioning of ANT is also important for mitochondrial integrity
and low micromolar concentrations of PENAO increased the cytosolic levels
of superoxide, disrupted the mitochondrial trans-membrane potential and
inhibited O2 utilization in glioblastoma cells. Blocking ANT with PENAO
resulted in inhibition of glioblastoma cell migration at IC50 value of
1.4 M, proliferation arrest at IC50 values of 0.3-4.5 M and
mitochondrial-mediated apoptotic cell death at PENAO concentrations of
0.3-5 M. These effects were observed under both normoxic and hypoxic (1%
O2) conditions. PENAO has up to 440- and 171-fold greater
anti-proliferative activity than temozolomide or carboplatin, typical
drugs used to treat glioblastoma, in glioblastoma cell lines and primary
glioma initiating cells. PENAO was found to cross the intact
blood-brain-barrier in mice and administration of 1 mg/kg/day PENAO to
ten mice bearing subcutaneous glioblastoma tumors resulted in eight
partial and two complete tumor responses. There were no signs or symptoms
of treatment toxicity. These findings indicate that blocking ATP delivery
to hexokinase II in glioblastoma by inhibiting mitochondrial ANT is a
promising therapeutic strategy. The efficacy of PENAO in in vitro and in
vivo models of glioblastoma supports its clinical development as a
treatment option for this cancer. 1. Dilda PJ, Decollogne S, Weerakoon L,
Norris MD, Haber M, Allen JD, Hogg PJ (2009) Optimization of the
antitumor efficacy of a synthetic mitochondrial toxin by increasing the
residence time in the cytosol. J Med Chem 52, 6209-6216.

