Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch1 affects ABCC1-mediated drug efflux and drug sensitivity in
MCF7 breast cancer cells


Development of multidrug resistance is a major impediment to the
successful treatment of cancer. Although many cellular mechanisms are
involved in multidrug resistant cancers, overexpression of ATP-binding
cassette (ABC) membrane transporters represents one of the main
determinants of the multidrug resistance phenotype. We have previously
demonstrated a positive correlation of expression of intracellular Notch1
(NIC) and the ABCC1 transporter; we found that NIC contributes to
multidrug resistance by upregulation of ABCC1 (S Cho, M Lu et al, PNAS,
in press, 2011). In order to determine whether there is a functional
relationship between the two proteins, we performed drug efflux
experiments. We treated drug-sensitive MCF-7 and multidrug resistant
(MDR) MCF-7/VP breast cancer cells with the anticancer drug doxorubicin
and measured the amount of drug efflux by flow cytometry over time. The
MDR MCF-7/VP cells, which have high levels of activated Notch1 and ABCC1
proteins, exhibited increased doxorubicin efflux, compared to the
drug-sensitive MCF-7 cells. Since -secretase (GS) is required for the
processing of Notch into its active form, NIC, we blocked GS activity
using a GS inhibitor, DAPT, in MCF-7/VP cells and assayed drug efflux
from them. We found that inhibition of Notch signaling by DAPT blocks
ABCC1 mediated drug efflux. To better understand the connection between
Notch, ABCC1, and drug efflux, we compared drug efflux in MCF-7 cells
stably overexpressing NIC (ICN1-c4, which also overexpress ABCC1), and
the empty vector control MCF-7 cells (pcDNA3). As expected, we saw
increased drug efflux in the ICN1-c4 cells compared to MCF7/pcDNA3 cells.
To establish whether the observed drug efflux is ABCC1-specific, we
treated ICN1-c4 cells with either the ABCC1-specific inhibitors reversan
or probenecid, or with an ABCC1 siRNA to knockdown ABCC1 expression, and
then examined these cells for changes in drug efflux. We found that
inhibition of ABCC1, by reducing ABCC1 activity or levels in the presence
of activated Notch1, blocks drug efflux from ICN1-c4 cells. In addition,
we also found that the ABCC1 inhibitor reversan sensitizes ICN1-c4 cells
to doxorubicin, and knockdown of ABCC1 reverses the resistance of ICN1-c4
cells to doxorubicin. These results strongly support the idea that Notch1
exerts its effect on ABCC1-mediated drug efflux to a large extent through
its induction of ABCC1. Overall, our results reveal a novel functional
relationship between expression of Notch and ABCC1. (Supported in part by
CA40570 [to WTB] and in part by UIC.)

