Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy is correlated with chemoresistance in neuroblastoma


Neuroblastoma (NB) is a frequent pediatric tumor. After combined
treatments of chemotherapy, bone marrow transplantation, surgery and/or
radiotherapy, metastatic NBs still have a poor prognosis. Therefore,
finding new therapeutic strategies to increase the survival rate of
patients with NB is essential. Autophagy is a self-degradative process
induced primarily by starvation and, with the intermediate of lysosomes,
damaged macromolecules and cell organelles are degraded. This degradation
insures cell survival by adapting to stress conditions. In addition,
recent studies proposed that autophagy may contribute to cancer
resistance to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. However, in some
circumstances, autophagy can induce non-apoptotic programmed cell death.
The aim of this study is to determine how autophagy is regulated and
whether it is associated with chemoresistance in NB. Firstly, tissue
Microarray blocks containing 184 patients NB were used for an
immunohistochemistry study in order to identify the expression of LC3, a
cytosolic protein required for autophagic vacuole (autophagosome)
formation, and beclin 1, a positive regulator of autophagy. Secondly, in
vitro and in vivo (NOD/SCID/IL2Rc-null mice) studies were performed to
determine the level of autophagy in NB cells following chemotherapy.
Finally, autophagy was inhibited in NB cells with shRNA targeting Atg5
(an essential protein for autophagy) or with hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), a
pharmacological inhibitor of autophagy. NB cells were further treated
with conventional drugs used in NB treatments to evaluate if they retain
their ability to resist to chemotherapy. Cell survival was measured using
MTT cell proliferation assay. Autophagy was detected by labelling the
autophagic vacuoles with monodansylcadaverine (MDC) and by Western blot
analysis of LC3 cleavage and Atg5 expression. Our study demonstrated that
autophagy is present at low levels in a majority of NB. LC3 expression
was not correlated with any clinical pathological data. On the other
hand, Beclin1 expression in NB was higher in children older than one year
of age who have a poor prognosis. Also, it had a higher level in
primitive tumors than in metastases. In our in vitro and in vivo studies,
autophagy, which was detected by cleavage of LC3 and by MDC test, was
correlated with increasing concentrations of therapeutic agents.
Interestingly, inhibition of autophagy with either Atg5 shRNA or HCQ
strongly increased the sensitivity of NB cells to chemotherapy.Overall,
these results suggest that autophagy contributes to NB cells resistance
to chemotherapy. Therefore, inhibition of autophagy in combination with
current treatments may be of great interest in order to improve
therapeutic strategies of NB.

