Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capture and molecular characterization of ovarian cancer-derived
exosomes


Exosomes are secreted, membrane-bound vesicles of 50-100 nm known to
carry cellular messenger RNAs (mRNA) and microRNAs (miRNA). Several
reports have indicated that tumor-derived exosomes are released into the
circulation of patients with a variety of cancer types, including
epithelial ovarian cancer. The goals of this study are (i) to develop
methods for specific capture and molecular profiling of ovarian cancer
tumor-derived exosomes from blood plasma and (ii) determine whether
information carried in tumor-derived exosomes can serve as a reliable
surrogate for tumor tissue for measurement of key miRNA and mRNA
biomarkers. In our work to date, we have used exosomes derived from
conditioned media of ovarian cancer cell lines to develop and optimize
methods for the isolation and physical characterization of exosomes.
Using Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) technology (NanoSight, Inc.)
to directly count and accurately size exosome populations, our initial
data indicates that traditional ultracentrifugation protocols may fail to
recover a major fraction of exosomes present in conditioned media. The
basis for this finding is currently under investigation and the latest
results will be presented. In parallel, we are developing affinity
capture approaches to isolate specific subpopulations of exosomes using
antibodies directed against epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) and
other exosomal surface proteins. Initial results indicate that a
subpopulation of ovarian cancer-derived exosomes can be purified in this
manner; molecular characterization of exosomal contents is in progress.
Finally, we are analyzing clinical plasma specimens from patients and
controls to: (i) test whether bulk properties of exosomes (e.g., size and
number) differ between cases and controls, and (ii) perform specific
capture of tumor-derived plasma exosomes and compare exosomal mRNA/miRNA
profiles to matched tumor tissue to determine the degree of concordance
between exosomal and tissue RNA profiles. Latest results from these
studies will be presented. Ultimately, we anticipate that this work will
lead to methods for molecular phenotyping of epithelial ovarian cancers
in individual patients using a blood-based approach. This work was
supported in part by a Stand Up To Cancer/AACR Innovative Research Grant
to M. Tewari.

