Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel diagnostic approach using genome-wide single nucleotide
polymorphism arrays for ovarian metastases in endometrial cancers


[Introduction] Synchronous cancers involving ovaries as well as uterine
corpus are well-known events in gynecologic malignancies. These tumors
may be independently derived, non-metastatic tumors (Dual Primary tumors;
DP) or a tumor from one organ with metastasis to the other (Single
Primary tumor with Metastasis; SPM). In the majority of these synchronous
endometrial and ovarian cancers, both tumors are histologically
endometrioid adenocarcinomas, which may cause a diagnostic difficulty to
distinguish DP and SPM. By genome-wide genotyping, single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) arrays, we can obtain chromosomal copy number
alterations (CNA) throughout the genome in a single assay. We
hypothesized that the copy number profiles by SNP arrays might be highly
informative for genetic diagnosis in the synchronous endometrioid
adenocarcinomas. [Material and Methods] We genetically diagnosed ten
tumors from five patients with synchronous endometrial and ovarian
carcinomas, using 250K SNP typing arrays and mutational analysis of
PIK3CA, PTEN, K-Ras and CTNNB1 (beta-catenin). We evaluated whether
conventional pathological diagnosis is compatible with the genetic
diagnosis. [Results] Three of the five patients show identical copy
number alterations (CNA), including type, loci and degree of each
alteration, between the endometrial and the ovarian carcinomas. The other
two show CNA only in either endometrial or ovarian carcinoma. All the
five tumors possess one or more genetic mutations in the genes examined.
One patient showed mutations both in PIK3CA and PTEN at discordant sites
between endometrial and ovarian carcinomas, whereas the other four showed
concordant mutations. Together, four of the five were genetically
diagnosed as SPM and the remaining one was as DP. The pathological
diagnosis was not in agreement with the molecular diagnosis in four of
the five cases. [Conclusion] Our data suggest that most of the copy
number alterations might occur before metastases and that genome-wide
genotyping may represent a useful approach to distinguish between SPM and
DP in synchronous endometrial and ovarian carcinomas. As chromosomal
instability is commonly observed in various types of tumors, SNP array
genotyping might be applicable to synchronous tumors in other organs.

