Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hexane fraction of Naematoloma sublateritium extracts inhibits
metastatic potential of MDA-MB-231 Breast cancer cells through modulation
of the JNK and p38 pathway


Despite years of therapeutic development and research, metastasis is
still the major driver of mortality in cancer patients. Breast cancer is
a second leading cause of cancer deaths in woman world-wide. The
prevalence of breast cancer continues to increase by approximately 2%
each year. Breast cancer also presents as metastatic disease, which has
spread beyond the original organ, breast to bone, liver, lung and brain.
Recently, many studies have reported that natural products- dietary
phytochemicals including mushroom are known to exhibit a variety of
anti-cancer, anti-invasive and anti-metastatic activities. Naematolma
spp. is a basidiomycete of the fungus that is known to produce anti-tumor
compound, clavaric acid. In our previous studies, HFNS has been shown to
significantly inhibit cell proliferation and induce apoptosis of human
estrogen-nonresponsive MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. In this present
study, we report for the first time that hexane fraction of Naematoloma
sublateritium (HFNS) regulates TNF-alpha induced invasion and migration
in MDA-MB-231 cells. We observed that non-cytotoxic concentrations (10-50
g/mL) of HFNS markedly inhibited the invasion and migration of highly
metastatic MDA-MB-231 cells as shown by a Matrigel invasion assay and
wound healing analysis, respectively. The results of a gelatin zymography
showed that HFNS suppressed the activity of matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP)-9 and urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA). Western blot results
demonstrated that treatment with HFNS had decreased level of MMP-9, and
uPA, while the expression of the endogenous inhibitor proteins including
tissue inhibitors of MMP (TIMP-1 and TIMP-2), and plasminogen activator
inhibitor (PAI)-1, was up-regulated in a dose-dependent manner.
Furthermore, HFNS suppressed the phosphorylation of p38, and JNK1/2 in
MDA-MB-231 cells, where extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2
were not affected. It was confirmed by pretreatment with SB203580 (p38
inhibitor), SP600125 (JNK inhibitor), and PD98059 (ERK inhibitor),
respectively, before stimulation with TNF-alpha. Interestingly, the HFNS
treatment also led to a dose-dependent inhibition on NF-B and activator
protein-1(AP-1) binding activity which are downstream targets of JNK and
p38. The gel-shift assay results supported that HFNS treatment caused
down-regulation of MMP-9 and uPA gene in mRNA level. Taken together,
these data suggest the inhibitory effect of HFNS on the metastatic
potential of MDA-MB-231 cells through inhibiting the phosphorylation of
JNK/p38 and reducing NFB and AP-1 DNA binding activities. In conclusion,
we propose that HFNS may be a safe and potential therapeutic agent
against metastasis of breast cancer.

