Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mouse models for detection of circulating tumor cells from breast
cancer


Breast cancer is the most frequent malignancy among women, causing at
least 373,000 deaths per year worldwide, and in United States alone an
estimated 208,000 women were diagnosed with breast cancer in 2010. Recent
studies indicate that breast cancer is initiated by breast cancer stem
cells (BCSCs) that express CD44+/high CD24-/low surface markers.
Mammospheres are non-adherent spherical cell clusters grown in selective
culture conditions. Our experimental results using mammosphere cultures
of different breast cancer cells such as MDA-MB-231 show drastic
enrichment of breast cancer stem-like cells with the phenotype of
CD44+/high CD24-/low by flow cytometry analysis. We have implanted
mammosphere-derived cells into mammary fat pads of nude mice and sampled
blood from such tumor-bearing animals to look for the presence of unique
breast cancer cells with metastatic potential {circulating tumor cells
(CTCs)}, by scoring for Epcam+/cytokeratin+/CD45- tumor cells using the
FDA-approved Veridex CellSearch Sysytem. As these metastatic breast
cancer cells stably express ZS-Green protein, isolated ZS-Green positive
CTCs are being further subjected to breast cancer-specific multiplexed
molecular marker analysis. When a mouse with the metastatic breast cancer
cell line - 4T1, stained with the CellVue dye is implanted in mammary fat
pads, high levels of metastasis are detected with the CellVue marker in
different internal organs such as the lungs, liver, heart and lymph
nodes. Fluorescence microscopy analysis of blood withdrawn from animals
bearing orthotopic 4T1 breast xenograft tumors, could detect ZS-Green
positive mouse breast cancer CTCs. These mouse animal models bearing
xenograft tumors are facilitating our understanding of CTC detection as
well as analysis methods and also in understanding of human breast cancer
metastasis. Open questions we are addressing include heterogeneity of
CTCs, relationships in stem cell markers and prognostic markers when CTCs
are compared with the primary tumors, relationships between tumor burden
and tumor aggressiveness with CTC numbers in this mouse model. In
addition the model provides an opportunity for testing candidate
therapeutic agents and drug combinations.

