Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of microRNA-based therapeutic candidates using a
unique lentiviral microRNA overexpression library


microRNA (miRNA) genes transcribed by RNA polymerase II generate small
noncoding miRNAs of 18 to 24 nucleotides after maturation process. The
mature miRNAs and their associated isomirs specifically bind to different
mRNA transcripts, resulting in down regulation of multiple genes within
the cell in a highly multiplexed way. miRNA expression profiles differ
between human cell types suggesting cell-specific impacts of each miRNA
on the regulation of different biological processes. Comparison of miRNA
profiles of tumor samples and adjacent normal tissues showed that some
miRNAs are up- or down- regulated and suggested their implication during
tumor progression. However, such a miRNA profiling approach is not
sufficient to identify the respective role of each miRNA gene during the
tumorigenesis. Here, to assess the individual role of each miRNA gene and
its different isomirs in a specific cell environment, we have constructed
a lentiviral miRNA expression library containing more than 1100 human
known and novel miRNA precursors. The arrayed layout of our library
allowed high-throughput screens with a large spectrum of functional
read-outs using either normal or tumor cells. To exemplify this approach,
the results of three different screens will be presented; i.e.
identification of miRNAs that inhibit the BRAF pathway, miRNAs that
inhibit tumor angiogenesis and miRNAs that stimulate the mesenchymal to
epithelial transition. In addition, beyond this hit identification step,
we will present detailed characterization of the role of the identified
miRNAs in tumor progression by means of molecular and cellular functional
assays. Combining our unique miRNA expression library with a functional
screening platform has allowed the identification and the further
characterization of several miRNAs able to significantly impact on tumor
behavior supporting the therapeutic interest of some candidates.

