Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel FAK kinase inhibitor (PF-4554878) decreases growth and
induces apoptosis in pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor cells


Introduction: Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PNETs) are poorly
understood and there are few effective therapies. Focal adhesion kinase
(FAK) is an important tyrosine kinase implicated in cell survival
signaling and found to be overexpressed in many malignancies. Our
hypotheses are that 1) FAK expression is upregulated, 2) that FAK plays
an important role in PNET cell survival, and 3) that a novel ATP
competitive kinase inhibitor of FAK demonstrates anti-neoplastic efficacy
in PNET cells. Methods: By Western blot, the expression of FAK was
determined in frozen human PNETs compared to normal human pancreas. The
compound, PF-4554878 (Pfizer), has been shown to be an ATP competitive
kinase inhibitor of FAK. The in-vitro effects of this compound on cell
signaling, viability and apoptosis in human pancreatic neuroendocrine
cells (BON-1 and QGP-1) were evaluated. Statistical analysis was
performed via t-test with significance defined as pIntroduction:
Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PNETs) are poorly understood and there
are few effective therapies. Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is an important
tyrosine kinase implicated in cell survival signaling and found to be
overexpressed in many malignancies. Our hypotheses are that 1) FAK
expression is upregulated, 2) that FAK plays an important role in PNET
cell survival, and 3) that a novel ATP competitive kinase inhibitor of
FAK demonstrates anti-neoplastic efficacy in PNET cells. Methods: By
Western blot, the expression of FAK was determined in frozen human PNETs
compared to normal human pancreas. The compound, PF-4554878 (Pfizer), has
been shown to be an ATP competitive kinase inhibitor of FAK. The in-vitro
effects of this compound on cell signaling, viability and apoptosis in
human pancreatic neuroendocrine cells (BON-1 and QGP-1) were evaluated.
Statistical analysis was performed via t-test with significance defined
as p<0.05. Results: FAK was found to be overexpressed in PNETs compared
to normal pancreas. PF-4554878 not only caused a decrease in PNET cell
viability with an IC50 of 5 M in human pancreatic neuroendocrine cell
lines, but also caused a statistically significant dose-dependent
increase in apoptosis by TUNEL staining and/or PARP cleavage. These
effects were associated with a decrease in Y397 phosphorylation of FAK.
Conclusions: A novel compound that inhibits the kinase activity of FAK
results in decreased PNET proliferation and induction of apoptosis. These
effects appear to be mediated through downregulation of p-FAK (Y397).
This compound deserves further study as a novel treatment strategy in
human PNETs.

