Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AME-133v, a humanized, Fc-engineered anti-CD20 monoclonal
antibody, demonstrates greater B cell depletion than Rituxan in vitro


Purpose The efficacy of AME-133v in depleting B lymphocytes was compared
in vitro to that of Rituxan, and the effect of FcRIII genotype was
assessed. Methods Blood samples from 37 healthy donors were collected and
genotyped for FcRIII polymorphism. Varying concentrations of AME-133v or
Rituxan were applied to samples and CD19+ peripheral circulating B
lymphocytes were measured using fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS). B cell depletion was listed as a percentage of baseline level.
Results In an in vitro whole blood assay, AME-133v was more effective in
depleting B lymphocytes from baseline levels than Rituxan, particularly
at increasing concentrations (Table 1). Significant differences were
found between treatments averaged over doses, between doses averaged over
treatments, and between treatments depending on dose, all with pPurpose
The efficacy of AME-133v in depleting B lymphocytes was compared in vitro
to that of Rituxan, and the effect of FcRIII genotype was assessed.
Methods Blood samples from 37 healthy donors were collected and genotyped
for FcRIII polymorphism. Varying concentrations of AME-133v or Rituxan
were applied to samples and CD19+ peripheral circulating B lymphocytes
were measured using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). B cell
depletion was listed as a percentage of baseline level. Results In an in
vitro whole blood assay, AME-133v was more effective in depleting B
lymphocytes from baseline levels than Rituxan, particularly at increasing
concentrations (Table 1). Significant differences were found between
treatments averaged over doses, between doses averaged over treatments,
and between treatments depending on dose, all with p<0.0001. AME-133v's
superior effect in depleting B cells is independent of dose (pPurpose The
efficacy of AME-133v in depleting B lymphocytes was compared in vitro to
that of Rituxan, and the effect of FcRIII genotype was assessed. Methods
Blood samples from 37 healthy donors were collected and genotyped for
FcRIII polymorphism. Varying concentrations of AME-133v or Rituxan were
applied to samples and CD19+ peripheral circulating B lymphocytes were
measured using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). B cell
depletion was listed as a percentage of baseline level. Results In an in
vitro whole blood assay, AME-133v was more effective in depleting B
lymphocytes from baseline levels than Rituxan, particularly at increasing
concentrations (Table 1). Significant differences were found between
treatments averaged over doses, between doses averaged over treatments,
and between treatments depending on dose, all with p<0.0001. AME-133v's
superior effect in depleting B cells is independent of dose (p<0.001),
but caused greater B cell depletion at lower concentrations of antibody.
In both AME-133v and Rituxan treatments, VF and FF patients demonstrated
less B cell depletion, corroborating previous data citing decreased
response to Rituxan among F-carriers and indicating improved
pharmacodynamics of AME-133v. Conclusion AME-133v is engineered for a
6-fold more potent effector function in antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity (ADCC) compared to Rituxan, which is elucidated through
improved B cell depletion, across doses. Depletion in AME-133v-treated
patients was also greater across all genotypes, suggesting superior
pharmacodynamics of AME-133v in the low-responding F-carrier population.
These findings indicate relevant biological activity of the antibody and
suggest that AME-133v may provide additional clinical benefit for
low-affinity FcRIII patients. A randomized trial is being planned to
compare clinical efficacy of AME-133v vs. Rituxan, targeting low-affinity
FcRIII patients.


