Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of cholesterol metabolism regulatory gene farnesyl
diphosphate farnesyltransferase is associated with poor prognosis of
non-small cell lung cancer patient and promotes metastasis through
feedback regulation of SPP1-PI3K-AKT signaling pathway


Lung cancer is the leading cause of the human cancer-related death in the
world and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for up to 80 % of
those patients. Cholesterol metabolism is especially active in cancer
cells, whereas cholesterol synthesis inhibition has been show to reduce
tumor cell growth. However, the involvement of farnesyl diphosphate
farnesyltransferase (FDFT1) in lung cancer development and progression
remains unclear. FDFT1 was involved in cholesterol biosynthesis. In this
study, we investigated the clinical significance and biological effects
of FDFT1 in NSCLC. Immunohistochemical studies performed on 141 primary
NSCLC specimens revealed a high prevalence of FDFT overexpression (51%),
which was significantly associated with lymph node metastasis (regional,
P = 0.022), advanced tumor stage (P = 0.004), and poorer disease-free
survival (P = 0.001, log-rank test; P = 0.001, Cox proportional hazard
model). FDFT1 down-regulation by two shRNAs significantly reduced cell
migration and invasion in highly invasive lung cancer cell lines in
vitro, as well as lung metastases in vivo. Conversely, overexpression of
FDFT1 in weakly invasive lung cancer cell lines in vitro and orthotopic
metastasis assay in vivo shows enhanced cell motility and lung
metastases. In addition, inhibition of FDFT1 decreased AKT activation and
thereby suppressing the migration of human lung cancer cell in vitro. The
results suggested that FDFT1 can positive feedback to regulate AKT. In
weakly invasive lung cancer cell lines, FDFT1 overexpression was
associated with the upregulation of secreted phosphoprotein 1(SPP1). The
shRNA mediated knockdown of SPP1 was found to block FDFT1-enhanced
invasion. Taken together, we have identified cholesterol metabolism
regulatory gene FDFT1 as a cancer progression biomarker who
overexpression leading to poor prognosis and result tumor metastasis
feedback regulation of SPP1-PI3K-AKT signaling pathway.

