Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Abrogating tamoxifen resistance with the ribonucleoside analog,
8-amino adenosine


Hormone therapy is a prevalent treatment of choice for patients with
estrogen receptor alpha (ER) positive breast cancers. Unfortunately, due
to resistance, many women do not benefit from these forms of therapy.
AIB1 is a transcriptional co-activator that plays an important role in
resistance to hormone therapy. Depending on the cell/gene context, agents
such as tamoxifen either stimulate or antagonize the transcriptional
activities of ER. Tamoxifen binding alters ER to an intermediate
conformation with affinity for both co-activators and co-repressors,
causing the conformation to be dependent on co-regulator levels in the
cell milieu. The stoichiometric balance between AIB1 and co-repressors is
a key determinant of tamoxifen resistance. Additionally, cross-talk
between ER and growth factor (GF) signaling further manipulates ER
activity and responsiveness to hormone therapy, particularly in cells
with high AIB1 levels. Of the receptor signaling transducers, AKT, ERK,
and p38 are key players in resistance. We hypothesized that strategies to
target the stoichiometric balance of AIB1 to co-repressors would be
clinically beneficial for abrogating tamoxifen resistance. Furthermore,
it has been demonstrated that agents that are able to interfere with the
ER/GF crosstalk are also highly advantageous for abrogating resistance to
tamoxifen. We have shown that the ribonucleoside analog, 8-aminoadenosine
(8-NH2-Ado) is a transcription inhibitor. As such, it is expected to
primarily deplete the expression of the small percentage (5%) of gene
transcripts with short-half lives, such as AIB1. We have demonstrated
that treatment of MCF-7 and BT-474 cells with non-tumoricidal
concentrations of 8-NH2-Ado (1 M) decreased AIB1 protein levels.
Furthermore, using in vitro kinase assays, we demonstrated the active
metabolite of 8-NH2-Ado is a selective inhibitor of MEK1, 2, and 6. An
initial analysis of 4-hydroxytamoxifen dose response in two different
tamoxifen resistant breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7/HER-2:18 and BT-474,
demonstrated non-tumoricidal analog concentrations were able to reduce
the dose of 4-hydroxytamoxifen needed to inhibit proliferation in these
cells. Additionally, 8-NH2-Ado inhibited AKT and ERK1/2 activity in these
cells. In conclusion, AIB1 and GF signaling molecules are attractive
targets for reversing resistance to hormone therapy. Our results suggest
that treating ER positive breast cancer with combinations of tamoxifen
and 8-NH2-Ado would be an effective strategy to overcome tamoxifen
resistance.

