Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breaking the dogma: AWT1 hypermethylation in myeloid leukemia
despite high expression


Hematological malignancies are the sixth leading cause of cancer related
death worldwide. The Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) gene is over-expressed in
numerous cancers with respect to normal cells, and has either a tumor
suppressor or oncogenic role depending on cellular context. WT1 has been
shown to be detectable at low levels only in CD34+/CD38- hematological
stem cells but is undetectable after differentiation. WT1 is reported to
be an excellent marker for diagnosis and minimal residual disease in
acute myeloid leukemia, but the underlying epigenetic alterations are
unknown. Using 23 hematological cancer cell lines we confirm the high
expression of WT1 and the transcripts derived the from alternative
promoter regions (AWT1) in myeloid associated cancer cell lines. To
determine if this expression profile is associated with lineage specific
DNA methylation changes we performed bisulphite analysis across the loci.
Surprisingly we observe hypermethylation of the AWT1 promoter region in
despitehigh levels of expression. This hypermethylation is associated
with the expected canonical histone modification signature, with high
levels of H3K9me3 and low H3K4me3 or H3K9ac. Subsequent bisulphite
pyrosequencing of the WT1 and AWT1 promoters in a 356 cytogenetically
characterized hematological malignancies revealed that AWT1 was
hypermethylated in 63% and WT1 in 8% of primary myeloid cancers at
diagnosis, whereas only 26% and 27% where hypermethylated in primary
lymphoid cancers. A subset of these patients were treated with decitabine
(5-aza-2-deoxycytidine), a DNA demethylation agent commonly used to treat
myeloid leukemia and myeloproliferative disease. The AWT1 methylation
state did not change during treatment suggesting that AWT1 methylation
state does not correlate with drug response. Our data suggests that
combining (A)WT1 expression and AWT1 methylation analyses will be a
useful tool for diagnose and confirmation of myeloid-lineage malignancies.

