Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity-associated growth factor signaling upregulates aromatase
expression and estrogen receptor activity in breast cancer cells


Obesity increases the risk of breast cancer by approximately 50% in
postmenopausal women and is also associated with a worse prognosis.
Elevated estrogen synthesis by the local mammary epithelia and adipose
tissue is thought to be the principal mediator of breast tumorigenesis in
this population, which primarily develops estrogen receptor alpha (ER)
positive breast cancer. However, the elevated levels of free insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF-1) that accompany obesity are also thought to play a
role. IGF-1 has significant tumorigenic effects in the breast and also
regulates aromatase, the key enzyme in the conversion of androgens to
estrogen. Consequently, we hypothesized that obesity increases the risk
of postmenopausal breast cancer via growth factor-induced aromatase
expression and/or activity in the local mammary tissue. We have
previously shown that MMTV-Wnt-1 mammary tumors from obese ovariectomized
mice express higher levels of aromatase in comparison to tumors from lean
ovariectomized mice. To examine the molecular pathways responsible for
this effect, we have utilized an in vitro model of obesity in which ER
positive MCF-7 breast cancer cells were exposed to human sera obtained
from postmenopausal women and pooled by BMI category. Our data indicates
that exposure to obese (BMI 30 kg/m2) human serum stimulates greater
aromatase expression in comparison to control (BMI: 18.5-24.9 kg/m2).
This is coupled with enhanced ER activity when exogenous androgen is
present, indicating that the increased aromatase expression results in
greater estrogen production. Obese human sera also activates MCF-7 cells
Akt pathway to a greater degree than control, while MCF-7 cells
expressing a constitutively active Akt demonstrate higher levels of
aromatase expression in comparison to MCF-7 cells. This suggests that
circulating growth factors in the obese sera, like IGF-1, may induce
elevated aromatase expression via the downstream PI3K/Akt pathway. To
expand on our findings, we plan to assess whether treatment with PI3K/Akt
pathway inhibitors eliminates the difference in MCF-7 cells aromatase
expression following exposure to obese versus control sera. We will also
examine how inhibition of the PI3K/Akt pathway affects ER activity in
sera-exposed MCF-7 cells. Through elucidation of the signaling pathways
responsible for obesity's upregulation of local aromatase expression, we
ultimately hope to develop rational and effective chemopreventive and
chemotherapeutic regimens for the high-risk obese postmenopausal
population.

