Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer chemoprevention by Jamun, the Indian blackberry:
Potential mechanisms


Dark-colored berries are gaining increasing attention lately for their
chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic activities. Jamun (Syzygium cumini
L.), the Indian blackberry is perhaps the only berry that has the
diversity of anthocyanins of blueberry and abundance of ellagic acid
present in black raspberry. We previously reported chemoprotective
activities in jamun pulp extract and powder in vitro and short-term in
vivo studies (Aqil et al. AACR 2010, Vol. 51, Abst. # 5688). Here we
report anti-cancer potential of jamun pulp powder against estrogen
mediated breast cancer and the role of miRNAs and other targets in the
disease inhibition. Groups of female ACI rats were given AIN-93M diet or
diet supplemented with jamun pulp powder (5%, w/w). Two weeks later,
animals from each group were treated with subcutaneous silastic implants
of 17-estradiol (1.2 cm; 9 mg). Additional groups of animals received
control or experimental diet in the absence of estrogen. Diet and water
were provided ad libitum. Twelve weeks later animals were palpated weekly
for the mammary tumors, and all groups were euthanized when tumors
incidence reached over 90% in control group. Compared to control,
jamun-supplemented diet delayed the first tumor appearance by 21 days,
and significantly reduced the tumor incidence (65% vs 96%), tumor burden
(31395 vs 661123 mm3) and tumor multiplicity (1.80.3 vs 4.20.4
tumors/rat). The experimental diet also significantly reduced the
estrogen-associated growth of pituitary prolactinomas, circulating
prolactin and estradiol levels and the mammary cell proliferation (PCNA)
markers. Mechanistically, the jamun diet significantly offset
estrogen-associated increases in mammary cell proliferation, ER- and
cyclin D1 as determined by western blot analysis. We have recently
identified miRNA signature associated with estrogen treatment (Munagala
et al. AACR 2011, Vol. 52, Abst. # 155). All miRNAs that were either
significantly overexpressed (miR-182 and miR-375) or underexpressed
(miR-127 and miR-206) as a result of estrogen treatment were
significantly protected by intervention with the jamun diet. Targets for
these miRNAs remain to be identified. Together, our data show that jamun
significantly offset estrogen-mediated alterations in i) mammary cell
proliferation; ii) ER-; iii) cyclin D1, and iv) candidate miRNAs, and
that the modulation of these biomarkers correlated with the reduction in
mammary carcinogenicity. (Supported by CA-125152, CA-118114 and Agnes
Brown Duggan Endowment).

