Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TAS266, a novel tetrameric nanobody agonist targeting death
receptor 5 (DR5), elicits superior antitumor efficacy than conventional
DR5-targeted approaches


Preferential induction of apoptosis in cancer cells has been the
objective of therapeutic strategies targeting apoptotic pathways. To this
end, multiple therapeutic agonists of Death Receptors 4 and 5 (DR4, DR5),
have been developed and are under clinical evaluation. Although these
agonists, including antibodies and soluble ligand TRAIL, demonstrate
significant anti-tumor activity in preclinical models, the clinical
efficacy in human cancer patients has been notably disappointing. One
possible explanation for the discrepant pre-clinical and clinical results
is that DR5 may play a more prominent role in in vitro model systems as
opposed to cancers in humans. Alternatively, these results might indicate
that the current classes of therapeutic molecules are not sufficiently
potent to elicit significant response in patients. In particular,
naturally dimeric antibody agonists require secondary cross-linking via
Fc receptors expressed on immune cells present in the tumor
microenvironment to achieve optimal clustering of DR5 into a ternary
active state. Because immune cell content in the tumor can be
heterogeneous, reliance on this secondary mechanism for activity may
limit the potency of these antibodies. To overcome this limitation, a
novel nanobody approach was taken to eliminate the need for cross-linking
and improve receptor activation with the goal of generating a
significantly more potent DR5 agonist. Nanobodies are a class of
therapeutic proteins based on single, high affinity heavy chain domain
(VHH) antibodies that naturally occur in camelid species, and these VHH
domains can be linked to form multivalent structures (di-, tri-, tetra-,
etc). This approach led to the development of a tetrameric DR5 targeted
agonist, TAS266, with significantly greater avidity for DR5 binding.
TAS266 activates downstream caspases with more rapid kinetics and is up
to 1000-fold more potent in cell death assays when compared to a
cross-linked DR5 antibody or TRAIL. In vivo, TAS266 elicits single dose
tumor regressions in multiple tumor xenograft models and sustained tumor
regressions after treatment cessation. TAS266 showed superior anti-tumor
activity compared to a DR5 agonist antibody and TRAIL, including the
ability to induce tumor regression in a patient-derived primary
pancreatic tumor model that is insensitive to the agonist antibody. Thus,
TAS266 has the potential for superior clinical activity in settings
insensitive to the conventional therapeutic approaches to DR5.
First-in-man trials are expected to begin in 2012.

