Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Grape seed extract targets bladder cancer cells via initiating
both apoptotic and autophagic machineries


Bladder cancer is the fifth most common malignancy in the US; statistical
reports for 2011 estimate 69,250 new bladder cancer cases and 14,990
associated deaths in the US alone. Of all types of cancers, bladder
cancer has an unusually high propensity for recurring after treatment,
making it the most expensive cancer to treat on a per patient basis.
Thus, discovery and development of agents, especially natural, non-toxic,
dietary- agents, which target growth and development of bladder cancer
cells, might provide opportunities to reduce the incidence of bladder
cancer pre-neoplastic lesions and/or prevent the progression to
carcinoma. In this regard, several pre-clinical studies conducted by us
and others have established strong anti-cancer efficacy of one such
phytochemical agent: grape seed extract (GSE) in various malignancies
including prostate, colon, skin, lung etc. Based on these previous
reports, in the present study, we sought to establish the efficacy of GSE
in bladder cancer and to delineate the mechanistic effects involved in
its protective effect. The cell culture studies revealed that indeed GSE
has the potential to target bladder cancer as indicated by a significant
(PBladder cancer is the fifth most common malignancy in the US;
statistical reports for 2011 estimate 69,250 new bladder cancer cases and
14,990 associated deaths in the US alone. Of all types of cancers,
bladder cancer has an unusually high propensity for recurring after
treatment, making it the most expensive cancer to treat on a per patient
basis. Thus, discovery and development of agents, especially natural,
non-toxic, dietary- agents, which target growth and development of
bladder cancer cells, might provide opportunities to reduce the incidence
of bladder cancer pre-neoplastic lesions and/or prevent the progression
to carcinoma. In this regard, several pre-clinical studies conducted by
us and others have established strong anti-cancer efficacy of one such
phytochemical agent: grape seed extract (GSE) in various malignancies
including prostate, colon, skin, lung etc. Based on these previous
reports, in the present study, we sought to establish the efficacy of GSE
in bladder cancer and to delineate the mechanistic effects involved in
its protective effect. The cell culture studies revealed that indeed GSE
has the potential to target bladder cancer as indicated by a significant
(P<0.05-0.001) dose and time dependant inhibitory effect (20-60% cell
death, 24-48 h) of GSE (25-100 g/ml) on the viability of two different
urinary bladder cancer cell lines viz., HT-B9 and T-24, representing
stage I and stage II bladder cancer, respectively. The observed cell
death was apoptotic in nature as determined by AnnexinV/PI staining,
which was also confirmed by increase in the expression levels of cleaved
caspase-3 and -9. Further, we also observed that exposure of urinary
bladder cancer cells to GSE causes a dose and time dependant increase in
intense cytoplasmic vacuolization, which under electron microscopy was
confirmed to be due to an enlargement of mitochondrial organelle as well
as due to the presence of autophagosomes. Through detailed in vitro
studies; we also examined and defined that GSE targets expression of
various molecules regulating apoptosis, as indicated by decreased levels
of anti-apoptotic molecules Bcl-2 and Mcl-1. Interestingly, the increase
in apoptotic response co-related with increased autophagic events as
evidenced by tracking the dynamics of LC3-II within the cells. Together,
these results indicate that autophagy might be the major event initiated
during GSE treatment of bladder cancer cells, driving the cells towards
an apoptotic death pathway; however, more mechanistic studies are
warranted in future to confirm our hypothesis. Nevertheless, the findings
of the present study are highly significant in establishing, for the
first time, that GSE could suppress bladder cancer growth and
progression, by targeting both apoptotic and autophagic machineries.

