Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An evaluation of the genes involved in the Base Excision Repair
(BER) pathway as potential phenotypic modifiers of breast cancer risk in
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers.


Germ-line mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes confer a high lifetime
risk of developing breast and other cancers. However, remarkable
differences exist regarding disease manifestation in mutation carriers,
suggesting the existence of other genetic modifier factors. Given that
both BRCA1 and BRCA2 are involved in the repair of double-strand breaks
(DSBs) mainly by Homologous Recombination, SNPs in genes involved in DNA
repair are good candidates to be tested as phenotypic modifiers. The Base
Excision Repair (BER) pathway could be particularly interesting given the
relation of synthetic lethality that exists between one of the components
of this pathway, PARP1, and both BRCA1 and BRCA2. To test our hypothesis
we have performed a comprehensive analysis of the 18 genes involved in
BER, in a series of 2000 BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers from the
Spanish Consortium for the Study of Hereditary Breast Cancer, the
Istituto Nazionale Tumori and the National Centre for Scientific Research
Demokritos. For this purpose we have used a tagging SNP approach in which
we have evaluated the common genetic variation in the 18 genes using the
VeraCode GoldenGate 144 SNP Genotyping Kit. Preliminary results have
showed statistically significant associations with cancer risk in BRCA1
and/or BRCA2 mutation carriers for 46 SNPs (pGerm-line mutations in the
BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes confer a high lifetime risk of developing breast
and other cancers. However, remarkable differences exist regarding
disease manifestation in mutation carriers, suggesting the existence of
other genetic modifier factors. Given that both BRCA1 and BRCA2 are
involved in the repair of double-strand breaks (DSBs) mainly by
Homologous Recombination, SNPs in genes involved in DNA repair are good
candidates to be tested as phenotypic modifiers. The Base Excision Repair
(BER) pathway could be particularly interesting given the relation of
synthetic lethality that exists between one of the components of this
pathway, PARP1, and both BRCA1 and BRCA2. To test our hypothesis we have
performed a comprehensive analysis of the 18 genes involved in BER, in a
series of 2000 BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers from the Spanish
Consortium for the Study of Hereditary Breast Cancer, the Istituto
Nazionale Tumori and the National Centre for Scientific Research
Demokritos. For this purpose we have used a tagging SNP approach in which
we have evaluated the common genetic variation in the 18 genes using the
VeraCode GoldenGate 144 SNP Genotyping Kit. Preliminary results have
showed statistically significant associations with cancer risk in BRCA1
and/or BRCA2 mutation carriers for 46 SNPs (p<0.05), seven of them
showing associations with pGerm-line mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2
genes confer a high lifetime risk of developing breast and other cancers.
However, remarkable differences exist regarding disease manifestation in
mutation carriers, suggesting the existence of other genetic modifier
factors. Given that both BRCA1 and BRCA2 are involved in the repair of
double-strand breaks (DSBs) mainly by Homologous Recombination, SNPs in
genes involved in DNA repair are good candidates to be tested as
phenotypic modifiers. The Base Excision Repair (BER) pathway could be
particularly interesting given the relation of synthetic lethality that
exists between one of the components of this pathway, PARP1, and both
BRCA1 and BRCA2. To test our hypothesis we have performed a comprehensive
analysis of the 18 genes involved in BER, in a series of 2000 BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutation carriers from the Spanish Consortium for the Study of
Hereditary Breast Cancer, the Istituto Nazionale Tumori and the National
Centre for Scientific Research Demokritos. For this purpose we have used
a tagging SNP approach in which we have evaluated the common genetic
variation in the 18 genes using the VeraCode GoldenGate 144 SNP
Genotyping Kit. Preliminary results have showed statistically significant
associations with cancer risk in BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 mutation carriers for
46 SNPs (p<0.05), seven of them showing associations with p<103. Genetic
and functional analyses are currently on-going to validate the most
statistically significant effects.

