Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of mTOR in the cisplatin resistant phenotype in ovarian
cancer lineage


Background Ovarian cancer (OVCA) is the second cause of
gynecological-cancer deaths in Brazil, being frequently associated to
chemotherapy resistance, a characteristic usually associated to
PI3K/Akt/mTOR. We herein present data concerning the role of mTORC2 in
cisplatin-resistant phenotype acquisition by OVCA cells. Methods
Antineoplastic efficacy of cisplatin, doxorubicin, paclitaxel, and
rapamycin was accessed, in different combinations, in the OVCA lineage
OVCAR3 (cisplatin-resistant, advanced serous OVCA), through cellular
metabolic viability (CMV) (MTT method). Cells were cultured in RPMI media
supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS and antibiotics until subconfluence. To
characterize the role of mTORC1 or mTORC2 in OVCAR3 MCV, 1.5x105
cells/well were treated according to: EA1) Inhibition of mTORC1: Drugs at
IC50 for 24h; EA2) Inhibition of mTORC1 and mTORC2: Rapamycin 100nM for
72h, followed by drugs at IC50 for 24h. Modulation of MTOR expression by
PKA, PKC, and PI3K was investigated by real time RT-PCR. Statistical
analysis was performed using PrismaGraphPad version 5.1. Findings OVCAR3
CMV was not significantly changed by cisplatin (IC50 0,08mM) nor
paclitaxel (IC50 0,06nM) or rapamycin (IC50 0,02nM) (CMV 95%, 100%, 100%,
respectively), but by doxorubicin (IC50 0,02nM) (CMV 60%), especially in
combination with cisplatin (CMV 31%), following EA1. Considering the
irreversible doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity, we pursued with EA2.
Intriguingly, OVCAR3 cisplatin sensitivity was, at least partially,
recovered (CMV 65%). No addictive effect was observed with
cisplatin/doxorubicin following EA2 (CMV 60%), suggesting that
OVCA-resistant patient might benefit from less toxic rapamycin-based
chemotherapy, leaving doxorubicin for palliative final-staged disease
management. Finally, neither PKA nor PI3K modulate MTOR expression;
however, PKC suppresses its transcription by 4.42-fold. Interpretation
Altogether, our data suggest that mTORC2, but not mTORC1, might influence
cisplatin sensitivity in OVCA. Moreover, PKC inhibits the expression of
MTORC in cisplatin-resistant OVCA. We propose that the inhibition of
mTORC2 followed by cisplatin treatment might lead to a conjunction of
autophagic cell death and apoptosis in OVCA. Of remarkable clinical
interest, we point to the urge of better design clinical trials, in which
not only novel drugs are tested, but also the chronological order of
drugs administration to the patient is seen as crucial for treatment
efficacy.

