Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of mithramycin analogues with increased potency and
more selective inhibition of EWS-FLI1 for the treatment of Ewing sarcoma


Background: Ewing Sarcoma Family Tumors (ESFT) is characterized by a
chromosomal translocation, most commonly, between chromosomes 11 and 22,
resulting in the fusion of the EWS and FLI1 genes. The fusion protein
EWS-FLI1 is known to function as a constitutively activated transcription
factor responsible for the oncogenic phenotype of ESFT. The
identification of potent and specific inhibitors of EWS-FLI1 offers the
hope of improved outcomes for ESFT patients. We have recently identified
mithramycin, an antineoplastic antibiotic produced by Streptomyces
plicatus, as a potent inhibitor of EWS-FLI1. In this report, we have
investigated a series of mithramycin structural analogs in an effort to
find compounds with better pharmacological properties. Methods: We
evaluated the relative effects of the mithramycin analogs on ESFT
viability using MTS, XTT and IncuCyte real time cell confluence assays.
The compounds were screened against a panel of pediatric cell lines
within the Pediatric Preclinical Testing Program (PPTP) to evaluate
selectivity. Western blot analysis and luciferase assays were used to
determine the effects on EWS-FLI1 downstream target expression. Results:
The mithramycin analogs 6 and 16 exhibit better potency and improved
selectivity relative to mithramycin for both cell viability and
downstream target inhibition. Furthermore, compound 6 is known to have a
higher 200mg/kg maximum tolerated dose (MTD) relative to the 5 mg/kg MTD
of mithramycin in xenograft models. Conclusions: In comparison to the
drug mithramycin, we have shown that some of its structural analogs
display better pharmacological properties such as increased potency and
more specificity for ESFT cells. These results indicate that studies of
analogs of DNA binding drugs are an important aspect of transcription
factor drug development. We are working to further characterize the
mechanism of these analogs and evaluate them in an in vivo model. The
ultimate goal would be to translate these compounds to the clinic and
improve therapeutic outcomes in patients with ESFT.

