Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo and in vitro imaging of Cyclooxygenase-2 in tumor


Cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) is a biomarker for tumor progression and
inflammatory diseases. It is known that normal tissues express minimal
amounts of Cox-2 proteins while inflammatory and malignant tumor cells
express high levels. Thus, inhibition of Cox-2 is a strategy in the
treatment of tumor progression and inflammatory diseases. Recently, many
different kinds of molecular imaging reagents for Cox-2 have been
developed. Among them, an indomethacin-based Cox-2 probe, fluorocoxib,
has been shown to bind to Cox-2 in vitro and in vivo. The binding
specificity to Cox-2 was shown using cell culture and tumor xenograph
models. In our present study, in order to optimize fluorocoxib imaging
conditions, we utilized HCT116 and HT29 cells as low and high Cox-2
expressers, respectively. First, cultured cells were grown overnight on
cover slips. Cells were then fixed with paraformaldehyde and incubated
with fluorocoxib probe. Multispectral images were taken using a camera
equipped with liquid crystal tunable filters. Spectral unmixing was
applied to these images to enhance fluorocoxib signals. Our results
indicate that HCT116 cells express fair amounts of Cox-2 protein. We also
transplanted HCT116 and HT29 cells into the flank regions of nu/nu mice
subcutaneously. After tumors grew to sufficient size (100 mm3) we
injected fluorocoxib intravenously and monitored probe binding to the
tumors. Whole animal in vivo imaging indicated that fluorocoxib binds to
HT29 tumors after 3 hours. All the probes were eliminated from the
animals by 24 hours. On the other hand, HCT116 tumors did not show strong
binding of fluorocoxib as expected. However, HCT116 tumors did show some
weak binding at the 3 and 6 hr time points. Once there was no longer any
probe detected in vivo, we dissected the primary tumors from the HCT116
and HT29 implantations. Tissue sections were made with paraffin embedded
tumors. After deparaffinization, tissue sections were incubated with
fluorocoxib and fluorescent images were taken using multispectral imaging
technology. Spectral unmixing data confirmed that HCT116 tumor sections
showed fair amounts of Cox-2 probe expression. The amount of binding was
also quantitated using a corresponding software package. Our results
demonstrated that fluorescent biomarker probes can be imaged in vitro and
in vivo non-invasively. Furthermore, we showed that the expression level
can be quantitated using spectral unmixing imaging technology.

