Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Massively parallel DNA-sequencing of aggressive prostate cancer
reveals disease heterogeneity and identifies targetable mutations


Background: Recent advances in our understanding of the mutational
landscape of prostate cancer (PCa) have occurred through sequencing of
primary prostate tumors. Highly aggressive PCa most often does not come
to surgery preventing access to frozen sample for high-throughput
studies. The purpose of this study is to determine the spectrum of
mutations in a subgroup of highly aggressive PCa and to evaluate for
targetable molecular alterations using a novel mutation analysis platform
from archival formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) samples. Methods:
21 PCa (of which 9 were Gleason 5, 8 metastatic), 18 Neuroendocrine PCa
(NEPC), and 18 benign FFPE prostate samples from 35 unique cases were
evaluated and 77 high-density foci were selected for DNA extraction and
sequencing library construction. Hybridization-based capture of 3230
exons and 37 intronic intervals of 189 cancer-related genes was
performed, followed by deep, massively-parallel sequencing. Sequence data
were analyzed for single nucleotide variants (sub), small insertions and
deletions (indels), significant copy number changes, and selected
re-arrangements/fusion genes. Results: 5/8 biopsies and 62/65 (overall
93%) of prostate or metastatic foci yielded sufficient DNA (50 ng) for
analysis from 40 of FFPE tissue. Average uniquely-mapping sequence
coverage was 885x. 133 mutations were identified in 30 genes with 58/67
samples containing at least one mutation. TMPRSS2-ERG fusion was present
in 31% of cases. Recurrent high confidence cancer alterations included:
gain of MYC (9%), gain or sub/indel of AR (43%), deletion or sub/indel of
PTEN (23%), RB1 (20%), BRCA2 (11%), and sub/indel of TP53 (40%), CTNNB1
(11%), PIK3CA (6%), ATM (6%). Several novel mutations were identified,
including in BRAF and BRCA2. AR alterations were more common in PCa
compared to NEPC, and were present even in clinically localized PCa.
There was high concordance between NEPC and PCa foci in mixed tumors, as
well as between primary tumor and metastases. Conclusions: This study
demonstrates feasibility of in-depth DNA analysis using FFPE tissue, and
even biopsy material. The spectrum of driver mutations observed
highlights potential value of comprehensive genomic profiling for
targeted therapy selection in clinical care. These analyses have laid the
foundation for ongoing comparison with indolent PCa, and have identified
potential new drug targets (e.g., PARP inhibitors for ATM and BRCA2
mutations), with a goal towards better defining biomarkers that
distinguish aggressive and indolent PCa and designing more effective
treatment approaches for patients with lethal PCa.

