Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PARP inhibitor induces cytotoxicity in primary lung cancer through
caspase induction


Considering the fact that lung cancer has a high incidental rate among
all cancer types, our investigation was aimed to see if PJ34, a PARP
inhibitor, could independently exert cytotoxicity in primary lung cancer
cells. In the past this PARP inhibitor has been used in combination with
other DNA targeted chemotherapeutics or in patients with DNA repair
defects (e.g. BRCA mutation), however, based on our published findings we
hypothesize that PJ34 can target lung cancer using alternative mechanisms
where defects in DNA repair or synthetic lethality are not required.
Additionally, we wanted to reveal the specific mechanisms of PARP
inhibitor mediated cytotoxicity in lung cancer cells. Anti-cancerous
effects of PJ34 were evaluated on six non-small cell lung cancer cell
lines developed from surgically resected tissue. Using WST-1 dye and BrdU
assay, 30uM (ED50) of PJ34 treatment showed a variable amount of cell
survival and DNA synthesis among cultures used herein. Cellular
morphological changes in response to the PJ34 treatment were investigated
using annexin-V expression, nuclear fragmentation staining, and PARP
specific protein in Western blot. Mitochondrial membrane potential
changes were measured through JC-1 dye staining and indicated increased
stress upon PJ34 treatment. The abundance of Caspase-9 further proves the
role of mitochondrial stress in PJ34 treated cells. Immunofluorescent
staining for Caspase-3 clearly showed changes towards apoptosis under
PJ34 treated vs. untreated conditions. Additionally, a Caspase-3 specific
protein band in PJ34 treated cells indicates the possibility of apoptosis
through a caspase dependent pathway. Furthermore, lower expressions of
PAR in PJ34 treated cells were indicative of PARP inhibition. This study
has brought a new paradigm for using PJ34 as a potential therapeutic
against lung cancer because of its ability to work regardless of a
patient's genetic makeup as well as the possibility of using this group
of compounds as independent chemotherapeutic agents.

