Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KIR haplotype polymorphism determines innate
susceptibility/resistance to childhood leukemia


Background: The Killer-cell Immunoglobulin-like Receptor (KIR) genes
encode receptors that are expressed on the surface of Natural Killer (NK)
cells and a subset of T cells. The receptors regulate functional
activities of these immune cells in the body. There exist seventeen
distinct KIR genes in humans of which nine encode inhibitory, and six
encode activating receptors, while two are pseudo genes. KIR haplotypes
show extensive variability with respect to their repertoire of activating
KIR genes. Humans may have none or up to six different activating KIR
genes. The acquisition of these genes is believed to decrease activation
threshold of NK cells in humans, and provide resistance to malignancy.
Hypothesis: We hypothesized that the acquisition of activating KIR genes
by an individual may protect him/her from childhood leukemia. Methods: We
used the candidate gene approach. In a case-control study, we determined
the presence or absence of different activating KIR genes using
gene-specific primer pairs. The frequencies of each gene were compared
between cases and controls using Chi2 test and multivariate logistic
regression. Results: Our results show for the first time that the
inheritance of activating KIR genes is associated with increased
resistance to childhood leukemia (both B-ALL and T-ALL; in adjusted
analysis p-values being as low as 1.14x10-7). Interestingly, this
resistance increased as the number of activating KIR genes increased in
the genome of the individual. Furthermore, we found that that this
resistance/susceptibility is differentially modulated by co-inheritance
of different inhibitory KIR-MHC class I gene pairs. Conclusions: The
inheritance of activating KIR gene-containing haplotypes confers innate
resistance to childhood leukemia. These receptors may serve as novel
target molecules for therapeutic interventions in childhood leukemia. The
study was supported by a research grant (2010-700554) from the Canadian
Cancer Society Research Institute (CCSRI).

