Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multikinase inhibition by TG02 is therapeutically effective in two
forms of breast cancer


Breast cancer (BC) is a heterogeneous disease in which several distinct
genetic and histopathological types have been defined. Triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC) lacking ER/PR and HER-2 is the most aggressive and
untreatable form. In the case of HER2+ tumors, and despite the emergence
of trastuzumab and lapatinib, in the metastatic setting these tumors
remain incurable due to the innate or acquired drug resistance. A number
of kinases are implicated in the proliferation and survival of breast
cancer cells. Here, we characterize the antitumor activity of the
multikinase inhibitor TG02 in TNBC and HER2+ BC. TG02 is a novel drug
with a unique kinase inhibitory spectrum, targeting both the cell cycle
regulatory CDKs 1/2 and the transcriptional regulators CDKs 7/9, along
with the emerging oncogenic MAPK ERK5 and the DNA damage response
mediator CDK5, all within a narrow low nanomolar potency range. In panels
of breast cancer cell lines, TG02 was potently and consistently
antiproliferative at low (100nM) and proapoptotic at moderate
(250-1000nM), clinically-achievable concentrations. In TNBC cells, the
drug usually induced a G2/M arrest, whereas blockade of cell cycle
progression at the G1/S boundary was more common in HER2+ lines.
Simultaneous multikinase inhibition was demonstrated in several cellular
models, showing that cell cycle arrest induced by inhibition of CDK1 and
CDK2 progresses to apoptosis associated with profound depletion of the
short-lived survival proteins of the Bcl-2 and IAP families downstream of
CDK9-dependent loss of RNA polymerase II-driven transcription. TG02 was
synergistic in combination with chemotherapy in TNBC models in vitro and
in vivo and with trastuzumab and lapatinib in HER2-overexpressing cell
lines. A majority of TNBC and HER2+ lines expressed constitutively active
ERK5, which was efficiently inhibited by TG02 and may contribute to the
antitumor activity of the drug. A robust DNA damage response including
CHK1/2 activation and formation of H2AX foci was induced in TNBC cells,
presumably due to inhibition of CDK5 by TG02, so we will also report on
the mechanism-based combination of TG02 with PARP inhibitors in this
setting. These data support clinical development of this compound for the
treatment of TNBC and HER2+ BC, especially in combination with standard
of care treatments used in these breast neoplasias.

