Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detecting prostate cancer in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers: A
role for EN2


EN2 is part of the HOX gene family and plays a role in foetal
development. More recently a potential oncogenic role for the protein has
been postulated and its utility as a cancer biomarker has been explored
in prostate cancer (PrCa) and breast cancer. Carriers of mutations in the
BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes have an increased risk of PrCa (1.8-fold and 5-fold
respectively) and their tumours tend to be more aggressive and advanced
than sporadic cases. Currently there is no national screening program for
BRCA mutation carriers in the UK, and the IMPACT study was set up to
evaluate PSA screening in this particular group. Here we analyse the
efficacy of the urinary EN2 protein and auto-antibody against EN2 in
serum and urine as markers of early cancer detection within this higher
risk group. Urine and serum were taken from the IMPACT screening study
which enrolled individuals aged between 40 and 69 who were unaffected by
PrCa at time of enrolment into the study (n= 418). All participants were
from families harbouring a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation and were either BRCA
mutation carriers themselves or controls with a negative predictive BRCA
genetic test. They underwent annual PSA test with a PSA of > 3.0 ng/ml
triggering a diagnostic biopsy. Annual urine and serum samples were
collected from this cohort. EN2 protein was measured in the urine using
an ELISA; (positive = > 42.5ng/ml). The autoantibody was measured in
serum and urine; (positive = measurement of 2 standard deviations above
the mean value when measured in a cohort of healthy volunteers). Using
detection of EN2 protein in urine alone our initial results demonstrated
the test had a sensitivity of 71.4% and a specificity of 75.4% when
discriminating between those with a positive biopsy and those with a
negative biopsy; the ROC AUC was 0.767. The difference in EN2 level
between those diagnosed with cancer and those who were not was
significant (p = EN2 is part of the HOX gene family and plays a role in
foetal development. More recently a potential oncogenic role for the
protein has been postulated and its utility as a cancer biomarker has
been explored in prostate cancer (PrCa) and breast cancer. Carriers of
mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes have an increased risk of PrCa
(1.8-fold and 5-fold respectively) and their tumours tend to be more
aggressive and advanced than sporadic cases. Currently there is no
national screening program for BRCA mutation carriers in the UK, and the
IMPACT study was set up to evaluate PSA screening in this particular
group. Here we analyse the efficacy of the urinary EN2 protein and
auto-antibody against EN2 in serum and urine as markers of early cancer
detection within this higher risk group. Urine and serum were taken from
the IMPACT screening study which enrolled individuals aged between 40 and
69 who were unaffected by PrCa at time of enrolment into the study (n=
418). All participants were from families harbouring a BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutation and were either BRCA mutation carriers themselves or controls
with a negative predictive BRCA genetic test. They underwent annual PSA
test with a PSA of > 3.0 ng/ml triggering a diagnostic biopsy. Annual
urine and serum samples were collected from this cohort. EN2 protein was
measured in the urine using an ELISA; (positive = > 42.5ng/ml). The
autoantibody was measured in serum and urine; (positive = measurement of
2 standard deviations above the mean value when measured in a cohort of
healthy volunteers). Using detection of EN2 protein in urine alone our
initial results demonstrated the test had a sensitivity of 71.4% and a
specificity of 75.4% when discriminating between those with a positive
biopsy and those with a negative biopsy; the ROC AUC was 0.767. The
difference in EN2 level between those diagnosed with cancer and those who
were not was significant (p = <0.001). EN2 antibody measured in serum was
less sensitive but more specific that the urinary protein (33.3% and
83.6% respectively), when combined with urinary protein the sensitivity
is 85.7% with a specificity of 63.3% and ROC AUC 0.745. Further samples
are in the process of being analysed and data and results of these will
be presented. In addition a new assay to measure urinary antibody is
currently under development and results from this test will be also
shown. EN2 protein and auto-antibody measurement warrants further
investigation as a PrCa biomarker in this higher risk group with genetic
predisposition to PrCa.

