Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lymphoma-associated macrophages benefit for tumor progress via
overexpressing legumain to degrade extracellular matrix in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma


Crosstalk between macrophages in the tumor microenvironment and malignant
cells has been implicated during the pathogenesis of many kinds of
tumors. However, role of lymphoma-associated macrophages in the progress
of lymphoma as well as its underlying mechanism is far from completely
clear yet. Here we evaluated the effect of lymphoma-associated
macrophages on the characteristics of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL). Immunohistological staining demonstrated that level of CD163
positive macrophages, so called M2 type macrophage, was negatively
related with the prognosis of DLBCL. In addition, M2 macrophage
overexpressed asparaginyl endopeptidase legumain, as shown by
double-immunofluoresence staining. Then we set up human DLBCL xenograft
model. Mice were sacrificed at the different stages of tumor progress
(average volume are 0.8 or 1.4 cm3. respectively. n=4). Real-time PCR
results showed that mRNA expression of CD206 (M2 macrophage marker in
mouse model) and legumain significantly increased with the progress of
tumor. However, contents of matrix significantly decreased as indicated
by sirus red and Masson's staining. Overlapping existed in
immunofluorescence staining of legumain and fibronectin/ collagen I. In
vitro, we cultured monocytes U937 with supernatant from primary DLBCL
cells. Real-time PCR and western blot demonstrated that mRNA and protein
expression of M2 markers as well as legumain significantly increased in
U937 after incubation of 48 hours. Further, we cultured the legumain
overexpressed stable cell line in the wells coated with fibronectin or
collagen I. Western blot showed that compared to control, legumain
overexpression promoted the degradation of fibronectin and collagen I.
Mice in human DLBCL xenograft model were randomly received clodronate
liposome; PBS liposome or legumain inhibitor via i.v. injection (n=5).
The results revealed that tumor growth was significantly delayed in the
clodronate liposome group compared with PBS liposome control. Similarly,
injection of legumain inhibitor mimicked the effect of clodronate
liposome on the tumor progress. Our data suggests that
lymphoma-associated macrophages polarized by lymophoma cells promote
tumor progress and this effect might be mediated by degrading the matrix
via overexpressed legumain.

