Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein biomarkers for breast cancer risk are specifically
correlated with local steroid hormones in nipple aspirate fluid


Background: Breast cancer risk is related to endogenous lifetime steroid
hormone exposure. The local production of steroid hormones in the breast
is a stable contributor to the hormonal environment. Several risk marker
proteins have been identified in nipple aspirate fluid (NAF) in
unaffected contralateral breast or in high-risk subjects as indicators of
changes in breast on oxidative stress (superoxide dismutase),
inflammation (C-reactive protein and YKL40), protease activity (cathepsin
D) and growth factors (bFGF). However, it is not clear whether the
alteration of protein markers is related to the local steroid hormone
synthesis and metabolism in the breast. In the study, we studied the
correlation between protein markers and both systematic (serum) and local
(NAF) abundance of hormones. Methods: NAF and blood samples were obtained
from normal breast of 54 healthy women and from unaffected breast of 60
breast cancer patients. The 114 subjects consisted of 48 women in
premenopausal, 54 in postmenopausal and 12 in perimenopausal. The
abundance of five protein markers (SOD1, CRP, YKL40, CatD and bFGF) was
measured using ELISA. The NAF concentration of estradiol (E2), estrone
(E1), progesterone (P4), andostenedione (A4), testosterone (T),
dehydroepiandrostrerone (DHEA) and DHEA sulfate (DHEAS), and the serum
concentration of E2, E1, P4, A4, T, DHEA and follicular-stimulating
hormone (FSH) were measured using ELISA or RIA. The correlation between
protein markers and hormones were examined using Spearman's rank
correlation test with Bonferroni adjusted p Background: Breast cancer
risk is related to endogenous lifetime steroid hormone exposure. The
local production of steroid hormones in the breast is a stable
contributor to the hormonal environment. Several risk marker proteins
have been identified in nipple aspirate fluid (NAF) in unaffected
contralateral breast or in high-risk subjects as indicators of changes in
breast on oxidative stress (superoxide dismutase), inflammation
(C-reactive protein and YKL40), protease activity (cathepsin D) and
growth factors (bFGF). However, it is not clear whether the alteration of
protein markers is related to the local steroid hormone synthesis and
metabolism in the breast. In the study, we studied the correlation
between protein markers and both systematic (serum) and local (NAF)
abundance of hormones. Methods: NAF and blood samples were obtained from
normal breast of 54 healthy women and from unaffected breast of 60 breast
cancer patients. The 114 subjects consisted of 48 women in premenopausal,
54 in postmenopausal and 12 in perimenopausal. The abundance of five
protein markers (SOD1, CRP, YKL40, CatD and bFGF) was measured using
ELISA. The NAF concentration of estradiol (E2), estrone (E1),
progesterone (P4), andostenedione (A4), testosterone (T),
dehydroepiandrostrerone (DHEA) and DHEA sulfate (DHEAS), and the serum
concentration of E2, E1, P4, A4, T, DHEA and follicular-stimulating
hormone (FSH) were measured using ELISA or RIA. The correlation between
protein markers and hormones were examined using Spearman's rank
correlation test with Bonferroni adjusted p < 0.05 as statistical
significant. Results: The correlation among the protein markers showed
that SOD1 was significantly correlated with CRP (r=0.276, p=0.033) and
catD (r=0.340, p=0.0036). bFGF was significantly correlated with CRP
(r=0.343, p=0.0021), indicating these proteins may be affected each other
in the breast. The relationship between protein markers and hormones
indicated that protein markers did not have much correlation with serum
hormones, except bFGF was negatively correlated with serum T level
(r=0.339, p=0.017). In contrast, protein markers showed stronger
correlation with multiple estradiol precursors in NAF. Specifically, SOD1
correlated with DHEA (r=0.333, P=0.019) and DHEAS (r=0.372, p=0.0030).
YKL40 correlated with NAF T level (r=0.389, p=0.0012). CatD correlated
with NAF DHEAS (r=0.400, p=0.0014). bFGF negatively correlated with NAF T
(r=0.339, p=0.015). CRP did not show significant correlation with any
types of measured NAF hormones. Conclusions: NAF protein markers were
more strongly related to local hormone levels in the breast, rather than
systematic hormones in the blood. Protein markers were specifically
correlated with different components of hormone hormones, suggesting that
metabolic precursors may contribute to breast cancer risk through
distinct mechanisms.

