Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial-mesenchymal gene expression signature defines
clinically relevant subtypes in epithelial ovarian cancer


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) represents a broad and heterogeneous
entity which includes different invasive behavior as well as distinct
histopathological subtypes. The heterogeneity of EOC is further
complicated by the fact that EOC is characterized by a high degree of
genetic damages and multiple genetic alterations resulting from different
mechanisms. Even within the seemingly similar histo-pathological group,
molecular subtypes with different gene/pathway activations have been
identified. In this study, we described a classification scheme based on
in silico meta-analysis of gene expression profiling of 1,538 EOC
microarray data. and identified five major robust subtypes termed
Epithelial-A, Epithelial-B, Mesenchymal, Stem-A, and Stem-B that were
distinctive in gene expression patterns. The epithelial subtype is
hallmarked by genes known to confer epithelial characteristics, such as
Keratin genes (KRT17, 14, 19, and 7), E-cadherin (CDH1), and Ep-CAM
(EPCAM) and show the second best prognosis in Kaplan-Meier analysis. On
the other hand, the mesenchymal subtype consists of genes such as
fibronectin (FN1) and known EMT inducers ZEB1 and TWIST1. The Stem-A
subtype consists of genes which confer stemness (LGR5, NCAM1). The
Mesenchymal and Stem-A subtypes are linked with poorer outcomes. We
further utilized a panel of 42 ovarian cancer cell lines to model EMT in
vitro by performing phenotypic EMT characterization. Four EMT subgroups
(epithelial, intermediate epithelial, intermediate mesenchymal,
mesenchymal) representing different epithelial-mesenchymal compositions
on the EMT spectrum were identified. We also demonstrated that this EMT
spectrum can be used to refine the analysis of data generated in
cell-based functional studies. By performing EMT-related functional
assays, we found that ovarian cancer cells harbouring intermediate
phenotypes are more migratory, invasive, anoikis resistant, and more
spheroidogenic. We further utilized this cell line model to apply a cell
line-based EMT scoring system to re-classify the 1,538 EOC microarray
data. It revealed that the Mesenchymal and Stem-A subtypes were both
enriched in higher mesenchymal scores. This supported the hypothesis of
EMT's contribution to the aggressiveness of solid tumors. In conclusion,
our results showed that EOC is sub-classified into distinct molecular
subtypes correlated with clinical outcomes that are linked to EMT.

