Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cathepsin B and uPAR downregulation sensitizes glioma initiating
cells to radiation induced cell cycle arrest


Ionizing radiation is the standard treatment for glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM). Radiation and chemoresistance have been attributed to a small
population of cells known as glioma stem cells (GSCs) or glioma
initiating cells (GICs). In the present study, we studied the effect of
ionizing radiation on the progression of cell cycle of glioma initiating
cells, non glioma initiating cells (non-GICs), and the respective
parental cell lines (U251 and U87). Initial experiments showed that GICs
were resistant to lower doses of radiation (3 and 5 Gy) as compared to
parental and non-GICs. Radiation dosage of 10 Gy induced significant G2/M
arrest as early as 12 and 24 hours in non-GICs (U251 and U87) and
parental cell lines (U251 and U87), respectively and a low percentage of
GICs were observed in the G2/M phase 48 hours after radiation. Apart from
cathepsin B and uPAR, expression levels of cyclin B1, pcdc2, pchk2 and
pERK were also elevated when cells were exposed to radiation.
shRNA-mediated simultaneous knockdown of cathepsin B and uPAR (pCU)
decreased radiation-induced expression of cyclin B1, pcdc2, pchk2 and
pERK and induced apoptosis. Further, immunoblot analysis indicated that
cathepsin B and uPAR downregulation reduced the expression of neural stem
cell markers, such as CD133, Sox-2 and Bmi-1. Activation of pERK played
an important role in inducing the G2/M arrest of GICs of both cell lines
as its inhibition induced cell differentiation and sensitized the cells
to radiation. Irradiation induced aggressive tumors in vivo and the
knockdown of uPAR and cathepsin B significantly decreased
radiation-induced tumor growth. Thus, these results indicate that uPAR
and cathepsin B downregulation sensitized GICs to ionizing radiation and
targeting these proteins could be an efficient approach to eradicate
tumors, particularly GICs in the tumor bulk.

