Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical specimen-based investigatory study of biomarkers for
gastric cancer


Objectives: We have identified potential biomarkers for gastric cancer
using a cDNA bank on the basis of mRNA extracted from frozen specimens of
gastric cancer tissue and adjacent normal gastric mucosa. We report
currently available results. Methods: The study group comprised 227
patients in whom 5 or more years had elapsed since gastrectomy. The
disease stage was IB in 29 patients, II in 66, III in 103, and IV in 29.
Among the 139 patients who postoperatively received fluoropyrimidines, 97
with stage II or III disease were given adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1. A
total 104 genes were selected on the basis of the results of
comprehensive DNA microarray analysis, extraction from serial analysis of
gene expression (SAGE) libraries, and preclinical and other studies of
potential targets for molecular-targeted therapy. The relative expression
levels of these genes in gastric cancer tissue and adjacent normal mucosa
from each patient were measured by a quantitative polymerase chain
reaction assay using the cDNA bank described above, and the relations
between clinicopathological factors and outcomes were examined. Results:
In patients who underwent gastrectomy, high expression of matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9), insulin-like growth factor receptor 1
(IGF-R1), and apolipoprotein E (APOE) genes were associated with
significantly worse outcomes. In patients with stage II or III disease
who received adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1, high expression of IGF-R1,
thymidylate synthase (TS), and regenerating IV (Reg IV) genes were
associated with significantly worse outcomes. Conclusions: MMP9, IGFR-1,
and APOE gene expression levels were suggested to be useful prognostic
factors in patients who underwent gastrectomy for gastric cancer. In
patients with stage II or III disease who received adjuvant chemotherapy
with S-1, IGF-1R, TS, and Reg IV gene expression levels were suggested to
be useful prognostic factors.

