Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Id1 (Inhibitor of differentiation-1) expression demonstrates
important translational implications for pancreatic adenocarcinoma


Introduction: Inhibitor of differentiation-1 (Id1) demonstrates a role in
tumor progression in a variety of tumors but scarce data exists for
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Previously, we demonstrated that nicotine, the
addicting component of tobacco, induces Id1 expression through a
Src-dependent signaling pathway promoting proliferation, invasion, and
chemoresistance in pancreatic cancer cells. Conversely, silencing of Id1
re-establishes gemcitabine sensitivity in acquired and innate
gemcitabine-resistant cell lines. Therefore, we determined the role of
Id1 in tumor progression and chemoresistance in vivo and determined the
expression status of Id1 in a large cohort of human pancreatic cancer
tissues. Methods: Cell lysate analyses (protein analyses, mRNA
expression) were determined in a bio-diverse sample of pancreatic cancer
cells by western and RT-PCR. Metastatic pancreatic cancer cells were
stably transfected with a luciferase expression vector and stable
short-hairpin RNA silencing of Id1 gene expression with controls.
Orthotopic nude mouse model utilized intraperitoneal injections of
nicotine (1mg/kg, M/W/F) and gemcitabine (250 mg/kg, T/Th) with
monitoring of in vivo growth and metastases based on luminescent signal
concentration. Confirmation of primary tumor and metastases was confirmed
by H&E staining. Tissue microarrays (TMAs) constructed from 100 resected
pancreatic adenocarcinoma were stained for Id1, phospho-Src, and total
Src using immunohistochemistry techniques. Scores based on intensity,
percent of positive cells, and pathological grade (1-4) were assigned to
each malignant core. Results: In vivo, nicotine significantly promoted
tumor growth and metastases in vivo. While gemcitabine reduced the tumor
burden in control mice, nicotine abrogates this inhibitory effect.
Additionally, knockdown of Id1 results in a significant decrease in tumor
burden with no identifiable liver metastases, regardless of nicotine
exposure. Analyses of resected pancreatic tumor TMAs demonstrated a
statistically significant correlation between Id1 and tumor
grade/differentiation (p =0.0368). The correlation of protein levels of
Id1 and phospho-Src was also statistically significant (p =0.0024);
Comparison of overall survival and tumor grade was also significant (p =
0.05); the correlation between overall-survival and Id1 expression
trended toward statistical significance (p =0.06). Conclusions: Id1,
through a Src-dependent-Id1 signaling axis, promotes tumorigenesis and
chemoresistance in an in vivo pancreatic cancer model. Id1 expression
correlates with phospho-Src levels and tumor differentiation in human
pancreatic cancer tissues. These results support the clinical assessment
of Id1 expression as a biomarker of prognosis and support investigations
toward targeted therapies against Id1 for pancreatic cancer patients.

