Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: JNK-FoxO3a dependent apoptosis in quercetin treated MDA-MB-231
human breast cancer cells


FoxO transcription factors are well known as key tumor suppressors in
mammalian cells. The suppression of FoxOs in cancer cells is thought to
be mainly due to activation of multiple onco-kinases, such as Akt and
SGK, by a phosphorylation-ubiquitylation-mediated cascade. On the other
hand, phosphorlyation of FoxO by JNK relocalizes it from the cytoplasm to
the nucleus allowing transcription of FoxO target genes. In this study,
we applied human breast cancer cells to determine whether the activity of
FoxO3a is regulated during the quercetin mediated apoptosis. After
treatment with the indicated amount of quercetin (5-80uM) for 5days, the
growth of human breast cancer cell lines including MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-486
and MCF-7 cells was reduced in dose- and time-dependent manner. FACS
analysis with AnnexinV/PI double staining showed that the proportion of
early apoptotic cancer cells were significantly increased in quercetin
treated cells. It represents the potent apoptotic effect of quercetin in
breast cancer cells. Furthermore, a marked elevation of FoxO3a
transcriptional activity was detected at 20M of quercetin using
FHRE-reporter assay, as well as increased protein level of FoxO3a was
detected by western blotting. And also it was determined that the
activation of FoxO3a lead to the upregulation of FasL expression during
the apoptotic process. To identify the signaling mechanism of FoxO3a
regulation, we examined the activation of several well known upstream
kinases such as Akt, Erk, IKK, AMPK and JNK. Notably, a significant
increase of JNK phosphorylation was observed in quercetin treated cells.
In addition, the inhibition study with pharmacological inhibitor
(SP600125) showed that the involvement of JNK for the regulation of
FoxO3a activity is critical in quercetin treated breast cancer cells.
These results demonstrate that quercetin induces FoxO3a-related apoptosis
by activation of JNK in MDA-MB-231 cells, and suggest the possibility
that JNK-FoxO3a signaling pathway contributes mainly to the apoptotic
process of breast cancer.

