Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new immunotherapy for pancreatic cancer stem cells by tumor
lysate vaccine, expressing -gal epitopes


Pancreatic cancer (PC) cells, expressing the markers CD44, CD24, and
epithelial-specific antigen (ESA) were identified as PC stem cells
(CSCs). Treatments targeting the CSCs may be more effective in resulting
in PC cure, but traditional treatments, including chemo/radiation therapy
can easily miss CSCs, because they are highly resistant to these
therapies. Human natural Ab, anti-Gal is an IgG known to be present in
large amounts in normal subjects and cancer patients, comprising 1% of
serum circulating IgG. Anti-Gal specifically interacts with -gal epitopes
(Gal1, 3Gal1, 4GlcNAc-R), synthesized by 1, 3 galactosyltransferase
(1,3GT) on cell surface glycolipids and glycoproteins. We hypothesized
that biosynthesis of -gal epitopes on the carbohydrate of CSC markers,
including CD44, CD24 could effectively induce Ab production against CSCs
and immune-mediate eradication of PC CSCs. To address this strategy, a
human PC cell line, PANC1, which expresses MUC1 was employed and
transfected with 1,3GT gene (-gal PANC1). To generate tumor lysate, 2 X
106 of either parental or -gal PANC1 were injected S.C. into NOD/SCID
mice, and the grown tumors were enucleated and homogenized. High anti-Gal
1,3GT KO mice, which displayed anti-Gal titers similar to those found in
humans, were generated by immunization of pig tissue. These mice were
vaccinated intraperitoneally (ip) by 10mg of either parental (parental
group) or -gal PANC1 tumor lysate (-gal group). We isolated PANC1 cells
with CD44+CD24+ phenotype by magnetic beads and assessed Ab production
toward both CSCs (binding PANC1 with beads) and differentiated cancer
cells (unbinding PANC1 with beads). In FACS analysis, a marked Ab
production against both CSCs and differentiated cancer cells were
observed in -gal group. To demonstrate in vivo tumor destruction, an
animal model was performed. Splenocytes from vaccinated KO mice were
prepared, then these cells were transferred ip (30X106 cells/ip X 3
times) into NOD/SCID mice. Transferred mice were challenged with S.C.
injection with either 1 X 107 of live PANC1 or 5 X 106 of CD44+CD24+
PANC1. PANC1 tumors in mice transferred from parental group reached the
size of 150 mm2 at 45 days after injection. For tumors in mice
transferred from -gal group, regrowth of tumor was completely prevented.
Survival of -gal transferred mice was significantly prolonged [-gal vs.
parental: 82.521.9 vs. 48.06.7 days, pPancreatic cancer (PC) cells,
expressing the markers CD44, CD24, and epithelial-specific antigen (ESA)
were identified as PC stem cells (CSCs). Treatments targeting the CSCs
may be more effective in resulting in PC cure, but traditional
treatments, including chemo/radiation therapy can easily miss CSCs,
because they are highly resistant to these therapies. Human natural Ab,
anti-Gal is an IgG known to be present in large amounts in normal
subjects and cancer patients, comprising 1% of serum circulating IgG.
Anti-Gal specifically interacts with -gal epitopes (Gal1, 3Gal1,
4GlcNAc-R), synthesized by 1, 3 galactosyltransferase (1,3GT) on cell
surface glycolipids and glycoproteins. We hypothesized that biosynthesis
of -gal epitopes on the carbohydrate of CSC markers, including CD44, CD24
could effectively induce Ab production against CSCs and immune-mediate
eradication of PC CSCs. To address this strategy, a human PC cell line,
PANC1, which expresses MUC1 was employed and transfected with 1,3GT gene
(-gal PANC1). To generate tumor lysate, 2 X 106 of either parental or
-gal PANC1 were injected S.C. into NOD/SCID mice, and the grown tumors
were enucleated and homogenized. High anti-Gal 1,3GT KO mice, which
displayed anti-Gal titers similar to those found in humans, were
generated by immunization of pig tissue. These mice were vaccinated
intraperitoneally (ip) by 10mg of either parental (parental group) or
-gal PANC1 tumor lysate (-gal group). We isolated PANC1 cells with
CD44+CD24+ phenotype by magnetic beads and assessed Ab production toward
both CSCs (binding PANC1 with beads) and differentiated cancer cells
(unbinding PANC1 with beads). In FACS analysis, a marked Ab production
against both CSCs and differentiated cancer cells were observed in -gal
group. To demonstrate in vivo tumor destruction, an animal model was
performed. Splenocytes from vaccinated KO mice were prepared, then these
cells were transferred ip (30X106 cells/ip X 3 times) into NOD/SCID mice.
Transferred mice were challenged with S.C. injection with either 1 X 107
of live PANC1 or 5 X 106 of CD44+CD24+ PANC1. PANC1 tumors in mice
transferred from parental group reached the size of 150 mm2 at 45 days
after injection. For tumors in mice transferred from -gal group, regrowth
of tumor was completely prevented. Survival of -gal transferred mice was
significantly prolonged [-gal vs. parental: 82.521.9 vs. 48.06.7 days,
p<0.0001]. CSC tumors in mice transferred from parental group reached the
size of 100 mm2 at 49 days after injection. For CSC tumors in mice from
-gal group, no tumor formation was observed. Survival was significantly
prolonged [-gal vs. parental: 85.020.8 vs. 49.314.3 days, p=0.0002]. We
conclude that immunotherapy with tumor lysate vaccine, expressing -gal
epitopes effectively targets both differentiated and PC CSCs and may
provide PC cure by destruction of micro-metastasis and minimal residual
cancer.

