Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phase II trial of poly-ICLC in the management of recurrent or
progressive pediatric low grade gliomas


Low-grade astrocytomas and gliomas are the most common type of childhood
brain tumor. Although children with low-grade gliomas often survive many
years after conventional treatment with surgery and radiotherapy, there
can be tremendous morbidity depending on the location of tumor and the
effects of therapy. Newer forms of treatment with reduced side effects
are much needed. We have designed a phase II trial to examine efficacy
and safety of the biological response modifier poly-ICLC in children with
low-grade gliomas, and to identify surrogate biomarkers for response to
this agent. Poly-ICLC, a synthetic complex of polyinosinic and
polycytidylic acid, stabilized with polylysine and carboxymethyl
cellulose is a double stranded RNA (dsRNA) that is a ligand for the
Toll-like Receptor 3 (TLR3), an important component of innate immunity.
It has been shown to have direct antiviral and antineoplastic effects
mediated by at least two interferon inducible nuclear enzyme systems of
OAS and PKR. A previous Phase I/II trial of poly-ICLC conducted in
pediatric patients with brain tumors (all histopathologic subtypes)
suggested the low-grade glioma cohort had the best response to this
therapy (50% PR rate). Additional clinical trials in adult patients have
confirmed that the most responsive subgroup to poly-ICLC is low-grade
glioma patients. We are currently conducting a multi-institutional phase
II study of poly-ICLC administered at 20mcg/kg/dose intramuscularly twice
weekly to children with recurrent or progressive low-grade gliomas.
Simon's two-stage design will be used for statistical analysis. The
primary goal of this study is determine the radiographic response rate.
We will also characterize toxicity and determine if surrogate markers of
tumor response and progression can be identified in patient serum,
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), and/or cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF). To date, 4 pediatric subjects (ages 2-15) with recurrent low-grade
gliomas have enrolled in the study. Poly-ICLC therapy has been well
tolerated and none of the subjects have shown radiologic or clinical
progressive disease. These results suggest that poly-ICLC may have a
beneficial role in children with low-grade gliomas while minimizing
treatment side effects. We have begun analyzing blood and CSF samples to
attempt biomarker identification and correlation with subject responses,
in hopes to yield a basis towards stratification and personalized therapy
with recurrent disease.

