Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-200c overexpression radiosensitizes lung cancer cells


MiR-200 family are key regulators of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) process and because this process is related to the
development of tumor cell resistance and metastasis, these microRNAs
represent potential biomarkers of cancer progression and therapy
response. Nevertheless, their roles in resistance and sensitivity to
radiotherapy are poorly understood. In the present work, we investigated
the potential application of miR-200 family for overcoming
radioresistence in non-small lung cancer cells (NSLC). First, we
demonstrated that NSCLC cell lines that have gone through EMT lose the
ability to express miR-200s. We established that miR-200s expression is
lost in mesenchymal-like NSCLC cell lines by using real-time polymerase
chain reaction analysis of two E-cadherin-positive cell lines H358 and
H322 and two E-cadherin-negative cell lines A549 and H1299. We confirmed
that restoring miR-200s in mesenchymal cells induces E-cadherin
expression. E-cadherin expression was increased and ZEB1 and BIM
expression were decreased after miR-200a overexpression in A549 cells.
Moreover, we analyzed the effect of radiation treatment in an
epithelial-like NSCLC cell line. H358 cells were treated with 4-Gys
radiation doses over a 2-week period. Morphologic changes consistent with
the development of mesenchymal-like characteristics were found and
Western blotting demonstrated a 53% reduction in E-cadherin, suggesting
that radiation drives epithelial cells into EMT. Next, we demonstrated
that miR-200c replacement radiosensitizes mesenchymal-like cells. A549
cells with stable expression of miR-200c and cells transiently
transfected with miR-200c mimics were exposed to ionizing radiation at 0,
2 and 4-Gys. Cell survival and DNA Double-strand breaks were monitored by
clonogenic assay and the formation of -H2AX foci by immunofluorescence,
respectively. We found that miR-200c treatment significantly sensitized
A549 cells to radiation treatment. Moreover, miR-200c overexpression
increased radiation-induced double-stranded DNA breaks relative to
mock-transfected control cells. We also demonstrated that overexpression
of miR-200c influenced two key DNA repair pathways, Rad-51 and Chk-1. To
further verify the mechanism by which miR-200c promotes
radiosensitization in lung cancer cells, we used reverse-phase protein
arrays (RPPA) to identify EMT and DNA-repair proteins that are regulated
by miR-200c. Comparison of several NSCLC lines that were or were not
transfected with miR-200c revealed reductions in the expression of
caveolin, AKT, phosphorylated AKT, phosphorylated SRC, and PI3K, BRCA1
and BRCA2, ATM, Ku80, XRCC1 and XIAP. Taken together, these results
suggest that miR-200c can significantly impact the ability of lung cancer
cells to respond to irradiation and may represent potential therapeutic
target in lung cancer.

