Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utility of retinoid treatment in the reversion of the malignant
phenotype of mammary tumors with alterations in the expression of protein
kinase C (PKC) isoforms


Some of the most promising signaling pathways for breast cancer treatment
include the PKC family, involved in proliferation and apoptosis, and the
retinoid system mainly involved in differentiation. In this work we have
developed a murine model of mammary adenocarcinoma-derived cells (LM3)
that overexpress or PKC isoforms in order to analyze whether elevated
levels of these kinases alter cell sensitivity to retinoid treatment
(ATRA). LM3 cells are poorly responsive to ATRA. The overexpression of
PKC induced alterations in LM3 in vitro behavior that could be associated
with tumor progression. In this sense, PKC increased proliferation and
motility (wound coverage: 69.38.3% vs 41.25.1% in control cells pSome of
the most promising signaling pathways for breast cancer treatment include
the PKC family, involved in proliferation and apoptosis, and the retinoid
system mainly involved in differentiation. In this work we have developed
a murine model of mammary adenocarcinoma-derived cells (LM3) that
overexpress or PKC isoforms in order to analyze whether elevated levels
of these kinases alter cell sensitivity to retinoid treatment (ATRA). LM3
cells are poorly responsive to ATRA. The overexpression of PKC induced
alterations in LM3 in vitro behavior that could be associated with tumor
progression. In this sense, PKC increased proliferation and motility
(wound coverage: 69.38.3% vs 41.25.1% in control cells p<0.05) of the
transfected LM3 cells. Interestingly, at the same time PKC sensitized LM3
cells to ATRA treatment as evidenced by a significant reduction in both
parameters. Upon othotopic inoculation into syngeneic mice LM3-PKC cells
formed tumors with higher growth rate and metastatic potential than
LM3-vector cells. In vivo treatment with an ATRA pellet reduced both the
local tumor growth and the number of spontaneous lung metastases (Md
[Range]: 9 [0-27] vs 55 [20-75] for LM3-PKC treated or not respectively
pSome of the most promising signaling pathways for breast cancer
treatment include the PKC family, involved in proliferation and
apoptosis, and the retinoid system mainly involved in differentiation. In
this work we have developed a murine model of mammary
adenocarcinoma-derived cells (LM3) that overexpress or PKC isoforms in
order to analyze whether elevated levels of these kinases alter cell
sensitivity to retinoid treatment (ATRA). LM3 cells are poorly responsive
to ATRA. The overexpression of PKC induced alterations in LM3 in vitro
behavior that could be associated with tumor progression. In this sense,
PKC increased proliferation and motility (wound coverage: 69.38.3% vs
41.25.1% in control cells p<0.05) of the transfected LM3 cells.
Interestingly, at the same time PKC sensitized LM3 cells to ATRA
treatment as evidenced by a significant reduction in both parameters.
Upon othotopic inoculation into syngeneic mice LM3-PKC cells formed
tumors with higher growth rate and metastatic potential than LM3-vector
cells. In vivo treatment with an ATRA pellet reduced both the local tumor
growth and the number of spontaneous lung metastases (Md [Range]: 9
[0-27] vs 55 [20-75] for LM3-PKC treated or not respectively p<0.05). On
the contrary PKC overexpression did not affect LM3 cells behavior either
in vitro or in vivo. LM3 cells response to ATRA was not modulated by PKC
either. However, through a RARE-luciferase gene reporter assay, we could
determine that the overexpression of PKC increased the activity of the
retinoic acid receptors. Our results show that PKC overexpression induced
a more aggressive phenotype but also conferred ATRA sensitivity to
mammary tumor cells. On the other side high PKC levels increased the
activity of retinoid receptors but did not modulate biological cell
responses to retinoids. We believe that the use of retinoids may be
beneficial in patients with aggressive breast tumors associated with high
PKC expression levels.

