Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galiximab disrupts the dysregulated NF-B/YY1/Snail/BclXL circuit
that regulates the resistance of B-NHL cell lines: Sensitization to
chemo-immunotherapeutic drugs


The combination of Rituximab and chemotherapy is currently the standard
treatment for several B-NHL malignancies. However, there is a subset of
patients that does not initially respond and a subset that fails to
respond to further treatment. Therefore, there is an urgent need to
develop new therapeutic modalities for those patients. Galiximab
(anti-CD80 mAb) has been developed with the objective of overcoming the
resistance to rituximab and/or used in combination with rituximab to
improve response rates. A Phase II double blind placebo controlled trial
of rituximab+galiximab vs. rituximab+placebo in 337 subjects with
relapsed or refractory, grade I-IIIa, follicular NHL in relapse were
followed up of 13.8 month. The addition of Galiximab to rituximab reduced
the hazard for disease progression or death by 26% compared to the
rituximab+placebo group. However, the mechanisms by which Galiximab
mediates its effects have not been examined. Preliminary findings
demonstrated that treatment of B-NHL cell lines with Galiximab resulted
in the inhibition of cell growth and sensitization of drug-resistant
tumor cells to both CDDP and TRAIL-mediated apoptosis. Sensitization was
a result of Galiximab-induced inhibition of the constitutively activated
NF-B pathway and downstream the resistant factors Yin Yang 1 (YY1),
Snail, and BclXL. The role of each of these factors in the regulation of
resistance and whether they also regulate each other were assessed by
transfection with siRNAs. Treatment of Raji (CD80+) Burkitt's Lymphoma
cell line with YY1 siRNA resulted in the inhibition of YY1, Snail,
phospho-p65, and BclXL as assessed by western. Likewise, transfection
with Snail siRNA resulted in the inhibition of Snail, YY1, phospho-p65,
and BclXL. In both cases, the transfected cells resulted in the reversal
of resistance and sensitization to apoptosis by both CDDP and TRAIL.
These findings revealed that NF-B regulates YY1, Snail, and BclXL and
that both YY1 and Snail, in turn, regulate NF-B and BclXL. It has been
reported that YY1 regulates NF-B via miR29 and, in turn, NF-B regulates
YY1 transcription. Also, YY1 regulates Snail transcription. However, it
is not known how does Snail regulate NF-B and YY1. We speculate that
Snail regulates phospho-p65 via transcription or indirectly through the
regulation of NF-B by YY1. The present findings reveal a new dysregulated
NF-B/YY1/Snail/BclXL circuit in the regulation of resistance of B-NHL to
cytotoxic drugs. Galiximab interferes with this circuit and results in
the reverse of resistance. In addition, the findings revealed new targets
that may be of prognostic significance as well as targets for therapy.
The present findings in B-NHL cell lines may be also generalized to
non-lymphoid malignancies.

