Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cell heterogeneity and cell-of-origin in
medulloblastomas


Understanding the origin of cancer stem cell (CSC) heterogeneity within a
tumor type is one of the major challenges in the CSC field currently. In
this study, we report that Ptch+/ mice develop three distinguishable
subtypes of medulloblastomas, and that CSCs in each subtype depend on
different signaling pathways for self-renewal and survival. In all three
tumor subtypes, the tumor initiating cell frequency is low (Understanding
the origin of cancer stem cell (CSC) heterogeneity within a tumor type is
one of the major challenges in the CSC field currently. In this study, we
report that Ptch+/ mice develop three distinguishable subtypes of
medulloblastomas, and that CSCs in each subtype depend on different
signaling pathways for self-renewal and survival. In all three tumor
subtypes, the tumor initiating cell frequency is low (< 1/300 cells) and
100% of the tumors can be serially passaged in vivo for at least 5
generations, indicating that each tumor subtype contains rare, long-term
self-renewing cells with tumor-initiating ability. However, CSCs in Type
I tumors require in vivo microenvironment for survival/proliferation;
hence, they do not grow in stem cell cultures in vitro. CSCs in Type II
and Type III tumors form tumorspheres but require different growth factor
signaling pathways for self-renewal and proliferation. Remarkably, except
in rare cases where spontaneous tumor progression occurs, the CSC
phenotype remains identical to the original tumor through multiple in
vivo serial passages, indicating that molecular and cellular phenotypes
of CSCs in each tumor are stable, cell-intrinsic characteristics of CSCs.
Based on their in vitro culture requirements and their gene expression
patterns, we hypothesized that different CSC subtypes arise from
different cell-of-origin. We tested this hypothesis by activating the SHH
pathway in cell type-specific manner using genetically engineered mice.
We provide strong evidence that Type I tumors arise from EGL progenitors
and that Type II tumors arise from embryonic neural stem cells. We also
show that Type I and Type II tumors can spontaneously progress onto Type
III tumors both in vivo and in vitro, and that this progression is
characterized by gain of chromosome 6. Importantly, the three tumor
subtypes can be distinguished at the bulk tumor level by unique gene
expression patterns. Analyses of subtype-specific signature genes against
human medulloblastoma gene expression data set published by Kool et al.,
show that different subtypes of Ptch+/ tumors correspond to different
human medulloblastoma subtypes. Importantly, they do not all correspond
to the SHH-subtype. In summary, we propose that the same initiating
oncogenic event can lead to generation of CSCs with distinct molecular
and cellular phenotypes depending on the cell of origin. Our observation
provides a partial explanation for the failure of SHH-inhibitors to cure
SHH-tumors in preclinical and clinical trials. Our findings suggest that
identification and analyses of CSCs in each tumor may be necessary for
efficient stratification and targeting of CSCs in histologically
indistinguishable tumors.

