Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular imaging of the cancer signature using targeted-split
enzyme complementation


Noninvasive diagnosis of any disease is a crucial step in the prevention,
treatment and reduction of the mortality rate. Further, tailoring
clinical diagnostics and therapeutics to specific forms of cancer and
even to the precise aberrant biological events underlying cancer
development in a particular patient has focused significant research on
molecular signatures. For instance, cell surface receptors important in
tumorigenesis are expressed at different levels during the multistage
process and are routinely used to guide treatment regimes. Moreover,
mutational events that drive a normal cell to become a cancer cell
require the coordinated overexpression of not just one receptor at a
time, but rather multiple biomarkers. Many cancers, including gliomas,
are characterized by an abnormal increase in the activity of epidermal
growth factor receptors (EGFR) and transferrin receptors (TfR). Our data
of representative human cancer cell lines demonstrate unique, observable
expression patterns for the two receptors. Current diagnostic techniques
such as medical imaging, tissue biopsy, and bioanalytical assay of body
fluids are relatively insensitive and lack the specificity to detect
these physiologic changes simultaneously. To develop imaging tools that
take advantage of the molecular signature, new technologies must employ
an activity-based imaging agent conjugated to a targeting element. By
linking a reporter enzyme, such as -gal, to a targeting moiety, either
ligand or a short peptide, signal-amplification at the molecular level is
achieved. We divided -gal into unique, independent polypeptides that
reassemble and complement enzymatic activity in bacteria and in mammalian
cells. We created two sets of complementing pairs that individually have
no enzymatic activity. However, when brought into close proximity,
complementing pairs associate, resulting in detectable enzymatic
activity. We then constructed a targeting complex composed of reporter
fragment, linker, and targeting moiety. Our studies demonstrate a time
course- and dose-dependent uptake in vitro. Further, we were able to
simultaneously visualize the two cell surface receptors implicated in
gliomas, EGFR and TfR, using complementing pairs of the targeted-reporter
fragment complex. In addition, we were able to image orthotopic brain
tumor accumulation and localization of the targeted-enzyme when a
fluorescence reporter was added to the complex, as well as
immunohistochemical staining of the -gal reporter complex ex vivo. After
fluorescence imaging localized the -gal complexes to the brain tumor, we
topically applied a bioluminescent -gal substrate to serial sections of
the brain to evaluate the delivery and integrity of enzyme. Robust
bioluminescence was captured within the tumor after 3 min, indicating
that -gal maintained its activity. Current experiments are underway to
image the enzyme complementation noninvasively in vivo.

