Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Green tea catechin intervention of reactive oxygen
species-mediated ERK pathway activation, DNA damage, and
chronically-induced breast cell carcinogenesis


Long-term exposure to low doses of environmental carcinogens contributes
to sporadic human breast cancers. Epidemiologic and experimental studies
indicate that green tea catechins (GTCs) may interfere with breast cancer
development. We have been developing a chronically-induced breast cell
carcinogenesis model wherein we repeatedly expose non-cancerous, human
breast epithelial MCF10A cells to physiologically-achievable pico-molar
concentrations of environmental carcinogens
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) and benzo[a]pyrene
(B[a]P), to progressively induce cellular acquisition of
cancer-associated properties, as measurable endpoints. The model is then
used as a target to identify non-cytotoxic preventive agents effective in
suppressing cellular carcinogenesis. Here, we report a two-step strategy
that initially used short-term endpoints that were transiently-induced by
a single exposure to NNK and B[a]P. These short-term endpoints were used
as targets to detect the ability of individual GTC components to block
carcinogenesis. We subsequently used long-term endpoints that were
constantly-induced by cumulative exposures to carcinogens as targets to
verify and compare the activity of individual GTC components in
suppressing carcinogenesis. We detected that a single exposure to NNK and
B[a]P resulted in elevation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), leading to
ERK pathway activation and induction of cell proliferation and
chromosomal DNA damage. GTC components, at non-cytotoxic levels, were
able to suppress chronically-induced cellular carcinogenesis by blocking
carcinogen-induced ROS elevation, ERK activation, cell proliferation, and
DNA damage in each exposure cycle. Our model may help accelerate the
identification of agents to prevent carcinogenesis induced by long-term
exposure to environmental carcinogens, thereby safely and effectively
reducing the health risk of sporadic breast cancer.

