Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retention of the radiosensitizing effect of gemcitabine and its
main metabolite dFdU under reduced oxygen conditions is not influenced by
HIF-1 functionality


Introduction: Regions within solid tumors often experience mild to severe
oxygen deprivation, associated with resistance to chemotherapy and
irradiation. The aim of this study was to evaluate the radiosensitizing
effect of gemcitabine and its main metabolite dFdU under normal versus
reduced oxygen conditions and to determine whether hypoxia-inducible
factor 1 (HIF-1) is involved in the radiosensitizing mechanism. Materials
& methods: The clonogenic assay was performed in three isogenic
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines differing in HIF-1alpha proficiency
(24h 0-8 nM gemcitabine or 0-4 microM dFdU, 0-8 Gy irradiation).
Validation of the transfection with dominant negative HIF-1alpha was done
by western blot and by assessment of HIF-1alpha activity. The relative
expression of 84 genes related to the hypoxia signaling pathway was
characterized by human hypoxia signaling pathway PCR array. Using
radiosensitizing conditions, cells were collected for cell cycle
analysis. Results: HIF-1 activity was significantly inhibited after
transfection with a dominant negative protein. Furthermore,
anoxia-induced VEGF secretion was significantly lower (pIntroduction:
Regions within solid tumors often experience mild to severe oxygen
deprivation, associated with resistance to chemotherapy and irradiation.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the radiosensitizing effect of
gemcitabine and its main metabolite dFdU under normal versus reduced
oxygen conditions and to determine whether hypoxia-inducible factor 1
(HIF-1) is involved in the radiosensitizing mechanism. Materials &
methods: The clonogenic assay was performed in three isogenic MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cell lines differing in HIF-1alpha proficiency (24h 0-8 nM
gemcitabine or 0-4 microM dFdU, 0-8 Gy irradiation). Validation of the
transfection with dominant negative HIF-1alpha was done by western blot
and by assessment of HIF-1alpha activity. The relative expression of 84
genes related to the hypoxia signaling pathway was characterized by human
hypoxia signaling pathway PCR array. Using radiosensitizing conditions,
cells were collected for cell cycle analysis. Results: HIF-1 activity was
significantly inhibited after transfection with a dominant negative
protein. Furthermore, anoxia-induced VEGF secretion was significantly
lower (p<0.05) in MDA-MB-231 cells stably expressing dnHIF (dominant
negative HIF-1alpha) than in MDA-MB-231 EV (empty vector) cells. PCR
array indicated that hypoxic conditions significantly influenced the
expression of HIF-1alpha and ANGPTL4 (angiopoetin-like 4). A clear
radiosensitizing effect under normoxic and anoxic conditions was observed
for both gemcitabine and dFdU. The radiosensitizing effect was similar
under normoxic and anoxic conditions (p=0.48 for gemcitabine, p=0.56 for
dFdU) and the dose enhancement factor (DEF) was not significantly
influenced by the cell line used. Under anoxia, DEFs for gemcitabine
ranged from 1.26 to 1.59, from 1.11 to 1.77, and from 1.34 to 2.04 in
MDA-MB-231 wt, EV and dnHIF cells, respectively. Statistical analysis
revealed no significant differences in radiobiological parameters between
HIF-1 proficient and HIF-1 deficient cells. Cell cycle analysis showed
that, in contrast to previous findings in other cell lines, exposure of
MDA-MB-231 cells to low oxygen conditions did not induce a significant
increase in the percentage of G0/1 cells (p=0.21). Gemcitabine and dFdU
caused a block of cells in the S phase of the cell cycle under both
normoxic and anoxic conditions. Conclusion: For the first time,
radiosensitization by dFdU, the main metabolite of gemcitabine, was
demonstrated under low oxygen conditions. As dFdU has a prolonged
half-life, the sustained presence of dFdU in the blood might induce
radiosensitization despite the short half-life of the parent drug,
gemcitabine. This might be highly relevant, especially considering
delivery of the drug to hypoxic tumor regions. No major role for HIF-1 in
radiosensitization by gemcitabine or dFdU could be shown.

