Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CR8, a novel CDK inhibitor, enhances vandetanib activity in a
human medullary thyroid carcinoma model


Introduction: CR8 (ManRos Therapeutics) is a novel inhibitor of
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) that selectively targets CDK1/2/3/5/7/9.
CDK inhibitors have already shown potent antitumoral activity. Recently,
vandetanib (Astra Zeneca), a tyrosine-kinase inhibitor, was approved in
the U.S. for the treatment of adult patients with metastatic Medullary
Thyroid Carcinoma (MTC). The absence of complete tumor responses
justifies the development of new therapeutic options. The aim of this
study was to investigate the preclinical activity of CR8 alone and in
combination with vandetanib in a MTC model. Materials and Methods: The
human MTC TT cell line, bearing a RETC634W activating mutation, was
cultured in the absence or the presence of CR8 (10-10 000 nM) and/or
vandetanib over 6 days. Cell proliferation was assessed by WST-1 assay.
Activation of RET, PP1 and oncogenic pathways (PI3K/AKT, MEK/p44-42) was
analyzed by western-immunoblotting. Calcitonin secretion in cell culture
media was measured by ELISA. Results: Both CR8 and vandetanib when used
alone strongly inhibit TT cell proliferation at day 3 of treatment.
Addition of CR8 (10 nM) enhances the antiproliferative activity of low
vandetanib concentrations. As expected, vandetanib alone inhibits RET,
MAPK and AKT phosphorylation and CR8 inhibits PP1. Interestingly, CR8
alone induces activation of RET, MAPK and AKT phosphorylation, and the
addition of vandetanib (>100 nM) inhibits RET signalling pathways. At day
3 of treatment, vandetanib (>100 nM) and CR8 (100 nM) reduced and induced
calcitonin secretion, respectively. Conclusion: CR8 displays an
antiproliferative effect on TT cells and enhances the antiproliferative
activity of vandetanib. CR8 acts by inhibiting PP1 and, surprisingly,
induces an activation of RET and stimulates calcitonin production. These
results suggest that the combination of vandetanib with CDKs inhibitors
such as CR8 may be of value to improve therapeutic response.

