Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide association study of lung cancer: Variation in TP63
gene confers the risk of lung adenocarcinoma


Lung cancer is the most common cause of death from cancer worldwide, and
its incidence is increasing in East Asian and Western countries. Lung
cancer comprises various types of histology that are often divided into
two main types, non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer.
Each type has different pathophysiological and clinical features,
suggesting that their mechanisms of carcinogenesis differ. Adencarcinoma
accounts for about 50% of all histological types of lung cancer, and its
incidence is increasing in East Asian and Western countries. Because most
of the current genome-wide association studies (GWAS) on lung cancer have
been conducted in European populations with a full range of different
histological types of lung cancer, GWAS that focus on individual
histological groups with archived clinicopathological features are
required. To identify genetic factors that modify the risk of lung
adenocarcinoma, we conducted a genome-wide association study in a
Japanese cohort, with replication in two independent studies in Japanese
and Korean individuals, in a total of 2,098 lung adenocarcinoma cases and
11,048 controls. The combined analyses identified two susceptibility loci
for lung adenocarcinoma: TERT (rs2736100, combined P = 2.91 10(-11), odds
ratio (OR) = 1.27) and TP63 (rs10937405, combined P = 7.26 10(-12), OR =
1.31). When we analyzed the combinational combined effect of TP63 and
TERT, we found that these two susceptibility genes showed a synergistic
effect on the risk of lung adenocarcinoma (OR = 4.26). Fine mapping and
re-sequencing of the region containing TP63 showed that a SNP (rs4488809)
in intron 1 of TP63 showed the most significant association. Our results
suggest that genetic variation in TP63 may influence susceptibility to
lung adenocarcinoma in East Asian populations. Further functional studies
are necessary to clarify the mechanisms by which TP63 influences
susceptibility to lung adenocarcinoma. We will also report additional
studies of TP63 on other ethnic populations as well as other histological
types of lung cancer that will provide detailed information on the
genetic etiology and heterogeneity of lung cancer.

