Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring radiation response in tumor vasculature using
intravital photoacoustic imaging in a murine window chamber model in vivo


VisualSonics has recently developed a preclinical photoacoustic (PA)
imaging system called the VevoLAZR that combines the sensitivity of
optical imaging and the high resolution of micro-ultrasound. The system
incorporates a 40 MHz (centre frequency) ultrasound transducer linear
array probe (LZ550) and a tuneable 680-970 nm nanosecond pulsed-laser. We
used this system to study in vivo changes in tumor oxygen saturation and
haemoglobin density caused by exposure to radiation therapy (RT). For
this, DsRed-Me180 human cervical tumors were grown in a nude mouse dorsal
skinfold window chamber model until they reached 2.5 mm in diameter.
Specifically, we investigated the system's sensitivity and dynamic range
to measure relative changes in oxygen saturation in tumor and surrounding
healthy tissues 10 days after treatment. Tumors (2.5 mm diameter) were
focally irradiated with a single dose of 30 Gy using a small animal
microirradiator (XRAD225, Precision XRay Inc., North Branford, CT). To
measure the dynamic range and stability of our setup for measuring oxygen
saturation in vivo, we altered the anesthetised animal's inhaled oxygen
from 100% to 7% for 1 min during PA imaging. This test showed that blood
oxygen saturation in the healthy dorsal skinfold tissue decreased from
82% to 8% and confirmed the linearity of the measurement technique.
Furthermore, we compared vascular morphology obtained by photoacoustic
imaging and intravital fluorescent microscopy using FITC-Dextran (2 MDa,
injected 20 mins prior). This comparison showed good correlation and
confirms that PA imaging can provide important structural information of
vascularity. Photoacoustic imaging was performed before and 10 days after
irradiation to assess changes in tumour volume, relative blood oxygen
saturation, relative tissue oxygen saturation, and relative hemoglobin
density. Ten days after irradiation, PA imaging showed that the tumour
volume increased from 5.7 to 14.2 mm3, relative blood oxygen saturation
decreased from 75.3 to 48.2%, relative tissue oxygen saturation decreased
from 40.7 to 0.1%, and hemoglobin density decreased from 18457 to 3253
a.u. These data illustrate the capability of PA imaging to simultaneously
measure multiple radiobiological response metrics from a single imaging
scan. Pilot results demonstrate: i) the compatibility of the VisualSonics
small animal VevoLAZR photoacoustic imaging system with intravital murine
tumor models, ii) the sensitivity of the system to detect RT-induced
changes in tumor vascular oxygen saturation non-invasively, in real time
and in vivo, and iii) a new preclinical application of PA imaging for
longitudinal monitoring of tumor response to RT in vivo.

