Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GE-huMab-HER3, a novel humanized, glycoengineered HER3 antibody
with enhanced ADCC and superior preclinical in vitro and in vivo efficacy


HER3 is a member of the Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (HER)
family. HER3 is a kinase dead receptor, but by forming heterodimers with
other HER family receptors, HER3 works as amplifier for PI3 kinase driven
tumorigenesis. It has been reported that tumors treated with EGFR-, HER2-
or cMET-targeted therapies can escape via HER3 activation or
upregulation. HER3 is expressed in a large variety of tumors for example
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), head and neck, colorectal,
gastric, pancreatic, breast, ovarian and prostate cancer. Anti-HER3
antibodies can work via various mechanisms including: (1) blocking ligand
(HRGs) binding to the receptor, (2) blocking heterodimerization with
other HER family members (HER1, 2 and 4), (3) downregulation of the
receptor from the cell surface, and (4) engaging immune effector
functions such as antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC). The
first three mechanisms lead to inhibition of HER3 phosphorylation and
downstream signaling thereby resulting in tumor cell growth inhibition,
while ADCC is a mechanism of direct target cell killing triggered by
cross-linking of Fc receptors on immune effector cells (e.g. NK cells,
macrophages). GE-huMab-HER3 is a novel humanized and glycoengineered IgG1
antibody that binds to HER3 with high affinity. This antibody prevents
ligand binding and receptor heterodimerization thereby blocking receptor
phosphorylation. In various tumor xenograft models treatment with this
antibody leads to substantial tumor growth inhibition. E.g. GE-huMab-HER3
treatment achieved >50% tumor growth inhibition in 10 out of 17 NSCLC
models and in some cases even resulted in complete tumor remission.
However, these xenograft experiments only reveal part of this antibody's
therapeutic potential. A unique feature of GE-huMab-HER3 that
differentiates it from other anti-HER3 antibodies, including AMG 888 and
MM-121, is its ability to bind to human FcgRIIIa on immune effector cells
with a 50-fold higher affinity than standard IgG1 antibodies, a property
conferred by the engineered glycosylation of the antibody Fc region.
Consequently, GE-huMab-HER3 exhibits superior potency and efficacy in
ADCC, as shown in vitro using recombinant A549 cells and in vivo by its
Fc mediated greater anti-tumor effect in A549 orthotopic mouse models
compared to a non-glyco-engineered variant of the antibody,
WT-huMab-HER3. The combination of strong signaling inhibition and
enhanced ADCC capability renders GE-huMabHER3 a highly potent
HER3-targeting agent. Phase I clinical testing of this promising novel
compound is ongoing.

