Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exon capture analysis of G-protein coupled receptors reveals
activating mutations in GRM3 in melanoma


An important feature of cellular signaling involves the activation of
plasma membrane-bound receptor complexes via endogenous ligands. G
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), the largest human gene family, are
known to be activated by ligands such as, thrombin, chemokines or
glutamate, and have been shown to be important regulators of signaling
pathways. Dysregulation via overexpression of diverse GPCRs has been well
documented in primary and metastatic tumors cells such as breast, lung,
prostate and gastric tumors, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, and
melanoma (1), however, knowledge of their genetic alterations is limited
especially in malignant melanoma. Thus, further analysis of this gene
family is warranted to determine if GPCR proteins play a role in
melanomagenesis. In our current study, we used exon capture and illumina
sequencing methods to analyze the mutational status of all the GPCRs in
melanoma. This investigation revealed that one family member, GRM3 was
frequently mutated in melanoma and that one of its mutations clustered
within one position (Glu870Lys). Biochemical analysis of GRM3 alterations
revealed that mutant GRM3 selectively regulated the phosphorylation of
MEK leading to increased anchorage-independent growth and migration. In
vivo studies revealed that overexpression of mutant forms of GRM3 result
in increased lung macrometastases; whereas depletion of GRM3 in cells
expressing mutant forms of GRM3 resulted in reduced xenograft tumor
formation compared to equivalently treated wild type GRM3 cells.
Furthermore, melanoma cells expressing mutant forms of GRM3 had reduced
cell growth and reduced cellular migration after shRNA-mediated knockdown
of GRM3 or treatment with a selective MEK inhibitor, AZD-6244, which is
currently being used in phase II clinical trials. Our study yields a
comprehensive map of genetic alterations in the GPCR gene family and
suggests a potential novel therapeutic target for melanoma patients.

