Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the role of E2F2 in mediating human breast cancer
metastasis


In human breast cancer it is not the primary tumor that is the cause of
mortality but tumor metastasis to distant sites. Therefore, it is
important to elucidate the biological mechanisms that underlie the
metastatic processes. To address this, we utilized bioinformatic methods
in combination with biochemical assays and genetic studies. Specifically,
we crossed MMTV-Myc transgenic mice with various activator E2Fs mutants.
We found that the tumor incidence decreased in MMTV-Myc mice interbred
with E2F2 and E2F3 mutant backgrounds. Surprisingly, we also found that
the loss of E2F2 sharply increased the percentage of lung metastasis in
MMTV-Myc mice. Here, we test whether these observations in mice translate
to human breast cancer and identify the genes under the control of E2F2
transcription factor that are responsible for mediating breast cancer
metastasis. To achieve these aims, we examined the probability of
activation of the E2F2 transcription factors in human breast cancer. We
calculated the probability of E2F2 activation and used this data to
stratify the human breast cancer samples and their associated metastatic
clinical data. Examining this data we found that a low probability of
E2F2 pathway activation led to decreased time to distant metastasis. To
account for this discrepancy, we performed hierarchical clustering of
human and mouse gene expression datasets. We found two clusters of human
breast tumors in which E2F2 played distinctly different roles in
mediating metastasis. One particular cluster clustered with our mouse
gene expression data and exhibited the same role for E2F2 where it
increased time to distant metastasis. In addition, we examined the
ontology of the genes in this cluster and found that the majority of
these genes had putative E2F binding sites. To further identify genes
that are involved in metastasis, we stratified human breast cancer
metastasis clinical annotation using gene expression values from these
genes. We found that there were seven genes that are uniquely
differentially regulated in this cluster. Interestingly, we observed that
this group of seven genes included genes that were implicated in the
metastatic process such as MMP16. Taken together, our results showed that
there is an important role for E2F2 in mediating breast cancer metastasis
and using our bioinformatic methods, we have begun to elucidate this role
of E2F2 in mediating breast cancer metastasis. Our future directions
include further validation of these target genes in vitro and in vivo to
establish the mechanism by which E2F2 mediates breast cancer metastasis.

