Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genistein inhibits highly proliferative hematopoietic stem cells


Genistein is a soybean-derived isoflavone with antioxidant and
anti-inflammatory effects. It also has tyrosine kinase inhibitory
properties that attenuates proliferation of both normal and cancerous
cells. Patients with severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) require
continuous G-CSF treatment throughout their lifetime. Such prolonged
treatment increases the incidence of myelodysplastic syndromes/acute
myeloid leukemia (MDS/AML) in this population. We hypothesize that
genistein could counteract the deleterious effects of excessive
hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) proliferation, which can lead to DNA
damage, increase in radical oxygen species (ROS) production and DNA
instability. To test our hypothesis we choose the p53 heterozygous (+/)
mouse model, once those animals have a constitutive enhancement in HSC
proliferation. They also display high levels of ROS and DNA damage in
comparison to wild type (WT). We started our experiments treating WT and
p53+/ mice 3 times a week with subcutaneous injections of genistein.
After treatment, we analyzed the total number of lin-ckit+sca+ (KLS)
cells. The number of p53+/ KLS decreased while the WT KLS numbers
remained unaffected. KLS cells were then analyzed for the amount of DNA
damage via nuclear pH2AX staining. Our results show a 2 fold decrease in
DNA damage on the p53+/ cells from treated animals, compared to untreated
ones, while the levels of DNA damage remained unaltered on WT. Basal
levels of ROS on p53+/ KLS cells were higher than in the WT KLS cells,
but after treated with genistein those levels decreased by 10 fold.
Interestingly, long term treatment with genistein did not result in a
decrease of white blood cells on neither p53+/ nor WT animals. To
elucidate the mechanism of action, KLS cells were sorted and cell cycle
analyses showed that genistein inhibited cell cycle specifically in the
stem cell population. Genistein reduced the percentage of p53+/ KLS cells
in cycle, but it had no effect on WT cells. We then tested genistein
effects on HSC population in bone marrow competitive repopulation assay.
We transplanted lethally irradiated mice with a 50:50 mix of bone marrow
from WT and p53+/ mice. After the transplant the animals were treated 3
times a week with subcutaneous injections of genistein or adjuvant.
Animals were euthanized after 5 weeks of treatment and blood and bone
marrow were analyzed. After genistein treatment, the percentages of p53+/
KLS cells in bone marrow were 60% on treated mice and 80% on untreated
mice. This data suggests that genistein preferentially inhibits the
highly proliferative stem cell population, indicating its preventive or
therapeutic potential against the deleterious effects of excessive HSC
proliferation. Understanding this mechanism of action could potentially
reveal novel treatments for patients suffering with severe congenital
neutropenia, leukemia, or other hematological malignancies with route on
excessive HCS proliferation.

