Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactive astrocytes promote the growth of cancer stem-like cells
of metastatic breast tumor by activating Notch signaling in brain


Metastatic diseases are responsible for the majority of deaths in breast
cancer patients, and brain is one of the most common metastatic sites.
The metastatic tumor in the brain profoundly affects the cognitive and
sensory functions as well as morbidity of patients, and the one year
survival rate among these patients remains less than 20%. However, little
is known about the pathogenesis of brain metastasis, and therefore, it is
of paramount importance to elucidate the molecular mechanism of
metastatic process in order to define a specific therapeutic target. Our
analysis of existing microarray database indicate that interleukin-1
(IL-1) is highly expressed in MDA-MB231BrM2a (231BrM) cell line which is
capable of preferentially metastasizing to the brain. IL-1 is known to
have an ability of activating astrocytes that are often found in the
metastatic niche, and therefore, it is speculated that the reactive
astrocytes can promote growth and invasion of metastasized cells in the
brain. To explore this possibility, we examined the effect of IL-1 and
the conditioned medium of 231BrM cells on rat primary astrocytes in
vitro. Our results of qRT-PCR and Western blot analysis indicate that
IL-1 and the conditioned medium significantly up-regulated the Notch
ligand, JAG1, in astrocytes, and that this up-regulation was abrogated by
the NF-B inhibitor, PDTC. We also found that the interaction between CSCs
and astrocytes significantly enhances the self-renewal ability of CSCs.
To further examine the interaction of astrocytes and tumor cells in the
brain, we intracardially injected 231BrM cells in nude mice, and tumor
growth was monitored by Xenogen bioimager. After 4 weeks, metastatic
tumor growth was observed at multiple sites of the brain, and the results
of immunohistochemical analysis indicated that astrocytes adjacent to the
metastatic lesions strongly expressed JAG1 and the reactive astrocyte
marker, GFAP (Glial fibrillary acidic protein). Finally, we found that a
BBB-permeable Notch inhibitor was able to significantly suppress
metastatic growth of breast cancer in the brain in our animal model.
These results represent a novel paradigm for the understanding of how
metastatic breast CSCs re-establish their niche for their self-renewal in
a totally different microenvironment, which opens a new avenue to
identify a novel and specific target for the brain metastatic disease.

