Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of miR-29 on cisplatin sensitivity of ovarian cancer cells


In clinical practice, the main dilemma to a successful ovarian cancer
therapy is the development of drug resistance. The mounting evidence
demonstrated that microRNAs (miRNAs) not only controlled cell
proliferation, invasion and metastasis but also therapeutic resistance of
ovarian cancer cell. Recently, we isolated CP70sps(CP70 side population
spheres) from CP70 ovarian cancer cell line and proved that CP70sps
exhibited more resistant to cisplatin than CP70. This phenomenon was
correlated to other study which supported that side population of cancer
cells was responsible for chemoresistance. In this study, we compared the
expression of miRNAs between CP70sps and CP70 to investigate the role of
miRNAs in cisplatin resistance of ovarian cancer cells. Our miRNA array
and quantitative RT-PCR data showed that CP70sps expressed lower level of
miR-29a/b/c family than CP70 cells and CP70sps4wks cells which were
repopulation of CP70sps in attached condition. After knockdown of
miR-29a/b/c family by miRNA inhibitors, reduction of miR-29a/b/c family
enhanced cisplatin resistance of CP70 cells. However, there was no effect
on cell cycle and proliferation rate in both CP70 cells and A2780, a
parental cisplatin-sensitive cell line of CP70 cells. Downregulation of
miR-29a/b/c family contributed cells to escape cisplatin-induced cell
death through COL1A1 upregulation. Moreover, reduction of miR-29a/b/c
increased phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and GSK3 to transduce survival
signaling and reduced active form casepase-9 to avoid cell apoptosis.
Furthermore, we found that either ectopic expression of miR-29 alone or
combination of miR-29 with cisplatin treatment efficaciously reduced
tumorigenicity of CP70 cells in immunodeficiency mice. Finally, we
ascertained that the ovarian cancer patients with high expression of
miR-29a had better overall survival rate. Taken together, our data
demonstrated that the miR-29 family was a sensitizer for cisplatin
treatment and might be associated with tumorigenecity of ovarian cancer
cells.

