Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A truncated DNMT3B protein (DNMT3B7) drives DNA methylation and
suppresses growth in human neuroblastoma


Cancer cells have an altered distribution of DNA methylation relative to
normal cells. We have shown previously that human cancer cells express
aberrant DNMT3B transcripts via abnormal gene splicing. Many of these
aberrant transcripts encode truncated proteins, including DNMT3B7, one of
the most commonly expressed aberrant isoforms expressed in cancer. In
vitro, DNMT3B7 expression modifies the pattern of DNA methylation and
gene expression. Neuroblastoma is a pediatric tumor of the neural crest
cell lineage. A clinically aggressive disease and poor outcome is
associated with CpG island methylator phenotype in neuroblastoma. We
found that the expression of four or more DNMT3B transcripts, in primary
neuroblastic tumors correlated with high-risk and stage IV disease.
Further, the expression of DNMT3B5 also correlated to high-risk and stage
IV tumors. Additionally, higher levels of DNMT3B7 expression were
detected in more differentiated neuroblastic tumors
(ganglioneuroblastomas) compared to undifferentiated neuroblastomas. To
determine if DNMT3B7 expression might alter neuroblastoma phenotype, we
induced exogenous expression of DNMT3B7 in SMS-KCNR and LA1-55n cells,
both aggressive neuroblastoma cell lines. Forced DNMT3B7 expression
significantly inhibited neuroblastoma tumor growth in both cell lines.
Histologic evaluation of the DNMT3B7-positive xenografts revealed
decreased neuroblastoma cell proliferation, increased apoptosis, and
inhibited angiogenesis. RNA-Sequencing of the DNMT3B7-expressing LA1-55n
cells revealed dramatic decreased expression of FOS and JUN family
members (FOS, FOSB, FOSL1, FOSL2, JUN, JUNB, JUND), which encode the
components of the AP1 complex. In addition to acting as a transcription
factor, AP1 can also antagonize the activity of retinoic acid receptors.
We therefore hypothesized that with reduced levels of AP1, retinoic acid
receptors would be more active and may drive the DNMT3B7-expressing cells
toward differentiation. Among 24 genes that have been used as markers for
differentiation in neuroblastoma, 19 have expression changes in
DNMT3B7-expressing LA1-55n cells relative to control cells that correlate
with a more differentiated phenotype. We also found higher levels of
total genomic methylation in neuroblastoma cells with forced DNMT3B7
expression compared to controls in addition to gene promoter methylation
changes that correlated to gene expression data. Our results demonstrate
that high levels of DNMT3B7 increases total DNA methylation and inhibits
neuroblastoma cell proliferation, angiogenesis, and tumor growth. Further
knowledge regarding mechanisms by which DNMT3B7 regulates gene
methylation may lead ultimately to the development of therapeutic
strategies that reverse the epigenetic aberrations that drive
neuroblastoma pathogenesis.

