Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel cationic peptide nanoparticle-based gene therapy with
angiotensin II type 2 receptor gene significantly attenuates growth of
lung adenocarcinoma xenografts in mouse model


A successful gene therapy requires targeted gene delivery, high gene
transfection efficiency at the target tissue, and low toxicity of the
vectors. We have demonstrated that the HIV-1 TAT peptide is suggested to
be an effective gene delivery vector in various cultured cells (Baoum, et
al., Pharm Res, 2009; Baoum, et al., Int J Pharm, 2011). The objectives
of the present study were to examine the gene transfection efficacy of
modified TAT peptide nanoparticle (two TAT peptides connected in tandem
i.e. dTAT NP) as a vector, and to examine the efficiency of the
tumor-targeted gene delivery after intratracheal administration.
Expression efficiency of the dTAT NP encapsulating luciferase or
angiotensin II type 2 receptor (AT2R) plasmid DNA (pDNA) was evaluated
using Lewis Lung carcinoma (LLC) cells in culture and orthotopic
autografts in C57BL/6 mice lungs. Cell culture studies clarified that the
dTAT NP caused effective gene transfection with negligible cytotoxicity
until approximately 4 mg dTAT/mL (IC50= 4.075 mg/mL), whereas
polyethyleneimine (PEI) showed much stronger cytotoxicity (IC50= 0.028
mg/mL). The in vitro study also revealed that the addition of calcium and
glucose to the dTAT/pDNA NP caused effective DNA transfection. The in
vitro transfection of pAT2R by dTAT NP caused marked attenuation of the
growth of LLC cells. Immunohistochemical analysis of the in vitro
transfection and in vivo mouse gene expression studies with
dTAT/luciferase pDNA NP revealed that dTAT NP vector successfully
delivered the dTAT/pDNA complex to the tumor tissues and caused gene
expression primarily in the tumor cells and bronchial epithelium. Gene
expression in the tumor tissues lasted for at least 14 days
post-administration. Bolus intratracheal administration of dTAT/pAT2R as
well as dTAT/pTRAIL markedly attenuated tumor growth of LLC autografts in
the mouse lungs. Immunohistochemical analysis of dissected tumors
revealed that the AT2R expression was predominantly located in the tumor
cells of the LLC tumor bearing mouse lung. Apoptotic index was
significantly higher in the treated tumors than PBS or luciferase treated
control tumors, suggesting that AT2R pDNA was successfully delivered to
the tumor tissues by dTAT NP vector and caused apoptosis of tumor cells.
Taken together, the current study suggests that a gene delivery system
using intratracheal administration of dTAT/pAT2R NP offers an effective
strategy for lung cancer gene therapy. This work was supported by the
Kansas State University (KSU) Terry C. Johnson Center for Basic Cancer
Research, KSU College of Veterinary Medicine Dean's Fund, NIH P20
RR017686, p20 RR1556, R21CA135599 and Kansas Bioscience Authority
Collaborative Cancer Research grant.

