Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A simple correction for population stratification in random forest
analysis


Introduction Random forest (RF) has been increasingly applied in
Genome-wide Association (GWA) studies because of its advantage in
handling high dimensional genetic data. RF creates importance measures
for SNPs which are helpful for feature selections. However, if the
confounding effect of population structure, including population
stratification and admixture, is not appropriately corrected, RF tends to
give greater importance to disease-unrelated SNPs with different
frequencies of allele or genotype among subpopulations, leading to
inaccurate results. Methods We propose to correct for the confounding
effect of population structure by including the EIGENSTRAT approach in
the RF analysis. The axes of variation are firstly extracted from a large
number of structure inference SNPs. Instead of including the axes of
variation in the RF model directly, the phenotype and genotypes are
regressed on these axes, respectively. The residuals for phenotype and
genotyoes are then used as the outcome and predictors in RF analysis. We
conduct simulation studies to investigate whether the proposed method
works well in RF analysis. We simulate 4 scenarios. Scenario 1 to 3 are
designed to have 2, 3 and 4 underlying subpopulations, respectively. In
each of the 3 scenarios, two levels (moderate and extreme) of population
stratification are simulated by varying the proportions of individuals in
cases and controls from the different subpopulations. In scenario 4, we
consider an admixed population formed by two ancestral populations. For
each setting in the different scenarios, we generate 1,000 datasets. Each
dataset consists of 10,000 SNPs for PS inference, 90 disease-unrelated
random SNPs, 9 disease-unrelated differentiated SNPs and 1 causal SNP
with RR=1.5. Results Our extensive simulations show that the correction
for PS improves the ability of identifying the causal SNP and decreases
the ranks of differentiated SNPs when compared with RF analysis without
PS correction. We apply the proposed method to analyze a subset of SNPs
from a GWA dataset on NSCLC. The dataset is analyzed by RF either without
or with PS correction. Lists of the top 1000 SNPs from the 2 analyses are
mapped to genes using the 20kb rule. GeneGO disease (by biomarkers)
analysis is performed for each of the 2 gene lists. In both analysis,
Tobacco Use Disorder ranks the 1st. Two lung-related diseases,
Adenocarcinoma, Bronchiolo-Alveolar and Lung Diseases, Obstructive, rank
the 12th and 18th in the RF with PS correction analysis, whereas they
rank the 69th and 104th when being analyzed by RF without PS correction.
Conclusion The confounding effect of population structure can be easily
corrected by including the EIGENSTRAT procedure in RF analysis.

