Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of high-throughput proteomics Micro-Western array in
studying molecular mechanism of anticancer effect of liver X receptor
agonists against human colon cancer cells


We recently developed a high-throughput proteomics technology, the
Micro-Western arrays (Ciaccio MF, Nature Methods 2010). Micro-Western
array is a nano-litter scale array-based Western blotting assay. This
method allowed us to measure 96 to 384 different phosphosites on multiple
proteins of a set of 6 to 15 different samples simultaneously. We applied
this technology in investigating molecular mechanism of anticancer effect
of small molecular compound. Colon cancer is the third leading cause of
cancer-related death in the world. Previously, we reported that agonists
for liver X receptors (LXRs) suppressed the proliferation of several
human cancer cell lines. LXR and LXR are nuclear receptors and are
important regulators of cholesterol, fatty acid, and glucose homeostasis.
96-well proliferation assay and colony formation assay showed that three
commonly used LXR agonists 22(R)-hydroxycholesterol, T0901317, and GW3965
suppressed proliferation of HT-29 and HCT-116 human colon cancer cells
dose-dependently. Flow cytometry analysis indicated that LXR agonists
induced G1 cell cycle arrest but not apoptosis in colon cancer cells. We
then used gene overexpression and shRNA/siRNA knockdown to verify that
LXR and LXR were directly involved in the growth inhibition caused by LXR
agonists. To understand the molecular mechanism, we used gene array and
Micro-Western Array with more than 240 phosphorylated antibodies
targeting signaling network regulating receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs),
cell cycle, cell stress, and PI3K/Akt to systematically investigate
signaling proteins being affected by LXR agonists in multiple time
points. With help of bioinformatics modeling, our result revealed a
potential mechanism how nuclear receptor LXR regulating cell cycle in
human colon cancer cells via EGFR/PI3K/Akt and ABCA1/SREBP-1/LDLR
signaling. Effect of LXR agonists treatment with or without chemotherapy
agents on HT-29 xenograft model and validation of target proteins for LXR
agonists in patients tissues are currently ongoing. Our observations
suggested that LXR agonists treatment may be a potential adjuvant therapy
for colon cancers.

