Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prospective study of the effects of adjuvant chemotherapy (CT)
on cognition and brain function in breast cancer patients


There is an accumulating body of literature reporting that cognitive
deficits, possibly long lasting, including lack of concentration,
short-term memory loss and difficulties in multitasking are observed in
patients receiving chemotherapy (CT) (chemobrain). We have used
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to determine the nature of
the changes in brain function that underlie the cognitive deficits that
can result from CT. This research was carried out prospectively in women
being treated with adjuvant CT for early-stage breast cancer (BC).
Methods: Seven healthy aged-matched control subjects (No CT) and six
subjects with BC took part in this study undergoing functional fMRI
scanning on a 3.0T scanner prior to initiating CT and after receiving
their fourth cycle of anthracycline-based CT. Task activation (n-back)
and resting-state functional connectivity (fC) scans were carried out.
The N-back letter task is a continuous performance task having 3 levels
of increasing cognitive load designed to probe regions of the brain
activated by attention and working memory. Resting-state fC measures
spontaneous low frequency oscillations in MR signal in brain and is used
to create maps of fC among brain regions. Results: There were no
significant differences in n-back task performance between the CT group
and controls. However, significant differences (p0.05) in task activation
and fC between the two subjects groups were observed. N-back task
activation was significantly greater in the BC group compared with
controls in right inferior frontal gyrus and right cerebellum. There were
significant interactions between subject group and cognitive load within
right inferior parietal and left inferior occipital cortex. The default
mode network consists of interconnected regions of the brain that are
active while the subjects are at rest and reduce activity when subjects
perform specific tasks. Within this network, the BC group has
significantly less deactivation during task compared to controls. There
were also differences between the groups in resting-state fC. Using the
left amygdala as a seed region, changes in fC were seen in the pre-chemo
scans of the BC group compared to the controls. The BC subjects showed a
185% increase in intraregional fC and increased fC with the superior
temporal gyrus, an area along with the amygdala that is activated by
emotional stimuli. These changes in fC may be due to increased stress
response in BC subjects. After four sessions of CT the BC group showed
significant decreases in fC between the amygdala and the parahippocampal
gyrus, an area involved in encoding and retrieving memories. This
decrease in functional connectivity along with alterations in brain
activation by cognitive tasks may play a part in the memory and other
cognitive complaints associated with cancer and CT and may inform the
search for strategies to reduce CT associated cognitive dysfunction.

