Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of c-Met receptor signaling by carcinoma-associated
fibroblasts in the tumor microenvironment


Objective: Carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) play a key role in
tumorigenesis by promoting tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis. At
sites of intra-abdominal ovarian cancer metastases, more than half of the
tumor microenvironment is composed of CAFs, however, the mechanism for
how CAFs promote metastatic disease in ovarian cancer is not known.
Because of the prominent role that the receptor tyrosine kinase c-Met
plays in metastasis, we hypothesized that CAFs within the metastatic
tumor microenvironment may activate c-Met signaling in ovarian cancer
cells leading to tumor progression at a metastatic site. Methods: Human
cancer cell lines and primary human carcinoma-associated fibroblasts
isolated from patients ovarian cancer metastases were used in multiple
biochemical assays to analyze the role of CAFs in c-Met receptor
signaling. Results: Using a receptor tyrosine kinase array to analyze
phosphorylation of 42 different receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), we
found that c-Met was the only RTK that was phosphorylated in cancer cells
upon co-culture with CAFs. Further analysis of the co-culture revealed
that direct contact between cancer cells and CAFs was required for
activation of c-Met. Interestingly, the unique ligand for c-Met,
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), could not be detected in conditioned
media from CAFs by ELISA and addition of HGF neutralizing antibodies to
the co-culture did not prevent activation of the receptor. Furthermore,
CAFs transiently transfected with HGF siRNA were still able to activate
c-Met in the human ovarian cancer cell line SKOV3ip1 suggesting that
c-Met activation by CAFs is HGF-independent. This effect was not limited
to ovarian cancer cell lines as co-culture of CAFs with the cervical
cancer cell line, HeLa, which expresses wild-type c-Met, and the breast
cancer cell line, T47D, showed the same results as the two ovarian cancer
cell lines, SKOV3ip1 and OVCAR-5. Remarkably, membrane fragments isolated
from CAFs were sufficient to stimulate phosphorylation of c-Met in cancer
cells in an HGF-independent manner. Several candidate factors were
identified in the CAF membrane proteome which can activate c-Met
signaling. Conclusions: Collectively, these results suggest a potentially
novel mechanism whereby CAFs activate c-Met in cancer cells through
direct contact which provides an additional rationale for the therapeutic
targeting of c-Met in cancer.

