Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relevance of mismatch repair deficiency in ovarian cancer


Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death in gynecologic malignancies
in the United States with most patients presenting with late stage
disease; patients receive the same treatment regardless of histology or
tumor characteristics. The mismatch repair (MMR) molecular pathway is
well-defined and known to be involved in up to 20% of ovarian cancers;
however, association of deficient v proficient MMR status (dMMR v pMMR
status) with risk factors and outcome is not well understood. We are
conducting extensive molecular testing of the MMR genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH3,
MSH6, and PMS2 on Mayo Clinic invasive epithelial ovarian cancer cases.
First, the prevalence of dMMR tumors will be estimated in ovarian cancer
cases (n=496) based on loss of expression of MLH1, MSH2, MSH3, MSH6, and
PMS2 determined by immunohistochemistry staining of primary antibodies
using negative and positive controls. Staining of tissue microarrays
(TMAs) is complete; triplicate cores will be scored independently for
presence or loss of protein expression by a board-certified pathologist.
Second, for those dMMR cases, the possible cause of MMR deficiency will
be evaluated considering germline and somatic mutations. The loss of
expression of each protein will be characterized as germline if a
deleterious mutation is present in peripheral blood or somatic if the
pathogenic mutation is only present in tumor tissue. In cases with MLH1
loss somatic hypermethylation will also be considered. Analysis of
germline mutation data will include all 496 cases and somatic mutations
data will include a subset of cases tested with frozen tumor DNA (n=292)
using Fluidigm access array targeted resequencing. Third, the clinical
features of dMMR disease will be compared to those of pMMR; in
particular, age at diagnosis, histopathology, and disease outcome. Among
cases in this analysis, the majority have high-grade serous disease with
a mean age at diagnosis of 61 years, about half had recurrence or
progression (n=243) of which two-thirds (n=167) are deceased. Finally,
known and suspected ovarian cancer risk factors (family history, smoking,
body mass index, parity, use of hormone therapy, and genetic variation in
susceptibility loci at 2q31, 3q25, 8q24, 9p22, 17q21, and 19p13) will be
analyzed by MMR phenotype. Risk factor questionnaire data is available on
462 cases (93%), as well as 737 population controls with germline
genome-wide genotype data. About half of the cases (n=231) report a 1st
or 2nd degree family member with breast or ovarian cancer. Given the
limited knowledge about ovarian cancer etiology and the poor prognosis of
advanced disease, it is very important to study risk factors with this
molecular subtype. The ovarian cancer dMMR phenotype may have distinct
clinicopathological features that could guide risk stratification and be
useful in diagnostics and therapeutics. This is the largest study
characterizing MMR in an ovarian cancer population to date.

