Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The rGel/BLyS fusion toxin enhances the therapeutic effects of
bortezomib in in vitro and in vivo models of mantle cell lymphoma.


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an incurable, aggressive histo-type of
B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma associated with both high relapse rates and
relatively short survival. MCL is a therapeutic challenge and presents an
opportunity for the application of novel, targeted agents. Because MCL
over-expresses receptors for B lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS) and displays
constitutively active NF-B, agents targeting these pathways may be of
therapeutic relevance in this disease. To explore the potential clinical
use of the rGel/BLyS fusion toxin in combination with bortezomib in MCL,
we evaluated this fusion toxin for its ability to inhibit MCL growth in a
severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) xenograft model. Compared with
PBS-treated mice, mice treated with rGel/BLyS showed both prolonged
median (84 d vs. 125 d) and overall survival (40%) (p=0.0027). Compared
with bortezomib alone-treated mice, mice treated with rGel/BLyS plus
bortezomib showed significant median (91d vs. 158d) and overall survival
(20%) (p=0.0127). Histopathologic analysis of peritoneal intestinal
mesentery from MCL-SCID mice showed no demonstrable microscopic
lymphomatous involvement at 225 days after treatment with rGel/BLyS.
Followup in vitro mechanistic studies demonstrated that the rGel/BLyS
plus bortezomib combination resulted in an additive or a synergistic
growth inhibition, reduction of NF-B DNA-binding activity, inhibition of
cyclin D1, Bcl-xL, p-Akt, and Akt and up-regulation of Bax. We
additionally found that combination treatment caused induction of
apoptosis associated with caspase-9, caspase-3 activation and PARP
cleavage. rGel/BLyS is an effective therapeutic agent for both primary
and savage treatment of aggressive MCL and may be an excellent candidate
for clinical development. This research was conducted, in part, by the
Clayton Foundation for Research and by a Translational Research Award
(LLS 6234-07) from the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society.

