Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Changing the metabolism of cancer cells with PKM2 activators - a
path to a cancer metabolism drug


Pyruvate kinase (PK) M2 which catalyzes the last step in glycolysis, is
the alternative spliced isoform expressed in cancer cells, and a key
player in exerting the Warburg effect. One of the mechanisms by which
PKM2 modulate cancer cell metabolism is by switching between the low
activity monomer and the high activity tetramer forms. This process is
controlled by the varying concentration of an upstream glycolytic
intermediate, FBP. These changes enable the cancer cell to manage its
usage of glucose carbon backbones, whether for ATP production or for
biomass generation, according to its changing demands. Further, it has
been recently shown that the elevated levels of ROS in cancer cells
contribute to the decreased activity of PKM2 to support NADPH production
to increase cellular anti-oxidation capacity to sustain proliferation.
Our goal is to disrupt the metabolic adaptation of cancer cells with
small molecule PKM2 modulators. We hypothesized that an activator will
redirect the consumption of nutrients, especially of glucose, away from
biomass production and ultimately send the cells to die. Using our
proprietary structure-based technology, we identified several series of
novel allosteric PKM2 activators. Chemical optimization resulted in
potent compounds with AC50 as low as 10nM, which were selective against
the other PK isoforms. These compounds were proven to stabilize the
active tetramer form of PKM2 in cancer cells. Bioenergetic experiments in
several cell lines demonstrated that not only do these agents reduce
lactate production; they also reduce the oxygen consumption rate.
Analysis of cell cycle showed that treatment with PKM2 activators causes
the cells to arrest at the G1 phase. In outcome-based assays, these
compounds significantly reduced the proliferation rate of various cancer
cell lines, and this effect was sensitive to media conditions, such as
glucose levels. Taken together, our data supports the hypothesis that
activation of PKM2 effectively deprives the cancer cell of building
blocks and reduces the detoxification capacity that are required to
support growth and proliferation. An in vivo colorectal cancer HT29 cell
line mouse xenograft model with a modestly active compound (IC50=0.9uM)
demonstrated tumor growth inhibition greater than 50% (100 mg/kg Q2D and
200 and 400 mg/kg IP QD). The compound was very safe in mouse, even at
the highest exposure levels (200 and 400 mg/kg IP QD), indicating that
these efficacious doses are significantly lower than the MTD. Additional
xenograft models are ongoing. Taken together, there is strong support for
the effect of potent PKM2 small molecule activators on the cellular
metabolism of cancer cells, demonstrating statistically significant
anti-cancer effect in an animal model of colorectal cancer. The favorable
DMPK profile of these compounds further supports their development as
anti-proliferative agents, both as a single agent and in combination
therapy.

