Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coupling S100A4 to Rhotekin alters Rho signaling output in breast
cancer cells


S100A4 is a calcium binding protein and tumor metastasis associated
factor that has been suggested to promote motility and invasiveness of
different types of cancer. This migratory promoting effect, in part, is
due to the interaction of S100A4 with actin and actin binding proteins,
such as myosin IIA. We found that S100A4 interacts with Rho binding
domain of Rhotekin (TRBD), one of the Rho effectors, thus suggesting a
connection between the Rho and S100A4 pathways. To test whether this
interaction is specific, we performed GST pull-down assays using Rho
binding domain from different Rho effectors such as Rhotekin, Rhophilin,
PKN, ROCK II, and Citron. These results showed that S100A4 specifically
interacts with Rho binding domain of Rhotekin but not of other Rho
effectors. We further determined that this interaction is direct and
calcium-dependant by performing GST-TRBD pull-down assays with purified
S100A4 in the presence and absence of calcium. The in vivo interaction of
these two proteins was further confirmed by immunoprecipitation of
exogenously expressed mutated forms of Rhotekin with endogenous S100A4
from MDA-MB-231 cells. Confocal microscopy showed that Rhotekin and
S100A4 co-localize at the edge of membrane ruffles in response to EGF. We
demonstrated that S100A4 did not bind TRBD using the same residues as
Rho, as determined by using a triple-A mutant of Rhotekin. Interestingly,
we found that active Rho, S100A4 and Rhotekin are in a complex by using
constitutively active GST-RhoQ63L pull-down assay. To examine the
function of this interaction, RNAi was used to suppress Rhotekin and/or
S100A4 in MDA-MB-231. F-actin staining showed that suppression of both
RTKN and S100A4 leads to the loss of Rho-dependent membrane ruffling in
response to EGF stimulation, an increase in contractile F-actin stress
fibers in the cell body and a reduction in invasive growth in
three-dimensional culture. Taken together, we showed that S100A4
specifically and directly interacts with Rhotekin in a calcium-dependent
manner. This coupling permits S100A4 to complex with RhoA and switch RhoA
function from stress fiber formation to membrane ruffling. Based on the
function of this interaction, we propose that interaction of S100A4 and
Rhotekin alters the functional output of Rho signaling to confer an
invasive phenotype in breast cancer cells.

