Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Critical mediation of E2-induced apoptosis through c-Src in
long-term estrogen deprived breast cancer cells


Our previous publication showed that physiological concentrations of
estrogen (E2) could trigger apoptosis of long-term E2 deprived breast
cancer cells (MCF-7:5C) (Lewis et al. JNCI 2005; 97:1746-59). This new
targeted strategy provides novel therapeutic approaches to endocrine
resistant breast cancer. A phase II clinical trial reported that E2
provided a clinical benefit for aromatase inhibitor-resistant advanced
breast cancer patients. However, only 30% of patients receive clinical
benefit (Ellis MJ et al. JAMA 2009;302:774-80). This prompted us to
investigate the mechanisms underlying E2-induced apoptosis to find
strategies to increase the therapeutic responsiveness. c-Src is currently
of interest, as it is an important adapter protein of ER in breast cancer
cells. Here, we found that E2 stimulated c-Src phosphorylation in
MCF-7:5C cells and 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) could block this
stimulation which demonstrated that E2 activated c-Src through ER. The
specific inhibitor of c-Src, PP2, could block c-Src activation induced by
E2. E2 rapidly activated growth pathways within minutes in MCF-7:5C cells
and PP2 could block this non-genomic pathway. E2 was also able to
activate Akt/MAPK pathways after 24 hour treatment which could be blocked
by inhibition of c-Src. These data showed that c-Src mediated downstream
signaling pathways of ER in MCF-7:5C cells. Characteristic E2-induced
apoptosis occurred around 72 hour treatment with E2, unexpectedly,
inhibition of c-Src could significantly block E2-induced apoptosis which
implied that c-Src played a critical role in E2-induced apoptosis.
Further examination through transcriptome analysis confirmed that E2
widely induced apoptosis-related pathways. Consistent with the biological
experiments, PP2 could completely abolish the apoptosis pathways induced
by E2. These data illustrate that c-Src acts as a critical molecule to
mediate the downstream signaling of ER (including E2-induced apoptosis)
in MCF-7:5C cells. It provides an important rationale for clinical trial
with c-Src inhibitors in aromatase inhibitors resistant patients,
especially avoiding in combination with physiological levels of E2.
Acknowledgements This work (VCJ and JWG) is supported by the SU2C (AACR)
Grant (SU2C-AACR-DT0409).

