Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo anti-leukemia activity of novel C-ring modified
prodigiosenes in a zebrafish xenograft model


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) remains fatal for 40% of patients, both due
to refractory disease and toxicity from traditional therapeutic agents.
Zebrafish provide an efficient and robust leukemia model with the
capacity for embryonic screens to test new drugs in vivo.
Naturally-occurring Prodigiosin has demonstrated potential as an
anti-cancer agent, but toxicity prevents its use as a chemotherapeutic.
Here, we present four novel derivatives, prodigiosenes designated DSB-8,
-31, -39, -50, synthesized using a multi-step sequence beginning with
simple pyrroles. These synthetic compounds demonstrated anti-leukemia
activity in vitro against cells in the NIH/NCI Developmental Therapeutics
Program, including K562, CCRF-CEM, MOLT-4, RPMI-8226 and SR cell lines.
We have previously xenografted human leukemia cells into 48 hour
zebrafish embryos and developed a cell quantification assay to evaluate
drug responses (Corkery et al BJH, 2011). To assess the anti-leukemia
activity and toxicity of our novel prodigiosenes in vivo, we first
conducted toxicity curves using 48-hour zebrafish embryos treated for 72
hours to determine an optimal dose (50% of maximum tolerated dose [MTD]).
Prodigiosenes DSB-39 (1.0 uM) and DSB-50 (1.5 uM) were tolerated better
than DSB-8 (0.2 uM) and DSB-31 (0.2 uM). Subsequently, 40-50
CM-DiI-labeled K562 chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) cells were
injected into the yolk sac of 48-hour zebrafish embryos, which were
treated with prodigiosenes at 50% MTD. Engrafted embryos were followed
using live cell microscopy. Embryos treated with 0.03% DMSO served as
negative control, showing abundant K562 cell proliferation and entry of
cells into circulation. Embryos treated with 20 M imatinib mesylate (IM),
a targeted inhibitor of the BCR-ABL1 oncoprotein in K562 cells, served as
a positive control, demonstrating no cell proliferation or migration. By
comparison, prodigiosenes inhibited K562 cell activity to a similar or
greater degree than IM. Qualitatively, the effects of prodigiosenes were
graduated: DSB-8 (n=6/7) was cytostatic, DSB-31 (n=5/8) and DSB-50
(n=6/9) were moderately cytotoxic, and DSB-39 (n=7/7) was strongly
cytotoxic. To quantify this effect, we are applying a modified ex vivo
proliferation assay. Embryos are dissociated to a single cell suspension
at 24 and 72 hours post-injection followed by immunohistochemistry
directed to human CD34. Our work extends the use of zebrafish xenografts
to determine the in vivo sensitivity of human cancer cells to novel drugs
and suggests that tailored prodigiosenes may represent novel therapeutic
agents for leukemia with improved anti-cancer potency and reduced
toxicity.

