Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel vasopressin analog [4-valine 5-glutamine] desmopressin
inhibits tumor growth and angiogenesis in V2 receptor-expressing breast
cancer xenografts


Desmopressin (dDAVP), a synthetic nonapeptide derivative of arginine
vasopressin, is a safe antidiuretic and hemostatic compound that acts as
a selective agonist for the vasopressin V2 membrane receptor (V2R). This
receptor is expressed in kidney collecting tubes, endothelium and also in
some tumor cells. We previously reported that dDAVP can inhibit
progression of residual metastatic cells in preclinical models. Among
other mechanisms, the compound induces an agonist effect on V2R present
in tumor cells. This cyclic nonapeptide was substituted in positions 4
and 5 searching for compounds with improved biological activity (Iannucci
et al., Fut. Med. Chem. 2011). Such positions belong to the
conformational peptide loop which has a key role in ligand-receptor
interaction. In this study, we evaluated the effects of the novel analog
[4-valine 5-glutamine] dDAVP ([V4Q5]dDAVP) on cell proliferation and
migration in vitro, and tumor growth and angiogenesis in vivo using the
MDA-MB-231 triple-negative V2R-expressing human breast cancer cell line.
We first examined peptide ability to modify in vitro cell growth of
MDA-MB-231 cells by the MTT assay. Incubation with [V4Q5]dDAVP analog
(100-1500 nM) during 72 h significantly reduced cell proliferation
showing a better performance at high concentrations than the parental
compound dDAVP. When studying the effect on cell cycle, flow cytometric
analysis showed that a 24-h treatment with [V4Q5]dDAVP resulted in an
arrest of MDA-MB-231 cells in G0/G1 phase. Next, we used wound migration
and transwell chemotaxis assays to study the ability of [V4Q5]dDAVP to
inhibit tumor cell motility. After a 16-h treatment, MDA-MB-231 migration
and chemotaxis was impaired by 30-60%. To asses the in vivo effect of the
compound on tumor growth, nu/nu mice where implanted s.c. with MDA-MB-231
cells. Three weekly i.v. doses of [V4Q5]dDAVP (0.3 g/kg/dose) reduced by
40% the subcutaneous tumor volume compared with vehicle-treated controls
after a 4- week treatment. Finally, to evaluate the in vivo angiostatic
effect, a modified Matrigel plug assay was used. Intravenous
administration of [V4Q5]dDAVP (0.3 g/kg/dose thrice a week) significantly
reduced by 18% MDA-MB-231 cell-induced angiogenesis as measured by
hemoglobin content in plugs recovered from mice 14 days after tumor cell
inoculation. These in vivo effects are probably due to a dual action of
[V4Q5]dDAVP involving angiogenesis inhibition mechanisms and direct
cytostatic action. In conclusion, this study indicates that the novel
peptide compound [V4Q5]dDAVP exerts a remarkable and improved antitumor
and antiangiogenic effect in comparison to parental peptide dDAVP.
Increased hidrophobicity at the conformational peptide loop by replacing
Gln for Val may play a key role on ligand-receptor interaction, thus
enhancing agonist effect on V2R present in tumor cells.

