Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bacterial infection-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) of colonic crypt cells with acquired characteristics of stem cells
promotes spheroid/organoid formation in vitro and tumorigenesis in vivo


DCLK-1 (doublecortin-like kinase-1) and LGR5
(leucine-rich-repeat-containing G-protein-coupled receptor) have recently
been identified as markers of quiescent and cycling stem cells in the
small intestinal crypts, respectively. The epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) is a key developmental program that is often activated
during cancer invasion and metastasis. We aimed at delineating if
bacterial infection affects colonic stemness and transdifferentiation and
whether these changes facilitate mucosal priming for neoplasia. Utilizing
the Citrobacter rodentium (CR)-induced transmissible murine colonic
hyperplasia (TMCH) model associated with hyperactive Wnt/-catenin, Notch
and NF-B pathways in NIH-Swiss mice, we observed dramatic loss of DCLK-1
expression in the distal colonic crypts with significant shift towards
stromal staining at peak (12-days post-infection) hyperplasia while
staining for both Lgr-5 and Msi-1 increased several fold. When
hyperplasia was regressing (at day 34), we observed a dramatic expansion
of DCLK-1+ve cells compared to that seen in uninfected control. Colonic
crypt cells when isolated from CR-infected mice at 12 days post-CR
infection and cultured in vitro, formed monolayers, converted to
mesenchymal cells, stained positive for vimentin and fibronectin but
negative for E-cadherin and cytokeratin suggesting a process of EMT, and
also stained positive for DCLK-1 thereby mimicking stromal staining
observed in vivo. Trypsinization of these cells followed by growth in
soft-agar led to formation of organoids which developed into crypt-like
structures (cryptoids) that stained positive for markers of epithelial
lineages. Day 34 crypt cells when deposited into the soft-agar also
formed spheroids with subsequent transition into organoids/cryptoids in
vitro. These changes were observed in culture conditions that did not
include intestinotrophic mitogens Noggin or R-spondin. Mice exhibiting 12
or 34 days of TMCH received azoxymethane once for 8h (Gp1) or twice for
two weeks (Gp2) and subjected to crypt isolation. Crypt cells from Gp1
animals formed monolayers as well as spheroids in soft-agar but failed to
form tumors in athymic/nude mice. Crypt cells, isolated from Gp2 animals
failed to form the monolayers but developed into huge spheroids in
soft-agar and formed tumors in athymic/nude mice. These studies suggest
that both hyperplasia and increased stemness promote cellular
transformation in response to a second hit. Thus, the investigation of a
model of bacterial infection-induced EMT and/or
spheroid/organoid/cryptoid formation with acquired characteristics of
stem cells represents an excellent system to study transdifferentiation,
crypt regeneration or colon carcinogenesis in response to bacterial
infection.

