Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interferon- receptor dependent and independent inhibition of type
I interferon production in plasmacytoid dendritic cells from mice and
melanoma patients


IFN- is pleiotropic cytokine belonging to the type I Interferon (IFNs)
family and can induce multiple biological effects, e.g. induction of
apoptosis and inhibition of cell growth. These cytokines exhibit a long
record of clinical use in patients with some types of cancer and viral
diseases. Notably, certain autoimmune disorders have been postulated to
be mediated by endogenous IFN- and are often observed in some
IFN--treated cancer patients. How IFN- promotes the generation of
antitumor T-cell immunity and its regulation mechanisms are still
unclear. To address these questions, we focus on the main producer of
IFNs, Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), which reside in bone marrow
and lymphoid organs and typically secrete type I IFNs on Toll-like
receptor (TLR) triggering. We detected cytokines production by human pDCs
from leukapheresis cells of melanoma patients who were treated with IFNs
for 25 weeks. After stimulation with CpG-A, these pDCs after treatment
(IFN--pDCs) produce 70% less IFN- compare to before treatment, but
compatible amount of other inflammatory cytokines e.g. IL-6. We observed
the similar phenomena in murine models either after VSV infection or by
systemic IFN- delivery. We showed that these IFN--pDCs possess more
active and mature morphology as DCs and they are particularly more
effective in inducing T- and NK-cell immunity by increasing cell
proliferation and differentiation. Of note, IFN--pDCs skewed the nave
CD4+ T cells to a Th17 antigen-presenting subset by producing more IL-17
but less IFN- compare to wide type pDCs. The ensemble of these results
suggests that IFN--pDCs could be successfully used in strategies of
cancer immunotherapy, especially in melanoma patients. We also
demonstrate that pDCs possess two fundamental, but separate, physiologic
mechanisms for negative feedback control of IFN- production after IFNs
treatment in melanoma patients. Both signaling through the canonical
TLR-MyD88 pathway and feedback inhibition from IFN- itself through the
IFN-/R render pDCs unable to synthesize type I interferon upon TLR
triggering. Mechanistically, we found that IFN--pDCs show increased IRF7
mRNA and protein upon TLR stimulation, but despite efficient nuclear
IRF-7 translocation, type I IFN was not produced. Interestingly, Ifn-6
promoter activity was blocked in the IFN--pDCs, suggesting a block of
type I IFN transcription despite nuclear IRF-7 translocation. Taken
together, triggering of TLR and of IFN-/R act independently to tightly
limit systemic IFN- production after IFNs treatment. All this reveals the
complexity of the IFN--pDC interactions under normal and pathological
conditions and stimulates further studies for identifying optimal
modalities in either using these cytokines or controlling their
production in melanoma patients.

