Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel ligand-independent Flt3 allele drives RANKL expression in
a murine model of B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia with CNS
dissemination


Survival rates for pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) have
improved dramatically, but outcomes for the 15% who relapse and for
adults with ALL remain poor. Up to 40% of pediatric ALL patients require
central nervous system (CNS) prophylaxis treatments that pose significant
risk. We previously showed that p53/ Rag-2/ Prkdcscid;scid triple mutant
(TM) mice spontaneously develop early B-cell ALL that disseminates to the
CNS. We used this model to investigate molecular mechanisms that drive
CNS dissemination of leukemic B-cells. Array comparative genomic
hybridization revealed that TM ALLs have recurrent polyploidy or partial
gains of telomeric chromosome 5 containing the Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3
(Flt3) locus. FLT3 is a type III receptor tyrosine kinase normally
expressed on multi-potent hematopoietic progenitors. Small molecule FLT3
inhibitors abrogated proliferation of leukemic TM blasts in vitro,
suggesting that Flt3 is a leukemic driver. During normal B-cell
development, Flt3 is repressed by the PAX5 transcription factor, which
also induces expression of B-lineage genes. Although TM ALLs expressed
many genes indicative of B-lineage commitment, they ectopically
over-expressed a truncated form of Flt3 (trFlt3) driven by an endogenous
retrovirus long terminal repeat. The trFlt3 allele lacked most of the
extracellular ligand-binding domain, but retained the trans-membrane
region. Retroviral transduction of trFlt3 into BaF3 hematopoietic
progenitor cells rendered their growth independent of interleukin-3.
Phospho-flow cytometric profiling studies demonstrated that the signaling
properties of trFLT3 are similar to those of FLT3-ITD, but are distinct
from ligand-dependent FLT3 signaling. Thus, genomic rearrangements make
Flt3 resistant to PAX5 repression and allow ectopic ligand-independent
FLT3 signaling in TM B-ALL. Gene set enrichment analysis was used to
identify genes downstream of Flt3 as potential drivers of B-ALL CNS
dissemination. TM B-ALL blasts (but not murine B-ALL blasts lacking Flt3
expression) expressed RANKL, a key regulator of osteoclast
differentiation and normal B-cell development. Cell surface expression of
RANKL was absolutely correlated with the presence of trFLT3 protein, and
RANKL cell surface expression was down-regulated by FLT3 inhibitors,
suggesting that RANKL expression was controlled by trFLT3 signaling. We
also found that interleukin-7, an important cytokine in B-cell
development, up-regulates RANKL in normal pro-B cells. We are currently
investigating if a RANKL antagonist can inhibit CNS dissemination of TM
B-ALL expressing RANKL. Our studies have identified a novel Flt3 mutant
allele with unusual signaling properties as a leukemic driver of early
B-ALL, and provide a model for in vivo testing of the role of RANKL in
mediating CNS dissemination of leukemic B-cell progenitors.

