Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smad4 inactivation correlates with EMT and cetuximab resistance in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Introduction: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is frequently
overexpressed in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and
cetuximab, a monoclonal antibody targeting EGFR, is widely used to treat
patients with HNSCC. However, the majority of patients do not respond or
develop resistance to cetuximab. Recent studies have shown that
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is associated with EGFR
inhibitor resistance in diverse tumors including HNSCC. To further
understand the role of EMT in cetuximab resistance, we examined the HNSCC
cell lines for EMT- related genes and proteins and correlated their
expression with cetuximab response in vitro. Methods: Responses to
cetuximab in the panel of 25 HNSCC cell lines and a spontaneously
immortalized keratinocyte (HaCaT) were determined by matrigel colony
formation assay. Global gene and microRNA expression of the cell lines
were determined using Affymetrix and Taqman microRNA arrays. Differential
expression of EMT-related genes was confirmed by qRT-PCR and western
blots. Collagen migration assay was performed to assess migration and
stable knockdowns of Smad4 and EGFR were achieved using lentiviral
shRNAs. The ligand levels in cell cultures were quantified by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA). Results: Both the array and
qRT-PCR data confirmed that the EMT-related genes were generally
correlated with cetuximab resistance. In two pairs of isogenic cell lines
with acquired resistance to cetuximab, SCC1/1Cc8 and SCC25/CTX-10 and
CTX-11, the resistant clones show lower E-cadherin, higher vimentin
expression and increased migration rate compared to parental cells. We
further examined the TGF- pathway known to induce EMT in HNSCC. Smad4
levels were lower in the resistant clones. Knockdown of Smad4 rendered
resistance in the cetuximab sensitive parent cells by activating TGF- and
c-Met pathways. In addition, knockdown of Smad4 resulted in increased
p-AKT levels and EMT cellular phenotypes in the SCC1. To further examine
the regulation of Smad4 by microRNAs, we determined differentially
expressed microRNAs between cetuximab sensitive and resistant isogenic
cell lines. We found that miRNA-146a was upregulated in the resistant
clones, and Smad4 and EGFR expression were regulated by miRNA-146a mimic
and inhibitor. TGFR1 inhibitor reversed acquired and intrinsic resistance
to cetuximab in vitro. Conclusion: We confirmed that EMT is associated
with cetuximab resistance and TGF- and c-MET signaling pathways may play
an important role in induction of EMT in a subset of HNSCC. Our results
suggest a combination strategy to improve the therapeutic index of
cetuximab therapy in HNSCC.

