Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGCG prevents hepatocellular carcinoma development in a
diethylnitrosamine-induced rat model


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is increasing in incidence and
treatment is often unsuccessful. Thus, prevention in high-risk patients
with established cirrhosis has been proposed as an alternative strategy.
It has been suggested that the increased inflammation and fibrogenesis
observed during cirrhosis predisposes the liver to future malignant
transformation to HCC through a field effect. A growing body of evidence
indicates that the green tea polyphenol, (-)-epigallocatechin gallate
(EGCG), can reduce inflammation and fibrogenesis during chronic liver
injury. Here, we test the hypothesis that physiological concentrations of
EGCG administered in the setting of cirrhosis can prevent future HCC
development. Methods: A rat model of diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced
cirrhosis was used to examine the efficacy of EGCG for inhibition of HCC
formation in these cirrhotic livers. DEN (50 mg/kg) was administered
weekly throughout the study while 0.02% EGCG was given in drinking water
beginning at the onset of cirrhosis. At the end of the study, rats were
sacrificed, livers were sectioned and stained to analyze disease
progression and tumor nodules were counted. Liver function tests were
performed to determine liver injury and overall liver function. Finally,
genome-wide gene expression profiling on the surrounding, non-tumoral
liver tissue was used to monitor the field effect in response to EGCG.
Results: EGCG significantly (p Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
is increasing in incidence and treatment is often unsuccessful. Thus,
prevention in high-risk patients with established cirrhosis has been
proposed as an alternative strategy. It has been suggested that the
increased inflammation and fibrogenesis observed during cirrhosis
predisposes the liver to future malignant transformation to HCC through a
field effect. A growing body of evidence indicates that the green tea
polyphenol, (-)-epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), can reduce inflammation
and fibrogenesis during chronic liver injury. Here, we test the
hypothesis that physiological concentrations of EGCG administered in the
setting of cirrhosis can prevent future HCC development. Methods: A rat
model of diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced cirrhosis was used to examine
the efficacy of EGCG for inhibition of HCC formation in these cirrhotic
livers. DEN (50 mg/kg) was administered weekly throughout the study while
0.02% EGCG was given in drinking water beginning at the onset of
cirrhosis. At the end of the study, rats were sacrificed, livers were
sectioned and stained to analyze disease progression and tumor nodules
were counted. Liver function tests were performed to determine liver
injury and overall liver function. Finally, genome-wide gene expression
profiling on the surrounding, non-tumoral liver tissue was used to
monitor the field effect in response to EGCG. Results: EGCG significantly
(p < 0.01) prevented the development of HCC tumor nodules from on average
18.8 in vehicle controls to on average 9.1 in EGCG-treated animals. EGCG
also reduced liver injury and improved liver function as assessed by
serum chemistry tests. Finally, a gene expression signature predictive of
poor survival and HCC development in human cirrhosis patients was
reversed in response to EGCG. Conclusions: Our data are consistent with
the growing body of evidence suggesting that EGCG has protective effects
in liver disease. Further, our results suggest that EGCG is a potentially
effective HCC prevention strategy that can be monitored using gene
expression signatures.

