Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic value of chromogranin A and alkaline phosphatase in
patients with advanced neuroendocrine tumor


BACKGROUND: Serum chromogranin A (CgA) or alkaline phosphatase (ALP) are
often assessed in patients with advanced neuroendocrine tumor (NET)
patients but their prognostic significance continues to be debated. We
evaluated whether elevated CgA or ALP levels were associated with shorter
survival in a large, prospectively collected cohort of NET patients.
METHODS: We identified patients with metastatic NET enrolled in an
institutional database between 2003-10. We used the single measurement of
serum CgA or ALP levels collected with shortest time after metastatic
diagnosis and classified them as binary variables (elevated/normal) based
on clinical laboratory specification of elevated value. Elevated
biomarker levels were correlated with overall survival using the log-rank
test. Hazard ratios for each biomarker were calculated using multivariate
Cox regression, adjusting for baseline characteristics of age, gender,
tumor histology, and tumor subtype. Each biomarker was modeled as a
time-varying covariate to account for variability in time from initial
metastatic diagnosis to time of biomarker test. RESULTS: We identified
526 patients who presented at our institution with metastatic NET. Of
these, 349 had available CgA values and 350 had available ALP values.
There were 146 and 153 deaths among those tested for CgA and ALP,
respectively. The median survival time from time of metastatic diagnosis
(yrs, (95%CI)) for patients with elevated CgA was 5.98 (5.04, 7.3), as
compared to 13.27 (9.51, -) for those at normal CgA limits (pBACKGROUND:
Serum chromogranin A (CgA) or alkaline phosphatase (ALP) are often
assessed in patients with advanced neuroendocrine tumor (NET) patients
but their prognostic significance continues to be debated. We evaluated
whether elevated CgA or ALP levels were associated with shorter survival
in a large, prospectively collected cohort of NET patients. METHODS: We
identified patients with metastatic NET enrolled in an institutional
database between 2003-10. We used the single measurement of serum CgA or
ALP levels collected with shortest time after metastatic diagnosis and
classified them as binary variables (elevated/normal) based on clinical
laboratory specification of elevated value. Elevated biomarker levels
were correlated with overall survival using the log-rank test. Hazard
ratios for each biomarker were calculated using multivariate Cox
regression, adjusting for baseline characteristics of age, gender, tumor
histology, and tumor subtype. Each biomarker was modeled as a
time-varying covariate to account for variability in time from initial
metastatic diagnosis to time of biomarker test. RESULTS: We identified
526 patients who presented at our institution with metastatic NET. Of
these, 349 had available CgA values and 350 had available ALP values.
There were 146 and 153 deaths among those tested for CgA and ALP,
respectively. The median survival time from time of metastatic diagnosis
(yrs, (95%CI)) for patients with elevated CgA was 5.98 (5.04, 7.3), as
compared to 13.27 (9.51, -) for those at normal CgA limits (p<0.0001).
The median survival time from time of metastatic diagnosis (yrs, (95%CI))
for patients with elevated ALP was 4.51 (3.27, 5.93), as compared to 8.87
(7.07, 9.64) for those at normal ALP levels (p=0.0001). Using the
adjusted time-varying model, either elevated CgA (aHR 3.97 (2.73, 5.75)
p=3.15E-13) or elevated ALP (aHR 2.4 (1.7, 3.4) p=7.96E-07) were adverse
prognostic factors for patients with advanced NET. Elevated CgA was
significantly associated with shorter survival in all NET subgroups
(pancreatic NET, carcinoid, other NET). Elevated ALP was also a predictor
of shorter survival in advanced NET patients, with the exception of those
with advanced pancreatic NET. CONCLUSION: Elevated serum CgA or elevated
ALP is an independent adverse prognostic factor in patients with advanced
NET.

