Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characteristics of cross-hybridization/cross-alignment of
expression in xenograft samples by RNAseq and microarrays


Stromal changes have been the focus of numerous research publications and
have led to insights in both tumor development and promising new avenues
for treatment. In order to study molecular changes in stroma from tissue
samples it is recommended to separate tumor tissue from stromal tissue.
One such context is mouse tumor xenograft models where tumors,
particularly metastatic tumors, can be small and difficult to separate
from the host tissue. In our research we compared qualitatively the
ability of RNA-seq and microarray data to detect tumor (human) and
stromal (mouse) expression from mixed samples in terms of cross-alignment
and cross-hybridization. Samples were analyzed using HumanWG-6_V3_0_R1
and MouseWG-6_V2_0_R0 Expression BeadChips and the GenomeAnalyzer IIe
(Illumina, Inc.). Samples consisted of total RNA from normal mouse lung
from NOD/SCID gamma mice and total RNA from MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells combined in fixed proportions in triplicate. We define a gene which
cross-hybridizes from mouse to human as one which exists in the set
defined by (B U C U D) - A, where A, B, C, and D are defined as follows.
A is the set of all genes detected when pure mouse RNA was hybridized
onto mouse chips (or aligned to the mouse genome); B is the set of all
genes detected when 25% human/75% mouse RNA was hybridized onto mouse
chips (or aligned to the mouse genome); C is the set of all genes
detected when 50% human/50% mouse RNA was hybridized onto mouse chips (or
aligned to the mouse genome); D is the set of all genes detected when 75%
human/25% mouse RNA was hybridized onto mouse chips (or aligned to the
mouse genome). A gene that cross-hybridizes from human to mouse is
defined analogously. Our results show that observed levels of
cross-hybridization are quite low (5.32% of human probes detected in
mouse, 3.48% of mouse probes detected in human). The observed levels of
cross-alignment are practically comparable to the levels of
cross-hybridization (6.50% of human genes detected in mouse, 2.27% of
mouse genes detected in human). However, there are genes and pathways of
considerable interest to oncology researchers which show significant
cross-hybridization/cross-alignment and, as such, their presence/absence
or level of expression in tumor tissue versus stromal tissue cannot be
determined using the platforms from this study.
Cross-hybridizing/cross-aligning genes in our studies include PDGF,
b-Raf, Beta-catenin, erbB2, NF-kB, MDM2, Claudin, VEGF-R, Notch2, Cyclin
B, HSP90 and Ubiquitin. Biological pathways significantly enriched for
genes which show cross-hybridization/cross-alignment include TGF-mediated
regulation of cell proliferation, TGF/WNT and cytoskeletal remodeling,
regulation of EMT, hedgehod signaling, and the FGFR signaling pathway.
Which platform to use with mixed tissues from xenografts - microarrays or
NGS - appears to be primarily a question of cost and specific genes of
interest.

