Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A fusion toxin for the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia


Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common cancer of
childhood. Two major challenges in the therapy of B-lineage ALL are
overcoming acquired drug resistance and treatment of relapse. The
interaction of ALL cells with the bone marrow microenvironment is thought
to assist the development of resistance to therapeutic drugs. Therefore,
we are focusing on the bone marrow microenvironment as a possible target
for treatment by investigating the interactions between cell surface
receptors on the ALL cells that are engaged by factors produced in the
bone marrow. Recently, we were the first to report that pre-B ALL cells
express the B cell-activating factor receptor (BAFF-R). In the current
study, we used a fusion protein, consisting of the toxin Gelonin (a plant
toxin which inhibits protein synthesis by inactivating ribosomes) and the
ligand for the BAFF-R, BAFF/BLys for selective killing of ALL cells.
Gelonin cannot enter the cells by itself since it lacks the ability to
bind to the cell surface. Here, we demonstrate that rGel/BLyS binds to
ALL cells expressing BAFF-R and, upon internalization, it induces
apoptosis of these cells and causes down-regulation of survival genes
even in the presence of stromal protection. Further, we transplanted
human leukemic cells into NSG mice and allowed the cells to proliferate
for 6 days to form an appreciable tumor burden. Then 3.75 mg/kg rGel/BLyS
was administered bi-weekly for 3 weeks. Mice not receiving treatment had
to be sacrificed at around day 34 whereas mice treated with rGel/BLyS
survived significantly (pAcute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most
common cancer of childhood. Two major challenges in the therapy of
B-lineage ALL are overcoming acquired drug resistance and treatment of
relapse. The interaction of ALL cells with the bone marrow
microenvironment is thought to assist the development of resistance to
therapeutic drugs. Therefore, we are focusing on the bone marrow
microenvironment as a possible target for treatment by investigating the
interactions between cell surface receptors on the ALL cells that are
engaged by factors produced in the bone marrow. Recently, we were the
first to report that pre-B ALL cells express the B cell-activating factor
receptor (BAFF-R). In the current study, we used a fusion protein,
consisting of the toxin Gelonin (a plant toxin which inhibits protein
synthesis by inactivating ribosomes) and the ligand for the BAFF-R,
BAFF/BLys for selective killing of ALL cells. Gelonin cannot enter the
cells by itself since it lacks the ability to bind to the cell surface.
Here, we demonstrate that rGel/BLyS binds to ALL cells expressing BAFF-R
and, upon internalization, it induces apoptosis of these cells and causes
down-regulation of survival genes even in the presence of stromal
protection. Further, we transplanted human leukemic cells into NSG mice
and allowed the cells to proliferate for 6 days to form an appreciable
tumor burden. Then 3.75 mg/kg rGel/BLyS was administered bi-weekly for 3
weeks. Mice not receiving treatment had to be sacrificed at around day 34
whereas mice treated with rGel/BLyS survived significantly (p<0.002)
longer. Remarkably, FACS analysis of peripheral blood from mice treated
with rGel/BLyS, using human CD19 and CD10 antibodies, showed that the
treatment had eliminated virtually all circulating leukemia cells.
However, the bone marrow (BM) of these mice clearly contained leukemic
cells. We used AMD3100, a CXCR4 antagonist, to mobilize the ALL cells
protected in the bone marrow microenvironment, in combination with
rGel/BLyS. In the combination treatment group, mice were first treated
with rGel/BLyS alone to reduce the overall leukemia burden. Then the
combination treatment was initiated, with AMD3100 injected 5-6 hours
before the rGel/BLyS was administered. This strategy was used to ensure
the presence of ALL cells in circulation at the time when the toxin would
also be in the circulation. The combination treatment resulted in a
significant reduction of the tumor load in the bone marrow and complete
eradication of ALL cells from the circulation. To conclude, rGel/BLyS is
a very promising therapeutic agent for ALL with selective cytotoxicity
mediated by its fusion to the ligand for the BAFF-R. Moreover, by
combining this selective but toxic fusion protein with a non-toxic ALL
mobilizing agent, we were able to significantly deplete the pool of
malignant lymphoblasts in vivo that could form the basis for relapse in
the bone marrow.

