Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of IL-10 production in effector B cells significantly
increases their therapeutic efficacy in cancer adoptive immunotherapy


We have previously reported the antitumor reactivity of adoptively
transferred effector B cells and the mechanisms by which they mediate
tumor regression in a spontaneous metastasis model. 4T1 breast cancer
cells were inoculated into syngeneic Balb/c mice to prime tumor-draining
lymph node (TDLN). TDLNs were subsequently harvested and B cells
activated ex vivo. When adoptively transferred into mice inoculated with
4T1 tumor in the mammary fat pad, these activated B cells alone mediated
the inhibition of spontaneous metastases to the lung. In this study, we
used IL-10/ Balb/c mice to generate IL-10/ TDLN, and evaluated the
antitumor immunity of IL-10/ TDLN B cells. Adoptively transferred IL-10/
TDLN B cells mediated significantly more effective antitumor immunity
than equal numbers of WT TDLN B cells (pWe have previously reported the
antitumor reactivity of adoptively transferred effector B cells and the
mechanisms by which they mediate tumor regression in a spontaneous
metastasis model. 4T1 breast cancer cells were inoculated into syngeneic
Balb/c mice to prime tumor-draining lymph node (TDLN). TDLNs were
subsequently harvested and B cells activated ex vivo. When adoptively
transferred into mice inoculated with 4T1 tumor in the mammary fat pad,
these activated B cells alone mediated the inhibition of spontaneous
metastases to the lung. In this study, we used IL-10/ Balb/c mice to
generate IL-10/ TDLN, and evaluated the antitumor immunity of IL-10/ TDLN
B cells. Adoptively transferred IL-10/ TDLN B cells mediated
significantly more effective antitumor immunity than equal numbers of WT
TDLN B cells (p<0.05). Activated IL-10/ effector 4T1 TDLN B cells were
capable of killing 4T1 tumor cells in a tumor antigen specific manner in
in vitro cytotoxicity assays independent of antibody and complement.
Adoptive transfer of IL-10/ TDLN B cells resulted in the induction of
host T and B cell antitumor immunity significantly more than adoptive
transfer of WT TDLN B cells (pWe have previously reported the antitumor
reactivity of adoptively transferred effector B cells and the mechanisms
by which they mediate tumor regression in a spontaneous metastasis model.
4T1 breast cancer cells were inoculated into syngeneic Balb/c mice to
prime tumor-draining lymph node (TDLN). TDLNs were subsequently harvested
and B cells activated ex vivo. When adoptively transferred into mice
inoculated with 4T1 tumor in the mammary fat pad, these activated B cells
alone mediated the inhibition of spontaneous metastases to the lung. In
this study, we used IL-10/ Balb/c mice to generate IL-10/ TDLN, and
evaluated the antitumor immunity of IL-10/ TDLN B cells. Adoptively
transferred IL-10/ TDLN B cells mediated significantly more effective
antitumor immunity than equal numbers of WT TDLN B cells (p<0.05).
Activated IL-10/ effector 4T1 TDLN B cells were capable of killing 4T1
tumor cells in a tumor antigen specific manner in in vitro cytotoxicity
assays independent of antibody and complement. Adoptive transfer of
IL-10/ TDLN B cells resulted in the induction of host T and B cell
antitumor immunity significantly more than adoptive transfer of WT TDLN B
cells (p<0.05). This was evident by significantly modulated cytokine
production (e.g. up-regulated IFN-gamma and IL-2 production by host T
cells, but down-regulated IL-10 production by host B cells). In addition,
adoptively transferred IL-10/ TDLN B cells increased the production of
IgG which bound to 4T1 tumor cells. Furthermore, IL-10/ TDLN B cell
infusion significantly increased tumor cell lysis (CTL) activity mediated
by host B cells as well as T cells in an immunologically specific
fashion. The molecular and cellular pathways involved in the direct
killing of 4T1 tumor cells by IL-10/- 4T1 TDLN effector B cells and by
host B cells subjected to IL-10/- 4T1 TDLN effector B cell adoptive
transfer is under active investigation in our lab. While the role played
by B cells in the host immune response to cancer is complex and
controversial, our results indicate that removal of IL-10-producing B
cell subsets may represent an effective strategy to augment the
therapeutic efficacy of TDLN B cells used in adoptive immunotherapy.
Mechanistically, adoptive transfer of B cells depleted of IL-10-producing
subsets destroys tumor cells directly and confers greater host cellular
and humoral antitumor immunity by shifting cytokine production to a Type
1 profile and by producing tumor-reactive antibodies respectively.

