Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin loaded magnetic nanoparticles for breast cancer
therapeutics and imaging applications


Background: Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) with theranostic features
(diagnosis and treatment) have attracted significant attention and will
greatly improve the scope of nanomedicine in cancer applications. The aim
of this study is to develop a novel MNPs formulation composed of an iron
oxide core coated with -cyclodextrin and pluronic polymer (F68), to load
an anti-cancer drug (curcumin, CUR) and prevent particle aggregation,
respectively. The therapeutic efficacy and imaging capabilities of this
novel formulation were evaluated in breast cancer cell line models.
Methods: The physico-chemical analyses of curcumin loaded MNPs (MNP-CUR)
were performed using dynamic light scattering (DLS), transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) analyses.
MNP-CUR internalization was evaluated after 6 hrs incubation with
MDA-MB-231 cancer cells by Prussian blue stain and TEM. Anti-cancer
effects of the MNP-CUR formulation was determined by a tetrazolium based
dye (MTT) and colony formation assays using triple negative MDA-MB-231
cancer cells. Tetramethylrhodamine, ethyl ester, perchlorate (TMRE), red
mitochondrial superoxide indicator (Mitosox), and propidium iodide stains
were used to evaluate the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential,
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, and apoptosis/dead cells,
respectively, to determine effects MNP-CUR on these cellular features.
The imaging capability of this MNP-CUR formulation was analyzed using a
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) system. The magnetic targeting feature
of the MNP-CUR formulation was evaluated using fluorescence microscopy.
Results: We prepared MNP-CUR with an average aggregative particles size
of 150 nm (individual particle grain size, 9-11 nm). Prussian blue stain
data represent a preferential uptake of MNP-CUR in MDA-MB-231 cells in a
dose dependant manner. TEM analysis demonstrates that accumulation of
MNP-CUR nanoparticles in cancer cells indicate that particles are not
attached on the surface of cells but internalized within the cells. The
MNP-CUR formulation showed strong anti-cancer effects in breast cancer
cells including triple negative MDA-MB-231 cancer cells compared to free
curcumin. This formulation also enhanced loss of mitochondrial membrane
potential, generation of ROS and apoptosis compared to free curcumin
treatment. Additionally, the MNP-CUR formulation exhibits superior T2
imaging characteristics compared to T1. A significant increase of the
targeting feature was observed with MNP-CUR in breast cancer cells.
Conclusion: These data suggest that our novel MNP-CUR formulation
exhibits potent anti-cancer activity along with imaging and magnetic
targeting capabilities. This approach can be extended to pre-clinical and
clinical use and may have importance in cancer treatment and cancer
imaging in the future.

