Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERG protein expression and genomic rearrangement status in primary
and metastatic prostate cancer - A comparative study of two monoclonal
antibodies


Introduction and Objective: Overexpression of the ERG protein is highly
prevalent in prostate cancer (PCa) and most commonly results from gene
fusions involving the ERG gene. Recently, an N-terminal epitope targeted
mouse and a C-terminal epitope targeted rabbit monoclonal anti-ERG
antibody have been introduced for the detection of the ERG protein.
Independent studies reported that immunohistochemical (IHC) stains with
both monoclonal anti-ERG antibodies (ERG-MAbs) highly correlate with the
underlying ERG gene rearrangement status. However, a comparative study of
both antibodies has not been provided so far. Here, we are the first to
compare the mouse ERG-MAb to the rabbit ERG-MAb for their concordance on
the same PCa cohort. Furthermore, we assessed if the ERG protein
expression is conserved in lymph node and distant PCa metastases, of
which a subset underwent decalcification. Methods: We evaluated tissue
microarrays of 278 specimens containing 265 localized PCa, 29 lymph node,
30 distant metastases, and 13 normal prostatic tissues. We correlated the
ERG protein expression with the ERG rearrangement status using an ERG
break-apart fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) assay and IHC of
both ERG antibodies. Results: ERG protein expression and ERG
rearrangement status were highly concordant regardless of whether the
mouse or rabbit ERG-MAb was used (97.8% versus 98.6%, respectively). Of
interest, both ERG antibodies reliably detected the ERG expression in
lymph node and distant PCa metastases, of which a subset underwent
decalcification. If an ERG protein expression was present in localized
PCa, we observed the same pattern in the corresponding lymph node
metastases. Conclusions: This is the first study to comprehensively
compare the two available ERG-MAbs. By demonstrating a broad
applicability of IHC to study ERG protein expression using either
antibody, this study adds an important step towards a facilitated routine
clinical application. Further, we demonstrate that the clonal nature of
the ERG rearrangement is not restricted to the genomic level, but
proceeds in the proteome. Together, our results simplify future efforts
to further elucidate the biological role of ERG in PCa.

