Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ganoderma lucidum (Reishi) suppresses key protein synthesis
initiation molecules in inflammatory breast cancer


Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is an aggressive and lethal type of
breast cancer. IBC's lethality originates from its nature of invading the
lymphatic system and to the absence of a palpable tumor mass. Pathogenic
properties of IBC result in part from deregulation of the eukaryotic
translation initiation factor (eIF4G), which is activated via the
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway. Active mTOR signaling
liberates eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) through the
hierarchical phosphorylation of eIF4E binding protein (4E-BP). When
hypophosphorylated, 4E-BP associates with eIF4E, preventing eIF4E from
binding eIF4G, blocking the formation of the eIF4F translation initiation
complex; thus, impeding protein translation. Therefore therapeutics that
target eIF4G in IBC are of great interest. Ganoderma lucidum (Reishi) is
a medicinal mushroom used to prevent and treat many diseases including
cancer. We recently reported that Reishi inhibits eIF4G expression after
24h of treatment in the SUM-149 IBC patient derived cell line. Therefore,
we investigated the therapeutic potential of Reishi mushroom in IBC cells
in vitro and in vivo, focusing on the regulation of mTOR and direct
downstream effectors: 4E-BP1 and the ribosomal protein p70S6K. Herein, we
show that Reishi treatment of SUM-149 cells impacts protein synthesis
initiation via inhibition of the mTOR pathway leading to
hypophosphorylation of 4E-BP1. Accordingly, Reishi downregulates mTOR
protein levels, 4E-BP1 phosphorylation, maintains eIF4E levels and
decreases p70S6k and eIF4G expression, potentially leading to reduced
eIF4F translation initiation complex levels after 6h of treatment. To
further investigate Reishi's therapeutic effects in vivo, we studied IBC
progression of SUM-149 subcutaneous tumors in severe combined
immunocompromised (SCID) mice. Following tumor establishment, mice were
gavaged every day with vehicle or Reishi at 28mg/kg BW for 13 weeks.
Tumor progression was quantified by caliper measurements, followed by
analysis of excised organs for protein expression. Results show that
Reishi significantly reduced tumor growth by 58% compared to vehicle
controls. Moreover, mTOR, eIF4E, eIF4G, E-cadherin, p4E-BP1 and p70S6k
expression decreases in the SUM-149 tumors from mice treated with Reishi.
Our results provide evidence that Reishi suppresses key molecules that
are important for protein synthesis initiation in IBC, thus highlighting
the potential of Reishi as a natural anti-IBC-therapeutic. This project
was sponsored by Title V PPOHA grant number P031M105050 from the US Dept
of Education to UCC, and NIH/RCMI 2G12RR003035 to UCC.

