Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved antitumor efficacy of an acid-sensitive doxorubicin
derivative delivered by thermally responsive elastin-like polypeptides


Doxorubicin is a widely used anticancer drug used in the treatment of
various cancers. It acts as an intercalator of DNA and inhibits
topoisomerase II thus preventing cell replication. Its side effects
include nausea, myelosuppression, alopecia, and dose-limiting
cardiotoxicity. Dox is nonspecific, and high doses are needed to treat
cancer cells. These high doses, however, are also harmful to normal
cells. Because of this toxicity to normal cells, there is a great need
for a delivery system that will target dox to the tumor site. In our
research, we have developed a tumor targeted drug delivery system
comprising the elastin-like polypeptide (ELP) which is a thermally
responsive macromolecule that remains soluble in physiologic temperature
but aggregates upon heating at 42 C in the tumor. The N-terminus of ELP
was modified with the cell-penetrating peptide SynB1. The SynB1-ELP
construct was further modified by the addition of an acid-sensitive
hydrazone derivative of doxorubicin (DOXO), by conjugation with a
6-maleimidocaproyl moiety on the drug to a terminal cysteine residue on
ELP. SynB1-ELP-DOXO was found to have a thermal transition temperature of
41 C. This construct was 2-fold more effective in inhibiting MCF-7 breast
cancer cell proliferation at 42 C than at 37 C, indicating that the
hyperthermia-induced phase transition of ELP increases the local
concentration of the drug. This inhibition may be due to apoptosis since
apoptosis was enhanced 2.3-fold in MCF-7 cells when SynB1-ELP-DOXO
aggregation was induced by hyperthermia. SynB1-ELP-DOXO had a similar
accumulation inside the cell as free Dox as shown by confocal
fluorescence imaging, and the uptake into the cell was increased by
hyperthermia. In the in vivo studies, a marked reduction in tumor size
was seen with SynB1-ELP-DOXO exposed to hyperthermia in the E0771
syngeneic breast cancer model in C57BL/6 mice. The efficacy of the
construct was further proved by the animal's body weight increasing over
time as compared to treatment with free Dox and a decreasing body weight.
An ongoing study uses the combination of free Dox and SynB1-ELP-DOXO at
lower doses to reduce tumor size. The ELP macromolecule can also be
applied to other small molecule therapeutics opening a potential platform
technology for this thermally responsive biopolymer.

