Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel insight into hallmark switch in cancer metabolism using the
Interrogative Biology discovery platform


Cancer metabolism is an intergrative ensemble of disrupted enzyme
kinetics and dysregulated metabolite utilization leading to loss of
normal cellular function that is the result of a multi-factorial yet
coordinated breakdown in vascular, immune, cell cycle, apoptotic, and ECM
components. In actively metabolizing cancer, the switch from
mitochondrial OXPHOS to anaerobic glycolysis is very well characterized
and understood. Global cellular changes in response to metabolic switch
have either been overlooked or not been primary interest or relevance to
cancer metabolism. We describe a novel systems biology/engineering
approach encompassing cell models that are conditioned under various
oncogenic perturbations or environments and then coupled with functional
bioenergetic read out such as employing the XF24 Seahorse Bioscience
analyzer, ATP assays, and ROS production. The OCR and ECAR measurements
generated by XF24 analyzer enabled quantifying the switch from aerobic to
the anerobic mode of energy metabolism. Cellular profiles were captured
in the form of multi-omic (proteomic, genomic, proteomic) signatures
using high-throughput mass spectrometry based protocols. Analyses were
performed on oncogenic breast, prostate, liver, pancreatic, skin
(melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma) and were compared to normal
fibroblasts, keratinocytes, hepatocytes, kidney cells, adipocytes, and
human aortic and endothelial cells. High throughput data cascades from
various cancer states were integrated with the metabolic data from the
XF24 analyzer using an AI-based data mining platform to generate causal
network based on bayesian models (REFS model). The output enables the
understanding of differential mechanisms that drive glycolysis and
mitochondrial OXPHOS in a cancer versus normal environment. Further
validation of prominent hub of activity as they partake as key drivers of
metabolic end points by siRNA knockdown experiments followed by
measurement using the XF24 analyzer confirmed the relevance of these hubs
in cancer metabolism and their relevance as potential therapeutic targets
and biomarkers for diagnostics development. The data output presented
herein strongly suggest that the Interrogative Biology platform is a key
tool in deciphering differential network analysis pertinent to disease
pathophysiology and bioenergetics.

