Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor growth inhibitory effect in EIF4B silenced in vitro and in
vivo lung cancer models


Backgraound The eIF4B, a key molecule for initiation of protein
translation, play an important role in cell growth, proliferation and
survival. We investigated that eIF4B is associated with the molecular
mechanism of de novo resistance against EGFR TKIs and its role on cell
proliferation and survival in NSCLC cells. Method Among five NSCLC cell
lines harboring EGFR and K-RAS wild type, PC14 cells showing the highest
IC50, were selected for our experiment. In eIF4B silenced PC14 cells by
shRNA, we evaluated cell proliferation by direct cell counts and SRB
assay and cell cycle distribution using flow cytometry. The expression of
signal molecules, transcription factors and apoptosis associated proteins
was measured by Western blot. In vivo tumor model established by
subcutaneous injection of eIF4B silenced PC14 cells, the retardation of
tumor growth was measured. Results In PC14 cells transformed with eIF4B
shRNA, we observed the protein expression of eIF4B was reduced (>70% at
day 5). The proliferation of eIF4B silenced cells was greatly inhibited
both in vitro and in vivo tumor model. Between eIF4B silenced cells and
control cells, there was no significant difference in anti-proliferative
activity of several target inhibitors (enzastaurin, gefitinib, LY294002,
vandetanib) against EGFR-PI3K-AKT signaling molecules. The expression of
proteins involved in cell survival (pEGFR, pAKT and mTOR), transcription
factors (pNFkB and TS) and anti-apoptotic protein (bcl-2), was decreased
and apoptosis associated proteins (phospho-p53 and active caspase-3) were
increased. The G0/G1 cell fraction in eIF4B silenced cells was reduced
(47.3% vs. 55.1% in control cells) and accumulation of apoptotic cells
was observed (12.7% vs. 1.5% in control cells; shown as sub G1
population). Conclusion Our results demonstrated that eIF4B silencing
resulted in a marked decrease of several anti-apoptotic and
pro-proliferative proteins and eIF4B was required for cell proliferation
and survival by regulating cell cycle and cell signaling molecules.

