Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Constitutively active androgen receptor splice variants function
independently of full-length androgen receptor in a cell-based model of
castrate-resistant prostate cancer


Recent studies suggest that progression to castrate-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) is due to generation of androgen receptor (AR) splice
variants, lacking the ligand binding domain. These AR variants originally
identified in cell-based models of CRPC, have also been detected in
benign and malignant human prostate tissue, with the highest levels
observed in late state CRPC. The diversity and complexity of AR variants
is well appreciated but not fully understood. Using RT-PCR we assessed
the expression of a number of AR variants in cell-based models of both
castrate-resistant and androgen-dependent prostate cancer. Several AR
variants were expressed in both 22Rv1 and VCaP cells, but not in LNCaP
cells. Coding sequences for AR variants were cloned into expression
vectors and constitutive transcriptional activity was observed using a
luciferase reporter assay. Augmented transcriptional activity of AR
variants was observed in cells that express full-length AR, when
full-length AR was silenced using shRNA targeting exons 7/8. This
observation suggests the constitutive activity of AR variants may be
independent of full-length AR. We profiled the AR variant transcriptome
in 22Rv1 cells, using the Illumina HumanHT12 v4 whole-genome expression
array platform. shRNA targeting exon 1 was used to silence all AR
isoforms and shRNA targeting exons 7/8 was used to silence full-length
AR. 5,256 genes were modulated by knocking down all AR isoforms and 5,086
genes were modulated by knocking down full-length AR. A total of 3,714
genes were common to both groups, leaving 1542 genes modulated by AR
variants and 1372 modulated by full-length AR (pRecent studies suggest
that progression to castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is due to
generation of androgen receptor (AR) splice variants, lacking the ligand
binding domain. These AR variants originally identified in cell-based
models of CRPC, have also been detected in benign and malignant human
prostate tissue, with the highest levels observed in late state CRPC. The
diversity and complexity of AR variants is well appreciated but not fully
understood. Using RT-PCR we assessed the expression of a number of AR
variants in cell-based models of both castrate-resistant and
androgen-dependent prostate cancer. Several AR variants were expressed in
both 22Rv1 and VCaP cells, but not in LNCaP cells. Coding sequences for
AR variants were cloned into expression vectors and constitutive
transcriptional activity was observed using a luciferase reporter assay.
Augmented transcriptional activity of AR variants was observed in cells
that express full-length AR, when full-length AR was silenced using shRNA
targeting exons 7/8. This observation suggests the constitutive activity
of AR variants may be independent of full-length AR. We profiled the AR
variant transcriptome in 22Rv1 cells, using the Illumina HumanHT12 v4
whole-genome expression array platform. shRNA targeting exon 1 was used
to silence all AR isoforms and shRNA targeting exons 7/8 was used to
silence full-length AR. 5,256 genes were modulated by knocking down all
AR isoforms and 5,086 genes were modulated by knocking down full-length
AR. A total of 3,714 genes were common to both groups, leaving 1542 genes
modulated by AR variants and 1372 modulated by full-length AR (p<0.05).
The represents a subset of genes differentially regulated by AR variants
independently of full length AR. Aggregate function of multiple AR
variants may confer a CRPC phenotype independent of full-length AR.
Pathway analysis of these genes differentially regulated by AR variants
may reveal potential targets for therapeutic intervention in patients who
progress despite androgen deprivation or anti-androgen therapy.
(Supported by NIH grants CA125747, CA091956 and CA121277, T.J. Martell
Foundation and the Mayo Clinic Prostate Cancer SPORE).

