Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of HER2 in human breast cancer cells leads to
massive alteration of RNA polymerase II binding and gene activation


Background. Herceptin, which targets the protein HER2, has poor efficacy
as a monotherapy. To better understand the role of HER2, we compared
isogenic HER2 expressing and non-expressing cells for the distribution
for RNA polymerase II (POL II) on promoters and RNA expression. Methods.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation was performed with anti-RNA polymerase II
(POL II) in high HER2-expressing and non-expressing MCF7 cells as well as
two breast cancer cell lines with naturally amplified HER2; MDA453 and
BT474. Binding of POL II was assessed on Agilent promoter arrays. Gene
activation in the same cells was assessed by expression analysis using
U133plus2 arrays. Results. De novo expression of HER2 in MCF7 cells
causes POLII to interact strongly with 606 genes not bound in empty
vector control cells (p Background. Herceptin, which targets the protein
HER2, has poor efficacy as a monotherapy. To better understand the role
of HER2, we compared isogenic HER2 expressing and non-expressing cells
for the distribution for RNA polymerase II (POL II) on promoters and RNA
expression. Methods. Chromatin immunoprecipitation was performed with
anti-RNA polymerase II (POL II) in high HER2-expressing and
non-expressing MCF7 cells as well as two breast cancer cell lines with
naturally amplified HER2; MDA453 and BT474. Binding of POL II was
assessed on Agilent promoter arrays. Gene activation in the same cells
was assessed by expression analysis using U133plus2 arrays. Results. De
novo expression of HER2 in MCF7 cells causes POLII to interact strongly
with 606 genes not bound in empty vector control cells (p < 0.05). 30% of
these genes exhibited a significant increase in transcription (p 1.4).
POL II also interacts 1079 genes that are common between HER2-expressing
and control cells. Conversely, 678 genes were bound more tightly by POL
II in the control (p 1.4). POL II also interacts 1079 genes that are
common between HER2-expressing and control cells. Conversely, 678 genes
were bound more tightly by POL II in the control (p < 0.05). 20% of these
genes exhibited a significant decrease in transcription. An additional
825 genes, bind POLII loosely in MCF7HER2 cells but not in MCF7 cells.
30% of these genes were significantly differentially regulated relative
to control. The transcription of 68 loosely bound genes was tested by
qPCR for all three cell lines. When compared with the array data, the
correlation coefficients were 0.74 - 0.90;(p 1.4). POL II also interacts
1079 genes that are common between HER2-expressing and control cells.
Conversely, 678 genes were bound more tightly by POL II in the control (p
< 0.05). 20% of these genes exhibited a significant decrease in
transcription. An additional 825 genes, bind POLII loosely in MCF7HER2
cells but not in MCF7 cells. 30% of these genes were significantly
differentially regulated relative to control. The transcription of 68
loosely bound genes was tested by qPCR for all three cell lines. When
compared with the array data, the correlation coefficients were 0.74 -
0.90;(p < 0.01). In both HER2 and non-expressing cells, loosely bound POL
II sites are largely associated with 3 positions of the Agilent probes
within the transcribed region, whereas strong binding sites were largely
localized to + 250 bp of the transcription start sites (TSSs). The
transcriptome of MCF7 was compared to MCF7HER2 and the two
HER2-expressing cancer cell lines. 633 genes were differentially
expressed between the control and the three lines. Conclusions. The
expression of HER2 is associated with a marked alteration in the number
of genes that interact with POL II, involving hundreds of genes. The
resulting gene activity depends upon the binding strength of POL II.
Strong localized binding in one part of the promoter is often associated
with less transcription, and diffused looser binding is often associated
with higher transcription, whereas a lack of POL II binding is usually
associated with no transcription. This is consistent with a mass action
model in which transcription is maximal for POL II sites with an optimal
koff rate and declines with either an increase (stalled) or decrease (not
interacting) in binding. 42%, of the HER2-dependent gene interactions and
transcription changes occur in both of the human cancer cell lines with
naturally amplified HER2. These observations reveal a much expanded role
of HER2 in gene regulation and indicate a greatly extended role in gene
activation in HER2-positive breast cancer.

