Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SRC-3 is a critical mediator in the development of
castration-resistant prostate cancer


Androgen ablation therapy is the standard treatment for advanced prostate
cancer. While tumors initially respond to androgen deprivation, they
almost always recur with an androgen-independent phenotype termed
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Castration-resistant tumors
are incurable with current therapy regimens and account for most prostate
cancer mortality. Better understanding of their biology is therefore
critical for devising novel treatment options. Steroid Receptor
Coactivator 3 (SRC-3) is a nuclear receptor coactivator that promotes
growth of endocrine tissues. It enhances proliferation of prostate cancer
cell lines and is highly expressed in advanced human prostate tumors.
Despite this, the role of SRC-3 in CRPC is not well studied. PTEN is a
tumor suppressor gene mutated in most human prostate cancers. Mice
harboring PTEN deletion in prostatic epithelial cells develop cancer that
arises from progenitors in the luminal epithelial and basal compartments.
Tumors histologically mimic advanced human disease and are
castration-resistant. We hypothesized that, in prostate tumors caused by
PTEN deletion, SRC-3 is a critical mediator for accelerating the
development of CRPC. To test this hypothesis, we generated mice in which
floxed PTEN and SRC-3 genes were concomitantly deleted in prostate
epithelial cells via a Cre recombinase driven by the Probasin promoter.
We first compared tumor mass, histology and biomarkers in these
PTENf/f/SRC-3f/f/ARR2PBiCre (pten3cko) mice vs. PTENf/f/ARR2PBiCre
(ptencko) mice. We found that while tumor growth in pten3cko mice was
slightly inhibited at 9 wks of age, tumor histology and cellular
composition were not markedly different. We then castrated mice of both
genotypes at 9-wks-old and harvested tumors at 12wks. Interestingly,
castrated ptencko mice had significantly worsened tumor aggressivenessas
indicated by increased proliferation index, reduced differentiation
(increased p63; decreased K5 and K8) and increased reactive stroma
(double staining of SMA and vimentin)versus their non-castrated
counterparts. Amazingly, in addition to significantly reducing tumor
size, SRC-3 ablation reversed all changes comprising the aggressive
phenotype seen in the post-castration tumors. Further investigation
showed SRC-3 deletion decreased mTOR signaling. Together, these data show
that castration induces a worse tumor phenotype in the setting of PTEN
deletion and that SRC-3 promotes this process by inducing epithelial cell
proliferation and enhancing the growth-promoting effect of these cells on
the stroma. Therefore, SRC-3 may serve as a potential target for
controlling CRPC development.

