Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelioid and fibroblastic cell elements coexisting within the
sarcomatoid renal carcinoma RCC52 cell line ensue divergent routes of
tumor differentiation and progression


The immunobiology of sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma and its
transformation from and to the clear cell RCC cells are not fully
understood. We analyzed a human sarcomatoid RCC cell line known as RCC52,
derived from a primary lesion of clear cell RCC with extensive
sarcomatoid differentiation. When grown as monolayers, RCC52 cells were
all PAX-2 negative and consisted of mostly epithelioid cells and
occasionally spindle/fibroblastic cells, suggestive of in vitro growth of
the sarcomatoid, but not clear cell, component of the tumor. PAX-2 is a
transcription factor found in all major RCC types including clear cell
RCCs, but not in sarcomatoid RCCs. We next isolated and maintained a
panel of epithelioid and fibroblastic clonal sublines. As determined by
cDNA microarray analysis, cancer stem cell (CSC) marker genes, such as
ALDH1L1, PSCA and ABCA2, were expressed greater in the epithelioid
sublines, while mesenchymal-like cell marker genes including vimentin,
snail, fibronectin and MMPs were expressed in much higher levels in the
fibroblastic counterpart. Xenotransplantation in NOD/SCID mice showed
that in contrast to fibroblastic sublines failing to developed tumors,
epithelioid sublines invariably developed tumors at the injection sites.
These results point to the existence of CSCs in the epithelioid, but not
fibroblastic sublines. In order to investigate the
self-renewal/colongenicity ability of these two types of clonal sublines,
we used soft agar assay to assess their differential
anchorage-independent colony forming abilities. Results showed the mean
colony number in the parental RCC52 cells at day 28 was 293.3 81.3
colonies/well, in the epithelioid sublines, the mean colony number was
322.2 92.0 colonies/well. In contrast, no visible colonies were detected
in any of the fibroblastic sublines tested. These results are consistent
with those obtained in the xenotransplantation studies. Another important
observation was that only epithelioid sublines developed xenografts in
which clear cell component which was identified by its positive PAX-2
reactivity by immunostaining in some areas of tissue sections.
Surprisingly, xenografts resulting from subcutaneous injection of RCC52
cells and the original patient tumor shared similar histopathology in
that mostly sarcomatoid cells were noted with occasional clear cell
areas. In conclusion, our results strongly point to the capability of
sarcomatoid RCCs to undergo dedifferentiation or transdifferentiation.
Further investigations into the molecular events responsible for
sarcomatoid transformation from clear cell RCCs and for the progression
of clear cell RCCs to sarcomatoid ones using additional tissues and cell
lines of either types are warranted.

