Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AMPK-mTOR axis as key target for chemoprevention of UV-induced
skin cancer by the bioflavonoid apigenin


Over two million new cases of UV-induced non-melanoma skin cancer are
diagnosed yearly in the USA, making it the most common form of cancer in
this country. Apigenin, a nonmutagenic, naturally occurring flavonoid
found in a variety of fruits and leafy vegetables, inhibits UV-induced
skin cancer in mice. Our laboratory and others have shown that apigenin
treatment of cells results in a wide variety of antitumorigenic and
chemopreventive actions, including suppression of COX-2 expression,
enhancement of p53 expression, and induction of cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis. However, the primary target(s) responsible for apigenin's
chemopreventive function remains elusive. For the first time, we have
demonstrated that apigenin activated AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)
in keratinocytes (mouse and human keratinocyte cell lines, primary normal
human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEKs) and mouse epidermis in vivo). The
activation of AMPK resulted in inhibition of mTOR signaling, which
relieved the block to the autophagy pathway, further inducing autophagy
in human keratinocytes. At early stages of tumorigenesis, autophagy acts
as a tumor suppressor by removing damaged organelles, proteins, reducing
chromosome instability, and inducing type II programmed cell death.
Therefore, pharmacological induction of autophagy provides a new strategy
for cancer chemoprevention. We have further demonstrated that UV
radiation also induced moderate AMPK activation, suggesting that there is
a protective cellular response after UV radiation alone, providing
limited protection through modest AMPK activation. More intriguingly,
pretreatment of keratinocytes or skin with apigenin prior to UV radiation
induced AMPK activation dramatically (both in vitro and in vivo). In
addition, UV markedly increased mTOR phosphorylation in SKH-1 mice
epidermis, and apigenin completely inhibited UV-mediated mTOR activation.
Taken together, our results demonstrate that the AMPK/mTOR axis is
involved in chemoprevention of UV-induced skin cancer by apigenin, and
mechanistically the activation of AMPK further induces autophagy to
suppress UV-induced tumorigenesis. Identifying AMPK-mTOR axis as a key
target of apigenin and targeting the autophagy pathway for cancer
chemoprevention would provide a new target and strategy for the
development of better treatment and prevention of skin cancer.

