Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nek3/Vav2 modulation of the expression of genes involved in breast
cancer pathogenesis


The pituitary hormone prolactin (PRL) is generally recognized for its
role in breast growth and differentiation; however, a role for PRL in the
pathogenesis of breast cancer has emerged from epidemiological studies
and basic science research using both human breast cancer cells and
animal models. Activation of the prolactin receptor (PRLr) by PRL
contributes to the growth, survival, and motility of human breast cancer
cells. PRLr stimulation by PRL results in the activation of multiple
signaling complexes including serine/threonine kinase Nek3 and guanine
nucleotide exchange factor Vav2. Nek3 is necessary for the activation of
Vav2, and Nek3 knockdown results in decreased cytoskeletal
re-organization, cell motility, and cell invasion in PRL-stimulated human
breast cancer cells. The overexpression of a kinase inactive form of Nek3
in human breast cancer cells results in increased apoptosis, indicating a
pro-survival function for Nek3. Furthermore, Nek3 expression is increased
in malignant vs. normal human breast tissue. These data make the
Nek3/Vav2 complex an interesting target for novel breast cancer
therapeutics. To this end, a greater understanding of the role of
Nek3/Vav2 in breast cancer pathogenesis is necessary. We hypothesized
that the Nek3/Vav2 complex modulates PRL-driven expression of genes
involved in the pathogenesis of breast cancer. In these studies,
luciferase assays and quantitative PCR were used to evaluate the effects
of gain- or loss-of-function of Nek3/Vav2 on the expression of CISH
(cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein). Gain- or loss-of-function of
Nek3/Vav2 was found to alter the expression of CISH in response to PRL in
both MCF7 and T47D human breast cancer cell lines. The CISH promoter has
4 binding sites for the transcription factor Stat5, which is known to
contribute to malignant transformation and tumor growth in breast cancer.
Luciferase assay showed that gain- or loss-of-function of Nek3 was also
found to alter the activation of a reporter construct containing the
lactogenic hormone response element which consists of six tandem Stat5
DNA-binding elements. This suggests that Nek3/Vav2 modulates the
PRL-driven expression of CISH by regulating activity of the transcription
factor Stat5. Gain- or loss-of-function of Nek3/Vav2 was not found to
alter the subcellular localization of Stat5 in response to PRL. Ongoing
studies are examining the mechanism of Nek3/Vav2 modulation of
PRL-responsive gene expression in breast cancer cells.

