Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated genomics on molecular subgroups in medulloblastoma


Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor in childhood.
Molecular studies from several groups around the world demonstrated that
medulloblastoma is not one disease but comprises a collection of distinct
molecular subgroups. However, all these studies reported on different
numbers of subgroups. The current consensus is that there are only four
major subgroups, which are now called WNT, SHH, Group 3 and Group 4. A
better understanding of each of these molecular subtypes is urgently
warranted to improve treatment strategies and the overall survival of
patients and ultimately also the quality of life for those that survive
medulloblastoma. We used the data of seven independent studies on
medulloblastoma for further characterization of these molecular subtypes.
All cases (n = 550) were analyzed by expression profiling and for most
cases SNP or array-CGH data were available. Data are presented for all
medulloblastomas together and for each subgroup separately. For
validation purposes we compared the results of this meta-analysis with
another large medulloblastoma cohort (n = 408) for which subgroup
information was obtained by immunohistochemistry. Results from both
cohorts are highly similar and show how distinct the molecular subtypes
are with respect to their transcriptome, DNA copy number aberrations,
demographics, and survival. Interestingly, the data also showed how
different medulloblastomas are between infants, children and adults. In
infants, for instance, almost all medulloblastomas are classified as SHH
or Group 3, whereas in adults most medulloblastomas are of the SHH
subtype and almost never of Group 3. Recent next generation sequencing
data (whole genome and exome) generated in our laboratory for a large
series of pediatric and adult medulloblastomas show that the spectrum of
genetic mutations is also very different, not only between the molecular
subtypes, but also between the different age categories. All these data
clearly show that medulloblastoma is not one disease. Results from these
molecular analyses will form the basis for prospective multi-center
studies and will have an impact on how the different variants of
medulloblastoma will be treated in the future.

