Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin suppresses the growth and modulates the metabolic
profiles of pancreatic cancer cells under hypoxia in an IKK-dependent
manner


Nuclear factor-B; (NF-B) controls a range of genes involved in
inflammation, cell survival, growth and apoptosis. The dysregulated NF-B
pathway has been found to be involved in carcinogenesis and cancer
progression. An IKK-deleted mouse pancreatic cancer cell line was
generated using a lentiviral construct with an shRNA. We investigated the
effects of metformin, an anti-diabetic drug, on the cell proliferation
and metabolism of these cells, under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. A
high dose (5 mM) of metformin under normoxic conditions suppressed the
growth of both wild-type and IKK knockdown cell types; however, under
hypoxic conditions IKK knockdown cells were more sensitive to treatment
than their wild-type counterpart (p Nuclear factor-B; (NF-B) controls a
range of genes involved in inflammation, cell survival, growth and
apoptosis. The dysregulated NF-B pathway has been found to be involved in
carcinogenesis and cancer progression. An IKK-deleted mouse pancreatic
cancer cell line was generated using a lentiviral construct with an
shRNA. We investigated the effects of metformin, an anti-diabetic drug,
on the cell proliferation and metabolism of these cells, under normoxic
and hypoxic conditions. A high dose (5 mM) of metformin under normoxic
conditions suppressed the growth of both wild-type and IKK knockdown cell
types; however, under hypoxic conditions IKK knockdown cells were more
sensitive to treatment than their wild-type counterpart (p < 0.001).
Metabolic assays revealed that metformin treatment under normoxic
conditions decreased the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) whilst
increasing the lactate production of both cell types to similar levels.
Under hypoxia, metformin treatment of both cancer cells resulted in
decreased OXPHOS, with a more profound effect on the IKK knockdown cells,
and a significant decrease in lactate production in the IKK knockdown
cells only (p Nuclear factor-B; (NF-B) controls a range of genes involved
in inflammation, cell survival, growth and apoptosis. The dysregulated
NF-B pathway has been found to be involved in carcinogenesis and cancer
progression. An IKK-deleted mouse pancreatic cancer cell line was
generated using a lentiviral construct with an shRNA. We investigated the
effects of metformin, an anti-diabetic drug, on the cell proliferation
and metabolism of these cells, under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. A
high dose (5 mM) of metformin under normoxic conditions suppressed the
growth of both wild-type and IKK knockdown cell types; however, under
hypoxic conditions IKK knockdown cells were more sensitive to treatment
than their wild-type counterpart (p < 0.001). Metabolic assays revealed
that metformin treatment under normoxic conditions decreased the
oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) whilst increasing the lactate
production of both cell types to similar levels. Under hypoxia, metformin
treatment of both cancer cells resulted in decreased OXPHOS, with a more
profound effect on the IKK knockdown cells, and a significant decrease in
lactate production in the IKK knockdown cells only (p < 0.001). We
believe our findings have implications for understanding the molecular
mechanisms of metformin as a therapeutic agent in cancer treatment.

