Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utility of circulating biomarkers as outcome predictors in
metastatic colorectal cancer and recurrent glioblastoma multiforme
patients treated with bevacizumab/sorafenib


Purpose: Surrogate biomarkers are lacking for predicting or monitoring
response to anti-angiogenesis therapies. We investigated whether
circulating biomarkers (CBMs) of angiogenesis (i.e., bFGF, SDF-1, HGF,
sKIT, Ang-2, and PlGF) correlated with treatment efficacy in a pooled
analysis of metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) and recurrent
glioblastoma multiforme (rGBM) patients (pts) treated with
bevacizumab/sorafenib (BEV/SOR). Experimental procedures: Peripheral
blood samples were obtained for CBM analyses from pts enrolled in the
North Central Cancer Treatment Group (NCCTG) phase II studies N054C
(mCRC, n=75, Grothey, ASCO 2010) and N0776 (rGBM, n=54, Galanis, ASCO
2010). Blood collection time points were: baseline (BL), cycle 1 day 3
(C1D3), prior to treatment cycles 2, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, and after the pt
went off study. Plasma CBM levels were determined by
commercially-available ELISAs (R&D Systems) and performed according to
manufacturer's instructions. For each CBM, a linear regression model that
adjusted for study was used to evaluate the correlation with either
progression-free survival (PFS) success/failure or progression within 14
days of the last blood draw for the following measures: absolute BL
levels, log2 BL levels; C1D3 log2-fold change (FC) from BL, prior to
cycle 2 log2-FC from BL, last draw log2-FC from BL, and last draw log2-FC
from prior draw. Results summary: There appears to be no significant
difference in the PFS or overall survival (OS) between the pts on these
two studies; therefore, we pooled the patients from both studies for a
combined analyses. We found no difference in absolute or log2 levels for
any of the CBMs during the course of BEV/SOR treatment. In these pooled
analyses, we found increased absolute and increased log2 BL SDF-1 levels
were significantly correlated with PFS success (p=0.023 and p=0.02,
respectively). After correcting for multiple comparisons (method of
Benjamini & Hochberg) the p-values 0.10). Conclusions: This study
provides preliminary evidence that SDF-1 may be a useful CBM for
determining treatment efficacy in these pts treated with BEV/SOR. Further
prospective validation of SDF-1 for predicting pt progression with this
treatment combination in advanced disease (e.g., mCRC and rGBM) appears
warranted.

