Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidative stress analysis in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of
pediatric leukemia undergoing chemotherapy: Correlations with dietary
intake


Clinical observations suggest that poor nutrition worsens outcomes for
pediatric leukemia patients undergoing therapy. However, the molecular
basis for this observation is not well understood. Ample data indicates
that increased cellular oxidative stress is an important mechanism of
action of chemotherapeutic regimens used for pediatric acute leukemias.
Reports also suggest that diet may modulate the balance of cellular pro-
and antioxidants. Here, we propose that age appropriate adequate
nutrition promotes endogenous metabolic sources of oxidative stress,
which when combined with chemotherapy induced oxidative stress, provide
better outcomes for these patients. Assessments of nutrition and
oxidative stress were completed for each patient at regularly scheduled
intervals over a six month period. Changes in nutrition and oxidative
stress were monitored. Nutrition was quantified by conducting 24 hour
dietary recalls. Data was entered into the Minnesota Nutrition Data
System for Research (NDSR) dietary analysis program. Cellular oxidative
stress in mononuclear cells isolated from peripheral blood was also
quantified. Specifically, intracellular superoxide and hydrogen peroxide
were measured with dihydroethidium (HE) and 2,7-dichlorofluorescin
diacetate (DCF-DA) staining by flow cytometry, respectively. Glutathione
(GSH), an antioxidant, was also measured by monochlorobimane staining. To
date, analyses have been completed for 12 patients. An increase in
superoxides was detected in 72.7% of patients (8 of 11). An increase in
hydrogen peroxide was detected in 50% of patients (6 of 12). An increase
was defined as a two-fold or greater elevation in ROS at any subsequent
visit compared to the baseline visit. A decrease in GSH was seen in 50%
of patients (6 of 12) and 33% (4 of 12) demonstrated a decrease in GSH
coincident with an increase in both superoxides and hydrogen peroxide.
This increase in ROS and decrease in GSH suggests that the majority of
our patients experience oxidative stress during therapy. To investigate
the impact of diet on oxidant status, NDSR software was used to compare
the consumption of dietary antioxidants, such as vitamins A, B3, C, and
E, selenium, and glutamic acid, to the corresponding amounts of ROS from
the same visit. The strongest correlation was between vitamin C
consumption and hydrogen peroxide levels. An inverse relationship between
vitamin C consumption and hydrogen peroxide levels was apparent in 58.3%
of patients (7 of 12). These data provide insight into the relationship
between diet and oxidative stress in pediatric leukemia patients. Future
work will support the design of dietary interventions that will modulate
oxidant status to favor improved survival of children with leukemia.

