Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Hsp90 impairs expression of VDAC in plasma and
mitochondrial membrane influencing cancer cell metabolism


Voltage dependent anion channels (VDACs) play an important role in
transport through the outer mitochondrial membrane. Importantly,
mitochondrial VDACs (mVDACs) are crucial for glycolysis, the predominant
metabolic pathway in cancer cells (Warburg effect), where they bind
hexokinase II (HK II) and supply ATP necessary for metabolic activity of
this enzyme. In addition, overexpression of the molecular chaperone
heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90) in cancer cells has been described.
Interestingly, TOM complex, responsible for import of proteins (e.g.
VDACs) into mitochondria, is an Hsp90 client protein. Therefore, we
hypothesised that targeting Hsp90 would affect HK II binding to VDAC and
in consequence decrease glycolysis. Interestingly, in cancer cells, VDACs
have been shown also to localise to plasma membrane and iron uptake was
suggested to be one of the probable plasma membrane (pm) activity of
VDACs. Here, we have also evaluated the possible role for Hsp90 in cell
trafficking of pmVDACs. To determine the effects of Hsp90 inhibitor
17-DMAG (17-(dimethylaminoethylamino)-17-demethoxygeldanamycin) on cancer
cell metabolism and VDAC localisation we have adopted human gastric and
pancreatic cancer cell lines (TMK1, MiaPaCa2). In vitro, localisation of
proteins was determined using Western blotting and immunocytochemistry.
Spectrophotometric technique was employed to evaluate HK enzyme activity
and intracellular iron level whilst co-immunoprecipitation was used for
protein complex formation. In vivo, murine Panc02 pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cells were used in subcutaneous tumor model. Staining of
HK II, VDAC and mitochondria in the cells showed large areas of
co-localisation upon control conditions which was significantly reduced
when cells were treated with 17-DMAG. Overall HK activity in the
mitochondrial fraction was decreased by 25 8,1% and 57 9,7% in cells and
tissues treated with 17-DMAG compared to control conditions. Furthermore,
expression of VDACs in plasma membrane fraction was significantly
decreased after 4 h 17-DMAG treatment. Complex formation of VDACs with
Hsp90 was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation. 4 min incubation of cells
in the presence of different concentrations of extracellular iron
resulted in a dose dependent iron uptake. Moreover, in the presence of
extracellular iron, dose-dependent iron uptake was decreased when cells
were incubated with VDACs blocker - phosphorothioate randomer (20 3,5 %)
or preincubated with 17-DMAG (40 % 2,5 %) for both cell lines. Overall,
the results have shown that (1) Targeting Hsp90 affects glucose
metabolism in cancer cells via inhibition of VDAC incorporation into the
mitochondrial membrane resulting in HK II - VDAC binding impairment. (2)
VDACs are also expressed in the plasma membrane of cancer cells and their
trafficking depends on Hsp90. (3) One of the potential roles of pmVDAC is
iron transport.

