Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PMA induces malignant characteristics in MCF-7 breast cancer cells
via MAPK-pathway


Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) is a well known tumor promoter, the
effect of which is mainly mediated by protein kinase C (PKC). The effect
of PMA varies depending on the cell line and growth conditions. In MCF-7
breast cancer cells PMA has been found to induce growth arrest and
resistance to apoptosis. Here, we studied the effects of PMA on
differentiation and malignant characteristics of MCF-7 cells. The cells
were grown on Matrigel besement membrane preparation or on plastic/glass
surface with and without PMA, rottlerin or bryostatin. The cell
proliferation assay was carried out using the cells grown on 96-well
plates. Wound healing test, on glass surface, was used to detect the
differences in cell migration. Activation of MAPK-pathway proteins was
studied with Phospho-kinase array. When grown on Matrigel, the addition
of PMA to cell culture medium increased the motility of the cells and
induced dramatic morphological changes, leading to the formation of
web-like multicellular structures. These changes were not observed when
the cells were grown on plastic or glass surface. However, PMA caused a
two-fold increase in the migration of the cells on glass surface.
Furthermore, the PMA treated cells had lower proliferation rate than the
untreated cells. Preincubation of the cells with PKC-inhibitors rottlerin
or bryostatin abolished the effects of PMA, suggesting that these effects
are mediated by PKC. PMA also induced several changes in the
phosphorylation of different proteins involved in MAPK-pathway. Our
results confirm the previous findings showing that PMA induces malignant
characteristics in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Morphological
differentiation was only seen when the cells were grown on basement
membrane preparation, recapitulating the physiological growth environment
of the cells better than the artificial plastic surface. Furthermore, our
results indicate that the effects of PMA on MCF-7 cells are mediated by
MAPK-pathway.

