Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR7 protein is strongly expressed in B-acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) but not in T-ALL or acute myelogenous leukemia


The identification of CXCR7 in addition to CXCR4 as a receptor for the
chemokine CXCL12/SDF-1 and recent reports that CXCR7 is expressed in many
cancers including breast, lung and prostate prompted us to evaluate the
role of CXCR7 in hematological malignancies. While CXCR4 is known to be
involved in the progression of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and
acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), the role of CXCR7 in leukemic
dissemination remains unknown. Using immunohistochemistry, we evaluated
the expression patterns of CXCR7 and CXCR4 in tissue microarrays (TMAs)
constructed from bone marrow biopsies obtained from patients diagnosed
with pre B- and B-ALL (n=75; median age 5 yrs, range 6 mo-72 yrs), T-ALL
(n=11; median age 12 yrs, range 4-29 yrs) and AML (n=140; median age 62
yrs, range 1-83 yrs). CXCR7 expression was also evaluated at the gene and
protein levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from ALL and AML
patients and in B-cell lines (Raji, NC-37, Ramos, Nalm-6, Reh), T-cell
lines (Jurkat, Hut-102B, Sez-4, CEM), and myeloid cell lines (KG-1,
HL-60, THP-1, U-937, K562, HEL) using RT-PCR and flow cytometry. We found
that in B-and preB-ALL TMAs, CXCR7 was immunopositive in 79% of the
patients, in contrast to negative immunostaining in 100% of T-ALL and AML
samples. Consistently, flow cytometry showed that CXCR7 protein is
expressed on the surface of preB-ALL cells, but not on T-ALL, AML or
normal controls. CXCR7 surface expression in the cell lines studied
showed that three (NC-37, Raji, Reh) out of five B-cell lines expressed
CXCR7, but not in any of the T-cell lines, and only weakly in one (KG-1)
of six myeloid cell lines studied. Analysis of the functional role of
CXCR7 in leukemia revealed that CXCR7 did not mediate chemotaxis of
CXCR7-positive NC-37 B-cell line and CXCR7-negative HL-60 myeloid cell
line towards an SDF-1 gradient. However, CXCR7 was found to mediate the
trans-endothelial migration, adhesion to HUVEC and survival of NC-37
cells, but not the adhesion to HUVEC or survival of HL-60 cells. In
conclusion, the selective strong expression of CXCR7 in B-ALL but not in
T-ALL or AML suggests a differential role this protein may play in
various types of leukemia. As CXCR7 mediates trans-endothelial migration,
adhesion and survival of B-cell line, further investigations into the
functional role of CXCR7 in primary B-ALL are warranted with the aim of
identifying new therapeutic targets.

