Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetics and CNS biodistribution of WP1066, a novel small
molecule inhibitor of STAT-3 phosphorylation


Utilizing molecular modeling and medicinal chemistry we have designed and
discovered novel, potent small molecule inhibitors of STAT3 activation.
WP1066, our lead compound, suppressed several downstream signaling
products including c-myc, Bcl-XL and Mcl-1, and induced apoptosis in a
panel of malignant gliomas. Further studies demonstrated that WP1066
inhibited, in vivo, the growth of malignant glioma xenografts and
decreased levels of phosphorylated STAT3. In order to determine the best
dosing schedule for WP1066 we designed a number of in vivo studies to
assess the biodistribution of this agent following oral and intravenous
administration in a mouse model. For the purposes of this study we
developed LC/MS/MS analytical methods capable of quantifying WP1066
extracted from plasma or tissues having a limit of quantification of 1
ng/ml or gm tissue. 80 female mice were assigned to the intravenous arm
(16 timepoints, 5 animals per timepoint) and 65 mice to the oral arm (13
timepoints, 5 animals per timepoint). Each mouse received a single
administration of 40 mg/kg WP1066 or control vehicle, either orally or
intravenously. Blood samples were collected by cardiac puncture under
isoflurane anesthesia. At sacrifice blood and brain tissue was collected
from groups of animals receiving WP1066. Blood and brain tissue was also
collected within 30 minutes of injection in a group of 5 animals
receiving control vehicle alone. Blood samples were collected in
appropriately labeled heparinized tubes, plasma was generated by
centrifugation and frozen at 80C until analyzed. Brain tissue from all
animals was harvested, blotted, weighed, and placed in appropriately
labeled cryotubes and frozen at 80C until analyzed. Following analysis
the mean value of 5 measured samples at each timepoint (plasma and brain)
were subject to non-compartmental PK analysis. WP1066 showed excellent
CNS bioavailability with concurrent brain-to-blood concentration ratios
ranging from 10:1 to 100:1, reaching mean CNS and plasma peak
concentrations of 57.6 g/g (162.2 M) and 0.6 g /mL (1.8 M), respectively,
following a 40 mg/kg IV bolus administration. CNS penetration following
oral administration was similar with tissue and plasma peak
concentrations reaching 2.7 g/g (7.6 M) and 0.09 g/mL (0.3 M),
respectively. Oral bioavailability was 36.3% (AUC PO/AUC IV), reaching a
mean peak concentration at 0.75 hours postdose with measureable
concentrations up to 8 hours after dosing administration. This study
demonstrates WP1066 maintains CNS concentrations at many fold higher
concentrations than that needed to demonstrate activity in vitro in many
cancer cell lines (1 M). These concentrations were maintained for a
significant period of time in this mouse model following a single dose of
drug, and support the use of once daily dosing in clinical trials.

