Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tyrosine kinase activity profiling of metastatic malignant
melanoma: Identification of possible therapeutic targets and markers
predicting response to therapy


Metastatic melanoma is an aggressive form of skin cancer that is highly
resistant to conventional chemotherapy. Thus, novel approaches to improve
the current treatment of advanced melanoma are urgently needed. Kinases
are key regulators of cellular processes, and since nearly half of the
tyrosine kinase complement is implicated in cancer, the information of
kinase activity in tumors give important tumor-specific information on
affected pathways and potential targets for treatment. With this in mind,
we performed tyrosine kinase activity profiling of 26 tissue samples
obtained from patients suffering from metastatic stage IV melanoma, prior
to dacarbazine (DTIC) treatment, using Tyrosine Kinase PamChip
microarrays. Each sample lysate generated an individual phospho-substrate
signature, representing the state of the kinase signalling cascades,
which allowed us to compare affected targets in responders and
non-responders to DTIC treatment. Further, we attempted to evaluate the
kinase activity in response to BRAF inhibitor, PLX4032 (Vemurafenib),
which has shown dramatic and positive effects in advanced melanoma
tumors, and has recently been approved for the treatment of late stage
melanoma. In this case, incubation was carried out on all samples with
and without PLX4032. Our preliminary results showed that although the
compound is mainly directed against a serine/threonine kinase, BRAF,
PLX4032 also showed inhibitory effects on the activity of multiple
tyrosine kinases. Since the drug is only beneficial for melanoma patients
with BRAF V600E mutations, we compared the activated kinase pathways in
patients with and without this mutation in order to identify alternative
survival pathways in patients with wild type BRAF. The technology used in
this study is based on a unique 3D flow-through microarray format that
allows monitoring of the reaction in real time, ideal for the
characterization of pathways. Each array contained 144 peptide substrates
with sites for phosphorylation, representing about 100 different
proteins. The use of kinase inhibitors will cause inhibition of
corresponding kinases of activated signalling pathways; hence, providing
us leads to therapeutic targets and possible prediction markers for
response to therapy. The detailed effects of both PLX4032 and sunitinib
in the chosen test system are currently prepared for presentation.

