Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic approach to the prediction of chemotherapeutic sensitivity
in osteosarcoma


PURPOSE: Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common malignant bone tumor in
children and adolescents. Despite of recent progress of combined therapy,
about 30% of OS patients die because of tumor progression or relapse. It
is generally accepted that sensitivity of neoadjuvant chemotherapy is the
most important prognostic factor for OS, however, there have been few
analyses documenting molecular markers that predicts the chemosensitivity
of OS patients. The aim of this study is to identify possible genomic
biomarkers for the prediction of chemosensitivity and prognosis for OS
patients. METHODS: Pretherapeutic biopsy samples of 22 pediatric OS
patients treated in Chiba cancer center who had homogeneous
clinicopathological- and therapeutic- background were analyzed. In our
study, patients were divided into 3 groups; group A includes 8 patients
who demonstrated a good response for 1st regimen, group B includes 6
patients who were resistant to 1st regimen but showed good response to
2nd regimen, group C includes 8 patients who did not respond to neither
1st nor 2nd regimen. Genomic DNAs were prepared from each frozen tissue
and used for aCGH analysis with Agilent 44k DNA microarray. RESULTS:
According to the results of comparative analysis of CNV patterns in each
patient, three chromosomal patterns strongly separated group A from B&C
or C from A&B were identified. Gain of 5p12 was found in 7 out of 8
patients of group A, while only 1 out of 14 patients of group B and C
(sensitivity 87.5%, specificity 92.9%). On the other hand, loss of 9q21
and amplification of 12q14 were specifically observed in group C, but not
in A and B (sensitivity 100%, specificity 92.9%). The average of copy
numbers within the region of 5p12 and 9q21.3 on each patient were
calculated, and 2-dimensional plot of these two values clearly showed
that each group formed distinct clusters. CONCLUSION: Our results
indicated that copy number changes in OS biopsy samples could be good
markers to determine suitable chemotherapeutic regimen for individual
patients.

