Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of stromal fibroblasts in the progression of esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma


Objectives: The prevalence of esophageal squamous-cell carcinoma (ESCC)
is high in Asia, including Japan. Cancer results from the accumulated
effects of many genetic alterations. However, the microenvironment of
cancer cells has recently been shown to strongly influence the biologic
properties of cancer. In this study, we focused on interrelations between
cancer and fibroblasts, the main component of cancer stroma. Methods: We
purchased 22 cell lines of esophageal squamous-cell carcinoma from RIKEN
Cell Bank and the Japanese Collection of Research Bioresources. For
fibroblasts we used human esophageal fibroblasts isolated from surgical
specimens. To examine interactions between esophageal squamous-cell
carcinoma and fibroblasts, the following in vitro experiments were
performed: 1) cell proliferation assays; 2) cell migration assays; 3)
3-dimensional organotypic culture; and 4) time-lapse cinematography of
3-dimentional culture. For in vivo experiments, cancer cells and
fibroblasts were co-transplanted subcutaneously in NOD/SCID mice to
assess the effects of fibroblasts on tumorigenicity. We also
retrospectively analyzed 97 ESCC patients to study the relationship
between tumor stroma and pathological findings. Results: Fibroblast
culture supernatant increased the cell count in 14 of 22 cell lines. The
stimulating effect of fibroblast supernatant could be explained by
various growth factors and cytokines; HGF and IL-6 stimulated the
proliferation of 6 and 5 cancer cell lines, respectively, while FGF1,
FGF7, and FGF10 increased cell proliferation of 7, 6, and 6 cancer cell
lines, respectively. When the MET inhibitor PHA-665752 was added to the
fibroblast culture supernatant, the culture supernatant-induced
proliferation of was abrogated in 2 cell lines. Among 10 cell lines whose
proliferation was induced by FGFs, addition of FGFR inhibitor PD-173074
to the fibroblast culture supernatant abrogated the effect of the culture
supernatant in 4 cell lines. In migration assays, the presence of
fibroblasts significantly increased the migration of cancer cells in 3 of
6 representative cell lines. In organotypic culture, stromal invasion was
seen only in presence of fibroblasts. Time-lapse cinematography confirmed
that clusters of cancer cells progressively migrated towards the
fibroblast meshwork. In vivo tumor growth was promoted by co-injection of
fibroblasts in 13 of 22 cancer cell lines. In clinicopathological study,
the extent of stromal fibrosis was significantly related to depth of
invasion and venous invasion of tumor cells. Conclusion: In many
esophageal cancer cell lines, cell proliferation was promoted by the
presence of fibroblasts both in vivo and in vitro. The stimulatory effect
of fibroblast could be accounted for by various growth factors and
cytokines, such as HGF, interleukin-6 and/or FGFs.

