Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blood vessel structure and expression of permeability related
factors in advanced lung cancer complicated with pleural effusion


Background. Malignant pleural effusion (MPE) is a common and debilitating
condition in patients with lung cancer. For unknown reasons, some tumors
are more strongly associated with the condition than others. The
pathophysiology of this condition has not been fully determined and to
date no specific medical treatment is available. Our goal was to study
the structure and assess the permeability related factors in MPE
associated blood vessels to better understand the mechanisms of this
condition. Methods. Immunohistochemical analysis of human NSCLC
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimens from patients who underwent
lobectomy (MPE- cases) or pleural biopsy (MPE+ cases) was employed. Nine
adenocarcinomas (AC) and eight squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) with and
without MPE were studied. For endothelial cell (EC) staining and
microvessel density (MVD) determination, the anti-CD31 Abs was employed.
Pericytes were stained by aSMA Abs. Coexpression of some of receptor
tyrosine kinases (PDGFR, VEGF/VEGFR, Tie-2) was also evaluated. Results.
In SCC complicated with MPE a narrow, clogged and fibrotic vessels were
seen in tumors located near the pleura (pleura involved). In MPE positive
AC specimens there were regions of tumor vessels where ECs were
irregularly laminated and hardly noticed. This observation was also
confirmed by CD31 staining where lower number of positive vessels related
to the total number of vessels was observed (88.4% in MPE+ vs. 94.8% in
MPE- cases, pBackground. Malignant pleural effusion (MPE) is a common and
debilitating condition in patients with lung cancer. For unknown reasons,
some tumors are more strongly associated with the condition than others.
The pathophysiology of this condition has not been fully determined and
to date no specific medical treatment is available. Our goal was to study
the structure and assess the permeability related factors in MPE
associated blood vessels to better understand the mechanisms of this
condition. Methods. Immunohistochemical analysis of human NSCLC
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimens from patients who underwent
lobectomy (MPE- cases) or pleural biopsy (MPE+ cases) was employed. Nine
adenocarcinomas (AC) and eight squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) with and
without MPE were studied. For endothelial cell (EC) staining and
microvessel density (MVD) determination, the anti-CD31 Abs was employed.
Pericytes were stained by aSMA Abs. Coexpression of some of receptor
tyrosine kinases (PDGFR, VEGF/VEGFR, Tie-2) was also evaluated. Results.
In SCC complicated with MPE a narrow, clogged and fibrotic vessels were
seen in tumors located near the pleura (pleura involved). In MPE positive
AC specimens there were regions of tumor vessels where ECs were
irregularly laminated and hardly noticed. This observation was also
confirmed by CD31 staining where lower number of positive vessels related
to the total number of vessels was observed (88.4% in MPE+ vs. 94.8% in
MPE- cases, p<0.05). Regarding the vessel coverage by pericytes, the
pericyte expression (aSMA staining) was shown to be less extensive in
cases with than without effusion (59.1% vs 96.2%, pBackground. Malignant
pleural effusion (MPE) is a common and debilitating condition in patients
with lung cancer. For unknown reasons, some tumors are more strongly
associated with the condition than others. The pathophysiology of this
condition has not been fully determined and to date no specific medical
treatment is available. Our goal was to study the structure and assess
the permeability related factors in MPE associated blood vessels to
better understand the mechanisms of this condition. Methods.
Immunohistochemical analysis of human NSCLC formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded specimens from patients who underwent lobectomy (MPE-
cases) or pleural biopsy (MPE+ cases) was employed. Nine adenocarcinomas
(AC) and eight squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) with and without MPE were
studied. For endothelial cell (EC) staining and microvessel density (MVD)
determination, the anti-CD31 Abs was employed. Pericytes were stained by
aSMA Abs. Coexpression of some of receptor tyrosine kinases (PDGFR,
VEGF/VEGFR, Tie-2) was also evaluated. Results. In SCC complicated with
MPE a narrow, clogged and fibrotic vessels were seen in tumors located
near the pleura (pleura involved). In MPE positive AC specimens there
were regions of tumor vessels where ECs were irregularly laminated and
hardly noticed. This observation was also confirmed by CD31 staining
where lower number of positive vessels related to the total number of
vessels was observed (88.4% in MPE+ vs. 94.8% in MPE- cases, p<0.05).
Regarding the vessel coverage by pericytes, the pericyte expression (aSMA
staining) was shown to be less extensive in cases with than without
effusion (59.1% vs 96.2%, p<0.001) probably because of their thinning or
even detachment. This clarification could also explain the finding that
the PDGFR was more expressed on ECs on MPE - tumors than on MPE + ones.
For VEGF and VEGFR staining, the staining index was more prominent in
tumors with than without effusion, for both staining area and staining
intensity (1.7 and 1.9, respectively). However, in distinction to the
staining of tumor cells almost no vessel EC staining by VEGFR Abs was
seen, while staining by anti-VEGF Abs was substantial. Similarly, the
staining of Ang-2 receptor (Tie-2) was found in the cytoplasm of the
tumor cells, but not in the vascular endothelium, regardless the pleura
effusion positive or negative features. Conclusions. To our knowledge
this is one of the first studies on structural abnormalities of blood
vessels in human lung cancer malignant pleural effusion. For now, because
of the relatively small number of cases analyzed no single mechanism was
found able to explain the occurrence of a pleural effusion, and it is
likely that multiple factors contribute to effusion formation. This
formulation may also better explain why some patients with pleural
metastases have malignant effusions while others do not.

