Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of divergent hypoxic gene expression data in prostate
cancer cell lines suggests novel tumor progression biomarkers


Decreased oxygen tension which can be caused by isolation of solid tumor
cells from vascularization is hypothesized to lead cause migration,
adaptation, or death. These cellular endpoints require transcriptional
regulation of genes that are involved in numerous metabolic and
physiological processes. We hypothesize those differences in
transcriptional regulation account for variation of cellular response to
a hypoxic environment (i.e. metastasis). To test this hypothesis, we
characterized the difference in hypoxic gene expression of two isogenic
cell lines (LnCap and C4-2) which differ in metastatic potential. In
three independent experiments, cell lines (LnCAP and C-42) were incubated
in a hypoxic or normoxic environment and pathway analysis was performed
on the list of genes whose expression was significantly different.
Analysis of the divergent hypoxic gene expression data (i.e. 641 genes)
supported significant changes in starch and sucrose pathways (i.e. UDP
glucoronosyltransferases), and cardiac arteriolopathy (i.e. DPP4).
Differences in gene expression (i.e. 300 genes) between LNCaP and C4-2
were noted under normoxic conditions and included genes related to cell
cycle (i.e. CDKN1B, JUNB, and CYR61) and cell differentiation (i.e. ID2,
ID3, and HBP1). C4-2 cells are much more metastatic than LNCaP cells from
which they were derived. Differences in response to hypoxia may reflect a
strategy used by the C4-2 cell line to escape or survive in a hypoxic
environment. Transcript profiles may have prognostic or diagnostic value
for distinguishing the propensity for prostate cells to metastasize, and
those genes that assist in hypoxic survival of C4-2 may be therapeutic
targets for PCa. Continued investigation will identify the contributions
of these genes to the metastatic process and clarify the downstream
transcriptional networks involved in this facet of tumor progression.

