Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecule inhibitors of choline kinase lead to reduced
phosphocholine levels and induction of apoptosis in cancer cells


Choline Kinase (ChoK) catalyzes the synthesis of phosphocholine (pCho) as
the first step in the Kennedy pathway towards synthesis of the major
membrane phospholipid, phosphatidylcholine. Increased phosphorylation of
choline is a hallmark of the malignant phenotype and ChoK over-expression
(primarily ChoK) has been reported in a variety of human cancers
including breast, lung, colorectal and prostate. These observations have
recently motivated efforts to develop anti-cancer agents targeting ChoK.
Here we summarize our efforts to further validate ChoK as an oncogenic
target by characterizing its tumorigenic potential and exploring the
activity of novel small molecule inhibitors. We transduced the ChoK gene
into HEK293 cells to examine the effects of ChoK expression in vitro and
in vivo. Under reduced serum conditions, over-expression of ChoK promoted
cell growth, increased phospho-ERK and phospho-AKT levels, and reduced
p21 levels. ChoK, but not vector-expressing cells, formed tumors in
immune-compromised mice and ChoK expression levels were positively
associated with tumor growth rates. Together, these data suggest that
ChoK maintains proliferative pathways in the absence of growth factors,
and itself provides an oncogenic driver capable of inducing tumor growth
in the absence of other transforming mutations. Recently we identified a
novel chemical series that inhibits ChoK in both enzymatic and cellular
assays. The binding of these inhibitors to ChoK protein was confirmed in
surface plasmon resonance experiments. A representative member of this
lead series, compound A, was characterized in more detail and
demonstrated potent enzyme inhibition against ChoK with an IC50 of 70 nM.
Compound A also inhibited the growth of ChoK -expressing breast cancer
lines, MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-415, with GI50s of 7 and 2 uM respectively.
In contrast, compound A exhibited much lower activity against the
non-transformed breast epithelial cell line MCF-12A, with a GI50 >40 uM.
Consistent with its effects on cell growth, pCho levels in MDA-MB-415
cells, as measured by NMR, were dose-dependently inhibited up to 80% by
24 hours with an IC50 of 750 nM. In MDA-MB-415 cells, but not MCF-12A
cells, levels of apoptotic markers were increased at 24 hours with
compound concentrations 5 uM. In summary, we demonstrated that small
molecule inhibition of ChoK results in a dose-dependent decrease of pCho
levels, inhibition of proliferation and induction of apoptosis in ChoK
expressing breast cancer cells. We established that exogenous expression
of ChoK in HEK293 cells drives both oncogenic transformation and
constitutive activation of proliferative signaling pathways. Taken
together, these data further validate ChoK as a potential therapeutic
target in cancer and support the continued investigation into the utility
of ChoK inhibitors as anti-oncogenic agents.

