Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integration of HGF/Met signaling and hypoxia response in cancer
cell invasion and proliferation


The cellular response to hypoxia is a major influence on the
aggressiveness of primary tumors, yet much of how this response mechanism
integrates with other signaling pathways is unknown. The MET
proto-oncogene, which encodes the tyrosine kinase receptor for hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF), is often overexpressed in cancers and can drive cell
proliferation, invasion, and metastasis. Prior studies demonstrate that
the Met tyrosine-kinase receptor drives cell invasion and metastasis
under hypoxic conditions, and this invasive phenotype is lost if MET
expression is inhibited. Hypoxia also has been shown to sensitize
Met-activated pathways to drive HGF-induced invasion through an as yet
undefined molecular mechanism. The high mortality rate of metastatic
cancer makes it crucial to understand the functional integration of these
two prevalent drivers of metastasis, hypoxia and Met signaling, and to
identify ways to selectively block cancer cell invasiveness. We show that
a chemically generated pseudo-hypoxic condition enhanced HGF-mediated
cell migration and invasion in the papillary renal cell (PRC) carcinoma
cell lines ACHN and UOK112. Enhanced HGF-driven invasiveness was
associated with sensitization of the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathway and increased matrix metalloproteinase activity.
HGF-stimulated cell proliferation, in contrast, was phosphoinositide
3-kinase (PI3K) pathway dependent and not enhanced under the same
pseudo-hypoxic condition. Furthermore, MAPK activation in the presence of
HGF and hypoxia negatively regulated HGF-induced Akt activation and
mitochondrial reductase enzymes as detected by MTT assay. These data
suggest that hypoxia promotes tumor invasion by sensitizing the MAPK
pathway to HGF stimulation in PRC-derived cells while limiting and/or
suppressing HGF activation of PI3K-mediated cell proliferation.
Identifying the specific effectors responsible for the integration these
signals will improve our understanding of pro-metastatic invasiveness and
potentially identify novels targets for its selective blockade.

