Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDR1 gene overexpression confers resistance to C-MET inhibitor in
multidrug resistant cancer cell line


c-MET signaling is implicated in a wide variety of human malignancies.
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) binding to the proto-oncogenic c-MET
receptor lead to activate multiple tyrosine kinase signaling pathway.
Inappropriate c-MET signaling in cancer can enhance tumor cell
proliferation, survival, motility, and invasion. Recently, several
reports have indicated that inhibition of c-MET signaling induced
apoptosis in a variety of cancer cells and recognized as a novel
anticancer therapy approach. Previous study from our laboratory also
showed that the higher mRNA expression level of HGF, and its downstream
genes including HGF receptor (c-Met) and urokinase (uPA) were detected in
drug resistant Dx5-C5 cell compared with parental human uterus sarcoma
MES-SA cell line. Furthermore, report indicated that the constitutive
expression of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) is involved in the HGF/MET related
pathway of MDR-positive human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line.
Moreover, MDR1 gene overexpressed leukemia cell line also shown more
resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate. These finding
suggested that chemoresistant cancer cells may also develop a similar
mechanism to against c-MET inhibitor. Our results shown: when treated
both cell cancer lines with c-MET inhibitor PHA665752, we found that
compared to parental MES-SA cells, the Dx5-C5 cells with highly expressed
P-gp was more resistant to PHA665752, the resistance was also reversed by
co-treatment of MDR inhibitor verapamil and PHA665752. In addition, when
transfection of c-MET shRNA into Dx5-C5 and MES-SA cell line for 48 hrs,
we found that the viability was decreased in the c-MET shRNA transfected
Dx5-C5 cell line in a dose dependent manner but not in the MES-SA cell
line. In conclusion, our study demonstrated that existence of
P-glycoprotein in MDR cell line would attenuate c-MET inhibitor induced
cell death and may help us to develop a new strategy for treatment of
multiple drug resistance cancer cells.

