Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting malignant mesothelioma with a novel
6-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine thienoyl antifolate via its
selective uptake by the proton-coupled folate transporter


Pemetrexed (Pmx; Alimta) is among the most active agents for treating
malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM). Pmx is transported into cells by 3
systems, the reduced folate carrier (RFC), folate receptor (FR) , and
proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT). RFC is present in all tissues
and tumors, whereas PCFT and FR are more narrowly expressed. By real-time
RT-PCR, clinically-relevant MPM cell lines express both RFC and PCFT but
not FR. The reported clinical efficacy of Pmx toward MPM may partly
reflect high levels of PCFT in this tumor. Novel 6-substituted
pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine antifolates with significant PCFT substrate
activity but with greater specificities toward PCFT over RFC than Pmx,
might offer significant advantages for selective therapeutic targeting
MPM with reduced toxicity. We directly tested this notion for AG94, a
6-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine thienoyl antifolate with a 3
carbon bridge. In HeLa sublines expressing moderate PCFT (R1-11-PCFT4) or
RFC (R1-11-RFC6) levels, AG94 selectively inhibited (>35-fold)
proliferation of PCFT-expressing R1-11-PCFT4 cells, in contrast to the
nearly identical inhibitions with Pmx toward these sublines. H2452 human
MPM cells showed similar sensitivities to the anti-proliferative effects
of AG94 and Pmx (IC50s of 72 nM and 64 nM, respectively). Analogous
results were obtained by colony-forming assays. Growth inhibition by AG94
was reversed with excess adenosine and 5-amino-4-imidazolecarboxamide but
not thymidine. Potent inhibition of glycinamide ribonucleotide
formyltransferase (GARFTase), the first folate-dependent step in de novo
purine biosynthesis, was confirmed by an in situ GARFTase assay in both
R-1-11-PCFT and H2452 cells. Assays with [3H]AG94 with engineered Chinese
hamster ovary cells confirmed selective PCFT transport, characterized by
an acidic pH optimum and transport superiority over Pmx at both pH 5.5
and pH 6.8. Analogous results were seen with R1-11-PCFT4 and H2452 cells.
In both R1-11-PCFT4 and H2452 cells, [3H]Pmx and [3H]AG94 were
metabolized to polyglutamates, including di- to heptaglutamyl forms.
Efficacy trials with subcutaneous early and upstage H2452 tumors were
performed in SCID mice administered AG94, compared to gemcitabine and
cisplatin. AG94 showed antitumor efficacies superior to gemcitabine and
cisplatin. All mice tolerated the treatment regimens well. Our results
demonstrate potent antitumor efficacies of AG94 toward H2452 MPM cells in
vitro and in vivo, reflecting its efficient membrane transport by PCFT
over RFC, synthesis of polyglutamate conjugates, and inhibition of
GARFTase. Selectivity for non-RFC cellular uptake processes by potent
antifolate drugs such as AG94 presents an exciting new opportunity for
treating solid tumors including MPM over chemotherapy agents currently
available.

